Reliquiae Aquitanicae (Édouard Lartet and Henry Christy (edited by Thomas Rupert Jones), 1875)
==============================================================================================
Lartet and Christy's 1865–75 Dordogne memoir — the founding excavation record of Cro-Magnon man and palaeolithic cave life. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (reliquiaeaquitan00lartuoft)


RELIQUIAE    AQUITANICLE;

BEING   CONTRIBUTIONS   TO

THE   ARCHEOLOGY  AND   PALEONTOLOGY

OP
«

PERIGORD

AND

THE  ADJOINING  PROVINCES  OF  SOUTHERN   FRANCE,

BY

EDOUARD  LARTET  AND  HENRY  CHRISTY,


EDITED  BY

THOMAS  RUPERT  JONES,  F.R.S.,  F.G.S.,  &c.,

PROFESSOR    OP    GEOLOGY,    ROYAL    MILITARY    AND    STAFF    COLLEGES,   SANDHURST.


ILLUSTRATED  WITH  87  PLATES,  3  MAPS,  AND  132  WOODCUTS.


1865-75.

LONDON:

WILLIAMS  &  NORGATE,  14  HENRIETTA  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN,  AND
20  SOUTH  FREDERICK  STREET,  EDINBURGH.

PARIS :  J.  B.  BAILLIERE  &  FILS,  RUE  HAUTEFEUILLE.
LEIPSIC :  F.  A.  BROCKHAUS.

1875.


AF.ERK


FLAM1IA5I.


PRINTED  BY  TAYLOR  AND  FRANCIS,
RED  LION  COURT.  FLKET  STREET.


PREFATORY    NOTICE,


THIS  Work  was  commenced  under  circumstances  very  different  from  those   under  which  it
is  to  be  carried  on.

The  results  of  the  researches  in  the  Valley  of  the  Dordogne,  which  the  late  HENRY  CHRISTY
ardently  prosecuted,  liberally  providing  for  the  cost,  and  combining  his  own  active  exertions
and  experience  with  the  labours  and  counsels  of  friends,  must  now  be  almost  wholly  described
by  another  pen  than  his.

He  was  carried  off,  in  the  midst  of  his  self-imposed  and  well-directed  work,  by  acute  illness,
brought  on  by  over-exertion  in  a  visit  to  the  Belgian  Bone-caves,  not  long  after  the  first
few  sheets  of  this  Book  had  been  put  into  the  Printer's  hand.

He  had  arranged  its  style  and  mode  of  publication;  very  many  Plates  had  been  drawn
and  lithographed  in  Paris  under  his  own  and  M.  Lartet's  superintendence;  descriptions  of
some  few  of  these  had  been  prepared  by  him;  and  a  general  notice  of  the  relationship  held
by  the  Stone  Implements  and  other  objects  found  in  the  Caves  of  Dordogne  to  the  Implements
and  usages  of  existing  savage  life  and  of  prehistoric  people,  which  he  had  already  communicated
to  the  Ethnological  Society,  had  been  re-arranged  by  him  for  the  present  "Work.

On  his  friend  and  fellow-worker,  M.  E.  Lartet,  falls,  therefore,  the  labour  of  preparing  a
very  much  greater  portion  of  this  Work  than  was  originally  contemplated,  although  much  of


IV


the   Descriptions   and   nearly   all    the   general    and   special   considerations   on   archaeological
and  zoological  subjects  were  already  undertaken  by  him.

A  desire  to  fulfil  the  earnest  wishes  of  his  departed  friend,  and  a  true  appreciation  of
the  value  of  Mr.  CHRISTY'S  researches  and  their  results,  urge  M.  Lartet  to  persevere  in
carrying  out  as  far  as  is  now  possible  the  original  intentions  regarding  this  Book.

In  this  he  is  supported  by  the  goodwill  and  aid  of  friends,  glad  to  join  him  in  carrying
on  a  useful  work,  which,  though  not  so  largely  comprehensive  as  was  once  intended,  will
be  a  fit  and  lasting  memorial  of  the  Energy,  Liberality,  and  Love  of  Science  which  originated
its  design,  collected  its  materials,  and  furnished  the  means  for  its  completion.

M.  Penguilly  1'Haridon  (Director  of  the  Musee  d'Artillerie),  Mr.  John  Evans,  F.R.S.,
Mr.  A.  W.  Franks,  Dir.S.A.,  Mr.  W.  Tipping,  F.S.A.,  and  Professor  T.  Rupert  Jones,  F.G.S.,
have  promised  their  assistance  in  several  matters ;  the  last-named  will  edit  the  Work;
and  Mr.  HENRY  CHRISTY'S  Executors,  desirous  of  fully  carrying  out  the  last  wishes  of
their  Brother,  are  resolved  to  give  every  assistance  in  producing  the  Book  in  the  style  he
contemplated.

NOVEMBER  1,  1865.


EDITORIAL    NOTE,


THE  publication  of  this  Serial  Work,  descriptive  of  the  Implements,  Bones,  &c.  found  by
MM.  HENRY  CHRISTY  and  EDOUARD  LARTET  in  the  Caves  of  the  Vezere  (Dordogne),  Prance,
has  again  met  with  a  sad  and  unexpected  interruption  from  the  Death  of  M.  LARTET  and  the
Troubles  of  the  French  War.  "

At  first  intended  to  embrace  a  considerable  portion  of  the  Cave  Relics  of  the  whole  Province
of  AQUITAINE,  the  scope  of  this  Work  was  necessarily  limited  after  the  lamented  Death  of
Mr.  HENRY  CHRISTY  (May  4th,  1865),  the  enthusiastic  fellow- worker  with  M.  LARTET  in  the
Exploration  of  the  Caves,  and  the  originator  of  this  Book, — it  being  then  decided  that  the
specimens  already  collected  at  Mr.  H.  CHRISTY'S  expense  should  form  the  main  basis  of  the
Essays  and  Descriptions.

The  great  loss  which  Palaeontologists  and  Naturalists  in  general  have  suft'ered  in  the  Decease
of  M.  E.  LARTET  affects  us  also  very  heavily,  and,  besides  calling  for  our  sincere  sympathy  with
his  afflicted  Family,  has  deprived  us  of  still  another  valued  Friend  and  able  Coadjutor.

The  lamented  M.  LARTET  had  in  1865  cheerfully  undertaken  the  labour  of  fulfilling  all  that,
from  the  loss  of  his  friend  and  fellow-worker,  H.  CHRISTY,  had  fallen  upon  him  to  do,  in  carrying
out  as  far  as  possible  the  original  intentions  regarding  the  '  Reliquiae  Aquitanicae.'

Conscientiously  and  with  loving  care  he  fulfilled  this  melancholy,  but  congenial,  task,  though
much  interrupted  by  ill-health  and  family  affliction — until,  seriously  invalided,  and  deeply


VI

affected  by  the  disasters  of  his  Country,  he  retired  from  Paris  in  the  dismal  autumn  of  1870,
and  was  struck  by  Apoplexy  at  his  country  residence  at  Seissan  (Gers),  January  28,  1871.

Far  too  much  of  his  great  store  of  knowledge  has  gone  with  him !  Beyond  what  he  had
already  given  to  the  world  in  his  published  papers,  but  little  remains  in  any  thing  approaching
a  complete  form  in  MS.  Whatever  can  be  made  available  will  doubtless  by  the  filial  care  of
M.  Louis  LARTET  be  brought  to  light.

The  Executors  and  Friends  of  the  late  HENRY  CHRISTY  are  desirous  of  speedily  and  worthily
completing  the  '  Reliquiae  Aquitanicx '  in  accordance  with  the  intentions  of  the  Authors ;  and
with  the  aid  of  Friends  at  home,  and  of  M.  Louis  LARTET,  M.  ALPHONSE  MILNE-EDWARDS,
M.  SAUVAGE,  and  other  Fellow-workers  in  France,  they  will  proceed  with  the  work  as  expe-
ditiously  as  possible.

Owing  to  the  melancholy  events  above  referred  to,  there  will  be  fewer  Parts  published  than
originally  contemplated.

FEBRUARY  1873.


PREFACE.


THE  Description  of  the  old  Aquitanian  Caves  and  their  Contents,  in  a  book
worthy  of  the  subject,  useful  to  Anthropologist  and  Archaeologist,  and  within
the  reach  of  teacher  and  learner,  was  the  well  known  intention  of  the  late
HENRY  CHRISTY;  and  he  originated  this  Work  with  the  hearty  cooperation  of
his  friend  EDOITARD  LARTET,  whose  death,  alas !  we  also  deplore.

The  death  of  one  of  these  enthusiastic  and  devoted  friends  hindered  an
exhaustive  examination  of  the  Caves  in  Aquitania ;  and  the  description  of  what
had  been  collected  in  the  Caves  already  explored  has  been  sadly  curtailed  by
M.  Lartet's  decease.

Besides  the  extended  illustration  of  prehistoric  objects,  to  which  H.  Christy's
further  research  in  this  district,  by  careful  excavation  of  the  Caves,  would  have
given  rise,  we  have  lost  a  valuable  account  of  the  Mammalian  Remains,  which
M.  Lartet  so  well  knew  how  to  describe,  comparing  them  with  both  extinct  and
existing  allies.

"We  have  had  occasion  already,  in  our  PREFATORY  NOTICE,  of  November  1865,
and  EDITORIAL  NOTE,  of  February  1873,  to  explain  the  limitation  of  scope  in  this
Work,  and  the  unavoidable  delays  in  its  publication.  We  need  only  thus  allude
to  the  melancholy  events  causing  these  alterations  in  its  plan  and  interruptions
in  its  progress.

Many  explorers  in  France  have  briefly  noticed  or  described  at  large  the


viii

results  of  their  search  in  some  of  the  Caves  not  excavated  or  not  fully  examined
by  MM.  Christy  and  Lartet ;  they  have  enriched  their  museums  with  numerous
and  often  choice  relics  of  the  Cave-folk,  and  have  published  thoughtful  and  philo-
sophic memoirs  on  the  conditions  and  habits  of  that  early  people.  The  Bones,
also,  of  Birds  and  Fishes  found  in  the  Caves  have  been  carefully  treated  of  by
Dr.  A.  MILNE-EDWARDS  and  Dr.  SAUVAGE,  in  the  '  RELIQUIAE  AQTJITANIC^:  '  and
elsewhere.  But  the  Mammalian  Eemains  are  still  undescribed ;  for  M.  Lartet's
notes  were  left  in  too  fragmentary  and  unfinished  a  state  to  yield  a  continuous
memoir,  and  no  other  palaeontologist  as  yet  has  turned  his  attention  to  the
subject.

M.  LARTET'S  catalogue  of  these  Mammals,  however, — his  note  on  the  Ovibos
(reprinted), — and  numerous  remarks  by  him  on  other  members  of  the  Cave
Fauna,  are  to  be  found  in  the  '  RELIQUI^;  AQUITANIC.E.'

The  Caves  which  were  actually  examined  are  treated  of  by  both  E.  LARTET
and  H.  CHRISTY,  in  this  Book ;  and  more  fully  by  Mr.  JOHN  EVANS.  M.  Louis
LARTET  has  given  a  detailed  description  of  Cro-Magnon;  and  Dr.  HAMY  has
noticed  some  points  in  the  Rock-shelter  of  Laugerie  Basse.  A  full  account  of  the
geological  surroundings  of  the  Caves  of  the  Ve'zere  is  also  given.

Of  the  Cave-dwellers  themselves  much  is  reported  in  this  Work.  Such  of
their  Skulls  and  other  Bones  as  have  been  met  with  are  described  in  full  by  Dr.
PRTJNER-BEY,  Dr.  BROCA,  and  Dr.  HAMY,  and  commented  on  by  M.  DE  QUATRE-
FAGES.  Their  features,  stature,  characters,  and  race  have  been  discussed.  Their
habits  have  been  elucidated  in  the  descriptions  of  their  Weapons  and  other  Im-
plements adapted  for  shooting  or  darting,  stabbing,  clubbing,  cutting,  chopping,  •
flensing,  scraping,  smoothing,  grinding,  boring,  drilling,  and  other  work,  wanted
either  in  peace  or  war,  in  hunting  and  fishing,  in  domestic  operations,  and  in
designing  the  works  of  art  which  so  markedly  characterized  this  peculiar  people
of  Western  Europe.  Their  cooking- stones,  hearths,  and  mortars ;  their  bodkins


IX

and  sewing-needles ;  their  personal  ornaments  and  amulets,  perforated  for  string-
ing, their  whistling  instruments*,  and  their  batons,  possibly  distinctive  of  rank
and  dignity,  have  received  much  attention,  as  the  memoirs  and  descriptions  by
E.  LARTET  in  particular  will  show.  Even  their  Owner-marks,  Tally-scores,  and
probable  Gambling-tools  have  been  recognized  and  described  in  this  Work.  How
they  made  their  many  Implements  of  Mint,  and  why  that  stone  was  good  for
their  purpose,  has  also  been  explained.

The  differences  of  Cave  from  Cave,  in  their  earliest  animal  inhabitants,  and
in  the  style  of  living  of  their  subsequent  Human  occupants,  have  been  noticed,
according  to  the  evidence  yielded  by  the  osseous  relics  found  therein,  by  the
several  kinds  of  stone  and  other  Implements,  and  by  the  presence  or  absence  of
engraving  and  carved  ornament  on  those  of  bone  and  antler.

Much  light  has  been  thrown  on  some  points  of  the  domestic  economy  of
these  Aborigines  of  Perigord  by  comparison  of  their  Implements  with  those  used

0

by  the  North -American  Indians,  and  by  Savages  of  other  parts  of  the  world.
Among  the  many  friends  who  have  indicated  points  of  interest  in  this  direction,
Mr.  ANDERSON,  of  Vancouver,  Dr.  BROWN,  and  Mr.  LLOYD,  C.E.,  have  greatly
aided  us.  Mr.  Anderson  has  also  discussed  the  important  bearings  that  the
characters  and  conditions  of  these  Cave  Relics  have  in  the  consideration  of  their
relative  and  positive  age — a  subject  treated  by  M.  E.  LARTET  especially  with
reference  to  the  association  of  the  Reindeer,  Musk-ox,  Mammoth,  Cave-Lion,  and
other  primEeval  animals  with  these  old  inhabitants  of  France.

In  treating  of  the  Reindeer,  the  constant  associate  of  the  Cave-folk  of
Perigord,  we  have  been  indebted  for  much  information  to  ALEX.  ANDERSON,  of
Vancouver,  the  late  N.  L.  AUSTEN,  and  T.  G.  B.  LLOYD,  C.E.,  each  personally
acquainted  with  this  animal  in  either  Europe  or  America.  It  is  sad  to  remember

*  A  musical  pipe,  made  of  a  hollow  bone,  found  among  some  relics  of  the  Cave-folk,  has  also  been
described  and  commented  on  by  M.  Piette.


that  the  promising  young  Naturalist  Mr.  N.  Laurence  Austen  died  so  soon  after
communicating  his  valuable  notes  to  the  '  RELIQUIAE  AQUITANIC.E.'

We  must  not  here  enumerate  all  whose  names  appear  in  the  following  pages
as  helpers  in  the  elucidation  of  prehistoric  life.  To  few,  however,  do  we  owe  so
much  as  to  the  late  Mr.  T.  K.  GAY,  who  was  cut  off  from  among  us  at  an  early
age  by  consumption,  deeply  regretted  by  all  who  knew  him.  Earnest,  en-
lightened, and  courteous,  he  was  ever  ready  to  task  his  memory,  or  to  search
Voyages  and  Travels  for  analogous  facts  in  the  history  of  early  and  of  savage
peoples,  and  to  apply  his  intimate  knowledge  of  the  CHRISTY  COLLECTION  to  the
elucidation  of  the  primaeval  objects  treated  of  in  the  '  HELIQTJLE  AQTJITANIOE.'
To  his  willing  and  clever  pencil  also  we  owe  many  original  sketches,  besides
copies  of  useful  illustrations.

In  bringing  together  and  arranging  the  varied  materials  supplied  by  friends
at  home  and  abroad,  desirous  of  making  the  '  E-ELIQULS;  AQTJITANIC^E  '  thoroughly

%

useful  in  Archaeology  and  Anthropology,  the  directing  counsels  of  Mr.  A.  W.
FRANKS,  F.R.S.,  have  been  constant  and  efficient,  like  his  courtesy  and  great
knowledge.  The  revision  of  the  proofs,  also,  has  profited  not  only  by  his  care,
but  by  the  experience  and  accuracy  of  our  friend  Mr.  JOHN  EVANS,  F.R.S.

Lastly  it  must  be  noticed  that  the  resolution  of  Mr.  HENRY  CHRISTY'S  EXE-
CUTORS, "  desirous  of  fully  carrying  out  the  last  wishes  of  their  Brother,  to  give
every  assistance  in  producing  the  Book  in  the  style  he  contemplated, ".has  been
amply  and  generously  fulfilled ;  and  we  believe  the  hope,  formerly  expressed,  has
also  been  fulfilled,— namely,  that,  supported  by  the  goodwill  and  aid  of  friends,
this  useful  work,  though  not  so  largely  comprehensive  as  was  once  intended,
will  be  a  fit  and  lasting  memorial  of  him  whose  Energy,  Liberality,  and  Love  of
Science  originated  its  design,  collected  its  materials,  and  furnished  the  means  for
its  completion.

T.  RUPERT  JONES,  September  7th,  1875.


CONTENTS.


PREFATORY  NOTICE,  November  1865     iii

EDITORIAL  NOTE,  February  1873 v

PREFACE,  September  1875     vii

LISTS  : —

I.  The  Essays  and  Memoirs xii

II.  Descriptions  of  the  Plates    xiii

III.  Lists  of  the  Plates  :—

A.  Stone  Implements xiv

B.  Bone  Implements  and  other  Objects xvi

C.  Skulls,  Bones,  and  Antlers xviii

Maps xviii

Sketches  on  the  Vezere     xviii

IV.  Lists  of  the  Woodcuts :—

I.  Illustrating  the  Essays  and  Memoirs    xix

II.  In  the  Descriptions  of  the  Plates xxi

CHRONOLOGICAL  ORDER  AND  THE  CONTENTS  OF  THE  SEVENTEEN  PAKTS  AS  PUBLISHED .  xxiii

DIRECTIONS  TO  THE  BINDER   xxiv

INDEX     .  .  .• 189


CONTENTS.


I.  THE  ESSAYS  AND  MEMOIRS.

Page

I.  Aquitania.— Features  of  the  Dordogne  District— The  Caves  in  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere  and
their  Contents— Infilling  of  Bone-caves— Eelative  Chronology  of  Bone-caves.  By  M.  E.  LARTET  .  1

IL  The  Prehistoric  Cave-dwellers  of  Southern  France.— i.  Stone  Implements— n.  The  Dordogne
Caves— ni.  The  Reindeer  Period.  By  HENRY  CHKISTT  11

Sketch  Map  of  a  part  of  the  VaUey  of  the  Vezere

in.  Sketch  of  the  Chief  Geological  Features  of  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere  and  the  Bordering
Country.  By  Professor  T.  EUPEKT  JONES

Geological  Sketch  Map  of  the  Valley  of  the  Vezure  and  Neighbouring  Country 29

IV.  Remarks  on  the  Similarity  of  some  Implements  found  in  the  Caves  of  Dordogne  to  some  used
by  the  North- American  Indians,— on  the  "  Germani "  of  the  Roman  Period,— and  on  the  Range  of  the
Reindeer.     By  ALEXANDER  C.  ANDERSON    37

Appendix  to  Mr.  Anderson's  Letter  (Notes  by  M.  E.  LARTET  and  Professor  T.  RUPERT  JONBS)  .  50

V.  Some  of  the  Implements  from  the  Caves  of  Dordogne  compared  with  North-American-Indian
Tools.     By  Dr.  ROBERT  BROWN  58

VI.  A  Burial-place  of  the  Cave-dwellers  of  Perigord  (Cro-Magnon).     By  M.  Louis  LARTET     ....      62

VII.  An  Account  of  the  Human  Bones  found  in  the  Cave  of  Cro-Magnon,  in  Dordogne.     By  Dr.
PRFNER-BEY.    (C.  Plates  I.-VI.)

VIII.  Remarks  on  the  Fauna  found  in  the  Cave  of  Cro-Magnon.     By  .M.  E.  LARTET 98

IX.  On  the  Human  Skulls  and  Bones  found  in  the  Cave  of  Cro-Magnon,  near  Les  Eyzies.     By

Dr.  PAUL  BROCA.    (C.  Plates  I.-VI.) 9V

X.  Remarks  on  the  Human  Remains  from  the  Cave  at  Cro-Magnon.     By  M.  DE  QUATREFAGES    . .    123

Sketch  Map  of  a  Part  of  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere,  including  the  Prehistoric  Stations  of  Laugerie
Haute,  Laugerie  Basse,  Gorge  d'Enfer,  and  Les  Eyzies  126

XI.  On  the  Employment  of  Sewing-needles  in  Ancient  Times.     By  M.  E.  LAHTET 127

XII.  Remarks  on  the  Reindeer.     By  ALEXANDER  C.  ANDERSON.    (In  a  letter  dated  November  20,
1868,  Rosebank,  Victoria,  Vancouver's  Island.)    142

XIII.  Notes  on  the  Reindeer  and  Hippopotamus.     By  M.  E.  LARTET    147

XIV.  Further  Remarks  on  the  Reindeer ;  and  on  its  assumed  Coexistence  with  the  Hippopotamus.
By  ALEXANDER  C.  ANDERSON.     (In  a  letter  dated  December  10,  1870,  Rosebank,  Victoria,  Vancouver's
Island.)    153

XV.  On  some  Bone-  and  Cave-deposits  of  the  Reindeer  Period  in  the  South  of  France.     By  JOHN
EVANS,  F.R.S 161

XVI.  Catalogue  of  the  Mammalian  Fauna  found  at  the  several  Caves  or  Rock-shelters  in  the
Vezere  Valley  (Dordogne)  by  MM.  Christy  and  Lartet.     By  M.  E.  LARTET    181


CONTENTS.  xiii

Page

XVII.  On  some  Bone  and  other  Implements  from  the  Caves  of  Perigord,  France,  bearing  Marks
indicative  of  Ownership,  Tallying,  and  Gambling.     By  Professor  T.  RUPERT  JONES.     (B.  Plates  XXV.
and  XXVI.)    183

XVIII.  Flint— its  Nature,  Character,  and  Adaptability  for  Implements.     By  Professor  T.  RUPERT
JONES   202

XIX.  On  a  Piece  of  Elephant's  Tusk  engraved  with  the  Outline  of  a  Mammoth,  from  La  Made-
laine,  Dep.  Dordogne.     By  M.  E.  LARTET.     (B.  Plate  XXVIII.)    ' 206

XX.  On  an  Engraved  Figure  of  a  Glutton  from  one  of  the  Dordogne  Caves.     By  Professor  T.
RUPERT  JONES 209

XXI.  Notes  on  the  Scandinavian  Reindeer.     By  N.  LAURENCE  AUSTEN,  F.L.S 213

XXII.  On  Fishing  during  the  Reindeer  Period.     By  Dr.  H.  E.  SAUVASE 219

XXIII.  Observations  on  the  Birds  whose  Bones  have  been  found  in  the  Caves  of  the  South-west

of  France.     By  Dr.  ALPHONSE  MILNE-EDWARDS    226

XXIV.  Notes  on  Objects  of  Stone  from  the  Cave  of  Les  Eyzies,  Valley  of  the  Vezere,  Perigord.

By  Professor  T.  RUPERT  JONES   248

XXV.  Fossil  Man  from  La  Madelaine  and  Laugerie  Basse.     By  Dr.  E.  T.  HAMT.     (C.  Plate  IX.

&  X.,  double) 255

XXVI.  Notes  on  the  Reindeer  (Caribou)  of  Newfoundland.     By  T.  G.  B.  LLOTD,  C.E 273

XXVII.  Note  on  Ovibos  moschatus,  Blainvillc.     By  M.  E.  LARTET 280

SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES  by  the  EDITOR  :  Addenda  et  Corrigenda 283


II.  DESCRIPTIONS  OE  THE  PLATES.
A.  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.

Pages

PLATES  I.  &  II.     By  HENBY  CHKISTT  and  Professor  T.  RUPEKT  JONES    I

PLATES  III.-XLII.     By  Professor  T.  RUPERT  JONES    6  &c.

B.  BONE  IMPLEMENTS  &c.

PLATES  I.-XVIII.     By  Professor  EDOUAHD  LAHTET 9  &c.

PLATES  XIX.-XXXI.     By  Professor  T.  RUPEBT  JONES   142  Ac.

C.  SKULLS,  BONES,  AND  ANTLERS.

PLATES  I.-VI.     By  Dr.  PRUNER-BET 89-91

PLATE  VII.  &  VIII.     By  Professor  T.  RUPERT  JONES  and  N.  L.  AUSTEN,  F.L.S 169,170

PLATE  IX.  &  X.     By  Dr.  E.  T.  HAMT 186,  187


xiv  CONTENTS.

III.  LISTS  OE  THE  PLATES.

A.  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.

Page

PLATE  I.  These  are  blocks  of  Flint  from  which  narrow  flakes  have  been  struck  off,  by  a  succession  of
carefully  directed  blows ;  so  that  the  piece  remaining  bears  several  narrow  facets,  and  may  be
regarded  as  the  Nucleus  or  Core  from  which  numerous  blade-like  pieces  have  been  knocked  off  . .  i

PLATE  II.  A  series  of  flakes  of  Flint,  mostly  of  small  size ;  some  few  have  been  tanged  or  otherwise
dressed.  See  Note,  at  page  26 3

PLATE  III.  Two  Flint  Implements,  of  lanceolate  form,  one  retaining  the  flake-face,  and  the  other
chipped  all  over.  From  Le  Moustier  6

PLATE  IV.  Lanceolate  Flint  "Weapons,  carefully  shaped  by  repeated  chippings  into  a  flattish,  acute-
ovate  form,  with  pointed  ends  and  somewhat  sharp  edges.  They  are  all  from  Laugerie  Haute.
The  resemblance  between  these  neatly  made  flint  implements  and  some  found  in  Denmark  is
very  remarkable ;  hence  these  much  chipped  and  symmetrical  forms  are  sometimes  spoken  of
as  belonging  to  the  "  Scandinavian  Type  "  7

PLATE  V.  The  specimens  here  figured  belong  to  a  type  of  Implements  specially  adapted  for  being  held
in  the  hand  by  the  thick  and  naturally  rounded  margin ;  whilst  the  opposite  margin,  reduced  to  a
sharp  curved  edge  by  careful  chipping,  can  be  used  in  chopping.  From  Le  Moustier  17

PLATE  VI.  This  Plate  represents  twelve  Instruments  of  Flint,  which  have  been  thought  to  have  one
end  prepared  for  fastening  in  a  stick  or  shaft ;  but,  while  some  may  be  regarded  as  Lance-heads,
others  were  probably  Lateral  Scrapers,  with  sharpened  butt  (figured  upside  down)  1 8

PLATE  VII.  A  Series  of  Flint  Implements,  somewhat  spatulate  in  form,  having  one  end  nearly  semi-
circular, the  other  tapering,  and  the  sides  more  or  less  parallel.  They  have  all  been  formed  of
flakes ;  and  the  ends,  and  sometimes  one  or  both  of  the  sides,  have  been  chipped.  One  end  has
been  rounded  by  a  series  of  small  fractures  perpendicular  to  the  flat  or  inner  face  of  the  flake ;
and  a  curved  solid  terminal  edge  has  been  thus  formed,  such  as  we  find  in  certain  Stone  Imple-
ments that  the  Esquimaux  at  present  use  in  scraping  and  dressing  skins  22

PLATE  VIII.  Ten  Implements  formed  of  Flint  flakes,  either  without  any  further  chipping,  or  by  more

or  less  reduction  of  the  ends  and  edges 27

PLATE  IX.  Two  large,  simple,  untrimmed  Flakes  of  Flint,  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.  These  almost
strigil-shaped  Flakes  have  been  struck  off  blocks  of  flint  like  those  figured  in  A.  Plates  I.  and
XIV.,  a  flake  at  a  blow 34.

PLATE  X.  Six  implements  of  worked  Flint,  from  the  Gorge  d'Eufer,  of  which  four  have  one  end
chipped  into  the  semicircular  or  elliptical  solid  edge  of  a  Scraper,  and  two. have  both  ends  so
prepared ,  r

PLATE  XI.  Four  lanceolate  specimens.     Fig.  4  is  merely  a  flake,  with  no  modification  of  its  edges.

Figs.  1,  2,  and  3  also  were  flakes,  but  have  been  dressed  and  used 3  j


CONTENTS.  xv


PLATE  XII.  Six  roughly  shaped  specimens,  in  which  an  irregular  cutting-edge  has  been  produced  on
some  part  of  the  margin  by  thinning  it  by  bold  parallel  chipping  on  one  or  both  faces  of  the
stone.  From  Le  Moustier 39

PLATE  XIII.  The  two  specimens  here  figured  are  examples  of  the  hollowed  pebbles  of  granite  found  in

the  Cave  at  Les  Eyzies  59

PLATE  XIV.  The  blocks  of  Flint  here  shown  are  Nuclei  or  Cores,  from  which  flakes  have  been  struck.

Some  such  Cores  have  been  figured  in  A.  Plate  I 63

PLATE  XV.  The  specimens  here  figured  are  flint  flakes,  which  have  mostly  been  dressed  to  a  taper  point
at  one  end ;  and  two  have  had  the  broad  end  carefully  rounded  (figs.  3  and  8).  All  bear  marks
of  having  been  used  in  scraping  or  cutting  or  both 73

PLATE  XVI.  Of  these  Implements  of  Flint,  some  (figs.  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  10)  are  of  the  same  type  as  the
majority  of  those  in  the  preceding  Plate — that  is,  flakes  dressed  to  symmetry  at  one  or  both  ends.
Figs.  1,  9,  11,  and  12  resemble  some  drawn  in  A.  Plate  VIII.,  which  have  one  end  pointed  as  a
"  tang  "  for  fixing  in  a  handle,  perhaps,  and  the  other  end  somewhat  shaped  by  chipping.  Except
figs.  8  and  13,  all  bear  marks  of  use 75

PLATE  XVII.  Four  Implements  of  Flint  from  the  Cave  of  Le  Moustier.  Two  are  remarkable  as  being
of  the  same  type  as  many  found  in  the  old  gravel  of  the  Somme,  also  in  England  and  elsewhere.
A  more  ovate  instrument  of  this  kind  has  been  already  figured  from  Le  Moustier  in  A.  Plate  III.
fig.  2.  The  other  two  somewhat  approach  in  shape  those  from  Le  Moustier  already  figured  in
A.  Plate  V.,  and,  like  them,  could  have  been  conveniently  used  when  held  in  the  hand  78

PLATE  XVIII.  The  Implements  here  figured  have  been  worked  out  of  Flint-flakes,  probably  as  Scrapers

and  Awls  or  Eimers.     They  include  some  rare  curved  or  subfalcate  forms     79

PLATE  XIX.  Eight  neatly  trimmed  Flint  Instruments  and  a  fragment,  from  Cro-Magnon    83

PLATE  XX.  Implements  from  Cro-Magnon.  Fig.  3  may  have  been  the  Poignard  or  personal  weapon
of  the  Aboriginal  Chief  buried  in  Cro-Magnon  Cave.  Fig.  5  is  a  rare  chisel-pointed  Implement ;
the  others  were  probably  Scrapers ;  two  have  hooked  points  . . . ." 85

PLATE  XXI.  Five  Flint  Implements  of  lanceolate  form,  from  Laugerie 105

PLATE  XXII.  Three  large  flakes  of  Flint  from  Laugerie  Haute ;  fig.  1  is  rounded  at  one  end ;  fig.  2  is

unworked ;  fig.  3  is  pointed   107

PLATE  XXIII.  We  have  here  (1)  a  small  Mortar-stone  of  sandstone,  (2)  a  piece  of  naturally  hollowed
sandstone,  which  may  possibly  have  served  as  a  kind  of  Mortar,  (3)  a  Kubber  of  soft  stone,  and
(4)  a  Mortar-stone  of  Quartzite 108

PLATE  XXIV.  Examples  of  two  sorts  of  those  Implements  termed  "  Scrapers,"  being  dressed  portions  of
flakes,  with  either  more  or  less  oblong  or  more  or  less  ovate  outline,  and  having  either  one  or  both
ends  neatly  dressed  to  a  semicircular  or  elliptical  edge  in

PLATE  XXV.  This  Plate  shows  three  views  of  one  of  the  large  Chopper-like  Implements  common  in  the

Cave  at  Le  Moustier    114.

PLATE  XXVI.  Three  long,  arched,  tapering  flint  flakes,  with  unworn  edges 115

PLATE  XXVII.  Six  broad  rough  flakes,  of  which  only  two  (figs.  1  and  3)  have  been  dressed  at  the

edges    117


CONTENTS.

Page

PLATE  XXVIII.  Illustrates  four  different  types  of  flint  Implements  from  the  Cave  at  Le  Moustier.
Fig.  5,  a  carefully  dressed  long  ovate  Arrow-head,  belongs  to  a  type  known  at  Le  Moustier  by
this  specimen  only

PLATE  XXIX.  Two  pieces  of  schist,  engraved  with  figures  of  Animals,  and  three  pieces  of  worked

stone,  more  or  less  rounded,  and  engraved  with  lines IZ7

PLATE  XXX.  Pieces  of  stone  used  in  grinding  and  polishing.  Fig.  1  appears  fitted  for  polishing  flat
and  grooved  surfaces  of  wood  or  bone,  or  for  flattening  seams  in  sewn  skins.  Figs.  2,  3,  4,  and  5
are  of  soft  sandstone,  and  have  been  used  in  the  rounding  and  sharpening  of  splinters  and  spfflets
of  bone,  intended  for  needles,  awls,  arrow-points,  &c '  29

PLATE  XXXI.  Common  flint  flakes,  of  which  some  are  more  or  less  dressed  into  shape     131

PLATE  XXXII.  Examples  of  Scrapers,  Lance-heads,  Knives,  &c »33

PLATE  XXXIII.  Some  interesting  specimens  of  stonework,  consisting  of  Lance-heads,  Scrapers,  or

Knives,  including  two  broken  Semilunes  1 3^

PLATE  XXXIV.  A  series  of  the  common  round-ended  Scraper-like  Implements,  or  simple  flakes  more

or  less  dressed  and  rounded  at  one  or  both  ends,  are  here  figured    138

PLATE  XXXV.  Five  specimens  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  comprising  two  pieces  of  large  spatulate
Scrapers  (figs.  1  and  2),  one  long  simple  Scraper  (fig.  3),  one  handsome  Scraper  with  both  ends
rounded  (fig.  4),  and  one  simple  flake  (fig.  5)  151

PLATE  XXXVI.  Flint  flakes  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  four  of  which  have  been  more  or  less  dressed
into  symmetrical  Implements  for  chiselling  (figs.  1  and  3),  or  for  Scraping  (figs.  1,  3,  and  4),  or
as  a  Spear-head  (fig.  2).  The  others  are  simple  flakes,  one  of  which  (fig.  5)  has  been  used  as  an
Implement  ready  to  the  hand  of  the  Savage 153

PLATE  XXXVII.  Three  simple  unused  flakes,  the  waste  in  dressing  blocks,  and  three  large  coarse

flakes  dressed  as  Scrapers  or  Choppers,  of  different  shapes 155

PLATE  XXXVIII.  &  XXXIX.  Several  of  the  large  clumsy  Knives,  Choppers,  or  one-edged  cleaver-like
flint  Implements  from  Le  Moustier.  Each  is  carefully  dressed  to  a  sharp  hatchet-edge,  usually
curved,  along  one  margin,  and  elsewhere  retaining  some  portion  of  the  surface  and  outer  crust  of
the  original  flint  nodule 171

PLATE  XL.  A  series  of  Flint  Implements  formed  of  dressed  flakes,  from  the  Moustier  Cave 173

PLATE  XLI.  A  miscellaneous  group  of  dressed  and  worn  Implements,  made  out  of  flint  flakes,  and  two

simple  flakes  of  quartz  (figs.  4  and  11);  from  various  Stations    175

PLATE  XLII.  A  selection  of  specimens,  comprising  flint  Tools  which  must  have  been  in  use  with  the

old  Cave-folk  in  their  ordinary  work  of  flaying,  cutting,  scraping,  boring,  &c 183

B.  BONE  IMPLEMENTS  &c.

PLATE  I.  The  specimens  figured  in  this  Plate  are  Hunting-  or  Fishing-Implements,  made  of  Reindeer's
Horn.  "Whether  Arrow-  or  Harpoon-heads,  all,  both  large  and  small,  have  on  each  side  recurved
points,  hooks,  or  barbs  cut  out  of  the  sides,  sometimes  opposite,  sometimes  alternate.  The  upper
end,  more  or  less  elongated  and  pointed,  is  sometimes  rounded  and  nearly  smooth  9


CONTENTS.  xvii

Pagp
PLATE  II.  Engraved  outlines  of  Fish,  Stag,  Reindeer,  Ibex,  Aurochs,  Horse,  Eel  (?),  and  Han,  on  Bono

and  Antler :  figs.  3,  7,  and  8  are  portions  of  Batons  or  perforated  Clubs    13

PLATE  III.  &  IV.  Seven  portions  of  Eeindeer  Antler,  variously  cut  and  ornamented.     Figs.  2  and  3

were  Poignards :  figs.  1,  4,  5,  and  6  were  perforated  Clubs  or  Batons    30

PLATE  V.  Excepting  figs.  14  and  22,  the  specimens  represented  in  this  Plate  are  perforated  for  suspen-
sion, and  may  be  regarded  as  having  been  intended  to  bo  worn  on  the  person,  as  Ornaments  or
Amulets,  and  some  perhaps  as  memorials  and  trophies  of  the  chase.  Fig.  21  is  a  Whistle.  Only
one  of  these  articles  is  of  Stone.  Some  are  fossil  Shells.  By  far  the  greater  number  are  formed
of  the  Incisor  and  Canine  Teeth  of  Carnivorous  or  of  Herbivorous  Animals ;  and  among  them  can

be  recognized  teeth  of  the  Wolf,  Fox,  a  great  Bos,  the  Ibex,  and  the  Reindeer 41

PLATE  VI.  Arrow-heads  or  Harpoons  of  Antler,  figs.  1-9,  of  different  sizes,  and  barbed  on  one  or  both
sides.  Some  have  been  repointed  after  breakage.  Figs.  10-15  are  Spillets,  Skewers,  or  Pins  of
Antler,  pointed  at  both  ends,  and  useful  for  fastening  skins  and  cloths ;  or,  if  lashed  on  to  sticks,
as  points  of  arrows ;  or  as  both  point  and  barb  in  javelins  and  fish-hooks,  if  fastened  on  obliquely.
Some  may  have  been  used  singly,  with  a  line  and  bait,  as  fish-snares ;  p.  294 49

PLATE  VII.  &  VIII.  Carvings  and  outlines  of  Horse,  Stag,  and  other  Animals  on  Reindeer's  Horn

(Batons  &c.)    s 64

PLATE  IX.  &  X.  The  Bone  Implements  illustrated  by  these  two  Plates  may  be  regarded  as  armatures,
or  pointed  heads,  of  Implements  and  Weapons  used  in  Fishing  and  Hunting,  or  in  War.  These
"  Dart-heads  "  are  variously  ornamented 68

PLATE  XI.  Marine  Shells  and  some  small  ovate  flattish  plates  of  Ivory,  perforated  for  suspension,  from

Cro-Magnon  Cave  92

PLATE  XII.  Dart-heads,  Arrow-heads,  Awls,  Bodkins,  &c.,  made  principally  of  Reindeer-horn.     From

Cro-Magnon    95

PLATE  XIII.  Sharp-pointed  Implements  from  Gorge  d'Enfer ;  Arrow-  and  Harpoon-heads,  Awls,  &c.,

mostly  made  of  Reindeer-horn.     Fig.  13,  of  ivory,  may  have  been  used  for  Gambling,  p.  187  ....      97

PLATE  XIV.  Double-barbed  Harpoon-  or  Arrow-heads  from  La  Madelaine    100

PLATE  XV.  &  XVI.  Trimmed  and  ornamented  Antler-stems.     Fig.  4  is  a  Chisel  of  Stag's  Horn 102

PLATE  XVII.  Needles  made  of  bone  and  antler ;  also  the  broken  radius  of  a  Bird  (Crane,  perhaps)
supposed  to  have  been  used  as  a  Needle-case ;  metapodal  bones  out  of  which  pieces  have  been  cut
for  needles,  and  from  which  sinews  have  been  cut  for  thread ;  and  some  other  specimens  121

PLATE  XVIII.  Carved  Implements  made  of  Reindeer-antler   1 24

PLATE  XIX.  &  XX.  This  double  Plate  comprises  figures  of  some  of  the  choicest  specimens  of  prehistoric
art,  and  some  of  the  most  valuable  (as  indicative  of  primaeval  taste  and  habits)  that  the  Caves  of
Aquitaine  have  yielded.  Carvings  of  Horse  and  Reindeer,  and  sketches  of  Ibex  and  two  Bovine
forms.  From  the  rock-shelter  of  Laugerie  Basse 1 42

PLATE  XXI.  This  Plate  exhibits  some  carved  Implements,  formed  out  of  Reindeer-antler,  from  Laugerie

and  La  Madelaine    148

PLATE  XXII.  Barbed  and  grooved  Harpoon-heads,  bulbed  at  the  butt,  such  as  have  been  found  in  the

rock-shelter  of  La  Madelaine  and  figured  above    150


xviii  CONTENTS.

Page
PLATE  XXIII.  A  selection  of  imperfect,  ornamented,  subcylindrical  Implements  or  Weapons,  mostly  of

Antler,  fig.  2  only  being  of  bone.     A  raised  fillet,  variously  sculptured,  is  the  characteristic  feature

in  most  of  them 157

PLATE  XXIV.  Fragments  of  various  ornamented,  subcylindrical,  and  other  Implements,  mostly  of  Antler,

fig.  4  only  being  of  bone.    Figs.  1  and  7,  at  least,  were  parts  of  "  Batons  " 159

PLATE  XXV.  Implements  of  Antler  and  Bone,  illustrative  of  Tally-marks,  Owner-marks,  Gambling-
tools,  and  other  carving i6z

FLATS  XXVI.  A  series  of  Implements  of  cut  Antler  showing  Owner-marks  and  other  carving     1 64

PLATE  XXVII.  Barbed  and  grooved  Harpoon-  or  Arrow-heads,  of  Reindeer-horn     167

PLATE  XXVIII.  A  portion  of  the  outside  layer  of  a  Tusk  of  an  Elephant,  most  probably  a  Mammoth,

with  the  outline  of  a  hairy  Elephant  cut  on  its  outer  surface 1 68

PLATE  XXIX.  Some  imperfect  and  some  unfinished  Harpoon-heads,  of  Reindeer-antler 178

PLATE  XXX.  &  XXXI.  Figs.  2  to  5  illustrate  some  fine  specimens  of  the  Aquitanian  Pogamagan,  or
Baton,  made  of  carved  and  perforated  Antlers,  common  in  the  Caves  of  the  Vezere,  and  rare  else-
where. Fig.  1  is  a  fragment  of  some  carved  Implement,  of  unknown  use 1 80

C.  SKULLS,  BONES,  AND  ANTLERS.

PLATES  I.- VI.  Skulls  and  Bones  from  the  Cro-Magnon  Cave 89

PLATE  VII.  &  VIII.  Reindeer  Antlers,  in  various  conditions,  of  different  ages,  and  in  several  stages  of

growth     1 69

PLATE  IX.  &  X.  Bones  and  portions  of  Skulls  from  Cro-Magnon  and  other  Caves     1 86


MAPS.

Sketch  Map  of  a  part  of  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere     19

Geological  Sketch  Map  of  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere  and  neighbouring  Country 29

Corrected  Sketch  Map  of  a  part  of  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere    12f>

SKETCHES   ON   THE   VEZERE.

BY  W.  TIPPING,  ESQ.,  F.S.A.

Page

1.  View  of  Le  Moustier,  with  fly-leaf  of  title    opposite  166

2.  View  of  Les  Eyzies,  with  fly-leaf  of  title opposite  170

3.  View  of  the  Chateau  des  Eyzies,  with  fly-leaf  of  title opposite  172

4.  View  of  Le  Roc  de  Tayac,  with  fly-leaf  of  title    opposite  180


CONTENTS.  XIX


IV.  LISTS  OF  THE  WOODCUTS.
I.  WOODCUTS  IN  THE  ESSAYS  AND  MEMOIRS.

Pago
FIG.    1.  Diagram  Profile  of  the  Limestone  Escarpment  of  Le  Moustier,  from  the  South-west 3

FIG.    2.  Diagram  Profile  of  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  a  lateral  Valley  on  the  Right  Bank  of  the  Vezere 4

FIG.    3.  Obsidian  Lance-head,  mounted  on  a  Shaft ;  from  New  Caledonia     14

FIG.    4.  Flint  Lance-head ;  from  the  Gravel  of  the  Valley  of  the  Somme 14

FIG.    5.  Scraper  of  Lydite,  mounted  in  an  ivory  handle ;  used  by  the  Esquimaux  (two  views,  a,  b)    .

FIG.    6.  Flint  Scraper ;  from  a  Cave  in  Perigord     1*

FIG.    7.  Flint  Scraper ;  from  the  Gravel  of  the  Valley  of  the  Somme     14

FIG.    8.  Polished  Axe  of  Greenstone ;  British  India    15

FIG.    9.  Polished  Axe  of  Greenstone ;  England  15

FIG.  10.  Polished  Axe  of  Greenstone ;  South  America     15

FIG.  11.  Polished  Axe  of  Basalt ;  France 15

FIG.  12.  Polished  Adze  of  Greenstone,  mounted  in  a  wooden  handle ;  from  New  Caledonia  (?)    15

FIG.  13.  Stone-chipper  used  by  the  Esquimaux  (two  views,  a,  b)   18

FIG.  14.  Diagram  of  the  Cave-deposits  at  Les  Eyzies 36

FIG.  15.  Implement  of  Deer's  Horn,  from  Mackenzie-Eiver  District,  North-east  of  British  Columbia

(two  views,  a,  b)   37

FIGS.  16-31.  North- American  Implements  of  Stone,  Metal,  Horn,  and  Bone     43

FIG.  32.  A  perfect  Specimen  of  a  "  Puek-a-maugan,"  from  Sitka,  North  America.  Several  views  (a-Ti)
of  the  stem  and  branch,  showing  the  details  of  ornament,  the  leathern  cover,  and  the  strap  for
suspension 51

FIG.  33.  Carved  and  perforated  Piece  of  Reindeer's  Horn,  from  the  Rock-shelter  at  La  Madelaine  ....     53
Fie.  34.  Lapland  Instrument  for  tapping  the  Magic  Drum  ;  in  Dr.  G.  Klemm's  Collection  (two  views,

a,  b).     Sketched  by  Professor  Griiner 53

FIGS.  35  and  36.  Copies  of  Scheffer's  Figures  of  the  Hammer  for  tapping  the  Magic  Drum  of  the

Laplanders     54

FIG.  37.  View  of  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere,  showing  the  Chamfering  or  Fluting  of  the  Rocky  face  of
the  Right  Bank,  and  the  Inclination  of  these  Lines  in  a  direction  contrary  to  that  of  the  Slope
of  the  River  64

FIG.  38.  View  of  the  Rocks  along  the  Left  Bank  of  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere,  from  Tayac  to  Les  Eyzies,

including  the  Cave  of  Cro-Magnon 64

FIG.  39.  Section  through  the  Rock  of  Cro-Magnon,  down  the  river.    (The  blank  spot  at  d  ought  to  have

been  shaded.)     65


XX  CONTENTS.


FIG.  40.  View  of  the  Cro-Magnon  Cave,  with  the  Pillar  supporting  the  Eoof    65

FIG.  41.  Detailed  Section  of  the  Cave  of  Cro-Magnon,  near  Les  Eyzies 67

FIG.  42.  Plan  of  the  Cave  of  Cro-Magnon,  showing  the  Position  of  the  Human  Skeletons,  of  the

Slabs,  &c 69

FIG.  43.  Section  of  a  lateral  Portion  of  the  Cave  ;  along  the  line  y-S  of  the  Plan,  fig.  42    69

FIG.  44.  Diagram  of  the  Back  View  of  the  Upper  Portion  of  a  Eight  Tibia  104

FIG.  45.  Diagrams  showing  the  Transverse  Section  of  an  ordinary  and  of  a  Platycnemic  Tibia    105

FIG.  46.  Outline  of  the  Outer  Side  of  the  Upper  Portion  of  a  Platycnemic  Tibia 105

FIG.  47.  Diagrammatic  Sections  of  Healthy  and  of  Eickety  Tibias,  at  the  Level  of  the  Nutritive

Foramen    108

FIGS.  48  a  and  48  b.  Ancient  Egyptian  Needles,  drawn  by  M.  Prisse  d'Avesnes    128

FIG.  49.  Ancient  Gaulish  Bronze  Needle,  thin,  with  the  eye  near  the  middle  (M.  Matthieu)    129

FIG.  50.  Esquimaux  Needle  of  Bone.    (After  Parry.) 130

FIG.  51.  A  Piece  of  Sandstone  that  has  served  as  a  Eubber  in  making  Needles ;  from  Massat,  Ariege . .  133

FIG.  52.  Flint  Needle-piercer  from  La  Madelaine     134

FIG.  53.  Broken  Needle,  with  a  new  Eye 135

FIG.  54.  Broken  Needle,  with  a  new  Eye  partly  made     135

FIG.  55.  A  small  Awl  or  Needle -piercer,  from  Mentone,  North  Italy 141

FIG.  56.  A  small  Awl  or  Needle-piercer,  from  Les  Eyzies,  Dordogne 141

FIG.  57.  Portion  of  a  perforated  Harpoon-head  of  Eeindeer-horn,  from  La  Madelaine 160

FIG.  58.  Harpoon,  from  the  Konjags  of  Alaska,  for  comparison  with  fig.  57 160

FIG.  59.  Diagram  Section  of  the  Hill  above  Condat     165

FIG.  60.  Eye-sketch  of  Le  Moustier,  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  Eiver,  showing  the  Upper  and  the

Lower  Cave,  the  latter  partly  railed  off,  with  Garden-ground  in  front  of  it 166

FIG.  61.  Diagram  Profile  of  the  Limestone  Escarpment  of  Le  Moustier,  from  the  South-west 166

FIG.  62.  Diagram  Profile  of  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  a  lateral  Valley  on  the  Eight  Bank  of  the  Vezere 170

FIG.  63.  Diagram  of  the  deposits  in  the  Cave  at  Les  Eyzies    171

FIG.  64.  Ivory  Ornament  or  Implement  from  Central  Africa,  forming  part  of  an  Amulet  worn  by

the  Djibba  Negroes 135

FIG.  65.  Knife  of  hard  Wood,  described  as  a  "Woman's  Knife  "  of  the  Dor  Negroes    186

FIG.  66.  Notched  Stone  Implement  from  Pennsylvania   186

FIG.  67.  Knife  of  Walrus  Tusk  (probably  Esquimaux)     . .  . . , 186

FIG.  68.  Scored  Stone  Implement  from  Denmark.    (Figs.  65-68  drawn  by  Col.  A.  Lane  Fox,  F.E.S.). .  186

FIG.  69.  Scored  Bone  Knife  from  Heathery  Burn.     Sketched  by  A.  W.  Franks,  F.E.S 188

FIG.  70.  Tally-board  used  in  the  South  of  Ireland.     From  a  Sketch  by  M.  J.  C.  Buckley,  Esq 192.

FIG.  71.  Burmese  Tally 192


CONTENTS.  XXI

Page
FIG.  72.  Tally-stick  from  Wishmoor,  Surrey    192

FIGS.  73  a-g.  Esquimaux  Owner-marks  on  Harpoons 193

FIG.  74.  Australian  Club,  with  Marks  of  Ownership.     Drawn  by  Col.  A.  Lane  Fox,  F.R.S 194

FIG.  75.  Owner-mark  (?)  on  a  Dart-head  from  Massat,  France 194

FIG.  76.  Butt  of  an  Harpoon-head,  with  Owner-mark,  from  Dordogne 194

FIG.  77.  Edge-view  of  an  Esquimaux  Bone  Arrow-head,  with  Owner's  Mark 194

FIG.  78.  Slate  Harpoon-head     196

FIG.  79.  Irish  Spade,  with  Owner-marks.     From  a  Sketch  by  M.  J.  C.  Buckley,  Esq 196

FIG.  80.  Outline  of  the  Glutton,  cut  on  a  Piece  of  Antler,  from  one  of  the  Caves  in  the  Department  of

the  Dordogne.     From  a  Photograph    209

FIG.  81.  The  Glutton  (Gulo  luscus)  in  the  Zoological  Society's  Gardens,  London.     Drawn  by  N.  L.

Austen,  F.L.S 210

FIG.  82.  A  Pair  of  fully  developed  Antlers  of  a  Siberian  Eeindeer  (Hunterian  Museum) 215

FIG.  83.  Cervus  tarandus,  Linne   218

FIG.  84.  Outline  of  a  Seal  on  a  Bear's  Tooth  from  the  Duruthy  Cave,  near  Sorde     223

FIG.  85.  Outline  of  a  Pike  on  a  Bear's  Tooth,  from  the  Duruthy  Cave 224

FIG.  86.  Outline  of  a  Fish  (Squalius)  engraved  on  a  Eeindeer  Jaw,  from  Laugerie  Basse     225

FIG.  87.  A  Core-end  Flake  dressed  as  a  Scraper,  from  La  Madelaine 254

t
FIG.  88.  Section  of  the  Eock-shelter  at  Laugerie  Basse,  showing  the  Human  Skeleton  "  No.  4  "  of  the

Massenat  Collection,  in  situ 257

FIG.  89.  Cranium  from  Laugerie  Basse,  "  No.  4  "    260

FIG.  90.  Norma  verticalis  of  Cranium  "  No.  2  "  from  Laugerie  Basse     264

FIG.  91.  Norma  verticalis  of  Cranium  "  No.  3  "  from  Laugerie  Basse    264

FIG.  92.  Frontal  Bone  from  La  Madelaine    266

FIG.  93.  The  same,  front  view 266

FIG.  94.  Inferior  Maxillary  from  La  Madelaine   267

FIG.  95.  Inferior  Maxillary  from  La  Naulette.     (Figs.  89-95  are  copied  from  the  '  Crania  Ethnica.') . .   267

FIG.  96.  Sketch  of  a  Saskadegan,  used  in  dressing  Skins  in  Newfoundland    277

FIG.  97.  Jeegegan  or  Skin-scraper.     From  a  Sketch  by  T.  G.  B.  Lloyd,  C.E 277

FIG.  98.  Incised  Outline  of  a  Eeindeer,  on  a  piece  of  Eeindeer  Antler,  from  the  Kesslerloch,  near
Thaingen,  Canton  Schaff hausen,  Switzerland.  Copied  from  Professor  A.  Heim's  drawing  in  the
'  Mittheil.  antiq.  Ges.  Zurich,'  xviii.  1874 279

II.  WOODCUTS  IN  THE  DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES.

FIGS,  la  and  1  b.  The  two  faces  of  a  flint  Implement,  chipped  into  shape  and  used  for  scraping  21

FIG.  2.  A  flint  flake,  worn  away  along  the  middle  part  of  one  edge  by  scraping   21


xxii  CONTENTS.

Page

FIG.  3.  A  Tanged  Scraper  of  chalcedonic  flint ;  from  La  Madelaine 22

Fio.  4.  Perforated  pebble,  with  oblique  grooves  and  rude  outline  of  an  animal.  See  B.  PL  V.  fig.  1 . .  45

FIG.  5.  Arrow-head  of  Eeindeer-horn,  used  by  the  Tchutski  of  N.E.  Asia  50

Fio.  6.  Esquimaux  Arrow-head,  wanting  the  point  of  stone  or  metal 50

FIG.  7.  Fuegian  Harpoon-head  of  Bone.  After  Lubbock 50

FIG.  8.  Ancient  Danish  Harpoon-head  of  Bone.  After  Madsen  50

FIG.  9.  Harpoon-head  of  Reindeer-horn  from  Bruniquel  50

FIG.  10.  Bone  Harpoon-head  from  the  Alluvium  of  the  River  Lacque,  near  Calais  50

FIG.  11.  Harpoon-head  of  Stag's  horn  from  the  Lake-Station  of  the  Aubin :  of  the  Stone- Age  51

FIG.  12.  Harpoon-head  of  bone  from  the  "  Drift,"  Lake  Superior,  North  America  51

Fis.  13.  Esquimaux  Harpoon-head  of  ivory  (a),  and  the  socket  for  it  in  the  ivory  head  of  the  shaft  (b)  5 1

FIG.  14.  Fishing-Implement  from  Nootka  Sound 5 '

FIG.  15.  Arrow-head  of  hone,  with  a  barb  of  whalebone,  from  Oriental  Siberia  51

FIGS.  16  a  and  16  b.  A  fragment  of  Eeindeer-Horn  on  which  is  carved  a  Bovine  head  (two  views).  See

B.  Plate  VII.  &  VIII.  fig.  7 67

FIG.  17.  The  bone  point  or  head  of  an  Arrow  from  Oriental  Siberia  or  Kamtechatka  68

FIGS.  18  a-c.  Three  views  of  a  Flint  Implement  adapted,  perhaps,  for  striking  fire.  See  A.  Plate  XX.

fig.  10  85

FIGS.  19  a-c.  A  subovate  tongue-shaped  Double  Scraper  (three  views).  See  A.  Plate  XX.  fig.  7  ....  85
FIG.  20.  Sketch  of  the  edge  of  the  carved  and  perforated  Implement,  fig.  1,  B.  Plate  XV.  &  XVI.,

showing  the  transverse  notches  or  scoring   103

FIG.  21.  A  Double  Awl  or  Graver,  from  La  Madelaine    128

FIG.  22.  Outline  of  the  lower  end  of  fig.  3  in  A.  Plate  XXX 129

FIG.  23.  An  Awl  or  Double  End-scraper,  from  La  Madelaine : 130

FIG.  24.  Stone  Knife,  hafted  with  fur  and  cord,  from  Australia.     After  J.  Evans 134

FIG.  25.  Portion  of  a  Flint  Tool  with  semicircular  edge.     Dordogne 135

FIG.  26.  Edge-view  of  the  specimen  fig.  3  in  A.  Plate  XXXIV 139

FIG.  27.  Diagram  to  show  the  method  of  producing  fire  with  flints  and  punk    139

FIG.  28.  Drawing  of  Wild-Goat's  head  on  Reindeer's  brow-antler.     See  B.  Plate  XIX.  &  XX.  fig.  2  . .  144

FIG.  29.  Outlines  of  Bovine  Animals,  engraved  on  the  back  of  the  specimen  figured  in  B.  Plate  XIX.  &

XX.  fig.  3 146

FIG.  30.  A  portion  of  a  Tally-stick  or  Gambling- Tool  (?)  of  Reindeer  Antler,  from  La  Madelaine    .  .  152

FIG.  31.  A  long  Harpoon  or  Barbed  Lance,  from  the  Gambler  Islands  161

FIGS.  32-34.  Three  bone  Harpoon-heads  from  Tierra  del  Fuego 1 79


ESSAYS  AND   MEMOIRS.


RELIQUIAE    AQUITANICJE.


i.

AQUITANIA— FEATURES  OF  THE  DORDOGNE  DISTRICT— THE  CAVES  IN  THE  VALLEY
OF  THE  VEZERE  AND  THEIR  CONTENTS— INFILLING  OF  BONE-CAVES—RELATIVE
CHRONOLOGY  OF  BONE-CAVES.

Aquitania. — In.  explanation  of  the  Latinized  title  of  this  Work,  the  Authors
have  to  mention  that,  at  various  periods  of  History,  the  geographical  term
"  Aquitaine"  has  been  applied  to  a  region  of  Gaul  and  France  diiferently  limited
at  different  times.

Before  the  Roman  Conquest  of  Gaul,  Aquitaine  comprised  only  the  conquered
lands  lying  between  the  Pyrenees,  the  Garonne,  and  the  Ocean.  It  was  partly
subjected  to  the  Romans  by  the  younger  Crassus,  one  of  Caesar's  lieutenants ;
but  the  Roman  domination  was  not  definitely  established  until  after  the  victories
of  Messala,  who,  under  Augustus,  repressed  the  revolts  of  the  Aquitanians.

Augustus,  on  the  new  division  that  he  made  of  the  Provinces  of  Gaul,
considerably  enlarged  Aquitania,  at  the  expense  of  Celtica,  and  settled  the
Cevennes  and  the  Loire  as  its  boundaries.  The  new  Province,  thus  constituted,
was  subdivided  into  the  First,  Second,  and  Third  Aquitania, — the  last,  more  often
designated  by  the  name  "  Novempopulania,"  comprising  almost  entirely  the
territory  of  the  original  Aquitania,  such  as  it  was  before  the  Conquest.  This
division  continued  to  exist  until  the  invasion  of  the  Barbarians-  The  Visigoths,
who  located  themselves  in  Aquitaine  in  419,  were  dispossessed  of  it  in  507  by
the  French  King  Clovis ;  and  his  immediate  successors  modified  from  time  to
time  its  boundaries.

In  the  Sixth  Century  the  irruption  and  settling  of  the  Basques,  Vascons,  or
Gascons  gave  the  name  of  "  Gascony  "  to  a  large  portion  of  Novempopulania  or

B


2  KELIQULE  AQUITANIC.E.

Aquitania  Tertia ;  and  detached  portions  of  the  two  other  Aquitaines  subsequently
took  the  names  of  Upper  and  Lower  Guyenne,  supposed  to  be  a  corrupted  form  of
the  name  Aquitaine.

Still  later,  a  considerable  part  of  the  three  Aquitaines,  thus  dismembered  and
partitioned,  sometimes  belonging  to  the  Crown  of  Trance,  sometimes  held  by  the
Kings  of  England,  long  remained  the  theatre  of  international  strife,  which  did  not
cease  until  the  middle  of  the  15th  century,  when  all  the  territories  for  the  pos-
session of  which  the  English  had  so  long  struggled  in  that  region  were  definitely
reunited  to  France.

Considered  with  reference  to  the  division  of  France  into  Provinces,  which  ceased
to  exist  in  1789,  the  "  Aquitania  Prima  "  of  the  Romans,  which  had  Avaricum
(Bourges)  for  its  metropolis,  corresponded  with  the  Provinces  of  Berri,  Auvergne,
Quercy,  GeVaudan,  Albigeois,  Limousin,  Rouergue,  and  Velay.  Aquitania  Secunda,
the  metropolis  of  which  was  Burdigala  (Bordeaux),  comprised  the  Provinces  of
Angoumois,  Bordelais,  Me" doc, Agenais,  Pe"rigord,  Poitou,  and  Saintonge.  Aquitania
Tertia,  or  Novempopulania,  having  Elusa  (Eauze)  for  its  metropolis,  corresponded
only  with  the  Provinces  of  Beam  and  Bigorre  and  a  large  part  of  Gascony.

Although  the  archaeological  researches  of  which  this  Work  is  intended  to  give
some  account  have  been  carried  out  only  at  some  circumscribed  points  of  the
different  provinces  belonging  to  the  great  Aquitania,  the  Authors  have  found  it
convenient,  without  explicitly  determining  the  limits  of  exploration,  to  adopt
this  wide  geographical  title.

Features  of  the  Dordogne  District. — This  Work  will  be  principally  devoted
to  the  description,  accompanied  by  Figures,  of  the  more  interesting  materials
which  have  been  collected  in  that  part  of  Perigord  (the  territory  of  the  ancient
Petrocorii  of  Celtica)  which  forms  at  present  the  Arrondissement  of  Sarlat,  in  the
De"partement  of  Dordogne.

This  country  is  now  traversed  by  the  railroad  from  Paris  to  Agen  (Central  Line),
passing  by  Orleans,  Chateauroux,  Limoges,  and  Pe"rigueux.  After  passing  the  last-
named  town  about  eighteen  miles,  and  descending  to  the  valley  of  the  Vezere,
between  the  Stations  of  Miremont  and  Les  Eyzies,  the  eye  is  struck  by  the  sud-
den change  which  affects  the  physical  aspect  of  the  country.  The  two  sides  of  the
valley  rise  in  great  escarpments  of  massive  rock,  more  or  less  interrupted  by
ancient  falls.  Their  summit  is  usually  crowned  with  projecting  cornices,  below
which  are  great  horizontal  niches  or  hollow  flutings.  These  great  flutings  are


VALLEY  OF  THE  VEZEEE.  3

strikingly  evident  at  the  same  level  on  the  two  sides  of  the  valley,  where  the
escarpments  overlook  the  river,  and  where  they  are  continued  in  the  rocks
bordering  the  lateral  valleys,  down  which  small  streams  run  into  the  Vezere.
Hence  the  first  impression  on  the  observer  is  that  these  are  great  lines  of  erosion,
due  to  the  rapid  movement  and  long-continued  passage  of  a  vast  mass  of  water
that  had  filled  both  the  principal  and  the  accessory  valleys.  Further  reflection,
however,  and  a  more  attentive  examination  soon  suggest  a  more  reasonable  expla-
nation.

When  we  approach  the  foot  of  these  cliffs,  it  is  readily  seen  that  these  masses
of  rock,  referable  geologically  to  the  Cretaceous  Formation,  present  horizontal
beds  of  a  somewhat  various  structure  and  composition.  Some  of  the  layers
are  more  susceptible  than  others  of  being  attacked  by  the  atmospheric  agents
which  degrade  and  eat  into  their  exposed  surfaces,  whilst  the  harder  intervening
layers  resist  better  and  remain  as  projections.  Hence  result  the  projecting  ledges
and  the  long  hollow  linep,  which,  necessarily  corresponding  in  level  on  the  two
sides  of  the  valley,  suggest  at  first  sight  the  action  of  water.

Passing  near  these  cliffs  after  a  thaw, — or  even,  in  summer,  at  a  time  when
intense  heat  has  followed  moist  and  rainy  weather,  one  may  see  both  large  thin
plates  and  small  flakes  and  films  of  the  rock  scale  off  from  the  beds  where  the
hollow  flutings  are  being  formed ;  and  these  scalings  accumulate  all  along  at  the
foot  of  the  escarpment,  where  they  are  sometimes  reconstituted  as  solid  masses  by
the  effect  of  calcareous  infiltrations  of  the  percolating  waters.

As  for  the  upper  cornices,  the  bed  which  supports  them  being  continually
diminished    by    weathering,    they   project
horizontally   sometimes   far   forward ;   and
when    by   their   weight    they    are    forced
to  break  off,  they  fall  and  lie  at  the  foot

of   the    cliff,    where   some    may    be    now  T^k  The  cave,  with  bone.,  &c.

observed  that   have  been   lying    there   for
centuries.

It  is  thus  possible  to  conceive  that  at-  — ^  ««*"•  ** bone8'  *"•

mospheric  Causes,  however  gently  Operating,      Diagram  Profile  of  the  Limestone  Escarpment  of

may  have  powerfully  contributed,  in  long        Le  Moustier,  from  the  South-west,  about  190

.  ,       .  „  feet  high.

series  of  ages,  to   the   widening   01   some

valleys — and  this  independently  of  the  action  of  water,  which  indeed  in  many

cases  is  limited  to  filling  up  the  bottoms  of  the  valleys.

B2


4  BELIQTJIJE  AQUITANKLE.

The  great  rocky  masses  which  border  the  valley  of  the  Vezere,  and  those
enclosing  the  adjacent  valleys,  are  also  hollowed  with  numerous  cavities,  which


Fig.  2.


Limestone.


Limestone.


(a)  Cave,  with  Bones,  &c.          (6)  Recess,  with  Bonos,  &c.
Diagram  Profile  of  the  Qorye  d'Enfer,  a  lateral  Valley  on  the  right  Bank  of  the  Vezere.

the  hand  of  Man  has  often  modified  and  enlarged.  For  here,  as  in  many  other
countries,  the  caves,  recesses,  and  other  irregular  openings,  so  frequent  in
calcareous  rocks,  have  been  without  doubt  utilized  for  temporary  shelter,  and
even  for  permanent  residence.  This  habit,  more  general  when  the  people  of  this
country  were  exposed  to  constant  war  and  sudden  attacks,  became  less  usual  as
political  and  social  security  increased.

The  Rock  of  Tayac,  of  which  frequent  mention  is  made  in  the  history  of  the
wars  between  the  English  and  French  in  the  14th  and  15th  centuries,  was
at  that  time  a  kind  of  fortress  entirely  hollowed  out  of  the  rock,  and  it  sustained
more  than  one  siege.  There  still  exist  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Vezere  remains
of  this  mediaeval  fortress,  now  scarcely  accessible,  in  one  of  the  escarpments  at
the  foot  of  which  we  have  been  led  to  make  some  of  our  archaeological  researches,
though  of  course  relating  to  a  very  different  period.

At  the  present  time,  the  occupation  of  rocks  for  purposes  of  residence,  in  this
part  of  .Pe"rigord,  is  become  rarer ;  and  nearly  everywhere  where  it  still  obtains
recourse  is  also  had  habitually  to  additions  of  masonry,  rendering  the  residence
more  healthy  and  more  comfortable.

The  Caves  and  their  Contents. — The  Authors  have  already  had  occasion*  to
treat  of  several  Caves  and  Rockshelters,  situated  in  the  united  Communes

*  Eevue  Archeologique,  April  1864,  p.  257  et  seq.


CONTENTS  OF  THE  DOTCDOGNE  CAVES.  5

of  Les  Eyzies  and  Tayac,  and  in  the  neighbouring  Communes  of  Turzac  and
Peyzac,  all  belonging  to  the  Arrondissement  of  Sarlat ;  and  further  descriptions
of  them  and  their  contents  will  be  given  in  the  sequel.

At  present  we  will  only  mention  that  these  different  Stations,  although  within  the
chronological  divisions  of  the  Age  of  simply  worked  stone,  without  the  accompa-
niment of  domestic  animals,  do  not  present  a  uniformity  in  the  products  of  human
industry  collected  there.

In  fact,  at  Laugerie  Haute  (in  the  Commune  of  Tayac),  on  the  right  bank  of
the  Vezere,  where  worked  flints,  like  lance-heads,  were  comparatively  abundant,
the  arrow-heads  or  harpoon-heads  of  Reindeer-horn  were  almost  entirely  absent ;
whilst  the  latter  implements  are  found  in  great  numbers  at  Laugerie  Basse,
at  La  Madelaine,  and  even  at  Les  Eyzies,  where  scarcely  any  of  the  flint  lance-
heads  have  been  met  with.

The  figures  of  animals  engraved  or  sculptured  on  stone,  on  bone,  or  on
Reindeer-horn,  have  appeared  only  at  three  Stations  as  yet,  namely,  Les  Eyzies,
Laugerie  Basse,  and  La  Madelaine.

The  cave  of  Moustier,  which  has  yielded  worked  flints  of  a  special  type,  and
exceptional  with  respect  to  the  whole  range  of  our  explorations,  has  also
furnished  a  large  number  of  specimens  approaching  forms  frequent  in  the
"Diluvium"  of  St.  Acheul  and  Abbeville.  On  the  other  hand,  there  has  not
been  found  there  a  single  worked  bone,  or  any  engraved  or  sculptured  animal-
figure.

Nevertheless  the  Fauna  of  the  several  Stations  appears  to  be  almost  the  same  ;
only  at  Moustier  the  Reindeer  is  less  dominant  numerically  than  at  the  two
Laugeries,  at  La  Madelaine,  and  at  Les  Eyzies.

At  all  the  five  Stations  have  been  found  separate  plates  of  the  molar  teeth  of
Elephant  (Mephas  primig emus'),  the  occurrence  of  which,  evidently  connected
with  intentional  introduction,  we  have  not  yet  sought  to  explain.  At  two  (Les
Eyzies  and  La  Madelaine)  worked  ivory  has  been  met  with  ;  at  Laugerie  Basse  a
portion  of  the  pelvis  of  an  Elephant  was  found.

As  palaeontological  peculiarities  special  to  a  single  locality,  we  may  men-
tion : — in  the  Moustier  Cave,  the  half  of  a  lower  jaw  of  Jlycena ;  at  Les  Eyzies,  a
metacarpal  of  a  large  Felis  (F.  spelcea  ?)  bearing  the  marks  of  scrapings,  such  as
are  often  found  on  the  bones  of  the  Herbivores  eaten  by  the  natives ;  at  Laugerie
Haute  we  have  two  molars  of  the  Great  Irish  Deer  ( Cervus  euryceros  vel  Mega-
ceros  Hibernians) ;  and  at  Laugerie  Basse  the  phalanges  of  a  great  Bear,  marked
with  notches  made  by  a  cutting  instrument.


6  RELIQTJUE  AQDTTANIC^E.

Neither  in  the  two  Caves  of  Les  Eyzies  and  Moustier,  nor  in  the  three  Bock-
shelters  of  La  Madelaine  and  the  two  Laugeries,  have  any  gnawed  bones
occurred,  excepting  one  specimen  at  La  Madelaine,  namely  the  head  of  the
femur  of  a  Horse,  bearing  slight  impressions  of  the  sharp  teeth  of  a  young
Carnivore.

Hence  we  may  suppose  that  the  natives  who  congregated  in  these  caverns  and
under  these  rockshelters  had  the  means  of  closing  them  up,  and  preventing  the
access  of  beasts  of  prey,  such  as  certainly  lived  at  that  time  in  the  country,  for
their  existence  is  proved  by  tolerably  numerous  remains  of  Wolves  and  Poxes  in
the  different  localities  explored  by  us.

There  is  also  another  peculiarity  meriting  notice.  This  is  the  almost  complete
absence  of  the  back-bones  of  Ox  and  Horse  in  the  several  Stations  mentioned
above,  except  at  La  Madelaine,  where  several  dorsal  and  lumbar  vertebrae  of  a
young  Aurochs  (?)  have  been  collected.  We  may  thence  infer  that  the  large
animals  (Oxen  and  Horses),  after  having  been  slaughtered  by  the  aboriginal
huntsmen,  were  cut  up  on  the  spot,  and  that  only  the  extremities,  with  their
fleshy  parts  and  marrow-bones,  were  carried  away*.

Of  animals  of  less  size,  especially  the  Reindeer,  the  back-bones  are  found  in
considerable  numbers  at  all  the  Stations ;  and  at  the  cave  of  Les  Eyzies  we  have
many  times  observed  the  dorsal  vertebrae  remaining  in  series :  hence  we  may
presume  that  these  animals  were  carried  thither  entire.

Of  all  the  animals  the  heads  seem  to  have  been  always  brought  to  the  places  of
meeting,  probably  for  the  sake  of  the  brain ;  for  all  are  broken,  and  their  frag-
ments only  have  been  met  with.

Lastly,  no  bone  referable  to  a  Domestic  Animal  has  been  found  in  either
of  the  five  Stations  above  mentioned;  and  among  the  countless  thousands  of
worked  flints,  of  most  varied  types,  which  have  been  as  yet  collected,  not  one  has
presented  traces  of  intentional  polish  on  any  of  its  faces.  These  two  circumstances,
combined  with  the  constant  presence  of  the  Reindeer,  suffice  to  distinguish
definitely  this  First  Period  of  the  Age  of  Stone  simply  worked  t  from  the  Second

*  In  regard  to  Aurignac,  we  have  attributed  (Ann.  Sc.  Nat.,  1861)  the  total  disappearance  of  the  vertebrae
of  Ehinoceros,  Aurochs,  and  Horse  to  the  voracity  of  the  Hygenas.  The  explanation  now  offered  may  be
more  to  the  purpose.

t  To  affirm  absolutely  that  the  Men  of  the  Period  of  simply  worked  Stone  did  not  know  how  to  polish  the
Stones  which  they  fashioned  into  arms,  implements,  and  instruments  of  diverse  forms  would  be  an  imprudent
and  not  well-founded  assertion.  How,  indeed,  is  it  to  be  explained  that  the  people  who  gave  to  their  imple-
ments or  weapons  of  stone  forms  so  varied  and  often  elegant, — who  finished  them  off  for  ordinary  purposes
with  oftentimes  so  delicate  a  touch, — who,  on  the  other  hand,  took  the  trouble  to  give  to  their  needles  of  bone,


THE  FILLING  AND  AGE  OF  BONE-CAVES.  7

Period,  when  polished  stone  comes  before  us  together  with  domestic  animals  and
habits  of  agriculture  quite  unknown  to  the  earlier  natives.

This  is  a  striking  contrast,  involving  the  supposition  of  there  having  been
a  great  lapse  of  time  between  these  two  periods.  For,  if  the  rapid  change
of  manners  and  customs  might  be  explained  by  the  invasion  of  a  people
more  advanced  in  civilization,  and  by  the  extermination  of  the  conquered,
this  would  not  account  for  the  sudden  disappearance  of  a  species  of  animal, —
the  Reindeer  for  example,  of  which  we  do  not  find  any  trace,  either  in  the
oldest  Lake-dwellings  of  Switzerland,  or  in  the  caves  of  the  same  age,  containing
polished  stones  and  remains  of  domestic  animals,  or  even  in  the  earliest  of  the
Dolmens.

Infilling  of  Bone-caves. — There  was  a  time  when  Geologists,  at  variance  as  to
the  manner  in  which  the  introduction  of  Mammalian  Remains  into  Caves  has
been  effected,  proposed  only  two  explanations,  of  very  different  tendencies.

Some  thought,  with  Dr.  Buckland,  that  the  caverns  must  have  served  during  a
long  time  for  the  haunt  of  great  Carnivores,  especially  Hyaenas,  which  had
successively  dragged  into  them  the  entire  or  dismembered  carcases  of  their
prey.  In  certain  cases,  indeed,  the  evidence  agrees  well  enough  with  this  hypo-
thesis.

Another  opinion,  proposed  and  perseveringly  held  by  Constant  Prevost,  attri-
buted, in  very  great  part,  to  running  and  torrential  waters  the  transport  and  accu-
mulation of  the  cave-bones.

This  second  hypothesis   is   more  than  probable   when   it   concerns  the  great

and  instruments  made  of  Reindeer -horn,  the  finest  polish, — who  engraved  and  carved  these  same  bones  with
taste  and  remarkable  art, — how  can  we  explain,  we  say,  that  they  had  not  divined  the  art  of  polishing  stones,
especially  when  they  knew  (we  have  proofs  of  it)  how  to  hollow  them,  pierce  them,  to  cut  figures  of  animals
on  them,  and  even  to  produce  on  them,  by  rubbing,  intended  for  other  effects,  the  accident  of  polish,  alone
sufficient  to  reveal  to  them  the  process  ?  Among  different  peoples  of  Antiquity  there  have  always  been  some
long-respected  traditions,  sacred  usages,  and  mystic  prohibitions,  the  origin  of  which,  and  their  signification,
remain  unknown  to  us.  Among  the  Egyptians  the  use  of  stone,  to  the  exclusion  of  metal,  was  always
connected  with  certain  religious  and  funereal  practices.  The  Biblical  precept  (Exodus,  xx.  25)  prohibited,  in
the  building  of  the  primitive  altars,  the  use  or  contact  of  metal,  as  an  abomination.  In  our  Western  Europe
the  Menhirs,  the  Dolmens,  the  Cromlechs,  and  other  monuments  of  large  stones,  the  national  origin  of  which
is  still  obscure,  attest,  by  the  natural  state  of  the  blocks  used  in  them,  that  their  constructors  abstained
altogether  from  all  auxiliary  art,  and  even  from  the  mere  squaring  of  the  stones,  while,  notwithstanding,
they  did  often  associate  with  them,  as  consecrated  votive  offerings,  arms,  implements,  and  amulets  of
perfectly  polished  stone.


8  BELIQULE  AQTJITANICLE.

underground  cavities,  of  difficult  access,  or  having  no  external  communication
but  by  fissures  and  cracks,  more  or  less  vertical,  but  large  enough  to  give  passage
to  the  streams  carrying  and  depositing  the  bones  of  animals.

Later  researches  have  obliged  us  to  recognize  the  intervention  of  Man,  to  a
great  extent,  and  in  some  cases  exclusively,  in  the  accumulation  of  the  organic
debris  in  a  large  number  of  caverns,  inasmuch  as,  nearly  always,  the  same
deposits  contain  works  of  industry,  fragments  of  charcoal  and  of  burnt  bones,
as  well  as  other  signs  of  a  more  or  less  prolonged  habitation  by  Man.

Relative  Chronology  of  Bone-caves. — By  the  comparative  examination  of  the
material,  the  form,  and  style  of  the  works  of  industry,  together  with  the  study  of
the  specific  characters  recognizable  in  the  Mammalian  bones  found  with  them,
we  have  been  able  to  refer  these  organic  deposits  to  different  successive  periods,
thus  forming  a  kind  of  Relative  Chronology  of  the  Bone-caves.

Thus,  as  it  has  been  already  said,  it  is  generally  accepted  that  the  infilling
of  those  caverns  in  which  are  found  polished  stone  axes,  accompanied  only
by  bones  of  domestic  animals,  is  of  a  more  recent  date  than  that  of  the
deposits  in  certain  other  caves  where  domestic  animals  are  wanting,  where
there  has  been  only  simply  worked,  not  polished,  flint,  and  where  there
are  abundant  remains  of  extinct  or  emigrated  Mammals,  among  others  the
E/eindeer.

If  sometimes,  to  distinguish  the  latter  caves,  we  have  designated  them  as
being  of  the  Reindeer  Age,  simply  because  the  bones  of  this  animal  have
there  a  great  numerical  predominance,  we  have  not  thereby  intended  to  limit
the  local  existence  of  the  Reindeer  to  the  particular  epoch  to  which  these
caverns  appear  to  belong.  The  bones  of  Reindeer  have,  indeed,  been  observed,
though  in  smaller  numbers,  in  other  caves,  reputed  older  because,  with  works
of  industry  somewhat  different,  there  is  also  an  association  of  the  remains  of
the  large  Pachyderms,  the  extinction  of  which  is  usually  referred  to  a  more
distant  period.

It  is  known  also  that  Reindeer-bones  have  been  collected  from  different  beds  of
"  Diluvium,"  or  Quaternary  Alluviums  of  the  beds  of  valleys.  That  they  have  come
down  to  the  present  time  in  very  limited  number  only,  as  also  those  of  other
Mammals  of  middling  and  small  size,  may  perhaps  be  accounted  for  by  their
offering  less  resistance  than  those  of  the  great  Pachyderms  to  the  chances  of
destruction  from  the  multiplied  shocks  of  the  gravel  and  shingle  among  which
they  would  be  hurried  in  rapid  torrents.


CAVE-DWELLEES.  9

Mr.  Prestwich*  has  indeed  cited  the  remains  of  Eeindeer  associated  with
worked  flints  in  the  Quaternary  beds  of  the  "  Drift "  at  Bedford,  in  England,
at  Menchecourt  near  Abbeville,  and  at  Clichy  near  Paris,  in  Prance.  More
recently  we  have  seen  a  well-preserved  bone,  undoubtedly  referable  to  the
Eeindeer,  from  the  High-level  Valley-gravels  of  St.  Acheul  t.  The  Eeindeer
had  also  been  found  in  this  gravel  of  the  Valley  of  the  Oise,  at  Viry-Noureuil
near  Chauny  (Aisne),  where  M.  1'Abbe"  Lambert  collected  a  good  number  of
teeth  and  bones  of  Elephas  antiquus,  Elephas  primigenius,  Rhinoceros  ticho-
rhinus,  Megaceros  Hibernicm,  Ovibos  moschatus,  Hycena  spelcea,  &c.,  as  well
as  the  remains  of  a  small  Bear  which  certainly  was  not  (although  so  stated)
the  Great  Cave-bear  (Ursus  spelceus).

We  will  remark,  further,  that  remains  of  Eeindeer  have  been  noticed  by  our
lamented  and  esteemed  friend  Dr.  Palconer,  in  his  Memoir  on  the  Bone-caves
in  the  Peninsula  of  Gower  in  South  Wales,  where  the  fauna  seems  to  be
comparatively  very  ancient,  from  the  considerable  proportion  there  met  with
of  bones  of  Rhinoceros  heniitoecli'us  and  Elephas  antiquus — two  species  which,
in  the  opinion  of  the  great  palaeontologist  we  are  citing,  have  characterized
especially  the  earlier  part  of  the  Quaternary  Period  $.

As  for  the  parallelism  that  has  been  thought  to  be  established  between  the
organic  deposits  of  the  Caverns  and  the  fossiliferous  beds  of  the  "  Diluvium,"  it  has
no  real  support  but  the  affinity  found  on  comparison  of  the  pala3ontological
characters.  If  some  are  inclined  to  attribute  to  the  works  of  human  industry
found  in  the  "  Diluvium,"  or  "  Drift,"  a  date  more  ancient  than  to  those  occurring
in  Caves  with  a  similar  association  of  animal  remains,  we  are  obliged  to  remark
that  such  a  proposition,  expressed  as  a  systematic  generalization,  is  not  justifiable
in  any  point  of  view.  It  is  not  illogical  to  suppose  that  the  men  who  manu-
factured the  worked  flints  of  St.  Acheul,  Abbeville,  Hoxne,  Bedford,  &c.,  may,  at
one  time  or  another,  have  inhabited  caverns,  where  they  would  have  left  traces  of
their  sojourn,  whether  in  the  products  of  their  industry  or  in  the  remains  of  the
animals  they  had  eaten.

Caves  were  in  truth  the  first  shelter  which  primitive  Man  would  choose,  whether

*  "  On  the  Geological  Position  and  Age  of  the  Flint-implement-hearing  Beds,  &c.,"  Phil.  Trans.  1864,
Part  II.  pp.  94,  254.  See  also  Buteux,  '  Esquisso  Geol.  Dep.  Somme,'  1849,  pp.  101,  102.

t  A  Calcaneum  of  a  Eeindeer  was  obtained  at  St.  Acheul  by  Mr.  H.  Christy  on  one  of  his  latest  visits
there,  in  company  with  H.  L.  Lartet.  The  latter,  also,  brought  thence  two  plates  of  a  molar  of  Elephas
antiquus.  Since  then  M.  E.  Lartet  has  had  remains  of  Eeindeer  from  the  "Drift"  of  the  Oise,  near
Compiegne.

t  Falconer,  "  On  the  Ossiferous  Caves  of  the  Peninsula  of  Gower,  &c.,"  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  xvi.

C


10  RELIQUm   AQUITANICJE.


driven  by  instinct  or  determined  by  reason.  There  has  been  with  all  people  of
antiquity  a  tradition  that  the  first  men  inhabited  caves.  This  remembrance
has  been  preserved  among  the  Chinese  and  the  Egyptians*.  Plato  observes  that
Homer  has  attributed  this  kind  of  life  to  the  savages  of  Sicily;  and  he  himself  says
the  same  of  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  Greece.  It  is  apropos  of  the  latter  that
Pliny  says,  "formerly  caves  served  them  for  houses"  t.  Pliny  also  cites  the
Troglodytes,  or  cave-dwellers,  among  the  .(Ethiopians,  and  in  another  region
of  Africa.  He  adds  that  it  had  been  the  custom  also  among  the  Scythians,  those
Barbarians  who,  according  to  Diodorus  Siculus,  pretended  to  an  origin  of
higher  antiquity  than  the  Greeks  or  even  the  Egyptians.  Lastly,  it  is  written
in  the  Scandinavian  '  Edda  '  that,  "  during  the  combats  of  the  Gods  and  Giants,
Men  sighed  and  groaned  at  the  entrances  of  their  caves  "  J.

E.  L.

*  Boulanger,  'L'Antiquite  devoilee  par  les  usages,'  &c.,  liv.  vi.  ch.  11,  1777.
t  "  Antea  specus  erant  pro  domibus."  —  Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vii.  c.  57.
±  Edda,  Fab.  xxxii.


STOXE  IMPLEMENTS,  WIDELY   DISTEIBUTED.  11


II.

THE  PREHISTORIC  GIVE-DWELLERS  OF  SOUTHERN  FRANCE.     I.  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.
—II.  THE  DORDOGNE  CAVES.— III.  THE  REINDEER-PERIOD.

§  I.  Stone  Implements:  their  wide  distribution. — We  may  repeat  here  what  has
been  already  stated  by  one  of  us  elsewhere*.  Man's  existence  upon  earth  is  to  be
traced  in  almost  all  countries  by  the  relics  of  one  of  his  primitive  industries —
implements  of  stone.  One  of  his  primitive  industries,  we  say,  because  it  is  very
probable  that  the  use  of  wood  may,  in  many  cases,  have  preceded  that  of  stone,
although,  from  its  perishable  nature,  no  very  ancient  examples  have  come  down
to  us  to  serve  as  proofs.

The  term  primitive  may  be  fairly  applied  to  these  works,  because  we  have  broad
ground  for  believing  that  the  various  races  of  men  (though  at  widely  different
periods)  have  passed  through  what  has  been  designated  the  "  Age  of  Stone," —
and  the  more  so,  because  we  have  but  one  known  example,  and  that  comparatively
recent,  in  which  man,  after  he  has  attained  to  the  use  of  metal,  has  returned  to
implements  of  stone  f.

These  Implements  of  Stone  are  to  be  regarded  as  indicating  a  grade  of  civilization
rather  than  any  definite  antiquity ;  and  although  in  some  countries  there  are  clear
evidences,  so  to  say,  of  an  overlap  with  the  Age  of  Bronze,  and  that  the  use  of  metal
has  come  in  gradually,  and  the  use  of  stone  has  gradually  gone  out,  yet  there  is
no  reason  to  conclude  that  both  have  been  long  or  generally  employed  together
for  the  same  purposes.

Geographically  this  primitive  industry  in  stone  is  to  be  traced  over  the  whole
of  Europe,  from  the  wilds  of  Scandinavia  to  the  plain  of  Marathon,  and  from  the
eastern  shores  of  the  Atlantic  to  the  steppes  of  Russia.  In  Asia  it  is  present  in
the  desolate  valleys  of  Mount  Sinai,  the  grottos  of  Bethlehem,  the  caves  of  Le-
banon, and  on  the  plain  of  Babylon,  through  the  breadth  of  British  India,  through-
out the  Indian  Archipelago,  the  northern  isles  of  Japan,  and  on  the  frozen  shores
of  the  Arctic  Sea.  It  is  doubtless  from  want  of  research  that  China  has  not,  as
yet,  afforded  proofs  of  its  existence  there  also.  In  Africa  it  is  found  in  Nubia,  on

*  H.  Christy,  '  Transactions  of  the  Ethnological  Society,'  New  Scries,  vol.  iii.  1865.

f  Namely,  the  inhabitants  of  the  West  Coast  of  Greenland,  in  the  interval  between  the  destruction  of  the
first  Scandinavian  colonies  and  the  arrival  of  the  Danish  Missionary,  Hans  Egede,  in  1721, — regular  inter-
course with  Europeans  having  ceased  for  about  300  years.

c2


12  RELIQUIAE  AQUITAJSTIC^E.

the  central  plateau  of  the  Atlas-ranges,  and  on  their  northern  and  southern
slopes,  and  southward  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  In  America  its  existence  is
recognized  throughout  the  whole  of  the  northern  continent  in  its  length  and
hreadth,  from  Behring's  Straits  to  the  Mexican  plateau,  and  from  Western
Columbia  to  the  Atlantic  shores.  In  the  southern  continent  it  extends  from
the  Cordillera  of  Peru  to  Tierra  del  Fuego,  and  is  met  with  in  the  islands  of
the  West  Indies,  the  lowlands  of  the  Amazon  and  the  Orinoko,  and  the  forest
fastnesses  of  Brazil.

Even  yet  more  widely  spread  in  point  of  time  are  these  mute  but  indisputable
witnesses  of  man's  presence.

To  this  day  the  Stone-age  lingers  on  among  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  shores  of
the  Polar  Sea,  both  in  Asia  and  America,  and  among  the  Indians  of  California  and  of
the  Hocky  Mountains,  the  natives  of  New  Caledonia  and  of  the  Andaman  Islands,
and  some  Australian  tribes.  Not  a  century  has  elapsed  since  the  great  majority
of  the  Islanders  of  the  Pacific  first  acquired,  by  contact  with  the  outer  world,  an
acquaintance  with  metals.  Nor  have  four  centuries  elapsed  since  the  discoverers
of  America  found  the  inhabitants  of  the  New  World,  with  some  slight  exception
with  regard  to  copper  and  bronze,  totally  unacquainted  with  the  use  of  metal
implements.

In  the  Old  World,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  widely  different.  There,  in  Europe,
in  Northern  Africa,  and  throughout  the  continent  of  Asia,  except  at  its  north-
eastern extremity,  with  one  single  exception  mentioned  by  Herodotus,  history
and  tradition  are  alike  silent  as  to  Implements  of  Stone*.  In  this  field  of
research,  therefore,  the  antiquity  of  the  objects  in  question  must  be  determined
by  surrounding  circumstances.

Three  Prehistoric  Periods  of  the  Stone-age. — Subject  to  many  exceptions,  the
prehistoric  implements  may  be  grouped  into  three  great  divisions — namely,  those
of  the  Surface,  the  Cave,  and  the  Drift.  In  the  most  recent  of  these,  the  Surface-
period,  where  the  implements  are  most  commonly  found  in  association  with  the
battle-field  or  the  sepulchre,  the  work  of  assigning  the  relative  age  lies  chiefly
with  the  archa3ologist ;  and  this  is  to  be  determined  by  their  types,  the  presence  of
other  industrial  products,  or  the  circumstances  under  which  they  are  found,  though
occasionally  the  associated  animal  remains  give  some  clue  to  their  antiquity.

*  The  indications  of  Stone  Knives  having  been  in  use  among  the  Hebrews,  as  supported  by  the  Septuagint
version  of  'Exodus,'  iv.  25,  and  '  Joshua,' v.  2,  and  by  a  Septuagint  interpolation  in  'Joshua,'  xxiv.,  are
fully  treated  of  in  Mr.  E.  B.  Tylor's  '  Early  History  of  Mankind,'  &c.,  pp.  214  et  seq.— ED.


STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  13

In  the  next  more  ancient,  or  Cave,  period,  of  an  age  prior  to  the  construction  of
habitations  for  the  living,  or  of  receptacles  for  the  dead,  and  in  which  the  traces
of  other  and  more  advanced  industries  are  but  rare,  the  task  of  indicating  their
antiquity  falls  mainly  on  the  palaeontologist,  and  the  fauna  (sometimes  of  animals
extinct  locally  prior  to  either  history  or  tradition,  but  whose  remains  are  found  in
indubitable  association  with  these  works  of  man)  is  his  only  certain  guide — the
more  so,  as  sometimes  the  types  of  the  implements  found  on  the  same  spot  take
a  wide  range,  from  those  until  lately  supposed  peculiar  to  the  Drift,  down  to
those  hitherto  assigned  to  the  earlier  part  of  the  Surface-period.

In  the  earliest  period — that  of  the  Drift — the  Archaeologist  finds  not  the
slightest  trace  of  other  human  industry  to  guide  him  ;  and  the  work  of  the  Palae-
ontologist is  less  determinate;  it  rests  with  the  Geologist,  by  indicating  the
changes  which  have  occurred  in  the  very  land  itself,  to  shadow  out  the  period  in
the  dim  distance  of  that  far  antiquity  when  these  implements,  the  undoubted  work
of  human  hands,  were  used  and  left  there  by  primeval  man.

Similarity  of  Form  in  Stone  Implements. — Here  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  remark
that,  whilst  the  implements  of  stone  in  various  countries,  and  in  various  periods,
differ  much  one  from  another,  both  in  form  and  in  skill  of  construction,  and
whilst,  in  some  countries,  there  are  various  grades,  extending  over  various  and
widely  remote  periods  of  time,  there  can  yet  be  traced  throughout  the  whole
world,  from  the  very  earliest  to  the  very  latest  time,  a  marvellous  coincidence—
not  merely  in  the  simplest  and  most  primitive,  but  also  in  the  more  complex  types ;
and  within  a  more  limited  but  still  wide  range,  both  as  regards  time  and  distance,
there  are,  in  the  more  highly  finished  forms,  some  most  curious  resemblances.

In  proof  of  the  agreement  between  simple  forms  may  be  cited  a  lance-head  of
obsidian,  mounted  on  its  shaft,  and  an  unmounted  one  of  flint,  both  from  the
dominions  of  the  same  sovereign,  wide  apart  in  point  of  distance,  but  wider
still  in  point  of  time, — the  one  still  in  use  by  the  natives  of  New  Caledonia ;  the
other  from  the  Valley  of  the  Somme,  left  there  by  man  when  the  Mammoth
yet  existed  there,  when  the  river-level  was  seventy  feet  above  its  present  bed,
and  when  it  had  not  cut  out  the  broad  valley  through  which  it  now  flows.  (See
figs.  3  and  4,  page  14.)

In  support  of  our  remark  as  to  the  more  complex  forms,  we  may  note  an
instrument  in  use  amongst  the  Polar  Esquimaux  for  scraping  skins,  one  of  a
similar  description  from  the  Reindeer-caves  of  France,  and  another  from  the  Drift
of  St.  Acheul.  (See  figs.  5,  6,  7,  page  14.)


EELIQTJI^E  AQUITANIC^E.


Fig.  3.


Fig.  4.


Fig.  56.


1


«.  5  a.


Fig.  3.  Obsidian  Lance-head,  mounted  on  a  shaft ;  from  New  Caledonia.
Fig.  4.  Flint  Lance-head;  from  the  Gravel  of  the  Valley  of  the  Somme.

Fig.  5.  Scraper  of  Lydite,  mounted  in  an  ivory  handle;  used  by  the
Esquimaux.     (Two  views,  a,  6.)

Fig.  6.  Flint  Scraper;  from  a  Cave  in  Perigord.

Fig.  7.  Flint  Scraper;  from  the  Gravel  of  the  Valley  of  the  Somme.

[All  reduced  to  Half-size.']


STONE  IMPLEMENTS.


15


Fig.  8.


Fig.  9.


Fig.  10.


Fig.  11.


Fig.  12.


Fig.    8.  Polished  Axe  of  Greenstone  :  British  India.
Fig.    9.  Polished  Axe  of  Greenstone :  England.
Fig.  10.  Polished  Axe  of  Greenstone :  South  Ame-


rica.


Fig.  11.  Polished  Axe  of  Basalt:  France.

Fig.  12.  Polished  Axe  or  Adze  of  Greenstone,  mount-
ed in  a  wooden  handle :  from  Solomon
Islands,  Pacific.


[All  reduced  to  Half-size.']


16

It  seems  that  in  a  time  far  remote  the  Cave-dwellers  of  Pe"rigord  found  it  con-
venient to  scrape  the  Pveindeer-skins  with  a  form  of  instrument  which  the  modern
Esquimaux  finds  to  be  also  suited  to  the  same  purpose.  Of  the  inhabitants  of  the
Somme  Valley,  we  only  know  that  they  also  practised  the  same  re-chipping  of  the
flake  to  give  it  a  rounded  or  blunted  end.

The  resemblances  existing  among  the  yet  more  highly  finished  forms  may  be
illustrated  by  a  polished  axe  of  the  so-called  "  Celtic  Period"  from  Prance,  and
others  from  England,  British  India,  South  America,  and  the  Southern  Pacific.
(See  figs.  8-12,  page  15.)

Manufacture  of  Stone  Implements. — Owing  to  the  prehistoric  antiquity  of  the
flint  implements  of  the  Old  World,  we  have  no  description  of  how  they  were  made.
Prom  the  New  World,  however,  we  have  the  direct  testimony  of  an  eye-witness  as
to  the  manufacture  of  flaked  and  chipped  weapons  in  obsidian.  The  process  is
described  by  the  old  Hispano-American  historian,  Torquemada,  and  has  been
quoted  in  Mr.  E.  B.  Tylor's  'Anahuac'  pp.  331  &c.*;  and  for  an  exact  and  most

*  '  Anahuac  ;  or  Mexico  and  the  Mexicans,'  8vo,  London,  1861.  "  Some  of  the  old  Spanish  writers  on
Mexico  give  a  tolerably  full  account  of  the  manner  in  which  the  Obsidian  Knives,  &c.,  were  made  by  the  Aztecs."
....  "Torquemada  ('  Monarquia  Indiana,'  Seville,  1615)  says,  (free  translation)  'They  had  and  still
have  workmen  who  make  knives  of  a  certain  black  stone  or  flint,  which  it  is  a  most  wonderful  and  admirable
thing  to  see  them  make  out  of  the  stone  ;  and  the  ingenuity  which  invented  this  art  is  much  to  be  praised.
They  are  made  and  got  out  of  the  stone  (if  one  can  explain  it)  in  this  manner.  One  of  these  Indian  workmen
sits  down  upon  the  ground,  and  takes  a  piece  of  this  black  stone,  which  is  like  jet,  and  hard  as  flint,  and  is  a
stone  which  might  be  called  precious,  more  beautiful  and  brilliant  than  alabaster  or  jasper,  and  so  much  so
that  of  it  are  made  tablets  and  mirrors.  The  piece  they  take  is  about  8  inches  long  or  rather  more,  and  as
thick  as  one's  leg  or  rather  less,  and  cylindrical ;  they  have  a  stick  as  large  as  the  shaft  of  a  lance,  and  three
cubits  or  rather  more  in  length  ;  and  at  the  end  of  it  they  fasten  firmly  another  piece  of  wood,  8  inches  long,
to  give  weight  to  this  part ;  then  pressing  their  naked  feet  together,  they  hold  the  stone  as  with  a  pair  of
pincers,  or  a  vice  of  a  carpenter's  bench.  They  take  the  stick  (which  is  cut  off  smooth  at  the  end)  with
both  hands,  and  set  it  well  home  against  the  edges  of  the  front  of  the  stone  (y  ponenlo  a  versar  con  el  canto
de  la  frente  de  la  piedra),  which  also  is  cut  smooth  in  the  part ;  and  then  they  press  it  against  their  breast,
and  with  the  force  of  the  pressure  there  flies  off  a  knife,  with  its  point,  and  edge  on  each  side,  as  neatly
as  if  one  were  to  make  them  of  a  turnip  with  a  sharp  knife,  or  of  iron  in  the  fire.  Then  they  sharpen  it  on
stone,  using  a  bone  to  give  it  a  very  fine  edge ;  and  in  a  very  short  time  these  workmen  will  make  more
than  twenty  knives  in  the  aforesaid  manner.  They  come  out  of  the  same  shape  as  our  barbers'  lancets,
except  they  have  a  rib  up  the  middle,  and  have  a  slight  graceful  curve  towards  the  point.  They  will  cut
and  shave  the  hair  the  first  time  they  are  used,  at  the  first  cut  nearly  as  well  as  a  steel  razor,  but  they  lose
their  edge  at  the  second  cut,  and  so  to  finish  shaving  one's  beard  or  hair,  one  after  another  has  to  be  used ;
though  indeed  they  are  cheap,  and  spoiling  them  is  of  no  consequence.  Many  Spaniards,  both  regular  and
secular  clergy,  have  been  shaved  with  them,  especially  at  the  beginning  of  the  colonization  of  these  realms,


MANUFACTURE  OF  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  17

interesting  narrative  of  how  the  much  more  difficult  and  complicated  chipped
weapons  are  fabricated  by  the  Indians  of  California,  we  are  indebted  to  Sir  Charles
Lyell,  to  whom  it  was  recently  communicated  by  Mr.  Cabot,  who  had  it  from  an
eye-witness.  The  communication  is  entitled,  "An  Account,  by  an  Actual
Observer  in  California,  of  the  Process  of  making  Stone  Arrow-heads,  by  the
Shasta  Indians,  who  still  commonly  use  them."

"  The  Indian  seated  himself  on  the  floor,  and,  laying  the  stone  anvil  upon  his
knee,  with  one  blow  of  his  agate  chisel  he  separated  the  obsidian  pebble  into
two  parts ;  then,  giving  a  blow  to  the  fractured  side,  he  split  off  a  slab  a  quarter
of  an  inch  in  thickness.  Holding  the  piece  against  his  anvil  with  the  thumb
and  finger  of  his  left  hand,  he  commenced  a  series  of  continuous  blows,  every  one
of  which  chipped  off  fragments  of  the  brittle  substance.  It  gradually  seemed
to  acquire  shape.  After  finishing  the  base  of  the  arrow-head  (the  whole  being
little  over  an  inch  in  length),  he  began  striking  gentle  blows,  every  one  of  which
I  expected  would  break  it  in  pieces.  Yet  such  was  his  adroit  application,  his
skill  and  dexterity,  that  in-  little  over  an  hour  he  produced  a  perfect  obsidian
arrow-head.

"  I  then  requested  him  to  carve  one  from  the  remains  of  a  broken  bottle,  which,
after  two  failures,  he  succeeded  in  doing.  He  gave  as  a  reason  for  his  ill-success,
that  he  did  not  understand  the  grain  of  the  glass.  No  sculptor  ever  handled
a  chisel  with  greater  precision,  or  more  carefully  measured  the  weight  and  effect
of  every  blow,  than  did  this  ingenious  Indian ;  for  even  among  them  arrow-making
is  a  distinct  profession,  in  which  few  attain  excellence.  In  a  moment  all  I  had
read  of  the  hardening  of  copper  for  the  working  of  flint  axes,  etc.,  vanished  before
this  simplest  mechanical  process."

In  the  '  Transactions  of  the  Ethnological  Society,'  New  Series,  vol.  i.  part  2
(1861),  p.  138,  Captain  Sir  E.  Belcher  gives  an  account  of  the  methods  used  by


when  there  was  no  such  abundance  as  now  of  the  necessary  instruments,  and  people  who  gained  their
livelihood  by  practising  this  occupation.  But  I  conclude  by  saying  it  is  an  admirable  thing  to  see  them
made,  and  no  small  argument  for  the  capacity  of  men  who  found  out  such  an  invention.'  Vetancurt
('  Teatro  Mejicano ')  gives  an  account,  taken  from  the  above.  Hernandez  ('  Rerum  Med.  Nov.  Hisp.  Thes.'
Rome,  1651)  gives  a  similar  account  of  the  process.  He  compares  the  wooden  instrument  used  to  a  cross-
bow. It  was  evidently  a  J-shaped  implement ;  and  the  workman  held  the  cross-piece  with  his  two  hands
against  his  breast,  while  the  end  of  the  straight  stick  rested  on  the  stone.  He  furthermore  gives  a  description
of  the  making  of  the  well-known  '  maquahuitl,'  or  Aztec  war-club,  which  was  armed  on  both  sides  with  a  row
of  obsidian  knives,  or  teeth,  stuck  into  holes  with  a  kind  of  gum.  With  this  instrument,  he  says,  a  man  could
be  cut  in  half  at  a  blow — an  absurd  statement,  which  has  been  repeated  by  more  modern  writers."


18


KELIQUIJE   AQUITANICJE.


the  Western  Esquimaux  tribes,  at  and  north  of  Icy  Cape,  in  making  their  stone
implements.     He  says  : —

"  Cape  Lisburne  is  about  sixty  feet  in  height,  composed  of  a  greyish  dolomite,  in  which  many  fossil  encri-
nites,  corals,  and  Crustacea  are  found.  Near  the  base,  about  four  feet  above  the  sea-level,  a  vein  of  chert  is
found,  on  which  this  friable  stone  lies.  It  varies  from  about  nine  inches  inland  (as  exposed)  to  about  three
or  four  inches  as  it  is  lost  in  the  gravelly  beach.  It  is  broken  in  vertical  shivers,  or  conchoidal  plates,
by  a  slight  tap  with  the  hammer  (formed  of  a  very  stubborn  jade,  or  nephrite),  the  splinters  affording  a
ringing  sound  like  glass  or  pottery.  The  fragments,  indeed,  in  many

instances,  were   already  sufficiently  formed  without  human  aid  for  the   Fig.  136.  Fig.  13  a.

ordinary  purposes  of  flaying,  or  skinning  off  the  superfluous  fat  from
hides,  etc. ;  indeed  it  then  occurred  to  me  that  many  fragments,  where
nature  seemed  either  to  have  pressed  heavily,  or  acted  by  frost,  were  so
splintered  and  almost  formed  by  nature  to  be  used  as  arrow-  or  spear-
heads without  further  attention  to  chipping.  But  to  the  process  which
they  pursue  in  effecting  the  fine  regular  serrated  edges  which  you  will
notice  in  those  specimens  now  before  you.

"  Possibly,  had  I  not  witnessed  the  operation,  and  been  at  the  time  one
of  the  first  Europeans  with  whom  they  ever  held  communion,  the  idea
would  have  remained  undisputed  that  '  they  owed  their  formation  to  the
stroke  of  the  hammer.'  Being  a  working  amateur  mechanic  myself,  and
having  practised  in  a  very  similar  manner  on  glass  with  a  penny-piece
in  1815,  I  was  not  at  all  surprised  at  witnessing  the  modus  operand*.
Selecting  a  log  of  wood,  in  which  a  spoon-shaped  cavity  was  cut,  they
placed  the  splinter  to  be  worked  over  it,  and  by  pressing  gently  along  the
margin  vertically,  first  on  one  side,  then  the  other,  as  one  would  set
a  saw,  they  splintered  off  alternate  fragments  until  the  object,  thus
properly  outlined,  presented  the  spear  or  arrow-head  form,  with  two
cutting  serrated  sides.

"  But  let  us  revert  to  this  instrument,  for  the  use  of  which  the  untaught
would  never  imagine  a  purpose,  and,  I  suspect,  was  not  witnessed  or
deemed  worthy  of  notice  by  any  other  individual  of  the  expedition.

"First,  this  instrument  (again  ornamented)  has  a  graceful  outline.
The  handle  is  of  fine  fossil  ivory.  That  would  be  too  soft  to  deal  with
flint  or  chert  in  the  manner  required.  But  they  discovered  that  the
point  of  the  deer-horn*  is  harder,  and  also  more  stubborn ;  therefore,  in  a
slit,  like  lead  in  our  pencils,  they  introduced  a  slip  of  this  substance  and
secured  it  by  a  strong  thong,  put  on  wet,  but  which  on  drying  becomes
very  rigid.  Here  we  cannot  fail  to  trace  ingenuity,  ability,  and  a  view  to
ornament.  It  is  the  point  of  deer-horn  which,  refusing  to  yield,  drives
off  the  fine  conchoidal  splinters  from  the  chert.

"  I  cannot  here  omit  remarking  that  the  very  same  process  is  pursued  by  the  Indians  of  Mexican  origin  in


Fig.  13.  Stone-chipper  used  by
the  Esquimaux  (Christy  Col-
lection). Half  nat.  size.

a,  Seen  from  above.
b,  Edge  view.


«  »  "Wherever  horn  is  named,  it  refers  to  the  hard  point  of  the  antler  of  the  Eeindeer.''


CAVES  OF  DOBDOGNE.


19


©IF  A


©I?  7MS


/  ' ',,  1 1  J

2  RockshtXttr)

3  Hock&kelfer      _LcuMcuieLcL,ir^e

4-     CCLY*  )


Thorta.c


Scale-      o    '       /ood  2000  aooo  +000  3000          sooo  7000  Sooo          9000


#000  f?


20  RELIQUIAE  AQTJITANKLE.

California  with  the  obsidian  points  for  their  arrows.  And  also  in  the  north  and  south  Pacific,  at  Sandwich
Islands,  21°  north,  and  Tahiti,  18°  south — 39  degrees=2340  miles  asunder — similar  indentations  or  chip-
pings  are  carried  out  in  forming  their  axes  from  basaltic  lava,  but  probably  performed  in  the  latter  instances
with  stone  hammers.  I  myself  witnessed  at  the  Convent  of  Monterey  the  captured  Indians  forming  their
arrow-heads  out  of  obsidian  exactly  similar  to  the  mode  practised  by  the  Esquimaux."

§  II.  Caves  of  Dor  dog  ne. — The  calcareous  formations  of  Central  and  Southern
France  abound  in  caves ;  and  their  ossiferous  deposits  give  evidence  that,  besides
those  introduced  by  the  agency  of  water,  they  comprise  also  those  which  have
accumulated  when  these  caves  were  the  haunts  of  wild  beasts  or  the  sheltering  places
of  men.  Some  have  been  the  resorts  of  beasts  alone,  and  some  only  inhabited  by
man.  In  the  comparatively  few  which  have  been  tenanted  by  both,  there  are
usually  indications  that  the  earlier  occupancy  has  not  been  that  of  man.  The
osseous  remains  in  the  former  class  are  usually  entire,  or,  if  broken,  bear,  in
tooth-marks,  indications  that  they  were  broken  by  Carnivora ;  on  the  other  hand,
in  those  inhabited  by  man,  the  bones,  except  those  originally  without  marrow,
are  very  generally  in  fragments.  No  part  of  France  appears  to  be  richer  in  caves
which  have  been  inhabited  by  man  than  the  ancient  province  of  Perigord,  a  por-
tion of  the  old  Roman  Aquitaine.

It  is  especially  in  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere,  a  tributary  of  the  Dordogne,  which
is  an  affluent  of  the  Garonne,  that  these  remains  are  in  great  abundance,  and  are
indisputably  contemporaneous  with  the  remains  of  animals  extinct  in  that  country
before  history  or  tradition.  In  it,  and  in  some  of  its  lateral  branches,  have  been
found  the  resting-places  of  an  early  race,  either  in  the  small  caves  usually
denominated  grottes,  or  in  the  sheltered  recesses  of  overhanging  cliffs  (abris),
— the  former  sometimes  at  an  elevation  of  one  hundred  feet  above  the  river,  as  the
cave  at  Les  Eyzies ;  and  the  latter,  as  at  La  Madelaine,  but  little  above  the  line  of
an  extraordinary  flood  at  the  present  day — from  which  it  would  seem  that  the
river-level  has  not  materially  varied  since  the  accumulation  of  these  osseous
remains.

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  Cave  of  Moustier,  at  an  elevation  of  ninety  feet  above
the  river,  and  where  the  valley  is  of  considerable  width,  the  line  of  human  occupa-
tion is  covered,  to  the  depth  of  five  or  six  feet,  by  earth  subsequently  introduced,
filling  the  cave  to  its  very  top.  We  leave  to  those  more  competent  to  reconcile
these  apparently  conflicting  facts,  as  well  as  to  determine  how  much  the  formation
of  this  picturesque  valley  is  due  to  erosion,  and  how  much  to  fissure, — subjects
which  were  matters  of  warm  debate  with  a  party  of  geologists  who  lately  traversed
the  principal  portion  of  its  course.


CONTENTS  OF  THE  CAVES.  21

Contents  of  the  Caves. — The  deposits  consist  usually  of  accumulations  of
broken  bones,  various-sized  pebbles  of  stone  extraneous  to  the  local  formation
and  collected  from  the  river-bed,  nodules  of  flint  from  which  flakes  have  been
struck,  innumerable  fragments  or  chips  detached  in  the  first  dressings  of
these  cores,  and  countless  thousands  of  blades  of  flint,  varying  in  size  from
lance-heads  long  enough  and  stout  enough  to  have  been  used  against  the
largest  animals,  down  to  lancets  no  larger  than  the  blade  of  a  penknife,  and
piercing-instruments  of  the  size  of  the  smallest  bodkin.  These  remains  are
usually  intermixed  with  charcoal  in  dust  and  in  small  fragments,  and  extend
to  a  depth  in  some  cases  of  eight  to  ten  feet,  and  a  length  of  sixty  to  seventy
feet.

Besides  these  have  been  found  a  multitude  of  implements  formed  of  bone  or
deer-horn,  and  equally  proved  to  have  been  made  there,  by  the  presence  of  the
remnants  of  the  bones  and  horns  from  which  they  had  been  sawn,  and  by  the  im-
plements themselves  being  often  in  an  unfinished  state.  They  consist  of  square
chisel-shaped  implements ;  .round,  sharp-pointed,  awl-like  tools,  some  of  which  may
also  have  served  as  the  spikes  of  fish-hooks ;  harpoon-shaped  lance-heads,  plain  or
barbed ;  arrow-heads,  with  many  and  sometimes  double  barbs,  cut  with  wonderful
vigour ;  and,  lastly,  eyed  needles  of  compact  bone,  finely  pointed,  polished,  and
drilled,  with  round  eyes  so  small  and  regular  that  some  of  the  most  assured  and
acute  believers  in  all  other  findings  might  well  doubt  whether  indeed  they  could
have  been  drilled  with  stone,  until  their  actual  repetition  by  the  very  stone  im-
plements found  with  them  has  dispelled  their  honest  doubts.  More  than  this,  all
but  two  of  the  many  deposits  explored  have  given  more  or  less  of  examples  of  orna-
mented work ;  and  three  of  them  (Les  Eyzies,  Laugerie  Basse,  and  La  Madelaine)
drawings  and  sculptures  of  various  animals,  perfectly  recognizable  as  such.

The  Old  Fauna  of  the  Country. — It  is  not  so  much  the  existence  of  the  multi-
tudinous implements  in  stone  and  bone,  with  the  evidences  of  their  manufacture
on  the  spot,  which  invests  these  deposits  with  their  chief  interest ;  but  the  even
yet  more  multitudinous  examples  of  bones,  broken  up  by  man,  of  animals  extinct
in  that  part  of  Europe,  out  of  all  record  of  history  or  tradition,  and  the  failure
as  yet  to  detect  amongst  them  any  undoubted  indication  of  the  early  domesticated
animals.  The  broad  features  of  the  fauna  are  the  same  throughout  the  district :
the  Reindeer  is  almost  everywhere  by  far  the  most  prevalent  animal ;  in  some
places  the  Horse  is  next,  in  others  the  Aurochs ;  but  in  all  the  first  two  have  been
a  staple  food.


22  KELIQULE

The  Ibex  and  the  Chamois,  now  only  found  on  the  higher  peaks  of  the  Alps  and
the  Pyrenees,  then  dwelt  on  the  neighbouring  hills  ;  the  Wild  Boar  was  scarce,  or  but
little  eaten.  In  fine,  with  the  exception  of  the  Horse,  the  fauna  tends  to  a  northern
grouping,  in  which  a  species  of  Spermophile  plays  its  tiny  but  significant  part.

That  these  rock-dwellers  fared  not  badly  in  other  matters  of  food  is  proved
by  the  many  bones  of  Birds  and  of  Salmon  which  are  mixed  with  the  refuse.
Nor,  as  regards  quantity,  was  there  any  great  struggle  for  existence,  as  is  shown
by  the  many  bones  massed  in  the  breccia  (where  the  infiltration  of  water  charged
with  lime  or  iron  has  massed  the  deposits  into  a  more  or  less  solid  conglomerate),
and  which  remain  articulated,  showing  that  some  parts,  such  as  the  foot,  for
instance,  were  not  closely  eaten.

Works  of  Art  of  the  Cave-dwellers. — With  these  evidences  of  easy  living,  it  is
not  surprising  to  find  there  was  leisure  for  less  necessary  work,  and  that  spare
time  found  occupation  in  works  of  pleasure,  as  instanced  in  the  sketches  and  sculp-
ture before  alluded  to.  And  it  is  curious  to  trace  how  they  passed  from  the  simple
exercise  of  industry  to  ornament,  and  at  last  to  something  of  art ;  for  such  may
well  be  termed  the  sculptured  poniard-handle,  representing  the  figure  of  a
Reindeer,  and  which,  whilst  clever  in  its  adaptation  of  the  material  to  the  purpose
intended,  preserves  at  the  same  time  all  the  characteristics  of  the  animal.  It  is  to
be  regretted  that  this  example,  so  remarkable  for  its  period,  is  but  an  unfinished
essay, — unless  it  be  here  as  it  has  been  sometimes  found  in  more  modern  times,  that
the  genius  of  the  artist  was  more  conspicuous  in  the  clay  than  in  the  marble,  in
the  sketch  than  in  the  finished  picture.

With  these  early  cave-dwellers  the  art  of  painting  was,  as  far  as  we  know,  limited
to  that  favourite  aboriginal  colour,  red.  Various  pieces  of  soft  red  hematite,
covered  with  scratches,  indicate  how  they  scraped  off  a  red  powder,  which,
mixed  with  grease,  would  furnish  as  good  means  of  personal  adornment  as  is  em-
ployed by  many  Indians  at  the  present  day.  And  that  they  were  not  insensible  to
the  charms  of  sound  as  well  as  sight,  may  be  inferred  from  their  having  made
whistles  out  of  phalangeal  bones  of  the  Reindeer  or  Chamois ;  these  have  been
found  in  more  than  one  Station.

Teeth  of  animals  (the  Reindeer,  Horse,  Aurochs,  and  some  others),  as  well
as  Shells  of  several  species,  drilled,  and  in  some  cases  cut  ornamentally,  have  been
found  in  several  of  the  Stations,  and  no  doubt  have  been  worn  either  as  ornaments
or  as  amulets.

That  these  rude  people  had  communication  with  the  outer  world,  or  were  them-


FOOD   OF   THE  CAVE-DWELLEBS.  23

selves  migratory,  is  manifest  by  there  having  been  found  in  four  different  places
Rock-crystal,  either  wrought  or  unwrought,  which  does  not  occur  in  the  neighbour-
ing country,  and  by  the  finding  at  three  of  them  fossil  Shells  which  must  have
been  brought  from  the  Faluns  of  Touraine  (a  distance  of  at  least  one  hundred
miles),  and  all  of  which  have  been  pierced  for  suspension.

Hearths  and  Cooking. — We  have  also  some  indications  of  the  domestic  economy
of  this  early  race  in  a  variety  of  stones  found  in  these  accumulations.

There  are  some  which  have  neither  served  for  hearth-  nor  boiling-stones,  but,  from
their  fractured  ends,  have  evidently  been  used  as  hammers ;  some  which,  from  their
being  of  too  great  a  size  for  implements  of  manufacture,  and  the  absence  of  fracture,
may  have  been  used  for  breaking  bones  to  extract  the  marrow ;  others,  from  the
artificial  depression  on  either  side,  suitable  for  firm  handling,  and  from  the  many
fractures  of  concussion  at  the  outer  edge,  have  no  doubt  been  employed  in  the
manufacture  of  flint  tools.  Besides  these  are  small  flat  slabs  of  schistose  stone,
— some  bearing  grooves  made  by  cutting-implements,  it  may  be  for  sharpening ;
and  others  which,  from  their  smoothness,  may  have  been  used  as  polishers  of  bone
implements ;  and,  lastly,  objects  in  considerable  numbers  and  found  in  several
places,  the  use  of  which  it  is  difficult  to  conjecture,  viz.  water-rounded  pebbles  of
various  sizes,  almost  always  of  granite,  the  upper  surface  of  which  has  been  arti-
ficially hollowed  out,  leaving  a  flat  saucer-like  depression,  the  size  of  which  varies
from  an  inch  to  four  or  five  inches  in  diameter.

The  number  of  hearths,  the  great  abundance  of  charcoal,  and  the  presence  of
many  more  round  quartzose  pebbles  (often  bearing  traces  of  fire)  than  would  be
requisite  for  the  uses  of  the  hearth  or  paving,  for  the  fabrication  of  flint  knives,  or
for  smashing  bones,  as  well  as  the  very  small  proportion  of  bones  which  show  the
action  of  fire,  all  lead  to  the  doubt  whether  the  flesh  taken  from  the  large
mass  of  fractured  bones  found  at  all  the  Stations,  if  it  has  indeed  been  cooked,
has  been  cooked  by  roasting.

In  favour  of  the  food  having  been  cooked,  is  the  abundance  of  fires,  more  than
in  that  rude  condition  of  life  could  be  supposed  to  be  required  merely  for  purposes
of  warmth.  If  the  meat  was  cooked  by  roasting  at  the  fire,  it  is  not  likely  that  so
many  of  the  bones  would  escape  traces  of  fire.

The  absence  of  any  sufficient  depth  of  earth  between  the  layers  of  bones  and  the
rock-floor  in  the  Les  Eyzies  Cave,  where,  above  all  places,  both  the  charcoal  and  the
burnt  pebbles  are  in  the  greatest  abundance,  forbids  the  idea  that  these  cave-dwellers
cooked  in  the  manner  so  long  practised  by  some  tribes  in  North  America,  and  still


24  RELIQUIAE  AQUITANICJE.

used  in  our  own  country  by  the  gipsies — namely,  that  of  burying  in  the  ground  the
animal  encased  in  clay,  and  lighting  a  fire  over  it.  The  only  other  way,  then,  in
which  they  can  have  cooked  their  food  is  by  boiling ;  but  the  general  absence  of
pottery  in  the  Reindeer- caves  of  Perigord  makes  it  difficult  to  imagine  how  they
could  effect  this,  unless  we  suppose  they  may  have  employed  means  still,  or  until
lately,  used  by  the  Indians  of  North  America,  who  boil  their  food  without  putting
the  vessel  in  which  it  is  cooked  upon  the  fire.  Vessels  of  wood,  of  bark,  or  of  plait
so  firmly  worked  as  to  contain  water,  are  all  spoken  of  by  travellers  within  a
century  past  as  in  use  for  boiling  food  by  means  of  stones  heated  in  the  fire
and  then  thrown  into  these  vessels  filled  with  water,  which  is  thus  boiled  from
within*.

Although  there  is,  in  this  district  of  Perigord,  throughout  these  deposits  of  the
Reindeer-period,  an  almost  entire  absence  of  pottery,  there  are  yet  indications  that
in  a  later  period  of  the  Stone-age  the  knowledge  of  it  was  possessed  by  the  inhabi-
tants of  this  country;  for  at  the  distance  of  a  few  miles,  on  a  plateau  of  considerable
elevation  near  the  Chateau  of  the  Marquis  de  Campagne,  abundant  fragments  of
rude  pottery  have  been  lately  observed,  in  connexion  with  a  carefully  chipped
barbed  arrow-head  of  so  called  Celtic  type,  and  a  portion  of  a  polished  stone  axe.

Former  Climate. — In  addition  to  the  presumption  of  a  once  colder  climate
which  is  furnished  by  the  fauna,  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  at  the  period  when
these  remains  were  left  the  climate  was  the  same  as  it  now  is ;  for,  though  we
may  have  examples  in  the  habits  of  the  present  Esquimaux,  that  in  their  cold
climate  it  is  possible  to  live  without  detriment  to  health  amid  an  accumulation
of  animal  remains,  the  case  would  be  very  different  in  the  South  of  France,
where  at  the  temperature  of  the  present  day  such  accumulations  would,  except  in
Avinter,  become  speedily  a  fearfully  decomposing  mass.  That  the  inhabitants  of
that  day  had  no  such  difficulty  to  contend  with  may  be  inferred  from  their  having
almost  invariably  chosen  a  southern  exposure  and  the  warmest  and  sunniest  nooks
for  their  residences ;  and  that  they  lived  in  them  at  all  seasons,  and  did  not  quit
them  in  summer  for  cooler  ones,  is  evident  from  the  occurrence  of  the  Reindeer
horns  and  bones  in  all  conditions  of  age.

It  is  to  be  noted  that  in  this  country  there  are  no  high  mountains,  among  whose
snows,  as  in  the  Pyrenees,  the  Reindeer  could  have  taken  refuge  from  the  summer
heats, — the  greatest  elevation  being  a  little  over  eight  hundred  feet.

*  The  European  bushranger  in  Australia  practises  a  similar  method  of  heating  water,  in  a  hollowed  lump
of  the  soft  Bottle-tree.  See  also  the  Chapter  on  "  Fire-making  and  Cooking,"  in  E.  B.  Tylor's  '  Early
History  of  Mankind,'  1865.— EDIT.


THE  EEINDEEE-PEKIOD.  25

•

§  III.  The  Reindeer-Period. — It  is  of  some  interest  to  have  good  proofs,  on
a  large  scale,  of  Man's  coexistence  with  the  Reindeer  in  Southern  Europe—
still  more  to  trace  his  hand  in  the  fracture  of  its  bones  for  food,  and  the  marks
on  them  of  his  knife  as  he  cut  away  its  skin,  its  flesh,  and  its  sinews  for  thread, —
but  of  greater  interest  still  to  find  upon  its  horns,  engraved,  cut  in  relievo,  or
sculptured,  representations  of  the  animal  itself,  rendered  with  a  fidelity  which
makes  them  characteristic  and  unmistakeable.

It  would  be  easy  to  cite  many  circumstances  illustrative  of  the  resemblance  be-
tween the  condition  and  habits  of  the  modern  Esquimaux  and  these  cave-dwellers
of  Prance  at  the  Reindeer-period.  But  now  comes  the  great  question,  When  was
the  Eeindeer-period  in  Southern  France  ?  and  what  is  its  antiquity  ?

It  is  far  easier  to  indicate  its  place  in  the  series  of  observed  facts  in  relation  to
ancient  man,  than  to  assign  to  it  any  definite  antiquity  of  years.  Geologically,  a
wide  gulf  separates  it  from  the  Drift-period,  though  perhaps  wider  in  the  geolo-
gical than  in  the  palseontological  aspect ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  will  seem,
both  from  the  palaeontological  and  archaeological  bearings,  to  be  of  higher  antiquity
than  the  Kjokkenmoddings  of  Denmark  and  the  Lacustrine  Dwellings  of  Switzer-
land, and  very  certainly  than  the  whole  group  of  so  called  Celtic  and  Cromlech
remains.  Comparing  its  fauna  with  that  of  these  various  periods,  the  Reindeer-
period  may  be  placed  thus  : —

In  the  Drift  (Valley-gravels)  the  Mammoth,  Rhinoceros,  Horse,  and  Ox  are
the  predominant  animals,  and  the  Reindeer  appears  but  sparingly.  In  the
Dordogne  Caves  the  Reindeer  predominates,  associated  largely  with  the  Horse
and  Aurochs,  and  exceptionally  with  some  remains  of  Mammoth,  Hyena,  &c.;
but  all  traces  of  such  domesticated  animals  as  the  Sheep,  the  Goat,  and  the
Dog  are  wanting.

In  the  Kjokkenmoddings  of  Denmark,  though  so  much  nearer  the  Subarctic
regions,  the  Reindeer  is  not  found,  and  the  fauna,  though  more  ancient  than  that
now  existing,  indicates  the  presence  of  domesticated  animals  (Dog).

The  same  may  be  said  of  the  Swiss  Lacustrine  Dwellings  :  domestic  animals  are
present ;  and  the  Reindeer  is  absent  even  from  the  most  ancient  of  them,  though
that  it  was  once  in  the  neighbourhood  is  manifest  by  the  existence  of  its  remains
in  caves  (at  1'Echelle)  in  the  same  district.

In  none  of  the  Cromlechs  or  Sepulchres  is  there  a  trace  of  Reindeer ;  and  the
fauna  indicated  by  the  remains  found  in  them  is  cited  as  more  recent  than  either
the  fauna  of  the  Kjokkenmoddings  or  that  of  the  most  ancient  of  the  Lake-
dwellings.


26  RELIQUIAE  AQtTITANlC^E.

From  the  archaeological  or  industrial  point  of  view,  it  may  be  remarked  that  from
the  Drift  we  have  no  example  of  Man's  industry  except  implements  of  flint ;  and
of  these  only  the  larger  and  coarser  have  heen  detected,  though  there  is  no  reason
to  doubt  that  he  had  also  implements  for  finer  work  than  the  majority  of  those
found  are  fitted  for.

In  the  Reindeer-period,  although  Man  had  attained  to  a  great  proficiency  in
chipping,  we  have  a  total  absence  of  ground  or  polished  axes ;  and  though  he
had  arrived  at  the  art  of  sewing,  there  is  no  trace  of  his  having  known  how  to
spin ;  and  in  many  of  these  caves  of  Dordogne  there  are  no  traces  of  pottery.

In  the  Rjokkenmoddings  pottery  is  not  unfrequent,  though  ground  axes  are
very  few,  but  not  wholly  wanting*,  and  spindle-whorls  are  scarce.

In  the  very  oldest  of  the  Lake- dwellings  (those  in  which  there  is  no  trace  of
metal,  as  at  Wangen)  the  majority  of  the  axes  are  ground,  and  the  grinding-beds
are  the  same  as  those  found  in  the  Surface-period  of  Denmark  and  England.
Pottery  is  abundant;  not  only  spinning  but  weaving  is  presented;  and  there  are
evidences  that  the  cultivation  of  wheat  and  other  cereals  had  been  attained  to.
In  the  Cromlechs  and  the  Sepulchres,  pottery  is  abundant ;  and  the  frequent
occurrence  of  articles  in  bronze  indicates  a  later  time.

In  conclusion,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  facts  here  stated  bear  on  the
hitherto  presumed  duration  of  Man's  existence  on  earth,  and  can  only  be  fairly  in-
terpreted in  favour  of  a  higher  antiquity  than  was  once  assigned  to  it,  and  that  these
and  kindred  researches  are  doing  in  degree  for  the  chronology  of  Man  what  geo-
logy has  already  done  for  the  chronology  of  the  earth's  crust;  but,  at  the  same
time,  we  are  bound  to  confess  that,  so  far,  nothing  in  the  investigation  of  the  works
of  uncivilized  or  primitive  man,  either  of  ancient  or  modern  times,  appears  to  ne-
cessitate a  change  in  the  old  cherished  idea  of  the  Unity  of  the  Human  Race.

H.  C.

*  Mr.  John  Evans,  F.E.S.,  F.S.A.,  in  company  with  Professor  Steenstrup,  For.  Mem.  E.S.,  recently  dis-
covered in  one  of  the  Danish  Kjokkenmoddings  two  or  three  flint  flakes  made  out  of  broken  polished  axes  ;
he  also  found  a  polished  gouge-edged  hatchet,  ploughed  up  on  the  surface  of  another  Kjokkenmodding.
Professor  Steenstrup  has  also  detected  specimens  similar  to  those  first-mentioned  among  the  numerous  flint
implements  found  along  the  sea-margin  of  Denmark  and  referred  to  the  period  of  the  Kjokkenmoddings. —
EDITOR,  February  1867.


GEOLOGY  OF  THE  VEZERE.  27


in.

SKETCH  OF  THE  CHIEF  GEOLOGICAL  FEATURES  OF  THE  VALLEY  OF  THE  VEZERE

AND  THE  BORDERING  COUNTRY*.

THE  Caves  and  Bock-shelters  containing  the  Aquitanian  relics  treated  of  in  this
Work  are,  as  already  described  (pages  3  and  20),  excavated  in  cliffs  of  limestone
along  the  lower  portion  of  the  Vezere.  A  considerable  extent  of  country
traversed  by  this  part  of  the  river,  in  a  N.E.-S.W.  direction,  from  near  Condatf
to  Limeuil,  where  the  Vezere  joins  the  Dordogne,  and  by  the  latter  river  to
La  Linde,  and  seven  miles  beyond,  is  composed  of  stratified  limestones,  thinly
capped,  here  and  there,  by  patches  of  clays,  sands,  ironstone,  and  gravel  (see  Map,
p.  29).  The  limestones  have  a  gentle  inclination  to  the  south-west  (see  Section,
p.  29);  their  lower  beds  successively  disappear  as  we  go  down  the  river,  under
the  outcropping  edges  of  the  upper  layers.  Right  and  left  of  the  Vezere  these
calcareous  strata  stretch  far  away,  with  a  N.W.-S.E.  'strike,'  through  the
Departments  de  la  Dordogne  and  du  Lot  on  the  one  hand,  and  through  the
Departments  de  la  Dordogne,  de  la  Charente,  de  la  Charente  Inferieure,  &c.,
on  the  other  (see  Map,  p.  29).

These  limestones  (k  in  the  Map  and  Section)  mostly  belong  to  the  Cretaceous  J
System, — that  is,  all  those  forming  the  thirty  miles  of  country  from  below  La
Linde,  along  the  Dordogne  and  the  Vezere,  to  about  three  miles  north-east  of
Montignac  (near  Aubas).  There  Jurassic  limestones  and  Infra-lias  (i,  h,f)  form
the  ground  for  about  three  miles ;  and  above  this  the  Vezere  has  its  course  through

*  The  Geology  of  the  Department  de  la  Dordogne  has  been  treated  of : — in  MM.  Dufrenoy  and  Elie  de  Beau-
mont's '  Explication  de  la  Carte  Geologique  de  la  France ; '  in  M.  le  Vicomte  d'Archiac's  '  Histoire  des  Progres
de  la  Geologic,'  &c.,  in  which  are  given  references  to  previous  writings  on  the  subject ;  and  in  several  memoirs
by  Coquand,  d'Archiac,  Hebert,  Arnaud,  Harle,  and  others,  in  the  '  Bulletin  de  la  Societe  Geologique  de
France.'  A  notice  of  the  Dordogne  Chalk  and  Fossils  also  occurs  in  M.  d'Archiac's  '  Geologie  et  Paleontologie '
(8vo,  Paris,  1866),  p.  605,  &c.  The  accompanying  sketch-map  has  been  taken  from  Dufrenoy  and  Elie  de
Beaumont's  Geological  Map  of  France.

f  The  Orleans  Railway  passes  near  Condat ;  and  from  the  Railway-station  there,  under  the  guidance  of
the  late  Henry  Christy,  many  of  his  friends  have  started,  after  examining  the  Badegoule  Cave,  on  pleasant
trips  down  the  Vezere,  by  taking  boat  on  its  little  tributary  the  Ser  ("  Cerne  "  in  some  maps),  near  Condat.

J  M.  d'Archiac  says  that  the  zone  of  Cretaceous  strata  on  the  south-west  of  the  Central  Plateau  extends
from  Souillac  and  Cahors  (Dep.  du  Lot)  to  the  Island  of  Oleron,  with  a  length  of  70  leagues  and  a  breadth
of  15  leagues.

E  2


28  BELIQTJLE  AQTJITANIC^E.

sandstones  belonging  to  the  Trias  (e),  and  exposes  the  underlying  patches  of  Car-
boniferous strata  (Coal  &c.,  d)  in  its  valley  at  Cublac  and  near  Alassac*.

The  upper  course  of  the  Vezere  is  among  the  mica-schists,  gneiss,  granite,  and
porphyries,  or  the  metamorphic  and  igneous  rocks  (c,  b,  a),  of  the  Central  Plateau.
Hence  the  gravel  along  the  river-course  is  composed  of  more  or  less  rounded  frag-
ments of  quartzite  and  vein-quartz,  and  of  micaceous,  hornblendic,  granitic,  and
other  rocks,  derived  from  the  uplands,  mingled  with  the  limestone  and  flint  of  the
lower  district.  Similar  materials  constitute  the  patches  of  the  neighbouring  old
Alluvia,  formed  at  various  times,  when  the  river  had  greater  breadth  and  a  higher
level.

The  Granitic  and  Gneissic  Rocks  (a,  b,  c). — The  rocks  constituting  the  higher
region,  or  Central  Plateau,  are  chiefly  "metamorphic,"  such  as  gneiss,  marble,
slate,  mica-schist,  and  other  varieties  of  crystalline  rocks,  that  have  resulted  from
the  metamorphosis,  or  alteration  by  pressure,  chemical  agencies,  or  direct  fusion,
of  old  sandstones,  shales,  limestones,  &c.,  whether  of  Laurentian,  Cambrian,  Silu-
rian, or  later  age,  into  new  forms  of  mineral  matter,  but  often  preserving  clear
traces  of  their  original  bedding.  Igneous  rocks,  such  as  greenstones,  porphyries,
granites,  &c.,  also  occur  as  dykes  and  bosses  protruding  through  these  old  schists ;
and  mineral  veins,  or  cracks  filled  with  infiltrated  quartz,  metallic  ores,  and  other
minerals,  are  of  frequent  occurrence.

The  Carboniferous  Rocks  (d). — The  Coal-measures  consist  of  reddish  schists,
sandstones,  and  conglomerates, — yellowish-grey  sandstones, — and  dark-coloured
micaceous  shales  with  plant-remains  (Ferns,  &c.)  and  a  few  thin  seams  of  coal ;
and  they  form  isolated  patches  or  remnants  of  a  once  broad  sheet  of  Carboniferous
strataf.  Resting  against  the  old  schists,  they  lie  at  high  angles,  and  are  con-
torted, dislocated,  and  traversed  by  porphyries.  The  red  sandstones  of  the  Trias
have  been  deposited  on  their  upturned  and  denuded  edges.

The  Triassic  Rocks  (<?). — From  near  Alassac  to  L'Arche,  and  thence,  past
Terrasson,  to  Le  Lardin,  the  Vezere  traverses  red  and  variegated  sandstones,
referred  to  the  Triassic  System,  overlying  unconformably  some  Carboniferous
strata,  and  capped  here  and  there  with  patches  of  Infra-lias  and  Oolite.  About

*  For  a  pictorial  section  of  the  hills  of  granite,  gneiss,  slate,  coal-measures,  and  red  sandstone,  at  Le
Saillant,  near  Alassac,  see  Dufrenoy  and  Elie  de  Beaumont's  '  Explication  de  la  Carte  Geol.  de  la  France,'
'vol.  i.  p.  126.

t  The  sections  of  these  heds  at  Alassac,  Brives,  Le  Lardin,  and  Cublac  are  given  in  the  '  Explic.  Carte
Geol.  de  la  France,'  vol.  i.  pp.  126,  619,  and  629.


GEOLOGY  OF  THE   VEZERE.  29

GEOLOGICAL  SKETCH:MAP  OF  THE   VALLEY  OF  THE  VEZERE  &  NEIGHBOURING  COUNTRY.


,  v,v/<V>/t  <//'  /Ju.  Cretcucraun   and  ottier  Strafas  alona  the.  ValUf  of  Uu.   Vf-xire- .


A  £


30  KELIQU1JE  AQTJITANIC^E.

Terrasson  the  red  beds  consist  of  conglomerate  and  pebbly  sandstones,  formed
of  pebbles  and  grains  of  quartz  (mostly  milk-white,  but  occasionally  hyaline),
with  a  reddish  cement  of  ferruginous  clay;  the  sandstones  also  contain  de-
composed felspar,  and  are  often  micaceous  and  fissile:  their  angle  of  dip  is
sometimes  as  much  as  40°.  They  are  classed  as  the  Ores  bigarrt  or  Bunter
Sandstone — the  lowest  member  of  the  Trias.

In  their  upper  portion  occurs  some  limestone,  supposed  to  be  equivalent  to  the
Muschelkalk.  In  some  places  this  appears  as  concretionary  nodules,  with  traces
of  Corals ;  elsewhere  it  expands  into  great  stratified  lenticular  masses.

Still  higher  beds  are  red  and  green  variegated  sandstones,  laminated  and  false-
bedded,  quartzose  and  micaceous,  with  a  white  argillaceous  cement.  These  are
regarded  as  the  Marnes  irisees,  or  Keuper  Sandstone,  the  uppermost  division  of
the  Trias.

The  Infra-lias  (f),  the  Lias  (g),  and  the  Oolite  (h,  i,  j). — Still  further  west-
ward, and  lying  (for  the  most  part  unconformably)  on  the  above-mentioned  in-
clined Triassic  beds,  are  thin  grey  quartzose  sandstones  (Infra-lias,  or  Ores  de
Lias)  and  some  magnesian  limestones,  characterized  by  Gryphcete  and  Belem-
nites,  referable  to  the  Lias*.  Further  to  the  north  the  Infra-liassic  beds  lie  on
the  old  crystalline  rocks,  with  the  interposition  of  beds  of  arkosef.  At  some
places  they  comprise  gypsiferous  clays,  and  their  sandstones  and  breccias  are
full  of  barytes,  oxides  of  manganese  and  iron,  and  other  minerals.

The  Oolite  follows  to  the  south-west,  and  is  represented  by  (1st,  h)  thin  bands
of  crystalline  limestone  (often  dolomitic,  and  either  friable  or  hard  and  cellular), —
succeeded  by  (2nd,  i)  yellow  limestones,  more  or  less  oolitic,  and  compact  white
oolitic  limestones  (Oolithes  miliaires),  in  which  large  lenticular  Coral-beds  are
recognized ;  and  lastly,  in  some  places,  the  series  is  completed  by  (3rd,  j)  shales
and  thin  limestones,  characterized  by  Exogyra  virgula.

One  of  the  hills  near  Condat,  about  a  mile  to  the  north-west  of  the  Railway-
station,  and  on  the  slope  of  which  (at  about  260  feet  above  the  valley)  the  Bade-
goule  Cave  is  excavated,  consists  of  yellowish  limestone  belonging  to  the  Oolitic
series.  One  band  of  shells,  from  the  upper  part  of  the  hill,  is  composed  of
numerous  donaciform  Bivalves,  very  much  like  M.  Buvignier's  Hettangia  Bro-
liensis  %  from  the  upper  sandy  limestone  of  the  Lias  of  Breux.

*  The  Lias  is  more  fully  developed  to  the  South-east.
t  Granitic  materials  disintegrated  and  rearranged.

i  '  Statistique  geologique  &c.  du  Departement  de  la  Meuse,'  par  Amand  Buvignier,  1852,  p.  14,  pi.  10.
figs.  22-25.  The  genus  Hettangia  (or  Tancredia)  belongs  to  the  Lias  and  the  Lower  Oolite.


GEOLOGY  OF  THE  VEZERE.  31

Sandy  alluvium,  irregularly  bedded  here  and  there,  lies  on  the  side  of  the  hill,
up  to  and  beyond  the  cave,  and  contains  numerous  large  pebbles  of  quartz,
quartzite,  and  schist ;  but  there  is  little  or  no  alluvium  on  the  upper  part  of  the
hill,  where  the  limestone  is  nearly  bare,  and  only  a  few  scattered  pebbles  occur.
Some  weathered  blocks  of  iron-ore  (brown  hematite)  lie  on  the  hill-top,  probably
the  debris  of  some  Tertiary  beds  (such  as  I  of  the  Map  and  Section).

A  specimen  of  thin-bedded,  yellow,  marly,  fossiliferous  limestone,  also  from
some  part  of  the  above-mentioned  hill  near  Condat,  bears  on  the  planes  of
bedding  numerous  small  Bivalves  resembling  Buvignier's  Lucma  Mosensis*  from
the  Upper  Coral-rag  of  Saint-Germain.  A  larger  Bivalve  and  some  small  Oysters
occur  in  the  same  block  of  stone.

The  Cretaceous  Hocks  (k). — A  hard,  pinkish-white,  compact  limestone,  oolitic
(or  rather  pseud-oolitic)  in  structure,  containing  remains  of  Corals,  Polyzoans,
Rhynchonella,  &c.,  is  quarried  south  of  the  Condat  Railway-station  on  the  right-
hand  (west)  bank  of  the  river,  for  road-metal  and  other  purposes ;  and  one  band
at  least  of  this  limestone  yields  a  small  Echinoderm,  probably  identical  with
Nucleolites  oblongus,  Desor,  which  is  found  in  the  '  Senonian '  stage  of  the  Chalk
(Upper)  in  the  North  of  France.  This  limestone  seems  to  be  one  of  the  lowest  in
the  Cretaceous  series  at  this  place,  and  to  be  succeeded  upwards  by  the  limestones
that  are  met  with  nearer  Montignac,  which,  in  their  turn,  are  covered  to  the
south-west  by  higher  strata.  The  limestones  being  all  whitish  and  nearly  hori-
zontal, the  cliffs  of  the  river-bluffs  seem  at  first  sight  to  be  formed  of  the  same
great  strata ;  but  descending  the  Vezere  we  come  to  newer  and  newer  beds.

Near  Montignac  we  find  Rudistes  in  the  talus  of  the  cliffs ;  and  a  coarse,  friable
sandstone,  like  the  Quadersandstein  of  Germany,  caps  the  cliff  not  far  from  the  same
place.  A  thick  Polyzoan  limestone  has  also  set  in  near  Montignac  (reminding
us  of  the  similar  rock  of  Touraine,  Maestricht,  and  Eaxoe),  and  continues,  by
Moustier,  to  Les  Eyzies.  Ostrcea  vesicularis,  O.  carinata,  Rhynchonella  alata,
and  Trigonia  are  found  in  the  cliffs  between  Le  Moustier  and  Les  Eyzies.

As  to  the  Elint  of  the  district,  the  railway-cuttings  between  P6rigueux  and
Thenon  show  abundance  of  flint-nodules  in  the  Cretaceous  limestone ;  flint  also
abounds  in  the  limestone  near  Montignac;  and  probably  these  are  the  same
flint-bearing  beds,  as  the  general  strike,  or  bearing,  of  the  strata  passes  through
the  two  localities.

The  Cretaceous  system  is  represented  in  the  Department  of  the  Dordogne  by

*  '  Stat.  geologique  &c.  de  la  Meuse,'  p.  12,  pi.  10.  figs.  9-11.


32  BELIQUUi  AQUITANIC^E.

successive  limestones  sloping  away  gently  to  the  south-west  (Section,  p.  29,
k,  i,  2, 3, 4),  nowhere  occurring  all  in  one  vertical  section,  and  altogether  probably
not  having  an  aggregate  thickness  of  much  more  than  200  metres.  The  lowest
of  these  four  groups  into  which  M.  le  Vicomte  d' Archiac  has  divided  the  Cretaceous
strata  of  this  Department  seems  to  be  wanting  in  the  district  traversed  by  the
Vezere,  the  series  having  there  commenced  with  the  beds  characterized  by
Exogyra  columba — the  lower  part  of  M.  d'Archiac's  Third  Division.  Of  the
Third  Group  the  uppermost  beds  are  seen  (under  other  limestones)  to  form  the
banks  of  the  Vezere  at  and  near  Montignac ;  and  they  come  out  to  the  surface
of  the  country  somewhat  further  up  the  stream.  Limestones  of  the  next  highest
stage  form  the  high  ground  near  Montignac,  and  range  beyond  Perigueux  on
the  north,  and  to  Sarlat  and  Gourdon  on  the  south.

The  nearly  flat  uppermost  limestones  (Premier  Etage  of  D' Archiac)  form  a
considerable  extent  of  ground  traversed  by  the  Rivers  Vezere  and  Dordogne,
on  their  way  westward  by  Lime  nil  and  La  Linde  towards  Bergerac,  halfway
between  which  last  two  places  the  Cretaceous  strata  disappear  beneath  Tertiary
beds  (I)  of  limestone  (of  freshwater  origin),  sands,  clays,  and  ironstone.

The  Cretaceous  limestones  of  the  Department  of  the  Dordogne  are  remarkable
for  the  large  rough  Bivalve  shells  belonging  to  the  family  Rudistes,  particular
forms  of  which  abound  at  four  or  five  different  levels  in  the  series.  The  lime-
stones are  often  oolitic  (or  rather  pseud-oolitic)  in  structure;  that  is,  they
consist  of  roundish  fragments  of  Shells  and  Polyzoans  cemented  with  carbonate
of  lime  (occasionally  crystallized).  Sometimes  the  particles  are  but  slightly
cemented,  and  the  rock  is  friable.  Occasionally  the  fragments  of  Polyzoa  have
not  been  much  triturated ;  and  in  some  cases  they  are  merely  broken  stems  lying
matted  together.  Similar  varieties  of  Polyzoan  limestone  occur  in  the  Chalk
of  Touraine,  Maestricht,  and  Denmark.

The  Elint  in  the  Chalk  of  the  Dep.  de  la  Dordogne  is  mostly  only  so  much  of  the
Cretaceous  stratum  silicified, — the  particles  of  Polyzoa,  the  Orbitoides,  and  other
organic  remains  being  still  in  place  and  retaining  their  characteristic  structures.
Even  Fish-teeth  (Otodus),  in  a  block  of  Flint  from  near  Le  Moustier,  have  been
altered  into  Flint,  excepting  a  thin  external  pellicle.  There  is  also  Flint  showing
a  further  progress  of  mineralization,  in  which  the  constituent  organic  remains  of
the  limestone  have  been  more  and  more  removed  from  sight  by  the  increased
homogeneity  of  the  pseudomorphous  silex,  as  is  usually  the  case  with  the  flint  of
Northern  France  and  of  England.

The  Dordogne  limestones  are  thrown  into  undulations,  and  traversed  by  cracks


GEOLOGY  OF  THE  VEZERE.  33

and  dislocations,  as  is  usual  with  such  rocky  strata.  One  of  these  "  faults  "  in
particular  is  conspicuous  in  the  precipitous  hill-side  bordering  the  valley  of
the  Vezere,  between  Le  Moustier  and  La  Madelaine.

We  must  refer  the  reader  to  the  books  and  memoirs  of  MM.  d'Archiac,  Hubert,
Coquand,  Arnaud,  Harle,  and  other  eminent  geologists  of  France,  for  detailed
descriptions  of  these  Cretaceous  Limestones,  which,  deeply  channelled  by  the
Vezere  for  nearly  thirty  miles,  and  cut  into  by  its  many  tributary  valleys,  are  on
nearly  all  their  precipitous  escarpments  excavated  by  natural  agencies  and  the
hand  of  Man  into  galleries,  recesses,  and  caverns,  which  here  and  there  have  been
elaborated  into  residences  with  stairs  and  chambers.  A  general  idea,  however,
of  their  characters  and  structure,  useful  to  the  passing  observer,  and  sufficient
for  our  descriptions  of  the  Caves,  their  nature  and  their  position,  is  offered  in  the
following  condensed  description  of  M.  d'Archiac's  several  Stages  of  the  Cretaceous
System  as  it  exists  in  the  district  under  notice.

Premier  Etage. — The  uppermost  group  of  the  Cretaceous  Limestones,  coining  out  from  under  the  Tertiary
heds  on  the  Dordogne,  and  on  the  Ceuze  at  Beaumont  and  elsewhere,  and  spreading  over  the  country  to  the
north-west,  east,  and  south-east,  are  described  by  D'Archiac  as  being  yellowish,  sometimes  soft  and  friable,
sometimes  hard  but  full  of  small  cavities,  especially  towards  the  upper  part,  where  the  stratification  is  often
indistinct,  whilst  the  lower  portion  is  more  clearly  bedded.  Here  and  there  the  limestone  is  sandy  with
grains  of  quartz  and  glauconite,  and  sometimes  micaceous.

These  yellow  limestones  ("  le  Premier  Etage "  or  "  les  Calcaires  jaunes  superieurs "  of  M.  d'Archiac)
contain,  among  other  fossils,  Ostrea  vesicularis,  with  Sphcerulites  cylindraceus,  and  many  other  Rudistes.
These  are  large  rough  shells,  peculiar  to  the  Cretaceous  rocks,  often  large,  subcylindrical,  rough  externally,
coarsely  cellular  in  structure,  and  known,  according  to  the  different  genera,  under  the  names  of  Uippuriies,
SpJicerulites,  Radiolites,  Caprina,  &c.  There  are  several  zones  or  beds  of  Rudistes  in  the  Cretaceous  series
of  the  Dordogne,  characterized  by  different  species ;  and  the  "  Premier  Etage,"  containing  two  beds  of
them,  is  M.  d'Archiac's  "  Upper  Zone  of  Rudistes."

The  road-section  on  the  hill  of  Beaumont,  south  of  La  Liude,  showed,  besides  the  overlying  Tertiary  beds
of  limestone  (of  freshwater  origin),  sands,  clays,  and  ironstone  (altogether  about  30  metres  thick),  a
succession  of  Cretaceous  strata,  80  metres  thick,  in  the  following  order  (from  above  downwards)  : —

1.  Coarse-grained,  friable,  yellowish-grey  limestone,  with  quartz  grains  in  it.     Containing  some  Rudistes

(Sphcerulites,  Radiolites,  and  Hippurites).     6  metres  thick.

2.  Whitish  cellular  limestone,  harder  than  the  bed  above.     With  numerous  Rudistes  (Sphcerulites  and

Radiolites).     10  metres.

3.  Hard  limestone,  passing  into  a  yellow,  compact  but  cellular  and  breccioid  limestone.     Cyclolites  &c.

15  metres.

4.  Yellow  limestone,  hard,  subcrystalline,  and  fissile.     4  metres.

5.  Yellowish-white  limestone,  hard  and  subcompact,  alternating  with  subcrystalliue  limestone.     30  metres.

6.  Yellow  homogeneous  limestone,  with  earthy  fracture,  in  regular  beds.    (This  is  the  zone  worked  for  the  best

building-stone  in  the  line  of  quarries  opened  on  both  banks  of  the  Couze  and  the  Dordogne.)     Towards
its  base  this  rock  becomes  breccioid,  hard,  and  yellowish-grey,  with  sparkling  fracture.     15  metres.

F


34  EELIQUI^E  AQUTTANKLE.

The  outcropping  edges  of  these  Upper  Limestones  follow  an  irregular  line  crossing  the  lower  part  of  the
Vezere.  They  have  been  very  much  denuded,  and  in  some  places  have  been  cut  away  by  the  valleys  so  as
to  expose  the  next  underlying  set  of  beds.  In  the  gorges  of  the  Cretaceous  Limestone  near  Campagne,
north-west  of  St.-Cyprien,  even  the  Jurassic  series,  characterized  by  Exogyra  virgula,  is  exposed.

Deuxieme  Etage. — The  next  lowest  Cretaceous  zone  consists  of  grey  or  whitish,  marly,  chalk-like  limestone,
in  some  places  full  of  nodules  of  Flint.  This  band  also  traverses  the  Departments  du  Lot,  de  la  Dordogne,
and  of  the  two  Charentes,  passing  southwards  under  the  yellow  limestones,  and  on  the  north  and  east  resting
on  an  underlying  white  limestone.  Towards  its  base  the  marly  chalk,  or  chalk-marl,  is  sandy,  glauconitic,
hard,  and  laminated ;  but  upwards  it  becomes  thick-bedded,  sandy,  glauconitic,  and  micaceous,  with  grey
and  black  flint-nodules  distributed  unequally  throughout ;  and  in  its  uppermost  part  this  chalk  is  still  more
marly,  friable,  and  soft,  with  fewer  green  glauconitic  grains.  Some  of  the  most  characteristic  of  the  fossils
of  this  "  grey  chalk "  are  Ostrea  proboscidea  and  0.  auricularis.  The  lower  beds  are  especially  rich  in
fossils,  comprising  numerous  Polyzoa,  Ammonites  and  other  Shells,  Echinoderms,  claws  of  a  Hermitcrab,
Fish-teeth,  &c.

This  marly  stratified  limestone  forms  the  banks  of  the  Vezere  at  Montignac*,  where  it  is  characterized  by
Terebratula  alata,  Lima  Santonensis,  and  Pecten  quadricostatus,  and  contains  also,  besides  other  fossils,
Hippurites  organizans,  Sphcerulites  Sawvagesii,  ifec.  The  general  dip  of  the  beds  here  is,  according  to
M.  Harle,  not  more  than  2-2  in  100  to  the  W.  25°  S.

Beyond  the  neighbourhood  of  Montignac  to  the  north-west,  this  second  zone  is  more  outspread,  parti-
cularly on  the  Manoir  and  the  Isle  Eivers ;  and  it  is  thicker  and  better  stratified,  yielding  a  good  building-
stone,  on  the  Isle,  where  the  beds  are  90  metres  thick ;  and  at  Perigueux  they  are  over  120  metres,  with
black  flint  in  abundance.

Troisieme  Etage. — The  third  group  of  limestones,  forming  the  uppermost  member  of  the  Lower  Cre-
taceous Formation,  consists  of: — 1st  (uppermost).  Whitish  limestones  (white  to  the  east,  but  yellowish
westward),  sometimes  compact  and  subcrystallinef,  sometimes  soft  and  very  friable,  and  nearly  always
abounding  with  Rudistes  (Radiolites  lumbricalis,  E.  angulosus,  R.  cornu-pastoris,  SpTicerulites  Ponsianus,  and
Sph.  Beaumontii),  and  constituting  M.  d'Archiac's  "Middle  Eudistes-zone."  2nd.  "White,  greyish,  and
yellowish  marly  limestones.  3rd.  Yellowish  marly  limestones,  sandy  and  glauconitic,  containing  Ammonites
Fleuriausianus  &c.,  and  blue  clays  with  many  Oyster-like  Shells  (such  as  Ostrea  biauriculata  and  Exogyra
eolumba).

*  The  overlying  limestone  at  Montignac  (referred  to  also  at  page  32)  is  regarded  by  M.  Harle  as  being
really  a  portion  of  the  "  Second  Stage,"  and  not  an  eastward  extension  of  the  "  First  Stage,"  reaching  to
Sarlat,  as  M.  d'Archiac  described  it.  M.  Harle  traces  it  from  Gourdon,  &c.,  as  a  yellowish  and  glauconitic
limestone,  more  thickly  developed  around  Sarlat  than  it  is  even  at  Perigueux,  where  it  is  micaceous.  It  is
composed  of  fragments  of  Shells  and  Polyzoans,  with  a  yellowish  calcareous  cement.  It  usually  resembles  in
colour  and  general  appearance  the  "  Upper  Yellow  Limestones  ;  "  but  it  really  lies  under  thn  friable  chalk-
marl  and  upon  the  very  persistent  grey  marly  strata  (at  about  70  metres  above  the  level  of  the  valley  at
Montignac) ;  and  all  these  together  constitute  the  base  of  M.  d'Archiac's  '  Deuxieme  Etage,'  and  of  the
Upper  Cretaceous  Formation.  (Harle,  '  Bullet.  Soc.  Geol.  France,'  Deux.  Ser.  vol.  xix.  pp.  120  ifec.)

t  Locally  termed  "  Chaudron."  It  is  characterized  by  Sphcerulites  radiosus,  Sph.  Sauvagesii,  Hippurites
organizaiis,  and  H.  comu-vaccinum.


GEOLOGY  OF  THE  VEZERE.  35

Quatritme  Etage. — The  fourth  group  of  Cretaceous  limestones  seems  to  be  absent  in  the  course  of  the
Vezere ;  but  its  uppermost  Beds  (No.  1  of  the  following  list)  appear  between  the  Perigucux  and  Thmers
Road  and  Millac-de-Nontron,  lying  between  the  limestones  of  the  "  Third  Stage  "  and  the  "  Upper  Oolite ;  "
and  they  probably  extend  to  the  S.E.  They  have  been  well  seen  around  Mareuil.  To  complete  our
account  of  the  Cretaceous  series  of  the  Dordogne  we  briefly  note  that  this  "  Fourth  Stage  "  consists  of: —

1.  Limestones,  varying  from  white  to  yellow,  from  friable  to  compact,  and  sometimes  sandy  and  glauconitic,

and  often  abounding  with  Alveolince,  Caprince,  Eadiolites,  Echinoderms,  and  other  fossils.     M.  d*  Archiac's
"  Lower  Rudistes-zone."

2.  Grey,  green,  and  ferruginous  sands  and  sandstones,  more  or  less  calciferous.

3.  Yellow  or  greyish,  marly,  cellular  limestone,  and  calciferous  concretionary  sandstones.     The  limestone

contains  Alveolince,  Orbitoides,  Corals,  Rudistes,  Echinoderms,  and  other  fossils.

4.  Greyish  pyritr  us  clays,  with  lignite.     (These  sometimes  alternate  with  the  beds  No.  3.)

The  Caves. — The  ossiferous  caves  and  recesses  (whether  or  not,  in  some  cases,
enlarged  artificially)  have  been  hollowed  out,  as  already  noticed,  by  atmospheric
agency, — where  the  softer  alternate  with  the  harder  bands  of  limestones,  the  latter
often  still  forming  more  or  less  continuous  ledges.  The  effect  of  the  last  winter's
frosts  in  flaking  off  the  concave  faces  of  the  softer  beds  is  often  conspicuous  along
these  cliffs.

In  the  Cave  qf  Le  Moustier*  there  is  much  red,  sandy,  micaceous  alluvium,
very  similar  to  the  brick-earth  of  the  valley  below.  It  is  not  necessary,  however,  to
suppose  that  the  cave  was  on  a  level  with  the  flood- waters  of  the  valley  since  Man
inhabited  it;  for,  as  Mr.  J.  Evans  has  suggested t,  the  sand  may  either  have  been
blown  in  by  the  winds,  or,  possibly,  it  may  have  reached  the  cave  from  the  top  of
the  hill  during  the  formation  of  a  talus,  removed  for  the  most  part  since  that  time
by  the  river  having  swept  the  foot  of  the  cliff,  from  which  it  has  now  receded.

The  little  valley  in  which  the  Cave  called  Gorge  d'Enfer  occurs  shows  (as
Mr.  Evans  pointed  out  J)  how  the  talus  of  the  cliffs  themselves  may  have  choked
the  caves,  thus  accounting  for  some  of  the  recesses  being  filled  up  to  the  roof.  On
one  side  of  this  valley  the  edges  of  the  limestone  strata  are  covered  with  a  grass-
grown  talus ;  on  the  other  the  cliff  is  prominent,  bare,  and  cavernous  (see  "Wood-
cut, fig.  2,  page  4).  The  alluvial  bottom  of  the  valley  being  cultivated  as  a  "  water-
meadow,"  the  old  stream  has  been  diverted  to  a  small  channel  immediately  under
the  bare  prominent  cliff,  and  made  to  distribute  itself  thence  in  rectangular  rills
at  intervals  over  the  soil.  Whatever  amount  of  talus  may  have  accumulated
on  what  is  now  the  bare  side,  the  above-mentioned  process  of  cultivation  has
probably  succeeded  in  removing,  down  to  a  line  of  ledges  and  recesses  level  with

*  See  "Woodcut,  fig.  1,  page  3 ;  and  Lithographic  Sketch,  No.  1.

t  In  a  Paper  read  before  the  Geological  Society,  June  22,  1864.  £  In  the  same  Memoir.


36


BELIQULE   AQUITANICJE.


the  present  meadow.  One  of  these  recesses  (rich  with  bones  and  implements),
along  the  mouth  of  which  the  meadow-hank  and  the  artificial  stream  pass  by,  was
nearly  choked  with  de"bris,  fallen  in,  probably,  from  the  back  of  the  old  talus  since
the  cave  was  deserted, — the  fallen  rubbish  of  the  cliff-face  having  been  partly
pushed  backwards,  perhaps,  when  alternately  muddy  and  frozen  (3.  Evans).

In  some  cases  flakings  and  fragments  from  the  limestone  roof  seem  to  have
formed  a  breccia  over  the  ossiferous  deposits,  at  least  near  the  sides  of  the  cave.
Thus  at  Les  Eyzies*  the  chief  cave  has  a  vaulted  ceiling,  ribbed  with  stalagmite,
and  corniced  with  a  rough  edge  of  a  hard  band  of  limestone  (see  fig.  14) :  the
cornice  is  wanting  at  one  place ;  and  here  the  stalagmite  has  come  lower  down
the  wall  and  cemented  more  breccia  than  elsewhere  in  the  cave,  showing  that
at  this  place  the  fragments  from  the  ceiling  once  formed  a  considerable  mass
against  the  walls  and  above  the  ossiferous  layers.

T.  E.  3.


Fig.  14.


b  b

a,  Limestone.

b,  Hearth-stuff,  with  Bones,  Flint  Flakes,  and  Implements  of  Stone  and  Bone.
c,  Breccia  of  Limestone,  cemented  with  Stalagmite.

Diagram  of  the  Cave-deposits  at  Les  Eyzies.


See  Lithographic  Sketch,  No.  2.


OLD  IMPLEMENTS  OF  NOETH  AMEEICA  AND  DOEDOGNE.


37


IV.

EEMAEKS  ON  THE  SIMILARITY  OF  SOME  IMPLEMENTS  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVES  OF  DOE-
DOGNE TO  SOME  USED  BY  THE  NOETH- AMEEICAN  INDIANS,  ON  THE  "GEEMANI"
OF  THE  EOMAN  PEEIOD,  AND  ON  THE  EANGE  OF  THE  EEINDEEE.


THE  following  valuable  Letter  from
a  Correspondent*,  who  most  kindly
and  readily  replied  to  some  inquiries
respecting  the  probable  use  of  the
North-American  horn  tool  (see  fig.  15)
referred  to  in  the  footnote  at  p.  32,
the  primitive  weapons  and  habits  of
the  Indians,  and  other  associated  sub-
jects, cannot  fail  of  being  of  high
interest  to  our  Readers,  and  raises
the  hope  that  others  also  will  help  us,
by  careful  examination  and  mutual
criticism,  to  arrive  at  as  full  explana-
tions of  the  uses  of  the  prehistoric
implements  that  we  have  to  treat  of,
and  of  the  character  and  habits  of
the  old  people  of  Pe"rigord,  as  circum-
stances will  permit.

Since  the  Implement  under  con-
sideration was  noticed,  in  March  1866,
as  forming  part  of  a  collection  sent
from  Vancouver  and  British  Columbia
to  the  Exhibition  of  1862,  a  manu-
script list  of  Indian  articles,  dated
November  29,  1862,  has  been  found,

*  To  another  friendly  correspondent  (Mr.
Eobert  Brown)  we  are  indebted  for  another
letter  full  of  information,  which  we  shall  also
publish.


Fig,  15  a.


Fig.  15  b.


Implement  of  Horn,  from  Mackenzie  Eiver,  the  great
district  traversed  by  the  Mackenzie,  North-east  of
British  Columbia.  (One-third  of  the  natural  size.)


38  KELIQTJIJE   AQUITANIC^E.

in  which  it  is  referred  to  as  a  "  Pick  or  Axe  of  Stag's  Horn,  from  Mackenzie
River."— T.  E.  J.

Rosebank,  Victoria,  Vancouver's  Island,  July  16, 1866.

SIR, — I  received  a  few  days  ago  your  favour  of  the  22nd  May,  and  have  much
pleasure  in  giving  you  any  information  that  may  tend  to  elucidate  the  very
interesting  subject  which  you  have  in  hand.

As  regards  the  "  British-Columbian  "  Horn 1  [see  the  Appendix  to  this  Letter
for  the  Notes  indicated  by  the  Numbers  i-u]  sketched  by  you  in  the  margin  of
your  letter  [this  is  the  specimen  alluded  to  above],  I  think  I  can  at  once,  and
without  hesitation,  indicate  the  use  for  which  it  was  originally  intended.
It  is  a  chisel,  used  for  various  purposes  among  the  Indians  of  the  North-west
Coast,  but  chiefly  for  raising  the  large  sheets  of  bark  of  the  Thuja  occidentalis
during  the  flow  of  the  sap  in  summer,  and  for  the  excavation  of  the  canoes
formed  of  the  wood  of  the  same  tree.  Fire  is  first  employed  to  char  the
surface,  which  is  then  easily  abraded  by  means  of  the  bone  (or  horn)  chisel.
A  repetition  of  the  process,  again  and  again,  completes  the  excavation  of  the
canoe  roughly;  the  finishing  strokes  are  given  with  an  adze  or,  rather,  chisel,
handled  at  an  acute  angle,  and  formed  originally  of  stone,  but  now  usually  of  a
piece  of  iron  or  steel  [fig.  22].  This  implement,  I  may  mention,  appears  to
be  the  exact  counterpart  of  one  of  corresponding  use  figured  on  Egyptian
monuments,  and  is  fastened  to  the  handle  with  leathern  thongs  in  the  same
way.  I  allude  here  to  the  implement  last  described,  not  to  the  horn  chisel
sketched  by  you,  which  is  used  alone,  by  pressure,  or  by  occasionally  striking
it  gently  with  a  mallet.  It  was  probably  thus  that  the  upper  end  of  the  horn
in  question  was  fractured.  The  ornamental  lines  I  believe  to  have  been  engraved
merely  for  the  amusement  of  idle  hours,  and  to  have  no  assignable  meaning
beyond  a  taste  for  ornament.  Such  engravings,  or  others  resembling  them,  are
very  common  among  the  Indians  of  this  Coast,  originating  from  taste  partly,
and  partly  as  marks  distinctive  of  private  property  in  various  articles  of  domestic
use.  The  short  projecting  piece  of  the  brow-antler  that  appears  in  your  sketch
is  designedly  left  to  afford  a  firm  hold  to  the  lower  hand  while  exerting  pressure
for  cutting-purposes.

I.  have  examined  with  much  interest  the  engravings  [a  set  of  the  Plates  B.  of
the  first  two  numbers  of  this  Work]  enclosed  by  you,  representing  some  of  the
antiquities  discovered  in  Dordogne.  The  appearance  of  these,  or  their  counter-
parts, is  very  familiar;  and  I  think  I  can  assign  an  application  for  most  of


NORTH-AMEBICAN  IMPLEMENTS.  39

them.     To  commence  with  that  marked  "  B.  Plate  I."    All  the  smaller  articles
in  this  sheet  I  believe  to  have  been  arrow-heads  formed  (I  presume)  of  bone,  and
barbed.     [See  descriptions  in  detail  at  pages  10-12.]     The  lower  part  is  tapered
off  so  as  to  fit  upon  the  wooden  shaft  of  the  arrow, — babiche,  or  sinew  in  a  wet
state,  being  employed  to  secure  the  junction,  which,  by  its  contractile  powers  in
drying,  it  would  do  very  firmly.     (By  babiche,  I  should  explain,  I  mean  thin
cords  of  deer-parchment,  such  as  are  used  by  the  North-American  Indians  for
similar  purposes  and  for  lacing  snow-shoes, — by  sinew,  the  dorsal  sinew  of  the
Deer.)     The  figure  marked  fig.  8,  in  particular,  is  very  familiar  to  me.     As  may
be  supposed,  these  primitive  implements,  as  well  as  the  arrow-heads  of  stone,  &c.,
are  gradually  becoming  rarer  with  the  spread  of  the  white  population,  and  the
introduction  of  firearms  and  more  efficient  implements  of  iron  and  steel.     Indeed
it  would  perhaps  be  difficult  now  to  find  specimens  in  actual  use.     Still,  among
the  more  secluded  tribes,  the  use  is  not  forgotten  nor  neglected,  and  especially
by  the  old  men — who,  many  of  them,  pertinaciously  adhere  to  the  customs  of
their  forefathers,  notwithstanding  the  changes  that  take  place  among  the  rising
generation.     In  1846,  while  exploring  in  the  mountains  of  the  north-west  Coast-
range  of  British  Columbia,  I  fell  in  with  some  native  hunters  engaged  in  the
chase  of  the  Mountain-goat.     Their  implements  were  the  bow  and  arrow — the
arrow  headed  with,  I  believe,  an  exact  counterpart  of  fig.  8.     Even  at  that  time
most  of  the  tribe  (the  Sillooett)  had  guns  and  ammunition ;  but  they  told  me
they  preferred  the  bow  and  arrow  for  their  present  purpose,  since  the  Goat,  if
not  killed  on  the  spot  with  the  bullet,  was  frequently  enabled  to  reach  places
inaccessible   to   the   hunters   before   succumbing;   while  with  the   arrow,   even
though  not  instantaneously  killed,  the  progress  of  a  wounded  animal  was  more
effectually  hindered 2.     They  told  me,  too,  that  the  bone  arrow-heads  were  used  by
them  chiefly,  if  not  exclusively,  in  the  chase  of  the  Goat,  and  that  when  using  the
arrow  for  other  purposes  the  ordinary  arrow-head  of  stone  or  iron  was  employed.
But,  as  I  have  said,  the  use  of  the  bow  and  arrow  among  the  tribes  generally  has
become  very  rare  comparatively,  and  the  arrow-heads  of  flint,  with  the  knives  and
adzes  of  stone,  &c.,  are  now  even  here  a  rarity.     The  larger  implements  figured
on  the  same  sheet  are,  I  believe,  spear-heads.     In  B.  PI.  II.  fig.  5,  there  is  a  Deer
transfixed  apparently  by  a  spear  of  this  description3.     I  infer  that  spears  were
planted  in  a  "run-way,"  inclined  at  the  proper  angle,  and  that  the  driven  herd,
in  its  effort  to  escape,  rushed   against   the  hidden  danger,  where   some  were
impaled.     This  inference  would,  I  think,  explain  the  object  of  fig.  7,  in  connexion
with  fig.  5.    There  is  a  painting  at  Pompeii  (engraved  in  Mazois  *)  of  a  gladiatorial


40  EELIQUI^E

combat,  where  this  mode  of  spearing  an  animal  is  illustrated.  It  is  figured  in
Kitto's  '  Pictorial  Bible,'  among  the  notes  to  "  1  Corinthians  " ;  and  if  you  can
conveniently  refer  to  it  you  will  find  the  animal,  as  there  figured*,  transfixed
almost  similarly  to  that  in  fig.  5.  Most  of  the  other  fragments  in  the  same
Plate  seem  to  have  had  reference  to  scenes  of  hunting  or  fishing ;  but  in  their
incomplete  state  it  would  be  hard  to  assign  to  them  any  special  use.  I  am
disposed  to  regard  them  merely  as  fragments  of  implements  similar  to  the  large
ones  figured  in  the  double  Plate  B.  III.  &  IV.

In  this  Plate,  fig.  1  is  analogous  to  the  sabres  (or  clubs)  of  horn  which  are,  or
were,  in  common  use  among  the  North-American  Indians.  These  are  called  by
the  French-Canadian  voyageurs  Puck-d-maugan  (literally  "  Strikers "),  a  name
originating  with  Cree  Indians  of  the  Saskatchewan  and  elsewhere.  These  pucka-
maugans  are  really  blunt  swords  of  horn,  which  can  hack  and  bruise  severely,  and
inflict  even  fatal  blows5.  There  is  usually  a  perforation  near  the  lower  end  of
the  hilt,  for  the  facility  of  passing  a  cord  through,  so  that  the  implement  may  be
suspended  from  the  wrist  when  not  directly  in  use — a  sword-knot,  in  fact.  The
perforations  in  figs.  1  and  4  (admitting  my  assumption  of  the  uses  of  the  weapon
to  be  correct)  I  consider  to  have  been  made  for  the  same  purpose.  But  I  am  at  a
loss  to  assign  a  reason  for  the  series  of  holes  that  appear  in  figs.  5  and  6  a.  The
engraved  lines  I  regard  as  ornamental  tracings, — though  possibly  the  figures  on
fig.  1  may  have  had  an  object  and  a  significance  which  it  would  be  fruitless  to
attempt  to  explain.  I  might  possibly  suggest  that,  admitting  the  use  of  these
implements  as  weapons  (or  in  some  cases  their  application  to  other  purposes,
as  in  the  case  of  the  "British-Columbian"  horn),  the  special  ornamentation  may
have  been  designed  to  distinguish  them  as  trophies  of  the  chase.  A  custom
analogous  to  this  existed,  we  know,  among  the  Germans  in  regard  to  the  horns  of
the  Urust.  Taken  in  pitfalls,  the  horns  of  these  animals  conferred  celebrity  on
their  captors ;  and,  highly  ornamented,  were  carefully  preserved.  I  believe  that
some  of  these  relics  of  the  past  still  exist  among  the  old  German  and  Swiss
families.  The  carved  horns  which  you  allude  to  as  being  found  among  the
natives  of  Queen  Charlotte's  Island  (and  elsewhere,  I  may  add,  along  the  north-
west coast)  are  grotesque  and  highly  elaborated  works  of  native  art.  These  are
usually  the  horns  of  the  common  white  Goat,  found  in  all  precipitous  ranges

*  In  this  case  the  spear  appears  to  have  been  held  in  position  by  the  gladiator,  who  is  seen  escaping
adroitly  aside.  Probably  the  figure  represents  a  German  captive  doomed,  as  of  wont,  to  the  sports
of  the  arena.

t  See  Cses.  de  Bel.  Gal.  vi.  28.


NORTH-AMERICAN  CARVINGS.  41

dependent  on  the  Rocky  Mountains  and  the  mountainous  line  of  the  North-west
Coast  (not  the  animal  known  as  the  Rocky- Mountain  Sheep,  which  is  the  Big-horn
or  Ashaka,  common  in  the  Rocky  Mountains  and  their  immediate  spurs,  hut  not
found  in  the  vicinity  of  the  coast).  Some  of  these  carvings  have  a  useful  purpose —
i.  e.  the  larger  ones  as  cups  or  ladles,  the  smaller  as  spoons.  Others,  carved
throughout  their  original  form,  and  sometimes  inlaid  with  the  nacre  of  the  pearl-
shell,  have  in  many  cases  a  superstitious  interest  connected  with  them,  and  may
indeed  be  regarded  sometimes  as  the  Penates  or  Teraphim  of  a  family.  I  say
sometimes ;  for  though  the  goat-horn  is  perhaps  preferred  as  a  convenient  material
by  many,  others  select  a  different  substance,  such  as  the  hard  wood  of  the  crab-
tree,  the  teeth  of  the  Walrus 6,  or  the  soft  pipe-stone  common  along  the  coast,  as
the  material  whereon  to  exercise  their  ingenuity ;  and  thus  the  carving,  and  the
associations  connected  with  it,  convey  the  superstitious  reverence  irrespectively  of
the  material.  But  there  is  very  little  resemblance  between  these  works  of  art
and  the  Aquitanian  carvings.  Usually  they  are  very  grotesque,  with  traits  of
similarity  pervading  the  Whole  of  them.  In  some  the  family  mark  is  conveyed
(corresponding  to  the  "totem"  of  the  Ojibways  of  Canada,  of  which  you  will  doubt-
less find  a  description  in  Mr.  Schoolcraft's  work).  This,  for  instance,  is  in  one
particular  case  that  occurs  to  my  memory  a  pair  of  "  Fishers  "  (the  large  variety
of  the  Marten  or  Sable),  or  rather  a  grotesque  imitation  of  those  animals,  rivalling
our  own  heraldic  caricatures.  In  some  cases  pairs  of  Fishes,  as  you  mention  (see
also  page  13,  note],  may  be  employed.  But  in  any  case,  where  no  useful  purpose
is  obviously  assignable  to  such  carved  relics  as  above  described,  I  should  be  dis-
posed to  consider  them  to  be  superstitious  emblems,  analogous  to  the  "  teraphim  "
of  old,  or  family  insignia*.  A  friend  of  mine  who  possesses  one  of  these  horns
has  promised  to  send  it  to  me  in  order  that  I  might  send  you  a  sketch  of  it.  If
it  reaches  me  in  time  I  will  do  so,  though  I  do  not  think  it  will  tend  to  elucidate
materially  any  special  point.  Meanwhile,  however,  I  will  sketch  from  fragments,
assisted  by  memory,  some  articles  in  horn  and  other  material,  in  present  or  past
use  among  the  natives,  which,  by  affording  a  point  of  comparison,  may  possibly
tend  to  assist  your  inquiry.

*  And,  of  course,  as  family  insignia,  expressive  of  distinction,  as  you  suggest,  when  borne  by  the  chief  or
head  of  the  family.  At  public  feasts,  on  the  North-west  Coast,  hereditary  carvings — badges  of  authority
blended  with  some  superstitious  prestige — are  commonly  borne  by  the  chiefs  in  their  dances  of  ceremony.


42  EELIQUI^:  AQUITANICJE.


Description  of  the  Figures.

Fig.  16.  Knife  handled  as  a  double  dagger.  1  Fastened   with    thongs   of   deer-skin
Fig.  17.  Knife  handled  for  cutting  (used  I       parchment  applied  in  a  wet  state.

as  a  Drawing  Knife).  Figs.  16  and  18  have  cords  for  the

Fig.  18.  Knife  handled  as  a  dagger.  wrist.

Fig.  19.  An  Axe  or,  rather,  large  Chisel,  used  for  felling  trees.     The  material  is  a

hard  dark-green  or  blackish  stone,  which  I  take  to  be  hornblende.     N.B.  Flint,

obsidian,  agate,  &c.  are  used  for  arrow-heads  and  other  purposes,  according  to

the  circumstances  of  the  locality.
Fig.  20.  An  Arrow-head  of  agate.     Spear-heads  and  knives  of  analogous  material

are  commonly  found  in  the  vicinity  of  ancient  villages  in  different  parts  where

the  earth  is  disturbed.     Frequently  of  felspar,  I  think.
Figs.  21  and  22.  Adzes  (formerly  of  stone)  with  handles  of  various  shapes,  of  which

two  are  here  represented.     Tied  on  with  leathern  thongs.
Fig.  23.  A  Stone  Pestle  for  crushing  fish-roes  or  other  substances.     Frequently

for  pulverizing  bones,  so  as  to  extract  the  marrow  by  boiling.
Fig.  24.  Whip-handle  of  Wapiti  deer-horn  (the  horns  of  young  bucks  are  selected),

used  among  the  interior  tribes  who  possess  horses.     The  thong  fastened  into

the  hollowed  but-end  with  a  peg,  as  shown.     These  horn  whip-handles  are  fre-

quently much  ornamented  with  fanciful  tracings.     There  is  a  perforation  at  the

upper  end  for  the  wrist-cord,   so  that  the  bow  and  arrow  or  gun  may  be  used

on  horseback  without  losing  the  whip.
Fig.  25.  There  are  Bone  Awls  for  ordinary  purposes  of  various  simple  shapes,  which

can  readily  be  imagined.     The  one  figured  is  in  use  for  sewing  bark  canoes  :

a  large  awl  having  a  hook  near  the  end,  by  means  of  which  the  watt  ape  (root-

fibre  with  which  the  canoe  is  fastened)  can  be  drawn  through  the  perforation.
Fig.  26.  A  Bone  sharpened  for  taking  off  the  hair  from  deer-skins  in  dressing

them.     Stone  and  bone  or  horn  implements  of  various  forms  —  but  all  made

thin  at  the  edge  —  are  used  for  this  purpose.
Fig.  27.  A  Bone  Pin  (the  spina  of  Tacitus).
Figs.  28  and  29.  Fish-hooks  of  bone,  or  wood  and  bone  combined.     The  fastenings

of  all  implements  intended  for  use  in  the  water  are  of  cedar-bark  or  other

vegetable  fibre.
Fig.  30.  A  Fish-spear.    Fig.  31.  A  Fish-spear  of  a  simpler  kind.    In  both  cases  the

haft  fixes  into  a  socket,  as  shown.     When  withdrawn,  the  fish  is  retained  by

the  connecting  cord.


NORTH-AMEEICAN  IMPLEMENTS.


43


Fiffs.  16-31.

North- American  ImplcmentM  of  Stone,  Metal,  Horn,  and  Bone.


17


44  EELIQUI^E  AQUITANIdS.

In  addition  to  the  above,  I  may  indicate  hastily  various  simple  implements
formed  of  horn  and  bone  : — A  large  piece  of  the  but  of  a  horn,  perforated  through
the  centre,  like  a  crutch-head,  for  inserting  a  stout  crooked  crab-stick  used  for
digging  roots,  the  sharp  point  being  hardened  by  fire  for  the  purpose.  Bones,  or
horns,  wedge-  or  chisel-shaped,  for  various  purposes — among  the  rest  very  gene-
rally for  stripping  the  soft  tender  sap-wood  of  trees  during  early  summer  for  food.
In  the  interior  the  Scotch  Fir  and  the  Aspen  chiefly.  Along  the  coast  the
Hemlock  (Pinus  Canadensis),  the  under  sap-wood  of  which  is  made  into  a  kind  of
bread.  (A  practice  of  the  same  kind  exists,  I  think,  in  the  North  of  Europe,  and,
I  fancy,  existed  in  Germany  &c.  of  old,  as  now,  in  some  shape,  among  most
barbarous  tribes.  Hence  it  is  more  than  probable  that  among  the  relics  found  at
Dordogne  some  implements,  either  of  horn  or  bone,  adapted  for  this  purpose
will  appear.)  Stone  mallets.  Perforated  stones,  probably  for  use  with  a  cord,
like  a  sling.  Pebbles  that  have  undergone  the  action  of  fire,  used  for  boiling
meats,  &c.,  in  bark  vessels.

In  the  hope  that  the  imperfect  explanations  I  have  been  enabled  to  furnish  will
be  of  some  service,  I  will  remark  generally  that  I  shall  watch  with  great  interest
the  solution  of  the  problem  in  which  you,  and  the  other  gentlemen  connected
Avith  you,  are  engaged.  The  relics  of  which  you  have  sent  me  copies  are  unques-
tionably of  a  date  anterior  to  the  age  of  Caesar  or  Tacitus.  This  must  be  inferred
from  the  primitive  material  of  which  the  weapons  are  composed.  The  existence
of  the  Reindeer  in  Germany  in  the  age  of  Caesar  is  sufficiently  proved  by  his  own
words ;  but  no  evidence  has,  I  think,  been  adduced  until  now  to  show  that  they
ever  extended  into  the  most  southern  province  of  Gaul ;  and  indeed  I  think  they
could  not  have  been  in  the  habit  of  migrating  thither  in  Csesar's  day,  or  he  would
'have  mentioned  the  fact*.  In  his  description  of  the  animal  as  then  existing  in
Germany  there  is  a  mixture  of  truth  and  fable,  which  shows  that,  having  probably
himself  seen  a  single  antler  and  some  skins,  he  was  indebted  to  other  persons  for
the  remainder  of  the  picture.  Yet,  putting  the  fabulous  portion  aside,  there  can
be  no  question  that  he  means  the  Reindeer.  I  mean  in  that  passage  of  the
6th  Book  which  begins  "  Est  bos  cervi  figura,"  &c.  Apart  from  the  idea  of
the  Unicorn,  the  description  of  the  Reindeer  is  not  inapt ;  and  this  we  may  the
more  readily  allow  when  we  read  the  next  passage,  describing  the  well-known

*  On  the  contrary,  Ciesar,  talking  of  the  Hercynian  Forest,  says  distinctly,  "  Multa  in  ea  genera  ferarum
nasei  constat,  qua  rdiqiiis  in  locis  non  sint:  ex  quibus,"  &e.,  and  then  goes  on  to  describe  the  Reindeer,
the  Urus,  &c.  (Bel.  Gal.  vi.  25).


THE  ANCIENT  GEEMANI.  46

Elk  in  terms  the  most  unreal  and  extravagant.  Besides,  Caesar  talks  of  the  skins
of  the  Hheno  thus: — "et  pellibus,  aut  parvis  rhenonum  tegumentis,  utuntur"  &c.7
I  am  aware  that  some  diversity  of  interpretation  has  existed  in  regard  to  this
passage ;  but  it  seems  to  be  clearly  thus : — "  they  use  the  skins  of  Reindeer
(rhenones)  to  cover  themselves,  or  small  vestments  made  of  the  same  material."
The  name,  too,  given  by  Caesar,  a  Latinization  of  the  Saxon  "  Ran,"  is  another
proof.  Hence  the  modern  Prench  Henne,  and  our  own  Reindeer.  I  might  mul-
tiply illustrations,  but  will  confine  myself  to  saying  that  the  term  "  Rhenones  "
(which  other  authors,  while  dubious  of  its  true  signification,  explain  as  being  a
word  of  German  origin)  appears  to  have  been  applied  by  Caesar  to  the  skins  used
for  the  garments  in  question,  and  to  the  animals  which  yielded  them,  but  that
afterwards,  when  describing  the  same  animal,  albeit  inaccurately,  he  does  not
appear  to  have  identified  it  with  the  animal  of  which  he  had  previously  spoken
and  had  actually  named8.  The  recent  discoveries  not  only  corroborate  the  fact
that  the  Reindeer  (or  Rheno)  existed  in  localities  where  they  are  now  extinct,
but  prove  that  they  at  one  time  existed  in  a  region  far  to  the  south  of  the
locality  where  Caesar  describes  them  as  existing  in  his  time — in  the  interior  of
Gaul  namely,  and  up  to  the  slopes  of  the  Pyrenees 9.

I  have  been  insensibly  led  to  dwell  on  particulars  which  will  doubtless  not  have
escaped  the  notice  of  yourself  and  your  learned  coadjutors ;  a  feeling  of  curiosity,
however,  has  prompted  me  to  consider  the  subject  more  fully  than  when  I  sat
down  (yesterday)  to  reply  to  your  letter ;  and  it  has  struck  me  that  some  facts
that  have  come  under  my  own  observation  during  a  long  residence  in  the  North-
west of  America,  in  regard  to  the  migration  and  disappearance  of  races  of  the
larger  animals  from  localities  where  they  were  once  numerous,  and  the  consequent
changes  of  place  of  tribes,  or  portions  of  tribes,  to  which  they  yielded  a  subsistence,
may  tend  to  aid  a  solution  of  the  Aquitanian  problem.  I  may  be  pardoned,  then,
if  I  dwell  for  awhile  on  the  subject  before  concluding.  And  I  will  set  out  by  at
once  broadly  stating  my  impression  that  the  Cave-race  who  once  inhabited  the
southern  region  were  similar  in  habits,  and  indeed  identical  with  a  portion  of  the
Germans  as  described  by  Tacitus, — that,  inhabiting  Aquitania,  and  subsisting
chiefly  with  the  products  of  the  chase,  they  dwelt  in  caves  either  naturally  formed
or  artificially  hollowed — even  as  the  Germans  of  a  later  day,  as  described  by
Tacitus,  who  says,  "  Solent  et  subterraneos  specus  aperire,  eosque  multo  insuper
fimo  onerant,  suffugium  hiemi,  et  receptaculum  frugibus,"  &c.  (Germ,  xvi.), — that
at  the  period  (a  vague  one)  in  question  the  lowland  forests  of  Gaul — as  of  Germany


46  RELIQUIAE  AQTJITANIC^E

in  Caesar's  time,  and  as  now  in  parts  of  Northern  Europe  and  in  the  corre-
sponding latitudes  of  North  America — were  the  resort  of  vast  herds  of  Reindeer,
which  periodically,  during  the  summer  months,  migrated  towards  the  mountains 10,
driven  thither  as  a  refuge  from  the  flies,  of  whose  attacks  they  are  peculiarly
susceptible,  and  especially  those  of  a  species  of  Gad-fly  (the  (Estrus  tarandi), — that
in  these  migrations  a  sufficient  number  were  slaughtered  to  afford  an  important
amount  of  food  and  clothing  to  the  inhabitants,  eked  out  by  the  yield  of  their
flocks  and  herds  and  other  local  resources, — that  with  the  increase  of  inhabitants
the  supply  gradually  decreased,  and  that  under  constant  molestation  the  herds
retreated  northwards  towards  the  less  frequented  or  more  spacious  forests  bor-
dering on  the  Northern  Alps, — that  a  portion  of  the  inhabitants,  with  their
nomadic  habits,  followed  the  migrations  of  the  retreating  herds,  and  took  posses-
sion of  other  lands  where  they  could  enjoy  their  favourite  pastime  and  obtain
their  wonted  supplies — displacing  the  previous  inhabitants,  who  were  unable  to
resist  them,  or  possibly  in  time  amalgamating  with  them.

This,  mutatis  mutandis,  is  almost  literally  the  history  of  tribes  of  men,  and
races  of  the  larger  animals,  in  North  America.  There  are  parts  where  the  Rein-
deer (once  numerous)  are  no  longer  found, — others  where  the  bones  of  the  Bison
alone  indicate  their  once  having  occupied  the  land,  but  whence  they  have  dis-
appeared within  the  last  fifty  years,  or  within  the  last  ten,  or  the  last  five  years  ".
But  there  is  in  the  present  case  an  end,  I  think,  to  speculation  on  the  subject
when  we  refer  to  Caesar — the  surest  guide,  with  Tacitus,  in  all  that  relates  to  old
Gaul  or  Ancient  Britain.  He  says  (Bel.  Gal.  lib.  vi.),  "  Ac  fuit  antea  tempus,
quum  Germanos  Galli  virtute  superarent,  et  ultro  bella  inferrent,  ac  propter  homi-
num  multitudinem  agrique  inopiam  trans  Rhenum  colonias  mitterent.  Itaque

ea,  quse  fertilissima  sunt,  Germanise  loca  circum  Hercyniam  sylvam Volcae

Tectosages  occupaverunt,  atque  ibi  consederunt.  Quse  gens  ad  hoc  tempus  iis
sedibus  sese  continet,  summamque  habet  justitiae  et  bellicse  laudis  opinion  em :
nunc  quoque  in  eadem  inopia,  egestate,  patientia,  qua  Germani,  permanent ;
eodem  victu  et  cultu  corporis  utuntur,  &c."*  This  emigration  is  set  down  by
Livy  (as  quoted  in  the  notes  to  the  Delphin  edition  of  Caesar)  as  having  taken
place  under  Ambigatus,  King  of  the  Bituriges,  who  appears  to  have  been  con-
temporary with  Tarquinius  Priscus,  and  consequently  to  have  lived  between
500  and  600  years  B.C.,  or  about  600  before  the  age  of  Julius  Caesar.

*  He  continues  to  say  that  those  of  the  Gauls  (i.  e.  of  the  Volcse  Tectosages)  who  did  not  emigrate,  gradually
lost  their  primitive  habits  (retained  hy  the  others)  through  the  propinquity  of  the  province  and  the  intro-
duction of  foreign  commodities  or  luxuries.  Their  valour,  too,  became  impaired  through  the  same  causes.


WEAPONS  OF  THE  GEEMANI. — REINDEEK.  47

We  are  thus,  in  the  consideration  of  this  subject  under  the  assumption  I  have
advanced,  thrown  back  about  670  years,  at  the  least,  anterior  to  the  time  when
Tacitus  wrote ;  and  even  at  that  comparatively  late  day  horn  or  bone,  as  well  as
stone  implements  and  weapons  of  war,  must  have  been  largely  used  by  the
"  Germans,"  whom,  as  before  shown,  I  assume,  allowing  for  the  changes  of  time,  to
represent  the  ancient  people  of  Aquitaine.  I  mean  particularly  that  portion  of
the  great  German  race  who  inhabited  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Hercynian  Forest —
the  descendants  of  the  VolcaB  Tectosages*  who  migrated  thither,  as  told  by  Caesar.
Tacitus  says,  "Ne  ferrum  quidem  superest,  sicut  ex  genere  telorum  colligitur 12.
Rari  gladiis,  aut  majoribus  lanceis  utuntur :  hastas,  vel  ipsorum  vocabulo/ramm*
gerunt,  angusto  et  brevi  ferro,  sed  ita  acri,  et  ad  usum  habili,  ut  eodem  telo,
prout  ratio  poscit,  vel  cominus  vel  eminus  pugnent"  (Germ.  vi.).  But  after-
wards we  find  (I  quote  from  Relhan's  notes  to  Brotier's  edition),  "  Postea,  cum
ferrum  abundaret,  Germani  gladiis  praacipue  usi  sunt."  And  again,  "  Cum  ferrum
apud  Germanos  abundavit,  non  frameis  vel  hastis,  sed  longis  acutisque  gladiis  usi
sunt,"  &c.,  to  the  same  end.  Hence  I  infer  that  even  in  the  days  of  Tacitus  horn
weapons  for  striking,  such  as  are  figured  in  B.  Plates  III.  &  IV.,  were  used  by  the
Germans.  These  the  Romans  did  not  dignify  with  the  name  of  swords.  The
swords  alluded  to  by  Tacitus  as  being  "  rarely  used "  were  doubtless  the  short
straight  Roman  weapon,  obtained  in  various  ways,  which,  of  course,  with  those
who  were  fortunate  enough  to  obtain  them,  supplanted  the  unwieldy  prototype  of
horn.  These,  again,  as  civilization  advanced  and  iron  became  common,  gave  way
to  the  enormous  two-handed  weapons  which  characterized  the  warfare  of  the
Middle  Ages,  and  which,  in  the  hands  of  the  descendants  of  the  Helvetii,  com-
mitted such  havoc  amid  the  ranks  of  Burgundy  upon  the  fields  of  Granson  and
Morat.

I  omitted  to  remark  that  the  horn  which  you  describe  as  having  been  sent
from  British  Columbia  is  more  probably  that  of  what  is  here  miscalled  the  Elk
than  that  of  the  Reindeer 13.  This  Elk  of  the  north-west  coast  is  in  reality  a  variety
of  the  Cervus  elaphus,  and  is,  I  think,  distinguished  by  naturalists  as  the  Wapiti.
It  attains  to  an  enormous  size  in  these  localities ;  and  its  antlers  are  applied  by
the  natives  to  many  useful  purposes.  The  Reindeer  is  not  found  upon  this  portion
of  the  coast ;  though  approaching  Behring's  Strait,  it  appears  to  winter  in  close
proximity  to  the  sea-board.  Further  south  it  frequents  the  Coast-range  of  moun-

*  Lempriere  says  that  the  Volcoe  of  Aquitania  received  the  name  of  Tectosagso,  quod  sayls  tegerentur.
Compare  Tacitus,  Germ.  xvii.  Tegumen  omnibus  sagum,  &c.


48  KELIQUI^E   AQUITANICJE.

tains  and  all  the  interior  parts  of  British  Columbia  north  of  a  certain  latitude.
This  leads  me  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  close  correspondence,  in  point  of
latitude,  of  its  former  habitat  in  Europe,  proved  by  the  recent  developments  in
Dordogne,  with  the  localities  to  which  it  is  indigenous  on  the  Atlantic  coasts  of
America — that  is,  about  lat.  43° ;  south  of  which  I  do  not  think  it  was  found  in
America — at  least  not  far.  Upon  the  Pacific  coast,  however,  the  Reindeer  or
Caribou  takes  a  more  northern  range.  It  may  occasionally  come  somewhat  further
south  than  49°  in  the  interior,  along  the  borders  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  range ;
but  my  own  experience  would  lead  me  to  place  that  (49°)  as  the  limit — that  is,  the
limit  imposed  by  the  various  exigencies  of  its  nature.  Nearer  the  coast  I  should
be  inclined  to  limit  its  southern  range  by  lat.  51°,  or  thereabout.  In  part
explanation  of  this  disparity,  I  may  remind  you  that  there  is  a  difference  of  winter
temperature  in  favour  of  the  Pacific  coast,  as  compared  with  the  Atlantic,
equivalent  to  at  least  10°  of  latitude.  Reindeer  have  never,  in  America,  been
herded  in  a  domestic  state,  as  is  done  by  the  Laplanders  and  others  of  Northern
Europe ;  nor  are  they  by  the  natives  employed  as  beasts  of  draught.  They  exist
only  in  their  wild  and  natural  condition.  The  late  Lord  Selkirk,  actively  in-
terested at  the  time  in  the  affairs  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  and  the  Red
River  Colony,  introduced  some  Norwegian  experts  with  the  view  of  employing
the  Reindeer  largely  for  winter  transport.  The  project,  however,  did  not  result
satisfactorily,  owing  to  various  local  causes.  In  one  of  the  District-reports  to  the
Council  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  sitting  at  Norway  House,  some  years  ago,
I  noticed  that  the  Officers  of  H.M.S.  '  Plover,'  had  been,  as  they  reported,  when
wintering  in  Wainwright  Inlet,  supplied  by  the  natives  with  "  abundance  of
Reindeer  venison  from  their  herds  in  the  mountains."  But  I  do  not  doubt  that
there  was  a  misapprehension  here,  and  that  what  the  sailors  supposed  to  be  the
yield  of  domesticated  herds,  corresponding  with  their  preconceptions  of  the
Laplanders  &c.,  were  really  the  wild  deer  of  the  forest u.  So  with  the  Germans ;
and  so,  inferentially,  with  the  people  of  ancient  Aquitania ;  for  there  is  nothing
to  authorize  the  supposition  that  they  (the  Germans)  tamed  the  Reindeer  for
domestic  purposes,  but  only  hunted  it.  Small  cattle,  sheep,  and  goats,  with
horses,  composed  their  riches — their  pecora  and  armenta.  The  Reindeer,  the
Urus,  the  Elk,  the  Boar,  &c.  were  J 'era;  of  the  forest.  Indeed  I  very  much
question  whether  the  Laps,  Fins,  &c.  domesticated  the  Reindeer  until  a  com-
paratively late  date — warned  thereto  by  necessity  arising  from  experience  of  the
fugitive  nature  of  the  resource  in  a  wild  state,  exemplified  in  the  case  of  the
southern  races,  and  encouraged  to  it  by  the  peculiar  facilities  and  advantages


ANALOGY  OF  RACES  AND  HABITS.  49

offered  to  them  by  their  country  and  its  climate,  so  consonant  with  the  habits
and  nature  of  the  animal.  Any  theory,  therefore,  that  might  be  based  upon  the
disappearance  of  the  Reindeer  from  southern  latitudes,  in  connexion  with  the
migration  northward  in  remote  ages  of  the  past  of  the  Esquimaux  and  other
northern  tribes,  ought,  I  submit,  to  be  very  cautiously  entertained.  Nor  would
it  be  prudent,  I  think,  to  found  too  much  upon  the  similarity  of  implements  now,
or  recently,  in  use  among  divers  barbarous  nations,  and  the  interesting  relics
which  have  been  discovered  in  Dordogne.  I  will  not  call  this  an  accidental
similarity ;  for  there  is  in  this,  as  in  all  other  mundane  things,  a  deeper  influencing
cause  than  that  which  men  call  "accident."  The  same  Power  which  endows  the
inferior  animals  with  the  perceptions  necessary  to  the  conservation  of  life,  and
which  in  them  we  call  instinct,  prompts  Man  likewise  in  his  primitive  state  with
certain  innate  conceptions  in  regard  to  the  elementary  objects  necessary  to  the
same  end.  Thus  I  believe  that  under  similar  circumstances  and  conditions  of
things,  isolated  branches  of  the  human  race  will  arrive,  in  simple  matters  of
domestic  or  offensive  art,  at  nearly  similar  conclusions,  each  independently  of  the
other.  I  say  this  without  reference  to  that  transmission  of  example  which  has
of  course  gone  on  from  age  to  age,  and  which  has  extended  necessarily  with  the
human  race  in  its  various  ramifications,  no  longer  traceable,  save  by  deduction,
through  the  dim  and  mysterious  vista  of  the  past.  It  is  with  the  slow  and  partial
advance  of  civilization,  modified  by  conditions  of  climate  and  other  influences,
that  the  genius  of  nations,  and  the  broad  deviations  in  manufactures  from  a
common  and  primeval  type,  are  tardily  developed.

I  wrote  a  few  years  ago  at  the  request  of  a  scientific  friend  a  few  notes
regarding  the  Indian  tribes  of  America.  These,  falling  under  the  notice  of  the
Historical  Society  of  New  York,  were  afterwards  printed  by  them,  and  some  copies
sent  to  me.  I  find  that  I  have  still  two  or  three  remaining,  and  send  you  one
herewith.  These  notes  bear,  if  at  all,  very  remotely  on  the  subject  of  your
communication ;  but  they  may  possibly  contain  something  that  may  be  suggestive
to  your  antiquarian  friends,  interested  in  tracing  the  spread  of  races.  It  is,
however,  time  that  I  should  conclude ;  and  I  do  so  with  a  renewed  expression  of
the  warm  interest  I  feel  in  the  progress  of  your  present  undertaking — important,
in  more  senses  than  one,  to  all  reflecting  persons.  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall
cheerfully  contribute,  if  in  my  power,  to  promote  the  end  in  view  by  answering
any  further  queries  you  may  find  it  expedient  to  put ;  and  I  shall  in  any  case
trust  to  hear  from  you,  however  briefly,  in  reference  to  the  subject  and  the
progress  you  have  made  in  your  investigations.  I  should  like,  too,  to  learn  in

H


50


EELIQTJI^E  AQUITANKLE.


how  far  you  agree  with  me  in  the  view  I  have  taken  of  the  matter  under  the
superficial  consideration  I  have  been  enabled  to  give  to  it.  Meanwhile  believe
me  to  be,

Dear  Sir,

Yours  very  truly,

ALEX.  C.  ANDERSON.

T.  Rupert  Jones,  Esq.,  Professor  of  Geology,  $c.,
Royal  Military  College,  Sandhurst.


APPENDIX  TO  ME.  ANDERSON'S  LETTEE.

1  Together  -with  this  horn  chisel  from  Mackenzie  River  (fig.  15,  p.  37)  we  here  figure  (also  in
reduced  outline)  a  similar  but  more  perfect  specimen  of  the  Indian  "  Puck-a-maugan "  (or
"  Pogamagan,"  as  Mackenzie  terms  it)  which  was  brought  by  Gordon  A.  Thomson,  Esq.,  from
Sitka,  as  an  implement  with  which  the  Indians  knocked  game  on  the  head,  and  presented  to
the  Museum  at  Belfast,  where  Mr.  Franks  lately  saw  it.  This  specimen  is  covered  with  leather
on  the  upper  part,  and  has  a  leathern  string  or  shoulder-strap,  reaching  from  the  top  to  a  hole  in
the  end  of  the  projecting  remnant  of  the  brow-antler.  See  fig.  32.

The  following  extracts  (kindly  supplied  by  Mr.  T.  K.  Gay)  from  works  descriptive  of  travels  in  the
high  latitudes  of  North  America  contain  information  as  to  the  implements  under  notice,  as  well
as  remarks  on  the  use  of  instruments  of  stone,  bone,  tooth,  &c.,  which  elucidate  to  some  extent
the  probable  habits  of  the  ancient  people  of  Perigord,  whose  implements  and  weapons  we  are
illustrating  in  this  book.

Extract  from  'A  Journey  to  the  Northern  Ocean,'  by  SAMUEL  HEARNE  (8vo,  Dublin,  1796).

Hearne,  speaking  of  a  woman  of  the  tribe  of  the  Western  Dog-ribbed  Indians,  who  had  been
taken  prisoner  by  the  Athapuscow  tribe,  and  had  managed  to  escape  from  them,  and  was
discovered  by  Hearne's  party  to  the  south  of  the  Athapuscow  Lake,  where  she  had  subsisted
herself  for  seven  months  by  snaring  rabbits,  partridges,  etc.,  and  had  built  herself  a  hut  to  live
in,  says  (p.  267),  "In  a  conversation  with  this  woman  soon  afterward,  she  told  us  that  her
country  h'es  so  far  to  the  Westward  that  she  had  never  seen  iron,  or  any  other  kind  of  metal,
till  she  was  taken  prisoner.  All  her  tribe,  she  observed,  made  their  hatchets  and  ice-chisels  of
Deer's  horns,  and  their  knives  of  stones  and  bones,  that  their  arrows  were  shod  with  a  kind  of
slate,  bones,  and  Deer's  horns ;  and  the  instruments  which  they  employed  to  make  their  wood-
work were  nothing  but  Beavers'  teeth.  Though  they  had  frequently  heard  of  the  useful  materials
which  the  nations  or  tribes  to  the  East  of  them  were  supplied  with  from  the  English,  so  far  were
they  from  drawing  nearer,  to  be  in  the  way  of  trading  for  iron-work  &c.,  that  they  were  obliged
to  retreat  farther  back,  to  avoid  the  Athapuscow  Indians  who  made  surprizing  slaughter  among
them,  both  in  winter  and  summer/'


XOETH-AMERICAN  IMPLEMENTS.


51


Figs.  32  a-h.

A  perfect  Specimen  of  a  "  Puck-a-maugan,"  from  Sitka,  North  America.  Several  views  (a-h)  of  the  stem
and  branch,  showing  the  details  of  ornament,  the  leathern  cover,  and  the  strap  for  suspension,  are  here
given.  (Reduced  to  one-third  of  the  natural  size.)


52  RELIQULE  AQUITANIC^E.

Extracts  from  the  '  Voyages  through  the  Continent  of  North  America  to  the  Frozen  and  Pacific

Oceans,  1789  and  1793,  by  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE'  (4to,  London,  1801).
At  page  cvi  (Account  of  the  Knisteneaux  Indians),  "A  sharp  flint  serves  them  as  a  lancet  for
letting  blood,  as  well  as  for  scarification  in  bruises  and  swellings."

At  pages  37-38  (Account  of  the  Slave  and  Dog-rib  Indians  on  the  Mackenzie  River),  "  They  like-
wise make  lines  of  the  sinews  of  the  Reindeer,  and  manufacture  their  hooks  from  wood,  horn,  or
bone.  Their  arms  and  weapons  for  hunting  are  bows  and  arrows,  spears,  daggers,  and  '  pogamagans '
or  clubs.  The  bows  are  about  5  or  6  feet  in  length,  and  the  strings  are  of  sinews  or  raw  skins.
The  arrows  are  2|  feet  long,  including  the  barb,  which  is  variously  formed  of  bone,  horn,  flint,
iron,  or  copper,  and  are  winged  with  three  feathers.  The  pole  of  the  spears  is  about  6  feet  in
length,  and  pointed  with  a  barbed  bone  of  10  inches.  With  this  weapon  they  strike  the
Reindeer  in  the  water.  The  daggers  are  flat  and  sharp-pointed,  about  12  inches  long,  and  made
of  horn  or  bone.  The  '  pogamagan '  is  made  of  the  horn  of  the  Reindeer,  the  branches  being  all
cut  off,  except  that  which  forms  the  extremity.  This  instrument  is  about  2  feet  in  length,  and
is  employed  to  dispatch  their  enemies  in  battle,  and  such  animals  as  they  catch  in  snares  placed

for  that  purpose Their  axes  are  manufactured  of  a  piece  of  brown  or  grey  stone,  from

6  to  8  inches  long,  and  2  inches  thick.  The  inside  is  flat,  and  the  outside  round  and  tapering
to  an  edge,  an  inch  wide.  They  are  fastened  by  the  middle  with  the  flat  side  inwards  to  a  handle
2  feet  long,  with  a  cord  of  green  skin.  This  is  the  tool  with  which  they  split  their  wood,  and,
we  believe,  the  only  one  of  its  kind  among  them.  They  kindle  fire,  by  striking  together  a  piece
of  white  or  yellow  pyrites  and  a  flint  stone,  over  a  piece  of  touch-wood.  They  are  universally
provided  with  a  small  bag  containing  these  materials,  so  that  they  are  in  a  state  of  continual
preparation  to  produce  fire.  From  the  adjoining  tribes,  the  Red-Knives  and  Chepewyans,  they
procure  in  barter,  for  Marten  skins  and  a  few  Beaver,  small  pieces  of  iron,  of  which  they
manufacture  knives,  by  fixing  them  at  the  end  of  a  short  stick ;  and  with  them  and  the  Beaver's
teeth  they  finish  all  their  work.  They  keep  them  in  a  sheath  hanging  to  their  neck,  which
also  contains  their  awls  both  of  iron  and  bone."

At  page  59  (speaking  of  some  untenanted  huts  of  the  Esquimaux  near  the  mouth  of  the
Mackenzie  River),  "A  square  stone  kettle,  with  a  flat  bottom,  also  occupied  our  attention,
which  was  capable  of  containing  two  gallons;  and  we  were  puzzled  as  to  the  means  these
people  must  have  employed  to  have  chiselled  it  out  of  a  solid  rock  into  its  present  form.  To
these  articles  may  be  added,  small  pieces  of  flint  fixed  into  handles  of  wood,  which,  probably,
serve  as  knives."

2  M.  Marcou,  so  well  known  by  his  excellent  works  on  Geology  and  his  travels  in  North
America,  has  informed  me  of  his  having  in  New  Mexico  met  with  hunters,  of  Spanish  origin,
who  had  abandoned  the  gun  of  their  ancestors  and  taken  the  bow  and  arrows  of  the  Indians.
The  loud  report  of  fire-arms   frightens  away  all  the  animals  round  about;   whilst  with  the
bow  and  arrow  the  hunter,  stealing  upon  his  game,  can  hit  many  successively  before  being
seen. — E.  L.

3  To  me  it  still  appears  probable  that  the  particular  stroke  alluded  to  by  Mr.  Anderson  in  the
figure  noticed  (fig.  5)  is  merely  a  copy  of  an  accidental  scratch  on  the  original  specimen. — E.  L.


NORTH-AMERICAN  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.


53


4  Portion  of  fig.  3,  in  pi.  32,  of  the  First  Part  of  '  Les  Ruines  de  Pompeii/  par  L.  Mazow
(fol.  1824).     The  but  of  the  spear  is  here  represented  broken,  not  pointed  as  it  appears  in
Kitto's  copy.— T.  R.  J.

5  Some  of  these  stems  of  Reindeer  antlers,  ornamented  and  pierced,  are  really  too  light  and

Fig.  33.

Carved  and  perforated  piece  of  Reindeer's  Horn,  from  the  Rock-skelter  at  La  Madelaine.


slender  to  have  served  as  weapons  or  any  other  instruments  of  percussion.     Among  our  specimens
of  these  ornamented  horns  from  Perigord  there  are  some  without  any  perforation ;  others  have

Fig.  34.

Sketch  of  a  Lapland  Implement  for  tapping  the  Magic  Drum,  in  Dr.  G.  Klemm's  Collection.

(Reduced  to  one-third.)


a,  Side  view.     I,  Top  view.

This  Drumstick  is  made  from  a  Horn ;  and  the  zigzag  ornament  and  other  black  lines  are  filled  in  with
pigment.    (For  this  Sketch  we  are  indebted  to  Professor  Griiner,  of  Dresden.)

one,  two,  three,  or  even  four  holes  (see  B.  Plates  III.  &  IV).    The  making  of  these  holes  had

I


KELIQTTLE   AQTJITANIOE.


surely  some  meaning;   for  in  certain  specimens,  to  make  the  hole,  it  has  been  necessary  to
destroy  a  portion  of  the  figures  which  had  already  been  carved. — E.  L.

A  Lapland  drumstick  (or  hammer-like  implement  used  for  tapping  the  Magic  Drum)  in  the
Dresden  Museum,  and  another  in  the  Museum  at  Geneva,  have  been  noticed  by  Mr.  Franks,
during  visits  made  last  year,  to  be  made  of  a  piece  of  Reindeer-horn,  where  a  branch  goes  off
at  right  angles  from  the  beam  of  the  antler,  the  former  being  the  handle,  and  the  hammer-like
part,  or  head,  consisting  of  the  latter;  whilst  the  triangular  portion,  where  branch  and  stem
meet,  is  perforated  with  a  round  hole,  reminding  us  of  this  style  of  ornament  in  the  implements
from  Dordogne,  figured  in  B.  Plates  III.  &  IV.,  though  the  perforation  has  not  the  same  relative
place  in  all  the  latter  specimens.  The  Lapland  tapping- sticks  are  described  in  J.  Scheffer's
'Lapponia'  (Frankfurt,  1673),  p.  131,  as  made  of  Reindeer's  antler;  and  the  two  figured  by
Scheffer  at  page  125  consist  of  similar  parts  of  the  antler,  where  a  branch  goes  off  at  right
angles  from  the  stem,  and  the  broad  portion  where  they  meet  has  in  one  case,  it  seems,  been
either  carved  into  a  semicircular  notch,  or  perforated  and  then  pared  away  until  only  one  half
of  the  hole  is  left.  This  specimen  (see  fig.  35)  has  a  running  ornament  of  the  "  key-pattern ''' ;
and  one  in  Dr.  G.  Klemm's  Collection,  at  Dresden,  shown  in  fig.  34,  p.  53,  has,  besides  the  hole
(which  is  encircled  with  a  radiate  pattern),  zigzag  marks  for  ornament,  somewhat  similar  to  those
borne  by  the  North- American  horn  implements  (figs.  15  and  32).  The  two  figures  given  by
Scheffer  are  here  reproduced  in  figs.  35  and  36.  The  wizard  tapping  the  drum  at  page  139

Figs.  35  and  36.

Copies  of  Scheffer's  figures  of  the  Hammer  for  tapping  the  Magic  Drum  of  the  Laplanders.


of  Scheffer's  'Lapponia'  holds  in  his  hand  a  hammer  that  may  be  either  one  of  the  above
(allowing  for  difference  of  scale),  or  a  terminal  piece  of  an  antler  where  it  branches  at  the
end  symmetrically  and  nearly  horizontally,  as  is  not  unusual. — T.  R.  J.

1  The  ear-bone,  or  os  petrosum,  of  a  Whale,  carved  with  numerous  entangled  human  figures,
brought  from  the  region  under  notice,  is  preserved  in  the  collection  of  A.  G.  Dallas,  Esq.,  of  the
Hudson-Bay  Company. — T.  R.  J.

In  the  Philippine  Islands  it  is,  according  to  M.  Roulin,  the  "rocher"  or  "os  petrosum"


NORTH-AMERICAN  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  55

of  the  Dugong  which  is  employed  as  a  talisman.  That  of  the  Manatee  (Lamantin)  is  sought
after  for  the  same  purpose  by  the  Indians  of  the  Amazon,  and  by  the  people  inhabiting  the
eastern  coast  of  South  America.  In  the  more  ancient  caverns  of  France  (those  in  which
Man  is  found  contemporary  with  the  great  Bear,  the  great  Lion,  the  Hyena,  Mammoth,  and
Rhinoceros)  it  is  the  "os  petrosum"  of  the  Horse  and  the  Ox  which  occurs  prepared  and
worked  in  many  ways  for  ornaments  or  amulets.  The  caverns  of  Aurignac,  of  la  Chaise
(Charente),  des  Fees  (Allier),  of  Vergisson  (Saone  et  Loire),  have  yielded  numbers  of  these
specimens.  Up  to  the  present  time,  however,  we  have  not  observed  them  in  any  caves  of
more  recent  date,  where  the  remains  of  Reindeer  predominate,  with  objects  of  arts  and  of
more  advanced  industry. — E.  L.

7  This  reading  of  Csesar  is  not  found  in  every  edition.     That  the  common  article  of  dress,
here  alluded  to,  should  have  been  made  of  the  skins  of  young  Reindeers,  it  would  be  necessary
for  the  animal  to  have  been  very  common  in  the  countries  inhabited  by  the  "  Germani."     How,
then,  could  Csesar,  who  had  called  it  by  its  name  "  Rheno,"  describe  it,  a  few  lines  after,  as  a
sort  of  deer-shaped  Ox  ("  est  bos  cervi  figura,"  &c.)  without  recalling  its  name  or  the  use  made
of  its   skin.      Sallust,  who  wrote  after  the  death  of  Caesar,  speaks  of  the   "Rheno"   as  if
it  were  a  garment  and   not   an  animal— "  intectum  rhenonibus  corpus  tegunt."      Isidore  of
Seville  gives   the   same  interpretation — "rhenones  sunt  velamina  humerorum   atque   pectoris
usque  ad  umbilicum,   atque  intortis  villis  adeo  hispida   ut   imbrem   respuant."      This  also  is
the  opinion   adopted  by  other  scholars.     M.  Quicherat  ('  Diet.  Latin- Fran9/)  remarks  on  the
word  "  Rheno,"  that  it  was  a  simple  waistcoat  (gilet)  made  of  sheep-skin.     At  our  Universal
Exposition  of  1867  I  observed  this  same   "Rheno"  or   tunic  of  sheep-skin,  with  the  wool
turned  inwards,  on  the  life-sized  models  showing  Swedish  costumes,  exhibited  in  the  Swedish
Section. — E.  L.

8  The  following  observations  written  lately  by  Mr.  W.  Boyd  Dawkins,  F.R.S.,  quite  independently
of  the  remarks  on  the  subject  communicated  in  Mr.  Anderson's  Letter,  are  here  appended  as  adding
considerably  to  the  interest  of  this  portion  of  the  '  Reliquiae  Aquitanicae.' — T.  R.  J.

"  If  we  turn  to  History,  we  shall  see  that  the  animal  [the  Reindeer]  has  been  retreating  north-
wards at  least  during  the  last  two  thousand  years.  In  Caesar's  time  it  dwelt  in  the  great  Hercynian
Forest  that  overshadowed  Germany.  He  describes  it  as*  '  an  ox  in  the  shape  of  a  stag,'  and  as
'  having  one  antler  springing  from  the  middle  of  its  forehead,  between  the  ears,  loftier  and  more
directed  forwards  than  any  known  to  the  Romans.  From  its  palm-like  top  branches  spread  widely.
In  both  male  and  female  there  is  the  same  nature,  the  same  form  and  magnitude  of  antlers.'  This
description  has  been  considered  by  many  of  no  value  at  all,  and  as  the  pure  invention  of  Caesar's
brain.  It  seems  to  me,  however,  a  very  natural  explanation  of  the  difficulties  of  the  passage,  if
we  suppose  that  Caesar  described  the  animal  partly  from  hearsay  and  partly  from  a  rude  sketch
and  profile.  In  the  latter  case,  unless  the  drawing  were  in  correct  perspective,  the  animal  would

*  "  De  Bellico  Gallico,  lib.  vi.  cap.  xxvi.  '  Est  bos  cervi  flgura,  cujus  a  media  fronte  inter  aures  unura
cornu  existit,  excelsius,  magisque  directum  his  quse  nobis  nota  sunt  cornibus.  Ab  ejus  summo,  sicut
palmae,  rami  quam  late  diffunduntur.  Eadem  est  fceminse  marisque  natura,  eadem  forma  magnitudoque
cornuum.' "

12


56  EELIQULE  AQUITANICLE.

appear  to  be  possessed  of  one  horn  only ;  and  therefore  he  might  legitimately  describe  it,  in
times  when  a  belief  in  all  kinds  of  monsters  was  current,  as  possessed  of  one  horn.  To  this
imperfection  of  drawing  many  of  the  monsters  in  the  natural-history  books  of  the  Middle  Ages
may  most  probably  be  traced.  It  is  not  at  all  reasonable  to  suppose  that  Csesar  himself  ever
saw  a  Reindeer;  for  he  describes  the  Hercynian  Forest  as  stretching  far  beyond  his  ken;  then
he  proceeds  to  enumerate  the  animals  that  are  found  in  it.  The  Germans,  however,  in  his
time  were  well  acquainted  with  the  Reindeer;  for  in  the  21st  chap,  of  the  6th  Book  of  his
'  Commmentaries '  he  writes  that  they  use  small  skins  of  Reindeer,  '  parvis  rhenonum  tegumentis
utuntur/  a  passage  in  which  '  rhenones '  is  the  Latinized  form  of  the  word  that  is  now  current
as  'Rennthier'  (Swedish  'Rendjur'),  and  which  is  preserved  in  the  Romance  word  'Renne/
the  root-meaning  being  found  in  the  German  '  rennen '  to  run*.  When  the  Teutonic  invaders
of  Europe  advanced  northwards  and  westwards  in  the  Hercynian  Forest,  they  met  with  an
animal  altogether  strange  to  their  eyes ;  they  were  struck  with  its  running-powers,  and  so  they
termed  it  the  running  beast,  and  thus  the  animal  acquired  a  name.  Other  writers  of  antiquity,
such  as  Pliny,  Solinus,  and  ^Elian  speak  of  an  animal  which  they  term  '  Tarandus ' ;  their
accounts,  however,  are  purely  mythical,  and  it  may  have  been  an  Elk,  or,  as  Gesner  believes,  a
Polish  'Thur/  as  reasonably  as  any  other  animalf.  In  Caesar's  description  the  uprightness
of  the  horns  shows  that  he  meant  the  true  Reindeer  and  not  the  Elk." — "  On  the  Former
Range  of  the  Reindeer  in  Europe,"  in  '  The  Popular  Science  Review/  No.  26,  January  1868,
pp.  40,  41.

9  The  Reindeer  must  have  retired  from  Western  Europe  by  gradual  stages.     It  has  been
noted  as  fossil  in  the  peat-bogs  of  Pomerania,  which  are  regarded  as  of  a  more  recent  age
than  the  deposits  of  our  caverns,  where  this   animal   has   left  such  abundant  remains;    and,
adopting  the  calculations  cited  by  M.  Grewingk  ('Ueber  die  friihere  Existenz  von  Rennthieren
in  den  Ostseeprovinzen/  &c.   1867),  the   Reindeer  perhaps   existed  in   Livonia  600  or  1200
years  ago. — E.L.

10  After  the  very  many  observations  which  we  have  been  able  to  make,  in  the  caverns  and
rock-shelters  of  Perigord,  on  the  remains  of  Reindeer,  slain  in  all  seasons  and  at  every  age
(judging  by  the  state  of  their  antlers  still  attached  to  the  frontal  bones),  we  must  conclude
that  this  animal  had  a  permanent  habitat  in  that  region.     At  the  time  of  the  Glacial  Epoch,
as  well  as  before  and  after,  in  the  mean  latitude  of  Europe  of  the  Quaternary  Period,  the  more
humid  climate  may  have  had  less  extreme  seasons,  the  summers  being  cooler  than  at  present,
not  driving  the  Reindeer  to  take   refuge  in  the  mountains,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  milder
winters,  allowing  the  Hippopotamus  to  live  in  the  rivers,  which,  fed  by  abundant  rains,  have
left  in  wide-spread  alluvia  the  witnesses  of  their  enormous  power. — E.  L.

11  Formerly  ranging  through  nearly  the  whole  of  North  America,  east  of  the  Rocky  Mountains,
the  Bison  is  now  confined  to  the  plains  west  of  the  Missouri  and  along  the  slopes  of  the  Rocky

*  "  That  this  is  the  true  derivation  is  proved  by  the  prominence  which  Olaus  Magnus,  Albertus  Magnus,
and  Gesner  give  to  its  attribute  of  swiftness.  Dr.  Lee  derives  the  name  from  the  German  'rein'  (clean),
without,  however,  giving  any  reason."

t  "Historia  naturalis;  folio,  1603,  vol.  i.  p.  140."


NOBTH-AMEEICAN  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  57

Mountains.  Some  interesting  remarks  on  the  rapid  decrease  of  the  "  Buffalo "  are  given  by
Dr.  P.  V.  Hayden  at  pages  150  and  151  of  the  '  Report  on  the  Geology  and  Natural  History
of  the  Upper  Missouri/  4to,  Philadelphia,  1862.— T.  R.  J.

12  We  might  still  better  quote  the  passage  from  Tacitus  ('Germania/  xlvi.),  where  he  says
"  Fennis  mira  feritas ;  foeda  paupertas ;  non  arma,  non  equi,  non  penates ;  victui  herba,  vestitui
pellis ;  cubile  humus ;  sola  in  sagittis  spes,  quas,  inopia  ferri,  ossibus  asperant." — E.  L.

13  This  horn  is  not  that  of  the  Elk  or  Moose,  nor  of  the  Wapiti,  but  decidedly  of  the  Reindeer ;
nor  is  this  a  matter  of  surprise,  since  it  came  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Mackenzie  River,
where  the  Reindeer  is  said  to  abound. — E.  L.

14  In  a  letter  dated  July  29,  1867,  Mr.  Anderson  courteously  informs  us  that,  "  in  regard
to  the  remark  made  by  me  concerning  the  domestication  of  the  Reindeer  not  being  practised
by  the  North-American  tribes,    I  wrote  to  His  Highness   Prince  Maksoutoff,  the   Governor
of   Sitka,   requesting   him    to   confirm,   if  in   his  -power,   my   assertion,   as  far  as   concerns
the   tracts   under  his   immediate  jurisdiction.      The  reply  he   has   favoured  me  with  I  now
enclose  (the  duplicate),  and  you  will  observe  that  he  fully  supports  the  view  I  had  advanced
(this   tract   of   country,  you    are    aware,  has   since   been    transferred    to    the   United    States
Government)  " : —

"  Port  of  New  Archangel,  Sitka,

"  17/29  March  1867.
"Alexander  C.  Anderson,  Esq.,  Victoria,  V.  I.

"  SIR, — In  reply  to  your  letter  of  15  October  1866  with  regard  to  domesticated  herds  of
Reindeers  on  the  N.W.  Coast  of  America,  I  am  very  glad  to  be  able  to  inform  you  on  quite
authentic  grounds — (1)  that  the  natives  in  the  vicinity  of  Wainwright  Inlet,  Norton  Sound,  or
elsewhere  on  the  American  shore  of  the  Strait  of  Behring,  do  not  domesticate  the  Reindeer
at  all ;  (2)  and  that  any  deer's  meat  supplied  by  the  natives  to  vessels  frequenting  that  vicinity
is  positively  the  produce  of  the  chase.

"  I  am,

"  With  my  best  regards,

"  Your  obedient  Servant,

[Signed]  "  P.  MAKSOUTOFF,

"  Governor  of  Russian  Colonies  in  America."

[NOTE. — Reference  should  be  made  also  to  Professor  Nilsson's  opinion  as  to  the  Framea,
mentioned  by  Tacitus  (see  above,  p.  47),  having  been  a  lance  pointed  with  iron  (see  Sir  John
Lubbock's  translation  of  Sven  Nilsson's  'The  Primitive  Inhabitants  of  Scandinavia/  8vo,
London,  1868,  p.  195) ;  also  to  his  remarks  on  the  Fins  (Fenni)  as  stone- weaponed  Cave-
dwellers,  detested  by  the  Germanic  race,  ibid.  pp.  219  et  seq. ;  and  on  the  Reindeer  as  described
by  Cffisar,  and  its  extinction  in  Scania,  ibid.  pp.  249,  256. — EDIT.]


58  BELIQULE  AQTJITANIOS:.


V.

SOME  OF  THE  IMPLEMENTS  FEOM  THE  CAVES  OF  DORDOGNE  COMPARED  WITH
NORTH-AMERICAN-INDIAN  TOOLS.

THE  following  Letter,  like  the  foregoing,  was  given  in  courteous  reply  to
inquiries  respecting  the  North-American  Tool  referred  to  at  page  32  and  page  37,
and  as  to  the  possibility  of  Indian  Implements  and  Habits  being  illustrative
of  the  Dordogne  specimens. — T.  R.  J.

4  Gladstone  Terrace,  Hope  Park,  Edinburgh,
October  22,  1866.

DEAR  SIR, — I  have  only  just  received  from  Dr.  Balfour  your  note  of  the
22nd  May,  having  but  very  recently  returned  from  North-west  America,  and  the
uncertainty  of  my  locale  and  the  expectation  of  my  speedy  return  to  England
having  prevented  your  communication  being  forwarded  to  me.  I,  however,  take
the  earliest  opportunity  of  doing  myself  the  honour  and  pleasure  of  affording
you  what  information  I  possess  (somewhat  unsatisfactory,  I  fear)  regarding  the
"  native  British- Columbian  implement "  you  refer  to.

Though  very  intimately  acquainted  with  many  of  the  aboriginal  nations  and
tribes  of  North  America,  having  resided  and  travelled  amongst  them  (almost
as  one  of  their  people)  for  a  number  of  years  whilst  engaged  as  a  Botanist  and
afterwards  as  Commander  and  Government  Agent  of  the  Vancouver' s-Island
Exploring  Expeditions,  I  cannot  recollect  any  implement  in  use  amongst  them
exactly  corresponding  with  the  one  figured  and  described  in  your  letter,  or  in  the
supposed  analogues  figured  in  '  Reliquiae  Aquitanicse,'  B.  Plate  III.  &  IV.  fig.  3.
Though  the  Indians  live  to  a  great  extent  in  the  same  state  of  barbarism  which
they  did  a  hundred  years  ago,  yet  the  introduction  of  iron  weapons  and  tools
amongst  them  by  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  and  others  has  rendered  obsolete
most  of  the  former  rude  weapons  of  bone  and  stone,  so  that  these  are  very  rarely
seen  except  when  accidentally  dug  up  on  the  sites  of  their  old  villages.  Even
the  tomahawks  and  the  scalping-knives  of  the  horse-tribes  are  manufactured
in  Birmingham  and  Sheffield,  and  imported  for  the  Indian  trade  by  the  Great
Eur  Company.

I  have,  however,  seen  pieces  of  the  horns  of  the  Elk  and  other  Deer,  of  a  similar


NOKTH-AMERICAN  IMPLEMENTS.  59

or  even  (with  the  exception  of  the  zigzag  markings)  identical  form,  used  by  the
Indians  for  splitting  the  cedar  logs,  of  the  boards  from  which  their  lodges
are  made.  They  are  used  after  the  manner  of  a  wedge,  and  are  still  used  by
many  of  the  tribes  living  on  the  borders  of  the  great  forest  which  covered  the
western  slope  of  the  Cascade  Mountains,  and  I  have  employed  them  for  the
same  purpose  in  splitting  cedar  logs  to  make  rafts  for  crossing  lakes,  &c.,  during
my  wanderings.  The  Cowichan  Indians  relate  that  once  they  used  to  live  in
holes  in  the  ground  until  Hoelse  (a  being  who  under  various  names  appears  in  all
Indian  traditions ;  he  is  the  Quatiahk  of  the  Western  Vancouver-Island  tribes,
the  Komikunx  of  the  Klamaths  in  Southern  Oregon ;  and  Longfellow  has  woven
this  and  other  traditions  together  in  his  poem  under  the  Chippeway  name  of
Hiawatha)  taught  them  to  make  an  axe  out  of  the  horns  of  the  Elk  which  they
caught  in  pitfalls,  and  wedges  out  of  the  stone,  and  so  they  cut  down  the  great
cedar-trees  (Thuja  gigantea,  Nutt.)  and  made  boards  and  canoes  out  of  its  trunk ;
and  it  was  a  sad  thing  for  the  poor  Indian  when  he  learned  this  fatal  art,  for  then
he  went  to  war  and  travelled  from  home  on  the  great  lakes  and  the  fiords  and  bays
of  the  coast,  and  they  have  been  decreasing  ever  since.  Therefore  on  the  whole  I
am  inclined  to  think  that  the  use  of  your  "British-Columbian"  implement  was
as  a  wedge  for  splitting  trees,  and  that  the  portion  of  the  "tine"  was  left
projecting,  either  to  add  to  its  force,  to  hold  it  by,  as  a  surface  to  apply  the
mallet  against,  or,  just  as  likely  as  not,  for  no  particular  reason  at  all ;  for,  as
the  Indian  said  of  the  white  man,  "he's  very  unsartain."  The  zigzag  markings
I  cannot  account  for,  unless  they  were  formed  when  dressing  the  horn,  the
better  to  penetrate  the  wood.

Regarding  the  analogy  of  the  implements  figured  in  '  Reliquiae  Aquitanicae,'
such  as  B.  Plate  III.  &  IV.  fig.  3,  I  cannot  say  much,  the  mishaps  they  may
have  undergone  during  the  long  period  they  have  lain  exposed  having  no  doubt
materially  altered  their  original  finish ;  and  they  may  possibly  have  been  used  for
the  same  purpose,  notwithstanding  the  slight  dissimilarity  between  them  and  the
"  British-Columbian  "  tool,  savages  not  being  very  particular  to  have  a  rude  im-
plement, such  as  a  wedge,  always  of  one  arbitrary  form.  I  do  not,  however,  doubt
that  the  implement  figured  in  Plate  III.  &  IV.  fig.  2  was  of  that  nature,  the  con-
ditions of  life  among  the  ancient  savage  coast-tribes  of  Europe  and  the  present
fishing-  and  coast-tribes  of  the  shores  of  North  America,  particularly  on  the
seaboard  of  the  North  Pacific,  having,  no  doubt,  been  very  similar,  even  to  the
Avooded  character  of  the  country  and  many  of  the  common  animals  of  the  chase ;
and  it  will  be  found  that  savages  or  men  (such  as  explorers  having  to  depend  on


(JO  RELIQUIAE  AQUITANKLE.

their  own  resources,  and  shipwrecked  seamen)  thrown  under  the  same  conditions
of  life,  in  a  similar  style  of  country,  will  instinctively  strike  upon  the  -same
adaptations  of  rude  nature  around  them  to  assist  them  or  to  ameliorate  their
existence.  I  speak  from  hard-earned  experience.  For  instance,  the  stone  era
(and  it  will  perhaps  be  found  that  there  was  a  bone  age  before  the  "  stone  "  one)
is  just  extinct  among  the  Indian  tribes  of  the  north-west  slope  of  the  Rocky
Mountains.  I  have  collected  many  stone  axes,  scalping-knives,  &c.,  of  a  shape
almost  identical  with  those  being  now  disinterred  in  the  Drift,  &c.

Doubtless  the  lacustrine  dwellings  of  Switzerland  were  formed  for  defence,
against  either  wild  beasts  or  wilder  men,  by  some  weak  tribe ;  for  I  find  traditions
among  the  Indian  races  that  they  at  one  time  erected  similar  edifices  to  protect
themselves  against  an  animal  which  ravaged  the  country  long  long  ago.  This,
from  description,  was  no  doubt  the  Mastodon.  I  find  the  tradition  identical
among  the  Indians  of  the  Snoqualami  and  Peace  Rivers,  who  have  no  connexion
with  each  other ;  but  in  both  localities  remains  of  that  animal  are  found  abun-
dantly. The  discovery  of  the  remains  of  Man  and  implements  of  the  chase
among  the  bones  of  that  animal,  and  even  marks  of  the  spears  on  the  bones,
with  embers  of  the  fires,  leaves  little  doubt  that  the  Mastodon  was  contemporary
with  Man.  These  were  found,  I  think,  in  Missouri* ;  but  I  speak  from  memory,
as  I  have  been  separated  from  books  and  civilization  (unless  of  the  rudest  frontier
description)  for  some  years  past.

The  spears  figured  in  { Reliquiae  Aquitanicte,'  B.  Plate  I.,  were  doubtless  fish-
spears,  such  as  are  used  at  this  very  day  amongst  the  Eskimo  and  other  rude
races :  some  with  reverted  points,  as  in  figs.  4  ?  and  10,  are  used  by  the  Eskimo
as  bird-spears  (compound),  so  that  if  the  main  point  misses,  one  of  the  side
spearlets  will  be  sure  to  strike.

The  only  other  use  of  Deer-horns  which  I  have  seen  was  as  a  rude  sword,
which  the  old  Indians  have  told  me  was  once  a  common  weapon ;  and  I  have
seen  the  Eskimo  in  Lancaster  Sound,  &c.,  use  a  knife  of  a  similar  character.

If  you  wished  further  information  about  British-Columbian  savage  implements,
you  might  obtain  it  from : — Dr.  William  F.  Tolmie,  Chief  Factor  of  the  Hudson's
Bay  Company,  at  Victoria,  Vancouver's  Island;  Sir  James  Douglas,  K.C.B.,

*  See  a  memoir  descriptive  of  "  Mastodon  Eemains  in  the  State  of  Missouri,  together  with  Evidences
of  the  existence  of  Man  contemporaneously  with  the  Mastodon,  by  Dr.  Albert  C.  Koch,"  in  the  Transactions
of  the  Academy  of  Science  of  St.-Louis,  vol.  i.  p.  61  (1860).  The  same  subject  was  noticed  previously  in
the  '  Philadelphia  Presbyterian '  Newspaper  for  January  12,  1839,  and  in  the  '  American  Journal  of  Science
and  Arte,'  vol.  xxxvi.  p.  198  (1839). — EDIT.


NOKTH-AMEKICAN  IMPLEMENTS.  61

Ex-Governor,  Victoria;  Mr.  Joseph  W.  M'Kay,  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  Port
Yale,  British  Columbia;  Mr.  William  Duncan,  a  Lay  Missionary  amongst  the
Chimseans,  Metlakathla,  British  Columbia  (through  the  Church  Missionary
Society) ;  or  from  Mr.  George  Gibbs,  Smithsonian  Institute,  Washington,
District  of  Columbia,  United  States.  I  may  possibly  be  writing  to  one  or
other  of  the  two  first-named  gentlemen  soon,  and  will  mention  the  matter
to  them ;  but  I  do  not  think  that  you  will  find  that  they  will  be  able  to  give
a  different  answer  from  mine.

I  forgot  to  say  that  I  know  of  no  Indian  tribe  which  use  or  used  a  sceptre
or  insigne  of  office.  For  myself,  if  ever  I  can  give  you  the  slightest  information
or  be  of  any  use  to  you  whatever,  do  not  for  a  moment  hesitate,  as  it  will  not  only
be  a  pleasure,  but  a  small  recompense  for  the  benefit  which  I,  in  common  with
others,  have  derived  from  your  researches.  In  the  meantime  believe  me  to  be,

Dear  Sir,

Yours  very  sincerely,

ROBERT  BROWN.

Professor  Rupert  Jones,  dfc.


62  KELIQULE  AQUITANIC^E.


VI.

A  BURIAL-PLACE  OF  THE  CAVE-DWELLERS  OF  PERIGOED.     By  M.  Louis  LAETET.

PASSING  from  Limoges  to  Agen  by  railway  for  the  first  time,  and  traversing  the
tortuous  denies  of  Pe"rigord,  we  cannot  but  feel  surprise  and  admiration  on  seeing
the  Vezere  flow  in  the  deep  valley*  whose  freshness  is  in  marked  contrast
with  its  bare  and  rocky  escarpments.  These  picturesque  cliffs,  sharply  limiting
the  river's  course,  and  not  unfrequently  fantastic  in  shape,  attract  the  traveller's
attention,  indifferent  though  he  be,  by  a  succession  of  unexpected  and  striking
effects.  Soon  the  eye  becomes  familiarized  with  the  forms  of  the  rocks,  and  we
recognize  a  multitude  of  cavities  in  the  cliffs.  Some  of  them  are  natural ;  others
have  been  carefully  worked  out  by  Man,  and  are  sometimes  even  now  used  as
portions  of  the  rural  habitations.  The  Romans,  Normans,  and  English  have
succeeded  one  another  in  this  little  Perigordian  Petra;  and  the  chronicles  of
the  Middle  Ages  comprise  curious  documents  relative  to  the  part  played  in
the  wars  of  those  times  by  the  Roc  de  Tayac,  where  we  still  find,  cut  in  the
limestone,  rooms,  galleries,  and  stables,  constituting  indeed  a  veritable  castle
(see  page  4).

The  Cave-dwellers,  however,  the  oldest  and  strangest  of  all  whom  these  rocks
of  Tayac  have  sheltered,  were,  without  doubt,  the  Hunters  of  the  Reindeer,  who
trod  our  soil  when  a  crowd  of  strange  animals  existed  here — such  as  the  Mam-
moth, Lion,  Reindeer,  Musk  Ox,  Aurochs,  and  others,  now  extinct  or  completely
driven  from  our  climate.  The  Stations  of  these  Hunters  are  numerous  on
the  banks  of  the  Vezere  (pages  5  and  20) ;  and  the  natural  caves  which  served
them  for  retreats,  carefully  explored  by  MM.  H.  Christy  and  E.  Lartet,  have  of
late  years  yielded  up  the  secrets  of  their  primitive  industry  and  of  their  savage
life.  Little,  however,  has  hitherto  been  determined  as  to  their  ethnic  characters —
and  that  only  from  unsatisfactory  specimens,  found  in  possibly  abnormal  positions.
It  was  therefore  with  lively  curiosity  that,  towards  the  end  of  last  March,  we  were
made  acquainted  with  the  discovery  of  some  Human  Skeletons  in  this  district,
under  conditions  which  cannot  fail  to  prove  their  high  antiquity.

His  Excellency  M.  Duruy,  the  Minister  of  Public  Instruction,  from  whom
studies  of  this  kind  receive  high  encouragement,  being  desirous  of  verifying  the

*  See  the  Maps  at  pages  19  and  29.


CAVE  OF  CRO-MAGNON.  63

authenticity  of  this  discovery,  confided  to  me  the  scientific  examination  of  the
Cave ;  and  of  this  mission  the  following  are  the  principal  results*.

The  rocky  cliffs  out  of  which  are  hollowed  the  caves  on  the  banks  of  the  Vezere
consist  of  the  edges  of  the  nearly  horizontal  strata  of  Cretaceous  Limestones  t,
which  the  river  and  watercourses  have  deeply  cut  in  excavating  their  beds.  The
faces  of  the  cliffs  present  great  parallel  furrows  or  flutings,  at  several  different
levels  and  of  great  length.  At  first  sight  these  chamfered  lines  seem  attributable
to  the  rapid  and  long-continued  passage  of  strong  currents  much  above  the
present  level  of  the  river ;  but  on  further  examination  we  easily  see  that  these
parallel  flutings  have  been  produced  by  the  incessant  degradation  of  the  soft,
laminated,  and  therefore  absorbent  beds  intercalated  among  harder  strata,  under
the  influence  of  atmospheric  agents,  particularly  frost.  This  explanation,  adopted
by  my  father  J,  has  been  developed  with  much  sagacity  by  M.  Alain  Laganne§.
Among  the  proofs  which  he  has  advanced,  the  most  conclusive  appears  to  me  to
be  furnished  by  the  fact  that  at  certain  places,  where  the  inclination  of  the  lime-
stone bands  have  a  direction  different  from  that  of  the  fall  of  the  river-bed,
the  flutings  follow  the  dip  of  the  bands,  thus  showing  their  independence  of  the
slope  of  the  valley.  To  show  this  I  give  a  sketch  (fig.  37)  of  the  arrangement  of
the  chamfered  lines  along  the  rocks  bordering  the  Vezere,  to  the  right  and  left
of  the  Koc  de  Tayac.

In  accordance  with  the  greater  energy  of  atmospheric  action  there  have  been
produced  in  these  cliffs  the  flutings,  the  rock-shelters,  and  the  true  caves,  in
which  the  Reindeer- Hunters  could  find  a  refuge  and  a  home.

*  See  also  the  preliminary  notice,  read  before  the  Meeting  of  the  Delegates  of  Scientific  Societies,  at  the
Sorbonne,  April  16, 1868,  by  MM.  Louis  Lartet,  Broca,  Pruner-Bey,  and  Quatrefages ;  Mortillet's  '  Materiaux
pour  1'Histoire  de  1'Homme,'  vol.  iv.  p.  150.

Since  authorizing  the  immediate  publication  of  the  discovery  of  the  Cro-Magnon  Cave  and  its  contents
in  the  'Reliquiae  Aquitanicse,'  the  Minister  of  Public  Instruction  has  determined  that  all  the  Human
Remains  found  in  the  Cave  shall  be  deposited  in  the  Anthropological  Collection  of  the  Museum  of  Natural
History  at  Paris.  His  Excellency  has  also  decided  that  painted  casts  of  the  Human  Skulls  and  other
important  specimens  shall  be  made,  for  distribution,  together  with  the  worked  flints,  shells,  and  other
accompanying  objects,  to  different  Museums  and  Scientific  Institutions.  One  series  of  these  casts  and
specimens  will  be  presented  to  the  Christy  Collection,  and  another  to  the  Anthropological  Society  of  London.

f  See  above,  pages  3  and  33.  t  See  above,  page  3.

§  See  his  "Note  sur  les  erosions  des  Calcaires  denudes  de  la  vallee  de  la  Vezere  et  de  ses  affluents,"  in
the  '  Ann.  d'Agric.  Sc.  et  Arts  de  la  Dordogne,'  vol.  xxix.  pp.  192  &c.,  February  1868.  Taking  as  a  term
of  comparison  the  erosions  effected  since  a  well-determined  date,  M.  Laganne  has  been  able  to  calculate
approximately  that,  in  the  natural  process  of  chamfering,  these  flutings  are  deepened  15  millimetres
(0-6  inch)  in  twenty  years.

K  2


EELIQUIJE  AQITITANKLE.


The  accumulation  of  rubbish  detached  from  the  friable  strata  gives  rise,  at  the
foot  of  these  scarped  rocks,  to  the  formation  of  a  talus  of  comminuted  debris,
lying  at  the  highest  "  angle  of  rest "  ;  and  these  accumulations  sometimes  entirely
mask  the  flutings  and  rock-shelters  of  lower  levels.  One  of  these  latter,  covered
by  a  talus  4  metres  thick,  has  been  found  880  metres  N.W.  of  the  village  of

Fig.  37.

View  of  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere,  showing  the  Chamfering  or  Fluting  of  the  rocky  face  of  the  Right  Bank,
and  the  Inclination  of  these  Lines  in  a  direction  contrary  to  that  of  the  Slope  of  the  River.


a,  Les  Eyzies.

b,  Caves  of  Le  Cingle.
e,  Railway-bridge.

d,  Roc  de  Tayac.
«,  Gorge  d'Enfer.


/,  Laugerie  Basse.

rj,  Tayac  Church.

h,  Les  Eyzies  Railway-station.

i,  Place  of  the  Rock  of  Cro-Magnon.


Fig.  38.

View  of  the  rocks  along  the  Left  Bank  of  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere,  from  Tayac  to  Les  Eyzies,  including

the  Cave  of  Cro-Magnon.

be  d


N.W.
a


S.E.


a,  Tayac  Church.

6,  Les  Eyzies  Railway-station.

e,  Cro-Magnon  Cave.


d,  Rock  of  Les  Eyzies.

«,  Chateau  of  Les  Eyzies.

/,  Railway-bridge  across  the  Vezere.


Les  Eyzies,  and  130  metres  S.E.  of  the  Les  Eyzies  Railway-station,  at  a  place
called  Cro-Magnon*,  and  at  the  foot  of  a  rock  the  upper  part  of  which  stands
up  detached,  roughly  resembling  a  great  mushroom.    See  figs.  38,  39,  and  40.
This  newly  discovered  Shelter  would  perhaps  have  remained  for  ever  unknown

*  '  Cramagnon '  on  the  Survey-Map.


CAVE  OF  CRO-MAGNON.


65


if  the  construction  of  the   Railway-embankment  (fig.  39,  a)  close  by  had  not
occasioned  the  removal  of  a  considerable  portion  of  the  talus  (b),  and  of  a  gigantic

Fig.  39.

Section  across  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere,  and  through  the  Hock  of  Cro-Magnon.
N.E.      e  g         h  j  i  s.W.


*  Level  of  the  Vezere,  at  low  water,  58'25  metres  above  the  sea.

Height  of  the  Cave  above  the  Vezere  15  metres,  above  the  sea-level  73-25  metres.

Distance  from  the  Cave  to  the  River  177  metres.


a,  Railroad.
6,  Talus.

c,  Great  Block  of  Stone.

d,  Ledge  of  Rock.
P,  Limestone.

M,  Detritus  of  the  Slopes,  and  Alluvium
of  the  Valley.


e,  Rock  of  Cro-Magnon.

/,  Cave.

g,  Chateau  and  Village  of  Les  Eyzies,

in  the  Valley  of  the  Beune.
h,  Gate-keeper's  House.
i,  Railway-bridge  over  the  Vezere.
j,  Caves  of  Le  Cingle.


block  (c),  detached  from  the  neighbouring  rocks  and  measuring  311  cubic  metres,
and  afterwards  the  pulling  down  of  a  projecting  ledge  of  rock  (d)  above  the

talus*.

Fig.  40.

View  of  the  Cro-Magnon  Cave,  with  the  Pillar  supporting  the  Roof.

b


a,  The  Road  rising  to  the  N.N.W.


6,  Les  Eyzies.


*  Thanks  to  M.  de  Nomaison,  Railway-Engineer,  at  Perigueux,  who  kindly  communicated  the  necessary
documents,  we  have  been  able  to  give  an  exact  account  of  the  successive  interferences  with  the  natural
form  of  the  ground  at  this  spot.


66  EELIQUI^E  AQUITANKLE.

Lastly,  towards  the  end  of  March,  two  Contractors  at  Les  Eyzies,  MM.  Bertou-
Mevrou  and  Delmar6s,  took  away  still  more  of  the  talus,  as  material  for  a  road
near  by ;  and,  after  having  removed  4  metres  of  the  debris  covering  the  Shelter,
the  workmen,  digging  further  beneath  the  projecting  ledge  which  they  had  thus
exposed,  soon  came  upon  broken  bones,  worked  flints,  and,  lastly,  human  skulls,
the  antiquity  and  scientific  importance  of  which  the  Contractors  immediately
recognized.  With  prudence  and  good  feeling,  such  as  are  unfortunately  too
often  wanting,  but  which  all  lovers  of  Palethnological  Studies  will  be  glad  to
hear  of,  the  Contractors  at  once  stopped  the  works,  and  hastened  to  write  to
M.  Alain  Laganne,  whose  affairs  had  taken  him  to  Bordeaux.  Returning  to
Les  Eyzies,  M.  Laganne  some  days  after  exhumed,  in  the  presence  of  MM.  Galy
and  Simon,  of  Pe"rigueux,  two  skulls  and  some  other  fragments  of  a  human
skeleton,  as  well  as  worked  bones  of  Reindeer  and  many  chipped  flint  implements.
It  was  now  that  the  Minister  for  Public  Instruction  sent  me  to  Les  Eyzies,
where,  having  surmounted  some  unexpected  difficulties,  thanks  to  M.  the  Prefect
of  the  Dordogne,  and  to  the  obliging  concurrence  of  MM.  the  Mayor  and  the
Cure  of  Tayac,  I  was  soon  able  to  proceed  with  a  regular  and  systematic
exhumation  of  the  sepulture  and  its  approaches.

First  of  all  it  was  necessary  to  support  the  vault  of  the  Shelter  or  Cave  by  a
pillar ;  for  a  deep  crack  threatened  its  fall,  or  at  least  its  giving  way  (see  figs.  40,
41,  and  42).  In  digging  a  hole  for  the  base  of  this  pillar  (Y),  we  were  able  to
determine  the  succession  of  four  black  beds  of  ashes,  one  on  another,  the  lowest
of  which  contained  the  stump  of  the  tusk  of  an  Elephant  (figs.  41  and  42,  «) ;  and
this,  although  damaged  by  the  pickaxe,  was  of  sufficient  interest  to  induce  the
Rev.  P.  Sanna  Solaro,  present  at  the  discovery,  to  help  me  in  disengaging  it  from
the  matrix.  The  pillar  having  been  set  up,  we  methodically  excavated  the
several  beds,  one  by  one;  and  thus  determined  very  exactly  their  nature,
relations,  and  contents.  As,  however,  in  these  respects  they  present  a  perfect
analogy  among  themselves,  excepting  that  they  increase  in  thickness  from  below
upwards,  I  shall  very  briefly  describe  them  in  the  order  of  their  formation.

The  Cave  of  Cro-Magnon  is  formed  by  a  projecting  ledge  of  Cretaceous  Lime-
stone* (rich  with  fossil  Corals  and  Polyzoans),  having  a  thickness  of  8  metres
and  a  length  of  about  17  metres  (figs.  38,  39,  40,  and  41,  P).  The  bed  which
it  overlies,  and  the  destruction  of  which  has  given  rise  to  the  Cave,  abounds
with  Rhynchonella  vespertilio,  which  is  a  type  fossil,  fixing  the  geological  horizon.
The  debris  of  this  marly  and  micaceous  limestone  had  accumulated  on  the  original

*  See  also  the  Map,  page  29,  where  this  limestone  is  marked  K  1.


CAVE  OF  CEO-MAGNON.


floor  of  the  cavern  to  a  great  thickness,  at  least  for  0-70  mfctre  (see  fig.  41,  A),  when
the  Hunters  of  the  Reindeer  stopped  here  for  the  first  time,  leaving  as  a  trace  of
their  short  stay  a  blackish  layer  (fig.  41,  B),  from  0'05  to  0-15  metre  thick,

Fig.  41.

Detailed  Section  of  the  Cave  of  Cro-Magnon,  near  Les  Eyzies.     (The  Section  passes  through  the  middle
of  the  Cave,  along  the  line  a-/3  of  the  Plan,  fig.  42.)     Scale  =  T-L  (1  centimetre  to  1  metre).

S.W.


A,  Debris  of  the  soft  limestone.

B,  First  layer  of  ashes  &c.

C,  Calcareous  debris.

D,  Second  layer  of  ashes  &c.

E,  Calcareous  debris,  reddened  by  fire  under   the

next  layer  of  ashes  &c.

F,  Third  layer  of  ashes  &c.

G,  lied  earth,  with  bones  &c.

H,  Thickest  layer  of  ashes,  bones,  &c.
I,  Yellowish  earth,  with  bones,  flints,  &c.
J,  Thin  bed  of  hearth-stuff.


K,  Calcareous  debris.

L,  Kubbish  of  the  Talus.

N,  Crack  in  the  projecting  ledge  of  rock.

P,  Projecting  shelf  of  hard  limestone.

Y,  Place  of  the  pillar  made  to  support  the  roof.

a,  Tusk  of  an  Elephant.

b,  Bones  of  an  old  man.
e,  Block  of  gneiss.

d,  Human  bones.

e,  Slabs  of  stone  fallen  from  the  roof  at  different

times.


containing  worked  flints,  bits  of  charcoal,  broken  or  calcined  bones,  and  in  its
upper  portion  the  Elephant-tusk  before  alluded  to  (figs.  41  and  42,  a).

This  first  hearth  is  covered  by  a  layer  (C),  0-25  metre  thick,  of  calcareous
debris,  detached  bit  by  bit  from  the  roof,  during  the  temporary  disuse  of  the


68  KELIQULE  AQU1TANKLE.

Shelter.  Then  follows  another  thin  layer  of  hearth-stuff  (D),  O'lO  metre  thick,
also  containing  pieces  of  charcoal,  bones,  and  worked  flints.  This  bed  is  in  its
turn  overlain  by  a  layer  of  fallen  limestone  rubbish  (E),  0'50  metre  thick.
Lastly  there  is  over  these  a  series  of  more  important  layers,  all  of  them  con-
taining, in  different  proportions,  charcoal,  bones  (broken,  burnt,  and  worked),
worked  flints  (of  different  types,  but  chiefly  Scrapers),  flint  cores,  and  pebbles  of
quartz,  granite,  &c.  from  the  bed  of  the  Vezere  and  bearing  numerous  marks  of
hammering.  Altogether  these  layers  seem  to  have  reference  to  a  period  during
which  the  cave  was  inhabited,  if  not  continuously,  at  least  at  intervals  so  short
as  not  to  admit  of  intercalations  of  debris  falling  from  the  roof  between  the
different  hearth-layers  which  correspond  with  the  successive  phases  of  this  (the
third)  period  of  habitation.  The  first  (lowest)  of  these  layers  (F)  is  full  of
charcoal,  and  has  a  thickness  of  0-20  metre ;  it  does  not  touch  the  back  of  the
cave,  but  extends  a  little  further  than  the  earlier  layers.  At  its  line  of  contact
with  the  calcareous  debris  beneath,  the  latter  is  strongly  reddened  by  the  action
of  fire.

On  the  last-mentioned  hearth-layer  is  a  bed  of  unctuous  reddish  earth  (G),
O30  metre  thick,  containing  similar  objects,  though  in  less  quantities.  Last
in  succession  is  a  carbonaceous  bed  (H),  the  widest  and  thickest  of  all,  having
an  average  thickness  of  0'30  metre ;  at  the  edges  it  is  only  O'lO  metre  thick ;
but  in  the  centre  (X),  where  it  cuts  into  the  subjacent  deposits,  which  were
excavated  by  the  inhabitants  in  making  the  principal  hearth,  it  attains  a  depth
of  0'60  metre.  This  bed,  being  by  far  the  richest  in  pieces  of  charcoal,  in  bones,
pebbles  of  quartz,  worked  flints,  flint  cores,  and  bone  implements,  such  as  points
or  dart-heads,  arrow-heads,  &c.,  may  be  regarded  as  indicative  of  a  far  more
prolonged  habitation  than  the  previous.

Above  this  thick  hearth-layer  is  a  bed  of  yellowish  earth  (I),  rather  argil-
laceous, also  containing  bones,  flints,  and  implements  of  bone,  as  well  as  amulets
or  pendants.  This  appears  to  be  limited  upwards  by  a  carbonaceous  bed  (J),  very
thin  and  of  little  extent,  0-05  metre  thick,  which  M.  Laganne  observed  before
my  arrival,  but  of  which  only  slight  traces  remained  afterwards.

It  was  on  the  upper  part  of  this  yellow  band  (I),  and  at  the  back  of  the  Cave,
that  the  human  skeletons  and  the  accessories  of  the  sepulture  were  met  with ;
and  all  of  them  were  found  in  the  calcareous  debris  (K),  except  in  a  small  space
in  the  furthest  hollow  at  the  back  of  the  Cave.  This  last  deposit  also  contains
some  worked  flints,  mixed  up  with  broken  bones,  and  with  some  uninjured  bones
referable  to  small  Rodents  and  to  a  peculiar  kind  of  Fox.


CAVE  OF  CRO-MAGNON.


69


Lastly,  above  these  different  layers,  and  all  over  the  Shelter  itself,  lay  the
rubbish  of  the  talus  (4  to  6  metres  thick),  sufficient  in  itself,  according  to  what

Fig.  42.

Plan  of  the  Cave  of  Cro-Magnon,  showing  the  Position  of  the  Human  Skeletons,  of  the  Slabs,  &c.
N.W.  S.E.


P,  Limestone.  d,  Human  bones.

X,  Central  portion  of  layer  H  (fig.  41)  where  it  was  e,  Slabs  fallen  from  the  roof  at  different  times.

thickest.  m,  Bones  of  a  Woman.

Y,  Base  of  the  pillar  built  to  support  the  roof.  n,  Human  bones.

a,  Tusk  of  an  Elephant.  a-/3,  Line  of  the  section  shown  in  fig.  41.

b,  Skull  of  an  Old  Man.  S-y.  Line  of  the  section  shown  in  fig.  43.


Fig.  43.

Section  of  a  lateral  portion  of  the  Cave  ;  along  the  line  y-&  of  the  Plan,  fig.  42.
Scale  =  y^j-jy  (1  centimetre  to  1  metre).

N.E.  S.W.


'  £


The  Letters  mean  the  same  as  in  fig.  41,  except  that  the  bed  J  here  contains  no  relics,  and  is  stalagmitic

and  not  carbonaceous.

we  have  said  above  about  its  mode  of  formation  (p.  63),  to  carry  back  the  date
of  the  sepulture  to  a  very  distant  period  in  the  Prehistoric  Age.

As  for  the  human   remains   and   the   position  they  occupied  in  bed  I,  the
following  are  the  results  of  my  careful  inquiries  in  the  matter.     At  the  back

L


70  KELIQULE   AQUITANKLE.

of  the  cave  was  found  an  old  man's  skull  (ft),  which  alone  was  on  a  level  with
the  surface,  in  the  cavity  not  filled  up  in  the  back  of  the  cave,  and  was  therefore
exposed  to  the  calcareous  drip  from  the  roof,  as  is  shown  by  its  having  a
stalao-mitic  coating  on  some  parts.  The  other  human  bones,  referable  to  four
other  skeletons,  were  found  around  the  first,  within  a  radius  of  about  1'50  metre.
Among  these  bones  were  found,  on  the  left  of  the  old  man,  the  skeleton  of  a
woman  (fig.  42,  m),  whose  skull  presents  in  front  a  deep  wound,  made  by  a
cutting  instrument,  but  which  did  not  kill  her  at  once,  as  the  bone  has  been
partly  repaired  within;  indeed  our  physicians  think  that  she  survived  several
weeks.  By  the  side  of  the  woman's  skeleton  was  that  of  an  infant  which  had  not
arrived  at  its  full  time  of  foetal  development.  The  other  skeletons  (figs.  41  and
42,  d)  seem  to  have  been  those  of  men.

Amidst  the  human  remains  lay  a  multitude  of  Marine  Shells  (about  300),
each  pierced  with  a  hole,  and  nearly  all  belonging  to  the  species  Littorina  littorea
so  common  on  our  Atlantic  coasts.  Some  other  species,  such  as  Purpura  lapillus,
Turritella  communis,  &c.*,  occur,  but  in  small  numbers.  These  also  are  per-
forated, and,  like  the  others,  have  been  used  for  necklaces,  bracelets,  or  other
ornamental  attire  t-  Not  far  from  the  skeletons,  I  found  a  pendant  or  amulet  of
ivory,  oval,  flat,  and  pierced  with  two  holes.  M.  Laganne  had  already  discovered
a  smaller  specimen ;  and  M.  Ch.  Grenier,  Schoolmaster  at  Les  Eyzies,  has  kindly
given  me  another,  quite  similar,  which  he  had  received  from  one  of  his  pupils.
There  were  also  found  near  the  skeletons  several  perforated  teeth,  a  large  block
of  gneiss,  split  and  presenting  a  large  smoothed  surface ;  also  worked  antlers  of
Reindeer,  and  chipped  flints,  of  the  same  types  as  those  found  in  the  hearth-
layers  underneath.

This  Sepulture  occupied  a  very  limited  area ;  and  we  have  met  with  no  trace  of
it  in  a  cutting  along  the  line  y-S  of  the  Plan  (fig.  42).  This  second  section  (fig.  43),

*  M.  Fisher,  my  Colleague  in  the  Museum,  has  been  so  good  as  to  assist  me  in  these  determinations.

t  Should  it  he  asked  if  the  Reindeer-hunters  of  Perigord  did  not  use  these  shells  as  money,  as  is  at
present  the  custom  in  the  East  and  on  the  Coast  of  Guinea  with  the  Cowries  got  from  the  Philippines  and
the  Maldives,  we  have  three  reasons  for  not  supposing  that  they  did.  1st.  The  original  place  of  the  Shells
is  too  near  to  the  Stations  of  the  Vezere.  2ndly.  Though  the  Littorina  littorea  much  predominates,  yet
there  were  found  other  oceanic  shells  with  them,  which  could  not  answer  to  the  conventional  and  specified
type  constituting  this  sort  of  money.  3rdly.  In  analogous  Stations  we  find  rare  fossil  shells  similarly
perforated,  and  prohably  intended  to  be  hung  from  the  neck,  just  like  the  amulets  and  pierced  teeth
frequently  found  in  deposits  of  this  kind.

Moreover,  of  what  use  would  money  have  been  to  men  who  found  in  the  animals  with  which  the  country
abounded  all  the  supplies  required  by  their  manner  of  life  ?


CAVE  OP  CRO-MAGNON.  71

4  metres  away  from  the  preceding,  shows  the  same  alternation  and  succession
of  the  detrital  and  the  carbonaceous  layers.  We  here  find,  at  the  upper  part  of
bed  I,  no  trace  of  the  thin  upper  hearth-layer ;  but  its  level  seems  to  be  indicated
by  a  little  bed  (J),  the  constituent  particles  of  which  are  more  or  less  coated  with
stalagmite.  This  was  probably  the  floor  of  the  cave  previously  to  its  being
definitely  filled  with  the  accumulated  debris  (K).

What  this  last  section  shows  us  as  particularly  remarkable  are  the  great  slabs  (<?),
occurring  at  different  levels,  but  principally  above  the  carbonaceous  layers.  They
have  fallen  from  the  roof  of  the  cave  at  different  times ;  and  some  of  them  were
so  large  as  to  require  gunpowder  for  their  removal.  Similar  blocks,  of  less  size,
were  scattered  nearly  throughout  the  Cavern,  as  shown  by  the  sections  and  plan
(figs.  41,  42,  and  43) ;  and  they  were  notably  accumulated  in  great  numbers  over-
against  the  pillar  (fig.  41)  which  we  had  to  build,  as  above  described  (p.  66).

To  resume : — The  presence,  at  all  levels,  of  the  same  kind  of  flint  scrapers,  as
finely  chipped  as  those  of  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  and  of  the  same  animals  as  in  that
classic  Station,  evidently  shows  them  to  be  relics  of  the  successive  habitation  of  the
Cro-Magnon  Shelter  by  the  same  race  of  Nomadic  Hunters,  who  at  first  could  use
it  merely  as  a  rendezvous,  where  they  came  to  share  the  spoils  of  the  chase  taken  in
the  neighbourhood ;  but  coming  again,  they  made  a  more  permanent  occupation,
until  their  accumulated  refuse  and  the  debris  gradually  raised  the  floor  of  the  cave,
leaving  the  inconvenient  height  of  only  1'20  metre  between  it  and  the  roof;  and
then  they  abandoned  it  by  degrees,  returning  once  more  at  last  to  conceal  their
dead  there.  No  longer  accessible,  except  perhaps  to  the  Foxes  above  noticed,  this
Shelter  and  its  strange  Sepulture  were  slowly  and  completely  hidden  from  sight
by  atmospheric  degradation  bringing  down  the  earthy  covering,  which,  by  its
thickness  alone,  proves  the  great  antiquity  of  the  burial  in  the  cave.

The  presence  of  the  remains  of  an  enormous  Bear,  of  the  Mammoth,  of  the
great  Cave-Lion,  of  the  Reindeer,  the  Spermophile,  &c.  in  the  hearth-beds
strengthens  in  every  way  this  estimation  of  their  antiquity;  and  this  can  be
rendered  more  rigorously  still  if  we  base  our  argument  on  the  predominance
of  the  Horse  here  in  comparison  with  the  Reindeer,  on  the  form  of  the  worked
flints  and  of  the  bone  arrow-  and  dart-heads,  and  on  the  above-mentioned
indications  of  hunting,  as  well  as  on  the  absence  of  any  engraving  or  carving.
Hence  we  may  refer  this  Station  of  Cro-Magnon  to  the  age  immediately  preceding
that  artistic  period  which  saw  in  this  country  the  first  attempts  of  the  Engraver
and  the  Sculptor.

Whence  came  these  ancient  men  of  the  Vezere  ?   Here  the  Geologist  must  be


72  KELIQUI^E  AQUITANICLE.

silent.     His  duty  is  to  confirm  the  facts  forming  the  subject  of  this  Introductory

Notice,  as  far  as  they  belong  to  his  domain.     To  the  Anthropologist  we  look  to

enlighten  us  on  the  characters  of  the  race.     It  may,  however,  be  remarked  that

the  sea-shells  associated  with  the  Sepulture  at  Cro-Magnon  are  in  no  wise  of

Mediterranean  origin,  but  belong  only  to  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  and  are  notably

common  on  the  shores  of  La  Charente.     This  fact  may  be  taken  in  consideration

together  with  the  circumstance  of  there  being  in  this  Sepulture  several  pebbles  of

Basalt,  which  could  not  have  been  taken  from  the  valley  of  the  Vezere,  but

might  well  have  been  brought  from  that  of  the  Dordogne.     Hence  we  are  led  to

suppose  that  before  coming  to  the  Cave  District,  where  they  found  conditions  so

favourable  for  their  mode  of  life,  the   Reindeer-hunters  had  sojourned  on  our

Atlantic  Coasts,  and  that  they  arrived  at  the  banks  of  the  Vezere  after  having

ascended  the  Valley  of  the  Dordogne.


HUMAN  BONES  IN  THE  CAVE  OF  CRO-MAGNON.  73


VII.

AX  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HUMAN  BONES  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVE  OF   CRO-MAGNON  IN

DORDOGNE.     Br  Dr.  PRUNER-BEY.

[C.  PIATES  I.- VI.*]
PRELIMINARY  NOTICE.

IMMEDIATELY  on  the  discovery  of  this  Cave  it  was  rumoured  that  seven  human
skeletons  had  been  found ;  but,  with  the  most  scrupulous  care,  only  those  of  four
adults  and  one  immature  infant  have  been  recognized.

There  are  more  or  less  perfect  skulls,  and  some  bones  of  the  extremities,  of
three  full-grown  individuals,  together  with  ribs,  vertebrae,  and  fragments  of  a
pelvis  and  of  a  collar-bone.  Of  a  fourth  individual  there  remain  only  some
remains  of  the  calvarium,  half  of  the  upper  alveolar  process,  and  a  piece  of  the
jaw.  Judging  from  the^e  fragments,  this  latter  person  appears  to  have  been  a
female ;  and,  since  one  of  the  above-mentioned  crania  is  also  that  of  a  female,
the  four  adults  were  two  men  and  two  women.  Moreover  there  are  some  bones
belonging  to  a  foetus.

As  the  bones  differ  in  condition  only  with  the  matrix  surrounding  them,  and
as  they  were  found  at  the  same  level,  we  may  conclude  that  they  were  buried
either  at  the  same  time  or  at  short  intervals.  The  small  number  of  the  bones
leads  us  to  suppose  that  we  have  here  to  do  with  a  family  burial-place ;  and  this
supposition  is  strengthened  by  the  marked  agreement  of  the  cranial  characters.

Among  this  collection  of  bones  the  skeleton  of  an  old  man,  possibly  the  head
of  the  family,  has  better  resisted  decomposition  than  the  others,  having  been
protected  by  a  thin  coating  of  stalagmite.  Everything  remaining  of  the  other
individuals  is  more  or  less  imperfect.

Lastly,  all  these  human  bones,  now  carefully  hardened  by  M.  Stahl,  presented,
before  being  prepared,  absolutely  the  same  aspect  and  the  same  specific  gravity
(from  want  of  gelatine  &c.)  as  the  bones  of  Reindeer  and  other  animals  with
which  they  were  associated.

I  shall  divide  my  Memoir  on  these  osseous  remains  into  two  Parts, — the  first
being  analytical,  and  the  other  synthetical.  The  First  Part  (Chapters  I.  and  II.)

*  The  artist  has  produced  reversed  figures  of  the  Skulls  aud  Bones  on  these  Plates.

M


74  KELIQULE  AQUITANIC^E.

will  be  purely  descriptive,  comprising  an  account  of  the  skulls  in  the  first
Chapter,  and  of  the  other  bones  of  the  skeleton  in  the  second.  In  the  Second
Part  (Chapter  III.),  I  shall  endeavour,  as  far  as  I  can,  to  indicate  the  race  to
which  the  Cave-dwellers  of  Pe"rigord  belonged,  and  what  we  may  deduce,  from
their  bony  remains,  as  to  their  physical  and  moral  qualities.


CHAPTER  I.

DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  CRANIA.
1.  THE  CRANIUM  OF  AN  OLD  MAN  :  SKULL  No.  1.     [C.  PLATES  I.,  II.,  AND  C.  PLATE  III.  fig.  1.]

A.  General  Condition  of  this  Cranium.

This  cranium  is  very  large  and  heavy.  When  struck  it  gives  off  a  sound  like  a  glazed  earthenware
bowl ;  and  it  is  covered  in  front  with  a  slight  stalagmitic  crust,  which  gives  to  that  portion  a  granular  or
papillary  aspect.  A  similar  coating,  though  very  slight,  occurs  also  on  the  frontal  region  and  the  left
temporal  bones.  The  anterior  part  of  the  crown  is  covered  with  reddish  plates,  such  as  are  observable  also
on  the  jaw,  and  are  probably  the  result  of  an  infiltration  of  oxide  of  iron  ;  otherwise  the  bones  of  this  cranium
are  dull  white,  and  present  a  porous  aspect.  Very  narrow  fissures  traverse  the  upper  anterior  part  of  the
crown  in  different  directions.  We  may  especially  direct  attention  to  a  spot  a  little  off  the  median  line,  in
the  right*  frontal  region,  measuring  35  millimetres  in  breadth  and  29  in  height,  where  the  diploe  is  laid
bare.  The  outer  edge  of  this  depression  is  thicker  than  the  inner  edge ;  and  everything  here  leads  us  to
suppose  that  the  frontal  bone  was  affected  with  caries  during  life.  One  word  also  on  some  linear  markings
which  intersect  each  other  on  the  posterior  parietal  region  as  though  the  bone  had  been  scratched  by  the
cutting  edge  of  a  flint :  a  similar  appearance  is  observable  on  the  second  male  cranium,  and  also  on  some
femurs,  where  it  was  easy  for  us  to  establish  the  origin  of  these  little  depressions,  which  were  clearly
caused  by  the  rootlets  of  plants.  There  is  no  sign  that  this  cranium  had  undergone  any  rolling  by  water ;
and  the  same  remark  is  applicable  to  the  other  bones.

The  bones  of  the  orbital  and  nasal  cavities  are  wanting  in  this  cranium,  also  a  part  of  the  left  malar
bones  and  of  its  zygomatie  process ;  there  is  a  defect  at  the  base  of  the  anterior  border  of  the  foramen
magnum ;  and  one  of  the  two  facets  of  the  right  condyle  is  wanting.  The  external  pterygoid  plates  are
also  defective,  and  the  palatine  bone  of  the  left  side.  The  lower  maxilla  wants  the  left  ramus  and  the
right  condyle.

Excepting  a  stump  in  the  upper  jaw,  all  the  teeth  are  wanting.  Nevertheless,  for  the  most  part,  the
sockets  remain;  they  are  deep,  and  everything  indicates  that  the  teeth  were  lost  after  interment;  and
indeed  some  roots  recently  broken  are  visible  in  the  sockets.  All  the  teeth,  however,  in  this  skull  were
not  healthy ;  for  in  the  jaw  there  is  a  fistulous  hole  communicating  with  the  socket  of  the  inner  incisor.
Moreover  there  are,  on  the  same  (left)  side,  between  the  last  premolar  and  the  first  molar  all  the  signs  of
caries;  for  the  partitions  of  the  sockets  are  absent,  and  we  see  smooth  little  projections  of  bone  on  the  jaw
below  the  sockets.  Lastly  some  trace  of  caries  shows  itself  in  the  upper  molars.

*  The  reader  will  remember  that  all  the  figures  are  reversed  on  the  Plates  illustrating  the  human  bones.


HUMAN   BONES  IN  THE  CAVE  OF   CEO-MAGNON.  75

B.  Determination  of  the  Sex  and  Age.

The  size,  the  development  of  the  processes,  the  muscular  depressions — in  a  word  everything  here  indicates
the  male  sex.  The  condition  of  the  sutures  and  of  the  only  remaining  tooth,  the  aged  projection  of  th<
chin,  &c.  show  us  that  this  man  had  passed  his  sixtieth  year.  Indeed,  excepting  the  posterior  portion  of
the  sagittal  suture,  the  squamous  suture,  the  upper  end  and  some  small  lateral  traces  of  the  larnbdoid,
and,  lastly,  excepting  the  spheno-temporal  at  the  hase  of  the  skull,  all  the  sutures  are  soldered  up,  leaving
no  trace.  At  the  same  time  the  left  parietal  foramen  is  still  quite  visible,  though  very  small.

Is  this  almost  complete  obliteration  of  the  cranial  sutures  to  be  attributed  solely  to  the  effect  of  age  ?
We  may  doubt  it,  since  in  the  normal  state  the  soldering  of  the  sagittal  commences  at  its  posterior  third  ;
whilst  in  this  skull  the  progress  of  obliteration  has  been  in  the  contrary  direction.

Judging  by  a  stump  of  the  penultimate  upper  molar,  this  old  man's  teeth  had  been  worn  down  to  the
crown.  What  is  more,  this  stump  is  surrounded  below  with  a  plate  of  crushed  enamel,  which  laterally  laps
over  much  of  the  root.  The  dentine  and  the  canal  are  visible  in  the  centre  of  the  tooth.

C.  Morphology.

This  skull  so  stands  on  its  mastoid  processes  and  dentary  arch  that  the  sockets  of  the  incisors  remain
in  the  air  (C.  Plate  I.  fig.  1).  Seen  from  above  (C.  Plate  II.  fig.  1),  it  presents  an  oblong  form,  narrowing
gradually  towards  the  forehead.  The  crown  is  marked  on  the  sides  with  the  semicircular  lines  or  temporal
ridges,  and  on  the  top  with  the  elevated  ridge  of  the  sagittal  suture,  where  the  parietals  unite,  almost  like  an
ass's  back.  The  gradual  narrowing  towards  the  median  line  of  the  summit  is  equally  pronounced  on  the
coronal  suture,  where  a  projection- following  the  same  line  is  neatly  drawn  above  the  frontal  region.

In  front  view  this  skull  has  very  decided  characters.  In  general  form  the  face  has  the  lozenge-shape
almost  as  well  pronounced  as  in  an  Esquimaux  skull ;  the  latter,  however,  differs  in  all  other  particulars.
If  we  establish  a  horizontal  plane  at  the  level  of  the  lower  edges  of  the  malar  bones,  and  follow  at  the
sides  of  the  face  the  line  bordering  the  malo-orbital  processes  in  their  prolongation  to  the  forehead,  we  shall
have  on  each  side  a  line  strongly  inclined  inwards,  meeting  with  that  of  the  opposite  side  to  form  a  triangle,
the  base  of  which  is  at  the  lower  rim  of  the  broad  cheek-bones,  and  the  point  of  intersection  at  the  apex  of
the  forehead.  If  we  then  adjust  the  lower  jaw  to  the  skull,  and,  again  starting  from  the  aforesaid  plane,
follow  the  contour  downwards  to  the  chin,  we  shall  have  a  reversed  triangle,  and  consequently  a  lozenge-
form  in  the  general  outline  (C.  Plate  I.  fig.  1).

The  anatomical  details  of  the  face  combine,  on  the  one  hand,  in  producing  this  general  form ;  and,  on
the  other,  they  impress  on  the  countenance  its  altogether  peculiar  stamp.

In  the  first  place,  the  forehead  is  marked  by  very  short  superciliary  ridges,  not  very  prominent,  and
uniting  at  the  glabella,  which  however  shows  no  particular  prominence.  A  slight  depression  traverses  the
brow ;  and  above  this  the  forehead  rises  with  a  bumpy  surface.  This  conformation  of  the  forehead  and
brow  is  accompanied  by  a  receding  of  the  sides  towards  the  temples,  already  commencing  at  the  level  of  the
orbital  arches,  and,  at  first  very  moderate,  rapidly  increasing  as  the  lateral  slope  of  the  forehead  approaches
the  crown.  Hence  the  formation  of  the  triangle  of  the  frontal  bone.

If  then  from  the  forehead  we  descend  to  the  orbital  region,  we  first  recognize  the  great  depth  of  the
orbits  and  the  convergence  of  their  axes,  and  then  their  enormous  transverse  diameter.  This  conformation
of  the  orbital  opening  is  connected  above  with  the  excessive  development  of  the  external  angular  process
of  the  frontal  bone,  which,  large  and  directed  outward,  usurps  the  outer  two-thirds  of  the  orbital  arch.
On  its  side,  to  unite  the  lower  with  the  upper  orbital  rim,  the  upper  maxillary  sends  a  broad  process  to
the  malar,  high,  not  hollowed,  and  with  its  lower  border  turned  laterally  outwards,  enlarging  the  base  of


yg  KELIQUIJE  AQUITANIC^E.

the  two  triangles  before  mentioned.  The  upper  orbital  border  is  thin  and  overhangs  the  lower,  which  is
thick  ;  and,  lastly,  the  vertical  diameter  of  the  orbital  opening  is  much  less  than  the  transverse.  There  was,
then,  a  small  eye,  sunken  in  a  flat  orbit,  giving  rise  to  a  sombre  expression  efface.

As  for  the  nose,— here  the  frontal  processes  of  the  upper  maxillary  are  somewhat  curved  inwards ;
the  root  of  the  nose  is  broad  and  deeply  hollowed.  The  nostrils,  under  a  blunt  and  upturned  nose,
are  broad,  opening  out  downwards  and  sideways.  The  spina  nasalis  has  been  apparently  reduced  since
interment.  Altogether,  then,  we  have  here  a  nose  deviating,  in  spite  of  some  prominence  of  its  ridge,
considerably  from  the  Aryan  type  in  its  general  characters.  It  was  a  nose  widely  open  to  the  winds,  as  it
were,  to  scent  its  prey.

In  harmony  with  what  precedes,  the  sockets  of  the  incisors,  flattened  anteriorly,  are  suddenly  directed
forward — whence  result  a  prognathism  comparable  to  that  of  our  existing  savages,  and  a  broad  sensual
mouth.

Lastly  a  pointed  chin,  rather  square,  and  prominent  from  age,  helps  us  to  complete  our  sketch  of  the
physiognomic  features  of  this  old  skull.

Looking  at  the  profile  (C.  Plate  I.  fig.  1),  -we  recognize  in  this  skull  the  retreating  forehead  and  the
lateral  compression  behind  the  orbital  processes,  and  consequently  the  triangular  form  of  the  temporal  fossa,
which  is  short  compared  with,  the  size  of  the  skull.  We  also  notice  the  strong  zygomatic  arches  below,
swollen  out  externally,  with  the  upper  border  descending  from  in  front  backwards.  The  lower  root  of  the
zygoma  continues  backwards,  as  a  sharp  ridge,  as  far  as  the  temporal  plate.  Below  this  ridge  a  wide  and  deep
fossa  separates  off  the  mastoid  process.  The  temples,  flat  and  very  wide  in  every  direction,  are  bordered
above  by  the  semicircular  lines,  which,  in  their  posterior  moiety,  encroach  considerably  on  the  crown,
without,  however,  coming  nearer  together  than  89  millimetres.  Placed  behind  the  auditory  canal,  the
parietal  eminence,  though  comprised  within  the  semicircular  lines,  stands  out  from  the  skull  on  account  of
its  size.  Lastly,  if  the  parietals  come  down  a  little  below  the  semicircular  lines  vertically  towards  the
temples,  it  is  nearly  the  same  with  their  descent  towards  the  occiput,  where  their  lateral  surface  bulges
out,  whilst  their  hinder  portion  is  flattened.  This  disposition  of  the  parietals  produces,  on  the  one  hand
the  square  shape  of  the  crown,  and,  on  the  other,  it  is  the  cause  why  the  occiput  retreats  only  oelow.

Seen  from  behind  (C.  Plate  III.  fig.  1),  the  cranium  shows  its  great  width  at  the  parietal  eminences,
which  are  here  very  visible,  its  nearly  pentagonal  outline,  and  parietal  flatness.  The  free  portion  of  the  occipital
plate,  broad  and  short,  descends  almost  to  the  level  of  the  posterior  curve  of  the  parietals ;  consequently
there  is  no  occipital  protuberance.

At  the  base  of  the  cranium  (C.  Plate  II.  fig.  2),  the  muscular  portion  of  the  occipital  plate  joins  its
upper  portion  at  a  right  angle.  The  contour  of  the  former  approaches  a  semicircle  rather  than  an  ellipse.
The  occipital  protuberance  is  scarcely  indicated,  though  the  superior  curved  line  presents  a  somewhat
prominent  ridge.  In  other  respects,  except  two  slight  lateral  elevations,  the  surface  is  nearly  horizontal
and  deeply  hollowed  for  the  attachment  of  muscles.  The  mastoid  processes  are  of  a  rather  uncommon
thickness,  rounded,  conical,  and  laterally  prominent,  but  rather  short  in  comparison  with  their  thickness.
The  digastric  fossa  is  narrow  and  deep ;  and  the  postcondyloid  fossa  is  also  deep.  The  foramen  magnum
is  damaged  at  its  anterior  edge ;  still  we  may  say  that  it  was  elliptical,  and,  for  the  size  of  the  skull,
rather  contracted  than  broad.  This  contraction  is  increased  laterally  by  the  prominence  of  the  two-
facetted  condyles  which  project  into  the  hollow.  The  level  of  the  foramen  passes  a  little  above  the  roof
of  the  palate.  Two-thirds  of  the  foramen  lie  behind  the  auditory  passages,  which  are  elliptically  broad.
The  styloid  process  appears  to  have  been  very  slender  indeed.  The  glenoid  cavities  are  deep,  and  short
from  side  to  side,  leading  us  to  suppose  that  the  condyles  of  the  lower  jaw  were  conical.  The  basilar


HUMAN  BONES  IN  THE  CAVE  OF  CRO-MAGNON.  77

portion  of  the  occiput  is  narrow,  flat,  and  hollow  in  the  middle  of  its  inner  surface.     The  pterygoid  processes
of  the  sphenoid  are  greatly  inclined ;  and  the  external  much  exceed  the  internal  processes  in  width.

The  form  of  the  palate  is  remarkable  by  its  slight  depth,  by  the  nearness  of  the  dental  series  (the  width
between  the  molars  being  only  35  millims.),  and  by  the  extreme  projection  of  the  incisal  region.  Not  less
remarkable  is  the  smallness  of  all  the  foramina  giving  passage  to  vessels  and  nerves,  excepting  that  of  the
right  jugular  vein.  Lastly,  we  may  note  a  slight  asymmetry  of  the  nasal  septum,  and  the  great  projection
of  the  os  petrosum  into  the  cavity  of  the  skull.

The  lower  jaw  (Plate  I.),  left  to  itself,  rests  on  the  middle  of  its  under  edge,  whilst  the  chin  and  the
posterior  angle  are  in  the  air.  Excepting  the  ramus,  its  body  is  not  large.  The  under  edge  is  thick  in  the
molar  region,  and  thins  away  considerably  at  its  posterior  third,  where  the  outer  surface  of  the  ramus  is
deeply  hollowed  for  the  attachment  of  the  masticatory  muscles.  The  ramus  has  a  rather  uncommon
breadth ;  and  its  angle,  rounded  at  the  edge,  is  very  slightly  bent  outwards.  The  coronoid  process  appears
to  have  been  short ;  the  sigmoid  notch  is  wide  and  rather  shallow.  The  form  of  the  dentary  arc  is  trian-
gular, and  the  length  occupied  by  the  teeth  (measured  inside)  is  58  millims.  (2-303  in.).  The  last  molars
are  hidden  behind  the  ramus.  The  incisors  are  much  compressed  laterally,  as  well  as  the  canine,  the
alveolus  of  which  projects.  Judging  from  the  sockets,  the  molars  were  large  and  of  the  normal  size,  the
wisdom-tooth  being  smaller  than  the  others  and  with  two  fangs.  On  the  inner  surface,  the  mylo-hyoidean
attachments  are  very  wide  and  deep,  and  the  mental  processes  are  very  prominent.  Altogether  the  lower
jaw,  like  the  temporal  region,  gives  evidence  of  a  powerful  masticatory  apparatus.

A  slight  want  of  symmetry  in  the  chin  (the  left  side  predominating)  corresponds  with  that  of  the  nasal
septum.  The  squareness  of  the  chin  is  more  evident  on  its  inner  than  on  its  outer  surface.  Lastly,  the
length  of  the  horizontal  body  of  the  jaw  corresponds  with  the  widening  of  the  ramus.

Arrived  at  this  stage  of  the  physiognomical  examination,  I  have  to  remark  that  the  greatest  height  of  the
skull  is  at  the  point  where  the  parietals  begin  to  descend  towards  the  occiput,  and  the  greatest  breadth  is
behind  this  point  (that  is,  at  the  parietal  eminences).  As  for  the  dimensions  and  the  relative  diameters,  I
must  refer  to  the  Table  of  Measurements  annexed  (page  90).

With  regard  to  the  sutures  of  the  skull,  we  cannot  form  an  absolute  opinion  from  what  remains.  The
small  traces  of  the  sagittal  and  of  the  lambdoid  still  visible  present  coarse  but  deep  toothing ;  and  there  is  a
little  Wormian  bone  in  the  sagittal  suture.  Lastly,  I  ought  to  remark  that  the  thickness  of  the  skull  does  not
appear  to  be  considerable,

2.  THE  CRANIUM  OF  AN  ADULI  MALE:  SKULL  No.  2.  [C.  PLATE  III.  figs.  2  &  3;  AND  C.  PLATE  IV.J
This  skull  is  imperfect,  there  remaining  only  a  very  incomplete  calvarium  (that  is  to  say,  the  frontal,
the  parietals  with  the  edge  of  the  wing  of  the  sphenoid,  and  a  part  of  the  occiput)  and  the  arch  of  a
lower  jaw,  without  teeth,  which  appears  to  belong  to  this  skull.  These  bones  are  well  preserved,  but  have
a  reddish  colour.  The  greatest  thickness  (at  the  occiput)  is  7  millims.  The  sutures  are  still  visible
throughout.  The  coronal  is  nearly  straight,  and  on  the  left  side  makes  a  reentrant  angle  in  the  parietal
bone.  This  skull,  then,  belonged  to  an  individual,  if  not  young,  at  least  still  in  the  prime  of  life.  As  for
its  volume  and  shape,  this  skull  is  like  the  foregoing,  except  in  some  particulars  which  I  proceed  to
point  out.

The  upper  rim  of  the  orbit  is  thick ;  the  superciliary  arches  are  more  prominent  and  longer  than  in  the
old  man's  skull,  but  just  as  much  united  at  the  glabclla.  The  subglabellar  depression  is  therefore  deeper.
The  forehead  is  swollen  above,  and  the  frontal  eminences  are  but  slightly  indicated ;  the  space  between  them
is  61  millims.  (2-402  in.).  Moreover  the  lateral  slope  of  the  forehead  towards  the  crown  is  well  marked.


;s  RELIQULE  AQUITAN1O&.

There  is  a  depression  of  the  parietals  on  the  crown  in  their  first  third,  behind  the  coronal  suture ;  and
therefore  the  elevation  of  the  sagittal  suture  is  there  strongly  marked;  but  it  disappears  in  the  posterior
two-thirds  of  the  parietals.  This  difference  in  relation  to  two  other  skulls  belongs,  without  doubt,  to  the
abnormal  condition  of  the  occiput,  where  a  series  of  Wormian  bones  are  intercalated  at  the  lambdoid  angle,
a  disposition  favouring  the  transverse  extension  of  the  cranium,  whilst  in  the  others  there  is  a  lateral
compression  along  the  sagittal  suture.

At  the  occiput  the  parietal  flatness  is  wanting.  Moreover,  by  an  anomaly,  which  we  meet  with  also
sometimes  in  the  cranium  of  other  races,  the  occipital  plate,  being  globular,  is  as  it  were  detached  from
the  parietals,  being  separated  at  the  lambdoidal  angle  by  four  large  Wormian  bones,  whilst  others  smaller
occur  in  the  lambdoidal  suture.  Lastly,  the  parietal  eminences,  prominent  upwards  and  backwards,  are
still  more  pronounced  than  in  the  old  man's  cranium ;  and  they  are  also  unsymmetrical,  the  prominence
on  the  right  side  being  much  greater  than  that  on  the  left.

This  cranium  has  its  greatest  width  below  the  parietal  eminences ;  but  we  must  not  forget  that  its
having  been  filled  with  earth  must  have  increased  its  original  transverse  diameter.

The  body  of  the  lower  jaw,  when  at  rest,  takes  the  same  position  as  the  one  last  described,  the  chin
rising  in  the  air  a  little  and  the  hinder  portion  altogether.  Moreover  this  chin,  with  its  rounded  point,
projects  but  very  little,  and  is  marked  in  front  with  a  flattened  ridge.  The  height  of  the  chin  is  31  millims.,
its  thickness  is  12  millims. ;  the  height  of  the  horizontal  portion  is  25,  and  its  thickness  12  millims.  This
jaw  presents  no  indication  of  prognathism.  On  its  inner  surface  the  mental  processes  are  weak  and  the
mylo-hyoidean  furrows  are  broad  and  deep.  No  tooth  remains  in  this  jaw.  The  sockets  show  that  the
form  and  size  of  the  teeth  corresponded  with  those  of  the  preceding  specimen.

3.  FEMALE  SKULL,  No.  3.     [C.  PLATE  V.]

In  this  specimen  the  calvarium  is  still  more  incomplete  than  the  foregoing ;  but  it  has  the  advantage  of
still  possessing  the  right  side  of  the  face  with  the  anterior  portion  of  the  palate.  The  bones  are  dullish
white  in  colour,  and  not  more  than  6  to  7  millims.  in  thickness.

Its  relatively  small  size,  the  smallness  of  its  processes  and  bony  projections,  the  slightness  of  the
muscular  depressions,  the  conformation  of  the  forehead,  <fcc.,  leave  no  doubt  of  this  skull  having  been  that
of  a  female.  What  remains  of  the  calvarium  and  the  face  authorizes  us  moreover  to  regard  it  as  belonging
to  one  of  the  same  race  as  those  above  described.

Excepting  the  coronal  at  the  temple,  all  the  sutures  are  open  outwards ;  but  within,  excepting  at  the
angle  of  the  lambdoid  and  middle  of  the  sagittal,  all  appear  to  have  been  closed  up.  They  are  more
strongly  toothed  than  in  No.  2,  but  the  toothing  is  not  deep.  Most  of  the  molars  have  their  tubercles
worn ;  consequently  this  woman  had  passed  her  thirtieth  year.  We  may  remark  that  the  first  premolar
had  two  fangs.  Moreover  the  teeth  that  remain  are  sound,  strong,  and  white,  with  very  thick  enamel.

This  cranium,  as  shown  by  the  longitudinal  diameter,  would  be  very  much  elongated,  and  even  more
dolichocephalic  than  those  of  the  men ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  determine  its  greater  breadth,  on  account  of
the  imperfect  state  of  the  parietals.  The  crown  is  oblong,  with  the  sagittal  suture  more  prominent  than  in
the  foregoing  (No.  2).

The  features  of  the  face,  allowing  for  sexual  differences,  correspond  with  those  of  No.  1.  The  forehead
is  smooth,  even  to  the  slight  projection  of  the  superciliary  arches ;  it  is  straight  in  front,  but  slopes
laterally.  The  frontal  eminences  are  small ;  and  are  60  millims.  apart.  The  orbit  is  very  large,  with  a
square  opening ;  and,  as  is  usual  in  the  female,  it  is  higher  than  in  Man :  its  lower  rim  is  very  thick.  The
lacrymal  canal  is  almost  wholly  excavated  in  the  maxillary.  The  nose  was  probably  thicker  than  in  the


HUMAN  BONES  IN  THE  CAVE  OF  CfiO-MAGNON.  79

man,  and  not  so  depressed  at  the  root.  The  nostrils  are  very  large  and  smooth  at  their  lateral  and  inferior  rim,
as  also  in  the  man ;  and  there  is  the  same  flatness  of  the  anterior  surface  of  the  alveoli  of  the  incisors ;  hut  the
sockets  are  rather  shallower,  and  there  is  less  prognathism.  The  malar  process  of  the  maxillary  is  smooth,
broad,  and  high,  and  hut  slightly  turned  out  at  its  lower  edge.  There  is  the  same  shallowness  of  the  palate
as  in  the  Old  Man.  From  these  details  it  results  that  the  face  of  this  skull  is  pyramidal  in  a  high  degree.

As  the  cranial  cavity  is  open  (C.  Plate  V.  fig.  1),  it  shows  the  strong  projection  of  the  petrous  bone
within.  Externally  (fig.  2)  we  can  see  in  profile  the  mastoid  process,  short  and  convex  outwards,  the
digastric  fossa  larger  than  in  the  Old  Man,  the  submastoid  fossa  also  deep,  but  the  temporal  ridge,  behind
the  zygomatic  arch,  less  prominent  and  smoother.

Looking  at  the  occiput,  we  observe  the  parietal  eminences  above,  which  are  smaller  than  in  the  skulls
of  the  men ;  and  the  parietal  flattening  is  less  visible  than  in  No.  1.

In  the  skull  No.  1  there  are  some  alterations  from  disease ;  and  in  this  female  skull  I  have  to
notice  an  injury  from  violence.  In  the  region  of  the  right  frontal  eminence  is  a  penetrating  wound,
which,  inflicted  during  life,  has  cicatrized  on  its  edges,  as  is  plainly  seen.  This  wound,  traversing
obliquely  the  right  frontal  eminence,  has  a  narrow  lozenge-shape ;  and  one  of  the  lance-heads  of  chipped
flint  found  in  the  Cave  perfectly  fits  it.  Moreover,  on  the  left  side  of  the  skull  the  two  anterior  thirds  of
the  temporal  region  are  wanting,  and  the  remaining  edges  of  the  parietal  and  frontal  have  such  an
appearance  as  leaves  us  in  doubt  whether  the  present  condition  of  this  part  of  the  skull  is  due  to  injury
during  life  or  to  subsequent  damage.  This  woman  was  killed,  perhaps,  whilst  pregnant ;  for,  as  above
noticed  (pages  70  and  73),  there  were  found,  associated  with  the  other  human  bones,  fragments  of  a  skull
and  some  of  the  long  bones  of  a  foetus.

4.  DIFFERENT  FRAGMENTS  BELONGING  TO  THE  SKULLS  Nos.  2  and  4.

I  proceed  to  mention  first  a  small  fragment  of  the  occiput,  which  seems  to  have  belonged  to  cranium
No.  2,  because  the  protuberance  here  projects  much  more  than  in  the  other  two  skulls  and  is  much
flattened.  Below  the  occipital  protuberance  the  muscular  impressions  are  very  deep,  as  in  specimen
No.  1  (see  page  76).

All  the  other  cranial  fragments  appear  to  me  to  have  belonged  to  one  skull.  First,  there  are  some
pieces  of  the  frontal  and  the  parietals,  with  a  thickness  reaching  10  millims.,  contrary  to  what  we  have
observed  in  the  perfect  skulls.  These  remains  must,  for  another  reason,  have  belonged  to  the  skull  of  an
individual  of  some  age ;  for  the  coronal  suture  is  almost  wholly  closed ;  so  also  the  sagittal  on  its  inner
surface,  and  this  suture,  as  in  the  other  skulls,  is  somewhat  raised  on  the  external  surface.

Next,  the  left  side  of  an  upper  jaw  is  worth  mentioning.  This  still  retains  the  second  premolar  and  the
two  foremost  molars ;  these  are  very  much  worn  on  the  crown.  They  are  large,  very  white,  and  strongly
enamelled.  As  in  the  female  skull,  No.  3,  the  first  premolar  had  two  fangs.  The  sockets  of  the  teeth  are
short ;  and  are  less  inclined,  and  the  breadth  of  the  nostrils  less  marked.  The  spina  nasalis,  damaged  in
the  other  specimens,  is  here  well  preserved ;  it  is  short,  broad,  and  somewhat  pointed.  Lastly,  the  palatine
vault  is  slightly  hollow;  it  is  expanded  in  front,  arched  along  the  median  line,  and  marked  with
longitudinal  crests  near  the  alveolar  border.

Lastly,  a  small  piece  of  the  right  side  of  the  lower  jaw  retains  three  molars.  The  first  two  are  large,  and
worn  in  the  same  manner  and  to  the  same  degree  as  those  of  the  upper  jaw.  The  wisdom-tooth,  smaller
than  the  others,  is  still  retained  in  its  socket  in  consequence  of  the  anomalous  growth  of  its  fangs  (very
large  and  curved  backward).

Altogether,  excepting  this  last-mentioned  anomaly  and  the  two-fanged  condition  of  the  first  upper  pre-

N


80  KELIQULE  AQUITANKLE.

molar,  the  fine  and  strong  dentition  of  these  individuals  shows  no  deviation  from  what  we  see  in  other
jaws  of  the  prehistoric  period.

[For  the  measurements  of  the  Skulls,  see  the  Explanations  of  C.  Plates  I.-V.]


CHAPTER  II.
BONES  OF  THE  SKELETON.

1.  PELVIS.

All  that  remains  of  pelves,  attributable  to  four  individuals,  is  very  fragmentary.  The  best  preserved,  on
account  of  the  stalagmitic  coating,  is  that  of  the  Old  Man.

a.  The  Old  Man's  Pelvis.

There  are  two  coxal  bones  (ossa  innominata),  both  imperfect  at  the  ilium  above  and  at  the  tuberosity
of  the  ischium  below.  That  of  the  right  side  is  more  complete  than  the  other.

The  principal  characters  are  as  follows.  What  strikes  one  at  first  sight  is  the  great  size  in  relation
to  that  of  the  skull :  indeed  everything  here  has  reference  to  the  extent  of  the  bony  surfaces.  As
peculiarities  I  may  notice : — the  deep  excavation  of  the  ilium  and  the  transparency  of  its  fossa ;  the
enormous  expanse  of  the  ilio-sacral  articulation ;  the  great  breadth  of  the  ilio-pectineal  eminence ;  the
thickness  of  the  symphysis  and  the  prominence  of  the  spine  of  the  pubes ;  the  contraction  upwards  of  the
ischiatic  notch ;  and  the  large  size  of  the  acetabulum.  Moreover  the  anterior-inferior  spine  of  the  ilium
is  very  high  and  flattened ;  the  posterior  spines  are  broad,  thick,  and  convex.  The  horizontal  axis  of  the
acetabulum  being  directed  rather  more  inwards  than  usual,  the  thighs  must  have  been  near  together  above
and  separated  below.  The  ilium  being  imperfect  at  top,  we  cannot  determine  its  inclination  with
the  horizon.  Nevertheless,  judging  from  its  lower  two-thirds,  its  inclination  must  be  less  than  what
is  found  to  be  the  case  in  the  European  or  even  in  the  Laplander.

As  for  the  dimensions  of  the  pelvic  cavity,  it  is  impossible  to  determine  them  from  these  fragments.  We
can  here  give  only  some  measurements  taken  from  separate  bones.  The  acetabulum  is  54  millimetres  high,
and  51  broad.  The  general  height  of  the  pelvis  must  have  been  200  millims.  or  more,  since  what  remains
gives  150  millims.  The  thickness  of  the  pubis  is  24  millimetres ;  that  of  the  ischiatic  tuberosity  above
31  millimetres ;  and  the  breadth  of  the  body  of  the  ischium  is  84  millimetres.

But  in  spite  of  the  size  and  massive  structure  of  the  pelvic  bones,  it  would  seem  that  the  upper  part  of
the  pelvis  was  not  very  spacious,  on  account  of  the  excessive  amplitude  of  the  ilio-sacral  articulation,  which
has  a  breadth  of  88  and  a  height  of  81  millimetres,  whilst  the  distance  from  the  anterior  edge  of  this
articulation  to  the  subcotyloid  notch  is  only  74  millims.  This  may  give  an  approximate  idea  of  the
narrowness  of  the  upper  part  of  the  pelvis,  especially  if  we  add  that  the  distance  from  the  arch  of  the  pubes
to  the  front  edge  of  the  articulation  above  mentioned  is  102  millimetres  in  a  straight  line.

Lastly,  the  curvature  of  the  ilio-pectineal  and  pectineal  eminences  being  slightly  marked,  the  transverse
diameter  of  the  pelvis  could  not  have  attained  the  normal  length,  unless  the  sacrum  had  been  exceptionally
broad ;  and  this  we  proceed  to  prove  by  the  specimen  next  to  be  described.

b.  Sacrum,

This  specimen,  belonging  probably  to  a  male  in  the  vigour  of  life,  wants  its  fifth  vertebra.  What
particularly  strikes  us  in  this  sacrum  is  its  breadth.  It  is  122  millims.  broad  above,  and  57  below  at


HUMAN  BONES  IN  THE  CAVE  OP  CKO-MAGNON.  81

the  level  of  the  foramina.  The  total  height  of  the  four  vertebrae,  in  a  straight  line,  is  102  millims.  The
body  of  the  first  vertebra  has  a  breadth  of  50  millims.,  and  a  depth  of  30  millims.  On  the  anterior  face
a  little  excavation  is  noticeable.  On  the  posterior  face  the  articular  facet  is  very  hollow,  and  is  59  millims.
long  and  33  wide ;  there  is  a  deep  fossa  above  and  within  this  facet ;  and,  lastly,  the  sacral  crest  is  bifid
at  the  fourth  vertebra.

c.  Right  Os  Innominatu/m.

This  is  less  perfect  than  those  of  the  Old  Man,  being  defective  above  and  below.  This  fragment,  however,
belonged  evidently  to  the  pelvis  of  a  male,  as  is  shown  by  its  size,  massive  structure,  &c.  Nevertheless
the  iliac  fossa  is  deep,  and  its  wall  thin ;  the  anterior-inferior  iliac  spine  is  rather  thicker  than  in  that
of  the  Old  Man,  but  equally  bent  inwards  as  the  latter.  At  the  ilio-pectineal  eminence  the  groove  is  flat
and  has  a  rather  uncommon  breadth  (43  millims.).  At  the  ilio-sacral  articular  surface  the  auricular  facet
is  deeply  excavated  and  notched  ;  its  height  is  71  millimetres,  whilst  in  the  Old  Man  it  is  only  60  millims.
The  ischiatic  notch  is  a  little  broader  than  in  the  latter ;  whilst  the  length  from  its  anterior  border  to  the
spine  is  60  millims.  in  both.  The  distance  from  the  front  edge  of  the  ilio-sacral  articulation  to  the
subeotyloidal  notch  is  here  81  millims. ;  the  width  of  the  body  of  the  ischium  is  70  millims. ;  the  thickness
of  the  ischiatic  tuberosity  is  26  millims.  (it  is  directed  vertically  downwards)  ;  the  height  of  the  acetabulum
is  55,  its  breadth  54  millims. ;  and,  lastly,  the  total  height  of  this  fragment  of  coxal  bone  is  195  millims.
The  last  measurement  proves  that  the  height  of  this  pelvis  much  exceeded  200  millims.

Hitherto  we  have  been  examining  the  pelves  of  some  males ;  we  have  now  to  study  the  remains  of  some
female  pelves.

d.  Bight  Os  Innominatum.

This  fragment  consists  only  of  the  acetabular  cavity  with  the  body  of  the  ischium  and  its  tuberosity.
The  height  of  the  acetabulum  is  55,  its  breadth  53  millims.  The  height  of  the  ischium  below  this  cavity
is  66  millims.,  the  breadth  of  its  body  is  65,  and  the  thickness  of  its  tuberosity  29  millims.

Compared  with  the  preceding  examples,  the  external  ischiatic  surface  is  here  more  excavated ;  the  spine
and  the  tuberosity  are  turned  more  outwards.  Hence  very  probably  this  was  the  pelvis  of  a  tall  woman*.

e.  Sight  Os  Innominatum.

This  consists  of  two  fragments  belonging  to  one  pelvis.  They  are  of  manifold  interest,  and  I  shall
therefore  examine  them  in  detail.  First,  there  exists  the  portion  corresponding  to  the  piece  "  d  "  described
above ;  but  it  is  of  much  less  size,  as  these  measurements  show.  The  height  of  the  acetabulum  (shallower
and  directed  more  forward)  is  50  millimetres,  its  breadth  the  same ;  the  height  of  the  ischium  is  54,  its
breadth  65,  and  the  thickness  of  its  tuberosity  23  millims.  The  anterior-inferior  iliac  spine  is  flattish,
high,  and  directed  inwards ;  the  ilio-pectineal  eminence  is  arched  and  rather  thick.  The  inner  face
of  the  ischium  is  excavated ;  its  spine  and  its  tuberosity  are  directed  outwards.

To  this  fragment  belongs  another,  representing  the  supero-posterior  portion  of  the  ilium.  Its  exca-
vation and  its  inclination  are  considerable,  and  therefore  feminine.  Of  the  posterior  iliac  spines,  the
superior  is  arched,  the  inferior  flattened.  The  superior  iliac  crest  has  a  fine  curve.  The  ilio-sacral
articular  surface  is  squarish ;  its  height  is  57,  its  breadth  60  millims.  What  is  of  much  interest,  both  the
articular  surface  and  the  curve  of  the  crest  correspond  exactly  with  those  in  a  female  pelvis,  in  my

*  A  parallel  to  this,  belonging  to  a  woman  of  the  Finnish  type,  and  of  the  Age  of  the  Eeindeer,  is
preserved  in  M.  de  Ferry's  fine  collection.

N2


82  KELIQTJDE  AQUITANICJE.

collection,  belonging  to  an  individual  of  the  Mongoloid  brachycephalie  type  and  of  small  stature,  of  the
Age  of  the  Reindeer.

Lastly,  there  is  the  head  of  a  femur,  also  small,  which  fits  the  acetabulum  of  the  pelvis  "  e,"  and  without  doubt
belongs  to  it.  The  circumference  of  this  articular  head  is  140,  its  height  31£,  and  its  breadth  42  millims.

To  sum  up : — Though  the  first  three  pelves  agree  as  to  their  size  and  morphology,  it  is  not  so  with  the
last,  which  appears  to  indicate,  in  every  point,  the  presence  of  a  woman  of  short  stature.  Are  we  to
conclude  that  there  was  also  a  different  cranial  form  ?  Possibly ;  but  we  must  look  to  other  facts  to  enable
us  to  pronounce  on  this  subject.

2.  LOWER  EXTREMITY.
a.  Femur.     [C.  PLATE  VI.  fig.  2.]

The  two  femurs  which  certainly  belong  to  the  Old  Man  are  very  remarkable.  Wanting  their  ends,  they
are  nevertheless  evidently  very  massive,  and  also  much -curved  from  before  backwards  in  the  upper  part ;  the
linea  aspera  also,  flattened  on  its  free  edge,  has  been  excessively  developed ;  for  after  the  point  where  it  rises
from  the  body  of  the  femur  it  projects  to  the  extent  of  16  millims.  The  lateral  curvature  is  also  more
considerable  than  in  other  cases.  After  the  upper  third  the  shaft  is  compressed  laterally ;  and,  lastly,
quite  a  lip  here  constitutes  the  posterior  edge  of  the  inner  surface, — a  peculiarity  which  occurs  in  all  the
femurs  of  these  skeletons.

On  the  left  femur  there  is  below  the  outer  surface  a  depression  due  to  the  loss  of  substance,  either  from
injury  or  superficial  caries.  We  may  also  remark  that  the  linea  aspera,  in  spite  of  its  excessive  develop-
ment, disappears  entirely  at  its  lower  end.

These  bones  without  their  ends  have  a  length  of  40  centimetres  (15-74  inches) ;  hence  their  total  length
must  have  been  at  least  50  centims.  (19-685  inches).  Taking  in  the  linea  aspera,  the  greatest  width  is
40  millims.  (1-57  inch),  though  the  thickness  at  the  same  point  reaches  only  28  millims.  (1-1  inch).  The
circumference  of  the  shaft  is  11  centims.  (4-33  inches)  above,  and  14  centims.  (5-5  inches)  below.

Another  right  femur,  without  its  ends,  and  probably  female,  is  less  massive.  The  linea  aspera,  although
very  prominent,  is  less  developed  than  in  the  foregoing  specimens,  and  its  lower  end  is  well  produced.  The
curvature  forward  is  at  the  middle  of  the  shaft,  and  the  lateral  curve  is  on  the  outside  instead  of  being  on
the  inside.  The  length  of  the  shaft  is  38  centims.  (15-55  inches),  and  its  thickness  25  centims.  (9-84  inches) ;
its  circumference  at  top  is  105  and  below  125  millims.  (5-315  in.  and  4-921  in.).

There  is  also  a  fragment  of  a  femoral  shaft  which  must  be  feminine.  It  is  laterally  compressed ;  its
linea  aspera  is  less  prominent  and  flatter  than  in  the  others.  The  antero-posterior  curvature  is  at  top,
and  the  lateral  curve  outwards.  The  greatest  width  is  31,  and  the  thickness  25  millims.

Lastly,  a  fragment  of  the  shaft  of  a  left  thigh-bone  consists  of  an  upper  third,  much  compressed  laterally.
Its  circumference  is  98  millimetres;  at  the  same  point  in  the  foregoing  the  circumference  is  98,  and  in
that  of  the  Old  Man  it  is  106  millims.

Altogether  there  exist  evidently  fragments  of  thigh-bones  belonging  to  four  individuals ;  for  the  last
three  fragments  do  not  correspond.

Of  two  lower  ends  of  femurs,  one  of  the  left  side  belonged  probably  to  a  woman,  and  another,  of  the
opposite  side,  to  a  man.  On  the  former  the  crest  of  the  linea  aspera  appears  to  be  little  developed,  contrary
to  what  is  seen  in  the  other.  The  breadth  of  the  articulation  is  74  millims.  in  the  former,  and  at  least
80  millims.  in  the  hitter,  which  has  lost  the  inner  face  of  the  condyle.  The  circumference  above  the  joint  is
150  and  160  millims.


HUMAN  BONES  IN  THE  CAVE  OF  CRO-MAGNON.  83

b.  Tibia.     [C.  PLATE  VI.  fig.  3.]

Of  four  tibias  three  are  imperfect,  and  one  whole.  This  latter  corresponds  with  the  but-end  of  the  femur
last  described ;  and  very  probably  those  two  bones  and  the  Skull  No.  2  belonged  to  the  same  man.  Thin
tibia,  which  is  very  massive  and  long,  presents  some  peculiarities  which  arc  in  correlation  with  those  of  the
thigh-bones.  First,  its  direction  is  oblique  from  within  outwards ;  then,  less  prismatic  and  more  com-
pressed laterally  than  a  normal  tibia.  This  bone  presents  on  its  outer  face  a  deep  excavation  marked  by
a  very  prominent  ridge ;  this  hollow  has  reference  to  the  same  feature  observable  in  the  only  fibula  obtained
from  the  Cave.  By  the  lateral  compression  the  exterior  surface  is  enlarged  at  the  expense  of  the  posterior,
so  that  the  breadth  of  the  latter  is  reduced  at  one  point  to  21|  millims.,  whilst  the  antero-posterior  diameter
is  43  millimetres.

The  length  of  the  tibia  is  380,  the  breadth  of  the  articulation  is  80,  and  the  circumference  above  the
joint  is  150  millims.

The  right  tibia  belonging  to  the  skeleton  of  the  Old  Man  is  also  compressed  laterally  above.  The
excavation  on  the  outer  surface  is  here  rather  shallower,  and  the  ridge,  marking  it  towards  the  posterior
surface,  is  rather  less  prominent  than  in  the  foregoing  case ;  but  there  are  in  this  region  papillary  pro-
jections, which  would  appear,  in  part  at  least,  to  have  been  due  to  disease.  The  transverse  diameter  is
reduced  to  18  millims. ;  the  antero-posterior  is  47  millims.

Another  lower  end  of  a  tibia  of  the  right  side  presents  no  excavation  on  the  outer  face.  There  are,
however,  some  papillary  growths  of  bone  observable  above  the  fibular  notch.

Lastly,  another  distal  end,  left  side,  smaller  than  the  others,  also  shows  the  excavation  on  its  outer  face.

c.  Fibula.     [C.  PLATE  VI.  fig.  4.]

This  bone,  very  much  excavated,  measures  385  millims.  in  length.  Its  greatest  breadth  is  18  millims.
In  place  of  being  straight,  it  is  slightly  curved,  like  the  bow  of  a  violin.

d.  Bones  of  the  Fuot.

A  right  calcaneum  belongs  without  doubt  to  the  skeleton  of  the  Old  Man.  Compared  with  that  of  a
man  above  middle  height,  it  is  larger  in  every  direction,  but  notably  in  length.  There  is  here  one
exceeding  7  millimetres  in  length,  of  which  4  go  to  the  articular  portion,  and  3  to  the  talon.  The  superior
articular  surfaces  are  flatter,  and  therefore  the  groove  is  shallower.  The  two  inner  facets  are  united,
and  the  upper  one  is  longest.  The  lower  surface  is  less  excavated  and  flatter ;  and  its  two  tuberosities  are
less  prominent.  On  the  internal  surface  the  groove  is  very  large ;  but  the  little  process  is  less  prominent.

Of  two  astragali,  the  left  is  larger  than  the  right  one;  and  the  latter  has  the  neck  very  short.  If,  then,
the  os  calcis  has  an  excess  of  length,  the  first  of  these  astragali  has  an  excess  of  breadth  of  10  millims.

In  two  scaphoids  the  anterior  articular  surfaces  are  rather  indistinct :  the  tubercle  is  very  much  rounded,
and  presents  no  facets  for  the  cuboid.

The  cuboid,  also  large  in  every  sense,  surpasses,  in  its  length  of  6  millims.,  the  modern  specimen  which
serves  as  a  term  of  comparison.

In  breadth  the  three  cuneiforms  also  have  an  excess  of  6  millims.

The  first  metatarsal  has  a  papillary  aspect  on  its  upper  surface.  The  articular  pulley  is  flattened  below
and  much  elongated  (as  is  also  another  specimen  which  is  imperfect).  The  length  of  this  bone  has  an
excess  of  5,  and  the  breadth  at  the  articulations  of  2  millims.

There  is  a  first  phalange  of  the  great  toe ;  and  its  length  surpasses  by  2  millims.,  and  the  breadth  of  the
articular  tubercles  by  3  to  4  millims.  the  specimen  of  comparison.  Independently  of  the  swelling  of  the
articulations,  the  inferior  articulation  offers  a  rough  surface.


84  BELIQULE  AQUTTANIC^E.

Lastly,  of  other  metatarsals,  a  third,  two  fourth,  and  one  fifth  are  all  that  remains  of  the  bones  of  the
foot.  The  excess  in  their  length  is  11,  9,  and  3  millims.  The  last  metatarsal  is  deformed  by  the  rugged
state  of  its  inferior  articular  extremity  and  by  the  swelling  of  its  pyramidal  process.

Having  arrived  at  this  stage  of  the  inquiry  respecting  the  bones  of  the  lower  extremities,  I  proceed  to
state  the  two  orders  of  resulting  facts.  In  the  first  place,  we  have  determined  that  these  bones  are  massive
and  that  the  foot  was  flat  and  long,  compared  with  the  length  of  the  long  bones ;  and  this  is  itself  in  every
case  considerable.  Then  it  follows  from  the  form  of  the  femurs,  tibias,  and  fibula,  and  even  from  the
condition  of  the  metatarsals,  that  nearly  every  individual  had  been  more  or  less  subject  to  rickets,  at  least
in  a  small  degree*.

3.  UPPER  EXTREMITIES.

a.  Shoulder-blade  and  Clavicle.

Of  the  shoulder-blade  there  remains  only  one  mutilated  anterior  extremity,  with  deep  muscular
impressions  and  a  very  flat  glenoid  cavity.  The  external  edge  is  16  millims.  thick.

A  sternal  end  of  a  clavicle  is  also  imperfect.  Its  breadth  is  20,  and  its  thickness  10  millims.  It  is
very  smooth  and  flat ;  and  its  curvature  does  not  seem  to  be  great.

b.  Hwnerus.     [C.  PLATE  VI.  fig.  1.]

There  are  three  complete  specimens,  well  representing  this  bone.  The  longest  belongs  to  the  left  side.
In  comparison  with  its  length  and  the  breadth  of  its  ends,  it  is  the  thinnest  and  straightest.  Its  shaft  is
laterally  compressed,  instead  of  being  rounded  like  the  others.  The  triangular  surface  above  the  elbow
is  also  very  much  broadened  by  flatness.  Lastly,  the  impress  of  the  muscles  is  feeble.

The  second,  also  belonging  to  the  left  side,  besides  being  shorter,  is  more  massive,  and  more  round  in  its
shaft.  The  bicipital  groove  is  here  longer  and  deeper.  The  imprint  of  the  deltoid,  the  groove  of  torsion,  &c.
are  here  so  marked  that,  independently  of  the  normal  twist,  the  body  of  the  bone  appears  to  have  been
subjected  to  a  curvature.

The  third  specimen  belongs  to  the  right  side,  and  resembles  the  last  described ;  only  the  bicipital  groove
has  here  rather  less  depth ;  but  it  has  greater  breadth,  and  the  imprint  of  the  deltoid  has  not  left  so
prominent  a  ridge  as  in  the  last.

Lastly,  a  fragment  of  a  distal  extremity  corresponds  with  the  last  two  specimens.

[For  the  measurements  of  the  Humeri,  see  Explanation  of  Plates,  page  91.]

*  The  tibias  like  sabre-blades  (that  is,  laterally  compressed,  even  much  more  than  among  these  old  people
of  Perigord)  have  had  their  day  of  glory  (ephemeral  enough,  to  speak  the  truth) ;  for  some  would  herein
incontinently  see  a  character  of  the  race,  and,  what  is  more,  some  Simian  feature.  There  is  nothing,
however,  in  these  adventurous  hypotheses.  Almost  at  the  same  time  that  Mr.  Busk  and  the  lamented
Falconer  called  public  attention  to  similar  tibias  found  in  Caves  of  Gibraltar,  M.  Broca  obtained  a
considerable  number  in  a  megalithic  monument  (Chamant),  belonging  to  the  Period  of  Polished  Stone.
They  have  also  been  found  elsewhere  in  France.  For  my  part,  I  have  also  met  with  such  a  one  among
bones  from  Algeria,  of  recent  date.  On  the  other  hand,  the  examination  of  a  skeleton  affected  by
severe  rickets  satisfies  me  that  this  form  of  tibia  belongs  to  this  category  of  individuals;  and  this  is
further  confirmed,  as  regards  these  aborigines  of  Perigord,  by  the  condition  of  other  bones  of  the  lower
extremities.


HUMAN  BONES  IN  THE  CAVE  OF  CRO-MAGNON.  85

c.  The  Ulna.

There  are  five  specimens  of  the  upper  articular  end  of  the  Ulna.  One  of  these  is  very  massive,  curved
from  before  backwards,  very  rough  at  the  olecranon,  and  deeply  marked  hy  muscular  impressions.
The  four  others  are  less  robust.  They  belonged  to  three  different  persons.  One  only  is  quite  thin  and
delicate.

Two  lower  ends,  corresponding,  have  the  normal  curvature.

Lastly,  there  is  a  very  remarkable  fragment  of  a  shaft.  Its  anterior  surface,  instead  of  being  smooth,
is  hollowed  deeply  by  a  groove ;  and  its  hinder  face,  though  convex,  is  quite  rough.  Can  these  be  traces
of  rickets  ?

d.  The  Radius.

Of  this  bone  there  are  two  upper  extremities  and  two  lower,  differing  in  size.  One  of  these  two  radiuses
must  have  been  at  least  262,  and  the  other  270  millims.  in  length.  There  is  also  a  fragment  of  the  body
of  the  bone.

All  these  radius  bones  are  large,  but  have  nothing  abnormal  about  them.

e.  The  Hand.

There  are  only  some  metacarpals  and  phalangeal  bones.  The  former  comprise  the  second,  third,  and
fourth,  and  are  in  general  longer,  less  excavated,  and  less  curved  on  the  lower  face  than  the  same  bones
in  a  modern  specimen.

The  first  phalanges,  corresponding  with  the  metacarpals,  are  not  only  longer  but  in  general  broader  in
the  body,  though  the  articular  cavities  are  shallower.

Hence  the  hand  was  broad,  the  fingers  large  and  less  used  than  in  the  modern  races.

With  data  so  fragmentary  as  the  foregoing,  it  is  impossible  to  determine  the  length  of  the  upper
extremities  compared  with  the  lower.  My  impression  is  that  the  arm,  in  its  totality,  was  short  in  relation
to  the  pelvic  limb,  and  that  the  forearm  was  long  relatively  to  the  arm  above  the  elbow.

4.  THE  VERTEBBAI,  COLUMN  AND  EIBS.

a.    Vertebral.

There  remains  a  solitary  atlas,  belonging  to  the  Old  Man.  It  is  large  and  strong;  indeed  the  support  of
the  upper  and  lower  articular  facet  is  enormous,  and  the  inequalities  where  the  annular  ligament  is
attached  present  two  knobs  projecting  into  the  cavity.  The  inferior  articular  surfaces  also  are  very  broad.
The  transverse  processes  are  square  instead  of  triangular.  On  the  other  hand,  the  cavity  is  narrowed  in  its
anterior  portion.  The  antero-posterior  internal  diameter  is  30,  and  the  transverse  26  millims.  Externally
the  width  from  one  transverse  process  to  the  other  is  81  millims.,  and  the  antero-posterior  diameter
49  millims.

To  another  and  younger  skeleton  belong  a  set  of  from  the  third  to  the  sixth  cervical,  with  a  length  of
56  millims.,  and  with  11  to  14  millims.  for  the  height  of  the  several  vertebra).  The  seventh,  belonging  to
another  individual,  is  16  millims.  high.  The  spinous  process  remains  only  on  the  third,  where  it  is  bifid.
Within,  the  transverse  diameter  is  20  and  the  fore-and-aft  measurement  15  millims.,  both  for  the  third  and
the  sixth  of  these  cervical  vertebrae.

To  the  same  individual  apparently  belongs  also  another  set  of  from  the  second  to  the  ninth  dorsal
vertebrae,  with  a  length  of  160  millims.  The  backward  curve  is  here  well  pronounced.  In  the  seventh


85  EELIQULE  AQUITANIOE.

dorsal,  the  transverse  diameter  is  to  the  antero-posterior,  in  the  inside,  as  18  to  17  millims.,  though  in  the
first  dorsal  belonging  to  another  person  these  measurements  are  17  millims.  each.  The  width  from  one
transverse  process  to  another  attains  60  millims.

Five  lumbar  vertebra?  belonging  to  the  Old  Man  have  been  fitted  together.  The  bodies  are  very  much
depressed,  the  edges  very  prominent  and  sharp.  Altogether  they  are  140  millims.  long.  The  curvature
in  a  contrary  direction  to  that  of  the  dorsals  is  also  well  marked.  In  the  fifth  lumbar  the  fore-and-aft
diameter  within  is  27-15  millims.  The  transverse  processes  are  lost  in  these  specimens;  but  in  a  fifth
lumbar  belonging  to  another  backbone  the  distance  between  the  transverse  processes  is  94  millims.

Besides  these,  there  are  also  some  separate  dorsal  and  lumbar  vertebrae,  which  enable  us  to  prove  the
existence  here  of  four  persons.

b.  Eibs.     [C.  PLATE  III.  figs.  4  and  5.]

Altogether  there  are  fifteen  fragmentary  specimens.  Eight  of  them  alone  permit  us  to  presume  that  the
thorax  was  rather  convex  than  flat.  There  are,  however,  amongst  them  two  ribs,  one  with  a  squarish,  and
the  other  with  a  rounded  edge,  which  have  a  thickness  of  from  10  to  12  millims. ;  and  two  others,  with  a
sharp  edge,  have  a  thickness  of  from  7  to  11  millims. :  and  this  very  probably  is  an  anomaly  dependent
on  rickets.

After  all  this  description  of  details,  we  have  to  regret  that  the  imperfection  of  the  materials  at  command
does  not  enable  us  to  determine  the  stature  of  the  individuals  with  precision.  Everything,  however,  concurs
in  leading  us  to  presume  that  they  were  tall,  attaining  a  height  of  six  feet  if  not  more.


CHAPTER  III.

SYNTHETICAL.

Judging  from  the  zoological  and  industrial  accompaniments  of  the  Human
Remains  described  in  the  preceding  Chapters,  this  family  must  have  subsisted
by  hunting  and  fishing,  and  by  such  natural  products  as  Man  without  agriculture
and  domestic  animals  can  obtain.  As  to  the  products  of  his  industry,  this  man,
living  in  a  state  of  nature,  is  comparable  with  that  of  Aurignac,  d'Arcy,  &c.*
He  does  not  appear,  however,  to  have  attained  such  a  degree  of  skill  as  was
acquired  later  in  the  same  neighbourhood  and  elsewhere,  especially  in  an  artistic
point  of  view,  by  the  men  of  the  Reindeer  Age  properly  so  called.

As  to  his  exterior,  a  heavy  frame  was  managed  by  a  powerful  muscular
apparatus,  which  has  left  its  traces  in  the  hollows  and  ridges  of  the  bones.
A  robust,  but  flattish,  foot  bore  the  body,  and  was  fitted  for  running  by  its
elongated  heel.  Of  a  sombre  aspect,  with  an  imposing  stature,  and  conscious

*  It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  human  bones  found  in  these  localities  present  no  evidence  of  tall
stature.  On  the  contrary,  we  have  proofs  at  hand  that  there  were  there  at  least  some  individuals  of  a
really  liliputian  dwarfishness ;  and  yet,  judging  from  paloeontological  and  archaeological  data,  the  epoch
was  the  same.


HUMAN   BONES   IN  THE  CAVE   OP  CRO-MAGNON.  87

of  his  strength,  ignorant  of  moderating  his  passions  by  a  cultivated  morale,  he
could  be  violent,  and  turn  against  -the  weaker  sex  the  weapon  intended  to  kill  his
prey.  Indeed,  whether  we  regard  the  wound  inflicted  on  the  woman,  described
above  (page  79),  as  the  result  of  a  family  quarrel,  or  of  a  combat  between  hostile
tribes,  it  must  be  noted  that  as  yet  nothing  parallel  has  been  found  among  the
human  remains  dating  from  that  distant  period.

His  ornament  was  in  accordance  with  the  grossness  of  his  instinct.  Like  the
lowest  savages  of  today,  this  old  hunter  had  perforated  shells  for  adornment
(see  B.  Plate  XI.  fig.  1).  Nevertheless  these  shells  could  have  scarcely  been
within  his  reach,  since  they  are  marine.  To  acquire  them  he  must  have  gone
afar,  or  he  must  have  got  them  by  exchange,  or  even  have  taken  them  by  force.
At  this  period  the  abundant  collection  of  Periwinkle-shells  represents  probably
quite  as  great  a  treasure  as  pearls  and  precious  stones  with  us ;  but  it  is  scarcely
presumable  that  this  was  current  money,  as  Cowries  now  are  in  Africa,  but
rather  a  bijou  of  imaginary  value.  Lastly,  some  polished  plates  of  bone,
which  by  their  wedge-like  shape  resemble  little  polished  and  perforated  axes
of  a  later  age,  were  perhaps  intended  to  serve  as  pendants  (see  B.  Plate  XI.
figs.  2-4).  At  least  such 'was  the  use  of  these  hatchets  in  the  Period  of  Polished
Stone,  when  necklaces  were  made  of  disks  of  bone,  polished  stone,  &c.,  in  pre-
ference to  shells,  thus  showing  a  progress  in  skill  and  industry.  We  may
remark,  nevertheless,  that  in  the  Phoenix  Park,  near  Dublin,  there  was  found
under  a  dolmen  a  necklace  of  shells  (Nerita  \_Littorina\  littoralis),  although  the
associated  Objects  seem  to  belong  to  the  Age  of  Polished  Stone*. ,

Although  endowed  with  an  uncommon  vigour,  yet  this  old  Cave-dweller  was
affected  with  rickets  in  his  infancy,  and  caries  in  his  old  age.  The  latter  disease
is  visible  on  the  skull  and  jaw  of  the  Old  Man  (page  74).  As  for  the  rickets,
the  long  bones  of  the  lower  extremities,  some  rib-bones,  and  even  the  processes
of  the  phalanges,  bear  evident  marks  of  this  disease :  was  it  living  in  caves  that
caused  this  ?  This  may  have  been  the  case,  since  the  Cave-dweller  of  Neanderthal
and  the  Great  Bear  of  the  Caverns  were  also  afflicted  with  rickets.

If  the  field  opened  to  the  imagination  in  recalling  the  social  state  of  the
ancient  Perigordians  is  vast,  it  is  not  so  as  to  the  group  and  race  to  which  he
belonged.  Here  we  have  for  our  guidance  the  osteological  characters,  and
notably  those  of  the  cranium.  Moreover  these  characters  agree  in  the  majority
of  the  individuals,  of  both  sexes,  whose  bones  have  here  been  best  preserved ;  and,

*  See  'Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Antiquities  of  Stone,  Earthen,  and  Vegetable  Materials  in  the
Museum  of  the  Boyal  Irish  Academy.'  By  W.  K.  Wilde,  &c.,  8vo,  1857,  pp.  180-183.

O


88  RELIQUIAE  AQUITANIOE.

further,  they  are  such  as  to  enable  us  to  refer  these  skulls  and  skeletons  to  the
race  living  in  the  Age  of  the  Reindeer,  properly  so  called,  and  made  known  to  us
by  the  discoveries  of  M.  Dupont  in  Belgium,  M.  Brunn  at  Montauban,  and
particularly  M.  de  Ferry  in  the  Maconnais.

I  have  shown  elsewhere  that  all  the  crania  of  the  Reindeer  Age,  which  I
have  provisionally  termed  "  Mongoloid,"  constitute  a  double  series,  of  which  one
approaches  the  Lap  and  the  other  the  Fin  of  our  day.

Now,  as  we  may  prove  by  the  foregoing  descriptions  and  by  the  Plates  C.  I.-V.,
the  Perigordian  skulls  belong  evidently  by  their  cranial  and  facial  architecture
to  the  category  of  the  Mongoloid  group.  At  the  same  time,  they  are  far  from
being  Laps ;  and  they  depart  even  in  some  particulars  from  the  type  of  the  Fin
in  the  strict  sense.  Thus,  the  cranium  of  the  Lap  is  decidedly  brachycephalic
and  generally  not  voluminous  :  that  of  the  Fin  (Suomi)  is  ordinarily  also  brachy-
cephalic, as  we  learn  from  Dr.  J.  B.  Davis's  '  Catalogue '  and  from  the  specimens
in  the  Museum  of  the  Jardin  des  Plantes  in  Paris;  or  it  is  in  any  case  very
slightly  dolichocephalic  when  it  departs  from  the  rule,  as  we  may  presume  from
the  average  of  the  indicial  number  given  by  Retzius,  which  is  808.  Consequently,
though  Mongoloid,  these  Perigordian  skulls,  remarkable  for  their  volume  and
length,  present  incontestably  something  new  to  us,  as  compared  with  all  those
of  the  Age  of  the  Reindeer  which  as  yet  we  have  been  able  to  study.  Indeed,
if  the  cranium  from  Rosette,  found  by  M.  Dupont,  is  sufficiently  voluminous
(560  millims.  in  circumference)  to  serve  in  this  respect  as  a  term  of*  comparison,
it  is  on  the  other  hand  eminently  brachycephalic.  Then,  the  male  Finnish  skull
from  Bruniquel  and  the  female  from  Solutre",  both  belonging  to  the  Reindeer
Age,  are  certainly  less  dolichocephalic  than  these  skulls  from  Perigord ;  and  they
present,  too,  at  least  some  shades  of  difference  in  the  conformation  of  the  orbits,
the  nose,  and  the  maxillaries.  Nevertheless  in  considering  the  Perigordian
crania,  such  as  they  are,  as  dolichocephalic,  as  we  see  by  the  Table  of  Measure-
ments (page  90),  we  are  far  from  being  able  to  establish  the  degree  of  this
dolichocephalism ;  for  the  three  calvaria  are  partly  abnormal  and  partly  defective.
The  most  complete  of  them,  namely  No.  1  (page  75),  is  affected  with  premature
synostosis.  The  second  presents  both  an  abnormal  conformation  of  the  occiput
(increasing  its  longitudinal  diameter),  and  a  posthumous  transverse  distension.
Lastly,  the  third,  female,  wants  almost  all  the  left  parietal.  Consequently  it  is
impossible  to  define,  with  sufficient  accuracy  for  the  determination  of  race-
character,  the  dolichocephalism  of  these  individuals.  But  if  these  skulls  are
Mongoloid,  but  neither  Finnish  nor  Lappish,  to  what  type  do  they  approach  ?


HUMAN  BONES  IN  THE  CAVE  OF   CEO-MAGNON.  89

My  answer  to  this  can  be  only  suggestive ;  for,  as  concerns  the  Ougrian  peoples
specifically,  we  have  not  at  our  command  any  Vogul,  Tcheremiss,  Syryain,
Mordvine,  Votyak,  or  Ostyak  skulls;  and  I  can  compare  the  old  skulls  only
with  those  modern  specimens  we  have.

Passing  in  review  the  modern  Mongoloid  skulls  that  are  in  the  Jardin  des
Plantes,  I  am  struck  with  the  analogy  which  the  existing  Esthonian  cranium
presents  to  that  of  the  old  Cave-folk.  Among  the  four  skulls  from  Esthonia,
one  is  abnormal  from  premature  synostosis.  Of  the  three  others,  two  are
modern,  and  one,  taken  from  a  tomb  at  E-eval,  is  older.  Of  these  three
normal  skulls,  two  are  male,  and  one  female.  Of  the  two  former  the  cephalic
index  of  the  modern  one  is  835,  and  that  of  the  ancient  one  is  779;  in  the
female  specimen  it  is  as  low  as  718.  This  last  is  consequently  dolichocephalic
in  a  high  degree,  more  so  even  than  the  Perigordian  skulls.  This  first  difficulty
removed,  we  see  what  remains : — excepting  the  volume,  everything  that  distin-
guishes the  Esthonian  from  his  Finnish  brother,  whether  in  general  conformation,
or  in  details,  is  found  in  the  skulls  from  Perigord.  My  statements  may  be  verified
by  those  who  have  no  Esthonian  materials  at  command ;  for  there  is  a  very  fully
detailed  description  incorporated  by  the  lamented  Prichard  in  his  '  Researches  on
the  Physical  History  of  Mankind.'  Any  one  consequently  may  with  advantage
compare  Hueck's  plates  and  description*  with  ours,  and  form  a  judgment  with
a  full  knowledge  of  the  case.

Altogether,  what  I  wish  to  affirm  is  that  the  skull  from  Perigord  much
resembles  the  Esthonian ;  but  it  may  well  be  identical  with  others  of  the  high
north,  and  of  which  we  have  as  yet  no  knowledge.  Thus,  to  cite  one  example,
M.  von  Baer  informs  us  that  the  Vogul  skull  is,  in  the  main,  dolichocephalic.
So  also,  according  to  all  travellers,  the  skulls  of  the  Siberian  peoples  are  very
large  in  relation  to  the  stature  of  the  individuals ;  and  indeed  a  Toungouse  and  a
Ghiliak  skull  each  gave  me  a  measurement  of  550  millimetres  for  their  circum-
ference, lastly,  an  Esquimaux  skull  long  held  the  place  of  honour,  for  its  size,
in  Morton's  collection.

"Who  would  be  bold  enough  to  assert  that  the  volume  of  the  Perigordian  skull
is  a  faithful  expression  of  the  cranial  type  of  a  whole  people  ?  On  the  contrary,
we  have  here  evidently  to  do  with  a  family,  rather  than  with  an  entire  tribe ;  and
this  character  might  be  exceptional  here  as  it  is  elsewhere.  At  all  events  let  us
wait  for  other  facts  to  clear  up  the  subject.

We  must  remark,  however,  that  a  cranial  volume,  as  in  the  two  men,  of  580

*  Dr.  Alex.  Hueck,  '  Dissert,  inaug.  de  Craniis  Esthonum,'  Dorpat,  1838.

o2


90  EELIQUM:  AQUITANKLE.

millims.  (horizontal  circumference)  rarely  occurs  now-a-days.      Among  modern
specimens  I  know  only  a  skull  of  a  Croat  (580  millims.)  and  one  of  a  Yoloff
Negro  (575  millims.)  which  have  such  dimensions.      It  is  otherwise  with  some
ancient  crania  which  I  regard  as  Celtic ;   for  here  such  a  volume  is  not  rare.
Altogether,  the  volume  of  the  Pe"rigord  skull  by  no  means  obliges  us  to  refer  it  to
any  other  than  some  of  the  existing  races  of  the  North.     This  opinion  gains
some  weight  when  the  cranial  volume  is  contrasted  with  the  stature,  as  far  as  we
can  judge  from  the  extremities,  pelvis,  and  vertebrae.     At  least,  if  we  take  the
length  of  the  femur  among  the  old  Pe"  rigor  d  folk  as  50  centimetres,  we  see  at
once  that  among  modern  races  the  length  of  the  femur,  even  in  some  females,
exceeds  this ;  and  yet  their  cranium  is  very  far  from  attaining  a  circumference
of  58  centims.      On  the  other   hand,  the   ancient  Finnish   female  of  Solutre",
whose  femur  is  46  centims.  long,   and  whose  pelvis  is  really  enormous,  has  a
cranial  circumference  of  53  centims.;  and  this  corresponds  very  nearly  with  that
of  the  Perigordian.      It  may  be   asked,  however,  If  the  stature  of  this  Cave-
dweller  approached  6  feet,  how  can  he  be  classed  among  the  Mongoloid  peoples
of  the  North,  especially  the  Esthonians  (who  have  at  the  present  day  a  sorry
constitution  and  dwarf  stature,  particularly  near  Dorpat,  where  they  drag  out  a
miserable  existence  in  hard  serfdom)  ?  We  must  take  into  consideration  the  fol-
lowing circumstances,  here  briefly  stated.     Eirst,  such  is  the  information  given  by
two  competent  judges,  MM.  von  Baer  and  Hueck.     Secondly,  further  north,  where
they  are  in  a  better  condition,  the  Esthonians  have  a  finer  size  and  aspect,  as  also
the  Eins,  among  whom  there  are  some  as  tall  as  the  Swedes,  and  whose  average
height  is  5'7  English  feet  (J.  B.  Davis).     Thirdly,  we  must  remember,  too,  that
the  great  stature  which  we  are  discussing  occurs  only  in  two  men  among  the
Perigordian  Cave-folk,  and  that  there  is,  among  four  persons,  at  least  one  female
of  low  stature,  as  I  have  shown  by  the  examination  of  the  pelvis  &c.

My  anatomical  review  would  be  very  defective  without  again  alluding  to  the
pelvis,  a  portion  of  the  skeleton  which,  after  the  skull,  is  the  next  important
characteristic  of  the  races  of  men.  That  of  the  Old  Man  at  Cro-Magnon,  which
is  the  most  perfect,  is  remarkable  for  its  massiveness,  for  the  deep  excavation  of
its  iliac  fossa,  for  the  great  extent  of  the  ilio-sacral  articulation,  for  the  pro-
minence of  the  spine  of  the  pubis,  &c. ;  in  two  others  we  noticed  the  considerable
breadth  of  the  ilio-pectineal  eminence,  the  breadth  and  slight  concavity  of  the
sacrum, — all  of  which  characters  at  one  time  I  have  noticed  in  the  pelvis  of  a
Lap,  the  only  one  I  have  of  a  northern  race.

As  for  the  characters  of  the  hand  and  foot  in  the  Perigord  skeletons,  there


HUMAN  BONES  IN  THE  CAVE  OF  CEO-MAGNON.  91

is  nothing  incompatible  with  what  we  know  as  belonging  to  the  northern  races
above  mentioned.

On  the  whole,  if  I  am  not  entirely  deceived,  this  review  of  the  anatomical
details  authorizes  us  to  regard  the  Cave-dweller  of  P£rigord  as  decidedly  affiliated
to  the  other  Mongoloids  of  the  Age  of  the  Reindeer;  and  where  the  repre-
sentative of  the  Lap  and  the  Pin  occurs,  the  Esthonian  should  rightfully  come
in.  Such,  besides,  is  still  at  the  present  day  the  geographical  position  of  these
peoples  in  the  North  of  Europe.  To  all  we  have  said  on  the  massiveness  of  the
bony  structure,  we  may  append  the  words  of  Lmn6 — "  Eennones  corpore  toroso."

Can  we,  in  the  last  place,  draw  from  other  sources  any  indications  of  the  origin
of  our  Troglodytes  ?  In  other  words,  will  history,  archaeology,  or  philology  give
us  here  a  ray  of  light.  History  cannot  be  asked  for  the  explanation  of  prehistoric
facts ;  but  Tacitus,  in  his  inscriptive  style,  represents  the  Eins  of  his  epoch  as
savages,  in  the  hunting  stage,  and  as  having  only  bone  points  for  their  arrows,
just  as  our  Perigordians  had;  and  thus  much  only  we  get  from  history  with
archaeology.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  these  people  of  prehistoric  times
might,  on  their  part,  throw  an  unexpected  light  on  passages  in  the  Scandinavian
Sagas,  where  it  is  a  question  of  dwarfs  versed  in  sorcery,  and  giants  terrific  in
their  violence.  As  for  the  former,  they  may  be  readily  accounted  Laps ;  and  as
for  the  giants,  they  might  be  regarded  as  mythological  beings ;  but,  if  among  the
primitive  Eins  there  were  men  of  such  stature  and  bearing  as  our  old  men  of
P6rigord,  they  might  well  have  overawed  even  the  Scandinavians.

Lastly,  as  to  the  data  of  philology,  the  skulls  are  mute  enough ;  nevertheless
the  conformation  of  the  bony  palate  leads  us  to  conclude  that,  at  least  pho-
netically, the  language  of  our  Cave-dwellers  was  neither  Aryan  nor  Semitic.  In
fact  we  find  their  peculiar  palate,  low  and  extending  forwards,  only  in  those
modern  races  who  have  a  weak  phonology,  and  sweet  at  times;  and  such  are
the  Einnish  idioms.

NOTE. — Since  this  paper  was  delivered  to  the  printer,  other  strong  proofs  have
come  into  my  hand  with  regard  of  the  rachitical  character  of  the  malformations
observed  on  the  bones  belonging  to  the  Troglodyte  of  Cro-Magnon.  Moreover
the  existence  of  a  cranial  type  as  truly  Esthonian  as  the  modern,  during  the
Reindeer  Period,  is  now  a  well-established  fact.  We  owe  these  discoveries  to
MM.  de  Eerry  and  Arcelin,  two  eminent  pioneers  in  the  unknown  territories  of
Prehistoric  Man.  Eor  two  years  they  have  been  hard  at  work  in  a  burial-ground


92  EELIQUI^   AQUITANICLE.

belonging  to  the  Reindeer  Period,  which  was  discovered  by  M.  de  Ferry  at
Solutre",  near  M&con;  and  already  fifty  tombs,  dating  from  this  remote  time,
have  been  explored.  Amongst  the  human  remains,  which  were  all  kindly
submitted  to  my  examination,  there  are  skulls  of  the  Lappish  and  Finnish  types —
some  the  same  as  those  of  Cro-Magnon,  one  very  nearly  resembling  the  skull
of  the  Esquimaux  at  Behring's  Strait,  and  one  skull  as  truly  Esthonian  as  any
known  to  us  from  Dorpat  or  Reval ;  and,  what  is  still  more,  all  the  bones  of  the
skeleton  belonging  to  this  last  skull  bear  the  vestiges  of  rachitism  in  a  manner
which  admits  of  no  discussion. — J.  E.  PRTJNER-BEY,  Paris,  August  18,  1868.


REMARKS  ON  THE  CRO-MAGNON  FAUNA.  93


VIII.

REMARKS  ON  THE  FAUNA  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVE  OF  CRO-MAGNON.    BY  M.  EDOUAHD  LAKTKT.

THIS  Fauna  is  represented  both  by  the  osseous  remains  found  associated  with  the
Sepulture  in  this  Cave,  and  by  those  found  in  the  layers  of  Hearth-stuff.  See  tin-
description  of  the  Cave  and  its  contents,  pages  62  et  seq.  This  Fauna  comprises
fourteen  or  fifteen  species  of  Mammals,  and  one  Bird  (represented  by  a  single
bone).

The  Carnivora  are  represented  among  others  by  a  Bear,  of  great  size,  of
which  a  metatarsal  and  two  phalanges  have  been  found ;  but  they  do  not  present
sufficiently  well  marked  forms  for  accurate  specification.

Another  Carnivore,  of  great  size,  is  referable  to  the  genus  Felis,  and  is  repre-
sented by  a  portion  of  an  upper  jaw,  containing  the  sockets  of  the  upper  penul-
timate and  of  the  last  or  carnassial  premolars.  This  fragment  can  be  fairly
identified  with  the  same  bone  in  Felis  speleea.  There  is  also  half  of  a  canine
tooth,  which  appears  to  have  belonged  to  a  somewhat  smaller  and  younger
individual.  The  fang  of  this  canine  is  marked  with  two  notches  made  by  a  very
sharp  cutting  instrument.

There  is  also  the  lower  jaw  of  a  large  Canis,  not  distinguishable  from  the
existing  Wolf.  Some  other  specimens  are  referable  to  other  species  or  varieties
of  Canis,  of  which  one  does  not  seem  to  differ  from  our  common  Fox ;  whilst  the
other,  smaller  in  its  proportions,  presents  some  anatomical  peculiarities  which  I
have  not  been  able  to  match  in  the  many  skulls  of  the  Fox  in  the  Museum  of
Natural  History  at  Paris.

There  was  also  found  at  this  Sepulture  the  femur  of  a  Spermophile,  but  of  an
undetermined  species.  Some  years  ago  we  found  in  the  neighbouring  Cave  of
Les  Eyzies  half  of  a  lower  jaw  and  some  cervical  vertebrae  of  a  Spermophile,
which  Dr.  Falconer  regarded  as  closely  approaching  Spermophihis  erythrogemts :
it  certainly  differs  from  that  found  by  M.  Desnoyers  in  the  Bone-breccia  of  Mont-
morency,  which  has  been  compared  by  some  with  Sp.  citillus,  and  by  others  with
Sp.  Richardsoni.

Two  other  Rodents,  of  the  genus  Lepus,  but  of  a  different  size,  have  left  their
remains  at  the  entrance  of  the  Cave.

In  one  of  the  layers  of  hearth-stuff  was  found  a  good  portion  of  an  Elephant's


94  EELIQUI^E  AQUITANICJL

tusk,  which  we  naturally  refer  to  Elephas  prlmigenius.  It  had  in  great  part
exfoliated  and  separated  into  small  fragments,  so  that  with  great  trouble  only  a
stump  a  few  inches  long  could  be  dug  out  (see  page  66).  Mention  has  already
been  made  (page  70)  of  the  discovery,  among  the  human  skeletons,  of  ornaments
or  amulets  of  ivory,  one  of  them  in  particular  showing,  by  fracture,  the  peculiar
mode  of  exfoliation  due  to  change  by  time  in  Elephants'  tusks.

The  genus  Sus,  rare  throughout  the  Stations  of  Perigord,  is  here  represented
only  by  two  molars  and  a  lower  tusk  similar  to  those  of  the  present  Wild  Boar.

As  for  the  Horse,  its  remains  are  the  most  numerous  here  at  Cro-Magnon,
where  it  must  have  constituted  the  chief  article  of  food  for  the  people  of  the
period.

The  remains  of  the  Reindeer  are  much  less  abundant  here  than  we  have
usually  found  to  be  the  case  in  other  caves  in  the  Dordogne ;  and  those  of  the
Aurochs  seem  also  to  bear  a  like  proportion.

Some  teeth  only  of  the  Common  Stag  (Cervus  elaphus)  and  of  the  Bouquetin
(Capra  ibex]  have  been  found  here.  There  are  no  relics  of  the  Chamois,  nor  of
the  Musk-Ox,  though  probably  the  contemporary  Cave-folk  ate  these  animals  at
the  Station  of  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Vezere.

Lastly,  a  single  bone  of  a  Bird  has  been  found  in  the  Cro-Magnon  Cave.  It  is
a  humerus  of  large  size ;  but  it  has  lost  its  two  articular  extremities  by  old
fractures,  so  that  it  is  only  with  considerable  reserve  that  M.  Alphonse  Milne-
Edwards  states  that  he  believes  it  to  present  an  aspect  referable  to  the  Crane
genus.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  remains  of  Birds  are  much  rarer  at  these  Stations
of  high  Palaeolithic  antiquity  than  in  those  presumed  to  be  more  recent  where
the  Reindeer  predominated :  thus  we  have  not  found  a  single  Bird-bone  in  the
Caves  of  Moustier  and  the  Gorge  d'Enfer  in  Dordogne;  nor  have  I  found  any
remains  of  Birds  in  the  Grotte  des  Pe'es  in  the  Allier.  At  Aurignac  in
Haute  Garonne  there  have  been  found  but  few  Bird-bones ;  and  MM.  Bour-
geois and  Delaunay  have  mentioned  a  few  only  as  occurring  in  the  Grotte  de  la
Chaise  (Charente).  Let  us  bear  in  mind  that  all  the  Stations  above-mentioned
are  characterized  archaeologically  by  the  presence  of  arrows  of  the  same  type  as
those  of  Aurignac — that  is  to  say,  with  simple  points,  and  not  barbed  as  are  those
of  Les  Eyzies,  La  Madelaine,  Bruniquel,  Massat,  &c.,  where  remains  of  Birds
abound.

There  is  also  another  peculiarity,  still  more  striking  and  significant,  if  it  be  con-
firmed by-and-by  by  more  extended  observations — namely,  that  in  the  same  Caves


EEMAKKS  ON  THE  CKO-MAGNON  FAUNA.  95

or  Stations  of  the  former  age,  in  Dordogne  and  other  countries,  we  have  not
ourselves  ever  collected  a  single  Fish-bone ;  and  we  know  that  remains  of  Fish
are  abundant  at  La  Madelaine,  in  the  Cave  of  Les  Eyzies,  and  particularly  in  the
Bock-shelter  of  Bruniquel.  There  was  not,  therefore,  in  the  mode  of  living  an
absolute  conformity  between  the  people  of  these  two  periods,  though  inhabiting
the  same  country,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  river,  rich  probably  with  fish
then  as  now.  Could  it  be  that  the  more  ancient  people  had  no  good  fishing-
implements  ?  Or,  perhaps,  were  they  in  the  habit  of  eating  their  fish  raw  on  the
banks  of  the  river,  whilst  their  descendants,  or  successors  of  a  different  race  (?),
preferred  to  take  their  fish  to  the  Caves  and  Shelters  where  they  cooked  their
other  articles  of  food  ?  Indeed  some  modern  travellers  tell  us  of  existing  savages
living  near  the  sea  and  yet  ignorant  of  the  means  of  obtaining  fish  therefrom  as
an  article  of  food.

Before  leaving  the  consideration  of  this  Fauna  of  Cro-Magnon,  I  would  remark
that  no  trace  has  been  met  with  of  the  Saiga  Antelope.  Indeed  it  is  only  in  the
Stations  with  barbed  arrow-heads,  and  where  the  Reindeer  predominates,  that  we
have  as  yet  observed  remains  of  the  Saiga.  Perhaps  some  persons  may  be
disposed  to  admit  that  the  people  using  barbed  arrows  must  have  introduced  the
Saiga  into  Western  Europe,  as  others  have  already  supposed  that  the  same  race
brought  in  the  domesticated  Reindeer  and  even  the  Horse*.  According  to  some
the  Saiga  is  moreover  as  fit  for  domestication  as  the  Reindeer.

In  verifying,  in  the  first  place,  the  specific  determination  of  the  cores  which  I
was  led  to  refer  to  the  Saiga,  I  only  had  the  opportunity  of  studying,  for
comparison,  a  pair  of  horns,  in  the  Museum  of  Natural  History,  which  Professor
Milne-Edwards  courteously  allowed  me  to  have  sawn  through  lengthwise,  so  as
to  show  the  structure  of  their  bony  cores.  This  examination  removed  all  doubt
as  to  the  specific  identity  of  the  fossil  horns  from  the  Caves  of  France  with  those
of  the  Saiga  now  living  in  Russia.  For  the  comparison  of  the  limb-bones,
however,  and  also  of  the  head  and  teeth,  I  was  at  a  loss  for  material,  as  there
was  neither  skull  nor  skeleton  of  this  animal  in  the  Museum,  though  afterwards
the  bones  of  a  young  one  were  procured.  I  have,  however,  through  the  kindness
of  the  eminent  Professor  Brandt,  of  St.  Petersburg,  obtained  an  adult  skull,
together  with  bones  of  the  front  and  hind  limbs.  By  a  careful  comparison  of

*  See  '  La  Caverne  Bize,  et  les  especes  animates  dont  les  debris  y  sont  associes  &  ceux  de  1'homme,'  par
P.  Gervais  et  Brinckmann ;  Hontpellier,  1864 ;  and  Van  Beneden,  <  Eapport  sur  les  collections  polytech-
niques  de  1'universite  de  Louvain,'  1868.

P


96  KELIQULE  AQUITANIC^E.

these  with  the  remains  of  the  Quaternary  Ruminants,  I  am  convinced  that
in  the  almost  incalculable  number  of  bones,  from  the  Drift  and  the  Caves  of
France,  which  during  the  last  ten  years  have  passed  through  my  hands,  there
was  not  a  fragment  of  a  jaw,  or  detached  teeth,  or  even  a  single  fragment  of  a
limb-bone  referable  to  the  Saiga,  though  I  have  met  with  horn-cores  (always
isolated)  coming  from  six  or  seven  different  localities.  In  particular,  a  portion
of  the  frontal  bone  still  supporting  the  two  bony  horn-cores,  has  been  obtained
from  the  celebrated  Cave  of  Chaffaut*,  near  Civray  (Vienne),  by  M.  Gaillard  de  la
Dionnerie,  Procureur  Imperial  at  St.  Pons  (He"rault).

How,  then,  can  we  account  for  the  frequent  occurrence  of  the  horns  of  the  Saiga
in  the  Caves  of  Central  and  Southern  France,  and  of  no  other  portion  whatever
of  this  animal's  skeleton,  except  by  supposing  that  the  long,  solid,  and  pointed
horns  of  the  Saiga  constituted  a  formidable  weapon,  which  the  Reindeer-Hunters
of  Perigord  probably  obtained,  by  barter  or  commerce  of  some  sort,  from  the
people  with  whom  this  Antelope  was  indigenous  ?

However  that  may  be,  I  take  this  occasion  to  point  out  to  those  palaeontologists
who  have  not  the  skeleton  or  skull  of  the  Saiga  a  distinctive  and  very  important
character  in  its  dentition.  In  the  skull  sent  me  by  Professor  Brandt,  which
appears  to  be  adult  and  quite  normal,  there  are  in  the  lower  jaw,  on  either  side,
only  two  premolars  and  three  true  molars  (altogether  five  grinders  in  each
ramus) ;  and  this  appears  to  me  to  be  a  deviation  from  the  dentary  formula  of
Ruminants,  excepting  the  Camel  of  Asia  and  the  Llama  of  America.

*  In  this  Cave  M.  de  la  Dionnerie  has  found  barbed  arrow-heads,  numerous  implements,  a  complete
necklace  of  the  canine  teeth  of  the  Stag,  and  an  engraved  stone  bearing  two  rows  of  Horses  at  a  gallop.
From  this  cave  also,  then  known  as  the  Cave  of  Savigne,  were  obtained  the  barbed  weapon-head,  and  the  two
engraved  figures  of  animals  on  bone,  which  I  published  in  1861,  in  the  '  Annalcs  des  Sciences  Naturelles,'
4rae  serie,  vol.  xv.  pi.  13.  figs.  1  and  2.


CRO-MAGNON  SKULLS  AND  BONES.  97


IX.

ON  THE  HUMAN  SKULLS  AND  BONES  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVE  OF  CRO-MAGNON,  NEAR  LES
EYZIES.     BY  Professor  PATII,  BROCA,  General  Secretary  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  Paris.

CONTENTS.
§  I.  Preliminary  Remarks,  p.  97.

§  II.  Remarks  on  the  Ages  and  Sexes  of  the  three  Individuals,  and  the  General  Characters  of  the  Cro-
Magnon  Race,  p.  99.

§  III.  Remarks  on  the  Three  Individuals  above  described,  p.  101.
§  1.  General  Remarks,  p.  101.

§  2.  The  Stature ;    the  Limbs ;    the  Trunk  generally  studied ;    and  the  Hypothesis   of  Rachitical
Condition  discussed,  p.  101.

§  a.  The  Stature,  p.  101.     §  6.  The  Femurs,  p.  102.     §  c.  The  Tibias,  p.  103.     §  d.  Pla-
tycnemic  Bones,  p.  104.     §  e.  Discussion  of  the  supposed  Rachitic  State  of  the  Bones,
p.  106.      §/.  The  Fibula,  p.  110.      §  g.  The  Humerus  and  Ulna,  p.  110.      §  h.  The
Vertebrae  and  Pelvis,  p.  110.
§  3.  Study  of  the  Skulls,  p.  110.

§  a.  The  Cranial  Region,  p.  110.     §  b.  The  Facial  Region,  p.  113.
§  IV.  Conclusion,  p.  120.
NOTE  on  M.  Pruner-Bey's  Esthonian  Hypothesis,  p.  121.

[JVofe. — In  the  following  descriptions  the  numbering  of  the  Skulls  is  different  from  that  in  M.  Pruner-
Bey's  Memoir  (see  above,  pages  73-92,  and  pages  89-91).  "No.  1"  is  the  same  in  both.  "No.  2"  in
this  Memoir  corresponds  with  M.  Pruner-Bey's  "No.  3;"  and  "No.  3"  with  his  "No.  2."  M.  Brora
has  adopted  the  numbers  attached  to  these  Skulls  in  the  Museum  of  Natural  History  at  Paris.]

§  I.  PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.

No  discovery  could  be  of  greater  interest  to  Anthropologists  than  that  of  these
bones.  It  is  the  complement,  I  may  say  the  crowning,  of  the  important  disco-
veries made  by  M.  Edouard  Lartet  and  his  lamented  collaborator  Henry  Christy
in  the  Caves  of  P6rigord,  especially  in  that  of  Les  Eyzies.  The  objects  found  in
these  Caves  not  only  furnished  us  with  the  most  satisfactory  proofs  of  the
contemporaneity  of  Man  and  the  Mammoth,  but  they  revealed  the  most  curious
details  of  the  life  and  manners  of  the  old  Cave-dwellers  of  Pe"rigord;  still  we
were  without  any  knowledge  of  the  anatomical  characters  of  this  intelligent  and
artistic  race,  whose  clever  carvings  are  objects  of  our  astonishment.

The  excavations  lately  made  near  Les  Eyzies,  by  M.  Louis  Lartet,  enable  us  to
supply  this  want ;  and  there  cannot  be  any  doubt  of  the  authenticity  and  high

p  2


98  RELIQUIAE  AQUITANICLE.

antiquity  of  the  human  bones  there  exhumed.  The  stratigraphical  details  of  the
contents  of  the  Cro-Magnon  Cave,  furnished  by  M.  Louis  Lartet  (see  above,
pa<*es  62-72),  prove  that  the  human  bones  are  not  only  as  old  as,  but  even
perhaps  older  than  the  carved  objects  from  the  great  Les-Eyzies  Cave.  The
latter  correspond  with  the  Period  when  the  Reindeer  predominated  in  the  Fauna ;
whilst  the  former  belong  rather  to  the  Period  of  the  Mammoth ;  and  though  a
considerable  time  must  have  elapsed  between  the  two  periods,  yet  there  is  nothing
to  hinder  the  belief  of  the  gradual  passage  from  one  to  the  other,  without  any
ethnic  revolution,  the  same  race  maintaining  itself  in  the  same  district  uninter-
ruptedly ;  so  that,  if  the  bones  from  Cro-Magnon  are  not  those  of  the  artists  of
the  Reindeer  Period,  they  are  at  least  those  of  the  ancestors  of  that  people.

The  remains  of  the  Men  of  the  Quaternary  Period  that  we  have  hitherto  been
able  to  study  belonged,  for  the  most  part,  to  individuals  of  short  stature,  with  a
rather  small  cranium,  and  a  more  or  less  prognathous  face.  Hence  it  has  been
concluded  that  the  primitive  population  of  Europe  belonged  to  a  Negroid  race,
according  to  some,  and  according  to  others  to  a  Mongoloid  race,  whose  stature
did  not  much  exceed  that  of  the  modern  Laps.  The  facts  on  which  this  opinion
rests  I  take  as  exact ;  but  it  rests  also  on  a  preconceived  idea,  which,  for  my  part,
I  have  long  combated — namely,  that  in  Quaternary  Europe  there  was  only  one
race  of  Men.  Starting  with  the  ethnogenic  theory,  that  the  diversity  of  the
Human  Race  is  produced  by  the  influence  of  time  and  circumstances,  the  holders
of  the  above-mentioned  opinion  admit  that  the  typical  differences  ought  to  be  less
and  less  as  we  look  back  to  past  ages ;  and  when  the  Polygenists  object  that  the
separation  of  the  principal  groups  of  races  was  already  complete  in  the  earliest
historical  times,  they  are  told  that  it  was  not  in  those  times,  so  close  to  our  own,
but  in  the  immense  and  incalculable  preceding  periods  that  the  divergences  from
the  original  type  were  manifested.  Reduced  to  these  terms,  the  question  of  the
Unity  of  the  Human  Race  is  adjourned  to  the  time  when  Palaeontology  shall  have
discovered  the  remains  of  Primitive  Man,  or  at  least  relics  of  the  races  of  the
Quaternary  Epoch.  The  Monogenists  suppose  that  these  races,  separated  from
us  by  thousands  of  ages  perhaps,  and  for  certain  infinitely  nearer  to  original  Man
than  the  most  ancient  of  the  historic  races,  ought  to  present,  if  not  an  absolute
uniformity,  at  least  a  manifest  convergence  towards  the  type  of  the  common
mould  whence,  they  believe,  all  the  races  came.

It  comes  to  this,  however,  (and  it  is  usually  the  case,)  that  facts  begin  to
contradict  a  preconceived  hypothesis.  The  Quaternary  race  of  Dordogne  (Cro-
Magnon)  differs  from  the  Quaternary  race  of  the  Belgian  Caves,  as  much  at  least


CKO-MAGNON  SKULLS  AND  BONES.  99

as  dissimilar  modern  races  differ  one  from  another.  The  contrast  is  complete,
not  only  when  we  look  at  the  conformation  and  volume  of  the  head,  but  also  if
we  look  at  the  form  and  dimensions  of  the  bones  of  the  limbs.

§  II.  REMARKS  ON  THE  AGES  AND  SEXES  OF  THE  THREE  INDIVIDUALS,  AND  THE  GEITERAL  CHARACTERS  OP  THE

CBO-MAGNON  KACE.

The  greater  part  of  the  Human  Bones  found  at  Cro-Magnon  belonged  to  three  individuals.  There  are
three  skulls,  one  of  which  is  perfect.  No  one  skeleton  is  complete ;  but  the  bones  of  the  trunk  and  the
limbs,  classed  according  to  their  form,  colour,  and  density,  fall  into  three  groups,  which,  according  to  the
same  characters,  correspond  to  the  three  skulls  respectively.  There  are  also  some  small  fragments  of  an
adult  cranium,  and  others  of  an  infant's  cranium.  The  number  of  bodies  laid  in  this  Cave  was  therefore  not
less  than  five ;  and  everything  goes  to  prove  there  were  no  more.  It  is  therefore  not  impossible  that  all
these  individuals  belonged  to  the  same  family.

We  need  here  treat  of  only  three  of  these,  the  others  being  represented  by  only  very  insignificant  remains.

§  1.  Individual  "No.  1." — This  skeleton,  the  skull*  of  which  is  complete  excepting  a  part  of  the  lower
jaw,  is  that  of  an  old  man.  The  bones  of  the  face  are  incrusted  with  stalagmite.  All  the  sutures  were
closed  long  before  death.  The  lambdoid  suture  is  still  visible;  but  the  coronal  is  entirely  effaced,  as
well  as  the  anterior  portion  of  the  sagittal.  It  results  that  the  exact  determination  of  the  bregma  is
impossible ;  but  I  think  that  I  recognize  a  trace  of  itf.  In  spite  of  the  advanced  age  of  this  old  man,
nearly  all  the  teeth  were  still  in  pjace  at  the  time  of  death ;  they  have  fallen  out  since,  and  have  not  been
discovered ;  the  inner  fang  of  the  second  right  molar  alone  remains.  In  consequence  of  the  crown  of  this
grinder  having  been  almost  completely  worn  away  by  use,  the  remaining  fang  had  been  separated  from  the
two  others,  which  have  fallen  out.  The  flat  top  of  this  old  worn  fang  is  oblique  from  below  upwards  and  from
without  inwards.  It  is  an  indication  of  old  age,  the  other  teeth  also  having  necessarily  been  well  worn.

The  loss  of  the  teeth  has  been  posthumous,  because  the  sockets  have  not  cicatrized ;  but  it  took  place
before  the  incrustation,  for  this  extends  into  the  sockets.  Everything,  indeed,  leads  us  to  believe  that  this
old  man's  teeth  were  not  firmly  fixed ;  for  the  sockets  are  wide  and  shallow,  some  evidently  wider  than  the
fangs,  a  condition  common  when  teeth  have  been  reduced  to  stumps,  particularly  in  old  people,  and  not  at  all
referable  to  the  presence  of  caries  in  the  teeth  or  in  the  alveolar  process.

To  the  skull  No.  1  corresponds  the  group  of  the  largest  of  all  the  bones  found.  We  refer  in  particular  to
two  thigh-bones,  a  tibia,  and  several  ribs  of  extraordinary  thickness.  One  of  the  femurs  presents  at  its
lower  portion,  immediately  above  the  condyles,  a  shallow,  well-defined  depression,  very  old  and  evidently
pathologic,  resulting  from  a  blow  of  a  very  hard  body,  forcing  the  compact  outer  plate  into  the  spongy
interior,  without  breaking  the  whole  bone.  I  see  reason  to  believe  that  this  injury  was  caused  by  a  smooth
projectile,  thrown  perhaps  by  a  sling ;  for  our  spent  bullets  sometimes  produce  similar  injuries.  The  blow  of
a  horn  or  antler,  or  of  an  Elephant's  tusk,  might  probably  have  produced  the  same  effect.

§  2.  The  Slcull  "  No.  2." — This  belonged  to  a  female,  whose  age  I  suppose  to  have  been  only  from  thirty-
five  to  forty  years,  although  the  ossification  of  the  sutures  was  far  advanced.  The  bones  of  the  cranial  vault

•  On  the  lower  part  of  the  frontal  bone,  on  the  right  side,  is  a  large  superficial  erosion,  which  does  not
appear  to  me  to  present  the  characters  of  a  pathological  lesion,  but  seems  to  have  been  produced,  after
death,  by  physical  causes  in  the  cave.

t  This  I  have  marked  with  pencil  on  the  skull ;  but  I  may  be  in  error  as  much  as  2  or  3  millimetres.


100  BELIQUI/E  AQUITANKLE.

are  entirely  coalesced  on  their  inner  face.  On  the  exterior  the  coronal  suture  is  partly  effaced ;  the  sagittal
and  especially  the  lambdoid  are  much  more  apparent.  Consequently  the  obliteration  of  the  sutures
advanced  from  before  backwards.  A  similar  state  of  the  sutures  in  skulls  of  modern  Europeans  would
indicate  on  an  average  an  age  of  more  than  fifty  years ;  but  we  know  that  among  uncivilized  races  the
sutures  become  obliterated  at  a  much  earlier  period  of  life  than  with  us.  It  is  possible,  then,  that  this
woman  was  less  than  fifty  years  of  age ;  and  the  state  of  her  teeth  supports  this  view.  Only  two  teeth,  the
first  and  second  right  large  molars,  remain  in  place.  The  other  teeth  are  gone ;  but  the  condition  of  the
sockets  proves  that  the  teeth  were  displaced  after  death.  The  two  remaining  molars  have  been  worn, — one
very  much,  so  that  its  cusps  and  furrows  have  disappeared  and  the  ivory  has  been  laid  bare  ;  the  other  has  lost
its  cusps,  but  the  bases  of  the  furrows  are  still  visible,  and  its  enamel  is  nowhere  worn  through.  As  the  first
large  molar  cuts  the  gum  at  about  the  sixth  or  seventh  year,  and  the  second  not  until  from  the  twelfth  to
the  fourteenth,  it  follows  that  the  first  will  be  more  used  than  the  second,  with  the  difference  of  from  six  to
eight  years.  The  amount  of  difference  existing  between  the  two  molars  under  notice  is  such  as  would  be
referable  to  eight  years'  use ;  it  is  very  considerable,  and  indicates  a  very  rapid  wearing  of  the  teeth —
either  because  the  person  habitually  fed  on  very  hard  substances,  or  because  the  dental  tissues  were
relatively  soft.  Moreover  the  wearing  away  of  the  second  molar  is  very  slight,  compared  with  that  of  the
first ;  and  hence  we  may  regard  it  as  probable  that  a  very  long  time  had  not  elapsed  between  the  cutting  of
that  tooth  and  the  woman's  death.  It  seems  to  me  impossible  that  she  lived  to  the  age  of  fifty  years,  as  the
advanced  stage  of  the  obliteration  of  the  sutures  would  seem  to  indicate.  I  am  indeed  disposed  to  think
that  she  was  still  young,  not  more  than  thirty-five  or  forty — an  age  at  which  in  Negroes  I  have  many
times  seen  the  sutures  of  the  cranial  vault  almost  entirely  closed.

The  direction  of  the  plane  of  wearing  cannot  be  determined  on  the  second  molar,  which  was  not
sufficiently  ground  down;  but  on  the  first  molar  it  is  oblique  from  below  upwards  and  from  without
inwards.  This  is  the  same  as  is  observed  in  the  tooth  of  the  "  Old  Man  "  No.  1.

The  cranium  of  our  "  No.  2  "  is  imperfect,  especially  behind  and  on  the  left  side.  Although  incomplete,
the  face  may  be  studied  in  its  principal  features.  The  left  half  of  the  frontal  bone  is  penetrated,  above  the
outer  half  of  the  orbit,  by  an  oblique  hole  33  millimetres  (1-299  inch)  long,  12  (0-472  inch)  wide  in  the
middle,  and  narrowing  to  sharp  angles  at  the  end,  therefore  in  all  probability  made  by  a  blow  with  a  small
stone  axe.  It  was  certainly  made  during  life,  and  probably  produced  death,  but  not  immediately ;  for  we
perceive  on  the  inner  face  of  the  frontal,  around  the  hole,  a  vascularity  of  the  bone  and  a  deposit  of  finely
porous  bony  matter,  which  must  have  required  from  fifteen  to  twenty  days  for  ite  production.  The  little
fragment  of  bone,  probably  driven  into  the  brain,  has  not  been  found ;  and  there  is  no  splintering  of  the  table
of  the  skull,  the  aperture  in  which  has  nearly  as  sharp  an  edge  as  that  outside.  Hence  the  blow  must  have
been  given  with  very  great  force.

As  we  have  already  seen  that  one  of  the  Old  Man's  thigh-bones  presents  some  traces  of  an  old  wound,
received  possibly  in  a  fight,  the  Cro-Magnon  people  appear  to  us  as  of  violent  habits ;  and  indeed,  if  the
"  Old  Man  "  was  wounded  in  the  chase,  the  woman's  wound  was  evidently  given  by  a  murderer.

The  bones  corresponding  in  colour  with  the  cranium  "No.  2"  are  large  and  strong,  but  less  rough  and
massive  than  those  of  "  No.  1 ;  "  and  they  otherwise  present  the  characters  of  the  bones  of  a  female.

§  3.  Skeleton  "  No.  3." — "  No.  3  "  was  an  adult  man,  about  forty-five  years  old.  The  face  and  the
temporal  bones  are  wanting.  All  the  occipital  sutures,  including  those  of  six  rather  large  wormian  bones
in  the  lambdoid  suture,  are  still  quite  open.  The  sagittal  is  not  at  all  closed  externally,  but  it  is  closed  on
the  inside.  The  coronal  has  quite  coalesced  on  the  inside ;  but  on  the  outside,  though  the  obliteration  is
much  advanced  throughout,  there  are  still  traces  of  the  suture.


CRO-MAGNON  SKULLS  AND  BONES.  101

It  is  evident  that  the  sutural  obliteration  has  proceeded  from  front  to  back;  having  begun  with  the
coronal,  it  next  affected  the  sagittal,  and  had  not  time  to  influence  the  lambdoid.  Comparing  this  condition
with  that  of  the  two  former  skulls  (in  which  also  we  saw  the  anterior  sutures  more  obliterated  than  the
posterior),  we  recognize  among  the  Cro-Magnon  people,  as  among  the  lower  races  of  the  present  day,  the
ordinary  obliteration  of  the  sutures  from  before  backwards.

I  believe  we  may  associate  with  this  skull  "  No.  3  "  a  detached  fragment,  consisting  of  the  alveolar  arcade
and  the  palatine  process  of  the  left  upper  maxillary  bone.  Three  teeth  are  still  implanted  in  it — namely,
the  second  premolar,  and  the  first  and  second  molars.  All  have  been  much  used,  particularly  the  first
molar.  As  in  the  other  cases,  these  teeth  are  worn  from  below  upwards  and  from  without  inwards.

The  group  of  bones  of  the  trunk  and  limbs,  which  we  believe  to  belong  to  the  skeleton  "  No.  3,"  are  not
so  well  characterized  as  are  the  other  two  groups,  the  colour  and  density  of  the  bones  being  less  uniform.
It  is  possible  that  some  may  belong  to  a  fourth,  and  even  to  a  fifth  skeleton ;  the  fragment  of  jaw,  however,
seems  to  me  to  belong  to  "  No.  3."

In  accordance  with  the  foregoing  explanations,  we  shall  designate  "  No.  1"  as  "  The  Old  Man,"  "  No.  2  "
as  "  The  Woman,"  and  "  No.  3  "  as  "  The  Adult  Man."

§  III.  KEMAEKS  ON  THE  THBEE  INDIVIDUALS  ABOVE  DESCEIBED.
§  1.  General  Remarks.

These  three  individuals,  though  necessarily  presenting  notable  differences  among  themselves,  possess
very  many  features  of  resemblance,  which  clearly  establish  their  affinity,  and  characterize  them  as  a
particular  race,  different  from  all  others  at  present  known.  They  were  of  lofty  stature ;  their  bones  are
robust ;  their  tibias  are  flattened  transversely ;  their  femurs  present  immediately  below  the  region  of  the
trochanters  a  somewhat  irregular  curve ;  their  cubiti  have  a  relatively  shallow  sigmoid  hollow,  and  present
at  the  top  below  the  coronoid  process  a  manifest  concavity  facing  forward.  Their  pelvis  is  very  broad.
Lastly,  the  skull  is  very  large,  and  markedly  dolichocephalic.  This  dolichocephalism  is  not  due  to  narrow-
ness of  the  cranium  (the  breadth  of  which,  on  the  contrary,  is  considerable),  but  to  its  great  length.
The  orbital  arches  of  the  men  are  very  much  developed ;  the  root  of  the  nose  is  very  much  depressed ;  the
forehead  is  broad,  vertical,  and  convex,  particularly  on  its  median  line ;  the  temporal  regions  are  not
prominent ;  the  greatest  breadth  of  the  skull  corresponds  with  a  line  near  the  level  of  the  parietal
prominences,  much  above  the  level  of  the  auricular  regions ;  and  the  profile  of  the  skull  gives  the  form  of  an
elongated  ellipse,  of  which  the  anterior  or  frontal  extremity  is  well  developed,  whilst  its  posterior  or
occipital  end  is  still  more  broadly  convex.

These  characters  are  common  to  all  the  three  individuals.  As  "  No.  3  "  wants  the  bones  of  the  face  we
cannot  carry  the  parallel  further,  the  more  so  as  "  Nos.  1 "  and  "  2  "  are  of  different  sexes,  and  the  face,  as
far  as  we  know,  always  presents  marked  sexual  differences.  We  may  say  at  all  events  that  in  these  two
subjects  the  face  is  orthognathic  from  the  root  of  the  nose  to  the  spina  nasi — that  below  this  spine  there  is
an  alveolar  prognathism,  much  more  strongly  pronounced  in  the  man  than  in  the  woman — that  the  orbits  are
very  wide  and  very  little  developed  in  height — and,  lastly,  that  the  face  altogether  is  very  broad  in  relation
to  its  height.

§2.  TheStature;  theLimbs;  the  Trunk  generally  studied  ;  and  the  Hypothesis  of  Rachitical  Condition  discussed.

§  a.  The  Stature.— The  stature  was  incontestably  much  greater  than  ours ;  and  this  is  seen  by  a  glance  at

the  tibias  and  femurs.    It  is  impossible  to  determine  correctly  the  stature  of  any  imperfect  and  disarticulated


102  EELIQULE  AQTJITANIOE.

skeleton ;  it  is  not  even  safe  to  apply  to  this  determination  the  relationship  between  the  length  of  the
femur  and  the  height  of  the  body  that  medical  jurisprudence  has  adopted;  for  these  relations  have  been
determined  for  men  of  our  own  race,  and  we  know  that  the  proportions  of  the  body  notably  vary  among
existing  races;  and  there  is  more  reason  why  they  may  have  varied  among  races  who  died  out  in  the
course  of  ages.  On  the  other  hand,  the  femurs  from  Cro-Magnon  are  imperfect,  having  lost  their  two
extremities ;  but  the  shafts  are  so  well  developed  in  length  and  in  breadth  that  they  indicate  a  high  stature
and  powerful  frame.  For  example,  the  shaft  of  one  of  the  Old  Man's  femora  measures  394  millims. ;  and
accurately  matching  the  two  ends  of  this  shaft  with  those  of  the  shaft  of  a  complete  femur,  altogether
453  millims.  long,  I  find  that  the  part  of  the  latter  femur  corresponding  to  the  fragment  from  the  Cave
would  be  only  354  millims.  instead  of  394  millims.  long;  the  Cro-Magnon  femur  therefore  was  at  least
4  centims.  longer  than  the  one  with  which  I  compared  it ;  that  is  to  say,  it  was  at  least  493  millims.  (19-410
inches)  in  total  length.  This  minimum  is  got  by  supposing  that  the  epiphysial  ends  were  exactly  of  the  same
length  on  each  of  the  two  femurs  under  comparison — which  indeed  is  in  nowise  probable,  for  it  is  certain  that
the  extremities  of  the  longer  shaft  were  the  more  developed.  If  we  suppose  that  the  proportional  length  of
the  shaft  to  that  of  the  whole  femur  was  the  same  in  the  two  cases,  we  shall  have  a  total  length  of
504  millims.  (19-843  inches)  for  the  femur  from  Cro-Magnon.  Doubtless  the  493  millims.  is  much  less  than
the  reality.  Now  the  Tables  of  relative  size  as  prepared  by  Jurisprudents  show  that  a  femur  of  49  centims.
corresponds  to  at  least  a  stature  of  1-80  metre.  "We  may  conclude,  then,  for  certain  that  the  Old  Man  of  Cro-
Magnon  (allowance  being  made  for  the  unknown  diminution  due  to  the  effect  of  old  age  on  the  vertebral
column)  was  more  than  1-80  metre  (5  feet  11  inches)  in  height.  This  stature  is  exceptional  at  present  among
the  European  Races,  and  for  the  most  part  in  other  races ;  but  it  was  not  so  among  these  old  folk  of  Cro-Magnon,
for  the  stature  of  the  Man  "  No.  3,"  and  even  that  of  the  Woman  "  No.  2,"  was  little  less.  This  race,  then,
was  very  tall ;  and  this  feature  is  still  more  worthy  of  attention  since  the  long  bones  found  in  the  Caves  of
Belgium  indicate,  for  the  Quaternary  Men  of  that  region,  a  stature  below  what  is  common  now.

§  b.  The  Femurs.— The  thigh-bones  of  our  Old  Man,  remarkable  as  they  are  for  their  length,  are  not  less
noticeable  for  their  breadth  and  thickness.  At  the  middle  portion,  at  the  narrowest  point,  the  shaft  is  32  millims.
broad  and  39  millims.  thick.  I  have  compared  these  measurements  with  some  I  have  taken  of  the  same  region
in  thirty-three  femurs  iu  our  Museum  from  the  ossuary  of  St.-Jean-de-Luz.  None  of  these  have  attained  the
volume  of  the  thigh-bones  of  the  Old  Man  of  Cro-Magnon,  as  shown  by  the  following  Table : —

Dimensions  of  the  Shaft  of  the  Femur.


Breadth.                               Thickness,
millims.  millims.

Femurs  of  the  Old  Man    32        39

„,  .  ,  f  Maximum 31         38

Thirty-three  Femurs  from

\  Minimum    23        22

Saint-Jean-de-Luz.

I  Mean 26-51   27-79

None  of  these  modern  thigh-bones,  we  see,  equal  those  from  Cro-Magnon  in  breadth  and  thickness ;  but
the  difference  becomes  still  more  striking,  if  we  consider  them  one  by  one.  Thus,  for  the  thickness,  there
is  in  the  modern  series  a  femur  38  millims.  thick,  a  second  is  but  35  millims.,  and  a  third  is  only  32  millims
thick ;  the  others  are  below  32  millims.  There  is,  then,  but  one  of  these  modern  femurs  which  approaches
the  old  femurs  in  breadth,  and  one  in  thickness ;  and  the  two  maxima  (in  breadth  and  thickness)  are  not  in
the  same  bone  (the  femur  38  millims.  thick  is  only  29  millims.  broad ;  and  the  femur  31  millims.  broad  is
only  35  millims.  thick) ;  so  that  if,  to  get  an  idea  of  the  volume  of  the  shafts  we  multiply  the  breadth  by


CRO-MAGNON  SKULLS  AND  BONES.  103

the  thickness,  we  find,  for  the  two  largest  of  these  modern  femurs,  the  products  1102  and  1085 ;  whilst  for
the  old  femurs  we  have  the  product  1248,  greater  than  the  others  by  13  and  15  per  cent.

The  femurs  from  Cro-Magnon,  broader  than  all  the  human  femurs  with  which  I  have  compared  them,
approach  in  this  character  the  femurs  of  the  anthropomorphous  Apes.  The  femur  of  the  Chimpanzee  in  the
Orfila  Museum  is  34  millims.  broad ;  and  that  of  the  Gorilla  in  the  same  Museum  is  42  millims.  In  other
respects,  however,  the  femurs  from  Cro-Magnon  differ  essentially  from  those  of  the  great  Apes,  since  that  of
the  Chimpanzee  is  only  27  millims.  thick,  and  that  of  the  Gorilla  is  31  millims.  The  femurs  of  Apes,  then,
are  broader  than  thick ;  whilst  those  from  Cro-Magnon  are  much  thicker  than  broad.  The  differences  of
length  are,  of  course,  greater  still ;  for,  as  is  well  known,  the  thigh-bones  of  the  anthropomorphic  Apes  are,
absolutely  and  relatively,  much  shorter  than  those  of  Man.

The  most  striking  character  of  the  femurs  from  Cro-Magnon  is  furnished  by  the  linea  aspera,  which  is
here  unusually  broad  and  thick*.  The  lines  of  muscular  insertion  are  more  strongly  pronounced  than  I
have  ever  seen  them.  In  the  anthropomorphous  Apes  the  linea  aspera  is  always  much  less  prominent  than
in  Man ;  indeed  it  is  sometimes  wanting  in  them ;  the  conformation,  therefore,  of  the  femurs  from  Cro-
Magnon  is  quite  opposed  to  that  of  Simian  femurs.

§  c.  The  Tibias. — These  indeed  present  in  a  higher  degree  the  shape  of  a  straight  sabre,  due  to  transverse
flattening,  and  characterizing  the  tibias  of  the  great  Apes.  This  recognized  feature,  which  we  observed
for  the  first  time,  in  May  1864,  in  the  tibias  from  the  Dolmen  of  Chamant  (Oise)  and  afterwards  in
those  from  the  Dolmen  of  Maintenon  (Eure-et-Loire),  occurs  also  in  many  tibias  of  the  Polished-Stone
Period  both  in  France  and  elsewhere.  Recently  M.  E.  Bertrand,  student  of  Chaptal  College,  has  been
fortunate  enough  to  find  in  the  -Quaternary  Drift  at  Clichy  the  remains  of  a  Man,  whose  skull  resembles
in  some  respects  those  from  Cro-Magnon,  and  whose  tibia  is  remarkable  for  its  flatness  or  sharp-shin
form.  So  also  Mr.  Busk,  by  his  researches  at  Gibraltar  in  1863,  has  shown  that  the  old  tibias  found  in
the  caves  there  were  all  platycnemicf-  This  form,  then,  so  different  from  that  of  the  leg-bones  of
existing  Men,  ought  to  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  most  of  the  prehistoric  races  of  Men;  I  do  not
say  of  all,  since  M.  Dupont  has  proved  that  in  several  of  the  Belgian  Caves  the  human  tibias  of  the
Reindeer  Period  are  prismatic  and  triangular  like  ours.  This  is  a  proof  of  the  diversity  of  the  so-called
Autochthonic  races  of  Europe,  already  referred  to  (page  98).

Among  the  many  tibias,  however,  in  which  we  have  as  yet  studied  the  platycnemic  condition!,  there  are
none  which  have  exhibited  it  to  the  same  degree  as  the  tibias  from  Cro-Magnon — none  presenting  so
striking  a  contrast  of  the  antero-posterior  and  transverse  diameters,  suggesting  a  resemblance  to  the  Simian
form  at  first  sight.  The  great  size  also  of  these  tibias  drew  attention  to  the  strangeness  of  their  shape ;  for
when  seen  in  profile  they  show  a  much  greater  fore-and-aft  thickness  than  the  largest  modern  tibias,  but
seen  in  front  they  do  not  appear  broader  than  ordinary  tibias.  Thus  in  the  Old  Man's  tibia,  of  which  we
have  the  shaft  only,  we  find  the  antero-posterior  diameter  to  be  54  millims.  at  the  upper  part  of  the

*  The  same  "  carinate  "  form  is  seen  in  three  femurs  obtained  by  Mr.  Busk  from  the  Caves  of  Gibraltar.
These  bones  were  exhibited  to  the  Congress  of  Prehistoric  Archaeology  at  Norwich  (in  August  1868)
together  with  casts  of  those  from  Cro-Magnon ;  and  their  very  great  similarity  was  evident  to  all.

t  We  saw  them  at  the  Congress  of  Prehistoric  Archaeology  at  Norwich  in  August  1868,  where  these
specimens  were  carefully  compared.

+  I  have  met  with  this  transverse  flatness  in  the  tibias  of  many  Negroes,  but  less  pronounced  than  in
prehistoric  tibias.  This  character  is  strongly  marked  in  the  great  Negro  skeleton  of  the  Orfila  Museum ;
other  Negro  tibias,  however,  are  triangular.

Q


104


KELIQULE  AQUITANKLE.


fragment,  45  millims.  at  the  middle,  and  31  below:  the  three  corresponding  transverse  diameters  are,
respectively,  37,  27,  and  27  millims.  The  length  of  the  fragment,  comprising  nearly  all  of  the  shaft,  is
323  millims. ;  and  adding  the  probable  length  of  the  ends  wanting  here,  but  present  on  another  and  smaller
tibia,  I  make  the  total  length  of  the  tibia  under  notice  to  have  been  41  centims.  (16-142  inches)  at  least.
These  measurements  abundantly  show  that  the  bone  is  much  thicker  (in  a  fore-and-aft  direction)  with
respect  to  its  length,  and  much  narrower  with  respect  to  its  thickness,  than  are  the  tibias  of  existing  men.

§  d.  Platycnemic  Bones. — We  may  here  offer  some  remarks  on  the  nature  of  the  structural  differences
between  the  flattened  or  compressed  tibias,  described  above,  and  modern  tibias.  The  latter  have  a  triangular
and  prismatic  shaft,  thus  presenting  three  faces  and  three  edges.  The  anterior  edge,  or  "  crest  of  the  tibia,"
is  just  covered  by  the  skin ;  the  other  two  edges  are  behind  ;  one  of  them  facing  inward,  just  beneath  the
skin ;  the  other  facing  outward,  covered  by  flesh,  and  giving  insertion  along  its  length  to  the  interosseous
aponeurosis  extending  between  it  and  the  fibula.  The  three  faces  of  the  bones,  bordered  by  the  three  edges,

are : — the  internal  and  subcutaneous  face ;  the  external  face,  giving  insertion  in  its  upper  two-thirds  to  the

tibialis  anticus ;  and  the  posterior,  with  backward  aspect,  and  giving  insertion  to  several  muscles.    It  is  this

posterior  face  which  chiefly  interests  us  now.

The  two  limiting  edges  1 1',  E  E'  (fig.  44),  are  almost  parallel  in  the  lower  three-fifths  of  the  bone ;  but  in

the  upper  two-fifths  they  gradually  separate  from  below  upwards,  terminating  respectively  on  the  margins  of

the  two  condyles  of  the  tibia.     This  widened  portion,  forming  the  upper

two-fifths  of  the  posterior  face,  is  obliquely  traversed,  from  above  down-
wards, and  from  the  outside  inwards,  by  a  rough  line  (pp'  p"),  termed  the

"  popliteal  line,"  commencing  above  the  fibular  articulation,  and  descending

thence  very  obliquely  until  it  touches  the  inner  edge  of  the  tibia.     From

the  middle,  almost,  of  this  line  another  (jj'),  which  we  call  the  "  tibial

line,"  goes  off  very  obliquely ;  but  it  is  much  less  prominent,  sometimes

indeed  scarcely  marked.     It  descends  along  the  posterior  face,  gradually

approaching  the  outer  edge,  in  which  it  ends  at  about  the  middle  of  the

length  of  the  bone.      These  two  lines  divide  tho  upper  portion  of  the

posterior  face  of  the  tibia  into  three  surfaces,  which  give  insertion  to

three  muscles.     The  popliteal  muscle  occupies  the  great  triangular  space

between  the  "  popliteal  line  "  and  the  inner  edge  (pp1 '  p",  I);  the  space

between  the  "  tibial  line,"  the  "  popliteal  line,"  and  the  outer  edge  (pp',

jj',  E  E')  is  occupied  by  the  tibialis  postims ;  and  lastly  there  is  the  space

in  the  sharp  angle  which,  intercepted  by  the  "  popliteal "  and  the  "  tibial

line  "  (p" p',  jj1),  is  occupied  by  the  flexor  longus  digitorwn  pedis.     These

three  muscles  are  inserted  equally  by  their  respective  margins  on  the

"  popliteal  line,"  which  moreover  gives  throughout  its  length  insertion  to  the  soleiis  muscle.     The  "  tibial

line"  gives  insertion  only  to  the  intermuscular  aponeurosis  separating  the  tibialis posticus  from  \heflexor

longus.     Lastly,  towards  the  point  of  union  of  these  two  lines,  at  the  edge  of  the  tibialis  posticus,  and  at

about  the  middle  of  the  bone's  width,  there  is  a  nutritive  foramen  (N),  well  known  as  the  largest  of  the

kind  in  the  skeleton.

These   descriptive   details   are  necessary  to  show  clearly  the  conformation  of  the  platycnemic  tibias.

Their   characteristic  compression  occurs  in  only  the  upper  two-fifths  of  the   shaft,  which  is  triangular

in  its  lower  moiety.      The  two   diagrammatic   sections   here   given  (fig.  45,   i,   2),   transverse   to   the

bone  at  the  nutritive  foramen  (N,  fig.  44),  enable  us  to  compare   the  triangular  with  the  flat  tibias.


CEO-MAGNON  SKULLS  AND  BONES.


105


Fig.  45.

Diagrams  showing  the  Trans-
verse Section  of  an  Ordinary
(No.  i)  and  of  a  Platycnemic
(No.  2)  Tibia.

A


Fig.  45,  No.  i,  represents  the  section  of  a  triangular  tibia.    The  three  angles,  A  El,  correspond  to  the

three  edges,  anterior,  external,  and  internal.     The  side  A  E  corresponds  to  the  outer  face,  on  which  the

tibialis  anticus  has  its  insertion ;  A I  is  the  inner  face,  subcutaneous ;  E  I,

lastly,  is  the  posterior  face,  in  which  the  situation  of  the  nutritive  foramen

is  indicated  by  N ;  the  inner  portion  of  this  face  (I  N)  corresponds  to  the

surface  of  insertion  of  the popliteus,  and  its  outer  part  (N  E)  to  the  surface

for  the  tibialis  posticus.

In  fig.  45,  No.  z,  representing  the  section  of  a  flat  tibia,  with  the  same
letters  indicating  similar  parts,  we  see  that  the  posterior  face  has  an
entirely  different  shape ;  for  its  outer  portion  (E  N)  forms  part  of  the
outer  face,  and  its  inner  portion  (N  I)  forms  part  of  the  inner  face,  so
that  the  only  part  of  this  posterior  face  which  has  really  a  backward
aspect  forms  merely  a  thick  edge,  in  which  the  nutritive  foramen  opens
at  N.  Such  a  flattened  shaft  has  therefore  only  two  faces  and  two
edges:  1st,  an  anterior  edge,  A,  or  "crest  of  the  tibia,"  like  that  of  the
triangular  tibias,  but  rather  more  trenchant;  2nd,  a  posterior  edge,  N,
which  is  formed  above  by  the  upper  part  of  the  "  popliteal  line  "  (fig.  44,
pp'),  and  lower  down  by  the  "  tibial  line"  (fig.  44, _;'/);  3rd,  an  inner  face,  formed  in  front  by  the  inner
face  of  the  ordinary  tibias,  behind  by  the  surface  for  the  popliteus ;  4th,  an
outer  face,  formed  in  front  by  the  outer  face  of  the  ordinary  tibias,  and
behind  by  the  surface  for  the  tibialis  posticus.  Having  thus  illustrated
the  anatomical  correspondence  of  parts  in  the  tibias  of  the  two  types  in
question,  we  can  more  easily  describe  the  conformation  of  the  flattened
tibias.

Their  outer  face  (fig.  46)  has  in  its  lower  portion  the  breadth  of  ordi-
nary tibias ;  but  in  its  upper  moiety  it  widens  considerably ;  and  through
this  widened  portion  a  vertical  salient  line  (B  C)  passes  from  above  down-
wards, exactly  parallel  to  the  crest  of  the  tibia  (A  A),  and  lower  down,
about  where  the  shaft  begins  to  be  triangular,  it  is  continuous  with  the
outer  edge  (C  D),  which  gives  insertion,  as  before  said,  to  the  interosseous
aponeurosis ;  and  this  also  is  partly  attached  to  the  line  above  described,
whence  it  results  that  the  portion  of  the  bone  in  front  of  the  "  interosseous  "
line  gives  insertion  to  the  tibialis  anticus  and  corresponds  to  the  outer  face
of  the  triangular  tibias ;  whilst  the  portion  behind  it  (C  Bpp'jj')  gives
insertion  to  the  tibialis  posticus,  and  consequently  corresponds  to  the  outer
part  of  the  posterior  face  of  the  triangular  tibias.

Likewise  in  examining  the  inner  face  of  the  sharp-shin  tibias  we  find
that  throughout  the  compressed  portion  this  inner  face  is  widened.  In
the  lower  portion,  where  the  shaft  is  triangular,  we  distinctly  recognize
the  inner  edge,  which  is  not  less  evident  than  in  ordinary  tibias ;  but,  in
following  this  edge  from  below  upwards,  we  see  on  coming  to  the  level  of
the  flattened  portion  that  it  disappears  entirely ;  in  continuance  with  it
some  slight  rugosities  just  indicate  a  longitudinal  line,  which  traverses  the
inner  face  of  the  flattened  and  widened  portion,  just  as  the  "  interosseous  "

Q2


CO


.S


I


PH
ca


.-3

QC

I
£


o

C


A


106  EELIQUIJE  AQUITANICLE.

line  passes  along  the  opposite  face.  The  above-mentioned  line  divides  the  internal  face  into  two  equal
parts(_the  one  (anterior)  representing  the  inner  face  of  the  triangular  tibias;  the  other  (posterior)
extending  as  far  as  the  nutritive  foramen,  and  consequently  representing  the  inner  moiety  of  the  posterior
face,  the  outer  moiety  of  which,  as  seen  above,  is  turned  on  to  the  outer  face  of  the  bone.  In  other  words,
whilst  the  surface  of  insertion  of  the  tibialis  posticus  is  carried  on  to  the  outer  face,  the  surfaces  for  the
popliteus  and  the  long  flexor  of  the  toes  are  added  to  the  inner  face.  An  oblique  line,  marked  by  rugosities,
along  which  the  soleus  is  inserted,  and  corresponding  to  the  linep>"  in  fig.  1,  indicates  the  separation  of
the  surface  for  the  popliteus  from  that  for  the  flexor  longus.

The  posterior  edge  (the  only  portion  of  the  posterior  face  which  is  really  directed  backwards)  occurs  on
only  the  upper  part  of  the  shaft.  High  up  above  the  level  of  the  nutritive  foramen  it  is  thick  and  rounded ;
lower  down  it  ends  by  sinking  gradually  into  a  prominent  line,  or  true  bony  orest,  which  becomes  more  and
more  pronounced  as  it  passes  downwards  until,  towards  the  middle  of  the  bone,  gradually  dying  out,  it
rejoins  the  external  edge  of  the  now  triangular  shaft.  This  crest  is  nothing  but  the  "  tibial  line  "  (fig.  44,  jj').
Hence  the  posterior  edge  of  the  compressed  portion  is  composed,  above  the  nutritive  foramen,  of  the  upper
part  of  the  "  popliteal  line  "  (figs.  44  and  46,  pp"),  and  of  the  "  tibial  line  "  below  that  level.

The  foregoing  description  applies  especially  to  the  tibias  from  Cro-Magnon ;  but  it  is  applicable  also  to
all  the  other  platycnemic  tibias — both  to  that  of  the  fossil  Man  found  by  M.  Bertrand  (see  above,  page  103),
and  those  from  the  dolmens.  It  will  serve  also,  with  some  slight  differences  of  secondary  importance,  for
the  tibias  of  the  anthropomorphic  Apes.  These  differences  concern  the  relative  degree  of  prominence  of
the  "  popliteal "  and  "  tibial "  lines ;  and  there  would  be  nothing  extraordinary  in  supposing  them  to  have
reference  to  the  smaller  development  of  muscles  in  the  calf  of  the  Ape ;  but  the  form  of  the  tibia,  and  the
arrangement  of  the  lines  and  of  the  muscular  surfaces,  differ  in  nothing  from  the  type  above-described  and
so  well  characterized  in  the  tibias  from  Cro-Magnon.  I  have  already  mentioned  that  certain  Negro  tibias
have  an  analogous  conformation ;  and  I  here  add  that  in  several  other  Negro  tibias  I  have  found  a
conformation  intermediate  to  that  of  the  triangular  and  of  the  compressed  tibias.  The  morphological
importance  of  this  character  cannot  be  misunderstood.

§  e.  Discussion  of  the  Supposed  Raehitic  State  of  the  Bones. — I  have  given  the  foregoing  minute
description  because  M.  Pruner-Bey  has  sustained,  in  the  discussions  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  Paris,
the  opinion  that  the  compressed  tibias  from  Cro-Magnon  had  been  affected  by  Rickets.  (See  also  above,
page  84.)  This  hypothesis  cannot  be  accepted  by  those  who  have  studied  the  influence  of  Rickets  on  the
general  growth  of  the  body  and  on  the  conformation  of  each  bone  in  particular.  I  can  here  appeal  to  the
opinion  of  one  who  for  more  than  thirty  years  has  studied  the  deformities  of  the  human  body,  and  whose
works  on  Rickets  have  authority.  M.  Jules  Gue"rin,  who  has  examined  the  bones  in  question,  when  before
the  Anthropological  Society,  has  declared  that  these  bones  exhibit  no  trace  of  disease,  no  rachitic
malformation.  I  know,  however,  that  in  matters  of  science,  authority  should  yield  to  demonstration ;  and
we  must  therefore  enter  upon  a  detailed  examination  of  facts.

The  most  characteristic  feature  of  Rickets  is  the  arrested  development  of  the  skeleton.  M.  Jules  Guerin
has  long  since  shown  that  Rickets,  in  stopping  the  growth  of  the  bones,  tends  to  maintain,  even  after  the
recovery  of  the  subjects,  and  even  after  their  full  growth,  the  morphologic  type  of  the  skeleton  of  the  infant.
Thus  adults  who  have  been  rachitic  in  infancy  are  remarkable  for  the  relative  length  of  their  arms, — the
hands  reaching  sometimes  almost  to  the  knee.  For  my  part,  I  proved  (sixteen  years  ago)  that  the  so-called
rachitic  layers  are  nothing  but  the  normal  bone-forming  tissues  arrested  in  their  evolution,  and  I  have  thus
given  a  histological  explanation  of  the  fact  discovered  by  M.  J.  Guerin.

The  skeletons  of  rickety  persons,  then,  are  arrested  in  development ;  their  stature  never  reaches  what  it


CRO-MAGNON   SKULLS  AND  BONES.  107

would  have  been  without  the  disease.  Adults  that  have  been  rachitic  are  nearly  always  short;  this
shortening  has  relation  to  the  duration  of  the  disease,  and  it  is  always  very  considerable  when  the  malady
has  lasted  long  enough  to  deform  the  bones.  If  the  tibias  from  Cro-Magnon  had  really  been  deformed  by
Rickets,  the  disease  must  have  lasted  long ;  and  we  ought  to  have  found  the  bones  of  the  "  Old  Man,"
particularly  those  of  his  lower  limbs,  decidedly  stunted  and  misgrown.  Instead  of  this,  these  bones  are
enormous,  and  indicate  a  stature  that  M.  Pruner-Bey  himself  estimates  as  having  been  not  under  six  feet.
There  is  no  example  of  a  rickety  person  having  attained  such  a  size.  This  is  the  first  fact  incompatible
with  the  hypothesis  under  consideration.

M.  Pruner-Bey  thinks  with  some  reason  that  a  rachitism  capable  of  deforming  the  bones  ought  to  leave
in  their  tissue,  after  recovery,  apparent  traces  of  its  occurrence ;  and,  in  accordance,  he  points  out  indeed  at
several  points  of  the  skeleton,  principally  on  the  posterior  extremity  of  the  metatarsal  bones,  roughnesses
more  or  less  coarse,  which  he  takes  for  traces  of  the  disease  (see  above,  page  84).  In  the  same  manner  he
interprets  the  excessive  prominence  of  some  lines  giving  insertion  to  aponeuroses  or  aponeurotic  tendons  &c.
All  these  so-called  traces  of  Rickets,  however,  far  from  dating  from  infancy,  are  due  to  old  age.  In  very
many  old  people  the  muscles  and  bones  become  atrophied ;  but  in  robust  old  men  we  habitually  see,  instead
of  this  decadence  of  the  bones,  a  manifest  tendency  to  the  ossification  of  the  ligamentous,  tendinous,  and
aponeurotic  fibres  inserted  directly  in  the  bone.  I  have  many  a  time,  when  Surgeon  to  the  Hospital  for
Old  Men  (Bicetre),  had  occasion  to  study  these  effects,  well  known  to  all  anatomists  as  senile  ossification.
Indeed  they  are  often  more  strongly  marked  than  in  the  Old  Man  from  Cro-Magnon,  and  never  bear  any
resemblance  to  the  effects  of  Rickets.

M.  Pruner-Bey,  however,  has  had  reason  to  believe  that  Rickets  leaves  a  recognizable  imprint,  in  the
bony  tissue,  even  after  complete  recovery;  for  this  takes  place  by  condensation,  as  technically  expressed;
and  the  reparative  bony  matter  being  disposed  among  the  lamellae,  and  filling  all  the  interstices  and  pores,
the  surface  of  the  bone  becomes  quite  smooth,  and  appears  less  vascular  than  in  the  normal  state.  The
bone  itself  has  become  harder,  more  massive,  almost  like  ivory ;  the  walls  are  thickened,  the  medullary
cavity  narrowed.  There  is  nothing  like  this  in  the  bones  from  Cro-Magnon:  their  weight,  internal
structure,  and  vascularity  are  altogether  of  the  ordinary  kind.  When  the  cure  of  Rickets  is  not  followed
by  the  process  of  condensation  the  bone  remains  less  dense  and  more  vascular  than  in  its  normal  state ;
often  indeed  we  find  here  and  there  porosities  comparable  to  those  of  rarifying  osteitis.  None  of  these  or  of
other  alterations  from  disease  exist  in  the  tibias  from  Cro-Magnon ;  and  therefore  they  have  never  been  rachitic.
I  venture  to  say  that  the  idea  of  regarding  the  athletic  Old  Man  of  Cro-Magpon  as  a  rickety  subject  could
not  have  occurred  to  any  one  had  it  not  been  that  a  pathological  explanation  of  the  compression  of  the
tibias  was  required  to  do  away  with  the  importance  that  comparative  anatomy  gives  to  this  peculiar  feature
in  the  tibias  of  the  Old  Man.  Rickets  often  induces  a  flattening  of  the  tibia,  giving  it  the  form  of  a  sabre-
blade,  convex  or  concave ;  but  it  is  enough  to  examine  rachitic  tibias  in  any  museum  to  be  certain  that
they  differ  very  much  both  from  the  tibias  of  Cro-Magnon  and  those  of  the  ordinary  triangular  shape.
The  difference  is  so  great,  characteristic,  and  complete,  that  it  strikes  the  eye  at  first  sight.

In  the  first  place,  the  flattening  of  rickety  tibias  always  results  from  their  curvature ;  a  tibia  remaining
straight  is  never  flattened ;  and,  from  the  nature  of  the  organic  process  causing  the  flattening,  it  is  impossible
that  it  should.  I  cannot  here  enter  into  the  details  of  this  elementary  point  in  pathological  anatomy  and
physiology ;  but  I  am  sure  that  no  competent  person  will  contradict  me  when  I  affirm  that  the  rectilineal
conformation  of  the  tibias  from  Cro-Magnon  proves  that  they  have  not  been  flattened  by  rickets.

In  the  second  place,  rachitic  deformity  of  the  tibia  is  never  limited  to  the  upper  part  of  the  bone.  It  is
in  the  middle  of  the  bone,  sometimes  even  lower  down,  that  the  alteration  is  greatest,  sometimes  reaching


108


RELIQUIAE  AQUITANICLE.


almost  to  the  instep.     The  old  tibias  in  question,  having  the  ordinary  conformation  in  their  lower  moiety,
and  presenting  a  special  type  only  in  their  upper  portion,  radically  differ  from  rickety  tibias.

In  the  third  place,  the  tibia  is  never  flattened  by  rickets  without  the  fibula  being  similarly  affected ;
indeed  the  widening  and  flattening  are  ordinarily  even  much  more  pronounced  in  the  latter  than  in  the
former.  The  fibula,  however,  accompanying  the  tibia  at  Cro-Magnon  is  not  only  free  from  curvature,  but
has  kept  its  triangular  form,  being  neither  flattened  nor  widened.  If  its  longitudinal  crests  are  more
salient  than  usual,  it  is  because  the  individual  was  very  robust  and  old ;  but  this  bone  differs  completely
from  rachitic  fibulas,  and  its  form  is  quite  incompatible  with  the  notion  of  the  adjacent  tibia  having  been
deformed  by  rickets.

Lastly  (and  this  argument  is  still  more  decisive  than  the  foregoing),  the  nature  of  the  flattening  in  these
old  tibias,  the  situation  and  relation  of  the  different  parts  of  these  bones,  the  disposition  of  the  surfaces
intended  for  the  insertion  of  the  interosseous'aponeurosis  of  the  muscles,  have  absolutely  nothing  in  common
with  the  condition  observable  in  rickety  tibias.  Ilickets  sometimes  produces  in  the  tibia  a  fore-and-aft
curvature ;  the  width  of  the  bone  is  then  lessened,  its  thickness  from  front  to  back  is  increased,  its  anterior
edge  (crest  of  the  tibia)  becomes  sharper,  and  the  bone  takes  the  form  of  a  convex  sabre-blade,  but  without
ceasing  to  be  triangular,  the  situation  and  anatomical  relations  of  its  three  faces  and  its  three  edges  not
having  been  at  all  modified.  The  two  lateral  faces  are  broader,  and  the  posterior  face  is  narrower ;  this  is
all  the  difference;  and  the  "popliteal"  and  "tibial"  lines  still  mark  on  this  posterior  face  the  altogether
normal  position  of  the  surfaces  for  the  posterior  muscles.

This  arrangement  is  shown  in  the  diagrammatic  section  No.  3,  fig.  47;   and  we  readily  see  that  it  has

Fiff.  47.

Diagrammatic  Sections  of  Healthy  and  of  Rickety  Tibias,  at  the  level  of  the  nutritive  foramen.


No.  I.  Normal  Triangular  Tibia.     No.  2.  Compressed  Tibia  from  Cro-Magnon.     No.  3.  Rickety  Tibia,

deformed  by  antero-posterior  curvature.     No.  4.  Rickety  Tibia,  flattened  by  lateral  curvature.
A,  Crest  or  front  edge  of  the  Tibia.      E,  Outer  edge,  giving  insertion  to  the  interosseous  aponeurosis.
I,   Inner  edge.      N,   Situation   of  the  nutritive  foramen.      EN,  Surface   for   the  tibialis  posticits.
I  N,  Surface  for  the  popliteus  muscle.

nothing  in  common  with  that  of  the  old  tibias  under  notice,  since  the  triangular  form  of  the  shaft  is
preserved,  the  bone  not  being  flattened  in  other  respects.

Tibias  really  flattened  by  rickets  are  always  laterally  curved.  The  convexity  of  the  curve  is  always  then
turned  inward,  and  occurs  on  the  inner  edge  of  the  bone,  the  outer  edge  being  concave.  The  latter  edge  being
thinner  than  the  former,  the  shaft  is  sabre-like,  but  it  does  not,  like  that  just  mentioned,  resemble  a  convex
blade— nor  a  straight  blade*,  as  do  those  from  Cro-Magnon — but  a  blade  with  a  coiwave  edge,  like  that  of  a

*  Somewhat  like  that  of  a  Dyak  sword,  called  "  Parang."— T.  R.  J.


CEO-MAGNON  SKULLS  AND  BONES.  109

yataghan.  Such  a  tibia,  moreover,  is  flattened  on  front  and  back,  not  on  the  sides.  Of  its  two  faces  (No.  4,
fig.  47),  one  is  posterior  (E  N  I),  and  is  the  normal  posterior  face,  widened  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  flat-
tening, but  not  otherwise  modified.  The  other  face  is  anterior  (E  A  I),  formed  by  the  union  of  the  outer  (E  A)
and  the  inner  face  (A  I).  There  is  now  no  anterior  edge ;  the  crest  of  the  tibia  (A)  is  hut  a  slight  prominence ;
and  this  is  sometimes  so  feeble  that  it  is  with  difficulty  traced  upwards  to  the  anterior  tuberosity,  or  tubercle
for  the  insertion  of  the  ligament  of  the  patella.  By  comparing  the  dotted  lines  E'  A',  I'  A',  which  represent
the  two  anterior  faces  of  the  normal  tibia,  with  the  line  E  A  I,  the  reader  will  readily  see  how  the  crest  of
the  tibia  is  now  represented  merely  by  a  very  obtuse  angle,  but  still  opposite  to  the  nutritive  foramen.

It  is  clear  that  of  all  the  forms  represented  in  the  four  diagrams  (fig.  47)  this  is  the  only  one  offering  at
first  sight  a  certain  resemblance  to  that  of  the  tibias  from  Cro-Magnon  ;  but  really  it  differs  from  them  the
most.  The  sharp  edge  of  the  sabre,  which  in  the  latter  corresponds  with  the  crest  of  the  tibia,  answers
here  to  the  outer  edge — that  is,  to  the  insertion  of  the  interosseous  aponeurosis.  The  thick  edge  of  the  blade
in  the  old  tibias  falls  on  the  nutritive  foramen  and  is  directly  behind ;  whereas  that  of  the  tibia  rachitically
flattened  falls  on  the  inner  edge  and  is  turned  inwards.  The  reader  may  complete  the  parallel  by
comparing  the  details  of  No.  z,  fig.  47,  with  those  of  No.  4,  fig.  47,  which  show  that  the  conformation  of  the
Cro-Magnon  tibias  is  at  all  points  the  contrary  of  rachitic  malformations.

M.  Pruner-Bey  has  met  this  view  of  the  subject  with  the  statement  that  these  are  the  results  of
constitutional  rickets,  whilst  the  Old  Man  of  Cro-Magnon  had  rickets  only  in  infancy.  I  must  reply  that
rickets  is  always  constitutional  and  always  a  disease  of  infancy.  How  could  a  malady,  consisting  of  an
abnormal  development  of  the  skeleton  and  having  its  principal  lesions  near  the  subepiphysial  cartilages,
attack  adult  subjects?  Adults,  it  is  true,  have  a  disease  known  as  softening  of  the  bone,  very  rare  and
very  severe,  which  is  neither  more  nor  less  constitutional  than  rickets,  and  which  can  also,  misshape  the
bones ;  but  the  deformation  in  this  case  is  quite  otherwise  than  that  by  rickets,  and  in  other  respects  it
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  matter.  The  distinction  established  by  M.  Pruner-Bey  between  constitutional
and  infantile  rickets  is,  then,  quite  imaginary.  He  seeks  otherwise  himself  to  prove  that  we  have  here  a
constitutional  rickets,  since  he  believes  he  finds  traces  of  this  disease  in  other  bones,  such  as  the  femur,  the
ulna,  and  the  ribs.  The  slight  arching,  however,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh-bone  is  much  higher  up  than
the  curvatures  produced  by  rickets ;  the  somewhat  bowed  shape  of  the  upper  part  of  the  ulna  is  never  seen
in  rickety  ulnas,  where  the  curvature,  very  rare  itself,  is  at  the  middle  of  the  bone ;  and,  lastly,  as  to  the
ribs,  they  are  very  thick  compared  with  their  breadth,  whilst  rickety  ribs  are  wide  and  thin.  M.  Pruner-
Bey,  then,  is  here  in  formal  contradiction  to  the  common  ideas  of  pathological  anatomy.

Lastly,  if  the  compression  of  the  upper  end  of  the  tibias  has  been  observed  as  yet  only  at  Cro-Magnon,
we  might  ask  if  this  peculiar  condition  of  the  bone  was  not  due  to  some  old  unknown  disease,  and,
putting  aside  all  that  is  known  in  pathology,  call  it  a  special  rachitism  which  flattened  without
bending  the  tibias,  which  deformed  their  upper  half  only,  without  affecting  the  fibulas,  which  left  neither
rarefaction  nor  eburnation  of  the  bone  in  recovery,  which  thickened  the  ribs,  bent  the  ulnas  and  femurs
where  they  could  most  resist  the  curvature,  and  not  where  they  were  weakest,  and  which,  lastly,  permitted
the  skeleton  to  take  on  a  gigantic  growth.  This  interpretation  would  be  simply  a  pathological  mistake,
logical  at  least.  The  tibias,  however,  from  the  Caves  of  Gibraltar,  that  of  the  Quaternary  Man  of  Clichy,
the  tibias  from  the  dolmens  of  Chamant,  of  Maintenon,  and  of  many  other  dolmens  examined  in  France
and  elsewhere,  present  exactly  this  same  conformation,  which  has  its  maximum  in  the  Anthropomorphic
Apes,  and  of  which  also  we  find  traces  in  several  skeletons  of  N'egroes.  Is  it  required,  then,  of  us,  because
the  tibias  from  Cro-Magnon,  older  than  the  others,  are  also  more  like  those  of  the  great  Apes,  to  give
over  to  rachitism  the  majority  of  prehistoric  men  ?  Do  we  not  see  that  a  strictly  presentable  hypothesis,


HO  EELIQUI^E  AQUITANIOfl:.

if  it  be  applicable  only  to  a  reputed  exceptional  individual,  loses  its  probability  in  proportion  as  it
is  necessary  to  apply  it  to  a  greater  number  of  facts,  and  becomes  quite  impossible  when  the  character
which  it  pretends  to  explain  becomes  frequent,  habitual,  and  nearly  general?  We  may  dismiss,  then,  this
hypothesis,  the  result  of  doctrinal  prepossessions.  Nor  does  it  concern  us  that  the  flattened  form  of  the
Cro-Magnon  tibias  and  of  a  great  number  of  prehistoric  tibias  furnishes  arguments  to  the  developmentalists,
or  that  their  adversaries  find  arguments  to  the  contrary  in  the  large  volume  and  fine  frontal  conformation
of  the  Cro-Magnon  skulls.  We  have  to  study  facts,  and  to  observe  before  we  interpret.  For  my  part,  I
consider  the  compression  of  the  upper  part  of  the  tibia  to  be  an  anthropological  character  connected
very  probably,  like  most  if  not  all  morphological  details,  with  functional  conditions.  I  see  reason  to  believe,
but  am  far  from  affirming,  that  this  conformation  is  in  relation  with  the  strength  of  the  muscles  of  the  leg,
especially  those  of  the  hinder  region,  and  that  the  triangular  form  of  the  upper  part  of  the  tibias  is
particularly  observable  in  the  peoples  which  have  the  calf  well  developed.

§  f.  The  Fibula. — A  nearly  perfect  fibula,  apparently  belonging  to  the  skeleton  "  No.  1 "  (page  99),  is
remarkable  for  the  great  depth  of  the  longitudinal  gutters  for  the  insertion  of  the  muscles,  and  for  the  great
prominence  of  the  ridge  for  the  insertion  of  the  interosseous  ligament.  This  conformation  is  unaccom-
panied by  any  curvature  or  morbid  twist  of  the  bone ;  it  is  in  relation,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the  great  power
of  the  muscles,  and,  on  the  other,  to  tho  advanced  age  of  the  individual ;  for  we  know  that  in  robust  old
men  the  interosseous  ridge  of  the  fibula  always  becomes  very  prominent.

§  g.  The  Humerus  and  Ulna. — There  is  nothing  special  in  the  three  humeri  and  fragments  of  humeri :
their  fossce  are  not  perforated ;  their  dimensions  are  in  accordance  with  those  of  the  rest  of  the  skeleton ;
and  they  have  quite  the  ordinary  form.

So  also  of  the  bones  of  the  forearm, — except  that  we  may  notice  in  the  upper  extremity  of  three  of  the
five  ulnas  the  slight  depth  of  the  sigmoid  cavity,  which  contrasts  with  the  great  size  of  the  olecranon  and  of
the  coronoid  process,  and  that  immediately  below  this  cavity  is  an  evident  antero-posterior  curvature,  with
the  concavity  directly  forward,  and  below  which  the  shaft  of  the  bone  is  perfectly  straight.  This  curvature
is  analogous  to  that  in  the  same  bone  of  certain  Anthropomorphous  Apes ;  it  is  altogether  different  from
rachitic  curvatures,  which  take  place  much  lower  down,  in  the  middle  of  the  bone,  where  it  offers  less
resistance,  and  which  moreover  occur  very  rarely  and  in  cases  where  nearly  all  the  other  bones  have  been
distorted  by  far  advanced  rickets.

§  h.  The  Vertebrae  and  Pelvis. — The  different  parts  of  the  vertebral  column  that  have  been  found  at
Cro-Magnon  offer  nothing  particular  except  their  considerable  size,  especially  the  lumbar  vertebra?  of
"No.  3 "(page  101).

So  also  of  the  different  pieces  of  the  pelvis.  No  entire  pelvis  was  preserved ;  but  the  fragments  of  a
sacrum  and  iliac  bones  indicate  one  of  great  size.  A  male  sacrum,  apparently  belonging  to  "  No.  3,"  presents
in  its  upper  part  a  breadth  of  116  millimetres — a  considerable  measurement,  and  much  greater  than  the
average  in  either  sex.  In  fifty  pelves,  of  all  races,  which  I  have  measured  in  the  Museum  of  Natural
History,  Jardin  des  Plantes,  there  are  only  four  in  which  the  breadth  exceeds  110  millimetres.  These  are  of
a  Frenchman  from  the  Pas-de-Calais  (114  millims.),  a  Turk  from  Algiers  (113  millims.),  a  Turk  from  Smyrna
(123  millims.),  and  a  Frenchwoman  (123  millims.).  The  sacrum  from  Cro-Magnon  is  then  very  broad.  It  is
slightly  curved.  I  could  not  determine  its  height,  which  is  considerable ;  for  its  lower  extremity  is  wanting.

§  3.  Study  of  the  Skulls.

§  a.  TJie  Cranial  Region. — I  have  already  said  that  the  Skulls  are  very  large.  That  of  the  Old  Man  only
is  sufficiently  perfect  to  allow  of  cubic  measurement.  Gauging  it  with  shot  I  found  its  capacity  to  be


CKO-MAGNON  SKULLS  AND  BONES.  Ill

1590  cubic  centimetres  (97-038  cubic  inches);  and  as  the  fear  of  breaking  what  remains  of  the  orbital  plates
hindered  my  pressing  the  shot  with  force,  I  regard  this  measure  as  a  minimum.  The  two  other  skulls  could  not
be  gauged ;  but  I  think  I  cannot  be  far  wrong  in  saying  that  that  of  the  Woman  exceeded  1550  cub.  centims.
(94-596  cub.  inches),  and  that  of  the  Adult  "  No.  3  "  was  but  little  less.  We  ought,  doubtless,  to  take  account
of  the  great  stature  of  the  three  individuals :  we  know  that  (other  things  being  equal)  the  brain  enlarges  with
the  stature,  but  not  in  proportion  to  the  stature  ;  for  the  tallest  persons  have  ordinarily  a  smaller  brain,  rela-
tively to  the  mass  of  the  body,  than  shorter  people.  Further,  these  rules  are  true  only  for  a  somewhat  extensive
series,  for  they  allow  of  very  numerous  individual  exceptions.  The  series  from  Cro-Magnon  is  too  limited
to  allow  of  definite  conclusions ;  but  if  we  consider  that  its  three  individuals  had  a  cranial  capacity  much
superior  to  the  average  at  the  present  day,  that  one  of  them  was  a  female  and  that  female  crania  are  gene-
rally below  the  average  of  male  crania  in  size,  and  that  nevertheless  the  cranial  capacity  of  the  Cro-Magnon
Woman  surpasses  the  average  capacity  of  male  skulls  of  to-day,  we  are  led  to  regard  the  great  size  of  the
brain  as  one  of  the  more  remarkable  characters  of  the  Cro-Magnon  race.  This  cerebral  volume  seems  to  me
even  to  exceed  that  with  which  at  the  present  day  a  stature  equal  to  that  of  our  Cave-folks  would  be
associated ;  whilst  the  skulls  from  the  Belgium  caves  are  small,  not  only  absolutely,  but  even  relatively  to
the  rather  small  stature  of  the  inhabitants  of  those  caves.  This  is  additional  confirmation  of  what  is
mentioned  above  (page  98)  respecting  the  difference  of  these  two  palseontological  races.

The  great  size  of  the  brain  permits  us  to  speak  well  of  the  intelligence  of  the  Cro-Magnon  people ;  but
the  form  of  the  brain  is  not  less  worthy  of  attention  than  its  volume,  for  the  study  of  races,  as  that  of
individuals,  authorizes  us  to  attach  particular  importance  to  the  development  of  the  frontal  region.  Now,
the  coronal  presents,  in  the  profile  of  our  three  skulls,  a  fine  elliptical  curve,  indicative  of  an  elevated
forehead  and  of  a  spacious  frontal  cavity.  The  length  of  this  curve  cannot  be  exactly  measured  in  "  No.  1,"
because  the  bregma  is  effaced;  I  may  be  wrong  to  the  amount  of  some  millimetres  in  estimating  it  at
145  minims,  from  behind  the  point  where  I  think  I  find  a  trace  of  the  bregma.  In  "  No.  2  "  it  is  positively
135  millims.,  and  in  "  No.  3  "  148  milli'ms.,  measurements  nearly  2  centimetres  above  the  present  average.
The  frontal  region  is  equally  well  developed  in  a  transverse  direction.  Its  minimum  diameter  in  the
Old  Man  is  103,  in  the  Woman  97,  and  in  the  Adult  Man  97  millims.;  and  this  amplitude  is  the  more
remarkable  as  it  occurs  in  dolichocephalic  skulls.

These  skulls  from  Cro-Magnon  are  indeed  highly  dolichocephalic,  and  help  to  confirm  an  opinion  that  I
have  held  for  many  years  against  the  School  of  Eetzius,  represented  at  Paris  by  M.  Pruner-Bey.  The  existence
of  a  palffiontological  dolichocephalic  race  cannot  henceforth  be  denied.  The  dolichocephalism  of  the  Cro-
Magnon  skulls  is  not  such  as  depends  on  a  short  transverse  diameter ;  for,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  considerable
in  these,  especially  in  "  No.  1"  and  "  No.  3,"  where  it  much  exceeds  the  average  transverse  diameter  of  the
most  brachycephalic  series.  It  is  the  great  length  of  the  antero-posterior  diameter  which  makes  them  dolicho-
cephalic ;  and  this  very  rarely  now-a-days  reaches  the  figure  of  202  millims.,  which  "  No.  1 "  and  "  No.  3  "
give ;  and  it  is  even  exceptional  now  if  191  millims.  (the  measure  of  "  No.  2  ")  be  surpassed.

The  Cephalic  Indices  of  our  three  skulls  are  73-76  for  "  No.  1,"  71-72  for  "  No.  2,"  and  74-75  for
"  No.  3."  The  mean  is  73-41,  and  is  lower  than  the  average  Cephalic  Index  of  the  large  Merovingian
series  in  the  Collection  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  Paris,  which  series  is  the  most  dolichocephalic
of  all  the  groups  ydt  collected  in  France.

Comparing  those  from  Cro-Magnon  with  the  skull  obtained  by  M.  E.  Bertrand  from  the  Quaternary
deposits  at  Clichy,  we  find  the  latter,  which  unfortunately  is  imperfect,  to  be  certainly  highly  dolicho-
cephalic. It  appears  to  have  had  a  length  of  204  and  a  width  of  138  millims.,  giving  a  Cephalic  Index
of  67-65  only.  If  there  is  any  error,  it  is  only  of  a  few  millimetres;  but  it  is  incontestable  that  the  fossil

B


H2  KELIQUkE  AQUITANIC.E.

skull  from  Clichy  is  more  dolichocephalic,  if  not  than  "No.  2,"  at  least  than  "No.  1"  and  "No.  3."
It  is  remarkable  also,  as  are  many  other  prehistoric  skulls,  for  the  great  thickness  of  its  walls,  which  are  at
some  points  13  and  14  millims.  thick ;  and  this  we  scarcely  see  now-a-days,  except  in  disease.  I  must  add
that  the  female  skull  from  Cro-Magnon  is  rather  thin  and  very  light ;  that  of  "  No.  3  "  is  rather  thinner,  that
of  "No.  1"  thicker,  and  at  the  same  time  very  heavy;  as  it  is  perfect,  the  thickness  of  its  walls  cannot  be
exactly  determined ;  but  I  believe  it  to  be  decidedly  less  than  in  the  skull  from  Clichy.

In  the  three  skulls  from  Cro-Magnon  the  occiput  is  greatly  developed.  The  occipital  reaches  rather  far
behind  the  lambda ;  in  "  No.  2  "  and  especially  in  "  No.  3  "  it  swells  out  prominently  below  and  behind  the
parietals.  This  coincides,  in  "  No.  3,"  with  the  presence  of  five  or  six  rather  large  and  somewhat  deeply
toothed  wormian  bones,  which  form  a  nearly  continuous  series  in  the  lambdoid  suture  and  its  two
branches.  I  may  add  that  the  sutures  in  our  three  skulls  are  but  little  complicated.

Another  character  common  to  these  three  skulls  is  the  smallness,  and  even  absence  of  the  external
occipital  protuberance.  "  No.  3  "  (the  Adult  Man's  Skull,  C.  Plate  IV.),  though  imperfect  behind,  shows  by
the  adjacent  surface  that  this  protuberance  was  probably  wanting.  In  the  Woman  ("  No.  2,"  C.  Plate  V.)
there  is  an  evident  prominence,  but  it  is  very  slight.  In  the  Old  Man  ("  No.  1,"  C.  Plates  I.,  II.,  &  III.,
fig.  1)  some  median  rugosities  represent  a  rudimentary  protuberance;  but  the  linea  semitircularis  is
very  prominent  and  thick,  forming  a  kind  of  semicircular  ridge,  which  stretches  transversely  from  one
mastoid  process  to  the  other ;  and  below  this  all  the  region  of  the  cerebellum  is  flattened  as  far  as  the
foramen  magnum,  forming  a  large  rough  surface  for  the  insertion  of  the  powerful  muscles  of  the  neck.

None  of  these  skulls  presents  the  form  described  by  Prichard  as  "  Pyramidal,"  nor  even  the  variety  of
this  form  known  as  "  Ogival."  In  the  "  pyramidal "  form  (proper)  the  width  of  the  skull  diminishes
upwards  from  the  base,  whilst  in  the  "  ogival "  the  sides  of  the  skull,  parallel  or  sometimes  divergent  in
their  lower  half,  converge  above  the  level  of  the  parietal  bosses,  and  meet  at  the  middle  line,  forming  a  kind
of  roof;  so  that  the  transverse  section,  instead  of  being  rounded  at  the  level  of  the  sagittal  suture,  as  in
ordinary  skulls,  has  rather  the  form  of  a  very  elliptical  ogive.  It  is  not  only  in  the  length  of  the  sagittal
suture  that  this  roof-like  condition  exists ;  it  is  prolonged  in  the  upper  part  of  the  frontal  bone.  A  very
large  number  of  skulls  present  in  certain  parts  of  the  upper  median  line  a  slight  arching:  when  we
incline  them  so  as  to  make  the  apparent  contour  of  their  transverse  curve  pass  through  this  arching,  we  get
the  appearance  of  an  ogive;  but  if  we  incline  them  a  little  more  or  less,  the  contour  appears  rounded.
Now,  a  partial  arching  by  no  means  constitutes  the  "  ogival "  form ;  it  indicates  a  peculiarity  of  the
conformation  of  a  circumscribed  region,  and  not  a  special  type  of  cranial  architecture.  The  skull  is  not
really  "  ogival "  except  when  the  arching  occupies  all  the  median  line  from  the  lambda  to  the  middle  of  the
forehead,  and  when  it  makes  a  manifest  longitudinal  prominence.  In  this  sense  the  skulls  from  Cro-
Magnon  cannot  be  considered  to  have  the  "ogival"  form.  "No.  1"  presents  towards  the  middle  of  the
frontal  bone,  for  an  extent  of  about  5  centimetres,  a  certain  degree  of  arching ;  but  the  sagittal  suture  is
not  at  all  prominent,  and  is  rather  flattened  than  "ogival."  "No.  2"  is  very  slightly  "ogival"  in  the
anterior  half  of  the  sagittal  suture,  whilst  in  "  No.  3  "  this  is  not  at  all  "  ogival."  This  skull  presents,  it  is
true,  on  the  median  line,  behind  the  bregma,  a  round  and  slightly  prominent  lump,  about  3  centimetres  in
diameter,  but  having  nothing  in  common  with  the  "  ogival "  form.  There  are  some  other  lumps  on  this
skull,  in  which  also  we  observe  a  considerable  postlambdoidal  prominence,  made  the  more  manifest  by  a
series  of  wormian  bones  occupying  the  two  branches  of  the  lambdoid  suture.  These  characters  are
produced  when,  during  infancy,  the  volume  of  the  brain  increases  more  rapidly  than  usual;  for  the
distended  skull  gives  way  in  its  least-resisting  parts,  especially  at  the  sutures;  and  hence  arise  such
modifications  as  we  see  in  "  No.  3."


CRO-MAGNON  SKULLS  AND  BONES.  113

§  b.  The  Facial  Region. — The  skull  "  No.  3  "  has  lost  all  its  facial  region ;  but  we  can  still  get  some
indications  of  the  state  of  the  lower  edge  of  the  os  frontix.  The  superciliary  arches  are  very  much
developed,  the  glabella  rather  less  so ;  below  it  the  frontal  retreats  markedly,  and  shows  that  the  root  of
the  nose  was  rather  strongly  depressed.  The  outer  orbital  processes  are  112  millims.  (4-410  inches)  apart,
indicating  that  the  face  was  very  large.

The  face  of  the  Old  Man  presents  quite  unusual  characters.  The  disproportion  of  height  and  width
strikes  us  at  once  ;  the  face  seems  at  once  very  short  and  very  broad ;  but  when  we  take  the  compasses  we
find  that  the  face  is  not  really  short,  but  appears  so  only  in  contrast  with  its  great  breadth ;  and  the  very
sudden  and  considerable  contraction  just  below  the  lower  edge  of  the  malar  bono  makes  this  still  more
apparent.  The  alveolar  region,  indeed,  is  not  broader  than  in  an  ordinary  man ;  hence  the  cheek-bones
just  above  are  excessively  prominent.

The  distance  between  the  root  of  the  nose  and  the  spina  nasi,  or  the  height  of  the  orbito-nasal  region,
is  51  millimetres ;  and  this  agrees  with  the  average  of  ordinary  men's  skulls ;  but  I  have  never  seen  a
corresponding  transverse  development  in  dolichocephalic  heads ;  and  it  is  altogether  exceptional,  even  in
the  largest  brachycephalic  skulls.  Thus  the  bizygomatic  diameter  reaches  143  millims.;  and  among  one
hundred  and  twenty-three  brachycephalic  crania  which  I  have  measured  there  is  but  one  (No.  11  of
St.-Jean-de-Luz)  in  which  the  diameter  amounts  to  144  millims. ;  whilst  in  all  the  others  it  is  140  millims.
or  less.  So  also  the  distance  between  the  two  suborbital  foramina  is  63  millims.  in  the  Old  Man,  and  none
of  the  other  skulls  I  have  measured  show  a  greater  distance  than  62  millims.

In  establishing  the  proportion  of  the  height  of  the  orbito-alveolar  region  to  its  breadth,  represented
by  the  bizygomatic  diameter,  we  find  it  as  35-6  :  100.  I  have  made  the  same  calculation  for  all  the
skulls  of  the  Basque  series  of  St.-Jean-de-Luz,  in  which  brachycephalics  largely  predominate.  In  none  of
these  fifty-seven  Basque  skulls  is  the  proportion  less  than  36;  it  often  rises  beyond  39,  and  may  attain
40  and  more ;  and  its  mean  is  38-3.  Hence  we  may  comprehend  why  the  face  of  the  Old  Man  of  Cro-
Magnon,  though  of  the  ordinary  height,  seems  so  very  low, — namely,  owing  to  its  great  breadth.

This  extraordinary  breadth  is  due  exclusively  to  the  transverse  development  of  the  orbits;  for  the
breadth  of  the  nose,  of  the  interorbital  space,  and  of  the  lower  part  of  the  nostrils  is  not  above  the  general
average,  and  is  even  below  the  mean  of  male  skulls.

The  disposition  and  dimensions  of  the  orbits  certainly  constitute  one  of  the  most  remarkable  characters
of  the  face  of  the  Old  Man.  They  have  a  very  long  rectangular  shape,  with  the  corners  rounded,  and  with
the  bases  inclined  from  above  downward  and  from  within  outward.  They  are  44  millims.  broad  and
27  millims.  high  (C.  Plate  I.).  For  comparison  with  these  I  will  cite  some  measurements  from  a  register
of  250  European  crania.  Only  one  skull  (Basque  of  Zaraus,  No.  23)  gives  an  orbital  width  of  44  millims.
Five  others  have  a  width  of  43 ;  and  all  the  rest  have  less.  The  orbits,  then,  of  this  Cro-Magnon  skull
attain  the  maximum  limit  of  width ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  their  height  is  almost  at  the  minimum  limit ;
for  I  know  of  only  one  skull  (No.  5  of  the  Second  Merovingian  Series  of  CheUes)  in  which  the  height  of  the
orbit  is  so  little  as  26  millims.  In  three  others  it  is  27  millims.,  as  in  the  Old  Man's  skull ;  and  it  is
remarkable  that  these  three  come  also  from  the  Merovingian  Sepultures  at  Chelles ;  it  is  there  only  that  1
have  found  orbits  comparable  with  those  of  "  No.  1 "  from  Cro-Magnon  (that  is  to  say,  at  once  very  broad
and  deep),  three  of  the  four  Merovingian  skulls  cited  above  having  the  orbital  width  of  42,  42,  and  41  millims.
respectively.

In  working  by  percentage  to  obtain  the  Orbital  Index,  I  find  that,  the  transverse  diameter  of  the  orbit  in
the  Old  Man  being  represented  by  100,  the  vertical  is  only  61-36,  the  lowest  I  have  met  with.  That  of
No.  5  of  the  Second  Merovingian  Series  is  scarcely  higher  (61-90).  Two  other  Merovingians  give  64-28

E2


^:  AQUITANICLE.

and  65-85 ;  whilst  I  find  a  Basque  of  St.-Jean-de-Luz  with  67-44.  All  the  others  of  250  skulls  whose
Orbital  Index  I  have  calculated  exceed  70 ;  and  yet  there  are  only  three  in  which  this  Index  is  between
70  and  73;  so  that  the  mean  Orbital  Index  varies,  in  different  series,  between  82  and  84.  These
comparative  figures  signalize  the  peculiar  conformation  of  the  orbits  of  the  Old  Man  of  Cro-Magnon.

The  profile  of  this  skull  is  not  less  curious  than  the  face-view.  Below  a  very  large  glabella,  the  root  of
the  nose  is  deeply  hollowed ;  and  this  depression,  very  remarkable  in  itself,  is  rendered  still  more  striking  by
the  disposition  of  the  nasal  bones.  The  ridge  of  the  nose,  slightly  depressed  at  its  base,  rises  again  almost
immediately  and  advances  boldly  forwards,  making  a  rapid  curve  with  the  concavity  directed  rather  forward
and  especially  upward,  so  that  the  lower  ends  of  the  ossa  nasi  are  placed  18  millims.  in  front  of  a  line  dropt
vertically  from  the  fronto-nasal  suture.  Below  this  enormous  projection,  the  line  of  the  profile  presents  a
depression  not  less  singular ;  for  it  retreats  very  obliquely  to  the  level  of  the  lower  part  of  the  nostrils,
where  it  bends  again  to  pass  very  obliquely  forward,  and  to  reach,  without  any  further  curve,  the  edge  of
the  alveolar  process.  In  studying  this  line  of  profile  and  the  bony  structure  around  it  (C.  Plate  I.),  we  see
that  the  skeleton  of  the  face  is  nearly  vertical  from  the  glabella  above  to  the  lower  edge  of  the  nasal  fossae,
and  that  below  this  latter  level  it  runs,  on  the  contrary,  very  obliquely  forwards.  In  other  words,  the
upper  part  of  the  face  is  very  orthognathous,  whilst  the  alveolar  region  is  very  prognathous.  Thus  it  is
proved  by  the  goniometer  that  Camper's  facial  angle,  the  summit  of  which,  as  we  know,  is  placed  at  the  level
of  the  spina  nasi,  gives  a  good  opening  of  84° ;  whilst  the  alveolar  facial  angle,  with  its  summit  at  the
lower  edge  of  the  alveolar  process,  is  no  more  than  75°.

In  spite  of  the  great  obliquity  resulting  from  the  alveolar  prognathism,  the  direction  of  the  sockets  (and  neces-
sarily of  the  teeth)  is  very  nearly  vertical ;  and  in  the  lower  jaw  we  can  see  that  there  the  incisors  were  vertical
also.  We  have,  then,  here  only  a  partial  prognathism,  exclusively  limited  to  the  upper  alveolar  arcade.

I  have  referred  to  the  level  of  the  spina  nasi ;  this  is  indicated  by  the  meeting  of  the  upper  edge  of  the
alveolar  arcade  and  the  lower  edge  of  the  opening  of  the  nostrils;  the  spina  nasi  itself  is  wanting.
Moreover  it  is  this  which  is  observed  when  the  alveolar  prognathism  is  very  much  pronounced.

Although  the  palatine  vault  is  rather  large,  its  length  and  breadth,  scarcely  above  the  average,  are  not  at
all  in  proportion  to  the  great  antero-posterior  and  transverse  extent  of  the  facial  region ;  moreover  it  is
very  slightly  concave.  What  specially  characterizes  it  is  its  median  prominence.  We  know  that  this  vault
is  sometimes  transversely  concave,  more  often  quite  flat,  and  sometimes  more  or  less  convex.  In  the  last
condition,  which  is  somewhat  rare,  the  two  palatine  plates  thicken  as  they  approach  the  median  line,  so  that
their  suture  forms  a  kind  of  longitudinal  ridge  along  the  middle  of  the  vault.  I  have  met  with  this,  more
or  less  pronounced,  in  some  skulls  in  the  Collection  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  Paris ;  but  there  are
only  three  or  four  in  which  it  is  well  marked,  and  none  of  them  present  it  in  the  same  degree  as  in
this  skull  from  Cro-Magnon.  Here,  indeed,  the  median  elevation  is  so  considerable  that  the  two
lateral  parts  of  the  vault  are  merely  straightish  gutters.  I  know  of  only  one  skull  that  can  in  this
respect  be  compared  with  that  of  the  Old  Man ;  and  that  is  the  one  I  presented  and  described  at  the
Meeting  of  that  Society  on  February  6,  1868*,  and  which  Dr.  Prunieres  had  sent  to  me  in  the  name  of
Abbe  Boissonade.  The  finding-place  of  this  skull,  unfortunately,  is  not  well  authenticated ;  it  is  believed
to  have  come  from  the  Cave  of  Meyreuis  (Lozere) ;  but  without  doubt  it  is  very  ancient ;  it  is  moreover
brachycephalic,  and  resembles  that  from  Cro-Magnon  only  in  the  conformation  of  the  palatine  vault.

The  lower  jaw  of  the  Old  Man's  skull  is  of  great  interest ;  but  all  its  characters  cannot  be  studied,  as  the  two
condyles  and  one  of  the  ascending  rami  are  wanting.  All  the  alveolar  cavities  are  open ;  consequently  all  the

*  Bulletins  de  la  Societe  d'Anthropologie,  2"16  Serie,  vol.  iii.  p.  129.


CEO-MAGNON  SKULLS  AND  BONES.  115

teeth  were  present  at  death.  The  teeth  were  large,  especially  the  molars,  judging  from  their  sockets.  The
body  of  the  jaw  has  nothing  remarkable.  The  mental  process  is  very  prominent ;  the  apophyses  yeni  are
well  developed.  The  body  of  the  jaw  is  of  somewhat  large  size,  but  in  proportion  to  the  face.  The  curve
of  the  alveolar  arcade  is  very  divergent,  so  that  the  wisdom-teeth  are  much  further  apart  than  the  first
true  molars  are.  This  curve  is  rather  hyperbolic  than  parabolic,  as  is  rather  frequently  seen  at  present  in
the  so-called  Germanic  races ;  but  it  is  rare  for  the  divergence  of  the  two  halves  of  the  curve  to  be  so  great
as  it  is  in  this  case.  Altogether  these  characters  are  in  very  strong  contrast  with  the  well-known  description
of  the  jaw  of  the  Naulette,  where  the  alveolar  curve  is  rather  convergent  than  divergent,  the  apophyses
geni  are  replaced  by  a  foramen,  the  mental  process  is  entirely  absent,  and  the  thickness  of  the  body  is
enormous  in  proportion  to  its  height.  In  all  these  features  the  jaw  of  the  Naulette  departs  from  the  human
type,  going  towards  that  of  the  Apes ;  whilst  the  Old  Man's  jaw  presents  rather  an  exaggeration  of  the  features
which  distinguish  the  human  type  from  that  of  the  Anthropomorphous  Apes.  This  is  an  additional  proof  of
the  great  difference  existing  between  the  Quaternary  Man  of  Cro-Magnon  and  the  Cave-man  of  Belgium.

The  most  curious  part  of  the  Cro-Magnon  jaw  is  its  ascending  ramus,  which  is  nearly  perpendicular  to  the
axis  of  the  body ;  the  angle,  however,  is  much  rounded.  This  portion  presents  on  its  two  faces  strongly  marked
inequalities,  for  the  insertion  of  the  masticatory  muscles  ;  but,  taken  altogether,  it  is  flat — that  is,  its  infero-
posterior  edge  is  not  inflected  either  inwards  or  outwards.  Its  thickness  is  not  greater  than  that  seen  in
robust  men.  Its  breadth,  however,  is  extraordinary ;  for,  measured  across  at  the  level  of  the  base  of  the
coronoid  process,  it  is  49  millims.  The  oblique  diameter,  from  the  angle  of  the  jaw  to  the  lower  part  of  the
anterior  edge,  is  44  millims., — less  than  the  transverse  diameter,  contrary  to  what  we  usually  find.  This
difference  is  due  to  the  rounded  form  of  the  angle  of  the  jaw.  There  is  no  European  jaw  in  the  Collection
of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  Paris  having  dimensions  approaching  the  above.  The  results  of  measure-
ments made  in  four  of  our  series  are  given  below.  In  the  series  of  modern  Parisians  and  in  that  of  the
Merovingians  of  Chelles,  I  have  taken  male  jaws  only,  the  corresponding  crania  guiding  me  in  this  selection.
In  the  series  of  St.-Jean-de-Luz  and  in  that  of  Chamant,  the  jaws  having  been  parted  from  the  crania,  the
separation  of  the  sexes  would  have  been  somewhat  arbitrary.  Measuring  all  these  jaws  indiscriminately,  I
have  obtained  the  following  results : —

Dimensions  of  the  Ascending  Eami  of  the  Lower  Jaws.

Transverse  Diameter.  Oblique  Diameter.


French.            English.                     French.  English,

millim.                inch.                          millim.  inch.

Old  Man  of  Cro-Magnon 49  1-929   44        1-732

,    f  Maximum           .   40               .   1-575   .              .41  .   1-614
Modern  Parisians  (only           .

j  Minimum 29  ....    1-142   30  ....   1-181

I  Mean    32-83  ....   1-292   35-58  ....   1-401

f  Maximum       ...   37              .   1-457  .             .41  ....   1-614

Basques  of  St.-Jean-de-    ^.^ ^                 ^                    ^  ^

Lnz(XVth  Century).  |  ^    ^         _   ^   ^  _        ^

Merovingians  of  Chelles  I         .

(VnthCentaryA.D.).!^"---------   "^  ""  ^  •'  —  "'  ^  ""   ^

Dolmen     of     Chamant  f  Maximum     35  1-378   37        1-457

(Oise).    (Age  of  Po-  \  Minimum 31  ....   1-220   30  ....   1-181

lished  Stone.)              I  Mean                  .   33-37  .      .   1-313   .          ...   34  ....   1-339


Maximum     38        1-496   39        1-535

Minimum...        .   28  .   1-102  .  .28  .   1-102


116  HELIQUDE  AQUITANICLE.

This  Table  shows  clearly  that  the  ascending  ramus,  the  breadth  of  which  is  in  relation  with  the  volume
of  the  masticatory  muscles,  is  far  more  developed  in  the  Old  Man  of  Cro-Magnon  than  in  aU  the  Europeans,
ancient  or  modern,  that  I  have  studied  in  the  Collection  of  the  Anthropological  Society.  To  appreciate  the
significance  of  this  character,  it  is  well  to  remember  that  the  great  size  of  the  ascending  ramus  is  now-a-days
chiefly  noticeable  among  savage  races.  Thus  in  seven  lower  jaws,  from  Oceania,  which  are  in  the  Collection  of
the  Anthropological  Society,  there  are  three  which  surpass  in  this  respect  the  maxima  observed  in  our  European
series.  Three  jaws,  of  a  Bushman,  Kafir,  and  Javan,  figured  full-size  in  Plate  I.  of  Barkow's  great  work*,
also  have  dimensions  greater  than  these  maxima,  but,  as  in  all  other  cases,  less  than  those  of  the  jaw  under
notice  from  Cro-Magnon.  This  is  shown  by  the  following  Table,  in  which  also  I  have  introduced  the  measure-
ments taken  from  the  skull  of  Troglodytes  Awbryi  given  to  the  Anthropological  Society  by  Gratiolet,  and  from
five  other  skulls  of  Anthropomorphous  Apes,  which  I  have  deposited  in  the  Society's  Collection : —

Dimensions  of  the  Ascending  Kami  of  the  Lower  Jaws.
TransTerse  Diameter.  Oblique  Diameter.


French.  English.  French.  English.

milliui.  inch.  inilliiu.  inch.

Old  Man  of  Cro-Magnon    . .   49   1-929   44   1-732

Man  of  Tahiti     43   ....  1-693   44   ....  1-732  "\

I  Collection  of  the  An-

of  the  Isle  of  Pines  1

\    40   ....  1-575   44   ....  1-732   >    thropological  Society

(New  Caledonia).  J  I        f  p.   '

of  New  Caledonia 44 1-732 46   1-81 1  J

Bushman  (male)     41    1-614   42   1-654     Barkow,  fig.  13.

Kafir  (male)    41    ....  1-614   41    ....  1-614          — ,  fig.  12.

Javan  (male) 42   ....  1-654   42   ....  1-654          — ,  fig.  10.

Troglodytes  Aubryi  (young)   40   1-575    40   1-575  ^

-niger  (adult) 48   ....  1-890   52   .      .  2-074  I

Aubnji  (adult) 57   ....  2-244  53   .      .  2-087  I  CoUectlon  of  the  An'

<?on7fcfc%o(adultmale)..    73   ....  2-874   70   ....  2-756   f    ^P^eal  Society

-  Savagii  (adult  male). .   72   ....  2-835  68   ....  2-677

(adult  female)  . .   56   ....  2-205   59   ....  2-323


Thus,  as  to  the  dimensions  of  the  ascending  ramus,  the  Old  Man  of  Cro-Magnon  takes  his  place  between
semisavage  or  uncivilized  races  and  the  Anthropomorphous  Apes.  We  must  not,  however,  exaggerate  the
importance  of  this  fact.  In  the  first  place,  this  Old  Man  was  probably  larger  and  stronger  than  most  of
those  with  whom  we  have  compared  him,  and  it  is  natural  that  his  jaw  should  require  a  very  broad  surface
for  the  insertion  of  the  masticatory  muscles ;  and,  secondly,  we  must  not  forget  that,  though  the  ascending
ramus  presents  unusual  dimensions,  recalling  those  of  the  Apes,  the  conformation  of  the  body  of  the  jaw  is,
on  the  contrary,  quite  different  from  that  characterizing  the  Simian  type.

The  facial  region  of  the  Woman  (C.  Plate  V.)  differs,  at  first  sight,  altogether  from  that  of  the  Old  Man ;
but  on  closer  examination  we  find  most  of  the  characters  above  described,  though  in  a  much  feebler  form.
Thus  the  upper  part  of  the  face  is  orthognathousf,  although  the  tooth-sockets  are  prognathous ;  but  the

*  H.  Carl  Leopold  Barkow,  '  Comparative  Morphologie  der  Menschen  und  der  menschenahnlichen  Thiere,'
part  2,  pi.  1.  figs.  10, 12,  and  13.

t  The  absence  of  the  left  temporal  bone  prevents  the  facial  angles  being  measured;  but  there  is  no
doubt  of  these  angles  being  very  open.


CRO-MAGNON  SKULLS  AND  BONES.  117

alveolar  region  is  much  less  oblique  than  in  the  Old  Man.  The  depression  at  the  root  of  the  nose  also  is
much  less,  though  very  noticeable ;  the  distance  between  the  cheek-bones  is  not  so  great ;  the  orbits  are
shorter  and  narrower,  giving  a  much  higher  Orbital  Index,  though  still  much  lower  than  that  of  the
European  races.  We  may  add  that  all  the  contours  are  softer,  and  that  the  muscular  imprints  are  less
strongly  marked.  These  differences  are  considerable:  some  of  them  may  certainly  be  attributed  to
difference  of  sex ;  but  how  far  do  the  others  depend  on  this  cause  ?  This  will  remain  doubtful  as  long  us
there  is  only  one  of  each  sex  for  comparison ;  and  we  still  have  to  ask  if  the  characters,  so  remarkable,  of
the  Old  Man's  face  belonged  to  all  the  individuals  of  his  race  and  his  sex, — or  if,  by  accident,  the  first
man's  skull  taken  from  the  Caves  of  Perigord  happens  to  be  that  of  an  individual  more  or  less  exceptional,
presenting  an  exaggeration  of  the  characters  of  his  race.  However  this  may  be,  even  when  we  abstract  the
influence  of  sex,  and  only  admit  as  characters  of  the  Cro-Magnon  race  those  which  are  common  to  the  two
skulls  "No.  1"  and  "No.  2,"  there  still  remains  an  ensemble  of  features  sufficient  to  distinguish  this  race
from  all  existing  races,  and  especially  from  that  other  Quaternary  race,  remains  of  which  have  been  found
in  the  Caves  of  Belgium.


118


RELIQUIAE  AQITITANIC^E.


MEASUEEMENTS  OF  THE  CEANIUM  FEOM  CEO-MAGNON.

I.  TABLE  OF  MEASUREMENTS  OF  THE  CRANIUM  PROPERLY  so  CALLED.


No.  1.

No.  2.

No.  3.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

DIAMETERS.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G

H
I
J
K
L
M
N
0
P
Q
E
S
T
U

V

millim.

202
199
149
122
141
103
132

145*
133*
70
57
36
104
545
348
405
568
272
296
463
330

29

inch.

7-953
7-835
5-866
4-803
5-551
4-055
5-197

5-709
5-236
2-756
2-244
1-417
4-095
21-457
13-701
15-945
22-363
10-709
11-654
18-229
12-992

1-142

millim.
191

184
137

132?
97

135
133

71

339

540
236
304

inch.
7-520
7-244
5-394

5-197
3-819

5-315
5-236
2-795

13-347

21-260
9-291
11-969

millim.
202

190?
151

97

148
133t
76f

357
565

306?

inch.

7-953

7-480
5-945

3-819

5-827
5-236
2-992

14'055
22-248

12-047

bitemporal

CURVES.

Circumference,  medio-vertical  :—
Frontal    •.

Parietal

Supraoccipital

Cerebellar

Length  of  foramen  magnum

Naso-basilar  line     ...

Total  median  circumference

Inio-frontal  curve  (H+I+  J)

Occipito-frontal  curve  (0  +  K)

Total  horizoiital  circumference

Preauricular  circumference

Postauricular  circumference

Total  transverse  circumference

Supraauricular  circumference

.  Width  of  foramen   magnum  (for  the  1
length,  see  L)  J

Cephalic  Index,  C  :  A  (  —  100)

X
Y
Z

73-76
69-12
65-34

71-72
70-80

....

74-75
64-23

Frontal  Index,  F  :  C  (—100)

Vertical  Index,  G  :  A  (—100)

Internal  Capacity

cub.  cent.
1590

cub.  inch.

97-038

*  The  measurements  H  and  I  of  No.  1  want  precision,  because  the  exact  position  of  the  bregma  is
rather  uncertain.     The  sum,  however,  of  H+I  is  278  millims.

•  f  The  measurements  I  and  J  in  No.  3  together  amount  to  209  millims. ;  but  the  presence  of  several
large  wormian  bones  in  the  lambdoid  suture  makes  the  position  of  the  lambda  somewhat  uncertain.  The
parietal  curve  (I)  has  been  measured  from  the  bregma  at  the  top  of  the  occipital  bone.  If  we  place  the
lambda  at  the  centre  of  the  middle  wormian  bone,  the  parietal  curve  (I)  will  not  be  more  than  120,  and  the
supraoccipital  (J)  will  amount  to  89  millims.


CRO-MAGNON  SKULLS  AND  BONES.
II.  TABLE  OP  MEASUREMENTS  OF  THE  PACE.


119


No.  1.

No.  2.

No.  3.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

BREADTH  OF  THE  FACE.
Distance,  external  biorbital

millim.
116
103
54?

63

101?
112?
128?
143?

44
27
54

23
26
10
8
18
24
23

51

19
91
27
51

35

67

83

52
37
36
24
11

51?

inch.

4-567
4-055
2-126
2-480
3-976
4-410
5-039
5-630

1-732
1-063
2-126

0-906
1-024
0-393
0-315
0-709
0-945
0-906

2-008

0-748
3-583
1-063

2-008

1-378

2-638
3-268

2-074
1-457
1-417
0-945
0-433

2-008

millim.
109
95
53
54?
93
108
112?

40

28-5

14

25?
24

49

16
82
26
42

32?

73?

36?
26?
15?

inch.

4-291
3-740
2-087
2-126
3-661
4-252
4-410

1-575
1-122

0-551

0-984
0-945

1-929

0-630
3-228
1-024
1-693

1-260

2-874

1417
1-024
0-591

millim.
112
100

inch.
4-410
3-937

,  internal  biorbital    ...

,  bimaxillar,  greatest

,  bimalar,  greatest

,  bijugal,  greatest

bizygomatic  greatest

OMITS.
Breadth

Height  .

Depth

NASAL  REGION.
Length  of  the  Nasal  Bones,  median

lateral    .                .

Breadth  of  the  Nose,  upper

,  lower

Interorbital  thickness  ...

Greatest  breadth  of  the  nostrils

HEIGHT  OP  THE  FACE.
Height  from  the  Root  of  the  Nose  to  the  1
spinet  nasi    J

•  of  the  cheek-bone

Orbito-alveolar  height

AURICULAR  REGION.
Distance  from  the  top  of  the  mastoid  pro-  )
cess  to  the  supramastoidean  line  ...         J

carial  to  the  Jugal  point   J

PALATAL  VATTLT,
Lensrth  .

Breadth,  backwards

•    at  the  first  molar

•  ••  •  at  the  premaxillary  bone

Depth

Distance   from   the   palatal  vault   to   the  ]
foramen  magnum  J

N.B.  The  majority  of  the  first  group  of  measurements  (Breadth  of  Face)  have  not  been  taken  from  the  specimens,  because
in  two  of  them  one-half  of  the  face  cannot  be  used,  as  it  wants  one  of  the  two  points  of  measurement.  The  dimensions  given
have  been  obtained  by  taking  the  distance  from  the  uninjured  points  of  measurement  to  the  median  line,  and  multiplying  it
by  two.  The  dimensions  in  question  are  accompanied  by  a  point  of  interrogation.


120  BELIQUI^E  AQUITANIC^E.

§  IV.  CONCLUSION.

A  general  view  of  the  different  features  and  peculiarities  that  we  have  ahove
described  presents  a  remarkable  union  of  characters  of  superiority  and  of  infe-
riority in  the  Cro-Magnon  race.  The  great  volume  of  the  brain,  the  development
of  the  frontal  region,  the  fine  elliptical  profile  of  the  anterior  portion  of  the
skull,  and  the  orthognathism  of  the  upper  facial  region  (giving  a  considerable
openness  to  Camper's  facial  angle),  are  incontestable  characters  of  superiority,
which  are  met  with  usually  only  in  the  civilized  races.  On  the  other  hand,  the
great  breadth  of  face,  the  alveolar  prognathism,  the  enormous  development  of  the
ascending  ramus  of  the  lower  jaw,  the  extent  and  roughness  of  the  muscular  in-
sertions, especially  for  the  masticatory  muscles,  give  rise  to  the  idea  of  a  violent
and  brutal  race,  especially  when  we  are  nearly  certain  that  the  Woman  was  killed
with  the  blow  of  an  axe  and  that  the  Old  Man  bore  on  his  femur  traces  of  an  old
and  severe  wound.  We  may  note,  too,  the  simplicity  of  the  sutures  and  their
probably  precocious  closure,  proceeding  from  before  backwards,  as  in  savages.
We  may  add  that  the  athletic  conformation  of  the  bones,  and  particularly  the
extraordinary  prominence  of  the  linea  aspera  of  the  femur,  bears  witness  to  the
great  development  of  muscular  power.  Lastly  we  may  refer  to  three  characters
(the  excessive  breadth  of  the  ascending  ramus,  the  subcoronoidal  curve  of  the  ulna,
with  its  very  shallow  coronoid  cavity,  and,  above  all,  the  flattening  of  the  tibias)  as
being  more  or  less  manifestly  Simian ;  and  we  shall  thus  complete  the  picture  of
a  race  which  in  some  of  its  features  attained  the  highest  and  noblest  stages  in
human  morphology,  and  in  other  traits  descended  below  even  the  lowest  of  the
anthropologic  types  at  present  existing.

The  antithesis  seems,  at  first  sight,  paradoxical ;  and  nevertheless  is  it  not  the
anatomical  confirmation  of  what  the  discoveries  of  Henry  Christy  and  Edouard
Lartet  have  already  taught  us  as  to  the  life  and  manners  of  the  Cave-dwellers  of
Perigord  ?  The  men  who  in  the  Quaternary  Period  were  the  initiators  of  progress
and  the  precursors  of  civilization,  they  whose  were  the  remarkable  works  of
industry  and  art  which  we  wonder  at  to-day,  necessarily  combined  with  the
intelligence  of  the  inventor  and  workman  the  physical  force  and  habits  of  war
and  the  chase  which  alone  at  that  time  could  assure  subsistence  and  security.
At  the  present  day,  with  our  powerful  metals,  our  terrible  arms,  and  our  country
long  since  cleared — with  all  the  resources  furnished  by  agriculture  and  commerce,
we  can  live  peaceably  the  life  of  civilization ;  but  when  immense  forests,  which
the  axe  of  stone  could  not  fell,  covered  the  greater  part  of  the  soil,  and,  instead  of
agriculture,  hunting  only  could  provide  sustenance  for  Man,  when  the  immediate


CRO-MAGNON   SKULLS  AND   BONES.  121

wants  of  life  necessitated  a  constant  war  against  wild  animals  such  as  the  Mam-
moth, and  when  at  last  the  hunting  territory,  the  sole  resource  of  a  tribe,  had  to
be  continually  defended  against  the  encroachments  and  attacks  of  neighbouring
tribes,  men  were  obliged,  under  pain  of  destruction,  to  accommodate  themselves
to  circumstances  and  live  the  violent  life  of  savages.

The  Cave-dwellers  of  Cro-Magnon  were  then  savages,  like  all  men  of  their
time;  and  we  are  not  astonished  that  such  conditions  of  existence  have  left
strong  traces  in  their  skeletons.  But  these  barbarians  were  intelligent  and
improvable ;  and  whilst  continuing  to  struggle  with  Nature  and  to  war  against
their  kind,  they  knew  how  to  make  leisure  enough  to  increase  their  knowledge,
to  develope  their  industry,  and,  still  further,  to  rise  to  the  culture  of  the  arts.
These  aptitudes,  so  precious — rare  at  all  epochs,  but  truly  extraordinary  in
respect  to  the  time  they  were  manifested  among  these  Cave-folk — could  not  have
dawned  but  by  favour  of  a  fine  cerebral  organization,  of  which  we  have  found  the
morphological  expression  in  the  skulls  of  the  Cro-Magnon  race.

What  has  become  of  this  remarkable  race,  appearing  to  us  as  a  shining  point
amidst  the  darkness  of  the  far  past  ?  In  cultivating  the  arts  which  embellish  life
and  soften  manners,  did  it  lose  some  of  the  warlike  energy  which  could  alone
serve  to  defend  it  against  the  fierce  aggressions  of  surrounding  barbarism  ?  Did  it
succumb,  like  those  who,  coming  before  their  hour,  disappear,  starved  by  the
inclement  conditions  among  which  they  try  to  introduce  a  premature  progress  ?
Or  rather,  surviving  that  inevitable  struggle  in  which  its  civilization  perished,
did  this  race  escape  extermination  but  to  fall  into  the  universal  barbarism,  and  to
lose  at  length,  under  the  isolated  or  combined  influences  of  crossing,  of  social
change,  and  of  the  gradual  transformation  of  the  fauna  and  the  climate,  the
anatomical  characters  which  had  formerly  distinguished  it  ?  We  may  hope  that
future  discoveries  will  furnish  new  elements  for  the  solution  of  these  important
questions ;  but  at  present  we  can  only  be  sure  of  one  thing — that  the  race  of
Cro-Magnon  was  entirely  different  from  all  other  known  races,  ancient  and
modern.

NOTE. — M.  Pruner-Bey  thinks  that  he  has  found  among  the  modern  Esthonians  the  type  of
the  ancient  race  of  Cro-Magnon  (see  page  89) .  To  comprehend  fully  the  importance  of  this
proposed  relationship,  we  ought  to  refer  to  the  discussions  that  took  place,  six  years  since,  in  the
Anthropological  Society  of  Paris  on  the  question  of  the  Prehistoric  Races  of  Europe.  Admitting
with  Retzius  that  the  aborigines  were  brachycephalic  and  that  dolichocephalism  was  introduced
by  the  Kelts  from  Asia,  M.  Pruner-Bey  has  rejected  all  the  facts  opposed  to  this  doctrine  that
have  been  offered  to  the  Society.  He  has  associated  with  the  Keltic  race  all  the  dolichocephalic

s2


122  RELIQUIAE  AQTJ1TANICJE.

skulls  found  in  the  megalithic  monuments,  and  even  in  certain  caves,  the  date  of  which,  in  his
opinion,  has  not  been  exactly  established,  or  the  floor  of  which  he  supposes  to  have  been  more  or
less  disturbed ;  and  as  for  the  true  Prekeltic  aborigines,  he  seeks  to  prove  that  they  all  belong  to
one  race,  which  he  terms  the  Mongoloid  Brachycephales.  In  sustaining  this  opinion,  he  has  many
a  time  had  to  appeal  to  ingenious  hypotheses  which  could  throw  doubt  on  the  value  of  the  facts
quoted  by  those  holding  different  opinions.  Affairs  were  thus  when  the  discovery  of  the  skulls  in
the  Cro-Magnon  Cave  brought  the  question  to  a  new  phase.  In  this  case  the  authenticity  of  the
date  was  so  sure  that  it  was  not  possible  to  deny  the  existence  of  a  dolichocephalic  race  contem-
porary with  the  Mammoth,  and  far  earlier,  therefore,  than  the  arrival  of  the  Kelts.  Unable  then,
in  the  presence  of  such  a  fact,  to  maintain  his  general  theory  of  the  Mongoloid  Brachycephales,
M.  Pruner-Bey  endeavours  to  prove  that,  if  the  Cro-Magnon  people  were  not  brachycephalic,
they  were  at  least  Mongoloid ;  and  as  it  would  seem  singular  and  contrary  to  all  expectation
that  a  race  of  the  Mongoloid  type  would  be  at  the  same  time  highly  dolichocephalic,  he  has  been
led  to  weaken  this  contradiction  by  referring  the  Cro-Magnon  race  to  the  modern  Esthonians,
who,  without  being  really  dolichocephalic,  have  a  longer  head  than  all  the  other  races  who  speak
the  languages  of  the  Mongolian  group.

Having  discussed  at  length  this  hypothesis  at  the  Meeting  of  the  Anthropological  Society,
July  18,  1868, 1  need  not  here  reproduce  the  two  large  tables  in  which  I  compared  the  measure-
ments of  the  Cro-Magnon  skulls  with  the  Esthonian  skulls  in  the  Museum  of  Natural  History ;
but  I  may  add  that  in  all  points  of  view,,  whether  we  consider  the  absolute  dimensions  of  the
different  parts  of  the  cranium  and  of  the  face,  or  if  we  determine  their  relationships  by  the
percentage  method — whether  we  compare  the  individuals,  or  take  the  averages,  there  exist
between  the  Cro-Magnon  and  Esthonian  races  radical  differences,  as  great  as  exist  between  any
two  European  races  ancient  or  modern.


REMARKS  ON  THE  CRO-MAGNON  REMAINS.  123


X.

REMARKS  ON  THE  HUMAN  REMAINS  FROM  THE  CAVE  AT  CRO-MAGNON*.
By  M.  DE  QUATBEFAGES,  Professor  of  Anthropology,  Museum  of  Natural  History,  Paris.

ENGAGED  in  other  studies,  I  have  made  only  a  rapid  examination  of  these  spe-
cimens, and  have  nothing  to  add  to  the  elaborate  descriptions  by  MM.  Broca  and
Pruner-Bey ;  hence  I  limit  myself  to  some  general  reflections  on  these  interesting
remains.

These  skulls  afford  another  opportunity  of  instruction  to  anthropologists,
the  importance  of  which  can  hardly  be  exaggerated.  M.  Joly  has  said  that  in
all  populations  we  find  both  brachycephalic  and  dolichocephalic  heads ;  and  he
has  good  reason  for  the  statement  as  far  as  European  peoples  are  concerned.
Has,  then,  this  characteristic  lost  all  its  value  ?  No — although  no  one  can  now
grant  it  to  be  of  such  impprtance  as  Retzius  considered  it  when  he  divided  all  the
races  on  the  globe  into  dolichocephalic  and  brachycephalic.  We  now  know  that
even  amongst  populations  once  regarded  as  most  definitely  characterized  by  one
or  the  other  of  these  features,  there  are  exceptional  groups.  The  Andamanians,
for  example,  are  positively  Negroes,  and  positively  brachycephalic,  although  until
lately  we  may  have  truly  set  down  all  Negro  races  as  dolichocephalic.  It  follows
therefore  that  these  cephalic  conformations  have  not  the  value  formerly  attri-
buted to  them ;  there  are,  however,  sufficient  facts  to  enable  us  to  affirm  that  they
have  still  a  real  importance  in  the  characterization  of  the  subdivisions  of  a
great  race.

We  have  before  our  eyes  proofs  that  we  must  apply  what  I  have  been  saying
to  fossil  Man.  I  am  one  of  those  who,  taking  account  only  of  the  best  demon-
strated facts,  have  thought  it  very  probable  that  Western  Europe  was  peopled  at
first  by  a  small  and  brachycephalic  race.  With  some  limitations,  and  guided  by
certain  facts,  I  supposed  it  possible  that  populations  existed  in  Europe  presenting
the  two  cephalic  types ;  but  I  did  not  think  that  any  fact  authorized  us  to  suppose
that  the  brachycephalic  type  had  at  so  early  an  epoch  reached  Western  Erance.
In  presence  of  the  bones  before  us  it  is  evident  that  my  opinion  must  be  changed ;
and  I  do  not  hesitate  to  take  the  side  of  M.  Broca,  at  least  in  that  which  con-

*  These  remarks  were  spoken  at  the  Meeting  of  Scientific  Societies  (Congress  of  Delegates)  at  the
Sorbonne,  April  16,  1868.


124  KELIQUL-E  AQUITANIC^E.

cerns  the  coexistence  of  the  two  types.     It  is  clear  that  the  Cave-dwellers  of  the
Stone  Age,  who  fought  the  Elephant  and  Rhinoceros  with  their  flint  weapons,
are  represented  in  their  remains  by  two  distinct  races.     This  very  thing  leads  me
to  insist  on  a  consideration  arising  from  M.  Pruner-Bey's  Memoir.     He  informs
us   that  these   old   skulls  would  answer  feature   by  feature  to  the  description
of  certain  Esthonian  skulls.     At  any  rate  it  is  not  so  with  those  which  I  have
received  from  St.  Petersburg,  and  which  are  in  the  Museum  of  Natural  History.
These  are  either  brachycephalic  or  mesaticephalic ;   not  one  approaches  the  well-
marked  dolichocephalism  of  the  skulls  from  Cro-Magnon.      The  skulls  in  our
Museum  correspond  plainly  with  the  Esthonian  skulls  described  by  Von  Baer
about  1816.     They  would  also  correspond  in  type  to  the  crania  (of  the  Reindeer
Age)  found  in  Belgium  by  M.  Dupont.     I  cannot  have  the  least  doubt  about  it
after  the  exclamation  uttered  by  the  latter  on  seeing  the  skulls  I  received  from
St.  Petersburg.     It  must  be,  then,  that  this  little  province  of  Esthonia  possesses,
in  the  existing  population,  the  two  types  indicated  by  the  fossil  human  remains.

I  may  add  that  of  the  three  skulls  in  our  Museum,  one  recalls  essentially,  by
the  whole  of  its  characters,  the  Mongolian  and  Chinese  type;  the  bones  are
robust,  and  the  canine  fossa  is  slightly  marked.  The  other  two  (of  which  one  at
least  is  more  plainly  brachycephalic)  are  distinguished  by  very  different  characters  :
they  are  remarkable  for  their  slenderness ;  the  canine  fossa  is  deeply  hollowed ;
the  lower  jaw  of  one  of  them  reproduces  nearly  all  the  characters  of  the  famous
jaw  from  the  Moulin  Quignon,  and  resembles  it  in  particular  by  the  premature
loss  of  the  teeth.

Everything,  then,  shows  that  the  men  who  preceded  us  in  Europe  were  already
divided  into  several  races,  as  I  have  elsewhere  indicated.

It  is  evident,  moreover,  that  the  Cro-Magnon  skulls  introduce  new  elements
into  the  question  of  European  origins,  and  oblige  us  to  take  up  again  some  of
the  questions  already  treated  of  by  the  Anthropological  Society,  particularly  as  to
the  ethnic  composition  of  the  Basque  populations.

Before  I  finish  I  would  ask  my  two  colleagues  permission  to  criticise  some
observations  they  have  made.  Treating  of  certain  characters,  they  have  said  that
some  were  a  sign  of  inferiority,  others  of  superiority.  M.  Broca  has  pointed  out
the  curve  of  a  femur  as  furnishing  a  point  of  comparison  between  the  Man  whose
remains  are  before  us  and  the  Gorilla ;  whilst  M.  Pruner-Bey  says  that  a  slight
degree  of  rickets  suffered  in  infancy,  and  of  which  he  believes  he  finds  other
traces,  has  sufficed  to  account  for  this  condition  of  the  femur.  M.  Pruner-Bey,
however,  sees  a  sign  of  inferiority  in  a  faintly  marked  disposition  of  the  parietal


EEMAEKS  ON  THE  CRO-MAGNON   REMAINS.  125

bones  to  form  a  ridge  at  the  sagittal  suture.  This  feature,  indeed,  is  found
among  some  races  of  men  justly  placed  near  the  lowest  stages  of  civilization ;  but
I  must  say  that  I  have  found  it  recently  in  a  perfectly  pure  white  man — one  of
the  most  distinguished  Delegates  who  have  come  to  the  Congress  from  America.
It  was  indeed  far  more  strongly  marked  in  him  than  in  any  skull  in  our
Museum.

From  these  facts  and  many  others,  I  conclude  that  we  ought  to  be  very  careful
in  assigning  significance  to  characters  of  which  in  reality  we  know  neither  the
cause  nor  the  value ;  and  I  should  always  with  regret  employ  expressions  liable
to  deceive  others  not  acquainted  with  their  real  value,  and  likely  to  lead  them  to
believe  in  agreements  between  Man  and  Apes,  of  which  nobody  is  thinking.


120


EKLIQULE  AQUITANIdE.


SKETCH  MAP  OF  A  PART  OF  THE  VALLEY  OF  THE  VEZERE,

including  several  of  the  PREHISTORIC  STATIONS,  namely  those  of  LAUGERIE  HAUTE,  LAUGERIE  BASSE,
(JORGE  D'ENFER,  CRO-MAGNON,  and  LES  EY/IKS.

(Scale  to;oj,  01-  ;H<J8  Inches  to  a  Mile.)


Lang-erie

^tcH.


La  Boric


is   Afaf>  indicates  tft«  position,  of  the    Cro  Mnanon  Cave  .-  it  alvo
thf  Itwalitiej  of  Zaufferie  Haute.  Laiigerie  Jfi^-jrr- .  <*•  the  Gory*  dEnftr  more
correctly  tftan.  the  Map   at  page  29.


EMPLOYMENT  OF  SEWING -NEEDLES.  127


XL

ON  THE  EMPLOYMENT  OF  SEWING-NEEDLES  IN  ANCIENT  TIMES.
BY  M.  E.  LABTET,  Professor  of  Palooontologj-,  Museum  of  Natural  History,  Jardin  dcs  Plantes,  Paris.

"  No  collection  of  antiquities,"  says  the  learned  Mongez  (Article  "  AIGUILLE  a
coudre,"  in  the  Dictionary  of  Antiquities,  '  Encyclopedic  Mdthodique,'  1786),
"  presents  any  ancient  needles,  although  Greek  and  Roman  authors  frequently
mention  needle-work  and  embroidery.  If  needles,"  he  adds,  "  were  at  that  time
made  of  steel,  like  ours,  rust  has  destroyed  them  all."

The  art  of  working  iron  has  been  known,  as  we  are  well  aware,  from  time
immemorial.  In  the  Fourth  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  Genesis  it  is  said  that  men
had  learned  from  Tubal-cain  the  art  of  forging  iron  and  brass  (bronze).  Homer
often  mentions  iron  ;  and  in  the  '  Odyssey,'  Book  ix.  line  391,  we  find  a  com-
parison of  the  noise  made,  by  the  burning  stake  plunged  by  Ulysses  into  the  eye
of  Polyphemus  to  that  of  the  red-hot  hatchet  or  axe-head  hissing  in  the  cold
water  into  which  it  has  been  plunged  by  the  smith  to  give  it  hardness,  —  an
operation,  adds  the  poet,  by  which  iron  gets  its  strength  :  hence  we  may  conclude
that  even  the  art  of  tempering  was  known*.

Nevertheless  for  those  distant  times  of  high  antiquity,  and  even  down  to  the
end  of  the  Middle  Ages,  we  know  only  of  needles  of  bone  and  of  other  metal  than
iron,  namely  bronze.  It  seems  indeed  that  the  ancients  gave  the  preference  to
bronze  in  the  manufacture  of  their  most  delicate  surgical  implements.

The  oldest  mention  of  bronze  needles  occurs  in  the  "  Batrachomyomachia,"
if  this  burlesque  poem  can  indeed  be  attributed  to  Homer.  It  is  there  said,
verses  129  and  130,  that  the  combatants  (the  Mice)  are  armed  with  a  long
bronze  needle  in  place  of  a  lancet.  I  have  to  thank  M.  Merime'e  in  the


*ii»  2'  or"  afi/p  %<i\i;evs  ire\€Kvr  jueyor  i/e  ftirafvbv

t\v  vSiiTi  \j/vxp<j>  ftavrei  /.teydXa  laypVTa,

<bapfinaaii>v'   rii  yup  aurc  atSi'ipov  ye  Kpuros  earii'.  —  Od.  ix.  391—93.

t  Batrachom.,  lin.  129  &  130,  ed.  F.  Frankc,  Londini,  1828.


Apqot*

........      and  their  lance  (is)

a  long  needle,  the  solid  bronze  work  of  Ares.

T2


128  EELIQTJLE  AQU1TANKLE.

first  place,  and  M.  J.  Desnoyers,  for  enabling  me  to  make  this  curious
reference*.

We  know,  moreover,  that  certain  oriental  nations  were  renowned  for  various
kinds  of  needlework.  Phrygia  was  said  to  produce  the  finest  embroideries  of
•antiquity;  and  Babylon  was  celebrated  for  the  magnificence  of  her  tapestries t.
Thus  also  we  find  that  in  later  times  the  Romans  gave  the  name  of  "acus
Phrygia}  "J  to  the  embroidery -needle ;  whilst  a  tapestry-needle  was  known  to
them  by  the  name  of  "  acus  Babylonis  "  §  or  "  acus  Semiramia  "  || .

The  art  of  sewing  must  have  been  carried  to  great  perfection  by  the  Egyptians
also,  if,  at  least,  we  may  judge  by  the  repairs  made  by  hand  in  tissues  of  the
greatest  delicacy.  M.  Prisse  d'Avesnes  has  informed  me  of  his  having  seen  in  an
ancient  Egyptian  shawl,  comparable  with  modern  shawls  of  Indian  muslin,  some
darnings  that  could  only  have  been  effected  by  means  of  an  extremely  fine  needle.

Figs.  48  a  and  48  b.

Ancient  Egyptian  Needles,  drawn  by  II.  Prisse  d'Avesnes.


The  Egyptian  Museum  in  the  Louvre  possesses  a  number  of  bronze  sewing-
needles,  of  different  shapes  and  sizes.  Most  of  them  are  round  or  oblong  at  the
"eye"  or  perforated  end.  Those  figured  in  Wilkinson's  work  'On  the  Manners
and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians,'  3rd  edit.  1847,  vol.  iii.  p.  384,  woodcut,
no.  412,  are  rather  thin  and  have  an  oblong  head.  These  are  from  3  to  3^  English
inches  in  length.  The  bronze  needle  found  at  Pompeii  and  figured  in  the  Article
"Acus"  of  the  'Dictionary  of  Antiquities  '  by  Anthony  Rich,  is  still  thinner  and
shorter  ;  it  is  scarcely  3  centimetres  (about  1^  inch)  long.

Among  the  Romans  the  word  Acus  was  used  both  for  toilet-pins  and  for  sewing-
needles.  The  Acus  crinalis,  or  the  hair-pin  of  the  Roman  ladies,  was  made

*  The  idea  of  needles  and  their  use  in  the  time  of  Homer  is  associated  also  with  a  passage  in  the  '  Iliad  '
(Book  iii.  lines  125,  126),  where  Helen  is  represented  as  being  occupied  in  her  palace  with  tapestry-work.


Inruv  v<f>auc>>,
uVXciKii  itop<ljvi>ei<i>',  TroXercs  2    treiraaaei  aiOXovs,

"  ......  and  she  was  weaving  a  huge  web,  a  twofold  purple  [veil  or  mantle],  and  sprinkling  in  [t.  e.  em-

broidering thereon]  many  contests."  t  Plinii  Hist.  Nat.  lib.  viii.  74.

J  Plin.  1.  c.  §  Martial,  lib.  xiv.  epig.  150.  ||  Ejusd.  lib.  viii.  epig.  28.


EMPLOYMENT  OF  SEWING-NEEDLES.  129

of  other  metals  besides  iron.     Acus  sarcinatrix  was  a  bronze  needle  used  by
tailors  in  making  clothes.     The  needles  of  Cyprus  were  most  sought  after.

I  have  been  unable  to  observe  any  thing  of  the  needles  of  historic  Gaul  witli
well-determined  dates.  Those  of  bone  or  of  bronze  that  have  been  found  at
Alise,  at  Corent,  or  at  Gergovia  in  Auvergne,  date  (according  to  the  learned
antiquary  of  Clermont,  M.  Matthieu)  from  an  epoch  anterior  to  the  Roman
Invasion.  Those  made  of  bone  are  of  less  perfect  Avorkmanship  than  our
prehistoric  specimens  of  needles  made  of  Reindeer  antler.  Most  of  the  Gaulish
needles  have  the  eye  terminal,  and  round  or  oblong ;  but  some  have  the  hole  for
the  thread  pierced  in  a  widened  part  in  the  upper  third  of  the  stem — thus  resem-
bling those  in  bronze,  of  which  we  here  giye  a  figure  (fig.  49)
supplied  by  M.  Matthieu,  and  remarkable  for  the  thinness  of
the  shaft.

o

Among  the  American  nations  Avho  were  civilized  previously  to  Jj

their  connexion  with  European  nations,  AVC  may  refer  to  the
Mexicans,  who,  Avith  considerably  advanced  notions  of  some  arts,
had  not  however  any  knowledge  of  the  use  of  iron.  We  knoAv  3  is

that,  when  the  Spaniards  invaded  Mexico,  the  barbers  in  the  city     ^    4  a
had  still  to  make  use  of  thin-edged  flakes  of  obsidian  as  razors,     .§>  £
in  shaving  their  customers  &c.     The  art  of  sewing,  however,  Avas  |  ^

not  unknown  among  the  ancient  Mexicans ;  and  they  had  needles  J   £

of  bronze,  according  to  Mr.  E.  B.  Tylor*.     The  late  Mr.  Henry  $  -S

Christy's  Collection  contains  some  of  these  bronze  specimens,
which  somewhat  resemble  in  form  and  size  our  packing-needles.  -g

"Among  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  Peru,"  says  Goguetf,
"  Avhom  we  must  regard  at  all  events  as  a  highly  enlightened
and  polished  nation,  neither  needles  nor  pins  were  known ;  but  long  thorns  Avere
used  in  sewing  and  in  fastening  garments  "  % ;  but  this  assertion  of  Goguet's  is
contradicted  by  an  observation,  lately  made  before  the  Anthropological  Society  of
Paris,  on  an  ancient  Peruvian  mummy  having  a  copper  needle  still  inserted  in
the  linen  of  the  envelope,  and  accompanied  with  a  ball  of  thread  §.  Eor  a  know-

*  Anahuac ;  or  Mexico  and  the  Mexicans,  Ancient  and  Modern,  p.  235,  8vo,  London,  1861.

f  De  1'origine  des  lois,  &c.  Nouvelle  edition,  3  vols.  8vo,  Paris,  1809,  vol.  i.  p.  136 ;  and  6th  edit.,  8vo,
1820,  vol.  i.  p.  142.

J  "Hist,  des  Incas  [de  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega;  Traduite  ifec.,  1715  and  1744],  vol.  ii.  pp.  63,  77."

§  [Mr.  David  Forbes,  F.E.S.,  has  informed  us  that  needles  made  of  large  strong  Cactus  spines  are
frequently  found  with  the  female  mummies  of  Peru.  Similar  needles,  in  the  Christy  Collection,  are  nearly
as  strong  as  bone,  and  retain  some  of  the  sewing  thread  of  hair  (?).  And  a  large  bronze  needle,  retaining


130


KELIQUIJi  AQUITANIOE.


ledge  of  this  interesting  fact  I  am  indebted  to  my  learned  friends  Dr.  Broca  and
Dr.  Pruner-Bey.

The  earliest  use  of  iron  or  steel  needles  in  Europe  that  I  have  been  able  to
learn  any  thing  of  was  in  connexion  with  the  establishment  of  a  manufactory  of
these  kinds  of  sewing-needles  at  Nuremberg  in  the  Fourteenth  Century.  They
were  known  in  Prance  in  1540,  and  a  little  later  in  England,  where  they  were
introduced  by  Catherine  Howard,  wife  of  Henry  the  Eighth,  but  they  were  not
sold  till  the  reign  of  Mary,  in  1555.

At  the  present  day  the  use  of  these  necessary  implements  of  steel  is  almost
universally  spread  abroad  by  European  navigators  and  travellers  supplying  such
ware  to  the  more  or  less  savage  nations  with  whom  they  come  into  contact.

Needles  of  bone,  or  of  Walrus  ivory,  were  in  common  use  among  the  Esqui-'
maux  of  the  Arctic  regions  when  visited  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  Century  by
Sir  John  Ross,  who,  writing  of  their  garments,  observes*,  "the  whole  of  these
are  made  by  women,  the  needles  used  being  ivory  [probably  Walrus  ivory],  and

the  threads  of  the  sinews  of  the  Seal ;   the  seams  are  so

neat  that  they  can  scarcely  be  distinguished."

A  similar  account  is  given  by  Captain  Parry f,  who  says

of  the  Esquimaux,  "  In  some  of  the  few  arts  practised  by

the  women,  there  is  much  dexterity  displayed,  particu-
larly in  that  important  branch  of  a  housewife's  business,

sewing,  which,  even  with  their  own  clumsy  needles  of

bone,  they  perform  with  extraordinary  neatness."     The

plate  at  the  end  of  'Parry's   Second  Voyage'   (opposite

p.  548)  contains  an  illustration  (fig.  11)  of  one  of  these  bone

needles,  with  its  sinew  thread ;  and  we  have  reproduced  it

in  our  fig.  50  (Woodcut).     It  differs  but  little  from,  those

used  by  the  Aborigines  of  Perigord,  except  that  it  is  not

so  straight  or  so  delicate  as  most  of  those  figured  in  our  B.  Plate  XVII.

As  to  the  thread  used  by  the  Esquimaux  in  sewing  skins  together  for  garments,

it  appears,  according  to  the  reports  of  Ross  and  Parry,  that  it  is  usually  made

from  the  tendons  of  the  Reindeer ;    and  when  these  are  wanting,  they  employ  the

entrails  of  a  species  of  Seal.

some  woollen  thread,  from  an  ancient  Peruvian  grave,  has  lately  been  presented  to  the  Christy  Collection  by
the  llev.  Saunderson  Tennant. — EDITOR.]

*  Voyage  of  Discovery  &c.,  1819,  vol.  i.  p.  172.

t  Parry's  Second  Voyage  for  the  Discovery  of  a  North-west  Passage,  4to,  1824,  p.  537.


Fig.  50.

Esquimaux  Needle  of  Bone.
(After  Parry.)


EMPLOYMENT  OF  SEWING-NEEDLES.  131

We  have  long  known  also  that  the  Laplanders  use  the  tendons  of  the  Reindeer
in  sewing  their  garments  of  skin.  Olaiis  Magnus*,  who  wrote  about  the  middle
of  the  Sixteenth  Century,  remarks,  in  speaking  of  Lapland,  then  but  little  known,
"Nervi  loco  lini  (ibidem  ob  frigora  non  crescentis)  ad  indumentorum  usum,
instar  fili  prseparati,  deputantur."

A  century  later  Schefferf  gave  an  account  of  the  manner  of  their  preparing  this
thread,  of  which  he  mentions  the  coarse,  fine,  and  very  fine  sorts,  none  of  them,
however,  being  very  long.

This  agrees  well  with  the  report  of  the  poet  Regnard,  who  visited  that  country
in  1681,  and  says  "  the  thread  used  by  the  Laps  is  made  of  Reindeer  sinews  ;  the
finest  is  employed  in  sewing  their  garments,  and  the  coarsest  in  fastening  the
planks  of  their  canoes."

It  is  Linnaeus,  however,  who  has  given  the  fullest  details  of  the  making  and  using
of  this  thread  J  ;  and  we  therefore  transcribe  the  passages  in  full : — "  They  [the
women]  make  their  thread  of  the  sinews  in  the  legs  of  the  Reindeer,  separating
them,  while  fresh,  with  their  teeth,  into  slender  strings,  which  they  twist  together  "
(vol.  i.  p.  133);  and  "  The  te'ndons  in  the  legs  of  the  Reindeer  serve  to  make  thread
or  cord.  In  each  hind  leg  are  two  tendons,  one  before  the  other ;  in  each  fore  leg
one  behind  and  two  or  three  before  it.  The  Laplanders  lay  hold  of  with  their  mouth,
split,  and  moisten  them,  rubbing  them  from  time  to  time  with  Reindeer  marrow,
preserved  in  bladders  for  that  use,  in  order  to  render  them  as  supple  as  possible.
Each  string  is  made  sharp  at  both  ends,  and  drawn  through  holes  of  various  sizes
in  an  instrument  made  on  purpose  (of  wood  or  metal),  to  render  it  as  fine  and
smooth  as  they  can.  Two  such  threads  are  then  twisted  together  by  means  of  the
hand  upon  the  thigh  or  knee.  They  are  generally  held  with  the  left  hand,  and
twisted  with  the  right  upon  the  left  knee,  proceeding  downwards,  the  thread  being
moistened  from  time  to  time  with  saliva  "  (vol.  ii.  p.  25).

Neither  Linne,  Regnard,  nor  Scheffer,  however,  as  far  as  I  can  find,  have
mentioned  how  the  needles  used  by  the  Laps  in  their  day  were  made.  It  is  quite
probable  that  they  were  of  metal,  possibly  of  steel,  since  in  the  above-cited
passage  from  Linne  there  is  mention  made  of  an  implement  "  of  wood  or  metal "

*  Olai  Magni  Historia  de  gentibus  septentrionalibus  eanimque  diversis  statibus,  &c.,  fol.,  Komse,  1555,  lib.
xvii.  cap.  30,  p.  598  ;  and  Olai  Magni  gentium  septentrionalium  historise  breviarium,  12mo,  1652,  p.  443.

t  Joannis  Schcffcri  Argentoratensis  Lapponia,  &e.,  1673,  Frankfort,  4to,  p.  262  ;  '  Histoire  de  la  Laponie,'
traduction  franchise,  Paris,  1678,  4to,  pp.  240,  241.

J  Lachesis  Lapponica ;  or  a  Tour  in  Lapland,  now  first  published  from  the  original  MS.  Journal  of  the
celebrated  Linnoeus  [translated  by  C.  Troillius],  by  J.  E.  Smith,  2  vols.  8vo,  London,  1811.


132  KELIQUI.E

with  which  they  prepared  the  thread.  The  North-Europeans  seem  to  have  been
acquainted  with  the  use  of  metals  long  before  the  American  Esquimaux.  Thus
the  Kamtschadale  women  who,  towards  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  used  for
sewing  and  embroidering  sometimes  vegetable  thread,  sometimes  the  sinews  of
quadrupeds,  were  provided  with  steel  needles  by  the  Russians,  and  at  an  earlier
date  got  them  from  Japan*.

Captain  Parry  t  furnishes  also  similar  notices  of  the  employment  by  the  Esqui-
maux of  thread  made  of  Reindeer  tendon;  and  he  gives  some  very  interesting
details  relating  to  their  management  of  the  needle,  and  the  preparation  to  which
they  subject  the  skins  intended  to  be  sewn  together  for  garments,  probably  to  give
greater  facility  to  the  passage  of  the  needles,  especially  when  these  are  of  bone.
He  says  : — "  The  thread  they  use  is  the  sinew  of  the  Reindeer  (tooktoo  ewalloo),  or,
when  they  cannot  procure  this,  the  swallow-pipe  of  the  Neitiek  [a  kind  of  Seal  ?].
This  may  be  split  into  threads  of  different  sizes,  according  to  the  nature  of  their
work,  and  is  certainly  a  most  admirable  material.  In  sewing,  the  point  of  the
needle  is  entered  and  drawn  through  in  a  direction  towards  the  body,  and  not  from
it  or  towards  one  side  as  with  our  seamstresses.  They  sew  the  Deer-skins  with  a
'  round  seam ; '  and  the  water-tight  boots  and  shoes  are  '  stitched.'  The  latter  is
performed  in  a  very  adroit  and  efficacious  manner,  by  putting  the  needle  only  half
through  the  substance  of  one  part  of  the  Seal-skin,  so  as  to  leave  no  hole  for
admitting  the  water.  To  soften  the  Seal-skins  of  which  the  boots,  shoes,  and
mittens  are  made,  the  women  chew  them  an  hour  or  two  together,  and  the  young
girls  are  often  seen  employed  in  thus  preparing  the  materials  for  their  mothers."
It  can  readily  be  conceived  that  this  preparation  would  greatly  facilitate  the
passage  of  a  bone  or  ivory  needle  through  the  edges  of  two  skins  that  have  to  be
joined  by  sewing  at  the  edge  ("  overcasting  ")  or  by  stitching  flat.

Now,  if  the  reader  looks  at  our  B.  Plate  XVII.,  he  will  see  in  figs.  7-20  a  series
of  fourteen  needles  of  different  sizes,  and  all  pierced  with  an  eye,  or  hole  for
threading.  In  the  two  longest  (figs.  7  and  12)  the  top  of  the  needle  has  broken
off  at  the  eye,  the  lower  border  of  the  perforation  remaining.  The  longest
specimens  have  been  made  of  flakes  detached  by  sawing  from  Reindeer  antlers,
and  subsequently  cut  thin  and  round  so  as  to  taper  to  a  point  at  one  end,  whilst
the  other  is  somewhat  flattened  and  pierced  with  the.  hole  for  the  passage  of  the

*  Description  do  toutes  les  nations  de  1'Empirc  de  Eussie  [par  J.  G.  Georgi] ;  St.  Petersburg,  3  torn.  1776,
4to ;  and  1797,  3me  Collection,  p.  86.  See  also  '  Russia ;  or  a  compleat  historical  account  of  all  the  nations
which  compose  that  Empire,'  3  vols.  8vo,  London,  1780,  vol.  iii.  p.  150.

t  Loc.  cit.


EMPLOYMENT  OF  SEWING-NEEDLES.


133


Fig.  51.

A  piece  of  Sandstone  that  has
served  as  a  Rubber  in  making
Needles ;  from  Massat,  Ariege*.


thread.  Figure  16  appears  to  have  been  made  of  a  splinter  taken  from  the  shaft
of  a  Bird's  bone.  Others,  of  medium  size,  must  have  been  made  from  pieces  cut
out  from  the  very  compact  bones  of  Herbivorous  Mammals.  Figure  3  in  the
same  Plate  shows  the  upper  half  of  a  metatarsal  of  Reindeer,  having  on  its
anterior  face  a  long  notch  made  by  saw-cuts,  visible  on  both  its  sides,  by  means
of  which  it  has  been  easy  to  remove  from  this  very  hard  part  of  the  bone  long
narrow  pieces  sufficiently  thin  to  be  worked  into  needles  of  very  small  size.  The
lower  portion  of  a  Horse's  metacarpal,  shown  by  fig.  13,  also  bears  traces  of
sawing  and  longitudinal  cuts,  made  with  the  same  intention.  Some  Prehistoric
Stations  of  the  Reindeer  Age  have  been  cited  as  having  yielded  needles  of  ivory ;
but  as  yet,  for  our  part,  we  do  not  know  of  any  specimens  consisting  of  that
particular  material.

The  aforesaid  needles  of  bony  substance  have  nearly  always  rounded  stems ;  and
most  usually  they  have  been  carefully  polished.  When  they  have  not  received
this  polish,  it  is  possible  with  a  lens  to  distinguish
longitudinal  stria?,  that  must  have  been  produced  by
the  finely  broken  edges  of  flint  flakes,  such  as  served
to  thin  down  and  to  point  these  little  instruments,
just  as  at  the  present  day  we  use  a  piece  of  broken
glass  to  shape  and  sharpen  an  awl  of  bone  or  hard
wood.  Perhaps  the  first  polish  was  given  to  these
bone  needles  by  rubbing  them  on  a  piece  of  sandstone  ;
and  we  have  found  several  such  examples,  bearing
straight  and  rather  deep  grooves,  in  which  can  be
placed,  as  we  ourselves  have  done,  the  partly  reduced
splinters  of  bone,  which  therein  rapidly  receive  a  rough
polish  by  simple  rubbing.  We  here  figure  (Woodcut,
fig.  51)  a  piece  of  sandstone,  with  numerous  grooves,
•which  came  from  the  Cave  of  Massat  (Ariege),  where,
as  is  well  known,  M.  Alfred  Fontan,  in  the  first  place,  and,  subsequently,  M.  Gar-
rigou  have  found  needles  of  the  same  type  as  those  figured  in  our  B.  Plate  XVII.
In  A.  Plate  XXIX.,  among  the  Stone  Implements,  are  represented  three  other

*  [In  the  Christy  Collection  is  a  rounded  piece  of  sandstone,  about  the  size  of  the  palm  of  the  hand,  hearing
grooves  made  hy  rubbing  small  cylindrical  objects  on  its  surface,  in  different  directions.  It  was  obtained
from  an  Indian  mound,  containing  skeletons,  near  Appalachicola,  in  Florida.  Polished  stone  celts,  chipped
arrow-heads,  and  small  earthenware  vases  were  obtained  from  the  same  mound,  but  neither  needles  nor
piercers. — EDITOR.]


134


EELIQUI.E  AQUITAJSTIOE.


Firj.  52.

Flint  Piercer  from
La  Madelaine.


small  furrowed  slabs  of  this  sandstone,  which  have  served  for  the  same  purpose :
these  are  from  the  Caves  of  Dordogne.  As  for  the  more  polished  and  shining
surface  observable  in  some  of  the  better-made  specimens  of  Needles  from  the
Dordogne  Caves,  it  has  been  produced  by  friction,  but  probably  with  the  aid  of
some  fine  sand  or  hard  powder,  such  as  is  used  for  the  like  purpose  at  present  in
this  kind  of  work.

The  "  eye,"  or  hole  for  threading,  in  these  Prehistoric  Bone  Needles  has  been
usually  hollowed  out  by  the  workman  boring  alternately,  first  on  one  side  and
then  on  the  other,  with  a  tool  used  as  a  drill.

In  the  attempts  we  have  made  to  get  a  clear  notion  of  the  processes  by  which,
in  the  absence  of  every  kind  of  metal,  the  Aborigines  of  Pe"rigord  were  able  to
manufacture  such  delicate  implements,  we  have  been
tolerably  successful  in  preparing,  by  the  employment
simply  of  flint  flakes,  the  little  rods  of  bone  sufficiently
thin  to  be  fashioned  as  needles,  and  in  scraping  them
with  a  splinter  of  flint  to  make  them  cylindrical  and
pointed;  but  when  we  tried  to  bore  the  hole  for  the
"eye"  in  the  thicker  end,  with  some  of  the  fine-pointed
simple  flint  flakes  so  frequent  in  the  Caves  where  such
stone  chips  were  abundantly  made,  the  points  always  broke
off  at  the  first  turn  of  the  hand  in  the  attempt.  Luckily
we  had  collected  some  rare  specimens  of  flint  flakes,  one
end  of  which,  worked  into  little  facets,  somewhat  like  cer-
tain diamonds,  terminated  in  an  obtuse  point ;  and  by
means  of  these  shaped  flakes,  or  little  piercers,  applied
alternately  to  the  two  faces  of  the  somewhat  flattened
head  of  the  bone  needle,  and  worked  by  a  simple  turn  of

the  hand,  we  have  made  in  fifteen  minutes  a  perforation  or  "eye"  exactly  like
those  of  the  old  needles  of  the  Caves.  Fitted  to  the  end  of  a  turner's  or  a  lock-
smith's drill,  one  of  these  old  piercers  produced  the  same  result  in  two  or  three
minutes.

It  is  conceivable  that  the  Cave-folk  here  had  resort  to  some  mechanical
appliance  in  making  their  tools,  and  particularly  their  sewing-needles ;  for  when
these  were  unfit  for  use,  from  the  breaking  of  the  eye,  they  had  ready  means  of
making  another  perforation  below  the  place  of  the  first,  as  clearly  seen  in  B.  Plate
XVII.  fig.  16,  in  which  the  rough  fracture  of  the  thick  end  of  the  needle  shows
the  trace  of  a  former  hole,  below  which  the  existing  "  eye  "  has  been  pierced.


EMPLOYMENT  OF  SEWING-NEEDLES.  135

We  here  figure  also  another  needle  ("Woodcut,  fig.  53),  in  which  the  relation  of
the  second  "  eye  "  to  the  place  of  the  first  is  still  more  evident.      In  another

Fig.  53.  Fig.  54.

Broken  Needle,  with  a  new  Eye.  Broken  Needle,  with  a  new  Eye  partly  made.


specimen  (Woodcut,  fig.  54)  we  see  the  commencement  only  of  the  new  perfora-
tion, shown  by  the  black  dot,  which  was  intended  to  be  completely  worked  into  a
new  "  eye  "  to  the  broken  needle.

So  also  when  the  point  of  a  needle  was  broken,  the  Cave-folks  proceeded  to  refit
it  for  use,  though  shortened,  as  can  well  be  seen  in  figs.  17-20  of  B.  Plate  XVII.
It  is  even  easy  to  see  in  figs.  18  and  20  that,  in  the  broken  needles,  the  point  has
been  made  by  means  of  simple  longitudinal  cuts,  and  the  workman  has  not  taken
the  trouble  to  make  the  point  round  by  smoothing  off  the  angles.

It  has  been  thought  by  some  that  these  needles  made  of  bone  and  Reindeer
antler,  and  so  slight  in  the  stem,  could  not  have  offered  sufficient  resistance  to
the  necessary  pressure  for  piercing  skins  joined  edge  on  edge,  and  that  really  the
perforations  must  have  been  made  with  an  ordinary  awl, — the  needle  only  carrying
the  sewing-thread.  But  the  operation  thus  conducted  would  have  been  more
complicated,  and  quite  as  long  as  if  the  workman  had  simply  employed  the
bodkin  or  the  awl  in  use  among  shoemakers  and  harness-makers.  We  have  also
seen,  in  the  detailed  account  which  Captain  Parry  has  given  of  the  mode  of
sewing  among  the  Esquimaux  women  (see  above,  p.  132),  that,  by  means  of  a
preparatory  manipulation,  they  render  the  skins  well  suited  for  the  direct  use
of  their  bone  and  ivory  needles ;  and  the  seams  are  actually  impermeable  to  water,
so  perfectly  and  ingeniously  are  they  stitched  together.

There  are,  however,  among  the  specimens  figured  in  B.  Plate  XVII.,  some  very
long  and  slender  Needles  (such  as  figs.  7-12)  which  it  would  be  difficult  to
suppose  could  bear  without  breaking  the  pressure  necessary  to  force  such  a  needle

u2


136  RELIQULE  AQUITANIOE.

through  two  skins  in  process  of  being  sewn  together.  The  short  Needles  must
have  been  far  more  appropriate  for  this  kind  of  work,  as,  indeed,  we  see  at  the
present  day  with  tailors  and  sempstresses  in  sewing  cloth  and  thick  linen  or
cotton  stuffs.

Among  the  ancients  long  and  very  slender  needles,  of  which  bronze  examples
have  been  met  with,  served  probably  for  working  embroidery  or  tapestry  (acus
Phrygian ;  acus  Babylonis).  May  it  not  be  necessary,  therefore,  to  explain  the
use  of  the  long  needles  among  the  Cave-folk  of  Perigord  by  supposing  that  their
women  had  other  handiwork  with  the  needle  besides  the  simple  sewing  of
garments  to  cover  the  body  and  protect  it  from  the  rigours  of  the  climate  ?
Excepting  this,  we  must  admit  that  we  have  no  foundation  for  supposing  that
these  Aborigines  had  any  notion  of  the  use  of  textile  vegetable  matters  in
preparing  tissues ;  for  among  the  remains  of  their  household  industry  there  is
not  known  at  present  any  relic  of  the  distaff,  or  of  those  loom-weights  which  are
of  frequent  occurrence  among  the  remains  of  the  Lake-habitations  of  Switzerland
and  also  in  other  Stations  of  that  more  recent  age  when  a  knowledge  of  the  art  of
weaving  coarse  stuffs  of  linen  thread  had  grown  up.

Scheffer,  whom  we  have  already  had  occasion  to  cite,  mentions  also,  in  his
'  History  of  Lapland,'  that  the  Lap  women  are  very  prodigal  of  embroidered
ornament,  not  only  on  their  own  clothing,  but  also  on  various  little  articles  of
everyday  use  to  which  the  ornament  can  be  applied — as,  for  instance,  the  sledge-
harness  of  the  Reindeers.  It  is,  however,  in  the  embroidering  of  bands  for  different
parts  of  their  garments  that  they  especially  excel.

The  same  love  for  ornaments  of  needlework  shows  itself  among  the  Esquimaux
women.  The  Danish  Missionary,  Hans  Egede,  who  in  the  beginning  of  the
Eighteenth  Century  had  sojourned  many  years  among  the  aboriginal  Green-
landers,  gives  the  following  details  respecting  the  women's  toilet*  : — "Next  the
body  they  wear  a  waistcoat  made  of  young  fawns'  skins,  with  the  hairy  side
inwards.  The  coat,  or  upper  garment,  is  also  made  of  fine  coloured  swans'  skins
(or,  in  defect  of  that,  of  seal  skins)  trimmed  and  edged  with  white,  and  nicely
wrought  in  the  seams  and  about  the  brim,  which  looks  very  well."

In  the  third  volume  of  the  '  Description  of  all  the  Nations  of  the  Russian  Empire,'
cited  above  (p.  132),  are  given  details,  of  a  similar  kind,  respecting  the  costumes  of
the  inhabitants  of  some  islands  of  Behring  Straits,  to  the  east  of  Kamtschatka,  and
belonging  to  the  Aleutian  group.  At  the  time  when  the  account  was  written

*  A  Description  of  Greenland  &c.  By  M.  Hans  Egede.  Translated  from  the  Danish.  8vo,  London,  1745,
p.  131.


EMPLOYMENT  OF  SEWING-NEEDLES.  137

(1777)  "  these  islanders  lived  in  holes  which  they  had  hollowed  out  for  themselves
in  the  ground.  They  possessed  no  domestic  animal,  not  even  the  dog ;  and  they
had  nothing  but  stone  and  bone  as  the  materials  for  arms  and  household
implements :  they  lived  on  fish  and  the  flesh  of  such  quadrupeds  as  they  could
take  by  hunting,  and  the  remains  of  which,  accumulated  in  their  subterranean
habitations,  exhaled  a  strong  odour :  their  clothing  was  made  of  the  skins  of
different  animals  and  sewn  with  thread  made  of  sinew.  Nevertheless  the  women
displayed  an  extreme  coquetry  in  some  of  the  details  of  their  attire.  Their  out-
door garments  were  composed  of  the  belly-skin  of  different  birds ;  and,  though
they  had  but  a  poor  knowledge  of  the  art  of  tanning,  they  were  very  adroit
sempstresses;  and  the  borders  of  their  robes  or  dresses  were  very  prettily
embroidered.  They  also  applied  embroidered  bands  to  their  caps  made  of  the
skins  of  the  Grebe  and  Diver.  These  embroiderings  were  very  ingenious.  They
were  made  with  fish-bones,  which  served  for  needles,  and  with  sinews  of  quadrupeds,
which  they  know  how  to  split  and  prepare  as  thread"*.

Thus,  among  this  people,  having  no  flocks  to  supply  them  with  wool  for  their
garments — deprived  too  of  -textile  plants  such  as  could  be  converted  into  thread
— the  instinct  of  coquetry  still  showed  itself  in  the  luxury  of  embroideries,  which
the  women  were  reduced  to  execute  with  fish-bones  for  needles,  and  sinews  for
thread.

Judging,  then,  by  what  we  have  found  in  their  household  works  of  arts,  the
women  of  the  Prehistoric  Aborigines  of  Pe"rigord,  in  the  Reindeer  Age,  must
have  had  more  advantages,  at  least  in  some  points  of  view ;  and  their  needles,
various  in  size  and  form,  sufficiently  denote  that  they  could  use  them  for  handi-
work of  divers  kinds.

If,  now,  the  reader  looks  at  fig.  6,  in  B.  Plate  XVII.,  he  will  observe  on  an
Implement  made  of  Reindeer  Antler,  and  unfortunately  broken  at  both  ends,  the
engraved  outline  of  an  object  which  appeaxs  to  us  to  be  a  human  hand,  with
slender  and  somewhat  over-long  fingers.  There  remain  only  four  fingers  and  a
portion  of  the  upper  metacarpal  surface,  behind  which  we  can  recognize  a  series
of  chevrons  or  lines  broken  at  a  recurrent  angle.  At  first  sight  these  chevron
lines  might  be  taken  for  marks  of  tattooing,  such  as  are  still  in  our  own  times
made  on  this  part  of  the  forearm  among  some  savages.  The  figured  specimen,
however,  does  not  show  any  contraction  behind  the  hand,  where  the  wrist  should
be ;  and  therefore  we  are  led  to  suppose  that  this  part  is  covered,  as  far  as  the
back  of  the  hand,  by  a  garment  or  sleeve  ornamented  with  embroidery  or  with

*  See  also  '  Russia'  &c.,  3  vols.  Svo,  London,  1780,  vol.  iii.  pp.  209-213.


138  RELIQUIAE  AQUITANICJE.

such  attached  bands  as  Scheffer  describes  as  being  very  frequently  used  for  orna-
ment by  the  women  of  Lapland.

As  for  the  thread  used  in  sewing  or  in  embroidery  by  the  aborigines  of  Peri-
gord,  we  have  on  several  occasions*  had  to  notice  on  certain  Reindeer  bones
particular  marks  indicative  of  the  tendons  of  this  animal  having  been  used  for
some  purpose;  and  what  we  know  of  the  use  made  of  them  among  the  Lap-
landers, the  Esquimaux,  and  other  modern  nations  authorizes  us  to  conclude
that  the  old  Pe"rigord  people,  living  under  like  circumstances,  employed  them  in
a  similar  way.

In  fig.  2  of  B.  Plate  XVII.,  showing  the  posterior  face  of  the  lower  end  of  a
metacarpal  bone  of  the  Eeindeer,  there  are  above  the  left  condyle,  at  a,  two
marks,  or  little  notches,  which  can  be  explained  only  as  having  been  made  by  the
sharp  edge  of  the  instrument  used  at  this  point  in  cutting  away  the  flexor  tendon.
In  fig.  4  also  of  the  same  Plate,  representing  a  cubo-scaphoid  of  the  hock  of  the
Reindeer,  we  notice  some  similar  notches  that  have  been  made  on  the  front  face
of  the  bone,  on  the  course  of  the  tendons.  It  is  not  rare  to  find  these  bones  of
the  Reindeer  bearing  the  same  significative  marks — though,  as  it  is  easy  to  under-
stand, they  could  only  have  been  produced  when  the  pressure  of  the  instrument
cutting  the  tendon  has  been  sufficiently  great  to  penetrate  even  to  the  bone.  We
may  remark,  however,  that  up  to  the  present  time  we  have  not  observed  such
notches  or  analogous  marks  on  the  metacarpals  or  metatarsals  either  of  the
Aurochs  or  of  the  Horse.

All  tends  to  make  us  admit  that,  like  the  Laplanders  and  Esquimaux  of  the
present  day,  the  ancient  Cave-folk  of  Pe"rigord  must  have  used  the  tendons  of  the
Reindeer  in  sewing  their  clothes  that  were  made  of  skins ;  and,  as  the  needles  of
those  primitive  times  vary  considerably  in  form  and  dimensions,  it  may  well  be
assumed  that  they  also  knew  at  that  time  how  to  split  the  tendons  and  make  them
into  threads  of  different  degrees  of  fineness,  so  that  they  could  be  used  for  different
kinds  of  needle-work.

Scheffer  t  tells  us  that,  in  his  time,  the  Lapland  women  did  not  spin  flax  (which,
indeed,  as  Olaus  Magnus  remarks  J,  could  not  grow  in  so  cold  a  climate),  but
they  knew  how  to  make  thread  with  the  wool  of  their  Sheep,  and  also  with  Hare's
fur ;  and  with  the  latter  they  knitted  caps,  as  soft  as  the  down  of  the  Swan's  neck,
and  wonderfully  warm§.

*  '  Comptes  Eendus,'  vol.  Iviii.  p.  407 ;  "  Cavernes  du  Perigord,"  p.  33,  in  the  '  Revue  Archeologique,'
March  1864  &c.  f  Op.  cit.  J  Op.  cit.

§  Pliny  also  refers  to  garments  having  been  made  of  hare  (and  rabbit  ?)  fur,  '  Nat.  Hist.'  lib.  viii.  §  81  (55).


EMPLOYMENT  OF  SEWING-NEEDLES.  139

Our  Aborigines  of  the  Reindeer  Period,  however,  had  no  Sheep,  and  probably
did  not  know  this  animal  even  in  the  wild  state  (we  have  not  found  any  bones  of
this  genus  in  the  hearth-stuffs  or  refuse-heaps) ;  but  the  bones  of  the  Hare  and
Rabbit  are  not  very  rare  in  the  caves  formerly  inhabited  in  Pdrigord ;  and  the
usually  unbroken  state  of  these  bones  may  imply  that  the  flesh  of  these  animals
did  not  serve  for  food  to  the  cave-dwellers.  Besides,  it  is  known  that  a  reluctance
to  eat  the  flesh  of  Hare  and  Rabbit,  general  enough  in  ancient  times,  still  exists
among  some  nations  of  modern  Europe ;  and  it  may  be  that  in  hunting  the  Hare
and  Rabbit  the  people  of  the  Reindeer  Age  had  no  other  object  than  to  procure
the  furs  of  these  animals  for  making  clothes,  or,  if  we  were  to  propose  another
assimilation  with  the  habits  of  the  Laplanders,  for  using  the  spun  hair  of
their  fur.

We  have  represented  in  figs.  5,  21,  and  22,  of  B.  Plate  XVII.,  three  tools  of
Reindeer  antler,  having  one  extremity  truncated,  the  other  cut  across  with  shallow
notches  and  ending  in  a  blunt  point.  In  endeavouring  to  explain  the  probable  use
of  these  little  implements,  it  was  at  first  thought  that  they  might  be  some  kind  of
crochet-hook,  for  making  thread,  or  for  knitting  with  very  large  meshes;  but
since  these  three  specimens  were  drawn,  other  similar  specimens  have  been  found
quite  perfect,  with  a  somewhat  sharp  point,  which  is  wanting  in  these  figured
specimens.  Hence  they  who  at  first  were  disposed  to  consider  them  knitting
hooks  would  now  be  inclined  to  regard  them  as  points  of  barbless  arrows,  intended
to  be  fastened  to  the  shaft  with  a  ligature  in  the  notches  of  the  lower  end.  With
these  different  interpretations,  we  still  leave  them  in  some  uncertainty.

Before  ending  this  detailed  account  of  the  art  of  sewing  among  the  Aborigines
of  the  Reindeer  Period,  I  must  state  that  the  eyed  needles  were  not  found
indifferently  in  all  the  Stations  of  that  Period.

In  Dordogne,  it  is  at  Les  Eyzies,  at  Laugerie  Basse,  and  at  La  Madelaine  that
the  largest  quantity  of  Needles  of  this  form  have  been  collected,  and  always  in
company  with  Harpoon-heads  of  the  barbed  type.  It  is  also  with  these  barbed
weapon-heads  that  similar  Needles  have  been  found  in  the  Bruniquel  Cave,  by
M.  De  Lastic,  and  in  the  rock-shelters  of  the  same  place,  so  successfully  explored
by  M.  Brun  of  Montauban.  One  of  those  eyed  needles  had  been  discovered  in
1852  by  M.  Alfred  Fontan,  who  was  kind  enough  to  intrust  it  to  me  for  illus-
tration in  the  '  Annales  des  Sciences  Naturelles '  in  1861*.  M.  Fontan  found  it
in  the  lower  cave  of  Massat  (Arie"ge),  where  it  was  associated  with  the  barbed
weapon-heads.  Since  that  time,  other  Needles,  with  barbed  harpoons,  have  been

*  Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat.  4""  serie,  Zoologie,  vol.  xv.  1861,  p.  251,  pi.  13.  fig.  4.


110  EELIQUI^E  AQTJITANHLE.

obtained  by  M.  Garrigou  from  that  cave  of  Massat :  they  were  exhibited  in  the
Exhibition  of  the  History  of  Labour  at  Paris  in  1867.

The  cave  of  Lourdes  (Hautes  Pyre'ne'es),  containing  many  remains  of  the
Reindeer,  has  furnished  only  two  coarse  Needles,  having  an  oblong  head  and  eye,
not  pierced  by  boring,  but  rather  by  cutting  with  a  sharp  instrument.  One  of
these  needles  has  been  illustrated  by  M.  Alphonse  Milne-Edwards,  in  his  note  on
the  works  of  man  found  in  this  cave  of  Lourdes*.  The  eye  of  this  coarse  needle
is  broken  half  off,  as  shown  in  the  illustration  referred  to.

In  the  cave  of  Veyrier,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Saleve,  which  belongs,  like  those
of  Les  Eyzies,  La  Madelaine,  Laugerie  Basse,  &c.,  to  the  artistic  portion  of  the
Reindeer  Period,  and  where  have  been  found  antlers  of  this  ruminant  on  which
some  figures  of  animals  and  plants  are  engraved,  MM.  Alphonse  Favret  and
Thioly  j  have  noticed  the  discovery  of  Sewing-needles,  one  of  which,  according  to
M.  Thioly,  seems  to  be  of  ivory.

In  the  cavern  of  Aurignac  (Haute  Garonne),  however,  in  that  of  Les  Fe"es
(Allier),  and  at  the  station  of  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  where  the  remains  of  the  Rein-
deer are  less  abundant,  and  at  the  same  time  the  Quaternary  fauna  is  more
completely  represented  by  extinct  species,  the  eyed  Needles  have  not  as  yet
been  met  with.  They  seem  to  be  represented  by  simple  awls,  made  of  bone,  or
perhaps  of  ivory.  We  may  add  that  in  the  Stations  above  named  the  probably
older  lanceolate  weapon-heads  occxir  in  place  of  those  of  the  barbed  type  (see
above,  p.  94,  and  p.  95).

We  know  that  eyed  needles  of  bone  have  been  discovered  in  several  of  the
ancient  lacustrine  habitations  in  Switzerland.  M.  Delfortrie  has  noticed  some  in
a  Station  (of  the  Polished-Stone  Period)  which  he  has  explored,  even  in  the  town
of  Bordeaux;  and  we  must  remember  that  a  considerable  number  have  been
found  at  the  Gaulish  Stations  of  Alise,  Corent,  and  Gergovia  in  Auvergne.  But
in  general  these  needles,  though  belonging  to  times  comparatively  more  recent,
are  far  from  being  as  well  shaped  as  those  of  the  Artistic  Epoch  of  the  Reindeer
Age.

It  may  well  be  supposed  that,  in  the  same  region  of  Asia  where  the  art  of
embroidery  in  historic  times  was  carried  to  high  perfection,  the  use  of  the  acus
Phrygia  and  the  acus  Babylonia  (see  above,  p.  128)  must  in  more  remote  antiquity

*  "De  Pexistence  de  1'homme  pendant  la  periode  quaternaire  dans  la  grotte  do  Lourdes,"  &c.,  'Ann.  des
So.  Nat.'  ^""serie,  Zoologie,  vol.  xvii.  1862,  p.  243,  pi.  6.  fig.  3.

t  '  Station  de  1'homme  de  1'age  de  la  pierre  a  Veyrier,  prus  de  Geneve,'  1868.
+  '  L'Epoque  du  Benne  an  pied  du  mont  Saleve,'  1868.


EMPLOYMENT  OF  SEWING-NEEDLES.


14,1


have  been  preceded  by  the  use  of  bone  needles.  When,  in  1863,  at  the  end  of
his  expedition  to  the  Dead  Sea,  the  late  Due  de  Luynes  visited  (at  Beth-Saour)
the  collection  of  worked  flints  and  other  very  ancient  objects  collected  by  M.  le
Cure  Moretain  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bethlehem,  he  noticed  a  bone  sewing-
needle,  having  a  pierced  eye,  but  broken  at  the  point.  M.  Louis  Lartet,  who
accompanied  the  Duke,  asked  permission  to  draw  it ;  and  hence  I  am  enabled  to
satisfy  myself  that  this  needle  is  exactly  similar  to  those  found  in  our  Stations
of  the  Reindeer  Period  in  Perigord.


Fig.  55.

A  small  Awl  or  Needle-piercer,  from  Mentone,  North  Italy.


Fig.  56.

A  small  Awl  or  Needle-piercer,  from  Les  Eyzies,  Dordogne.


142  RELIQUL/E  AQUITANIOE.


XII.

REMARKS  ON  THE  REINDEER.     By  ALEXANDER  C.  ANDERSON,  Esq.
(In  a  Letter  dated  November  20,  1868,  Rosebank,  Victoria,  Vancouver's  Island.)

THE  following  observations  are  connected  with  the  Notes  upon  my  former  com-
munication, supra,  pages  55-57.  As  I  consider  the  establishment  of  the  identity
of  the  Reindeer  with  the  description  given  by  Caesar  to  be  a  point  of  great  im-
portance in  the  furtherance  of  your  investigations,  I  must  ask  indulgence  for  the
remarks  here  offered,  as  a  necessary  pendant  to  my  former  letter.

With  reference  to  Note  7,  page  55. — The  authority  of  Sallust  will,  I  apprehend,
go  but  a  small  way  to  solve  the  apparent  difficulty,  since  probably  from  that  very
authority  all  subsequent  misapprehensions  on  the  subject  have  arisen.  His  words
("  Germani  intectum  rhenonibus  corpus  tegunt")*  stand  an  isolated  passage
among  the  fragments  of  the  missing  historical  books.  It  is  possible  that  the  con-
text, had  it  been  preserved,  might  have  conveyed  intimation  of  the  true  meaning
of  the  foreign  word  which  he  introduces,  apparently  for  the  first  time  in  its  adapted
sense,  to  his  Roman  readers ;  but  in  the  absence  of  such  explanation  it  is  permissible
to  suppose  that  he  uses  the  word  in  this  concise  form  to  avoid  a  long  periphrasis.
Be  this  as  it  may,  Sallust,  the  contemporary  of  Ca3sar,  and  writing  soon  after  his
death,  could  have  derived  his  information  only  from  the  words  of  Caesar,  the  sole
original  authority.  To  revert,  then,  to  the  text :  the  passage  is  so  clear  that  it
can,  I  submit,  admit  of  no  questionable  reading.  Amplifying  it  somewhat  in
order  to  its  due  apprehension,  it  reads  thus : — "  pellibus  rhenonum,  aut  parvis
tegumentis  de  pellibus  rhenonum  consutis,  utuntur,"  &c.  "  They  wear  the  skins
of  [certain  animals  called]  Rhenones,  or  scanty  garments  [composed]  of  the  skins
of  those  animals."  When  the  Rheno  became  scarce  in  after  times  the  skins  of
other  animals  were  necessarily  employed  as  a  substitute;  and  foreign  writers,
having  once  adopted  the  term  "  rhenones  "  to  signify  such  garments,  might  still
continue  to  do  so  notwithstanding  the  change  of  material, — this  the  more  readily,
since  the  original  derivation  of  the  word  seems  to  have  been  entirely  overlooked.
The  modern  languages  present  many  instances  of  a  similar  kind.  The  defensive
armour,  originally  made  of  leather,  for  instance,  is  still  called  a  cuirass,  notwith-

*  Sallustii  Historiarum  Incert.  Lib.  Fragmenta  (Editio  Crispini  in  usum  Delphini,  Lond.  1793).


HEMAEKS  ON  THE  KEINDEEK.  143

standing  the  widely  different  material  of  which  it  is  now  composed.  From  the
first,  however,  this  word  "  Rheno "  (so  rarely  occurring  in  original  authorities)
seems  to  have  been  a  crux  to  commentators.  Varro,  '  De  Lingua  Latina,'  lib.  iv.
(I  cite  the  "  Delphin  "  annotators),  states  it  to  be  a  word  of  Gallic  origin  ("  rheno-
nem  esse  ait  vocem  Gallicam  "),  apparently  to  guard  against  the  misconstructions
which,  we  may  infer,  had  even  then  arisen.  Not  to  appeal  to  my  own  experience,
I  will  quote  from  Sir  Alexander  Mackenzie  a  description  of  the  garment  formed
of  the  Reindeer  skin,  such,  though  more  ample  in  its  proportions,  as  Caesar
probably  intended.  Speaking  of  the  dress  of  the  Chipewyans,  he  says : — "  In  the
winter  it  is  composed  of  the  skins  of  Deer*  and  their  fawns,  and  dressed  as  fine  as
chamois  leather,  in  the  hair.  In  the  summer  their  apparel  is  the  same,  except
that  it  is  prepared  without  the  hair  ....  The  shirt  or  coat  when  girded  round  the
waist  reaches  to  the  middle  of  the  thigh  ....  A  ruff  or  tippet  surrounds  the
neck ;  and  the  skin  of  the  head  forms  a  curious  kind  of  cap.  A  robe  made  of
several  deer-  or  fawn-skins  covers  the  whole.  The  dress  is  worn  single  or
double,  but  always,  in  the  winter,  with  the  hair  within  and  without "  f.

Prom  his  omission  to  supply  the  name,  as  he  was  careful  to  do  in  his  other
descriptions,  it  is  evident  that  Caesar,  in  describing  the  particular  animal  under
consideration,  was  dubious  of  its  identity  with  that  of  whose  skin  he  had  already
spoken.  Yet  the  mere  fact  of  this  omission  might  be  argued  to  prove  that  he  at
least  suspected  that  identity.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  he  obtained  his  descrip-
tions, under  the  most  favourable  assumption,  at  second  hand,  and  probably  through
interpreters  very  inadequate  where  nice  discrimination  was  required.  Hence  what-
ever inaccuracies  he  may  have  been  led  into ;  and  of  these  inaccuracies  we  have  a
notable  example  in  the  absurd  description  of  the  Elk,  immediately  succeeding.
As  aptly  suggested  by  Mr.  Dawkins  in  the  quotation  given  at  page  55,  a  rude
profile  sketch,  rather  than,  as  supposed  by  me,  the  view  of  a  single  antler,  may
have  led  to  the  notion  of  the  Unicorn — a  fabulous  creature  whose  existence  was
long  firmly  believed.  Apart  from  this  the  description  is  singularly  apt,  even  to
the  possession  of  the  antler  by  both  sexes,  unlike  the  other  Cervidee.  This
peculiarity  alone  might  have  caused  Caesar  to  hesitate  to  call  the  animal  a  Deer,

*  Mackenzie  here  refers  to  the  Caribou  or  Reindeer,  whose  skin  is  preferred  for  the  closeness  of  its
texture,  its  thick  coating  of  hair,  and  consequent  warmth.  It  is  to  he  borne  in  mind  that  the  garments
described  are  adapted  for  a  climate  whose  ordinary  winter  temperature  is  from  20°  to  40°  below  the  zero  of
Fahrenheit.  They  afford  perfect  protection  against  the  cold.  The  voyageurs  call  them  "  robes  de  caribou,"
or  briefly  "cariboux."

t  Travels  of  Sir  A.  Mackenzie,  8vo  Edit.,  Lond.  1802,  p.  148.

X  2


14-4  BELIQULE  AQUITAOT(LE.

and  induced  him  to  style  it  rather  "a  kind  of  ox  having  the  shape  of  a  deer;"
but  the  mention  of  this  attribute,  peculiarly  distinctive  of  the  Reindeer  among
other  varieties  of  the  genus,  establishes  the  reality  of  his  description,  and  proves
that  that  animal  alone  could  have  been  intended.

That  such  is  the  case,  were  other  evidence  wanting,  the  recent  discoveries  in
Dordogne,  relics  of  an  anterior  age,  I  think  conclusively  prove — conclusively,
even  without  the  important  evidence  of  the  name  incidentally  quoted  by  Caesar,
and  preserved  to  our  day  in  the  Teutonic  Renn-Thier,  the  French  Renne,  our  own
Reindeer,  and  almost  literally  in  the  Spanish  Reno.  The  etymology  of  the  name
as  given  by  Mr.  Dawkins,  unlike  many  fanciful  etymologies  of  the  present  day,
has  an  obvious  air  of  correctness.  I  might  suggest,  however,  that  the  term
originated  not  in  the  absolute  powers  of  speed,  relatively  considered,  but  rather
in  the  far-running  tendencies  of  the  animal.  Gregarious  in  their  habits,  and  by
nature  migratory,  a  herd,  when  once  fairly  alarmed,  seeks  instinctively  a  distant
place  of  refuge.  This  is  characteristic  at  least  of  the  American  Reindeer ;  and  I
have  myself  in  days  of  yore,  while  hunting  in  the  remote  interior  of  British
Columbia,  pursued  a  retreating  herd,  affrighted  by  the  recent  attack  of  a
Carcajou*,  more  than  a  hard  day's  march  on  the  snowshoe — a  persistent  retreat,
unlike  the  capricious  flight  of  other  varieties  of  the  genus.

"With  reference  to  Notes  9  and  10,  page  56. — "We  have,  I  think,  notable  proof
of  the  Reindeer  having  retreated  northward  by  gradual  stages  in  the  fact  that,
evidence  being  adduced  of  their  having  existed  in  Dordogne  at  an  earlier  day,
they  were  not  found  south  of  the  Hercynian  forest  at  the  period  when  Caesar  wrote.
Their  residence  in  Dordogne,  too,  was  doubtless  permanent  [see  M.  Lartet's  Note  A,
further  on],  as  far  as  the  idea  of  permanency  can  be  attached  to  these  animals,
whose  habits,  from  known  natural  causes,  are  essentially  migratory.  Thus  the
low  swampy  lands  around  Hudson's  Bay  and  towards  Lake  Winipic,  abounding  in
lichens  for  their  winter  sustenance,  and  at  that  season  their  natural  habitat,  are
quite  unfitted  for  their  summer  residence,  owing  to  innumerable  flies.  Hence
their  periodical  migration  towards  the  snows  of  Labrador  on  the  one  hand,  and
towards  the  Arctic  confines  on  the  other.  Even  in  a  domesticated  state,  among
the  Laplanders  &c.,  this  exigency  of  their  nature  has  to  be  sedulously  attended
to.  It  was  to  this  cause  that  the  failure  of  Lord  Selkirk's  experiment t,  to  which

*  The  Wolverine  (Taxus  gulo  of  Cuvier),  a  formidable  enemy  to  the  Keindeer,  and  indeed  a  general
mischief-maker.

t  The  Earl  of  Selkirk  selected  for  his  nursery  the  spot  at  the  effluence  of  Lake  Winipic,  known  as  the


REMARKS  ON  THE  RE1NDEEE.  145

I  have  before  alluded  (p.  48),  was  chiefly,  if  not  entirely,  attributable — the  want,
namely,  of  adjacent  mountains  to  which  the  herds  might  be  driven  in  summer.

As  regards  the  ancient  climate  of  the  Continent,  all  classical  authority  goes,  I
think,  to  prove  that  the  variation  of  temperature  was  far  greater  than  it  now  is—
consequently  more  congenial  with  the  nature  of  the  Reindeer.  This  admitted,
much  of  what  might  otherwise  seem  improbable  is  at  once  removed.  Juvenal
(Sat.  vi.)  speaks  of  the  freezing  of  the  Tiber  quite  as  a  common  occurrence  : —

"  Hibernum  fracta  glacie  descendet  in  amnem,
Ter  matutino  Tiberi  mergetur,  et  ipsis
Vorticibus  timidum  caput  abluet."

Horace  in  his  '  Odes '  makes  frequent  allusion  to  the  severe  cold,  not  excep-
tionally, but  as  an  ordinary  condition  of  the  winter.  Witness  the  opening  of

Ode  ix.  lib.  1  :—

"  Vides,  ut  alta  stet  nive  candidum
Soracte,  nee  jam  sustineant  onus
Sylyae  laborantes,  geluque
Flumina  constiterint  acuto  ?  "

Ovid  (Tristia,  lib.  iii.  eleg.  x.),  speaking  of  his  place  of  exile  on  the  Euxine,
says : —

"  Vidimus  ingeiitem  glacie  consistere  pontem,

Lubricaque  immotas  testa  premebat  aquas.
Nee  vidisse  sat  est :  durum  calcavimus  aequor : "

and  throughout  the  same  books  he  speaks  of  the  climate  in  terms  which  in  these
days  would  apply  only  to  that  of  a  hyperborean  region.  Receding  from  the
Augustan  era  the  Roman  annals  are  quoted  as  recording  an  intense  frost  in

site  of  "  Old  Norway  House " — so  named  from  the  Norwegian  experts  stationed  there  to  conduct  the
experiment.  The  date,  I  think,  1812.

On  my  last  visit  to  York  Factory  in  Hudson's  Bay,  in  the  summer  of  1842,  it  was  mentioned  to  me  that
the  customary  supply  of  Eeindeer  for  the  use  of  the  Post  was  then  procured  with  more  difficulty  than
before.  The  ancient  Pass,  where  the  fence  for  driving  the  deer  during  their  periodical  migrations  had  long
stood,  had  become  gradually  less  frequented,  doubtless  through  long-continued  molestation  of  the  migrating
herds,  many  of  which  had  evidently  sought  more  remote  and  less  disturbed  lines  of  transit.  Hearne,  in  his
'  Travels,'  gives,  I  think,  a  description  of  the  method  of  driving  the  deer  adopted  by  the  natives — a  method
both  simple  and  efficacious.  That  the  ancient  Cave-dwellers  practised  some  such  device  to  the  same  end,
under  the  inference  that  primitive  races  will  arrive  under  similar  circumstances  at  nearly  similar  con-
clusions, I  do  not  question.  Some  of  the  tracings  on  B.  Plate  II.,  and  especially  those  in  fig.  7,  are,  I
think,  corroborative  of  this  assumption.


146  EELIQUI.E  AQUITANICLE.

A.TLC.  480,  when  the  Tiber  was  frozen  and  the  ground  covered  with  snow  for  a
period  of  forty  days.  Throughout,  hy  ancient  writers,  the  climate  of  Gaul  is
described  as  extremely  inclement — sometimes,  indeed,  in  terms  obviously  exag-
gerated. The  limited  resources  of  my  private  shelves,  however,  to  which  alone  I
can  make  reference,  do  not  permit  me  to  pursue  this  subject  further.  It  has,  I
believe,  been  amply  treated  by  Hume  in  his  '  Essay  on  the  Populousness  of
Ancient  Europe,'  and  by  other  authorities.  Withal,  making  every  allowance  for
probable  exaggeration,  the  weight  of  evidence  is  in  favour  of  the  conclusion  that
the  winter  climate  of  Europe  has  become  much  less  severe.  Whether  this
change  be  due,  as  is  asserted  to  be  the  case  in  Upper  Canada,  to  the  clearing  and
subsequent  draining  of  large  tracts  of  land  in  the  progress  of  agriculture,  or
whether,  with  the  lapse  of  time,  to  more  recondite  causes,  is  a  question  I  do  not
profess  to  decide ;  but  naturally,  in  a  choice  of  difficulties,  one  is  disposed  to
accept  the  more  obvious  explication.

While  advocating,  then,  a  solution  of  the  interesting  question  before  us  recon-
cilable with  modern  analogies,  and  consistent  with  the  partial  enlightenment
afforded  by  anciently  recorded  facts,  I  shall,  I  trust,  be  pardoned  if  I  venture  to
submit  that  the  existence  of  the  Reindeer,  and  that  of  some  of  the  other  fossil
animals,  such  as  the  Hippopotamus  incidentally  mentioned,  must  be  referred  to
widely  different  epochs  [see  M.  Lartet's  Note  B,  further  on] — that  they  could  not,
in  the  recognized  order  of  Nature,  have  been  coexistent.  The  presence  of  the  one
it  is  easy  to  realize  as  of  comparatively  modern  date,  without  presupposing  any
material  change  in  the  world's  condition  :  easy,  again,  for  the  imagination,  travel-
ling backwards,  to  repeople  the  now  smiling  fields  of  Gaul  with  a  nomadic  race,
primitive  in  habits,  and  deriving  a  precarious  subsistence  from  the  spoils  of  the
chase,  of  which  the  relics,  with  other  rude  vestiges  of  human  occupancy,  are
displayed  before  us.  It  is  to  my  conception  as  a  thing  of  yesterday  in  the  great
Kalendar  of  ages — remote,  indeed,  but  realizable  to  the  mind  without  inferring
those  vast  climatic  changes  inseparable  from  the  consideration,  with  reference
to  geographical  distribution,  of  the  Fauna  of  the  remote  geologic  periods.


NOTES  ON  THE  EEINDEER  AND  HIPPOPOTAMUS.  147


xm,

NOTES  ON  THE  KEINDEER  AND  HIPPOPOTAMUS.    By  M.  E.  LABTET.

NOTE  A  (see  above,  page  144). — We  have  already  often  observed  that  by  the  exa-
mination of  the  many  antlers  of  Reindeer  collected  in  our  caves,  and  evidently
derived  from  individuals  which  had  been  eaten  there,  we  are  led  to  the  conclusion
that  these  animals  have  been  slain  of  all  ages,  and  consequently  at  all  seasons.
Thus,  among  the  antlers  still  adhering  to  the  frontal  bones  of  skulls  broken  open
to  get  at  the  brains,  there  were  some  not  more  than  fifteen  days  old  (with  the
Reindeer  the  antlers  begin  to  show  at  a  much  earlier  date  than  in  other  Deer) ;
we  have  found  also  antlers  of  every  stage  of  development,  and,  lastly,  remains  of
skulls  belonging  to  individuals  that  were  shedding  their  antlers.

As  for  the  permanency  of  the  Reindeer  in  our  low  plains  of  Pe"rigord,  it  may  be
explained  (as  we  have  sought  to  establish  elsewhere)  by  the  probability  that  the
summers  at  that  time  were  cooler  in  this  part  of  our  continent,  then  surrounded
by  colder  seas.  "We  see  moreover  that  the  Ibex,  the  Chamois,  and  the  Musk-ox
also  lived  on  our  plains,  as  well  as  Marmots,  families  of  which  were  established  as
far  as  our  north-western  districts  (Calvados,  the  Two  Sevres,  &c.).

NOTE  B  (see  above,  page  146). — If  we  were  to  refer  the  existence  of  the  Rein-
deer and  Hippopotamus  respectively  to  epochs  very  distant  from  each  other,  we
should  be  obliged  to  renounce  the  establishment  of  the  biological  synchronism
of  our  Quaternary  Mammalia  according  to  the  collocation  of  their  remains  accu-
mulated in  one  and  the  same  deposit.

In  England  remains  of  Hippopotamus  have  been  found  in  at  least  four  caverns
and  in  many  river-deposits  (at  Bedford,  for  instance)  with  the  Reindeer  and
Elephas  primigenius.  In  France  we  have  found  the  Hippopotamus  in  only  one
cavern,  that  of  Arcy,  where  it  was  noticed  by  the  Engineer  Bonnard,  who  placed
the  specimens  in  our  Museum  of  Natural  History.  De  Vibraye  found  afterwards,
in  the  same  cavern  of  Arcy,  numerous  remains  of  Reindeer,  accompanied  by
worked  flint, — and  in  the  lowest  layer  a  human  jaw,  associated  with  numerous
remains  of  the  great  Bear,  the  Elephant,  Rhinoceros,  and  Hysena.  We  have
received  from  St.  Acheul  and  other  places  on  the  Somme,  remains  of  Hippo-
potamus and  Reindeer  found  in  the  same  deposit.  The  "  diluvial "  beds  of  the


148  EELIQTJI^:  AQCTITANIC^E.


Seine  even  in  Paris,  at  Joinville,  Montreuil,  Grenelle,  and  Levallois  have  furnished
some  teeth  and  other  remains  of  Hippopotamus  ;  and  at  Levallois  these  remains
were  found  in  company  with  those  of  the  Reindeer,  of  three  Rhinoceroses,  and
two  Elephants,  and  with  numerous  worked  flints.  At  Viry  Noureuil  (Aisne)  the
Hippopotamus  is  also  found  with  some  worked  flints,  and  associated  with  two
Elephants,  the  Hyaena,  Reindeer,  and  Musk-ox.

The  lowering  of  the  level  of  the  perpetual  snow-line  and  the  wide  extension  of
the  glaciers  do  not,  as  I  have  said  elsewhere,  at  all  imply  an  excessive  cold.  In
the  Southern  Island  of  New  Zealand,  where  the  glaciers  come  down  nearly  to  the
sea,  and  where  a  subtropical  vegetation  is  developed  quite  near  these  glaciers,
the  Hippopotamus  would  acclimatize  itself  very  well  if  there  were  large  rivers  such
as  our  Seine  was  in  the  Quaternary  Period,  when  its  bed,  according  to  the  demon-
strative works  of  M.  Belgrand,  was  about  4  kilometres  (4370  yards)  in  breadth.
Our  Quaternary  flora,  according  to  recent  studies,  and  the  usual  commingling,  in
our  fluviatile  drift,  of  bones  of  mammals  of  arctic  character  with  those  of  species
analogous  to  certain  of  our  existing  intertropical  types,  would  denote,  as  has  been
very  well  said  by  M.  de  Saporta,  a  damp  and  warm  climate,  with  variations  of
temperature  less  extreme  than  those  noticed  by  the  ancient  authors  quoted  by
Mr.  Anderson.

What  especially  strikes  and  preoccupies  the  mind  is  the  great  development  of
the  glaciers  and  the  probable  abundance  of  snow  during  the  Period  termed
"  Glacial."  It  is,  however,  in  most  cases,  the  ice  and  snow  that  act  as  preserva-
tives against  extreme  cold.  In  our  mean  latitudes  there  are  many  plants  perfectly
preserved  beneath  the  snow  and  ice,  which  would  infallibly  perish  if  they  were
exposed  to  the  effects  of  the  prolonged  radiation  during  the  clear  quiet  nights  of
winter.  There  are  some  districts  in  Siberia  where  neither  rain  nor  snow  fall
during  the  winter,  and  where,  during  the  long  serene  nights,  the  temperature  on
a  level  with  the  soil  is  lowered  to  50°  (Centigrade)  below  zero.  There  is  no  orga-
nized nature  which  could  resist  such  an  excess  of  cold  ;  while  most  of  the  plants
and  animals  are  perfectly  preserved  under  the  shelter  of  ice  and  snow.

As  to  the  contemporary  existence,  in  Western  Europe,  of  the  Reindeer,  Musk-ox
(Ovibos  moschatus),  Hippopotamus,  and  certain  Rhinoceroses,  I  must  refer  to
what  I  have  said  in  the  'Annales  des  Sciences  Naturelles,'  serie  5me,  Zoologie,
1867,  vol.  viii.  pp.  189-193.  The  passage  runs  thus  :—

"  In  concluding  this  sketch  of  Rhinoceros  Merkii,  a  few  words  may  be  added
on  the  geographical  distribution  of  that  species  during  the  several  phases  of  its
existence.


NOTES  ON  THE  REINDEER  AND  HIPPOPOTAMUS.  149

"  In  England,  the  remains  of  this  species  have  been  observed  principally  in  the
Quaternary  Gravels  of  the  Thames,  and  in  the  caverns  in  some  of  the  Southern
Counties.

"In  France,  its  remains  occur  in  formations  regarded  as  belonging  to  the
early  Pliocene  (the  fluvio-marine  sands  of  Montpellier).  They  have  also  been
met  with  in  the  Quaternary  Alluvium  of  various  valleys,  and,  though  more
rarely,  in  caverns.

"  The  age  of  the  deposits  yielding  Rh.  Merkii  in  Germany  (in  Baden  and
Wurtemberg)  is  not  quite  ascertained.

"  In  Italy,  this  species  is  met  with  in  the  Pliocene  strata  of  the  Plaisantin,  the
Milanais,  and  Tuscany.  It  has  also  been  found  in  an  evidently  Postpliocene
formation  near  Rome.

"  In  Spain,  it  is  only  in  caverns  that  some  molars  of  Rh.  Merkii  have  been
collected.  So  also  in  Northern  Africa,  sufficiently  characterized  fragments  of
molars  have  been  obtained  from  a  cave  near  Algiers.  These  relics  were  buried
with  the  remains  of  Elephants  (Elephas  africanus  ?),  of  Phacochoere,  of  Hysena
(H.  spelcea  ?  or  crocuta  ?),  of  Panther,  Porcupine,  &c. ;  and  among  them  human
remains  have  been  discovered,  together  with  flints  evidently  chipped  by  the  hand
of  Man*.

"As  far  as  at  present  known,  the  habitat  of  Rhinoceros  Merkii  was  limited
between  36°  and  51°  of  north  latitude,  with  an  extension  of  17°  of  longitude.
This  is  almost  the  geographical  area,  in  the  two  directions,  which  appears  to  have
been  occupied  by  Rh.  leptorhinus  and  Rh.  etruscus,  which  have  also  been  observed
in  England,  France,  Rhenish  Germany,  and  in  Spain ;  but  it  is  much  less  than
that  overrun  by  Rh.  tichorhinus,  which  had  a  distribution  over  more  than  30  de-
grees of  latitude,  from  the  northern  slope  of  the  Pyrenees  up  to  the  72nd  parallel
in  Siberia,  and  over  nearly  130  degrees  of  longitude.

"  It  is  well  known,  from  the  observations  of  Pallas,  that  Rh.  tichorhinus,  coated
with  fur  of  great  thickness,  was,  like  Mephas  primigenius,  able  to  support  the
rigorous  cold  of  the  polar  regions.  It  has  been  presumed  that  the  same  con-
ditions did  not  exist  with  Rhinoceros  Merkii  and  its  contemporary  congeners
Rh.  leptorhinus  and  Rh.  etruscus,  the  fossil  remains  of  which  have  not  yet  been
observed  further  north  than  the  51st  degree  of  latitude.  This  is  also  the  limit  of
the  fossil  Hippopotamus.

"  Indeed  we  know  that  the  remains  of  two  of  these  Rhinoceroses  (Rh.  lepto-
rhinus and  Rh.  Merkii)  have  been  found,  in  the  Pliocene  Sands  of  Montpellier,

*  "H.  Eenou,  '  Geologic  de  1'Algerie,'  pp.  81-83."

T


150  EELIQULE  AQUITANIC^.

associated  with  those  of  a  Mastodon  and  two  Apes  (Semnopithecw  monspessulanus
and  Macacus  prisons,  Gerv.),  with  which  they  were  contemporary.  The  presence
of  Apes,  always  incapable  of  being  acclimatized  in  cold  regions,  necessarily  implies,
for  the  epoch  when  this  commingled  fauna  lived  on  the  Pliocene  coast  of  the  Medi-
terranean, conditions  of  a  higher  temperature  than  that  of  our  cooler  climates.

"Nevertheless  it  has  transpired  that  at  a  certain  epoch  of  the  following  or
Quaternary  Period  the  same  species  of  Rhinoceros,  as  well  as  the  Hippopotamus,
dating  like  them  from  the  Pliocene  Period,  must  have  met  together,  existing  in
different  parts  of  Central  Europe  with  the  Elephant  (Elephas  primigenius)  and
the  shaggy  Rhinoceros  (Rh.  tichorhinns),  seeing  that  their  remains  are  found
imbedded  pell-mell  in  the  same  deposits.  We  have  to  add  that  the  Reindeer  and
Musk-ox  (Ovibos  moschatus)  also  have  left  their  remains  with  them.

"  To  explain,  however,  how  the  Reindeer  and  Musk-ox  were  enabled  to  exist  in
Europe  in  the  Glacial  or  Quaternary  Period,  side  by  side  with  the  Hippopotamus
and  Rhinoceros,  previously  contemporaries  of  the  Pliocene  Apes,  we  are  led  to
disallow  much  of  the  supposed  rigours  of  the  Glacial  Period,  the  climate  of  which
was  probably  marked  by  varieties  much  less  extreme  than  those  of  the  actual
climate  of  modern  times.  In  a  word,  it  necessitates  cooler  summers  for  the
Reindeer  and  Musk-ox,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  milder  winters  for  the  Hippo-
potamus and  other  species  whose  analogues  have  retired  towards  the  tropical
regions.

"  Similar  conditions  of  temperature  are  by  no  means  incompatible  with  the
great  extension  attributed  to  the  Quaternary  glaciers.  We  meet  with  their
realization  in  certain  parts  of  the  globe,  particularly  in  mean  latitudes.  Thus
in  Chile,  according  to  Mr.  Darwin,  at  38°  south  latitude  the  glaciers  of  the
Andes  descend  to  the  sea-shore  opposite  the  Island  of  Chiloe.

"  In  the  Southern  Island  of  New  Zealand,  where  perpetual  snow  exists  at  an
altitude  of  scarcely  more  than  2000  metres,  the  glaciers  extend  down  to  within
some  hundred  metres  from  the  shore;  and  the  savants  attached  to  the  Novara
Expedition  testify  that  in  proximity  to  those  glaciers  there  exists  a  forest  vege-
tation of  tropical  physiognomy — Palms  and  Tree-ferns  abounding.  It  has  been
remarked*  that  in  certain  parts  of  that  island  the  difference  between  winter  and
summer  can  scarcely  be  distinguished.

"It  may  be  said  that  there  it  is  the  property  of  certain  littoral  or  insular
climates.  But,  in  the  opinion  of  most  of  our  geologists,  at  the  very  moment  of
the  greatest  development  of  the  glacial  phenomenon  in  Europe,  vast  tracts  of

*  "  Chapman's  '  New  Zealand  Almanack '  for  1867,  p.  57."


NOTES  ON  THE  KEINDEER  AND  HIPPOPOTAMUS.  161

that  which  to-day  constitutes  our  continent  were  covered  by  the  then  existing
seas,  the  limits  of  which  are  nearly  everywhere  indicated  by  the  great  Erratic
Formation.  What  was  not  quite  submerged  probably  formed  no  more  than  a  large
archipelago,  with  perhaps  certain  peninsulas.  Hence  we  can  realize  for  that  period
all  the  advantages  possessed  by  marine  climates  under  mean  latitudes.

"This  hypothesis,  which  attributes  to  the  Europe  of  the  glacial  period  a
climate  milder,  and  less  excessive  in  its  extremes,  than  that  which  to-day  favours
our  so-called  temperate  regions,  will  be  accepted  with  difficulty  by  those  geologists
or  palaeontologists  who  have  assumed  that  many  of  the  great  Quaternary  Mammals
must  have  perished  by  reason  of  the  extreme  cold.

"  We  may  note  that  the  majority  of  those  Mammals  which  are  now  accepted
as  characteristic  of  the  Quaternary  Period  (that  is  to  say,  Elephas  primigenius,
Hippopotamus  major,  three  of  the  above-mentioned  Rhinoceroses,  &c.),  and  which
appear  to  have  retired  before  the  epoch  of  the  greatest  extension  of  the  glacial
conditions  in  Europe,  must  have  weathered  that  supposed  climacteric  safe  and
sound.  In  fact,  their  remains  have  very  often  been  found  in  gravel  and  alluvium
of  valley -bottoms,  as  well  as  in  cave-deposits,  attested  by  the  majority  of  geologists
as  more  recent  than  the  great  Northern  Erratics.

"  It  will  be  more  rational,  it  seems  to  us,  to  suppose  that  after  the  retreat  of  the
Glacial  sea,  and  from  the  period  when  Europe,  thus  enlarged,  recovered  a  conti-
nental climate,  the  increased  heat  of  the  summers  forced  the  Reindeer  and  Musk-
ox  to  migrate  towards  arctic  latitudes,  more  in  consonance  with  the  requirements
of  their  temperaments.  The  Chamois,  Ibex,  and  Marmot,  for  the  same  cause,
ceased  to  inhabit  the  plains  of  Central  Erance  and  took  refuge  on  the  tops  of  the
Alps  and  Pyrenees.  On  the  other  hand,  the  disappearance  or  extinction  of  the
Hippopotamus,  of  certain  species  of  Rhinoceros,  and  of  the  great  Carnivores,
whose  congeners  have  migrated  towards  tropical  regions,  may  have  been  caused
by  the  coldness  of  our  winters  having  become  too  excessive  for  the  exigencies  of
their  organization.

"  We  conclude  with  a  remark  having  particular  reference  to  the  fossil  fauna  of
caverns  in  South-eastern  Erance.  It  has  been  seen*  that,  in  the  Maritime  Alps,
the  Marsf  cavern  failed  to  yield  to  M.  Bourguignat  any  remains  of  Reindeer;  the
absence  also  of  that  animal  from  the  cave  of  Rigabe  (Var)  has  been  verified  by
M.  Marion  $  ;  and  the  fact  is  not  to  be  lost  sight  of  that  the  Reindeer  does  not

*  In  the  earlier  part  of  this  Memoir  by  M.  Lartet,  '  Ann.  Sc.  Nat.'  ser.  5,  Zoologie,  vol.  viii.  p.  158.

t  "  So  called  after  M.  Mars,  the  proprietor."

J  "  Premieres  observations  sur  1'anciennete  de  1'Homme  dans  les  Bouches-du-Khone :  1867."


152  RELIQUIAE  AQUITAOTCLE.

figure  among  the  numerous  Herbivores  of  the  caverns  of  Lunel-Viel  (H^rault),
described  by  MM.  Marcel  de  Serres,  Dubreuil,  and  Jeanjean*.  In  opposition,
however,  to  these  negative  coincidences,  each  of  those  three  caves  contains  remains
of  Rhinoceros  Merkii,  the  sole  species  of  the  genus  which  has  been  there  observed
up  to  the  present  time.  It  is  well  known  that  Rh.  Merkii  existed  in  that  district
of  France  from  the  earliest  part  of  the  Pliocene  Period ;  for  fragments,  sufficiently
characteristic,  have  been  collected  in  the  fluvio-marine  sands  of  Montpellier,  where
they  were  mixed  with  remains  of  Mastodons,  Apes,  and  other  Mammals  of  the
same  epoch.

"  Now  what  can  be  inferred  from  the  absence  of  Reindeer  from  these  south-
eastern caverns  ?  Must  it  be  believed  that,  at  that  ancient  epoch,  this  part  of  the
Mediterranean  coast  was,  as  at  present,  favoured  by  an  exceptional  climate,  too
warm  to  allow  of  the  existence  of  Reindeer  ?  Or  would  it  be  better  to  suppose
that  the  infilling  of  these  caverns,  that  of  Mars  for  example,  which  M.  Bour-
guignat  calculates  to  have  taken  place  in  his  '  fifth  epoch,'  was  in  reality  anterior
in  date  to  the  appearance  of  Reindeer  in  Quaternary  Europe  ?  Let  us  hope
that  M.  Bourguignat's  further  researches  in  this  Mars  cavern  will  supply  him
with  more  complete  materials  to  elucidate  the  question  from  the  one  or  the  other
point  of  view."

*  "Eecherches  sur  les  casements  humatiles  des  cavernes  de  Lunel-Viel:  1834."


EEMARKS  ON  THE  EEINDEEE  AND  HIPPOPOTAMUS.  153


XIV.

FURTHER  REMARKS  ON  THE  REINDEER;    AND  ON  ITS  ASSUMED  COEXISTENCE  WITH
THE  HIPPOPOTAMUS.     By  A.  C.  ANDERSON,  Esq.

(In  a  Letter  dated  December  10,  1870,  Rosebank,  Victoria,  Vancouver's  Island,- British  Columbia.)

I  HAVE  perused  with  much  interest  the  annotations  by  M.  E.  Lartet  upon  my
paper  of  November  1868  [see  above,  page  147],  having  relation  to  subjects  treated
of  generally  in  the  '  Reliquiae  Aquitanicce,'  and  more  particularly  in  my  previous
contribution  at  pages  37-57.  I  must  crave  indulgence  while  I  venture  to  state
some  of  the  grounds,  at  least,  upon  which  are  founded  my  dissent  from  the  con-
clusions to  which  the  arguments  of  M.  Lartet  tend — premising  that  I  do  so  in  no
dogmatic  spirit,  but  solely  to  elicit,  as  far  as  may  be  practicable,  the  true  rela-
tions of  a  question  having,  a  bearing  of  deeper  significance  than  the  mere  points
at  issue,  of  which  the  decision  may  appear  to  be  in  itself  of  comparatively  trivial
importance.

With  reference,  first,  to  my  remark  that  animals  so  diversely  constituted  as  the
Reindeer  and  the  Hippopotamus  could  not  have  coexisted  under  similar  circum-
stances, it  would,  I  submit,  be  illogical  to  assume  that  the  existing  races  of
animals,  whether  under  supposed  processes  of  acclimatization  or  otherwise,  have
changed  in  any  degree  their  relative  conditions.  All  written  evidence  goes  to
show  that,  where  unchanged  by  the  effects  of  domestication,  the  different  genera
retain  now  their  pristine  characteristics.  The  habits  of  divers  known  Birds  and
other  animals,  as  described  in  the  writings  of  antiquity,  and  especially  in  one  of
the  oldest  known  records,  the  "  Book  of  Job,"  are  unaltered.  Among  the  Insect
tribes  the  like  identity  is  observable.  The  flight  of  the  Locust,  the  habits  of  the
Ant  as  described  by  Virgil*,  remain  accurately  as  they  were.  The  Asihis  of  the
"  Georgics  "  has  its  representative  in  the  modern  Gad-fly ;  and  the  "  fly  from  the
remotest  parts  of  the  rivers  of  Egypt "  of  Sacred  Writ  is  still  exemplified  in  the
Zim  of  Bruce,  the  dreaded  Tzetze  of  Livingston.  Hence  we  may  reason  that  the
same  sequence  of  constitution  and  habit  had  continued  through  ages  anterior  to
historic  record — consequently  that  the  distinctive  characteristics  of  the  two  races

*  Ma.  iv.  402  &c.     Georg.  iii.  147.     Isa.  vii.  18.     The  Asilus  of  the  Romans  appears  to  have  been
synonymous  with  the  Grecian  (Estrus.


154  EELIQULE  AQUITANIC^E.

specially  in  question  are  precisely  those  of  their  early  prototypes.  The  nature  of
the  Hippopotamus  is  too  well  known  to  admit  of  comment.  This  animal  indubi-
tably requires  a  temperature  almost  tropical,  with  a  vegetation  of  corresponding
luxuriance  to  sustain  life.  Deprived  of  these,  in  its  natural  state,  it  must  die  of
inanition.  The  Reindeer,  on  the  other  hand,  under  such  conditions,  must  un-
questionably perish.  The  non-succulent  Lichens,  with  other  vegetable  products
found  only  under  a  climate  subject  to  great  seasonal  variations,  for  food,  and  the
power  of  alternating  its  habitat  according  to  circumstances,  are  conditions  indis-
pensable to  its  existence.

That  the  Reindeer  permanently  inhabited  the  low  lands  of  Pe"rigord,  under  the
hypothesis  advanced  by  M.  Lartet,  that  cooler  seas  and  a  more  equable  tempera-
ture rendered  them  at  one  time  more  congenial  to  its  nature,  is  an  assumption,
I  would  deferentially  remark,  nowise  reconcilable  with  observation.  Admitting,
for  the  argument's  sake,  the  questionable  position  that  such  condition  of  climate
existed,  the  assumed  consequence  does  not  ensue.  In  the  northern  regions  (and
I  will  particularize  the  frigid  tract  bordering  on  Hudson's  Bay)  the  Flies,  whose
agency  as  affecting  the  Reindeer  I  have  before  specially  noted,  are  notoriously
troublesome.  Around  York  Factory,  situated  on  the  verge  of  the  great  inlet
mentioned,  while  the  river-banks  are  yet  encumbered  with  packed  ice,  the  sea
covered  with  floating  drift,  and  when  the  ground  is  never  thawed  beyond  a  certain
depth,  the  Mosquitoes  appear  in  myriads,  followed  a  little  later  by  swarms  of  the
Gad-fly — an  almost  intolerable  pest,  corresponding,  as  I  conceive,  with  the  Rein-
deer-fly of  Northern  Europe.  A  breeze  from  seaward,  reducing  suddenly  the
temperature,  checks  the  torment  for  a  while ;  but  with  the  cessation  it  is  renewed
in  all  its  vigour.  Domestic  Cattle  under  such  circumstances  can  be  preserved
only  by  providing  continued  smoke  from  smouldering  fires ;  while  Man  himself
is  reduced  to  adopt  various  expedients  to  mitigate  the  almost  incessant  scourge.
Reindeer,  the  winter  frequenters  of  these  localities,  are  thus  instinctively  driven
to  migrate  as  already  shown.  As  I  have  before  remarked,  these  animals  are
peculiarly  liable  to  the  attacks  of  the  (Estrus.  Notwithstanding  their  regular
migrations,  indeed,  they  do  not  entirely  escape  the  punctures  and  the  deposition
of  the  eggs  of  this  formidable  enemy.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  that,  when
killed  in  the  early  summer,  the  skins  are  (many  of  them)  almost  worthless  for  use,
from  the  holes  occasioned  by  the  escaping  larvae  that  have  been  engendered  there.
From  the  native  hunters  I  have  learnt  that  at  this  season  the  Reindeer  are
subject  to  disease  of  the  brain,  sometimes  inducing  death,  through  the  larvae


EEMAEKS  ON  THE  EEINDEEE  AND  HIPPOPOTAMUS.  155

being  produced  about  the  head  and  causing  inflammation,  probably  through  the
obstruction  of  the  lachrymal  ducts*.

The  fact  mentioned  by  M.  Lartet,  that  the  Reindeer  whose  remains  are  in
question  had  been  killed  at  different  stages  of  the  annual  mutations  of  the
antlers,  and  consequently  at  all  seasons  of  the  year  in  the  same  localities,  appears
at  first  sight  a  strong  objection  to  the  general  principle  which  I  have  advanced.
This  objection,  however,  cannot  be  admitted  as  conclusive,  in  violation  of  a
strictly  established  natural  law.  There  are  two  alternatives  to  account  for  the
observed  anomaly.  The  one  is  that  some  having  been  killed  at  a  distance  in
their  summer  retreats,  the  antlered  heads  were  conveyed  by  the  hunters  to  a
common  rendezvous  as  trophies  of  the  chase ;  the  other,  and  the  more  probable,
that  the  herds,  molested  in  the  mountains,  and  hunted  persistently  from  refuge
to  refuge,  broke  at  length  from  their  retreats  in  quest  of  other  less  disturbed
localities,  and  were  intercepted  during  their  progress.  I  have  already,  in  my
former  communication,  mentioned  the  tendency  of  this  animal  to  go  a  long
distance  when  really  alarmed ;  and  we  may  conceive  that  under  continued  molesta.
tion  a  herd  might  be  driven  in  desperation  to  seek  refuge  even  in  its  winter  haunts
in  the  lowlands,  however  adverse  to  its  instinctive  habits  the  enforced  migration
might  be.

But  a  system  of  destructive  persecution,  such  as  is  here  indicated,  could  not
possibly  endure.  It  must  end  either  in  the  total  extirpation  of  the  herds  (which
is  not  probable),  or  their  compelled  emigration  to  distant  regions  affording
greater  security — a  result  in  accordance  with  the  hypothesis  which  I  at  first
advanced  (see  above,  page  46).  The  southern  parts  of  Gaul  having  been  thus  first

*  It  seems  almost  superfluous  to  dwell  longer  upon  the  peculiar  characteristics,  so  well  known  to  natu-
ralists, -which  distinguish  the  Reindeer  from  the  other  branches  of  the  Cervidce.  One  peculiarity,  however,
may  he  cited  as  proving  irrefragahly  that  this  animal  has  heen  designed  hy  Nature  to  occupy  constantly  a
region  where  it  can  enjoy  a  comparatively  cold  temperature — an  end  to  be  secured  only  by  seasonal  migra-
tion. Its  hair  is  not  shed  in  the  spring  like  that  of  other  varieties  of  the  genus.  Lengthening  constantly,
and  becoming  more  compacted,  to  meet  the  exigencies  of  the  winter,  the  extremities  of  the  hair  acquire
gradually  a  lighter  hue  as  they  recede  from  the  source  of  nourishment.  With  the  approach  of  summer
these  exhausted  ends  break  off,  leaving  still  a  permanent  coating,  of  the  normal  colour,  adequate  to  the
protection  of  the  bearer  under  the  comparatively  mild  temperature  of  its  summer  retreat,  but  incompatible
with  the  extreme  heat  of  the  lower  elevations.  This  condition,  inseparable  from  the  organism  of  the  animal,
might  of  itself  be  adduced  as  argument  against  the  coexistence  in  the  same  locality  of  the  Eeindeer  with
an  animal  so  diverse  in  constitution  as  the  Hippopotamus.  Else  we  must  forego  the  admission  of  that
constancy  of  Nature  in  all  her  varied  operations  of  which  the  evidences  are  manifest.  I  think  Saint-Pierre
alludes  to  the  peculiar  natural  provision  I  have  cited  in  his  '  Harmonies  de  la  Nature ; '  but  I  cannot  find
the  passage,  if  indeed  it  exists.


156  RELIQUIAE  AQUITANIC^E.

evacuated,  the  herds  probably  lingered  for  a  while  in  some  of  the  northern  districts
— perhaps  latest  of  all  in  the  wooded  tracts  of  Bretagne.  This  may  be  inferred
from  the  fact  that  when  Csesar  wrote,  though  the  Reindeer  had  apparently  then
disappeared  from  all  parts  of  Gaul,  the  inhabitants  of  Brittany  were  still  distin-
guished by  their  neighbours  as  the  "  Rhedones,"  or  Rhenones — a  name  perpe-
tuated in  that  of  the  modern  town  and  district  of  Rennes*.

Collocation  of  Various  Remains. — The  argument  derived  from  the  juxtaposition
of  the  remains  of  divers  animals  in  diluvial  deposits,  as  indicating  synchronism  of
existence,  however  specious,  is,  I  must  again  urge,  to  be  received  with  very  great
caution.  Applied  to  the  earlier  geological  strata,  where  perfect  correlation  in  the
nature  of  the  fossils  is  discernible,  it  must  of  course  be  admitted  in  all  its  cogency ;
but  in  the  more  recent  formations,  where  great  superficial  agencies  of  disturbance
have  obviously  been  in  operation,  a  prudent  discrimination  must  be  exercised  to
avoid  conclusions  which  cannot  be  consistently  reconciled  with  other  considera-
tions. Of  such  discrepancy  the  instance  cited  presents,  I  opine,  a  conspicuous
example.  It  may,  however,  be  regarded  as  an  extreme  case,  and  as  nowise  mili-
tating against  the  coexistence  with  the  Reindeer  of  other  animals  less  diverse  in
constitution,  but  of  which  the  species  may,  like  the  Reindeer,  have  disappeared
from  certain  localities,  or  become,  as  in  other  instances,  extinct  before  human
influences  in  comparatively  modern  ages.  Of  such  extinctions  the  Dinornis  of
New  Zealand  affords,  among  Birds,  a  familiar  example ;  and  but  for  the  positive
evidence  of  its  recent  existence  the  Dodo  of  the  Mauritius,  judged  from  fossil
vestiges  only,  might  have  been  referred  to  a  date  long  anterior  to  that  of  which
we  have  proof.  In  like  manner  the  Great  Bustard  has  disappeared  from  England,
its  habitat  even  within  the  memory  of  Man.

During  the  diluvial  epochs,  of  which  the  unmistakable  evidences  appear,  it  is
obvious  that  many  fragmentary  remains,  and  even  perfect  skeletons,  must  have
been  transported  to  distances  varying  with  circumstances.  A  great  commingling

*  The  substitution  of  the  d  for  the  n  in  the  original  word  has  crept,  through  misprint  or  oversight,  into
some  editions  of  Csesar.  Misled  by  this,  Ainsworth,  our  standard  English  authority,  notices  only  the  former ;
but  this  reading  is  ignored  by  the  best  commentators.  In  two  editions  which  I  possess,  while  the  n  is  pre-
served in  the  word  applied  to  the  animal,  the  d  is  employed  in  that  assigned  to  the  tribe,  but,  I  believe,
erroneously — an  assumption  supported  by  the  form  of  its  modern  derivative,  noted  above.  In  perfect
analogy  with  the  name  given  to  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  Brittany,  under  the  interpretation  I  have  given
to  it,  is  the  term  by  which  the  natives  of  the  "  Barren  Lands  "  of  Mackenzie's  River,  who  subsist  chiefly  by
the  Reindeer-chase,  are  distinguished  by  the  other  branches  of  the  Chipewyan  tribe  to  which  they  belong.
It  is  paraphrased  by  the  voyageurs,  who  call  them  Gens  de  Caribou ;  quasi  Rhenones  =  Gens  de  Renne.


EEMAEKS  ON  THE  EEINDEEE  AND  HIPPOPOTAMUS.  157

must  have  resulted — in  some  cases  assuming  the  appearance  of  order,  as  the
concurrence  of  eddies  might  have  favoured  the  collocation  in  certain  deposits  of
objects  of  nearly  the  same  specific  gravity.  Successive  inundations,  and  at  more
recent  periods  the  action  of  great  land-floods,  the  effects  of  local  disturbances,
would  tend  further  to  account  for  a  collocation  so  far  accidental;  and  thus
remains,  separated  in  their  origin  by  wide  intervals  of  time,  might  be  found
together  in  deposits,  undistinguishable  as  to  their  relative  eras  of  existence  by  any
ordinary  process  of  reasoning.  Nor  is  the  agency  of  Man,  where  vestiges  of  his
existence  may  appear  in  proximity,  to  be  disregarded.  Primitive  races,  such  as
the  Aquitanian  Cave-men,  would  readily  adopt  as  their  occasional  dwellings  those
excavations  which  in  many  cases  had  received  the  accidental  deposit  of  ancient
remains — the  previous  or  subsequent  haunts,  perhaps,  of  various  species  of  beasts
then  still  existing,  though  now  extinct.  Or,  impelled  by  superstitious  reverence  (no
unfertile  motive  of  action  even  among  the  rudest  races),  they  might  have  conveyed
to  their  retreats,  as  memorials,  the  casually  developed  relics  of  the  gigantic  mam-
mals whose  nature  was  to  them  a  mystery.  Or  again,  portions  of  such  remains,
when  accidentally  discovered,  like  the  fossil  ivory  of  the  present  day,  might  have
been  employed  by  them  for  artificial  purposes.  All  these  are  suppositions,  not
susceptible  indeed  of  proof,  but  compatible  at  least  with  probability.

From  such  considerations,  joined  to  the  experience  which  my  own  opportunities
of  observation  have  afforded,  while  deferring  much  to  the  opinions  that  have  been
expressed  by  various  writers  on  this  subject,  I  cannot  but  regard  the  argument
derived  from  the  mere  collocation  of  varied  remains  in  diluvial  deposits,  unsup-
ported by  the  probabilities  of  other  evidence,  as  apt  to  lead  to  very  erroneous
conclusions*.

I  will  not  enter  upon  the  many  reasons  that  afford  me  ground  for  this  opinion ;  yet  I  may  mention  one
case  which  bears  upon  the  question.  In  the  summer  of  1855,  while  engaged  in  a  hasty  tour  to  the  verge
of  the  Eocky  Mountains,  I  stopped,  in  passing,  at  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company's  post  at  Walla- Walla.  Fort
Nez-Perces,  the  station  in  question,  is  situated  in  what,  under  the  Oregon  Treaty  of  1846,  became  American
territory — the  rights  of  occupation,  together  with  that  of  other  posts  similarly  circumstanced,  having  since
the  period  I  speak  of  been  ceded,  under  purchase,  to  the  United-States  Government.  The  position  of  this

*  I  notice  that  allusion  is  made,  in  a  foot-note  at  page  60,  to  an  account  of  the  remains  of  a  Mastodon
found  in  Missouri  in  connexion  with  evidences  of  the  contemporaneous  residence  of  Man.  I  have  never
met  with  this  account,  and  of  course  do  not  pretend  in  any  way  to  question  the  conclusions  arrived  at.  In
fact  I  am  myself  disposed  to  think,  both  from  evidences  that  appear  and  from  the  faint  and  fallible  echoes
of  native  traditions,  that  the  existence  of  that  animal  in  America  may  be  reconciled  with  a  comparatively
modern  date  in  the  world's  history.  Still  I  am  always  inclined  in  such  cases  to  accept  with  great  caution
the  conclusions  of  observers,  and  to  admit  them  only  under  the  most  cogent  evidence.

Z


158  RELIQULE  AQUITANIC^E.

post  is  in  lat.  46°  13'  N.,  long.  118°  40'  W.,  a  few  miles  below  the  junction  with  the  Columbia  of  the
Shoshone  or  Snake  fork,  flowing  from  the  southward.  Some  days  previous  to  my  arrival,  the  officer  in
charge,  the  late  Mr.  James  Sinclair,  formerly  of  the  Bed-River  Settlement,  while  witnessing  an  Indian
horse-race  near  the  Fort,  observed  a  white  object  protruding  from  the  sand  on  the  surface  of  a  low  knoll  on
which  he  was  standing.  On  examination  it  proved  to  be  part  of  the  thigh-bone  of  a  gigantic  mammal,
which  on  examination  I  agreed  with  him  in  judging  to  have  been  a  Mastodon.  Some  further  portions  had
been  discovered  by  scraping ;  and  it  was  settled  that  on  my  return  from  the  mountains  in  about  two  months
we  should  proceed  to  level  the  mound,  in  the  hope  of  discovering  the  remainder  of  the  skeleton.  Before  my
return,  however,  a  war  had  sprung  up  between  the  local  government  and  the  Indian  tribes,  which  eventually
assumed  rather  formidable  proportions.  It  was  only  through  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  natives  that
our  small  party  succeeded  in  penetrating  downwards  through  the  hostile  masses.  But  the  project  was
necessarily  deferred ;  subsequently  the  Fort  had  to  be  temporarily  abandoned :  Mr.  Sinclair  was  killed  while
accompanying  a  party  surprised  by  an  ambuscade.  The  fragments  mentioned,  buried,  I  believe,  for  security's
sake,  when  the  fort  was  evacuated,  were  never  rediscovered;  nor  had  I  any  subsequent  opportunity  of
searching  for  the  original  deposit.  The  locality  itself  presents,  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach,  an  uninterrupted
level,  through  which  the  Columbia  flows;  the  small  stream  of  the  Walla- Walla  coming  in  from  the  south.
This  level — a  sea  of  sand  many  hundreds  of  square  miles  in  extent,  overlying  a  stratum  of  indurated  sandy
clay — yields  little  vegetation  beyond  the  Artemisia,  the  Cactus,  and  other  congenial  plants,  common  to
similar  wastes  of  remote  volcanic  and  diluvial  origin.  It  may  be  regarded  as  part  of  the  Great  American
Desert,  extending  from  the  frontiers  of  Mexico  to  the  middle  region  of  the  Columbia  River.  The  immediate
portion  under  consideration  has  obviously  formed  at  one  period  the  bed  of  an  extensive  lake,  occasioned  by
the  damming  of  the  waters  by  a  basaltic  rampart,  extending  from  the  Cascade  range  to  the  Blue  Mountains,
and  through  which  the  river,  after  flowing  placidly  for  many  miles,  bursts  by  a  narrow  gap.

On  the  surface  of  this  great  plain,  under  a  dry  climate  with  excessive  summer  heat,  innumerable  relics  of
bygone  generations  are  met  with,  discovered  or  again  concealed  by  the  constantly  shifting  sands — the  bones
of  various  indigenous  animals,  human  remains,  the  skeletons  of  Horses  (descendants  of  the  race  imported
originally  to  the  southern  regions  by  Cortez  and  Pizarro),  the  bones  of  domestic  cattle  introduced  within  the
last  half  century.  Beneath,  buried  more  or  less  deeply  by  the  clay,  it  may  be  assumed  that  many  fossil  remains
of  distant  ages  exist.  In  some  cases  these  fossil  deposits  are  presumptively  very  superficial,  as  may  be  argued
from  the  instance  above  noted.  In  this  case  there  appeared,  scattered  on  the  surface  around  or  partially
buried  in  the  sands,  many  human  remains — some,  doubtless,  in  close  contiguity  with  the  Mastodontal  relic.
These  we  had  long  known,  from  positive  evidence,  to  be  the  remains  of  a  war-party  of  the  Shoshones,  who,
about  seventy  years  ago,  made  an  attack  on  the  united  Nez-Perces  and  Walla-Wallas,  and  were  repulsed
with  slaughter.  Stone  arrow-heads,  and  other  primitive  weapons  of  offence,  are  of  course  discovered  occa-
sionally around  the  arena  of  conflict ;  and  under  the  constant  process  of  weathering  and  desiccation,  the
remains,  even  when  I  first  visited  the  scene  many  years  ago,  had  then  already  assumed  the  appearance  of
antiquity.

I  do  not,  of  course,  assert  that  the  vestiges  in  question  would  have  misled  the  experienced  and  cautious
observer,  but  refer  only  to  the  conclusions  to  which,  with  the  less  discriminating,  the  circumstances  would
probably  have  tended.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  were  it  permitted  to  imagine  that  by  a  sudden  convulsion
the  united  waters  of  the  Columbia  and  its  great  tributary  (the  Snake)  were  again  temporarily  dammed  up,
so  as  to  restore  the  wide  expanse  to  something  resembling  its  ancient  condition,  we  may  partially  conceive
the  effects  that  must  ensue  upon  the  subsequent  debdcle.  A  heterogeneous  commingling  of  the  remains  of
diverse  existences  would  be  a  consequence,  much  as  that  which  I  assume  to  appear  now  on  a  grander  scale


EEMAEKS  ON  THE  REINDEER  AND  HIPPOPOTAMUS.  159

in  the  ancient  Diluvial  Drift.  Thus  collocated,  the  lapse  of  a  few  centuries,  all  record  of  the  event  being
supposed  to  be  absent,  would  suffice  to  render  the  facts  enigmatical  to  the  shrewdest  observer  of  a  future
day,  unguided  by  the  consideration  of  those  analogies  which  only  could  aid  in  solving  the  apparent  mystery.
Yet  it  needs  but  a  small  effort  of  the  imagination  to  suppose  the  possibility — nay,  even  the  probability — of
an  occurrence  such  as  I  have  indicated.  The  effects  of  an  earthquake,  even  less  formidable  than  that  which
but  recently  devastated  a  portion  of  South  America,  might  suffice  to  close  temporarily  the  very  narrow
portal  in  the  volcanic  barrier,  by  which  the  drainage  of  the  ancient  lake-bed  has  been  effected,  and  through
which  the  still  partially  impeded  river  now  rushes.

Indeed,  that  the  probability  of  a  stoppage  such  as  I  have  supposed  is  not  entirely  visionary,  we  have
evidence,  of  a  comparatively  recent  date,  at  a  point  about  150  miles  lower  down  the  river.  At  this  point,
where  the  Columbia  breaks  through  the  Cascade  range,  to  flow  afterwards  tranquilly  to  the  ocean,  a
stupendous  mountain-slide,  the  effect  of  some  great  convulsion,  has  taken  place,  the  date  of  which,  as  well
from  the  accounts  formerly  given  to  me  by  the  elders  of  the  Indian  residents  as  from  evidences  that  appear,
could  not  certainly  have  been  more  remote  than  towards  the  end  of  the  last  century.  The  river,  in  this
part  flowing  between  lofty  ridges,  temporarily  dammed,  rose  far  above  its  wonted  boundaries  for  many  miles
up,  in  such  wise  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  hanks  escaped  only  by  means  of  their  canoes.  Gradually  the
pent-up  stream  forced  its  way  through  the  impeding  mass ;  but  huge  fragments  of  rock  still  obstruct  the
contracted  channel,  occasioning  the  unnavigable  rapid  now  known  as  the  "  Cascades."  Owing  to  this  partial
obstruction,  the  waters  of  the  upper  vicinity,  with  a  retarded  current,  have  since  flowed  permanently  at  a
height  some  15  or  20  feet  above  their  former  level,  submerging  the  lower  banks  with  their  forest-growth,
of  which  at  various  points  the  slowly  decaying  stumps,  chiefly  of  the  Abies  Douglasii,  were  conspicuous
some  years  ago  and  doubtless  still  remain*.

But  there  is  perhaps  no  part  of  the  world  where  the  grand  natural  changes,  constantly  operating  through
very  simple  causes,  are  better  exemplified  than  in  some  parts  of  the  Upper  Fraser,  in  British  Columbia.
Flowing  for  a  long  distance  through  deep  wooded  banks  of  diluvial  origin,  beneath  which,  in  places,  there  is
exposed  a  thin  stratum  of  lignite,  the  river  bursts,  about  twenty  miles  below  Alexandriaf,  through  a  chasm
in  a  lofty  volcanic  barrier.  Above  this  are  evidences  of  an  ancient  lake-bed,  drained  suddenly  at  successive
intervals,  as  indicated  by  the  corresponding  terraces  along  the  banks,  much  (though,  from  the  hilly  nature
of  the  country,  on  a  comparatively  inexpansive  scale)  as  the  similar  process  indicated  at  Walla- Walla  under
the  description  I  have  given.  Along  the  banks,  for  more  than  100  miles  above  this  point,  land-slides  of
greater  or  less  magnitude  are  constantly  occurring.  The  fall  of  one  of  these  I  had  the  good  fortune  (if  to
have  narrowly  escaped  destruction  with  the  whole  of  my  command  may  so  be  termed)  to  witness,  when  in
charge  of  Fort  Alexandria  in  1845.  Another,  upon  a  still  grander  scale,  some  seventy  miles  higher  up,
I  had  examined  shortly  after  it  fell,  some  time  before.  In  this  last  case,  with  a  vertical  depth  approaching
500  feet  at  the  line  of  rupture,  and  an  area  of  perhaps  a  thousand  acres  or  more,  the  surface  exhibited  a
complete  bouleversement,\ibe  an  ill-ploughed  field  gigantically  magnified.  Under  similar  processes  the  river,

*  The  truncated  stems  of  these  huge  trees  are  doubtless  greatly  preserved  from  decay  by  the  drying  effect
of  the  fierce  gales  of  wind  that  almost  incessantly  prevail  in  this  locality.  At  the  same  time  the  lower
portions,  which  are  more  or  less  silted  over,  are  probably  to  some  extent  petrified.  This  I  infer  from  the
numerous  petrified  fragments  that  appear  along  the  banks,  especially  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of
the  Cascades.

t  Alexandria  is  in  lat.  52°  33',  about  midway  between  the  mouth  of  Fraser  River  and  its  source  in  the
Rocky  Mountains.

z2


160


RELIQUIAE  AQUITANICLE.


with  an  impetuous  current,  is  constantly  shifting  portions  of  its  channel ;  and  the  stupendous  effects  of  water
thus  temporarily  arrested  are  exemplified  in  a  degree  of  rare  magnificence.

To  my  conception  these  minor  effects  were  typical  of  the  grand  cataclysms  of  which  the  geological
evidences  are  apparent ;  and,  from  the  heterogeneous  commingling  of  the  relics  of  different  ages  which  must
obviously  hence  ensue,  the  corresponding  confusion  in  remote  epochs,  over  wider  areas  and  on  a  scale
immeasurably  more  grand,  is  necessarily  to  be  inferred.


Fig.  57.

Portion  of  an  Harpoon-head  of  Reindeer-horn,
from  La  Madelaine.    (Christy  Collection.)


Fig.  57.  This  butt  is  convex  on  one  face  and
nearly  flat  on  the  other.  The  perforation  is  deeply
«ut  in  and  grooved  on  both  faces.


Fig.  58.  The  loose  head  is  of  Walrus  ivory,  and
is  7  inches  long.  It  is  attached  to  a  long,  cylin-
drical, pine-wood  shaft  (tapering  downwards),  7
feet  long,  by  a  square  plaited  cord  of  sipew,  8  feet
long,  dividing  into  two  branches  for  rather  more
than  half  of  its  length  where  attached  to  the  shaft,
similarly  to  the  Sea-Otter  arrow,  fig.  13,  p.  5 1 ,  in
Part  III.  A  large  air-bladder  is  attached  to  the
shaft  near  its  lower  extremity.


Fig.  58.

Harpoon  (half  nat.  size)  from  the  Konjags  of
Alaska,  for  comparison  with  fig.  57.


BONE-  AND  CAVE-DEPOSITS   OF  THE  BEINDEEll-PEKIOD.  161


XV.

ON  SOME  BONE-  AND  CAVE-DEPOSITS  OF  THE  REINDEER-PERIOD  IN  THE  SOUTH  OF
FRANCE.  By  JOHN  EVANS,  Esq.,  F.R.S.,  F.S.A.,  Hon.  Secretary  of  the  Geological  and  Numismatic
Societies  of  London,  &c.

PREFACE.

THIS  Paper,  written  soon  after  a  Visit  to  the  Caves  on  the  Vezere,  in  company  with  the  late  Mr.  Henry
Christy  and  other  friends,  was  read  before  the  Geological  Society  of  London  on  22nd  June,  1864.  A  short
Abstract  only  appeared  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  that  Society,  vol.  xx.  p.  444.

When  first  I  was  requested  to  allow  of  this  Paper  being  printed  in  the  '  RELIOTI^;  AQCITANIC^;,'  it  was  a
question  with  me  whether  it  was  in  any  way  desirable  that  it  should  appear  in  type.  In  consenting  to  its
being  printed,  it  seemed  best  that  it  should  stand  in  its  original  form,  as  the  only  merit  it  possessed  was
that  it  conveyed  my  first  impressions  of  what,  at  the  time  of  its  being  written,  was  a  novel  and  comparatively
unexplored  field  of  research.  With  one  or  two  verbal  corrections,  the  paper  is  therefore  reproduced  in  the
exact  form  in  which  it  was  communicated  to  the  Geological  Society.

With  the  large  experience  that  has  since  been  gained,  much  might  have  been  added,  and  some  of  the
suggested  difficulties  as  to  the  chronological  position  of  the  Reindeer-period  might  to  a  certain  extent  have
been  removed.  The  relatively  superior  antiquity  of  the  Moustier  relics  over  those  of  the  other  Caves,  how-
ever, has  been  almost  universally  acknowledged ;  and  attempts  have  been  made  to  arrange  the  whole  series
in  an  approximately  chronological  order,  more  especially  by  M.  Gabriel  de  Mortillet.  My  own  views  upon
the  subject  I  have  given  elsewhere*.  I  will  only  add  that,  with  all  our  advance  in  knowledge,  including
the  experience  gained  by  the  skilful  examination  of  the  Belgian  caves  by  M.  E.  Dupont,  there  still  remains
much  to  be  learned  before  we  can,  with  any  degree  of  confidence,  assign  any  definite  date  to  either  the

earliest  or  the  latest  of  these  Cave-deposits.

J.E.

April  1873.

Introduction. — In  these  days,  when  the  Cavern-deposits  throughout  the  globe
are  deservedly  attracting  so  much  attention,  and  when  the  limits  of  the  Border-
land that  lies  between  the  provinces  of  Geology  and  Archaeology  are  being  gra-
dually extended,  a  slight  notice  of  some  of  the  caves  and  bone  deposits  of  the
Southern  part  of  Central  Trance  will  probably  be  of  some  interest  to  this  Society.
The  deposits  to  which  I  would  more  particularly  direct  attention  are  those  which
have  been  and  are  still  being  explored  with  so  much  success  under  the  auspices  of
the  distinguished  Erench  palaeontologist;  M.  Edouard  Lartet,  and  our  energetic
countryman,  Mr.  Henry  Christy,  both  Fellows  of  this  Society.  It  was  under  the
guidance  of  the  latter  gentleman,  and  accompanied  by  our  President  (Mr.  W.  J.
*  The  Ancient  Stone  Implements,  Weapons,  and  Ornaments  of  Great  Britain  (1872),  pp.  436-438.


162  KELIQUkE  AQUITANIC2E.

Hamilton),  Prof.  Rupert  Jones,  Capt.  Galton,  Mr.  Lubbock,  and  Mr.  Franks,
that  I  visited  the  localities  at  the  end  of  March  last,  and  was  thus  enabled  more
fully  to  estimate  the  value  of  the  facts  detailed  in  the  communications  already
addressed  by  M.  Lartet  and  Christy  to  the  French  Academy*  and  to  the  'Revue
Arche'ologique  't-  It  is  to  these  memoirs,  and  to  information  received  from  their
liberal  authors,  that  I  am  indebted  for  many  of  the  facts  that  I  am  about  to
adduce.  I  am  also  indebted  to  Prof.  Rupert  Jones  for  the  sketches  which  illus-
trate this  paper.

The  principal  spots  where  the  investigations  of  Messrs.  Lartet  and  Christy  have
been  carried  on  are  situated  within  the  valley  of  the  V6zere,  or  in  those  of  its
affluents  in  the  Arrondissement  of  Sarlat,  in  the  Department  of  the  Dordogne.
[See  the  Map  at  page  126,  in  Part  X.]

The  Valley  of  the  Vezere :  River  and  Cliffs. — The  river  V£zere,  which  takes
its  rise  near  Chavagne,  in  the  Department  of  the  Correze,  enters  Dordogne  as  a
considerable  stream  near  Terrasson,  and,  after  pursuing  a  tortuous  course  in  a
south-westerly  direction  for  about  thirty  miles  as  the  crow  flies,  joins  the  river
Dordogne  at  Limeuil  a  few  miles  south  of  Le  Bugue.  In  the  neighbourhood  of
Terrasson  the  V6zere  passes  over  a  small  tract  of  Carboniferous  beds,  which  are
regularly  worked  for  coal;  but  by  the  time  it  reaches  Condat,  where  first  we
joined  the  river,  its  valley  is  excavated  through  rocks  belonging  to  the  Jurassic
series,  which  near  Aubas,  a  few  miles  lower  down,  are  exchanged  for  those  of  the
Cretaceous  system.  [See  Geological  Map  and  Section,  supra,  page  29.]  It  is
neither  in  my  power,  nor  is  it  in  the  slightest  degree  necessary  for  my  subject,  to
enter  into  any  stratigraphical  details  with  regard  to  this  succession  of  beds,  which,
however,  in  general  appearance,  present  a  considerable  contrast  to  their  equivalents
in  this  country.  I  will  only  mention  that  the  Cretaceous  beds,  from  the  Lower
Greensand  upwards  J,  assume,  in  the  Department  of  the  Dordogne,  the  form  of  a
compact  limestone,  more  or  less  arenaceous  in  its  different  subdivisions,  which
also  vary  considerably  in  hardness.  [See  Geological  Notes,  by  T.  Rupert  Jones,
at  page  31  &c.]

The  valley  of  the  Vezere  seems  to  afford  good  evidence  of  its  having  been,
at  all  events  as  to  that  part  of  it  more  immediately  visible  from  the  river,
excavated  by  the  action  of  the  river  itself,  aided  by  the  action  of  the  frost  and

*  Comptes  Rendus,  29  Feb.  1864.  t  Rev.  Arch.  April  1864.

t  A  notice  of  the  Chalk  formation  of  this  Department,  from  the  pen  of  M.  Arnaud,  will  be  found  in  the
'  Bull,  de  la  Soc.  Geol.  de  France,'  2nd  ser.  vol.  xix.  p.  465.


BONE-  AND  CAVE-DEPOSITS  OF  THE  REINDEER-PERIOD.  163

atmosphere.  The  bottom  of  the  valley  consists  of  an  alluvial  plain,  varying  in
width  from  £  to  f  of  a  mile,  and  skirted,  first  on  one  side  and  then  on  the  other,
or  occasionally  on  both,  by  a  line  of  precipitous  cliffs.  In  cases  where  the  river
no  longer  flows  at  the  foot  of  these  cliffs,  a  considerable  talus  has  been  formed  by
the  weathering  of  the  rock ;  in  some  places  the  degradation  has  gone  on  to  such
an  extent  that  the  side  of  the  valley  presents  an  even  slope,  though  occasionally  a
low  cliff-like  face  of  rock  may  be  left  exposed,  as  if  to  show  that  what  is  now  for
the  most  part  a  uniform  declivity  may  have  been  originally,  when  the  river  flowed
on  that  side  of  the  valley,  a  sheer  precipice.  In  other  places,  where  the  river  now
flows  at  the  foot  of  the  cliffs,  occasional  masses  of  fallen  rock,  standing  out  from
the  stream,  which  in  many  parts  is  very  rapid  in  its  course,  testify  to  its  under-
mining-power, though  in  one  instance,  at  least,  an  ancient  chateau,  with  the  rock
on  which  it  stands  undercut  to  a  great  extent,  but  not  yet  brought  down  by  the
river,  proves  that  its  action,  though  sure,  is  slow.  Near  Condat  the  river  has
worked  its  way  to  a  considerable  depth  beneath  the  level  of  its  older  alluvium,
and  is  gradually  cutting  away  a  low  line  of  limestone  cliff,  some  15  or  20  feet  in
height,  and  a  full  quarter  of  a  mile  away  from  the  older  boundary  of  the  valley
at  the  margin  of  the  alluvial  plain.

In  hardly  any  case  is  the  summit  of  the  present  line  of  cliffs  at  the  highest  level
of  the  surrounding  country,  but  the  cliffs  form  an  abrupt  termination  to  sloping
ground,  on  which  beds  containing  large  rolled  pebbles  of  quartz,  gneiss,  mica-
schist,  granite,  and  other  of  the  metamorphic  rocks  of  the  country  to  the  north-
east, through  which  the  stream  passes  in  the  upper  part  of  its  course,  are  of
frequent  occurrence.  Whether  these  are  in  all  cases  connected  with  the  beds  of
Miocene  age  which  cap  a  considerable  portion  of  the  plateau  of  the  district,  or
whether  any  of  them  represent  the  "  high-level "  gravels  of  the  river,  are  ques-
tions which  I  will  not  attempt  to  determine.

The  height  of  the  cliffs  at  the  side  of  the  valley  must  in  many  places  be  at  least
300  feet ;  and  the  scenery  brought  to  view  in  descending  the  windings  of  the  river
(as  we  did)  in  a  boat,  is  strikingly  picturesque.  Owing  to  the  different  degrees  of
hardness  of  different  beds,  which  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  weathering  of  the
face  of  the  cliff  has  been  very  unequal.  The  percolation  of  water  through  the
softer  beds,  combined  with  the  action  of  frost,  has  caused  them  to  perish  much
faster  than  harder  beds  above  and  below ;  and  the  consequence  has  been  that  in
many  (I  may  say  most)  places  there  are  deep  grooves  along  the  face  of  the  cliffs
following  the  almost  horizontal  lines  of  stratification,  and  where  the  cliffs  stand
out  like  rounded  bastions,  following  their  contour.  In  some  places  two  or  three


164  KELIQULE  AQUITANICJi:.

of  these  grooved  recesses  occur  one  above  the  other.  They  vary  considerably  in
depth,  but  frequently  extend  as  much  as  20  or  30  feet  into  the  face  of  the  rock,  and
are  occasionally  continuous  for  some  hundreds  of  yards.  The  roof  is  sometimes
flat,  but  more  generally  arching  over  the  recess ;  and  the  floor  generally  slopes
outwards,  partly  in  consequence  of  the  accumulation  of  debris,  where  the  recesses
have  not  been  artificially  altered  or  enlarged.  For,  as  may  well  be  supposed,
these  natural  shelters  are  made  use  of  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  country,  and
have  been,  as  we  shall  shortly  see,  from  the  earliest  ages.  Numbers  of  cottages
along  the  sides  of  the  valley  consist,  even  at  the  present  day,  of  merely  front
and  side  walls,  the  native  rock  serving  for  floor,  back,  and  roof.  But  a  few
centuries  ago,  even  some  of  the  chateaux  were  built  on  shelves  in  the  rock,  with
their  terrace-walks  extending  along  these  natural  cloisters,  with  the  rock  arching
overhead  and  the  beautiful  valley  of  the  Vezere  forming  the  landscape.  [See
"  Sketches  on  the  Vezere,"  Nos.  3  and  4,  in  Part  IX.]  The  whole  valley  teems
with  the  remains  of  these  rock-habitations ;  and  there  are  hardly  any  of  the
natural  galleries,  however  inaccessible,  but  show  some  traces  of  human  occupa-
tion, by  recesses,  or  even  chambers  of  various  sizes,  cut  into  the  cliff,  by  mortices
for  beams,  or  eyes  through  which  ropes  might  pass,  or  by  remains  of  steps  cut
in  the  rock.  Such  is  a  general  outline  of  the  principal  features  of  the  valley  of
the  Vezere  between  Condat  and  Les  Eyzies,  and  of  the  "  Petra  "  along  its  course
between  Le  Moustier  and  the  latter  place ;  and,  as  far  as  my  observation  went,
the  same  description  would  be  applicable  to  many  other  valleys  in  that  part
of  France.

Caves  and  Rock-shelters  on  the  Vezere. — I  now  come  to  the  Bone-  and  Cave-
deposits  which  form  the  more  immediate  object  of  this  notice.  [The  relative
positions  of  the  Caves  and  neighbouring  villages  are  shown  in  the  Map  at  page  29,
and  the  corrected  Map  at  page  126,  and  by  the  Woodcuts,  figs.  37^0,  at  pages  64
and  65.]

Badegoule. — The  first  of  these  which  we  visited  was  the  Cave  of  Badegoule
(fig.  59),  mentioned  by  the  Abbe  Audierne*,  where,  however,  no  recent  excavations
had  taken  place,  and  the  Cave  itself  had  been  emptied.  It  faces  the  south  at  an
elevation  of  about  250  feet  above  the  Cerne  (a  small  tributary  of  the  Vezere),  and  is
about  a  mile  from  the  Condat  Railway-station,  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  road
leading  from  Terrasson  to  La  Bachelerie.

*  De  1'Origine  et  de  1'Enfance  des  Arts  en  Perigord  (1863),  p.  18.


BONE-  AND  CAVE-DEPOSITS  OF  THE  EEINDEER-PEBIOD.  165

On  what  had  apparently  been  a  terrace  in  the  rock  below  the  cave,  we  found
portions  of  a  layer  of  breccia  resting  against  the  cliff,  and  containing  fractured
bones,  worked  flints,  and  some  charcoal.  The  whole  surface  of  the  ground  in
front,  which  had  been  converted  into  a  vineyard,  was  literally  strewed  with
worked  flints,  bones,  and  teeth,  among  which  we  recognized  those  of  the  Horse,
Ox,  and  Reindeer.  The  worked  flints  consisted  of  flakes  and  the  cores  or  nuclei

Fig.  59.

Diagram  Section  of  the  Hill  above  Condat.
d


a,  Jurassic  Limestone.  d,  Top  of  hill  (vineyards),  with

b,  Sand  and  stones  (quartzite  &c).  a  few  foreign  stones  on  the

c,  Badegoule ;  vines  on  the  platform.  surface.

from  which  they  had  been  struck,  scrapers  (grattoira)  or  flakes  worked  to  a
rounded  end,  some  fragments  of  carefully  chipped  lance-heads,  and  of  long  narrow
blades  neatly  chipped  on  both  faces,  and  of  a  few  other  forms.  Many  of  them
have  a  stalagmitic  coating  upon  them,  proving  that  they  had  been  derived  from
the  breccia.  As  this  is  only  one  of  a  series  of  very  similar,  but  better  investigated
cases,  I  propose  giving  a  short  description  of  them  all,  and  of  the  character  of  the
objects  discovered  at  each,  before  proceeding  to  any  general  considerations.

Le  Momtier. — After  sleeping  at  Montignac,  the  next  spot  which  we  visited  was
the  Cave  at  Le  Moustier,  explored  by  MM.  Lartet  and  Christy  during  the  course
of  the  previous  winter  (figs.  60  and  61;  and  Lithographic  Sketch,  No.  1,  in  Part  V.).
This,  more  correctly  speaking,  may  be  said  to  be  a  recess  running  along  the  face  of
the  cliff  rather  than  a  cavern  in  the  ordinary  acceptation  of  the  word.  It  lies  on
the  north  bank  of  the  river,  about  80  feet  above  its  level,  and  was  until  lately
filled  up  within  a  few  inches  of  the  roof  by  a  succession  of  beds  varying  in  thick-
ness at  different  spots,  but  preserving  generally  the  following  arrangement  in
descending  order  :—

2  A


166


EELIQTJLE  AQUITANICLE.


ft.    in.

1.  Calcareous  rubble,  with  a  few  flint  flakes,  reaching  nearly  to  roof  of  cave  at  the  back,

and  filling  it  up  in  front   about    2     6

2.  Dark-coloured  bed,  containing  numerous  fractured  bones,  worked  flints,  and  calca-

reous and  other  pebbles.     A  regular  kjokken-modding about     1     0

3.  Layer  of  red  micaceous  sand,  containing  but  few  bones  and  worked  flints    about     1     6

4.  Bed  containing  stones  used  for  hearths,  with  charcoal,  bones,  and  worked  flints.    (Both

this  bed  and  No.  2  are  brecciated  in  places.)   about    1     0

5.  Hard  brecciated  bed,  containing  rolled  flints  and  quartz  and  other  pebbles,  and  possibly

bones about    1     0

The  bones  in  the  upper  beds  comprise  those  of  the  Horse,  Aurochs,  Chamois,
Reindeer,  and  other  animals ;  but  the  remains  of  the  Reindeer  are  not  so  abun-
dant as  they  are  at  some  of  the  other  stations  shortly  to  be  described.  In  the
bed  of  sand  No.  3  some  detached  plates  of  molars  of  Mephas  primigenim  were
found  by  MM.  Lartet  and  Christy,  who  also  discovered  in  the  Cave  some  remains
of  Hyaena  spelcea,  but  not  under  such  circumstances  as,  in  their  opinion,  to  justify


Fig.  60.

Eye-sketch  of  Le  Moustier,  from  the  opposite  side
of  the  river,  showing  the  upper  Cave  (said  to
contain  nothing),  and  Le-Moustier  Cave,  partly
railed  off,  and  with  garden-ground  in  front  of  it.


Fig.  61.

Diagram  Profile  of  the  Limestone  Escarpment  of
Le  Moustier,  from  the  South-west,  about  190
feet  high.


The  Cave,  with  bones  &c.


^_  Recesa,  with  bones  &c.


in  this  instance  an  inference  of  their  contemporaneity  with  Man.  None  of  the
bones  found  here  have  been  carved  or  wrought  into  instruments  of  any  kind.
The  worked  flints  discovered  here  present  a  different  fades  from  those  which  we
saw  at  other  places  in  the  valley  of  the  Vezere.  The  smaller  and  more  delicate
and  taper  flakes  are  far  less  frequently  found  than  at  the  other  stations  lower
down  the  valley ;  and  the  coarser  broad  flat  forms  predominate ;  "  scrapers  "  are
comparatively  scarce ;  and  many  of  the  cores  or  nuclei,  if  such  they  are,  are  irre-


SKETCHES  ON  THE  VEZERE.  No.  1.

View  of  Le  Moustier  on  the  Vezere,  and  the  Hill  with  its  Caverns,     Taken
from  the  River,  by  W.  Tipping,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  October  1864.

The  Cavern  examined  by  Messrs.  H.  Christy  and  E.  Lartet  is  the  Lower  Cave,
seen  just  over  the  housetops.


m  fin

HI      s ;  v

-.  v  *       •  •

'


BONE-  AND  CAVE-DEPOSITS  OF  THE  EEINDEER-PEEIOD.  167

gularly  flattened,  though  approaching  occasionally  in  form  to  what  have  been
termed  sling-stones,  or  even  to  some  of  the  ruder  flint  implements  from  the  river-
gravels  of  the  Valley  of  the  Somme  and  elsewhere.  But  the  most  remarkable
forms  are  those  presented  by  a  series  of  implements  of  common  occurrence  at
Le  Moustier,  but  which  I  had  never  before  met  with.  These  are  made  from
flints,  some  of  considerable,  size,  either  flat  by  nature  or  wrought  into  a  flattened
shape  so  as  to  be  conveniently  held  in  the  hand,  and  carefully  chipped  along
one  side  to  an  evenly  curved  cutting  edge.  In  some  cases  this  edge  is  con-
tinued round  the  end  of  the  flint  so  as  to  produce  a  rounded  cutting  point ;  and
occasionally  the  flint  has  been  chipped  into  an  ovato-lanceolate  form  with  a  cutting
edge  nearly  or  quite  all  round.  These  latter  bear  the  strongest  resemblance  to  some
of  the  flint  implements  from  the  river-deposits  at  Abbeville,  from  which  indeed  they
can  hardly  be  distinguished  in  form.  There  are,  however,  at  Le  Moustier  all  the
intermediate  forms  between  them  and  the  flat  flints  chipped  at  one  side  only  into
a  cutting  edge  with  a  more  or  less  circular  outline  like  a  very  large  "  scraper."

So  much  for  the  contents  of  the  Cavern ;  the  question  now  arises  how  it  became
filled  to  such  an  extent,  as,  though  a  great  portion  of  the  beds  is  evidently  the
result  of  human  occupation,  yet  the  cause  why  the  debris  should  have  accumulated
up  to  the  roof  of  the  Cavern  is  not  so  apparent.  As  to  the  origin  of  the  lowest  bed
(No.  5)  I  can  pronounce  no  decided  opinion,  as  it  appears  to  be  uncertain  whether
worked  flints  and  fractured  bones  occur  in  it  or  not ;  but  it  seems  by  no  means
impossible  that  the  rolled  flints  with  which  it  abounds  may  be  connected  with  or
derived  from  a  high-level  gravel  of  the  river.  The  bed  above  it,  containing  the
hearth-stones,  is  of  course  the  result  of  human  occupation  of  the  recess  at  the  time
when  there  was  probably  a  clear  space  of  some  4  or  5  feet  above  the  floor.  The
difficulty  is  to  explain  the  presence  of  the  upper  beds.  It  appears,  however,  that
the  stratum  of  rock  forming  the  floor  of  the  Cave  originally  extended,  as  a  broad
ledge,  some  30  or  40  feet  in  advance  of  the  present  line  of  cliff  above.  In  fact
the  whole  hill  at  this  particular  spot  is  divided  into  several  steps  or  stages,  giving
it  a  general  trap-like  outline.  I  would  suggest,  as  a  possible  hypothesis,  that
on  this  ledge,  which  was  possibly  protected  by  some  portion  of  the  roof  of  the
recess  which  has  now  been  weathered  away,  the  ancient  occupants  of  the
station  lodged  when  the  height  of  the  back  of  the  Cave  had  been  diminished  by
the  accumulation  on  the  floor,  and  had  thus  been  rendered  less  habitable.  After
this  desertion  of  the  back  of  the  Cave,  the  sand  resulting  from  the  decomposition
of  the  rocks  around  accumulated  on  the  old  floor  by  atmospheric  agency,  and
subsequently,  as  the  kjokken-modding  outside  the  recess  increased  in  height,  the

2  A  2


168


RELIQULE  AQUITANIOE.


refuse  of  the  meals  was  thrown  back  over  the  layer  of  sand ;  and  then,  after  the
desertion  of  the  Cave,  the  talus,  which  accumulated  by  successive  falls  from  the
face  of  the  cliff,  filled  up  the  recess  entirely  in  front  and  nearly  to  the  roof  at  the
back,  and  finally,  by  the  weathering  away  of  the  edge  of  the  ledge  of  rock  on
which  it  rested,  was  partially  removed  from  outside  the  recess.

On  a  lower  edge  of  the  hill  at  Le  Moustier  is  a. second  deposit  containing
worked  flints  and  bones,  but  which  we  had  not  the  opportunity  of  narrowly
examining;  the  whole  neighbourhood,  indeed,  appears  to  abound  with  similar
remains.  On  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  the  cliff  is  replete  with  rock-habitations
of  a  later  period.  In  a  brickfield  near  the  village  I  found  a  number  of  flint  flakes,
some  of  them  imbedded  at  depths  of  from  4  to  5  feet  in  the  alluvium.

La  Madelaine. — The  next  spot  we  visited  in  descending  the  Ve"zere  was  the
station,  near  the  ancient  castle  of  La  Madelaine,  which  has  been  and  still  is  under
examination  by  Messrs.  Lartet  and  Christy.  It  lies  at  the  foot  of  the  cliff  on  the
north  bank  of  the  river,  about  30  yards  distant  from  it ;  and  the  upper  surface  of
the  deposit  is  not  more  than  20  feet  above  the  level  of  the  stream,  so  as  to  be  even
now  within  reach  of  the  highest  floods.  The  beds,  which  must  be  about  50  feet
in  length  by  about  25  feet  in  width  and  8  to  10  feet  in  thickness,  lie  in  a  recess
under  the  overhanging  cliff,  a  portion  of  which  appears,  however,  to  have  fallen
off  not  more  than  a  century  or  two  ago,  at  the  most.  The  upper  bed  consists
principally  of  rubble  from  the  cliff  above ;  but  the  lower  part  of  the  deposit  is  a
regular  kjokken-modding,  rich  beyond  conception  in  the  rude  implements  formed
by  the  primitive  occupants  of  the  spot.  Flint  flakes  of  all  sizes,  many  of  them  of
most  symmetrical  form,  some  of  great  length  and  others  of  most  diminutive  size,
"  scrapers  "  of  various  forms  and  sizes,  and  cores  or  nuclei  of  flint  abound.  Inter-
spersed in  the  deposit  are  numerous  large  stones  used  as  hearths,  and  occasionally,
as  it  appears,  arranged  to  form  a  sort  of  oven.  There  are  also  numbers  of  large
pebbles  of  quartz,  granite,  and  other  rocks,  some  few  of  which,  of  spheroidal  form,
have  had  a  slight  recess  worked  in  one  of  their  faces  so  as  to  look  like  a  sort  of
mortar ;  a  few  others  bear  traces  of  rubbing  upon  them ;  and  many  others,  espe-
cially of  quartz,  have  their  edges  battered,  or  have  even  been  broken,  by  having
been  used  as  hammers.  A  few  flint  cores  bear  traces  also  of  having  been  used  in
the  same  manner.  Some  of  the  flakes  and  scrapers  have  been  broken  diagonally
from  each  side  so  as  to  produce  a  pointed  end  or  tang,  as  if  for  insertion  into  a
handle,  or  for  use  as  a  narrow  chisel.  But  in  addition  to  the  worked  flints,  the
beds  contain  a  large  number  of  implements,  of  various  forms  and  sizes,  made  of


BONE-  AJSTD  CAVE-DEPOSITS  OF  THE  EEINDEER-PEBIOD.  169

Reindeer-horn  or  of  bone.  The  principal  of  these  are  dart-  or  arrow-heads  with
a  number  of  barbs  running  along  either  one  or  both  sides, — s^Ztts-shaped  in-
struments, pointed  at  one  end  and  chisel-shaped  at  the  other  [harpoon-points],
and  needles  of  good  finish  and  workmanship,  with  neatly  drilled  eyes.  Some
perforated  pieces  of  Reindeer-horn,  and  others  bearing  the  marks  of  sawing  upon
them,  have  also  been  found,  as  well  as  some  bearing  animal  forms  sculptured  upon
them,  but  not  so  finely  engraved  as  those  which  will  subsequently  be  mentioned.
The  deposit  is  of  course  full  of  animal  remains ;  but  the  fauna  is  the  same  as  that
of  the  Cave  of  Les  Eyzies,  which  will  shortly  be  described.

Laugerie  Saute  and  Laugerie  Basse. — Descending  the  valley,  the  next  place  to
be  noticed  is  Laugerie  Haute,  where  a  nearly  similar  deposit  to  that  of  La  Made-
laine  occurs,  in  various  places  at  the  foot  of  the  cliffs  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river,
over  a  distance  of  upwards  of  half  a  mile  to  Laugerie  Basse.  In  one  place,  where
the  ossiferous  deposit  is  covered  by  a  large  mass  of  rock  which  fell  from  the  cliff
about  120  years  ago,  it  attains  a  thickness  of  from  7  to  8  feet ;  but  it  is  usually
rather  thinner.  Besides  containing  worked  flints  of  much  the  same  character  as
those  at  La  Madelaine,  a  number  of  fragments  of  the  more  carefully  chipped  lance-
heads,  similar  to  those  from  Badegoule,  and  of  what  are  possibly  crescent-shaped
implements,  like  those  so  frequently  found  in  Denmark,  have  been  found  here,  as
also  a  few  arrow-heads  of  the  leaf-shaped  type,  and  some  flakes  skilfully  chipped
into  a  knife-like  form.  The  animal-remains,  which  are  usually  very  friable,  are
the  same  as  at  Les  Eyzies ;  but  a  few  teeth  of  the  Megaceros  ?iibernicu8,  and  some
detached  plates  of  molars  and  portions  of  the  tusk  of  Elephas  primigenius,  have
been  met  with.

I  had  not  the  opportunity  of  making  more  than  a  cursory  examination  of  the
deposit  at  Laugerie  Basse,  whence  Messrs.  Lartet  and  Christy  have  procured  a
large  number  of  important  objects.  The  scene  of  their  excavations  lies  beneath
the  shelter  of  the  overhanging  rock  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  and  about
30  feet  above  its  level.  In  general  character  the  beds  approach  very  closely  to
those  of  La  Madelaine.  The  worked  flints,  especially  those  of  small  size,  are
common ;  but  the  carefully  chipped  forms,  such  as  those  from  Laugerie  Haute,
appear  to  be  extremely  rare.  Reindeer-horns,  both  shed  and  attached  to  portions
of  the  skull  of  the  animal,  are  very  abundant ;  and  nearly  all  have  had  some
portion  of  them  removed,  apparently  by  means  of  flint  saws.  Instruments  carved
from  these  horns  are  also  numerous,  and  present  a  considerable  variety  of  form,
some  of  them  being  also  ornamented  with  patterns  in  relief.  Besides  these,  there


170


KELIQUI-E  AQTJITANKLE.


are  many  needles  of  bone,  and  a  few  teeth  and  bones  pierced  for  suspension  as
personal  ornaments ;  among  these  are  some  of  the  small  ear-bones  of  the  Horse
and  Ox  and  a  canine  tooth  of  a  Wolf.  But  the  most  remarkable  objects  are
engravings  on  portions  of  Reindeer-horn,  giving  what  M.  Lartet  suggests  are  : —
representations  of  the  Aurochs  and  Bos  primigenius ;  some  carvings  in  relief,  on
the  surface  of  an  harpoon-shaped  instrument,  of  the  heads  of  the  Horse  and  Stag ;
and  a  highly  spirited  carved  figure  of  a  Reindeer  most  skilfully  adapted  to  form
the  handle  of  a  sort  of  poniard  made  from  the  horn  of  that  animal.  The  same
fauna  prevails  here  as  at  Les  Eyzies ;  but  some  detached  plates  of  molars  and  a
portion  of  the  pelvis  of  the  Elephant  have  been  found.

Gorge  d'Enfer. — On  the  same  side  of  the  river  as  Laugerie,  but  a  little  lower
down  the  valley,  and  in  a  ravine  opening  into  it,  are  the  caverns  of  the  Gorge
d'Enfer  (fig.  62),  where  also  similar  deposits  have  been  found,  containing  the

Fig.  62.

Diagram  Profile  of  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  a  lateral  Valley  on  the  right  Bank  of  the  Vezere.


Limestone.


Limestone.


a,  Cave,  with  Bones  ifcc.


b          a
b,  Recess,  with  Bones  &e.


usual  worked  flints  and  fractured  bones — among  the  former  some  of  the  more
carefully  chipped  specimens.  It  appears  probable  that  these  caves  had  been
emptied  to  a  great  extent  at  the  time  of  the  French  Revolution,  for  the  sake  of
the  saltpetre  to  be  obtained  from  their  contents.

Les  Eyzies. — I  now  come  to  the  renowned  Cavern  of  Les  Eyzies — renowned
because,  owing  to  the  unprecedented  liberality  of  its  explorers  (Messrs.  Lartet
and  Christy),  almost  every  museum  of  note,  whether  public  or  private,  not  only  in
France  and  England,  but  throughout  a  great  part  of  the  civilized  world,  has  had
specimens  of  its  breccia,  worked  flints,  and  animal- remains  presented  to  it;  so
that  the  name  of  Les  Eyzies  is  everywhere  known ;  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the


SKETCHES  OX  THE  VEZERE.  No.  2.

View  of  part  of  the  village  of  Les  Eyzies,  near  the  junction  of  the  Beune
and  the  Vezere,  showing  the  position  of  the  Cave  worked  out  by  Messrs.  H.
Christy  and  E.  Lartet.

Taken  by  W.  Tipping,  Esq.,-  E.S.A.,  May  1867.

The  position  of  the  Cave  is  indicated  by  the  point  at  which  the  two  lines  at  the  margin  -would  intersect

if  continued  over  the  plate.


m


BONE-  AND  CAVE-DEPOSITS  OF  THE  EEINDEEE-PEEIOD.  171

collections  formed  there  may  in  many  instances  prove  to  be  the  nuclei  around
which  may  centre  collections  from  analogous  cave-deposits  in  other  countries.
The  cave  or  grotto  is  situated  on  the  north  side  of  the  Valley  of  the  Beune,  a  small
tributary  of  the  Vezere,  and  about  half  a  mile  above  the  junction  of  the  two
streams.  [See  Lithographic  Sketch,  No.  2,  in  Part  V.  The  situation  is  shown
on  the  Maps  already  referred  to,  and  in  figs.  37-40,  pp.  64,  65.]

It  is  a  fine  vaulted  cave,  in  plan  approximating  to  a  segment  of  a  circle  about
50  feet  in  diameter,  with  an  arc  of  about  90  degrees  cut  off  to  form  the  opening.
Its  floor  is  a  continuation  of  a  ledge  of  rock  nearly  120  feet  above  the  river,  the
face  of  the  cliff  being  at  this  spot  divided  into  steps  or  terraces  in  much  the  same
manner  as  at  Le  Moustier.  There  is  a  stalactitic  coating  over  much  of  the  roof;
and  the  greater  part  of  the  floor  of  rock  was,  before  Messrs.  Lartet  and  Christy's
explorations,  covered  by  a  layer  of  hard  breccia  from  4  to  10  inches  thick,
cemented  by  the  infiltration  of  water  charged  with  calcareous  matter  (fig.  63).

Fig.  63.

Diagram  of  the  Cave-deposits  at  Les  Eyzies.


b  b

a,  Limestone.

b,  Hearth- stuff,  with  Bones,  Flint  Flakes,  and  Implements  of  Stone  and  Bone.
c,  Breccia  of  Limestone,  cemented  with  Stalagmite.

Above  this  there  had  formerly  existed  a  looser  deposit,  of  the  nature  of  a  kjokken-
modding,  from  2  to  3  feet  in  thickness,  which  had  been  removed  some  years  ago,
but  of  which  some  portions  remain  cemented  by  stalactite  to  the  walls  of  the  cave.
The  stalagmitic  breccia  from  the  floor  contains,  as  usual,  a  number  of  worked
flints  of  much  the  same  character  as  those  from  La  Madelaine,  and  also  many
pebbles  of  quartz,  gneiss,  granite,  and  other  rocks,  some  of  which  have  been  used
as  hammers,  and  others  have  been  exposed  to  the  action  of  fire.  Some  of  the
rounded  stones,  with  mortar-like  depressions  in  them,  have  been  found  here,  and
also  several  pieces  of  hsematitic  iron-ore,  the  surfaces  of  which  have  evidently


172  EBLIQUI^E  AQTJITANIC^E.

been  scraped  so  as  to  produce  a  kind  of  raddle  or  red  paint,  which  must  have  been
used  by  the  occupants  of  the  cave  for  ornamental  purposes.  There  are  also  traces
of  hearths  and  fragments  of  charcoal,  as  well  as  a  great  deal  of  sooty  matter
dispersed  through  the  bed.  Numerous  bones  and  teeth  are,  as  usual,  interspersed.
The  former,  if  they  were  such  as  contained  marrow,  have  in  all  cases  been  broken,
probably  with  the  pebbles  already  mentioned  as  having  been  used  as  hammers,
while  the  bones  without  marrow,  such  for  instance  as  the  numerous  small  bones
of  the  carpus  and  tarsus,  have  been  left  not  only  unbroken  but  in  many  cases
undisturbed  in  their  relative  positions,  proving,  as  M.  Lartet  has  remarked,  that
the  ancient  hunters  who  inhabited  these  spots,  though  greedy  for  marrow,  did  not
care  for  gristle,  and  moreover  had  no  dogs.  Harpoons  and  arrow-heads  of  Rein-
deer-horn, bone  needles,  and  whistles  formed  by  piercing  a  hole  in  the  lower  side
of  the  hollow  phalanges  of  Deer  have  been  found  here,  the  latter  having  also
occurred  at  Laugerie  Basse.  Besides  these,  bones  and  even  pieces  of  schist  with
engravings  of  various  animals  upon  them  have  been  discovered.  A  fragment  of
Elephant's  tusk,  showing  traces  of  human  work,  and  a  metacarpal  of  a  young
Fells,  of  great  size  (F.  spelcea  ?),  presenting  numerous  cuts  and  scratches  like
those  on  the  bones  of  other  animals  in  the  mass  of  refuse,  have  also  occurred.

Remains  of  Animals  in  the  Caves. — The  animal-remains,  whether  from  La
Madelaine,  Laugerie,  or  Les  Eyzies,  are,  as  I  have  already  observed,  for  the  most
part  of  the  same  species.  The  complete  list  has  not  yet  been  published  by
MM.  Lartet  and  Christy ;  but  the  following  appear  to  be  the  animals  whose  bones
are  found  in  the  greatest  abundance : —


Equus  caballus.
Sus  scrofa.
Cervus  tarandus.

elaphus.

capreolus.


Megaceros  hibernicus.
Antilope  rupicapra.


saiga.


Ibex.
Bos.


Bison  europaeus.
Spermophilus.
Lepus  timidus.
Sciurus.


Besides  these,  remains  of  several  species  of  Birds  and  Fishes  have  been  found.

Besides  these  remains  of  the  lower  animals,  a  few  Human  remains  have  occurred.
At  Les  Eyzies  part  of  the  jaw  of  an  individual,  of  small  stature,  was  found  among
the  debris,  but  its  position  appears  to  be  undetermined ;  while  at  La  Madelaine  the
fragment  of  the  skull,  the  half  of  the  jaw,  and  several  of  the  long  bones  of  a  large
subject  were  discovered  in  the  midst  of  the  fragmentary  bones  and  worked  flints
which  constitute  the  mass.  These  human  remains  I  have  not  seen ;  but  the  frag-
mentary state  of  the  cranium  and  the  occurrence  of  the  bones  in  the  middle  of  an


SKETCHES  ON  THE  VEZEEE.   No.  3.

View  of  the  Chateau  des  Eyzies.     By  W.  Tipping,  Esq.,  M.P.,  F.S.A.,  May  1867.

This  fine  old  ruinous  Chateau,  parts  of  which  have  heen  excavated  in  the  rock
against  which  it  is  built,  stands  at  the  angle  to  the  south-west  of  Les  Eyzies
village,  near  the  junction  of  the  Beune  with  the  Vezere.  It  is  visible  in  the
distance  in  the  Woodcuts,  figs.  38,  39,  and  40,  pages  64  and  65.


-   -f  •


,


V;^


\s\x


BONE-  AND  CAVE-DEPOSITS  OF  THE  REINDEER-PERIOD.  173

indubitable  "  kjokken-modding  "  seem  inconsistent  with  their  presence  being  due
to  any  ordinary  sepulture,  and  to  be  rather  suggestive  of  one  of  those  periods  of
famine  which  must  of  necessity  occasionally  occur  among  a  people  entirely  de-
pendent upon  the  chase  for  its  means  of  subsistence,  and  under  the  pressure  of
which  men  of  far  higher  civilization  than  the  ancient  occupants  of  these  caves
have  been  driven  to  support  their  own  life  at  the  expense  of  that  of  one  of  their
fellow-beings.

Relative  Antiquity  of  the  Caves  and  their  Contents. — Our  concern  here  is  not,
however,  with  the  mode  of  life  or  the  ethnological  peculiarities  of  these  ancient
inhabitants  of  Perigord,  but  with  the  antiquity  of  the  deposits  containing  their
remains.

To  arrive  at  some  approximate  estimate  of  this,  there  are  four  methods  of
inquiry  open.  "We  may  to  some  extent  judge  of  it : —

1.  Prom  Geological  considerations  with  regard  to  the  character  and  position

of  the  Caves.

2.  Prom  the  Palseontological  evidence  of  the  remains  found  in  them.

3.  Prom  the  Archaeological  character  of  the  objects  of  human  workman-

ship ;  and

4.  Prom  a  comparison  with  similar  deposits  in  neighbouring  districts  in

Prance.

Under  the  first  head  of  inquiry  the  subject  is  fortunately  free  from  any  ques-
tions as  to  the  "diluvial"  or  aqueous  origin  of  the  deposits — questions  which  in
other  cases  have  led  to  so  much  discussion,  especially  among  Prench  geologists.
Notwithstanding  the  presence  of  numerous  rolled  pebbles,  common  in  the  ad-
jacent gravels,  but  which  have  been  brought  in  for  the  purpose  of  being  used  as
hammers,  hearth-stones,  and  heaters,  the  deposits  are  beyond  all  doubt  the  refuse-
heaps  arising  from  the  human  habitation  of  the  caves — kjokken-mod  dings  pure
and  simple.  As  far,  then,  as  Geological  evidence  of  their  antiquity  goes,  it  is
merely  a  question  as  to  what  changes  have  taken  place  in  the  valley  since  their
accumulation ;  for  the  time  necessary  for  the  formation  of  the  stalagmite  which
in  some  cases  overlies  them,  or  of  the  calcareous  breccia  into  which  they  have
occasionally  been  converted,  is  so  dependent  upon  variable  conditions  that  it
seems  needless  to  take  it  into  account.  These  changes  in  the  valley  have  then,  it
must  be  confessed,  been  but  slight.  The  face  of  the  cliff  above  many  of  the
recesses  cannot  have  weathered  away  more  than  a  foot  or  two  at  the  utmost  since
their  occupation ;  and  though  in  some  cases,  as  at  Le  Moustier  and  one  of  the

2B


174  KELIQUIJE  AQUITANICLE.

caves  in  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  a  talus  has  at  one  time  or  another  accumulated  suffi-
cient to  obscure  the  mouth  of  the  cave,  yet  this  seems  to  be  the  exception  rather
than  the  rule.  Neither  has  the  river  deepened  its  course  to  any  appreciable
extent,  as  some  of  the  caves  or  recesses  are  even  now  within  reach  of  its  highest
floods.  Still  we  have  evidence  of  the  remarkable  power  of  the  cliffs  to  withstand
the  influence  of  weathering,  in  the  well-preserved  remains  of  the  ancient  rock-
habitations  which  I  have  mentioned,  and  in  the  fact  that  the  extraordinarily
severe  winter  of  1863-64  produced  but  the  slightest  effect  upon  the  face  of  the
rocks ;  so  that  with  the  present  climate  a  small  amount  of  degradation  may
testify  to  an  enormous  lapse  of  time*.  And  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  in  com-
paring the  erosion  of  the  valley  during  the  recent  period  with  the  great  extent  of
the  total  excavation,  that  in  all  probability  it  had  gone  on  to  some  extent  before
the  submergence  of  the  country  during  the  Miocene  period,  and  that  since  that
time  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  valley  having  been  protected  by  submergence
from  the  erosive  power  of  the  river,  which  therefore  must  have  been  in  operation
for  ages,  while  its  power  during  the  period  of  the  great  extension  of  the  Glaciers
must  have  been  inordinately  greater  than  at  present.  Though,  therefore,  the  geo-
logical changes  in  the  Valley  of  the  Ve"zere  have  been  but  slight  since  the  occupa-
tion of  the  caves,  they  are  not  inconsistent  with  a  considerable  degree  of  antiquity,
historically  (not  geologically)  speaking,  being  assigned  to  these  deposits.

I  now  come  to  the  Palaiontological  evidence  of  the  case.  The  animal  remains
which  have  been  discovered  in  the  alluvial  deposits  and  caves  of  the  South  of
France  may  be,  and  indeed  have  been,  broadly  divided  into  two  groups.  The
earlier  of  these,  like  the  Postpliocene  group  of  other  parts  of  Western  Europe,  is
characterized  by  the  presence  of  Ursus  spelceus,  Jlytena  spelcea,  Fells  spelcea,
Elephas  primigenius,  Rhinoceros  tichorhimis,  and  perhaps  some  other  animals,
though  comprising  also  most  of  the  members  of  the  later  group.  The  principal
of  these  seem  to  be  Ursus  arctos,  Canis  lupus,  Megaceros  hibernicm  (?),  Cervus
tarandus,  C.elaphus,  C.capreolus,  Bison priscus,  Bos  primigenius,  Equus  caballus,
and  possibly  E.  asinus.

Now  it  will  have  been  observed  that  in  the  deposits  of  which  I  have  been
treating,  the  older  group  has  been  represented  by  only  a  few  scattered  remains,
such  as  might  have  been  introduced  by  the  occupants  of  the  caves  from  some
older  deposit  in  the  neighbourhood,  if  they  did  not  find  them  even  in  the  caves
themselves.  A  tooth  such  as  the  molar  of  an  Elephant  would  be  certain  to

*  See  the  Footnote  at  page  63,  relative  to  the  progress  of  denudation  as  calculated  by  II.  Laganne. —
EDIT.  EEL.  Aa.


BONE-  AND  CAVE-DEPOSITS  OF  THE  EEINDEEE-PEEIOD.  175

attract  the  attention  of  a  savage  accustomed  to  construct  his  weapons  for  the
chase  from  hone  or  horn ;  and  accordingly  we  find  at  Le  Moustier  and  Laugerie
portions  of  such  teeth,  and  at  Les  Eyzies  a  portion  of  a  tusk  hearing  traces  of
human  work.  The  plates  of  the  molars,  however,  are  detached,  suggesting  that
the  teeth  were  already  in  a  somewhat  altered  condition  when  deposited  in  the
refuse-heap.  The  metacarpal  of  the  large  Felis,  which  I  have  mentioned  as
bearing  cut  marks  upon  it,  I  have  not  seen ;  hut  there  is  not  much  probability
of  the  animal  being  represented  by  only  a  single  bone,  had  it  been  killed  at  the  time
when  these  deposits  were  formed ;  and  there  is  at  least  a  possibility  of  cut  marks
being  caused  upon  it  by  its  being  trodden  in  a  mass  of  rubble  all  bristling  with
flint  knives.  We  may  therefore,  I  think,  for  the  present  regard  all  the  remains
of  the  older  fauna  as  being  of  casual  introduction — unless  possibly  some  of  those
found  at  Le  Moustier  may  be  considered  to  have  belonged  to  a  deposit  of  another
character  than  that  of  a  mere  "  kjokken-modding."  Confining  ourselves,  therefore,
to  the  second  group,  of  some  members  of  which  the  remains  occur  in  such  abun-
dance, we  still  find  that  a  vast  change  has  taken  place  in  the  fauna  of  the  country
since  these  deposits  were  formed.  The  Reindeer,  the  Aurochs,  the  Chamois,  the
Saiga,  have  all  now  retreated,  some  to  the  extreme  north,  others  to  the  forests  of
Lithuania  or  Moldavia,  or  to  the  snow-capped  summits  of  the  Alps  or  the  Pyrenees.
The  Spermophilus  has  also  disappeared.  Whether  we  are  to  attribute  this  retreat
to  a  change  in  the  climate  or  to  the  advance  of  cultivation  and  the  persecutions  of
Man,  the  process  must  necessarily  have  been  slow.  And  yet,  to  judge  from  the
fact  recorded  by  M.  Lartet,  that  no  Reindeer-remains  are  ever  found  associated
with  the  ancient  Celtic  monuments  of  Gaul,  it  would  appear  that  the  animal
which  formed  the  staple  food  of  the  occupants  of  these  Caves  had  already  disap-
peared from  the  South  of  France,  even  in  an  early  prehistoric  period.  The  absence
of  all  domesticated  animals,  and  even  of  the  Dog,  which  has  always  been  regarded
as  Man's  earliest  companion,  also  seems  to  testify  to  a  great  antiquity  for  these
deposits.  The  fact,  too,  pointed  out  by  M.  Lartet*,  that  in  a  cave  on  Mont  Saleve,
near  Geneva,  similar  breccia  occurs  of  charcoal  and  worked  flints  mixed  up  with
fractured  bones  of  Ox,  Horse,  and  Reindeer,  while  Reindeer  has  not  been  noticed
among  the  remains  of  any  of  the  Swiss  lake-habitations,  seems  to  place  these  cave-
dwellings  earlier  in  point  of  time.  It  must,  however,  be  borne  in  mind  that  they
are  in  a  district  which,  not  improbably,  civilization  would  be  slow  to  reach,  and  that
it  does  not  of  necessity  follow  that  the  extinction  of  the  Reindeer  in  Switzerland
and  in  the  South  of  France  was  contemporaneous.  The  "  bos  cervi  figura  "  men-

*  Ann.  des  Sciences  Nat.  xv.  p.  227.


176  EELIQUIJi  AQUITANIC2E.

tioned  by  Caesar  has,  since  the  days  of  Gesner,  been  generally  recognized  as  the
Reindeer ;  so  that  less  than  2000  years  ago  it  was  living  in  the  Hercynian  Forest ;
and  though  probably  this  forest  was  situate  in  Southern  and  Central  Germany
and  not  in  France,  yet  it  is  worth  recording  as  at  all  events  a  curious  coincidence
that  some  of  the  earlier  authors  place  it  near  the  Pyrenees*.  On  the  whole,  then,
it  would  appear  that  the  Palaeontological  evidence,  though  apparently  fixing  a  limit
in  one  direction,  as  tending  to  show  the  deposits  to  be  more  recent  than  the  Post-
Pliocene  period,  does  not  afford  us  any  very  precise  indications  in  the  other,
though  suggestive  of  what,  historically  regarded,  must  be  considered  a  very  high
antiquity.

Looking  at  the  subject  from  an  Archaeological  point  of  view,  it  appears,  first,
that  from  the  vast  number  of  objects  of  human  workmanship  contained  in  the
deposits,  the  accumulations  at  different  spots  must  probably  have  extended  over  a
lengthened  period;  and,  secondly,  that,  from  the  different  character  of  the  flint
implements  found  at  Le  Moustier,  the  beds  there  are  of  a  somewhat  different  and
probably  earlier  age  than  the  others.  I  have  already  mentioned  that  though
some  of  the  implements  found  at  Le  Moustier  approximate  most  closely  to  some
of  those  from  the  Postpliocene  gravels  of  the  Somme  valley,  yet  this  form  shaded
off  insensibly  into  another  which  has  never  been  found  in  the  river-gravels,  though
occasionally  recurring,  with  but  slight  modification,  in  others  of  these  cave-
deposits.  The  other  forms  of  flakes  and  scrapers  are  found,  though  with  rather
different  accompaniments,  at  all  the  other  stations  along  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere.
Flakes,  however,  may  be  of  any  age ;  and  the  flake  chipped  at  the  end  into  a  semi-
circular form,  to  which  the  name  of  "scraper"  or  "graltoir"  has  been  given,
seems  to  come  under  the  same  category.  They  are  sold  at  the  present  day  for
lighting  tinder,  are  found  on  the  surface,  and  in  barrows  and  ancient  encamp-
ments ;  and  one  has  occurred  even  in  the  Brixham  Cave.  As  to  the  date  of  the
Le-Moustier  implements,  it  will  therefore  be  safest  to  suspend  our  opinion  for  the
present.  With  regard  to  the  objects  from  the  other  deposits,  there  are  some
which,  if  not  giving  a  definite  age,  at  all  events  seem  to  point  to  a  definite  stage
of  civilization;  I  mean  the  more  carefully  chipped  implements  and  arrow-heads,
of  which  a  considerable  number  has  been  found  at  Badegoule,  Laugerie,  and  the
Gorge  d'Enfer,  and  which  are  analogous  in  all  respects  to  those  of  what  may  be
termed  the  "  ordinary  Stone  Period,"  such  as  have  been  found  in  so  many  places
both  in  the  superficial  soil  and  in  barrows.  Some  of  these  forms,  indeed,  are
such  as  not  improbably  remained  in  use  even  after  the  introduction  of  the  use  of

*  Smith's  '  Diet,  of  Geog.'  sub.  voce  (Schol.  ad  Dionys.  Perieg.  286).


BONE-  AND  CAVE-DEPOSITS  OF  THE  REINDEER-PERIOD.  177

bronze.  The  presence  in  these  refuse-heaps  of  skilfully  carved  bone  arrow-heads
and  harpoons,  of  bone  needles  with  neatly  drilled  eyes,  and  more  especially  of  the
sculptured  and  engraved  bones,  testifies  to  a  considerable  advance  in  civilization,
and  even  in  art,  such  as  would  at  first  sight  appear  more  consistent  with  some
acquaintance  with  metallic  tools,  rather  than  with  cutting-instruments  of  stone
alone.  Of  metallic  tools  of  any  kind  there  is  not,  however,  the  slightest  trace —
though  it  must  be  mentioned  that  a  small  piece  of  rough  copper  was  found  among
the  rubble  thrown  out  from  the  cave  at  Laugerie  Basse,  which  may  nevertheless
have  been  of  accidental  introduction  from  the  surface.  The  Marquis  de  Vibraye
has  also  found  a  small  piece  of  copper  in  the  "foyer"  which  he  thinks  is  native.
Still,  judging  from  the  archaeological  evidence  alone,  there  is  no  reason  why  the
presence  of  metal,  if  eventually  found,  should  excite  great  surprise,  as  the
majority  of  the  deposits,  so  far  as  objects  of  human  workmanship  are  concerned,
might  well  be  relics  of  a  tribe  subsisting  by  the  chase,  who,  if  not  themselves
acquainted  with  metal,  may  have  lived  at  a  period  when  in  some  not  very  distant
but  more  favoured  part  of  France  the  use  of  metal  was  already  known.

Let  us  now  see  what  is  the  testimony  of  other  deposits  containing  human  relics
of  a  similar  character  in  the  South  of  France.

In  the  well-known  cave  of  Bize*  (Aude)  were  found  portions  of  Reindeer-horn
cut  and  carved  f,  some  with  a  chevron-like  pattern,  worked  flints,  pottery,  and
human  bones,  mixed  up  with  the  fractured  bones  of  Reindeer,  Aurochs,  Ursus,  &c.,
together  with  numerous  land  and  marine  shells,  principally  of  edible  species.  In
that  of  Lourdes  J  (Hautes  Pyrenees)  Dr.  Alphonse  Milne-Edwards  found  bones  of
Reindeer  cut  by  flint  instruments,  needles  of  bone,  flint  flakes  and  cores,  mixed
with  fractured  bones  of  Aurochs,  Horse,  Stag,  Ibex,  Chamois,  Pig,  &c.

In  the  lower  cave  of  Massat  (Ariege)  were  a  number  of  arrow-heads,  harpoons,
needles,  &c.,  made  of  bone  or  Stag's  horn,  accompanied  by  flint  knives.  With
them  were  associated  a  number  of  fractured  bones  of  Stag,  Ibex,  Chamois,  and
Aurochs,  as  well  as  a  few  bones  of  Ursus  arctos  and  other  animals.  Besides
these  an  antler  of  a  Stag,  perforated  at  one  end,  and  having  the  head  of  a  Bear
engraved  upon  it,  was  found  by  M.  Lartet§.  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the
deposit  in  this  cave  having  been  a  "  kjokken-modding,"  though  regarded  as  of
diluvial  origin  by  M.  Fontan||.

In  the  Cave  of  Savigne^j"  (Vienne)  were  found  a  number  of  worked  bones  and

*  Marcel  de  Serres,  '  Geog.  des  Terr.  Tert.'  p.  64  ;  Lyell,  '  Principles,'  p.  738.

t  Lartet,  '  Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat.'  xv.  p.  214.         t  Lartet,  ibid.  xv.  p.  227 ;  A.  Milne-Edwards,  ibid.  xvii.

§  Lartet,  ut  sup.  p.  205.  ||  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  xvii.  p.  468.  If  Lartet,  ut  sup.  p.  214.


178  KELIQULE  AQUITANICLE.

flints  associated  with  broken  bones  and  cemented  into  a  breccia.  Among  them
was  a  barbed  harpoon  and  the  cannon  bone  of  a  Deer  engraved  with  the  figure  of
a  Doe  or  Reindeer,  followed  by  another  animal  of  much  the  same  appearance.

An  analogous  deposit  in  a  cave  on  Mont  Saleve,  near  Geneva,  has  been  already
mentioned.

Now  it  will  be  observed  that  in  all  these  instances,  in  which  to  all  appearance
precisely  similar  deposits  to  those  of  the  Valley  of  the  Ve'zere  have  occurred,  the
animals  characteristic  of  the  older  or  Postpliocene  fauna  are  entirely  absent.

In  the  Grotte  d'Arcy  *  (sur  Cure),  described,  though  apparently  under  somewhat
erroneous  impressions,  by  the  Marquis  de  Vibraye,  there  appears  to  have  been  a
lower  bed  distinct  from  that  immediately  superimposed  upon  it,  and  containing
remains  of  Ursus  spelaius,  Hycena  spelcea,  and  Rhinoceros  tichorhinm,  among
which,  however,  a  Human  jaw  was  discovered.  The  bed  above  contained  bones
of  Reindeer,  Deer,  Ox,  and  Horse,  associated  with  flint  knives.  In  this  bed  were
fragments  of  a  ring  with  notches  in  it ;  and  its  whole  character  seems  much  the
same  as  that  of  the  deposits  I  have  been  describing ;  so  that  it  would  appear  as
if  we  had  here  a  case  of  superposition  of  the  beds  of  what  M.  Lartet  has  termed
the  "  Reindeer  period  "  of  the  South  of  Erance  upon  an  older  bed.  The  Cave  of
Pontil  (Herault),  described  by  M.  Paul  Gervais,  presents  an  analogous  instance.
There  the  remains  of  Rhinoceros  tichorhinus,  Ursus  spelceus,  &c.  are  in  a  lower
lied  than  that  which  furnished  bones  of  Horse,  Human  remains,  ancient  hearths,
a  flint  knife,  and  various  instruments  made  of  Deer's  horn  and  bone,  but  in  this
case  similar  to  those  found  in  the  Lake-habitations  of  Switzerland.  Indeed  some
of  the  upper  beds  produced  polished  stone  axes  and  objects  belonging  to  the
Age  of  Bronze.

Baron  Ancaf  has  remarked  something  of  the  same  kind  in  the  Grotta  San
Teodoro  (Sicily),  where  beds  containing  siliceous  flakes  mixed  with  bones  of  Stag,
Horse,  and  Pig  overlie  beds  containing  bones  of  Hyaena,  Bear,  Elephant,  and
Hippopotamus.  In  the  Grotta  Perciata  the  deposit  of  broken  bones  and  flint
flakes  occurred,  but  without  the  remains  of  the  older  animals.

In  the  Cave  of  Bruniquel,  from  which  the  collection  of  objects  now  in  the
British  Museum  was  procured,  and  which  has  formed  the  subject  of  a  communi-
cation from  Professor  Owen  to  the  Royal  Society,  as  yet,  however,  incomplete!,
arrow-heads,  harpoons,  needles,  and  other  instruments  in  bone,  cut  and  engraved
bones  and  Reindeer -horns,  and  various  forms  of  worked  flints,  all  similar  to  the

*  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  de  France,  2nd  ser.,  xvii.  p.  462.  t  Hid.  pp.  680-684.

J  Since  this  was  written,  further  communications  have  been  made  to  the  Koyal  Society  by  Prof.  Owen.


BOKE-  AND  CAVE-DEPOSITS  OF  THE  KEINDEEK-PERIOD.  179

objects  from.  Les  Eyzies,  occurred  in  association  with  bones  of  Reindeer,  Ox,
Horse,  and  other  animals,  mostly  in  a  fractured  condition.  We  have  not  as  yet
the  advantage  of  knowing  what  opinion  has  been  formed  by  Professor  Owen  as  to
the  age  of  the  deposit,  or  what  fauna  he  has  been  enabled  to  determine  as
belonging  to  the  cave ;  but  in  a  second  collection  from  thence,  which  I  saw  at  the
chateau  of  the  Vicomte  de  Lastic  St.  Jal,  the  explorer  of  the  cave,  were  the  base
of  a  large  canine  tooth,  probably  of  Ursus  spelceus,  and  the  tooth  of  a  large
Carnivore.  There  were  also  several  marine  shells,  such  as  Dentalium,  Natica,
Nassa,  Pectunculus,  Scalaria,  Valuta,  and  a  Cypnea  an  inch  in  length,  all  not
improbably  derived  from  the  Miocene  beds  of  the  Garonne.  As  several  of  these
shells  are  perforated,  it  is  evident  that  they  were  brought  into  the  cave  as  personal
ornaments ;  and  this  fact  strengthens  the  supposition  that  in  other  cases  remains
of  an  older  period,  such1  as  teeth  of  Ursus  spelteus  and  Elephant,  may  have  been
introduced  into  the  caves  by  their  primitive  human  occupants  long  after  the
death  of  the  animals.  In  some  cases,  as  at  La  Madelaine,  fossil  shells  have  been
found  imbedded  in  the  refuse-heaps.  A  shell  of  the  genus  Cassis  has  also  been
found  at  Les  Eyzies.

On  the  whole,  the  evidence  of  all  the  caves  which  I  have  here  cited  as  con-
taining deposits  of  a  similar  character  to  those  of  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere  is
strongly  corroborative  of  their  belonging  to  a  period  subsequent  to  that  of  the
Elephas  primigeuim  and  Rhinoceros  tichorhinus  and  their  Postpliocene  associates,
but  characterized  by  the  presence  of  the  Reindeer  and  some  other  animals  now
extinct  in  that  part  of  Europe,  though  they  must  have  lived  on  to  a  period  when
some  slight  advance  had  been  made  in  human  civilization.  For  the  works  of
Human  Art  found  in  these  deposits  show  faculties  of  design  beyond  those  of
mere  savages ;  and  there  is,  moreover,  for  the  most  part,  a  definite  character
pervading  them,  so  much  so  that,  even  with  our  present  experience,  there  are
a  certain  number  of  objects  which  may,  with  considerable  confidence,  be  regarded
as  characteristic  of  what  M.  Lartet  has  termed  the  "Reindeer-period"  in  the
South  of  France.  It  is  indeed  evident  that  outward  conditions,  and  the  means
requisite  for  obtaining  a  supply  of  animal  food,  must  react  upon  the  manner  of
life  of  a  people,  and  that  this  will  in  turn  regulate  the  weapons  and  implements
most  in  use,  so  that  such  objects  will  always  be  to  some  extent  correlated  with
the  fauna  of  the  period.

I  must,  however,  acknowledge  that  there  are  some  instances  of  caves  which,
according  to  the  observations  of  those  who  explored  them,  favour  the  view  of
weapons,  implements,  and  ornaments  of  precisely  the  same  character  as  those  of


180  EELIQUIyE    AQU1TANKLE.

the  "  Reindeer -period "  having  lieen  associated  with  the  Postpliocene  fauna.
Such,  for  instance,  is  the  upper  cave  at  Massat*,  where  a  bone  arrow-head  (I  do
not  know  of  what  form)  is  said  to  have  been  found  in  a  deposit  containing,  among
others,  abundant  bones  of  TJrsus  spelceus,  Hyccna  spelcea,  and  a  large  Felis.  But
the  most  remarkable  cave  is  that  of  Aurignac,  where  a  number  of  objects,  of
much  the  same  character  as  those  from  the  Caves  of  Dordogne  (though  without
any  barbed  arrow-heads  or  harpoons),  were  discovered  by  M.  Lartet  associated
with  bones  of  Ursus  spelaus,  Hycena  spelcea,  and  Rhinoceros  tichorhinus,  and  with
teeth  of  Felis  spelcea  and  portions  of  molars  of  Elephas  primigenim,  as  well  as
with  bones  of  Reindeer,  Aurochs,  Stag,  Horse,  &c.  Future  observations  may
serve  to  reconcile  this  apparent  discrepancy ;  but  in  the  mean  time  all  geologists
will  be  thankful  to  Messrs.  Lartet  and  Christy  for  their  careful  researches  in  the
Caverns  of  the  Dordogne  and  for  the  liberal  manner  in  which  they  have  striven
to  make  the  results  subservient  to  the  interests  of  science.  It  is  satisfactory  to
know  that  they  are  about  to  publish  a  profusely  illustrated  account  of  their
discoveries ;  and  it  is  hoped  that  this  slight  sketch  of  the  impressions  given  by  a
visit  of  a  few  days  may  serve  to  show  how  interesting  will  be  the  details  of  the
researches  when  recorded  by  those  by  whom  they  were  undertaken.  (See  the
Prefatory  Remarks  at  page  161.)

*  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  xvii.  p.  468.


SKETCHES  ON  THE  VEZERE.   No.  4.

View  of  Le  Roc  de  Tayac.     Taken  from  the  elevated  ledge,  by  W.  Tipping,
Esq.,  M.P.,  P.S.A.,  May  1867.

This  much  excavated  escarpment,  opposite  the  Church  of  Tayac,  still  contains
many  chambers  and  galleries  of  an  old  Stronghold,  hollowed  out  of  the  rock,  as
already  mentioned  at  page  4.  See  also  the  Map  at  page  19,  and  the  Woodcut,
tig.  37,  at  page  64.  The  opening  of  a  vertical  passage  leading  to  lower  chambers
is  seen  on  the  left.


.   \       .


182


KELIQULE   AQUITANIC^E.


STATION  IV.
Cave  at  Laugerie  Basse,  on  the  Vezere  (Dordogne).     See  pages  5,  169,  &c.


1.  Ursus,  sp.

2.  Canis  lupus.
3. vulpes.

4.  Lepus  timidus  ?


5.  Elephas  primigenius.

6.  Equus  caballns.

7.  Cervus  elaphus.

8.  tarandus.


9.  Bos,  sp.

10.  Capra  ibex.

11.  Antilope  mpicapra.
12. saiga.


STATION  V.
Cave  at  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  on  the  Vezere  (Dordogne).     See  pages  35,  170,  &c.


1 .  Ursus  spelseus.

2.  Felis  spelsea.

3.  Canis  lupus.


4.  Canis  vulpes.

5.  Cervus  tarandus.

6.  Bos,  sp.


7.  Ovibos  moschatus.

8.  Capra  ibex.


STATION  VI.
Cave  of  Cro-Maynon,  on  the  Vezere  (Dordogne) .     See  pages  62  et  seq.


1.  Homo.

2.  Ursus  (of  large  size).

3.  Felis  spelaea.

4.  Canis  lupus.

5. vulpes.

(i. ,  sp.


7.  Spermophilus.

8.  Lepus  timidus  ?

9.  cuniculus?

10.  Elephas.

11.  Sus  scrofa.


12.  Equus  caballus.

1!3.  Cervus  elaphus.

14.  tarandus.

15.  Bos  (Bison  priscus?).

16.  Capra  ibex.


STATION  VII.

Cave  of  Les  Eyzies,  at  the  junction  of  the  Beune  and  the  Vezere  (Dordogne).
See  pages  5,  20,  36,  170,  &c.


1.  Homo.

2.  Felis  speleea.

3.  Canis  lupus.

4.  vulpes.

5.  Elephas  primigenius.

6.  Lepus  timidus.


7.  Spermophilus  erythro-

genoides.

8.  Arvicola,  sp.

9.  Mus.

10.  Equus  caballus.

11.  Cervus  elaphus.


12.  Cervus  tarandus.

13.  Bison  europaeus.

14.  Capra  ibex.

15.  Antilope  rupicapra.

16.  saiga.


IMPLEMENTS  BEARING-   SIGNIFICANT  MARKS.  183'


XVII.

ON  SOME  BONE  AND  OTHER  IMPLEMENTS  FROM  THE  CAVES  OF  PERIGORD,  FRANCE,
BEARING  MARKS  INDICATIVE  OF  OWNERSHIP,  TALLYING,  AND  GAMBLING.  .  By
Professor  T.  RUPEBT  JONES,  F.R.S.,  F.G.S.

[This  Memoir  was  read  at  the  Meeting  of  the  British  Association,  August  1872,  and  before  the  Anthro-
pological Institute,  December  3rd,  1872 ;  see  abstract,  '  Rep.  Brit.  Assoc.'  for  1872,  Trans.  Sect.  p.  189 :
and  '  Journ.  Anthrop.  Instit.'  vol.  ii.  p.  362.]

A  REMARKABLE  specimen  from  one  of  the  Rock-shelters  in  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  a
lateral  valley  of  the  Vezere,  Dordogne,  is  an  oblong  blade  of  ivory  (much  decom-
posed), 4  inches  long  by  1^  at  its  widest  part,  tapering  towards  one  end  but  imperfect,
broken  across  at  the  other,  convex  on  one  face,  slightly  concave  on  the  other,  and
marked  on  both  sides  with  numerous,  small,  regularly  arranged  pits,  several  groups
of  more  or  less  parallel  cuts  at  and  near  the  margins,  and  some  minute  notches  on
the  edge  at  two  places.  See  B.  Plate  XIII.  figs.  I3a,  b,  c,  and  page  98.

The  minute  marginal  notching  was  possibly  for  ornament.  The  series  of  shallow
cuts  near  the  edges,  and  the  systematically  arranged  pitting,  on  both  faces,  are
very  puzzling.  The  groups  of  cuts  differ  in  direction,  shape,  and  number ;  but  in
this  some  may  see  a  character  of  value.  It  is  difficult  to  say  if  the  combination
of  oblique  transverse  lines  of  pits,  almost  quincuncial,  was  made  on  a  premeditated
plan.  The  several  lines  have  not  the  same  number  of  pits,  nor  is  the  arrange-
ment of  the  latter  vertically  symmetrical.  Though  the  isolated  group  of  pits  on
the  flat  face  (fig.  13 b)  gives  nine,  when  counted  either  vertically  or  transversely,
yet  neither  this  nor  the  groups  of  notches  constitute  for  certain  any  indication  of
a  system  of  numeration ;  indeed  we  are  not  sure  that  they  belong  to  any  intelli-
gible plan  of  marking ;  but  we  will  point  out  some  analogous  objects  and  their
probable  uses  and  meanings;  and  perhaps  our  readers  will  help  us  to  clearer
interpretations.  What  appears  to  be  a  notch,  or  the  segment  of  a  hole,  at  the
base  is  due  to  a  recent  fracture.

This  ivory  plate,  or  Implement,  somewhat  like  a  short  Paper-knife  of  the
present  day,  reminds  us  of  the  Smoothers,  used  in  dressing  skins,  for  flattening
seams,  and  for  a  variety  of  purposes  by  Esquimaux  and  others.  It  may  have
been  merely  an  ornament ;  or  it  may  have  been  a  Tally,  or  possibly  a  Gambling-
implement,  as  Dr.  Robert  Brown,  M.A.,  E.R.G.S.,  who  is  well  acquainted  with
the  habits  of  many  savage  tribes,  is  inclined  to  think.

2c2


181  KELIQUL&  AQUITANICLE.

Dr.  E.  Brown  observes  (in  a  letter  dated  Sept.  28,  1868): — "Always  under  correction,  not  having  seen
the  original,  I  am  very  strongly  inclined  to  believe  that  it  was  a  Gambling-tool,  used  in  much  the  same  way
as  dice,  the  regular  dotted  markings,  and  possibly  some  of  the  transverse  ones  at  the  edge,  being  equivalent
to  the  marks  on  dice,  or  having  some  reference  to  the  chances  of  the  game.  How  it  was  used,  it  is  now
impossible  even  to  conjecture,  so  multifarious  are  the  gambling-tools  of  savages  at  the  present  day.

"  The  Indians  on  the  North-west  Coast  of  America  are  inveterate  gamblers,  and,  among  numerous  other
contrivances,  have  a  game  called  (by  the  Tsongeisth,  near  Victoria)  '  Smee-tell-aew,'  played  with  Beavers'
teeth  (the  incisors).  A  blanket  is  spread  on  the  ground;  the  number  of  players  is  two  or  three  (generally
two) ;  and  the  gambling-implements  are  eight  teeth,  marked  as  follows : — two  of  them  with  one  '  spot,'  four
with  five,  two  with  three  sets  of  transverse  bars,  and  one  of  the  '  spotted '  ones  with  a  ring  of  leather.  The
teeth  are  tossed  with  a  circular  motion  from  the  hand,  and  counted  in  pairs,  each  of  which  counts  one ;  but
if  more  than  two  of  each  kind  turn  up,  it  is  counted  as  nothing.  If  two  teeth,  one  with  bars  and  another
with  spots,  turn  up,  and  one  of  them  is  the  leather-marked  tooth  (or  'ace'), it  counts  double  (four);  and  so
on,  until  the  counters  (the  leg-bones  of  Wild  Ducks)  are  exhausted.

"I  remember,  in  the  summer  of  1861,  picking  up  (among  other  curiosities  from  the  wild  Eskimo  of
Pond's  Bay,  in  Baffin's  Bay)  some  beautifully  polished  pieces  of  Walrus  ivory,  with  almost  identical  figures
marked  on  them.  I  was  then  puzzled  to  make  out  their  use,  but  am  now  convinced  that  they  were
gambling-tools,  essentially  the  same  in  character  with  the  Tsongeisth  '  Smee-tell-aew.'  There  is  no  race  of
savages  so  rude  that  they  have  not  some  game  of  chance ;  and,  indeed,  it  seems  almost  to  be  a  rule  that  the
gambling  propensity  bears  an  inverse  ratio  to  their  elevation  in  the  social  scale.

"  During  last  summer  (1867)  I  did  not  see  any  gambling  among  the  Greenlanders ;  but  they  are  now  so
far  changed  that  no  criterion  can  be  drawn  from  them.  They  are  (up  to  72°  N.  lat.  at  least)  a  civilized
race,  though  compelled  by  necessity  to  resort  to  a  savage  mode  of  subsistence.

"  I  doubt  not  that  the  old  Cave-dwellers  of  Dordogne  were  also  gamblers,  and  that,  if  the  tool  figured
(fig.  13)  on  B.  Plate  XIII.  is  not  a  gambling-implement,  others  will  be  found."

Mr.  Frank  Poole  refers  to  some  Gaming-sticks  used  by  North- American  Indians,
in  his  '  Queen-Charlotte  Islands,'  8vo,  1872,  pp.  319,  320,  as  follows  :—

"  The  game  was  Odd  or  Even,  which  is  played  thus.  The  players  spread  a  mat,  made  of  the  inner  bark
of  the  yellow  cypress,  upon  the  ground,  each  party  being  provided  with  from  -forty  to  fifty  round  pins  or
pieces  of  wood,  five  inches  long  by  one  eighth  of  an  inch  thick,  painted  in  black  and  blue  rings,  and  beau-
tifully polished.  One  of  the  players,  selecting  a  number,  of  these  pins,  covers  them  up  in  a  heap  of  bark
cut  into  fine  fibre-like  tow.  Under  cover  of  the  bark,  he  then  divides  the  pins  into  two  parcels,  and,
having  taken  them  out,  passes  them  several  times  from  his  right  hand  to  his  left,  or  the  contrary.  While
the  player  shuffles,  he  repeats  the  words  '  I  E  Ly  yah,'  to  a  low  monotonous  chant  or  moan.  The  moment
he  finishes  the  incantation,  his  opponent,  who  has  been  intently  watching  him,  chooses  the  parcel  where  he
thinks  the  luck  lies  for  Odd  or  Even ;  after  which  the  second  player  takes  his  innings,  with  his  own  pins
and  the  same  ceremonies.  This  goes  on  till  one  or  the  other  loses  all  his  pins.  That  decides  the  game"*.

§  I.  As  to  Shape. — A  plain  bone  knife  (from  Moosseedorf),  the  blade  of  which
somewhat  resembles  our  specimen,  is  figured  in  Keller's  '  Lake-dwellings,'  &c.,

*  Specimens  of  the  North-American  Dice  and  Gaming-sticks  are  preserved  in  the  British  Museum  and  in
the  Christy  Collection.  In  '  The  Eaces  of  Mankind '  (Cassell  &  Co.),  Part  II.,  p.  35,  Dr.  Brown  has  described
a  similar  game.


IMPLEMENTS  BEARING  SIGNIFICANT  MARKS.


185


Lee's  Translation,  pi.  14.  fig.  22.  Others  have  been  met  with  in  England
(Heathery -Burn  Cave;  see  'Proc.  Soc.  Antiq.'  ser.  2,  vol.  ii.  p.  130,  fig.  1);  and,
through  the  courtesy  of  J.  H.  Lamprey,  Esq.,  Librarian  of  the  Royal  Geographical
Society  of  London,  we  have  seen  several  from  Ireland,  rather  narrower  and  thinner,
some  with  and  some  without  holes  near  the  end  for  suspension.  Scorings  perpen-
dicular to  the  edge,  whether  accidental  or  inten-
tionally made,  are  visible  on  some  of  these  Irish  and
English  specimens.  See  fig.*  69,  page  188.

§  II.  As  to  the  Marginal  Notching. — We  know
of  no  specimen  like  this  one  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,
combining  the  knife-like  shape,  the  marginal  crenu-
lation,  the  scoring  on  the  sides,  and  the  pitting  on
the  faces.

A  more  spatulate  and  blade-like  bone  implement
from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer  (fig.  2,  B.  Plate  XXV.)  bears
a  notched  or  crenulated  edge  and  some  superficial
scorings.

A  symmetrical  and  perforated  blade-like  piece  of
ivory  (Woodcut,  fig.  64),  with  an  iron  ring,  forming
part  of  an  Amulet*,  used  by  the  Djibba  Negroes  of
Central  Africa,  though  more  neatly  elongate-ovate,
closely  corresponds  in  shape  with  fig.  13,  of  B.  Plate
XIII.,  except  that  the  broken  narrow  end  in  fig.  13
is  replaced  by  a  perforated  apex  in  the  modern  spe-
cimen ;  and  instead  of  the  notched  base  of  fig.  13,  we
have  in  the  other  a  broken  projection.  The  margin
of  the  African  specimen  is  neatly  notched  all  round ;
but  the  notching  is  coarser  than  the  partial  crenu-
lation  of  the  edges  in  fig.  13  of  B.  Plate  XIII.  The
African  specimen  bears  neither  pits  nor  scoring;
nor  can  we  offer  any  remarks  on  its  original  shape
and  use  before  its  narrow  projecting  portion  was
broken  off,  if  ever,  indeed,  it  was  more  complete  than  at  present,  or  if  ever  intended
for  any  thing  else  than  an  article  of  Eetish.  We  get  from  this,  therefore,  little  to

*  Consisting  of  some  cowries,  leg-bones  of  a  small  reptile,  a  large  seed-vessel,  and  this  ivory  plate,  all
strung  on  a  leathern  thong.


186


RELIQULE  AQTJITANICJE.


illustrate  the  character  and  use  of  the  Dordogne  specimen,  excepting  that  ivory  has
been  cut  into  somewhat  similar  shapes  by  peoples  far  removed  in  time  and  space.
Colonel  Lane  Fox,  however,  has  shown  us  a  wooden  knife,  from  Central  Africa,
of  nearly  similar  outline,  with  crenulated  edge  and  long  handle  (fig.  65) ;  and  he

Fig.  67.


Fig.  66.


Fig.  68.


a


jL


Fig.  65.  Knife  of  very  hard  dark- red  wood,  described  as  a  "Woman's  Knife"  of  the  Dor  Tribe  of  Negroes.

Brought  to  England  by  Mr.  Petherick.     It  is  notched  along  both  edges,  at  nearly  regular  intervals

of  about  |  of  an  inch,  at  right  angles  to  the  line  of  the  edge.     One  fourth  of  nat.  size.     (Col.  A.

Lane  Fox's  Collection.)

Fig.  (36.  Notched  Stone  Implement.     From  Pennsylvania.     (Col.  A.  Lane  Fox's  Collection.)
Fig.  07.  Knife  of  Walrus  Tusk  (probably  Esquimaux),  notched  at  irregular  intervals  along  the  edge.     It

has  a  hole  j  inch  deep  in  the  back  of  the  handle.     One  fourth  of  nat.  size.     (Col.  A.  Lane  Fox's

Collection.)
Fig.  68.  Scored  Stone  Implement.     From  Denmark.     (Col.  A.  Lane  Fox's  Collection.)

suggests  that  this  ivory  specimen  may  have  been  an  old  knife,  broken  from  its
handle,  and  subsequently  bored  at  the  tip  for  suspension.  M.  J.  C.  Buckley,  Esq.,
Member  of  the  Celtic  Society,  has  moreover  informed  us  that  a  short  broad  knife
with  a  crenulated  edge  is  commonly  used  in  the  South  of  Ireland  to  scrape  roots
(potatoes,  carrots,  &c.)  into  a  pulp  for  culinary  purposes.


IMPLEMENTS  BEARING  SIGNIFICANT  MARKS.


187


§  III.  As  to  the  Parallel  Cuts. — With  regard  to  the  scoring  on  our  specimen
(B.  Plate  XIII.  fig.  13),  we  have  the  following  remarks  to  make.

1.  We  find  some  linear  transverse  notches  on  the  above-mentioned  hone  Imple-
ment (fig.  2,  B.  Plate  XXV.)  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  which  is  not  without  some
resemblance  to  fig.  13  of  Plate  XIII.     It  is  a  flat  piece  of  bone,  convex  on  one  face,
partly  flat  and  partly  concave  on  the  other,  rounded  at  one  end,  and  broken  at  the
other,  which  is  narrower.    The  margin  is  smooth  and  rounded,  and  marked  through-
out nearly  all  its  unbroken  extent  with  numerous,  small,  transverse,  parallel  nicks,
forming  a  crenulated  edge,  such  as  we  see  in  fig.  13  under  notice,  and  much  finer
than  that  given  to  the  transversely  notched  teeth  in  B.  Plate  V.  figs.  7  and  8.     This
ornament  is  lost  on  the  rounded  end,  possibly  from  wear.     On  each  face,  at  the  nar-
rower portion  of  this  blunt  bone  blade,  are  some  cross  scorings ;  but  the  fracture
has  interfered  with  the  several  series  of  notches,  some  of  the  smaller  of  which  are
in  pairs.     These  groups  of -marks  were  evidently  intentional;  and  this  specimen,
as  far  as  general  form,  crenulated  edge,  and  scoring  are  concerned,  has  an  evident
relationship  with  fig.  13  of  Plate  XIII.,  and  came  from  the  same  place.

2.  Many  articles  made  for  different  purposes,  in  different  countries,  have  notched
edges,  whether  for  use  or  ornament  (see,  for  instance,  fig.  89,  page  18,  of  Worsaae's
'  Nordiske  Oldsager '  &c.,  1859).     In  the  Blackmore  Museum,  Salisbury,  Mr.  E.  T.
Stevens  has  shown  us  a  very  handsome,  mounted,  jade  adze  marked  with  notches
that  are  arranged  in  groups  chiefly  along  the  edges ;  and  Mr.  J.  Evans,  E.S.A.,  has
another,  from  New  Zealand,  and  a  fragment  of  a  stone  celt  from  Burwell  Een  with
numerous  parallel  incised  lines,  or  scorings,  on  the  two  edges  of  one  face.

Besides  the  sketch  (fig.  65),  Colonel  Lane  Eox  has  favoured  us  with  sketches  of
other  notched  and  scored  specimens  in  his  collection : — 1.  A  celt-shaped  imple-
ment of  basalt,  from  Pennsylvania,  with  a  hole  drilled  from  both  sides,  and  eight
notches  across  the  small  end  or  butt*  (fig.  66).  2.  A  knife  of  Walrus-tusk,  with
irregular  notches,  possibly  for  the  handle  (fig.  67).  3.  An  oblong,  hard,  black  stone,
from  Denmark,  regularly  notched  with  fine  lines  at  eight  places  (two  places  on
each  of  the  four  edges),  with  7,  8,  9  (three  times),  10, 11,  and  12  notches  (fig.  68).
Could  this,  asks  Colonel  Lane  Eox,  have  been  intended  for  gambling-purposes  ?

3.  Of  bone  implements  scored  with  marks  that  scarcely  seem  intended  to  be
ornamental,  and  may  have  served  originally  for  numbers,  or  other  private  marks,
many  specimens  may  be  adduced.     We  may  draw  attention  to  a  knife-like  bone

*  These  may  possibly  have  had  to  do  with  the  fastening  of  the  handle.  See  also  '  Proc.  Soc.  Antiq.'
ser.  2,  vol.  i.  p.  281  (1860) — W.  Galloway,  on  an  incised  ironstone  celt  from  near  Edinburgh,  with  notches,
longitudinal  and  transverse,  at  the  heel  for  fastening.


188


KELIQIJLE


C5


Implement,  not  dissimilar  to  some  from  Switzerland  and  elsewhere  (see  above,
page  185),  that  was  found  in  the  Heathery-Burn  Cave,  near  Stanhope,  in  the
County  of  Durham,  which  bears  a  scoring,  or  groups  of  notches,  on  the  edges,  as
observed  by  A.  "W.  Pranks,  Esq.,  E.S.A.  (fig.  69).  At  one  edge  there  is  a  set  of

two  short  parallel  notches  perpendicular  to  the
margin,  and  another  of  three,  close  by ;  and  these
appear  on  one  face  only.  The  other  edge  has  two
series  of  similar  notches  (eleven  and  thirteen)  con-
tinued on  the  two  faces  of  the  blade.  The  specimen
is  8  inches  long  by  1^  broad,  and  about  ^  thick.
There  is  a  figure  of  a  specimen  like  this,  reduced  in
size,  and  without  markings,  accompanying  an  ac-
count of  the  Heathery-Burn  Cave*  and  its  contents,
in  the  '  Proceedings  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries,'
ser.  2.  vol.  ii.  p.  130.

4.  The  Rev.  W.  Greenwell,  F.S.A.,  has  observed
groups  of  three,  five,  and  seven  notches  or  lines,  of
unequal  lengths,  perpendicular  to  the  edge,  on  one  of
the  perforated  implements  made  of  Red-deer  Antler,
from  Heathery-Burn  Cave,  and  not  uncommon  in
England  and  Switzerland,  which  have  been  regarded
as  analogous  to  Shuttles  &c.,  such  as  those  figured  in
Keller's  'Lake-dwellings'  (Lee's  Translation),  pl.37.
figs.  11  &  13 ;  pi.  41.  fig.  9 ;  and  pi.  62.  fig.  27.

5.  The  marginal  scoring  on  a  knife-like  bone  implement  from  Ireland  has  been
alluded  to  above,  page  185.

6.  Marginal  scoring,  or  groups  of  small  notches  perpendicular  to  the  edge,  we
have  also  seen  on  two  edges  of  a  fragment  of  a  flattish  bone  stem,  subtriangular
in  section  (a  Dart-head,  perhaps,  or  rather  a  Tally-stick),  from  the  rock-shelter  of
La  Madelaine,  Dordogne  (fig.  3,  B.  Plate  XXV.).     Here  there  are  two  perfect
groups  of  four  notches  on  one  edge  and  part  of  another,  and  an  imperfect  series
of  eleven,  at  somewhat  irregular  distances,  on  another  f.

*  This  Cave  is  also  described  in  the  'Geologist'  for  1862,  pages  34  and  167;  and  some  of  the  Human
Remains  found  in  it  are  described  and  figured  in  the  same  volume.

t  Specimens  of  implements  made  of  antler,  and  so  notched  or  scored  as  probably  to  have  served  as
Tallies,  have  been  collected  by  MM.  G.  &  P.  Parrot,  in  the  Grotte  de  PEglise,  Commune  d'Excideuil
(Dordogne),  and  are  preserved  in  the  Museum  at  St.  Germain.


IMPLEMENTS  BEAE1NG  SIGNIFICANT  MARKS.  189

7.  Two  fragments  of  small,  subcylindrical,  hollow  Bird-bones,  also  from  La
Madelaine,  have  vertical  rows  of  transverse  parallel  notches,  and  probably  served
as  Tally-sticks :    in  one  instance  (fig.  6,  B.  Plate  XXV.)  there  are  two  vertical
rows  (in  ones,  twos,  threes,  and  greater  numbers,  not  far  apart)  on  the  two  oppo-
site sides,  where  the  surface  of  the  bone  is  most  prominent;   and  in  the  other
specimen  there  are  four,  less  regular  rows,  occupying  all  the  surface.     The  latter,
however,  is  possibly  a  mere  roughening  of  the  smooth  bone  to  ensure  tight  lashing
(compare  figs.  1  and  10  of  B.  Plate  XIII.) ;  but  the  former  seems  far  too  simple  to
have  been  intended  for  that  purpose.     A  piece  of  a  solid  stem  of  a  Dart-head  (?)
from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer  is  also  scored  all  over  with  small  transverse  marks  with
an  almost  alternate  arrangement,  and  hence  probably  intended  for  ornament.

8.  On  the  edge  of  a  perforated  and  carved  antler  figured  in  B.  Plates  XV.  &
XVI.  (fig.  1,  described  at  page  103)  there  is  a  scoring  of  upwards  of  thirty  slight
but  distinct  transverse  notches,  in  different  groups,  at  varying  distances.     See  also
Woodcut,  fig.  20,  page  103,  and  B.  Plate  XXV.  fig.  1.

This  was  the  shed  antler  of  a  young  Reindeer,  or  perhaps  of  a  doe,  judging
from  the  small  size  of  the  base.  The  stem  or  beam  has  been  cut  away  laterally,
so  as  to  present  two  flat  faces,  the  convex  edge  of  which  still  bears  the  bases  of
three  truncated  branches  at  unequal  distances.  The  stem  appears  to  have  lost
some  of  its  length  by  an  old  fracture.  The  convex  edge  is  marked  with  a  scoring
of  numerous  (thirty-three)  slight  transverse  notches — some  at  equal  distances
apart,  some  more  widely  separated,  and  a  few  in  pairs.  The  two  broad  and  flat  sur-
faces are  grooved  with  two  chief  lines  from  base  to  top ;  and  secondary  groovings
follow  the  contours  of  the  projecting  stumps.  Four  holes,  of  unequal  diameters,
are  pierced  in  the  wide  portion,  from  the  brow-antler  to  the  third  branch  or  "  royal "
above.  Four  is  the  greatest  number  of  holes  we  have  yet  met  with  in  these  imple-
ments (see  also  B.  Plates  III.  &  IV.  fig.  5).  The  specimen  under  notice  may  pos-
sibly have  been  part  of  an  apparatus  for  the  suspension  of  several  articles,  either
on  the  person  or  in  the  dwelling ;  and  if  there  were  a  pair  of  such  specimens  fixed
in  a  wall,  side  by  side,  they  would  serve  as  a  rack  for  arrows*.  The  scoring  on
the  edge,  however,  would  rather  point  to  this  implement  being  of  personal  use  as
an  ornamental  Tally-stick.

North- American  Indians  and  other  savages  notch  sticks  as  Tallies,  for  scoring  f

*  Besides  the  above-suggested  purposes  for  these  perforated  horns,  and  the  others  mentioned  at  page  102,
we  find  that  they  have  also  been  regarded  as  possibly  fitted  for  bridle-harness  and  sledge-gear  ('  Geological
Magazine,'  vol.  vi.  p.  278).  In  Hindoostan  ropes  of  bark  are  twisted,  with  perforated  sticks.

t  Thus  the  words  a  "score"  of  things,  "scoring"  a  game,  "scoring"  an  account,  "scoring"  music,

2  B


190  BELIQULE  AQUITANI<m

games,  counting  days  of  travel,  and  such  like ;  and  they  mark  their  weapons  to
enumerate  enemies  slain  or  prey  captured  (see  above,  page  47) :  Mr.  Lamprey
informs  me  they  nick  their  rifles  for  good  (and  sometimes  for  bad)  shots ;  and
even  the  more  civilized  hunters  and  trappers  do  the  same.  Thus  also  an  ardent
schoolboy  notches  his  cricket-bat  in  memory  of  good  "  hits  "  and  "  runs."

Mr.  T.  K.  Gay  has  kindly  drawn  my  attention  to  an  interesting  Esquimaux
specimen  in  the  Christy  Collection,  bearing  what  may  be  Tally-marks.  It  is  a
wooden  sheath  for  the  head  of  a  Whale-dart  or  Harpoon,  from  Cook's  River,
Russian  America.  It  is  made  of  two  pieces  of  wood,  hollowed  and  laid  together,
and  tied  with  sinew  string  in  two  places.  This  sheath  has  four  notches  on  one  of
its  edges,  cut  since  it  was  made ;  and  they  possibly  stand  for  four  Whales  killed.
This  sheath  would  fit  such  an  Harpoon-head  as  that  shown  in  fig.  78,  page  196.

Though  it  is  long  since  "  our  forefathers  had  no  other  books  but  the  Score  and  the
Tally"*  (Jack  Cade  in  '  Henry  VI.'  Part  2,  Act  iv.  Sc.  7),  yet  we  know  that  Tally-
sticks  were  used  in  the  Exchequer  accounts  until  a  recent  period  f.  At  Riga  and
elsewhere  Tallies  are  still  used  in  taking  in  and  discharging  a  cargo  ;  and  Mr.  S.  R.
Pattison  has  seen  them  used  in  loading  minerals  in  Andalusia.  In  loading  carts
with  turf  in  Ireland,  and  on  other  occasions,  Tally-sticks  are  still  sometimes  in  requi-
sition ;  indeed  M.  J.  C.  Buckley,  Esq.,  Member  of  the  Celtic  Society  of  London,  in-
forms me  that  in  some  parts  of  the  south  of  Ireland  Tally-sticks  and  Tally-boards,
either  of  wood  or  slate,  and  either  notched  or  otherwise  marked,  are  frequently  used
in  noting  loads  and  other  quantities  of  Corn,  Hay,  Potatoes,  and  Turf,  barrels  of
Beer,  firkins  of  Butter,  pails  of  Milk,  &c.  See  fig.  70,  page  192.


"scoring"  a  piece  of  roasting-pork,  glacial  "scoring"  of  rocks,  old  "scores"  of  injuries  to  be  revenged,
a  favour  granted  on  the  "score"  of  kindred,  &c.,  also  "scaur,"  "scar,"  "  scarify,"  &c.  have  evidently  a
close  relationship.  Thus  also  : — "All  shall  eat  and  drink  on  my  score"  (Jack  Cade  in  '  Henry  VI.'  Part  2,
Act  iv.  Sc.  2);  "Do  you  owe  me  nothing  on  that  scorel"  (Dickens's  'Little  Dorrit');  "A  clear  score
between  us"  (Dickens's  'Battle  of  Life');  and  "Start  off  on  a  score,"  and  "Death  clears  old  scores"
(Barham's  '  Ingoldsby  Legends').

*  An  interesting  remark  as  to  scoring  or  notching  being  available  as  means  of  intercommunication,
has  been  copied  for  me  by  Mr.  T.  K.  Gay  from  "  Some  Notes  on  the  Ainos,"  by  A.  S.  Bickmore,  in  the
'  Transactions  of  the  Ethnological  Society  of  London,'  New  Series,  vol.  vii.  1869,  p.  22 : — "  They  have  no
written  characters.  The  only  approach  to  such  a  thing,  of  which  I  was  able  to  hear,  was  that  in  the
southern  part  of  Saghalien  the  old  men  can  send  information  to  each  other  by  notching  sticks  in  a  peculiar
manner ;  but  only  the  old  men  can  understand  what  is  meant  by  this  notching."  Colonel  A.  Lane  Fox
remarks  on  intelligible  signs  and  signals  among  the  Esquimaux,  in  his  memoir  "  On  Oghams  "  &c.  1867.

t  See  remarks  on  Tallies,  in  '  Notes  and  Queries '  (1st  series,  vol.  x.  p.  485 ;  vol.  xi.  pp.  18,  95 ;  and
3rd  series,  vol.  x.  pp.  197,  307,  382);  on  Music-scores,  ibid.  2nd  series,  vol.  xii.  p.  416;  and  on  Masons'
Marks,  ibid.  3rd  series,  vol.  xii.  pp.  431,  514.  A  "Tallyman"  now  sells  on  a  running  account.


IMPLEMENTS  BEARING  SIGNIFICANT  MAEKS.  191

See  also  the  '  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,'  January  1873,  vol.  ii.  p.  364,  where  Mr.  Buckley
adds : — "  The  system  of  markiug  is  by  Jives.  When  the  scores  are  equal  in  playing  ball,  the  local  expression
in  Cork  is  '  all  aboard.'  The  adage,  '  it  tallies  with '  something  else,  is  from  the  fact  of  the  scores  on  either
side  of  the  Tally-stick  or  -board  being  equal."

"  Among  the  people  of  the  Himalaya  mountains,"  says  Dr.  Campbell,  op.  eit.  p.  364,  "  the  '  tally '  is  in  constant
use  in  the  occupations  of  ordinary  life.  A  '  sirdar,'  or  head  man  of  coolies,  keeps  a  '  tally '  to  enable  him  at  the
end  of  the  day  to  give  his  master  the  number  of  men  present ;  so  in  woodcutting,  &c.,  a  man  will  have  a  '  tally
to  show  the  number  of  logs  delivered,  &c.,  ....  kept  ....  generally  on  a  piece  of  stick  cut  in  the  jungle,  and
thrown  away  when  the  work  is  paid  for.  There  are  various  ways  of  keeping  a  '  tally : '  a  long  notch  may
indicate  5,  10,  or  20 ;  so  5  notches,  with  a  notch  across,  may  stand  for  10  or  20,  as  the  case  may  be."

In  the  same  Journal,  loc.  cit.,  A.  W.  Pranks,  Esq.,  describes  an  interesting
aide-de-memoir  e,  or  carved  stick,  bearing  numerical  indications,  made  for  a
definite  purpose  by  the  New-Zealanders.

"  There  is  preserved  in  the  British  Museum  an  object  of  another  kind,  the  use  of  which  it  would  not  be
easy  to  discover  had  it  not  been  accompanied  by  a  description  of  its  meaning.  It  is  a  wooden  staff,
3  feet  4|  inches  in  length,  surmounted  by  a  figure,  and  covered  with  designs  of  the  usual  New-Zealand
pattern.  Down  one  side  are  eighteen  projections,  of  which  the  fifteenth  is  inlaid  with  a  piece  of  green
jade.  It  was  obtained  in  New  Zealand  by  His  Excellency  Sir  George  Grey,  who  states  it  to  record  the
history  of  the  Ngati-Rangitiki  tribe,  and  to  have  belonged  to  a  chief  named  Te-Rorokai,  who  used  it  to
aid  his  memory  when  recounting  the  history  of  the  tribe."

Pig.  71  (p.  192)  is  a  reduced  sketch  of  a  Burmese  Tally,  presented  to  the  Christy
Collection  by  J.  M.  Poster,  Esq.,  P.S.A.  It  consists  of  a  narrow  piece  of  Bamboo
rind,  carefully  split  into  ten  longitudinal  strips ;  and  these  are  notched  across  at
regular  intervals  into  sections  (ten  remain  in  this  specimen).  It  is  stated  that
"  one  of  the  100  sections  is  broken  off  as  the  article  passes  the  tally-keeper,  and
the  remainder  is  handed  in  to  account  for  the  number  passed."

Gamekeepers  with  us  are  in  the  habit  of  cutting  notches  on  a  stick  to  keep
account  of  the  number  of  game  killed  during  a  shooting  excursion,  different
notches  being  made  for  different  kinds  of  game.  In  Wales,  Cornwall,  and  else-
where labourers  keep  note  of  work  done  and  wages  due  on  sticks,  with  different
circles  for  different  coins,  and  notches  against  them  in  the  required  numbers,  or
with  notches  of  different  sizes  and  lengths  for  the  several  moneys  and  portions  of
time  :  these  are  sometimes  produced  before  Magistrates  in  proof  of  claims  for  earn-
ings. A  Mexican  shop-score  is  figured  in  E.  B.  Tylor's  'Anahuac,'  1861,  p.  87.

Pig.  72  (p.  192)  illustrates  a  modern  English  flat  Tally-stick*,  belonging  to  a

*  Somewhat  similar,  but  more  complex,  notchings  on  the  edges  and  faces  of  a  four-sided  stick  constituted
the  chief  character  of  the  runic  primstafF,  runic  calendar,  clogg,  and  suchlike  stick  almanacks  of  olden  times :
Dr.  Plot's  '  Nat.  Hist.  Staffordshire,'  1686 ;  J.  Brady's  'Clavis  Calendaria,'  2  vols.  8vo,  1812 ;  Dr.  J.  B.  Davis's
memoir  in  '  Archseologia,'  vol.  xli.  1867;  also  '  Proc.  Soc.  Ant.'  i.  pp.  51,  284,  and  n.  s.  vol.  i.  p.  274  (a  Tally).

2D2


192


KELIQTJI^E  AQUITANIOgS.


Turf-cutter,  or  Broom-maker,  or  perhaps  a  Shepherd,  lately  picked  up  on  the  heath
at  Wishmoor,  near  Bagshot,  on  the  confines  of  Berks  and  Surrey,  by  C.  Cooper
King,  Esq.,  R.M.Art.


Fig.  71.


Fig.  70.


Fig.  70.  Tally-board*  used  in  the  south  of  Ireland.

Reduced.     (From  a  Sketch  by  M.  J.  C.

Bud-ley,  Esq.)
Fig.  71.  Burmese  Tally.     Two  thirds  nat.  size.    (In

the  Christy  Collection.)
Fig.  72.  Tally-stick  from  Wishmoor,  Surrey.     One

half  nat.  size.   (In  the  Christy  Collection.)


Fig.  72.


In  reply  to  an  inquiry  on  the  subject,  G.  D.  Atherstone,  Esq.,  of  Graham's
Town,  South  Africa,  has  obliged  me  with  the  following : — "  I  find  that  the  native
shepherds  in  the  Cape  Colony  keep  a  Tally-stick  on  which  they  make  a  score  for
every  sheep  that  dies.  There  is  generally  one  herd  to  each  flock  of  1000  sheep ;

*  In  Hogarth's  picture  of  the  Distressed  Poet  the  milk-maid  presents  a  heavily  scored  Tally-board,  of  an
oblong  shape,  broader  than  fig.  70,  to  the  poor  moneyless  man.


IMPLEMENTS  BEAKING  SIGNIFICANT  MAEK8.


193


and  by  means  of  these  Tally-sticks  they  keep  an  account  of  the  number  of  sheep
that  die.  Also  during  shearing-season  each  man  keeps  an  account,  by  means  of
notches  or  cuts  on  pieces  of  wood,  of  the  number  of  sheep  he  has  shorn.  Besides
these,  I  do  not  know  of  any  Tally-sticks  in  use  amongst  the  natives ;  and  these
may  have  been  introduced  by  Europeans."

9.  On  a  small  lanceolate  weapon-point  with  a  notched  base,  such  as  figs.  5
and  6  in  B.  Plate  XIII.  (and,  like  that,  also  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer),  we  see
small   notches   crossing   each   edge,  but   not   continued  on  the  faces :    on  one
edge  sixteen,  irregularly  paired,  are  visible  on  one  edge ;  and  only  six  remain
on  the  other  (broken)  edge :   see  fig.  2,  B.  Plate  XXVI.     It  is  possible,  however,
that  these  numerous  small  transverse  nicks  were  intended  to  serve  for  a  kind  of
barbing,  to  make  the  weapon  hold  better ;  or  they  may  have  been  for  poison ;  or
they  may  have  been  Marks  of  Ownership.

10.  Such  Marks  of  Ownership  as  we  see  on  the  bone  Arrow-heads  of  the  Esqui-

Figs.  73a-g.

Esquimaux  Owner-marks  on  Harpoons.     (In  the  Christy  Collection.)
a  b  c  d  e  f  g


\


maux,  figs.  73  a-g,  and  on  Colonel  A.  Lane  Fox's  Australian  Club,  fig.  74  (p.  194),
are  not  uncommon  on  weapon-heads  from  the  Caves  of  Dordogne*  and  elsewhere.
Such  a  mark,  consisting  of  three  parallel  oblique  notches,  is  found  on  the  side  or

*  Colonel  A.  Lane  Fox,  F.S.A.,  in  a  Memoir  ('  Archaeological  Journal,'  No.  94,  1867)  on  the  "  Oghams  "
inscribed  on  stones  found  in  Ireland,  has  noticed  the  ogham-like  appearance  that  many  of  the  Esquimaux
marks  of  ownership  have  (p.  9,  and  figs.  1-32);  and  he  notices  the  occurrence  of  similar  primitive  scorings
on  ancient  Danish  bows.  The  inscribed  implements,  alluded  to  above,  from  the  Dordogne  Caves  indicate  a
still  higher  antiquity  for  the  use  of  such  markings,  as  is  indeed  almost  anticipated  by  Colonel  A.  L.  Fox  at
page  12  of  his  memoir.  See  also  'Trans.  International  Congress  Prehist.  Archseol.'  1868,  pp.  313-316.

We  may  add  that  in  Stokes's  '  Discoveries  in  Australia '  &c.,  1846,  fig.  30  (in  the  plate  opposite  page  170)
represents  some  ogham-like  and  other  markings  in  use  among  the  Australian  savages,  and  very  similar  to
those  above  alluded  to.


194


KELIQUI^E  AQUITAN1CLE.


edge  of  a  subcylindrical  weapon-point  from  Laugerie  Basse  (fig.  8,  B.  Plate  XXVI.) ;
and  a  similar  mark  of  four  large  and  two  small  oblique  parallel  cuts,  occurs  on  a
similar  implement  from  Massat  (Ariege),  fig.  75.  In  M.  Lartet's  collection  is  an


Fig.  75.


Fig.  77.


Fig.  74.


Fig.  76.


Fig.  74.  Australian  Club,  with  Marks  of  Ownership.     Reduced.

(In  Col.  A.  Lane  Fox's  Collection.)
Fig.  75.  Owner-mark  (?)  on  a  Dart-head,  from  Massat,  France.

(In  the  Christy  Collection.)
Fig.  76.  Butt  of  an  Harpoon-head,  with  Owner-mark,  from  Dor-

dogne.     (In  M.  Lartet's  Collection.)
Fig.  77.  Edge-view  of  an  Esquimaux  Bone  Arrow-head,  with

Owner's  Mark.     (In  the  Christy  Collection.)


Harpoon-head  from  one  of  the  Caves  of  Perigord,  with  four  parallel  oblique  cuts
on  one  side,  just  above  the  collar  or  bulb  (fig.  76).  A  similar  weapon  in  the
Christy  Collection  bears  a  single  oblique  cut  or  notch  in  the  same  position.  The
eight  bold  oblique  cuts,  also,  on  fig.  6,  pi.  13,  'Ann.  Sc.  Nat.,'  ser.  4,  vol.  xv.,  from
Massat  (Ariege),  may  rather  be  inscriptive  than  ornamental*.  A  pair  of  small,
oblique,  narrow  notches,  and  a  series  of  three  larger  oblique  notches,  just  below,
mark  one  edge  (B.  Plate  XXVI.  fig.  76)  of  a  Dart-head  (oblong  in  section)  from

*  See  '  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.'  vol.  xvii.  p.  470,  fig.  4.


IMPLEMENTS  BEARING  SIGNIFICANT  MAEKS.  195

La  Madelaine ;  whilst  the  opposite  edge  (fig.  7  a)  is  ornamented  with  bold,  deep-cut
notches,  both  straight  and  oblique,  in  an  irregular  chevron  pattern*.

On  the  Dart-heads  and  other  implements  already  figured  in  this  Work  we
may  see  several  groups  of  notches,  more  or  less  systematically  arranged,  such
as : — the  five  notches,  alternately  long  and  short,  remaining  on  the  broken  speci-
men, fig.  8,  Double  Plate  B.  VII.  &  VIII. ;  three  curved  notches,  deep  and
broad,  on  the  upper  part  of  fig.  2,  B.  Plate  IX. ;  two  sets  of  a  transverse  line
and  a  cross t  on  fig.  6,  B.Plate  X.;  the  transverse  scorings  repeated  in  fives,
with  similar  spacings,  on  the  pig-heads  (?),  placed  snout  to  snout,  in  fig.  7 ;  the
three  oblique  lines  associated  with  a  chevron  in  fig.  9 ;  and  four  faint  scratches
(probably  accidental)  on  fig.  11,  B.  Plate  XII.

So  also  the  Esquimaux  mark  of  an  oblique  notch  crossed  with  either  one  or  two
her  oblique  notches  is  found  on  t  he  Dart-heads  from  La  Madelaine.  Thus  near
he  point  of  one  specimen,  fig.  4,  B.  Plate  XXVI.,  we  see  four  such  crosses,  two
ymmetrical,  and  two  lower  ones  crossing  less  and  less  centrally.  Two  such
oblique  notches  crossed  by  four  others,  but  with  deeper  and  broader  cuttings
than  the  foregoing,  form  the  mark  (or  ornament  ?)  near  the  butt-end  of  a  Dart-
head  from  La  Madelaine,  fig.  6,  B.  Plate  XXVI. ;  and  a  more  complex  pattern,
consisting  of  a  row  of  six  short,  broad,  oblique  notches  (like  adze-heads),  each
associated  with  a  short  thin  line  meeting  its  middle  on  one  side  (like  handles),
is  found  near  the  butt  of  another  Dart-head  from  the  same  place,  fig.  3,
B.  Plate  XXVI.  See  also  fig.  5.

The  Esquimaux  bone  Arrow-head,  fig.  77,  with  Owner-mark,  is  especially  of
interest,  as  the  pattern  is  essentially  similar  in  style  to  that  on  figs.  1,  10,  and  11,
and  remotely  to  figs.  3  and  5,  B.  Plate  XXVI.,  namely  transverse  oblique  notches
either  parallel  or  at  different  angles.

The  Whale  Harpoon-head  represented,  in  reduced  outline,  by  fig.  78  (p.  196)  is
very  neatly  cut  out  of  black  Slate,  and  bears  the  private  mark  of  its  Esquimaux
owner.  On  one  face  (fig.  780)  are  two  parallel  longitudinal  incised  lines,  with
interrupted  line  and  dots  between,  near  one  edge.  The  other  face  (fig.  78  b)  has
a  simple  longitudinal  line,  near  the  other  edge.  Such  a  spear-head  would  fit  the
notched  sheath  mentioned  above,  at  page  190.

*  Bone  Implements  bearing  ornamental  patterns,  besides  marks  possibly  intended  for  numeration  or  for
recognition,  have  been  obtained  also  from  M.  de  Lastie's  Cave  near  Bruniquel  (Tarn  et  Garonne) ;  see  remark*
by  A.  W.  Franks,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  '  Journ.  Anthrop.  Instit.'  vol.  ii.  p.  364.

t  Similar  to  a  mark,  from  an  ancient  Danish  bow,  figured  by  Engelhardt  and  in  Colonel  Fox's  Memoir,
pi.  3.  fig.  27,  referred  to  in  the  footnote  at  page  193.


196


EELIQUI^E  AQUITANKLE.


Fig.  78.

Slate  Harpoon-head*.     Two  thirds  real
size.     (In  the  Christy  Collection.)
b  a     '


Fig.  79.

Irish  Spade,  with  Owner-marks.
Reduced.  {From  a  Sketch  by
M.J.  C.  Bud-ley,  Esq.)


a,  Front  view,     b,  Back  view.

The  whole  Implement  is  4|  feet
long ;  the  Spade  itself,  about  1  foot
long,  is  tipped  with  steel.


*  See  also  '  Materiaux  pour  Phistoire  de  1'Hominc,'
vol.  vi.  p.  142,  figs.  63,  64.


IMPLEMENTS  BEARING  SIGNIFICANT  MARKS.  197

These  Esquimaux  specimens  have  been  especially  pointed  out  by  Mr.  T.  K.  Gay,
who  has  also  favoured  me  with  extracts  from  various  writers  bearing  on  this  and
other  subjects.  Eor  instance,  with  regard  to  the  marked  Harpoons  (although  it
is  not  the  long  form  seen  in  fig.  78  that  is  referred  to,  but  much  shorter  and  leaf-
shaped  or  lanceolate  points)  the  following  extract  is  very  illustrative  : —

Urey  Lisiansky's  Voyage  round  the  "World  in  1803-6  (Lond.  4to,  1 814),  p.  206  (island  of  Cadiack)  :—
"  The  whale-harpoon  is  about  ten  feet  long,  the  spear  or  point  is  of  slate-stone,  and  of  the  form  of  a  knife,
sharp  on  both  sides,  and  is  set  loose  into  the  handle."  Page  202 :— "  A  Cadiack  whaler  in  a  single  bidarka
attacks  only  small  whales ;  and  for  this  purpose  he  is  provided  with  an  harpoon,  the  spear  of  which  is  made
of  slate-stone,  and  so  fixed  into  the  handle  as  to  detach  itself  when  the  whale  is  struck.  When  wounded
by  it,  the  whale  runs  to  sea  and  dies,  and  is  perhaps  never  seen  again,  unless  the  currents  and  winds  should
throw  it  on  the  coast.  Thus  no  whaler  is  sure  of  his  prey.  The  spears  of  the  whale-harpoons  are  marked
by  the  whaler,  so  that  every  one  knows  his  own  "  *.

With  regard  to  Owner-marks,  Mr.  Buckley  observes  (Journ.  Anthrop.  Instit.
vol.  ii.  p.  364)  that  "  the  handles  of  spades  and  sticks  in  Cork  and  Waterford  are
often  marked  with  notches  as  in  the  Australian  club  exhibited  by  Colonel  Lane
Eox  (see  page  194,  fig.  74).  The  expression  '  I  put  my  criss-cross  on  it,'  used  by
the  peasantry,  is  from  this  custom,  so  that  the  owner,  being  unable  to  readf,
could  always  claim  his  own  stick  or  spade  by  its  marks.  The  way  of  mounting
the  spade  which  is  in  use  in  the  stony  districts  of  the  south-west  of  Ireland  is
precisely  similar  to  the  way  in  which  the  so-called  bronze  '  celts '  or  hatchets  of
the  ancient  Irish  were  fastened  to  their  handles  "  (fig.  79  a  and  b).

The  Trade-marks  and  Brands,  now  so  common  on  manufactured  articles  and  in
advertisements,  though  sometimes  elaborate  in  design,  are,  of  course,  essentially
Owner-marks  J  ;  and  so  were  the  old  Merchant-marks  §,  such  as  are  indicated  in
the  '  Proceed.  Soc.  Antiq.'  ser.  2,  vol.  i.  p.  202.  The  old  Masons'  Marks,  of  the
XII.-XV.  Centuries,  were  somewhat  similar ;  also  their  modern  "  Banker-marks."

Owners'  Marks,  Heraldic  Devices,  and  Monograms  slide  into  each  other,  and,

*  The  American  and  British  whalers  also  mark  their  harpoons  with  the  conventional  sign  adopted  for
their  ship,  so  that,  if  the  whale  escapes  and  is  afterwards  captured  with  an  old  harpoon  in  it,  it  is  known
from  the  crew  of  what  vessel  it  had  escaped.

f  Branding  their  tools  with  letters  is  now  the  nearly  universal  custom  with  labourers,  artisans,  and  others.

J  So  also  we  may  refer  to  the  farmer's  ruddle- marks  on  his  Sheep,  the  brand  on  the  flanks  of  hill
Ponies  and  on  the  hoofs  of  cavalry  Horses,  the  ear-cuts  and  other  marks  on  Sheep  turned  out  on  commons,
and  on  colonial  Horses  and  Cattle,  the  butcher's  varied  knife-scorings  on  carcasses,  and  the  nicks  on  tame
Swans'  bills.  For  the  last  see  'Archeeologia,'  vol.  xvi.  (1812),  pis.  xi.-xiii.

§  8.  K.  Pattison,  Esq.,  F.G.S.,  who  has  favoured  me  with  notes  on  Tallies  and  Owner-marks,  refers  me
to  '  The  Statutes  at  Large '  (edit.  "  Record  Commission  ")  for  information  as  to  the  recognition  of  special
marks  in  some  of  the  earliest  statutes  respecting  manufactures,  cattle,  &c.

2  E


198  EELIQTJL&  AQUITANIC^l.

not  only  for  individuals,  but  also  for  whole  tribes,  are  marks  or  figures  made  as
distinctive  signs,  either  on  their  weapons  or  persons — and  this  not  merely  after
the  fashion  of  the  "  Totem  "  of  the  North-American,  or  the  "  Plaid  "  of  the  High-
lander, but  by  a  more  definite  sign-manual*,  such  as  is  described  in  the  following
extract  from  "  The  Red  Men  of  To-day  "  (especially  in  Colorado),  '  Chambers's
Journal,'  Series  4,  No.  463,  November  9,  1872,  pages  725  and  726  :—

"  Each  tribe,  as  has  often  heen  told,  has  its  distinctive  signs,  but  I  had  no  idea  that  these  were  carried
into  minute  details.  No  Ute  arrow  can  ever  be  mistaken  for  an  Apache  arrow,  or  vice  versa.  One  always
has  a  rounded  point,  or  rather  end,  the  other  always  a  sharp  one ;  and  on  the  wooden  shaft  of  the  weapon
are  signs,  telh'ng  to  the  initiated  what  tribe  it  was  discharged  by.  This  last  sign  consists  of  a  sort  of  zigzag
line  in  each  case,  but  being  large  and  small  in  different  places  according  to  the  tribe.  The  Ute  always
makes  his  zigzag  large  in  the  same  spot,  dwindling  almost  to  a  straight  line  in  others ;  while  the  Apache
has  his  traditional  curving;  and  from  these  rules  they  never  deviate.  As  for  exchanging  marks  !  why,  an
Apache  will  not  allow  the  Ute  sign  to  be  drawn  in  his  presence — as  I  once  discovered  by  the  actions  of  a
strapping  young  warrior,  a  son  of  the  great  Apache  chief  Jose  Largo.  This  young  man,  by-the-by,  said
his  name  was  Juan  ;  so  I  asked  him  what  it  was  in  Indiano,  and  he  told  me  '  George.'  I  had  my  doubts.
He  drew  the  Apache  sign  readily  enough,  but  would  not  touch  the  Ute ;  and  when  I  tried  to  show  him,  he
put  his  hand  heavily  on  the  paper,  and  said  '  No !  No  Ute  ! '  and  as  I  persevered,  he  grew  more  vociferous,
till  I  judged  it  best  to  give  in.  The  tribes  have,  of  course,  their  characteristic  paints ;  and  hideous  enough
they  look  in  them.  The  Utes  paint  three  white  bars  on  each  cheek ;  the  Apaches,  three  black  ones  :  that
is,  they  do  so  when  they  are  very  careful ;  sometimes  it  appears  merely  a  few  daubs  of  white  or  black  paint.
The  Ute  colours  are  much  more  awful  and  ghastly  than  the  Apaches',  as  on  their  brown  skins  black  does
not  make  so  frightful  a  contrast  as  does  white."

11.  Other  and  different  instances  of  what  may  have  been  the  private  mark  of
the  primitive  Hunter  occur  on  at  least  two  of  the  large  sub  cylindrical  Dart-heads
with  wedge-like  butts  f,  such  as  are  figured  in  B.  Plate  IX.  figs.  2  and  7.     These
curious  inscriptive  markings  (if  not  imperfect  attempts  at  definite  patterns)  con-
sist of  sixteen  or  seventeen  shallow  transverse  cuts  at  various  angles,  rarely  per-
pendicular to  the  edge,  but  sloping  parallel  with,  or,  more  often,  towards  each
other  (but  without  crossing),  like  a  row  of  imperfect  V,  A,  M,  and  Ns,  irregularly
arranged,  see  figs.  10  and  11,  B.  Plate  XXVI.

12.  Some  of  these,  as  well  as  the  more  elaborate  carvings,  may  have  been  idle
whittlings ;  some,  very  probably,  were  signs  of  Ownership ;  and  it  may  be  that
some  at  least  of  the  marks  and  signs  above  described  or  alluded  to  had  the
value  of  a  Charm  in  the  eyes  of  the  Aborigines — an  idea  well  expressed  by

*  "Hast  thou  a  mark  to  thyself ?"'(«/ac&  Cade  in  'Henry  VI.'  Part  2,  Act  iv.  Sc.  2).

t  We  may  mention  that,  of  course,  we  do  not  allude  to  the  scoring  on  the  bevelled  faces  of  the  butt-ends,
which  have  been  cut  down  and  scraped  with  flint  tools,  and  afterwards  scored  over  for  firmer  fixing  in
the  haft,


IMPLEMENTS  BEAEING  SIGNIFICANT  MARKS.  199

Mr.  William  Morris  in  his  Poem  "The  Life  and  Death  of  Jason"*,  where,
speaking  of  an  arrow,  with  iron  head  and  carved  stem  of  wood,  that  had  been
shot  by  Natives  on  shore  against  the  Argonauts,  he  says  : —

But  Jason  from  the  mast  the  arrow  broke,
That  erewhile  had  so  scantly  missed  his  life,
And  found  it  scored  as  by  a  sharp-edged  knife,
From  barb  to  notch,  with  what  seemed  written  words,
In  tongue  unknown  to  aught  but  beast  and  birds.
So  when  Medea  saw  it,  straight  she  said  :—
"  Fair  love,  now  praise  some  God  thou  art  not  dead,
For  from  the  Cimbrian  folk  this  arrow  came,
And  its  sharp  barbs  within  a  wizard's  flame
Were  forged  with  peril,  and  the  shaft  of  it
Was  carved  by  one  who  in  great  fear  did  sit
Within  the  haunted  places  of  the  wood,
And  tears  are  on  its  feathers,  and  red  blood."

§  IV.  As  to  other  Markings,  ornamental  or  otherwise,  on  some  Implements. —
Besides  the  Dart-heads  and  other  articles  bearing  marginal  scorings,  we  meet
with  stick-like  implements  that  are  crossed  with  lines  at  more  or  less  regular
intervals,  some  also  having  short  deep  notches  along  the  edges,  both  kinds
having  probably  been  used  as  Tally-sticks  and  Gambling-scores.

1.  Such  is  the  fragment  of  a  narrow  flat  implement,  made  of  antler,  from
Aurignac,  described  and  figured  in  the  'Ann.  Sc.  Nat.'  ser.  4,  vol.  xv.  pp.  189  &
251,  pi.  11.  fig.  7,  with  its  two  rounded  crenulated  edges  (18  notches  on  one
edge,  and  19  on  the  other,  in  obscure  groupings),  and  with  one  of  its  faces
marked  with  the  remains  of  two  regular  series  of  incised  lines  reaching  from
edge  to  edge,  but  not  corresponding  to  the  little  marginal  notches.     Figure  5,
B.  Plate  XXV.,  also  belongs  to  the  same  category,  bearing  perhaps  the  score  of
some  game.

2.  From  La  Madelaine  we  have  an  imperfect,  flat,  tapering  implement   of
carved  antler,  figs.  4  a-c,  B.  Plate  XXV.,  bearing  on  one  side  eleven  straight,
more  or  less  deeply  and  broadly  cut  lines  reaching  across,  with  pairs  of  badly
cut  suboval  cipher-like  outlines  alternating  with  eight  of  them ;  and  on  the  other
face  there  are  only  six,  transverse,  shallow  and  curved  lines  towards  the  thinnest
end.     The  four  angles  are  strongly  notched  at  rather  irregular  intervals,  with
five  or  six  notches  each ;   and  the  cut  lines  rarely  correspond  with  these.

*  London  :  Bell  and  Daldy.    1867,  8vo,  p.  180.

2E2


200  RELIQUIAE

It  is  possible  that  these  transversely  marked  implements  may  have  been  used
in  Games,  not  being  without  resemblance  to  some  of  the  gambling-instruments
of  the  Indians  of  North-west  America,  as  we  are  informed  by  Dr.  Robert  Brown.
We  learn,  moreover,  from  Milton  and  Cheadle's  '  North-west  Passage  by  Land,'
4th  edit.  8vo,  1865,  p.  150,  that  these  Indians  also  notch  sticks  as  they  win
and  lose  the  stakes  in  their  nearly  interminable  games  of  chance.  Indeed
Dr.  Brown  says  that  the  Indians  always  keep  count,  in  this  way,  of  the  number
of  days  they  travel  with  you,  and  so  on.

3.  The  closely  notched  tally -like  fragment,  from  Cro-Magnon,  in  B.  Plate  XII.
fig.  10,  has  already  been  described  (page  96);  and  the  notched  bone  implement,
fig.  4s,  B.  Plate  XXIV.,  with  its  snake-like  ornament,  has  a  similar  character.

4.  B.  Plate  II.  fig.  8  6  shows  three  series  of  parallel  incised  lines,  at   right
angles  to  three  imperfect  transverse  lines,  one  of  which  is  forked  at  one  end ;
and  there  are  some  chevron  marks  touching  these  latter  lines.     They  all  seem
to  have  been  cut  subsequently  to  the  Eel  (?)  in  the  carving ;  and  their  meaning,
if  they  had  any,  remains  enigmatical.     Possibly  they  were  meant  as  a  symbol
for  water.      Their  ogham-like  arrangement  (that   is,  the   parallelism  of  some,
perpendicular  to  an  axial  line)  is  noticeable,  though  it  may  really  be  accidental.

§  V.  As  to  the  Pitting. — With  regard  to  the  pitting  on  fig.  13,  B.  Plate  XIII.,
whether  it  be  ornamental  or  inscriptive,  we  need  not  refer  to  many  specimens
as  analogous,  although  punctate  markings  and  circular  indentations  are  not  at  all
uncommon  as  savage  decoration.

1.  As  the  first  instance,  we  may  allude  to  the  ornament  of  an  Australian
Boomerang  (from  Victoria),  now  in  the  Christy  Collection,  which  is  covered  on
one  side  (the  convex  face)  with  irregular  transverse  rows  of  rough  pits,  filled
with  white  pigment.     These  are  necessarily  much  larger  than  those  on  fig.  13,
as  the  numbers  in  the  rows  are  about  the  same  on  the  two  specimens,  but  the
Boomerang  is  very  much  the  broader  of  the  two.

2.  For  a  second  example  we  may  refer  to  another  specimen  in  the  Christy  Col-
lection, namely  an  African  armlet  with  an  ivory  pendant  ornamented  with  rows
of  dots,  or  pittings  filled  in  with  dark-coloured  pigment.

3.  Eor  a  third  case  we  refer  to  a  broken  subcylindrical  Dart-head,  from  La
Madelaine,  now  in  the  University  Museum,  Oxford  (fig.  7,  B.  Plate  XXV.),  which
bears  on  one  edge,  high  up  towards  the  point  (lost  by  an  old  fracture),  a  series  of
about  forty  small  pits.     These  may  be  looked  on  as  forming  three  longitudinal
rows,  with  an  irregular  alternation,  and  with  some  confusion  at  the  lower  end,


IMPLEMENTS  BEAEING  SIGNIFICANT  MARKS.


201


where  the  left-hand  row  of  thirteen  pits  (fig.  76)  curves  across  the  end  of  the
middle  row ;  and  another  group  (of  four  in  one  line,  and  two  in  other)  intrudes
between  the  left-hand  row  and  the  edge :  the  pits  of  the  middle  row  are  more
closely  set  than  the  others ;  and  this  row  has  certainly  been  interrupted  by  the
fracture  of  the  implement ;  and  so  probably  has  the  right-hand  row  also.  Again,
the  pitting  may  be  regarded  as  having  been  arranged  in  irregular  transverse  rows
of  threes  and  twos,  with  occasional  single  pits.  On  the  surface,  however,  of  the
bone  longitudinal  interrupted  lines  appear  to  have  been  drawn  to  indicate  the
lineal  position  of  some  at  least  of  the  pits  (see  fig.  7c,  and  the  Description  of
B.  Plate  XXV.).

How  far  the  position  of  these  serial  pits  on  the  Dart -head,  in  one  patch  only,
may  influence  our  readers  in  regarding  them  as  inscriptive  (the  Owner's  Mark,
or  his  Hunting-score)  we  cannot  say ;  and  whether  we  ought  to  regard  them  as
the  aimless  tooling  of  an  idle  time,  as  holes  for  the  lodgment  of  poison,  or  as  the
intentional  ornament  or  unfinished  decoration  of  the  weapon,  which  the  maker
or  owner  thought  to  spot  all  over,  just  as  some  such  stems  are  scored  all  over*,
we  do  not  pretend  to  decide  until  further  evidence  offers  itself.  ,

4.  We  may  also  draw  the  reader's  attention  to  the  systematic  pitting  on  the
subpentagonal  Game-stone,  figured  and  described  in  the  '  Catalogue  of  the  Anti-
quities in  the  Museum  of  the  Royal  Irish  Academy,'  1857,  p.  125,  fig.  99.

Conclusion. — Having  thus  described  and  commented  on  the  peculiar  knife-like
ivory  plate,  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  marked  with  regular  pits,  marginal  notches,
and  groups  of  lateral  scorings,  and  having  taken  into  consideration  numerous
ancient  and  modern  implements,  mostly  of  savage  make,  which  show,  one  or  the
other,  similar  shape,  systematic  pittings,  crenulated  edge,  and  scorings,  either
simple  or  compound,  and  known  in  some  instances  to  be  Tally-marks,  in  others
Owner-marks,  and  in  some  to  be  indicative  of  Gambling,  we  may  be  assured  that
some  at  least  of  the  Cave  Implements  served  for  like  purposes  in  ancient  times.

Poison-grooves,  capricious  and  useless  cutting  and  dotting,  and  unfinished
carving  may  probably  enough  account  for  some  of  the  specimens  referred  to,
and  many  analogous  examples.  The  number  and  great  variety,  however,  of  the
systematic  markings  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  in  the  majority  of  cases  they
were  not  the  result  of  accident  or  chance,  but  of  intentional  workmanship,  the
uses  of  which  certainly  furnish  food  for  conjecture,  and  must  indicate  the  habits
and  propensities  of  the  long-past  Cave-folk.

*  See  for  instance  fig.  4,  B.  Plate  III.  &  IV.,  and  fig.  11,  B.  Plate  XXIII.


202  EELIQUI^:  AQUITAJSTICJE.


XVIII.

FLINT— ITS  NATUEE,  CHAEACTER,  AND  ADAPTABILITY  FOE  IMPLEMENTS.
By  Professor  T.  EUPERT  JONES,  F.E.S.,  F.G.S.

[These  notes  on  Flint  were  written  at  the  late  Mr.  Henry  Christy's  request  in  1864  or  1865,  and  set  up  in

type  by  his  desire  soon  after.]

FLINT,  the  well-known  hard  stone  out  of  which  so  many  old  Implements  have
been  fashioned,  is  more  or  less  abundant  in  nearly  all  Chalk  districts.  It  is,
indeed,  found  in  one  condition  or  another  (flint,  hornstone,  chert,  chalcedony,  &c.)
in  most  limestones,  whether  soft  and  earthy  (like  Chalk),  solid  (like  the  Portland
stone),  or  hard  and  crystalline  (like  the  Mountain-limestone  of  Derbyshire  and
other  calcareous  rocks  of  even  older  formations).

Flint  occurs  both  as  extensive  sheets  and  as  lumps  or  nodules,  generally  in
regular  beds,  and  sometimes  as  veins  crossing  the  bedding.  It  is  fine-grained  or
homogeneous — consisting  of  silica,  such  as  is  also  seen  in  the  form  of  rock-crystal
(quartz),  but  not  so  pure,  containing  some  iron,  clay,  lime,  or  other  impurities,
besides  having  rather  more  water  in  its  composition.

It  is  often  found  as  gravel  and  shingle ;  and  in  that  state  it  is  the  flinty  ruins
of  Chalk  or  other  limestones  that  have  been  broken  down  and  worn  away  by  frost,
torrents,  and  sea- waves.

In  the  Chalk,  flint  usually  presents  itself  in  irregular  lumps,  blackish  within
and  white  without,  breaking  up  (by  frost  or  under  blows)  with  a  clean  fracture
and  sharp  translucent  edges.  It  sometimes  shows  evidence  of  the  presence  of  a
Sponge,  or  some  sponge-like  organism,  inside  it ;  and  other  fossil  bodies  are  often
seen  in  it.  This  silica,  indeed,  was  once  in  solution  in  the  water,  and,  either  sepa-
rating from  the  calcareous  mud  that  subsequently  became  Chalk  or  permeating
it,  has  been  accumulated  in  and  about  the  Sponges,  not  only  changing  them,  but
some  of  the  surrounding  Chalk,  into  its  own  substance  ;  for  frequently  a  layer  of
greater  or  less  extent  of  the  calcareous  material,  before  or  after  its  hardening,  has
been  converted  atom  for  atom  into  flint,  excepting  the  shells  of  Mollusks  of  the
Oyster  group,  and  the  tests  and  ossicles  of  different  kinds  of  Echinoderms  (Sea-
urchin,  Starfish,  and  Stone  Lily).  In  the  Portland  stone,  the  oolitic  structure  is
preserved  in  the  transmuted  flint  bands ;  so  also  the  organic  structure  of  small
fossils  in  some  of  the  flint  of  the  Polyzoan  limestone  of  Central  France ;  whilst  in


NATURE,  CHAEACTEE,  AND  ADAPTABILITY  OF  FLINT.


20.3


some  West-Indian  limestones  the  little  Orbitoides  and  Nummulinae,  and  their
imbedding  matrix,  are  silicified  in  varying  degrees  at  different  places*.

However  found,  the  nodules  and  bands  of  flint  have  yielded  fit  material  for
human  hands  to  fashion  into  sharp-edged  tools  and  weapons,  whether  the  blocks
were  taken  from  the  Chalk  itself  or  other  limestone,  or  from  the  rolled  pebbles
and  gravel  strewed  over  countries  where  the  Chalk  has  suffered  degradation.

The  action  of  frost  on  a  flint  might  result  in  the  production  of  two  or  more
pieces,  more  or  less  triangular,  with  points  and  edges,  and  capable  of  being  used
as  rough  cutting-instruments,  or,  being  set  with  others  like  them  side  by  side
along  a  stick,  formed  into  a  cutting-stick  or  armed  club.

Blows,  also,  and  even  pressure  on  a  flint,  if  properly  directed,  produce  angular
flakes,  with  sharp  edges,  owing  to  the  mode  of  fracture  that  this  mineral  possesses,
somewhat  after  the  manner  of  glass  and  resin,  though  it  is  less  brittle  than  either.

Given  a  solid  block  of  flint,  flakes  may  be  struck  off  its  sides f,  and  other  flakes,
parallel  to  the  first  fractures,  off  the  remaining  surface,  until  the  flint  is  reduced
to  a  small  centre-piece  bearing  several  narrow  facets.  Such  a  flaked  piece  is  a
"core,"  from  which  one  or  more  sets  of  flakes  have  been  removed  (A.  Plate  I.);
such  a  "  core  "  or  "  nucleus  "  will  be  somewhat  prismatic,  and  must  be  the  result
of  well-directed  blows,  striking  off  flakes  or  narrow  laminae,  having  their  axes  in
one  direction ;  the  blows,  succeeding  each  other  round  the  edge  of  the  prism,
produce  a  succession  of  new  narrow  faces,  bounded  by  parallel  ridges  or  long
solid  edges ;  and  these  being  carried  away  with  the  new  set  of  flakes,  each  flake
will  have  one  or  two  angles  along  its  outside,  or  back,  and  a  nearly  even  narrow
face  Avithin  (A.  Plate  II.).  At  the  end  of  the  flake  where  it  was  struck  there  will
be  more  or  less  of  a  convex  swelling,  called  the  "bulb  of  percussion,"  due  to  the
"  conchoidal "  style  of  fracture  which  the  flint  shows  when  smartly  hit ;  and  the
further  end  of  the  flake  will  usually  taper  somewhat  and  have  a  curve,  the  hollow
of  which  fits  against  the  "  core."  Obsidian  J  behaves  in  the  same  way  under  well-
directed  blows  or  pressure,  and,  though  more  homogeneous,  yields  scarcely  larger,
cleaner  or  neater  flakes,  razor-shaped  and  thin-edged,  than  flint  will  if  carefully
selected  and  j  udiciously  handled.

*  Geological  Magazine,  vol.  i.  1864,  p.  102.

t  See  Dr.  Falconer's  remarks  on  this  subject  in  his  paper  on  the  Maccagnone  Cave,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.
Soc.,  vol.  xvi.  p.  105.  At  the  reading  of  this  Memoir,  June  22,  1859,  Dr.  Falconer  fully  illustrated  the
process  of  "  dislamination,  as  films,  of  the  long  angles  of  prismatic  blocks  of  stone."  The  agate  form  of
chalcedony,  also  jasper,  lydite,  quartzite,  and  solid  vein-quartz  behave  under  blows  and  pressure  similarly
to  flint  and  its  varieties  above  mentioned.

t  See  Mr.  E.  B.  Tylor's  'Anahuac,'  1861,  pages  95-99  and  331.


204  KELIQULE   AQUITANIC^l.

Both  neat  and  rough  flakes,  however,  tell  their  own  history,  as  design  must  be
concerned  in  their  formation ;  and  hundreds  may  have  often  been  struck  off
"  cores  "  of  flint  in  some  stations  (or  places  where  the  old  Elint-folk  lived,  or  at
least  manufactured  their  implements)  and  allowed  to  lie  about,  whilst  but  few,
perhaps,  were  selected  as  being  of  the  right  shape  for  the  purpose  intended,
whether  used  in  their  original  shape  or  further  trimmed  by  flakings  and  chippings
of  edges  or  ends.

Again,  pebbles  of  flint  and  large  flake-like  pieces  may  be,  and  have  been,
"  dressed  "  into  definite  shapes — as  hammers,  tomahawks,  axes,  wedges,  chisels,
knives,  scrapers,  and  heads  of  spears,  lances,  javelins,  harpoons,  and  arrows — by
careful  removal  of  flakes  and  chips  by  repeated  and  well-directed  blows  of  varying
force,  chiefly  along  the  intended  edges  of  the  instrument.  The  peculiar  fracture
of  flint  (flaky,  but  showing  everywhere  a  tendency  to  the  "  conchoidal "  condition,
with  concavo-convex  surfaces)  allows  of  this  procedure,  and  indeed  has  led  to  its
being  done,  as  is  the  case  with  obsidian  also.  The  reiterated  blows  in  definite
directions,  removing  flakes  more  or  less  parallel,  and  resulting  in  a  nearly  symme-
trical, more  or  less  convex  surface,  are  as  plainly  traceable  as  if  they  had  been
given  under  our  own  eyes ;  and  the  resulting  surfaces  are  very  different,  when
carefully  examined,  from  what  occurs  on  any  much-broken  or  many-faced  flint  on
the  beach  or  in  a  gravel  heap.

The  strong  curvatures  on  flakes  of  flint  and  obsidian  broken  off  by  smart  blows,
culminate  in  what  is  termed  the  "bulb  of  percussion,"  and,  with  the  correspond-
ing conchoidal  hollows  on  the  "  cores,"  are  of  rare  occurrence  in  the  naturally
broken  stones;  and  hence  they  are  good  tokens  of  human  workmanship*.

A  further  development  of  the  conchoidal  fracture  is  seen  in  the  cones  produced
by  direct  blows  on  some  solid  flints.  Circular  and  semicircular  concentric  flaking
is  produced  by  such  blows ;  these  overlapping  flakes  flying  off,  a  solid  cone  remains.
The  battering  of  shingle  on  the  beach  produces  such  minute  concentric  flakings  by
the  innumerable  blows  of  pebble  on  pebble ;  and,  by  the  easy  removal  of  the  thin
edges  of  the  little  circular  flakes  coating  the  minute  cones,  the  rolling  wears  the
pebbles  round.

Broken  flint,  exposed  to  the  weather,  to  water,  or  to  moisture  under  ground,
suffers  certain  changes  of  surface.  If  dark-coloured,  it  loses  its  uniform  tint  and
translucency,  becoming  opaque  and  either  blotched  or  wholly  white  or  yellow ;  if

*  One  of  the  newly  invented  stone-breaking  machines  chips  small  fragments  from  the  rough  blocks  by
direct  blows,  without  crushing ;  hence  road-metal  prepared  by  such  a  machine  consists  largely  of  fake-chip
having  bulbs  of  percussion. — EDIT.  HEL.  AQ.  1873.


NATURE,  CHARACTER,  AND  ADAPTABILITY  OF  FLINT.  205

originally  yellowish,  it  retains  its  colour  more  persistently.  The  dulness,  also,  of
a  fresh  fracture  is  changed  for  a  more  shiny  surface,  and  under  some  circum-
stances, such  as  when  alkaline  water  has  affected  the  flint,  the  surface  becomes
quite  smooth  and  shining,  showing  the  "patina"  that  may  he  recognized,  for
instance,  on  the  old  flint  implements  from  the  gravel.

The  discoloration  and  "  patina,"  as  well  as  the  "  dendritic  "  markings  of  metallic
oxides  creeping  over  parts  of  the  surface,  and  incrustations  of  oxide  of  iron  and  of
carbonate  of  lime  by  permeating  waters,  cannot  be  taken  as  independent  evidences
of  very  great  age  for  worked  flints,  since  these  superficial  changes  and  appear-
ances can  be  produced  within  limited  periods  of  time ;  nevertheless  it  is  necessary
to  notice  them  as  the  result  of  some  lapse  of  time,  and  of  certain  conditions  of
deposit,  as  well  as  indications  sometimes  not  only  of  the  differences  of  faces  pro-
duced artificially  from  natural  surfaces  of  the  flint,  but  of  the  successive  production
of  artificial  and  accidental  fractures  in  worked  flints.


P.S. — The  very  many  Memoirs  and  Books  in  which  Flint  Implements  and  the
methods  of  their  manufacture  have  been  treated  of  since  1860  constitute  a  litera-
ture of  itself  *.

Besides  the  standard  works  on  the  subject  by  Nilsson  ('  On  the  Stone-Age '  &c.
1843-67),  Stevens  ('Elint  Chips'  &c.  1870),  Evans  ('Ancient  Stone  Implements'
&c.  1872),  and  the  many  papers  and  notices  referred  to  by  them,  we  must  espe-
cially direct  attention  to  Mr.  S.  J.  Mackie's  remarks  on  the  manufacture  of  flint
tools,  in  the  '  Geologist,'  1861,  vol.  iv.  pp.  26-29,  and  to  Professor  T.  McKenny
Hughes's  paper  on  the  same  subject  (Proc.  Soc.  Antiq.  Lond.  2nd  ser.  vol.  iv.  p.  94),
part  of  which  was  afterwards  published  in  extenso  in  the  'Geological  and  Nat. -Hist.
Repertory'  &c.,  May  1, 1868,  vol.ii.  No.34,  pp.126  &c.,  Mr.Mackie's  further  account
of  "the  natural  fractures  of  flints,"  in  vol.  iii.  pp.  205  &c.,  and  Mr.  T.  Baines's
interesting  and  illustrated  letter  on  the  Australian  flake-makers,  ibid.  pp.  258-262.
See  also  Professor  T.  MCK.  Hughes's  note  on  the  fracture  of  chert  and  flint  in  the
'  Report  Brit.  Assoc.'  for  1872,  Trans.  Sect.  p.  189 ;  and  the  late  Mr.  Henry  Christy's
remarks  on  the  subject,  '  Transact.  Ethnolog.  Society,'  New  Series,  vol.  iii.  1865,
pp.  362  &c.,  and  '  Eeliquia3  Aquitanicse,'  Parts  II.  and  III.,  1866,  pp.  13-20.

T.  R.  J.

September  1873.

*  Many  references  will  be  found  in  Mortillet,  Trutat,  and  Cartailhac's  '  Materiaux  pour  Phistoire  de
1'Homme,'  1864-73.

2  F


206  KELIQFI^:  AQTJITAJSTIC^:.


XIX.

ON  A  PIECE  OF  ELEPHANT'S  TUSK  ENGKAVED  WITH  THE  OUTLINE  OF  A  MAMMOTH,
FEOM  LA  MADELAINE,  DEP.  DORDOGNE.     By  the  late  M.  E.  LAHTET.

[From  the  '  Comptes  Rendus  des  Seances  de  1' Academic  des  Sciences,'  vol.  Ixi.  (Seance  du  21  Aout,  1865),

pp.  309-311.]

(See  B.  Plate  XXVIII.)

ON  August  21, 1865,  M.  Milne-Edwards  communicated  to  the  Academy  the  fol-
lowing letter  by  M.  Lartet — relative  to  a  slah  of  fossil  ivory,  found  in  an  ossiferous
deposit  in  Pe"rigord,  and  marked  with  incisions  apparently  representing  a  long-
haired Elephant.

"  Since  you  think  good  to  give  publicity  to  the  palaeontological  specimen  which
was  shown  you,  and  on  which  some  have  found  the  contours  and  other  linear
details  of  an  animal  form  referable  to  an  Elephant,  I  will  hand  over  to  you,
before  leaving,  a  cast  of  that  fragment,  prepared  by  M.  Stahl,  the  able  artist
attached  to  the  Museum  of  Natural  History ;  and  the  original,  after  my  return  to
Paris,  will  be  at  the  disposal  of  those  who  desire  to  make  a  more  direct  examina-
tion. The  history  of  the  specimen,  found  more  than  fifteen  months  ago,  is  this  :—

"  In  May  1864  M.  de  Verneuil  and  our  deceased  friend  Dr.  Falconer  having
shown  a  desire  to  visit  the  caverns  and  other  localities  of  the  Dordogne  which  I
had  explored  in  company  with  my  much  regretted  fellow-labourer  the  late  Mr.  H.
Christy,  I  accompanied  them  in  that  excursion.  We  were  at  that  time  still  exca-
vating at  the  Madelaine,  which  had  already  furnished  a  number  of  those  animal
figures  carved  on  bone  or  on  reindeer-antler,  which  were  submitted  last  year  to
the  inspection  of  the  Academy.

"On  our  arrival  the  workmen  had  just  discovered  five  broken  pieces  of  a
rather  thin  plate  or  slab  of  ivory,  once  forming  part  of  a  moderate-sized  tusk  of
an  Elephant.  Having  joined  the  pieces  together,  according  to  lines  of  junction
marked  out  by  the  minute  intricacies  of  fracture,  I  showed  Dr.  Falconer  the
numerous  characteristic,  though  shallow,  engraved  lines,  which  seemed  to  me  to
indicate  some  animal  forms.  The  practised  eye  of  the  celebrated  palaeontologist,
who  has  so  well  studied  the  Proboscidians,  at  once  recognized  the  head  of  an
Elephant ;  and  he  soon  pointed  out  other  parts  of  the  body,  and  particularly,  in
the  region  of  the  neck,  a  bundle  of  descending  lines,  which  recall  the  long  shaggy


AN  ENGKAVED  PIECE  OP  ELEPHANT'S  TUSK.


207


hair  characteristic  of  the  Mammoth,  or  Elephant  of  the  Glacial  Period*.  We
know  that  this  specific  peculiarity,  indicative  of  the  subarctic  habitat  of  an  animal
of  this  genus,  had  been  verified,  in  1799,  by  Mr.  Adams,  of  the  Academy  of  Saint-
Petersburg,  by  the  remains  of  a  carcass  of  the  same  kind  of  Elephant  (Elephas
primigenins)  imbedded,  flesh  and  bone,  in  the  ice  near  the  mouth  of  the  Lena.
In  the  Geological  Gallery  of  the  Museum  a  tuft  of  the  long  hair  of  this  Mammoth
can  be  seen  t-

"  Not  wishing,  in  accordance  with  the  rule  we  had  laid  down,  to  publish  this
discovery  previously  to  confirmation  by  analogous  observations  J,  I  merely  showed
the  specimens  to  some  persons  of  competent  judgment.  I  may  mention,  among
others,  Messrs,  de  Quatrefages,  Desnoyers,  and  de  Longpe"rier,  who,  together  with
yourself,  have  examined  it  with  the  most  scrupulous  attention ;  also  Mr.  A.  W.
Franks,  Director  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries  of  London,  who  has  taken  the
trouble  to  examine  the  cast,  and  to  blacken  with  pencil  the  more  definite  lines  of
carving,  and  the  more  characteristic  forms  which  he  can  distinguish  by  means  of
them.  It  is  therefore,  in  reality,  the  opinion  of  these  eminent  scientific  men,
including  Dr.  Falconer  and  yourself,  that  is  produced  before  the  Academy,  rather
than  my  own.

"  This  new  fact  will  not,  indeed,  add  any  thing  to  already  acquired  convictions
as  to  the  coexistence  of  Man  with  the  fossil  Elephant  (Elephas  primigenius)
and  other  great  Herbivores  and  Carnivores  which  geologists  regard  as  having
lived  together  in  the  earlier  phases  of  the  Quaternary  Period.  This  truth  of  retro-

*  "  On  the  cast  there  is,  in  the  lines  descending  from  the  summit  of  the  head,  a  gap  corresponding  to  a
transverse  crack  filled  up  by  cement  in  the  original."

t  [Portions  of  the  hide,  with  its  coat  of  black  bristly  hair,  15  inches  long,  shorter  hair  of  a  fawn  colour,
and  reddish-brown  wool,  are  preserved  also  in  the  Natural-History  Museum  at  St.  Petersburg,  and  in  the
British  and  Hunterian  Museums,  London. — EDIT.  KEL.  AQ.]

t  [Another  indication  of  the  Aborigines  of  Perigord  being  acquainted  with  the  Elephant  or  Mammoth  is
shown  by  the  carved  head  of  an  Elephant,  which  was  once  the  butt-end  of  an  ornamented  Antler  ("  Baton
de  commandement "  or  "  Pogamagan  "),  from  Laugerie  Basse  (Dordogne),  in  the  collection  of  the  Marquis
de  Vibraye.  See  '  Materiaux  pour  1'Histoire  de  1'Homme,'  vol.  iii.  p.  206  ;  vol.  iv.  p.  465.

A  far  less  definite  indication  is  an  obscure  outline  of  what  M.  Elie  Massenat  regards  as  the  head  and
trunk  of  an  Elephant,  cut  on  a  piece  of  smooth  bone  from  the  same  Station.  '  Materiaux '  &c.  vol.  v.  p.  354,
pi.  22.  fig.  2.

That  the  neighbouring  people,  probably  of  the  same  race,  who  left  their  remains  at  Bruniquel  (Tarn-et-
Garonne),  personally  knew  the  Elephant,  is  proved  by  the  figure  of  that  animal  carved  out  of  the  palm  of  a
Reindeer  Antler  as  the  handle  of  a  poniard,  found  at  Bruniquel,  and  in  the  Collection  of  M.  Peccadeau  de
1'Isle.  See  '  B-evue  Archeologique '  for  March  1868 ;  and  '  Materiaux '  &c.  vol.  iii.  p.  206,  and  vol.  iv.  p.  9",
fig.  32.— EDIT.  KEL.  Aa.]


208  KELIQULE  AQUITANICLE.

spective  evidence  is  deduced  now-a-days  from  so  great  a  number  of  concordant
observations,  and  of  material  facts  of  so  clear  a  significance,  that  minds  the  least
prepared  to  admit  it  are  not  slow  to  accept  it  in  all  its  reality,  when  they  will
but  take  the  trouble  to  look  and  then  judge  conscientiously.

"  Permit  me  to  take  this  occasion  of  requesting  you  to  point  out  to  the  Academy
two  discoveries  of  even  more  immediate  interest  in  regard  to  my  studies  on  the
geographical  distribution  of  the  Quaternary  Mammalia.  In  the  first  place,  the
discovery  of  the  remains  of  a  Marmot,  of  a  new  species,  or  at  least  different  from
that  of  the  Alps,  in  a  cavern  of  the  Dordogne,  anciently  inhabited  by  Man.  The
second  fact,  still  more  important,  is  the  occurrence,  also  in  Pe"rigord,  at  another
Human  Station  of  very  great  antiquity,  of  a  number  of  bones  of  Ovibos  mos-
chatus  or  Musk-ox,  showing  a  state  of  fracture  analogous  to  that  of  other  animal
bones  used  for  food  by  the  aborigines.  These  bones  of  the  Musk-ox  were  found
associated  with  the  remains  of  the  great  Bears,  the  great  Cave-cat  (Felis  spel<ea),
the  Reindeer,  Aurochs,  Horse,  &c.,  and  in  the  midst  of  relics  of  human  industry,
thus  testifying  to  the  persistence  of  a  glacial  climate  at  the  time  when  Man  was
already  established  in  this  region  of  Europe,  now  so  temperate  in  climate.  We
know,  indeed,  that  the  Musk-ox,  at  present  exiled  to  Arctic  North  America,  never
comes  on  this  side  of  60° ;  in  the  early  part  of  the  Quaternary  Period,  therefore,
he  came  15°  of  latitude  further  to  the  south  in  this  district.  It  is  deserving  of
remark  that  M.  Alphonse  Milne-Edwards*  has  arrived  at  analogous  conclusions
by  his  study  of  the  fossil  Birds  from  our  caverns  and  other  Human  Stations  of
P&igord."

*  Socicte  Philomathique,  Seance  du  8  Juillet,  in  the  '  Institut '  for  August  3,  1865.


AN  ENGRAVED  FIGUKE  OF  A  GLUTTON.


209


XX,

ON  AN  ENGEAVED  FIGUKE  OF  A  GLUTTON  FEOM  ONE  OF  THE  DOEDOGNE  CAVES.

By  Professor  T.  EOTEKT  JONES,  F.E.S.,  F.G.S.

THE  accompanying  woodcut  is  engraved  from  the  photograph  of  a  specimen
believed  by  the  late  M.  E.  Lartet  to  have  been  abstracted  by  a  workman  from
one  of  Mr.  H.  Christy's  diggings  in  the  Caves  of  Dordogne.

Fig.  80.

Outline  of  the  Glutton,  cut  on  a  piece  of  Antler,  from  one  of  the  Caves  in  the  Department  of  the  Dordogne.


In  M.  G.  de Mortillet's  "Promenades  pr&iistoriques  a  1'Exposition  universelle,"
1867  ('  Materiaux  pour  Phistoire  de  I'Homme,'  vol.  iii.  p.  201),  this  specimen,  re-
ferred to  as  being  exhibited  among  others  from  the  Caves  of  the  Department  of
the  Dordogne,  and  belonging  to  M.  Peccadeau  de  1'Isle,  is  described  in  these
words : — "  La  piece  capitale  est  une  lame  de  bois  du  renne,  troupe  pour  suspen-
sion, portant  une  gravure  tres-nette  d'un  animal  qui  a  un  peu  le  museau  carre"
des  hippopotames,  mais  qu'il  est  fort  difficile  de  determiner  exactement."

The  object  itself  is  a  blade-like  piece  of  Reindeer  antler,  perforated  near  one
end,  and  bearing  an  incised  outline  of  a  hairy  quadruped,  with  heavy  head  and
large  tail.  To  this  figure  the  Glutton,  Oulo  luscus  (Linn.),  most  nearly  answers,
as  indeed  the  late  M.  Lartet  always  thought.  The  hairy  saddle  on  the  back  of
the  figure  very  nearly  coincides  with  the  outline  of  the  "blackish  dorsal  disk"
(Dr.  J.  E.  Gray,  "On  the  Mustelidje,"  'Proceed.  Zoolog.  Soc.'  1865,  p.  120),  weU
seen  in  Schreber's  figure  of  the  Glutton  ('  Saugthiere  in  Abbildungen  nach  der
Natur  mit  Beschreibungen,'  iii.  1778,  p.  525,  pi.  144),  and  in  that  given  by  Pallas
('Spicilegia  Zoologica,'  xiv.  1779,  pi.  2);  and  distinguishable  in  the  more  lively
picture  of  the  Glutton  in  Paul  Gervais's  'Histoire  naturelle  des  Mammiferes,'
1855,  p.  109.  The  tail  and  jaws  in  the  outline  from  the  Dordogne  are  larger  than
represented  by  either  Schreber  or  Pallas,  who  seem  to  have  had  their  drawings


210


EELIQUI^E  AQUITANICLE.


made  from  dry  stuffed  specimens.  Gervais  is  more  true  to  nature  in  giving  a
fuller  tail  and  a  rather  thicker,  though  short,  muzzle ;  but  the  last  is  not  so  large
as  that  in  our  engraving  (fig.  80),  which  may  be  an  exaggerated  feature,  and  due
to  the  imperfect  art,  or  obstinate  whim,  of  the  aboriginal  draughtsman.

The  exact  proportions,  however,  of  the  North-European  Glutton  are  best  shown
in  the  annexed  Woodcut  (fig.  81),  being  a  portrait  of  the  Glutton  now  living  in


Fig.  81.

The  Glutton  (Gulo  luscus)  in  the  Zoological  Society's  Gardens,  London.
F.L.S.,  F.Z.S.,  &c.


Drawn  by  N.  L.  Austen,  Esq.,
About  one  sixth  of  the  natural  size.


the  Zoological  Society's  Gardens,  London,  carefully  studied  and  drawn  by  Mr.  N.
Laurence  Austen,  P.L.S.,  E.Z.S.,  who  is  well  acquainted  with  the  Glutton  in  its
Norwegian  home.

+3

The  Asiatico-European  Glutton  (Mustela  gulo,  Linn.,  Gulo  arcticus,  Desrn.)  has
been  specially  treated  of  by  Pallas  in  his  '  Zoographia  Rossico-Asiatica,'  1831,  vol.  i.
pp.  73-75,  and  by  many  classificatory  naturalists.  See  C.  Knight's  '  Penny  Cyclo-
paedia,' 1838,  article  GULO.

The  North- American  Glutton,  or  Wolverene,  Gulo  luscus  ( Ursus,  Linn.),  first
figured  by  Edwards  in  his  '  Natural  History  of  Birds,'  in  1747,  p.  103,  pi.  103,  is
described  in  Dr.  Richardson's  'Pauna  Boreali- Americana,'  1829,  p.  41,  and  in
Baird's  'Mammals'  &c.  1857,  p.  181,  and  has  been  treated  of  by  very  many
travellers  and  writers.  See  'Penny  Cyclop.'  loc.  cit.  The  two  forms  are  now
regarded  as  belonging  to  one  species,  Gulo  luscus  (Linn.).  Dr.  Robert  Brown,


AN  ENGEAVED  FIGURE  OF  A  GLUTTON.


211


in  his  paper  "On  the  Mammalian  Fauna  of  Greenland,"  'Proceed.  Zoolog.  Soc.'
1868,  pp.  358  &c.,  gives  some  interesting  notes  about  the  probable  non-occurrence
of  this  animal  in  Greenland.

The  following  note  on  the  Glutton,  taken  from  '  The  Geographical  Distribution
of  Mammals,'  by  Andrew  Murray,  1866,  p.  116,  is  quite  applicable  in  this  place  :—

"  GTJIO.  The  Glutton,  or  Wolverene,  is  generally  believed  to  be  found  in  all  the  three  continents  of
Europe,  Asia,  and  America,  although  there  are  still  some  authors  who  are  disinclined  to  admit  the  identity
of  the  old-world  and  the  new-world  species.  It  is  a  boreal,  almost  an  arctic,  animal,  coming  in  the  cate-
gory of  those  which  compose  the  circumpolar  zone  of  life ;  and  yet  its  remains  havo  been  found  in  the  Caves
of  Gailenreuth  [Franconia],  Liege,  and  Voidon  near  Joyeuse  (Ardeche),  and  in  the  caverns  of  Germany.
These  remains  have  been  supposed  to  belong  to  an  extinct  species  (£?.  spelceus);  but  both  Baron  Cuvier  and
De  Blainville  were  of  opinion  that  they  were  those  of  the  existing  species.  Another  extinct  species  has  been
described  by  Kaup  from  Eppelsheim,  under  the  name  of  Q.  antediluvianus ;  but  it  may  belong  to  the  living
species.  If  they  belonged  to  the  present  species,  we  cannot  escape  from  the  inference,  that  either  it  has
changed  its  nature  so  far  as  to  require  now  a  colder  climate  than  it  did  formerly,  or  else  that  the  climate  of
Europe  was  much  colder  when  the  individuals  whose  bones  are  found  in  the  caves  in  question  roamed
through  France  and  Germany  than  it  is  now."

In  May  1871  Mr.  "W.  Boyd  Dawkins,  E.B.S.,  E.G.S.,  communicated  to  the
Geological  Society  of  London  a  memoir  on  the  discovery  of  the  Glutton  in  Britain,
(1)  at  the  Plas-Heaton  cave,  on  the  Elwy  (near  Cefn,  St.  Asaph),  North  Wales,
by  Messrs.  Hughes  and  Heaton,  and  (2)  from  the  caves  of  Ban  well  and  Bleadon
(Somerset)  and  Gower  (South  Wales),  by  Messrs.  Sanford  and  Dawkins ;  and  the
following  extract  of  observations,  resulting  from  his  special  examination  of  the
British  remains  of  the  Glutton,  are  well  worthy  of  note,  and  will  be  fully  appre-
ciated by  all  interested  in  the  study  of  the  Cave-fauna  of  Western  Europe,  and  in
the  inquiry  as  to  the  coexistence  of  the  Glutton  with  the  Cave-folk  of  Perigord.

"  The  Glutton  of  the  present  day  inhabits  the  inclement  northern  regions  of  the  Old  World,  to  the  point
where  the  forests  gradually  die  down  into  the  lonely  wastes  of  the  '  Tundras,'  and  is  to  be  found  in  Norway,
Sweden,  Lapland,  and  as  far  east  as  Kamtschatka.  In  the  New  World  it  ranges,  under  the  name  of
'Wolverine,'  northwards  from  the  latitude  of  Canada.  It  was  seen  by  Eoss  in  the  70°  parallel  in  the
winter ;  and  its  bones  have  been  met  with  in  Melville  Island.  Its  southern  limit  in  Asia  is  the  latitude
50°,  where  it  occurs  in  the  Altai.  In  Europe  its  southern  limit  is  not  clearly  defined ;  but  it  has  steadily
retreated  northwards  as  the  vast  forests  of  Germany  and  Poland  gradually  fell  under  the  axe  of  the  woodman.
According  to  Eichwald,  it  once  lived  in  the  Lithuanian  region  with  the  Bison,  which  still  lingers  there  under
the  protection  of  an  Imperial  ukase ;  and  Zimmermann  adduces  proof  of  its  having  been  killed  as  far  south
as  Helmstadt,  in  Brunswick*.

"  In  the  Pleistocene  Caves  of  Germany  it  is  found  abundantly,  with  the  Eeindeer,  Cave  Lion,  and  Hyaena,

*  "  The  authorities  consulted  for  the  range  of  the  Glutton  are  Blasius  (Fauna  der  Wirbelthiere  Deutsch-
lands),  Zimmermann  (Specimen  Zoologies  Geographicae),  and  Sir  John  Eichardson  (Fauna  Boreali- Americana)."


212  EELIQUI^E    AQUITANICLE.

at  least  as  far  south  as  Gailenreuth,  in  Bavaria,  where  it  was  first  discovered  by  Dr.  Goldfuss.  It  is  figured
and  described  from  the  Caves  of  Belgium  by  Dr.  Schmerling.  We  might  therefore  naturally  expect  to  find
the  animal  ranging  over  our  Island  at  a  time  when  it  formed  part  of  the  mainland  of  Europe,  and  offered
free  access  to  the  same  animals  (the  Eeindeer,  the  Lemming,  and  the  Horse)  as  those  which  still  furnish
food  to  the  living  Glutton  in  Siberia.  The  presence  in  Great  Britain  of  a  creature  adapted  for  enduring  the
severity  of  an  Arctic  winter,  and  not  now  found  in  any  hot  regions,  with  the  Reindeer,  Lemming,  and
Musk-sheep,  implies  that  the  Pleistocene  winters  were  of  an  Arctic  severity, — just  as  the  Hippopotamus,
found  under  precisely  the  same  conditions,  and  associated  with  the  same  group  of  animals,  points  to  a  hot
summer  like  that  which  obtains  on  the  Lower  Volga.  The  intimate  association  in  one  spot  of  animals
now  confined  respectively  to  the  hottest  and  coldest  regions  seems  to  me  admit  of  no  other  explanation ."-
Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  London,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  409.


NOTES  ON  THE  SCANDINAVIAN  EEINDEEE.


213


XXL

NOTES  ON  THE  SCANDINAVIAN  REINDEER.     By  N.  LAUEENCE  ATTSTEN,  Esq.,  F.L.S.,  F.Z.S.,  &e.

WILD  Reindeer  were  formerly,  it  is  believed,  found  throughout  the  greater  por-
tion of  the  Scandinavian  peninsula ;  but  at  the  present  day  they  are  confined  to


[To  face  page  212.


NOTE.

Subsequently  to  the  printing  of  Sheet '« 2  E  "  (pp.  205-212)  appeared  Dr.  Louis
Lartet's  short  memoir,  "  Gravures  ine"dites  de  1'ftge  du  renne,  paraissant  repre"-
senter  le  Mammouth  et  le  Glouton,"  in  the  <Mate"riaux  pour  1'histoire  de  1'Homme,'
2e  se"r.,  vol.  v.  pp.  33-36,  with  woodcuts  of  (1)  two  lively  heads  of  the  Mammoth,
in  outline,  on  a  plate  of  bone  from  Pe"rigord  (figs.  20  &  21),  and  (2)  of  the  Glutton
(fig.  22),  which  we  have  also  figured,  from  a  Photograph,  at  p.  209,  fig.  80.


reached  the  moss,  they  are  frequently  driven  away  by  the  hinds  and  younger
males,  which,  retaining  their  antlers  during  the  period  of  winter,  are  thus  enabled
to  keep  off  their  more  vigorous  companions.


212  RELIQUIAE    AQUITANIC^E.

at  least  as  far  south  as  Gailenreuth,  in  Bavaria,  where  it  was  first  discovered  by  Dr.  Goldfuss.  It  is  figured
and  described  from  the  Caves  of  Belgium  by  Dr.  Schmerling.  We  might  therefore  naturally  expect  to  find
the  animal  ranging  over  our  Island  at  a  time  when  it  formed  part  of  the  mainland  of  Europe,  and  offered
free  access  to  the  same  animals  (the  Reindeer,  the  Lemming,  and  the  Horse)  as  those  which  still  furnish
food  to  the  living  Glutton  in  Siberia.  The  presence  in  Great  Britain  of  a  creature  adapted  for  enduring  the
severity  of  an  Arctic  winter,  and  not  now  found  in  any  hot  regions,  with  the  Reindeer,  Lemming,  and
Musk-sheep,  implies  that  the  Pleistocene  winters  were  of  an  Arctic  severity, — just  as  the  Hippopotamus,
found  under  precisely  the  same  conditions,  and  associated  with  the  same  group  of  animals,  points  to  a  hot
summer  like  that  which  obtains  on  the  Lower  Volga.  The  intimate  association  in  one  spot  of  animals
now  confined  respectively  to  the  hottest  and  coldest  regions  seems  to  me  admit  of  no  other  explanation." —
Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  London,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  409.


NOTES  ON  THE  SCANDINAVIAN  EEINDEEE.


213


XXI.

NOTES  ON  THE  SCANDINAVIAN  REINDEER.    By  N.  LAURENCE  AUSTEN,  Esq.,  F.L.S.,  F.Z.S.,  &c.

WILD  Reindeer  were  formerly,  it  is  believed,  found  throughout  the  greater  por-
tion of  the  Scandinavian  peninsula ;  but  at  the  present  day  they  are  confined  to
the  more  northern  parts.  They  exist  in  large  herds  on  the  more  elevated  moun-
tain plateaux  of  Norway — but  do  not  appear  to  descend  lower  than  the  Birch-
limit,  about  3700  feet  above  the  sea-level,  and  seem  never  to  frequent  the  dense
Pine-forests  which  clothe  the  lower  slopes  of  the  mountains.

The  principal  food  of  the -Reindeer  during  the  summer  months  consists  of  grass
and  the  foliage  of  the  dwarf  Willows  (Salix  glauca  and  S.  hastata).  They  also
feed  on  various  species  of  Cerastium,  on  the  Buckbean  (Menyanthes  trifoliata),
and  they  are  especially  fond  of  the  Glacier  Buttercup  (Ranunculus  glacialis),  which
is  found  only  above  the  Birch-limit,  and  extends  considerably  above  the  line  of
perpetual  snow,  growing  in  clefts  of  slaty  rock.  This  plant  is  called  "  Ren-
blumme,"  or  Reindeer-flower,  in  Norsk ;  two  varieties  of  it  are  known,  one  having
white,  and  the  other  purplish  blossoms.

During  the  winter  the  Deer  subsist  almost  entirely  on  the  Reindeer-moss  ( Cla-
donia  rangiferina),  which  grows  on  the  higher  parts  of  the  "  fjeld."  There  is  a
prevailing  idea  that  the  Reindeer  uses  its  broad  frontal  antlers  to  plough  up  the
snow  when  searching  for  the  moss ;  but  this,  I  believe,  is  not  the  case,  as  the  full-
grown  stags,  whose  horns  alone  possess  this  peculiarity  of  form,  shed  their  antlers
in  the  earlier  portion  of  the  winter,  about  the  middle  of  November,  the  hinds  and
immature  males  retaining  theirs  until  the  ensuing  spring.  An  experienced  Nor-
wegian hunter,  who  was  with  me  for  several  seasons  in  the  mountains,  assured  me
that  in  severe  weather  the  Deer  united  in  large  herds,  and  resorted  to  the  highest
parts  of  the  fjeld,  where  the  snow  does  not  lie  so  deeply,  constant  gusts  of  wind
sweeping  over  it  and  causing  it  to  collect  in  ravines  and  sheltered  corries.  In
such  situations,  where  the  snow  is  thinnest,  the  largest  and  most  powerful  stags
go  in  advance  of  the  herd,  and  scrape  up  the  snow  with  their  fore  feet ;  but  having
reached  the  moss,  they  are  frequently  driven  away  by  the  hinds  and  younger
males,  which,  retaining  their  antlers  during  the  period  of  winter,  are  thus  enabled
to  keep  off  their  more  vigorous  companions.

2G


214  BELIQUUE

At  the  commencement  of  spring  the  Reindeer  descend  from  the  snowy  regions
to  the  subalpine  pastures,  for  the  purpose  of  feeding  on  the  sweet  young  grass
then  springing  up ;  but  as  soon  as  the  weather  becomes  warm,  they  return  to  the
highest  fjelds  to  escape  the  plague  of  insects,  as  they  are  especially  annoyed  at
this  season  by  a  species  of  Breeze-fly  (CEstrus  tarandi),  which  lays  its  eggs,
covered  with  an  adhesive  secretion,  on  the  hairs  of  the  Deer's  back.  The  larvae,
when  hatched,  burrow  their  way  beneath  the  skin,  and,  as  in  the  case  of  the
CEstrus  bovis,  which  attacks  cattle,  form  a  considerable  swelling.

During  the  heat  of  summer,  the  herds  resort  to  the  largest  "  Snee-fonds,"  or
snow-fields,  remaining  on  the  snow  during  the  day  and  descending  morning  and
evening  to  feed.  At  this  season  the  old  stags  separate  from  the  main  herd,  not
rejoining  it  until  their  horns  are  fully  developed,  which  takes  place  about  the
beginning  of  September,  when  the  animals  are  in  their  best  condition.

The  period  of  gestation  with  the  female  is  about  eight  months ;  the  fawns  are
generally  produced  in  May  or  the  beginning  of  June.  In  August  the  fawns  have
horns  from  4  to  9  inches  in  length,  according  to  sex ;  and  in  November,  when  they
lose  the  velvet,  the  antlers  measure  from  12  to  15  inches.

Unlike  the  generality  of  the  deer  tribe,  the  young  are  not  spotted  or  dappled
when  first  born,  but  are  of  a  uniform  reddish-brown  tint.  In  August  this  changes
to  a  blackish  colour,  becoming  grey  during  the  winter.  In  the  adult  Deer  the
winter  coat  is  extremely  thick,  varying  in  hue  from  dark  brownish  red  to  nearly
white.  The  stags  at  this  season  have  a  mane,  or  ruff,  of  white  hair  on  the  neck
and  throat,  which  in  some  specimens  attains  a  great  length.

The  hoofs  of  the  Reindeer  are  large  and  broad,  being  admirably  adapted  to
support  the  animal  in  its  passage  over  soft  snow  or  among  slippery  rocks.  A
peculiar  clicking  noise  is  heard  when  the  animal  is  in  motion,  occasioned  by  the
contraction  of  the  hoof  when  the  foot  is  raised  from  the  ground,  and  the  conse-
quent striking  of  the  two  portions  of  the  hoof  against  each  other.  In  descending
precipitous  slopes  of  rock,  they  obtain  increased  security  of  foothold  by  the  use
of  the  spurious  hoofs,  which,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Chamois  and  other  mountain-
animals,  are  capable  of  considerable  holding-power.  The  hind  legs  are  much
longer  in  proportion  to  the  others  than  is  usually  the  case  among  the  deer  tribe ;
and  this  peculiarity  of  structure  is  of  great  assistance  to  the  animal  in  traversing
rocky  ground.

Although  both  sexes  are  furnished  with  horns,  those  of  the  hind  (or  "  simle,"
as  she  is  called  in  Norsk)  rarely  exceed  14  to  18  inches,  measured  along  the
curve;  while  those  of  the  stag,  or  "ren,"  reach  a  much  larger  size.  A  pair


NOTES  ON  THE  SCANDINAVIAN  EEINDEEE.


215


Fig.  82.
A  Pair  of  fully  developed  Antlers  of  a  Siberian  Eeindeer,  in  the  Hunterian  Museum  of  the  Royal  College  of

Surgeons*.


*  [This  is  described  in  the  'Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Osteological  Series  contained  in  the  Museum  of  the

2  G2


216  EELIQULE  AQUITANICLE.

in  my  possession,  taken  from  a  Deer  shot  by  myself  two  years  ago,  measure
as  follows : —

inches.

Length  of  antler,  folio-wing  curve  47

Width  between  antlers,  from  tip  to  tip 41

Length  of  brow-antlers 14—15

The  total  number  of  points,  including  the  small  ones  on  the  brow-antlers,  is
thirty-seven ;  but  the  head  is  a  remarkable  one,  and  by  far  the  finest  I  have  ever
shot.  I  have  described  the  circumstances  under  which  this  head  was  obtained  in
an  article  which  appeared  in  '  Land  and  Water '  of  February  the  4th,  1871.

In  the  great  majority  of  Reindeer  horns  from  Northern  Europe  only  one  broAv-
antler  is  fully  developed — the  other  appearing  in  a  rudimentary  form,  as  a  knob,
or  in  some  cases  as  a  spike,  3  or  4  inches  in  length.

I  have  noticed  that  this  is  also  the  case  with  the  North-American  "  Caribou,"
though  I  have  seen  heads  of  this  animal  from  Newfoundland  in  which  both  frontal
antlers  are  perfectly  developed  *.

The  European  Reindeer  seems  to  be  more  exclusively  a  mountain-animal  than
its  American  congener,  which  appears  to  inhabit  densely  wooded  districts,  as  well
as  extensive  "  pine-barrens  "  and  open  plains.

The  variety  of  Reindeer  found  in  Spitzbergen  t  is  considerably  less  in  size  than
the  Norwegian  animal.  I  have  examined  several  heads  reported  to  be  Greenland
and  Spitzbergen  specimens,  which,  though  evidently  taken  from  adult  males,  had

Royal  College  of  Surgeons  of  England,'  vol.  ii.  "Mammalia  Placentalia"  (4to,  London,  1853),  as  "No.  3519,"
in  which  "  both  brow-snags  are  equally  developed  with  compressed  branched  palms,"  p.  585 ;  and  it  is  here
figured  (by  permission)  not  only  to  illustrate  the  size  and  form  of  the  full-grown  antler,  but  to  show  the
relative  position  of  the  great  palmate  brow-antlers,  such  as  have  been  used  for  the  etchings  of  bovine  and
other  animals  figured  in  B.  Plate  II.  fig.  6,  B.  Plate  XIX.  &  XX.  figs.  2,  3,  and  4.  See  also  the  figure  en-
graved on  stone,  A.  Plate  XXX.  fig.  5.

Besides  a  large  collection  of  Eeindeer  horns,  exemplifying  remarkable  variations  of  shape  and  size,  a  very
large  head  and  antlers  of  a  Caribou  from  Newfoundland  is  to  be  seen  in  the  Hunterian  Museum,  and  is
described  in  'Descriptive  Catalogue'  above-quoted,  p.  587,  as  "No.  3534,"  in  which  "the  right  brow-snag
is  much  expanded  vertically,  and  palmate;  the  left  one  is  bifurcate,  the  prongs  being  long,  round,  and
simple.  The  front  branch  of  the  beam  and  the  termination  of  the  beam  are  palmate."

The  reader  is  referred  also  to  the  Description  of  the  series  of  young  and  old  Antlers,  figured  in  C.  Plate
VII.  &  VIII.  pages  169,  170. — EDIT.  REL.  Aa.]

*  In  '  Forest  Life  in  Acadie,  with  Sketches  of  Sport  in  Newfoundland,'  8vo,  1869,  by  Capt.  Hardy,  R.A.,  a
plate  is  devoted  to  the  difference  of  form  between  Caribou  heads  from  Nova  Scotia  and  from  Newfoundland.

t  Some  remarks  on  the  Reindeer  of  Spitzbergen  are  to  be  found  in  Mr.  James  Lamont's  '  Seasons  with  the
Sea-horses,'  8vo,  1861,  chap.  xv.


NOTES  ON  THE  SCANDINAVIAN  KEINDEER.


217


the  number  of  points  at  the  top  of  the  horns  very  irregular ;  in  some  instances
there  were  several  points  on  the  summit  of  one  horn,  and  only  the  single  beam
on  the  other.

The  rutting-season  of  the  Norwegian  Reindeer  begins  early  in  October;  and
the  more  powerful  stags  then  leave  their  solitary  haunts  and  rejoin  the  large
herds.  At  this  period  the  males  utter  a  peculiar,  hoarse,  guttural  roar,  which
can  be  heard  at  a  considerable  distance,  and,  when  listened  to  among  the  moun-
tains at  night,  would  not  be  supposed  to  proceed  from  a  Ruminant.

The  stags  at  this  period  become  very  pugnacious,  and  desperate  battles  take
place  between  them,  in  which  their  horns  become  sometimes  locked  together  in  the
same  way  as  those  on  the  two  Elk  skulls  in  the  Hunterian  Museum  at  the  Royal
College  of  Surgeons,  so  that  the  animals  are  unable  to  extricate  themselves.

In  former  times  great  numbers  of  wild  Reindeer  were  captured  in  Norway  by
means  of  pitfalls,  usually  constructed  in  some  narrow  rocky  pass  which  the  Deer
would  be  obliged  to  traverse  in  single  file.  I  have  seen  many  remains  of  these  con-
trivances, called  "Rengraven;"  but,  as  the  present  game-laws  of  Norway  forbid
their  use,  they  have  been  filled  up.  They  were  oblong  in  shape,  about  6  to  8  feet
in  length  by  2-|  in  breadth,  the  sides  of  the  pit  being  built  in  with  flat  stones,  and
5  or  6  feet  in  depth.  These  were  covered  with  small  sticks  and  brushwood,  over
which  a  thick  layer  of  moss  was  laid.  Of  course,  when  the  Deer  trod  on  the
concealed  trap,  it  was  instantly  engulfed ;  and  its  struggles  to  escape  were  useless,
from  the  depth  and  narrowness  of  the  pit.

An  ingenious  and  somewhat  similar  method  of  capturing  the  American  "  Cari-
bou "  is  practised  by  the  Esquimaux  inhabiting  the  country  to  the  southward  of
Chesterfield's  Inlet.  The  sides  of  this  trap,  according  to  Dr.  Richardson,  are
built  of  slabs  of  snow,  cut  as  if  for  a  snow  house.  An  inclined  plane  of  snow
leads  to  the  entrance  of  the  pit,,  which  is  about  5  feet  deep,  and  of  sufficient
dimensions  to  contain  two  or  three  full-grown  Deer.  The  pit  is  covered  with  a
large  thin  slab  of  snow,  which  the  animal  is  enticed  to  tread  upon  by  a  quantity
of  the  lichens  on  which  it  feeds  being  placed  conspicuously  on  an  eminence
beyond  the  opening.  The  exterior  of  the  trap  is  banked  up  with  snow,  so  as  to
resemble  a  natural  hillock,  and  care  is  taken  to  render  it  so  steep  on  all  sides  but
one,  that  the  Deer  must  pass  over  the  mouth  of  the  trap  before  it  can  reach  the
bait.  The  slab  is  sufficiently  strong  to  bear  the  weight  of  a  Deer  until  it  has
passed  the  middle,  when  it  revolves  on  two  short  axles  of  wood,  precipitates  the
Deer  into  the  trap,  and  returns  to  its  place  again,  in  consequence  of  the  lower
end  being  heavier  than  the  other.


218  BELIQIILE  AQUITANIC^E.

In  some  parts  of  Lapland  and  Russian  Finland,  another  device,  called  the  "  Vild
Ren  Hage,"  is  adopted  for  capturing  Reindeer.  A  kind  of  fence  about  two  miles
long  is  constructed  of  small  trees  matted  and  interlaced  with  brushwood.  Open-
ings are  left  at  intervals,  about  3  feet  in  width,  and  two  stout  posts  are  driven
into  the  ground  on  each  side ;  to  one  of  these  is  attached  a  strong  noose  made  of
thick  rope,  which  is  retained  in  a  circular  form  by  means  of  very  slender  twigs
which  give  way  at  the  slightest  touch ;  and,  to  prevent  the  fawns  from  leaping
through  without  entangling  themselves,  two  threads  are  placed  diagonally  across  it.

It  is  said  that  when  the  Deer  meet  with  these  hedges,  which  are  usually  made
at  the  time  of  their  partial  migration  to  the  lower  grounds  in  spring,  they  proceed
along  them,  until  they  come  to  one  of  these  openings,  in  forcing  their  way  through
which,  one  of  their  number  is  usually  entangled  in  the  snare.

Fig.  83.

Cervus  tarandus,  Linne.


G.  R.  DeWilde  dtl.  et  tculpml.


NOTE. — We  deeply  regret  the  recent  death  of  the  talented  young  naturalist  and  traveller,  Mr.  Nathaniel
Laurence  Austen,  F.L.S.,  F.Z.S.,  who  favoured  us  with  this  note  on  the  Eeindeer,  and  with  the  sketch  of
the  Glutton  given  at  page  210.  He  died,  on  August  9th,  from  concussion  of  the  brain,  caused  by  a  fall
from  his  horse ;  and  his  sorrowing  friends  see  the  promise  of  a  useful  life  of  observation  and  research  sadly
cut  off  by  his  sudden  death. — EDITOR  RELIQ.  AQUIT.


FISHING  DUBING  THE  EEINDEEE-PEEIOD.


219


XXII.

ON  FISHING  DUEING  THE  EEINDEER-PERIOD.
By  Dr.  H.  E.  SAUVAGE,  Museum  of  Natural  History,  Jardin  des  Plantes,  <fec.

THE  Ethnographic  History  of  existing  Savages  shows  that  all  nomadic  races  are
strongly  addicted  to  both  fishing  and  the  chase.

To  hunt  the  wild  beasts  of  the  forest,  to  capture  the  birds  of  the  thickets  and
plains,  and  to  seek  for  the  inhabitants  of  the  waters  must  necessarily  be  the
continuous  and  urgent  occupation  of  people  living  from  hand  to  mouth  and
getting  their  food  day  by  day.

Their  migrations  have  followed  the  courses  of  the  rivers,  partially  or  altogether,
whether  by  hordes  or  families — these  being  the  most  convenient  lines  of  commu-
nication, affording  food  easily  and  abundantly,  and  thus  leading  the  nations  along
tracks  marked  out  by  nature.

We  easily  see  how,  under  such  conditions  of  life,  Fish  must  must  have  entered
largely  into  the  food-supply  of  primitive  peoples,  and  that  the  prehistoric  savage
must  have  employed  every  means  in  his  power  to  obtain  such  an  article  of  food
always  at  hand.  Thus  we  may  regard  the  early  inhabitants  of  Europe  as  occu-
pied in  fishing  as  well  as  hunting  from  the  beginning.

It  is  true  that  we  have  no  positive  evidence  of  Fishing  in  the  "  Mammoth-
Period."  It  has,  however,  been  pointed  out  that  the  large,  roughly  chipped
flint  implements,  lanceolate  or  ovoid  in  shape,  and  known  as  "  langues  de  chat,"
may  have  served  to  make  holes  in  the  ice  during  winter  whereat  to  catch  fish  or
amphibious  animals  frequenting  the  great  rivers  at  that  time*  (see  Prestwich
"  On  the  Geology  of  the  Deposits  containing  Flint  Implements "  &c.,  '  Phil.
Trans.'  vol.  cliv.  p.  286).

The  Esquimaux,  contemporary  with  our  civilization,  partly  remain  in  the
"  Stone  Age,"  employing  analogous  implements  of  stone  for  similar  purposes ;
and  it  is  known  that  throughout  the  Arctic  Regions  the  natives  make  holes  in
the  ice  and  patiently  wait  for  hours  at  the  aperture  until  the  Seals,  coming  to  the
surface  to  breathe,  can  be  struck  and  secured  for  food.  Amphibious  Mammals
probably  ascended  the  Quaternary  Seine  and  Somme  under  the  rigorous  climate

*  [Some  roughly  dressed  flints  found  in  the  Quaternary  Gravels  may  have  been  "  sinkers  "  and  imitation
baits,  such  as  the  Esquimaux  use  in  fishing  and  angling. — EDITOR.]


220  EELIQUI^l   AQUITANKLE.

then  existing;  and  the  natives  had  then  possibly  the  same  habits  as  existing
savages  now  have :  and  as  some  support  to  this  hypothesis,  we  know  that  the
above-mentioned  flint  implements  are  always  found  in  aqueous  deposits,  and  often
accumulated  in  certain  quantities  and  at  one  point,  having  been  of  little  value,
and  easily  lost  by  falling  through  into  the  water.

After  the  age  of  the  extinct  animals  follows  that  of  the  retreating  animals :  of
this  latter  age  we  know  numerous  Stations,  where  we  discover  also  Man,  with
indications  of  his  manners  and  customs.  This  "  Reindeer  Age,"  with  which  the
patient  and  conscientious  researches  of  Edouard  Lartet  and  Henry  Christy  have
made  us  acquainted,  has  chiefly  furnished  us  with  information  respecting  the
modes  and  results  of  Eishing  in  the  Quaternary  Period.

The  ethnography  of  the  present  natives  of  the  North,  among  whom  the  Eein-
deer is  still  a  principal  source  of  food,  gives  valuable  suggestions  as  to  the
probable  habits  of  the  Quaternary  people  of  the  Reindeer  Age.

The  same  wants  must  have  given  rise  to  the  same  habits  and  the  same  indus-
tries. Nilsson*  says : —

"  Indeed,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  explain  the  close  resemblance  between  the  fishing-tools  and  hunting-
weapons  of  savage  nations  the  most  distinct  as  to  time,  place,  and  origin,  without  assuming  that  all  of  them,
in  one  and  the  same  low  degree  of  civilization,  contrived  these  hunting-weapons  instinctively,  and  in
consequence  of  a  sort  of  natural  necessity."

So  also  the  North-American  Indians,  on  the  Pacific  coast  especially,  employing
weapons  and  tools  similar  to  those  used  in  the  "  Reindeer  Age  "  in  Dordognef,
use  the  same  implements  in  the  same  or  nearly  the  same  kind  of  fishing.

Throughout  the  breccia  with  worked  flints  and  the  debris  with  bones  in  the
caves  and  shelters  of  the  South  of  France,  both  in  Dordogne  and  the  neigh-
bouring regions,  the  remains  of  the  Salmon  are  met  with  in  great  abundance ;
and  it  is  probable  that  this  Fish  served  largely  for  food  among  the  people  of  the
"  Reindeer  Age,"  just  as  in  our  day  it  is  a  valuable  article  of  food  among
northern  savages.  The  manners  of  these  peoples  supply  us,  without  doubt,  with
many  data  in  forming  a  notion  of  the  habits  of  the  prehistoric  people  under
similar  conditions  of  life.

Every  traveller — Vancouver,  Mackenzie,  Eranklin,  Bogg,  Lord,  and  others —
tells  us  of  the  enormous  resources  which  the  Salmon-fishery  furnishes  to  the
natives.  Vancouver  informs  us  that  the  natives  of  Cook  River  eat  dried  Salmon.
According  to  Mackenzie,  Salmon  constitutes  almost  exclusively  the  food  of  the

*  'The  Primitive  Inhabitants  of  Scandinavia,'  by  Sven  Nilsson,  3rd  edit,  (edited  by  Sir  J.  Lubbock,
Bart.),  8vo,  1868,  p.  104.  t  See  above,  pp.  43  &c.


FISHING  DURING  THE  EEINDEER-PEEIOD.  221

Tribes  on  the  Mackenzie  and  the  rivers  Anah-yoe  and  Tacoutche.  It  is  the  same
in  California,  according  to  Mr.  Edward  F.  Chever  ("  The  Indians  of  California,"
'  American  Naturalist,'  vol.  iv.  no.  3,  May  1870,  pp.  138,  141),  and  in  Columbia
and  Vancouver,  according  to  Mr.  J.  K.  Lord  ('The  Naturalist  in  Vancouver's
Island  and  British  Columbia,'  2  vols.  8vo,  London  1866)  and  Mr.  Bogg  ("  The
Fishing  Indians  of  Vancouver's  Island,"  '  Memoirs  read  before  the  Anthropo-
logical Society  of  London,'  vol.  iii.  1870,  p.  260).

According  to  a  note  with  which  we  have  been  favoured  by  our  friend  M.  A.  Pinart,
who  also  has  traversed  these  little-known  regions,  the  Salmon  at  certain  seasons
of  the  year  is  so  common  in  the  Fraser  River  and  its  tributaries  that  there  is  no
need  of  fishing-implements ;  but  the  natives  stand  in  the  shallow  parts  of  the
river,  and  with  their  hands  throw  out  the  fish  to  the  banks,  where  the  women
dispatch  them.

Mr.  Lord  reports  the  same  fact  thus  : — "  Quoting  from  Dr.  Scouler,  '  Obser-
vatory Inlet  (which  I  should  imagine  to  be  just  such  an  inlet  as  Puget's  Sound)
was  frequented  at  the  time  by  such  myriads  of  the  Salmon  that  a  stone  could  not
have  reached  the  bottom  without  touching  several  individuals,  their  abundance
surpassing  imagination  to  conceive.'  He  goes  on  to  say  that  in  a  little  brook
they  killed  sixty  with  their  boarding-pikes "  ('  Naturalist  in  Vancouver '  &c.,
p.  56).  Lord  himself  states  that  "Thirty  Salmon  an  hour  is  not  an  unusual  take
for  two  skilled  Indians  to  land  on  a  stage,"  with  their  hoop-nets  (op.  cit.  p.  69).

These  Salmon,  so  abundant  in  North-west  America,  belong  to  several  species —
at  least  in  Vancouver  and  British  Columbia.  At  Victoria  in  June  and  July  great
numbers  of  Salmo  quinnat  of  Richardson  arrive,  and  another  species  (S.  Gaird-
neri  of  Richardson)  at  the  same  time.  These  are  the  summer  Salmon ;  but  the
autumn  has  its  Salmon  almost  as  plentiful,  though  not  equal  in  quality.  A  little
after  S.  Gairdneri  comes  S.  paucidens,  Richardson ;  in  October  the  S.  lycaodon
of  Pallas ;  and  last  of  all  S.  proteus,  Pallas.

Unfortunately  we  have  no  materials  for  the  study  and  comparison  of  the  osteo-
logy of  these  different  Salmons ;  hence  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  refer  any  of  the
Salmon-bones  found  in  the  Reindeer  Caves  to  one  rather  than  another  of  these
species.  Indeed  we  have  been  unable  to  recognize  any  difference  between  the
Salmon  vertebrae  from  the  Caves  and  those  of  the  living  Salmo  solar,  Linne,
although  we  have  taken  care  to  compare  vertebrae  from  the  same  region  and  of
the  same  size,  derived  from  individuals  presumably  of  the  same  age.

We  know  that  the  Salmon  has  a  very  wide  geographical  distribution,  the  same
species  being  met  with  in  Scandinavia,  Russia,  Germany,  France,  Galicia,  Britain,

2n


222  KELIQTTLE  AQUITAN1CJE.

Iceland,  and  in  North  America,  according  to  Mitchell,  Storer,  Hichardson,  Dekay,
Giinther,  and  other  naturalists ;  the  Salmon  reaching  very  high  latitudes.

The  Mammalian  Fauna  of  the  Reindeer  Age  is  that  of  the  boreal  regions  of
to-day ;  the  Birds  killed  hy  the  Cave-dwellers  of  Pe'rigord  are  the  Birds  of  this
region ;  the  Shells  they  used  for  ornament,  obtained  from  the  shores  of  the
Atlantic  and  Mediterranean,  are  such  as  live  there  still.  It  is  therefore  highly
probable,  not  to  say  certain,  that  the  existing  Salmo  salar  was  the  common
Salmon  of  the  Dordogne,  affording  food  to  the  Cave-dwellers  of  the  Ve"zere.

Two  of  the  Salmon  tribe  were  caught  by  these  people — one  the  Salmon,  and
the  other  a  smaller  fish,  a  Trout,  doubtless  the  Common  Trout  (Salmo  fario  or
Truttafario).  This  species,  common  in  Scandinavia,  Iceland,  Scotland,  England,
Ireland,  Germany,  and  France,  is  far  less  abundantly  distributed  among  the
hearth-stuffs  of  the  Caves  than  the  Salmon,  though  we  have  seen  numerous  ver-
tebrae from  the  Stations  of  La  Madelaine,  Laugerie  Basse,  Bruniquel,  Gourdan,
La  Vache-noire,  &c.

The  habits  of  the  Salmon  explain,  perhaps,  how  it  is  that  this  fish  is  found  in
certain  Stations  of  the  "  Reindeer  Age,"  though  wanting  in  others — namely,
because  the  Salmon  ascends  only  rivers  with  calcareous  beds,  and  it  appears  that
they  avoid  those  flowing  on  granite  or  the  old  rocks.  In  North  America  the
Salmon  have  the  same  habits ;  and  according  to  Mackenzie  the  river  Anah-yoe,
abounding  with  Salmon,  runs  on  limestone.

It  is  thought  pretty  generally  that  the  Man  of  the  "Reindeer  Age"  was
stationary — there  being  found,  among  the  debris  of  their  cooking,  accumulated  in
the  caves  and  shelters  where  they  lived,  bones  of  Fawns  and  Deer  of  all  ages.
According  to  M.  E.  Piette,  however,  who  has  studied  with  great  care  the  Cave  of
Gourdan  in  the  Pyrenees,  this  simply  proves  that  they  did  not  come  here  to
reside  for  a  fixed  period ;  they  came  there  to  lodge  at  one  season  or  another
indifferently,  coming  and  going  according  to  the  quantity  of  game  at  hand
('  Bulletin  de  la  Societe  d'Anthropologie  de  Paris,'  2e  se"r.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  413  &c.,
1874;  and  'MateViaux'  &c.,  2e  se*r.,  vol.  v.  pp.  53  &c.).

It  is  now  an  accepted  fact,  it  seems,  that  the  people  of  the  Reindeer  Age  were
migratory.  We  might  perhaps  suppose  that  the  shells  from  the  Mediterranean
and  the  Atlantic,  with  which  they  loved  to  decorate  themselves,  were  procured
by  exchange;  but  we  cannot  deny  that  these  people  had  themselves  seen  the
marine  animals,  figures  of  which  they  engraved,  very  often  with  a  scrupulous
exactness,  as  if  the  animal  had  been  drawn  from  nature.  M.  Piette,  among  the
objects  collected  by  him  in  the  Cave  of  Gourdan,  has  one  representing  a  Seal ;


FISHING  DUKING  THE  REINDEER-PEEIOD.


223


nor  can  we  mistake  the  accurate  reproduction  of  this  mammal  on  a  Bear's  tooth
(fig.  84)  from  the  Duruthy  Cave,  near  Sorde,  excavated  by  MM.  Louis  Lartet  and
Chaplain  Duparc*.

Fig.  84.

Outline  of  a  Seal  on  a  Bear's  Tooth  from  the  Duruthy  Cave :  collected  by  M¥.  Lartet  and  Duparc.


It  is  possible  also  that,  like  the  North-American  Indians,  the  Cave-folk  of
Southern  France  would  migrate  in  search  of  Salmon.  Mr.  Lordf  tells  us  that
about  three  weeks  before  the  arrival  of  Salmon  the  Indians  of  Vancouver  and
British  Columbia  begin  to  collect  together  from  all  sides,  with  their  wives,
children,  dogs,  horses,  lodges,  weapons,  and  skins,  under  the  guidance  of  a  chief,
who  directs  the  fishing,  and  divides  the  products  amongst  the  tribe.

It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  among  the  numerous  Salmon-remains  from  the
Caves,  which  we  have  examined,  we  have  not  met  with  an  entire  skeleton,  having
seen  only  portions  of  the  vertebral  column,  as  if  only  the  edible  portions  were
taken  home  to  the  Caves.  The  bones  of  the  head  of  the  Salmon,  had  they  been
there,  would  have  been  as  well  preserved  as  those  of  the  small  Cyprinoids  which
we  find  in  the  same  deposits.  These  Cyprinoids,  on  the  contrary,  which  consti-
tuted what  we  may  call  the  every-day  fishing  of  the  Aborigines,  are  recognized
in  all  parts  of  their  skeleton.  They  were  evidently  caught  near  the  abode,  and
furnished  fresh  food  ;  whilst  the  Salmon  went  to  form  a  food-reserve.

The  northern  people  sometimes  take  Salmon,  their  principal  food,  at  the  rocks
and  dams  of  the  Salmon-leaps ;  sometimes  they  use  harpoons.  Some  of  the  bone
Harpoons  barbed  on  one  or  both  edges,  found  in  the  Caves  of  Pe"rigord  ('  Reliq.
Aquit.'  B.  Plates  I.,  VI.,  XIV.,  XXII.,  XXVII.,  and  XXIX.),  may  well  have  served
in  fishing  for  Salmon  and  Pike.  That  the  latter  was  caught  by  the  Aborigines  of
the  Reindeer-Period  we  know  by  the  remains  found  in  the  Caverns  of  the  Ve*zere

*  See  also  '  Materiaux  pour  1'Histoire  de  rHomme '  &c.,  2e  ser.  vol.  v.  p.  143,  fig.  38.       t  L.  c.  pp.  71  &  72.


224


EELIQTJI^E  AQTJITAJSTKLE.


(Laugerie  Basse  and  La  Madelaine),  and  in  those  of  the  Pyrenees  (Bagneres  de
Bigorre,  La  Vache,  and  Gourdan).  The  ancient  people  of  this  part  of  Prance
have  also  figured  this  Fish,  as  shown  on  an  engraved  Bear's  tooth*  (fig.  85),

Fig.  85.

Outline  of  a  Pike  on  a  Bear's  tooth,  from  the  Duruthy  Cave,  near  Sorde :   collected  by  MM.  Lartet  and

Chaplain  Duparc.


discovered  by  MM.  Louis  Lartet  and  Chaplain  Duparc  in  the  Duruthy  Cave,  near
Sorde.

The  Pike  (Esox  lucius)  appears  to  have  been  less  used  for  food  than  the  Salmon
by  the  Aborigines.  Common  throughout  Europe,  from  Scandinavia  to  Turkey,
Northern  Asia,  and  North  America,  and  frequenting  turbaries  and  marshes  espe-
cially, the  Pike  attains  a  large  development  in  cold  countries ;  and  its  habitat
doubtless  explains  why  it  is  somewhat  rare  in  the  Caverns  of  South  France,
situated  on  the  great  rivers ;  whilst  it  is  met  with  more  frequently  in  Stations  of
later  age,  generally  established  near  marshy  districts.

Together  with  the  Salmon  and  the  Pike  some  other  Fishes  were  taken  by  the
Cave-dwellers  of  Pe"rigord.  We  have  found  in  their  hearth-stuffs  the  remains  of
the  White  Bream  (Abramis  Uicca),  now  common  in  Holland,  England,  France,
and  Germany ;  also  remains  of  the  Bream  or  Carpbream  (A.  brama),  which  lives
in  Sweden  and  as  far  as  the  Pyrenees,  of  the  Dace  (Squaliiis  leuciscus),  now
distributed  from  the  north  of  Europe  to  the  Pyrenees,  and  of  the  Chub  (S.  cephalus),
which  has  the  same  range.  The  Aborigines  figured  also  some  of  these  Fishes.
There  can  be  no  mistaking  a  Cyprinoid  in  the  Fish  outlined  on  a  piece  of  antler,
from  La  Madelaine,  in  B.Plate  II.  fig.  1,  thus  described  above,  at  page  13  : —
"A  cylindrical  piece  of  Reindeer  Horn,  on  which  are  carved  two  outlines  of
Fishes,  one  on  each  side.  In  the  figure  here  given  the  form  of  the  head,  the
shape  of  the  gills,  an  obscure  indication  of  the  back-fin,  and  the  proportions  and
general  appearance  permit  us  to  refer  this  Fish  to  one  of  the  freshwater  kind,
probably  of  the  Cyprinoid  (Carp)  family Similarly  engraved  pieces  of  bone,

*  See  also  '  Materiaux  pour  PHistoire '  &c.,  torn.  cit.  p.  142,  fig.  37.


FISHING  DURING  THE  EEINDEER-PEEIOD.


225


bearing  figures  of  Fishes,  are  worn  (we  are  told  by  Mr.  Francis  Poole)  by  some  of
the  Indians,  of  North-west  America  as  Charms,  when  sailing  across  Queen
Charlotte's  Sound."  We  can  add  that  we  have  seen  similar  specimens  in  the
collection  brought  home  from  Alaska  by  M.  Alphonse  Pinart.

An  outline  of  a  Fish  engraved  on  a  Reindeer  jawbone,  from  Laugerie  Basse,
and  in  M.  de  Vibraye's  collection,  seems  referable  to  a  Squalius,  as  shown  in  the
annexed  woodcut  (fig.  86).

Fig.  86.

Outline  of  a  Fish  (Squalius)  engraved  on  a  Reindeer  Jaw,  from  Laugerie  Basse.     In  the  Collection  of  the

Marquis  de  Yibraye.


Several  figures,  on  bone,  from  the  Caves  represent  an  Eel-like  animal,  either
a  Snake  or  an  Eel.  "We  think  it  rather  improbable  that  it  is  the  latter  animal
which  the  primitive  artists  wished  to  figure ;  for  they  would  have  indicated,  with
their  usual  exactness,  the  fins  of  this  Fish ;  nor  have  we  recognized  its  bones
among  the  debris  of  the  habitations  of  these  people.

To  resume,  the  Salmon  appears  to  have  been  of  great,  importance  as  food  with
the  Cave-dwellers  of  Perigord,  and  it  is  probable  that  they  migrated  in  search
of  this  Fish ;  whilst  in  their  every-day  fishing  they  caught  Trout,  Pike,  Bream,
White  Bream,  Dace,  and  Chub.

[NOTE. — For  some  remarks  on  the  Art  of  Fishing  among  Prehistoric  People,
see  M.  G.  de  Mortillet's  memoir  '  Origine  de  la  Navigation  et  de  la  Peche,'  8vo
(pp.  48) :  Paris,  1867.— EDITOR.]


2i


226  KELIQULE  AQUITANKLE.


xxm.

OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  BIRDS  WHOSE  BONES  HAVE  BEEN  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVES  OF
THE  SOUTH-WEST  OF  FRANCE.  By  M.  ALPHONSE  MILNE-EDWABDS,  1I.D.  &c.  &c.,  Jardin  des
Plantes,  Paris.

THE  number  of  the  species  of  Birds  the  remains  of  which  have  been  found  in  the
Caves  of  the  South-west  of  France  is  very  considerable,  especially  when  compared
with  that  of  the  Mammalia  from  the  same  beds.  Many  of  these  birds  have  been
brought  thither  by  Man  to  serve  for  his  sustenance ;  other  species  probably  inha-
bited those  caves,  or  sought  shelter  there  during  the  day;  others  may  have
been  carried  there  by  currents  of  water ;  but  these  last  are  certainly  few.

In  order  to  account  satisfactorily  for  the  character  presented  by  the  ornithic
fauna  of  the  Caves  of  the  Aquitanian  region,  it  is  necessary  not  only  to  draw  up
the  list  of  the  species  which  have  been  discovered  there,  but  also  to  indicate  the
relative  abundance  of  the  bones  of  each ;  for  one  bird  may  be  represented  only
by  a  single  piece  of  the  skeleton,  while  others  will  have  left  hundreds  of  remains.
This  study  may  supply  valuable  information :  it  shows  us  that  certain  species  were
evidently  sought  for  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  Caves ;  for  their  bones  abound,  and
the  delicacy  of  their  flesh  well  justifies  the  pursuit  to  which  they  were  exposed.

It  is  equally  useful  to  examine  particularly  the  fauna  of  each  of  the  Stations
where  excavations  have  been  made ;  for  some  of  them  present  a  special  character.
I  shall  therefore,  first,  point  out,  in  zoological  order,  which  are  the  Birds  whose
presence  I  have  been  able  to  recognize  in  the  Caves  of  Ancient  Aquitania ;  and
then,  passing  in  review  successively  each  of  the  Stations  explored,  I  shall  specify
what  species  have  been  found  there.

ACCIPITKES  DIURNI.

1.  THE  TAWNY  EAGLE.   Falcofu Ivus,  Linn.;  Aquilaftilua,Savigny. — L' Aigle  fauve.

This  species  is  everywhere  rare  in  the  Caves.  That  of  La  Madelaine  (Dor-
dogne),  explored  in  1863  by  MM.  Lartet  and  Christy,  has  furnished  us  with
the  remains  of  only  one  individual;  these  consist  of  two  femora,  one  ulna,  a
metacarpal,  and  several  ungual  phalanges.  All  these  bones  are  more  or  less
broken ;  and  the  ulna  bears  traces  of  the  teeth  of  small  Carnivores.  The  osseous


BIED-BONES  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVES.  227

tissue  of  the  metacarpal  is  altered  in  places,  and  presents  in  the  carpal  region
such  exostoses  as  those  resulting  from  violent  contusions.     The  bones  are  smaller

o

than  those  of  Aquila  imperialis,  Bechstein,  and  are  also  distinguished  from  them
by  their  less  squat  forms,  and  less  prominent  muscular  ridges.

In  the  Station  of  Bruniquel  an  ulna  and  several  digital  phalanges  were  found,
which  appear  to  belong  to  the  same  species.  Other  phalanges  come  from  the
Moustier  Cave  and  from  that  of  Lacombe-Tayac  (Dordogne);  and,  lastly,  a  frag-
ment of  a  sternum  was  discovered  in  the  Gourdan  Cave,  near  Montrejeau  (Haute
Garonne),  by  M.  Piette ;  but  it  is-  impossible  to  be  certain  if  these  last  belonged
to  the  Tawny  Eagle  or  to  an  allied  species,  such  as  the  Imperial  or  the  Golden
Eagle :  the  materials  for  the  determination  are  wanting.  The  Tawny  Eagle  is
not  commonly  seen  in  Perigord :  it  is  common  and  remains  throughout  the  year
in  the  Alps,  but  it  is  rare  in  the  Pyrenees.

2.  THE  SCBEA.MING  EAGLE.     Aquila  clanga,  Pallas  ? — L'Aigle  criard.

To  this  species,  I  think,  should  be  referred  a  nearly  perfect  leg-bone  found  in
the  Cave  at  Massat  (Ariege).  I  hesitated  much  for  a  long  time  about  the  iden-
tification of  this  tarso-metatarse,  the  length  of  which  is  about  the  same  as  in
Aquila  fulva ;  but  the  proportions  are  different,  the  bone  being  more  slender,  and
narrower  at  the  articular  extremities.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  stouter  than  that
of  the  Spotted  Eagle  (Aquila  ncevia  of  Brisson),  and  even  than  that  of  the  Barred-
tailed  Eagle  (A.fasciata,  Vieillot).  But  having  recently  procured  the  skeleton  of
the  Screaming  Eagle,  I  found  that  the  leg-bone  of  the  female  of  this  bird  had
almost  exactly  the  same  dimensions  as  our  fossil ;  I  am  therefore  led  to  believe
that  the  bird  of  the  Massat  Cave  differed  in  nothing  from  A.  clanga.  At  the
present  day  the  latter  does  not  show  itself  in  France,  but  is  met  with  in  Poland
and  Germany ;  and  it  is  common  in  Southern  Russia  and  the  adjacent  parts  of
Asia,  where  it  prefers  to  remain  in  the  vicinity  of  rivers,  lakes,  and  marshes.

A  humerus  found  by  M.  E.  Lartet  in  1860,  in  the  celebrated  Human  Station  of
Aurignac  (Haute  Garonne),  seems  to  me  to  have  belonged  to  the  same  species.

3.  THE  COMMON  SEA-EAGLE.    Fkiltur  albicilla,  Linne" ;  Haliceetus  albicilla,  Leach.

— Le  Pygargue  ordinaire.

The  only  bones  of  this  Bird  which  I  have  ever  been  able  to  study  came  from  the
Cave  at  Gourdan,  where  they  had  been  found  by  M.  Piette.  The  researches  made
in  the  lakes  of  Switzerland  have  led  to  the  discovery  of  a  number  of  remains  of
the  Sea-Eagle ;  but  until  now  the  presence  of  that  bird  had  not  been  noted  in  the

2i2


228  KELIQULE  AQUITANIOE.

ossiferous  caves.  This  species,  however,  is  not  rare  in  Prance;  thus  it  is  often
seen  on  the  coasts  of  the  Channel,  where  it  is  in  passage  in  autumn.  It  is  more
common  in  all  parts  of  Russia  and  in  Northern  Asia.

4.  THE  COMMON  BUZZARD.     Falco  vulgaris,  Linne ;   Buteo  vulgaris,  Bechst. — Le

Bute  vulgaire.

The  deposit  at  Aurignac  likewise  furnished  to  M.  E.  Lartet  a  tibia  of  a  Bird  of
prey  which  I  have  determined  as  having  belonged  to  a  Buzzard  of  large  size.  At
that  time  I  said : — "  Although  in  size  this  lower  extremity  of  the  tibia  exceeds
the  ordinary  dimensions  in  most  of  the  individuals  of  this  species  which  I  have
had  the  opportunity  of  examining,  the  osteological  characters  are  identical,  so
that  it  appears  to  me  impossible  to  attribute  this  fossil  to  any  other  specific  type
than  that  at  present  living  in  Europe"*.

I  have  since  been  able  to  compare  this  bone  with  those  of  a  very  great  number
of  individuals  of  the  same  species,  and  have  found  in  adult  females  of  the  common
Buzzard  proportions  nearly  identical  with  those  of  the  Aurignac  fossil.

A  tibia  of  a  Buzzard  found  at  Bruniquel  presents  nothing  peculiar  in  its
dimensions;  and  some  ungual  phalanges  seem  also  to  belong  to  this  species.
I  have  likewise  recognized  its  presence  in  the  Cave  at  Gourdan.  Marcel  de
Serres  mentioned  this  bird  as  having  been  found  in  the  Caves  in  the  Department
of  the  Aude ;  but  that  author's  determinations  are  so  uncertain  that  it  is  impos-
sible to  accept  them  uncontrolled.

5.  THE  COMMON  FALCON.     Falco  communis,  Gmelin. — Le  Faucon  ordinaire.

The  Family  of  the  Falcons  is  represented  in  the  Caves  of  Aquitania  by  three
species ;  but  up  to  the  present  moment  the  large  Falcons  of  the  north  have  not
been  seen  there.  Thus  no  trace  has  been  found  of  the  presence  in  France,  at
that  period,  of  the  White  Gerfalcon,  of  the  Iceland  Gerfalcon,  or  of  that  of
Norway.  The  common  Falcon  has  not  left  numerous  remains ;  and  hitherto  I
have  only  seen  one  humerus  of  this  bird,  from  the  Cave  at  Lacombe-Tayac.

6.  THE  HOBBY.     Falco  subbuteo,  Linne. — Le  Faucon  hobereau.

M.  Piette  found,  in  the  diggings  he  made  in  the  Cave  of  Gourdan,  a  humerus
of  a  Falcon  smaller  than  that  of  the  common  Falcon,  but  larger  than  that  of  the
Kestrel  (F.  tinnunculus).  When  studying  for  the  first  time  this  bone,  I  could  not
refer  it  to  any  species  living  since  that  epoch ;  but  I  have  lately  compared  it  with
its  analogue  in  F.  subbuteo,  and  find  that  it  presents  all  the  characters  peculiar  to

*  Rccherches  pour  servir  a  1'histoire  des  Oiseaux  fossilcs,  tome  ii.  p.  470,  pi.  187.  figs.  8-10.


BIKD-BONES  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVES.  229

the  humerus  of  the  females  of  this  species,  the  size  of  which  is  always  a  little
larger  than  that  of  the  males.  M.  Lartet  also  collected  at  Massat  another  arm-
bone  of  a  Falcon  which  I  think  can  be  identified  with  this  species.  The  Hobby
now  inhabits  all  Europe,  a  part  of  Asia,  and  the  north  of  Africa.  It  is  rather
common  in  the  north  of  France  and  in  Germany.

7.  THE  KESTREL.     Falco  tinnunculus,  Linne". — Le  Faucon  cresserelle.

Of  all  the  Birds  of  prey  the  Kestrel  is  the  most  common  in  France,  where  it
nests  in  holes  in  the  rocks,  and  sometimes  even  on  trees ;  it  is  also  the  Hawk
whose  bones  have  been  most  frequently  found  in  the  Caves.  That  at  Lacombe-Tayac
has  furnished  some  remains  of  it,  especially  a  tarso-metatarsal  and  several  humeri.
Several  tibias  and  some  ulnas  were  collected  at  Bruniquel ;  a  leg-bone  was  found
in  the  Grotte  des  Demoiselles  (Dordogne) :  this  bone  is  a  little  larger  than  usual,
but  in  other  respects  presents  all  the  characters  proper  to  Falco  tinnuncnlus.
I  should  also  mention  a  tibia  from  the  Cave  of  Gourdan.  I  have  likewise  ascer-
tained the  presence  of  this  species  in  the  Cave  at  Verezzi  in  Liguria* ;  but  together
with  it  was  found  the  Falco  cenchris,  Naum.,  the  existence  of  which  has  never
been  noticed  in  the  Caves  of  the  South-west  of  France.

8.  THE  ROYAL  KITE.     Falco  milvus,  Linne;  Milmis  regalis,  Brisson. — Le  Milan

royal.

A  humerus  from  the  Station  of  Aurignac  is  the  only  relic  of  this  Bird  which
has  hitherto  been  found  in  the  prehistoric  deposits,  either  in  France  or  in  other
countriesf.  The  Royal  Kite  is  nevertheless  far  from  rare  in  the  South-west  of
France,  principally  in  the  Department  of  Landes,  where  it  is  a  constant  resident.

9.  THE  BEARDED  VULTURE.     Vultur  barbatus,  Linne";    Gypaiitus  barbatm,  Tem-

minck. — La  Gypaete  barbu.

A  fragment  of  the  upper  mandible  of  this  species  was  found  in  the  Cave  at
Lacombe-Tayac.  This  part  is  so  well  characterized  in  the  Gypaetus  that  there
can  be  no  uncertainty  about  its  determination ;  I  have  given  a  figure  of  it  in  my
work  on  Fossil  Birds  {.

An  ulna  and  a  humerus  collected  at  Bruniquel  belong  to  this  same  species,
which  nowadays  lives  in  the  Pyrenees  as  well  as  in  the  Alps,  in  the  north  of
Africa,  and  extends  even  into  Asia  as  far  as  the  chain  of  the  Himalayas.

*  Ramorino,  "  Sopra  le  Caverne  di  Liguria,"  Atti  dell'  Accademia  delle  Soiecze  di  Torino,  Ser.  3,  t.  xxiv.
p.  29.  f  See  A.  Milne-Edwards,  op.  cit.  t.  ii.  p.  472,  pi.  187.  figs.  16, 17.  t  Op.  cit.  pi.  188.  figs.  1-3.


230  RELIQUIAE  AQUITANICS.

10.  THE  VULTURE.     Vultur  monachtts,  Linn.  ? — Le  Vautour.

I  have  been  able  to  recognize  the  bones  of  the  Vulture  in  several  ossiferous
caves : — at  La  Madelaine,  upon  the  banks  of  the  V£zere,  3  imperfect  ulnas ;  at
Lacombe-Tayac,  1  metacarpal ;  at  the  Gorge  d'Enfer  (Dordogne)  and  at  Gourdan,
1  ulna.  Other  wing-bones  of  very  large  size  come  from  Aurignac.  From  the
condition  of  these  bones  it  seems  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  Caves  carefully
sought  after  them,  their  dimensions  being  considerable,  and  their  remarkable
pneumatic  state  permitting  them  to  be  easily  converted  into  pipes.  Indeed  the
ulnas  are  generally  broken  so  as  to  separate  the  articular  extremities ;  and  on
several  of  them  we  observe  outlines  or  regular  lines.  On  one  of  these  bones,  found
at  La  Madelaine,  is  seen  the  figure  of  an  animal  destitute  of  horns,  the  form  of
the  head  of  which  recalls  that  of  the  Horse.  The  hind  quarters  of  the  animal  are
wanting,  the  bone  being  broken  in  front  of  the  hind  legs.  On  the  opposite  surface
there  is  a  straight  and  deep  furrow  extending  the  whole  length  of  the  bone.  On
another  ulna,  of  which  I  have  only  the  upper  portion,  it  seems  that  the  artist  in-
tended to  engrave  an  arrow-head  or  a  barbed  lance-head  similar  to  those  found  in
the  same  beds,  some  of  which  have  been  figured  in  this  work  * ;  on  the  other  side
are  a  great  number  of  lines  of  more  or  less  depth,  the  signification  of  which  it  is
difficult  to  guess.  On  a  third  ulna,  also  from  La  Madelaine,  there  are  numerous
furrows  produced  by  means  of  an  extremely  sharp  flint ;  these  are  short,  crowded,
and  all  arranged  on  the  inner  surface  and  following  the  length  of  the  bone ;  those
nearest  the  carpal  extremity  are  larger  and  deeper  than  the  others.  This  bone
bears  also  the  marks  of  the  teeth  of  Rodents.

All  these  bones  seem,  by  their  size  and  strength,  to  belong  to  Vultur  monachm
rather  than  to  V.fulvus ;  nevertheless,  in  order  to  fully  establish  their  determina-
tion, it  would  be  useful  to  examine  more  perfect  specimens  than  those  which  I  have
had  at  my  disposal.

ACCIPITRES  NOCTUENI.

11.  THE  EAGLE  OWL.    Stria:  bubo,  Linne" ;  Bubo  maximus,  Plem. — Le  Grand-due.
This  species,  already  noticed  in  the  Departement  de  1' Aude  by  Marcel  de  Serres,

and  in  the  Cave  at  Verezzi,  has  also  been  found  in  the  Cave  at  Gourdan.

12.  THE  SHORT-EARED  OWL.     Strix  brachyotiis,  Linne ;   Otus  brachyotus,  Boie. —

Le  Hibou  brachyote.
It  is  only  in  the  Shelter  of  Bruniquel  that  a  bone  (a  tars  -  metatarsal)  of  this

Bird  has  been  found.

*  See  B.  Plate  XIV.  figs.  3  &  6.


BIRD-BONES  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVES.  231

13.  THE  COMMON  BARN-OWL.     Strix  fiammea,  Linne". — L'Effraye  commune.

The  presence  of  this  species  at  Bruniquel  is  indicated  by  a  tarso-metatarsal  bone
and  by  a  humerus.  They  are  the  only  proofs  we  possess  of  the  presence  at  that
epoch  of  an  Owl  which  is  nevertheless  now  so  common  in  France.

14.  THE  COMMON  SPARROW-OWL.     Noctua  minor,  Brisson. — La  Cheve'che.

M.  P.  Gervais  had  already  recognized  some  bones  of  this  species  in  the  Cave  at
La  Tour  de  Farges,  not  far  from  that  of  Lunel  Vieil*.  I  again  found  this  same
Owl  in  the  Cave  of  Verezzi  in  Liguriaf,  and  at  Bruniquel,  where  a  tibia  and  a
tarso-metatarsal  were  collected  in  a  good  state  of  preservation.

15.  THE  LITTLE  SPARROW-OWL.     Strix  passer ina,  Linne ;  Glaucidium  passerimim,

Boie. — La  Chevechette.

M.  Lartet  forwarded  to  me,  a  little  before  his  death,  a  very  small  tarso-meta-
tarsal found  by  him  at  Aurignac.  This  bone  appears  to  me  to  have  come  from
Glaucidium  passerinum%.  It  is  very  different  from  its  analogue  in  the  Scops  Owl
and  the  Sparrow-Owl ;  it  is  much  shorter  and  more  expanded,  not  merely  in  its
articular  portions,  but  also  in  its  diaphysary  part.  By  its  proportions  it  approxi-
mates very  nearly  to  the  tarso-metatarsal  of  Glaucidium  phalcenoides,  a  small  Owl
found  in  the  Antilles,  but  it  is  still  broader.

Glaucidium  passerinum  is  now  common  in  the  cold  regions  of  the  Old  Conti-
nent ;  in  Norway  it  is  found  in  the  Conifer-woods,  where  it  feeds  chiefly  on  small
Rodents,  and,  in  case  of  need,  on  Bats  and  small  Birds.

Schrenck,  and  afterwards  Radde,  met  with  it  in  Siberia.  It  has  been  noticed
also  in  Poland  and  Lithuania ;  but  it  is  rare  and  has  only  accidentally  been  seen
in  Germany.  Yet  it  appears  sometimes  to  wander  further  southward,  especially
following  woods  of  the  large  mountain-chains;  thus  it  has  been  met  with  in
Savoy  and  Switzerland.  The  Little  Sparrow-Owl,  therefore,  at  the  present  day
may  be  regarded  as  an  arctic  species ;  and  its  presence  in  the  Caves,  where  the
remains  of  the  Reindeer  are  accumulated,  is  another  fact  to  be  added  to  the  list
of  proofs  of  a  low  temperature  at  that  period.

16.  THE  SNOWY  OWL.     Nyctea  nivea,  Bonap. ;  Strix  nyctea,  Linne". — Le  Harfang.

The  remains  of  this  species  are  met  with  in  abundance  in  most  of  the  Caves  in
the  South-west  of  France;  and  it  is  certainly  one  of  the  most  interesting  that

*  Zoologie  et  Paleontologie  fran§aise,  2nd  edit.  p.  419.  t  Ramorino,  op.  cit.  p.  29.

J  Strix  passerina,  Linne,  Systeme  Naturel  (1766),  t.  i.  p.  133.


232  RELIQULE  AQUITANICLE.

have  hitherto  been  remarked  there.  It  no  longer  belongs  to  our  fauna,  but  is
banished  to  the  coldest  regions,  not  only  of  Europe,  but  of  America ;  it  has  there-
fore followed  the  Reindeer  in  its  successive  migrations ;  and,  like  that  Mammal,
its  presence  in  France  may  be  considered  a  sure  indication  of  a  relatively  very
low  temperature  at  the  period  of  its  living  there.

In  Norway  the  Harfang  is  not  rare,  and  the  number  of  individuals  seems  to  be
in  relation  to  that  of  the  Lemmings.  Mr.  Dresser,  in  his  excellent  '  History  of
the  Birds  of  Europe,'  gives  us  some  interesting  information  on  this  subject,  for
which  he  was  indebted  to  Mr.  Collett  of  Christiania : — "  In  the  summer  and
autumn  of  1872,  immense  numbers  of  Lemmings  (Myodes  lemmus)  migrated  south
and  north  from  the  Dovrefjeld  and  its  ramifications,  also  from  the  fells  in  Sondre
Throndhjems  Amt,  whence  they  made  their  way  along  the  frontier  towards  Jemt-
land  in  Sweden.  In  these  localities  the  number  of  Snowy  Owls  was  observed
gradually  to  increase,  becoming  in  the  course  of  the  summer  much  greater  than
had  been  the  case  even  of  late  years  under  similar  circumstances  "*.

In  the  north  of  Sweden  and  in  Lapland  the  Snowy  Owl  is  less  common,  although
frequently  met  with.

In  Siberia,  Middendorff  mentions  it  among  the  birds  which  are  not  rare.
Schrenck  found  it  further  southward,  in  the  valley  of  the  Amoor,  but  only  in
winter ;  and  Radde  assures  us  that  during  that  season  it  extends  into  Mongolia.
In  these  different  localities  it  feeds  principally  on  Lagomys  ogotoma.

In  North  America  it  abounds,  and  remains  there  throughout  the  year  within
the  coldest  regions.  According  to  Mr.  Elliott  Coues,  it  frequents  the  parts  which
are  destitute  of  forests,  where,  just  as  in  Norway,  its  food  consists  principally  of
Lemmings,  which  it  hunts  in  the  daytime  as  well  as  in  the  evening.

In  Greenland  it  is  more  common  in  the  north  than  in  the  south ;  it  is  rare  in
Spitzbergen,  as  well  as  in  Iceland.

The  Arctic  regions,  then,  may  be  regarded  as  the  present  home  of  the  Harfang ;
but  it  sometimes  appears  outside  those  limits,  though  in  an  irregular  manner.
Thus,  during  the  winter,  it  is  sometimes  seen  in  Poland,  the  north  of  Germany,
and  even  in  Bohemia.  It  appears  almost  every  year  in  Denmark.  Lastly,  from
time  to  time  stray  individuals  have  been  noted  in  Holland,  in  the  British  Isles,
and  even  in  France,  where,  Degland  informs  us,  a  young  one  was  killed  near
Abbeville.  But  these  isolated  cases  must  be  considered  accidental;  they  are
birds  that  have  lost  their  way,  having  removed  further  and  further,  during  severe
winters,  from  their  usual  habitat.

*  A  History  of  the  Birds  of  Europe,  Part  xxiii.  <fe  xxiv. :   Nyctea  scandiaca,  p.  9.


B1ED-BONES  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVES.  233

On  the  contrary,  at  the  epoch  of  the  filling  of  the  Caves,  the  Harfang  was  one
of  the  commonest  species  in  France;  it  must  have  found  there  the  biological
conditions,  hoth  of  climate  and  food,  which  are  necessary  for  it  to-day.  Rodents,
therefore,  were  probably  present;  we  know,  however,  that  it  eats  also  some
Birds,  especially  Ptarmigan.  At  Spitzbergen,  where  Rodents  are  wanting,  the
Snowy  Owls  subsist  on  Lagopus  hemileucurus.  Now  it  is  known  that  species  of
the  latter  genus  were  formerly  very  numerous  in  France ;  and  they  may  have
served  as  food  for  Nyctea  nivea.

In  the  Cave  of  Les  Eyzies  nearly  all  the  parts  of  the  skeleton  of  these  birds  have
been  found — among  others  a  tarso-metatarsal  bone  in  a  perfect  state  of  preserva-
tion. This  bone,  by  its  conformation,  would  alone  be  sufficient  for  the  rigorous
determination  of  the  Harfang.  The  ulnas,  on  account  of  their  solidity,  are  pretty
plentiful ;  I  have  counted  seven  of  the  same  side ;  on  one  of  them  a  deep  spiral
furrow  has  been  traced  with  a  flint.

The  Station  of  La  Madelaine  has  furnished  six  humeri,  two  tibias,  two  femurs,
several  coracoids,  and  a  few  ulnas.  In  that  of  Laugerie  Haute,  a  fragment  of  a
humerus  proves  the  existence  of  the  species ;  while  at  Lacombe-Tayac  no  remains
of  it  have  been  met  with ;  at  Bruniquel  an  arm-bone,  a  beak,  and  some  digital
phalanges  are  the  sole  indications  of  the  presence  of  this  bird.  At  Massat  the
number  of  Harfang  bones  is  small ;  I  have  seen  only  three  from  that  locality.
In  the  Cave  at  Lherm,  on  the  contrary,  M.  Filhol  has  found  them  in  abundance.
This  learned  naturalist  has  kindly  sent  me  the  specimens  he  collected  there ;  and
among  them  I  have  found  five  coracoids,  four  scapulas,  eight  humeri,  several
tibias,  and  other  bones,  such  as  ulnas,  femurs,  and  rnetacarpals.  At  Aurignac  a
single  humerus  has  been  discovered.  At  Gourdan  Nyctea  nivea  is  not  rare ;  I  have
recognized  several  bones  of  this  Bird  among  those  sent  me  by  M.  Piette.  The
Spanish  Caves  and  those  in  Liguria,  the  fossils  of  which  I  have  been  able  to
study,  contain  no  remains  of  the  Harfang ;  nevertheless  it  is  probable  that  some
exist  in  the  breccias  of  Sardinia*.

PASSERES.

17.  THE  RAVEN.     Corvus  corax,  Linne". — Le  Corbeau  ordinaire.

The  Raven  is  very  common  in  the  northern  countries,  in  Iceland  for  instance,
and  in  Northern  Asia;  but  it  inhabits  France  also,  and  breeds  there.  Its
presence  in  the  Caves  of  Perigord  is  not  surprising :  it  is,  however,  to  be

*  See  '  Recherches  pour  servir  a  PHistoire  des  Oiseaux  fossiles,'  t.  ii.  p.  501.

2K


234  EELIQTJI^;  AQTJITANKLE.

remarked  that  in  Ihese  it  is  always  rare.  At  La  Madelaine  a  humerus,  in  a  fair
state  of  preservation,  of  an  adult  individual  has  been  found.  I  have  recognized,
among  the  fossils  from  the  Station  of  Lacombe-Tayac,  two  other  humeri,  younger,
a  coracoid,  and  a  metatarsal ;  a  coracoid  was  found  at  Bruniquel.  In  the  Gourdan
Cave  also  some  remains  of  the  Raven  have  been  met  with.  And  M.  E.  Lartet  sent
me  a  coracoid  and  an  arm-bone  collected  by  him  at  Aurignac :  the  coracoid  pre-
sents nothing  peculiar ;  but  the  humerus  is  larger  than  any  of  those  of  the  same
species  which  I  have  seen.

18.  THE  CARKION-CROW.     Cormis  corone,  Linne. — La  Corneille.

I  have  found  this  species  in  the  Cave  at  Lourdes,  in  that  of  Aure,  and  in  the
Station  of  Lacombe-Tayac.

19.  THE  HOODED  CROW.     Corvus  comix,  Linne". — La  Corneille  mantele'e.

This  Bird  is  represented,  in  the  collection  made  by  M.  Piette  at  Gourdan,  by  a
humerus  and  a  portion  of  the  beak.  Cormts  comix  inhabits  in  preference  the
North  of  Europe  and  North  Asia.  In  winter  it  arrives  in  France,  proceeding  as
far  as  Languedoc,  Provence,  and  Dauphiny ;  but  it  is  rarely  seen  in  Perigord.

20.  THE  JACKDAW.     Corvus  monedula. — Le  Couchas.

The  Station  at  Le  Moustier,  on  the  banks  of  the  Vezere,  has  furnished  a  humerus
and  a  tibia — the  sole  indication  we  have  of  the  existence  of  this  species  at  the
time  of  the  infilling  of  the  Caves ;  and  the  circumstances  under  which  these
bones  were  found  do  not  permit  it  to  be  included  with  perfect  certainty  in  the
list  of  the  Birds  of  that  period ;  for  M.  E.  Lartet,  when  sending  the  bones  to  me,
stated  that  they  were  taken  from  no  great  depth,  in  company  with  numerous
remains  of  Rabbits  which  seemed  to  be  of  recent  date.  It  is  possible,  therefore,
that  their  burying  was  not  contemporaneous  with  that  of  the  remains  of  Elephas
primigenius  and  Hycena  spelcea  which  were  taken  from  the  cave-earth  of  the  same
Station.

21.  THE  ALPINE  CHOUGH.       Corvus  pyrrhocorax,  Linne ;    Pyrrhocorax  alpinus,

Vieillot. — Le  Chocard  des  Alpes.

The  remains  of  Pyrrhocorax  alpinus  are  very  common  in  the  Caves,  not  only  of
Perigord  and  the  Pyrenees,  but  also  of  the  South-east  of  France,  and  even  of
Italy.  For  a  long  time  they  were  confounded  with  those  of  the  Magpie  and  the
Jay.  Nevertheless  it  is  easy  to  distinguish  them ;  for  though  some  oi'  the  bones
are  similar  (the  ulnas  and  metacarpals  for  example),  the  tarso-metatarsal,  tibia,


BIRD-BONES  POUND  IN  THE  CAVES.  235

and  humerus  present  very  different  characters.  I  have  elsewhere*  pointed  out
the  peculiarities  hy  which  they  may  be  distinguished,  and  so  need  not  repeat
them  here.  The  Shelter  at  Lacombe  contains  many  bones  of  the  Chough ;
I  have  recognized  there  about  a  score  ulnas,  13  tibias,  4  femurs,  4  humeri,
5  metacarpals,  3  metatarsals,  and  2  coracoids.  At  Les  Eyzies  they  are  rarer;
I  have  seen  only  one  humerus  and  two  tarso-metatarsals.  It  is  the  same  in
the  Cave  of  1'Eglise  (Dordogne).  At  Bruniquel  M.  Pecado  collected  several  leg-
and  foot-bones.  At  Massat,  all  the  bones  determined  by  M.  Fontan  as  those  of
the  Magpie  and  the  Jay  belong  to  the  Chough ;  and  the  same  is  true  of  those
collected  by  M.  Puel  in  the  Cave  at  Breugues,  and  considered  by  that  explorer  to
be  those  of  the  Magpie.  Prom  the  Cave  at  Lherm  I  have  seen  but  few  remains
of  the  Chough ;  among  the  numerous  fossils  sent  me  by  M.  Pilhol  I  have  recog-
nized only  two  humeri  and  one  coracoid  of  this  Bird.  I  have  also  noticed  its
presence  in  the  Gourdan  Cavef,  and  at  Aure,  Lourdes,  and  La  Northe  (Bouches
du  Rhone).

The  Chough  is  not  rare,  at  the  present  day,  in  the  Alps  and  the  Pyrenees.  In
summer  it  remains  in  the  mountains,  but  in  winter  it  descends  to  the  plains.

22.  THE   CAVE-CHOUGH.      Pyrrtiocorax  primigenius,   n.  sp.  —  Le  Chocard  des
Cavernes.

Several  leg-bones,  found  in  the  Cave  at  Massat  (Ariege),  presenting  all  the
characters  peculiar  to  the  genus  Pyrrhocorax,  differ  from  those  of  the  Alpine
Chough  by  their  much  larger  dimensions.  They  cannot  be  mistaken  for  their
analogues  in  the  other  Corvidso,  because  the  osteological  peculiarities  are  in  this
genus  very  clearly  marked.  I  therefore  think  that  the  Bird  to  which  these  bones
belonged  must  here  be  recorded,  at  least  provisionally,  under  the  name  of  Pyrrho-
corax  primigenius.

23.  THE  CORNISH  CHOUGH.     Corvus  graculus,  Linne ;   Fregilus  graculus,  Cuvier.
— Le  Crave.

This  species  has  been  found  as  yet  only  at  Gourdan.

24.  THE  NUTCRACKER.      Corvus  cari/ocatactes,  Linne ;    Nucifraga  caryocatactes,

Temm. — Le  Caisse-noix.

I  have  recognized  several  foot-bones  of  this  Bird  in  the  Caves  at  Lacombe  and
Massat.  They  are  a  little  larger  than  those  of  the  common  Nutcracker;  but

*  Becherches  pour  servir  a  PHistoire  des  Oiseaux  fossiles,  tome  ii.  p.  401,  pi.  196.  figs.  1-10,  pis.  197,
149.  figs.  6-10.  t  Piette,  op.  cit.  p.  25.

2  K2


236  EELIQUI^E  AQTJTTANKLE.

we  know  that  individuals  of  this  species  inhabiting  Sweden  and  Lapland  are  gene-
rally of  a  larger  size  than  those  of  the  temperate  regions  of  Europe ;  Brehm  has
even  described  them  under  the  name  of  Nucifraga  brachyrhyncha.  They  have
the  beak  stronger  and  more  arched,  and  the  feet  more  robust.  It  is  possible  that
in  the  Reindeer  Period  the  Nutcracker  in  France  had  the  characters  of  those
which  now  live  in  Scandinavia  and  appear  to  constitute  a  well-defined  local  race.

25.  THE  MAGPIE.     Corvus  pica,  Linne" ;   Pica  caudata,  Linne. — La  Pie.

The  bones  of  this  species  are  not  met  with  in  the  most  ancient  Stations  of  the
Aquitanian  region ;  they  have  been  found  only  at  Lacombe-Tayac  and  Gourdan,
and  even  there  are  very  rare ;  I  have  seen  only  two  humeri.

26.  THE  CROSSBILL.     Loxia  curvirostra,  Linne". — Le  Bee  croise.

A  humerus,  a  coracoid,  and  a  tibia,  probably  belonging  to  the  same  individual,
have  been  collected  at  Massat  (Ariege).  This  Loxia  is  at  the  present  day  very
common  in  the  north  of  Europe,  and  even  in  Greenland,  but  it  is  a  bird  of  passage
in  France.

27.  THE  GREENFINCH.     Loxia  chloris,  L. ;  Ligurinus  chloris,  Koch. — Le  Verdier.

I  have  pointed  out  the  existence  of  this  species  in  the  Gourdan  Cave ;  but
M.  Piette,  who  had  extracted  it,  has  informed  me  that  he  found  it  in  a  fissure  of
the  rock  at  a  depth  of  only  70  centimetres  (2  feet  7'5  inches);  and  its  state  of
preservation  made  me  doubtful  of  its  antiquity.

28.  THE  SNOW-FINCH.     Fringilla  nivalis,  Brisson ;  Montifringilla  nivalis,  Brehm.
— La  Niverolle  des  neiges.

The  Stations  of  Bruniquel  and  Massat  contain  remains  which  I  regard  as
appertaining  to  this  species ;  they  consist  of  a  humerus,  a  tibia,  and  a  foot-bone.
It  is  interesting  to  find  the  Snow-Finch  in  the  beds  where  Lagopodes  also
abound;  for  in  the  present  day  it  lives  on  lofty  mountains  together  with  the
latter,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  snow,  and  only  accidentally  makes  its  appearance  in
the  centre  and  south  of  France  at  a  distance  from  the  chain  of  the  Pyrenees.

29.  THE  SKY-LARK.     Alauda  arvensis,  Linne". — L'Alouette  des  champs.
A  humerus  found  in  the  Station  of  Le  Moustier  belongs  to  this  species.

30.  THE  MISTLETOE.THRTJSH.     Turdus  viscivorus,  Linne. — La  Draine.

This  Bird,  the  existence  of  which  in  the  Cave  at  Verezzi,   Liguria,  I  have


BIRD-BONES  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVES.  237

already  noticed,  has  also  been  met  with  at  Lacombe-Tayac,  where  I  have  recog-
nized a  nearly  entire  metatarsus,  a  tibia,  and  a  humerus.  Parts  of  the  skeleton
of  Passeres  do  not  appear  to  be  very  rare  in  the  Cave-deposits;  but  their  size
renders  it  difficult  to  distinguish  them ;  and  their  fragility  is  such  that  the  leg-
bones  are  almost  always  broken.  It  is  generally  the  humerus  that  is  best-
preserved,  on  account  of  its  more  squat  form  and  greater  solidity.

31.  THE  WAXWING.     Ampelis  garrulus,  Linne". — Le  Jaseur  de  Boheme.

A  humerus  and  an  ulna  from  the  Cave  at  Lherm  evidently  belong  to  this
Bird,  which  is  a  species  not  seen  now  in  France,  except  at  distant  intervals.  It
inhabits  the  eastern  parts  of  the  north  of  Europe  and  Asia.

32.  THE  REDSTART.     Motacilla  phcenicura,  Linne;  Ruticilla  phoenicura,  Bonap.
— Le  Rouge-queue  des  murailles.

The  Lherm  Cave  has  likewise  yielded  a  humerus  which  I  think  should  be
referred  to  the  Redstart.  This  species  is  widespread  in  France,  and  is  seen  among
rocks  or  near  old  walls,  in  the  holes  of  which  it  usually  builds  its  nest.

33.  THE  CRAG-MARTIN.     Hirundo  rupestris,  Scopoli. — L'Hirondelle  de  rocher.

At  the  time  of  the  excavations  which  I  undertook,  with  M.  E.  Lartet,  in  the
Cave  at  Lourdes,  I  collected  two  small  humeri  which  agree  with  the  Crag-Martin.
The  arm-bone  of  the  Swallows  is  easily  distinguished  from  that  of  any  other  of
the  Passeres ;  and  that  of  the  species  in  question  is  more  robust  than  in  any
other  representative  living  in  our  regions.  Hirundo  rupestris  is  at  the  present
day  common  in  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees.  It  ordinarily  nests  in  caves  or  in  the
crevices  of  rocks — which  explains  readily  its  presence  at  Lourdes  and  Bruniquel,
where  I  have  likewise  recognized  its  bones.

34.  A  SWALLOW,  undetermined.     Hirundo,  sp.  ?

A  humerus  more  robust  than  that  of  the  preceding  species  has  also  been  found
at  Bruniquel.  I  have  not  hitherto  been  able  to  refer  it  to  any  known  species.
But  the  elements  of  determination  at  my  disposal  are  insufficient ;  and,  perhaps,
when  I  can  bring  together  the  bones  of  a  greater  number  of  Crag-Martins,  I  shall
be  able  to  assure  myself  that  the  size  of  this  bird  may  be  subject  to  more  consider-
able variations  than  those  I  have  already  observed,  and  that  in  them  the  arm-bone
may  attain  the  dimensions  of  the  Bruniquel  fossil.


238  RELIQULE  AQTJITANTCJE.

SYNDACTYLI.

35.  THE  KINGFISHER.     Alcedo  ispida,  Linn6. — Le  Martin-pecheur.

The  Station  of  Le  Moustier,  from  which  we  have  already  received  bones  of
several  species  of  small  size,  has  furnished  also  a  perfectly  characterized  humerus
and  coracoid  of  the  Kingfisher.  This  species  is  still  met  with  on  the  banks  of
the  Ve'zere.

COLUMB^E.

36.  THE  STOCKDOVE.     Columba  lima,  Brisson. — Le  Biset.

This  Bird,  which  is  rightly  considered  the  stem  of  all  our  races  of  domestic
Pigeons,  lives  in  the  wild  state,  like  the  Ringdove  and  the  Dove,  in  almost  every
part  of  Europe,  from  Sweden  and  Norway  to  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,
nesting  in  the  most  solitary  and  inaccessible  places.  Remains  of  this  species,
consisting  of  a  humerus  and  a  portion  of  an  ulna,  have  been  found  in  one  of  our
most  ancient  prehistoric  Stations,  that  of  Aurignac.  These  bones,  compared  with
those  of  the  common  Stockdove,  present  no  appreciable  difference;  their  general
dimensions  and  proportions  are  the  same.  This  species,  therefore,  so  easily  modi-
fied by  certain  influences  which  Man  has  taken  advantage  of  to  produce  the  variety
of  forms  which  exist  in  our  aviaries  and  dovecots,  has  been  propagated  without
alteration  from  a  very  remote  period  to  our  times ;  the  Stockdove  of  Aurignac
seems  to  resemble  in  its  osteological  characters  that  of  our  woods.

GALLING.

37.  THE  WILLOW-GROUSE.     Tetrao  albus,  Gmelin ;  Lagopus  albus,  Vieillot. — Le
Lagopede  blanc.

In  most  of  the  Caves  numerous  bones  of  Tetrao  are  found,  especially  of  Tetrao
albus.  This  abundance  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  admitting  that  Man  used
those  birds  as  food,  and  brought  thither  the  produce  of  his  chase;  for  if  the
Grouse  had  been  carried  in  by  Birds  of  prey  or  carnivorous  Mammals,  the  bones
would  generally  be  broken,  gnawed,  and  the  articular  heads  would  have  disap-
peared, as  Steenstrup  has  so  well  shown  in  his  memoir  on  the  bones  from  the
Kjokkenmoddings  of  Denmark ;  while  in  general  the  various  pieces  of  the  skeleton
of  the  Willow-Grouse  are  perfectly  preserved,  and  on  many  of  them  we  observe  fine


BIRD-BONES  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVES.  239

striae,  or  notches  similar  to  those  produced  by  the  flint  implements  made  use  of  by
the  men  of  that  period  to  detach  the  flesh  of  the  animals.  The  palaeontologists
who  have  explored  the  Cave-deposits,  whether  in  France  or  the  neighbouring
countries,  have  not  recognized  the  existence  of  this  species,  and  have  confounded
it  with  the  Partridge.  It  is  true  that  in  its  dimensions  it  does  not  differ  much
from  that  bird;  but  the  two  species  cannot  be  confounded  if  their  osteological
characters  be  studied.

The  Willow-Grouse  does  not  now  inhabit  the  temperate  parts  of  Europe;  it  is
banished  to  the  north,  into  Norway,  Sweden,  Lapland,  and  North  America.  It  lives
in  the  humid  plains  that  are  clad  with  clumps  of  Birch  trees ;  but  it  does  not
appear  to  frequent  forests,  and  it  does  not  ascend  the  mountains  above  the  limit  of
the  birch-growth.  It  is  often  met  with  in  large  flocks,  and  is  one  of  the  com-
monest birds  in  the  northern  regions.  Its  geological  and  geographical  distribution
is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Great  Snowy  Owl,  which  often  feeds  upon  it.

There  exist  in  Europe  other  species  of  the  same  genus  which  much  resemble
Lagopus  albus.  According  to  Prof.  A.  Newton*,  of  the  latter  the  following  sub-
species are  to  be  distinguished  : —

(1)  Lagopus  scoticus,  which  is  perhaps  only  an  insular  race  of  L.  albus.

(2)  Lagopus  mutus  vel  alpinus,  which  is  found  also  in  the  French  Caves.

(3)  Lagopus  rupestris,  which  does  not  apparently  differ  from  L.  islandorum

or  from  the  L.  Heinhardti  of  Greenland.

(4)  Lagopus  hemileucurus,  inhabiting  Spitzbergen  and  more  nearly  allied  to

L.  mutus  than  to  L.  rupestris.

The  plumage  of  all  these  birds  presents  a  certain  uniformity  of  tints ;  but  the
dimensions  of  the  various  pieces  of  the  skeleton  are  not  the  same,  and  render  their
determination  possible.

The  number  of  remains  of  Lagopus  albus  which  have  been  found  in  the  Cave
of  Les  Eyzies  is  very  considerable;  and  it  has  been  possible  to  reconstruct  an
almost  entire  skeleton  of  one  of  these  birds.

At  La  Madelaine  also  these  Lagopodes  are  very  plentiful ;  but  they  are  very
rare  at  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,-and  at  Massat.  They  are  common  at  Bruniquel.  At
Aurignac  their  existence  is  only  indicated  by  one  tarso-metatarsal.  In  the  Lherm
Cave  they  are  numerous.  Lastly,  their  remains  have  been  found  at  Aure,  Lourdes,
and  Gourdan.

*  "  On  certain  Species  of  Falconidae,  Tetraonidse,  and  Anatidee,"  Proceedings  of  the  Academy  of  Natural
Sciences  of  Philadelphia,  1871,  p.  94.


240  KELIQUkE  AQUITANKLE.

38.  THE  RED  GROUSE.     Lagopus  albus,  var.  major,  vel  L.  scoticus. — La  Grouse.

There  are  often  found,  mingled  with  remains  of  the  Willow -Grouse,  bones
notably  larger  and  stouter,  resembling  in  their  proportions  those  of  Lagopus
scoticus ;  but  ought  the  latter  bird  to  be  considered  specifically  distinct  from  the
preceding  ?  It  differs  little  from  it,  except  in  its  rather  larger  dimensions  and  in
not  assuming  an  entirely  white  plumage  in  winter.  May  it  not  be  that  the  Red
Grouse  are  the  product  of  a  colony  of  Lagopus  albus  which,  a  long  series  of
centuries  ago,  established  itself  in  Great  Britain  and  propagated  there  without
renewal  from  the  primitive  stock,  and  whose  descendants  have  gradually  under-
gone slight  modifications  in  size  and  plumage*  ?  What  has  been  observed  of  the
Lagopus  fauna  of  the  Caves  seems  to  prove  that  at  that  period  there  were  very
notable  differences  in  the  size  of  these  birds ;  but  did  those  differences  coincide
with  changes  in  the  colour  of  the  plumage  ?  and  did  the  largest  Lagopodes  of  the
Caves  of  the  south-west  of  France  assume  the  white  winter  plumage,  or  did  they
remain  during  that  season  more  or  less  marked  with  black  and  red  ?  These  are
questions  it  is  impossible  to  settle  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge ;  and
I  therefore  confine  myself  to  drawing  the  attention  of  naturalists  to  these  con-
si/lerable  differences  in  dimensions  presented  by  the  Lagopodes  contemporaneous
with  prehistoric  Man.

39.  THE  PTARMIGAN.     Tetrao  lagopus,  var.  alpina  minor,  Linne* ;  Lagopus  mutus,

Leach ;  Lagopus  alpinus,  Nilsson. — Le  Lagopede  muet.

This  species  was  contemporary  with  the  preceding ;  and  its  bones  are  found
mingled,  in  the  earth  of  the  Caves,  with  those  of  Lagopus  albus.  But  while  the
latter  disappeared  from  France  to  confine  itself  to  the  Polar  regions,  L.  mutus
has  not  quitted  the  central  parts  of  Europe — but  has  retired  to  the  highest
mountain-regions,  where  it  finds  a  temperature  corresponding  to  the  needs  of  its
organization.  It  is  met  with  in  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees;  these  mountains  form
the  southern  limit  of  its  geographical  extension ;  to  the  north,  it  inhabits  in  great
numbers  the  mountains  of  Scandinavia  and  Lapland.

Lagopus  mutus  is  rarer  in  the  Caves  than  L.  albus,  with  which  it  is  generally
associated.  It  is  found  at  Les  Eyzies,  La  Madelaine,  Massat,  Gourdan,  Lherm,
and  Lourdes.  I  have  indicated  in  another  work  the  characters  by  which  the  bones
of  this  species  may  be  determined  and  distinguished  from  those  of  the  other  repre-
sentatives of  the  genus,  and  therefore  shall  not  return  to  them  here.

*  Prof.  A.  Newton  seems  to  entertain  this  view :  vide  op.  cit.  p.  96.


BIED-BONES  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVES.  241

40.  THE  CAPERCAILLIE.     Tetrao  urogallus,  Linne. — Le  grand  Coq  de  Bruyere.

The  Capercaillie  is  rare  in  the  Caves.  I  first  recognized  its  remains  in  the  Station
of  Saleve  (near  the  shore  of  the  Lake  of  Geneva),  and  at  Verezzi  (in  Liguria);  after-
wards I  found  this  species  at  Bruniquel  and  Lacombe-Tayac ;  but  it  is  represented
there  by  only  a  small  number  of  bones.

41.  THE  BLACK  GROUSE.     Tetrao  tetrix,  Linne. — Le  Tetras  a  queue  fourchue.
This  species,  as  well  as  the  preceding,  is  common  in  the  mountains  of  Sweden,

Norway,  and  Germany ;  it  is  also  seen  in  France,  but  is  there  becoming  more  and
more  rare.  A  few  bones  of  it  have  been  found  in  the  Caves  at  Le  Moustier  and
Massat.

42.  THE  GREY  PARTRIDGE.     Tetrao  perdix,  Linne" ;  Perdix  cinerea,  Charleton. —

La  Perdrix  grise.

I  have  already  had  occasion  to  say  that  the  greater  part  of  the  bones  from  the
Caves  which  had  been  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  Partridge  should  be  referred
either  to  the  Willow-Grouse  or  to  the  Ptarmigan ;  such  are  : — those  from  the  Cave
at  Brengues,  cited  by  M.  Puel;  and  those  from  Mallet  and  Jobertas,  Fausan,
Salleles,  and  Bize,  noticed  by  M.  Marcel  de  Serres.  Among  the  hundreds  of
remains  of  Tetrao  sent  me  by  M.  Lartet,  I  have  found  scarcely  any  Partridge-
bones  ;  and  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  beds  in  which  they  are  found  are  gene-
rally of  a  more  recent  date  than  those  of  Les  Eyzies,  La  Madelaine,  and,  especially,
Aurignac :  the  places  I  allude  to  are  the  Stations  of  Lacombe,  Les  Escoutiers,
Lourdes,  and  the  Cave  of  L'Eglise.  Partridges  seem  to  have  first  appeared  when
Willow-Grouse  quitted  Prance.

The  Caves  of  Old  Castile,  searched  by  M.  Louis  Lartet,  did  not  contain  one
Lagopus;  but  Partridges  were  common  there.  At  the  present  day  the  Grey
Partridge  is  rare  in  the  south  of  France,  where,  on  the  contrary,  Bed  Partridges
abound ;  nevertheless  it  is  seen  as  far  southward  as  North  Africa.

43.  THE  COCK.     Gallus. — Le  Coq.

Naturalists  are  generally  agreed  in  admitting  that  the  Cock  is  a  native  of  Asia,
and  that  its  introduction  into  Europe  is  relatively  recent.  Bones  of  this  bird,
however,  are  found  associated  with  those  of  Ursus  spelceus,  Rhinoceros,  and  the
large  Felis.  In  France,  then,  there  was  a  species  of  the  genus  Gallus  at  a  very
ancient  period ;  and  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  it  had  been  conveyed  thither  by
Man — more  especially  as  the  number  of  the  bones  found  up  to  the  present  in  the

2L


242


KELIQUI.E


ossiferous  beds  is  very  inconsiderable,  and  does  not  indicate  that  the  Cock  lived
as  a  guest  of  Man.

Schmerling  described  some  remains  of  it  from  the  Caves  in  the  province  of
Lie*ge ;  he  even  figures  two  tarso-metatarsals  too  different  in  size  for  it  to  be  pos-
sible to  admit  that  they  come  from  the  same  species :  one  (pi.  37.  fig.  2)  is  short
and  slender ;  the  other  (pi.  37.  fig.  1)  is  much  stouter,  and  its  spur  situated  much
lower.  M.  Gervais  indicates  this  bird  as  found  in  the  Diluvial  conglomerate  near
the  Barrier  of  Fontainebleau ;  and  H.  von  Meyer  mentions  its  presence  in  the  beds
of  the  valley  of  the  Lahn,  deposited  at  the  same  period.

M.  Pilhol  has  sent  to  me  a  nearly  entire  tarso-metatarsal  taken  from  the
oldest  layer  of  the  Cave  at  Lherm  (Ariege).  Its  lower  extremity  is  broken ;  but
the  spur  is  almost  perfect.  This  bone  evidently  belonged  to  a  Cock;  but  it  is
distinguished  by  its  shortness  and  antero-posterior  flatness  from  those  of  all  the
species  of  the  genus  that  I  have  examined.  It  is  likewise  differentiated  by  the
narrowness  of  the  diaphysis,  which  is  hollowed  out  by  a  well-marked  groove.  The
foot-bone  of  Gallus  Sonneratl  is  thicker  and  longer ;  that  of  the  Bankiva  Cock  is
also  longer,  but  it  is  narrower.  Another  tarso-metatarsal,  destitute  of  spur,  which
belonged  to  a  Hen,  was  found  by  M.  Piette  in  the  Cave  at  Gourdan.  It  is
slenderer  and  shorter  than  the  one  from  Lherm ;  but  these  differences  must  be
regarded  as  sexual.

A  femur  found  in  the  Station  of  La  Madelaine  approaches  in  dimensions  that  of
Gallus  Sonnerati.  Another,  collected  at  Bruniquel,  is  much  smaller,  although
adult ;  and  I  can  only  assign  it  to  a  Hen.  Lastly,  to  complete  the  enumeration  of
the  parts  of  the  skeleton  of  these  birds  found  in  the  Caves,  I  have  to  mention  a
tibia  and  a  coracoid  from  the  Grotte  des  Fees,  in  the  Department  of  the  Allier.


44.  THE  THICK-KNEE.      Cliaradrius  cedicnemus,  Linne";    (Edicnemm  crepitam,

Temminck. — L'CEdicneme  criard.

A  unique  tarso-metatarsal,  found  at  Lacombe-Tayac,  must  be  referred  to  this
bird.

45.  THE  WATER-RAIL.     Itallus  aquaticus,  Linne. — Le  Rale  d'eau.

Several  bones  of  the  Water-Rail  have  been  collected  at  Bruniquel ;  they  present
no  peculiarity  worthy  of  notice.  They  are  the  sole  indications  of  the  existence
of  the  bird  at  the  period  of  the  filling  of  the  Caves.  Other  species  of  the  same


BIED-BONES  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVES.  243

group  have  been  noticed  in  prehistoric  Stations — such  as  Rallus  crex,  found  by
M.  J.  Desnoyers  in  the  breccia  of  Montmorency,  and  by  M.  Ramorino  in  that  of
Verezzi  (in  Italy).

46.  THE  MOORHEN.     Gallinula  chloropus,  var.  major. — La  Poule  d'eau.

A  humerus  from  Massat  (Ariege)  seems  to  me  to  agree  with  that  of  the
common  Moorhen,  though  it  is  a  little  larger  than  any  of  those  of  that  species
which  I  have  examined.

47.  THE  PRIMITIVE  CRANE.     Grus  primigenia,  nobis. — La  Grue  primitive.

M.  E.  Lartet  collected,  in  1863,  in  the  Cave  at  Les  Eyzies,  together  with  re-
mains of  Reindeer,  Aurochs,  &c.,  the  lower  portion  of  a  tibia,  which  had  been
separated  from  the  body  of  the  bone,  not  by  an  accidental  fracture,  but  evidently
by  the  hand  of  Man  and  by  means  of  a  sharp  instrument  which  played  the  part
of  a  saw.  The  fragment  bears  also  numerous  longitudinal  grooves  made  by  an
analogous  instrument,  probably  for  the  purpose  of  detaching  needles  or  arrow-
points.  M.  E.  Lartet  had  the  kindness  to  send  this  fossil  to  me;  and  I  easily
recognized  that  it  came  from  a  species  of  the  genus  Grus :  it  presents  all  the
characters  which  are  special  to  that  division ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  about
the  generic  determination.  But  if  one  asks  to  what  species  it  belongs,  we  re-
mark that  this  tibia  cannot  have  come  from  Grus  cinerea,  in  which  the  prin-
cipal leg-bone  is  much  thinner.  The  tibia  from  Les  Eyzies  is  even  much  larger
than  that  of  the  Australian  Crane.  I  have  likewise  compared  it  with  those
of  the  Mantchurian  Crane  and  Grus  antigone;  and  it  most  nearly  resembles
the  leg-bone  of  the  latter,  though  the  dimensions  of  the  fossil  are  greater.
It  is  these  considerations  which  have  determined  me  to  propose  for  the  Crane
of  the  Caves  a  new  specific  division,  and  to  designate  this  bird  under  the  name
of  Grus  primigenia.  It  was  a  species  remarkable  for  its  large  size,  and  has
gradually  disappeared  before  the  encroachments  of  Man  or  the  changes  which
have  happened  in  the  biological  conditions,  just  as  the  Aurochs  is  now  going,  and
as  Bos  primigenius  and  so  many  other  species  have  gone.

Since  the  time  when  this  determination  was  established,  it  has  been  confirmed
by  other  discoveries.  A  portion  of  a  humerus  has  been  found  at  La  Madelaine,
cut  a  little  above  the  articulation,  by  means  of  a  flint,  and  having  deep  grooves
similar  to  those  observed  on  the  tibia  and  apparently  made  with  the  same  intention.
A  fragment  of  a  lower  mandible  found  at  Gourdan  shows  that  Grus  primigenia
approached  nearer  to  G.  antigone  than  to  G.  cinerea.

2L2


244


KEL1QTILE  AQUIT  ANKLE.


PALMIPEDES  LAMELLIROSTRES.

48.  THE  WILD  SWAN.     Cygnmferus,  Ray. — Le  Cygne  sauvage.

The  remains  of  this  species  are  rare  in  the  Caves ;  one  can  understand  that
their  conveyance  thither  would  require  a  concurrence  of  exceptional  circum-
stances. In  fact,  the  Wild  Swan  inhabits  the  Polar  regions;  and  when  it
migrates  in  winter,  it  follows  in  preference  the  sea-shore,  and  only  accidentally
makes  its  appearance  inland.  Nevertheless  I  possess  a  tarso-metatarsal  of  this
hird,  collected  by  M.  J.  Desnoyers  in  the  Cave  at  Arcy  sur  Cure;  and  among
the  fossils  taken  out  of  the  Gourdan  Cave  by  M.  Piette  I  have  recognized  a
portion  of  an  ulna  which  must  be  referred  to  this  species.  At  La  Madelaine  and
Massat  some  fragments  of  ulnas  of  large  dimensions,  probably  also  from  the
same  species,  have  been  found ;  but  the  exact  determination  of  these  bones  pre-
sents almost  insurmountable  difficulties,  because  their  articular  extremities  have
been  detached,  probably  for  the  purpose  of  making  pipes  of  the  diaphyses.

49.  THE  WILD  DUCK.     Anas  boschas,  Linne. — Le  Canard  sauvage.

I  have  recognized  numerous  remains  of  the  Wild  Duck  in  the  ossiferous  deposit
of  Bruniquel,  and  at  Gourdan  and  Les  Eyzies.

50.  THE  SUMMER-TEAL.     Anas  querquedula,  Linne". — La  Sarcelle  d'e'te'.

I  have  likewise  found,  in  the  osteological  collection  formed  by  M.  Brun  at
Bruniquel,  a  tarso-metatarsal  and  a  metacarpal  of  the  Teal.


? — Le  Canard.


51.  THE  DUCK.     Anas  -

M.  Piette  has  submitted  to  me  several  bones  from  the  Cave  at  Gourdan,  which
belong  to  a  Duck  of  large  size,  with  very  short  legs,  and  allied  to  the  Eider,  from
which,  however,  it  differs  too  much  for  me  to  identify  it  with  that  species.


I  will  now  give  a  list  of  the  species  enumerated  above,  arranging  them  according
to  the  places  from  which  they  have  been  obtained :  we  may  derive  therefrom  some
information  which  will  not  be  without  its  use.


BIED-BONES  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVES.


245


CAVE  AT  LB  MOTJSTIER.


Aquila  fulva   1  individual.

Corvus  monedula    1         „

Alauda  arvensis  . .  1


Alcyon  ispida 1  individual.

Tetrao  tetrix 1         „


Vultur     1  individual.

Tetrao  albus    .  1


THE  GORGE  D'ENFER.

Tetrao  scoticus


1  individual.


CAVE  AT  LES  EYZIES.


Nyctea  nivea 7  individuals.

Pyrrhocorax  alpinus  ....     4         „
Lagopus  mutus 3    .     „


Lagopus  albus     15  individuals.

scoticus?    3         „

Qrus  primigenia 1  or  2  individuals.


STATION  OP  LA  MA.DELAINE.


Aquila  fulva   1  individual.

Falco  communis 1         „

tinnunculus  1         „

Gypaetus  barbatus 1         „

Vultur  monachus    1         „

Corvus  corax 2  individuals.

corone    1  individual.


Pyrrhocorax  alpinus  ....  14  individuals.

Nucifraga  caryocatactes . .  1  individual.

Pica  caudata  1         „

Turdus  viscivorus 10  individuals.

Tetrao  urogallus     1  individual.

Perdix  cinerea  ' 1         ,,

(Edicnemus  crepitans ....  1         „


CAVE  OF  L'EGLISE  (St.  Martin  d'Excideuil,  Dordogne).


Pyrrhocorax  alpinus  ....      1  individual.
primigenius   1         „


Perdix  cinerea    .          ...      1  individual.


STATION  OF  BRUNIQUEL  (Tarn  et  Garonne).


Aquila  fulva    1  individual.

Buteo  vulgaris    1  „

Falco  tinnunculus 1  „

Gypaetus  barbatus 1  „

Strix  flammea     1  „

Noctua  minor     1  „

Nyctea  nivea 1  „

Corvus  corax 1  „

Pyrrhocorax  alpinus  ....  1         „


Fringilla  nivalis      ....

1  individual.

Hirundo  rupestris  .  .

•      1         »

Lagopus  albus

3  individuals.

Tetrao  urogallus     .  .  .

1  individual.

Gallus

.  .      1

UiHlus  aquaticus     .  ,

.      1         „

Anas  boschas

2  individuals.

Querquedula  circia

1  individual.

246


RELIQUIAE  AQTJITANIC^E.


CAVE  AT  LHBRM  (Ariege).


Nyctea  nivea
Pyrrhocorax
Ampelis  garrulus


.    .          6  individuals.

Lagopus  mutus

.  .  .  .     7  individuals.

Ipinus              2         ,,

17

lus    1  individual.

scoticus?    .  .  .  .

9

lieura   .            1

Gallus  .  .

1  individual.

CAVE  AT  MASSAT  (Ariege).


Aquila  clanga     1  individual.

Falco  subbuteo    1         „

Nyctea  nivea 1         „

Pyrrhocorax  primigenius .  1         „

Nucifraga  caryocatactes  . .  1         „

Fringilla  nivalis 1


Loxia  curvirostra

1  individual

Lagopus  mutus

.  .      1         „

albus

2  individuals

Tetrao  tetrix

1  individual

Gallinula  chloropus    .  .
Anas  boschas  .  .

.      1

1

Haliaetus  albicilla.
Aquila  fulva.
Buteo  vulgaris.
Falco  tinnunculus.

subbuteo.

Vultur  monachus.
Nyctea  nivea.
Bubo  maximus.
Corvus  corax.

comix.

Pica  caudata.


CAVE  AT  GOURD  AN  (Haute  Garonne).

Pyrrhocorax  alpinus.
Coracia  gracula.
Loxia  chloris.
GaUus.
Lagopus  mutus.

albus.

Grus  primigenia.
Cygnus  ferus.
Anas  boschas.
Anas,  sp.  ?


Corvus  corone.
Pyrrhocorax  alpinus.
Hirundo  rupestris.


CAVE  AT  LOURDES  (Hautes  Pyrenees).

Tetrao  lagopus.

albus.

Perdix  cinerea.


STATION  OF  ATJRIGNAC.


Aquila  clanga

Buteo  vulgaris  . .  .
Milvus  regalis  . .  .
Vultur  monachus  ? .


1  individual.


2  individuals.


Nyctea  nivea

1  individual

Corvus  corax

2  individuals.

Columba  livia     ....

.  .  .  .      1  individual.

Tetrao  albus   .

1

BIRD-BONES  FOUND  IN  THE  CAVES.


247


When  the  distribution  of  the  species  in  the  beds  just  enumerated  is  examined,
the  influence  of  Man  is  evident  in  some  instances ;  it  was  he  who  brought  thither
the  Birds  which  must  have  served  for  his  food.     Thus  in  the  Cave  at  Les  Eyzies
we  find  almost  only  eatable  species,  such  as  the  Lagopodes  and   Grus  primi-
genia — which  latter  must  have  been  much  sought  after  at  that  period,  not  only
on  account  of  the  delicacy  of  its  flesh,  but  also  because  the  bones,  by  reason  of
their  length  and  solidity,  supplied  material  for  the  fabrication  of  needles,  arrow-
points,  and  other  similar  implements.     At  La  Madelaine,  also,  it  was  the  leavings
of  the  meals  that  brought  about  the  accumulation  of  bird-bones ;  but,  together
with  numerous  Tetraones  and  Cocks,  we  find  the  remains  of  several  Harfangs.
Were  these  last  eaten  by  Man  ?   or  did  they  inhabit  the  vicinity  ?   I  am  inclined
to  prefer  the  latter  hypothesis,  because  on  not  one  bone  have  I  found  the  marks
of  the  flint  implements  which  served  for  detaching  the  flesh.     It  seems,  on  the
contrary,  that  the  men  of  the  Lherm  Cave  ate  this  Owl ;  nearly  all  the  bones
there  bear  the  traces  of  stone  knives :    Tetraones  abound  also  at  Lherm,  while
other  Birds  are  rare,  or  only  represented  by  a  small  number  of  remains.     At  Le
Moustier  the  presence  of  Birds  seems  to  be  accidental,  as  well  as  in  the  Caves  of
the  Gorge  d'Enfer.     At  Lacombe-Tayac,  I  should  be  disposed  to  believe  that  it
was  principally  streams  of  water  that  carried  in  these  remains ;  for  there  are  but
few  bones  of  edible  species  there,  while  a  great  variety  of  Passeres  are  observed —
numerous  Choughs  and  several  Rapaces,  some  of  which  have  been  determined  by
a  single  bone  only.

The  deposit  at  Bruniquel  appears  to  have  been  formed  under  the  same  influ-
ences ;  and  Man  cannot  have  been  the  sole  cause  of  the  transport  of  the  bones
found  there.  At  Massat  edible  birds  do  not  seem  to  be  more  numerous  than  the
other  species,  while  at  Gourdan  we  see  them  predominate.


248


AQTJITANIC^E.


XXIV.

NOTES  ON  OBJECTS  OF  STONE  FROM  THE  CAVE  OF  LES  EYZIES,  VALLEY  OF  THE
VEZERE,  PERIGORD.     By  Professor  T.  RUPERT  JONES,  F.R.S.,  F.G.S.

A  CLASSIFIED  catalogue  of  the  flint  flakes  and  implements,  and  of  other  stone
objects,  found  in  each  of  the  Caves  on  the  Ve"zere  would  be  very  instructive,  but
cannot  be  compiled.  Nor,  indeed,  can  the  contents  of  any  one  of  the  Caves  be
enumerated  in  detail.  By  enumerating,  however,  such  specimens  from  one  Cave
as  have  been  preserved  in  the  CHRISTY  COLLECTION,  we  may  probably  find  an
average  and  sufficiently  characteristic  assortment.  We  take,  therefore,  those
preserved  from  the  Cave  of  Les  Eyzies*,  grouping  them  as  follows  :—

I.  Pieces  of  rocks  foreign  to  the  locality,  and  either  washed  down  from  the
higher  country  by  the  river  (see  page  28,  and  the  Map  at  page  29),  and  then
picked  up  and  introduced  into  the  Cave ;  or  brought  from  a  distance  by  the  Cave-
folk  themselves.     In  either  case,  probably  they  have  been  used  for  some  purpose,
evident  or  obscure  (as  Nos.  2,  8,  19,  20,  21,  22,  24,  28,  29,  30) — and  sometimes
engraved  with  recognizable  outlines  or  marked  with  less  intelligible  scorings  (as
Nos.  3,  9, 13, 14, 17,  27).     The  use  of  the  Iron-pyrites  (No.  30)  as  a  Strike-a-light,
and  of  the  Haematite  (Nos.  28  and  29)  for  paint,  is  of  much  interest.     Several  of
the  articles  having  been  figured,  as  noted  in  the  List,  their  full  descriptions  will
easily  be  found.

II.  Flint. — Besides  some  few  irregular  fragments,  and  one  roughly  chipped
hammer-like  piece,  we  find  53  Cores,  436  Flakes  (simple  and  dressed),  and  155
"  Scrapers  "  of  Flint  arranged  in  the  Collection;  but  these  necessarily  constitute
only  a  small  portion  of  the  whole  quantity  taken  from  the  Cave.     In  enumerating
the  different  kinds,  we  refer  to  the  specimens  from  Les  Eyzies  figured  in  the
Plates  A ;  and  the  descriptions  accompanying  those  figures  will  supply  detailed
information  regarding  them

There  is  one  Knapping  Stone  f,  if  not  two,  in  this  series  (Nos.  22  &  23);  and
four  of  the  curious  Mortar-stones  (No.  20).     There  are  five,  also,  of  the  latter

*  See  above,  pages  5,  20,  36,  170,  182.

t  A  quartz  pebble  Knapper  from  Le  Moustier,  and  one  of  granite  from  La  Madelaine,  may  be  mentioned.


OBJECTS  OF  STONE  AT  LES  EYZIES.  249

from  La  Madelaine ;  but  one  of  them  is  small,  and  may  have  been  a  Knapper.
No  Rubber-stone  has  been  recognized  at  Les  Eyzies,  like  either  the  one  of  clay-
slate  (A.  Plate  XXV.  fig.  3),  or  a  companion  quartz  pebble  so  used,  at  La  Made-
laine. The  rough  Lance-heads  of  Le  Moustier  and  the  highly  dressed  Javelin-
points  of  Laugerie  seem  to  be  wanting.  Among  the  Les-Eyzies  specimens  there
are  very  few  like  the  coarse  Choppers  of  Le  Moustier;  and  oblique  triangular
dressed  flakes,  such  as  are  common  in  the  latter  Cave,  are  also  rare  (No.  6).
These  two  kinds  occur  very  rarely  at  La  Madelaine  also,  and  seem  to  be  wanting
at  Laugerie  and  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.  The  little  Side-scrapers  (like  No.  26)  and
Angle-scrapers  (like  No.  27),  frequent  at  Les  Eyzies,  are  abundant  also  at  La
Madelaine.  So  also  ordinary  flakes  are  generally  abundant  in  the  Caves ;  but
at  Le  Moustier  such  simple  flakes,  especially  of  small  size,  are  very  rare.  For
remarks  on  the  contents  of  these  Caves  and  Rock-shelters,  see  above,  pages  4  ct
seq.  and  pages  166  et  seq.

In  applying  the  terms  "grey,"  "drab  and  cream-coloured,"  "brown,"  &c.  to
the  different  kinds  of  flint,  we  have  been  obliged  to  group  the  several  tints  of
light  and  dark,  as  well  as  the  mottled  and  granular  appearances,  together  under
these  respective  heads,  though  doubtless  a  careful  recognition  of  the  distinctive
characters  would  be  a  good  guide  in  investigating  the  local  sources  of  the  various
flints  used  by  the  Aborigines.  Indeed  the  study  of  the  flint  of  the  Vezere  Valley
would  be  of  much  interest.  Its  frequent  granular  condition  has  reference  to  the
still  visible  organic  particles,  such  as  Polyzoa,  constituting  the  original  lime-
stone ;  whilst  other  varieties  of  the  flint  show  the  Spicula  of  Sponges  abounding
here  and  there  in  the  Chalk  before  it  was  pseudomorphosed  into  flint,  as  is
often  the  case  in  England  and  Ireland.  Frequently  the  flint  is  translucent
and  apparently  homogeneous,  owing  to  the  perfect  change  the  rock  has  under-
gone in  its  silicification.  These  differences  are  alluded  to  in  the  notes  on
specimens  in  the  Descriptions  of  the  Plates.  See  also  remarks  on  Flint  at
pages  202-205.

Grey  flint,  of  many  tints  and  shades,  is  found  in  468  of  the  specimens ;  drab
and  cream-coloured  flint,  sometimes  almost  yellow,  rarely  white,  but  often  passing
towards  brownish-grey,  in  91;  various  yellow  flints,  sometimes  marked  with  den-
drites,  in  32 ;  and  several  browns,  honey-brown,  grey -brown,  &c.,  in  53.  Yellow
and  cream-coloured  specimens  are  most  abundant  among  specimens  from  the
Gorge  d'Enfer ;  there  are  many  from  Laugerie,  several  from  La  Madelaine  and
from  Les  Eyzies  ;  but  from  Le  Moustier  there  are  very  few,  if  any.  The  "  greys,"
both  light  and  dark,  mottled  and  granular,  abound  everywhere.

2  11


250


KELIQULE  AQUITANICJE.


Specimens  made  of  Chalcedony,  from  the  iusides  of  flint-nodules,  are  occasionally
met  with;  but  none  of  agate-chalcedony.  Rock-crystal  and  vein- quartz  occur  in
some  few  specimens  and  as  occasional  fragments  (see  above,  Nos.  18  and  22,  and
page  175),  but  are  rare.


A  Classified  List  of  Stones,  Stone  Flakes,  Implements,  Sec.  from  the  Cave  at

Les  Eyzies.

I.  VARIOUS  EOCKS  AND  MINEKALS.

1 .  A  broken  slab  of  Greenstone,  smoothed  on  both  sides  and  marked  with  parallel  and  crossing  lines,

probably  by  ice-action  (river-ice).

2.  A  narrow,  tongue-shaped,  tapering  piece  of  Greenstone,  polished  towards  one  end,  smoothed  and

striated  elsewhere.

'6.  A  fragment  of  Greenstone,  with  a  worn  (ground?)  flat  surface  marked  with  some  obscure  formal
outlines.

4.  A  fragment  of  a  subangular  piece  of  brown  dioritic  (?)  Schist,  partly  rounded  and  smooth.

5.  A  fragment  of  a  subangular  smooth  block  of  chloritic  Schist  with  quartz-vein.

(5.  Two  fragments  of  greenish-grey  hornblendic  (?)  Schist,  from  subangular  smoothed  blocks:  one  with
striated  surface ;  the  other  quite  smooth.

7.  Three  fragments  of  dark-grey  hornblendic  (?)  Schist.

8.  Seven  fragments  of  greenish-grey  hornblendic  (?)  Schist ;  with  one  side  worn  flat  and  in  some  instances

stained  with  haematite.

9.  A  small  slab  of  greenish-grey  hornblendic  (?)  Schist,  with  an  outline  of  a  Herbivore.     A.  Plate  XXIX.

fig.  1.

10.  A  piece  of  bluish-grey  hornblendic  (?)  Schist,  smoothed,  and  marked  with  parallel  and  cross  lines,

probably  by  the  action  of  river-ice.

11.  A  piece  of  brownish-grey  hornblendic  (?)  Schist,  smoothed  and  marked  with  irregular  lines  by  river-

ice-action.

12.  Flattish  pebble  of  dark-green  hornblendic  (?)  Schist,  smooth  and  faintly  striated.

13.  A  pebble  of  Schist,  with  the  outline  of  a  Fish  (?).     A.  Plate  XXIX.  fig.  3.

14.  A  fragment  of  quartzose  Schist,  worn  flat  on  one  face,  stained  red,  and  bearing  an  obscure  formal

outline.

15.  Two  chips  of  hard  black  siliceous  Schist.

16.  Two  flat  fragments  of  Mica-schist,  from  smooth  rounded  blocks :  one  granular  and  soft ;  the  other  solid,

with  reddish  felspar.

17.  A  small  slab  of  Mica-schist,  with  the  outline  of  the  head  of  a  Eeindeer.     A.  Plate  XXIX.  fig.  5.

18.  A  fragment  of  Vein-quartz  and  a  piece  of  decomposed  Mica-schist  in  Hearth-stuff.

19.  Eleven  fragments  of  rounded  blocks  and  subangular  pebbles  of  reddish,  finely  laminated,  hard,  mica-

ceous, Granitoid  Eocks :  some  may  have  been  used  for  fire-stones  or  boiling-stones.

20.  Four  hollowed,  round  stones,  small  and  large;  some  much,  others  only  slightly,  hollowed:   Granite,

both  solid  and  schistose.     "  Mortar-stones."     A.  Plate  XIII.


OBJECTS  OF  STONE  AT  LES  EYZIES.  251

21.  One  small  hollowed  pebble  of  yellow  fine-grained  Sandstone.     A.  Plate  XXIII.  fig.  1 .

22.  One  quartz  Knapping-stone.

23.  A  pebble  of  gneissic  granite,  with  a  slight  hollow  on  one  face ;  possibly  a  Knapping-stone.

24.  Ten  fragments  of  rounded  blocks  and  pebbles  of  Quartz  and  Quartzites :  some  may  have  been  used  for

hearth-stones  or  boiling-stones,  some  as  knapping  and  hammer  stones.

25.  An  irregularly  flat  flake  of  yellow  fine-grained  Quartzite,  passing  into  the  friable  brownish-grey  Sand-

stone of  the  outside.     Some  stalagmitic  hearth-stuff  adheres  to  the  flake-face.

26.  A  piece  of  a  four-sided,  slightly  tapering  rod  of  fine-grained,  brown,  micaceous  Sandstone,  rounded  at

one  end,  broken  at  the  other;  2|  inches  long,  and  about  |  inch  square.

27.  A  piece  of  brown  quartzose  Grit,  with  haematitic  matrix ;  smoothed  on  one  part.

28.  A  piece  of  red  Sandstone.

29.  A  small  pebble  of  Limestone,  striped  with  transverse  and  oblique  lines.     A.  Plate  XXIX.  fig.  2.

30.  A  fragment  of  Micaceous  Iron-ore  (spangly  Hasmatite).

31.  Six  pieces  of  Haematite,  mostly  scraped.

32.  A  subcylindrical  nodule  of  Iron-pyrites,  2|  inches  long,  bruised  on  one  end.


II.  FLINT.

1.  MISCELLANEOUS.

1.  Six  irregularly  chipped  Flints.

2.  An  unused  bayonet-shaped  splinter.     A.  Plate  II.  fig.  8.

3.  A  grey  Flint  chipped  into  an  irregularly  oval  Axe-hammer  (?),  with  a  rough  cutting  edge,  which  is

crushed  (used?)  on  one  side.

2.  CORES.

1.  Six  rough  or  slightly  chipped  Flints,  from  one  end  of  which  small  flakes  have  been  struck  off.

2.  Four  "  Mitre  Cores,"  large  and  small ;  in  which  the  removal  of  flakes  has  produced  a  cone  or  thick

disk,  oval  or  circular,  with  a  sloping  edge.     A.  Plate  I.  figs.  4  ifc  5.

3.  Nineteen  long  Cores  ;  some  rather  flat ;  some  large.     A.  Plate  I.  fig.  7 ;  Plate  XIV.  fig.  2.

4.  Twenty-four  short,  partly  rounded,  sloping  Cores  ("  Hoof  Cores").     One  made  out  of  an  old  (Tertiary  ?)

pebble.     A.  Plate  I.  fig.  2.


Cores,  53 :  grey,  40  ;  yellow,  8  ;  brown,  5.


3.  FLAKES.


1.  Ten  "Core-end  Flakes,"  having  a  thick  curved  end  which  was  part  of  the  apex  of  the  Core:  not

used.

2.  Twenty-three  large  and  small,  straight  and  curved  "  Corner  Flakes "  or  "  Edge  Flakes,"  struck  off

dressed  blocks ;  not  used.

3.  Two  large,  coarse,  curved,  simple  Flakes ;  not  used.

4.  Thirty-three  rough,  simple  Flakes,  various :  more  or  less  used  (sometimes  dressed)  on  edge  or  point.

A.  Plate  VIII.  fig.  3  ;  Plate  XXXI.  fig.  11.

2n  2


252  EELIQUI^:  AQUITANKLE.

5.  Nine  short,  wide,  rough,  unused  Flakes ;  one  thinner,  larger,  and  rougher  than  the  other.     A.  Plate

XXXI.  fig.  10.

6.  One  thick,  short,  triangular,  bulbed  Flake,  trimmed  straight  on  one  edge  to  make  a  broad  point.     Like

A.  Plate  XL.  figs.  2,  3,  and  5,  from  Le  Moustier.

7.  Fifty-eight  simple  Flakes,  unused;  fifty-five  whole,  three  broken.     A.Plate  XV.  fig.  1;  Plate  XXXI.

figs.  3,  4,  6.

8.  Fifty-five  whole  Flakes,  large  and  small,  bearing  more  or  less  evidence  of  having  been  used  in  cutting,

scraping,  or  other  work  :  one  is  a  "  Core-end  Flake."     A.  Plate  XVI.  fig.  7.

9.  Forty  simple  Flakes,  large  and  small,  more  or  less  used  and  broken.     A.  Plate  II.  figs.  8, 14 ;  Plate  XV.

figs.  1,  7,  10;  Plate  XXXI.  fig.  7.

10.  Nine  fragments  of  small,  thin  and  narrow  Flakes.

11.  Ten  Flakes,  worn  on  one  or  both  edges :  five  with  the  slope  of  the  scaling  on  the  inner  face  of  the  flake ;

two  with  it  on  the  outer  face ;  and  three  having  it  alternate.     A.  Plate  XXXI.  fig.  1.

12.  Fourteen  Flakes,  perfect  or  broken,  used  on  edge  or  end,  some  much  worn,  and  one  smoothed  by  use  on

one  edge.     A.  Plate  XV.  fig.  7;  Plate  XVIII.  fig.  12.

13.  Three  Flakes  used  roughly  and  smoothed  at  each  end.     A.  Plate  XV.  fig.  2.

14.  Two  broken  Flakes,  used  at  the  point.

15.  Ten  whole  Flakes,  with  marks  of  use  or  of  dressing  on  one  or  both  edges  at  the  but-end.     A.  Plate  XVI.

fig.  10.

16.  Thirteen  Flakes  (one  broad,  ten  various,  and  two  broken),  used  on  one  or  both  sides  of  the  point.

17.  Ten  Flakes  tanged,  mostly  at  the  bulb-end,  and  more  or  less  used.     A.  Plate  II.  fig.  14 ;  Plate  VIII.

figs.  5,  6,  7;  Plate  XVI.  fig.  11.

18.  Twenty-nine  Flakes,  of  various  sizes,  tanged  at  the  end  opposite  to  the  bulb- end;  some  used.     A.  Plate

II.  figs.  15,  24;  Plate  VIII.  fig.  2.

19.  Nine  Flakes  tanged  at  both  ends,  of  various  sizes,  without  distinct  marks  of  use.

20.  Eleven  scimitar-shaped,  pointed  Flakes,  somewhat  like  Share-bones*.    A.  Plate  XVIII.  figs.  1,  4, 5,  6,  7.

21.  Five  chisel-ended  Flakes,  both  narrow  and  broad,  with  the  end-edge  either  slightly  convex,  straight,  or

oblique.     (Compare  A.  Plate  XLII.  fig.  5,  from  La  Madelaine.)

22.  Six  crescent-ended  Implements,  or  Flakes  hollowed  at  the  broad  thin  end.

23.  Two  broad-ended  Flakes  with  two  hollows  and  three  points  worn  or  chipped  out  of  the  terminal  edge.

24.  Twenty-seven  flakes  (two  of  them  tanged),  with  a  broad  thin  end  worn  or  worked  away  obliquely  and

hollow,  so  that  a  lateral  point  remains,  sometimes  sharp,  generally  blunt.  Angle-scrapers  and  Rimers.
A.  Plate  XVIII.  fig.  10.

25.  Fifteen  Flakes,  some  simple,  some  tanged,  and  some  broken ;  worn  or  dressed  at  one  end  to  a  single

point,  and  serviceable  as  piercers  or  rimers,  side-scrapers,  or  double  angle-scrapers :  one  short,  chipped
to  a  sagittate  form,  fig.  la,  6,  page  21.

26.  Fourteen  more  or  less  dressed,  blade-like  Flakes,  worn  or  chipped  into  a  long  deep  notch  on  one  side  at

one  end  (Knives,  Side-scrapers,  or  Angle-scrapers ;  and  Arrow-heads,  if  regarded  with  point  upwards,
which  otherwise  is  supposed  to  have  been  inserted  in  a  haft).  Nine  are  worn  on  the  left  edge,  the
worn  end  being  forwards  and  the  ridge-face  upwards ;  four,  on  the  right  edge ;  fragments  of  the  sharp
end,  five.  A.  Plate  XVIII.  fig.  10.

*  See  also  the  figures  of  similar  specimens  from  the  Duruthy  Cave,  Pyrenees,  in  MM.  Lartet  &  Duparc's
Memoir  on  "Une  Sepulture  des  anciens  Troglodytes  &c.,"  1874,  8vo,  Paris,  p.  49,  pi.  19  (40).  figs.  7,  9.


OBJECTS  OF  STONE  AT  LES  EYZIES.  253

27.  Fourteen  small,  straight,  narrow  Flakes,  or  Side-scrapers,  used  or  chipped  along  one  edge  as  far  back  as

the  ridge ;  some  broken.     (Like  A.  Plate  II.  figs.  9,  10  ;  and  Plate  XLI.  fig.  18.)

28.  One  small  narrow  Flake  with  five  semicircular  notches  on  one  edge.     A.  Plate  XLI.  fig.  5.

29.  One  small,  narrow,  double-pointed  Flake,  shuttle-shaped  by  chipping  along  the  edges,  with  the  scaling

on  the  ridge-face.     Like  A.  Plate  VIII.  fig.  4,  from  Laugerie  Haute,  but  smaller.

'lakes,  436  :  grey,  328  ;  drab,  cream-coloured,  and  white  (rare),  56 ;  brown,  40 ;  purple,  2 ;  red,  10.
,  simple :  not  used,  nor  dressed,  111;  either  used,  or  dressed,  or  both,  181.
,  tanged :  at  one  end,  39  ;  at  both  ends,  9  :  mostly  used.
,  scimitar-shaped,  11.
,  chisel-ended,  5.
,  hollow-ended,  8.
,  pointed  by  one  lateral  notch,  27.
,  pointed  by  two  lateral  notches,  15.

,  dressed  sharp  at  one  end  and  broadly  notched  on  one  side  at  the  other,  14.
,  dressed  or  used  throughout  one  edge,  14.
,  notched  along  one  edge,  1 .     •
,  dressed  to  shuttle-shape,  1.


4.  SPLINTERS.

Twelve  Splinters  from  the  edges  of  worked  and  used  Implements ;  triangular  in  section,  crooked,  and  bayonet-
like.     The  chips  of  "  tanging."     Compare  A.  Plate  XLI.  fig.  10,  from  La  Madelaine.

Splinters  from  edges  of  dressed  or  used  Implements,  12.


5.  "  SCRAPERS,"  OR  "THUMB-FLINTS."

1.  Eight  large  and  small  one-ended  "Thumb-flints"  or  "Scrapers,"  made  out  of  Core-end  Flakes.

2.  Thirteen  Scraper-ended  Flakes  (slightly  rounded  at  one  end).

3.  A  Flake  roughly  rounded  at  one  end  and  notched  on  one-side  close  by ;  broken.

4.  Nine  Flakes  rounded  at  one  end,  and  squared,  partly  pointed,  or  irregularly  shaped  at  the  other :  one,

short,  rounded  at  one  end,  and  roughly  squared  at  the  other,  is  stained  with  haematite.     A.  Plate  XXIV.
figs.  5,  9.

5.  Fifteen  Flakes,  long  and  short,  rounded  at  one  end,  more  or  less  pointed,  rough,  bruised,  or  smoothed  at

the  other ;  and  three  similar  but  imperfect  by  loss  of  the  rounded  end.

6.  Three  Flakes  rounded  at  the  bulb-end.     A.  Plate  XXXIV.  fig.  9.

7.  Eleven  Flakes  rounded  at  the  end  opposite  to  the  bulb  :  five  short,  rough,  A.  Plate  XXIV.  figs.  2,  5,  9  ;

six  of  the  ordinary  form,  straight  and  parallel- sided,  A.  Plate  XXIV.  fig.  10,  Plate  XXXIV.  figs.  2,
10 ;  and  one  with  oblique  end,  A.  Plate  XLII.  fig.  4.

8.  Twenty  spatulate  Scrapers,  varying  in  length ;  two  broken.     A.  Plate  VII.  fig.  13.

9.  Twenty-two  tanged  Scrapers ;  two  broad  and  subrhomboidal,  A.  Plate  VII.  fig.  8 ;  the  others  varying  in

breadth,  A.  Plate  VII.  figs.  7,  9,  11;  two  broken.

10.  Five  tanged  Implements  like  the  Scrapers,  but  broken,  wanting  the  rounded  end :  one  angular  at  the
broad  end,  A.  Plate  VIII.  fig.  7.


254


RELIQUIAE  AQUITANIC^:.


11.  Fifteen  imperfect  Scrapers,  one  end  having  been  broken  off:    five  not  much  shortened;  ten  much

shortened :  one  of  these  latter  has  a  part  of  the  rounded  edge  smoothed  by  use ;  another  has  had  its
side-edges  used  and  is  stained  with  haematite.

12.  Eight  Scrapers,  various,  some  tanged,  some  irregular  in  shape,  some  broken.

13.  Fifteen  double  Scrapers  (Flakes  rounded  at  both  ends),  long  and  short,  one  of  the  latter  much  smooth* I

on  one  of  the  terminal  edges.     A.  Plate  XXIV.  figs.  13,  14 ;  Plate  XXXIV.  fig.  7.

14.  Six  double  Scrapers,  damaged  at  one  end.     A.  Plate  XXXIV.  fig.  2.

15.  An  irregular  double  Scraper  ;  short,  and  roughly  rounded  at  the  ends.

16.  Three  rounded  or  circular  Scrapers.     A.  Plate  XXXVII.  fig.  5.

•'Scrapers,"  155:  grey,  100;  drab  and  cream-coloured,  35;  yellow,  11;  brown,  8;  purple,  1.
Rounded  at  one  end :  not  tanged,  often  used  at  the  narrow  end,  100  ;  tanged,  30.
Hounded  at  both  ends,  22.
Circular,  3.


Fig.  87.

A  Core-end  Flake  (half  purple,  and  half  Yellowish-grey),  dressed  as  a  Scraper,  from  La  Madelaine.


a,  Ridge-face.


b,  Edge.


c,  Flake-face.


FOSSIL  MAX  FROM   LA   MADELAINE  AND   LAUGEEIE  BASSE.


255


XXV.

FOSSIL  MAN  FROM  LA  MADELAINE  AND  LAUGERIE  BASSE.  By  M.  E.  T.  HAMS-,  M.D.,
Assistant-Naturalist  in  the  Museum  of  Natural  History,  Assistant-General-Secretary  of  the  Anthro-
pological Society  of  Paris,  Memher  of  the  Anthropological  Societies  of  London,  Florence,  and  Moscow.

[C.  Plate  IX.  &  X.,  double.]

HUMAN  Palaeontology  has  had  the  rare  good  fortune  to  base  its  first  descriptions
on  the  examination  of  osseous  remains  presenting  extremely  pronounced  anato-
mical peculiarities.  The  Neanderthal  Man  gave  rise  to  numerous  publications,
in  which  the  more  salient  features  of  his  special  morphology  were  in  turn  pointed
out ;  and  anthropologists  have  been  able  to  group  around  this  typical  description
those  of  less  striking  examples  belonging  to  the  same  ethnic  division.  In  the
same  way,  for  the  great  dolichocephalic  race  of  the  South  of  France  the  skeletons
from  Cro-Magnon,  and  especially  that  of  the  "  Old  Man,"  have  furnished  charac-
teristics which  have  been  again  found,  more  or  less  attenuated,  in  the  other
Stations  of  the  Reindeer  Period  in  the  same  or  adjacent  Provinces.  The  human
bones  from  La  Madelaine,  Laugerie  Basse,  Bruniquel,  &c.  have  recently  been
successively  compared  with  those  from  the  Eock-shelter  of  Cro-Magnon;  and,
thanks  to  the  exaggerated  ethnic  characters  of  the  latter,  a  number  of  pecu-
liarities of  a  secondary  order,  which  at  first  had  escaped  notice,  have  been  recog-
nized and  appreciated.  We  have  been  able,  up  to  a  certain  point,  to  classify  the
characters,  the  degree  of  fixity  of  which  has  been  brought  out  by  all  these  com-
parisons ;  consequently  to  determine  which  are  the  constant  features  of  the  race,
and  which  are  individual  variations,  and  the  amount  of  the  latter ;  and  finally,
with  the  aid  of  these  determinations,  to  commence  the  study  of  the  extension  of
this  ethnic  group  in  space  and  time.

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  remark  that,  as  these  comparative  studies  are  founded
on  the  examination  of  only  a  very  few  bones,  up  to  the  present,  the  conclusions
which  may  be  drawn  from  them  cannot  be  presented  as  absolutely  definitive.
Such  as  they  are,  however,  these  researches  may  be  usefully  put  forth  in  this
work ;  and  we  will  give  a  rapid  survey  of  them,  limited  to  the  centre  of  opera-
tions of  the  lamented  Authors,  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  which  presides  over
the  publication  of  the  materials  that  are  to  complete  it.


256  EELIQUI^E  AQIJITANIC.*:.

I.

In  the  preceding  Parts  of  this  work*  detailed  descriptions  have  been  given  of
the  anatomical  conformation  of  the  Cro-Magnon  individuals.  The  recent  "  finds  "
at  Laugerie  Basse,  and  the  older  one  at  La  Madelaine,  which  we  are  now  about  to
describe,  supply  reduced  forms  of  what  was  excessive  in  the  Troglodytic  family
discovered  by  M.  L.  Lartet :  some  characters,  to  which  our  colleagues  attached
exaggerated  importance,  lose  a  little  of  their  value;  several  features,  reputed
constant  because  found  in  all  the  subjects  from  the  Burial-place  of  Les  Eyzies,
do  not  possess  the  fixity  which  was  attributed  to  them;  the  individual  variations
appear  greater ;  but,  on  the  whole,  the  ethnical  characteristics  subsist  nearly  as
presented  by  MM.  Broca  and  Pruner-Bey.  The  whole  of  the  facts  obtained,
however,  give  now  the  notion  of  a  mean  which  must  be  very  closely  approximate,
and  which  will  be  but  little  modified  by  fresh  discoveries,  at  least  in  the  Valley  of
the  Ve'zere.

The  number  of  subjects  exhumed  at  Laugerie  Basse  by  the  able  and  persevering
archaeologist  Elie  Masse"nat  is  four.  Lartet  and  Christy  found  at  La  Madelaine
the  remains  of  a  fifth  individual.  We  will  study  these  five  fossils  seriatim,  com-
mencing with  that  which  has  become  celebrated  under  the  name  of  "  the  crushed
Man  "  from  Laugerie,  and  bears  the  "  No.  4  "  in  M.  Elie  Massenat's  collection.

Skeleton  from  Laugerie  Basse  ("No.  4"). — M.  de  Mortilletf  communicated
the  discovery  of  this  skeleton  briefly  to  the  Anthropological  Society  of  Paris,  on
the  4th  of  April,  ]  872 ;  and  M.  Cartailhac  gave  a  detailed  description  of  it  in  a
memoir  presented  to  the  Natural-History  Society  of  Toulouse  in  the  course  of  the
same  month  J.  From  the  information  gathered  by  these  two  archaeologists,  as  well
as  from  that  which  the  principal  author  of  the  discovery  himself  forwarded  to  us,
the  Skeleton  lay  at  a  depth  of  4  metres,  in  ground  formed  of  ancient  hearths,  strewed
with  large  blocks  of  fallen  rock  from  the  escarpment  which  overhangs  the  Quater-
nary Station  of  Laugerie  Basse.

The  annexed  figure  will  make  intelligible  the  relations  of  the  skeleton  to  the
deposits  of  the  Reindeer  Period  which  surround  and  overly  it.  Beneath  and

*  PRUNER-BEY,  An  Account  of  the  Human  Bones  found  in  the  Cave  of  Cro-Magnon ;  P.  BROCA,  On  the
Human  Skulls  and  Bones  found  in  the  Cave  of  Cro-Magnon,  near  Les  Eyzies  :  swpra,  pp.  73-92,  and  97-122.

f  "  Les  hommes  des  cavernes  a  Fepoque  de  la  Madelaine,"  Bull.  Soc.  d'Anthrop.  de  Paris,  2e  serie,  vol.  vii.
p.  489,  1872 ;  Materiaux  pour  1'Hist.  de  I'Homme,  ser.  2,  vol.  vii.  p.  232.

J  '  Un  Sqnelette  humain  de  I'nge  du  Eenne  a  Laugerie  Basse  (Dordogne),'  8vo,  from  the  '  Bull,  de  la  Soc.
d'Hist.  Nat.  de  Toulouse,'  1872,  pp.  18,  19.  See  also  '  Materiaux '  &c.  ser.  2,  vol,  vii.  p.  224,  pi.  9.


FOSSIL  MAN  FROM  LA  MADELAINE  AND  LATJGERIE  BASSE.


257


behind  a  recent  structure  used  as  a  sheepfold,  in  the  construction  of  which
some  ancient  deposits,  1-45  metre  (4  ft.  8^  in.)  thick,  which  are  still  seen  filling
the  entire  depth  of  the  Shelter,  have  in  part  disappeared,  a  layer,  1'25  metre
(4  ft.  1  in.)  in  thickness,  principally  of  large  fallen  stones  (B  B),  was  met  with,
among  which  were  continued,  more  or  less  dislocated,  the  hearths  FF,  with
chipped  flints  and  worked  hones  from  the  superficial  bed.


In  order  to  get


Fig.  88.

Section  of  the  Rock-Shelter  at  Laugerie  Basse,  showing  the  Human  Skeleton  "  No.  4  "  of  the  Massenat

Collection,  in  situ.


A,  The  skeleton.
B  B,  Blocks  of  fallen  rock.
R  R'  R",  Lower  rocks,  beneath  which  the
gallery  was  excavated.


FF,  Palaeolithic  hearths.
T  T',  Ancient  level  of  the  talus,  cut  down
in  order  to  make  a  sheepfold.


beneath  these  blocks  (some  of  which  are  9  metres  in  length,  2  in  breadth,  and
2  in  thickness),  M.  Massenat  and  his  collaborators  excavated  a  gallery  under  the
rocks  B  B'  B"  of  our  section,  and  in  doing  so  brought  to  light  a  new  layer
of  hearths  of  1-2  metre  (3  ft.  ll£  in.)  thickness,  abounding  in  archasological  and
pala?ontological  remains  of  all  sorts,  and  but  little  deranged  by  the  fall  of  the
rocks  which  rested  on  them.  The  skeleton  was  at  A,  its  skull  to  the  north-east,

2N


258  BELIQUI^E  AQUITANIC^E.

towards  the  Ve'zere,  the  feet  to  the  south-west,  towards  the  further  end  of  the
Shelter.  It  lay  on  its  left  side,  in  a  crouching  posture,  the  left  hand  upon  the
corresponding  parietal,  the  right  on  the  neck,  the  elbows  towards  the  knees,  one
of  the  feet  somewhat  drawn  up  towards  the  pelvis.  To  M.  Cartailhac  it  repre-
sented an  individual  overtaken  by  a  fall  of  earth,  and  bending  himself  together  in
order  to  escape  death.  The  vertebral  column  was  crushed  under  the  edge  of  a
large  block  of  stone,  the  pelvis  dashed  to  pieces ;  but  some  of  the  limb-bones
were  nearly  intact,  and  the  skull  in  a  favourable  condition  for  a  tolerably  detailed
description.

Among  the  limb-bones  accessible  to  examination,  the  most  remarkable  are  the
right  humerus  and  fibula,  which  M.  Massenat  was  able  to  disengage  uninjured
from  the  block  in  which  the  skeleton  is  enclosed.  Still  these  two  bones  are
imperfect,  the  humerus  wanting  a  portion  of  its  head,  and  the  fibula  having
lost  its  upper  extremity.  It  is  easy  to  restore  the  parts  that  are  wanting,
by  comparing  these  with  the  similar  bones  found  at  Cro-Magnon,  especially
those  of  the  "  Old  Man."  The  humerus,  in  its  present  state,  is  309  rnillims.
(12  inches)  in  length ;  comparison  shows  that  about  30  millims.  (1'18  inch)  must
be  added  to  this  to  give  its  total  length  :  thus  completed,  it  measures  335  millims.
(12-19  inches);  that  is  to  say,  it  equals,  or  falls  very  little  short  of  the  mean
length  of  those  from  Cro-Magnon*,  which  allows  us  to  suppose  that  our  subject
must  have  been  not  far  from  the  height  (l-8  metre  =5  ft.  11  in.)  assigned  to  the
men  of  the  Rock-Shelter  discovered  by  M.  Louis  Lartet.  It  repeats,  moreover,
all  the  other  exceptional  characters  of  the  humeri  found  in  that  Station.  The
shaft  (diaphysis)  is  long  and  stout,  somewhat  compressed  laterally,  with  a
thick  and  rugose  posterior  border,  enormous  deltoid-muscular  impressions,  a
short  but  well-defined  groove  of  torsion.  The  inferior  extremity  is  remark-
able for  its  width  (66  millims.  or  2-6  inches),  the  prominence  of  its  epitrochlea
(exceeding  1  centim.  =0'39  inch),  and  the  dimensions  in  all  directions  of  its
articular  surfaces.  This  inferior  extremity,  flattened  antero-posteriorly,  is  a  little
incurved  forwards,  the  curvature  commencing  at  the  junction  of  the  middle  and
inferior  thirds.  The  olecranian  and  sigmoid  cavities  are  separated  by  a  relatively
thick  partition  f.

The  much  more  striking  anatomical  characters  described  in  the  fibulae  from
Cro-Magnon  are  found  with  extremely  remarkable  exaggerations  (C.  Plate  IX.  &  X.
fig.  12)  in  the  fibula  of  "No.  4"  from  Laugerie  Basse.  The  length  of  the  frag-
ment exceeds  34  centims.  (13'4  inches);  and  to  this  about  4-J  centims.  (1-8  inch)

*  Explanation  of  C.  Plate  VI.,  p.  91.  t  Vide  supra,  p.  84.


FOSSIL  MAN  FKOM  LA  MADELAINE  AND  LATJGERIE  BASSE.  259

should,  apparently,  be  added,  which  would  make  its  total  length  nearly  39  centims.
(15-3  in.),  nearly  equal  to  that  assigned  by  M.  Pruner-Bey  to  the  fibula  of  the
Old  Man  of  Cro-Magnon  (C.  Plate  VI.  fig.  4)*.

M.  Broca,  in  describing  this  latter,  mentions  particularly  the  depth  of  its  longi-
tudinal sulci,  and  the  prominence  of  the  crest  for  the  ligamentum  interosseum —
conditions  essentially  influenced  by  muscular  actions.  In  our  subject  the  former
has  received  an  astonishing  development.  The  external  face  of  the  bone,  which
gives  attachment  to  the  lateral  peronsei,  is  at  the  same  time  widened  and  sunk  to
such  a  degree  that  the  sulcus  which  furrows  it,  and  which  even  on  "No.  1"  from
Cro-Magnon  had  the  very  unusual  depth  of  5  millims.  (0'2  inch),  penetrates  here  to
a  maximum  of  8  millims.  (O3  inch)  within  the  plane  that  unites  the  external  and
anterior  angles.  The  groove  for  the  flexor  hallucis  longus  is  also  very  strongly
pronounced,  as  well  as  the  rugosities  for  the  inferior  fibres  of  that  muscle.  The
linea  interossea  is  salient  and  convex.  The  body  of  the  bone,  relatively  stout,  is
remarkable  for  its  total  outward  and  slightly  hindward  curvature — a  curvature,
like  that  of  the  humerus  described  above,  not  to  be  confounded  with  those  result-
ing from  rachitis,  which  are  very  different.  In  fine,  the  lower  extremity  is  enor-
mous, and  all  its  details  extremely  pronounced.

We  shall  find  again  in  the  anatomy  of  the  Skull  of  the  Man  of  Laugerie  the
analogies  which  strike  us  in  studying  his  long  bones.  Indeed,  in  almost  all  the
portions  which  remain  intact,  it  reproduces  the  traits  belonging  to  the  male  crania
from  the  Shelter  of  Cro-Magnon.  In  its  cephalic  curves  it  assimilates  particu-
larly to  the  cranium  "  No.  3,"  described  at  page  78,  to  which  it  is  little  inferior  in
dimensions.  Its  antero-posterior  diameter  not  exceeding  195  millims.  (7'68  inches),
and  its  transverse  diameter  reaching  146  millims.  (5'75  inches),  the  diminution
affects  simultaneously  and  in  nearly  equal  proportion  all  the  bones  of  the  cranial
arch  :  the  frontal,  equal  to  that  of  the  cranium  "  No.  3  "  from  Cro-Magnon  in  the
dimensions  of  its  base  (diam.  front,  min.  97  millims.  or  3'8  inches;  biorb.  ext.
Ill  millims.  or  4'37  inches;  biorb.  int.  101  millims.  or  3-98  inches),  is  a  little
shorter  (length  135  millims.  or  5'32  inches)  and  narrower  in  its  maximum  width
(118  (?)  millims.  or  4'65  inches).  It  has  besides  almost  completely  the  morpho-
logy of  the  crania  with  which  we  compare  it,  resembling  a  little  more  closely
"No.  1"  of  the  same  Shelter  by  the  existence  of  a  small  median  arching  com-
mencing immediately  above  the  glabella.

The  parietal  (the  length  of  which  it  is  difficult  to  estimate,  on  account  of  the
many  fractures  it  has  suffered)  appears  to  measure  125  millims.  (4'9  inches)  along

*  See  p.  83.

2N2


260  BELIQULE  AQDTTANICLE.

the  curve,  consequently  7  millims.  (0-276  inch)  less  than  that  of  the  cranium  with
which  we  are  particularly  comparing  it.

Of  the  occipital  the  superior  angle  only  is  preserved.  In  the  cast  which  we
have  before  us  the  angle  of  the  lambdoidal  suture  appears  to  be  occupied  by  a
small  Wormian  bone.  If  this  exists  in  the  original,  it  constitutes  a  further  point
of  resemblance  to  the  crania  from  Cro-Magnon,  of  which  two  out  of  three  have
these  supernumerary  bones  behind.  We  have  elsewhere  expressed  our  opinion  on
the  signification  of  these  anomalies* ;  we  revert  to  it  here  merely  to  insist  upon
their  relative  frequency  in  the  Cave-people  of  the  V6zere,  whose  cranial  synostosis
usually  follows  Gratiolet's  law,  of  which  our  law  of  inverse  anomalies  is,  in  truth,
only  a  corollary.

The  sutures  of  the  cranium  of  the  crushed  Man  of  Laugerie  appear  to  be  open,
and  seem  to  us  tolerably  simple.  Comparison  of  them  with  those  in  the  skulls
from  the  Shelter  of  Cro-Magnon  leads  us  to  believe  that  he  was  not  adult ;  we
know,  in  fact,  that  in  the  adult  "No.  3"  the  obliteration  of  the  sutures  was  already
far  advanced,  and  that  "No.  4,"  in  which  the  "wisdom-tooth"  had  not  yet  emerged,
already  presented  points  of  effacement  of  the  coronal  and  sagittal  sutures.  Never-
theless the  teeth  of  the  latter  individual  were  considerably  worn ;  and  we  shall  see

Fig.  89.

Cranium  from  Laugerie  Basse,  "  No.  4."     Profile,  one  fourth  natural  size.     (Copied,  by  permission  of  the
publishers,  MM.  Bailliere  etfik,from  the  'Crania  Ethnica,'  par  MM.de  Quatrefages  et  Hamy.)


HE.


that  the  Man  of  Laugerie  Basse  is  also  remarkable  for  his  greatly  impaired
dentition.  Beneath  a  face  deformed  by  vertical  crushing  (fig.  89),  and  from
which  no  anatomical  description  can  be  drawn,  an  incomplete  dental  arc  appears,

*  "  Kecherches  sur  lea  fontanelles  anomales  du  crane  humain,"  Journal  de  1'Anatomie  et  de  la  Physiologic
de  M.  Ch.  Eobin,  Nov.  1870-71,  pp.  599,  600.     Cf.  '  Crania  Ethnica,'  p.  47.


FOSSIL  MAN  FROM  LA  MADELA1NE  AND  LATJGEEIE  BASSE.


261


in  which  are  set  three  incisors,  two  canines,  two  premolars,  and  a  molar,  more
or  less  deeply  worn  away,  and  reduced,  by  that  rather  uneven  wear,  to  lengths
varying  from  8-J  millims.  (£  inch)  for  the  molars  to  7^  millims.  (O29  inch)  for
the  incisors.

We  have  said  that  the  examination  of  the  face  furnishes  little  useful  informa-
tion. One  can  only  ascertain  the  inclination  of  the  upper  border  of  the  orbit,  the
middling  breadth  and  great  prominence  of  the  nose,  of  which  only  fragments
remain,  and  the  existence  of  a  sharp  edge  in  front  of  the  nasal  floor.  The  spina
nasalis  anterior,  quite  broken,  seen  in  the  middle  of  that  edge,  is  short ;  the  inter-
maxillary, which  it  surmounts,  is  not  high,  is  but  little  prognathous,  and  is  rela-
tively depressed  at  the  place  of  insertion  of  the  myrtiform  muscles.  The  alveolus
of  the  canine  tooth,  which  externally  circumscribes  this  depression,  is  salient  and
thick ;  and  the  tooth  which  it  lodges  has  a  deep  root,  making  its  total  length
23  millimetres  (0-9  inch).

The  lower  maxillary  is  enormous ;  its  horizontal  ramus,  extremely  robust,  and
of  unknown  thickness  (imbedded  as  it  is  in  a  matrix  from  which  it  has  not  been
extracted),  has  nearly  the  height  of  "  No.  1"  from  Cro-Magnon.  There  is  still  less
difference  between  the  vertical  dimensions  of  the  symphysis  (36  millims.  or  1-4
inch)  and  of  the  molar  region  (34  millims.  or  1-34  inch).  The  outer  surface  has
almost  as  much  motion;  but  the  mental  fossso  are  shallower;  the  chin  is  less
massive  and  less  pointed,  although  the  alveolo-mental  angle  rises  from  64°  to  65°.
The  wear  of  the  teeth  is  still  more  considerable  than  in  the  upper  jaw :  of  the
molars  a  height  of  only  7  millims.  (0'276  inch)  above  the  alveolar  border  is  left,
and  only  4  millims.  (O157  inch)  of  the  incisors.

The  ascending  ramus,  high  and  broad,  has  its  postero-inferior  angle  broken;
so  that  its  transverse  (41-42  millims.  or  1'61-1*65  inch)  cannot  be  compared  with
its  oblique  diameter,  which  must  have  been  rather  less.  The  angle  formed  by  the
two  rami  is  nearly  the  same  as  that  of  the  mandible  "  No.  1"  from  Cro-Magnon,  as
it  fluctuates  between  108°  and  110°.  The  coronoid  process  is  thick,  flat,  and  rela-
tively short.  The  condyloid  process  and  its  neck  are,  unfortunately,  still  im-
bedded in  the  matrix,  which  conceals  their  forms.


II.

The  bones  which  we  have  now  described  were  not  the  first  discovered  at  the
Station  of  Laugerie  Basse.  As  early  as  1869  M.  Elie  Masse"nat,  in  a  brief  notice
inserted  in  the  'Mate"riaux  pour  1'Histoire  Primitive,'  proved  the  finding  of  a


262  RELIQUI^  AQUITAXICLE.

quantity  of  bones — humeri,  femurs,  tibias,  maxillaries,  &c., — and  a  great  number
of  incisor  and  molar  teeth*.  The  long  bones,  although  "perfectly  preserved  and
without  the  slightest  scratch  or  notch,"  appeared  to  their  discoverer  to  have  been
perhaps  associated  with  some  scene  of  cannibalism.  If  we  observe  that  certain
existing  savages,  and  the  Esquimaux  in  particular,  have  so  little  respect  for  the
remains  of  their  kind,  removed  by  various  circumstances  from  their  burial-places,
that  they  allow  them  to  be  dragged  round  their  huts  with  the  osseous  remains  of
the  animals  they  have  eaten  f,  we  shall  readily  account  for  these  accumulations  of
human  bones  in  the  hearths  of  Laugerie  Basse,  whither  many  causes  might  bring
them  after  inhumation,  of  which  if  proof  were  needed,  it  would  be  furnished
by  the  Shelter  of  La  Madelaine  and,  perhaps,  that  which  covered  "No.  4"  just
described.

"Whether  devoured  by  their  kind,  or  snatched  from  sepulture  by  some  cause  or
other,  the  Men  found  at  the  commencement  of  1869  at  Laugerie  Basse  have  not
been  anatomically  described.  We  know  only  that  a  humerus  a  little  shorter  than
that  of  "  No.  4  "  reached  32  centims.  (12'6  inches),  and  that  caries  is  very  rarely
met  with  in  the  numerous  teeth  discovered  by  M.  Massenat.

A  generous  communication  from  that  intelligent  and  conscientious  observer
enables  us  to  add  to  this  rather  vague  information  the  description  of  three  crania,
collected  under  conditions  comparable  with  those  of  the  skeleton  described  above.

Cranium  "No.  V  from  Laugerie  Basse. — This  male  cranium  is,  unfortunately,
reduced  to  its  posterior  half;  but  it  repeats,  in  a  remarkable  manner,  in  the
parietal,  temporal,  and  occipital  regions,  the  characters  of  the  "  Old  Man "  of
Cro-Magnon,  of  which  it  is  a  copy  with  reduced  dimensions,  especially  crosswise.
The  characters  of  the  parietal  and  temporal  bones  can  be  completely  studied  on
the  right  side,  where  these  bones  are  almost  entire.  The  parietal  curve  and
protuberances,  the  curved  temporal  line,  and  the  sagittal  suture  recall  exactly
what  was  said  of  the  same  region  in  the  male  crania  from  Cro-Magnon.  The
bone  is  merely  a  little  shorter  (130  millims.  or  5  inches,  measured  along  the
curve),  and  its  posterior  flattening  is  a  little  less  pronounced;  the  curved  line  is
well  marked,  but  not  exaggerated ;  and  the  suture  is  obliterated  at  the  junction
of  the  anterior  with  the  middle  third  of  the  sagittal.  The  squamous  portion  of
the  temporal  is  broken  along  its  margin ;  and  consequently  we  do  not  know  its

*  "  Objets  graves  et  sculptes  de  Laugerie  Basse  (Dordogne),"  Mat.  pour  FHist.  prim,  et  nat.  de  PHomme,
ser.  2,  vol.  i.  1869,  p.  356.

f  See  Parry's  Voyage  and  Lyon's  Journal  cited  by  Sir  J.  Lubbock,  '  Prehistoric  Times,'  p.  395.


FOSSIL  MAN  FKOM  LA  MADELAINE  AND  LATJGEBIE  BASSE.  263

form ;  but  its  mastoid  process,  projecting  a  little  outward,  is  but  little  inferior  in
strength  and  length  to  that  of  the  "  Old  Man  "  of  Cro-Magnon ;  only  the  posterior
root  of  the  zygoma  is  separated  from  it  by  a  shallower  and  less  distinct  depres-
sion. This  root  is  itself  almost  obliterated,  especially  above  the  auditory  fora-
men, where  it  is  scarcely  apparent.  Finally,  what  is  seen  of  the  zygoma  stands
out  prominently.

The  occipital,  of  which  only  the  squamous  portion  remains  nearly  intact,  shows
at  its  superior  angle  no  anomaly  of  ossification.  But  it  affects  a  curve  similar  to
that  of  "  No.  1"  from  Cro-Magnon,  and  nearly  of  the  same  length — superior  occi-
pital curve  68  millinis.  (2'68  inches),  inferior  56  millims.  (2-2  inches).  Its  width
is  a  little  greater  than  that  of  the  cranium  which  serves  as  a  term  of  comparison ;
and  it  bears  on  its  surface  a  remarkable  grouping  of  muscular  lines,  such  as  is  seen
in  C.  Plate  II.  fig.  2.  It  has  no  distinct  occipital  protuberance.

Cranium  "No.  2  "  from  Laugerie  Basse. — The  female  cranium  numbered  "  2  "
in  the  Massenat  Collection  consists  of  a  cranial  arch  comprising  the  frontal  and
parietals  nearly  complete  and  the  almost  entire  squamous  portion  of  the  occipital.
It  closely  resembles  the  cranium  of  the  same  sex  found  at  Cro-Magnon,  from
which  it  differs  a  little  by  its  somewhat  smaller  dimensions.  An  exact  account
of  the  extent  of  this  reduction  will  be  obtained  by  comparing  the  numbers  which
we  have  arranged  in  the  Table  accompanying  this  Memoir.

There  is  nothing  remarkable  in  its  morphology  which  we  have  not  already
indicated  in  the  preceding  descriptions;  only  those  ethnic  characters  manifest
themselves  with  the  attenuations  proper  to  the  sex,  attenuations  which  are  gene-
rally the  more  considerable  the  nearer  the  race  is  to  the  savage  state.

Above  the  scarcely  visible  superciliary  arcs  the  forehead  rises  vertically  as  far
as  the  level  of  the  well-marked  lateral  protuberances,  as  often  happens  in  the
female.  The  middle  frontal  protuberance  is  continued  by  a  sort  of  rudimentary
vaulting,  prolonged  to  the  vicinity  of  the  sagittal  suture.  The  parietal  protube-
rances are  less  salient  and  less  dilated  than  in  the  male  crania.  The  posterior
and  inferior  flattening  is  but  little  visible,  the  occipital  presenting  only  a  slight
rising  behind.  The  occipital  protuberance  is  but  little  marked;  the  curves  are
gentle ;  and  the  cerebellar  plane  is  directed,  as  in  the  male  crania,  very  obliquely
forward.

Cranium  "No.  3"  from  Laugerie  Basse. — By  the  side  of  the  Norma  verticalis
of  the  female  cranium  just  described  we  have  drawn  (p.  264),  in  geometrical  pro-


264  EELIQTJI^E  AQUITANICJi:.

jection,  that  of  a  cranium  of  the  same  sex,  distinguished  as  "  No.  3  "  in  M.  Mas-
se"nat's  Collection.     M.  Broca,  who  has  spoken  of  this  cranium  in  a  recent  commu-

Figs.  90  and  91.

(Copied,  ly  permission  of  the  publishers,  MM.  Bailliere  etfils,from  the  '  Crania  Ethnica,'  par  MM.de

Quatrefages  et  Hamy.)

Fig.  90.  Norma  verticalis  of  Cranium  "No.  2"  from         Fig.  91.  Norma  verticalis  of  Cranium  "No.  3"  from
Laugerie  Basse.     (Half  natural  size.)  Laugerie  Basse.     (Half  natural  size.)


nication  to  the  Anthropological  Society  of  Paris*,  believed,  from  the  study  of  an
inadequate  cast,  that  it  had  belonged  to  a  woman  "certainly  very  aged."  He
saw  no  sutures  apparent ;  and  as  the  cranium  was  very  small,  especially  in  front,
and  its  volume  did  not  appear  to  much  exceed  1100  cubic  centims.  (67  cubic
inches),  he  presented  it  as  "a  hitherto  unique  exception "  among  dolichocephalic
crania  of  this  type,  which  have,  on  the  average,  a  greater  volume  than  those  of
our  existing  races.

The  quite  unexpected  exception  noted  by  our  learned  master  and  friend  has  not
been  confirmed.     We  have  obtained  from  M.  Masse"nat  another  cast  of  this  skull,

*  P.  Broca,  "  Sur  trois  cranes  de  1'epoque  du  Eenne,  decouverts  par  M.  Elie  Massenat  a  Laugerie-Basse,"
Bull.  Soc.  d'Anthrop.  de  Paris,  2e  serie,  vol.  viii.  p.  217  (1873).


FOSSIL  MAN  FROM  LA  MADELAINE  AND  LAUGEBIE  BASSE.  265

in  which  all  the  sutures  are  apparent,  and  the  right  cheek-hone  still  adheres  to
the  frontal.  The  characters  of  this  portion  of  the  face,  as  well  as  those  of  the
entire  cranial  arch,  are  incontestably  infantile.  This  skull,  therefore,  does  not
possess  the  value  at  first  assigned  to  it.  Its  juvenility  masks  even  the  ethnic
characters  to  a  great  extent.  All  that  we  can  say  of  it  is  that  it  is  plainly
dolichocephalous  :  its  antero-posterior  diameter  equals  172  millims.  (677  inches) ;
its  maximum  transverse  diameter  reaches  126  millims.  (4'96  inches);  and  its
cephalic  index  is  73'25.  It  will  be  observed  that  it  has  a  large  Wormian  bone
above  the  lambdoidal  suture.


III.

Individuals  of  the  race  of  which  the  skeletons  from  Cro-Magnon  represent  the
most  marked  osteological  type  are  met  with,  in  the  fossil  state,  in  a  considerable
number  of  localities,  widely  distant  from  one  another :  but  the  principal  centre  is
still  the  South  of  France ;  and  among  our  southern  valleys,  that  of  the  V6zere
appears,  up  to  the  present,  to  have  been  the  most  frequented  during  the  whole
of  the  transition  period  which  unites  the  age  of  the  Extinct  with  that  of  the
Retreating  Animals.

Indeed  we  find  again  at  La  Madelaine  as  at  Laugerie,  towards  the  end  of  that
period,  the  same  type  as  at  Cro-Magnon — which  it  is  agreed  to  consider  contem-
poraneous with  "  Lower  Aurignac,"  and  consequently  much  more  ancient.

Lartet  and  Christy,  as  early  as  1864,  noticed  the  presence  of  Man  in  the  fauna
of  La  Madelaine*.  "  In  the  midst  of  this  deposit,"  they  wrote,  "  and  at  a  certain
depth,  a  fragment  of  a  human  skull,  a  half  of  a  jaw-bone,  and  several  long  bones
of  a  tall  subject  have  been  found.  These  human  remains  were  covered  by  the
same  medley  of  bones  of  animals  and  chipped  flints  of  which  this  bed  is  uniformly
constituted  throughout."  Their  state  of  preservation  was  identical  with  that  of
the  bones  of  Reindeer  and  other  mammals.  Not  finding,  however,  what  they
regarded  as  the  result  of  inhumation  in  the  very  place  which  had  served  for  the
meals  of  the  Reindeer-hunters,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  not  perceiving  around
the  human  bones  the  usual  accessories  of  sepulture  of  primordial  times,  the  two
authors  showed  extreme  reserve  as  to  the  date  of  the  skeleton  of  La  Madelaine
whilst  this  remained  an  isolated  discovery.

*  Ed.  Lartet  et  H.  Christy,  "  Sur  des  figures  d'animaux  gravees  ou  sculpte'es  et  autres  produits  d'art  et
d'industrie  rapportables  aux  temps  primordiaux  de  la  periode  humaine,"  Eevue  Archeologique,  April  1864  ;
and  <  L'homme  fossile  en  France '  (Paris :  J.  B.  BaiUiere.  1864,  8vo),  p.  135  et  seq.

2o


260


EELIQULE  AQUITANIOS.


The  observations  collected  at  Lafaye  (Bruniquel),  at  Cro-Magnon,  and  especially
the  state  of  things  at  Laugerie  Basse,  so  similar  to  that  of  La  Madelaine,  soon
showed  that  the  Cave-dwellers  late  in  the  Quaternary  period  had  willingly  buried
their  dead  in  the  places  they  inhabited ;  and  Lartet,  enlightened  as  to  the  true
signification  of  discoveries  of  this  nature  by  reading  Parry,  Lyon,  &c.,  no  longer
hesitated  to  admit  the  genuineness  of  a  piece  of  evidence  which  his  rare  good
faith  and  scrupulous  accuracy  had  at  first  induced  him  to  contest.  In  his  Table
of  the  faunas  of  the  Ve'zere,  the  genus  Homo  appears  at  the  head  of  the  genera  of
Mammalia  exhumed  at  La  Madelaine*.

As  we  have  seen  above,  the  skeleton  of  La  Madelaine  consists  of  the  greater
part  of  a  frontal  bone,  the  half  of  a  left  lower  maxillary,  and  a  number  of  more
or  less  entire  bones  of  the  trunk  and  extremities.

Figs.  92  and  93.

(Copied,  by  permission  of  the  publishers,  MM.  Bailltire  etfils,from  the  '  Crania  Ethnica,'  par  MM.  de

Quatrefages  et  Hamy.)


Fig.  92.  Frontal  Bone  from  La  Madelaine,
side  view.     (Half  natural  size.)


Fig.  93.  The  same,  front  view.     (Half
natural  size.)


The  frontal,  figs.  92  and  93,  and  C.  Plate  IX.  fig.  1  a,  very  much  resembles  that
of  "  No.  4  "  from  Laugerie  Basse,  above  described  (p.  261),  of  which  it  has  the  super-
ciliary arches,  the  subglabellar  depressions,  the  inclination  of  the  orbital  margin,  &c.
It  is  merely  narrower — its  minimum  diameter  scarcely  exceeding  9  centims.  (3*5  in.),
its  external  biorbital  diameter  being  107  millims.  (4-2  in.);  and  the  only  peculiarity
it  presents  is  a  certain  coarseness  of  the  osseous  tissue,  which  is  dense,  relatively
thick  (7  millims.  or  0*276  inch),  and  riddled,  especially  in  the  superciliary  region,
with  numerous  little  vascular  foramina.  A  short  articular  denticulation  at  the


*  Vide  supra,  p.  181.


FOSSIL  MAN  FROM  LA  MADELAINE  AND  LAUGEBIE  BASSE.


207


moderately  close  transversal  sinuosities  shows,  between  the  two  supercilia,  the
last  vestiges  of  the  medio-frontal  suture.  The  suborbital  cavities  are  very  large,
two  in  number  on  the  right  side,  represented  on  the  left  by  a  wide  and  relatively
deep  groove.  What  remains  of  the  nasal  bones  indicates  a  thin  and  prominent
nose.  The  interorbital  space  is  only  25  millims.  (0*98  inch);  and  the  width  of
the  bones  proper  reaches  only  8  millims.  (O315  inch).  The  upper  region  of  the
face  (of  which  alone  we  knew  any  thing)  gives  nearly  the  same  relative  proportions
as  the  same  part  in  the  crania  from  Cro-Magnon,  Laugerie  Basse,  &c. ;  that  is  to
say,  the  median  portion  takes  but  little  part  in  the  transverse  dilatation  which  is
remarked  in  them.

The  mandible,  like  the  frontal,  resembles  the  other  similar  pieces  from  the  valley
of  the  Vezere;  it  reproduces  their  forms  with  a  somewhat  less  injured  appear-
ance. So  far  as  can  be  judged  from  the  fragmentary  state  in  which  it  was  found


Figs.  94  and  95.

(  Copied,  by  permission  of  the  publishers,  MM.  BaiUiere  et  fils,  from  the  '  Crania  Ethnica,'  par  MM.  tie

Quatrefages  ct  Hamy.)


Fig.  94.  Inferior  Maxillary  from  La  Madelaine.
(Seen  from  above.)


Fig.  95.  Inferior  Maxillary  from  La  Naulette.
(Seen  from  above.)


JET.E.


(fig.  94,  and  C.  Plate  IX.  fig.  3),  the  rami  diverge  considerably ;  what  remains  of
the  chin  gives  it  angular  outlines,  repeating  on  a  smaller  scale  those  of  the  chin

-v  2  o  2


268


HELIQULE  AQTJITANICJE.


of  "No.  1"  from  Cro-Magnon.  The  description  of  the  horizontal  rami,  as  well
as  of  the  teeth  which  they  bear,  would  be  very  similar  to  those  above  given  by
Pruner-Bey,  Broca,  and  ourselves.  The  muscular  impressions  are  very  distinct.
The  solidity  of  the  teeth,  the  thickness  of  the  enamel  (nearly  2  millims.),  their
relatively  small  size,  &c.  have  already  been  given  in  this  work.  The  first  molar,
11*5  millims.  long,  is  still  stouter  than  the  second,  the  length  of  which  is  1O5
millims. ;  it  has  five  tubercles,  while  the  latter  has  but  four.  The  wisdom-tooth
is  small,  fixed  by  two  double  roots ;  the  revolving  wear,  proceeding  from  behind
forwards  and  from  within  outwards,  modifies  the  masticating  surfaces  along  an
almost  regular  helicoidal  curve  which  strongly  reminds  us  of  that  in  "  No.  4 "
from  Cro-Magnon,  &c.  One  character  (on  which,  besides,  we  are  not  sufiiciently
enlightened)  deserves  a  more  attentive  examination;  we  mean  the  obliquity  of
the  socket  of  the  second  premolar.  In  the  celebrated  mandible  represented  by
fig.  95  (after  the  engraving  published  by  M.  Dupont*)  this  alveolus  is  directed
obliquely  outward  and  backward.  The  Clichy  mandible  (the  description  of  which
will  be  found  in  the  First  Part  of  the  '  Crania  Ethnica,'  now  publishing,  by  myself
and  M.  de  Quatrefages)  presents  the  same  disposition.  In  that  from  La  Made-
laine,  on  the  contrary,  the  alveolus  of  the  second  premolar  is  oblique  outwards
and  forwards.  "We  shall  finish  the  description  of  the  La-Madelaine  maxillary  by
observing  that  the  horizontal  ramus  is  but  little  inferior  in  thickness  to  that  of
"  No.  3  "  from  Cro-Magnon,  that  its  ascending  ramus,  surmounted  by  a  feeble
condyle  with  a  very  short  neck,  42  millims.  (1'65  inch)  wide,  is  joined  to  the  hori-
zontal ramus  at  an  angle  of  111°,  and,  lastly,  that  the  posterior  angle  is  rounded
and  turned  outwards.

The  only  bony  fragments  of  the  trunk  which  we  have  been  able  to  recognize
consist  of  the  centrum  of  a  cervical  vertebra,  the  same  part  of  a  lumbar  vertebra,
a  fragment  of  a  large  and  stout  rib,  and  a  portion  of  the  right  ilium.  The  first
two  are  void  of  interest,  their  state  of  mutilation  not  permitting  the  study  of  their
apophyses.  The  iliac  bone  is  a  very  good  reproduction  of  the  corresponding  part
of  the  same  bone  in  the  skeleton  from  Cro-Magnon  as  we  have  represented  it  in
Plate  IX.  &  X.  fig.  6,  a  &  b.

Of  the  left  upper  limb  there  remain  the  superior  half  of  the  humeral  shaft,  and
a  small  fragment  of  the  shaft  of  the  ulna ;  and  of  the  right  arm-bones  the  lower
half  of  the  humerus,  and  the  superior  epiphyses  of  the  radius  and  ulna,  completing
the  articulation  of  the  elbow.  The  humerus  is  remarkable  for  an  antero-posterior

*  '  L'Homme  pendant  les  Ages  de  la  Pierre  dans  lea  Environs  de  Dinant-sur-lleuse,'  &c.,  2  Edit.,  1872
(8vo,  Brussels),  p.  100,  figs.  10, 11.


FOSSIL  MAN  FROM  LA.  MADELAINE  AND  LAUGEEIE  BASSE.  269

curvature  similar  to  that  in  the  Laugerie-Basse  subject  above  described,  of  which
it  reproduces  the  other  characters  on  a  slightly  smaller  scale.  Its  maximum  infe-
rior breadth  is  62  millions.  (2-34  inches).

The  ulna  is  broken  at  too  short  a  distance  from  its  superior  articulation  for  its
curvature  to  be  studied  as  in  that  from  Cro-Magnon,  of  which,  however,  fig.  9  of
C.  Plate  IX.  &  X.  gives  a  very  exact  idea.  We  find  in  this  mutilated  extremity
a  character  noticed  by  Dr.  Broca  in  describing  the  Cro-Magnon  bones — the  shal-
lowness  of  the  sigmoid  notch*.  But  as  the  olecranon  and  coronoid  process  do
not  exceed  the  ordinary  dimensions,  the  contrast  remarked  by  Dr.  Broca  between
the  small  extent  of  the  sigmoid  notch  and  the  size  of  the  eminences  which
surround  it  has  no  longer  any  thing  characteristic.  The  upper  extremity  of  the
radius,  too,  offers  nothing  remarkable.

The  right  femur,  in  a  perfect  state  of  preservation,  and  of  which  we  give  the  front
and  side  views,  reproduces,  in  feebler  form,  all  the  special  characters  dwelt  on  by
the  authors  of  the  anatomical  descriptions  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  workt-  Its
length  is  46  centims.  (18  inches), — and  corresponds  to  a  stature  of  1'7  metre  (5  ft.
6-9  in.),  consequently  14  centims.  (5'5  inches)  less  than  that  of  the  tall  Old  Man
of  Cro-Magnon,  and  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  femur  "  No.  2  "  from  the  same
burial-place,  of  which  it  moreover  repeats  the  characters  as  they  are  preserved  in
the  fragments  belonging  to  that  skeleton.  A  piece  of  the  shaft  of  the  left  femur
belonging  to  this  individual  measures  26  millims.  (1'024  in.)  in  minimum  breadth,
and  31  millims.  (1'22  in.)  in  thickness  at  the  same  level;  the  femur  from  La
Madelaine  has  a  breadth  of  27  millims.  (1'06  in.),  and  a  thickness  of  31  millims.
(1-22  in.).  This  latter  dimension  is  slightly  greater  than  the  former,  instead  of
being,  as  is  usually  the  case,  equal  to  it ;  but  the  differences  are  less  pronounced
than  in  the  two  men  of  Cro-Magnon,  whose  femurs  measure  27,  30,  and  31  millims.
(1-06,  1-18,  and  1-22  in.),  and  32,  37,  and  39  millims.  (1'26,  1-42,  and  1'54  in.)  in
thickness.  The  anatomists  who  described  these  bones  remarked  that  those  extra-
ordinary thicknesses  result  from  the  considerable  development  of  the  linea  aspera,
the  crest  of  which  is  extremely  prominent.

The  same  character,  weakened,  is  found  again  in  the  femur  from  La  Madelaine.
The  section  represented  in  fig.  10  c  of  our  Plate  shows  that  the  linea  aspera  is
developed  on  this  bone,  as  on  those  of  the  other  Cave-dwellers  of  the  same  valley,
in  the  form  of  a  small  strengthening  column  applied  to  the  shaft.  The  profile
(fig.  10  b),  which  compared  with  the  front  view  (fig.  10  a)  permits  an  accurate
estimate  to  be  made  of  the  ratio  of  breadth  to  thickness,  gives  at  the  same  time

*  See  above,  p.  110.  t  See  pp.  82  &  102.


270  KELIQUL&  AQUITANICLE.

a  very  correct  idea  of  the  antero-posterior  curvature  of  its  shaft ;  though  not  so
marked  as  in  the  Cro-Magnon  series,  this  curvature  is  greater  than  in  most  of  the
femurs  of  the  present  day.

The  lower  extremity  measures  82  millims.  (3'23  inches)  in  maximum  breadth ;
this  is  about  the  transverse  dimension  of  one  of  the  isolated  lower  extremities
found  at  Cro-Magnon;  the  other  was  narrower,  reaching  only  75  millims.
(2-95  inches).

We  have  only  to  notice  towards  the  upper  extremity  the  existence  of  a  slight
external  antero-lateral  flatness  corresponding  to  the  upper  third  of  the  shaft,  and
coexisting  with  an  outward  and  backward  deflection  of  the  outer  border  of  the
bone.  This  anatomical  feature  (which  appears  to  correspond  with  a  special  mode
of  insertion  of  the  glutei  and  vastus  externus  muscles)  is  one  of  the  most  pronounced
in  the  Old  Man  of  Cro-Magnon ;  and  M.  Pruner-Bey  has  not  failed  to  mention  it.
It  is  probable,  however,  that,  if  we  had  not  from  the  beginning  possessed  osseous
remains  so  exceptionally  characteristic  as  those  of  that  Shelter,  this  peculiar
and  constant  conformation,  which  we  indicate  by  the  way,  being  only  moderately
apparent  in  the  La-Madelaine  subject,  would,  for  some  time  at  least,  have  escaped
observation.

The  tibia  corresponding  to  the  femur  just  described  has  a  length  of  38  centims.
(15  inches)  from  one  articular  surface  to  the  other.  The  femur  measuring  46,  the
ratio  of  the  shin  to  the  thigh  equals  82'6  per  cent. ;  the  same  ratio  in  the  Man  of
Mentone  is  80'42.  These  two  numbers  are  much  higher  than  the  mean  in  our
existing  populations,  which  is  below  77.  Moreover  this  tibia  is  platycnemic,  after
the  fashion  of  those  from  Cro-Magnon,  Mentone,  &c.  The  full  description  given
in  this  work,  by  Dr.  Broca,  relieves  me  from  the  necessity  of  further  detail  on  this
conformation.  It  will  be  sufficient  for  me  to  remind  the  reader  that  the  transverse
flattening  known  in  England  under  the  name  of  "  platycnemism  "  since  the  publica-
tion of  Mr.  Busk's  remarkable  memoir*,  is  exemplified  at  Cro-Magnon  by  breadths
of  26  and  28  millims.  (1  and  1*1  inch)  corresponding  to  thicknesses  of  42  and
46  millims.  (1'65  and  1'81  inch)  at  the  level  of  the  foramen  nutritium.  The
tibia  from  La  Madelaine  has  a  thickness  of  37 '5  millims.  (1-46  inch)  and  a  breadth
of  24  millims.  (0'94  inch).  An  upper  portion  of  the  left  tibia  gives  25'5  for  the
breadth,  and  39  for  the  thickness.

We  have  but  a  few  words  to  say  on  the  other  bones  of  the  lower  limb,  nearly  all

*  'Transactions  of  the  International  Congress  of  Prehistoric  Archaeology,  Third  Session  (Norwich  and
London),  1868 '  (8vo.  London,  1869),  pp.  160  &c.  See  also  the  <  Journal  of  the  Ethnological  Society  of
London,'  January  1871,  vol.  ii.  pp.  457  &c.


FOSSIL  MAN  FROM  LA  MADELAINE  AND  LAUGEBIE  BASSE.  271

unfortunately  much  mutilated.  These  are :— the  lower  articular  extremity  of  the
left  femur,  similar  to  the  corresponding  part  of  the  bone  just  described ;  the  third
lower  quarter  of  the  left  fibula,  repeating  with  considerable  attenuations  the  mor-
phology of  the  corresponding  region  of  the  fibulas  from  Laugerie,  Cro-Magnon,
&c. ;  a  right  calcaneum,  of  which  only  the  non-articular  portion  remains,  mode-
rately salient  behind  (3  centims.  or  1-18  in.),  and  bearing  the  impression  of  an
extremely  stout  tendo  Achillis;  some  unimportant  fragments  of  a  fourth  left  and
a  second  right  metatarsal;  a  first  metatarsal  of  the  left  side,  very  robust  and
strong,  66  millims.  (2'6  in.)  in  length,  13  millims.  (O5  in.)  in  breadth  at  its  nar-
rowest part,  consequently  exceeding  in  both  these  dimensions  the  similar  bone  of
modern  subjects  of  the  same  stature,  and,  besides,  remarkable  (like  that  of  the
Old  Man  of  Cro-Magnon)  for  the  largeness  of  the  articular  surfaces  of  its  pha-
langial  extremity  (C.  Plate  IX.  &  X.  fig.  13,  a,  b,  c) :  this  development,  which  is
especially  considerable  on  the  plantar  side,  was  certainly  connected  with  peculiar
agility  of  the  toes,  which  must  have  executed  with  the  greater  facility  more
extensive  movements  of  prehension.

In  an  adult  European  male  subject  the  antero-posterior  maximum  develop-
ment of  the  metatarso-phalangial  articulation,  measured  circularly,  is  3  centims.
(1'18  in.) ;  in  the  La-Madelaine  man  it  reaches  35  millims.  (1'38  in.) ;  and  in
"No.  1"  from  Cro-Magnon  it  amounts  to  about  37  millims.  (1/46  in.),  which
represents  an  augmentation  of  the  extent  of  articular  surface  by  nearly  one  fourth.
This  trait  (the  last  we  have  to  notice  in  concluding  this  sketch)  is  to  be  regarded
as  much  rather  connected  with  the  manner  of  existence  of  a  savage  population
than  representing  a  more  or  less  peculiar  ethnic  character.  Indeed  we  find  in  a
great  number  of  individuals  now  living  in  a  state  approaching  that  of  our  Cave-
dwellers  modifications  of  the  same  order  in  the  articular  surfaces  of  the  toes :
the  cups  are  hollowed  out,  while  the  heads  of  the  metatarsals  become  rounder,
the  articular  surfaces  gain  in  extent  above  and  especially  beneath,  and  the  corre-
sponding movements  are  extended  and  facilitated.


272


EELIQTJI^E  AQUITANIC^E.


TABLE  OF  MEASUREMENTS  OF  TEE  CRANIA.


LA  MADELAINE.

LACGEBIE  BASSE.

No.  1.

No.  4.

No.  2.

No.  3.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

THE  CALVAEICM.

Diameter,   maximum   an-  1
tero-posterior  .

jnilliin.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.
195

inch.
7-677

millim.

179

168
134
117
97

inch.
7-047

6-614
5-276
4-606
3-819

millim.

172

163

129
108
86
103

480

269?
270?

100

117
116

68
44

72-67
68-80
98-89

87
80?
19

17

29

inch.

6-771

6-417
5-079
4-252
3-386
4-055
18-504

10-59?
10-63?

3-937

4-606
4-567

2-677
1-732

72-67
68-80
98-89

3-425
3-15?

0-748

0-669
1-142

.*T\                           J
,  mial

,  maximum  transverse  .
,  maximum  frontal

140?

5-51?

146
118?
97?

5-748
4-65?
3-82?

92

3-622

iio?

4-33?

,  maximum  occipital

Curve,  total  horizontal    .  .  .  .

550?

21-65?

510?

20-08?

290?
300?

11-42?
11-81?

zontal  j

115

135

125?

4-528

5-315
4-92?

113

133

124

74

More  than

40

74-86
72-38
90-65

107
98?
26

19

4-449

5-236

4-882

2-913

74-86
72-38
90-65

4-213

3-86?
1-024

0-748

rebral  frontal

130

68

56

64°
35°
30°

5-118
2-677

2-205

64°
35°
30°

pital

74-87
66-43

88-18

111

101?
24
85?
26?

23-5

20

74-87
66-43

88-18

4-370
3-98?
0-945
3-35?
1-02?

0-925

0-787

Angle,  parietal  auricular    .  .
,  cerebral  occipital

.   cercbcllar  occipital

Cephalic  index

Fronto-parietal  index

Fronto-orbital  index

THE  FACE.

Breadth,  external  biorbital
,  internal  biorbital  .  .  .  .

107?

4-21?

25

0-984

,  inferior  bimalar    .  .  .

—  ,  maximum,  of  the  nose

Height,  subcerebral  of  the  ]
forehead  j

20

0-787

,  intermaxillary

,  of  the  mastoid  process

31

1-260

Other  measurements  are  wanting,  in  consequence  of  the  mutilation  of  the  specimens.


NOTES  ON  THE  EEINDEER  OF  NEWFOUNDLAND.  273


XXVI.

NOTES  ON  THE  EEINDEEE  (CAEIBOU)  OF  NEWFOUNDLAND.
By  T.  G.  B.  LLOYD,  C.E.,  F.G.S.,  Member  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,  &c.,  &c.

Two  species  (or  varieties?)  of  Eeindeer  have  been  distinguished  by  zoologists
on  the  North- American  continent,  under  the  terms  of  the  "Woodland"  and  the
"Barren-Ground  Caribou"*.  To  the  former  of  these  belong  the  Caribou  of
Lower  Canada,  Nova  Scotia,  and  Newfoundland.

The  Caribou  of  Newfoundland  grows  to  a  large  size.  The  average  weight  of  a
full-grown  stag  may  be  taken  at  about  300  Ibs. ;  I  have  been  informed  by  an
Indian  hunter  that  a  very  large  one  will  weigh  400  Ibs.;  and  Captain  Hardy
states,  in  his  '  Forest  Life  in  Acadie,'  that  a  very  large  buck  will  exceed  that
weight :  but  Mr.  Alexander  Murray,  F.G.S.,  of  St.  John's,  Newfoundland,  puts
the  weight  at  250  Ibs.

The  varieties  in  the  growth  of  the  Antlers  have  been  so  fully  described  by
previous  writers  that  little  need  be  added  to  their  descriptions.  A  brow-snag,
picked  up  on  the  barrens  near  the  west  coast  of  the  island,  measured  across  its
palmated  extremity  the  unusual  breadth  of  18  inches.  •

Mr.  Alexander  Murray  informed  me  that  the  Caribou  of  the  island  has  not
been  known  to  live  more  than  two  years  under  confinement.

During  the  rutting-season,  which,  beginning  early  in  October,  lasts  about  three
weeks,  the  flesh,  marrow,  and  internal  organs  of  the  stags  acquire  a  peculiar
odour,  which  slightly  reminds  one  of  the  Skunk.  At  that  time  the  meat  is  con-
sidered by  the  Indians  to  be  uneatable ;  but  I  found  the  marrow  and  kidneys
not  at  all  unpalatable  f.  In  the  spring  and  winter  their  principal  food  is  the

*  See  Professor  Baird's  "  Description  of  North-American  Mammalia  "  ('  Pacific  Eailroad  Eeports '),  Sir  J.
Eichardson's  'Fauna  Boreali- Americana,'  and  Dr.  King's  'Account  of  Back's  Expedition.'  In  'Harper's
Magazine '  for  November  1874  it  is  stated  that  Judge  Caton,  of  Illinois,  visited  Europe  during  the  preceding
summer  to  study  the  Deer,  and,  contrary  to  his  former  conclusions,  based  on  imperfect  evidence,  is  satisfied
that  between  the  American  and  European  Caribou  there  is  no  specific  difference.

t  Prof.  W.  H.  Flower  informs  me  that  the  Eeindeer,  like  most  other  Euminants,  has  a  gland  between
the  hoofs,  which  secretes  an  oily  substance,  the  scent  of  which  is  supposed  to  assist  the  Deer  in  their  search
for  one  another.

2p


274  KELIQULE  AQUITANIOE.

"Reindeer  Lichen"  (Cladonia  rangiferina).  It  is  well  known  that  the  Caribou
use  their  fore  feet,  and  not  their  antlers,  to  get  at  their  food  under  the  snow;
the  "  Provision  of  Nature,"  therefore,  quoted  by  an  eminent  zoological  authority,
does  not  hold  good  in  the  case  of  the  Reindeer.  During  the  summer  and  fall
they  browse  on  the  leaves  of  the  young  White  Birch  (Betulct  papyracea)  and  of
"  Moose  Wood "  (Abies  striata}.  The  Reindeer  will  also  feed,  according  to
Linnaeus*,  "  on  Progs,  Snakes,  and  even  on  the  Lemming,  often  pursuing  the
latter  to  so  great  a  distance  as  not  to  find  his  way  back  again ;  this  happened,
in  several  instances,  two  years  ago,  when  these  Rats  came  down  in  immense
numbers  from  the  mountains."

The  Stags  shed  their  antlers  about  the  beginning  of  October,  when  they  are
often  seen  with  only  one  of  them  remaining  attached,  which  causes  them  to  hold
their  heads  on  one  side  (may  not  such  an  occurrence  have  given  rise  to  the  sup-
posed existence  of  the  Unicorn  ?  See  above,  p.  44).  The  Does  retain  their  dimi-
nutive appendages  till  the  spring;  the  "Not-does"  of  the  Newfoundlanders,  or
"  Nagwatfat "  of  the  Micmac  Indians,  never  have  antlers.  The  "  Barren  Does  "
are  not  strictly  infertile,  as  the  name  would  imply,  but  are  those  which  from
various  reasons  have  failed  in  producing  their  young ;  they  are  very  fat  during
the  fall  of  the  year,  and  their  flesh  is  highly  esteemed  as  food.  I  have  seen  a
Doe,  when  killed,  with  a  part  of  her  belly  covered  with  milk ;  she  had  probably
been  sucking  herself,  as  there  was  no  fawn  with  her.

The  island  of  Newfoundland  may  be  divided  into  two  sections  by  a  line  running
from  Hall's  Bay,  on  the  east  coast,  along  Indian  Brook,  through  Grand  Pond,  to
St.  George's  Bay  on  the  west  coast,  which  may  be  called  the  northern  and  southern
districts.  The  Caribou  of  the  northern,  like  those  of  the  southern  district,  enter
the  woods  in  the  early  part  of  June,  where  they  remain  until  the  latter  end  of
July,  frequenting  the  sides  of  the  numerous  streams,  where  their  tracks  on  the
sandy  shores  are  often  met  with :  at  that  season  they  wander  about  separately.
About  the  beginning  of  August  they  move  out  of  the  woods,  and  betake  them-
selves to  the  marshes  and  barrens ;  they  now  travel  in  a  southerly  direction  along
the  well-beaten  paths  or  "main  leads,"  from  which  they  diverge  to  rest  awhile
on  some  favourite  feeding-ground — amongst  the  groves  of  Juniper  or  "  Drokes,"
as  they  are  called.  On  the  advent  of  October  the  Stags  select  their  mates ;  and
small  herds  collect  together,  consisting  of  several  Stags  and  a  number  of  Does,
as  the  case  may  be.  At  this  season  serious  encounters  take  place  between  the
rival  "Monarchs  of  the  Waste,"  as  attested  by  the  "locked"  antlers  occasionally

*  Linne,  'A  Tour  in  Lapland,'  edited  by  J.  E.  Smith,  1811,  vol.  i.  p.  162.


NOTES  ON  THE  EEINDEEE  OF  NEWFOUNDLAND.  275

met  with*.  The  Stags  are  now  fearless  of  the  approach  of  the  hunter ;  and  the
Indians,  imitating  their  peculiar  grunting  noise,  easily  "  tole  "  them  within  gun-
shot. On  the  approach  of  winter,  as  indicated  by  the  first  fall  of  snow,  the  small
herds  collect  together  into  "  companies,"  and,  passing  in  a  southerly  direction,
arrive  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  dividing  line  already  described,  where  they
remain,  on  the  marshes,  until  the  second  fall  of  snow  compels  them  to  continue
their  journey.  The  Micmac  hunters,  like  the  Beothuc  Indians  of  former  days,
station  themselves  at  different  points  along  the  waterside  to  intercept  the  Deer
while  crossing  the  water.  When,  from  the  "  look-out "  places  near  their  wig-
warns,  they  see  a  company  of  Deer,  which  has  been  guided  towards  their  stations
by  means  of  the  Deer-fences  t,  swimming  across  the  lake  or  river,  they  push  out
in  their  canoes,  and  massacre  the  defenceless  animals  with  spears  $.  Those  Deer
of  the  northern  district  which  have  escaped  slaughter  pursue  their  course  towards
the  part  of  the  island  between  White-Bear  Bay  and  St.  George's  Bay,  where  they
pass  the  winter,  returning-  northwards  in  the  spring.

The  southern  company  leaves  the  district,  between  the  dividing  line  and  the
Exploits  Waters,  about  the  month  of  October;  and  as  many  of  them  as  have
managed  to  pass  the  "Rubicon,"  between  Exploits  Bay  and  Red-Indian  Pond,
where  the  Indians  lie  in  wait  for  them,  travel  down  south  towards  Fortune  Bay,
where  they  remain  till  about  Christmas  time,  when  a  portion  of  them  retreat  to
the  flat  burnt  district  between  Exploits  Bay  and  Gander  Bay,  the  rest  remaining
in  the  Fortune-Bay  country,  where  they  assemble  in  great  numbers  in  the  month
of  February.  It  is  said  that  five  or  six  Indians  killed  eight  hundred  head  of  Deer
near  Fortune  Bay  in  the  spring  of  1866.  About  April  the  separated  companies
return  northwards  to  the  barrens,  hills,  woods,  and  valleys  between  Grand  Pond
and  Red-Indian  Pond,  where  they  bring  forth  their  young  in  June.  It  is  said  a
good  many  Deer  remain  in  the  same  district  all  the  year  round.  The  general
description  of  the  migrations  of  the  Deer  at  different  seasons  was  gathered  from
the  Micmac  hunters,  whose  occupation  it  is  to  watch  their  movements;  but
possibly  it  may  not  be  accurate  in  all  its  details.

Besides  the  number  of  Deer  destroyed  by  spearing,  great  quantities  are  annually

*  I  saw  two  pairs  of  antlers  in  St.  John's  so  firmly  interlocked  that  they  could  not  have  been  separated
without  breakage :  they  had  belonged  to  an  old  and  a  young  Stag.  One  of  the  points  of  a  brow-snag  of
the  latter  had  pierced  the  orbit  of  the  former,  and  had  probably  caused  immediate  death,  entailing  a  fatal
legacy  for  the  survivor.

t  See  paper,  by  the  Author,  "  On  the  Beothucs  "  ('  Journal  of  Anthropological  Institute,'  vol.  iv.  p.  19).

J  See  Von  WrangeFs  '  Polar  Sea,'  p.  190,  for  a  very  interesting  description  of  the  spearing  of  Eeindeer
on  the  Aniuj  River.

2r2


276  EELIQULE  AQTJITANICJL

killed  by  stalking  them  on  the  barrens  and  marshes  with  guns ;  and  sometimes
they  are  caught  in  nooses  set  in  their  "  runways."

Whilst  living  with  an  Indian  hunter  in  his  wigwam  on  the  side  of  Red-Indian
Pond,  I  was  enabled  to  gain  some  information  about  the  crossing  of  the  Deer  at
that  spot.  The  usual  time  is  between  the  1st  and  10th  of  November,  according
to  the  weather ;  the  Indians  say  the  period  gets  later  every  year.  The  Deer  arrive
on  the  banks  of  the  Lake  in  companies  of  from  50  to  100  in  each,  when,  if  there
is  much  "  lop  "  on  the  water,  they  wander  along  shore  until  it  subsides.  They
then  enter  the  water  in  succession,  and  swim  across  in  Indian  file.  According  to
a  calculation  I  made  from  data  given  me  by  one  of  the  Indians,  it  would  appear
that  a  company,  numbering  about  482  head  of  Deer,  has  been  seen  in  the  water
at  one  time.

As  already  mentioned,  the  Indians  usually  kill  the  Deer  in  the  water  by  spearing
them,  because  they  consider  that  shooting  them  with  guns  is  a  needless  and  dan-
gerous method.  The  spear-head  is  of  steel,  in  the  form  of  a  common  lance-head,
attached  to  a  pole  about  10  feet  in  length.  When  the  Deer  is  killed  by  a  thrust
between  the  short  ribs,  an  attendant  canoe  is  in  waiting  to  drag  the  carcass  to  land.
As  many  as  five  or  six  animals  may  be  killed  in  this  manner  out  of  a  company.
It  requires  skill  and  adroitness  to  avoid  upsetting  the  canoe,  and  to  kill  the  animal
by  a  single  stroke  of  the  spear,  thus  avoiding  any  unnecessary  holes  in  the  skin.
The  Indians  never  let  out  the  blood  by  plunging  a  knife  into  its  heart,  nor  by
cutting  its  throat.  When  a  Deer  is  dead  the  skin  is  stripped  from  the  carcass ;
the  kidneys  and  heart,  with  the  fatty  membrane  about  the  intestines,  are  taken
out  and  packed  up  in  the  paunch,  to  form  a  portion  of  the  next  meal,  together  with
the  head :  the  liver  is  not  eaten  by  the  Micmac  Indians.  The  lower  portions  of
the  legs  are  separated  from  the  knee-joint,  for  the  sake  of  the  covering  of  skin,
which  is  used  in  making  moccasins,  and  for  the  marrow  in  the  metacarpal  bones :
the  carcass  is  then  cut  up  into  quarters,  which,  with  the  portions  above  enume-
rated, are  taken  back  to  the  camp.  The  skin  is  used  either  in  making  skin  canoes,
or  is  prepared  for  conversion  into  moccasins,  and  "  babiche  "  for  snow-shoes.  If
destined  for  the  former  purpose,  it  is  merely  shaved,  and  then  sewn  to  other  skins
to  cover  the  frame  of  the  canoe  *  ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  required  for  moccasin-
leather  and  babiche,  it  is  first  of  all  stretched  on  a  rectangular  frame  of  wood  to
dry,  and  subsequently  thrown,  in  a  moistened  state,  over  a  post  driven  in  the
ground,  when  the  vellum  is  scraped  from  the  inside  by  means  of  either  a  "  Saska-

*  See  a  description  of  the  method  of  building  a  skin  canoe  in  the  'Journal  of  the  Anthropological
Institute,'  vol.  iv.  pp.  435-436.


NOTES  ON  THE  REINDEER  OF  NEWFOUNDLAND.


277


dedagan  "  *  (fig.  96)  or  of  a  "  Jeegegan  "  t  (fig.  97) ;  the  hair  is  next  shaved  off,
and  the  bared  skin  is  placed,  for  about  twelve  hours,  in  tan-liquor,  made  either

Fig.  96.

Sketch  of  a  Saskadedagan  used  in  dressing  skins.     Half  the  original  size.


Fig.  97.

Sketch  of  a  Jeegegan  or  Skin-scraper.     Reduced.


The  middle  portion  of  the  bone  has  been  cut  down  and  hollowed  out,  with  the  sides  cut  into  sharp  edges.
One  end  of  this  specimen  was  enwrapped  with  pieces  of  cloth  or  other  stuff.

from  the  bark  of  the  "Var  "  (Abies  balsamifera),  or  from  that  of  the  Black  or  the
White  Spruce  (A.  nigra,  A.  alba),  or  the  White  Birch  (Betula  papyracea) ;  but
the  first  is  preferred :  after  this  it  is  ready  for  use.

The  sinews  used  for  sewing  are  cut  from  each  side  of  the  backbone.  They
are  prepared  by  being  drawn  out,  one  by  one,  with  the  teeth,  and,  when  dried,
rolled  between  the  palm  of  the  hand  and  thigh,  at  the  same  time  being  softened
by  being  passed  through  the  lips.

The  skin,  hoofs,  and  sinews  having  been  cut  away  from  the  shank  of  the  Deer,

*  The  Saskadedagan,  an  instrument  in  general  use  amongst  the  Montagnards  of  Labrador,  is  used  in  the
following  manner.  A  fold  of  the  skin  being  seized  by  the  left  hand,  the  tool  is  taken  round  the  middle  in
the  right  hand,  and  by  a  succession  of  downward  strokes  the  vellum  is  separated  from  the  skin.  The
Jeegegan  is  worked  by  scraping,  with  a  movement  of  the  arms,  the  skin  which  is  laid  across  an  inclined
post  stuck  in  the  ground.

t  An  instrument  of  this  kind  is  in  the  CHEISTT  COLLECTION.


278  EELIQUI^:  AQTTITANKLE.


the  metacarpal  bones  are  roasted  for  a  short  time  on  the  embers,  and  are  then
split  longitudinally  by  a  blow  of  an  axe  to  extract  the  marrow.  The  marrow  of
the  metatarsal  bones  is  of  a  dry  tallowy  nature,  and  is  therefore  not  much
esteemed  as  an  article  of  food.  The  portion  of  the  Beers'  meat  not  required  for
immediate  consumption  is  placed  on  a  scaffold,  out  of  the  reach  of  Bears  and
Wolves,  where  it  remains  until  required,  during  the  winter  months,  for  "  tailing  "
(baiting)  the  deadfalls  of  the  trapper.

A  set  of  phalangeal  bones,  seven  in  number,  are  occasionally  cut  and  scraped
into  a  conical  shape,  and  strung  on  a  strip  of  Deer's  sinew,  to  one  end  of  which
is  attached  a  portion  of  a  Deer's  tail  ;  at  the  other  end  is  fastened  a  bone  skewer,
fashioned  out  of  a  marrow-bone.  This  arrangement  is  used  for  playing  the  game
called  "  Sabudedagan,"  which  is  somewhat  like  our  cup-and-ball.  This  game  is
played  also  by  the  Montagnards  of  Labrador.  It  is  called  Nah-bah-wah-tah  by
the  Ojibwas.


NOTE. — A  careful  study  of  the  outline-drawing  of  a  Reindeer  on  a  piece  of
dressed  antler,  found  in  a  cave  at  Thaingen,  Canton  of  Schaffhausen  *  (fig.  98)
has  led  me  to  the  following  interpretation  of  the  artist's  design.

The  size  and  general  outline  of  the  body,  together  with  the  development  of  the
antlers,  as  especially  marked  by  the  brow-snags,  denote  the  characteristics  of  a
full-grown  Stag;  the  peculiar  pinched-up  form  of  the  belly,  apparently  exagge-
rated by  the  draughtsman,  coupled  with  the  general  emaciated  appearance  of  the
animal,  is  of  common  occurrence  soon  after  the  rutting-season.  The  eye  is  placed
pretty  nearly  in  its  natural  position,  and  appears  to  betoken  the  pleased  and
contented  look  of  an  animal  in  the  act  of  browsing  or  drinking;  but  it  may  be
remarked  that  the  Reindeer,  being  possessed  of  greater  acuteness  of  smell  than
power  of  eyesight,  is  accustomed  to  sniff  the  ground,  to  detect  the  near  presence
of  an  enemy  or  of  one  of  its  own  kind.  The  suggestion,  originally  entertained
by  Dr.  Keller,  that  grass  and  a  pond  (or  river)  are  depicted,  by  the  vertical  marks
and  the  long  groove,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  piece  of  antler  is,  I  think,  pro-
bably correct;  if  it  be  so,  however,  it  is  hard  to  account  for  the  "epuiseV
appearance  of  the  Stag,  such  as  might  be  caused  by  a  scarcity  of  food  during
snow-time,  unless  the  animal  had  just  come  from  bad  quarters  to  good.  In

*  Mittheilungen  antiquar.  Gesellschaft  in  Zurich,  vol.  xviii.  Heft  5,  1874,  p.  125  &c. ;  and  vol.  xix.
Heft  1,  1875,  p.  35 ;  Ann.  Nat.  Hist.  ser.  4,  vol.  xv.  February  1875,  p.  149.


NOTES  ON  THE  REINDEER  OF  NEWFOUNDLAND.


279


conclusion,  I  should  say  that  the  animal  is  figured  as  walking  slowly  along,
with  its  nostrils  near  the  ground,  either  for  one  or  other  of  the  purposes  above
mentioned.

It  must  be  distinctly  understood  that  the  above  remarks  have  been  suggested
by  a  comparison  with  the  Caribou  of  Newfoundland.


Fig.  98.

Incised  Outline  of  a  Reindeer,  on  a  piece  of  Reindeer  Antler,  from  the  Kesslerloch,  a  Cave  or  Rock-shelter
near  Thiiingen,  Canton  of  Schaffhausen,  Switzerland.     Natural  size.

(Copied  from  Professor  Albert  Helm's  drawing  in  the  plate  illustrating  his  memoir  "On  a  Find  of  the  Reindeer
Period  in  Switzerland,'''  in  the  'Mittheil.  antiq.  Oesell.  in  Zurich,'  vol.  xviii.  Heft  5,  1874.)


,•:._


The  surface  of  the  cylindrical  and  engraved  piece  of  Antler  is  here  shown  as  if  extended  open  : —

A,  A,  The  side  with  the  figure  of  the  Reindeer;

B,  B,  The  other  side,  bearing  incised  marks,  possibly  representing  herbage  and  water.
a,  a  mark  a  line  between  the  two  sides  of  the  engraved  antler.

The  one-holed  Baton,  Pogamagan,  or  Arrow-straightener  (broken)  which  bears  this  remarkable  engraving
is  figured  in  the  'Mittheil.  antiq.  Gesellsch.  Zurich,"  vol.  xix.  Heft  1,  1875,  pi.  8.  fig.  68,  among  the  many
interesting  illustrations  of  Herr  KONRAD  MEKK'S  memoir  "The  Cave-find  in  the  Kesslerloch"  &c.


280


XXVII.

NOTE  ON  OVIBOS  MOSCHATUS,  BLAINVILLE.     By  M.  E.  LAETET,  For.Mem.G.S.

[Translated  by  the  late  H.  Christy,  Esq.,  F.K.S.,  F.G.S.,  and  read  before  the  Geological  Society  of  London,
June  7, 1865*.     Reprinted  with  permission  of  the  Council  of  the  Geological  Society.]

CUVIEK,  has  given  the  history  of  three  skulls  of  Ovibos  moschatm  discovered  in
Siberia,  and  figured  by  Pallas  and  Ozeretskovskyf.

In  1846  M.  Giebel  J  noticed  the  existence,  in  the  Museum  of  Halle,  of  part  of
a  skull  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Merseburg.

In  1852  Sir  John  Richardson,  in  the  '  Zoology  of  the  Herald,'  gave  a  list  and
figures  of  some  remains  of  Ovibos  moschatm  brought  from  the  Bay  of  Esch-
scholtz,  with  bones  of  Elephants,  Reindeer,  and  other  Mammals.

In  1855  Professor  Owen  §  described,  under  the  name  of  J3os  moschattis,  a  fine
fragment  of  skull  of  Ovibos  moschatus,  discovered  by  the  Rev.  Charles  Kingsley
and  Sir  John  Lubbock  at  Maidenhead,  in  Berkshire,  in  a  bed  of  low-level  gravel,
of  which  Mr.  Prestwich  gave  at  the  same  time  a  description  ]| ,  with  a  sketch  of
the  bed,  in  which  he  afterwards  found  an  Elephant's  tooth.

In  the  third  edition  of  the  'Antiquity  of  Man '  Sir  Charles  Lyell  further  cites  a
skull  of  Ovibos  moschatus,  found  by  Sir  John  Lubbock,  near  Bromley,  Kent,  in
the  valley  of  a  small  affluent  of  the  Thames ;  and  also  two  other  skulls,  male
and  female,  discovered  in  the  Drift  of  the  Avon  [at  Freshford],  near  Bath-Easton,
by  Mr.  Charles  Moore  ^f .

In  the  same  page  of  the  'Antiquity  of  Man'  Sir  Charles  Lyell  further  mentions

*  [Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  xxi.  pp.  474-476.  A  brief  notice  of  the  discovery  of  the  Ovibos  at  the
Gorge  d'Enfer  was  also  given  to  the  Geological'  Society  of  France,  April  3,  1865,  '  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de
France,'  2  ser.  vol.  xxii.  p.  335. — EDITOR.]

t  Ossemens  foss.  4to,  vol.  iv.  pp.  155-159.

%  Leonhard  und  Bronn's  '  Neues  Jahrbuch,'  1846,  p.  460.

§  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  1856,  vol.  xii.  pp.  124-131.

||  Hid.  pp.  131-133.

If  Antiquity  of  Man,  3rd  edit.  p.  156.  [See  also  Cunnington,  'Wilts  Magazine,'  vol.  iv. ;  C.  Moore,
'  Bath  Nat.-Hist.  and  Antiq.  Field-Club,'  March  10,  1869 ;  and  for  notices  in  full  of  the  remains  found  in
England  (at  Maidenhead,  Greenstreet-Green,  Freshford,  Barnwood,  Salisbury,  and  Crayford),  see  W.  Boyd
Dawkins's  '  Monograph  on  Ovibos  moschatus,'  Palscontographical  Society,  1872,  pp.  19  &c. — EDITOR.]


NOTE  ON  OVIBOS  MOSCHATUS.  281

a  skull  of  Ovibos  moschatus  preserved  in  the  Museum  of  Berlin,  and  which  Mr.
Quenstedt  had  determined  in  the  year  1836 ;  hut  I  have  failed,  even  with  the
indications  given  by  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  to  find  the  description  of  this  skull.

In  1859  Professor  Hubert  communicated  to  me  a  molar  tooth  found  by  the
Abbe  Lambert  in  the  Diluvium  of  the  Oise  at  Viry-Noureuil,  near  Chauny  (Aisne),
in  association  with  remains  of  Elephas  antiquus  and  E.  priniigenius,  Rhinoceros
tichorhinus,  Hycena,  a  small  Bear,  Reindeer,  &c.*  This  tooth  I  ascertained  to  be
a  molar  of  Ovibos  moschatus.

In  1863  Professor  E.  E.  Schmid,  of  the  University  of  Jena,  described,  under  the
name  of  Bos  Pallasii  (De  Kay),  a  portion  of  skull  of  the  same  species  discovered
in  1862  in  the  ancient  alluvium  of  the  Saal  f.

In  1864  Dr.  Eugene  Robert  sent  me  a  very  fine  piece  of  the  skull  of  Ovibos
moschatus  discovered  by  him  in  the  Diluvium  of  the  Oise  at  Precy,  near  Creil
(Oise),  in  the  same  spot  where  he  had  collected  the  remains  of  an  Elephant's  tusk.
I  announced  this  discovery  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  its  sitting  on  the  27th
of  June ;  and  I  addressed  to  the  Geological  Society  of  London  an  extract  from  my
communication,  with  a  plate,  in  which  were  figured  this  skull  and  the  molar  teeth
found  at  Viry  by  the  Abbe  Lambert  |.

Further  researches  at  one  of  our  Stations  in  the  Gorge  d'Enfer  (Dordogne)
have  produced  a  hoof-phalange  exactly  identical,  both  in  form  and  dimensions,
with  the  corresponding  bone  of  the  existing  Ovibos  moschatus  (Bos  moschatus
auct.).  It  was  found,  in  association  with  remains  of  the  Great  Cave-Bear  (Ursus
spelcsus),  Lion  (Felis  spelcea],  Wolf,  Reindeer,  and  Aurochs.

[Since  this  paper  was  communicated  to  the  Geological  Society,  the  author  has
discovered,  among  the  fossil  remains  of  the  same  Station  in  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,
seven  new  bones  of  a  hind  leg  and  foot  of  Ovibos  moschatus — the  long  and  mar-
rowed  bones  being  split  and  broken,  like  those  of  the  other  Herbivora  used  for
food  by  the  ancient  indigenous  tribes  of  Perigord.]

It  is  to  be  noted  that  in  the  three  localities  where  the  bones  of  Ovibos  mos-
chatus have  been  observed  in  France,  there  have  been  also  gathered  the  products
of  human  industry.

At  Viry-Noureuil  worked  flints  were  found  by  the  Abbe  Lambert,  of  which  two
specimens  were  sent  to  London.  At  Precy  was  found,  in  1860,  an  axe  of  the
St.-Acheul  type,  which  was  presented  to  the  Geological  Society  of  France  by

*  Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat.  8vo,  4e  se'r.  Zool.  vol.  xv.  p.  224.
f  Leonhard  und  Bronn's  'Neues  Jahrbuch,'  1863,  p.  541.
£  Comptes  Rendus  de  1'Acad.  des  Soi.,  Seance  27  Juin  1864.

2Q


282  KELIQULE  AQUITANIOE.

M.  de  Verneuil  at  its  sitting  of  the  21st  of  May,  1860,  and  of  which  Sir  Charles
Lyell  makes  mention  in  pages  152  and  153  of  the  'Antiquity  of  Man'  [Eourth
Edition,  1873,  p.  199].

At  the  Gorge  d'Enfer  worked  flints  have  also  heen  found,  as  well  as  Reindeer-
horn  unbarbed  lance-heads  *  of  a  type  differing  from  those  found  in  any  other  of
the  Dordogne  Caves,  but  identical  with  those  of  Aurignac  (Haute  Garonne)  and
of  Chatelperron  (Allier).

The  discovery  of  this  fragment  [and  other  bones]  of  Ovibos  moschatus  in  the
Gorge  d'Enfer  gives  us  the  most  southern  spot  where  this  species  has  been
observed  t ;  and  its  Quaternary  habitat  %  is  carried  down  fifteen  degrees  south  of
its  existing  limit  in  North  America,  where  it  is  known  that  this  animal  is  rarely
found  below  the  sixtieth  degree  of  latitude.

The  Reindeer,  whose  migrations  are  still  more  extensive,  advanced  yet  further
south  during  the  Quaternary  Period,  as  I  have  found  its  remains  on  the  northern
slopes  of  the  Pyrenees.  [See  above,  page  147  &c.]

*  [For  subsequent  notices  of  these  lanceolate  harpoon-heads  and  arrow-points  of  Reindeer-antler,  found
at  the  Gorge  d'Enfer  and  Cro-Magnon,  see  above,  page  94,  and  in  the  Description  of  Plates,  B.  XII.  &  XIII.,
pages  95  and  97. — EDITOR.]

t  The  supposed  skull  of  Bos  Pallasit,  De  Kay,  from  the  alluvium  of  Mississippi  at  New  Madrid,  has  heen
recognized  hy  Mr.  Leidy  as  referable  to  his  genus  Bootherium.

t  [Among  the  many  interesting  relics  left  by  the  Cave-folk  in  the  Kesslerloch,  near  Thayngen  (Thaingen),
Canton  SchafFhausen,  is  a  carved  head  of  a  Musksheep  (see  'Mittheil.  antiquar.  Gesell.  in  Zurich,'  1875,
vol.  xix.  part  1,  p.  36,  pi.  7.  fig.  66),  showing  that  the  early  inhabitants  of  that  part  of  Switzerland  had
some  knowledge  of  this  animal. — EDITOR,  July  16,  1875.]


SUPPLEMENTAL    NOTES:


ADDENDA  ET  COKEIGENDA.


•  I.— PART  I.  ESSAYS  ETC.

Page  15.  The  Adze  represented  by  fig.  12  was  probably  derived  from  New
Caledonia  (not  from  the  Solomon  Islands).  A  similar  specimen  is  figured  by
G.  Forster  in  'Cook's  Voyages,'  fide  Steinhauer,  1866.

Page  19.  This  Map  is  superseded  by  the  engraved  Map  at  page  126.

Page  20.  A  chronological  classification  of  the  Caves,  by  reference  to  the  style
of  the  Implements  &c.  found  in  tbem,  was  offered  by  M.  G.  de  Mortillet  (in  the
'Comptes  Rendus,'  1869,  and  'Materiaux,'  1869,  se"r.  2,  vol.  i.  p.  172),  viz.:—
1  (oldest).  Epoch  of  Le  Moustier ;  2.  Of  Solutre" ;  3.  Of  Aurignac ;  4.  Of  La
Madelaine.  Followed  by  the  "  Polished-stone  Age."

Page  39,  line  21.  For  Sillooett  read  Lillooett.

Page  53  (and  p.  102).  In  illustrating  a  similarity  of  ornament  and  intended
purpose,  noticeable  in  the  perforation  of  the  Reindeer  antlers  from  the  Caves  of
Dordogne  and  the  pieces  of  antlers  used  by  the  Laplanders  as  tapping-sticks  for
their  Magic  Drums,  the  reader  might  think  that  we  ought  also  to  have  referred
to  the  perforated  hammer-like  portion  of  antler  from  Aurignac,  figured  and
described  in  the  '  Ann.  Sc.  Nat.'  se"r.  4,  vol.  xv.  pp.  189  &  250,  pi.  10.  fig.  5 ;  but
we  were  assured  by  the  late  M.  E.  Lartet  that  this  hole  seems  to  have  been  differ-
ently made  and  with  other  intentions.

Page  57.  The  relationship  of  the  archaic  Cave-folk  with  the  Fenni,  Fins,  Lap-
landers, and  Esquimaux,  is  also  treated  of  by  BOYD  DAWKINS,  LUBBOCK,  and
LANE  Fox  in  the  following  extracts : —

2Q2


284  EELIQUL&  AQUITAJN'ICLE.

(1)  The  Editor's  Notes  to  Sven  Nilsson's  '  Stone  Age '  &c.*,  1868,  p.  262.

"  My  friend  Mr.  Boyd  Dawkins,  in  his  Memoir  on  the  British  Fossil  Oxen,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.
vol.  xxiii.  (1867)  p.  183,  boldly  asserts  that  the  Cave-men  of  Pe'rigord  were  '  a  people  more  closely  allied  to
the  Esquimaux  than  any  other,'  and  sums  up,  as  follows,  the  evidence  in  favour  of  this  assertion.

" '  The  identity  of  form  of  the  harpoons,  of  fowling-spears,  marrow-spoons,  and  scrapers ;  the  habit  of
sculpturing  animals  on  their  implements ;  the  absence  of  pottery ;  the  same  method  of  crushing  the  bones
of  animals  slain  in  hunting,  and  their  accumulation  in  one  spot;  the  carelessness  about  the  remains  of
their  dead  relatives ;  the  fact  that  the  food  consisted  chiefly  of  Eeindeer,  varied  with  the  flesh  of  other
animals,  such  as  the  Musksheep  ;  and  especially  the  small  stature,  as  proved  in  the  people  of  the  Dordogne
Caverns  by  the  small-handled  dagger  figured  by  MM.  Lartet  and  Christy  in  the  '  Eevue  Archeologique '
(1864)  and  in  the  'Prehistoric  Times'  (Lubbock,  1865),  p.  255.  This  combination  of  characters  is  found,
so  far  as  I  know,  among  no  other  people  on  the  face  of  the  earth  except  the  Esquimaux ;  and  therefore
I  cannot  help  believing  that  people  in  South  Gaul  occupies  the  same  relation  to  the  Esquimaux  as  the
Musksheep  and  Eeindeer,  on  which  they  lived,  hold  to  those  now  living  in  the  northern  regions.'

"  Since  this  was  written  Mr.  Busk  has  shown  that  the  Ursus  priscus  of  our  Caves  is  undistinguishable
from  the  Grizzly  Bear  of  the  Eocky  Mountains.  There  is  therefore  some  reason  for  the  belief  that  the
Esquimaux  once  inhabited  Western  Europe."

(2)  Treating  of  some  incised  marks,  monogrammic  or  literal,  and  neither  Runic
nor  Ogham,  hut  possibly  related  to  the  latter,  Colonel  A.  Lane  Fox,  F.S.A.  &c.,
thus  writes,  in  his  Memoir  '  On  Roovesmore  Fort,  and  Stones  inscribed  with
Oghams  in  the  Parish  of  Aglesh,  County  Cork,'  1868,  pp.  11,  12  :—

"Viewing  the  resemblance  of  the  Picts'  houses  and  tumuli  which  abound  in  the  neighbourhood  [Island  of
Bressay]  and  throughout  Ireland  and  the  west  of  Scotland  to  the  Yourt  and  Igloo  of  the  Esquimaux,  and
many  other  points  of  resemblance  in  the  implements  of  the  two  countries,  that  might  be  noticed,  and
considering  also  the  geographical  position  of  these  [inscribed]  Bressay  stones,  upon  the  confines  of  the
'  Ogham '  region  and  inclining  towards  that  of  the  Greenlander  and  Esquimaux,  it  seems  not  impossible
that  these  inscriptions  may  eventually  be  found  to  establish  some  link  of  connexion  between  them — an
hypothesis  rendered  all  the  more  probable  by  considering  the  very  wide  extent  of  territory  over  which  the
Esquimaux  now  range,  extending  from  Greenland  on  the  one  hand  to  Behring  Strait  on  the  other,  and
their  affinity  to  the  Tchukchi  and  even  to  the  Laplander  of  Europe  and  Asia.  This  view  of  the  case  is
also  confirmed  by  the  discoveries  which  have  recently  been  made  in  the  French  Caves,  tending,  in  the
opinion  of  the  explorers  of  those  caves,  to  show  that  a  race  akin  to  the  Esquimaux  in  their  arts  and
implements,  if  not  the  Esquimaux  race  itself,  did  actually  occupy  Europe,  in  conjunction  with  the  Eein-
deer, at  a  time  anterior  to  that  in  which  the  Ogham  character  must  have  originated  in  Great  Britain
and  Ireland."

(3)  In  <  Nature '  (April  22,  1875),  vol.  xi.  p.  493,  Mr.  CHAKLES  E.  DE  RANGE,
F.G.S.,  thus  refers  to  the  probable  relationship  of  the  existing  Esquimaux  and
the  Cave-folk  of  the  Dordogne  : —

*  '  The  Primitive  Inhabitants  of  Scandinavia '  &c.  By  Sven  Nilsson.  Third  Edition,  revised  and  trans-
lated by  the  Author,  and  edited  by  Sir  John  Lubbock  &c.  Svo.  London,  1868.


SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES.  285

"  The  Esquimaux  inhabitants  of  the  coasts  of  Arctic  America,  from  Behring's  Strait  to  Greenland,  speak
the  same  language,  and  use  similar  implements.  There  is  no  more  interesting  passage  in  Prof.  Dawkins's
recent  work*  than  that  in  which  he  compares  the  identity  of  type  of  these  implements  with  those  from
Dordogne  and  other  parts  of  France,  and  Belgium,  both  as  regards  fowling-  and  fishing-spears,  darts,  and
arrows ;  this  likeness  extends  to  the  actual  shape  of  the  base  for  insertion  into  the  haft,  the  haft  being
formed  of  Mammoth  ivory,  derived  from  the  frozen  cliffs,  of  the  very  species  that  was  hunted  by  Palaeolithic
Man  in  the  South  of  Prance.

"  These  two  peoples,  separated  so  widely  in  time  and  space,  were  alike  in  "their  artistic  feelings  and
methods  of  incising  (on  tusks,  antlers,  and  bones)  representations  of  familiar  objects ;  alike  also  in  their
habit  of  splitting  bones  for  marrow  and  accumulating  them  around  their  dwellings,  in  their  disregard  for
the  sepulchre  of  their  dead,  in  their  preparation  of  skins  for  clothing,  and  in  the  pattern  of  the  needles  used
in  sewing  them  together;  alike  also  in  their  feeding  on  the  Musksheep  and  the  Eeindeer,  and  in  other
characteristics.  It  is  well-nigh  impossible  to  resist  Prof.  Dawkins's  conclusion  that  the  Esquimaux  is  the
descendant  of  Palaeolithic  Man,  who  retreated  northwards  with  the  Arctic  Fauna  with  which  he  lived  in
Europe;  though  before  the  close  of  the  Glacial  Epoch  it  is  probable  that  a  continuous  land-connexion
existed  between  France  and  North  America  by  way  of  Siberia,  remains  of  the  true  Horse  having  been
discovered  associated  with  Bison  priscus  and  the  Mammoth  in  Arctic  America,  and  representations  of  the
Horse,  by  a  palaeolithic  artist,  occurring  on  an  antler  from  La  Madelaine,  and  the  entire  skeleton  of  a  Horse
from  a  palaeolithic  Station  being  preserved  in  the  Lyons  Museum.

"  Sir  John  Kichardsonf  speaks  of  the  Kuskutchchewak  people  who  inhabit  the  banks  of  a  river  flowing
into  Kuskokvim  Bay,  Behring  Sea,  as  believing  that  the  Mammoth,  whose  tusks  they  constantly  find,  came
from  the  east,  and  were  destroyed  by  the  spells  of  their  Shaman."

Page  60  (footnote).  It  may  be  added  that  in  the  'American  Journal  of  Science
and  Arts,'  vol.  ix.  (May  1875)  pp.  335  &c.,  Prof.  JAMES  D.  DANA  criticises  the
statements  of  the  late  Dr.  ALBERT  KOCH  regarding  the  detailed  circumstances  of
the  discovery  of  a  Mastodon  near  the  Bourbeuse.  River,  Gasconade  County,
Missouri,  in  1838,  in  association  with  presumed  evidence  of  human  agency,  indi-
cated by  blocks  of  stone,  stone  implements,  and  action  of  fire.  Prof.  Dana  says
(p.  335) : — "  The  evidence  of  the  contemporaneity  of  Man  and  various  extinct
Quaternary  Mammals  in  Europe  and  Great  Britain  is  complete;  that  is,  it  is
beyond  reasonable  doubt  or  question;  for  (1)  it  has  been  gathered  with  great
care  by  the  best  of  geological  observers,  (2)  it  has  been  verified  through  the  re-
examination  of  reported  cases  by  other  able  geologists,  and  (3)  it  has  been  further
verified  by  the  special  investigations  of  Committees  of  Scientific  Societies.  The
North- American  facts  thus  far  announced  have  not,  unfortunately,  the  same
broad  basis  for  confidence."  The  Professor  goes  on  to  show  (p.  337)  "that
Dr.  Koch  was  a  man  of  enterprise,  'an  indefatigable  collector,"'  and  that  "the
credit  is  due  to  him  of  having  performed  a  great  service  to  science  by  his

*  "  Cave  Hunting.     London  :  Macmillan,  1874."
t  "  Arctic  Search  Expedition.     London,  1851."


286  RELIQUIAE  AQUITANICLE.

collections,"  but  that  not  being  at  all  a  good  geologist,  and  not  having  been
"  trained  to  investigation,  or  to  habits  of  precise  statement "  (p.  345),  and  not
being  wholly  trustworthy,  Dr.  Koch's  supposed  charring  of  the  body  and  calcining
of  the  bones,  his  presumed  weapons  of  offence,  and  statements  as  to  posture  and
condition  cannot  be  implicitly  believed,  and  his  "  evidence  of  the  contemporaneity
of  Man  and  the  Mastodon  "  is  therefore  "very  doubtful.  It  is  to  be  hoped  "  (Prof.
Dana  proceeds  to  say)  "  that  the  Geologists  of  the  Missouri  Geological  Survey  now
in  progress  will  succeed  in  settling  the  question  positively.  The  contemporaneity
claimed  will  probably  be  shown  to  be  true  for  North  America  by  future  disco-
veries, if  not  already  so  established ;  for  Man  existed  in  Europe  long  before  the
extinction  of  the  American  Mastodon  "  (p.  346).

See  also  page  157,  where  Mr.  ALEX.  C.  ANDERSON,  referring  to  the  contem-
poraneity of  Man  and  the  Mastodon,  although  not  doubting  its  probability,  points
out  that  great  care  is  always  required  in  these  investigations  to  avoid  fallacious
inferences ;  and  he  explains  how  in  one  instance  the  remains  of  a  Mastodon,
exposed  through  the  action  of  the  wind,  appeared  in  juxtaposition  with  numerous
human  skeletons,  which  are  constantly  becoming  in  like  manner  exposed,  and
again  re-covered  by  the  shifting  sands.  In  a  letter,  dated  November  20,  1868,
and  alluding  to  these  bones  in  the  great  sandy  flats  of  the  Columbia  River,
Mr.  Anderson  had  already  remarked : —

"  The  appearances  of  antiquity  in  both  were  not  obviously  different ;  and  an  uninformed  or  hasty  observer
might  have  jumped  to  a  very  erroneous  conclusion.  It  happened,  however,  that  the  history  of  the  human
remains  was  well  known  to  me  and  others  of  the  older  frequenters  of  the  North-west  as  being,  notwith-
standing their  antiquated  appearance,  of  very  modern  date ;  and  thus  a  very  plausible  hypothesis  was
spoilt.  These  remarks,  however,  are  not  intended  as  derogatory  from  the  accuracy  of  the  conclusions  that
may  have  been  arrived  at  in  the  other  case  referred  to,  but  solely  to  show  that  a  fortuitous  coincidence  of
widely  different  circumstances  might  in  some  cases  mislead  the  observer  very  gravely."

Page  70  &c.  Buried  Weapons  8fc.,  and  Local  Abundance  of  Stone  Implements.—
Dr.  R.  BROWN,  F.L.S.  &c.  offered  the  following  remarks  in  a  Letter  dated  Septem-
ber 28,  1868  :—

"The  reason  for  Savages, in  all  ages, burying  implements  with  the  dead  is, I  think,  a  little  misunderstood,
and  has,  to  a  great  extent,  got  into  the  domain  of  romance.  I  once  asked  an  Indian  Medicine-man  in
Klamath  County,  Southern  Oregon,  the  reason  why  they  burnt  all  the  property  of  a  deceased  person — was
it  to  help  him  on  his  way  to  their  after-land?  was  that  the  reason  why  even  slaves  and  horses  were
destroyed  ?  He  assured  me  that  the  true  reason  was,  that,  as  Indians  think  it  very  unlucky  to  talk  about
the  dead  (a  universal  superstition),  his  property  was  destroyed  so  that  there  might  be  no  temptation  for
children  or  careless  people  to  mention  his  name,  by  the  recollection  of  the  dead  person  being  continually
called  before  them  by  the  sight  of  his  former  property.  I  give  this  account  for  what  it  is  worth.  The
natives  further  north  have  the  same  superstition  about  the  dead ;  but  the  reason  of  their  putting  property


SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES.  287

on  their  graves  must  be  somewhat  different,  as  that  property  is  exposed  full  to  view  and  often  close  to  the
village.  In  Greenland,  to  this  day,  the  civilized  Eskimo  destroy  the  Kayak-cover  on  the  death  of  its
owner,  but  keep  the  wooden  frame.  You  will  find  some  account  of  this  and  similar  customs  in  Mr.  Sprout's
'  Scenes  and  Studies  of  Savage  Life '  (among  some  of  the  Vancouver  Indians),  and  in  a  review  of  that  work
in  the  September  Number  of  Murray's  '  Journal  of  Natural  History  and  Travel.'  Trophies  of  war  are  with
these  Vancouver  Indians  exhibited  in  full  sight  of  all  the  village,  so  that  all  may  see  them  and  have  their
hatred  of  their  enemies  kept  alive.  The  coast-tribes,  going  to  war  in  canoes,  take  the  natural  trophy — the
head  of  their  enemy.  The  horse-tribes,  travelling  great  distances  on  horseback,  could  not  of  course  take  the
heads,  as  these  would  be  rather  inconvenient  to  carry  home ;  and  accordingly  the  scalp  is  alone  taken.
Both  trophies,  however,  are  treated  in  the  same  manner,  viz.  fastened  to  poles  in  front  of  the  village.
It  is  curious  how  the  barbarous  mind  among  all  people  and  in  all  ages  is  the  same — the  fastening  of  heads
above  Temple  Bar  or  on  Old  London  Bridge,  in  1568,  or  on  the  poles  in  front  of  a  savage  village  in  Van-
couver Island  in  1868 !  Have  you  heard  of  any  human  remains  being  found  suggesting  that  Prehistoric
Man  was  addicted  to  war  ?

"We  need  not  be  surprised  at  the  vast  number  of  implements  often  found  in  old  abodes  or  other  places.
These  (independently  of  the  accumulation  of  generation  after  generation  of  flint-tool  users)  are  often  the
debris  of  the  workshops  of  the  old  savage  arrow-point-  and  spear-makers.  There  is  a  division  of  labour
among  some  savages;  and  I  know  that  on  the  western  shores  of  Vancouver  certain  families  have  the
monopoly  of  certain  trades,  while  others  follow  the  making  of  peculiar  implements  as  a  branch  of  business.
Longfellow  only  gives  poetical  expression  to  a  known  fact  when  he  talks,  in  '  Hiawatha,'  of  '  the  ancient
Arrow-maker,  in  the  land  of  the  Dacotahs,' "  &c.

Page  87,  line  12.  For  At  this  read  For  that.

Page  94,  line  18.  See  M.  LARTET'S  paper  on  remains  of  the  Musk-ox,  or  Musk-
sheep,  found  at  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  '  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.'  vol.  xxi.  p.  474,  and
above,  p.  280.

Page  95,  line  17.  See  M.  GEEVAIS  on  Remains  of  the  Saiga  found  by  M.  E.  Piette
in  the  Cave  of  Gourdan,  '  Mate"riaux  pour  1'hist.  de  1'Homme '  &c.,  se"r.  2,  vol.  iv.
1873,  pp.  270,  271,  and  fig.  74  (p.  396).

Page  97.  Dr.  P.  BROCA  has  also  treated  of  the  Crania  and  Bones  from  Cro-
Magnon,  at  Les  Eyzies,  in  the  'Transactions  of  the  International  Congress  of
Prehistoric  Archaeology,  3rd  Session,  Norwich  and  London,  1868,'  8vo,  London,
1869,  pp.  168-175.

Pages  99,  101,  &c.  Worn  Teeth.— In  a  Letter  dated  November  20, 1868,  Mr.
ALEX.  C.  ANDERSON,  of  Victoria,  Vancouver's  Island,  says : —

"  I  may  observe  in  regard  to  the  worn  condition  of  the  teeth  in  the  human  remains  found  in  the  Cave  of
Cro-Magnon,  that  the  same  effect  is  very  noticeable  among  such  of  the  Indian  tribes  as  inhabit  a  dry  sandy
locality,  and  whose  winter  provision  consists  chiefly  of  meats  or  fish  dried  in  the  sun*.  Minute  particles  of
sand  carried  by  the  winds  become  incorporated  with  the  food  in  the  process  of  drying ;  and  hence  the

*  [Similarly  flat-worn  teeth  are  observable  in  civilized  people  when  the  teeth  are  exactly  opposite  and  fit
throughout,  crown  to  crown. — EDITOB.]


288  RELIQULE  AQUITANKLE.

consequent  attrition.  In  the  vast  volcanic  region  bordering  on  the  Columbia  River,  from  the  Dalles  of
Wascopum  upwards,  this  effect  is  peculiarly  conspicuous.  The  teeth  of  the  inhabitants,  whose  winter  diet
is  chiefly  dried  Salmon  and  various  indigenous  roots,  are  invariably  much  worn  before  mid-age ;  of  the  elders
in  most  cases  absolutely  to  the  gums.  Notwithstanding  this  condition  of  the  teeth,  however,  caries,  or  at
least  its  outward  manifestation,  is  not  prevalent."

Page  138  (last  footnote).  At  the  page  quoted,  referring  probably  to  both  Spain
and  the  Balearic  Islands,  Pliny  writes : —

"  Necnon  et  vestes  leporino  pilo  faeere  tentatum  est,  tactu  non  perinde  molli,  ut  in  cute,  propter  brevi-
tatem  pili  dilabidas."  (Valpy's  Edition.)

Page  160,  fig.  57.  Compare  fig.  6,  pi.  20,  '  Materiaux,'  vol.  v.  (ser.  2,  vol.  i.)
p.  355.  Similar  specimens,  barbed  on  one  or  both  sides,  from  the  Dordogne  Caves,
were  exhibited  in  the  International  Exhibition,  at  Paris,  July  1867.

Page  169.  Laugerie  Hasse. — This  Station  has  yielded  many  good  specimens
since  Mr.  H.  Christy's  diggings  were  discontinued.  Among  the  most  interesting
of  the  objects  obtained  by  M.  E.  Massenat,  M.  1'Abbe  Landesque,  and  others,
may  be  mentioned  : —

1.  Engraved  and  Sculptured  Objects:  from  M.  E.  Massenat 's  Collection.     'Materiaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  i.  1869,

p.  348,  pis.  20-22.

2.  (1)  Human  Skeleton,  see  above,  page  255 ;   (2)  a  small  bizarre  Statuette  of  an  animal  sitting  on  its

haunches,  like  a  Cat  (?);   (3)  a  sculptured  Deer's  Head;   and  (4)  a  Cowrie  Shell,  perforated  by  a
notch.     'Materiaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  iii.  1872,  pp.  224  &c.,  pi.  9.     M.  E.  Massenat.

3.  Piece  of  Sculptured  Ivory :  from  M.  E.  Massenat's  Collection.     '  Materiaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  iv.  1873,  p.  394,

pi.  24.

4.  Engraved  Bones  and  Antlers :   from  M.  E.  Massenat's  Collection.     '  Materiaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  iv.  1873,

pp.  395,  396,  figs.  66-73.

5.  Sculptured  and  engraved  Bones :  from  M.  E.  Massenat's  Collection.     '  Materiaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  v.  1874,  pi.  4,

illustrating  M.  Piette's  memoir  on  the  art  and  civilization  of  the  Cave-folk  of  the  Reindeer  Period.

6.  Engraved  Bones  (Woman  and  Horses):  in  M.  1'Abbe  Landesque's  Collection.     '  Materiaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  v.

1874,  p.  276,  figs.  72,  73.

7.  Small  Human  Statuette  in  Reindeer  Antler.     'Materiaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  v.  1874,  p.  287,  fig.  103;    and  a

Pogamagan ;  ibid.  p.  288,  fig.  104.     In  the  Collection  of  M.  1'Abbe  Landesque.

Page  189,  line  8  from  top.  Figure  1  of  B.  Plate  XIII.  is  referred  to  by  Dr.  BROCA
as  a  Tally-stick  or  Hunting-score  ('  Les  Troglodytes  de  la  V6zere,'  1872);  and  pro-
bably that  was  its  use.

Page  189  (footnote),  line  last  but  one.  Delete  the  comma  after  twisted.

Page  189.  Tallies.— In  the  '  Times '  of  November  3, 1874,  the  writer  of  a  "  Letter
on  Peasant-Farming  "  states  that  in  Norfolk,  in  the  early  part  of  the  19th  Century,
as  told  by  an  old  man  who  was  eighteen  years  old  in  1811,  shepherds  told  off  the
sheep  once  a  year,  "  and  the  Tally  was  kept  in  this  way :  we  cut  notches  round  a


SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES.  289

stick,  one  notch  for  each  sheep ;  then  we  split  the  stick  in  two,  and  the  farmer
kept  one  half  and  the  shepherd  the  other  till  next  year."

In  Charles  Knight's  'Old  England,'  1844,  vol.  i.  are  figures  and  notices  of:—
(1)  Signs  for  docketed  documents,  p.  114,  fig.  467,  i-w;  (2)  a  Clog  Almanack,
p.  115,  fig.  472  ;  (3)  an  Exchequer  Tally,  p.  115,  fig.  471 ;  and  (4)  a  Saxon  Reeve-
pole,  formerly  used  in  the  Isle  of  Portland  by  the  Collector  of  the  King's  Rents,
p.  115,  fig.  473.

Page  190.  Score. — In  the  Game  of  Cricket  it  is  usual  for  some  players  to  record
a  run  as  "  scoring  a  notch."  (T.  K.  Gay.)

Page  190.  Tally.— Dr.  Robert  Brown,  E.R.G.S.,  writes  to  me  that

"  At  Eiga  in  former  times  (if  not  still,  for  all  I  know  to  the  contrary)  the  cargo  sent  down  to  a  vessel  was
cheeked  by  means  of  tallies.  The  Mate,  who  received  the  cargo,  and  the  man  who  brought  it  down  (or  the
merchant's  agent),  had  each  a  stick.  As  each  load  was  brought  down,  the  two  sticks,  which  were  exactly
the  same,  were  placed  together,  and  a  notch  made  on  them  in  a  transverse  direction.  The  result  was  that
it  was  impossible  for  either  party  to  cheat  in  the  number  of  loads  of  merchandise  sent  down ;  for,  if  an
attempt  was  made  to  do  so,  then,  instantly,  when  the  sticks  were  placed  together,  the  tell-tale  notch,
which  did  not  match  the  one  in  the  other  stick,  settled  the  point."

Page  190,  line  14.  Shakespeare  also  alludes  to  the  notched  stick  used  by  the
"  homely  swain "  to  reckon  time  and  times,  in  '  K.  Henry  VI.'  Part  3,  Act  ii.
Scene  5  ;  and  in  '  Taming  of  the  Shrew,'  Induction,  Scene  2,  "if  she  say  I  am  not
fourteen  pence  on  the  score  for  sheer  ale,  score  me  up  for  the  lyingest  knave  in
Christendom,"  illustrates  the  common  use  of  "  scoring."

Page  190  (footnote).  Esquimaux  Aide-de-memoir e. — The  late  Mr.  Gay  met  with
further  evidence  that  scoring  or  notching  has  been  used  for  intercommunication,  in
Sir  E.  Belcher's  memoir  on  the  Works  of  Art  of  the  Esquimaux,  '  Trans.  Ethnolog.
Soc.  London,'  new  series,  vol.  i.  1861.  At  page  135  it  is  remarked  that

"  Dr.  Rae  has  referred  to  their  signs,  counting  on  their  fingers,  &c.,  and  considered  that  they  have  no
records.  At  Icy  Cape  I  had  occasion  to  think  otherwise,  and  that  the  apparent  counting  on  the  fingers  has
a  deeper  signification  than  mere  numerals.  And  they  added,  in  the  instance  to  which  I  refer,  the  seeking
for  a  pair  of  notched  sticks  similar  to  a  Baker's  Tally.

"  Making  use  of  the  sticks  and  working  with  the  fingers,  apparently  using  each  joint  to  denote  some
signal,  and  the  front  and  back  as  variations,  possibly  as  past  and  future,  they  at  length,  by  the  intervention
of  the  seer  (which  I  think  has  been  noticed  by  Beechey),  made  me  understand  that  something  preceding  my
visit  was  referred  to ;  and  since  then  I  have  been  induced  to  think  that  it  related  to  some  matte«  connected
with  Sir  John  Franklin's  boat-expedition  in  1826-27,  passed  on  from  tribe  to  tribe  by  tradition."

Page  191.  The  New-Zealand  Aide-de -memoir e  has  its  analogues  amongst  the
Miantsze  or  Aborigines  of  China,  of  whom  Mr.  William  Lockhart  writes,  in  the
'  Trans.  Ethnolog.  Soc.  London,'  new  series,  vol.  i.  1861,  p.  185  : —

2K


290  EELIQUI^E  AQUITANKLE.

"  Among  some  of  the  tribes  a  knowledge  of  letters  is  possessed,  either  of  Chinese  books  or  of  their  own
written  language,  which  is  supposed  to  be  engraved  on  slips  of  wood  or  carved  on  palm-leaves.  Some  have
no  knowledge  of  any  written  language  or  of  a  regular  calendar.  For  records  of  events  they  use  pieces  of
carved  or  notched  wood.  Some  tribes  have  writing,  on  sections  of  wood,  in  the  seal  character,  which  are
taken  great  care  of,  and  may  be  of  much  interest  from  their  antiquity."

Page  193.  Owner-marks. — Besides  the  many  examples  of  ornamentation  on  the
Spear-points,  Dart-heads,  and  other  implements  of  Reindeer-antler,  found  in  the
Kesslerloch,  near  Thayngen,  and  figured  in  the  '  Mittheil.  d.  antiquar.  Gesell.  in
Zurich,'  vol.  xix.  part  1,  plates  2-8,  there  are  some  incised  markings  which  must
be  regarded  as  Owner-marks,  namely : — fig.  15  (p.  26),  angular  and  straight  lines
arranged  thus  =~>  ^>  | ;  fig.  33  (p.  43),  like  this  p>  <]  £>,  perhaps

imperfect,  on  a  broken  Dart-head.  In  fig.  43  (p.  31)  the  branched  line  crossing
a  circle,  though  clear  in  the  drawing,  is  of  doubtful  value.  In  fig.  13  (pp.  26,  27)
a  groove,  cut  along  two  thirds  of  the  tapering  Dart-point,  is  succeeded  by  sixteen
transverse,  parallel,  short,  broad  notches,  which  fill  the  space  between  the  lower
end  of  the  furrow  and  the  bevel  of  the  wedge-shaped  butt.  The  whole  may  have
constituted  an  Owner-mark  (see  B.  Plate  XXVI.  fig.  1);  or  the  groove  may  have
been  intended  for  poison,  and  the  notches  may  have  marked  a  hunter's  score.

Page  197.  Private  Marks. — On  the  Ramsgate  steamers,  newly  arrived  baggage
is  marked  by  the  porters  with  private  chalk  marks,  which  ensure  the  luggage
being  left  to  the  care  of  one  special  set  of  the  porters.

Page  200.  With  regard  to  the  Pitted  Markings  on  some  implements,  the  late
Mr.  Gay  drew  my  attention  to  a  set  of  Divination  Dice  ("  De"s  a  deviner  et  a  jeter
le  sort "),  from  the  Basutos,  presented  by  Miss  Powles  to  the  Christy  Collection.
They  consist  of: — (a)  three  white  (natural)  astragali  of  small  Deer  or  Antelope;
(6)  three  others  stained  dark  red ;  (c)  four  triangular  pieces  of  small  hoofs  (Ante-
lope ?),  three  hollow  and  one  solid,  engraved  on  one  or  more  faces  with  patterns
of  pits,  furrows,  and  raised  lines ;  (d)  a  flat  finger-shaped  piece  of  bone,  engraved
on  one  side  with  five  pits  encircled  by  rings ;  (e)  a  small  skin  bag,  containing  a
little  red  powder,  resembling  comminuted  wood.  The  whole  are  closely  strung
together  on  a  thong.

Somewhat  similar  Divination  Dice  are  referred  to  by  Henry  Lichtenstein,  in
his  '  Travels  in  Southern  Africa  in  1803-06 '  (2  vols.  4to,  London,  1815);  at  p.  332,
vol.  ii.,  he  figures  three  such  dice  (fig.  11;  copied  in  Wood's  '  Natural  History  of
Man,'  "Africa,"  p.  323),  and  says  :-

"  Fig.  11.  The  Magical  Dice,  made  of  the  cloven  feet  of  Antelopes  as  described  in  page  317.  I  could  not
learn  the  signification  of  the  figures  carved  on  the  outside ;  one  is  not  unlike  the  double  Hebrew  Schin,  a


SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES.  291

sign  to  which  great  consequence  was  attached  by  the  Jewish  priests,  and  which,  in  common  with  many
other  things  in  the  customs,  manners,  and  modes  of  life  among  these  people,  reminds  us  very  much  of  the
ancient  eastern  nations.  The  antiquarian  would  perhaps  find  in  these  dice  the  tali  and  astrayali  of  the
ancients."

The  description  of  the  Divining  Dice,  and  the  mode  of  using  them  by  the
Bechuanas,  near  Kuruman,  given  at  page  317,  is  as  follows : —

"  Among  the  few  things  that  I  wished  earnestly  to  possess  was  a  pair  of  dice,  if  so  they  might  he  called,
which  one  of  the  most  distinguished  among  them  wore,  fastened  to  a  leather  thong,  round  his  neck.  I  say,
if  they  might  be  called  dice,  because,  though  they  were  employed  much  in  the  same  way,  the  form  of  the
objects  in  question  was  not  cubical  like  that  of  a  die ;  they  had  the  figure  of  equal-sided  pyramids,  and
were  cut  out  of  the  cloven  foot  of  an  Antelope,  being  stuck  upon  small  thin  quadrangular  plates  of  the  same
material.  The  use  of  these  things,  as  I  learned,  was  to  determine,  when  any  thing  of  importance  was  to
be  undertaken,  whether  it  would  terminate  happily  or  not.  But  few  persons  (the  priests  only,  as  far  as  I
could  collect)  know  how  to  prepare  them ;  they  descend  as  an  inheritance  in  families ;  and  the  more  ancient
they  are,  the  greater  reliance  may  be  placed  on  their  prophetic  spirit.  In  order  to  sec  how  they  were  used,
I  entreated  the  owner  to  tell  me  whether  our  journey  would  be  happily  ended  or  not.  He  immediately
bent  himself  down  on  one  knee,  smoothed  the  ground  with  his  hand,  and  then  held  the  dice  between  the
points  of  his  fingers,  one  in  each  hand,  and  after  making  several  movements  with  his  hands  up  and  down,
and  pronouncing  some  incomprehensible  words,  threw  them  on  the  ground.  He  then  bent  himself  down,
appeared  to  examine  very  carefully  the  situation  of  each,  and  their  direction  towards  each  other,  and,  in
about  two  minutes,  pronounced  that  we  should  reach  home  without  any  accident.  My  very  great  desire  to
possess  these  magical  objects  made  me  not  object  to  the  high  price  required  for  them ;  and,  after  purchasing
two  young  oxen  with  some  beads  and  knives,  I  gave  the  oxen  for  my  dice,  recollecting,  as  a  balance  against
this  somewhat  unreasonable  bargain,  many  other  very  equal  ones  which  I  had  concluded."

Page  201. — Tfie  Ornamental  Markings  on  the  Aquitdnian  Implements. — Besides
the  use  of  the  Significant  Marks  above  described,  the  general  application  of  orna-
mental figures  and  patterns  to  their  bone  Implements  by  the  Aborigines  of  Aqui-
tania,  and  even  to  isolated  pieces  of  stone,  bone,  and  ivory,  may  really  have  arisen
from  the  several  impulses,  habits,  and  intentions  indicated  in  the  foregoing  pages.
There  is,  however,  another  possible  source  of  this  custom,  not  there  alluded  to,  but
intimated  by  Dr.  Broca  in  his  Essay  on  the  Cave-men  of  the  V6zere  ('  La  Revue
Scientifique  de  la  Prance'  &c.,  2e  ser.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  457  &c.,  1872;  and  'Nature,'
March,  1873),  namely  that,  as  regards  weapons  of  war  and  the  chase  and  imple-
ments of  superstition,  under  the  social  order  and  state-culture  which  he  supposes
to  have  existed  among  them,  the  grades  of  rank  may  have  had  special  signs  and
symbols  on  their  characteristic  arms  and  official  implements  and  sceptres.

In  reference  to  these  possibilities,  we  may  add  a  suggestive  note  from  the  Rev.
A.  M.  Fairbairn's  remarks  on  the  Semitic  Races  in  their  religious  aspect  ('  The

Contemporary  Review,'  Oct.  1873,  vol.  viii.  p.  792): —

2  R  2


292


KELIQUI.E  AQUITANICJE.


"  Religious  emblems  were  everywhere — on  buildings,  garments,  ornaments,  signets ;  almost  every  weapon
of  war  or  the  chase,  every  domestic  or  agricultural  implement  had  its  sacred  sign."

Page  206.  M.  E.  Lartet's  account  of  this  specimen  of  engraved  tusk  appeared
also  in  the  'Annales  des  Sc.  Nat.'  5"  s6r.  vol.  iv.  1865.

Page  212. — Subsequently  to  the  printing  of  Sheet  "  2  F  "  (pp.  205-212)  appeared
Dr.  Louis  Lartet's  short  memoir,  "  Gravures  in^dites  de  1'age  du  renne,  paraissant
representer  le  Mammouth  et  le  Glouton,"  in  the  '  Materiaux  pour  1'histoire  de
1'Homme,'  2e  ser.,  vol.  v.  pp.  33-36,  with  woodcuts  of  (1)  two  lively  heads  of  the
Mammoth,  in  outline,  on  a  plate  of  bone  from  Perigord  (figs.  20  &  21),  and  (2)  of
the  Glutton  (fig.  22),  which  we  have  also  figured,  from  a  Photograph,  at  p.  209,
fig.  80.

Page  216.  Reindeer. — Some  Notices  of  the  Lapland  Reindeer  are  given,  by
M.  Xavier  Marmier,  in  P.  Gaimard's  'Voyages  en  Scandinavie'  &c.,  1842,  vol.  i.,
Relation  du  Voyage,  p.  336;  of  the  Spitzbergen  Reindeer  in  Von  Heuglin's
'  Reisen '  &c.,  1872,  Part  1,  p.  192,  and  in  J.  C.  Wells's  '  Gateway  of  the  Polynia '
&c.,  1873,  p.  223.

Page  229,  No.  8.  Known  as  the  common  Kite  or  Glede.

Page  231,  No.  14.  Usually  called  the  Little  Owl.
„       „     No.  15.  Known  as  the  Passerine  Owl.

Page  234,  line  17.  For  Couchas  read  Choucas.

Page  235,  lines  3,  9,  12,  16.  For  the  Chough  read  this  Chough.

Page  236,  line  8  from  the  bottom.  For  Lagopodes  read  Grouse.

Page  238,  line  last  but  one.  For  Kjokkenmoddings  read  Kjokkenmoddings — or
rather  Kitchenmiddings  or  Kitchenmiddens.

Page  240,  lines  13  and  18.  For  Lagopodes  read  Grouse.

Page  244,  line  14.  For  diaphyses  read  shaft-bones.
„       ,,     No.  50.  This  is  known  also  as  the  Gargany.
„     No.  51.  Read  THE ?  DUCK.

Page  248,  line  16.     For  27  read  29 ;  for  30  read  32.
line  17.     For  Nos.  28  and  29  read  No.  31.


SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES.  293


II.— PART  II.   DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES.

Page  3,  A.  Plate  II.  See  Note  at  page  26.  Compare  figs.  9,  10  with  fig.  6,
A.Plate  XXXII.  pages  133,  134.

Page  9,  B.  Plate  I.  Barbed  Harpoon-  or  Arrow-heads  of  bone  from  the  Swiss
Lakes  are  figured  by  Keller  (Lee's  Translation,  pi.  5.  fig.  3 ;  pi.  20.  fig.  26 ;  pi.  54.
figs.  26,  27.  In  the  'Mate'riaux  pour  1'Hist.  de  1'Homme,'  we  have  figures  of
similar  barbed  points,  vol.  v.  pi.  20.  fig.  5  (Laugerie  Basse);  vol.  vi.  pi.  11
(Pyrenees),  &c.

Page  10.  Add  to  second  footnote  "and  'Annales  Sc.  Nat.'  se"r.  4,  Zoologie,
vol.  xv.  pi.  13.  figs.  3,  5,  6,  pp.  205  &  253."

Page  1 1 ,  line  20.  For  at  read  of.

Page  1 6,  B.  Plate  II.  fig.  8.  Among  the  other  known  figures  of  Human  Form
discovered  in  the  Caves  of  France  may  be  mentioned : —

1.  A  small,  imperfect,  ivory  Statuette  of  a  Female  from  Laugerie  Basse :  in  the  Collection  of  the  Marquis  de

Yibraye.     '  Materiaux,'  vol.  iii.  1867,  p.  209.

2.  Figures  of  Human  Hands.     'Keliq.  Aquit.'  1867-70,  p.  69,  B.Plate  IX.  figs,  la,  16;   and  p.  122,

B.Plate  XVII.  fig.  6.

3.  Figure  of  a  Man,  creeping  after  a  Bison  Bull,  or  swimming  (?) :   in  E.  Massenat's  Collection ;   from

Laugerie  Basse.     'Materiaux,'  se'r.  2,  vol.  i.  1869,  p.  353,  pi.  21.  fig.  1.

4.  Human  Head.     '  Materiaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  i.  1869,  p.  355,  pi.  21.  fig.  4.

5.  Human  (?)  Outline  &c.     'Materiaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  i.  1869,  p.  355,  pi.  22.  fig.  1.

6.  Imperfect  Human  Outline  on  slate ;  from  the  Grotte  d'Aurensan,  Pyrenees.     '  Materiaux,'  vol.  vi.  1870,

p.  205,  pi.  11.

7.  Outline  (imperfect)  of  gravid  Female  (?)  on  bone.     '  Materiaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  v.  1874,  p.  276.  fig.  72.

8.  Small,  rough,  imperfect  Statuette :  in  the  Abbe  Landesque's  Collection ;  from  Laugerie  Basse.     *  Mate-

riaux,' ser.  2,  vol.  v.  1874,  p.  287,  fig.  103.

9.  Attempted  figure  of  a  Human  Face,  cut  on  a  piece  of  Eeindeer  Antler,  from  the  Roche-Berthier  Cave

(Charente),  which  appears  to  be  of  "  the  Madelaine  Period."     '  Materiaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  vi.  1875,  p.  192,
figs.  75,  76.

Page  17,  A.  Plate  V.,  line  7.  A  large  "  Chopper,"  or  "  Casse-tete,"  in  black  flint
from  La  Madelaine  may  be  specially  noticed.

Page  31,  B.  Plate  III.  &  IV.  The  variously  shaped  and  ornamented,  but  always
hooked  batons,  of  wood,  jade,  &c.,  in  use  among  the  Chinese,  and  said  to  be  given
by  the  Emperor  (?)  as  emblems  of  authority,  may  also  be  mentioned.  This  curved
baton  of  power,  rank,  or  favour,  is  called  a  "  Joo-e,"  and  is  thought  by  some  to
belong  to  the  Priesthood  only.


294  KELIQULE  AQTJITANICLE.

Page  40,  A.  Plate  XII.,  fig.  6.  Compare  the  "  Casse-tete,"  from  Cro-Magnon,
in  '  Mate"riaux,'  vol.  v.  (2e  se"r.  vol.  i.)  p.  167.  fig.  16.

Page  45,  B.  Plate  V.  fig.  1  &c.  With  reference  to  the  dressed  pebble  and  per-
forated Teeth  and  Shells,  we  may  here  quote  the  statement  of  a  writer  in  the
'  Geological  Magazine,'  vol.  iii.  1866,  p.  463,  who  refers  to  a  dressed  fossil  and
some  bored  Shells  from  other  Cave-deposits.

"  It  is  interesting  to  record  that,  in  the  cavern  of  Bruniquel,  Dep.  Tarne  et  Garonne,  an  Oolitic  Belemnite,
having  its  sides  squared  by  grinding,  was  found  among  the  debris ;  also  an  Ammonite  and  a  Gryphaea,
probably  introduced  by  children  as  toys.  Perforated  recent  marine  Shells  were  likewise  numerous.  These
latter  are  preserved  in  the  British  Museum  "  *.

Page  45,  B.  Plate  V.  fig.  2.  For  an  example  of  a  perforated  canine  tooth  of
Bear  (?)  from  Laugerie  Basse,  see  '  Mate>iaux,'  vol.  v.  (2e  ser.  vol.  i.)  1869,  pi.  20.
fig.  7,  p.  355.

Page  50,  fig.  5.  This  Arrow-head  was  from  the  Tchutski  (Tschukses,  p.  54)  of
North-east  Asia,  who  are  regarded  by  some  as  not  being  true  Esquimaux.

Page  50,  fig.  8.  Originally  derived  from  the  figure  in  A.  P.  Madsen's  'Afbild-
ninger  af  Danske  Oldsager  og  Mindesmserker,'  1862.

Pages  55  and  58,  B.  Plate  VI.  figs.  10-15.  See  also  Keller's  '  Lake-dwellings '
&c.  (Lee's  Translation),  pi.  14.  figs.  23-25,  p.  67,  used  in  fishingf ;  and  a  larger
spindle-shaped  spillet  of  antler,  pi.  45.  fig.  3,  p.  151.  A  double-pointed  specimen,
somewhat  like  the  last,  is  figured  by  E.  Massenat  (from  Laugerie  Basse)  in  the
'Mate"riaux,'  vol.  v.  1869,  pi.  20.  fig.  8,  p.  355;  and  another,  ornamented,  ibid,
pi.  21.  fig.  3,  p.  353.  But  perhaps  the  last  has  one  face  flat,  like  B.  Plate  XVIII.
figs.  1  &  5,  pp.  124,  125.

For  an  illustration  of  the  double-pointed  spike,  lashed  on  obliquely  at  the  end
of  a  shaft,  and  thus  supplying  both  point  and  barb,  see  Dupont's  '  FHomme '  &c.,
2me  e"dit.  1872,  p.  116.  fig.  14.  Such  Dart-heads,  consisting  of  an  oblique  spike
tied  on  a  stick,  are  used  by  the  Australians  (Stokes  and  Huxley),  some  South-
Americans  (T.  K.  Gay),  and  others,  and  were  used  in  the  Pile-villages  of  the
Swiss  Lakes.  See  Le  Hon's  'L'Homme  fossile'  &c.,  1867,  p.  160.  See  also
page  1 24,  fig.  2.

As  other  analogues  in  form  for  these  simple  two-pointed  spikes,  we  may  mention,
not  only  the  Skewers  used  by  Butchers,  and  the  coarse  Pins  used  by  ancients  and
moderns,  for  fastening  cloths  and  skins  (of  tents,  dresses,  &c.),  but  also  the  Nose-

*  For  an  account  of  this  Cave  see  '  Geol.  Mag.'  vol.  i.  p.  137,  1864 ;  also  '  Phil.  Trans.'  1869,  p.  501.
t  Tied  to  the  fishing-line  by  the  centre,  and  wholly  covered  with  the  bait,  these  pins  when  swallowed  by
the  fish  are  pulled  across  the  gullet,  and  thus  act  as  a  "  hook."


SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES.  295

pins,  passed  through  the  cartilage  of  the  nose,  and  worn  by  the  inhabitants  of  the
Marquise  Islands  (' Voyage  deMandane,'  publiee  parCharton:  'Voyageurs  anciens
et  modernes,'  vol.  ix.  p.  201),  some  Australians,  and  others.  See  page  97.  A  fea-
ther is  sometimes  thus  worn  :  Ogle's  '  Colony  of  Western  Australia,'  8vo,  London,
1839,  p.  56.  Near  Torres  Strait,  Inner  Passage,  a  Native  in  a  canoe  was  seen  by
Mr.  T.  Baines  to  thrust  his  tobacco-pipe  through  his  septum  nasi,  as  a  convenient
method  of  carrying  it ;  and  Dr.  Robert  Brown  has  seen  Vancouver  Indians  (who
often  wear  nose-pendants)  put  their  clay  pipes  out  of  the  way,  in  the  perforated
septum  nasi;  and  he  informs  us  that  the  "Hioqua"  shell  (Dentalium pretiosum,
Nutt.),  used  as  money  by  most  of  the  North-western  Tribes,  is  often  used  as  a
Nose-ornament  in  the  way  described.  One  of  the  usual  kinds  of  bone  implement
worn  by  the  Australians  in  the  nose  is  figured  in  Stokes's  '  Discoveries  in  Aus-
tralia,' 1846,  pi.  1.  fig.  10 ;  and  needles  or  awls  of  bone,  like  our  fig.  1,  are  figured
in  his  pi.  4.  figs.  9-12.

Page  59,  A.  Plate  XIII.,  line  16.  After  made  insert  partly  by  chipping  and
partly.

Page  60,  line  1.  After  food,  insert  and  cracking  nuts.
„      „    line  2.  After  paint,  insert  medicines,.

Page  60.  Pestles. — The  Marquis  de  Vibraye  obtained  from  the  Cave  at  d'Arcy,
in  a  deposit  referred  by  him  to  the  Reindeer  Period,  a  smooth  oblong  stone,
5  inches  long,  3^  inches  broad,  and  2  inches  thick,  somewhat  conical  at  one  end,
and  slightly  convex  at  the  other  and  broader  end,  which  has  the  appearance  of
having  been  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  stamping  and  grinding,  as  a  kind  of
Pestle  or  Rubber.

Page  6 1,  A.  Plate  XIII.,  lines  1  and  2.  For  dirty-red  jasper  read  clayslate
stained  red.  See  A.  Plate  XXIII.  fig.  3,  p.  109.

Page  6 1  (footnote),  A.  Plate  XIII.  A  similar  implement  from  Aurignac  is
figured  in  the  'Annales  des  Scien.  Nat.'  se"r.  4,  Zool.  vol.  xv.  pi.  10.  fig.  3.

Page  62,  A.  Plate  XIII.  The  figured  specimen  of  a  stone  bowl  in  the  '  Catalogue
Mus.  R.  Irish  Acad.'  p.  114.  fig.  88,  presents  too  large  and  deep  a  cavity  for  an
analogue  to  our  hollowed  pebbles.

Page  67  (footnote),  B.  Plate  VII.  &  VIII.  Besides  the  specimen  "  fig.  3,"  the
following  may  be  added :— B.  Plate  II.  figs.  3,  7,  8 ;  III.  &  IV.  figs.  1,  4,  5,  6 ;
VII.  &  VIII.  figs.  3,  6,  7  :  see  page  180.

Page  68,  B.  Plate  IX.,  line  11.  See  also  'Annales  des  Sc.  Nat.'  se"r.  4,  Zoologie,
vol.  xv.  p.  253,  pi.  13.  fig.  7;  from  Massat.

Page  68,  B.  Plate  IX.,  line  16.   See  also  'Ann.  Sc.  Nat.'  ibid.  p.  251,  pi.  11.  fig.  1;


296  KELIQUkE  AQUITANIC^E.

from  Aurignac.  For  cylindrical  Dart-heads  from  Belgium,  see  Dupont's  THomme'
&c.,  2  edit.  1872,  p.  150,  figs.  25,  26.

Page  70,  B.  Plate  IX.  fig.  5.  The  Horse's  back  is  marked  across  with  seven  lines
or  shallow  notches.  In  fig.  5,  B.Plate  X.,  p.  71,  the  Horses  are  also  scored  on
the  back,  but  with  fewer  and  oblique  marks ;  whether  the  lines  were  intended  to
represent  hair,  colour,  or  perspective  is  very  uncertain.

Page  79,  A.  Plate  XVIII.  fig.  4.  These  round-notched  flakes,  adapted  for  scraping
round  sticks  and  stems,  are  noticed  also  by  Dupont,  '  L'Homme '  &c.,  2e  e*dit.  1872,
pp.  149  &  151.  See  also  A.  Plate  XXVII.  fig.  3,  p.  1 17.

Page  85.  After  Figs.  18«-c  insert  (fig.  10,  p.  88);  and  after  Figs.  19«-c  insert
(fig.  7,  p.  87).

Page  92,  B.  Plate  XI.  (see  also  page  70). —  Use  of  Shells  for  Ornament  :—

(1)  In  a  Letter   dated   September  28,  1868,   Dr.  ROBERT   BROWN.,  F.L.S.,
P.R.G.S.,  observes  :—

"  Such  strings  of  Shells  as  that  in  B.  Plate  XI.  fig.  1  are  to  this  day  common  ornaments  of  nearly  all
savage  races,  either  as  necklaces,  bracelets  (for  wrist  or  ankle),  or  ear-pendants.

"  The  objects  figured  in  B.  Plate  XI.  figs.  2-4  look  very  much  like  nose-  or  ear-pendants.  Savages  much
affect  this  kind  of  ornament,  as  indeed  do  races  far  from  barbarous,  e.  g.  the  Hindoos  as  far  as  nose-  and
ear-ornaments  are  concerned,  and  all  European  and  American  in  the  matter  of  ear-ornaments  for  the
women.  Some  of  the  North- American  nose-pendants  are  of  great  value.  On  the  North-west  Coast  they
are  generally  made  of  a  flat  piece  of  the  nacre  of  Haliotis  Nootkaemis ;  and,  as  a  piece  of  the  required
flatness  is  rather  hard  to  get,  large  sums  will  be  given  for  them.  Sometimes  the  cartilage  (septum)  of  the
nose  gets  so  much  broken  by  continually  putting  these  in  and  taking  them  out  (for  a  savage  is  very  proud
of  his  nose-appendage,  and  will  add  a  better  one,  or  gamble  it  oif,  as  circumstances  may  decide),  that  I  have
more  than  once  seen  an  Indian  on  the  Western  Coast  of  Vancouver  (iu  the  vicinity  of  Nootka  Sound)  push
his  clay-pipe-stem  through  it  so  as  to  be  out  of  the  way  when  requiring  to  use  his  hands  and  blanket !"

(2)  Mr.  ALEX.  C.  ANDERSON,  writing  from  Vancouver  Island,  November  20,
1868,  remarked : —

"  The  shell-relics  are  interesting ;  and  I  quite  agree  with  the  conclusion  that  they  were  used  solely  as
ornaments.  Among  the  natives  of  North-west  America  some  descriptions  of  shell,  from  their  rarity,  have
acquired  a  certain  conventional  value,  but  are  never  employed  for  monetary  exchange  like  the  Cowries  of
the  East.  Along  the  North-west  Coast  the  shell  of  the  Haliotis,  procured  from  the  south,  is  wrought  into
pendants  for  the  ear  or  nose,  and  used  also,  like  the  mother-of-pearl  when  procurable,  for  inlaying  ivory
or  wooden  ornaments.  The  Hai-a-qua,  a  species  of  Dentalium,  larger  than  the  D.  entails  or  '  Sea  Teeth '
of  Europe,  was  formerly  highly  esteemed  by  the  Chinooks,  a  tribe  (now  nearly  extinct)  inhabiting  the
estuary  of  the  Columbia,  and  continues  to  be  prized  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  southern  coast,  and  by  such
of  the  interior  tribes  as  can  procure  it  by  barter.  These  shells,  of  dazzling  whiteness,  are  used  for  personal
ornaments.  Among  the  Chinooks  forty  shells,  strung  lengthwise  through  their  natural  perforations,  com-
posed the  conventional  'fathom;'  and  by  so  much  as  their  united  length  exceeded  the  standard,  so,  in  a
rapidly  increasing  ratio,  was  their  value  enhanced.  Among  the  Tan-cully  of  the  Upper  Fraser,  by  whom


SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES.  297

the  shells  are  highly  prized,  this  method  of  estimation  is  not  observed.  They  plait  them  together  iu  broad
bandelets,  and  wear  them  as  ornaments  for  the  head  or  neck.  The  demand  for  these  shells  extends  over  a
very  large  tract  of  country ;  for  some  years  ago  I  noticed  that  my  brother,  the  late  Chief-Factor  James
Anderson,  of  the  Hudson's-Bay  Company,  when  in  charge  of  Mackenzie's  River,  wrote  to  the  Columbia  for
a  supply  for  the  purposes  of  that  remote  district,  the  natives  not  being  able  to  procure  a  sufficiency  for  their
wants  by  intermediate  barter.  They  are  procured  chiefly,  if  not  entirely,  from  the  strait  between  Vancouver
Island  and  the  mainland,  the  natives  fishing  for  them  in  deep  water  with  baits  to  which  the  inmates  of  the
shells  adhere.  The  fact  of  their  dispersion  over  so  wide  a  tract  of  the  interior,  from  the  frontiers  of  Cali-
fornia to  the  banks  of  the  Mackenzie,  serves  to  show  how  a  rude  and  desultory  traffic  among  barbarous
races  will  account  for  certain  articles,  such  as  the  Shells  in  question,  being  found  in  use  in  localities  very
remote  from  that  in  which  they  are  naturally  produced.  The  common  varieties  of  Shells,  such  as  those
composing  the  necklace  found  in  Cro-Magnon,  I  have  never  noticed  in  use :  but  I  can  readily  conceive  that
by  the  ancient  Cave-dwellers,  living  remote  from  the  sea-shore,  they  were  valued  as  rarities,  and  were  pro-
cured, it  may  be  presumed,  by  barter  with  adjacent  tribes  frequenting  the  coast — much  as  the  Hai-a-quas
now  by  the  interior  tribes  of  these  regions."

(3)  Pieces  of  Dentalium,  belonging  to  a  Necklace,  were  exhibited  by  M.  de
Vibraye  from  Tayac  (Laugerie  Basse)  at  the  International  Exhibition,  Paris,  1867.

Page  94.  Haematite  in  the  Burials  at  Cro-Magnon  and  Paviland. — So  also
there  was  red  ochre  with  the  "  Man  of  Mentone."  This  association  of  red  paint
and  the  corpse  is  vividly  suggested  in  Schiller's  "  Nadowessier's  Deathsong  "  : —

"  Colours  too,  to  paint  his  body,
place  within  his  hand,
that  in  the  land  of  souls
ruddy  he  may  shine."

See  also  Lyell's  'Antiquity  of  Man,'  4th  edit.  p.  131.

Page  95,  B.  Plate  XII.  fig.  2 ;  and  page  97,  B.  Plate  XIII.  figs.  2-6.  Such
lanceolate  Arrow-heads,  with  split  base,  are  mentioned  by  Dupont  ('  L'Homme '
&c.,  2  edit.,  1872,  p.  77)  as  occurring  in  the  Cavern  of  Sureau,  Montaigle,  and  as
belonging  to  the  Mammoth-period.

The  notch  or  slit  in  the  base  of  this  and  similar  weapon-heads  does  not  seem
calculated  to  retain  them  on  the  stem,  but  to  allow  them  to  be  left  in  the  wounded
animal,  whilst  the  shaft  could  be  regained  and  fitted  with  another  head.  Some
savages  (New  Guinea  &c.)  in  the  present  day  prepare  their  arrows  so  that  the
heads  may  leave  the  stem,  or  break  off  easily  at  incised  rings  or  notches ;  for  the
stems  take  much  time  and  labour  in  preparation,  and  are  too  valuable  to  be  lost
should  the  prey  or  enemy  bear  them  off  when  wounded.  (T.  K.  Gay.)

Page  95,  line  16.  For  Monteombroux  read  Montcombroux.
„      „    line  17.  For  Chatelperrou  read  Chatelperron.

Page  96,  B.Plate  XII.  fig.  11.  This  curved  and  pointed  fragment  reminds  one

2s


298  KELIQUI^E

of  the  curved  bone-picks,  pointed  at  each  end,  which  the  Esquimaux  mount  on  a
short  wooden  handle  by  lashing  them  on  at  the  middle  of  their  concave  side,  and
use  for  digging  roots.  (Christy  Collection  :  from  Sir  E.  H.  Belcher.)  Its  thinness
and  smoothness  of  surface,  however,  are  against  the  probability  of  its  having  been
so  used.  As  for  the  amount  of  curvature  in  this  and  other  implements  of  bone
or  antler,  so  many  circumstances  may  have  concurred  to  affect  them,  both  before
and  after  imbedding,  that  great  caution  must  be  had  in  drawing  conclusions.

Page  96,  line  12.  After  fastening  insert  and  sewing.
„      „    line  14.  For  Tarne  read  Tarn.

Page  97,  B.  Plate  XIII.  fig.  1.  It  has  been  suggested  by  Dr.  Broca,  and  with
some  probability,  that  tnis  bears  a  Game-score,  being  a  Hunter's  Tally-stick.  See
'Les  Troglodytes  de  la  Ve"zere,'  1872;  and  'Nature,'  March  13,  1873,  p.  367.
See  also  p.  162  and  p.  189.

Page  97,  B.  Plate  XIII.  fig.  7.  Possibly  an  Arrow-point.  The  groove  would
fit  nicely  to  an  Arrow-stem.  Some  South- American  arrows  in  the  Christy  Col-
lection are  armed  with  pieces  of  split  cane,  having  the  point  continued  from  the
convex  side.  (T.  K.  Gay.)

Page  98,  B.  Plate  XIII.  fig.  8.  Somewhat  similar  hollow  and  cylindrical  Bird-
bones,  cut  across  obliquely,  so  as  to  have  a  point  like  that  of  a  quill-pen,  have
been  used  in  place  of  needles  by  the  Greenlanders  (as  shown  by  specimens  from
old  graves  in  Greenland),  the  thread  having  been  passed  along  the  cavity  of  the
bone  and  doubled  back  on  the  outside.  These  sewing-implements,  however,  are
at  least  4^  inches  long,  and  about  ^  inch  wide,  being  made  of  the  long  slender
wing-bones  of  Wild  Fowl.  Larger  hollow  bones,  such  as  the  leg-bones  of  the
Goat  and  other  small  Ruminants,  cut  obliquely  like  the  specimen  shown  by  fig.  8,
have  been  found  in  Sweden,  Switzerland,  Prance,  and  England,  and  are  still  in
use  among  savages  (New  Guinea  &c.):  they  are  of  various  sizes,  and  are  well
adapted  for  heads  of  spears,  javelins,  and  arrows — the  hollow  butt-end  being  fitted
on  the  shaft  either  with  or  without  a  traversing  peg,  for  which  a  hole  sometimes
remains.  Mr.  John  Evans,  P.R.S.,  has  one  of  these  bone  weapon-heads,  from  the
Cambridge  Pens ;  it  is  hollow  at  the  butt-end,  with  a  hole  for  a  pin  or  rivet.  Such
a  spear-head  is  figured  in  pi.  4.  fig.  68,  of  Nilsson's  '  Primitive  Inhabitants  of  Scan-
dinavia,' Lubbock's  Edition,  8vo,  1866.  See  also  Keller's  '  Lake-dwellings,'  &c.,
Lee's  Translation,  pi.  3.  fig.  15,  and  pi.  20.  fig.  22 ;  these  latter,  however,  retain
the  knuckle-end  of  the  bone.

The  specimen  illustrated  by  fig.  8  seems  well  calculated  for  an  Arrow-point.  It
is  like  the  tips  of  some  New-Guinea  arrows  in  the  Christy  Collection.  The  Bush-


SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES.  299

men  use  sometimes  a  bone  and  sometimes  a  quill  for  the  points  of  their  Arrows.
(T.  K.  Gay.)

Page  99,  B.  Plate  XIII.  fig.  14.  A  Scraper  or  Scratcher  made  of  two  Beaver's
teeth,  from  Alaska,  and  some  Esquimaux  Scrapers  made  of  Birds'  Claws,  in
the  Christy  Collection,  remind  us  that  this  claw-like  implement  may  have  formed
part  of  such  a  scraping,  tearing,  or  carding  implement  as  those  alluded  to.

A  similar  hooked,  claw-like  point,  but  perforated,  is  figured  in  Lee's  Keller's
'  Lake- dwellings,'  pi.  5.  fig.  16,  p.  34.  Beavers'  incisors  are  used  by  North- Ame-
rican Indians  for  scraping  the  flesh  from  hides  in  the  process  of  tanning;  'Canad.
Journ.  Indust.  Sc.  Art.'  n.  s.  vol.  v.  p.  417,  1860.  See  also  Lee's  Keller's  '  Lake-
dwellings,'  pi.  28.  figs.  8, 16, 17  (the  "  comb  "  and  two  curved  pointed  "  needles  ").

Page  102,  B.  Plate  XV.  &  XVI.  With  regard  to  the  ornamental  clubs,
"  Batons,"  "  Commandosta.be,"  or  "  Pogamagans,"  here  treated  of,  further  obser-
vations will  be  found  at  pp.  300  and  1 80.

A  piece  of  forked  antler,  perforated  at  the  middle  of  the  cross,  at  the  junction
of  beam  and  brow,  is  figured  and  described  by  M.  Lartet  in  the  'Annales  des
Sciences  Naturelles,'  ser.  4,  vol.  xv.  p.  250,  pi.  10.  fig.  5 ;  but  M.  Lartet  satisfied
himself  that  the  specimen  (from  Aurignac)  is  quite  different  in  the  character  of
its  perforation  from  those  mentioned  in  the  text.

Page  1 02,  line  20.  One  fragment  of  a  barbed  Harpoon  marked  as  having  come
from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer  is  in  the  Christy  Collection ;  but  M.  Lartet  regarded  it
as  having  been  wrongly  labelled.

Page  103,  B.  Plate  XV.  &  XVI.  fig.  1.  This  is  regarded  as  an  ornamental  Tally-
stick,  with  a  Score  marked  on  its  edge,  at  page  189.

Pages  122,  123,  126,  B.  Plate  XVII.  figs.  5,  22,  &  25,  and  B.  Plate  XVIII.  fig.  6.
Though  differing  much  in  size,  yet  these  may  be  fragments  of  such  bows  as  are
used  in  working  drills,  making  fire,  and  other  purposes  by  the  Esquimaux.

Page  124,  B.  Plate  XVIII.  fig.  1.  The  ornament  on  the  flat  face  (not  figured)
here  referred  to  is  like  that  on  fig.  73,  '  Materiaux,'  1873,  p.  396,  a  similar  speci-
men from  Laugerie  Basse.

Page  134,  fig.  24.  In  Nilsson's  '  Stone  Age'  (Lubbock's  Edition)  a  stone  knife
of  very  similar  shape  is  represented,  pi.  5.  figs.  84,  85.  See  also  Evans's  '  Stone
Implements,'  p.  264.

Page  1 37,  A.  Plate  XXXIII.  fig.  4.  The  Implements  of  semicircular  shape  are
figured  also  in  Lee's  Keller's  '  Lake-dwellings,'  pi.  28.  fig.  32,  p.  99 ;  and  Lubbock's
Nilsson's  '  Stone  Age,'  pi.  5,  figs.  86-91,  pp.  86-91.  See  also  Evans's  '  Stone  Im-
plements,' p.  267.

2s2


300  EELIQUIJE  AQUITANKLE.

Page  139.  A  nodule  of  Pyrites,  used  as  a  Briquet  by  the  Cave-folk,  is  referred
to  by  Dupont,  '  L'Homme '  &c.,  2nd  edit.  1872,  p.  153,  fig.  29.  See  also  above,
p.  251,  no.  32.

Pages  142  and  143,  B.Plate  XIX.  &  XX.  fig.  1.  The  long-eared  figure  of  a
Horse.  It  is  suggested  by  M.  de  Mortillet  in  the  'Materiaux,'  vol.  iii.  1867,
p.  210,  that  there  might  have  been  a  race  of  Horses  having  long  ears.

Page  145,  line  11.   For  terete-pointed  read  terete,  pointed.

Page  159,  B.Plate  XXIV.  figs.  1  and  3.  Perhaps  the  pitted  figures  were  in-
tended to  represent  dappled  Deer,  or  rather  Fawns  of  Red  Deer,  which  are  always
somewhat  dappled.

Page  1 60,  B.  Plate  XXIV.  fig.  5.  The  figures  were  probably  intended  for  some
kind  of  Waterfowl.

Page  1 60,  B.Plate  XXIV.  fig.  7.  This  figure  has  a  decidedly  Asinine  aspect,
both  as  to  the  head  and  tail ;  and  so  has  the  figure  on  the  reverse,  but  not  so
strikingly.

Page  161,  fig.  31.  This  barbed  Lance  came  probably  from  the  Gambier  Islands,
Low  Archipelago.  See  Beechey's  'Voyage  to  the  Pacific,'  London,  1831,  p.  143.

Page  161,  line  last  but  one.     For  Society  Islands,  read  Gambier  Islands.

Page  172,  line  7.  After  120,  insert  136,.

Page  1 80,  B.Plate  XXX.  &  XXXI.  Pogamagans. — Besides  those  mentioned  in
the  text,  there  are  some  other  Pogamagans  figured  in  the  '  Materiaux,'  and  else-
where, from  Caves  of  the  Reindeer  Period  :—

1.  In  the  'Materiaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  iv.  1873,  p.  352,  pi.  22.  figs.  1,  3,  and  4  represent 'two  "Batons"  of

antler,  from  Veyrier,  Savoy,  and  of  the  Reindeer  Period.  Fig.  1  has  a  single  central  hole  in  the
slightly  dressed  butt,  and  belongs  probably  to  the  Arrow-straighteners ;  the  other  (figs.  3  and  4)  had
a  relatively  large  perforation,  but  is  broken.  Both  bear  obscure  outlines  and  other  marks.

2.  In  the  same  volume,  p.  446,  figs.  77  and  78  represent  an  imperfect  Baton  (from  the  Arudi  Cave,  in  the

Pyrenees),  with  its  butt  cut  down  to  a  ring  (broken),  with  two  associated  carvings  of  half-faces  of  a
horned  and  bearded  Goat-like  animal.  On  one  side  the  horn  projects,  with  a  slight  curve,  on  the
stem  ;  and  on  the  other  the  head  is  reversed  and  has  its  horn  curved  outwards  and  downwards  by  the
jowl,  like  that  of  a  Musk-ox.  From  the  mouth  extends  a  long  line,  with  numerous  short  lateral  lines,
either  single  and  oblique,  or  in  pairs  and  at  right  angles  to  the  median  line.

3.  In  the  '  Materiaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  v.  1874,  p.  288,  fig.  104,  a  woodcut  is  given  of  a  sculptured  "Baton"  of

Reindeer  horn,  having  the  butt  shaped  into  a  distant  resemblance  of  a  head  of  Bird,  Snake,  or  Fish,
and  the  stem  somewhat  attenuated  and  marked  with  groups  of  lines,  straight,  oblique,  and  zigzag,
•which  possibly  may  have  been  the  symbol  for  water.  It  is  from  Laugerie  Basse  (the  Abbe  Landesque's
Collection).  This  implement,  having  the  perforation  single,  and  central  in  the  fashioned  butt,  may
have  been  an  Arrow-straightener  rather  than  a  Pogamagan.

4.  Similar  Implements  of  antler  were  found  in  the  Kesslerloch,  near  Thiiingen ;  '  Mittheilungen  antiquar.


SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES.  301

Gesellschaft  in  Ziirich,'  vol.  six.  pi.  3.  fig.  17  (broken),  pi.  4.  fig.  41,  and  pi.  7.  fig.  63.  These  all
seem  to  have  had  only  a  single  central  perforation  in  the  butt,  which  is  merely  truncate  in  fig.  63,
and  somewhat  shaped,  but  irregularly,  in  fig.  41,  pi.  4.  Hence  these  also  come  into  the  category
of  Arrow-straighteners ;  but,  like  others,  they  would  serve  as  Pogamagans,  or  Clubs  to  kill  game
with.  The  Esquimaux  have  such  clubs  (not  ornamented),  both  large  and  small,  for  killing  Seals
(Christy  Collection,  from  Sir  E.  Belcher  and  others).  Their  well-known  Arrow-straighteners  are  of
bone,  shorter  and  more  equal-sided  than  our  perforated  antler-tools,  and  they  have  the  hole  cut  ob-
liquely from  face  to  face — an  adaptation  to  the  intended  purpose  not  evident  in  the  ancient  implements
under  notice,  though  sometimes  the  hole  is  slightly  oblique.  Small  Pogamagans  were  found  also  at
Bruniquel  (British  Museum) ;  and  one  of  them  has  a  subrhomboidal  ornamented  butt  with  central
perforation,  thus  corresponding  closely  with  the  specimen  from  Saleve  (Haute  Savoie),  discovered  by
M.  Thiolly,  and  generally  with  those  mentioned  above,  and  with  the  specimens  from  the  Goyet  Cave
(Dupont).

Page  1 80,  line  11.  After  Bear  add  (Hippopotamus?).

Page  1 8 1,  B.  Plate  XXX.  &  XXXI.  Although  the  majority  of  figures  of  Horses
from  the  Caves  seem  to  be  big-headed,  yet  there  are  some  with  small  heads  and
high  crests  or  much-arched  necks.  Thus  a  small-headed  and  high-crested  Horse,
in  an  attitude  of  surprise,  is  shown  in  fig.  4,  pi.  20,  '  Materiaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  i.
p.  354,  from  Laugerie  Basse,  in  M.  E.  Massenat's  Collection ;  and  another,  from
the  same  place,  in  '  MateViaux,'  ser.  2,  vol.  v.  1874,  p.  276,  fig.  73,  in  the  Abbe
Landesque's  Collection.

We  may  remark  also  that  of  the  two  engraved  outlines  of  Horses  found  in  the
Kesslerloch  at  Thaingen  (Schaffhausen)  and  figured  in  pi.  7,  '  Mittheilung.  antiq.
Gesellsch.  in  Zurich,'  vol.  xix.  part  1,  one  (fig.  65)  is  certainly  small-headed,  with
large  barrel,  and  a  long,  thin,  hairless  tail  (!);  whilst  the  other  (fig.  63),  on  a
Pogamagan,  has  a  strikingly  protuberant  muzzle,  though  its  head  does  not  appear
very  large  for  the  body,  which  is  somewhat  disproportioned  in  length.  The  latter
Horse  has  a  shaggy  jowl.  The  former  (fig.  65)  has  somewhat  the  aspect  of  a
Mule  (!).  If  these  be  taken  as  evidence  of  different  varieties  of  Horse,  the  Asinine
figure  in  our  B.  Plate  XXIV.  fig.  7,  may  really  be  another  form,  and  the  long-
eared  variety,  before  mentioned,  may  also  have  existed.

Page  183,  line  10  from  the  bottom.  Of  the  Flaying,  Flenshing,  Flensing,  or
Flinching  Tool  read  thus  : — In  this,  one  edge  is  made  to  fit  the  hand,  by  a  roll  of
root-fibres  and  split  rootlets,  passed  to  and  fro  through  holes  in  the  slate  near
the  margin,  and  enveloping  some  little  bundles  of  the  same,  set  straight  and
parallel ;  the  whole  intermixed  with  a  brownish  cement.


302


RELIQUIAE


III.— PART  III.   MISCELLANEOUS:  ART  ETC.

(1)  Possible  Variations  in  Form  of  Implements. — In  a  Letter  dated  September
28,  1868,  Dr.  Robert  Brown,  E.L.S.,  E.R.G.S.,  remarks  :—

"A  savage  is  capable  of  improving  his  implements,  even  though  his  house,  his  dress,  and  his  customs
remain  unaltered.  In  Greenland  you  find,  in  the  old  graves,  the  harpoon-holder  with  a  hole  for  the  thumb,
instead  of,  as  now,  only  a  depression  on  the  edge ;  and  when  civilization  first  reached  them  they  had  adopted
this  improvement,  showing  that  it  was  the  effect  of  an  idea  not  introduced  from  foreign  sources,  but  wrought
out  by  themselves.  This  is  of  some  importance,  as  it  shows  that  a  savage  is  capable  of  a  certain  degree  of
improvement  from  within,  though  the  generally  accepted  theory  is  that  the  impulse  must  come  from  vnihout.
If,  therefore,  you  should  find  among  the  Cave-men's  tools  some  which  seem  improvements  upon  those  of  a
preceding  age,  we  must  not  hastily  conclude  that  they  belong  to  a  different  people.

"A  people  may  go  back  in  civilization ;  and  the  rude  tools  found  need  not  have  been  the  first  efforts  of  a
people,  nor  the  more  polished  ones  the  later.  Some  months  ago,  when  in  the  Museum  of  Ethnology  at
Copenhagen,  the  eminent  Conservator,  Kammerherre  Carl  Steinhauer,  pointed  out  to  me  a  beautifully  formed
Chinese  musical  instrument,  and  another  from  Borneo,  rudely  made  after  the  same  design.  The  Chinese
who  emigrated  to  Borneo  had  fallen  back  in  civilization,  but  still  retained  the  remembrance  of  an  art  prac-
tised in  their  mother  country,  though  without  the  skill  to  fashion  an  instrument  as  beautiful  as  the  original ;
and  the  rude  instrument  shown  me  was  the  result  of  this.  Now,  if  it  had  been  found  in  tombs,  or  in  a
place  where  no  history  attached  to  it,  we  should  have  said  that  it  was  the  first  effort  of  a  savage  race,  and
that  the  other  was  the  advanced  work:  on  the  contrary,  the  rude  instrument  dates  after  the  finished,  being
the  result  of  a  retrograde  civilization  "  *.

(2)  Art  of  the  Cave-folk  of  Perigord. — In  the  '  Proceedings  of  the  Literary  and
Philosophical  Society  of  Manchester,'  vol.  xiv.  no.  10,  1875,  pp.  113-116,  Mr.
ARTHUR  W.  WATERS,  E.G.S.,  reviews  Prof.  ALBERT  HEIM'S  Memoir  on  the  Con-
tents of  the  Kesslerloch  at  Thaingen,  near  Schaffhausen,  and  says  (p.  116): —

"  Prof.  Heim  also  argues  that  the  preponderance  of  animals  [in  the  engraved  figures  illustrated  in  LAETET
and  CHRISTY'S  '  RELIQULE  AQTTITANIC^;  ']  looking  to  the  left  over  those  looking  to  the  right  indicates  a  proba-
bility that  the  artists  drew  with  the  right  hand.  He  concludes  by  saying,  '  the  race  of  zoo-artists  were
in  their  talents  in  advance  of  the  means  which  were  at  their  disposal.  In  the  late  races  (for  example,  the
Pile-dwellers)  the  intellectual  capacity  and  the  resources  in  the  midst  of  which  the  men  grew  up  are  more
nearly  balanced.'  He  also  says  'that  this  was  a  premature  attempt  of  the  human  genius,  and  that  no
partial  inconsistent  cultivation  of  a  single  talent  can  be  maintained  for  a  long  period.'  This  last  remark
does  not  seem  to  be  borne  out,  since  the  similarity  of  the  Esquimaux  and  Palaeolithic  Man  is  undoubted,
and  would  rather  make  us  consider  how  persistent  a  low  civilization  may  remain  when  there  are  few
extraneous  modifying  circumstances."

*  Thus  giving  rise  to  one  class  of  "survivals." — EDITOE.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES,


RELIQULE   AQUITANIC^E


(  DORDOGNE.)


A


PL,.  I


&a  del.et  lith.


hup  -Beceuet  3  $aris .


DESCRIPTIONS    OF   THE   PLATES.


A.  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.

A.  PLATE  I.

These  are  blocks  of  Flint  from  which  narrow  flakes  have  been  struck  off,  by
a  succession  of  carefully  directed  blows ;  so  that  the  piece  remaining  bears  several
narrow  facets,  and  may  be  regarded  as  the  nucleus  or  core  from  which  numerous
blade-like  pieces  have  been  removed  by  blows  of  another  stone  or  a  hammer.

Fig.  1.  Small  oblong  Core  of  grey  flint,  whitened  on   surface,  and  containing
Orbitoides.     From  it,  on  the  side  shown,  five  or  six  flakes  have  been  struck.
The  two  broadest  facets  bear,  at  the  bottom  of  the  figure,  the  depressions
due  to  the  "  bulb  of  percussion."
Laugerie  Basse.

Figs.  2  a,  2  b.  Conical  Core,  oblong  at  base,  formed  of  whitish-grey  flint,  with
surface-change,   and   shaped  by  the  removal  of   fourteen  or  fifteen  flakes.
2  a.  End-view,  presenting  the  hoof-like  form  which  the  kind  of  flaking  here
shown  produces.     2  b.  Side-view.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  3.  Core  of  dark-grey  flint,  oblong  in  form,  truncated  at  the  ends ;  bearing
on  one  side  traces  of  ten  or  twelve  detachments,  and  retaining  on  the  other  the
weather-worn  crust  of  the  original  flint-block.
Laugerie  Haute.

b


2  KELIQULE   AQUTTANIOE.

Eig.  4.  Rough  Core  of  dark-grey  flint,  surface-changed ;  forming  a  cone,  from
which  six  perfect  and  many  irregular  flakes  have  been  struck.
Les  Eyzies.

Tig.  5.  Irregular  Core  of  surface-changed  dark  flint ;  bearing  numerous  facets,
and  here  and  there  incrusted  with  the  calcareous  cement  of  the  Bone-breccia.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  6.  Unusually  large  Core  of  light-brown  flint,  formed  from  an  oval  nodule,
and  retaining  the  yellow-brown  crust,  except  where  the  fractured  ends  and
side  and  nine  or  ten  facets  expose  the  interior.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  7.  Very  large  Core,  truncated  at  each  end,   roughly  broken  on  one  side,
and  showing  on  the  figured  side  six  or  seven  facets.     The  whole  surface  is
much  altered  (dirty  white),  possibly  by  the  action  of  fire.
Les  Eyzies.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

inillim.

inch.

inillim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

70

2-756

25

0-984

19

0-748

3.

40

1-575

65

2-559

32

1-260

3.

68

2-677

40

1-575

20

0-787

4.

40

1-575

40

1-575

35

1-378

5.

32

1-260

35

1-378

30

1-181

6.

160

6-299

65

2-559

60

2-362

7.

150

5-906

80

3-150

50

1-968

REUQULE  AQUITANIC^E  .

(  DORDOGNE.)


A       PL. II


is


2ouveau  del.  etlith.


Imp.Becnu.et  a


DESCRIPTIONS  OP  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  3

A.  PLATE  II.

This  Plate  illustrates  a  series  of  "  flakes  "  of  Flint,  mostly  of  small  size,  and
many  of  which  have  sharp  points  for  piercing  or  fine-cutting.  They  all  show
more  or  less  the  discoloration  and  glazing  due  to  the  action  of  water  and  the
atmosphere.

Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  1.  Very  small,  flattish,  slightly  arched,  sharp  at  the  point  and  edges.     Dark-
coloured  flint.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  2.  Small,  long,  slightly  curved,  irregularly  triangular;  apparently  notched
by  use  on  one  edge  at  the  lower  end  of  the  figure.     Dark  flint.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  3.  Honey-coloured  >  slightly  arched  in  form,  small  in  size,  with  an  unusual
number  of  minute  regular  facets  on  the  outer  surface.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  4.  Brown ;  similar  to  the  last,  but  not  so  perfect,  the  bulb-end  having  been
broken  off.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  5.  Dark-coloured;  one-sided,  with  oblique  fracture  of  detachment;  tapered
to  a  fine  point,  with  sharp  edges.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  6.  Grey ;  thin,  narrow,  and  delicate  in  form,  nearly  flat ;  suddenly  curving
at  extremity.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  7.  Grey,  thick,  three-faced,  arched ;  possibly  used  as  a  drill.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  8.  Yellow ;  straight,  three-faced,  bayonet-like ;  broken  at  the  ends.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  9.  Small,  delicate,  white  (surface-changed),  slightly  arched ;  the  straighter
edge  minutely  chipped.
Laugerie  Basse.

52


4  EELIQUI^E  AQUITANIC^E.

Fig.  10.  Very  similar  to  Fig.  2   of  this  Plate,  but   smaller  and  less   curved ;
minutely  chipped  along  one  edge.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  11.  Dark  grey ;  flattish ;  like  Fig.  1,  but  larger.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  12.  Very  small  bayonet-like  flake  of  dark  flint.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  13.  Yellow ;  very  much  smaller ;  much  like  Fig.  1,  but  shorter  and  broader.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  14.  Cream-coloured,  surface-changed,  thick-ridged;   pointed  at  the  narrow
end  by  lateral  fractures,  making  a  sharp  edge.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  15.  Brown-grey,   surface-changed ;    larger   and   flatter   than   Fig.    14,    but
pointed  in  a  similar  manner.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  16.  Dark-coloured;  arched  and  sharp-edged;  much  more  pointed  than  the
two  preceding,  but  tapered  by  similar  lateral  fractures  at  the  thick  end.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  17.  Honey-coloured ;  large,  three-faced,  nearly  straight,  razor-shaped.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  18.  Simple  flake  of  grey  flint,  knife-shaped,  sharp  at  the  edges  and  points.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  19.  Brown,  narrow,  slightly  arched,  sharp  at  the  edges ;  suddenly  narrower
at  the  further  end,  with  a  shoulder.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  20.  Like  Fig.  2,  but  sharp  at  one  end.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  21.  Small,  subtriangular  flake  of  light-brown  flint;   slightly  roughened  at
both  sides,  probably  by  use.
Laugerie  Basse.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.


Fig.  22.  Dark-grey,  long,  narrow,  arched,  triangular ;  blunt  at  each  end.


Laugerie  Basse.


Fig.  23.  Simple  acute-lanceolate  flake  of  dark  flint.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  24.  Like  Fig.  14,  but  larger  and  buff-coloured.
Les  Eyzies.


Fig.  25.  Honey-coloured;    narrow,
roughened,  probably  by  use.
Laugerie  Basse.


lanceolate,    slightly    arched;    edges    partly


Fig.  26.  Simple,  knife-like  flake  of  dark  flint,  somewhat  irregular  in  outline.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  27.  Long,  narrow,  curved,  slightly  arched,  knife-like  flake  of  brown  flint.


Laugerie  Basse.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.             English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

22

0-865

4

0-157

2

0-078

2.

42

1-653

4

0-157

4

0-078

3.

52

1-976

9

0-354

4

0-157

4.

50

1-968

8

0-315

2

0-078

5.

50

1-968

13

0-512

3

0-118

6.

58

2-283

6

0-236

2

0-078

7.

65

2-559

11

0-433

5

0-197

8.

53

2-086

7

0-275

3

0-118

9.

42

1-653

5

0-197

2

0-078

10.

40

1-575

4

0-157

4

0-157

11.

32

1-260

5

0-197

2

0-078

12.

22

0-865

3

0-118

2

0-078

13.

21

0-826

5

0-197

3

0-118

14.

48

1-889

10

0-393

5

0-197

15.

59

2-322

15

0-590

5

0-197

16.

62

2-440

9

0-354

3

0-118

17.

132

5-196

25

0-984

r+
t

0-275

18.

56

2-330

12

0-472

3

0-118

19.

47

1-850

/

0-275

2

0-078

20.

44

1-732

4

0-157

4

0-157

21.

23

0-905

7

0-275

3

0-118

22.

58

2-282

8

0-315

3

0-118

23.

64

2-519

13

0-512

3

0-118

24.

85

3-346

15

0-590

7

0-275

25.

79

3-110

16

0-630

4

0-157

26.

60

2-362

14

0-551

3

0-118

27.

70

2-756

10

0-393

3

0-118

RELIQUIAE   AQUITAXIC7E.


A.  PLATE  III.

Figs.  1  a,  1  b,  I  c.  Large  broad  flake,  worked  into  a  lanceolate  form  by  careful
chipping  along  the  edges  of  the  outer  face.

Dark -grey  flint,  slightly  glazed.  Lightly  weathered  by  surface-change  on  the
face  1  b.

Le  Moustier.

French  millimetres.  English  inches.

Length 122  4-802

Breadth    60   2-362

Thickness 18   0-709

Figs.  2  a,  2b,  2c.  Implement  of  ovato-lanceolate  form,  almost  equally  convex  on
each  face ;  the  narrow  or  pointed  end  considerably  thinner  than  the  broad  end  or
butt.

This  specimen  has  been  roughly  chipped  from  the  solid,  and  then  more
carefully  worked  on  the  edges  of  the  pointed  end, — thus  resembling  some  of  the
old  worked  flints  from  the  Valley  of  the  Somme.

A  small  portion  of  the  original  crust  of  the  flint  is  left  on  the  outer  curve  of
Fig.  2  b.

Dark-grey  flint,  slightly  glazed.

Le  Moustier.

French  millimetres.  English  inches.

Length   90   3-543

Breadth 57   2-244

Thickness 30   .  .    1-181


RELIQULE   AQUITANICyE

(  DORDOGNE.)


A       PL  .  Ill


L ouveau  del. etlith.


Imp  .J3ec(7uet  A  Paris .


RELIQULE  AQUITANIC^E  .

(  DORDOGNE.)

1  2


A


PL  .  IV.


11


10


12


Zouveau  del  et  lith.


bnp.Btcyiet  a  Pa-is.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.


A.  PLATE  IV.

The  specimens  figured  in  this  Plate  are  lanceolate  pieces  of  Flint,  carefully
shaped  by  repeated  chippings  into  a  flattish,  long,  acute-ovate  form,  with  pointed
ends  and  somewhat  sharp  edges.  They  are  all  from  Laugerie  Haute.  The
resemblance  between  these  neatly  made  flint  implements  and  some  found  in
Denmark  is  very  remarkable ;  hence  these  much-chipped  and  symmetrical  forms
are  sometimes  spoken  of  as  belonging  to  the  "  Scandinavian  Type."

Eig.  1.  Light-grey ;  glazed.
Laugerie  Haute.

Eig.  2.  Dark-grey;  glazed.
Laugerie  Haute.

Eig.  3.  Chalcedonic  flint,  somewhat  weathered ;  one  end  broader  than  the  other.
Laugerie  Haute.

Eig.  4.  Darkish-grey ;  much  weathered  and  mottled,  chiefly  on  one  face.     More
oval  than  the  others.
Laugerie  Haute.

Eig.  5.  Narrow,  neat,  highly  finished,  nearly  smooth ;  broadest  at  its  lowest  third ;
mottled  light  and  dark  brown ;  glazed.
Laugerie  Haute.

Eig.  6.  Small,  retaining  curve  of  the  original  flake  from  which  it  has  been
worked ;  grey,  slightly  glazed.
Laugerie  Haute.

Eig.  7.  Fragment,  retaining  the  face  of  the  original  flake  on  one  side ;  dark  grey,
glazed  and  weathered,  showing  fine  grey  mottling,  especially  on  the  convex  face.
Laugerie  Haute.

Eig.  8.  Fragment.     Worked  on  both  faces ;  grey ;  glazed.
Laugerie  Haute.

Eig.  9.  Fragment.     Dark-grey,  coarse  flint ;  glazed.
Laugerie  Haute.


8


RELIQUIAE


Fig.  10.  Small ;  somewhat  irregular  in  outline ;  grey ;  glazed.
Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  11.  Long  and  narrow,  symmetrical,  broadest  towards  one  end ;  light-grey
flint,  much  weathered,  freely  flecked  with  white,  and  the  edges  white  and  opake.
Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  12.  Long,  narrow,  less  regularly  lanceolate  than  the  others,  tapering  nearly
equally  at  the  two  ends ;  one  side  formed  of  the  original  face  of  the  flake.
Brownish-grey  flint,  highly  glazed,  and  much  whitened  by  weathering,  especially
on  the  flat  face.
Laugerie  Haute.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inch.

miUim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

58

2-282

19

0-748

5

0-197

2.

64

2-519

18

0-709

5

0-197

3.

99

3-898

22

0-865

5

0-197

4.

55

2-165

22

0-865

6

0-236

5.

54

2-126

14

0-551

4

0-157

e.

47

1-850

14

0-551

4

0-157

7.

(73)  116

(2-9)  4-597

25

0-984

6

0-236

8.

(72)  122

(2-8)  4-802

35

1-378

6

0-236

9.

(57)    96

(2-2)  3-779

22

0-865

5

0-197

10.

39

1-535

15

0-590

4

0-157

11.

75

2-953

17

0-66!)

4

0-157

12.

70

2-756

16

0-630

5

0-197

Note. — Figs.  7,  8,  and  9  being  fragments,  the  measurements  in  brackets  give  the  actual  length  of  the
pieces,  and  the  estimated  length  of  the  specimens  when  perfect  is  placed  in  the  column  for  comparison  with
that  of  others.


RELI Q  ULE    AQ  Ul  TAN  I  CJE  .

(   DOJWOGNE.)


10


Jft'


J.ouveau  del.  etlith.


Imp.Becyuet  a  Paris.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.


B.  BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  &c.

B.  PLATE  I.

The  specimens  figured  in  this  Plate  belong  to  the  Category  of  Arms,  or,  perhaps,
of  Fishing-Implements,  made  of  Reindeer's  Horn.  Whether  considering  them  as
Arrow-heads,  or  as  Harpoon-heads,  we  see  that  all,  both  large  and  small,  have  on
each  side  recurved  points,  hooks,  or  barbs,  cut  out  of  the  sides,  and  sometimes
opposite,  sometimes  alternate.  The  upper  end,  more  or  less  elongated  and  pointed,
is  sometimes  rounded  and  nearly  smooth.  One  would  scarcely  think  that  weapons
of  so  little  sharpness  could  pierce  the  flesh  of  animals,  even  that  of  fishes,  had  we
not  known  that  the  Esquimaux  of  our  own  day  (particularly  those  of  the  more
northern  regions,  who  have  not  yet  been  able  to  get  any  iron)  are  obliged  to  make
their  tools  and  weapons  of  bits  of  wild  Reindeer  Horn,  and  that  these  are  not
the  less  formidable  to  wild  beasts  *.

All  the  "Weapon-heads  are  tapered,  and  even  pointed,  at  the  lower  end  or  butt,
without  doubt  to  fit  into  a  socket  in  the  end  of  a  wooden  shaft.  Two  or  three  lines
distant  above  this  tapering  butt-end  there  are  nearly  always  two  little  eminences
or  knobs,  probably  to  aid  in  fixing  the  implement  in  the  shaft,  unless,  indeed,  it
was  for  the  fastening  of  a  line  for  attachment  t-

*  In  his  '  Polar  Regions '  (8vo.  Edinburgh,  1861)  Sir  J.  Richardson  remarks,  p.  308,  "  A  strong  arm  is
required,  as  well  as  much  address  to  bend  an  Eskimo  bow.  In  the  hands  of  a  native  hunter,  it  will
propel  an  arrow  with  sufficient  force  to  pierce  the  heart  of  a  Musk-ox,  or  break  the  leg  of  a  Reindeer.  Iron
obtained  by  barter,  or  from  wrecks,  is  employed  to  point  weapons,  or  to  make  flenching  knives ;  but  among
the  Kittegareut  native  copper  is  extensively  used  for  the  purpose,  and  for  making  ice-chisels.  The  more
northern  Eskimos  are  compelled  to  resort  to  the  antlers  of  the  Deer  for  the  construction  of  the  indispensable
ice-chisels.  Flint  or  chert,  obtained  from  the  Silurian  limestone,  is  chipped  to  make  arrowheads,  pre-
cisely similar  to  the  flint  weapons  so  commonly  found  in  the  soil  of  various  parts  of  Europe,  and  even  now
frequently  fashioned  by  the  natives  of  Australia.  The  nature  of  this  material  has  caused  the  form  of  the
weapons  to  be  alike  in  all  these  distant  localities."  And  at  p.  307  he  says,  "  Strong  cord  is  made  from
strips  of  Seal-skin  hide ;  and  the  sinews  of  Musk-oxen  and  Deer  furnish  bow-strings,  or  cord  to  make  nets
or  snares."

t  Sir  J.  Richardson  states  (Polar  Regions,  1861,  p.  309),  "  The  harpoons  and  lances  used  in  killing  Whales
and  Seals  have  long  shafts  of  wood  or  of  Narwhal's  tooth ;  and  the  barbed  point  is  so  constructed  that,
when  the  blow  takes  effect,  it  is  left  sticking  in  the  body  of  the  animal,  while  the  shaft  attached  to  it  by  a
string  is  disengaged  from  the  socket,  and  becomes  a  buoy  of  wood."

C


I0  EELIQUIJE  AQTJITANICLE.

Perhaps  with  these  harpoons,  much  smaller  in  size  than  those  of  the  Esquimaux,
our  old  fishermen  of  Perigord  attacked  the  large  freshwater  Pishes  which  abounded
in  their  rivers*  ;  and  perhaps,  also,  the  shaft,  detached  from  the  harpoon,  served  as
a  float  to  indicate  where  the  fish  went,  and  to  check  its  retreat.

There  are  also  heads  for  arrows  or  harpoons  which  have  harbs  down  one  side  only;
and  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  them  to  be  anything  but  fishing-implements.  These
we  shall  figure  on  another  Plate.

In  most  of  these  barbed  weapon-heads  there  are  long  nicks  or  grooves  on  the
barbs,  and  almost  always  on  both  sides.  These  grooves  are  most  frequently  simple ;
but  sometimes  they  are  double ;  and  they  follow  the  curve  of  the  barbs,  which
sometimes  end  in  a  sharp  hook,  and  sometimes  with  a  nearly  smooth  point.  It  has
been  conjectured,  in  searching  for  an  explanation  of  the  probable  use  of  these
grooves,  that  they  may  have  served  to  hold  a  poisonous  substance,  active  enough
to  hasten  the  death  of  the  wounded  animal.  In  support  of  this  supposition,  one
may  refer  to  the  custom  that  some  of  the  savages  of  South  America  have  of
rubbing  the  arrows  used  in  hunting  with  a  poison  that  makes  the  flesh  of  the
animals  so  killed  more  tender.  An  historian  of  the  eighteenth  century  (Dom.
Martin,  Hist,  des  Gauloises)  has  held  that  the  Ancient  Gauls  had  just  such  a
practice  in  the  chase  f.

Eig.  1.  A  Head  of  an  Arrow  or  Harpoon,  with  barbs  on  each  side.  It  belongs  to
the  Long-pointed  type,  with  a  round  and  nearly  smooth  point.  It  has  eight
barbs,  one  of  which  has  been  broken ;  they  are  arranged  on  the  two  sides,  one
opposite  to  another,  that  is  to  say,  opposed,  and  not  alternate  as  we  shall  see
them  in  other  specimens;  they  are  flat,  and  their  points  are  sharply  curved
back  or  hooked,  and  hollowed  on  each  face  by  grooves  or  nicks,  intended,  perhaps,
to  lodge  poison  in.  The  stem  of  the  weapon  also  bears  longitudinal  grooves,
disposed  two  and  two  on  the  intervals  between  the  barbs.  This  weapon  is
made  of  Reindeer  horn,  like  all  the  others.
Prom  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  2.  Another  Harpoon-head,  with  the  apex  carefully  pointed;  it  bears  eight

*  It  was  not  very  long  ago,  that  is,  before  the  building  of  certain  weirs  on  the  Dordogne  Eiver,  that  Salmon
came  up  from  the  sea  as  far  as  the  Vezere,  which  still  produces  abundantly  Carp,  Barbel,  and  other  Cyprinoid
Fish.

t  Barbed  weapons,  somewhat  similar  to  those  described  above,  and  bearing  poison -grooves,  have  been
found  in  the  Lower  Cavern  at  Massat,  Languedoc,  by  M.  A.  Fontan  (see  'Quarterly  Journal  of  the
Geological  Society  of  London,'  vol.  xvii.  p.  470).


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  II

barbs,  subalternate,  those  on  one  side  rising  a  little  above  those  on  the  other.
These  barbs  are  not  so  long  as  those  in  Fig.  1,  and  lie  nearer  to  the  stem,  which
throughout  its  length  has  a  raised  riblet,  running  up  into  the  point,  and
bordered  all  along  by  engraved  lines  or  continued  notches.  The  barbs  in  this
specimen  have  double  grooves.  This  is  one  of  the  most  carefully  worked ;  but
it  is  imperfect,  owing  to  an  old  fracture  just  below  the  barbed  portion.
Prom  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  3.  This  is  of  the  Long-poMed  type,  but  not  very  sharp ;  it  has  seven  barbs —
three  on  one  side,  and  four  on  the  other ;  and  the  stem  is  marked  with  large
shallow  furrows.     This  specimen  differs  somewhat  in  form  from  most  of  the
weapons  of  this  kind.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  Another  Harpoon-head,  more  carefully  worked  than  the  last.  It  is  one
of  the  largest  we  have  found.  Its  point  is  elongate  and  somewhat  sharp.  The
stem  is  regularly  rounded.  The  barbs,  cut  out  symmetrically,  and  marked
with  simple  grooves,  are  three  on  one  side  (right),  and  five  on  the  other  (left) ;
the  first  on  the  left  side  is  placed  forward,  and  has  none  to  correspond  with  it
on  the  other  side.  The  others  are  some  alternate,  some  opposite.  There  are
no  longitudinal  lines,  but  only  oblique  notches  between  each  two  barbs.
The  knobs  at  the  haft  are  very  prominent.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  5.  A  Fragment,  broken  off  below  the  first  pair  of  barbs.    The  point  is  very
much  drawn  out,  rounded,  and  smooth  at  its  extremity.     The  barbs  have  simple
grooves.     This  is  a  form  very  distinct  from  those  ordinarily  met  with.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  6.  With  numerous  barbs ;   these  are  closely  set,  rounded,  and  offering  no
trace  of  the  supposed  poison-grooves.     Though   broken   through   the   barbed
portion,  this  specimen  still  presents  seven  barbs  on  one  side  and  eight  on  the
other.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  7.  A  distinct  type*,  with  the  point  forming  a  triangle  by  the  meeting  of  the
first  two  barbs,  which,  like  the  others,  are  nearly  flat,  and  are  hollowed  by  two

*  Unless,  indeed,  it  was  originally  longer,  and  has  been  re-cut  and  sharpened  after  having  been  broken.

c2


12  BELIQTJLE  AQUITANK1E.

parallel  grooves  on  both  faces.    The  stem  is  marked  by  two  longitudinal  lines,
between  which  is  a  somewhat  raised  fillet,  dying  out  at  the  point.     The  knobs
for  the  haft  are  tolerably  prominent.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  8.  With  a  sharp  point  and  numerous  barbs ;  these  lie  almost  close  to  the
stem,  and  are  subalternate,  seven  on  one  side  and  five  on  the  other,  mostly
without  poison-grooves.     The  stem  is  marked  by  a  continuous  fillet  along  one
side,  and  an  interrupted  fillet  on  the  other.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  9.  Another  Harpoon-head,  sharply  pointed,  and  very  short.  The  barbs  are
long,  curved  along  the  stem,  and  simply  grooved,  three  on  one  side  and  two  on
the  other.  The  haft-knobs  are  prominent ;  the  lower  or  butt  end  is  very  much
pointed.

From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  10.  Harpoon-head  of  particular  form,  bearing  along  its  middle  a  longitudinal
and  highly  raised  rib.  The  point  is  broken  off.  The  barbs  diverge  slightly,
are  subalternate,  and  oblique  to  the  axis  of  the  stem,  four  on  one  side  and  three
on  the  other.

From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  11.  A  small  specimen,  with  elongate  point,  and  belonging  to  the  same  type
as  Fig.  5.     It  has  been  broken  below  the  first  pair  of  barbs,  which  are
subalternate.
From  La  Madelaine.


RELIQUIAE   AQUITANIC^:  .

(  DORDOGNE.)


B.


PL.  II


f^'  "        "  "  --


^vTT1  '  s


.-.,-

.         /  X    *      -  ^-    "7    .'    .

'


-•/x,.


^^


c/eJ.  et  lith.


Imp  Becjuet  A  Paris.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  13


B.  PLATE  II.

Fig.  1.  A  cylindrical  piece  of  Reindeer  Horn,  on  which,  are  carved  two  outlines  of
Fishes,  one  on  each  side.  In  the  figure  here  given,  the  form  of  the  head,  the
shape  of  the  gills,  an  obscure  indication  of  the  back-fin,  and  the  proportions
and  general  appearance  permit  us  to  refer  this  Fish  to  one  of  the  freshwater
kind,  probably  of  the  Cyprinoid  (Carp)  family.

The  fragment  is  broken  at  both  ends ;  and  we  can  scarcely  form  an  opinion
as  to  its  original  use,  and  whether,  indeed,  it  was  an  ornament  or  not*.

From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  2.  This  is  a  piece  of  Bird's  Bone,  broken  at  both  ends  by  old  fractures ;  and
the  absence  of  an  articular  extremity  makes  it  very  difficult  to  attribute  a
specific  relation  for  this  bone.  Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  its  broken  and  worn
condition,  we  may  recognize  the  upper  part  of  a  cubitus  of  a  very  large
Palmipede,  probably  a  Swan.  On  it  is  engraved  the  incomplete  figure  of  a
four-footed  Mammal  standing  still.  By  the  old  fracture  of  the  fore  part  the
head  has  been  lost;  but  what  remains  of  the  shoulder,  rising  towards  the
withers,  which  join  by  a  slight  incurving  the  line  of  the  back,  that  ends  in  a
short  tail,  enables  us  to  recognize  the  B/eindeer,  so  often  represented  by  the
aborigines  of  Pe"rigord.  The  four  legs,  but  not  their  extremities,  are  shown.
Hatchings  or  indications  of  hair  under  the  line  of  the  back,  at  the  beginning  of
the  limbs,  and  below  the  ribs,  have  given  a  kind  of  relief  to  the  drawing.  It  is
not  apparent  for  what  intention  this  figure  has  been  surcharged  with  a  longi-
tudinal series  of  chevrons  or  zigzag  lines  from  shoulder  to  haunch.  The  figure
is  in  other  respects  boldly  drawn,  and  the  contours  vigorously  rendered.

This  specimen,  the  use  of  which  it  seems  impossible  to  indicate,  was  found  at
La  Madelaine.

Fig.  3.  This  is  also  a  fragment,  broken  at  the  ends,  and  showing  at  one  of  them
the  broken  rim  of  a  hole  intended  either  for  hanging  it  up  by,  or  for  some  other
use.  The  material  is  Stag's  Hornf ;  and  the  animal  which  we  find  represented

*  Similarly  engraved  pieces  of  bone,  bearing  figures  of  Fishes,  are  worn  (we  are  told  by  Mr.  Francis  Poole)
by  some  of  the  Indians  of  North-west  America  as  charms,  when  sailing  across  Queen  Charlotte's  Sound.

t  It  is  remarkable  that  the  old  Savage,  who  wished  to  represent  a  Stag,  has  judiciously  chosen  for  the
material  an  antler  of  Cervus  elaphus ;  whilst  among  the  thousands  of  fragments  of  Eeindeer  Horn  whieh  we
have  collected  in  the  Dordogne  Caves  we  have  found  scarcely  a  fragment  of  Stag  Horn.


!4  KELIQULE

on  it  is  certainly  a  Ruminant  with  complex  antlers.  The  animal  is  squatting*,
having  the  legs  folded  under  the  body.  The  form  of  the  head,  with  the  mouth
openf,  is  not  sufficiently  characteristic  for  determining  the  species ;  but  the
disposition  of  the  antlers  is  certainly  that  of  the  Common  Stag  (Cervus  elaphus),
bearing  a  chief  branch,  surmounted  by  a  smaller  one,  and  followed  by  the
middle  branch.  We  may  see,  moreover,  behind,  the  commencement  of  the  top-
branching.  The  shoulder,  slimmer  than  in  the  Reindeer,  bears  two  rows  of
hatchings  or  marks  for  hair ;  and  we  see  others  on  the  forehead,  and  some
patches  of  lines  thrown  in  here  and  there  on  the  body,  probably  to  give  relief
to  the  drawing.

On  the  opposite  face  of  this  specimen,  which  we  thought  to  be  too  difficult  to
figure,  we  find  confusedly  intermixed  several  engravings,  amongst  which,  how-
ever, we  can  distinguish  the  leg  and  foot  of  a  Horse,  sufficiently  well  designed.

From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  A  very  thin  slice  of  Reindeer  Horn,  broken  on  several  sides,  and  on  which
is  the  figure  of  an  animal  somewhat  difficult  to  define  as  to  its  specific  characters.
The  size  and  shortness  of  the  shoulder,  in  excluding  the  Reindeer,  the  Stag,  and
the  Horse,  might  yet  serve  for  a  Bovine  animal ;  but  the  fracture  at  the  attachment
of  the  horns  deprives  us  of  the  means  of  judging  if  it  be  of  this  character.  The
withers  do  not  seem  high  enough  for  the  Aurochs ;  or,  at  least,  they  would  do
only  for  a  young  individual.  The  marks  for  hair,  indicated  on  different  parts  of
the  body,  are  also  distributed  with  intelligence,  for  the  purpose  of  making  the
drawing  more  effective.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  5.  The  material  here  used  by  the  old  engraver  is  not  the  horn  of  the  Reindeer,
but  a  plate  from  the  cannon-bone  or  metatarsal  of  that  animal.  Of  the  design,
unfortunately,  only  a  part  remains ;  it  comprised  at  least  two  animals.  Of  one,
we  see  the  hinder  part ;  but  its  croup  is  hidden  by  the  head  of  the  one  that
follows.  This  last  appears  to  us  to  be  a  Reindeer.  The  general  attitude,  the
form  of  the  shoulder,  and  the  different  outlines  would  leave  small  doubt  as  to
the  species  to  which  it  is  to  be  referred,  were  it  not  more  evidently  confirmed  by
the  tuft  of  hair,  characteristic  of  the  male  Reindeer,  which  appears  under  the
chest  in  front  of  the  brisket.  The  head,  though  well  set  on,  is  short  and  not

*  Possibly  the  figure  may  be  more  correctly  referred  to  a  leaping  Stag.

t  The  mouth  is  too  widely  open  to  express  the  act  of  rumination.     Possibly,  however,  it  might  represent
the  panting  or  "  blown  "  condition  of  a  hunted  Stag.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  15

very  correct  in  design :  the  lower  lip  has  too  salient  an  angle  at  the  chin ;  the
nose  is  dilated  at  the  muzzle,  as  it  is  not  in  the  Reindeer ;  and  the  eyes  are
immoderately  large.  In  front  of  the  ear  there  is,  as  an  indication  of  antlers,  a
slender  horn  without  a  brow-antler,  and  which  would  seem  as  if  a  young  animal
was  meant  to  be  represented.  The  hatchings,  or  marks  for  hair,  are  cut  on
different  parts  of  the  figure  to  mark  the  projections  either  of  bone  or  muscle.
By  the  attitude  of  the  body  and  a  certain  degree  of  animation  expressed  in  the
head,  the  figure  recalls  tolerably  well  the  drawing  of  a  young  Wild  Reindeer
given  by  Count  Mellin  in  plate  viii.  of  his  '  Natural  History  of  the  Reindeer '
(see  '  Schriften  der  Berlinischen  Gesellschaft  naturforschender  Freunde,'  1783).
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  6.  This  is  a  piece  of  the  palm  of  a  Reindeer's  Antler,  by  the  natural  contour
of  which  the  old  artist  has  profited  in  engraving  on  its  two  sides,  in  light  lines,
the  profile  of  the  head  and  fore  body  of  an  animal  which  we  cannot  refer  to  any
other  than  the  Bouquetin  or  Ibex  (Capra  ibex}.  Its  head  is  rather  heavy,
and  the  forehead  is  not  hollow  enough.  The  horns,  sketched  on  one  of  the
branches  of  the  palm,  are  thin  and  without  exactitude  of  proportion ;  never-
theless their  simple  curvature  and  the  absence  of  any  sign  of  twist  in  them
permit  us  rather  to  refer  this  animal  to  the  Ibex  of  the  Alps  than  to  that  of
the  Pyrenees.  Lastly,  it  is  to  the  Ibex  of  the  Alps  that  we  may  refer  other
natural  and  very  well  characterized  remains  that  have  been  discovered  in  the
Caves  of  this  district  of  France.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  7.  Here  we  find  a  piece  of  the  beam  of  a  Reindeer  Horn,  with  indica-
tion of  a  hole  for  suspension,  and  with  broken  ends.  Two  animals  are  here
figured  evidently  galloping,  with  nose  in  the  air.  However  much  the  sketch  is
wanting  in  exactitude,  nevertheless  the  general  attitude  and  physiognomy  of  the
two  animals,  combined  with  a  manifest  expression  of  certain  zoological  charac-
ters (among  others,  the  dilatation  of  the  antlers,  however  incorrect  it  may  be),
make  them,  in  our  eyes,  represent  two  Reindeer  better  than  anything  else.

On  the  opposite  side  of  this  piece  of  the  beam  of  a  horn  are  engraved  two
figures  of  Horses,  which  have  not  been  reproduced  on  our  Plate,  in  view  of  our
having  occasion  to  figure  others  in  the  course  of  this  Publication.
From  La  Madelaine.

Figs.  8  a,  Sb.  The  objects  here  represented  are,  in  the  original,  engraved  on  the


6  KELIQTJLE  AQUITANIC^.

face  of  a  cylindrical  rod,  which  our  artist  has  rendered  diagrammatically  in  two
separate  figures,  so  as  to  reproduce  the  whole  in  halves.

On  one  of  these  halves  (represented  as  a  flat  surface,  fig.  8  a)  we  see  two
heads,  one  after  the  other,  evidently  referable  to  a  Bovine  genus.  We  may  add
that  characters  for  a  determination  of  the  species  are  not  altogether  wanting.
The  points  of  attachment  and  the  direction  of  the  horns  suffice,  by  themselves,
to  decide  for  the  Aurochs ;  whilst,  moreover,  a  more  significant  indication  could
not  be  offered  than  the  convexity  of  the  forehead  and  the  presence  of  hair-tufts,
both  on  the  face  and  under  the  throat.

On  the  opposite  side  of  the  other  half-cylinder  (reproduced  as  a  plane  in
fig.  8  b)  we  see,  in  a  medley  of  figures,  sometimes  upside  down,  first,  a  Human
form,  with  the  limbs  not  finished  very  incorrectly,  although  the  face  is  without
any  expression — a  negligence  probably  intentional  on  the  part  of  the  ancient
artist,  who  has  perfectly  characterized,  close  by  it,  a  Horse's  head  and  part  of
its  chest,  with  their  details  pretty  well  rendered.  More  to  the  right,  we  per-
ceive a  second  Horse's  head,  not  so  well  cut.  To  the  left  of  and  behind  the
Human  form,  amongst  rows  of  dashes,  or  figures,  of  which  we  cannot  com-
prehend either  the  intention  or  value,  there  is  an  outline  (reversed  with  respect
to  the  other  figures)  of  a  Serpent,  or  rather  of  an  Eel  with  indications  of  the
tail-fin;  and  its  head,  with  mouth  open,  approaches  the  leg  of  the  Human
figure.  In  this  bizarre  group  of  figures,  or  in  the  figures  themselves,  we  avow
we  cannot  see  any  intention  or  premeditated  arrangement ;  and  if  others,  more
knowing,  think  that  they  here  recognize  the  expression  of  an  allegory,  or  of
any  symbolism,  we  very  willingly  leave  to  them  the  merit  as  well  as  the
responsibility.


RELIQUIAE    AQUITANICjE  .

(  VORDOGNE .)


A


PL.V.


V  ,


.  del.  et  lith  ,


tcmiet  d  Paris.


DESCEIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  17


A.  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.

A.  PLATE  V.

The  specimens  here  figured  belong  to  a  type  of  Implements  specially  adapted
for  being  held  in  the  hand  by  the  thick  and  naturally  rounded  margin ;  whilst  the
opposite  margin,  reduced  to  a  sharp  curved  edge  by  careful  chipping,  can  be  used
as  a  hatchet  or  chopper,  and  seems  well  fitted  for  smashing  the  marrow-bones  which
are  found  broken  among  the  hearth-stuff  of  the  caves  in  great  profusion.

These  Choppers  vary  much  in  size,  and  were  chiefly  found  in  the  Le  Moustier  Cave,
a  few  only  having  occurred  at  Les  Eyzies  or  elsewhere.  Many  seem  to  show  signs  of
wear ;  and  some  have  the  edge  chipped  at  a  much  more  obtuse  angle  than  others.

Fig.  1.  One-edged  cutting-instrument,  or  chopper,  formed  from  a  block  of  grey  Flint,
which  has  been  first  reduced  by  bold  chipping  to  a  flattened  form,  and  then  finely
chipped  on  both  faces  along  one  margin,  so  as  to  produce  a  sharp  cutting-edge  in
the  form  of  a  segment  of  a  circle.  The  other  margin  is  left  with  the  natural  crust
of  the  flint,  and  can  be  conveniently  held  in  the  hand.  On  the  side  figured,  a  por-
tion of  the  crust  remains,  the  rest  of  the  surface  having  been  chipped  away.
Le  Moustier.

French  millimetres.  English  inches.

Length    130   '. 5-118

Breadth   88   3-465

Thickness    32   1-260

Figs.  2  a,  2  b.  A  similar  instrument,  but  bevel-edged,  formed  of  a  large  thick  flake,
that  has  been  struck  off  at  a  single  blow  from  a  block  of  Flint,  and  then  brought
to  a  curved  cutting-edge  along  one  border  by  the  chipping  away  of  the  outer
face.  This  flint  is  nearly  black,  with  a  yellowish  crust  remaining  on  the  portion
that  is  convenient  for  holding  in  the  hand.

Fig.  2a  shows  the  chipped  side,  with  some  of  the  crust  remaining;  fig.  2b,  the
flat  side.

Le  Moustier.

French  millimetres.  English  inches.

Length 95   3-740

Breadth     74   2-913

Thickness 21    0-827

d


KELIQULE   AQT7ITAKECLE.


A.  PLATE  VI.

This  Plate  represents  twelve  instruments  of  Flint,  all  of  which  have  heen
thought  to  have  one  end  prepared  for  fastening  in  a  stick  or  shaft.  It  is  not,
however,  always  easy  to  decide  which  was  really  the  fixed  end ;  for,  though  some
of  these  specimens  may  have  been  lance-heads,  many  hear  evidence  of  use  on  one
or  both  edges  of  what  seems  at  first  sight  the  but  end,  whilst  the  blade-like  and
unused  portion  is  still  quite  sharp  at  the  point  and  edges.

In  fig.  3  the  but  is  boldly  and  nearly  equally  notched  on  either  side ;  and  in
fig.  10,  though  broken,  it  seems  to  have  been  symmetrically  chipped  to  a  tapering
flattish  point,  like  that  of  the  other  extremity  of  the  specimen.  In  figs.  8  and  12
also  both  ends  of  the  instrument  have  been  pointed;  but  one  end  is  more
contracted  than  the  other,  having  been  much  reduced  at  the  edges.  In  all  the
others  one  end  has  been  narrowed  (with  or  without  tapering)  by  the  removal  of  a
large  portion  of  one  edge.  Whether  this  was  done  for  insertion  in  a  handle,  or
whether  the  diminution  in  width  was  not  rather  the  result  of  wear,  are  questions
not  easily  determined.  In  some  instances  it  seems  probable  that  the  part  of  the
flake  which  still  retains  its  sharp  edges  has  been  protected  by  insertion  in  a  handle,
while  the  other  part  has  been  used  for  cutting,  or  rather  for  scraping :  see  figs.  1
and  2,  p.  21.  The  care  with  which  many  of  them  have  been  chipped  (not  well
shown  by  the  figures)  has  given  them  a  character  approximating  to  that  of  the
"  Scandinavian  "  type, — also  alluded  to  in  the  description  of  A.  PI.  IV.

All  figured  in  this  Plate  are  from  Laugerie  Haute ;  but  the  same  forms  occur
also  elsewhere  in  considerable  numbers.

Fig.  1.  Light-brown  flint,  weathered  grey.  Long,  narrow ;  one-third  lanceolate ;
the  rest  semicylindrical.  This  has  been  a  part  of  a  flake  dressed  at  one  end  by
chipping  into  a  plano-convex  tapering  shape ;  at  the  other  it  is  narrower,  tapering,
and  subquadrate  in  section.  There  are  clear  evidences  of  wear  on  both  edges  of
the  semicylindrical  portion,  which  hence  seems  to  have  been  reduced  in  width
by  having  been  used  as  a  Scraper,  chiefly  on  one  side,  whilst  the  blade-like
portion  (figured  uppermost)  was  fixed  in  a  haft.

Fig.  2.  Greyish-brown  flint,  weathered.  A  flake  but  little  modified.  One  half
has  been  narrowed  by  rough  usage,  perhaps  as  a  Scraper,  on  one  edge,  and
roughly  pointed  by  chipping  at  the  end.  At  the  other  end  also  the  flake  has


RELIQUIJS   AQUITANKLE

(  DORDOGNE .)


A


PL. VI


10


-lonveau  del.  et  lith


Imp  Becju.it  <3  Paris


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  19

been  chipped  towards  the  point ;   but  this  has  been  broken  off,  and  is  restored
on  the  Plate.

Fig.  3.  Dark  olive-grey  flint,  somewhat  glazed ;  spearhead-shaped,  but  broken  at
the  top.  Carefully  chipped  on  both  faces,  and  indented  by  a  bold  angular
notch  at  each  side  of  the  broad  end.

Fig.  4.  A  flake  of  whitish  flint,  slightly  glazed ;  shortened  by  fracture.  By
careful  chipping  on  one  face  and  at  the  edges  it  has  got  a  long  lanceolate
form,  with  one-third  narrowed  by  wear  on  one  edge.  Marks  of  use  are
also  traceable  along  the  other  edge  of  the  narrow  part  of  the  specimen,  and
on  both  edges  of  the  broad  end.

Fig.  5.  A  thin  flake  of  flint,  chipped  into  a  lanceolate  shape,  and  narrowed  for
nearly  half  its  length  by  one  edge  having  been  crushed  and  splintered  away  by
use.  An  almost  saw-like  jaggedness  (not  well  shown  in  the  drawing),  referable  to
wear,  marks  the  other  edge  of  the  narrow  portion.  The  flint,  originally  light-
brown  and  translucent,  has  been  subsequently  mottled  by  a  white  opacity,
especially  on  the  flat  side  and  all  along  the  edges.

Fig.  6.  Dark-grey  narrow  flake  of  flint,  somewhat  glazed ;  sharpened  at  one  end,
by  careful  chipping  on  the  ridge  and  its  slopes,  into  an  arrowhead-shape  (point
broken  off) ;  one  edge  also  has  been  minutely  chipped  to  produce  the  symmetrical
outline ;  the  other  end  (shortened  by  fracture)  has  been  narrowed  by  breakage
of  the  edges,  probably  from  use,  chiefly  on  one  side.  [The  Figure  does  not  well
show  the  delicate  chipping  of  the  rounded  back  of  the  tapering  point.]

Fig.  7.  Small  flake  of  grey  flint,  glazed ;  pointed  by  chipping  on  the  ridge-face
and  edges,  like  fig.  6,  but  with  less  parallel  sides.  The  broken  end  shows  a
notch  (not  well  defined  in  the  figure),  either  coarsely  chipped  for  a  but,  or
worn  out  by  use,  the  sharp  end  having  been,  in  that  case,  fixed  in  a  handle.

Fig.  8.  Light-grey  coarse-grained  flint;  lanceolate;  rather  roughly  chipped  on
both  faces ;  the  ends  taper  almost  symmetrically,  but  one  more  rapidly  than
the  other ;  and  each  has  a  blunt  point.  The  edges  seem  throughout  to  have
been  fashioned  by  the  general  chipping  of  the  instrument ;  but  at  the  narrow
end  the  chipping  may  have  been  subsequent  to,  or  even  produced  by,  wear,
better  evidence  of  which  is  traceable  in  the  notches  where  the  narrowed
portion  begins.


2o  EELIQULE   AQDTTAJSTCJE.

Fig.  9.  Light-brown  translucent  flint,  mottled  all  over  with  the  opake  whiteness
due  to  weathering,  especially  on  the  flat  side,  and  at  the  edges  and  ends.  This
is  a  fragment  of  a  narrow  lanceolate  implement,  very  neatly  and  symmetrically
made  from  a  flake  by  careful  chipping  of  the  ridge-face,  which  has  been  reduced
to  a  flat-arched  outline  in  the  broader  part,  and  is  subtriangular  where  it  is
narrower.  The  reduction  in  breadth  has  been  caused  most  probably  by  the  use
of  one  edge  as  a  Scraper.  Very  slight  indications  of  wear  occur  elsewhere
on  the  edges.  [The  drawing  does  not  well  represent  the  numerous  parallel
flakings  of  this  well-chipped  implement.]

Fig.  10.  Dark-grey  flint,  with  a  lighter-grey  portion  showing  Sponge-spicules
and  other  small  organisms;  glazed.  A  broad  lance-head  (?),  worked  by  bold
chipping  on  both  faces.  One  end  broken  away.

Fig.  11.  The  tapering  end  of  a  flake  of  opake-white  flint,  minutely  chipped  on
the  edges  into  a  sharp  symmetrical  point,  and  towards  the  notched  end  chipped
over  the  ridge  and  slopes.  The  commencement  only  of  the  contracted  portion
remains,  owing  to  fracture ;  but  the  notch  probably  belonged  to  a  one-sided
Scraper,  broken  off  close  to  the  haft,  in  which  the  lancet-shaped  end  was
inserted.

Fig.  12.  Light-brown  translucent  flint,  weathered  (especially  on  one  face).  This
is  a  large  portion  of  a  long  blade-like  instrument,  with  nearly  parallel  sides.
It  is  broken  short  off  at  one  end ;  and  has  a  symmetrical,  sharply  tapering,
flattish  point  at  the  other.  Both  faces  have  been  reduced  by  free  chipping ;
the  face  figured  in  the  Plate  is  rather  more  convex  than  the  other.  The
parallel  edges  of  the  broad  part  show  no  signs  of  having  been  used ;  but  the
angular  end  has  the  peculiar  crushed  and  shivered  condition  due  to  its  having
been  worn  down  by  the  use  of  its  edges,  which  are  affected  mostly  on  alternate
sides, — the  upper  side  on  the  right  of  the  figure,  and  the  under  side  on  the  left
hand.  Under  these  circumstances,  we  may  suppose  that  the  blade-like  portion
was  held  in  the  hand  or  fixed  in  a  handle.

Note. — In.  the  following  Table,  for  the  specimens  that  have  been  broken,  the  actual  measurements  are  placed
in  brackets ;  and  the  estimated  length  is  entered  in  the  column,  for  comparison  with  the  other  specimens.


DESCBIPTIONS  OF  TKE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.


21


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

72

2-835

10

0-394

6

0-236

2.

(85)  90

(3-3)  3-543

20

0-787

7

0-276

3.

(70)  82

(2-7)  3-228

35

1-378

6

0-236

4.

(65)  71

(2-6)2-795

17

0-669

5

0-197

5.

73

2-874

18

0-709

4

0-157

6.

(38)  46

(1-5)1-811

5

0-197

3

0-118

7.

(37)  45

(1-5)1-772

6

0-236

3

0-118

8.

70

2-756

22

0-866

6

0-236

9.

(64)  88

(2-5)3-465

14

0-157

4

0-157

10.

(82)  98

(3-2)3-858

40

1-575

7

0-276

11.

(47)  75

(1-8)2-953

15

0-591

5

0-197

12.

(82)  98

(3-2)  3-858

28

1-102

5

0-197

NOTE. — Keverting  to  A.  PI.  IV.  (page  7)  we  may  remark  that  several  of  the  specimens  therein  figured
show  marks  of  having  been  used  for  cutting,  scraping,  or  chiselling.  Fig.  1.  This  specimen  has  such  marks
on  the  upper  part  of  the  left-hand  edge,  as  figured ;  fig.  2  has  them  on  the  right-hand  towards  the  top ;
figs.  3, 5, 10,  and  12  on  both  edges  of  the  broader  (lower)  end ;  fig.  6  bears  marks  of  wear  on  the  right-hand
edge  above,  and  the  left-hand  below.  Fig.  7  is  free  from  such  indications  of  having  been  used,  and  is
probably  the  inserted  part,  preserved  in  the  haft,  the  used  portion  having  been  broken  short  off.  The  other
specimens  (figs.  4,  8,  9)  less  distinctly  agree  in  some  or  other  of  the  conditions  above  mentioned.

Among  the  specimens  figured  in  A.  PI.  II.  (page  3)  several  show  marks  of  use.  Fig.  9  has  been  used  as  a
Knife  or  Scraper  on  the  straight  edge  (left-hand  of  the  drawing);  fig.  10,  on  the  left-hand  edge ;  fig.  14,  on  the
lower  half  of  the  right-hand  edge ;  fig.  21,  on  its  convex  (left-hand)  edge ;  and  fig.  24  on  the  left-hand  edge.


Fig.  la.


Fig.  16.


Fig.  2.


Figs,  la  and  16  represent  the  two  faces  of  an  implement  of  whitish  flint,  chipped  into  shape,and  used  for  scraping.
The  blade-like  portion  has  been  set  in  a  handle  or  held  in  the  hand ;  and  the  other  end  has  been  much  worn
by  scraping  with  the  two  sides  alternately,  whereby  the  narrow  end  has  been  tapered.  Nat.  size.

Fig.  2  is  a  neat  flake  of  grey  flint,  that  has  been  worn  away  along  the  middle  part  of  one  edge  by  scraping.
The  sharp  end  has  probably  been  set  in  a  handle.  Nat.  size.


22


KELIQULE


A.  PLATE  VII.

A  series  of  Elint  Implements,  somewhat   spatulate  in  form,  having  one  end
nearly  semicircular,  the  other  tapering,  and  the  sides  more  or  less  parallel.     They

Fig.  3.


a.


Fig.  3.  A  Tanged  Scraper  of  chalcedonic  flint  (weathered) ;  from  La  Madelaine.     Nat.  size,
a,  Eidge  face.     6,  Edge,    c,  Flat,  inner,  or  flake  face.

have  all  been  formed  of  flakes, — the  ends,  and  sometimes  one  or  both  of  the
sides,  having  been  chipped.  One  end  has  been  rounded  by  a  series  of  small
fractures  perpendicular  to  the  flat  or  inner  face  of  the  flake;  and  a  curved
solid  terminal  edge  has  been  thus  formed,  such  as  we  find  in  certain  Stone
Implements  that  the  Esquimaux  at  present  use  in  scraping  and  dressing  skins.
(See  figs.  5  a,  56,  page  14.)


RELIQULE   AQUITANIC^


f  DORDOGN£  .


A


PL.  VI I


Loaveau  del  etlith.


Imp  .Secjaet  a  firis .


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  23

The  sides  of  the  flakes  have  been  here  and  there  chipped,  so  as  to  produce
a  parallelism  of  the  edges  and  symmetry  of  form.

The  small  end  in  these  implements  suddenly  tapers  to  a  wedge-shaped  point,
produced  usually  by  two  or  more  bold  lateral  fractures,  perpendicular  to  the  flat
face,  and  at  an  angle  to  the  axis  of  the  flake.  In  some  specimens  (figs.  4,  8, 13)
the  pointed  end  has  been  formed,  or  modified,  by  numerous  chippings  at  the  edges.
In  either  case  the  pointed  end  is  fit  for  insertion  in  a  handle.  Fig.  4,  however,
appears  to  have  had  that  end  used  as  a  drill  or  rimer.  Usually  the  pointed  end
or  "  tang  "  is  quite  free  from  all  but  merely  accidental  chippings.

In  many  instances  the  terminal  curved  edge  of  these  tanged  Scrapers  has
been  blunted  by  use ;  and  sometimes  the  side  edges  seem  to  have  been  jagged
by  wear.

These  Implements  are  profusely  distributed  throughout  the  Hearth-stuff  of  the
Caves  of  Dordogne,  and  are  of  very  various  dimensions  and  proportions  in  length
and  breadth.  Some  have  been  formed  of  Flint-flakes  six  inches  long,  or  more;
and  some  of  very  small  flakes.  Some  have  both  ends  provided  with  the  peculiar
rounded  edge ;  but  when  there  is  only  one  rounded  end,  the  other  end  may  be
either  pointed  (as  in  the  figures  of  A.  Plate  VII.),  or  left  unworked,  presenting
the  original  state  of  the  flake,  and  often  well  adapted  for  holding  in  the  hand.

Fig.  1.  A  rough  high-ridged  curved  flake  of  dark-coloured  flint,  weathered  light
grey ;  rudely  chipped ;  short.     Indistinct  marks  of  use  on  the  rounded  end.
Le  Moustier.

Fig.  2.  Neat  flake  of  dark-coloured  flint,  slightly  curved ;  somewhat  glazed ;  well
worked  into  a  regular  form,  with  neatly  rounded  end,  parallel  sides,  and  sharp
tang.     The  rounded  end  has  been  used,  its  edge  being  minutely  crushed.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  3.  Long,  arched  flake  of  greyish-brown  flint,  somewhat  glazed ;  neatly  worked
along  the  edges ;  the  curved  solid  terminal  edge  of  the  flat  face  evidently  blunted
by  use.  This  specimen,  and  figs.  10  and  11,  have  the  semicircular  edge  worn
smooth  by  use,  but  not  to  such  an  extent  as  is  shown  by  a  Scraper  (of  the  same
flint  as  fig.  11)  in  the  British  Museum,  brought  from  Bruniquel.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  4.  A  spatulate  scraper  of  greyish-brown  flint,  containing  Sponge-spicules ;
somewhat  glazed,  and  partially  weathered  with  a  grey  opacity  on  the  ridge  face


24  BELIQTJL2E  AQUITAJSTK1E.

of  the  flake ;  chipped  into  a  broad  blade,  hollow  with  the  arching  of  the  inner
or  flake  face,  boldly  curved  at  the  end,  chipped  on  the  side  edges,  and  tapering
towards  the  point,  at  a  short  distance  from  which  the  blade  is  suddenly
narrowed  and  becomes  subtriangular  in  section.  Prom  the  crushed  state  of
its  lateral  angles,  the  pointed  end  has  evidently  been  used  as  a  Drill.  The
other  end  also  has  been  minutely  splintered  along  its  edge  by  use.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  5.  A  short,  narrow,  thickish,  straight  Scraper,  of  light-brown  flint,  glazed.
The  longer  of  the  two  lateral  edges  has  been  minutely  chipped,  or  perhaps
blunted  by  use.  The  other  retains  almost  perfectly  the  original  sharp  edge
of  the  flake.  The  tang  has  been  produced  by  bold  lateral  fractures.  The
rounded  end  has  been  used.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  6.  Subovate,  thick;  formed  of  a  flake  of  chalcedonic  flint ;  glazed,  and  rather
opake  and  mottled  by  weathering  on  the  ridge  face.     The  tang  is  coarsely
shivered.     Marks  of  use  on  the  other  end  are  indistinct.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  7.  Somewhat  similar  in  form  to  fig.  6,  but  narrower  and  more  neatly  made.
Light-grey  translucent  flint,  opake  and  white  all  over  by  weathering.     The
scraping-end  has  been  evidently  used.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  8.  Rude,  almost  as  broad  as  long,  of  nearly  uniform  thickness,  slightly  curved
underneath.     Dark-grey  flint,  weathered  all  over.     The  irregularly  semicircular
front  edge  shows  evidence  of  having  been  roughly  used.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  9.  A  longish  flat  Scraper,  of  mottled  grey  granular  flint  (showing  the
particles  of  Polyzoa,  which  composed  the  limestone  now  converted  into  flint);
glazed,  and  retaining  some  of  the  brown  calcareous  hearth-stuff  on  its  inner
flake-face.  A  flat  tapering  flake  has  in  this  instance  been  trimmed  at  the  two
ends, — the  lateral  edges  not  having  been  worked,  though  minutely  jagged,
possibly  from  wear.  The  scraping-end  has  been  used,  as  shown  by  its  partially
crushed  edge.
Les  Eyzies.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  25

Fig.  10.  Narrow,  thick,  curved  Scraper,  of  dark-grey  coarse-grained  flint,  full  of
small  fragments  of  fossils ;  glazed.     Under  a  lens  the  semicircular  solid  edge  of
this  Implement  is  seen  to  have  been  somewhat  blunted  by  use.     The  lateral
edges  are  those  of  the  original  flake.
La  Madelaine.

Fig.  11.  Straight,  with  parallel  sides,  which  have  been  jagged  or  chipped.  The
flint  is  brownish  and  speckly  grey  (minute  brown  and  dark- grey  spots  in  a
whitish  mass),  granular  with  Foraminifers  (Textularia,  &c.)  and  Polyzoan  and
other  fragments  (as  in  fig.  9  and  other  specimens).  The  tang  has  been  skilfully
made  by  breaking  off  equal  portions  of  the  flake  from  either  side ;  but  its  apex
has  been  blunted  by  recent  fracture.  The  scraping-edge  at  the  end  has  been
smoothed  by  much  use.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  12.  Somewhat  oblique,  with  elliptical  scraping-edge ;  made  from  a  slightly
curved  flake  of  chestnut-"brown  or  dark  honey-coloured  flint*,  finely  granular
and  faintly  banded.  Somewhat  glazed,  except  where  the  fracture  is  naturally
more  dull  than  elsewhere.  The  rounded  end  has  its  edge  minutely  splintered
by  use.

Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  13.  Spoon-shaped,  much  arched  by  the  curving  of  the  original  flake,  from
which  it  has  been  formed  by  chipping  all  round.  The  scraping-end  has  been
used  like  that  of  fig.  12  and  others.  Brownish-grey  flint;  full  of  Sponge-
spicules ;  glazed,  and  retaining  some  patches  of  the  brown  stalagmitic  Hearth-
stuff.
Les  Eyzies.

*  like  that  found  at  Pressigny  le  Grand  (Indre  et  Loire).


26


RELIQULE  AQlJITAJSttCjE.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

mil]  i  in.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

54

2-126

25

0-984

13

0-512

2.

78

3-071

26

1-024

10

0-394

3.

110

4-331

29

1-142

7

0-275

4.

68

2-677

33

1-299

8

0-315

5.

45

1-772

14

0-551

5

0-197

6.

44

1-732

25

0-984

10

0-394

7.

42

1-654

23

0-906

8

0-315

8.

45

1-772

38

1-496

10

0-394

9.

73

2-874

26

1-024

6

0-236

10.

75

2-953

20

0-787

9

0-354

11.

85

3-347

30

1-181

8

0-315

12.

77

3-032

27

1-063

6

0-236

13.

76

2-992

37

1-457

10

0-394

|

NOTE. — In  A.  PI.  II.,  fig.  14  (see  page  4)  has  the  form  of  a  small  tanged  Scraper,  of  very  neat  make ;  its
wedge-pointed  end  is  not  worn  at  all ;  and  its  scraping,  or  rather  chisel-like,  bevelled  end  has  been  only
slightly  chipped,  perhaps  by  accident ;  but  one  of  its  side  edges  seems  to  have  been  worn  away  by  having
been  used  as  a  Scraper,  as  far  as  the  notch,  like  most  of  the  specimens  figured  in  Plate  VI.  Fig.  15  is  also
"  tanged,"  but  less  neatly ;  and  its  other  extremity  is  merely  that  of  the  original  flake  slightly  modified.
Fig.  24  is  a  thick  narrow  piece  of  flake,  with  a  well-defined  tang.  One  margin  is  thick  and  straight,  the
other  thin,  curved,  and  much  worn  (not  shown  by  the  figure).


RELIQUIAE   AQUITANICLE

(  DORDOGNE  .)


A


PL.  VIII


Lauveau  del  etlith.


Jmp.-Becjuet  <e  Ptris.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  27


A.  PLATE  VIII.

Ten  Implements  formed  of  Flint-flakes,  either  without  any  further  chipping
(fig.  3),  or  by  more  or  less  reduction  of  the  ends  and  edges.  In  some,  each  end
has  been  narrowed  to  a  wedge-point,  chiefly  by  lateral  fractures  (figs.  5  &  8).  In
fig.  4  both  ends  have  been  symmetrically  shaped  by  chipping.  Others  have  one
wedge-like  thick  end,  or  tang,  probably  for  insertion  in  a  handle,  whilst  the  other
extremity  is  more  or  less  modified  by  chipping  (figs.  1,  2,  6,  7,  10) — sometimes
roughly  approaching  the  rounded  end  of  a  Scraper,  sometimes  ending  as  a  blunt
blade  (fig.  9).  Some  of  the  specimens  appear  to  have  been  either  unfinished
Scrapers,  or  old  implements  much  used  and  broken.  There  may  have  been  other
uses  for  both  the  blunt  and  the  pointed  ends ;  and  in  some  cases  the  side  edges
seem  to  have  been  fit,  if  not  used,  for  scraping  and  cutting,  like  the  blade  of  a
carpenter's  "  spoke-shave  "  (fig.  8),  or  a  rough  saw  (fig.  9).  Such  flakes,  dressed
and  undressed,  as  shown  -in  this  Plate,  are  exceedingly  abundant  in  the  Caves.

Fig.  1.  Light-grey,  translucent,  chalcedonic  flint,  with  Sponge-structure ;  slightly
glazed.  A  simple  flake;  with  a  sharp  wedge-point  defined  by  small  lateral
fractures.  The  other  end  is  blunt,  bears  the  "  bulb  of  percussion  "  on  the  flat
face,  and  has  been  somewhat  reduced  and  slightly  rounded  by  chipping.  The
lateral  edges,  sharp  but  jagged,  may  have  been  used  as  saws.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  2.  Dark-grey  opake  flint,  full  of  Sponge-spicules ;  highly  glazed.     The  flake
has  been  wedge-pointed  at  one  end ;  and  the  other  retains  a  small  part  of  the
round  solid  edge  (smoothed  by  use)  of  a  Scraper,  but  is  otherwise  irregular  from
old  fractures.     The  side  edges  have  been  partly  chipped,  probably  by  use.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  3.  A  long  rough  flake  of  dull  cream-coloured  flint,  mottled  with  yellowish-
brown  (probably  a  brownish  flint  whitened  and  opake  by  weathering).  The
sharp  and  thin  end  has  been  narrowed  by  the  removal  of  part  of  one  edge  by  a
long  lateral  fracture;  the  point  was  broken  off  before  the  weathering  took
place.  Except  at  the  obliquely  fractured  side  of  the  point,  both  edges  are
sharp  and  minutely  jagged.
Les  Eyzies.

e2


2g  EELIQULE  AQITITANIC^E.

Fig.  4.  Yellowish,  translucent,  chalcedonic  flint,  with  brownish  flocculence ;
glazed.  This  has  been  a  flake  chipped  along  the  edges  and  ends  (but  on  the
upper  or  ridged  side  only)  until  reduced  to  a  nearly  symmetrical  acute  oval,
with  rough  but  somewhat  sharp  solid  edges  and  points.  Either  end  fixed  in  a
handle  would  leave  the  other  as  a  small  strong  pointed  chisel ;  or  if  either
margin  were  imbedded  in  a  handle,  the  other  would  be  available  as  a  strong  and
slightly  curved  scraping-edge.
Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  5.  Part  of  a  thick  flake  of  dark-grey  opake  flint  with  Sponge-spicules ;
glazed ;  reduced  at  the  ends  by  lateral  oblique  fractures,  and  some  chipping,
to  thick  wedge-points.     Side  edges  short,  parallel,  minutely  chipped  by  use.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  6.  Mottled  dark-grey  rough   flake,  trimmed  as  fig.  5,  but  less  regularly;
glazed.     Part  of  an  old  smooth  (water-worn  ?)  surface  of  the  flint  remains  on
the  right-hand  side  of  fig.  6.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  7.  Light-brown  granular  flint,  of  the  same  kind  as  that  in  fig.  11,  PI.  VII.;
slightly  glazed.  Piece  of  a  flake,  wedge-pointed  at  one  end  by  an  oblique  lateral
fracture  on  one  side,  and  by  the  chipping  and  crushing  of  use  on  the  other ;
truncated  at  the  other  end,  with  one  angle  chipped  away,  and  the  other  recently
broken.  Side  edges  unequal,  nearly  parallel,  one  chipped  by  use.  Some
Hearth-stuff  adheres  to  the  specimen.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  8.  A  thick,  narrow,  curved  flake  of  grey  flint ;  almost  wholly  whitened  and
opake  by  weathering,  and  highly  glazed.  The  two  ends  are  wedge-pointed.
One  side  of  each  point,  alternately,  has  been  formed  by  oblique  lateral  fracture.
One  of  the  other  slopes  has  been  worn  down  by  hard  usage.  The  remaining
slope  has  been  chipped  into  shape.  One  of  the  side  edges  is  irregular  and  not
trimmed ;  it  has  been  partly  used :  the  other  is  nearly  straight,  chipped,  and,
by  the  arching  of  the  flake,  well  adapted  for  a  "  spoke-shave "  Scraper,  for
which  it  has  perhaps  been  used.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  9.  A  flake  of  dark-grey  flint,  with  Sponge-spicules ;    glazed.     At  one  end
this  has  been  wedge-pointed,  by  the  usual  oblique  converging  lateral  fractures


DESCRIPTIONS  OP  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.


29


perpendicular  to  the  flat  face,  as  shown  at  the  upper  ends  of  the  figs.  Qa,  b,  c.
The  other  end  has  been  trimmed  (rather  more  than  the  corresponding  part  of
fig.  1)  into  a  rounded  blunt  blade-end,  the  "  bulb  of  percussion  "  having  been
almost  entirely  removed.  One  side  edge,  rather  straighter  than  the  other,  has
been  minutely  chipped  by  use.  The  other  has  been  similarly  used,  and,
roughly  notched  by  old  fractures,  probably  served  as  a  saw.

Pig.  9«  shows  the  ridge  face;  96,  the  flat  face;  9c,  the  edge-view.

Le  Moustier.

Fig.  10.  Part  of  a  flake  of  dark-coloured  coarse-grained  flint ;  glazed.  One  end
wedge-pointed  by  bold  lateral  fractures ;  the  other,  or  bulb-end  of  the  flake,
somewhat  reduced  by  a  side  chip.  The  parallel  edges  are  minutely  chipped,
perhaps  by  use.

Laugerie  Basse.

[This  figure  is  not  correct,  the  outline  of  the  flat  side  having  been  substituted
for  that  of  the  convex  face.]


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inch.

mUlim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

52

2-047

30

1-181

5

0-197

2.

47

1-850

19

0-748

7

0-276

3.

106

4-173

35

1-378

10

0-394

4.

47

1-850

20

0-787

5

0-197

5.

54

2-126

24

0-945

7

0-276

6.

57

2-244

30

1-181

12

0-472

7.

57

2-244

32

1-260

10

0-394

8.

78

3-071

25

0-984

9

0-354

9.

100

3-937

33

1-299

7

0-276

10.

74

2-913

34

1-339

10

0-394

3°


EELIQULE  AQTJITAJSKLE.


B.  BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  &c.

B.  PLATES  III.  &  IV.     (One  Plate.)

The  dimensions  of  the  objects  we  have  at  present  to  describe  make  it  necessary
for  the  Plate  to  be  of  double  the  ordinary  size.  Hence  Plates  B.  III.  &  IV.  have
to  be  consolidated  in  one.

Some  of  the  specimens  before  us,  showing  to  some  extent  the  form  that  it  was
intended  they  should  take,  can  be  regarded  only  as  having  been  roughly  begun
(if  indeed  they  be  not  remnants  from  which  material  has  been  removed),  as  they
keep  the  ruggedness  of  fracture  even  where  they  would  have  to  be  held  while
being  completed.  Such  are  specimens  figs.  2  and  3.  Many  of  those  who  have
examined  the  four  almost  complete  specimens  figured  in  this  Plate  have  thought
that  they  may  have  been  used  as  weapons  by  the  primitive  people;  and  this
interpretation,  though  not  unsuitable  for  figs.  2  and  3,  would  be  less  applicable  to
figs.  1  and  4.

There  have  been  found  many  stems  or  beams  of  Reindeer  Antlers  ornamentally
carved  throughout  their  length.  Some,  moreover,  are  pierced  with  a  hole  in  the
broad  part  near  the  base  (fig.  4) ;  and  there  are  others  that  have  two,  three,  and
even  four  such  perforations.  We  shall  subsequently  figure  a  Reindeer  Horn  with
four  holes,  arranged  in  a  row  along  its  stem.  Very  flat  and  thin,  its  thickness
having  been  reduced  by  cutting,  it  could  scarcely  have  been  used  either  as  a
weapon  or  as  an  implement  for  any  work  whatever.  Others  have  not  been
pierced  at  all.  The  holes  referred  to  are  sometimes  large  enough  to  admit  of  the
finger,  frequently  much  smaller.

It  has  been  suggested  that  these  Reindeer  Horns,  so  fashioned,  and  sometimes
ornamented  with  careful  and  very  numerous  carvings,  might  have  been  either
symbols  of  authority,  or  simply  marks  of  social  position.  With  respect  to  this,
it  may  be  remembered  that  among  the  ancients,  as  we  find  in  Homer,  kings  and
chiefs  constantly  carried  a  sceptre,  or  staff  of  command.  The  sceptre,  however,
was  not  always  reserved  to  kings  and  princes ;  for  subsequently,  in  the  towns  of
Greece,  the  principal  citizens  hardly  showed  themselves  in  public  without  carrying
in  their  hand  one  of  these  marks  of  distinction.

Herodotus  (I.  cxcv.),  speaking  of  the  Assyrians,  says  that  "  each  person  has  a


RELIQULE  AQUITANICLE

(  LORD  0  ONE  .)


Louveau  del.  etliih.


B.


PL. Ill  et  IV.


6a


Imp .Becauet , &  Paris.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  31

seal-ring  and  a  walking-stick,  upon  the  top  of  which  is  carved  an  apple,  a  rose,  a
lily,  an  eagle,  or  some  figure  or  other ;  for  to  have  a  staff  without  a  device  on  it
is  unlawful."  Strabo  (Book  XVI.),  treating  of  the  manners  of  the  Assyrians,
repeats  almost  literally  what  Herodotus  stated.  "Each,"  he  says,  "carries  a
ring  on  the  finger,  and  a  staff,  not  simply  rough,  but  ornamentally  carved,  being
surmounted  with  an  apple,  a  rose,  a  lily,  or  some  such  thing."

It  appears  also  that  the  same  custom  existed  among  the  Hebrews  in  very
ancient  times ;  for  we  see  in  '  Genesis,'  ch.  xxxviii.  v.  18,  that  Tamar  demands
of  Judah,  in  pledge  for  his  promise,  his  signet,  his  bracelet,  and  the  staff  that
was  in  his  hand.  This  staff,  walking-stick,  or  wand,  may  be  supposed  to
have  borne  some  particular  marks,  since  Judah  recognized  it  afterwards  (loc.
cit.  v.  26).

We  may  add  that,  among  the  Athenians,  the  members  of  the  Areopagus  (the
institution  founded  by  Cecrops)  sat  on  a  stone  seat,  and  held  in  the  hand,  as  a
mark  of  office,  a  sceptre-like  staff  (Suidas,  vol.  i.  p.  411).

With  reference,  then,  to. this  explanation  of  the  possible  use  of  our  ornamented
stems  of  Reindeer  Horn,  that  they  may  have  been  used  either  as  sceptres  of
command,  or  as  symbols  of  rank,  we  shall  have  to  admit,  if  this  interpretation
be  applicable,  that  the  tribes  of  indigenous  hunters  in  Pe"rigord  were  already
numerous,  and  in  a  social  condition  so  far  systematized  that  the  authority  of
the  chiefs,  or  the  unequal  conditions  of  society  were  recognized  and  shown
by  external  signs.

Putting  aside  the  more  fanciful  notions  that  have  arisen  about  these  curious
relics  of  the  past,  we  bring  forward  this  suggestion  now  offered  as  to  the  use  of
the  Carved  Antlers  with  the  view  of  exciting  our  Readers  to  examine  and  to
criticise.  They  will  perhaps  discover  better  explanations,  and  thus  our  end
will  have  been  attained.

[To  such  carved  horns  as  are  here  described,  are  referable  some  at  least  of  the
specimens  figured  in  B.  PI.  II.,  particularly  figs.  3,  7,  and  8.]

Fig.  1.  The  stem  or  beam  of  a  Reindeer's  Antler,  rather  slender,  probably  from  a
young  individual,  or  a  doe.  It  was  a  shed  antler ;  and  these  are  always  harder
and  more  compact  than  others ;  such,  indeed,  are  even  at  the  present  time  pre-
ferred by  workmen  who  use  this  substance  in  the  arts.  The  brow-antler  and  the
second  branch  (bez-antler)  have  been  taken  off;  and  close  behind  their  place  of
attachment  the  stem  has  been  perforated  with  two  round  holes,  of  unequal
size,  and  edged  with  a  raised  border.  On  the  long  part  of  the  stem  some


-2  KELIQIHLE  AQTTITANICLE.

outlined  shapes  are  carved.  Two  of  these  (shown  in  the  figure)  are  generally
taken  for  figures  of  Fishes.  The  tail  of  the  second  of  these  is  confused  with
the  much  better-defined  head  of  a  Horse,  of  which  the  ear,  the  mane,  the  line
of  the  hack,  and  even  the  tail  leave  little  to  find  fault  with ;  hut  the  artist,
cramped  doubtless  by  want  of  space,  has  been  more  negligent  in  reproducing
the  legs.  On  the  side  opposite  to  that  shown  on  the  Plate  are  three  other
Fish-like  figures,  and  a  fourth  is  on  the  concave  surface,  altogether  forming  a
group  of  six  Fishes.  There  is  nothing  represented  on  the  other  side  of  the
Horse.  The  further  end  of  the  specimen  having  been  lost  by  an  old  fracture,
we  cannot  tell  whether  it  was  obtuse  or  pointed.
Found  at  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  2.  At  first  sight  this  specimen  is  always  taken  for  a  Poniard.  It  has
indeed  been  evidently  tapered  and  pointed  at  one  end  (either  intentionally,
or  by  removal  of  material  to  be  otherwise  used) ;  but  at  the  other  end,
or  but,  which  would  have  been  the  handle,  the  rough  parts,  left  on
detaching  the  two  branches  near  the  base,  have  not  been  smoothed  down
This  horn  was  broken  from  the  skull,  and  has  some  of  the  frontal  bone  still
attached.  The  intention  may  have  been  to  ornament  the  but  by  carving;
and  even  now  this  rugged  end  fits  the  grasp  of  the  hand,  like  a  rough
pistol-but.

Fig.  3.  Another  antler,  larger  than  the  foregoing,  and  also  broken  from  the
forehead  of  the  freshly  killed  Reindeer.  Both  the  brow-antler,  and  the  second
branch  higher  up  (bez-antler),  have  been  shortened,  but  not  cut  off  at  the  base.
Several  lines  have  been  cut  along  the  beam ;  and  the  two  middlemost  of  these
border  a  series  of  little  rhombs,  cut  in  relief,  for  nearly  the  whole  length.  The
specimen  thins  off  gradually  towards  the  extremity,  which  (lost  by  recent  frac-
ture) was  probably  pointed,  with  a  slanting  edge.  Although  the  ornament  was
considerably  advanced  in  this  specimen,  the  workman  had  not  removed  the
projections  of  the  broken  branches  and  frontal  bone  from  the  part  which  ought
to  serve  for  the  handle,  and  which  perhaps  was  intended  to  receive  one  or  more
holes,  or  to  be  carved  in  some  other  manner*.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

*  In  a  subsequent  Part  we  intend  to  figure  and  describe  a  recent  Beindeer  Antler,  cut  and  ornamented
nearly  in  the  same  manner  as  this  ancient  example  from  Laugerie  Basse.  The  modern  specimen,  met  with
a  few  days  since  in  the  late  Mr.  H.  Christy's  Collection,  formed  a  part  of  the  Vancouver  and  British-
Columbian  Contributions  to  the  International  Exhibition  of  1862.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  33

Fig.  4.  Another  Antler,  belonging  to  a  young  Reindeer,  or  rather  to  a  female,
judging  by  its  small  proportions.  There  is  a  round  hole  through  it  at  the  broad
part  where  the  brow-antler  was  set  on.  The  stem  is  marked  both  by  several
longitudinal  furrows  and  by  numerous  irregular  cross  cuts.  If  this  was  meant  for
ornament,  it  must  be  regarded  as  very  coarse  work.  At  its  base  this  antler  is  still
attached  to  the  broken  frontal  bone.  It  is  truncate  at  the  further  extremity.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  5.  A  much  carved  and  flattened  piece  of  Reindeer  Horn,  broken  at  both
ends,  but  bearing  three  entire  holes  and  part  of  a  fourth.  The  holes  have  a
raised  border  given  to  them  by  a  groove  running  more  or  less  parallel  to  the
circumference,  above  and  below,  but  not  between  the  holes.

We  cannot  possibly  guess  the  original  form  and  use  of  this  specimen,  any
more  than  those  of  the  following,  except  from  its  analogy  to  the  other  perforated
Deer-horns,  above  described.

From  La  Madelaine.

Figs.  6a,  6b.  Another  fragment,  analogous  to  fig.  5,  bearing  three  holes  at  least.
On  one  of  its  surfaces  (fig.  66)  is  carved  a  series  of  figures  comparable  with  a
vertebral  column,  or  the  fleshless  back-bone  of  an  animal,  five  and  a  half  of
such  joint-like  or  hourglass-like  shapes  being  visible.
From  La  Madelaine.

[We  have  lately  been  informed,  by  Dr.  A.  A.  Blandy,  that,  although  the  Indians
of  the  Amazon,  South  America,  do  not  at  the  present  time  either  carve  or  use  such
implements  as  the  worked  Antlers  illustrated  by  B,  Plates  III.  &  IV.,  yet  they
carry  similar  things  for  ornament.  The  holes  are  both  for  ornament  and  sus-
pension, as  these  carved  horns  are  hung  at  the  waist  of  Chiefs,  and  seem  to  be
implements  or  weapons  used  very  many  years  ago,  and  now  carefully  preserved, —
the  ordinary  weapons  now  used  by  the  Indians  being  the  spear  and  bow,  and  even
the  rifle  and  common  shot-gun. — June  30,  1866.]


34  RELIQULE  AQUITANKLE.


A.  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.

A.  PLATE  IX.

Two  large,  simple,  untrimmed  Flakes  of  Flint,  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer  (see
page  4),  are  here  shown,  such  as  are  not  uncommon  in  the  Caves,  having  been
used  for  cutting  and  scraping,  without  any  other  preparation  than  having,  perhaps,
one  edge  set  in  a  piece  of  wood  or  horn  for  a  handle  or  support.  These  almost
Strigil-shaped  Flakes  have  been  struck  off  blocks  of  flint  like  those  figured  in
A.  PI.  I.,  a  flake  at  a  blow.  The  upper  ends  on  PI.  IX.  were  uppermost  in  the
process  of  flaking :  the  "  bulbs  of  percussion  "  are  slight,  and  not  visible  in  the
figures.

Fig.  1.  A  long  curved  flake  of  opake,  yellowish,  granular  flint,  somewhat  glazed.
The  edges  are  irregularly  chipped ;  but  some  parts,  especially  on  the  left-hand
side  of  the  figure,  have  been  worn  by  use.

Fig.  la  shows  the  ridge  face,  and  fig.  16  the  edge  view  of  the  flake.

French  millimetres.  English  inches.

Length    174  6-850

Breadth  38   1-496

Thickness    10   0-394

Fig.  2.  A  long  curved  flake  of  dark-grey  granular  flint ;  similar  in  general
character  to  fig.  1.  The  straight  portion  of  the  left-hand  edge  in  the  figure  is
sharp  and  finely  jagged,  and  has  probably  been  used.  As  an  implement,  this
flake  could  be  conveniently  held  in  the  hand  by  the  lower  curved  portion,  and
the  straight  edge  used  for  cutting  or  scraping.
Fig.  2  a  shows  the  ridge  face,  and  fig.  26  the  edge  view  of  the  flake.


French  millimetres.  English  inches.

Length    185   7-284

Breadth  41    1-614

Thickness    12  .   0-472


RELIQUIAE    AQUITANIC^


PL.  IX


a  Paris.


RELIQU1/E     AQUITANIC/E.

(  DORDOGNE.)


A.


PL.X.


Louveaa  dd,  ctfah


hnp-Becyaet  i  Pans


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  35


A.  PLATE  X.

Six  implements  of  worked  Flint,  of  which  four  have  one  end  chipped  into  the
semicircular  or  elliptical  solid  edge  of  a  Scraper  (see  p.  22),  and  two  have  both
ends  so  prepared.  Four  of  these  implements  have,  more  or  less  distinctly,  marks
of  use  on  the  rounded  end ;  and  of  these  the  two  largest  have  had  their  side  edges
used  also.  One  (fig.  5)  looks  like  a  Scraper  with  one  end  narrowed  for  fastening
in  a  handle  :  but  its  round  edge  is  intact ;  and  the  seeming  tang  has  been  reduced
by  its  two  edges  having  been  used  in  scraping.  Another  specimen  (fig.  6),  rounded
at  its  two  ends,  has  been  worn  only  on  its  two  lateral  edges  by  use  as  a  Scraper
or  "  spoke-shave."  Hence  the  rounded  ends  have  in  some  cases  been  prepared
merely  for  neatness  or  for  convenience  of  holding,  and  not  necessarily  as  scraping-
edges.  All  these  specimens  are  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer  (page  4),  and  are  more  or
less  glazed.

Fig.  1.  A  portion  of  a  large,  regular,  slightly  curved  flake  of  opake  yellowish  flint,
striped  with  white  and  brown  along  one  edge,  where  part  of  the  original  light-
brown  crust  remains.  Carefully  rounded  (like  the  Scrapers  of  A.  PL  VII.)  at  one
end,  which  is  slightly  worn  by  use ;  truncate  at  the  other.  The  thin  edge  (right-
hand  in  the  figure)  has  been  minutely  chipped  by  use  throughout  its  length.

Fig.  2.  This  also  has  been  prepared  from  a  large  flint-flake,  opake,  purplish  grey
along  the  middle,  and  banded  with  white  and  faint  yellow  along  the  sides.
Obliquely  rounded  at  one  end.  Evidences  of  use  appear  on  the  two  side  edges
and  along  the  rounded  end.

Fig.  3.  Part  of  a  thick  flake ;  rounded  at  one  end,  truncate  at  the  other.  Opake
and  yellowish,  but  whiter  under  the  dark-brown  irony  crust  which  remains  on
the  outer  surface.  As  with  figs.  1  and  2,  and  many  other  specimens,  this  flint
was  once  a  Polyzoan  limestone.  The  elliptically  curved  end  and  the  sides  have
been  boldly  chipped  into  shape ;  and  the  edge,  especially  at  the  shoulders  of  the
curve,  has  been  worn  by  use.

Fig.  4.  A  Scraper  of  mottled  grey  flint,  with  large  Sponge-spicules,  Polyzoa,  &c.,
irregularly  rounded  at  one  end  and  roughly  tapered  at  the  other.  This  has  been
chipped  out  of  an  old  flake,  the  weathered,  shining,  and  iron-stained  surface  of

/2


^6  EELIQULE   AQUITANICLE.

which  is  partly  preserved  on  the  two  chief  faces  of  the  specimen.     The  rounded
end  bears  some  marks  of  use.

Fig.  5.  A  piece  of  opake,  granular,  whitish  flint-flake ;  shaped  like  a  Scraper  at
one  end,  chipped  boldly  on  the  parallel  lateral  edges,  and  much  worn  by  use  on
both  sides  of  the  narrow  end.  [The  minute  flaking  and  chipping  in  the  worn
hollows  not  shown  in  the  figure.]

Fig.  6.  Piece  of  a  grey  flint-flake  (containing  Orbitoides  and  Polyzoa) ;  trimmed
at  each  end,  by  the  usual  bold  chippings  perpendicular  to  the  faces,  into
irregular  curves.  The  parallel  side  edges  much  chipped  and  crushed  by  use.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.             English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

165

6-496

48

1-890

17

0-669

2.

158

6-221

62

2-441

25

0-984

3.

69

2-717

40

1-575

29

1-142

4.

65

2-559

35

1-378

16

0-630

5.

59

2-323

27

1-063

5

0-197

6.

53

2-087

32

1-260

6

0-236

REL1QULE  AQUITANTCjE

(DORDOGNE.)


A.  PL.  XI.


Louveaii  del  ethih


fmp.Becquetfans


DESCEIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  37


A.  PLATE  XI.

Four  lanceolate  specimens,  somewhat  glazed ;  three  of  them  show,  in  crushed
and  worn  portions  of  their  edges,  evidences  of  "having  been  used.  Fig.  4  is  merely
a  flake,  with  no  modification  of  its  edges.  Figs.  1  and  3  also  were  flakes,  but
have  been  dressed  and  used.  Fig.  2  is  almost  symmetrical,  chipped  all  over,
after  the  fashion  of  the  many  flint  implements  found  in  the  gravel  of  the  Somme
Valley  and  elsewhere :  forms  like  the  others,  however,  are  not  wanting  in  that
old  gravel.

Fig.  1.  Roughly  lanceolate  flake  of  brown  granular  flint  (Sponge-spicules,  &c.),
truncate  at  the  broad  end,  where  the  "bulb  of  percussion"  and  a  large
conchoidal  facet  are  well  marked  on  the  flat  face,  which  is  not  shown  in  the
figure.  The  point  at  the  other  end  has  been  broken  off.  Marks  of  use  are
plain  on  the  upper  half  of  the  left-hand  edge  of  the  figure,  and  also  in  the
hollows  on  either  side  of  its  upper  end.
Le  Moustier.

Fig.  2.  An  acutely  lanceolate  implement  of  dark-grey  flint,  with  Sponge-spicules,
&c.,  sharp  at  one  end,  roughly  truncate  at  the  other;  more  convex  on  one  face
than  on  the  other ;  with  the  edges  irregularly  crenulate.  Shaped  by  bold  and
nearly  parallel  chipping,  at  a  high  angle,  along  the  edges  of  one  face.  The
edge  has  some  slight  marks  of  use  on  either  side  of  the  point.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  3.  An  acute-ovate  implement,  chipped  out  of  a  broad,  mottled,  grey  flake,
having  the  "  bulb  "  and  roughly  conchoidal  face  on  the  flat  side  (not  figured).
Marks  of  use  exist  on  the  upper  right-hand  edge  of  the  figure.     The  opposite
edge  is  less  distinctly  worn.     The  point  is  broken.
Le  Moustier.

Fig.  4.  An  amber-coloured,  translucent,  broad  flake,  with  a  largely  conchoidal
under-face,  struck  off  from  a  water-worn  (battered  and  weathered)  mass  of  flint,
that  had  been  broadly  facetted  by  former  fractures.  It  has  no  artificial
chippings  on  the  edges.


EELIQUI^E


Fig.  4«  shows  the  ridge  face  of  the  flake;  4i,  the  edge  view,  with  the  low
"  bulb  "  of  the  conchoidally  fractured  under-face.
Laugerie  Basse.


Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

91

3-583

45

1-772

5

0-197

2.

90

3-543

36

1-417

18

0-709

3.

100

3-937

55

2-165

6

0-236

4.

127

5-000

54

2-126

16

0-630

RELIQ r  I .! .    AOUlTANlGjE  .


A.


PL. XII


J.onreau    del.  etlilh.


Jmp  Becfuet,  Paris


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  39


A.  PLATE  XII.

Six  roughly  shaped  specimens,  in  which  an  irregular  cutting-edge  has  been
produced  on  some  part  of  the  margin  by  thinning  it  by  bold  parallel  chippings  on
one  or  both  faces  of  the  stone.  Figs.  1,  2,  and  4  are  easily  held  in  the  hand,  the
thick  rough  part  against  the  palm ;  and  the  curved  edge  is  then  exposed  below
the  closed  fingers  and  thumb  as  a  Scraper  or  Chopper :  and  in  these  specimens
that  edge,  as  well  as  the  other,  bears  some  marks  of  use.  The  implements  before
us  are  thus  comparable  in  some  respects  with  the  larger  "  Choppers  "  described  at
page  17.  Figs.  3  and  6  have  been  roughly  flattened  and  squared;  the  thinned
edge  of  the  former  (right-hand  side  of  the  figure)  has  been  partly  crushed  by  hard
knocks.  Fig.  5  looks  like  the  broad  end  of  an  axe-head.

These  were  all  found  at  the  Moustier  Cave,  and  have  glazed  surfaces.

Fig.  1.  An  irregularly  triangular  piece  of  a  rough,  dark-grey,  mottled  flint-flake,
coarsely  chipped  on  one  face,  so  as  to  have  a  jagged  cutting-edge  on  two
margins,  both  of  which  seem  to  have  been  somewhat  worn  by  scraping  or
cutting.  A  portion  of  the  highest  part  of  the  ridge  face  has  either  been  roughly
weathered,  or,  more  probably,  was  so  close  to  the  original  water-worn  and
battered  surface  that  it  retains  traces  of  its  weathered  condition.

Fig.  2.  A  grey,  mottled,  somewhat  heart-shaped  flake,  showing  the  "  bulb  of  per-
cussion "  on  the  inner  face,  at  the  obtuse  projection ;  trimmed  on  the  convex
face  by  bold  chipping  so  as  to  have  a  cutting-edge  all  round,  except  at  the
thick  corner  where  the  "bulb"  is.  Both  the  curved  and  the  straight  edge
have  been  used.

Fig.  3.  A  piece  of  translucent  amber-coloured  flint,  retaining  on  one  face  the  old
water-worn  light-brown  crust,  and  coarsely  chipped  all  round  on  the  other,  so
as  to  have  an  irregular  oblong  shape  with  a  rough  angular  edge,  which  is  bruised
where  thinnest  (right-hand  side  of  the  figure).

Fig.  4.  Portion  of  a  dark-grey  mottled  flint-flake  (with  Sponge-structure),  retaining
part  of  the  original,  brown,  worn  crust,  but  otherwise  so  shaped  by  bold  parallel
chipping  as  to  have  a  roughly  circular  cutting-edge  along  two-thirds  of  its
circumference,  the  remainder  forming  a  corner  of  two  nearly  straight  solid
edges.  The  circular  edge  worn  here  and  there  by  use.


4o  EELIQTJI^E  AQUITANIC^E.

Fig.  5.  Greyish  flint,  mottled  white  by  weathering.  The  side  not  figured  retains
a  small  portion  of  the  old  yellowish  crust ;  excepting  this,  all  the  surface  has
been  removed  by  free  chipping,  and  a  hatchet-like  form  produced ;  the  narrow
end  appears  to  have  been  lost  by  fractures ;  and  the  remainder,  irregularly
quadrangular,  has  a  rough  cutting-edge  on  three  sides.

Eig.  6.  Dark  greenish-grey  pitch-like  flint,  translucent  at  the  edges,  full  of  minute
Sponge-spicules,  &c.,  and  still  retaining  the  old,  light-brown,  smooth-worn  crust
on  the  flat  side.  Roughly  squared  and  sharpened  at  the  edges  by  bold  chipping.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

niillini.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim,

inch.

1.

70

2-756

55

2-165

17

0-669

2.

70

2-756

60

2-362

16

0-630

3.

57

2-244

48

1-890

18

0-709

4.

66

2-598

60

2-362

20

0-787

5.

88

3-465

86

3-386

25

0-984

6.

80

3-150

72

2-835

24

0-945

RELIQULE   AQUITANKLE


(  DOKDOGNE.)


B.


PL.V.


Lauveau  del.eilifh.


<  Becquet  &  Paris .


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  41


B.  BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  &c.

B.  PLATE  V.

Most  of  the  specimens  represented  in  this  Plate  may  be  regarded  as  having
been  intended  to  be  worn  on  the  person,  as  ornaments  or  amulets,  and  some
perhaps  as  memorials  and  trophies  of  the  chase.  They  have  indeed  nearly  all
been  pierced  with  one  or  more  holes,  so  as  to  be  attached  or  suspended.

One  only  of  these  articles  is  of  Stone.  By  far  the  greater  number  are  formed
of  the  Incisor  and  Canine  Teeth  of  Carnivorous  or  of  Herbivorous  Animals ;  and
among  them  can  be  recognized  teeth  of  the  Wolf,  of  the  great  Bos,  the  Ibex,  and
the  Reindeer.  In  the  sequel  we  shall  have  occasion  to  figure  the  Incisor  of  a
Horse,  perforated  near-its  root,  very  probably  for  a  similar  purpose.

Such  perforated  Teeth  have  been  used  in  all  ages  and  places ;  and  indeed  at
the  present  day  we  find  them  among  divers  nations  that  are  either  savage  or  have
remained  in  a  low  state  of  civilization.

Almost  every  work  on  primitive  antiquities  published  of  late  years  affords  us
figures  of  Teeth  thus  pierced.  They  have  been  quoted  from  the  First  Stone-
Age  in  Denmark ;  from  the  Lake-habitations  of  Switzerland ;  and  from  several
sepulchres  belonging  to  a  high  antiquity.  Especially,  however,  under  the  Rock-
shelters  and  in  Caves,  that  were  refuges  for  the  aboriginals  of  Western  Europe,
have  they  been  collected  in  the  greatest  numbers.

The  same  usage  obtained  also  in  other  and  distant  regions  early  in  the  Human
Period.  Thus  MM.  Meynier  and  Louis  d'Eichthal  have  found  in  a  Bone-cave  of
Western  Siberia,  in  the  Province  of  Tomsk,  the  long  Canines  of  the  Musk-deer
(Moschus  moschiferus)  perforated  near  one  end.

Various  explanations  have  been  offered  as  to  the  intended  use  of  these  objects,
thus  prepared  to  be  attached  to  the  person.  Some  have  thought  that  imaginary
properties  and  virtues  were  attributed  to  them.  M.  F.  Troyon,  mentioning  the
Bears'  teeth,  having  holes  through  their  roots,  found  in  the  tombs  of  the  ancient
Livonians,  adds  that  "they  were  without  doubt  worn  as  amulets."  In  the
Catalogue  of  objects  found  in  the  diggings  at  Hallstatt  (sketches  of  which  I  have
been  enabled  to  refer  to,  thanks  to  the  kind  assistance  of  my  learned  friend
Dr.  Pruner-bey),  M.  Ramsauer  says  that  he  has  collected  many  stones  that  had


42  KELIQTJIJE  AQUITANKLE.

been  worn  as  talismans  and  amulets,  and  that  he  also  found  teeth  of  Bear  and
Wolf  drilled  for  the  same  purpose.  He  adds  moreover  that  even  now-a-days  the
same  kind  of  teeth  are  hung  on  the  necks  of  children  to  help  them  in  cutting
their  teeth.  Thus  we  see  that  in  certain  cases  the  employment  of  these  pierced
teeth  may  have  had  a  double  object.  M.  de  Mortillet  has  quite  lately  shown
me  a  lower  Canine  of  Sus  (Boar  or  Pig),  which  he  had  himself  obtained  in
a  province  of  Central  Italy,  where  such  teeth  are  still  commonly  used  among
the  people,  being  mounted  in  silver,  with  a  little  ring  for  suspension.  Usually
one  of  them  is  first  placed  on  the  swaddling-clothes  of  new-born  infants,  to  avert
the  malevolence  and  all  other  influences  of  the  bad  spirits ;  afterwards  it  is  hung
at  the  neck  of  the  same  children,  and,  when  suffering  the  pain  of  cutting  their
teeth,  they  instinctively  put  it  in  the  mouth  and  bite  it  between  the  gums, — just
supplying  the  place  of  the  toys  ("  corals  ")  specially  prepared  among  us  for  the
same  purpose.

In  other  cases,  however,  the  teeth  of  the  Boar  and  large  Carnivores  may  have
been  kept  and  worn  as  memorials  of  the  Chase.  It  is  known  also  that,  among  the
people  of  some  islands  in  the  Pacific  Ocean,  travellers  have  seen  necklaces  made
of  a  series  of  many  human  incisors  worn  as  ornaments.  There  we  see  real  trophies
of  war,  mostly  accompanied  by  cannibalism,  of  which,  however,  we  have  as  yet
found  not  the  least  trace  in  our  ancient  Stations  of  the  Dordogne  or  Pyrenees.

At  the  same  time  we  must  recollect  that  in  the  greater  number  of  instances
these  teeth,  perforated  at  the  root,  might  be  only  articles  of  ornament  and  dress.
Thus  used  they  are  still  found  in  various  regions  of  the  globe,  and  particularly
among  the  Esquimaux,  whose  women  make  for  themselves  girdles,  on  which  are
threaded  by  hundreds  teeth  of  Wolf,  Fox,  Musk-ox,  and  other  animals ;  and  the
men  themselves  sometimes  have  recourse  to  this  kind  of  ornament.  Captain  Parry  *
describes  a  kind  of  diadem  or  head-dress  worn  by  the  men  on  certain  occasions,
thus  :  he  says,  "  the  handsomest  thing  of  this  kind,  however,  was  to  be  worn  on  the
head  by  men,  though  we  did  not  learn  on  what  occasion ;  it  consisted  of  a  band,
two  inches  in  breadth,  composed  of  several  strips  of  skin  sewn  together,  alternately
black  and  yellow ;  near  the  upper  edge  hair  was  artfully  interwoven,  forming  with
the  skin  a  very  pretty  chequer-work ;  along  the  lower  edge  were  suspended  more
than  a  hundred  teeth,  principally  of  the  Deer,  neatly  fastened  by  small  double
tags  of  sinew,  and  forming  a  very  appropriate  fringe."

Examining  attentively  figure  7  of  the  plate  of  Esquimaux  Implements,  Wea-

*  Journal  of  a  Second  Voyage  for  the  Discovery  of  a  North-west  Passage  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific.
4to.  London,  1824,  pp.  498,  548,  plate  of  Esquimaux  Implements,  Weapons,  &c.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  43

perns,  &c.,  where  Parry  lias  given  a  sketch  of  this  ornament  specially  reserved  for
the  men,  we  can  readily  discern  that  the  teeth  are  the  small  incisors  of  the  Rein-
deer, identical  with  those  we  have  figured  in  B.  Plate  V.  figs.  8  and  10.

Lastly,  it  is  known  that  among  the  same  Esquimaux  the  Molar  Teeth  of  the
Seal  and  the  Morse  (Walrus),  perforated  and  fastened  to  the  ends  of  a  set  of
cords,  serve  as  missiles  to  catch  birds  in  flight,  and  that  these  missiles  are  used
in  preference  to  arrows  in  this  kind  of  hunting*.  Nothing,  however,  as  yet
has  occurred  to  authorize  us  to  suppose  that  such  a  method  was  employed  by  the
aborigines  of  Perigord  inhabiting  the  caves  we  have  examined.

"We  must  also  accept  as  having  been  personal  ornaments  the  fossil  marine  Shells
figured  below  the  Teeth  in  our  Plate  B.  V.  All  are  pierced  with  holes  as  if  for
suspension ;  and  some  indeed  have  two  perforations.

Dr.  Fischer,  Assistant  of  the  Professor  of  Palaeontology  in  the  Museum  of
Natural  History  at  Paris,  has  had  the  kindness  to  provide  us  with  the  specific
determination  of  these  Shells — as  many  as  five  species,  of  which  three  only  are
shown  by  the  specimens  figured  on  our  Plate.  They  are  easily  recognized  as
having  been  already  in  the  fossil  state  when  used  by  the  old  Cave-dwellers.
Not  that  we  should  hasten  to  imagine  some  special  virtue  was  attributed  to
them  in  consequence  of  their  geological  age !  it  is  rather  to  be  supposed  that,
in  consequence  of  their  distance  from  the  coasts  both  of  the  Atlantic  and  the
Mediterranean,  our  Aborigines  of  Perigord  found  it  more  easy  to  procure  in  the
Faluns  of  the  Bordelais  or  of  Touraine  these  materials  of  adornment,  rather  less
fresh  than  if  derived  direct  from  the  sea-shore,  but  such  as  Man  has  nearly
everywhere  instinctively  sought  for.  We  may  add  that,  although  the  Stations  at
which  these  fossil  Shells  were  found  are  geographically  nearer  to  the  Bordeaux
district  than  to  Touraine,  yet  they  seem  rather  to  have  been  got  from  the  Faluns
of  the  latter  than  from  the  former.

"These  five  species,"  says  M.  Fischer,  "are  very  common  in  the  Faluns  of
Touraine.  They  are  also  found,  but  less  abundantly,  at  Dax  and  Bordeaux.  They

*  So  also  perforated  pieces  of  Walrus-ivory,  either  squarish  or  oval  in  form,  and  about  1|  inch  long,  are
used  by  the  Esquimaux  for  the  same  purpose.  They  are  thus  described  in  the  '  Narrative  of  the  Discovery  on
the  North  Coast  of  America  effected  by  the  Officers  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  during  the  years  1836-39  ;
by  Thomas  Simpson,  Esq.'  (8vo.  London,  1843,  p.  156) : — "  But  what  most  attracted  our  curiosity  was  an
ingenious  and  novel  contrivance  for  capturing  wild  fowl.  It  consists  of  six  or  eight  small  perforated  ivory
balls,  attached  separately  to  cords  of  sinew,  three  feet  long,  the  ends  of  which  being  tied  together,  an
expanding  or  radiating  sling  is  thus  formed,  which,  dextrously  thrown  at  the  birds  as  they  fly  past,  entangles
and  brings  them  to  the  ground."  Examples  of  these  slings,  brought  home  by  Messrs.  Dease  and  Simpson,
are  in  the  Christy  Collection.


44  KELIQULE   AQUTTANIdE.

are,  for  the  most  part,  absent  from  the  sands  of  Perpignan,  Biot,  and  the  other
localities  in  Languedoc  and  Provence.  Hence  I  believe  they  have  been  taken
from  the  Faluns  of  Touraine ;  and,  in  support  of  this  opinion,  I  may  add  that  the
valves  of  Pectunculus  are  all  worn  and  rolled ;  and  it  is  especially  in  Touraine  (at
Pont-levoy,  Manthelan,  &c.)  that  considerable  accumulations  of  water- worn  fossils


occur."


The  last  specimen  represented  in  B.  Plate  V.  is  one  of  the  supposed  Whistles,
made  of  the  phalangeal  bone  of  the  Reindeer,  and  one  of  which  we  have  already
figured  elsewhere*.  Since  then,  discoveries  of  this  kind  of  instrument  have
multiplied  in  other  districts  of  Prance,  and  also  under  similar  archaeological
conditions.  The  writers  who  have  treated  of  them  have  continued  to  put  the
same  interpretation  on  them  that  we  proposed  at  first.

Fig.  1.  This  appears  to  be  simply  a  pebble,  the  rounded  contour  and  smooth  sur-
face of  which  have  been  produced  by  long  rolling  down  the  course  of  a  river ;
for  it  bears  no  trace  of  artificial  polish.  The  pebble  has  probably  been  used  on
account  of  its  almost  symmetrical  shape,  and  perhaps  also  because  it  was  soft
enough  to  be  easily  bored.  It  consists  of  a  softish  stone,  one  of  the  "  Meta-
morphic  "  rocks  of  geologists,  termed  leptinolite,  or  schistose  granulite.  It  is
greyish  green  in  colour,  and  is  speckled  with  minute  black  points,  which  may  be
imperfect  crystals  of  made  or  chiastolite.  The  bored  hole,  in  the  middle  part
towards  the  upper  margin  of  the  pebble,  has  been  made  by  working  on  the  two
sides  of  the  stone  alternately  with  an  instrument  acting  as  a  kind  of  drill ;  for
the  hole  opens  out  wide  on  the  two  surfaces  and  is  narrow  in  the  middle,  where
the  point  of  the  tool  worked.  On  close  examination  of  the  inside  of  the  hole,  it
can  be  readily  seen  that  the  boring  was  not  done  by  a  mechanical  contrivance  pro-
ducing continued  revolutions  of  a  tool,  but  merely  by  half  turns  corresponding  to
the  action  of  the  wrist  in  using  some  simple  drill  t.  We  shall  figure  in  a  future
Plate  of  this  work  several  of  the  little  boring-tools  or  drills  of  flint,  having  a
blunt  point  with  little  facets,  by  means  of  which  it  was  very  easy  to  bore  bones,
and  even  stones  that  were  not  so  hard  as  flint.
The  two  lines  or  grooves,  diverging  from  the  edge  of  the  hole  down  to  the

*  See  '  Revue  Archeologique,'  March  1864,  pi.  11.  fig.  12.

t  Mr.  E.  B.  Tylor,  in  his  '  Researches  into  the  Early  History  of  Mankind,'  1865,  has  given,  at  pp.  239-245,
some  curious  notices  of  the  employment  of  different  forms  of  mechanical  drills  amongst  some  savage  nations,
particularly  the  Esquimaux.  Sir  John  Lubbock  ('  Prehistoric  Times,'  1865,  p.  443)  relates  the  fact  stated
by  Cook,  in  his  First  Voyage,  "  that  the  New  Zealanders  succeeded  in  drilling  a  hole  through  a  piece  of
glass  which  he  had  given  them,  using  for  this  purpose,  as  he  supposed,  a  piece  of  jasper."


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.


45


lower  border  of  the  pebble,  are  about  one  millimetre  deep,  and  have  also  been
cut  with  a  flint-point.

At  a  is  a  kind  of  marking  of  fine  striae  diverging  in  different  directions.  It
is  evident  that  the  pebble  has  there  also  been  modified  by  Man's  work.  At  first
I  supposed  that  we  had  here  the  marks  of  rubbing  produced  in  sharpening  some
instrument;  but  on  further  consideration  I  have  thought  that  perhaps  the
removal  of  some  of  the  stone,  to  balance  the  pebble  when  hung,  the  hole  not
having  been  bored  exactly  coincident  with  the  centre  of  gravity,  may  account
for  the  abrasion.

"We  were  at  first  content  to  figure  one  side  only  of  this  pebble ;  but  several
persons  having  believed  that  on  the  other  and  rather  flatter  side  they  could
recognize  a  rough  sketch  of  an  animal  form,  traced  in  shallow  lines,  we  have
reproduced  this  side  also  in  the  accompanying  figure.  Here  also  we  have
further  occasion  to  draw  attention  to  this  specimen ;  for  the  two  oblique  lines
are  repeated  on  this  face,  cut  to  the  same  depth,  but  with  more  divergence.
This  repetition  of  the  marks,  or  sign,  on  the  two  faces  may  have  had  some
conventional  meaning;  and  it  may  suggest  to  some  of  our  readers  the
idea  of  a  talisman,  or  raise  some  altogether  different  claim  to  a  symbolic
meaning.  As  for  the  obscure  sketch  outline  of  an  animal,  we  do  not  try
to  interpret  it;  every  one  is  free  to  decide  about  it  according  to  his  own
impression.

This  specimen  was  found  at  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.


Perforated  Pebble,  with,  oblique  grooves  and  rude  outline  of  an  animal.
[The  opposite  side  is  shown  in  B.  PI.  V.  fig.  1.]

Pig.  2.  The  Canine  Tooth  of  a  Wolf,  pierced  near  the  end  of  its  root.     The  hole
does  not  seem  to  have  been  made  with  a  regular  drill,  but  rather  by  a  pointed
and  cutting  flint  instrument,  used  first  on  one  side  of  the  tooth  and  then  on
the  other,  alternately,  until  the  two  holes  met  in  one  at  the  centre.
Prom  Laugerie  Basse.


46  KELIQULE  AQTJITANIC^E.

Fig.  3.  A  Lower  Canine  Tooth  of  a  Wolf,  similarly  bored  through  its  root.     In  this
case  the  hole  is  more  neatly  rounded,  and  appears  to  have  been  made  by  a
hand-drill  worked  steadily  with  long-continued  half  turns  of  the  wrist.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  An  Upper  Canine  Tooth  of  a  Wolf,  pierced  at  the  end  of  the  root.  The
hole  was  evidently  made  with  a  cutting-implement  worked  first  on  one  face  and
then  on  the  other  until  the  elliptically  hollow  borings  met  in  a  small  round
hole  in  the  middle.

From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  a  Station  which  we  believe  to  be  older  than  those
above  mentioned.

Fig.  5.  The  Upper  Canine  Tooth  of  a  Fox,  bored  at  the  end  of  the  root,  which,
however,  had  previously  been  pared  down  on  its  two  faces,  rendering  the  work
of  perforation  more  easy.
From  La  Madelaine.

Figs.  6  a,  6  b.  An  Incisor  Tooth  of  a  large  Ox  (Aurochs  ?),  with  the  root  cut  and
bored.  The  two  sides  of  the  root  have  been  pared  down  on  its  two  opposite
sides  with  a  very  sharp  implement ;  and  two  holes  have  been  pierced  through
it,  one  near  the  end,  and  the  other  near  the  crown  of  the  tooth.  The  mouths
of  the  holes  are  not  conical ;  hence  probably  the  root  was  pared  down  after
it  had  been  pierced.  Six  transverse  marks  have  been  cut  at  intervals  along
one  edge  of  the  root  (that  shown  in  fig.  6i).  As  several  Bovine  Incisors,
cut  and  bored  in  a  similar  manner,  were  found  at  the  same  Station  and  rather
near  together,  it  is  probable  that  they  were  intended  to  be  strung  in  a  row  on
two  cords  for  some  ornamental  purpose.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  7.  Another  Bovine  Incisor,  in  all  respects  worked  like  the  last,  and  with  the
same  number  of  grooves  on  the  edge,  and  from  the  same  place.

Fig.  8.  An  Incisor  Tooth  of  a  Ruminant,  of  the  genus  Copra  (Ibex  ?),  having  its
root  pierced  near  the  end  with  a  hole  evidently  made  by  boring  from  both  sides.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  9.  A  middle  Incisor  of  a  Reindeer,  pierced  near  the  middle  of  the  root  with
a  hole  made  like  the  last.
From  Laugerie  Basse.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  47

Fig.  10.  A  lateral  Incisor  of  a  Reindeer,  with  its  root  bored  with  a  very  round
hole  which  must  have  been  carefully  made  with  a  stone  drill  having  a  finely
worked  point.  Such  perforated  teeth  as  this  we  have  already  noticed  (p.  42)
as  being  used  by  the  Esquimaux  in  a  kind  of  head-dress,  of  which  Capt.  Parry
has  given  a  figure.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Figs.  11,  12,  and  13.  These  three  Teeth,  pierced  through  the  middle  of  the  natu-
rally large  and  flat  root,  are  the  Canines  of  a  Ruminant  of  the  genus  Cervua.
They  much  resemble  those  of  the  common  Red  Deer  ( Cervus  elaphus) ;  whilst
they  notably  differ  from  the  Canines  of  the  female  Reindeer, — the  only  ones  that
I  have  observed  in  place,  not  having  had  the  opportunity  of  ascertaining  directly
the  form  of  those  of  the  male  Reindeer.  Whatever  they  are,  these  perforated
teeth  must  have  been  in  fashion  at  the  period  with  which  we  are  concerned ;
for  they  have  been  found  in  many  districts  of  France,  and  sometimes  in  large
numbers  at  one  place ; .  and  this  may  lead  us  to  suppose  they  had  been  used  as
necklaces,  or  for  some  such  decoration.

The  specimen  fig.  11  is  from  La  Madelaine;  fig.  12  from  Laugerie  Basse;
and  fig.  13  from  Les  Eyzies.

With  regard  to  the  several  Teeth  above  described,  we  must  again  mention
that  some  of  them  were  probably  used  for  ornament  only,  or  for  dress,  and
that  others  may  have  been  preserved  as  memorials  of  hunting.  Thus  among  the
Kuskuchewak,  says  Sir  John  Richardson  ('Arctic  Searching  Expedition,'  2  vols.
8vo.  London,  1851,  vol.  i.  p.  368),  "  Every  hunter  preserves  some  remembrance
of  each  Reindeer  that  he  kills.  He  either  scratches  a  mark  on  his  bow,  or
draws  out  a  tooth  of  the  beast,  and  adds  it  to  a  girdle  which  he  wears  as  an
ornament"*.

Fig.  14.  Inner  half  of  a  Boar's  Lower  Canine,  split  longitudinally.  We  have
thought  right  to  figure  this  specimen,  though  it  bears  no  other  indication  of
Man's  work  than  having  been  neatly  slit  along  its  length.  Such  plates  or  flakes
of  teeth  are  still  used  for  ornament,  particularly  by  the  Arabs,  who  fasten  them

*  This  custom  obtains  also  among  our  modern  sportsmen ;  for  instance,  those  who  have  retained  the
privilege,  now  very  rare  in  France,  of  hunting  the  Stag,  do  not  forget  to  pluck  out  the  canine  teeth  of  the
skin  deer ;  and  they  call  them  "  Crocs  "  or  "  Diamants."  Instead,  however,  of  making  a  hole  in  them  for
stringing,  they  set  them  in  gold  as  sleeve-buttons,  or  as  cravat-pins.  In  sporting  circles  the  ladies  wear
these  Deer-teeth  in  bracelets ;  and  we  have  heard  even  of  a  handsome  necklace  or  JtivUre  entirely
composed  of  these  "  Diamonds  of  Venery."


.g  KELIQULE  AQUITANICJE.

crosswise  as  breast-pieces  on  their  horses.  We  cannot  say  to  what  use  the  half-
tooth  before  us  may  have  been  put.

We  may  mention  that  the  remains  of  the  Boar  are  found  very  rarely  indeed
in  the  ancient  Stations  of  the  Reindeer- Age ;  and  nothing  has  yet  occurred  to
indicate  that  this  animal  served  for  food  to  the  aborigines  of  that  period.

From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  15.  This  is  a  Cowrie  Shell  ( Cypr&a),  already  fossilized  when  used,  probably
for  ornament,  by  the  early  natives  of  Perigord.  The  large  cavity  near  its  outer
edge  is  due  to  accidental  fracture;  but  above,  near  the  opening,  there  is  a
trace  of  a  hole  artificially  made.  This  shell  must  have  come  from  the  Faluns  of
Touraine,  according  to  M.  Fischer  (see  page  43),  who  refers  it  to  Cyprcea  pyrrnn
of  Gmelin  (<7.  sanguinolenta,  Dujardin).
From  La  Madelaine.

Figs.  16-19.  These  are  valves  of  Pectiwculus  gtycimeris  (Linnseus  and  Dujardin),  of
different  sizes.     Fig.  16  shows  a  specimen  with  only  one  hole  for  stringing ;  the
three  others  have  two  such  holes  (one  near  the  hinge,  the  other  at  the  opposite
border  of  the  shell),  so  that  they  were  probably  strung  in  a  different  manner.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  20  is  a  valve  of  Area  Breislaki  (Basterot  and  Dujardin).    Instead  of  showing
its  inner  face,  this  shell  is  figured  so  as  to  show  the  single  hole  with  which  its
umbo  has  been  bored.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  21.  The  First  Phalangeal  Bone  of  a  hind  foot  of  a  Reindeer,  with  a  hole  on
its  lower  face,  penetrating  only  into  the  cavity  of  the  bone,  and  not  going
through  and  through.  This  we  have  termed  a  Whistle;  for  on  applying
the  lip  to  the  hollow  of  the  proximal  (metatarsal)  articulation,  and  blowing
obliquely  into  the  hole,  we  get  a  sharp  sound  analogous  to  that  produced
by  a  cat-call,  or  a  key  used  as  a  whistle.  The  first  of  these  Whistles  was
observed  in  1860,  in  the  burial-cave  of  Aurignac;  but,  as  that  was  then  an
isolated  observation,  I  thought  it  prudent  not  to  publish  an  account  of  it.
Since  that  time,  however,  there  have  been  many  discoveries  of  this  kind  of
instrument  in  different  places ;  and  now  specimens  are  not  rare  in  collections.
From  Laugerie  Basse.


RELIQULE  AQUITANICLE

( DORDOGNE .  )

1  2


B.


PL  .VI


10
I


11


12


13


14


IS


Zoureau  del.etM.


Fmp.Becyuet  a.  Paris.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  49


B.  PLATE  VI.

In  our  description  of  B.  Plate  I.,  illustrating  several  Bone  Implements,  of
different  sizes  and  usually  regarded  as  Heads  of  Arrows  or  Harpoons,  we  stated
(page  10)  that  in  a  subsequent  Plate  we  would  figure  some  implements  having  a
still  more  distinct  appearance  of  having  been  used  in  Pishing.  Several  of  the
instruments  shown  in  B.  Plate  VI.,  and  about  to  be  described,  are  subcylindrical
pieces  of  Reindeer-horn,  pointed  at  the  ends,  and  armed  on  one  side  with  sharp
recurved  teeth,  or  barbs;  and  they  thus  resemble  certain  Fishing-Implements
which  are  in  use  among  the  natives  of  different  countries,  and  which  have  been
nearly  always  termed  Harpoons  by  travellers  who  have  figured  or  described  them
from  the  originals.  "We  proceed,  then,  to  reproduce,  in  woodcuts,  some  examples
of  these  implements,  of  different  ages  and  countries,  to  show  that,  however  great
the  distance  in  time  and  space,  there  is  throughout,  even  in  minute  details,  a
striking  analogy,  and  even  identity,  in  the  mechanical  resources  invented  by  man
to  supply  the  first  necessaries  of  life.

Nevertheless  we  must  allow  that  resemblance,  and  even  identity,  in  form
does  not  always  unmistakeably  imply  a  similar  mode  of  use  for  the  weapon
or  implement.

Thus  with  the  specimens  shown  in  the  annexed  woodcuts,  and  termed  "  Harpoons  "
by  the  authors  from  whose  works  they  have  been  copied,  are  two  harpoon-like  im-
plements (figs.  5  and  6)  made  of  Reindeer-horn  by  the  North-American  Esquimaux.
In  one  of  these  (fig.  5)  the  spike  or  point  is  made  of  the  same  piece  as  the  shank ;
in  the  other  (fig.  6)  the  top  of  the  shank  is  hollowed  so  as  to  receive,  in  a  socket,  a
point  or  armature,  of  a  mineral  nature,  iron  or  worked  stone  (we  have  not  been  able
to  determine  which,  the  specimen  having  come  to  us  without  its  moveable  point).
These  two  harpoon-like  implements  were  each  firmly  set  in  a  shaft  of  light  wood
(deal  or  birch) ;  and  we  were  obliged  to  detach  them,  to  examine  the  mode  of
their  insertion.  Now,  the  other  end  of  the  shaft  is  feathered  on  two  sides,  and
notched  at  the  butt,  to  fit  on  a  bow-string.  Hence  these  pointed  implements  with
barbs  on  one  side,  such  as  we  have  from  Pe'rigord,  are  now  used  as  Arrow-heads
by  the  Esquimaux ;  and  there  is  much  uncertainty  as  to  the  actual  mode  of  use
of  objects  similarly  shaped,  which  we  find  in  the  Caverns  and  other  ancient
Stations  of  Dordogne  and  the  Pyrenees.

The  analogy  is  repeated  also  in  the  indications  of  the  method  of  setting  the

h


5°
Fig.  5.


RELIQUIAE  AQUITANIC^E.
Fig.  6.  Fig.  7.  Fig.  8.


Fig.  9.


Fig.  10.


m


P
I


Fig.    5.  Esquimaux  Arrow-head  of  Reindeer-horn.

Fig.    6.  Esquimaux  Arrow-head,  wanting  the  point  of  stone

or  metal.
Fig.    7.  Fuegian  Harpoon-head  of  Bone.     (From  Lubbock's

'  Prehistoric  Times.')
Fig.    8.  Ancient  Danish  Harpoon-head   of  Bone.     (From

'  Lubbock's  Prehistoric  Times.')
Fig.    9.  Harpoon-head  of  Reindeer-horn  from   Bruniquel.

(In  the  Montauban  Collection.)
Fig.  10.  Bone  Harpoon-head  from  the  Alluvium  of  the  River

Lacque,  near  Calais.     Two-thirds  nat.  size.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.
Fig.  12.  Fig.  11.


Fig.  11.  Harpoon -head  of  Stag's  Horn  from  the  Lake-Station

of  St.  Auhin :  of  the  Stone-Age.    (In  M.  Mortillet's

Collection.)
Fig.  12.  Harpoon-head  of    Bone   from   the    "Drift,"    Lake

Superior,  North  America.
Fig.  13.  Esquimaux  Harpoon-head  of  ivory  (a),  and  the  socket

for  it  in  the  ivory  head  of  the  shaft  (6).     (Christ}-

Collection.)     Nat.  size.

Fig.  14.  Fishing-Implement  from  Nootka  Sound.
Fig.  15.  Arrow-head  of  Bone,  with  a  harb  of  whalebone,  from
Oriental  Siberia.


h  2


,2  EELIQULE

weapon  in  its  haft  or  handle.  In  a  former  memoir*  an  attempt  was  made  to
explain  the  probable  mode  of  inserting  the  supposed  Arrow-heads,  barbed  on  two
sides,  in  a  socket,  and  of  attaching  them  to  the  haft  by  means  of  cord  tied  on  above
the  two  knobs  always  present  at  the  lower  end  of  the  stem,  just  above  the  pointed
lower  end,  which  is  tapered  for  insertion  in  the  haft  (see  also  above,  page  i  o) .  These
two  little  projections,  or  knobs,  are  present  also  in  one  of  our  modern  Esquimaux
Arrow-heads  (fig,  6);  and  they  are  here  even  more  prominent,  and  fit  firmly  into  two
corresponding  little  hollows  made  in  the  inside  of  the  socket,  the  wall  of  which  is  very
thin  and  tightly  bound  with  a  ligature  of  thread  made  of  Reindeer's  tendon,  giving
great  strength  to  the  socketing.  In  the  other  Esquimaux  Arrow-head  the  point  of
insertion  is  simply  thicker  or  swollen  a  little  above  the  tendon-bound  socket.

In  the  same  page  with  these  two  Esquimaux  Arrows  we  have  represented  two
specimens  that  without  doubt  are  more  properly  termed  Harpoons;  and  these
figures  we  have  been  kindly  permitted  to  copy  from  Sir  John  Lubbock's  highly
interesting  and  instructive  '  Prehistoric  Times  '  f.

One  of  these  Harpoons  (fig.  7),  made  of  bone,  is  copied  from  the  figure  156,
page  436  of  '  Prehistoric  Times.'  It  is  one  of  those  still  in  use  among  the  natives
of  Tierra  del  Fuego  (Fuegians).  The  stem  is  bluntly  pointed;  and  is  barbed,  on
one  side  only,  with  sixteen  close-set  oblique  barbs,  arching  backwards,  not
prominent,  and  formed  by  simple  oblique  grooving.  The  lower  part  of  the  stem,
corresponding  nearly  in  extent  to  the  usual  tapering  butt  with  knobs  in  our
Dordogne  specimens,  is  marked  below  the  barbs,  and  on  that  edge  only,  with  five
or  six  irregular  notches  and  accompanying  low  angular  projections,  for  which  there
could  scarcely  be  a  use  except  in  aiding  to  fasten  the  implement  on  its  haft.

At  page  80  of  Sir  J.  Lubbock's  work  there  is  an  illustration  (fig.  95)  of  another
bone  Harpoon,  of  analogous  form.  This  we  reproduce  in  fig.  8,  page  50.  It
belongs  to  the  prehistoric  times  of  Denmark,  has  sixteen  barbs,  on  one  side  only,
as  in  fig.  7 ;  and  in  some  details  of  form  it  approaches  rather  more  nearly  our
supposed  Harpoons  from  the  ancient  Stations  in  Southern  France,  which  indeed
have  generally  been  more  carefully  worked,  as  may  be  very  fully  verified  by
reference  to  the  Harpoon  from  Bruniquel,  represented  by  fig.  9.

This  Harpoon  (fig.  9),  which  M.  Brun,  Conservator  of  the  Museum  of  Mon-
tauban,  has  authorized  us  to  have  figured,  was  found  by  him  in  the  deposit  under
the  Rock  Shelter  near  the  Chateau  of  Bruniquel  (Tarn  et  Garonne),  which  he  has

*  Annales  des  Sciences  Naturelles,  4e  serie,  Zoologie,  vol.  xv.  p.  210

t  Prehistoric  Times,  as  illustrated  by  Ancient  Remains  and  the  Manrers  and  Customs  of  Modern  Savages.
8vo.  London,  1865.


DESCBIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  53

worked  with  great  intelligence  and  good  success.  It  is  formed  of  Reindeer-horn,
as  are  most  of  those  belonging  to  the  "  Reindeer- Age."  Its  upper  point  is  short,
as  in  that  from  Denmark.  The  side-row  of  barbs  does  not  reach  so  far  down;
and  there  are  only  nine ;  they  are  more  detached  from  the  stem,  more  regularly
spaced  apart ;  and  all  are  hollowed  on  both  their  faces  with  that  middle  furrow  or
groove  characteristic  of  the  Arrows  and  Harpoons  belonging  to  that  period.  It  has
been  thought  that  the  grooves  cut  on  these  barbs  of  the  weapons  of  the  Reindeer-
Age  have  been  made  to  carry  poison  (see  page  10).  "Without  insisting  on  the
value  of  this  hypothesis,  we  may  repeat  that  this  practice  of  smearing  arrow-heads
with  a  substance  intended  to  increase  their  destructive  power  has  existed  at  all
times  and  in  all  countries.  To  the  instances  cited  elsewhere,  we  will  add  that
related  by  Gmelin,  in  his  'Travels  in  Siberia'*.  He  says  that  the  Tongouses  of
Nijnaia  Tongouska  attribute  an  analogous  quality  to  the  burnt  flesh  of  the  Wood-
pecker. "  They  roast  this  bird,  pound  it,  mix  it  with  fat  of  any  sort  except  Bears'
fat  (because  that  decomposes  readily);  and  with  this  mixture  they  smear  the
arrows  they  use  in  hunting.  An  animal  struck  with  one  of  these  always  falls
with  the  wound."  In  this  Harpoon  from  Bruniquel  there  is  only  one  knob  near
its  lower  end ;  it  is  on  the  same  side  with  the  barbs,  as  is  frequently  the  case  in
the  Harpoons  with  barbs  on  one  side  only.

The  Harpoon,  fig.  10,  page  50,  is  engraved  two-thirds  of  its  real  size.  It  is
made  of  a  very  compact  bone  of  some  Herbivore.  There  are  five  barbs,  on  one
side  only,  wide-set,  and  formed  by  simple  oblique  grooving.  This  Harpoon,  the  age
of  which  has  not  been  determined,  was  found  near  Isherque  (department  of  Pas-
de-Calais),  at  a  depth  of  three  metres,  in  the  alluvium  of  the  little  River  Lacque.
For  the  original  drawing  we  are  indebted  to  Mademoiselle  E.  Watelet,  by  whose
talent  the  great  work  of  her  father  Professor  Watelet,  of  Soissons,  on  the  '  Tertiary
Flora  of  the  Paris  Basin,'  has  been  enriched  with  many  plates.

Another  Harpoon  (fig.  11,  of  actual  size,  page  51)  has  but  a  single  barb,  and
appears  to  consist  of  Stag's  horn.  It  was  discovered,  together  with  many  others,
by  Dr.  Clement,  at  St.  Aubin,  one  of  the  Swiss  Lake-Stations  referred  to  the
Stone-Age, — a  fact  giving  us  a  relative  age  for  this  specimen.  It  forms  part  of
M.  Mortillet's  Collection,  who  has  kindly  permitted  us  to  have  it  drawn.

Another  specimen,  with  large  oblique  barbs  very  far  apart,  is  shown  by  fig.  12,
page  51,  two-thirds  its  real  size.  It  is  made  of  the  bone  of  a  Herbivore;  its
upper  end  is  obtuse ;  its  other  extremity  is  cut  square  and  bored  with  a  hole  for
attachment  or  suspension.  This  Harpoon,  said  to  have  been  found  in  the  "  Drift "

*  Gmelin,  '  Voyage  en  Siberie.'     Traduction  frangaise.     12mo.  Paris,  1767,  vol.  xi.  p.  113.


..  KELIQULE  AQUITANIC^E.

of  Lake  Superior,  North  America,  was  given  to  our  learned  friend  M.  Barrande,
who  has  obligingly  placed  it  at  our  disposal.

Lastly,  we  give  fig.  13  as  a  comparative  specimen,  from  the  late  Mr.  Henry
Christy's  Collection,  being  the  head  of  an  Esquimaux  Harpoon  for  hunting  the
Sea-Otter.  It  is  made  of  Walrus-ivory,  is  3£  inches  in  length,  and  has  a  blade
like  that  of  a  long  triangular  arrow-head,  but  is  further  barbed  by  a  notch  low
down  on  one  edge.  Its  short  shank  below  the  blade  is  cut  away  so  as  to  have
a  thick  compressed  rim  or  collar,  below  which  the  butt  tapers  to  fit  a  socket  in  the
head  of  the  shaft,  and  above  which  is  fastened  the  cord  of  plaited  tendon,  connecting
it  with  the  shaft.  The  latter  consists  of  two  parts, — a  head  of  ivory  or  hard  bone,
8  inches  long,  hollowed  at  the  top  to  receive  the  armed  point,  and  firmly  spliced
by  fine  cord  of  sinew  to  a  rod  of  deal,  3  feet  2^  inches  long,  feathered  on  three
sides  at  its  lower  end,  but  not  notched  or  "crutched"  to  fit  a  bow-string.
Altogether  this  "  Sea-Otter  Harpoon  "  is  4  feet  1^  inch  long.  The  cord  connecting
the  moveable  head  and  the  shaft  is  about  5  feet  long,  and  is  double  for  about  two
feet,  as  it  is  attached  to  the  shaft  at  two  places — just  between  its  upper  and
middle,  and  its  middle  and  lower  thirds.

In  the  same  Collection  is  an  Esquimaux  "  Sea-Otter  Arrow,"  made  on  the  same
plan  as  the  foregoing,  only  3  feet  long  altogether,  three-feathered,  "  crutched "
for  the  bow-string  at  the  butt,  and  furnished  with  a  small  sharp  harpoon-like  head
(1|  inch  long  by  f  inch  broad),  with  three  barbs  on  one  side  only;  it  fits  into  a
socket,  and  has  a  hole  drilled  through  its  base  for  fastening  the  cord  (here  6  feet
3  inches  long)  which  attaches  it  to  the  shaft.

Thus  we  see,  in  the  two  last-mentioned  Esquimaux  Fishing-Implements,  the
arrow-headed  instrument  adapted  as  a  Harpoon,  and  the  harpoon-like  head  be-
longing to  an  Arrow  (see  also  page  49).  In  either  case  the  barbed  head  inserted
in  the  head  of  the  shaft,  whether  shot  at  the  prey  or  hurled  by  hand,  would  be
readily  disengaged,  and  the  shaft,  attached  by  the  cord,  would  remain  floating
(in  a  transverse  direction,  owing  to  its  being  attached  at  two  points),  to  indicate
the  direction  taken  by  the  wounded  animal,  and  to  impede  its  retreat.

Other  applications  of  bone  points,  barbed  on  one  side  only,  are  seen  in  variously
modified  Fishing-spears  used  by  the  Esquimaux  (Tschukses)  of  North-eastern  Asia.
Here  such  barbed  pieces,  but  usually  slender,  and  more  curved  than  those  of  the
Caves,  are  fastened  at  the  end  of  a  wooden  shaft,  either  singly,  or  in  groups  of
three  or  four,  with  the  concavity  and  the  barbs  inside ;  and  others,  similar  but
shorter,  are  grouped  around  the  shaft,  about  halfway  down,  with  their  points
upwards  and  their  barbs  inwards.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  55

In  B.  Plate  VI.  there  are  also  other  supposed  Fishing- Implements, — namely
harpoon-like  weapons,  barbed  on  one  side,  similar  to  those  above-mentioned,  but
diminutive,  and,  as  it  were,  in  miniature  rather  than  fit  for  real  use.  They  may,
however,  have  been  used  as  Arrow-heads.

There  are  also  figured  in  the  same  Plate  some  small  rod-like  pieces  of  bone,  sub-
cylindrical,  and  tapering  at  both  ends  (figs.  10-15).  Mr.  Henry  Christy  thought
that  these  little  bone  spikes,  or  spindle-shaped  and  skewer-like  implements,  may
have  been  used  by  being  tied  on  obliquely  to  the  end  of  a  longer  stick  or  stem,  after
the  fashion  of  a  Fish-hook.  He  possessed  in  his  Collection  modern  Fish-hooks  so
made,  by  the  fastening  together  of  two  pieces  of  bone,  unequal  in  length,  at  a  sharp
angle.  Sir  John  Lubbock  has  also  some,  which  were  presented  to  him  by  a  person
who  saw  them  in  use  among  the  natives  on  the  north-west  coast  of  America.

Mr.  H.  Christy  also  thought  it  highly  probable  that  these  spikes  of  bone  may  have
been  used  in  the  construction  of  some  such  kind  of  Fish-hook  as  is  used  at
Nootka.  Sound  at  the  present  day,  and  many  examples  of  which  are  to  be  seen  in
his  own  and  other  Collections.  Such  thin  tapering  pieces  of  wood  or  bone  are
tied  securely,  at  a  certain  angle,  on  the  thicker  part,  and  within  the  curve,  of  a
stick  bent  like  a  shepherd's  crook.  Sometimes  the  spikes  are  sharp  at  both  ends,
but  more  often  they  are  blunt  at  the  outer  end.  Sometimes  the  framework  is  of
solid  wood  and  the  spike  or  tongue  of  iron.  These  curious  fishing-implements  are
of  different  sizes ;  a  small  one  is  drawn  in  fig.  14.  How  they  are  used,  except
that  they  are  suspended  by  a  line  attached  to  a  certain  point  nearly  in  the  middle
of  the  upper  part,  we  have  no  certain  knowledge.

We  must,  however,  also  remark  that  in  an  Arrow-stem,  made  of  a  kind  of  reed,
which  has  been  given  to  us  as  coming  from  Oriental  Siberia,  the  terminal  armature
consists  of  a  simple  spike  or  sharp  rod  of  bone  (probably  the  bony  ray  of  the  back-
fin  of  some  large  fish),  rounded  and  equally  pointed  at  both  ends  (fig.  15).  One
of  these  points  is  set  in  the  hollow  shaft,  and  is  tightly  held  by  a  ligature  round
the  edge  of  this  natural  socket.  We  may  add  that  in  these  kinds  of  Arrow-heads
a  piece  of  Whalebone  attached  to  the  stem  a  little  below  the  point,  and  spreading
out  at  its  end,  serves  as  a  barb  to  retain  the  weapon  in  a  wound.  This  is  well
shown  in  the  annexed  sketch  (fig.  15),  of  the  actual  size.  It  is  true  that  the
analogous  specimens  represented  in  B.  Plate  VI.  are  much  smaller ;  but  we  shall
in  the  sequel  have  occasion  to  figure  some  of  larger  size.  Whether  or  not  these
support  the  interpretation  proposed  at  first,  it  is  probably  the  best  at  all  events
for  the  two-pointed  instruments  figured  in  B.  Plate  VI.,  of  which  we  now  proceed
to  give  a  detailed  description.


_£  KELIQUI^E   AQTJITANKLE.

Possibly,  however,  some  of  the  more  slender  of  these  skewer-like  instruments
may  have  been  used  as  Pins,  for  fastening  dresses  and  skins  used  as  curtains
or  otherwise.

Fig.  1.  An  Harpoon-head,  with  a  slender  shank ;  one  of  the  longest  that  have
been  found  at  the  Stations  in  Dordogne.  Its  point  is  broken,  but  has  been
neatly  tapered  and  sharp.  The  shank  or  stem  has  on  one  side  six  barbs,  wide
apart,  with  nearly  equal  interspaces,  and  gradually  increasing  in  size  from
above  downwards.  The  lower  end  suddenly  tapers  to  a  point  for  insertion  in  a
socket ;  and  at  two  centimetres  above  this  pointed  end  there  are,  one  on  each
side,  two  swellings  or  slight  elevations,  answering  to  the  two  knobs  noticed  on
other  specimens,  such  as  those  figured  in  B.  PI.  I.  This  Harpoon,  like  most
of  those  about  to  be  described,  is  made  of  Reindeer-horn,  and  is  almost  wholly
coated  with  a  thin,  blackish,  calcareous  incrustation,  obscuring  the  shallow
grooves  or  channels  on  the  faces  of  each  barb,  which  are  usual  on  most  of  these
old  Harpoons  and  Arrow-heads.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  2.  Another  Harpoon,  with  only  two  barbs  on  one  side.  The  top  has  been
carefully  tapered  to  a  point.  The  points  of  the  barbs  are  at  a  greater  distance
from  the  stem  than  in  fig.  1;  and  the  grooves  are  deeply  cut,  especially  in  the
second  barb.  The  shank  is  slightly  curved,  with  an  evident  swelling  at  the
middle ;  and  near  the  butt  it  has  two  prominent  knobs,  to  aid  in  fastening  on
the  haft,  or  to  hold  on  a  string,  connecting  it  loosely  with  the  shaft.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  3.  This  specimen  has  perhaps  been  wrongly  figured  among  Implements
referred  to  the  category  of  Harpoons  properly  so  called ;  for  it  is  easy  to  see
that  it  has  been  accidentally  broken  where  its  upper  end  has  been  roughly
retouched,  without  the  marks  of  the  fracture  being  quite  removed.  It  is
noticeable  also  that  the  lines  cut  along  the  stem  continue  as  far  as  the  broken
end,  and  have  extended  further.  Hence  this  specimen  may  have  originally  been
longer,  with  many  barbs  on  each  side.  There  remain  now  only  two  barbs,  one
on  each  side,  thick  and  strong ;  and  each  of  them  shows  two  parallel  grooves.
The  shank  is  thick,  tapering  downwards  below  the  barbs  until  it  swells  slightly
with  the  two  usual  knobs  for  holding  a  string  on,  and  is  then  pointed  for
insertion  in  a  haft.
From  La  Madelaine.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  57

Fig.  4  We  cannot  propose  for  this  the  interpretation  offered  for  the  preceding
specimen.  On  the  contrary,  its  shape,  though  exceptional,  is  the  result  of  a
premeditated  plan.  Its  upper  end  is  cut  away  on  two  faces,  thin  and  wedge-
like,  with  rounded  corners.  The  two  barhs  with  which  it  is  armed  are  set  on
opposite  to  each  other,  not  far  below  the  flat  tapering  point ;  they  are  unequal
in  size,  are  marked  with  the  characteristic  median  groove,  and  do  not  stand  out
with  an  open  angle  from  the  stem.  Below  the  barbs  the  stem  is  thick ;  but  it
tapers  gently  towards  the  two  knobs,  which  are  more  prominent  than  usual.

It  is  difficult  to  determine  the  exact  use  of  this  Harpoon,  made  with  com-
paratively a  considerable  amount  of  care,  and  to  which  it  would  have  been  easy
to  give  a  sharp  point  instead  of  the  rounded  flat  edge,  ill  adapted,  we  should
think,  to  pierce  the  skin  of  a  Reindeer  or  even  to  wound  a  Fish.

From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  5.  This  also  presents  a  form  different  from  any  other  specimen  we  have  as  yet
seen.  The  upper  part- in  advance  of  the  two  barbs,  cylindrical  but  tapering  to
a  blunt  point,  is  extraordinarily  long.  The  barbs  are  opposite,  unequal,  and
broken ;  they  have  the  usual  median  groove.  The  stem  swells  out  in  its  lower
half,  below  the  barbs,  and  tapers  down  to  the  point  for  insertion  in  the  shaft
without  any  of  the  usual  knobs  or  prominences.  It  is  true  that  on  the  side
opposite  to  that  figured  there  is,  low  down  on  the  stem,  a  flat  surface,  which
may  give  rise  to  the  supposition  that  this  implement  may  have  been  fixed  by  a
ligature  to  a  shaft  or  handle.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  6.  In  this  we  have  only  the  sharp  upper  part  of  a  Harpoon,  with  barbs  on  one
side,  almost  transverse  in  direction,  and  marked  with  the  usual  median  groove.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  7.  A  fragment  of  a  slender  long-pointed  Harpoon,  barbed  on  one  side.     The
point,  the  barbs,  and  the  stem  are  all  broken.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  8.  A  small  specimen  cut  in  the  shape  of  a  barbed  Harpoon,  with  a  long
point,  which  has  been  broken.  There  are  four  barbs  on  one  side  only,  distinctly
separate,  sharp,  and  very  oblique,  but  without  the  usual  grooves.  The  lower
part  tapers  to  a  point  without  any  indication  of  knobs.

This  diminutive  weapon-head  may  have  served  as  an  Arrow-head.     We  have


^g  EELIQUIjE  AQUITANTCLE.

elsewhere*  figured  another,  still  smaller  miniature  Harpoon  (?)  of  this  sort,
which  was  found  imbedded  in  the  breccia  of  the  Cave  at  Les  Eyzies.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  9.  Another  minute  Harpoon-like  head,  of  similar  dimensions  to  the  last,  but
showing  only  two  barbs  cut  distinctly,  whilst  above  them  two  others  are  in-
dicated by  shallow,  oblique,  unfinished  notches.  This  specimen  has  preserved
its  sharp  point.  Near  the  pointed  butt  there  is  a  kind  of  notch,  which  may
have  been  of  use  in  fastening  this  little  weapon  on  a  shaft.
Prom  La  Madelaine.

Figs.  10  to  15  are  the  two-pointed  subcylindrical  spikes,  or  skewer-like  pieces,  of
Reindeer-horn,  referred  to  above,  page  55.  Their  use  is  uncertain.  Mr.  Henry
Christy  thought  that  they  may  have  formed  part  of  Fish-hooks,  having  been  tied
on  to  other  bones  or  sticks  obliquely,  as  already  described  (page  55) ;  and  indeed
in  the  specimen  fig.  12  there  are  notches  made  at  intervals  along  the  stem ;  and
one  of  its  ends  is  flattened  on  one  side,  so  as  to  allow  of  its  being  laid  against
another  piece  and  tied  securely  onf.  Fig.  15  is  longer  and  much  thicker  than
the  others;  and  one  end  is  thicker  than  the  other.  It  bears  some  rough
notchings  near  the  middle.
From  La  Madelaine.

Although  the  specimens  figured  in  B.  Plate  VI.  were  all  got  from  the  hearth-
stuff  at  La  Madelaine,  yet  similar  Implements  are  not  wanting  in  our  other
Stations  in  P>ordogne.  "We  have  indeed  precisely  similar  specimens  from  the
Cave  at  Les  Eyzies,  and  from  the  Rock-shelter  of  Laugerie  Basse.  From  the
Lower  Cavern  of  Massat  (Ariege)  we  have  also  got  Barbed  Harpoons  and  Arrow-
heads, of  the  same  type  f.  "We  are  also  able  to  cite  the  fine  specimens  of  the  same
kind  found  at  Bruniquel  by  M.  Brun,  who  has  kindly  authorized  us  to  have  a
drawing  made  of  the  Harpoon  figured  at  page  50.  The  specimens  from  La  Made-
laine, however,  being  more  perfect,  and  more  varied  in  form,  we  have  naturally
preferred  to  figure  them  for  the  purposes  of  this  publication.

*  Eevue  Archeologique,  April  1864,  p.  247.

t  These  bone  spikes,  lashed  on  obliquely  by  their  middle  to  the  bevelled  end  of  a  shaft,  may  also  have
served  for  both  point  and  barb  of  a  dart,  such,  as  the  Australians  make  out  of  a  long  stick  and  a  Kangaroo's
fibula  sharpened  at  both,  ends.

J  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  London,  vol.  xvii.  p.  470,  fig.  4.


RELIQULE   AQUITANIC^E

(  DORDOGNE  .)


A


PL.  XIII


-Louvezu  del.  etlitb.


Jmp  Jecjaft  a  Paris.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE   IMPLEMENTS.  59


A.  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.

A.  PLATE  XIII.

The  two  specimens  here  figured  are  examples  of  the  hollowed  pebbles  of  granite
found  in  the  Cave  at  Les  Eyzies,  and  referred  to  in  Lartet  and  Christy's  Memoir
on  the  Caves  of  Perigord  in  the  '  Revue  Archeologique,'  April  1864.

These  rounded  water-worn  blocks,  or  pebbles,  bearing  a  shallow  pit  ground
out  on  one  of  their  flatter  sides,  have  been  found  in  considerable  numbers  at
La  Madelaine  and  Les  Eyzies.  They  are  mostly  of  granite ;  but  a  few  (three  or
four)  of  quartzite  have  occurred ;  and  one  or  two  of  sandstone.  One  very  small
quartzite  specimen  was  met  with  at  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  and  one  of  larger  size  at
Laugerie  Basse.  These  pebbles  vary  considerably  in  size  (from  less  than  two  to
eight  inches  in  breadth),  and,  the  larger  specimens  especially,  besides  being
flattish,  are  more  or  less  oval*.  Sometimes  the  excavation  is  very  slight,  little
more  than  a  mere  flattening  of  the  middle  portion  of  one  of  the  broad  faces;
and  sometimes  it  is  deep  enough  to  serve  as  a  kind  of  Mortar.  It  appears  to
have  been  made  by  a  continued  or  repeated  grinding  with  other  hard  substances ;
and  its  surface  is  not  polished,  but  rough,  according  to  the  crystalline  and
granular  texture  of  the  granitic  rock.

The  use  or  uses  to  which  these  hollowed  stones  f  could  have  been  applied  are
rather  doubtful.  Some  are  large  enough  to  have  been  used  in  the  beating  or

*  The  specimens  of  different  sizes  may  be  easily  arranged  as  a  pyramid  of  rough  globes,  one  on  another,
the  largest  at  the  bottom,  and  the  hollowed  face  of  one  receiving  the  naturally  rounded  base  of  the  next
above.  It  is  improbable,  however,  that  the  fancy  of  the  Aborigines  would  have  led  them  to  make  such
an  ornament  or  plaything ;  and  the  occurrence  of  one  specimen  on  another  is  not  authenticated.  Nor  does
it  seem  to  have  been  the  intention  to  give  a  mere  flatness  to  the  stone,  so  as  to  make  it  lie  steady  when  used
as  an  anvil,  chopping-block,  or  such  like ;  for  the  ground  surface  is  always  hollowed  to  a  greater  or  less
extent ;  and  there  are  no  marks  of  blows  on  the  opposite  and  convex  face,  still  in  its  natural  condition.

t  In  the  '  Revue  Archeologique '  for  April  1864,  we  quoted  Dr.  Eoulin's  suggestion  that  they  may  have
served  the  Aborigines  in  the  production  of  fire  by  friction,  in  the  way  followed  by  some  American  Indians
(Oviedo,  '  Hystoria  general  de  las  Indias,'  Lib.  vi.  Cap.  5),  namely  by  twirling  the  end  of  a  dry  stick  rapidly
in  the  rough  hollow  of  such  a  stone.  A  stone,  however,  does  not  appear  to  have  formed  a  part  of  the
apparatus.  For  descriptions  and  illustrations  of  such  methods  of  fire-making,  see  Mr.  E.  B.  Tylor's
'  Early  History  of  Mankind,'  pp.  236-259.  Sir  John  Lubbock  also  makes  several  interesting  allusions  to
this  subject  in  his  '  Prehistoric  Times,'  pp.  353,  380,  400,  421,  453,  &c.

i2


0  ftELIQUI^E  AQTJITANIC2E.

^rinding  of  small  parcels  of  grain  or  other  food,  or  for  rubbing  the  materials  of
paint,  poison,  &c. ;  but  some  of  these  stones  seem  too  small  even  for  such  a
purpose ;  and,  if  these  rough-grained  bowls  had  been  used  in  the  preparation  of
a  paint  of  red  ochre  or  hematite,  we  should  expect  still  to  find  some  distinct
traces  of  its  persistent  reddish-brown  tint.  The  Indians  on  the  Upper  Amazon
actually  use,  we  are  told,  mortars  analogous  to  those  from  Pe"rigord  in  grinding
and  preparing  their  red  pimento.

We  have  been  informed  that  lately  in  Northern  California  there  have  been
found  in  the  auriferous  alluvium*,  containing  the  bones  of  Mastodon,  and
underlying  the  ancient  sheets  of  basaltic  lava,  some  hollowed  Mortar-like  pebbles
similar  to  these  under  notice  from  Les  Eyzies,  and  that  these  were  accompanied
by  pestles  of  stone.  M.  1'Abbe"  Bourgeois  has  indeed  shown  us  two  of  these
pestles;  one  is  of  greenstone,  and  the  other  of  a  hard,  black,  white-veined  stone,
highly  polished,  and  bored  at  one  end  with  a  hole  for  suspension  or  some  other
use.  M.  Simonin  also,  a  member  of  the  Geological  Society  of  France,  tells  us
that,  in  his  travels  in  California,  he  has  often  seen  on  rock-surfaces  hollows
(similar  to  those  on  the  pebbles  from  Dordogne)  that  have  been  made  by  the
Indians  to  be  used  as  mortars  for  grinding  the  maize  into  a  kind  of  flour,  which
they  mix  with  a  little  water  and  eat  cold.

Stones  hollowed  for  use  as  Mortars  or  Mealing-stones,  and  round,  oval,
cylindrical,  and  other  stones  for  Corn-crushers,  are  frequently  mentioned
in  the  descriptions  of  the  Lake-dwellings  of  Switzerland;  but  flat  slabs,  not
pebbles,  seem  to  have  been  always  chosen  for  these  cupped  or  hollowed
stones  of  Switzerland,  as  is  still  the  case  in  Africa  and  elsewhere.  (See
J.  E.  Lee's  Translation  of  E.  Keller's  'Lake-dwellings  of  Switzerland,'  &c.,
1866,  pp.  25  &c.

No  definite  pestles  have  been  found  with  these  Mortar-like  stones  of  Les  Eyzies
and  La  Madelaine ;  but  some  oval  flattish  pebbles  of  quartz,  found  in  the  Caves,
and  worn  on  the  edge  by  having  been  used  as  knapping-  or  chipping-stonesf,  fit
sufficiently  well  to  the  concavity  of  some  or  other  of  the  hollowed  pebbles  to

*  At  page  252  of  his  Report  on  the  Geological  Survey  of  California,  "  Geology,"  vol.  i.  (1865),  Mr.  J.  J.
Whitney  alludes  to  the  works  of  Man  having  been  frequently  found  in  this  gold-bearing  gravel,  together
•with  bones  of  Mastodon  and  Elephant ;  and  in  '  Silliman's  American  Journal  of  Science  and  Arts '  for
November  1866,  a  Human  Skull  is  reported  to  have  been  found  in  this  very  old  valley-gravel.

t  The  Knapping-stones,  for  chipping  flints  and  other  materials,  whether  consisting  of  natural  flattish
pebbles  of  hard  rock  or  of  .dressed  stone,  usually  have,  on  one  or  more  surfaces,  little  hollows  for  the  fingers
and  thumb ;  but  in  many  specimens  from  our  Caves  and  elsewhere  these  pits  have  been  chipped  out  and
remain  rough.  A  small  round  pebble  of  granite,  from  Les  Eyzies.  has  been  thus  adapted  and  used ;  lor  it


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  6 1

serve  also  as  rubbers  or  pestles.  There  is  also  one  flattish  oval  pebble  of  dirty-
red  jasper,  found  at  La  Madelaine,  which  has  been  much  worn  by  grinding,
having  on  each  face  an  obliquely  flat  patch  of  polished  surface.

In  the  British  Museum  are  several  stone  Mortars  from  Bruniquel.  They  are
irregularly  saucer-shaped,  larger  than  any  of  the  hollowed  pebbles  above
mentioned,  and  consist  of  roughly  dressed  blocks  of  limestone,  with  a  large,
oval,  shallow  depression  ground  out  of  one  surface.  A  piece  of  mica-schist,
somewhat  like  the  butt-end,  of  a  pistol  in  shape,  from  the  same  cave,  seems  to
have  served  as  a  Pestle.

Fig.  1.  A  smooth  round  pebble  of  fine-grained  grey  granite,  slightly  hollowed
on  one  of  its  flatter  surfaces.  The  pebble  is  3^  inches  (89  millimetres)  wide
in  its  greatest  diameter,  and  was  probably  3^2  inches  (79  millims.)  thick.  The
excavation  ground  out  on  the  top  is  about  %  inch  (8^  millims.)  deep  from  the
original  surface,  and  about  -3^-  inch  (6^  millims.)  deep  below  its  present  edge,
with  a  diameter  of  1-|  inch  (38  millims.).  From  the  lip  of  the  hollow  to  the
opposite  face,  the  pebble  is  2^f  inch  (73  millims.)  thick.

The  old  surface  of  the  stone  had  acquired  a  pinkish  tint,  which  is  seen  at  the
edge  of  the  depression  to  penetrate  the  pebble  for  about  ^  inch  (3^  millims.);
but  the  hollow  itself,  as  is  generally  the  case  with  these  cupped  pebbles,
whether  of  granite  or  quartzite,  has  a  fresher,  rougher,  and  whiter  surface
than  the  rest  of  the  stone,  having  been  made  subsequently  to  the  old  dis-
coloration of  the  pebble.

Fig.  2.  A  smooth  subovate  flattish  pebble  of  grey  granite,  with  a  broad  round  pit
ground  out  on  one  of  its  flat  faces.  It  is  rather  coarser  in  grain  than  the
specimen  above  described  (fig.  1).  It  is  noticeable  that  in  this  specimen,
contrary  to  what  is  observed  in  the  specimen  described  above,  the  surface  both
of  the  pebble  and  its  cup  has  a  dull  pinkish  tint,  due  possibly  to  a  ferruginous
stain  derived  from  the  brown  materials  of  the  hearth-stuff  in  which  it  has  been
imbedded.  As  the  bowl  or  hollow  is  not  more  deeply  stained  than  the  rest  of
the  pebble,  the  discoloration  can  scarcely  be  due  to  any  ochreous  pigment

has  had  a  little  pit  chipped  out  on  its  surface,  and  its  edge  bears  the  marks  of  knocking.  Possibly  in  some
cases  the  hollow  of  the  Mortar,  also,  was  commenced  by  chipping,  but  was  afterwards  ground  down  more
smoothly.  A  small,  round,  smooth  pebble  of  sandstone  (fine-grained,  compact,  cream-coloured,  and  slightly
micaceous),  from  Lea  Eyzies,  has  a  little  pit  chipped  out  on  one  face.


62  KELIQTILE  AQUITANKLE.

having  been  ground  in  it ;  but  why  it  should  have  been  stained  at  all,  when
others  are  not,  it  is  difficult  to  say,  unless  it  happened  that  some  of  the  pebbles
lay  with  the  bowl  upward,  which  thus  became  stained  by  the  downward  perco-
lation of  water,  and  others,  in  a  reverse  position,  remained  unaffected.

This  pebble  is  6f  inches  (130J  millims.)  broad  in  its  greatest,  and  2%  inches
(55  millims.)  in  its  least  diameter.  The  hollowed  surface  was  originally  almost
flat.  The  pit  is  2%  inches  (64  millims.)  broad  and  £  inch  (13  millims.)  deep.

Some  of  the  Lamp-stones  of  the  Esquimaux  are  flattish-oval  in  shape,  and
excavated  on  one  face,  like  fig.  2  and  other  specimens ;  but  the  hollow  is  much
larger  and  deeper  in  proportion,  and  the  stone  of  which  they  are  made  is
softer.  One  such  Lamp-stone  (from  Russian  America),  6  inches  (153  millims.)
long  and  5  inches  (127  millims.)  broad,  has  a  cavity  4  inches  (102  millims.)  long,
3^  inches  (83  millims.)  wide,  and  1  inch  (25|  millims.)  deep.


RELIQUIAE

(  DORDOGNE  .)

i


A      PL.  XIV,


louve&u  del.etlitk


Imp  .Becquet  a  Paris .


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.


A.  PLATE  XIV.

The  blocks  of  Flint  here  shown  are  nuclei  or  cores,  from  which  flakes  have
been  struck.     Some  such  cores  have  been  figured  in  A.  Plate  I.

Fig.  1.  A  roughly  cylindrical  and  slightly  tapering  core,  of  brownish-grey  flint
(granular  with  minute  fragmentary  fossils).     It  shows  upwards  of  twelve  facets.
[The  end  on  which  the  blows  were  struck  is  placed  downwards  in  the  figure].
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Figs.  2  «,  2  b.  A  piece  of  black-grey  flint  (full  of  minute  fossils),  retaining  on  two
sides  some  of  its  original  surface,  roughly  splintered  along  one  edge,  and  else-
where bearing  three  well-marked  facets.     [Figured  upside  down.]
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  3.  A  rough  piece  of  dark-grey,  granular,  fossiliferous  flint,  retaining  parts  of
two  old  surfaces  (one  consisting  of  the  original  crust,  somewhat  water-worn,
and  the  other  formed  by  the  face  of  a  subsequent  fracture,  water-worn  and  very
smooth) ;  whilst  two  sets  of  intentional  fractures  have  produced,  first,  seven
or  eight  facets  (seen  in  the  figure),  and,  secondly,  a  rude  splintery  surface,
truncating  the  facetted  face,  at  the  top  of  the  figure.  The  different  degrees  of
glaze  on  the  parts  successively  broken,  as  well  as  the  interference  of  the
fractures  with  the  former  faces,  are  easily  recognized  in  the  specimen.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  4.  A  rough  core  of  the  greyish-brown,  granular,  fossiliferous  flint  so  common
as  the  material  of  cores  and  flakes  in  the  Stations  of  the  Dordogne.     It  shows
six  or  seven  facets  on  the  side  figured ;  whilst  the  other  is  nearly  all  covered
by  the  original  yellowish-grey  crust  of  the  flint-nodule.
From  Laugerie  Haute.


Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

•

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

106

4-173

68

2-677

52

2-047

2.

95

3-740

45

1-772

35

1-378

3.

70

2-756

70

2-756

50

1-969

4.

118

4-646

82

3-228

65

2-559

64  KELIQTJkE  AQUITANIC^E.


B.  BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  &c.

B.  PLATES  VII.  &  VIII.     (One  Plate.)

A  double-sized  Plate  is  necessary  for  the  full  and  convenient  representation  of
some  of  the  specimens  now  before  us.

Fig.  1.  A  broken  piece  of  a  metatarsal  bone  of  a  Reindeer,  on  which  are  repre-
sented two  forms  of  animals  walking  one  after  the  other.  The  old  artist,
cutting  them  in  outline,  neglected  their  more  characteristic  features.  Thus
the  head  of  the  one  in  advance  is  indefinite  in  form,  and  has  neither  an  eye,
nor  ear,  nor  indication  of  a  mouth.  Nevertheless  the  four  oblique  marks
thrown  in  above  the  shoulders  to  indicate  a  mane,  the  curved  line  of  the  back
and  rump,  the  setting  on  of  the  tail,  and  the  bend  of  the  hock  are  sufficient
to  assure  us  that  a  Horse  was  here  meant  to  be  figured ;  and  although  the
legs  remain  unfinished  below,  there  is  still  in  the  general  attitude  of  the  animal
an  expression  of  movement,  which  denotes  a  practised  hand  and  a  capability  of
executing  more  correct  work.

The  hinder  figure,  still  less  carefully  engraved,  may  nevertheless  be  recognized
as  having  been  intended  for  a  Horse.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  2.  A  fragment  of  some  cylindrical  implement  made  of  Reindeer-horn,  broken
at  the  ends,  but  bearing  a  series  of  three  animals  walking  one  after  the  other ;
the  middle  one  only  is  complete,  and  is  a  mere  outline  of  a  form  referable  to  a
Carnivore — perhaps  a  Fox.  The  figures  of  Carnivorous  Animals  are  very  rare
at  the  Stations  in  Perigord ;  and  on  this  account  we  have  particularly  brought
forward  this  little  specimen,  though  offering  insufficient  material  for  correct
conclusions.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  3.  Here  we  have  a  subject  that  is  better  represented  in  B.  PL  II.  fig.  7 —
namely,  two  Reindeer  at  a  gallop,  which  are  very  well  characterized  by  the
bearing  of  the  head  and  by  the  stretching  of  the  faintly  indicated  limbs.  This
carving,  much  damaged  by  the  decay  of  the  material,  is  cut  on  the  stem  of  a


RELIQULE   AQUITANICLE

(  DORDOGNE . )


flft"         ft       '"

*.'x^     ^-«


del.  etlith.


B


PL  .  VII  et  VIII


c  a
b


Imp.Becquet  a  Paris


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  65

Reindeer's  antler,  the  base  of  which  had  been  pierced  with  a  hole,  of  which
half  remains  at  the  broken  end  of  the  specimen.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  A  piece  of  the  cave-breccia  from  Les  Eyzies,  in  which  is  imbedded  a
fragment  of  a  long  bone,  retaining  some  traces  of  carving.  At  one  end  of  it
we  see  a  part  of  the  head,  the  neck,  and  the  upper  half  of  the  trunk  of  an
animal  with  a  rather  rounded  back,  bristling  with  long  hairs,  such  as  are  also
indicated  by  numerous  hatchings  on  the  part  of  the  body  that  is  preserved.
The  head  is  decidedly  convex  in  front,  and  much  raised  towards  the  occiput,
where,  however,  no  signs  of  horns  appear,  nor  of  other  appendages.  The  generic
determination,  therefore,  of  this  animal  is  very  uncertain.  Nevertheless  behind
this  animal,  at  a  certain  distance  and  near  the  other  and  broken  end  of  the  frag-
ment, there  is  the  front  part  of  another  head,  of  analogous  form,  and  on  this  we
see  very  distinctly  some  appendages  having  the  appearance  of  horns  rather  than
ears.  This  feature,  together  with  the  convexity  of  the  forehead  and  the  position
of  the  much  dilated  eye  in  each  of  the  heads,  allows  us  to  suppose  that  the  designer
of  these  two  outlines  had  the  intention  to  represent  some  Bovine  animal.

This  specimen  was  found  in  the  cave  at  Les  Eyzies  by  Messrs.  Franks  and
Jones,  during  the  excursion  through  Pe"rigord  in  March  1864,  in  company  with
Messrs.  Evans,  Hamilton,  Lubbock,  and  Galton,  guided  by  our  much  regretted
friend  Mr.  Henry  Christy.

Fig.  5.  The  short  tapering  piece  of  Reindeer-horn  here  figured  shows  an  abruptly
broken  carving,  whichj  however,  is  not  so  indefinite  as  the  last,  but  evidently
represents  the  head  of  a  Horse,  the  head  of  which  is  put  back  in  a  nearly
vertical  position,  exaggerating  the  curve  of  shortened  shoulders.  The  head  is
tolerably  well  set  on;  also  the  ear.  The  eye  scarcely  appears.  The  mane,
as  usual,  is  indicated  by  a  line  along  the  curve  of  the  neck.
From  La  Madelaine.

Figs.  6  a,  65,  6  c.  Fig.  6  a  is  a  portion  of  a  carved  beam  of  a  large  Reindeer
Antler.  It  bears  at  one  end  (*)  the  trace  of  a  hole,  almost  obliterated  by  the
fracture.  The  other  extremity  is  also  broken ;  but  a  sloping  sawn  surface
at  **  indicates  that  it  probably  ended  in  a  wedge-like  or  tapering  point.  This
specimen,  of  which  only  one  side  is  here  figured,  is  nearly  cylindrical,  and  is
covered  all  round  by  the  carved  outlines  of  four  animals.  As  these  could  not

k


66  RELIQULE  AQUITANKLE.

be  reproduced  in  their  entirety  by  figuring  them   on   the  convexity  of  the
specimen,  they  are  shown,  in  plan,  in  figs.  6  b  and  6  c.

In  fig.  6  b  we  have  the  drawing  of  the  two  animals  for  the  most  part  visible
in  fi01.  Get;  and  the  head  and  frontal  appendages  leave  no  doubt  of  their
belonging  to  the  genus  Genus.  The  head  of  the  one  in  front  is  more  conical
than  that  of  the  Reindeer,  and  more  like  that  of  the  common  Stag  (Cervus
elaphus).  In  the  horns,  also,  the  brow-antlers  and  sur-antlers  are  near  together
as  in  the  adult  Stag ;  and  the  palmated  or  broad  brow-antler  of  the  Reindeer  is
wanting.  The  upper  part  of  the  stem  is,  it  is  true,  turned  too  much  horizon-
tally backwards ;  but  we  must  recollect  that  the  designer  could  not  do  other-
wise, having  to  avoid  carrying  the  uppermost  antlers  on  to  the  other  face  of  the
carved  stem,  already  occupied  by  two  figures  of  Horses ;  thus  the  horns  lie  too
close  on  the  shoulders  for  a  Stag.  "We  must  also  remark  that  the  figure  bears
no  trace  of  the  tuft  of  hairs  rarely  absent  under  the  neck  of  the  Reindeer.

The  second  animal,  or  that  behind  the  one  already  described,  also  has  the
physiognomy  of  the  Stag  rather  than  that  of  the  Reindeer.  Only  in  this  case
the  form  and  direction  of  the  horns  are  altogether  abnormal,  no  doubt  on
account  of  the  difficulty  the  carver  had  in  placing  them  in  the  space  at  his
command.

In  fig.  Qc,  are  the  two  Horses  which  are  carved  on  the  side  of  the  horn
opposite  to  that  shown  in  fig.  Qa.  The  front  figure,  to  the  right,  is  incorrect
in  several  points  of  drawing ;  the  head  is  badly  set  on,  the  eye  is  confused
with  the  mane,  and  the  legs  altogether  badly  drawn.

The  pose,  however,  of  the  second  Horse  is  much  better,  and  the  general  form
is  more  correctly  given ;  the  limbs  are  more  natural  and  better  proportioned.
Why,  however,  the  old  artist  roughened  the  hair  near"  the  root  of  the  tail  (an
unusual  feature  in  the  figures  of  Horses  drawn  by  the  Aborigines  of  Perigord),
it  is  difficult  to  say,  except  that  undressed  horses  and  wild  ponies  often  have
rough  tails,  in  consequence  of  rubbing  them  against  rocks  and  trees.

From  La  Madelaine.

Pig.  7.  A  fragment  of  Reindeer  Horn  on  which  is  carved  a  head,  with  a  large
and  outstanding  eye  and  a  face  apparently  ending  in  a  muzzle.  Possibly  some
Bovine  animal  was  intended  to  be  figured.  These  features  are  repeated  on  the
two  sides  of  the  specimen  symmetrically ;  or  rather  one  side  of  the  face  (with
one  nostril,  one  eye,  and  possibly  one  ear)  is  cut  on  one  side  of  the  stem,  and
the  corresponding  half  on  the  other, — the  two  halves  coming  closely  together


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.


along  the  upper  edge,  and  forming  something  like  a  full  face*.  Beyond  the
nose  three  pairs  of  oblique  symmetrical  notches  are  repeated  at  intervals  along
the  same  edge.  There  is  also  a  crenature  or  notching  on  the  other  edge ;  and
the  broken  end,  behind  the  head,  shows  p^  16  a.  Fig.  16  b.

(Fig.  16  V)  part  of  the  circumference  of  a
hole  with  which  the  hornt  was  pierced.

On  the  side  opposite  to  that  figured  in  the
Plate,  there  is  more  of  the  jowl,  and  what
seems  to  be  part  of  the  ear,  as  we  may  see
by  the  annexed  woodcut  (fig.  16  b).

From  La  Madelaine.


\


V


The  specimen  litho-
graphed in  B.  PI.
VII.  &  VIII.  fig.  7,
seen  from  above.


Fig.  8.  A  piece  of  Deer's  horn,  tapering  like
a  wedge  at  one  end,  perhaps  for  insertion
in  the  cleft  of  a  shaft.  The  other  end  is
broken,  but  seems  to  haye  been  pointed,
like  other  specimens.  It  may  have  been
either  a  weapon  or  an  implement.

On  each  side  is  the  same  kind  of  figure.
The  one  shown  in  fig.  8  leaves  much  to  be
desired  if  it  was  intended  to  represent  a
Horse,  of  which,  however,  there  is  little
doubt.  In  front  of  the  head  are  several
unequal  notches,  the  signification  of  which  it  is  difficult  to  suggest.

From  La  Madelaine.


The  same  specimen
showing  the  side
not  figured  in  B.  PI.
VII.  &  VIII.


Figs.  9  a,  9  b.  A  fragment  of  Reindeer  Horn,  broken  at  the  ends.  The  carving
on  it  is  too  indefinite  for  us  to  attempt  a  description.  Fig.  9  a  is  a  side  view,
showing  the  faint  outline  of  a  head  something  like  that  of  a  Boar,  but  for
which  we  offer  no  interpretation.  Fig.  9  b  is  an  edge  view,  in  which  some  have
thought  they  saw  the  figure  of  an  infant  in  swaddling  clothes  or  basket !

'  The  intention  of  the  old  carver  was  evidently  to  make  a  front  face  out  of  the  two  side  faces.  Such
attempts  at  making  perfect  figures,  by  the  completion  of  two  halves,  and  leaving  as  little  as  possible  to  the
imagination,  may  be  sometimes  seen  in  old  carvings  in  churches.

t  This  and  the  above-described  specimen  (fig.  3)  were  doubtless  of  the  same  character  and  use  as  those
shown  in  B.  PI.  III.  &  IV.  Owing  to  information  courteously  communicated  by  Mr.  A.  C.  Anderson,  of
Vancouver,  and  Mr.  R.  Brown,  of  Edinburgh,  and  of  which  we  shall  largely  avail  ourselves,  we  learn  that
antlers,  trimmed  and  fashioned  for  use,  are  common  enough  among  the  Indians  of  North-west  America  as
implements  of  various  kinds,  and  used  formerly  to  serve  as  a  kind  of  club.


68


KELIQITkE   AQTJITANICJE.


tc

c
o


B.  PLATES  IX.  &  X.

The  greater  number  of  the  Bone  Implements  illustrated  by  these
two  Plates  may  be  regarded  as  armatures,  or  pointed  heads,  of  im-
plements and  weapons  used  in  Fishing  and  Hunting,  or  even  in  War.
We  will  term  them  "Dart-heads,"  provisionally  and  for  want  of  more
certain  definition  of  their  character  and  use.  Most  of  them  have  lost
the  pointed  end,  by  accidental  fracture ;  and  in  this  state,  the  wedge-
like  or  bevelled  end  remaining  as  a  chief  feature,  they  have  some
resemblance  to  such  chisels  as  sculptors  and  stone-masons  use ;  hence
it  has  happened  that,  in  descriptive  works,  truncated  specimens  like
fig.  5,  PI.  IX.,  have  passed  under  the  name  of  "  chisels."  In  those  im-
plements, however,  which  have  been  preserved  entire,  as  fig.  2,  PI.  IX.,
and  fig.  4,  PI.  X.,  we  see  that  one  end  tapers  more  or  less  rapidly  to  a
sharp  point ;  whilst  the  other  extremity  is  cut  down  with  two  opposite
oblique  or  bevelled  faces,  equal  or  not,  but  meeting  at  the  end  in  a
wedge-like  shape.  Thus  fashioned,  this  extremity,  broad  and  thin,  is
adapted  for  insertion  in  the  cloven  end  of  a  handle  or  shaft  of  wood,  in
which  it  was  then  most  probably  securely  tied  by  an  outside  ligature.
To  ensure  the  fixing  of  the  armature  in  the  shaft,  and  to  prevent  its
slipping  from  the  cleft,  several  cross  cuts  or  grooves  were  made  on
both  the  sloping  faces  on  those  specimens  which  have  the  bevel
shown,  such  as  figs.  2  &  5,  PI.  IX.,  and  fig.  4,  PI.  X.

It  is  impossible  to  decide  that  the  larger  of  these  Darts  were  thrown
by  hand,  or  that  the  smaller  specimens  were  for  Arrows  to  be  shot
from  a  bow.  Neither  the  form  nor  size  of  any  of  the  supposed  shafts,
probably  of  wood,  are  at  all  known  to  us ;  for  no  wooden  implement,
weapon,  or  other  utensil  has  been  preserved  at  our  Stations  in  the
Dordogne.

We  here  figure  (Fig.  17)  a  modern  specimen  offering  a  very  close
analogy  to  our  ancient  Dart-heads  of  Perigord,  especially  in  the  mode
of  its  insertion  in  its  shaft.  In  this  cylindrical  armature,  which  is  of
very  solid  bone,  one  end  tapers  finely  to  a  point ;  and  the  other  or
thicker  end  is  bevelled  on  both  sides,  to  be  inserted  in  the  split  upper
end  of  the  shaft ;  and  in  this  it  was  tightly  tied  and  bound.  This


KJ


o

.3

1

1

•a
1


I


M


a


CO


3

a

.2

'  C

O


W


I


RELIQULE   AQUITANICLE

(  D  ORD  0  GNE  .  )


V>M


/>


i .


'•'I


B.


PL.  IX


'it  deL  etlith.


fmp.jiecyuei  i  Psns.


RELIQULE    AQUITANICLE

(  DORDOGNE  .  )


B


PL.X


i'l


;


loaveaa  del.  etlith.


Imp  .Be can et  &  PATJS.


DESCEIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  69

shaft  is  made  of  light  wood,  rather  slender,  18f  inches  long,  and  feathered  at  the
butt  like  an  ordinary  arrow.  This  specimen  was  given  to  us  as  having  been
brought  from  Oriental  Siberia.

o

These  Dart-heads,  perfect  in  some  instances,  but  mostly  broken,  and  nearly  all
made  of  Reindeer  Horn,  occur  in  considerable  quantities  in  some  of  our  Dordogne
Stations ;  and  similar  forms  have  been  met  with  in  like  quantities  in  other  caves
of  the  same  age,  in  other  parts  of  France,  as  well  as  in  deposits  referable  to  a
later  epoch.  In  the  caverns  and  rock-shelters  of  Perigord,  however,  it  is  not
unusual  to  meet  with  specimens  of  this  kind  bearing  outlines,  and  sometimes
raised  figures,  of  animals,  of  flowers,  of  arabesque  ornaments,  and  of  other  designs,
the  meaning  of  which  escapes  us,  or  which  were  merely  fanciful  and  aimless
carvings.  It  is  presumable  that  the  many  specimens  elaborately  and  sometimes
tastefully  carved  were  objects  of  show,  rather  than  implements  for  actual  and
daily  use.  The  figures  of  animals  and  other  ornaments  are  rarely  single,  but
are  ordinarily  repeated  on  both  sides  of  the  stem  and  in  series  of  the  same  kind.
The  Horse,  indeed,  is  so  frequently  thus  represented  at  our  Dordogne  Stations,  as
almost  to  lead  one  to  suppose  that  the  figure  of  this  animal  had  been  adopted
as  a  social  or  national  emblem  by  the  people  of  this  region !


B.  PLATE  IX.

Figs.  1  a  and  1  b.  A  fragment  of  a  Dart-head,  wanting,  the  pointed  extremity,
and  retaining  a  portion  only  of  one  of  the  sloping,  cross-grooved,  bevelled
faces  of  the  wedge-like  end.  On  each  of  its  two  opposite  sides  is  carved  what
appears  to  be  a  human  forearm  and  hand,  very  badly  executed,  and  presenting
only  four  fingers.  On  the  arm  are  cut  some  oblique  notches,  in  zigzag  or
chevron,  ill  defined,  and  repeated  not  quite  symmetrically,  even  in  their
number,  on  the  two  sides.  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  in  this  carving  there
were  meant  to  be  shown  any  marks  of  tattooing  or  of  dress,  or  merely  fanciful
lines  of  ornament.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  2.  A  perfect  head  or  armature  of  a  Dart,  without  ornament.  It  is  rounded
towards  the  point,  but  is  flattened  at  the  middle  of  the  stem  and  towards  the
wedge-like  end,  which  is  bevelled  and  cross-grooved  on  both  faces  for  insertion
in  the  cloven  top  of  the  shaft.  The  large  notch  just  below  the  point  is  the


result  of  an  old  accident ;  but  the  three  oblique  transverse  grooves  below,  one
after  the  other,  have  been  intentionally  made,  probably  for  ornament,  and
possibly  for  holding  a  poisonous  material.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  3.  A  Dart-head,  without  its  point.  It  bears  an  incised  ornamental  pattern,
repeated  on  the  two  sides,  consisting  of  a  waved  line,  the  alternate  concavities
of  which  are  occupied  by  an  elongate-ovate  (or  somewhat  fish-like)  outline,
traversed  by  from  four  to  seven  short  and  obliquely  transverse  lines.  Whether
this  figure  had  any  meaning  or  not  it  is  impossible  to  decide.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  Another  truncated  Dart-head,  the  point  having  been  broken  off.  Its
ornament  is  varied  and  carefully  executed.  On  the  side  shown  in  our  Plate,
we  see,  below  the  middle  of  the  specimen,  something  like  a  fully  opened  Flower
with  nine  petals.  At  the  lower  end,  between  the  converging  edges  of  the  bevelled
faces,  the  same  Flower  is  repeated,  but  with  fewer  petals,  and  its  margin  seems
to  have  been  encroached  on  by  the  cutting  away  of  these  two  terminal  slopes.
On  the  upper  part  of  the  stem,  above  the  first-mentioned  Flower,  there  is  an
animal  form,  resembling  an  outstretched  skin  of  a  Carnivore,  with  a  narrow
snout  and  a  thick  tail,  such  as  that  of  a  Fox,  or  some  allied  animal.

On  the  other  side  of  this  specimen  are  carved  two  Horse-heads  placed  back
to  back,  and  below  these  a  fantastical  figure,  indefinite  and  resembling
nothing  among  animals  or  plants.

From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  5.  Another  Dart-head  that  has  lost  its  point.  Its  bevelled  faces  are  scored  with
fine  transverse  lines,  of  which  nine  appear  in  the  figure.  On  the  figured  side,
and  continued  also  on  the  edges,  is  the  carved  outline  of  a  single  Horse,  without
any  accompaniment, — a  rare  circumstance  among  these  ornamented  implements.
[The  untinted  portions  of  fig.  5  represent  what  is  carved  on  the  edges  of  the
specimen.]  This  Horse's  head,  very  long  and  heavy,  is  badly  designed ;  the  ears
are  short  and  scarcely  distinguishable,  the  mane  is  more  vigorously  expressed,
and  the  tail  projects  horizontally.  The  outline,  though  far  from  being  correct,
is  boldly  drawn,  and,  it  would  seem,  by  a  firm  and  practised  hand.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  6.  Another  pointless  Dart-head.  This  is  carved  with  a  bar-like  ornament
in  relief,  which  at  its  upper  part  has  four  small  squarish  or  subcircular


DESCRIPTIONS  OP  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  71

hollows  in  successive  widened  portions  of  the  "bar,"  perhaps  representing
holes  in  it,  and  three   such  cavities  at  its  lower  part.     This  ornament  is
repeated  on  the  opposite  side,  with  a  difference  in  the  number  of  the  pits.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  7.  A   smooth,   tapering,   pointed   Dart-head,    of  Reindeer   Horn,   in    good
preservation,  but  probably  not  quite  finished.     The  point  has  been  perfectly
rounded ;  the  lower  half  is  flattened ;  but  the  thick  end  is  partly  cut,  without
having  been  completely  bevelled  on  its  two  sides.
From  La  Madelaine.


B.  PLATE  X.

Fig.  1.  A  broken  Dart-head,  the  point  wanting.  The  bevelled  slopes  are  not
transversely  scored,  but  have  some  longitudinal  stripes.  On  the  two  sides  are
repeated  figures  of  two-  Horses,  galloping.  The  head  is  too  stiff,  and  is  badly
proportioned;  but  the  eye,  the  ear,  and  the  mane  are  better  expressed,  and
the  general  attitude  has  reference  to  the  gallop  of  the  Horse.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  2.  Another  incomplete  Dart-head,  with  carving  on  one  side  only.     On  the
left  we  see  the  figure  of  a  Horse,  very  badly  designed,  and  damaged  by  decay
of  the  Reindeer  Horn.     Above  it,  or  to  the  right,  is  another  figure,  damaged
also  by  decay,  indistinct,  but  presenting  a  forked  tail.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  3.  Another  truncated  carved  Dart-head.     Its  incised  ornamental  figures,  of
an  oblong  form,  traversed  by  six  short  transverse  grooves,  are  too  indefinite
for  characterization.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  A  small,  rounded,  tapering  Dart-head,  simple  and  without  ornament.     It
is  rather  compressed ;  and  its  point  is  nearly  triangular.     Its  bevelled  end  is
marked  on  each  face  with  several  transverse  grooved  lines.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  5.  A  broken  Dart-head,  carved  with  a  series  of  at  least  three  Horses,  possibly
on  the  gallop,  on  each  of  its  two  sides.     The  figures  are  very  badly  expressed.
From  La  Madelaine.


-2  KELIQITLE

-.  6.  A  broken  Dart-head,  the  point  wanting,  and  the  bevelled  faces  of  the
other  end  smooth  and  without  the  usual  scoring.  Its  stem  is  nearly  triangular,
and  bears  on  each  of  its  three  faces  signs  formed  of  lines  crossed  like  a  long  X,
or  a  Saint  Andrew's  Cross,  surmounted  by  a  bar  or  transverse  line.  This  sign
occurs  twice  on  each  of  these  imperfect  faces.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  7.  A  fragment  of  a  Dart-head,  broken  at  the  ends.     On  the  two  opposite
sides  is  repeated,  symmetrically,  an  ornamental  pattern  consisting  of  what
appear  to  be  pairs  of  heads  of  animals  placed  snout  to  snout.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  8.  A  large  subcylindrical  implement,  broken  at  one  end,  but  narrowed  off  by
bevelling  at  the  other,  like  the  "  Dart-heads."  It,  however,  is  much  thicker  than
the  ordinary  specimens,  and  is  slightly  curved.  On  it  is  a  series  of  oval  figures,
placed  end  to  end,  with  the  alternate  opposed  ends  longitudinally  marked  by
two  or  three  grooves.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  9.  Another  piece  of  a  Dart-head — the  lower  part  only.  It  exhibits  an
elongated  carved  outline  with  an  eye  (?)  near  the  broader  end.  If  it  be  an
animal  form,  represented  without  legs,  feet,  or  fins,  it  can  be  compared  only
with  a  young  Batrachian  or  Tadpole.  Behind  this  figure,  and  on  the  other
side  also,  there  are  angular  and  crossing  lines,  making  different  patterns,
without  any  intelligible  characters.
From  La  Madelaine.


RELIQULE  AQUITANIOE

(  DORDOGNE .)


A


PI,.  X\


10


-


del.etlith.


Hnp.Bec cruet  d  -  .


DESCKIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE   IMPLEMENTS.  73


A.  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.

A.  PLATE  XV.

The  specimens  here  figured  are  flakes  of  Flint,  bearing  more  or  less  of  the
usual  "  glaze  "  of  age,  which  have  mostly  been  dressed  to  a  taper  point  at  one
end;  and  two  have  had  the  broad  end  carefully  rounded  (figs.  3  and  8).  Figs.  2
and  4  appear  to  be  old  fragments  of  flake  tools.  All  these  specimens  bear  marks
of  having  been  used  in  scraping  or  cutting  or  both.

Fig.  1.  An  elongate-oval  flake  of  mottled,  grey,  dull  flint.     Tapered  by  chipping
at  one  end  (the  lowest  in  the  figure).    The  edges  show  the  marks  of  use
throughout.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  2.  Part  of  a  narrow  arched  flake  of  grey,  dull  flint,  the  end  having  been
removed  by  an  old  fracture.     Edges  roughened  by  use.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  3.  A  small  pointed  flake  of  grey-brown,  subtranslucent  flint,  chipped  towards
the  point  on  one  side,  and  towards  the   but-end  on  the  other,  to  produce
symmetry  of  outline.      The  convex   edge  towards  the   point   slightly  worn,
perhaps  by  use.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  4.  Portion  of  a  long  narrow  flake  of  particoloured  flint  (yellowish-brown
and  greenish-grey),  somewhat  jasper-like,  but  subtranslucent.     Edges  worn.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  5.  A  simple,  knife-like,  curved  flake  of  light-brown  translucent  flint.     The
thick  end  has  been  narrowed  by  chipping.     Edges  roughened  by  use.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  6.  A  simple,  knife-shaped  flake  of  brown-grey,  subtranslucent  flint,  slightly
whitened  on  the  edge  by  weathering.     Edges  chipped  and  jagged  by  rough
use  in  scraping  and  cutting.
Le  Moustier.


74


KELIQULE  AQUITANKLE.


Fig.  7.  A  thick  straight  flake  of  granular  flint,  drab  and  mottled  outside  by
weathering,  but  subtranslucent  and  brownish  within.     Edges  roughened  but
slightly,  except  at  the  tapering  end,  where  they  are  more  markedly  chipped,
probably  in  producing  the  original  point  which  is  now  broken.
Les  Byzies.

Fig.  8.  A  simple  blade-like  flake,  slightly  curved,  of  yellowish-brown  or  snuff-
coloured  flint,  with  one  end  chipped  round,  and  the  other  once  dressed  pro-
bably to  a  taper  point,  but  now  broken.     Edges  somewhat  worn  throughout.
La  Madelaine.

•l

Fig.  9.  A  simple,  narrow,  strongly  arched  flake  of  brownish-grey  translucent
flint.     Edges  worn  by  use  nearly  throughout,  but  chiefly  towards  the  narrow
and  flat  end,  which  is  artificially  tapered.
La  Madelaine.

Fig.  10.  A  simple  flake,  narrow  and  somewhat  curved,  of  coarse  dark-grey  flint,
roughly  chipped  to  a  tapering  point  at  one  end.     Edges  roughened  by  use.
Les  Eyzies.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

I.

96

3-780

19

0-748

6

0-236

2.

82

3-228

16

0-630

5

0-197

3.

60

2-362

11

0-433

4

0-157

4.

63

2-480

18

0-709

4

0-157

5.

94

3-701

17

0-669

6

0-236

6.

98

3-858

24

0-945

6

0-236

7.

106

4-173

20

0-787

8

0-315

8.

145

5-709

23

0-905

7

0-276

9.

122

4-803

18

0-709

6

0-236

10.

113

4-449

18

0-709

6

0-236

)l  I  K  AQUITANIC-E

(  DOHDOGNE  .  )

2  3


A


PL.  XVI


12


Au  del.etlith.


Imp  .Hecjuet  a.  ftcia .


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  75


A.  PLATE  XVI.

Of  these  Implements  of  Flint,  weathered  and  glazed,  some  (figs.  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,
7,  10)  are  of  the  same  type  as  the  majority  of  those  in  the  preceding  Plate, —
that  is,  flakes  dressed  to  symmetry  at  one  or  both  ends.  Figs.  1,  9,  11,  and  12
resemble  some  drawn  in  A.  Plate  VIII.  (see  p.  27),  which  have  one  end  pointed
as  a  "tang,"  for  fixing  in  a  handle,  and  the  other  end  somewhat  shaped  by
chipping.  All,  except  figs.  8  and  13,  which  appear  to  be  rough  unused  flakes,
bear  marks  of  use.

Fig.  1.  A  neat,  narrow,  stout,  "  tanged  "  flake  of  brownish-grey  translucent  flint ;
pointed  at  one  end  by  lateral  fractures  perpendicular  to  the  flake's  face,  and
chipped  round  at  the  other.  The  edges  are  worn, — the  straighter  edge
throughout  and  the  other  partially ;  and  the  rounded  end  has  its  edge
somewhat  smoothed.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  2.  A  simple  thin  flake,  slightly  curved,  of  yellowish-grey  translucent  flint.
Both  edges  partly  worn.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  3.  A  simple  knife-like  flake  of  dark  olive-brown  subtranslucent  flint ;  showing
bulb  of  percussion  and  concentric  undulations  on  the  flat  side.     Edges  chipped
and  jagged  by  wear.     The  triangular  notch  is  an  accidental  fracture.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  4.  A  simple,  narrow,  tapering,  and  slightly  arched  flake  of  mottled  light-
brown  flint.     Edges  very  little  roughened.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  5.  A  neat,  arched,  narrow  flake  of  dark-brown  subtranslucent  flint ;   the
bulb-end  trimmed  to  symmetry.     Edges  worn,  especially  towards  the  sharp
oblique  end  (upwards  in  the  figure).
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  6.  A  thick  irregular-shaped  flake  of  dark  honey-coloured  translucent  flint.
The  bulb-end  is  thinnest  and  broadest,  and  has  been  rounded,  having  been


-6  KELIQTJI.E

dressed,  like  the  neighbouring  part  of  the  straight  side,  by  chipping.     One
edge  also  of  the  triangular  point  has  been  reduced  by  minute  chipping.    The
edges  show  no  sign  of  wear.
Laugerie  Basse.

Pig.  7.  A  long,  arched  flake  of  grey  and  slightly  mottled  flint,  opake,  either  from
weathering  or  from  fire.  Half  of  one  edge  (upper  left-hand  side  of  the  figure)
has  been  removed  by  lateral  fractures  perpendicular  to  the  faces  of  the  flake.
The  remainder  of  this  edge  and  the  whole  of  the  other  are  somewhat  worn
by  use.  One  end  has  been  lost  by  an  old  fracture.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  8.  A  narrow,  simple,  arched  flake  of  dark-grey  subtranslucent  flint,  rough
and  triangular  in  section.     Edges  not  distinctly  worn.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  9.  A  "tanged"  flake  of  dark-coloured  dull  flint,  with  bulb  of  percussion
and  concentric  undulations  on  the  flatter  side.  The  pointed  end  thick,  and
shaped  as  a  "  tang  "  by  sharp  lateral  fractures.  One  of  the  remaining  flake-
edges  (on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  figure)  distinctly  worn  by  use ;  the  other
less  so.

La  Madelaine.

Fig.  10.  A  simple,  narrow,  arched  flake  of  yellow-brown  flint,  somewhat  mottled
with  dark  grey  towards  one  end  (lowest  in  the  figure),  which  has  been  broken
by  an  old  fracture.     The  other  end  has  been  tapered  by  chipping.     The  edges
somewhat  used.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  11.  A  thick  "  tanged "  flake  of  opake,  grey  flint,  pointed  at  one  end  by
sharp  lateral  converging  fractures, — and  possibly  once  pointed  by  chipping
at  the  other,  which  is  broken.     Side  edges  chipped  and  worn.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  12.  An  arched,  narrow,  "tanged"  flake  of  brownish-grey,  subtranslucent,
spiculiferous  flint;  pointed  at  one  end  by  converging  lateral  fractures,  and
somewhat  reduced  by  chipping  at  the  other,  which  has  lost  its  point  by  an


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.


77


old  fracture.     One  edge  (left-hand  side  of  the  figure)  more  especially  roughened
by  use.

La  Madelaine.

Fig.  13.  A  rough  narrow  flake  of  dull  grey  flint,  triangular  in  section  and
retaining  a  piece  of  the  original  crust  of  the  flint-nodule.     Edges  not  worn.
Laugerie  Basse.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

79

3-110

13

0-512

5

0-197

2.

82

3-228

16

0-630

5

0-197

3.

86

3-386

20

0-787

5

0-197

4.

89

3-504

13

0-512

6

0-236

5.

80

3-150

13

0-512

4

0-157

6.

82

3-228

10

0-393

6

0-236

7.

150

5-906

22

0-866

8

0-315

8.

82

3-228

10

0-393

6

0-236

9.

98

3-858

22

0-866

9

0-354

10.

106

4-173

15

0-591

5

0-197

11.

104

4-095

25

0-984

9

0-354

12.

105

4-134

18

0-709

6

0-236

13.

88

3-465

10

0-393

5

0-197

KELIQTJI^E   AQTIITANIC^E.


A.  PLATE  XVII.

Four  cutting  or  chopping,  hatchet-like  Implements  of  Flint  (with  the  usual
"glaze")  from  the  Cave  of  Le  Moustier.  Two  are  remarkable  as  being  of  the
same  type  as  many  found  in  the  old  gravel  of  the  Somme,  also  in  England  and
elsewhere.  A  more  ovate  instrument  of  this  kind  has  been  already  figured  from
Le  Moustier  in  A.  PL  III.  fig.  2.  The  other  two  somewhat  approach  in  shape
those  from  Le  Moustier  already  figured  in  A.  Plate  V.  (see  p.  17),  and,  like
them,  could  have  been  conveniently  used  when  held  in  the  hand.  These  and
similar  implements,  common  at  Le  Moustier,  and  very  rare  elsewhere  in  the
Caves  of  Dordogne,  are  referred  to  in  the  memoir  entitled  "  Cavernes  du
Perigord,"  by  MM.  E.  Lartet  and  H.  Christy,  in  the  'Revue  Archeologique,'
1864,  pp.  238  &c.

Fig.  1.  An  ovately  triangular,  sharp-pointed  implement,  of  a  compressed  pear-
shape,  boldly  chipped  out  of  coarse,  mottled,  greyish-drab,  granular,  opake
flint,  with  an  undulated  cutting  edge  all  round.  This  closely  resembles  some
of  the  so-called  "  hatchets  "  from  Amiens  and  Abbeville.

Figs  2  a,  26.  A  subtriangular,  sharp-pointed  implement,  chipped  out  of  dark-
grey  flint,  that  retains  some  of  the  outer  crust  on  one  face.  The  but-end  is
blunt,  so  that  the  "  hatchet "  can  stand  on  end,  as  is  the  case  with  many  from
St.  Acheul.  Fig.  2  a  shows  one  of  the  faces ;  fig.  2  b  is  an  edge-view.

Fig.  3.  A  broken  flake  of  water-worn  dark  brown-grey  flint,  retaining  some  of  its
brown  crust,  neatly  chipped  on  one  margin  into  a  sharp  semicircular  edge  like
that  of  an  axe,  and  well  adapted  for  splitting  and  cutting.

Fig.  4.  A  smaller  axe-edged  piece  of  a  dark-coloured  flint-flake,  with  a  portion
of  its  original  crust.  The  cutting  edge  is  not  so  semicircular  as  that  of  the
preceding  specimen,  nor  so  neatly  chipped.


Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

92

3-661

61

2-402

28

1-102

2.

92

3-661

75

2-953

31

1-220

3.

95

3-740

75

2-953

27

1-063

4.

75

2-953

72

2-835

25

0-984

RELIQULE    AQUITANICLE

(  D  ORD  O  ONE  .  )

1


A


PL  .XVII


"     j  S


•  iu  del  etk'th


ImpJIecjuet  a


RELIQULE   AQUITANIC^

(  DORDOGNE  .)


A


PL.xvm.


Louveau  del.  etZi'


DESCRIPTIONS  Of  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  79


A.  PLATE  XVIII.

The  Implements  here  figured  have  been  worked  out  of  Flint-flakes,  and  are
more  or  less  glazed  and  weathered.  Pigs.  2,  8,  10,  and  11  are  such  Scrapers  as
we  have  already  seen  in  A.  Plate  VI.  &c.  (pp.  18  and  21).  Pigs.  4,  7,  and  9
appear  to  have  been  Scrapers  fitted  for  shaping  small  cylindrical  implements
of  bone  or  wood.  Pig.  1  may  also  have  been  a  two-edged  Scraper;  fig.  6  an
Awl;  and  fig.  5,  possibly  unfinished,  may  have  been  intended  to  be  either  one
or  the  other  as  circumstances  required.

Pig.  1.  A  somewhat  hook-like,  flat  implement  of  mottled,  grey,  granular  flint,
discoloured  by  weathering.  The  curved  part  has  the  shape  of  the  share-bone
or  coccyx  of  a  Powl.  The  flake  has  been  carefully  reduced  by  chipping
to  a  solid  edge  all  round;  and  this  is  throughout  splintered  by  crush,  ex-
cepting on  the  outside  of  the  curved  point.  What  appears  at  first  sight  as
a  but-end  may  possibly  have  been  a  broad  rough  drill  or  a  two-edged  scraper.
Les  Eyzies.

Pig.  2.  A  tanged  implement  of  dark-coloured  flint,  having  one  shoulder  formed
by  the  wear  and  tear  of  rough  scraping;  and   the   opposite  edge  is  partly
splintered  and  partly  worn.
Laugerie  Basse.

Pig.  3.  A  tanged,  broad,  blade-like  implement  of  honey-coloured  translucent  flint.
One  edge  has  been  dressed  straight,  and  the  end  oblique  by  chipping;   and
these,  as  well  as  the  other  edge,  appear  to  have  been  used.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  4.  A  dressed  piece  of  dark-grey  flint,  somewhat  like  an  arrow-head  with
an  oblique  but-end  set  on  to  it,  a  notch  on  either  side  defining  the  sagittate
portion.  This  latter  has  been  trimmed  to  a  solid  edge  on  one  side  and  a  thin
edge  on  the  other,  according  to  the  relative  thickness  of  the  flake ;  its  point  is
perfect  and  bears  no  sign  of  wear.  Minute  chippings,  like  those  produced  by
scraping,  mark  the  edges  of  the  oblong  part  of  the  implement,  and  the  blunt
end  is  splintered.  The  notches  are  rounded,  and  have  probably  been  used  in
scraping  cylindrical  rods,  arrow-stems,  skewers,  pins,  &c.;  or  possibly  they


g0  KELIQUI^:  AQCTTANIOE.

were  made  for  ornament,  or  to  help  in  tying  the  tool  to  the  handle  in  which
the  sharp  unworn  end  may  have  been  fixed.
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  5.  A  dressed  piece  of  a  flat  flake  of  yellowish-grey  opake  flint,  straight
on  one  margin  and  elliptically  curved  on  the  other ;  it  has  a  sharp  beak-like
point  at  one  end,  whilst  the  other  is  thick  and  blunt,  retaining  the  natural
crust  of  the  flint.  There  is  no  distinct  evidence  of  wear  on  the  point  or
edges ;  and  possibly  it  was  intended  to  have  the  point  worked  out  as  in  fig.  6,
or  the  thick  end  reduced  as  in  fig.  1.
Les  Eyzies.

Tig.  6.  A  dressed  piece  of  a  flake  of  yellowish,  opake,  granular  flint,  retaining
some  of  the  original  crust*.  The  margin  has  been  chipped  into  shape,  and
one  end  of  the  implement  has  been  worked  into  an  oblique  point,  about
one-fifth  the  length  of  the  specimen,  which  would  serve  as  a  rough  awl
or  drill.
Les  Eyzies.

Eig.  7.  A  dressed  piece  of  a  flat  flake  of  mottled,  grey,  granular  flint  (with
Polyzoa,  &c.).  Straight  on  one  edge,  curved  on  the  other,  and  terminating
at  one  end  in  a  sharp  point,  this  piece  is  somewhat  knife-like,  and  has  been
trimmed  to  a  solid  edge  all  round,  except  that  two  opposite  rounded  notches
break  the  outline  at  what  may  seem  at  first  sight  to  be  the  but.  These
notches  appear  to  have  been  used  in  scraping  cylindrical  sticks  and  rods,
and  are  probably  the  most  important  feature  in  the  implement,  the  rest  of
it  being  merely  the  handle.
Les  Eyzies.

Eig.  8.  A  mottled  dark-grey  flint-flake,  "  tanged  "  at  one  end,  and  worked  quite
narrow  at  the  other,  as  a  two-edged  scraper,  the  mid-ridge  only  of  the  flake
remaining.     The  side  edges  are  somewhat  roughened,  perhaps  by  use  also.
Les  Eyzies.

*  In  this  very  interesting  specimen  of  Cretaceous  Flint  the  crust  of  the  original  flint-nodule  is  siliceous  and
oolitic,  the  granules  merely  touching  each  other  at  their  peripheries.  This  crust  passes  into  the  flint  proper
by  the  presence  of  a  larger  proportion  of  infiltrated  siliceous  matter  (probably  chalcedony);  and  the  flint  itself
is  oolitic,  like  some  of  that  of  the  Portland  Oolite,  and  like  the  siliceous  Silurian  Limestone  of  Durness  in
North-west  Scotland.  All  of  these  are  good  instances  of  silex  being  a  pseudomorph  after  limestone.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.


8l


Fig.  9.  A  piece  of  a  narrow  flake  of  light-grey  opake  flint ;  one  end  has  been
broken  away,  and  the  other  has  been  worked  into  two  irregularly  rounded
opposite  notches,  as  in  fig.  7.  The  edges  also  of  the  flake  arc  roughened  by
wear  and  tear.

Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  10.  A  dressed  piece  of  narrow  flint-flake,  mottled  dark-grey.  One  end  has
been  sharpened  by  chipping  for  insertion  into  a  handle,  and  the  other  has  one
edge  worn  away  deeply  by  scraping,  whilst  distinct  indications  of  use  are
visible  on  the  other  edge  also.  This  is  a  perfect  specimen  (see  also  page  21,
fig.  2) ;  very  many  have  been  broken  at  or  below  the  shoulder  (see  A.  Plate  VI.,
and  page  18).
Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  11.  Like  fig.  10,  but  more  clumsy,  broken  at  the  lower  point,  and  worn
somewhat  by  hard  scraping  on  the  left  as  well  as  on  the  right  side  (of  the
figure).      In   the   crushed   splintery   edge   of  the   hollow   on  the  right   side
some  red  material,  possibly  hsematite,  still  remains.
Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  12.  A  broken  flake  of  yellowish-grey  opake  flint.     Most  of  the  margin
has  been  broken  off  by  lateral  fracture ;   and  none  of  the  edges  have  been
worn  by  use.
Les  Eyzies.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

raillim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

67

2-638

24

0-945

8

0-315

2.

68

2-677

30

1-181

7

0-276

3.

135

5-315

32

1-260

7

0-276

4.

70

2-756

27

1-063

6   i

0-236

5.

85

3-346

32

1-260

5

0-197

6.

79

3-110

25

0-984

10

0-393

7.

81

3-189

26

1-024

6

0-236

8.

100

3-937

22

0-866

10

0-393

9.

70

2-756

17

0-669

5

0-197

10.

67

2-638

12

0-472

4

0-157

11.

66

2-598

19

0-748

8

0-315

12.

105

4-134

24

0-945

8

0-315

g2  EELIQUI^:   AQTJITANIC./E.


A.  PLATES  XIX.  &  XX.

The  Flint  Implements  figured  in  these  two  Plates  came  from  the  different
beds  of  hearth-stuff,  and  the  uppermost  calcareous  debris,  in  the  Cro-Magnon
Cave,  described  at  pages  66-68,  the  same  forms  being  repeated  in  the  successive
layers,  and  occurring  also  in  company  with  the  Human  Skeletons  in  the  upper-
most deposit  of  that  Cave.  They  are  all  more  or  less  glazed,  and  some  are
whitened,  by  weathering.  The  longest  specimen  (A.  Plate  XX.  fig.  3)  was  the  only
one  of  the  kind  found  here ;  but  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  distinctively  peculiar,
being  merely  a  straight,  simple  flake,  triangular  in  section.  This  specimen,
according  to  the  statement  of  the  workmen  who  began  the  excavation  of  the
Cave  (p.  65),  was  picked  up  beside  the  Old  Man's  Skull ;  see  fig.  41,  p.  67.

The  principal  character  of  very  many  of  these  Flint  Implements  from  Cro-
Magnon  is  their  having  been  fashioned  by  much  chipping  on  the  edges  and
ends.  Their  shapes  are  not  very  much  diversified ;  and  the  predominating  form
is  either  that  of  the  so  called  "  Scraper,"  or  it  approaches  that  type.  Simple
flakes  more  or  less  dressed,  including  many  like  those  shown  in  A.  Plate  VIII.,
are  also  very  common.

The  nature  of  the  Flint  itself  is  not  different  from  that  found  in  the  other
Stations,  except  that  pieces  with  yellowish  tints  have  been  more  frequently
employed.

In  the  prevalence  of  Yellow  Flint  and  of  much  chipped  Scraper-like  Imple-
ments the  specimens  from  Cro-Magnon  resemble  those  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer
(p.  4,  and  '  Revue  Arche"ologique,'  1864,  p.  240),  collections  from  the  two  places
showing  also  a  characteristic  breadth,  massiveness,  and  finish.  Two  of  the  larger,
and  four  smaller  Grattoirs  or  Scrapers,  stout  and  mostly  yellow  in  colour,  from
the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  are  figured  in  A.  Plate  X.,  and  described  at  page  35.

Thick  flint-flakes  (both  flat  and  ridged)  trimmed  all  along  the  edges  and  at  the
ends  are  not  rare  at  Laugerie  Haute  (p.  5,  and  '  Revue  Archeologique,'  1864,
pp.  254  &c.) ;  but  there  they  are  not  equal  in  size  to  the  large  Scrapers  from  the
Gorge  d'Enfer,  and  they  are  associated  with  numerous  highly  worked  leaf-shaped
Implements,  mostly  lance-heads,  such  as  are  figured  in  A.  Plate  IV.,  and  none
of  which  have  been  found  at  the  Gorge  d'Enfer  or  Cro-Magnon.  At  Laugerie,
also,  there  are  numerous  yellow  specimens,  but  they  do  not  predominate.

At  Laugerie  Basse  simple  flakes,  sometimes  dressed  at  the  ends,  and  usually  of
dark  tints,  appear  to  be  the  most  common  Implements.


A.


PL .  XIX


RELIQULE   AOUITANICLE


Imp  .Becmi  a  t  a  J'arjs .


RELIQUIAE  AQUITANKLE

(  J)  ORDO  GNE  .)


IB  del  etliili


Jmp  Jeccruet


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  83

At  Les  Eyzies  (p.  20,  and  '  Revue  Arche'ologique,'  1864,  pp.  241  &c.),  where
there  are  many  yellow  specimens,  but  where  the  dark-coloured  and  grey  pre-
dominate, we  find  many  thick  and  broad  flakes,  but  none  of  those  with  worked
edges  are  so  broad  as  some  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.  There  is  from  Les  Eyzies  at
least  one  broad  flat  yellow  flake,  but  its  worked  end  is  chisel-shaped  and  not  Scraper-
edged.  The  associated  implements,  both  large  and  small,  from  this  Cave  are  charac-
teristically different  from  those  of  the  Gorge  d'Enfer  and  of  Cro-Magnon.

Simple  long  flakes,  more  or  less  trimmed,  as  well  as  common  Scrapers,  abound
at  La  Madelaine  (p.  5),  where  dark-coloured  specimens  prevail,  together  with
small  flakes  and  special  shapes  not  found  at  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

The  Implements  from  Le  Moustier  (pp.  3  and  20,  and  '  Revue  Archeologique,'
186i,  p.  238),  although  comprising  common  Scrapers  and  chipped  flakes,  differ
very  markedly  from  those  now  under  consideration.

Lastly,  we  recognize  a  kind  of  artistic  taste  in  these  neatly  shaped  Implements
from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer  and  Cro-Magnon ;  and  we  may  remark  that  this  is  for
the  most  part  wanting  in'  the  Flint  Tools  and  "Weapons  of  other  Stations,  such  as
Les  Eyzies  and  La  Madelaine,  where  Art  shows  itself  more  advanced  in  another
point  of  view,  namely  in  carvings  and  in  outlined  figures.


A.  PLATE  XIX.

Eight  neatly  trimmed  Flint  Instruments  and  a  fragment  of  another  are  here
shown.  Their  uses  are  undetermined.  Two  at  least  are  broad  enough  to  have
served  as  Spoon-like  Implements,  besides  being  Scrapers  probably  for  dressing
skins ;  perhaps  they  were  useful  both  in  scraping  meat  off  bones  and  in  ladling
it  up.  Specimens  like  these  have  been  found  also  at  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.  Eig.  1
may  have  been  a  lance-head — and  is  a  rare  type,  both  at  Cro-Magnon  and  all  the
other  Stations.

Fig.  1.  A  lanceolate,  thick,  sharp-pointed,  slightly  arched,  and  nearly  symmetrical
Implement,  triangular  in  section.  It  has  been  formed,  by  rough  chipping,  out
of  a  narrow,  high-ridged,  curved,  cream-coloured  flake,  opake  and  flecked  with
grey,  yellow,  and  red  (possibly  by  having  been  partially  burnt).

Fig.  2.  A  long,  subovate  Double  Scraper,  with  trimmed  sides  (one  of  them  rather
less  convex  than  the  other),  elliptical  at  the  large  end,  nearly  semicircular  at
the  other.  This  has  been  chipped  out  of  a  large  simple  flake  of  subtranslucent

m  2


84  BELIQUI^E  AQUITANIOE.

grey  flint.     In  general  make  this  may  be  compared  with  fig.  4  of  A.  Plate  VIII.
(p.  28),  but  its  larger  size,  more  oblong  shape,  and  flat  flake-face  distinguish  it.

Fig.  3.  A  long  Scraper,  made  from  a  slightly  arched,  opake,  cream-coloured  flake.
The  broad  end  has  been  trimmed  [it  is  much  rounder  than  shown  in  the  figure],
and  some  portions  of  the  adjoining  edges,  also  the  but  (round  the  bulb  of
percussion).  The  sides  have  lost  their  original  sharp  edges,  beyond  the  dressed
portions,  probably  by  use.

Fig.  4.  The  narrow  portion  of  an  Implement  probably  like  that  shown  by  fig.  5.
It  consists  of  yellowish  opake  granular  flint.  Part  of  the  broad  end  of  the
specimen  appears  to  have  been  used  for  scraping  since  it  was  fractured.

Fig.  5.  A  long,  spatulate,  nearly  symmetrical,  and  slightly  arched  Scraper,
tapering  from  its  broad  and  obliquely  rounded  end  to  a  narrow  blunt  but.
This  neat  and  spoon-like  Implement  has  been  carefully  chipped  out  of  a  broad
thin  flake,  dark-grey  and  somewhat  mottled ;  and  its  sharp  chipped  edges  bear
the  still  finer  crenulations  and  minute  flakings  caused  by  scraping.

Eig.  6.  A  small  Scraper,  made  from  a  dark-coloured  flake,  and  presenting  signs  of
having  been  used.

Fig.  7.  A  large  subspatulate  Implement,  somewhat  triangular  or  harp-shaped.
This  has  been  chipped  out  of  a  broad,  flat,  and  thin  flake  of  opake,  cream-
coloured  flint,  mottled  with  purplish  and  reddish  grey,  and  dotted  in  lines  with
obscure  sections  of  small  fossils.  The  long  edges  especially  appear  to  have
been  used.

Fig.  8.  A  large  Double  Scraper,  nearly  oblong,  made  of  a  thick,  high-ridged  flake
by  bold  chipping.  It  is  yellowish  white  and  opake  externally ;  light-grey  and
subtranslucent  in  the  interior,  as  shown  by  a  recent  fracture.  The  edges  appear
to  have  been  used.

Fig.  9.  A  short,  stout,  slightly  arched  Scraper,  chipped  out  of  a  flat  flake,  yellowish,
but  mottled  with  concentric  chevrons  of  yellow  and  whitish  bands.  The  ellip-
tical outline  of  the  underside  of  this  Scraper  is  very  neat  in  one  part,  but
rugged  elsewhere,  and  bears  marks  of  wear.  This  may  be  compared  with
fig.  6  of  A.  Plate  X.,  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer;  and  indeed  it  presents  the
commencement  of  the  rough  wear  that  appears  to  have  produced  the  shape  of
fig.  5  in  A.  Plate  IV.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

80

3-150

22

0-866

11

0-433

2.

87

3-425

32

1-260

12

0-472

3.

100

3-937

22

0-866

8

0-315

4.

60

2-362

21

0-827

6

0-236

5.

117

4-606

36

1-417

9

0-354

6.

60

2-362

20

0-787

7

0-276

7.

110

4-331

52

2-074

7

0-276

8.

100

3-937

41

1-614

15               0-591

9.

58

2-284

35

1-378

10

0-394

A.  PLATE  XX.

The  Instruments  figured  in  this  Plate  are  of  considerable  interest.  Fig.  3  may
(from  the  conditions  of  its  finding  and  its  nature)  have  been  the  poignard,  or
personal  weapon,  of  one  of  the  Aborigines  buried  in  the  Cro-Magnon  Cave.


Figs.  18  a-c.


.  19  a-c.


N — >x-3psg

'Fig.  5  is  a  rare  chisel-pointed  Implement.     Pigs.  2,  4,  6,  and  7  have  each  had
one  end  truncated,  more  or  less  obliquely,  by  use;   in  what  operation,  except


S6  EELIQUI^E  AQUITANICLE.

hard  scraping,  it  is  difficult  to  say;  but  there  is  also  a  similar  but  larger  spe-
cimen from  Cro-Magnon  which  is  very  much  crushed,  as  if  by  hard  blows,  on  the
obliquely  truncated  end,  and  somewhat  bruised  on  the  round  end.  At  first  sight
these  implements  seem  adapted  for  striking  fire  with  pyrites,  or  with  such  a
stone  as  that  represented  by  fig.  10  and  the  woodcuts,  figs.  18  a,  b,  c;  but,
though  scintillations  of  light  are  readily  produced  in  striking  one  piece  of  flint
against  another,  it  is  not  easy  to  strike  off  sparks  or  incandescent  particles  fit
to  ignite  any  combustible  material,  except  from  some  fresh,  sharp-edged  flints.

Whether  or  not  these  round-ended  implements  were  used  for  any  other  purpose
than  scraping,  the  evident  rough  usage  of  one  end  in  the  specimens  above
mentioned  strengthens  the  supposition,  already  offered  at  page  35,  that  the  finish
given  to  the  ends,  and  to  the  sides  also,  had  reference  frequently  to  convenience
of  holding,  and  not  necessarily  to  the  formation  of  edges  fit  for  handiwork,
although  in  many  cases  the  part  that  at  one  time  was  used  as  a  handle  may  have
been  at  other  times  used  for  scraping  and  cutting,  and  vice  versa,  as  convenience
or  necessity  or  whim  may  have  prompted.

Fig.  1.  A  somewhat  spatulate,  or  feather-shaped,  and  slightly  arched  Implement,
made  from  a  thin  flake  of  cream-coloured  granular  flint,  the  tapering  end
having  been  chipped  still  narrower.  We  have  one  like  this,  but  rather  larger
and  dark-coloured,  from  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  2.  A  Scraper  of  brownish-grey  subtranslucent  flint,  with  one  end  neatly
rounded,  the  other  angular  [more  neatly  so  than  shown  in  the  figure]  by  wear.
One  side  has  been  chipped  nearly  parallel  with  the  opposite  natural  edge  of  the
flake,  which  has  been  somewhat  used.

Fig.  3.  A  long,  simple,  high-ridged  flake  of  chestnut-brown  flint,  variegated  at
the  but-end  with  concentric  elliptical  bands  of  grey,  enclosing  a  dark-grey
portion  and  a  nuclear  spot  of  brown.  It  is  also  longitudinally  marked  with
two  or  three  faint,  parallel,  light-coloured  lines.  One  end  is  narrowed  by
lateral  fractures  made  on  the  block  (core) 'before  the  flake  was  struck  off.
The  extreme  point  of  this  Implement  has  been  broken  off;  its  edges  are  fresh
and  unused ;  it  may  have  been  mounted  in  a  handle  and  used  as  a  poignard.
This  interesting  specimen  was  found  at  the  same  time  with  the  Old  Man's
Skull;  see  page  70.  Somewhat  similar  flakes,  but  arched,  have  occurred  at
Les  Eyzies  and  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  A  roughish  Scraper  of  dark-grey  mottled  flint ;  nearly  straight  across  the


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  87

broad  end  (probably  from  use),  and  tapering  obliquely  to  a  blunt  point  at  the
other,  one  side  being  elliptically  convex  and  the  other  nearly  straight.  Edges
apparently  worn.

Fig.  5.  A  simple  flattish  flake  of  light-brown  spicular  flint,  the  thin  end  of  which
has  been  somewhat  squared  and  fashioned  as  a  chisel  by  small  chippings  on
the  edges  and  both  faces.  The  but-end  is  truncate,  and  narrowed  by  a  lateral
fracture.  This  is  a  rare  type  among  the  Flint  Implements  from  "Dordogne.  We
have  one  large  stout  flake  from  Les  Eyzies,  and  one  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,
showing  such  a  point.  We  also  have  a  short  stout  flake,  trimmed  and  chisel-
pointed,  from  the  North  of  Ireland ;  and  this  has  been  crushed  at  the  but-end,
seemingly  by  blows.

Fig.  6.  A  short  oblong  Double  Scraper  of  yellow  granular  flint,  shading  off  into
grey.  One  end  is  more  neatly  rounded  than  the  other,  and  one  side  is  straighter
than  the  other, — irregularities  probably  due  to  wear  and  tear.

Fig.  7.  A  subovate  tongue-shaped  Double  Scraper.  See  also  woodcuts,  figs.  19  a,
b,  c,  p.  85.  Piece  of  a  flake  worked  all  over  the  back  with  bold  chippings,  a
part  of  the  original  flat  face  remaining  as  the  under  surface,  the  broad  end  of
which  is  irregular  in  the  curvature  of  its  outline,  probably  from  use.  This
specimen  is  partly  brownish  grey,  and  partly  marked  with  concentric  bands
of  brown  and  grey.  The  only  two  specimens  represented  in  these  two  Plates
that  retain  little  or  nothing  of  the  original  ridge-face  of  the  flakes  out  of  which
they  were  made  are  figs.  7  and  10.  We  have,  from  Laugerie,  a  neat  Double
Scraper  of  light-grey  flint,  that  has  been  worked  all  over  the  back  with  careful
chipping.

Fig.  8.  A  drab-coloured,  carefully  chipped  Implement,  obliquely  rounded  at  one
end,  beak-shaped  at  the  other,  and  nearly  straight  on  the  sides,  which  appear
to  have  been  used.  The  notch  has  a  fresher  look  than  the  rest  of  the  surface ;
it  has  been  produced  by  the  removal  of  probably  only  one  flake,  leaving  a  thin,
entire,  curved  edge,  quite  unworn.  The  original  flint  flake  was  flattish,  but
slightly  curved,  opake  and  fossiliferous  (Orbitoides  and  Spicula).

Fig.  9.  A  mottled  grey  beaked  Implement,  somewhat  like  the  last,  but  made  out
of  a  thick  high-backed  flake  (triangular  in  section),  the  ridge  of  which  (crushed
and  battered)  is  parallel  with  and  close  to  the  straight  and  thick  side  (unworn
except  at  the  ridge).  This  straight  side  (on  which  the  specimen  can  stand  on


88  EELIQUI^E  AQUITANIC^E.

edge)  is  continued  backward  into  the  neatly  rounded  outline  of  the  scraper-
like  but-end  [not  well  shown  in  the  figure],  and  forward  into  the  irregular  notch,
which  has  an  old  surface,  and,  like  the  curved  side  edge,  seems  to  have  been  used.
This  beaked  type  of  Scraper  is  found  also  at  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.  Figs.  8  and  9
have,  in  general  shape,  something  in  common  with  figs.  1,  5,  6,  and  7  of
A.  Plate  XVIII.,  described  at  pages  79  and  80,  but  differ  from  them  in  being
Scrapers  (that  is,  neatly  rounded)  at  one  end.

Fig.  10.  A  coarsely  worked,  lumpy  fragment  of  a  thick  flake  of  dark-honey-
coloured,  spicular,  and  subtranslucent  flint,  retaining  a  portion  of  the  original
crust  (opake,  granular,  and  pinkish  grey)  on  the  highest  part  of  the  narrow
convex  back  of  the  Implement.  It  resembles  a  great  Slug,  contracted  and  at
rest.  See  also  figs.  18  «,  b,  c,  p.  85.  One  end  is  narrowed  and  arched,  pre-
senting, when  held  with  the  flat  part  upwards,  a  likeness  to  the  prow  of  a
boat ;  the  other  end  is  broader  and  more  depressed,  but  flexuous  and  irregular
in  shape.  The  edge  of  one  side  has  been  roughly  chipped  into  shape;  but
the  other  (lowest  in  the  figure)  has  been  further  splintered  and  crushed,
apparently  by  use  (see  also  page  85).

Another  such  specimen,  and  two  smaller  and  rougher,  in  dark  grey  flint,  from
Cro-Magnon,  and  a  very  roughly  dressed  specimen,  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  are
the  only  analogues  to  this  that  we  have  met  with  from  the  Caves.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

raillim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

84

3-307

21

0-827

5

0-197

2.

55

2-165

22

0-866

8

0-315

3.

170

6-693

21

0-827

9

0-354

4.

50

1-968

27

1-063

8

0-315

5.

93

3-661

17

0-669

8

0-315

6.

47

1-850

27

1-063

8

0-315

7.

51

2-008

34

1-339

12

0-472

8.

84

3-307

31

1-220

8

0-315

9.

92

3-661

30

1-181

15

0-591

10.

67

2-638

32

1-260

23

0-905

RELIQULE  AQUITANIC/E

(  DORDOGNE .)


C.


PL.  I.


£ouYea.u  del.  etTith.


Imp.Becijuet  a  Paris  .


RELIQULE    AQUITANIC^

(  DORDOGNE  .)


m


c


PL.  II.


V


del .  et  Jith .


Jmp .  Becquet  a.  Paris .


RELIQUIAE   AQUITANICLE

(  DORDOGNE.)


C.


PL.  Ill


-Louvean  del.  etlith


Imp.SecijTiet  a.  Paris.


RELIQULE  AQUITANIC^

( DORDOGNE  .)


c


PL.  IV.


r  '


£ou


Jmp  .-Becauet  a.


RELIQULE  AQUITANIC.E

(  DORjDOGNE  .)


C


PL.V.


del.  et  lith.


Imp  .Bee  cruet  a.  Paris.


RELIQULE   AQUITANIC/E

(  DORDOGNE .)


C


PL.  VI


Zonveau  del.  etliti.


hnp.Bectp.ct  A  Paris.


DESCRIPTIONS   OF  THE  PLATES.  89


C.  SKULLS  AND  BONES,

C.  PLATES  I.-VI.

Excepting  figs.  2  and  3  (views  of  a  Lower  Jaw)  in  C.  Plate  III.,  which  are
represented  of  the  natural  size,  all  the  figures  in  these  Plates  are  drawn  half-size.

[The  artist  has  produced  reversed  figures  on  these  Plates,  not  having  used  a
mirror  when  drawing  the  specimens.]

C.  PLATE  I.

Cranium  No.  1 :  Skull  of  an  Old  Man.
Fig.  1.  Side  view.  •
Fig.  2.  View  of  the  face.

C.  PLATE  II.

The  same  Skull.
Fig.  1.  Seen  from  above.

Fig.  2.  Seen  from  below.

C.  PLATE  III.

Fig.  1.  Occipital  View  of  the  same  Skull.

Fig.  2.  Lower  Jaw  of  the  Cranium  No.  2  (Adult  Male),  seen  in  profile.

Fig.  3.  The  same,  seen  from  above.

Figs.  4  and  5.  Two  of  the  thickest  Ribs.

C.  PLATE  IV.

The  Cranium  No.  2.
Fig.  1.  Side  view.

Fig.  2.  Seen  from  above.

C.  PLATE  V.

The  Cranium  No.  3  :   The  Skull  of  a  Woman.
Fig.  1.  Seen  in  profile.
Fig.  2.  Seen  in  front.


9o


EELIQUI^E  A  QUIT  ANKLE.
TABLE  OF  MEASUREMENTS  OF  THE  CRANIA.


N.B.  "Inial"  (from  Iviov,  ocdpUium)  in  Cranioseopy  has
reference  to  the  length  of  the  skull  taken  from  the

No.  1.

N

5.2.

N

o.3.

central  point  of  the  Occiput,  or  Spina  Occipitis  Ex-
terior.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

I.  THE  CALVARIUM.

millim.
203

inch.

7-992

millim.
202

inch.

7-953

millim.
193

inch.

7-599

200

7-874

185

7-284

Height

140

5-512

Breadth  frontal  greatest                        ....

120

4-724

121

4-764

118

4-646

105

4-134

102

4-016

100

3-937

140

5-512

135

5-315

136

5-354

123

4-843

152

6-011

153

6-024

140'

5-512

145

5-709

157

6-181

116

4-567

132

5-197

Radius,  auriculo-frontal     ,

126

4-961

120

4-724

110

4-331

113

4-449

Circumference,  horizontal  (total)

580

22-835

580

22-835

540

21-260

310

12-205

postauricular                             .        .

270

10-630

—       vertical  (total)

540

21-260

(composed  of  the  frontal

130

5-118

130

5-118

118

4-646

parietal

130

5-118

130

5-118

130

5-118

occipital

70+57

2-756  +  2-244

50+'

1-969

50+9

1-969

length  of  the  foramen  magnum

36

1-417

length  of  the  base  of  the  skull  .

117

4-606)

Breadth  of  the  foramen  magnum

26

1-024

Biauricular  curve

340

13-386

Distance  from  the  foramen  magnum  to  "1
the  incisors  J

113

4-449

Cephalic  Indices.

The  length  is  to  the  breadth  as  1000  is  to  .  .
to  tho  height  as  1000  is  to

748
690

....

772

725?

The  horizontal  circumference  is  to  the  1
vertical  as  1000  is  to  J

931

II.  THE  FACE.
Height,  total  .

115

4-528

[the  frontal)

17

9.044

KOI

2-094

47

1-8  in

....

OZ5
4ft

1-693

,  suhnasal

58

2-283

—  —  of  the  upper  maxillury

63

2-480

60

2-362

Distance   between   the   external    orbital  1
processes  J

120

4-724

113

4-449

112

4-410

Breadth  of  the  orbits

41

1-614

36

1-417

35

1-378

Height  of  the  orbits

27

1-063

274

1-083

Breadth  of  the  root  of  the  nose

30

1-181

30

1-181

27

1-063

of  the  nostrils

27

1-063

23

0-945

Distance  between  the  maxillo-malar  sutures.

130
i<*i

5-118
K.^M  i

89

3-504
4-410

142

5-591

1

DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES.
TABLE  (continued).


No.  1.

No.  2.

No.  3.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

Engliih.

Width  of  the  palate

millim.
56
70

113

103
65
49
32
30
15
18

inch.
2-205
2-756

4-449
4-055
2-559
1-929
1-260
1-181
0-591
0-709

millim.

31    .
25
12
12

inch.

1-220
0-984
0-472
0-472

millim.

inch.

Length  of  the  palate

The  Lower  Jaw.

Distance  between  the  posterior  angles  ....
Length  of  the  horizontal  portion      .    .

•  -        of  the  raniu3

Width  of  the  ramus

Height  of  the  chin

Thickness  of  the  chin

C.  PLATE  VI.

Long  Bones  of  the  Extremities.    (Half  the  natural  size.)

Fig.  1.  Humerus.
Fig.  2.  Femur.
Fig.  3.  Tibia.
Fig.  4.  Fibula.

TABLE  OF  THE  MEASUREMENTS  OF  THREE  HUMERI.


No.  1.

No.  2.

No.  3.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

Leneth  .

centim.
34|
5
16
9
10
62

inch.

13-59
1-97
6-30
3-54
3-93
24-41

centim.
32
3^9
13-5
9
10
57

inch.

12-60
1-53
5-31
3-54
3-93
22-44

centim.
33
4-4
14
10
10-2

inch.

12-99
1-73
5-51
3-93

4-02

Breadth  of  the  head

Circumference  of  the  head

of  the  shaft  above                    .  .

below                               .  .        ...

Breadth  of  the  articulation  .

2  KELIQTILE  AQUITANIC^.


B.  BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  &c.

B.  PLATE  XI.

(The  figures  are  of  the  Natural  Size,  but,  having  been  drawn  on  stone  without  a

mirror,  are  reversed  on  the  Plate.)

Fig.  1.  A  series  of  marine  Shells,  mostly  Littorina  littorea*,  that  have  been
perforated  and  strung  for  use  as  Necklaces  or  other  ornaments.  The  other
Shells  are  Pnrpura  lapillus,  Turritella  communis  (T.  cornea,  according  to
M.  Bourguignat),  and  Fusm  Islandicus^.

About  three  hundred  of  these  perforated  Shells  of  Littorina  were  found  in
the  Cave  at  Cro-Magnon.  See  pages  71  &c.

Pigs.  2,  3,  and  4.  Small  ovate  flattish  plates  of  Ivory,  perforated  at  one  end  for
suspension.  See  page  70.

In  the  specimen  shown  by  fig.  4,  we  can  see,  at  the  fracture  above  the  two
holes,  the  structure  peculiar  to  Elephant-Ivory,  commencing  to  exfoliate.
Other  pieces  of  worked  Ivory  have  been  collected  in  the  Cave ;  also  perforated
incisors  of  a  great  Ox  (Aurochs?).  Two  of  these  teeth  are  in  the  possession
of  M.  the  Cure"  of  Tayac.

The  majority  of  the  Littorina-shells  figured  in  this  Plate  have  preserved  their
colours,  showing  that  they  were  taken  alive  and  used  whilst  fresh.  It  is,  of
course,  well  known  that  this  species  is  eaten,  at  the  present  day  on  the  Atlantic
coasts  of  Prance  and  England.  The  five  shells  of  other  species  on  the  same
Plate,  being  quite  discoloured  and  worn,  were  gathered,  we  must  suppose,  on  the
shore  by  those  who  used  them.  "We  may  here  remark  that  the  old  Cave-folk  of
Cro-Magnon  seem  to  have  used  for  ornament  only  shells  of  existing  species,
whilst  those  of  La  Madelaine  and  Laugerie  Basse  (see  pages  43  and  48,  and
B.  Plate  V.  figs.  15-20)  got  fossil  shells  from  the  Miocene  Paluns  of  Touraine
for  the  same  purpose.

*  According  to  M.  Deshayes  these  Periwinkle-shells  from  Cro-Magnon  have  the  aspect  of  existing
varieties  of  the  species  now  living  in  the  North  Sea.

t  This  Shell,  which  M.  Bourguignat  reminds  us  must  not  be  confounded  with  Fusus  gracilis  (Da  Costa),
has  been  figured  by  our  artist  with  its  last  whorl  too  convex  and  its  spire  too  short.


RELIQUIAE    AQUITANIOE

(  DOKDOGNE .)


B.


PL. XI,


-lonvea.il  del.  ethth.


fnip  .JSecyuet  a


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  93

In  arranging  on  B.  Plate  XI.  this  group  of  Shells  in  the  form  of  a  Necklace,
we  do  not  presume  to  decide  that  all  were  exclusively  used  in  this  manner ;  but
we  have  been  led  to  adopt  this  arrangement  by  analogous  circumstances,  certainly
of  more  recent  date,  such  as  those  observed  in  the  tumulus  in  Phrenix  Park,
near  Dublin,  where  a  series  of  very  similar  shells  (Littorina  littoralis}  was  found
"immediately  under  each  skull,"  perforated  (like  those  of  Cro-Magnon),  and
still  retaining  some  vegetable  fibre  which  had  served  to  string  them  together.
In  the  '  Catalogue  of  the  Museum  of  the  Royal  Irish  Academy,'  by  W.  R.  Wilde,
&c.,  8vo,  1857,  p.  183,  a  series  of  these  shells  are  figured  as  part  of  a  necklace,
together  with  an  urn  and  a  double-headed  bone  pin  found  in  the  same  tumulus
(figs.  131-133).  See  also  the  'Crania  Britannica,'  by  Dr.  J.  B.  Davis  and  Dr.  J.
Thurnam,  vol.  i.  Decade  iii.  fig.  22.

Shells  of  Littorina,  under  the  name  of  Nerita  littoralis,  are  mentioned*  by
Dr.  Buckland  as  having  been  found  in  the  Paviland  Cave  (Goat's  Hole),  Glamor-
ganshire ;  but,  though  not  described  by  him  as  being  perforated,  one  at  least  of
these  shells,  preserved  in  the  Museum  at  Oxford,  has  been  pierced  like  those
at  Cro-Magnon  f.

According  to  Dr.  Buckland's  account  these  Littorina-shells  were  associated
with  some  remains  of  a  human  skeleton,  which  was  regarded  by  him,  we  know
not  why  |,  as  that  of  a  woman,  and  has  since  become  famous  as  "the  Red  Lady
of  Paviland."  Visiting  the  Oxford  Museum,  in  1863,  accompanied  by  Dr.  Fal-
coner, and  most  courteously  received  by  Prof.  Phillips,  we  assured  ourselves,  by
measurement  of  some  of  the  long  bones  of  this  so-called  "  Red  Lady,"  that  they
belonged  to  an  individual  of  very  great  stature.  Some  of  these  bones  are
reddened  with  oxide  of  iron ;  and  we  saw  that  the  remains  of  ivory  implements
are  in  the  same  state  of  alteration  as  the  fragments  of  Elephants'  tusks  from
which,  as  Dr.  Buckland  says,  the  implements  had  been  made.  These  circum-
stances are  strikingly  analogous  to  what  we  observe  in  the  Cave  at  Cro-Magnon,
where  also  were  found,  besides  Periwinkle-shells,  the  stump  of  an  Elephant's
tusk,  with  implements  and  ornaments  made  possibly  from  the  ivory  of  the  same

*  '  Eeliquiae  Diluvianae,'  1823,  page  88  ;  in  these  words : — "  close  to  that  part  of  the  thigh-bone  where
the  pocket  is  usually  worn,  I  found,  laid  together  and  surrounded  also  by  ruddle,  about  two  handfuls  of
small  shells  of  the  Nerita  littoralis,  in  a  state  of  complete  decay,  and  falling  to  dust  on  the  slightest
pressure."

t  With  Professor  Phillips's  kind  assistance,  Mr.  Eupert  Jones  was  lately  enabled  to  examine  these
specimens.

+  Except,  perhaps,  because  Periwinkle-shells  and  ivory  beads  are  stated  to  have  been  found  with  a
female  skeleton  in  a  tumulus.

0


94


RELIQULE  AQUITANIC^E.


tooth.  Moreover,  at  Cro-Magnon  among  the  human  skeletons  were  found
fragments  of  hematite  or  red  ochre,  unctuous  to  the  touch,  the  contact  of
which,  after  the  decomposition  of  the  corpses,  has  left  superficial  red  stains
on  a  skull  and  femur  referred  to  an  old  man  (see  page  74),  just  as  we  see
on  the  bones  of  the  so-called  "  Red  Lady  of  Paviland."  M.  Oscar  Fraas,  in
his  description  of  the  Station  (of  the  Reindeer  Age)  of  Schussenried  *,  near  the
Lake  of  Constance,  has  mentioned  that  very  many  bits  of  oxide  of  iron,  once
probably  mixed  with  fat,  were  there  found  among  the  stone  implements  and
remains  of  bones.  The  chemical  examination  of  the  unctuous  ochre  from  Cro-
Magnon  has  not  proved  the  existence  of  any  fatty  ingredient.

Dr.  Buckland,  admitting  that  the  ivory  implements  found  in  Paviland  Cave
must  have  been  made  out  of  the  Elephant's  tusk  lying  in  the  same  cave,  offered
no  explanation  how  this  tusk  had  been  preserved  (if  already  fossil)  so  as  to  be
made  into  implements  after  an  interval  of  ages.  Other  observers  have  since
then  sought  to  explain  the  fact  by  attributing  the  preservation  of  the  ivory  to
the  same  cause  (extreme  and  continued  cold)  which  still  preserves  in  the  frozen
soil  of  Siberia  the  Mammoths'  tusks  that  are  every  day  dug  out  and  sold  to
manufacturers.  The  present  advanced  study,  however,  of  the  Quaternary  flora
and  fauna  of  Central  Europe  does  not  permit  us  to  attribute  to  our  climate  in
the  Glacial  Period  the  rigorous  and  perpetual  frost  that  has  preserved  the  fossil
ivory  of  the  Mammoth  in  Siberia.

A  much  more  simple  explanation  of  the  circumstance  referred  to  above  is  met
with  by  supposing  the  Mammoth  to  have  been  contemporary  with  the  primitive
inhabitants  of  Europe,  who  took  for  their  purposes  the  ivory  fresh  from  the
Elephant.


*  '  Staate-Anzeiger  fur  Wiirtemberg,'  Sept.  and  Oct.  1866  ;  and  '  Geological  Magazine,'  vol.  iii.  p.  546.


RELIQULE

(  DORDOGNE  .)


B       PL.XII


-


10


-Louvea.iL


Imp . Hecauet  A


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  95


B.  PLATE  XII.

This  Plate,  drawn,  like  the  foregoing,  without  the  use  of  a  mirror,  and  there-
fore with  the  figures  reversed,  represents  objects  found  in  either  the  Sepulture
or  the  layers  of  Hearth-stuff  in  the  Cave  of  Cro-Magnon.

Fig.  1.  A  cylindrical  piece  of  Reindeer  Horn,  artificially  rounded  and  finished  off
at  one  end  with  a  smooth  point.  "We  can  say  nothing  as  to  its  intended  use,
nor  as  to  its  original  length,  its  lower  part  having  been  broken  by  an  old
fracture.  This  seems  to  have  been  found  with  the  human  skeletons,  or  at  least
in  the  uppermost  layer  in  which  the  Burial  had  been  made.

Fig.  2,  a.  An  Arrow-  or  Harpoon-head  of  the  lanceolate  type,  like  those  found  in
1860  in  the  Sepulture  at  Aurignac*.  It  has  lost  its  point  by  an  old  fracture.
At  its  base,  seen  edgewise  in  fig.  2  b,  we  clearly  see  the  slit  in  which  we  may
suppose  the  bevelled  end  of  the  shaft  to  have  been  inserted  t.

Besides  the  arrow-heads  of  this  type  found  at  Aurignac,  we  may  refer  to  that
found,  by  MM.  les  Abbes  Bourgeois  and  DelaunayJ,  in  the  Grotte  de  la  Chaise
(Charente).  The  late  M.  Poirrier  de  Monte"ombroux  found  one  of  similar
shape  in  the  Grotte  des  Fe"es,  at  Chatelperrou  (Allier)  ;  and  one  of  the  Stations
at  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Vezere,  opposite  Les  Eyzies,
has  furnished  us  with  numerous  specimens  of  these  arrow-heads,  with  a  more
or  less  dilated  base,  and  always  tapering,  without  any  trace  of  lateral
barbs.  Hitherto  we  have  not  met  with  this  kind  of  arrow-head  in  any  of
the  Stations  that  yields  barbed  arrows  or  harpoons,  such  as  those  figured  in
B.  Plate  XIV.  We  have  also  remarked  that  the  lanceolate  arrow-head  is
nearly  always  associated  with  a  larger  assemblage  of  extinct  species  of  animals
than  that  ordinarily  accompanying  the  barbed  kind  of  arrow-heads  and  other
products  of  more  advanced  art  and  industry.

Fig.  3.  A  piece  of  a  long  bone  of  a  Herbivore  (perhaps  a  Horse),  shaped  into  a
perfectly  rounded  tapering  point,  like  a  great  Bodkin,  Skewer,  Pin,  Awl,  or
Javelin-point.  The  base  shows  no  indication  of  a  handle.

*<  Ann.  Be.  Nat.  4me  ser.,  Zoologie,  vol.  xv.  pages  188  and  251,  pi.  11.  figs.  4  &  8  (1861).

t  This  is  the  reverse  of  the  method  adopted  for  the  moveahle  Dart-heads  figured  in  B.  Plates  IX.  <fe  X.,
page  68.

J  Revue  Archeologique,  1865:  Notice  sur  la  Grotte  de  la  Chaise,  par  MM.  Bourgeois  et  Delaunay,
pi.  17.  fig.  2.


o6  RELIQUIAE  AQUITANICLE.

Fig.  4.  Another  tapering  and  pointed  Implement,  but  shorter  and  sharper ;  also
made  of  a  compact  portion  of  a  bone  of  a  Herbivore.

Fig.  5.  A  cylindrical  piece  of  Reindeer  Antler,  similar  to  fig.  1,  except  that  it  is
broken  at  each  end :  this  also  was  found  in  the  uppermost  deposit  of  the  Cave,
with  the  Skeletons.

Fig.  6.  An  Awl-like  Implement,  made  of  a  bone  of  a  Herbivore,  with  a  large  and
broad  but-end,  convenient  for  holding  in  the  hand  when  used.

Fig.  7.  Another  kind  of  Awl  or  Bodkin,  with  a  flat  one-sided  but-end.

Fig.  8.  A  straight  and  slender  Bodkin,  Awl,  or  Arrow-point,  with  a  broad  and
rough  but.

It  is  probable  that  most  of  the  Bodkin-like  Implements  were  used  for
fastening  garments — none  of  the  Stations  of  this  Age  having  yet  yielded  eyed
needles,  such  as  those  found  in  the  more  recent  Stations  of  La  Madelaine,
Laugerie  Basse,  Bruniquel  (Tarne  et  Garonne),  and  Massat  (Ariege).

Fig.  9.  Another  Awl  or  Bodkin,  tapering  and  rounded,  but  thicker  than  the  fore-
going, and  pierced  near  the  but,  where  it  is  somewhat  flattened,  with  a  hole  for
suspension.  This  hole  opens  out  on  each  side  and  narrows  in  the  middle,
showing  that  the  boring  must  have  been  made  alternately  on  one  side  and  the
other.  The  material  is  white  and  compact,  but  so  altered  in  structure  that  we
cannot  say  if  it  be  ivory  or  deer's  horn ;  it  is  not  bone,  properly  so  called.

Fig.  10.  A  fragment  of  a  thin,  narrow,  straight-edged  plate  of  Reindeer  Horn,
showing  on  one  side  the  cellular  structure  of  the  middle  portion  of  the  antler,
and  numerous  notches  along  the  edges.  We  have  a  similar  specimen  from  the
Gorge  d'Enfer ;  and  in  the  '  Annales  des  Sciences  Naturelles,'  vol.  xv.  (above
cited),  pages  189  and  251,  pi.  11.  fig.  7,  another  is  figured,  from  Aurignac;  this
latter  has  transverse  lines  engraved  on  its  convex  and  smooth  face,  besides
notches  on  the  margins.  These  have  been  regarded  as  hunter's  marks;  but
no  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  intention  with  which  they  were  made  has
been  arrived  at.

Fig.  11.  Another  piece  of  Reindeer  Horn,  long,  flat,  and  narrow,  polished  on  one
side.  It  is  comparable  with  the  Aurignac  specimen,  fig.  6  of  plate  11,  in  the
'  Ann.  Sc.  Nat.,'  vol.  xv.,  above  cited.  Other  fragments  of  similar  implements
have  been  found  at  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  and  are  such  as  are  regarded  by  the
Danish  Archaeologists  as  having  been  used  in  dressing  skins  for  clothing.


RELIQUIAE    AQUITANIC.E


B.


PL  .XIII.


LOUVG&U  del.etlith.


JEW ^B&couet  A  Jrdris  •


DESCEIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XIII.]         97


B.  PLATE  XIII.

All  the  specimens  here  shown  came  from  a  Station  in  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  on
the  right  bank  of  the  Vezere,  and  nearly  opposite  to  the  village  of  Les  Eyzies.
We  have  introduced  this  Plate  immediately  after  those  illustrating  the  contents  of
the  Cave  of  Cro-Magnon  on  account  of  the  close  analogy  existing  between  the
fossil  fauna  and  archaeological  remains  found  at  the  one  and  the  other  of  these
two  Stations.

Fig.  1.  An  instrument  of  unusual  shape ;  of  its  intended  use  it  is  impossible  to
speak  decisively.  It  is  a  narrow,  curved,  blade-like  tine  of  a  Reindeer's  antler,
retaining  a  rough,  unworked  but-end,  above  which,  and  for  more  than  a  third
of  the  whole  length,  the  stem  is  subcylindrical,  and  bears  four  vertical  rows  of
transverse  notches  or  cut  lines,  unsymmetrical,  and  irregular  in  number.
Where  these  end,  the  stem  is  somewhat  polished  and  becomes  triangular ;  but
towards  the  extremity  it  is  flattened,  and  had  a  somewhat  chisel-like  point,
before  it  lost  a  portion  of  one  edge  by  a  recent  fracture, — the  cause  of  its
appearing  pointed  in  the  figure.

[Specimens  of  bone  closely  resembling  this  one  in  shape  (in  the  Christy
Collection)  have  been  brought  from  Western  Australia,  where  the  Natives
wear  them  in  the  cartilaginous  septum  of  the  nose,  which  is  perforated  for  the
purpose.  These  bone  spikes  may  serve  as  head-scratchers  (like  the  pointed
sticks  worn  in  the  hair  by  the  Shohoes  of  Abyssinia),  and  for  many  other
purposes. — T.  B.  J.]

Pig.  2.  The  head  of  a  kind  of  Javelin  or  Arrow,  long,  and  tapering  from  butt  to
point.  Its  base  is  transversely  slit  (as  in  figs.  3  and  5),  to  receive  the  wedge-
like  end  of  the  shaft;  as  with  other  arrow-heads  of  the  lanceolate  (not
barbed) type.

Pigs.  3,  4,  5,  and  6.  Lanceolate  moveable  heads  for  Harpoons  or  Arrows,  of  dif-
ferent sizes ;  all  made  of  Reindeer  Antler.  The  base  is  in  all  more  or  less
damaged,  but  retains  traces  of  the  slit  to  receive  the  shaft,  as  shown  in  figs.  3  b
and  5  b.

Fig.  7.  A  very  sharp,  pointed  Implement,  made  of  very  compact  bone.  Compare
figs.  6  and  8  of  B.  Plate  XII.  [This  is  very  similar  to  a  specimen,  from  the
Lake-dwelling  of  Meilen,  figured  in  Keller's  '  Lake-dwellings  of  Switzerland,'

P


g  KELIQTJLffi  AQTJITANIOE.

&c.,  translated  by  J.  E.  Lee,  8vo,  1866,  pi.  3.  fig.  20.  Similar  pointed  instru-
ments of  bone  and  horn  necessarily  have  been,  and  still  are,  in  common  use
as  piercers,  arrow-points,  &c.,  especially  among  people  not  in  possession  of
metals*.— T.  R.  J.]

Fig.  8.  A  pointed  Implement,  made  of  a  hollow  and  very  thin  bone  (probably  of
a  Bird),  by  one  end  having  been  cut  away  obliquely.

Fig.  9.  A  flat,  curved  Implement,  almost  sharp-edged  on  its  convex  margin;
made  of  Reindeer  Horn.

Figs.  10,  11,  and  12.  Small  pointed  Implements  made  of  the  most  compact
portion  of  the  tines  or  points  of  antlers  of  Reindeer  or  other  Deer.  That  shown
by  fig.  12  is  exactly  like  the  specimen,  from  Aurignac,  figured  in  the  '  Ann.  Sc.
Nat.'  I.  c.  pi.  11.  fig.  2.  In  the  absence  of  eyed  needles,  probably  these  served
as  awls  or  bodkins  for  sewing;  fig.  10,  however,  has  some  cross  cuts  at  its
base,  that  may  possibly  have  reference  to  its  having  been  lashed  on  a  stick  as
an  arrow-point.

Figs.  13  a  and  13  b  represent  a  somewhat  oblong  flake,  of  compact  bony  substance,
with  a  nearly  flat  face  in  fig.  13  b,  and  slightly  convex  in  fig.  13  a  (see  the  sec-
tion, fig.  13  c).  This  specimen  has  been  of  necessity  strongly  impregnated  with
gelatine  for  its  preservation ;  and  it  is  difficult  now  to  form  a  notion  of  its  real
structure,  excepting  that  at  certain  points  of  fracture  we  believe  we  can  see
some  traces  of  exfoliation ;  so  we  hesitate  to  come  to  a  decision  as  to  whether
it  is  antler,  hard  bone,  or  ivory.  It  may  possibly  consist  of  the  last-named
substance,  as  far  as  its  appearance  proves — especially  as  a  worked  piece  of
Elephant's  tusk  was  found  with  these  specimens  in  the  Rock- shelter  at  the
Gorge  d'Enfer,  just  as  a  fragment  of  a  tusk  was  found  in  the  cave  at
Cro-Magnon  (see  page  66).

Fig.  13  has  a  minute  marginal  notching,  probably  for  ornament.  The  series
of  shallow  cuts  near  the  edges,  and  the  somewhat  systematically  arranged
pitting,  on  both  faces,  are  very  puzzling, — if  indeed  they  were  intended  to
mean  anything  at  all.  The  reader  will  observe  that  the  groups  of  cuts  differ
in  direction,  shape,  and  number;  but  in  this  some  may  see  a  character  of
value.  It  is  difficult  also  to  say  if  the  combination  of  oblique  transverse  lines

[*  Such  pointed  implements  of  bone  have  been  found  in  the  Mounds  of  North  America,  where  also
implements  of  metal  occur;  see  'Smithsonian  Contributions,'  vol.  i.  p.  220,  figs.  119  &  120;  and  vol.  ii.
p.  79,  figs.  25-27.— T.  K.  J.]


DESCRIPTIONS  OP  THE  PLATES— BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XIII.]         99

of  pits  was  made  on  a  premeditated  plan.  The  several  lines  have  not  the
same  number  of  pits,  nor  is  the  arrangement  of  the  latter  vertically  symme-
trical. Though  the  isolated  group  of  pits  on  the  flat  face  (fig.  136)  gives  nine,
when  counted  either  vertically  or  transversely,  yet  neither  this  nor  the  groups
of  notches  constitute  for  certain  any  indication  of  a  system  of  numeration, —
nor  indeed  are  we  sure  that  they  belong  to  any  intelligible  plan  of  marking.

Fig.  14  is  a  small,  much  curved,  and  sharply  pointed  Implement  of  Reindeer
Horn,  triangular  in  section  where  it  is  thickest  and  straightest.


100


KELIQULE  AQUITANKLE.


B.  PLATE  XIV.

All  the  specimens  figured  in  this  Plate  were  got  from  the  Station  of  La  Made-
laine  in  Dordogne.  Similar  implements  have  been  found  at  other  Stations  in
the  same  district, — that  of  Laugerie  Basse,  for  example,  and  also  in  the  Cave
of  Les  Eyzies  properly  so  called,  not  far  from  the  Cro-Magnon  Cave.  (For
similar  Harpoons,  see  B.  Plates  I.  &  VI.,  pages  9,  49,  &c.)  The  caves  and
rock-shelters  of  Bruniquel  (Tarn  et  Garonne),  of  Massat  (Ariege),  and  of
Chaffaut  (Vienne),  have  also  furnished  barbed  Harpoons  and  Arrow-heads.
Lastly,  among  the  works  of  industry  collected,  during  the  last  twenty  years,
at  a  Station  (of  the  Reindeer  Age)  at  the  foot  of  Mont  Saleve,  in  Switzerland,
there  is  a  specimen  belonging  to  this  type ;  it  is  preserved  in  the  Museum
at  Geneva.

We  may  here  refer  to  what  has  already  been  stated  (page  95),  without,  however,
definitely  limiting  the  use  of  these  Harpoons  to  the  old  Fishermen,  that  remains
of  fish  are  found  in  the  Stations  with  the  barbed  implements,  and  none  occur  with
the  lanceolate  weapon-heads.

We  have  therefore  produced  this  Plate  of  barbed  Harpoon-heads,  in  sequence  to
those  of  a  different  type,  from  Cro-Magnon  and  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  as  offering  a
convenient  contrast  of  the  implements  found  in  these  Stations  with  those  from
La  Madelaine,  Laugerie  Basse,  and  other  places,  where  the  contemporary  Fauna
comprises  fewer  extinct  species  of  Mammals — a  fact  that  justifies  the  chronolo-
gical distinction  hitherto  adopted  by  Archaeologists  for  these  two  phases  of  the
Quaternary  Period.

Fig.  1.  A  double-barbed  Harpoon-  or  Arrow-head ;  bluntly  pointed ;  armed  with
six  recurved,  double-grooved  barbs  on  one  side,  and  five  on  the  other;  and
furnished  with  lateral  knobs  (or  an  imperfect  fillet)  just  above  the  tapering  butt,
which  was  inserted  in  the  top  of  the  shaft.  We  see  the  same  fashion  adopted
in  many  barbed  Weapon-heads  from  Stations  in  Dordogne,  such  as  those  figured
in  B.  Plates  I.  &  VI.,  in  some  from  Massat,  figured  in  'Ann.  Sc.  Nat.'  ser.  4-,
vol.  xv.  pi.  13,  figs.  3,  5,  and  6,  and  in  modern  Esquimaux  Implements  (see
pages  50  and  51).

This  specimen  is  ornamented  with  short,  curved,  longitudinal  grooves  on  its
sides,  from  barb  to  barb.  It  has  probably  been  longer  and  more  tapering  at
the  point,  and  seems  to  have  been  roughly  repointed  after  fracture.


RELIQULE   AQUITANICLE

(  DORDOGNE  .)

1  2


I


B.


PL.XIV^.


.


10


o  .J3ec<ruet  A  Paris .


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XIV.]       IOI

Fig.  2.  Another  Harpoon-head,  with  only  three  pairs  of  barbs,  the  lowest  pair
opposite,  the  other  barbs  alternate ;  they  have  been  subconical,  but  are  broken,
as  is  also  the  long  tapering  point  of  the  Implement.  The  barbs  are  deeply  and
doubly  grooved ;  and  the  stem  bears  many  flexuous  and  obliquely  longitudinal
grooves  and  notches.

Fig.  3.  A  large  specimen  of  the  same  type  as  fig.  1,  but  evidently  much  shortened
by  ancient  fracture  and  repointing.  The  grooved  ornament  is  bold  and  deep,
especially  on  the  stem;  and  the  tapering  butt,  with  its  knobs,  is  neatly
shaped.

Fig.  4.  This  is  a  longer,  more  slender,  and  rarer  form  than  the  foregoing ;  it  has
its  original  long  tapering  end  and  suddenly  sharp  point,  and  only  three  pairs  of
alternating,  single-grooved  barbs.  Some  faint  traces  of  oblique  grooves  remain
on  the  stem.

Fig.  5.  This  specimen,  broken  at  each  end  and  deprived  of  some  of  its  barbs,  had
on  either  side  numerous,  sharp,  single-grooved,  close-set,  and  strongly  recurved
barbs.  The  groove  on  each  barb  was  joined  at  its  base  by  an  oblique  groove,
varying  in  length,  from  barb  to  barb,  and  thus  altogether  constituting  an  irre-
gular zig-zag  lateral  line.

/

Fig.  6.  The  long,  tapering,  sharp  point  of  a  slender  Harpoon-head,  similar  in  type
to  fig.  4,  but  having  its  barbs  far  more  numerous,  close-set,  and  opposite.

Figs.  7-10.  Other  fragments  of  smaller  barbed  Weapon-heads,  of  the  same  type
as  fig.  4.  Figs.  7  and  8  appear  to  have  been  repointed.


I02  RELIQUIAE   AQUITANKLE.


B.  PLATE  XV.  &  XVI.     (One  Plate.)

We  have  here  before  us  other  specimens  of  those  Implements,  of  problematic
use,  of  which  we  have  already  figured  some,  more  or  less  imperfect,  in  B.  Plates
II.  III.  &  IV.,  and  VII.  &  VIII.  We  have  seen  that  various  suggestions  have
been  offered  as  to  the  probable  use  of  these  trimmed  and  ornamented  Antler-stems,
— namely,  as  implements  in  common  use,  for  splitting  soft  wood,  stripping  bark
from  trees,  &c.*,  and  for  killing  gamef ;  as  arms,  for  fighting  j,  and  as  insignia
of  rank  or  social  distinction  §,  and  possibly  also  employed  in  superstitious  usages.
We  shall  not,  however,  at  present  attempt  to  determine  the  relative  value  of  these
suggestions,  which  may  be  strengthened  or  enlarged  by  further  information,  and
by  the  study  of  the  very  many  specimens  yielded  by  the  Caves  of  Dordogne.  It
will  be  useful,  however,  to  remark  that  Implements  of  this  kind  are  not  found
indiscriminately  in  all  the  Stations  (hitherto  examined)  of  the  Period  of  Chipped
Stone  where  the  Reindeer  is  more  or  less  abundantly  represented  by  its  bones  or
by  tools  and  other  articles  of  use  or  art  wrought  out  of  its  antlers.  Thus  as  yet
we  do  not  know  of  any  well-defined  specimen  of  these  peculiarly  worked  antlers
in  the  more  ancient  Caves  at  our  Stations,  characterized  by  the  presence  of  the
lanceolate  Dart-head  (see  B.  Plates  XII.  &  XIII.)  and  the  older  fauna  (page  95).
In  support  of  this  view  we  may  also  cite  the  Caves  of  Aurignac  (Haute  Garonne),
La  Chaise  (Charente),  Des  Fe"es  (Allier),  and  the  B/ock-shelter  in  the  Gorge  d'Enfer
(Dordogne),  mentioned  above  (pages  94  and  97),  as  not  having  yielded  as  yet  any
fragment  of  a  worked  antler  analogous  to  those  under  notice ;  whilst  the  latter,
on  the  other  hand,  show  themselves  more  or  less  abundantly  at  all  the  Stations
where  barbed  Harpoons  were  used,  such  as  the  Caves  of  Massat  (Ariege)  and  Les
Eyzies  (Dordogne),  the  Rock-shelters  of  La  Madelaine  and  Laugerie  Basse  (Dor-
dogne), the  Caves  of  Bruniquel  (Tarn  et  Garonne),  and  of  Le  Chaffaut  (Vienne),  &c.
We  may  also  include  in  this  latter  category  the  Cave  at  Mont  Saleve  (Haute
Savoie),  where  M.  Alphonse  Favre||  and  M.  Thiolly^f  have  discovered  similar

*  Page8  38  and  59.  t  Pages  50  and  52.

J  Pages  40,  52,  and  60;  and  page  67,  note.  §  Page  41 ;  and  pages  30,  31,  and  33.

II  "Station  de  1'homme  de  1'age  de  la  pierre  a  Veihrier  pres  de  Geneve,"  'Archives  des  Sciences,

Bibliotheque  Universelle  de  Geneve,'  Mars  1868.  See  also  Mortillet's  'Materiaux  pour  I'histoire  de
1'homme,'  vol.  iv.  pp.  91  &c.

If  "Epoque  du  Eenne  au  pied  du  Mont  Saleve,"  'Kevue  Savoisienne,'  Mars  1868.  See  also  Mortillet's
'  Materiaux,'  vol.  iv.  pp.  93,  152,  154,  <fec.


RELIQULE   AQUITANIC^E

(  DORDOGNE .)


-Eau.rea.iL  del.  etlith.


B.


PL  .  XV  et  XVI


a. Paris.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES—  BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.    [B.  XV.  XVI.]     103


worked  antlers,  ornamented  also  with  well-engraved  figures  of  animals  and  plants  ;
and  moreover  in  the  same  Cave  remains  of  eyed  needles  and  barbed  harpoons
occur.  Lastly,  the  Station  of  Schussenried,  in  Wurtemberg,  has  also  furnished
two  specimens*  of  the  same  kind  of  implements,  con-
sisting of  antlers  in  the  rough  state  and  not  ornamented,
but  pierced,  like  the  others,  one  with  two,  and  the  other
with  a  single  hole,  near  the  base.

It  seems,  then,  that  in  the  Chipped-Stone  or  Palaeo-
lithic Period  there  were  distinct  epochs,  characterized
by  the  palaeontological  aspect  of  the  Fauna,  by  the
progress  of  art  and  industry,  and,  lastly,  by  the  intro-
duction of  new  habits  and  customs.


1

O


Fig.  1.  This  was  the  shed  antler  of  a  young  Reindeer,
or  perhaps  of  a  doe,  judging  from  the  small  size  of  the
base.  The  stem  or  beam  has  been  cut  away  laterally,
so  as  to  present  two  flat  faces,  the  convex  edge  of
which  still  bears  the  bases  of  three  truncated  branches
at  unequal  distances.  The  stem  appears  to  have  lost
some  of  its  length  by  an  old  fracture.  The  convex
edge  is  ornamented,  or  at  least  marked,  with  a  scoring
of  numerous  (thirty-three),  slight,  transverse  notches —
some  at  equal  distances  apart,  some  more  widely  sepa-
rated, and  a  few  in  pairs  (see  Woodcut,  fig.  20).  The
two  broad  and  flat  surfaces  are  grooved  with  two  chief
lines  from  base  to  top ;  and  secondary  groovings  fol-
low the  contours  of  the  projecting  stumps.  Four
holes,  of  unequal  diameters,  are  pierced  in  the  wide
portion,  from  the  brow-antler  to  the  third  branch  or
"  royal "  above.  Four  is  the  greatest  number  of
holes  we  have  yet  met  with  in  these  implements  (see
also  B.  Plate  III.  &  IV.  fig.  5).
From  La  Madelaine.


J


a

Q>
1


g      6C


§


be

T3
O


I

I


Fig.  2.  This  Reindeer  Antler  has  still  a  portion  of  the

*  These  two  specimens  were  exhibited  in  the  Universal  Exposition  at  Paris  in  1867  (Mortillet'a  '  Mate-
riaux,'  vol.  iii.  p.  254).  See  also  Mortillet's  '  Materiaux,'  vol.  ii.  p.  555,  vol.  iii.  pp.  253  and  427,  and  vol.  iv.
p.  198,  for  notices  of  the  excavations  at  Schussenried.


KELIQTJ1JE

frontal  bone  adhering  to  it.     Its  brow-antler,  somewhat  distant  from  the  burr,
has  been  cut  off.    The  stem  bears  a  certain  number  of  parallel  longitudinal
groovings,  and  is  not  perforated.     A  similar  Implement  is  shown  by  fig.  3,  in
Double  Plate  B.  III.  &  IV.
From  La  Madelaine.

.  3.  This  long  stem  of  Reindeer  Antler,  detached  by  force  from  the  frontal,
has  been  shortened  by  fracture  at  its  upper  end.     It  is  marked  with  a  somewhat
deep  marginal  groove  in  its  middle  third.    "Where  the  brow-antler  projected,  the
stem  is  pierced  with  one  hole,  as  in  fig.  4s,  B.  Plate  III.  &  IV.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4<.  This  specimen  is  distinct  in  character  from  the  foregoing.  In  the  first
place,  it  is  made  from  the  beam  of  an  antler  of  the  Stag  or  Red  Deer
(Genus  elaphus),  where  the  middle  branch  projected.  Next,  the  base  of  the
horn  and  the  brow-antler  have  both  been  cut  away,  and  the  butt-end  has  been
thinned  down  to  a  simple  bevel,  until  the  spongy  middle  of  the  antler  is
exposed.  It  was  probably  a  common  wedge-like  implement  of  some  sort,  such
as  are  in  frequent  use  among  Esquimaux,  North- American  Indians,  and  others,
for  stripping  bark,  splitting  wood,  and  for  other  purposes,  and,  like  the  bevelled
bone  figured  at  page  43  (fig.  26),  used  also  for  dressing  skins.  Somewhat
similar  implements  are  figured  in  Lee's  Translation  of  Keller's  '  Lake-dwellings
of  Switzerland '  (1866),  pi.  12.  fig.  9,  pi.  13.  fig.  10,  pi.  23.  fig.  5 ;  and  in  Lub-
bock's  Translation  of  Nilsson's  '  Stone- Age '  (1868),  pi.  15.  fig.  257.  There  is
no  trace  in  this  specimen  (fig.  4)  of  hard  blows  having  been  given  on  the  flat-
cut  end  opposite  to  the  wedge-like  extremity.

From  La  Madelaine,  where  other  specimens  of  these   "  Rippers "   have
occurred.


REUQULE  AQUITANICa:

(  DORDOGNF.  .)


\      PL.


XXI


./«?/.  *t  liih.


DESCEIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXI.]  105


A.  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.

A.  PLATE  XXI.

The  five  specimens  here  figured  exhibit  very  different  styles  of  workmanship,
from  one  Rock-shelter — that  of  Laugerie  Haute.  Figure  1  was  shaped  with  care,
and  its  sharp  tapering  point  was  carefully  thinned  on  both  faces.  Figure  2  is
one  of  the  boldly  chipped,  flat,  symmetrical  specimens  that  indicate  the  treat-
ment of  a  master-hand,  or,  at  least,  of  an  experienced  Weapon-maker  among  the
Flint-folk.  Specimens  somewhat  like  this,  but  much  smaller,  have  been  figured
in  A.  Plates  IV.  &  VI.  Figure  3  required  but  little  dressing  to  reduce  its  narrow
portion  to  the  form  of  a  rough  drill.  Figure  4  is  a  very  rough  production,  only
distantly  resembling  the  neatly  lanceolate  and  biconvex  implement  such  as  fig.  5 ;
but,  as  its  thick  edge  appears  to  have  been  worn  down  by  use,  it  has  served  for
some  definite  purpose.  Figure  5,  though  small,  belongs  to  the  well-known  type
of  prehistoric  implements  of  chipped  stone,  more  or  less  oval  in  outline,  and
more  convex  on  one  face  than  the  other,  in  which  a  continuous  and  undulating
cutting  edge  has  resulted  from  the  method  followed  in  chipping  the  sides.  In
the  full  possession  of  these  characters  it  resembles  many  of  the  old  implements
from  the  gravel  of  the  Somme  and  elsewhere  much  more  nearly  than  the
specimen  from  Le  Moustier  described  and  figured  above,  page  6,  A.  Plate  III.
fig.  2,  and  rather  more  so  than  those  in  A.  Plate  XVII.  figs.  1  &  2,  page  78.
This  small,  thick,  rough,  leaf-shaped  type  of  implement  is  not  an  uncommon
.associate  of  the  more  abundant  and  more  highly  worked  lance-head  type  at
Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  1.  A  narrow  lanceolate  implement,  formed  out  of  a  thickish  flake  of  light-
brown  subtranslucent  flint,  by  chipping  on  the  outer  face;  and  towards  the
point  (lost  by   old  fracture)  the  inner  face  also  is  somewhat  reduced  by
chipping.     Mottled  grey  all  over  by  weathering.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  2.  A  fragment  of  a  large,   thin,  lanceolate  implement  of  brownish-grey,
granular,  subtranslucent  flint ;   made  by  bold  chipping  on  both  faces.     It  is


io6


RELIQITLE  AQTJITANICJE.


impossible  to  say  what  the  implement  was  when  entire.     The  notch  on  the
left-hand  edge  of  the  figure  is  due  to  accidental  fracture.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  3.  A  thick  tapering  drill  or  rimer,  formed  of  a  three-faced  flake  taken  from
the  outside  of  a  somewhat  worn  nodule  of  dark-grey  flint.     It  retains  two
patches  of  the  exterior,  and  is  weathered  dull  white  and  motley  grey.     This
implement  is  shaped  conveniently  for  being  held  in  the  hand.
From  Laugerie  Haute-

Fig.  4.  A  roughly  lanceolate  implement  of  brownish  subtranslucent  flint ;  thin,
sharp,  and  rugged  along  one  edge,  thick  and  crushed  on  the  other.  Very
slightly  glazed  by  age,  and  retaining  a  triangular  patch  of  the  old,  smooth,
yellowish  surface  of  the  flint  block  from  which  it  was  chipped.  The  thick
edge  seems  to  have  been  reduced  and  blunted  by  use;  the  hollow  curve
between  this  thick  edge  and  the  point  is  not  worn ;  but  the  somewhat  convex
opposite  edge  has  possibly  been  used.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  5.  A  somewhat  neatly  shaped,  small,  lanceolate  implement,  boldly  chipped
on  both  sides,  one  of  which  is  nearly  flat,  the  other  being  more  convex  (the
side  shown  in  the  figure).  White  and  opake  by  weathering;  but  the  flint
is  light-brown  and  subtranslucent  within,  as  may  be  seen  by  a  strong  trans-
mitted light;  and  it  is  cavernous  here  and  there  with  little  quartz-geodes.
The  edge  is  perfect  all  round,  and  unworn,  exhibiting  the  characteristic  undu-
lating line  left  by  the  alternate  right  and  left  chips  that  have  produced  the
edge  in  this  kind  of  stone  implement.

[The  figure  is  2  millimetres  deficient  in  breadth  at  the  broadest  part  of  the
specimen.]

From  Laugerie  Haute.


Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1*.

73?

2-874?

27

1-063

10

0-394

2t.

95?

3-740  ?

65?

2-559  ?

10?

0-394?

3.

110

4-331

35

1-378

17

0-669

4.

83

3-268

38

1-496

17

0-669

5.

78

3-071

42

1-654

12

0-512

Broken  at  the  point.


f  A  fragment.


KELIOULE  AOUITANICE  .


(  DORDOGNE  .)


A


PL.  XXII.


Louveau  del.  cth'th.


Jmp  Bccauet  a.  Paris.


DESCEIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXII.]         107


A.  PLATE  XXII.

Fig.  1.  A  large,  highly  arched  flake  of  drab-coloured,  granular,  opake  flint ;  care-
fully rounded  by  chipping  at  one  end  (uppermost  in  the  figure),  and  dressed  at
the  other  to  an  obliquely  rounded  solid  edge  (not  seen  in  the  figure),  which  has
been  crushed,  possibly  by  use.  One  of  the  lateral  edges  is  roughly  indented,
apparently  by  accidental  blows;  the  other  edge  is  partly  untouched,  and  in
part  affected  by  minute  chipping,  such  as  may  have  been  caused  by  partial  use
in  scraping.

From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  2.  A  large,  thick,  simple  flake  of  brown  subtranslucent  flint,  weathered
greyish,  and  retaining  some  of  the  original  crust.  It  is  roughly  triangular  in
section  for  more  than  half  its  length,  where  the  ridge-face  has  three  facets.
The  remaining  portion  has  externally  the  irregularly  rounded  outline  of  the
original  block.  One  edge  is  almost  smooth ;  the  other  is  somewhat  chipped  by
accident,  and  possibly  by  use.
From  Laugerie.

Fig.  3.  The  pointed  end  of  a  large  thick  flake  of  brown  subtranslucent  flint,
triangular  in  section,  somewhat  weathered.  Considerable  pains  have  been
expended  in  chipping  this  massive  pick-like  implement  into  shape.  The
remainder  of  the  instrument,  broken  off  by  an  old  fracture,  can  be  only  a
subject  for  conjecture.
From  Laugerie  Haute.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

1.
3t.'

millim.
155
225
110?

inch.

6-102
8-858
4-331  ?

millim.

50
52
55?

inch.

1-968
2-074
2-165?

millim.
15

22?

28?

inch.

0-591
0-866?

1-102?

*  We  have  not  been  able  to  measure  the  thickness  of  the  butt-end.


t  A  fragment.


I0g  KELIQUUE


A.  PLATE  XXIII.

We  have  here  (1)  a  small  Mortar-stone  of  sandstone*,  (2)  a  piece  of  naturally
hollowed  sandstone,  which  may  possibly  have  served  as  a  kind  of  Mortar,  (3)  a
Ruhber  of  soft  stone,  and  (4)  a  Mortar-stone  of  quartzite.  Les  Eyzies,  La  Made-
lame,  and  Laugerie  Basse  have  yielded  these  interesting  relics  of  the  Cave-folk,
connected  certainly  with  their  habits  of  life,  though  not  easy  of  exact  definition
as  to  their  uses.

We  have  already  (at  pages  59-62)  stated  almost  all  we  know  about  these
Mortar-stones ;  but  we  may  add  that  M.  Leplay,  Commissioner-General  of  the
International  Exposition  of  1867,  has  informed  us  that  he  has  seen  in  the  Ural
region  of  Siberia  stone  Mortars,  similar  to  those  from  La  Madelaine  and  Les
Eyzies,  used  by  the  children  for  breaking  Hazel-nuts  and  crushing  the  seeds  of
the  Cembro  Pinef.  Mr.  Eranks  has  shown  us  a  sketch  of  a  similar  round
Mortar-stone  from  Guinea  (Africa),  2f  inches  in  diameter,  1^  inch  thick,  with  a
hollow  34  m°h  wide  and  f  inch  deep.

With  respect  to  the  Rubber-stone,  we  may  mention  that  at  the  Exposition  of
1867  we  saw  two  round  flat  stones,  exhibited  by  Mr.  Lawrence  Butler,  of  Missouri,
one  of  which  (consisting  of  brecciated  yellow  jasper  with  a  dark-brown  siliceous
matrix,  and  3^  inches  in  diameter  and  f  inch  thick)  had  been  worn  quite  smooth,
and  was  said  to  have  been  used  in  dressing  skins ;  the  other  (of  granite  2j  inches
in  diameter)  was  a  knapping-stone,  having  a  small  hollow  chipped  out  on  each
face,  and  the  edge  worn  all  round.  This  (and  the  other  also,  perhaps)  was  said  to
have  been  used  for  bruising  the  grains  of  maize  J.

It  may  be  desirable  to  add  that  we  have  not  seen  among  our  Cave  specimens
any  sufficiently  symmetrical,  or  cheese-shaped,  orbicular  stones  at  all  comparable
to  the  playing-stones  used  by  the  Sandwich  Islanders  and  the  North-American
Indians.

*  Already  referred  to  at  page  .61,  note.

t  We  have  been  informed  also  that  at  Agra  and  elsewhere  in  India  pellets  of  clay,  used  for  shooting
from  the  pellet-bow,  are  rounded  by  hand  in  small  hollows  excavated  in  stones ;  and  also  that  children's
playing-marbles  are  there  made  by  manual  labour  in  such  little  cavities,  being  rounded  by  a  continued
rotatory  rubbing  with  water  in  the  hollow  of  the  stone.

J  M.  Mortillet  refers  to  these  two  specimens  as  "  Mortars,"  but  evidently  without  good  reason,  in  his
•  Materiaux  pour  1'histoire  de  1'homme,'  1867,  p.  354.


RELlQULfi   AOUTTANIC^E

(  DORJJOGNE  .)


A       PL.


XX  III


Ay  •  Becjn  it  2  fjn'


DESCEIPTIONS  OP  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXIII.]         109

Fig.  1.  A  small,  subglobular,  smooth  pebble  of  fine-grained  siliceous  sandstone,
dull,  drab-coloured,  and  finely  micaceous,  on  one  face  of  which  a  round  hollow
has  been  chipped  out.  It  is  imbedded  in  a  piece  of  the  Hearth-stuff  or  Bone-
breccia,  composed,  as  usual,  of  stalagmite  coloured  by  carbonaceous  matter
and  enclosing  fragments  of  bones,  with  small  chips  of  flints,  minute  flakes  of
mica,  &c.  In  the  breccia,  under  the  pebble,  is  also  seen  a  piece  qf  bright-red
soft  hematite — red  ochre.  [The  pebble  is  rather  larger  and  more  oval,  longer
transversely  by  3  millimetres,  than  shown  in  the  figure.]
From  Les  Eyzies.

French  millimetres.  English  inch.

Diameter,  long 43  1-693

„        short    40   1-575

From  the  base  of  the  hollow  to  the  1

other  face  of  the  pebble  J

Depth  of  the  hollow     4   0-157

Diameter  of  the  hollow,  long  23   0-906

„  •,,  short 21 0-827

Fig.  2.  A  water-worn  irregular-shaped  fragment  of  softish,  friable,  grey  sand-
stone, bearing  a  part  of  the  natural  impression  of  a  Bivalve  Shell  that  had  ribs
and  prickles,  such  as  Spondylus  Santonemis ;  but  the  markings  caused  by
the  ornament  of  the  shell  have  been  nearly  obliterated,  either  by  the  natural
action  of  water,  or  by  artificial  rubbing, — probably  by  both.  Some  slight
ferruginous  stains  remain  in  little  hollows  in  the  qavity;  but  they  may  be
due  rather  to  the  imbedding  material  than  to  the  use  of  this  saucer-like  stone
as  a  paint-mortar  or  ochre-pot.  The  sandstone  is  quartzose  and  glauconitic,
with,  a  calcareous  cement ;  and,  besides  the  cast  of  Spondylus,  it  contains  small
fragments  of  Bivalve  Shells,  with  other  obscure  traces  of  fossils.  Doubtlessly
it  was  derived  by  natural  agency  from  one  of  the  Cretaceous  rocks  traversed  by
the  Vezere  and  the  Dordogne ;  and  indeed  it  may  be  from  the  sandstone  near
Montignac  :  see  page  31.
From  La  Madelaine.

French  millimetres.  English  inches.

Length 70   2-756

Breadth     60    2-362

Thickness 35   1-378

Figs.  3  a  and  3  b.  An  oval  pebble  of  soft,  grey,  finely  micaceous  clayslate,  worn
down  (by  rubbing)  on  both  faces  into  nearly  flat  and  very  smooth,  oblique,  and
slightly  curved  surfaces  not  reaching  nearly  to  the  periphery,  nor  of  exactly


IJO  EELIQUI^E  AQUITANICJE.

the  same  outline  as  the  pebble.  One  of  the  rubbed  faces  (that  shown  in  the
figure)  is  to  the  outline  of  the  stone  as  9  : 12  and  8  : 10 ;  the  other  is  as  18  :  24
and  15  :  20.  The  surface  all  over  has  a  dirty  red  aspect  (deep-red  mixed  with
dark  bluish-grey);  under  a  lens,  in  sunlight,  it  glitters  with  minute  specks  of
mica ;  some  irregularities  on  one  surface  contain  reddish  sand-grains,  loosely
impacted,  with  micaceous  dirt ;  and  both  of  the  smooth  surfaces  show  trans-
verse stride.  [The  cross  lines  of  a  former  set  of  strife,  so  plainly  marked  on  the
left  hand  of  fig.  3  a,  are  barely  visible.]

This  has  been  a  Rubber,  without  doubt;  and  sandy  materials  have  been
acted  on  (intentionally  or  otherwise),  as  the  striae  and  the  lodged  sand-grains
indicate.  The  red  colour  at  once  suggests  that  hematite  has  been  ground
down  with  this  implement,  the  colour  being  general  over  the  surface,  though
stronger  on  the  much  smoothed  planes;  and  on  the  removal  of  the  surface
by  a  knife,  only  grey,  minutely  speckled  with  red  and  brown,  appears.  (By
inadvertence,  after  a  superficial  examination  only,  this  interesting  specimen
was  mentioned  as  a  "  flattish  oval  pebble  of  dirty-red  jasper  "  at  page  61 .)

Erom  La  Madelaine.

French  millimetres.  English  inches.

Diameter,  long 75   .. .  . .   2-953

„        short    65   2-559

Thickness 28   1-102

Figs.  4  a  and  4  b.  An  oval  and  flattish  pebble  of  quartzite,  nearly  white  within,
and  brownish  outside.  A  round  shallow  hollow  has  been  neatly  chipped  and
ground  out  of  the  middle  of  one  surface, — small  faint  pits  (apparently  due  to
chipping)  remaining  within  the  hollow  towards  the  margin,  whilst  the  middle
is  smooth  or  nearly  so.  The  hollow  was  excavated  after  the  discoloration  of
the  exterior  of  the  pebble,  and  is  not  itself  at  all  stained.  The  opposite  face  of
the  pebble  is  somewhat  bruised  about  the  middle,  just  where  it  touches  the
ground  when  at  rest.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

French  millimetres.                           English  inches.
Diameter,  long 200   7-874

„         short 142   5-591

Depth  of  the  hollow  5 0-197

From  the  base  of  the  hollow  to  the  1

.,      ,  I      40   1-575

other  face    J

Diameter  of  the  hollow,  long 45   1-772

»  „  short  42   .  .    1-654


RKLIQULE   AQUITANICjfi

(    DOHDOGNE  .  )


A


PL.  XX  TV.


vca"^  fie'


5za.JJzc-juei


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXIV.]          1 1 1


A.  PLATE  XXIV.

We  have  here  a  series  of  two  sorts  of  those  Implements  termed  "Scrapers"*,
such  as  wholly  occupy  A.  Plates  VII.,  X.,  and  XIX.  and  occur  also  in  some  of
the  other  A.  Plates,  being  dressed  portions  of  flakes,  with  either  more  or  less
oblong  or  more  or  less  ovate  outline,  and  having  either  one  or  hoth  ends  neatly
dressed  to  a  semicircular  or  elliptical  edge.  None  on  this  Plate  have  had  the
tang  produced  by  sharp  lateral  fracture  of  the  edges,  like  most  of  those  in
A.  Plate  VII.  Some  "  Scrapers  "  appear  to  have  been  used  at  one  end  or  the
other ;  but  others  have  their  ends  unaffected  by  wear,  whilst  one  or  both  of  their
lateral  edges  have  been  much  worn.  See  also  pages  22,  35,  83,  85,  &c.  In  this
Plate,  figs.  1-9  have  only  one  end  broadly  rounded  with  the  usual  solid  edge, —
the  other  end  either  tapering  to  a  blunt  point,  or  reduced  to  a  narrow  irregularly
rounded  apex,  its  lateral  edges  having  been  chipped  away  towards  the  narrow
end  more  or  less  symmetrically.  In  either  case  the  shape  of  the  original  flake
has  frequently  had  an  influence  in  determining  the  formation  of  these  tapering,
acute-ovate,  or  pear-shaped  Scrapers ;  and  a  remnant  of  the  bulb  of  percussion
is  sometimes  still  present,  especially  in  figs.  1,  2,  4,  and  6,  though  of  course  not
visible  on  the  surfaces  (ridge-faces)  shown  in  the  Plate.  All  the  specimens
figured  here  are  more  or  less  arched.

It  is  impossible  to  make  a  distinct  separation  between  the  tapering  and  the
oblong  forms :  thus  fig.  11  has,  and  figs.  5  and  12  probably  have  had,  neatly
rounded  solid  edges  at  each  end;  and  the  unequal  size  of  the  ends  in  these
Double  Scrapers  alone  separates  them  from  the  more  symmetrically  oblong
specimens.

The  Implements  figured  on  this  Plate  show  more  or  less  the  effects  of  weather-
ing, either  in  discoloration  or  glazing  of  the  surface.

Fig.  1.  Dark-coloured  spicular  flint.     Obliquely  acute-ovate;    slightly  worn  on
the  oblique  side  and  rounded  end.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  2.  Dark-grey  spicular  flint,  retaining  a  portion  of  the  crust  of  the  narrow
end.     High -backed  and  rough ;  worn  at  the  round  end.
From  Les  Eyzies.

*  Also  termed  "  Thumb-flints  "  by  English  archaeologists,  who  find  analogous  implements,  both  on  the
surface  and  accompanying  very  old  burials,  in  Yorkshire  and  elsewhere.


IJ2  KELIQUI^E  AQUITANKLE.

Fig.  3.  Light-brown,  subtranslucent,  mottled  outside.     Broad,  spatulate,  high-
backed,  rounded  at  the  ends,  both  of  which  have  been  partially  crushed.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  4.  Opake  shining  white  (weathered),  with  light-brown  subtranslucent  spots
of  the  unaltered  flint.     Neatly  subovate,  with  straightish  sides  and  bluntly
pointed  apex ;  edge  worn.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  5.  Grey-mottled  (weathered)  granular  flint.     Short  and  thick ;  edges  intact ;
ends  worn.
.     From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  6.  Subtranslucent  brown  flint.     Well  worn  at  the  side-edges,  and  crushed
at  the  ends.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  7.  Greyish  brown.     Neatly  shaped ;  acute-ovate  or  sub  triangular.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  8.  Another,  but  larger,  neat  subovate  Scraper  of  greyish-brown  flint.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  9.  Subtranslucent,   greyish-brown,    granular   flint,  mottled  by  weathering.
Neatly  oblong ;  rounded  at  one  end  only ;  less  carefully  trimmed  at  the  other ;
worn  on  the  lateral  edges.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  10.  Dark-coloured  spicular  flint.     High-backed ;    ends  not   quite  equally
rounded ;  worn  on  the  side-edges.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  11.  Dark-grey,  mottled  (weathered),  fossiliferous  flint.      Piece   of  a  thin
flake,  with  a  small  patch  of  the  crust  remaining  near  one  end ;  ends  unequally
rounded.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  12.  Dark-brown,  coarse,  spicular  flint.  Probably  once  oblong ;  evenly  worn
on  one  edge;  roughly  and  unevenly  worn  away  on  the  other,  especially
towards  the  narrower  end,  where  hard  scraping  and  other  usage  has  destroyed


DESCRIPTIONS  OP  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXIV.]          113


the  symmetry  of  the  implement ;   the  other  end  is  somewhat  crushed  at  its

ge-

From  Laugerie  Basse.


edge.


Fig.  13.  Brownish-grey,  granular,  Polyzoan  flint,  mottled  by  weathering.  An
almost  symmetrical  Double  Scraper,  slightly  worn  by  use  on  some  parts  of
its  edges.

From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  14.  Light-brown,  narrow,  symmetrical  Double  Scraper;  worn  on  the  side-
edges,  and  somewhat  crushed  at  the  larger  end.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  15.  A  small  Double  Scraper  of  light-brown  sub  translucent  flint,  with  par-
tially opake  exterior ;  edges  somewhat  worn.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  16.  Side-view  of  a  neat  oblong  Double   Scraper  of  subtranslucent  light-
brown  flint ;  edges*  worn  by  use  (scraping),  especially  at  the  sides.
From  Laugerie  Basse.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

•  French.

English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

57

2-244

35

1-378

11'

0-433

2.

60

2-362

30

1-181

17

0-669

3.

80

3-150

38

1-496

14

0-551

4.

55

2-165

31

1-220

9

0-354

5.

46

1-811

27

1-063

10

0-394

6.

55

2-165

24

0-945

8

0-315

7.

46

1-811

29

1-142

8

0-315

8.

76

2-992

49

1-929

15

0-591

9.

52

2-074

24

0-945

7

0-276

10.

51

2-008

25

0-984

10

0-394

11.

57

2-244

31

1-220

7

0-276

12.

60

2-362

22

0-866

6

0-236

13.

69

2-717

28

1-102

9

0-354

14.

71

2-795

22

0-866

8

0-315

15.

44

1-732

18

0-709

7

0-276

16.

54

2-126

27

1-063

10

0-394

KELIQTJLE  AQUITANICLE.


A.  PLATE  XXV.

This  Plate  shows  three  views  of  one  of  the  Chopper-like  Implements  common
in  the  Cave  at  Le  Moustier,  but  occurring  also  at  Les  Eyzies  and  La  Madelaine*.
See  page  17  and  A.  Plate  V.  In  this  as  in  other  instances,  a  part  of  the  original
surface  of  the  flint  block  remains,  one  margin  only  having  been  chipped  into
shape,  as  a  trenchant  edge,  boldly  curved,  and  reaching  from  the  sharp  apex  of
the  Chopper  to  within  a  short  distance  of  the  blunt  end  (5f  inches  in  diagonal
distance ;  6|  inches  along  the  curve),  this  latter  extremity  and  the  back  of  the
implement  retaining  the  characters  and  thickness  of  the  stone.  This  had  origi-
nally been  a  weathered  nodule  of  light-brown  flint,  broken  longitudinally  and
again  weathered  (glazed)  on  what  is  now  the  back  of  the  Chopper.  The  cutting
edge  was  made  with  many  bold  strokes  and  by  careful  dressing ;  and  its  surfaces
have  been  rendered  opake  and  drab-coloured  by  subsequent  weathering.  Some  of
the  cave-breccia  (stalagmite  and  fragments  of  Polyzoan  limestone)  still  adheres  to
one  side  of  this  fine  specimen  (figs.  Ib  and  lc).

From  Les  Eyzies.

French  millimetres.  English  inches.

Length 150-3   5-916

Breadth    76-2   3-000

Thickness..  32-3   .  .   1-666


*  The  Blackmore  Museum,  at  Salisbury,  possesses  a  flint  Chopper,  like  the  above,  that  was  found  at
Icklingham,  and  another  (less  neatly  shaped)  from  Bury-St.-Edmund's,  both  in  the  Valley  of  the  Lark,
Suffolk.  Mr.  John  Evans,  F.E.S.,  has  specimens  with  much  the  same  characters  from  the  Valley  of  the
Little  Ouse,  Norfolk,  from  gravel  at  Bournemouth,  Hants,  and  also  from  a  high-level  brick-earth  pit  in  the
Valley  of  the  Thames  at  Highbury.  Implements  of  a  similar  kind  were  found  by  Col.  A.  Lane  Fox.,  F.S.  A.,
nt  the  Cissbury  Camp,  in  Sussex.


UKUOUL/E  AQUTTANICLE

I   DOKDOGNE.)


A


I'L.XXV


/nifi .Becyuet  a


RELIQUIAE   AQUITANICLE

(  DORDOGN£. )


A


PL. XXVI.


ouveau  del.etlith.


Imp.Jlecauet  *  Pu


DESCEIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXVI.]         115


A.  PLATE  XXVI.

We  have  here  three  long,  arched,  tapering  flint  flakes,  with  unworn  edges,
that  may  have  served  for  Scratchers  or  Poignards.  One  of  them,  fig.  3,  is  a
simple  flake,  of  the  same  character  as  one,  from  Cro-Magnon  near  Les  Eyzies,
already  described,  page  86,  A.  Plate  XX.  fig.  3.  The  two  others  differ  from  the
last  in  that  they  have  been  struck  off  from  blocks  of  flint  which  had  been  dressed
so  as  to  present  one  or  more  long  ridges  or  corners,  brought  to  an  angle,  along  a
convex  curve,  by  coarse  chipping  at  right  angles  to  the  ridge-line.  A  smart  blow
at  one  end  of  a  ridge  thus  prepared,  in  a  direction  coincident  with  the  long  axis
of  the  dressed  block,  has  detached  a  ridge-flake,  parallel  with  the  curved  edge,
and  therefore  arched,  triangular  in  section,  blunt  at  the  end  where  the  blow
was  struck,  and  tapering  to  a  point  at  the  other  end,  where  the  force  of  the
concussion  died  out  between  the  mass  of  the  block  and  the  outer  edge  of  its  long
corner  or  ridge.

The  large  flint  "  cores  "  found  abundantly  in  the  surface-soil  near  Pressigny-le-
Grand,  Dep.  Indre  et  Loire,  and  so  well  known  as  "  Livres  de  beurre,"  have  been
well  described  by  Mr.  John  Evans*,  E.E/.S.,  as  purposely  dressed  by  lateral
chipping  to  a  raised  ridge,  for  the  production  of  long,  smooth  flakes  (9  or  10
inches  in  length),  by  blows  given  at  the  end  of  the  broad  ridge  along  the  middle  of
the  "  core,"  in  a  direction  parallel  to  the  long  axis  of  the  stone.  The  specimens,
however,  here  shown  by  figures  1  and  2  are  corner-flakes,  that  have  been  struck
from  blocks  designedly  dressed  with  a  strongly  convex  curve,  probably  for  the
further  production  of  long,  arched,  tapering,  and  smoother  flakes  (like  fig.  3),
after  the  roughly  worked  surface  of  the  block  had  been  flaked  off,  the  convexity
of  the  surface  giving,  in  the  hands  of  the  practised  workman,  to  the  flakes
successively  struck  off  an  arched  formt,  highly  esteemed,  it  may  be,  either  for
practical  value  or  for  fancied  grace.

Figs,  la  and  15.  Two  views  of  a  long,  narrow,  arched  "  corner-flake  "  (see  above)
of  dull,  purplish-drab,  subtranslucent  flint,  with  segments  of  concentric  ellip-
tical bands,  faint  and  reddish,  towards  the  ends  of  the  flake.  The  back  or

*  '  Archseologia,'  vol.  xl. ;  see  also  '  Proceedings  of  the  Ethnographical  Society,'  vol.  v.  p.  221.

t  This  graceful  curve  of  arched  knife-flakes  was  much  more  easily  and  perfectly  obtained  by  the  Aztecs
in  working  Obsidian,  their  material  for  stone  implements,  in  consequence  of  the  more  perfect  "  conchoidal
fracture  "  of  the  stone.  See  E.  B.  Tylor's  '  Anahuac,'  1861,  pages  96  and  98  &c.


u6


RELIQULE  AQUITANKLE.


outside  is  high  and  rough ;  the  concave  face  is  smooth  and  faintly  undulating ;
the  side-edges  are  sharp,  irregular,  but  nearly  parallel,  and  converge  towards  a
point  that  has  been  broken  off  (upper  end  in  the  figures).
From  La  Madelaine  (?).

Fig.  2.  A  "  corner-flake  "  of  light-brown,  translucent  flint,  granular  with  minute
fossils.  This  is  rather  less  highly  arched  than  fig.  1,  and  has  a  slight  twist ;
the  ridge  is  smoother  also,  having  been  partly  flaked ;  the  inner  face  is  more
undulating ;  the  edges  are  thinner,  the  flake  being  broader  and  the  ridge  lower,
except  towards  one  end  (lowest  in  the  figure),  which  once  tapered  to  a  point,
probably  triangular  in  section,  but  lost  by  an  old  fracture.
From  La  Madelaine  (?).

Figs.  3  a  and  3  b.  A  long,  arched,  tapering,  simple  flake  of  translucent,  brownish-
grey  flint,  with  purplish  bands,  weathered  opake  and  drab-coloured.  It  is  nearly
symmetrical,  pointed,  and  perfect.  The  ridge-face  is  composed  of  several  flake-
facets  ;  and  the  inner  face  (not  figured)  shows  plainly  the  "  bulb  of  percussion  "
and  numerous  segments  of  the  concentric  undulations  of  "conchoidal  fracture."
This  neat  and  perfect  flake  is  comparable  with  figure  3  of  A.  Plate  XX.,  but  it
is  more  symmetrical  and  is  gracefully  arched.
From  La  Madelaine  (?).


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

TJiiekness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

1.
2.
3.

millim.
193-6
206-5
171-4

inch.

7-625*
8-125t
6-750J

millim.
22-2
23-5
25-4

inch.

0-8750
0-9375
1-0000

millim.
12-7
12-7
9-5

inch.

0-500
0-500
0-375

Rough  corner-flakes,  such  as  figs.  1  and  2,  but  mostly  smaller  and  less  perfect,
are  common  at  both  La  Madelaine  and  Les  Eyzies,  and  are  not  wanting  at
Laugerie  and  le  Gorge  d'Enfer.  Mr.  J.  Evans,  F.E.S.,  has  similar  flakes,  with
the  chipped  ridge,  from  Denmark.

*  Not  quite  perfect  in  length.     Over  the  curve  209-5  millims.  (S|  inches),
t  Not  quite  perfect  in  length.     Over  the  curve  216  millims.  (8£  inches).
J  Over  the  curve  184  millims.  (7|  inches).


AQUITANKLE

(  DORDOGNE  .)


JU  del  el  nth.


Imp .  Jlecau  et  A  Paris .


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXVII.]         117


A.  PLATE  XXVII.

These  broad  rough  flakes,  of  which  only  two  (figs.  1  and  3)  have  been  dressed
at  the  edges,  are  chiefly  from  Le  Moustier,  fig.  3  being  from  Laugerie.  Figure  2,
having  no  marks  of  use  on  it,  was  probably  a  waste  flake ;  figs.  4,  5,  and  6  appear
to  have  served  for  temporary  use  in  scraping  or  cutting  flesh,  bone,  or  wood,  as
one  edge  at  least  is  slightly  worn  in  each.  Figures  1  and  3  have  a  certain  simi-
larity of  form,  evidently  due  to  design,  in  their  falciform  shape,  in  the  notch  on
the  concave  edge,  and  in  their  shoulder  and  tang.  These  two  specimens  appear
to  have  been  prepared  for  some  special  use,  probably  as  Side-scrapers ;  their  ends
are  too  blunt  for  good  Spear-heads.

Fig.  1.  A  portion  of  a  flake  of  dark-grey  flint,  dressed  to  a  knife-shape  with  one
edge  convex  and  the  other  doubly  concave ;  the  notch  in  the  upper  moiety  of
the  latter  is  old.  The  apex  is  bluntly  pointed ;  the  butt  is  truncate  (end  of
flake)  and  reduced  in  vertical  thickness,  especially  at  the  edges,  by  chipping.
Weathered  light-mottled  grey,  especially  on  the  broad  face.
From  Le  Moustier.

Fig.  2.  A  simple  rough  flake  of  dark-grey  and  highly  spicular  flint.     The  "  bulb
of  percussion,"  prominent  on  the  flake-face  (not  shown  in  the  figure),  has  been
partly  chipped  off.     The  thin  end  of  the  flake  (upwards  in  the  figure)  is  natu-
rally chisel-shaped ;  but,  like  the  other  edges,  it  is  intact.
From  Le  Moustier.

Fig.  3.  A  drab-coloured,  knife-like,  double-edged  Scraper,  much  resembling  fig.  1,
but  rather  more  symmetrical.  The  dressed  convex  edge  terminates  in  a  blunt
apex  at  each  end ;  and  these  are  much  more  nearly  alike  than  in  fig.  1.  The
opposite  edge  is  more  equally  divided  by  the  prominent  part  of  the  flake,  and  is
of  nearly  uniform  thickness  throughout.  The  notch  in  its  longer  half  is  of  old
date ;  for  stalagmite  is  attached  to  its  hollow  surface.  This  implement  can  be
very  conveniently  held  between  the  thumb  and  bent  fingers,  with  its  convex
edge  exposed,  and  less  conveniently  in  other  positions.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  4.  A  broad  thick  flake  of  grey-brown,  subtranslucent  flint,  retaining  on  the
ridge-face  a  portion  of  the  original  calcareous  crust  of  the  flint-nodule.     The


ng  KELIQIHLE  AQUITANICJE.

butt  has  been  somewhat  reduced  by  chipping.     Except  where  the  old  crust
forms  a  part  of  it,  the  edge  is  thin  at  the  sides  and  apex ;  and  it  has  been  used,
especially  on  the  straight  side.
From  Le  Moustier.

TV.  5.  A  simple  rough  flake  of  brownish-grey  flint ;  similar  in  general  character
to  fig.  2.     Somewhat  worn  on  the  long  edge.
From  Le  Moustier.

Fig.  6.  A  broad,  rough,  simple  flake  of  drab-coloured  flint,  with  adherent  stalag-
mite.   The  long  edge,  and  the  lower  and  thinner  part  of  the  opposite  edge,
have  been  slightly  used.
From  Le  Moustier.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millitn.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

95

3-740   .

35

1-378

13

0-512

2.

88

3-465

43

1-693

12

0-472

3.

95

3-740

37

1-457

12

0-472

4.

113

4-449

57

2-244

21

0-827

5.

81

3-189

40

1-575

10

0-394

6.

104

4-095

55

2-165

16

0-630

Such  rough  flakes  as  figs.  2, 4, 5,  and  6,  when  reduced  on  the  edges  by  chipping,
would  supply  the  extremely  numerous  subtriangular  implements,  often  crude,  but
sometimes  very  neat,  and  always  more  or  less  adapted  for  scraping,  cutting,  or
piercing,  with  which  the  Moustier  Cave  especially  abounded,  such  for  instance  as
figs.  1  and  2  in  A.  Plate  XII.,  and  figs.  2  and  3  in  A.  Plate  XXVIII.


RELIQULE  AQUITANICJE

(  DORDOGNE  . )


A


PL.  XXVI II


Zouveau  del  el  hih.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXVIII.]        119


A.  PLATE  XXVIII.

Four  very  different  types  of  flint  implements,  from  the  Cave  at  Le  Moustier,
are  here  shown*.  Figure  1  is  a  small,  sharp,  thin-pointed  Spear-head,  pear-shaped,
biconvex,  and  chipped  all  over,  of  the  same  type  as  many  of  the  old  implements
from  the  Valley  of  the  Somme  and  elsewhere.  Several  specimens  of  this  type,  of
different  sizes,  have  been  found  at  Le  Moustier  (see,  for  instance,  A.  Plate  III.
fig.  2,  and  A.  Plate  XVII.  figs.  1  and  2);  and  one  from  Laugerie  Haute  is  figured
in  A.  Plate  XXI.  fig.  5.  A  small  rough  flint  Lance-head  (?)  of  this  kind  was
found  in  Wokey  Hole,  Somersetshire,  by  Mr.  Boyd  Dawkins,  and  is  figured  in
the  '  Geol.  Soc.  Quart.  Journ.'  vol.  xviii.  p.  118.  Such  a  one  also  has  been  brought
by  Mr.  Bauerman  from  the  mines  of  "Wady  Taibe,  in  Arabia  Petrsea.  Others,
of  larger  size,  have  been  found  in  the  ancient  tumuli  ("  mounds ")  of  North
America ;  and  others  were  met  with  by  Col.  A.  Lane  Fox,  F.S.A.,  among  the  flint
tools  and  weapons  at  the  Camp-station  of  Cissbury,  in  Sussex ;  and  the  same  type
is  common  among  the  implements  of  quartzite  found  in  India.  Figure  2  is
somewhat  similar  to  fig.  1,  but  it  is  a  leaf-shaped  piece  of  flake,  dressed  on  one
side  only, — and  in  so  much  resembles  the  larger  and  rougher  specimens  from
Le  Moustier,  A.  Plate  III.  fig.  1,  and  A.  Plate  XI.  figs.  1  and  3,  and  that  from
Laugerie  Basse,  A.  Plate  XI.  fig.  2 ;  similarly  dressed  flakes  also,  oval  and  ovate,
are  associated  with  the  biconvex  "  Haches  "  and  "  Langues  du  chat "  wherever
these  are  found.  Figure  3  is  a  roughly  trimmed,  lozenge-shaped  piece  of  flat
flake,  and  may  also  have  served  as  a  Spear-head,  or  as  a  pointed  Axe-blade.  Very
many  of  the  tools  and  weapons  from  Le  Moustier  have  been  similarly  fashioned
from  rough  flakes,  by  chipping  away  their  edges,  more  or  less  carefully,  into  tri-
angular, obliquely  elliptical,  and  various  leaf -like  outlines,  the  bulb  (if  remaining)
rarely  lying  in  the  middle  of  the  butt-end,  but  on  one  side  or  the  other  of  the  long
axis  of  the  specimen.  Indeed  fig.  2  really  belongs  to  this  category,  though  it  is
of  superior  manufacture.  Figure  4  is  a  neatly  chipped  and  symmetrical  piece  of
a  thick  flake,  and  may  have  served  as  a  Wedge,  Chisel,  Adze,  Axe,  Spear-head,  or
Scraper.  Figure  5,  a  carefully  dressed  long-ovate  Arrow-head,  belongs  to  a  type
known  by  this  specimen  only  (if  correctly  localized)  at  Le  Moustier,  where  small
implements,  even  small  flakes,  are  not  usual.  It  belongs  to  the  same  category  as
the  well  chipped  weapon-heads  from  Laugerie  Haute,  figured  in  A.  Plate  IV.

*  There  is  some  doubt  as  to  the  locality  of  fig.  5.


120


KELIQTILE  AQTJITANICJE.


Fi"s.  la  and  li.  Blackish-brown,  glazed  flint.     Boldly  chipped  all  over.     Neatly
pear-shaped.    Edge  entire,  and  very  thin  at  the  apex.     [The  rounded  butt  has
not  quite  its  full  dimensions  given  in  the  figure.]
From  Le  Moustier.

Fig.  2.  Blackish-grey  flint,  slightly  glazed.  Leaf-shaped  or  acute-ovate ;  sharp-
edged,  pointed,  and  symmetrical  at  the  apex ;  rough  at  the  butt.  Very  care-
fully dressed  out  of  a  flake,  the  "  bulb  "  of  which,  situated  under  the  rough  por-
tion in  the  lower  left-hand  portion  of  the  figure,  and  oblique  to  the  long  axis  of
the  weapon,  has  been  reduced  by  chipping.  This  is  a  remarkably  symmetrical
example  of  the  flake  tools  so  common  at  Le  Moustier,  and  found,  indeed,  more
or  less  abundantly  even  in  the  surface-soil  of  the  British  Islands  and  elsewhere ;
to  such  implements  we  have  already  alluded  at  pages  117  and  119.
From  Le  Moustier.

Fig.  3.  Mottled  grey  by  weathering ;  roughly  rhomboidal ;  thin-edged  at  the  apex
(two  opposite  parts  of  the  edge  have  been  freshly  fractured).     The  butt  is  where
the  "  bulb  "  was  broken  away.
From  Le  Moustier.

Fig.  4.  A  piece  of  a  straight,  thick,  broad  flake ;  grey-mottled ;  slipper-shaped ;
smooth  and  subconvex  below,  ridged  above ;  carefully  trimmed  along  its
slightly  convex  sides  and  broadly  chisel-shaped  apex  to  a  uniform  solid  cutting
edge.  The  butt  is  truncate  (the  flake-end),  and  has  been  thinned  by  chipping
above  and  by  the  removal  of  the  "  bulb  "  below.
From  Le  Moustier.

Fig.  5.  Translucent  light-brown  flint,  whitened  and  opake  by  surface-change.
Elongate  leaf-shaped,  with  a  tolerably  sharp  apex  and  a  short  stalk-like  tang.
Symmetrical  and  thin,  having  been  carefully  chipped  on  both  faces.
From  Le  Moustier  (?).


Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

71

2-795

46

1-811

17

0-669

2.

65

2-559

48

1-890

15

0-591

3.

101

3-976

78

3-071

17

0-669

4.

108

4-252

55

2-165

13

0-512

5.

47

1-850

18

0-709

4

0-157

RELIQULE  AQUITANIGE

( DORDOGNE.    )


Zouveau  del  c tilth.


Imp.Jlccju.et  i  Paris-


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XVII.]        121


R  BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  &c.

B.  PLATE  XVII.

Fig.  1.  The  broken  bone  of  a  Bird  (the  radius  of  a  Crane,  perhaps) ;  the  upper
third  is  wanting.  The  lower  articular  extremity  is  too  much  damaged  to  allow
of  exact  definition  of  the  species.  The  bone  does  not  appear  to  have  been  cut
with  a  saw ;  but  the  splintery  edge  of  the  fractured  bone  seems  to  have  been
beaten  down.  The  shaft  bears  throughout  some  fine  longitudinal  lines,  indi-
cating that  the  bone  has  been  scraped  with  a  sharp  and  faintly  notched  tool,
showing  the  effect  that  we  should  expect  to  see  produced  with  the  sharp  edge
of  a  piece  of  broken  glass.  Subsequently  to  these,  the  bone  has  been  marked,
in  the  upper  part,  with  several  oblique  transverse  notches,  plainly  visible  in  the
figure ;  and  below  these  there  is  a  group  of  lines  cut  across  in  different  direc-
tions, one  longitudinally,  and  others  obliquely.  On  the  opposite  surface,  the
upper  notches  are  reproduced,  but  more  neatly  disposed  in  zigzag,  and  in  such
a  way  as  to  represent  a  series  of  very  angular  chevrons,  of  which  one  of  the
strokes  is  always  more  marked  than  the  other.  We  do  not  propose  any  inter-
pretation for  these  marks  or  different  combinations  of  notches,  which  could
scarcely  have  had  an  intentional  meaning.

Although  we  have  figured  this  hollow  bone  on  the  same  Plate  with  the
Sewing-needles,  because  as  a  little  cylinder,  hollow  to  the  base,  it  is  capable  of
holding  three  or  four  of  the  most  delicate  of  our  bone  Needles,  yet  we  do  not
wish  to  state  it  as  a  certainty,  or  any  thing  more  than  a  possibility,  that  this
may  have  been  employed  for  the  same  purpose  as  the  needle-cases  of  our  own
or  of  ancient  times.

From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  2.  The  lower  part  of  the  metacarpal  bone  o£  a  Reindeer,  represented  by  its

posterior  face.     At  a,  above  the  projecting  ridge  of  one  of  the  articular  condyles,

are  two  transverse  notches,  indicating  the  spot  where  the  tendon,  intended  to  be

used  for  sewing-thread,  must  have  been  cut,  as  above  said  (at  pages  131  and  138).

From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  3.  The  upper  portion  of  a  metatarsal  bone  of  a  Reindeer,  represented  by  its


,22  RELIQULE  AQUITANKLE.

anterior  surface.     In  this  very  compact  part  of  the  bone,  we  see  the  large
vertical  crevice  made  hy  sawing  away  long  thin  plates  or  spillets  of  hard  bone
fit  for  being  made  into  Needles.
Prom  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  A  tarsal  bone  of  a  Reindeer,  the  cubo-scaphoid  of  the  right  side.  Its
anterior  surface  is  marked  with  several  transverse  notches  analogous  to  those
(shown  at  «)  in  the  lower  part  of  the  Reindeer's  metacarpal  (fig.  2).  These
notches  have  most  probably  been  produced,  as  in  the  former  case,  by  the  edge
of  the  tool  used  in  cutting  away  the  tendons.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  5.  This  is  a  small  rounded  rod  of  Reindeer  antler,  of  which  one  end  is
broken,  and  the  other  marked  with  blunt  lateral  projections  and  notches.

Neater  notches  are  seen  on  the  somewhat  similar  specimens,  figs.  21  and  22,
which  were  probably  intended  for  the  same  use.  It  was  thought  at  first  that
instruments  of  this  form  might  have  been  used  in  some  kinds  of  knitting  and
netting  (Comptes  Rendus,  1864,  vol.  liii.  p.  404) ;  but  subsequently,  since  this
Plate  was  drawn,  perfect  specimens  have  been  found,  ending  in  a  sharp  point,
and  hence  regarded  as  weapon-heads,  to  be  tied  on  the  shafts  of  javelins,  for
instance.  See  above,  pages  68  and  71,  and  B.  Plate  X.  fig.  4.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  6.  Fragment  of  an  undetermined  implement  of  Reindeer  antler,  on  which
we  think  we  recognize  an  engraving  of  a  human  hand  with  part  of  the  forearm
covered  with  a  kind  of  ornamental  clothing.     See,  for  more  details,  page  137 ;
and  compare  B.  Plate  IX.  figs.  "La  and  16,  page  69.
From  La  Madelaine.

Figs.  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  and  12.  Needles  of  different  lengths,  most  of  which  seem  to
be  made  of  Reindeer  antler.  Figs.  7  and  12  have  their  eyes  broken.

There  is  some  difficulty  in  supposing  that  such  long  and  thin  Needles  of  bone
could  have  resisted  the  necessary  pressure  in  piercing  the  twofold  thickness  of
skins  to  be  joined  edge  to  edge  by  overcasting  or  any  other  mode  of  sewing.
At  present  such  long  needles  are  used  for  other  purposes,  of  which  we  have
spoken  above,  pages  135  &c.  We  leave  the  reader  to  choose  for  himself  the
interpretation  which  he  thinks  the  most  proper.

All  these  Needles  came  from  the  Station  of  La  Madelaine.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XVII.]        123

Figs.  13,  14,  15,  and  16.  These  are  well-proportioned  Needles,  of  more  finished
workmanship,  and  carefully  polished.  The  bony  substance  is  very  compact  in
fig.  16,  in  which  the  eye,  having  been  broken,  has  been  re-made,  the  old  fracture
of  the  end  remaining  visible.  This  Needle  seems  to  have  been  made  of  a  flake
of  very  compact  Bird's  bone.  It  is  not  rare  with  us  to  find  Needles  that  have
been  made  of  Bird's  bone ;  and  they  may  be  recognized  at  the  first  glance,
because,  instead  of  being  regularly  rounded  throughout,  they  remain  flattened
even  in  the  roundest  portion  of  their  stem.  We  have  already  illustrated  at
page  135  (Woodcuts,  figs.  53  and  54)  two  other  Needles,  in  which  the  piercing
of  the  eye  is  complete  in  one,  and  only  begun  in  the  other.
These  Needles  caine  in  great  part  from  La  Madelaine.

Figs.  17,  18,  19,  and  20.  Needles,  of  which  the  point  has  been  broken,  and  re-
made with  more  or  less  care.     In  figs.  18  and  20  the  new  point  seems  to  have
been  made  by  simple  lateral  cuts.
From  La  Madelaine  ?

Figs.  21  and  22.  These  specimens  are  regarded  as  analogous  to  fig.  5,  described
above,  page  122.

From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  23.  The  lower  extremity  of  the  metacarpal  of  a  Horse.  On  the  figured
surface  are  a  certain  number  of  longitudinal  notches  made  by  various  saw-cuts,  so
as  to  remove  such  spillets  as  were  suitable  for  the  manufacture  of  Needles.  We
know  that  the  leg-bones  of  the  Horse  are  very  compact  in  tissue ;  and  we  have
experimentally  proved  that  a  Needle  made  of  a  fresh  bone  of  a  Horse  will
easily  pierce  the  double  thickness  of  a  skin  glove.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  24.  The  laterally  notched  point  of  an  implement  which  some  would  recognize
as  a  kind  of  knitting  or  crochet  needle;  but  is  it  not  more  likely  to  be  the  point
of  a  small  barbed  Harpoon-head  ?  (Compare  B.  Plate  VI.  figs.  7,  8,  and  9 ;  p.  57.)
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  25.  Part  of  another  small  bluntly  notched   implement  made  of  Reindeer
antler,  and  similar  to  fig.  22.     The  tapering  end  in  the  figure  bears  on  one  side
three  shallow  irregular  notches.     Its  use  is  unexplained.
From  La  Madelaine.


]2.  EELIQULE  AQUITANIC^E.


B.  PLATE  XVIII.

Fif.  1.  This  is  an  implement  made  of  Reindeer  antler,  the  use  of  which  seems  to
us  difficult  to  explain.  The  surface  shown  in  fig.  la  is  convex ;  and  the  opposite
one  is  flat,  as  seen  in  fig.  16.  The  surface  shown  in  fig.  la  is  marked  along  the
middle  throughout  most  of  its  length  by  two  parallel  close-set  lines ;  and  on
each  side  of  these  median  lines  are  carved  in  relief  two  series  of  rhombs,
obliquely  set,  alternate  on  either  side.  On  the  larger  moiety  of  the  surface
(left-hand,  in  the  figure)  there  is  an  ornamental  border-line  of  continuous
zigzags  or  chevrons,  such  as  occurs  very  often  in  works  of  art  of  the  Reindeer
Age.  The  upper  and  tapering  extremity  of  this  implement  is  marked  with
some  oblique  scratches,  in  pairs,  but  unequal  and  shallow ;  the  lower  end  has
six  long,  vertical,  parallel,  and  nearly  regular  notches.

On  the  opposite  face  (not  figured)  this  specimen  shows  for  the  greatest  part
of  its  length  a  large  number  of  shallow  notches,  obliquely  diverging  to  the
right  and  left  of  a  median  line,  some  pointing  towards  the  top  and  others
towards  the  butt  of  the  instrument ;  and  this  lower  end  is  hollowed,  for  from
15  to  18  lines,  with  a  broad  and  shallow  groove.
•From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  2.  Another  implement  of  Reindeer  antler,  convex  on  one  side  and  flat  on  the
other.  Its  ends  taper  to  bluntish  points :  the  end  uppermost  in  the  figure  is
shaped  by  lateral  cuts ;  the  lower  end  is  plano-convex  with  thin  edges.  The
middle  of  the  convex  face  is  cut  into  two  series  of  broad  irregular  notches,
alternating  on  either  side  of  a  narrow  median  ridge,  and  separated  one  from
another  by  hold  nodular  eminences*.

The  opposite  face  (not  shown  in  the  figure)  is  flat  in  its  breadth  and  slightly
convex  longitudinally :  it  is  scored  with  numerous  transverse  lines,  at  unequal
distances.

The  use  of  this  specimen  is  uncertain.  [Possibly  it  may  have  served  as  a
spike  lashed  on  obliquely  to  the  bevelled  end  of  a  shaft,  such  as  Australian  and
South-American  savages  use  in  many  of  their  single-barbed  spears  and  javelins
(see  also  p.  58).— T.  R.  J.]

From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  3.  An  implement  of  Reindeer  antler,  tapering  in  its  upper  fifth  to  a  sharp

*  This  specimen  was  figured  in  outline  in  the  '  Eevue  Archeologique,'  1864.


REIIQULE  AQUITANIC^E

( DORJ10GNE  .)


o


B.


PI .  XVIII

6*


Imp  .Hecyuet  &


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XVIII.]

point,  and  flattened  on  either  face  (see  fig.  3  b)  for  the  rest  of  its  length,  but
cut  away  more  on  one  side  than  the  other,  so  that  it  thins  away  at  its  broad,
thin,  and  rounded  butt.  It  is  thus  suited  for  being  spliced,  with  its  broadest
and  oblique  surface,  on  the  bevelled  shaft  of  such  a  weapon  as  a  javelin,  forming
its  straight  point.  Or  it  may  have  constituted  a  portion  of  a  fishing  instrument ;
in  which  case  the  point  would  be  turned  inwards  on  a  curved  stem  (see  p.  5 1 ,
fig.  14),  and  would  have  the  effect  of  the  barb  in  such  a  fish-hook,  made  of  two
pieces,  as  those  still  used  by  some  savages.  See  pages  55  and  58.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  The  specimen  of  which  two  faces  are  here  illustrated  is  also  made  of
Reindeer  antler.  For  this  implement  various  uses  have  been  suggested,  none
of  which  as  yet  have  appeared  quite  trustworthy.  In  its  middle  portion  this
specimen  is  highly  ornamented  with  carvings  in  relief  and  with  engraved  lines,
which  are  carefully  shown  in  the  figures*.  One  of  the  surfaces,  represented  by
fig.  4  a,  shows  distinctly  a  median  longitudinal  keel,  or  salient  line,  whilst  the
opposite  side  (not  figured)  is,  on  the  contrary,  engraved  with  a  corresponding
hollow  line.  Though  the  different  ornaments  are  not  identical  on  all  the
surfaces,  yet  they  are  approximately  symmetrical.

One  extremity  of  the  specimen  ends  in  a  blunt  point,  one  of  the  sides  of
which  has  decayed  away  (see  the  lower  part  of  fig.  4  a).  The  other  end,  as  shown
in  fig.  4  b,  is  carved  into  a  kind  of  beak,  grooved  with  a  hollow  deep  enough  to
hold  a  certain  quantity  of  more  or  less  solid  substance,  such  as  fat  or  marrow.
Hence  some  have  thought  that  this  specimen  might  have  been  a  marrow-spoon,
more  or  less  analogous  to  such  an  implement  as,  according  to  travellers,  the
Esquimaux  make  use  of  to  extract  the  marrow  from  the  large  cavities  of  long
bones.  We  notice  this  interpretation  of  the  possible  use  of  this  specimen
(which,  however,  we  regard  as  very  hazardous)  because  it  has  been  the  im-
pression of  many  who  have  examined  it.  [Viewed  as  being  figured  upside
down  in  the  illustrations  here  given,  this  specimen  is  analogous  to  a  very
common  type  of  spear-head,  in  which  the  butt-end  is  hollowed  for  the  reception
of  the  pointed  shaft,  such  as  are  and  have  been  used  by  various  savages  all
over  the  world. — T.  R.  J.]

From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  5.  A  weapon-head  made  of  Reindeer  antler,  tapering  at  the  ends  and  thicker
along  the  middle,  which,  however,  is  not  quite  cylindrical,  as  seen  in  the  section

*  Figured  also  in  the  '  Revue  Archeologique,'  1864.


126


EELIQULE  AQUITANKLE.


shown  by  fig.  5  b.  The  more  convex  surface,  which  is  represented  in  our  Plate,
is  engraved  with  several  nearly  regular,  undulating,  and  rather  deep,  longi-
tudinal lines.  The  upper  extremity  is  round  in  section  and  carefully  pointed.
The  lower  end  is  less  carefully  tapered,  and  may  have  been  intended  simply  for
insertion  into  the  terminal  hollow  of  a  shaft ;  and  thus  the  instrument  may  be
regarded  as  a  pointed  javelin-head*.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Figs.  6  a  and  6  b  illustrate  a  large  portion  of  a  carved  stem  of  Reindeer  antler,
irregularly  rounded  on  one  face  and  flattened  on  the  other ;  the  latter,  however,
is  defaced  by  decay  and  somewhat  reduced.  The  greatest  portion  of  the  convex
surface  presents  along  the  centre  a  longitudinal  band,  left  projecting  (as  shown
in  fig.  6  b)  by  two  sunken  lines  on  either  side ;  and  the  band  is  itself  cut  at  its
edges  with  numerous  triangular  notches,  which  give  the  effect  of  two  borders  of
chevrons.  The  carving  is  somewhat  carelessly  done.  The  instrument  must
have  been  longer,  for  both  ends  bear  the  marks  of  ancient  fracture.  It  would
be  difficult  to  offer  any  suggestion  as  to  its  intended  use.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

*  This  specimen  also  has  been  figured  in  the  '  Revue  Archeologique,'  1864.


RKLIQULE  AQUITANICa:  .


A


PL  .XXIX


-Louveau.  del.  etlith.


Jmp .^Bectruet  &  .Pans.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXIX.]  127


A.  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.

A.  PLATE  XXIX.

Fig.  1.  A  piece  of  quartzose  schist,  already  figured  elsewhere*  as  bearing  on  it  a
representation   in   faint   outline   of  the   fore  part  of  a  Herbivore,  with  very
doubtful  indications  of  horns ;  whilst  the  eye  is  simply  indicated  by  a  dot,
and  the  legs  are  rather  confusedly  drawn.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Figs.  2  a  and  2  b.  A  small  calcareous  pebble,  flat  on  one  side,  and  irregularly  con-
vex on  the  other ;  it  is  marked  with  a  great  many  lines  radiating  in  different
directions  (probably  with  the  sharp  edge  of  a  flint),  of  which  we  do  not  try
to  guess  the  meaning.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  3.  A  pebble  of  leptinolite,  perceptibly  concave  on  one  side,  and  convex  on
the  other,  and  bearing  on  its  two  faces  certain  combinations  of  lines.     On  the
side  figured  we  may,  with  a  little  effort,  recognize  the  rudiments  of  an  animal
form  incompletely  defined.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  4.  A  portion  of  an  elongate  pebble  of  limestone,  broken  across  one  of  its
extremities  by  a  recent  fracture.     It  also  bears  on  its  two  faces  numerous
transverse,  more  or  less  parallel  lines,  made  by  a  sharp  instrument.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  5.  An  irregular-shaped  slab  of  mica-schist,  on  which  can  be  distinguished  the
remains  of  the  outlines  of  an  animal,  whose  species  is  sufficiently  indicated  by  the
antlers  placed  in  front  of  the  forehead,  which,  it  is  known,  particularly  charac-
terize the  Reindeer.  This  figure,  engraved  with  a  sharp  point,  must  have  been
originally  more  perfect ;  and  even  since  the  piece  of  schist  has  been  broken,
one  recognizes  on  the  part  where  the  head  and  neck  of  the  animal  were
continued,  numerous  fine  scratches,  probably  produced  by  repeated  friction

*  "  Cavernes  du  Perigord,"  in  the  '  Revue  Archeologique,'  1864.


128


RELIQUIAE  AQTJITANICLE.


with  some  instrument  sharpened  upon  it.  These  striae  are  sufficiently  well
marked  in  the  figure.

Such  stones,  with  engraved  figures  of  animals,  were  very  rare  in  1863,  when
we  found  those  here  figured.  But  since  then  some  have  been  found  at  other
Stations  of  the  same  Reindeer  Period,  and  especially  at  Bruniquel  (De"p.  Tarn
et  Garonne),  by  M.  Peccadeau  de  1'Isle,  to  which  we  hope  he  will  soon  give
publicity.

From  Les  Eyzies.


Fig.  21.

A  Double  Awl  or  Graver.     From  La  Madelaine.


Each  end  of  this  flake  has  been  crushed  down  or  worn  away  into  two  irregular  notches,  on  either  side  of
a  bluntish  point.  The  chipping  and  crushing  force  has  been  applied  on  one  surface  only,  namely  the  flat
face  of  the  flake,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  outlines.


RELlQULfi  AQUITANIC^E

( DORDOGNE .)


A


PL  .  XXX


Xonrea.li  del.  etliih.


Imp  .JHecjuet  a  faris .


DESCEIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.    [  A.  XXX.]          129


A.  PLATE  XXX.

The  pieces  of  stone  here  figured  have  been  used  in  grinding  and  polishing.
Figure  1  appears  fitted  for  polishing  flat  and  grooved  surfaces  of  wood  or  bone,
or  for  flattening  seams  in  sewn  skins.  Figures  2,  3,  4,  and  5  are  of  soft  sand-
stone —  such  as  the  Cretaceous  strata  of  the  Valley  of  the  Vezere  supply,—  and  have
evidently  been  used  in  the  rounding  and  sharpening  of  splinters  and  spillets  of
bone,  intended  for  needles,  awls,  arrow-heads,  &c.  (see  p.  133).

Fig.  1.  A  thin  flake  of  limestone,  somewhat  polished  on  its  two  faces  and  its
rounded  edge.  The  figured  surface  is  slightly  concave,  as  if  it  had  been  used
for  sharpening  or  polishing  some  not  very  hard  substances.

?


Fig.  2.  An  angular  fragment  of  brownish-yellow  friable  sandstone,  consisting  of
quartz  grains  loosely  cemented  with  carbonate  of  lime.     Besides  the  five  grooves
shown  in  the  figure,  there  are  four  similar  on  the  other  side,  having  the  same
direction,  but  somewhat  more  divergent  and  deeper.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  3.  Portion  of  a  long   thin  grindstone   of  soft,  drab-coloured,  fine-grained
sandstone  (not  calcareous),  deeply  worn  on  both  faces  and  irregularly  rounded
on  the  edges.     It  seems  to  have  been  broader  once  :
former  grooves  on  the  opposite   faces   have   met,  Fig.  22.

dividing  the  stone  longitudinally  ;   and  the  speci-    Outline  of  the  lower  end  of  fig.  3.
men  has  been  broken  across,  at  the  lower  end  of
the  figure,  by  a  recent  fracture.     Three  grooves  are
shown  in  the  figure,  —  one  deep   and  narrow,  one
broad,  and  the  trace  of  a  third.     The  other  face  is*

scored  with  two  deep  longitudinal  grooves  (one  of  which  undercuts  the  inter-
vening rounded  ridge),  and  a  fainter  groove.     See  Woodcut,  fig.  22.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  An  angular  fragment  of  brownish-grey,  friable,  siliceous  sandstone,  deeply
grooved  on  the  face  that  is  figured,  and  irregularly  scored  here  and  there  on  the
other  face  and  edges.
From  La  Madelaine  (?).

t


130


KELIQU1JE  AQUITANKLE.


Fi".  5.  A  fragment  of  flat-bedded,  yellowish,  friable,  quartzose  sandstone,  with
calcareous  cement  and  slightly  micaceous.     Worn  on  one  side,  as  shown  by  the
figure ;  the  other  parts  retaining  their  natural  surfaces.     [The  figure  is  rather
too  small  in  the  lower  part.]
From  La  Madelaine.


Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

56

2-205

32

1-260

(?)

(?)

2.

70

2-756

45

1-772

18

0-709

3.

42

1-654

25

0-984

10

0-393

4.

75

2-953

68

2-677

32

1-260

5.

97

3-819

100

3-937

32

1-260

Fig.  23.

An  Awl  or  Graver.     From  La  Madelaine.


The  blunt  point  in  this  implement  has  been  formed  by  the  two  edges  at  the  end  being  crushed  down,  or
worn  away  by  scraping,  on  one  side  from  the  flake-face  (making  the  notch),  and  on  the  other  from  the
ridge-face.


RELIQUIAE  AQUITANIC2E

( DORDOGNZ •  )


A  .  PL. XXXI

4.


Louvea-u  del.  etlith.


cyuet


DESCEIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXXI.]         1 3 1


A.  PLATE  XXXI.

These  are  common  flint  flakes,  of  which  some  are  more  or  less  dressed  into
shape,  such  as  figs.  3,  5,  and  11 ;  and  these,  with  figs.  1,  2,  4,  6,  and  9,  may  have-
been  intended  for  heads  of  weapons.  Figure  8  is  either  a  double-pointed  weapon-
head,  to  be  lashed  on  obliquely,  serving  for  both  point  and  barb  (like  some  bone
specimens,  pages  58  and  124),  or  it  has  been  a  scraping-tool  in  the  hands  of  the
old  carver  of  bone  and  wood.

Fig.  1.  Simple  flake ;  brownish-grey,  minutely  chipped  at  the  edges,  on  alternate
sides,  perhaps  by  slight  use  as  a  scraper.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  2.  Simple  flake ;  translucent,  brown.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  3.  Triangular  flake,  translucent,   brownish;    weathered  grey.      Somewhat
shaped  towards  the  point,  and  narrowed  at  the  butt,  by  a  slight  dressing.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  4.  Simple  flake,  dark  grey ;  edges  minutely  chipped  here  and  there.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  5.  Narrow  flake  of  grey  and  granular  flint ;  shaped  at  point,  butt,  and  one
side,  by  careful  chipping  on  the  face  not  shown  in  the  figure.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  6.  Narrow,  thick,  simple  flake  of  dark-grey,  mottled,  spicular  flint,  chipped
on  the  convex  edge  near  the  point.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  7.  The  larger  portion  of  a  broad,  thin,  arched  flake;   brownish-grey  and
mottled.    [The  dotted  lines  in  the  figure  are  probably  more  than  half  too  long.]
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  8.  Dark  brownish-grey,  mottled  flake,  shaped  and  worn.  The  point  upper-
most in  the  figure  has  been  made  by  both  sides  having  been  chipped  and  worn
away  at  right  angles  to  the  lower  face ;  but  the  lower  point  has  lost  the  sides


I  32


EELIQTJI^E  AQUITANIOE.


by  chipping  on  the  alternate  faces,  and  by  use  perhaps  as  an  Awl  or  Rimer,  or
in  scraping  with  the  edges  of  the  upper  and  lower  faces  alternately.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

.  9.  Simple  flake  of  dark-grey,  mottled,  coarse  flint.     Edges  slightly  roughened
by  wear  and  tear.

From  Laugerie  Basse.

i"1.  10.  Simple  flake  (with  "bulb  of  percussion  "  on  the  face  not  figured)  of  white
(burnt  ?)  flint,  with  some  stalagmitic  adhesion,  and  stained  yellowish  outside.
Untouched  by  use.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  11.  A  fine  simple  flake  of  mottled  fossiliferous  flint,  carefully  shaped  into  a
leaf-like  or  lanceolate  form  by  dressing  here  and  there  on  the  edges.
From  Les  Eyzies.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Tliickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

milliin.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

37

1-457

12

0-472

6

0-2:5(1

2.

31

1-220

18

0-709

3

0-118

3.

42

1-654

26

1-024

8

0-315

4.

39

1-535

12

0-472

5

0-197

5.

62

2-441

15

0-591

5

0-197

6.

79

3-110

13

0-512

6

0-286

7*.

125  ?

4-921  ?

40

1-575

10

0-394

8.

Cl

2-402

14

0-551

5

0-197

9.

55

2-  105

14

0-551

4

0-157

10.

93

3-661

40

1-575

11

0-438

11.

113

4-449

50

1-969

13

0-512

The  specimen  has  lost  about  a  sixth  of  its  length.


RELIQUIAE  AQUITAN1GE


A


PL.  XXXII


lonvea.li  del.  etlith.


Imp  JJecyuet  a.  Paris .


IP

DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXXII.]        133


A.  PLATE  XXXII.

In  the  flint  Implements  here  figured  we  have  an  assortment  of  markedly  different
types  from  four  or  five  Stations ;  but,  excepting  figs.  6  and  10,  they  are  such  as
have  been  already  figured.  The  former  is  a  delicate  flake,  one  edge  of  which  has
been  worn  down  with  scraping  wood  or  bone ;  and  numbers  of  these  little  side-
scrapers  occur  at  the  Laugeries  and  at  La  Madelaine.  The  latter  is  a  short  strong
knife,  with  narrow  haft.  Figure  7  may  be  noticed  as  representing  an  extreme  stage
of  the  laborious  chipping  of  the  Laugerie  Haute  Station.

Fig.  1.  A  short  oblong  Scraper  or  "Thumb-flint,"  mottled  grey;  rounded  at  one
end,  and  obliquely  truncate  at  the  other.     Compare  A.  Plate  X.  figs.  5  and  6,
A.  Plate  XX.  fig.  6,  A.  Plate  XXIV.,  &c.
From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  2.  Piece  of  an  arched  flake  of  dark  spicular  flint ;  pointed  at  the  ends  (more
perfectly  at  one  end  than  the  other)  by  bold  lateral  fractures.     No  marks  of
wear.     See  also  fig.  5,  A.  Plate  VIII.,  described  at  page  28.
From ?

Fig.  3.  A  somewhat  pentagonal,  irregular-shaped  Scraper ;    of  the  same  mottled
grey  flint  as  that  of  fig.  1.     This  specimen  much  resembles  that  seen  in  fig.  8,
A.  Plate  VII.,  page  24.
From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  4.  A  narrow-lanceolate  Weapon-head  of  brownish  flint,  weathered  grey ;  made
out  of  a  simple  flake  by  careful  chipping  at  the  point,  along  the  convex  edge,
and  at  the  butt.

From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  5.  A  fragment  of  a  well-wrought,  thin,  lanceolate  implement  of  opaque,  yel-
lowish-white, granular  flint,  weathered  or  burnt  (?).     The  large  notches  on  the
edges  are  of  recent  origin.     For  other  specimens  of  this  type  of  workmanship
see  A.  Plates  IV.  and  VI.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  6.  A  small  narrow  flake,  light-brown  and  translucent,  which  has  been  used
on  one  side  as  a  Scraper.  These  small  side-scrapers,  very  common  at  the
Laugeries  and  La  Madelaine,  were  probably  set  lengthwise  and  edgewise  in  a

u


134


EELIQULE  AQUITAJSTKLE.


piece  of  wood  or  bone  to  strengthen  their  back,  and  give  a  handle  to  the  work-
man, as  in  a  small  Spokeshave.     Compare  figures  9  and  10,  in  A.  Plate  II.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  7.  A  fragment  of  a  well-worked  implement  of  whitish,  opaque,  granular  flint.
The  edges  of  this  portion  (probably  from  near  the  point  of  the  weapon)  are
deeply  and  broadly  notched  with  careful  chipping.     See  also  fig.  5.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  8.  An  imperfect  spatulate  Scraper*  of  yellow  flint,  similar  to  such  as  have
been  already  described  and  figured  (page  25,  A.  Plate  VII.  fig.  13 ;   and  pages
83  and  84,  A.  Plate  XIX.  figs.  4-7).
From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  9.  An  irregularly  ovate  implement  (perhaps  a  rough  Javelin-head),  boldly
chipped  on  both  faces,  and  bearing  a  continuous  and  flexuous  cutting  edge  all
round,  which,  however,  is  less  trenchant  at  the  narrow  end  or  butt.  "Weathered
white.  This  implement  is  ruder  and  smaller  than  that  shown  in  A.  Plate  XXI.
fig.  5  (from  Laugerie  Haute,  p.  106),  but  exhibits  the  same  style  of  workmanship.
From  Badegoule.

Fig.  10.  A  dressed  piece  of  flint  flake,  light-brown  within,  whitened  externally  by
weathering,  and  retaining  some  of  the  cave-earth  here  and  there  on  its  surface.  It
is  a  kind  of  Knife.  One  of  the  edges  of  the  flake  has  been  broken  away  along  an

Fig.  24.

Stone  Knife,  hafted  with  fur  and  cord.     From  Australia.     (Half  natural  size.)


irregular  line ;  and  this  rough  edge  constitutes  Ihe  back  of  the  Knife ;  the  other
edge,  trimmed  round  towards  the  point  (downwards  in  the  figure),  is  the  blade.
From  Badegoule.

*  The  dotted  lines  in  the  figure  are  doubtless  too  long  for  the  rapid  curve  of  the  perfect  instrument.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXXII.]        135

In  the  Christy  Collection  is  an  analogous  implement  made  out  of  a  thick  flake
of  lydite  by  the  Australian  aborigines,  and  furnished  with  a  handle  of  Kangaroo
fur,  lashed  on  the  narrow  butt  with  native  string.

The  Australian  implement  here  referred  to  has  been  described  and  figured  by
Mr.  John  Evans,  F.K.S.,  in  his  'Ancient  Stone  Implements,  Weapons,  and
Ornaments  of  Great  Britain '  (8vo,  1872),  p.  264,  fig.  198 ;  and  to  him  we  are
indebted  for  the  use  of  the  wood  block  (fig.  24)  in  this  place.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

53

2-087

30

1-181

7

0-276

2.

53

2-087

27

1-063

10

0-394

3.

42

1-654

35

1-378

9

0-354

4.

116

4-567

26

1-024

9

0-354

5*.

45?

1-772?

23?

0-906?

5?

0-197?

6.

55

2-165

6

0-236

2

0-079

7*.

30?

1-181?

15?

0-591  ?

6?

0-236?

8t-

110?

4-331  ?

35

1-378

11

0-433

9.

53

2-087

25

0-984

10

0-394

10.

68

2-677

21

0-827

6

0-236

*  These  are  fragments.          t  This  has  lost  perhaps  half  an  inch  of  its  rounded  end.


Fig.  25.    (See  page  136 ;  and  figs.  4  &  6  in  A.  Plate  XXIII.)

Portion  of  a  Flint  Tool  with  semicircular  edge.     Dordogne.


U  2


KELIQULE  AQUITAJNIOE.


A.  PLATE  XXXIII.

In  this  Plate  we  have  figures  of  some  very  interesting  specimens  of  stone  work.
1.  A  neat  and  symmetrical  Lance-head  (unfortunately  broken),  dressed  on  both
faces,  and  rather  more  oval  than  those  of  Laugerie.  2.  A  sharp-pointed  Lance-
head  (?)  or  tool,  chipped  out  of  a  triangular  flake.  3.  Two  pieces  of  the  peculiar
Scrapers  or  Knives  (figs.  4  &  6),  of  semilunar  outline,  strongly  convex  on  one
edge  and  slightly  incurved  on  the  other,  such  as  are  common  in  Denmark,  but
rare  elsewhere.  Another  specimen,  met  with  in  a  cave  in  the  Dordogne  district,
imperfect,  and  differing  from  the  others  by  its  straighter  edge  not  being  incurved,
has  been  presented  to  the  Christy  Collection  by  Mr.  John  Evans,  F.R.S.,  and  is
shown  in  the  woodcut  (fig.  25,  p.  135).  This  is  of  greyish-brown,  granular,  sub-
translucent  flint,  partially  weathered  with  bluish-white  mottling,  and  retaining  a
whitey-brown  patch  of  the  original  crust.  4.  A  piece  of  stout  flake  dressed  as  a
Saw  or  a  Comb  (for  wool,  hair,  or  fibre),  and  well  fitting  to  the  hand.

Fig.  1.  A  portion  of  a  carefully  dressed,  acute-oval  Implement  or  Lance-head  of
mottled  cream-coloured  flint,  of  the  same  type  as  those  figured  in  A.  Plate  IV.,
but  not  quite  so  pointed.
From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  2.   A  simple  triangular  flake  of  dark-grey,  mottled,   sponge-bearing  flint.
Edges  minutely  jagged,  probably  by  accidental  wear  and  tear.     Surface  bearing
small  patches  of  stalagmitic  concretion.
From  Le  Moustier.

Fig.  3.  Irregularly  triangular,  or  shoulder-of-mutton- shaped  Implement  of  dark-
grey  flint*,  narrowed  towards  the  point,  and  sharpened  by  careful  chipping  on
one  face.

From  Le  Moustier.

Fig.  4.  Moiety  of  a  semilunar  or  sickle-like,  neatly  dressed,  flat  Implement  of
brownish-grey  flint,  carefully  chipped  on  one  face.  It  is  mottled  grey  by
weathering :  and  the  fracture  is  old ;  for  its  face  is  equally  weathered  with  the
rest  of  the  surface.  In  the  drawing  of  this  imperfect  Implement  the  outline  of

*  Remarks  on  such  Implements,  fashioned  from  rough  triangular  flakes,  are  made  at  page  1 19.


RELIQULE  AQUITANKLE

(  DORHOGNE ;)


A.


PL.  XXXIII


del.  etlith.


-5np  Bectftiet  a.  Paris.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXXIII.]      137

the  whole  is  given,  hypothetically,  as  corresponding  with  the  shape  of  the
crescentic  flint  Implements  of  enigmatical  use,  of  which  notices  are  given  in
Worsaae's  '  Nordiske  Oldsager  i  det  Kongelige  Museum  i  Rjobenhavn '  (8vo,
Copenhagen,  1859),  p.  15;  in  Morlot's  '  L'Archeologie  du  Mecklenbourg,'
p.  27  ;  in  Lubbock's  '  Prehistoric  Times,'  1865,  p.  74 ;  and  in  Mr.  E.  T.  Stevens's
'  Flint  Chips :  a  Guide  to  Prehistoric  Archaeology '  &c.  (8vo,  London,  1870),
pp.  74,  75.

From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  5.  A  portion  of  a  coarse,  thick,  straight  flake  of  grey  flint,  the  thinnest  edge
of  which  has  been,  apparently  with  intention,  jagged  with  six  nearly  regular
notches.  Were  it  not  for  the  thickness  of  the  edge  (broadly  wedge-shape  in
section)  it  would  probably  serve  as  a  Saw ;  but  it  is  much  better  adapted  as  a
comb  for  tearing  flax  or  other  fibrous  substances.
From  Le  Moustier.

Fig.  6.  A  moiety  of  another  curved  flat  Implement,  but  tapering  more  delicately
than  fig.  4,  and  with  less  boldly  jagged  edges.     It  is  of  dull  amber-coloured
flint,  and  retains  some  of  the  ochreous  crust  of  the  original  nodule.
From  Le  Moustier.


Figure.

Length

Breadth.

Thickness.

.   French.

English.

French.

English.

French.            English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

72

2-835

42

1-654

5

0-197

2.

80

3-150

48

1-890

7

0-276

3.

70

2-756

47

1-850

5

0-197

4*.
5.

[55]
72

[2-165]
2-835

[38]
30

[1-496]
1-181

[5]
8

[0-197]
0-315

6*.

[84]

[3-307]

[36]

[1-417]

[5]

[0-197]

These  are  fragments.


'38


KELIQUI^E  AQUITAJSTICLE.


A.  PLATE  XXXIV.


A  series  of  the  common  round-ended  Scraper-like  Implements,  or  simple  flakes
more  or  less  dressed  and  rounded  at  one  or  both  ends,  are  here  figured.  They  are
from  several  Stations.  In  some  instances  signs  of  their  side-edges  having  been
used  in  scraping  are  evident  enough,  as  we  have  noticed  in  other  instances
(pages  23  &c.).  More  or  less  oblong  Scrapers  of  similar  and  allied  types  are
figured  in  A.  Plates  VII.,  X.,  XIX.,  XX.,  and  XXIV.,  also  here  and  there  among
the  figures  in  other  plates,  and  in  the  woodcut  (fig.  3«,  b,  c)  at  page  22.

The  applicability,  and  indeed  actual  use,  of  the  round-ended  flakes,  called
"  Scrapers,"  "  Thumb-flints,"  and  "  Finger-flints,"  for  striking  a  light  with  a  piece
of  iron-pyrites*,  has  been  clearly  illustrated  of  late  by  Mr.  John  Evans,  F.R.S.,
and  the  Rev.  Canon  Greenwell  (see  Evans's  '  Ancient  Stone  Implements  of  Great
Britain,'  1872,  pages  284  &  285).

Fig.  1.  A  neat  brownish  specimen  of  the  common  round-ended  Implement  or
"Thumb-flint."  Each  of  the  lateral  edges  has  been  worn  down  to  a  nearly
straight  line ;  and  one  of  them  (on  the  left  hand  in  the  figure)  has  been  worn
away  to  some  little  distance  within  the  original  curve  of  the  rounded  end.  A
smoothing  of  the  minute  jags  of  the  worn  edges  is  perhaps  referable  to  a
secondary  use  of  the  edges ;  and  just  such  an  edge  is  produced  in  a  flint  flake
by  scraping  a  bone  with  it,  and  afterwards  using  it  for  detaching  gristle  and
sinew,  or  for  shaping  a  piece  of  wood.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  2.  A  broad,  flat,  round-ended  Scraper  of  grey  granular  fossiliferous  flint.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  3.  A  roughly  shaped  Scraper-like  Implement  of  dark-grey  mottled  flint,  with
small  patches  of  stalagmitic  cement  still  attached.
From  Le  Moustier.
This  specimen  seems  to  be  particularly  well  adapted  for  "  striking  a  light,"

*  We  are  informed  by  Mr.  A.  Madgett  that  he  has  himself  seen  two  flints  used  to  light  a  fire  at  Thran-
destone,  Suffolk,  and  that  the  practice  was  not  at  all  uncommon  in  Suffolk  and  Norfolk  within  the  last  fifty
years.  He  says  that  "  they  were  certainly  two  flints,  very  dark,  with  sharp  edges.  The  '  tinder  '  used  was
very  dry  moss,  laid  on  the  ground ;  and  the  flints  were  struck  together  very  quickly,  just  above  it."


RELIQULE  AOUITANIC.E

(   DORDOGNE  .  )


A


PL.  XXXIV.


-Lam


del,  e£  ]i


-Sup  ^Becyuet  a.  ATI'S.


KELIQTJLE   AQUITANICJE.

the  above  mentioned  stone  (fig.  10)  or  a  piece  of  pyrites.  Further,  the  trun-
cated end  of  fig.  7  coincides  with  this  action,  as  also  do  the  squared  end  of
fig.  4  (of  the  same  Plate)  and  the  oblique  end  of  fig.  6.

Other  specimens,  such  as  fig.  7,  A.  Plate  VII.,  and  fig.  3  of  A.  Plate  XII.,  may
be  selected  as  having  probably  been  used  for  striking  fire, — a  necessity  which
the  Reindeer-hunters  must  have  felt  and  overcome  whenever  they  resorted  to
the  Caverns  for  cooking  their  food.  The  implements  for  this  and  other  prac-
tices and  employments  seem  to  have  been  made  on  the  spot,  often  in  considerable
numbers,  and  left  there  when  they  had  served  the  occasion,  either  not  cared  for,
or  superstitiously  thrown  aside  as  not  to  be  used  elsewhere  or  a  second  time.

Fig.  4.  A  neat  Scraper,  made  from  a  simple  flat  flake  of  translucent,  granular,
brown  Flint,  the  truncated  end  being  chipped  round.     This  end  has  possibly
been  used ;  and  the  side-edges  have  been  partially  worn  by  use.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  5.  A  narrow,  arched,  amber-coloured  flake,  roughly  truncate  at  the  bulb-end
(lowest  in  the  figure),  and  dressed  round  at  the  other  extremity.    Edges  not  worn.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  6.  A  symmetrical,  boldly  dressed  Scraper,  much  narrower  at  one  end  than
the  other.     Grey  and  brown  banded  flint.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  7.  A  narrow,  somewhat  arched,  yellow-banded  flake,  neatly  rounded  at  the
ends.     Edges  unworn.     Patches  of  hearth-stuff  still  attached.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  8.  A  simple,  arched,  shiny  flake  of  dark-coloured  flint,  with  the  bulb-end
neatly  dressed  to  an  elliptical  outline ;  the  other  end  rounded,  and  perhaps  used.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  9.  A  simple,  slightly  arched  flake,  rounded  at  one  end  as  usual.     Externally
opaque  and  discoloured  (dirty  yellow)  by  weathering.     The  totally  unworn  state
of  the  edges  is  in  strong  contrast  with  the  condition  of  the  edges  in  fig.  1.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  10.  A  narrow,  slightly  arched,  simple  Grattoir,  of  drab  opnque  flint.     Edges
not  used.

From  Les  Eyzies.


;


DESCEIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXXIV.]       141

Pig.  11.  An  irregularly  elliptical  arched  Grattoir,  dressed  symmetrically  at  the
broader  end,  and  less  carefully  at  the  other.     A  portion  of  one  edge  (low  down
on  the  left-hand  side  in  the  figure)  near  the  rounded  extremity  seems  to  have
been  worn  away.
From  Le  Moustier.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

72

2-835

20

0-787

6

0-236

2.

72

2-835

29

1-142

7

0-276

3.

79

3-110

40

1-575

15

0-591

4.

84

3-307

27

1-063"

6

0-236

5.

76

2-992

14

0-551

6

0-236

6.

96

3-780

33

1-299

16

0-630

7.

87

3-425

20

0-787

8

0-315

8.

123'

4-843

24

0-945

8

0-315

9.

105

4-134

28

1-102

7

0-276

10.

95

3-740

19

0-748

8

0-315

11.

86

3-386

30

1-181

10

0-394

X


2  RELIQUIAE  AQUITANKLE.


R  BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  &c.

B.  PLATE  XIX.  &  XX.     (Double.)

This  double  Plate  comprises  careful  figures  of  some  of  tbe  choicest  specimens
of  prehistoric  art,  and  the  most  valuable  (as  indicative  of  primaeval  taste  and  habits)
that  the  Caves  of  Aquitaine  have  yielded.  They  are  all  from  the  rock-shelter  of
Laugerie  Basse.  The  carvings  of  Horse  and  Reindeer,  the  sketches  of  Ibex  and
two  Bovine  forms,  both  broadly  and  specially  indicate  the  habits  and  surroundings
of  the  Cave-folk ;  whilst  the  adaptation  of  the  well-cut  figures  to  the  conditions  of
the  material,  and  even  to  the  shape  of  a  handle,  bespeaks  high  intelligence,  thought,
and  talent.

These  specimens  have  already  been  treated  of  by  Messrs.  Lartet  and  Christy,
and  partially  illustrated,  in  their  Memoirs,  (1)  "  On  engraved  and  carved  Objects
of  Prehistoric  Date  in  Western  Europe"*  ('Revue  Archeologique,'  nouvelle  serie,
5e  Annee,  Avril  1864),  and  (2)  "  New  observations  on  the  Existence  of  Man  in
Central  France  at  a  time  when  the  country  was  inhabited  by  the  Reindeer  and
other  animals  not  living  there  now"t  ('Compt.  Rendus  de  1'Acad.  des  Sciences,'
vol.  Iviii.  pp.  401  &c.,  and  '  Annales  des  Sciences  Naturelles,'  5m'  s£rie,  Zoologie,
vol.  i.  pp.  232  &c.,  1864).

Fig.  1.  This  is  a  long,  slightly  curved  Harpoon-head  (?),  carved  out  of  Antler,
broken  at  one  end,  and  furnished  with  a  lancet-shaped  point  (imperfect)  and  a
single  barb  at  the  other.  Below  the  barb  the  stem  is  carved,  in  low  relief,  so
as  to  represent  a  Horse's  head ;  the  face  (2  inches  long),  on  the  same  edge  witli
the  barb,  is  surmounted  with  a  pair  of  rather  long,  pointed,  parallel  ears  (f  inch
long),  towards  the  barb ;  and  the  eyes,  nostrils,  lips,  and  hairy  jowl  are  given
on  either  side  of  the  stem.  Beyond  the  Horse's  face,  on  one  side  of  the  stem,
is  an  elongated  figure  of  a  Deer,  in  low  relief,  imperfectly  carved,  the  hind
quarters  not  being  defined.  The  head  and  neck  are  carefully  executed;  the
left  fore  leg  roughly  indicated:  the  left-hand  Antler  (apparently  that  of  a

*  "  Cavernes  du  Perigord :  Objets  graves  et  sculptes  des  temps  prehistoriques  dans  1'Europe  occidentale."
t  "  Note  sur  de  nouvelles  observations  relatives  a  1'existence  de  1'homme  dans  le  centre  de  la  France  a  une
ou  cette  contree  etait  habitee  par  le  renne  et  d'autres  animaux  qui  n'y  vivent  pas  de  nos  jours."


RELIQULE   AQUITANICJE  .

(  D  ORD  O  ONE  .  )


2ouna.ii  del.  et  lith.


B.    PL.


XIX  &  XX


Imp.£ec^utt  i  Pins


DESCEIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XIX.  XX.]      143

Reindeer)  is  carried  over  the  edge ;  and  with  a  stem  £  inch  long,  furnished  with
a  short  brow-tyne,  it  stretches  backwards  (If  inch)  until  lost  in  indistinct
longitudinal  cuttings.  An  irregular  wavy  line  along  the  flank  reminds  us  of
the  longitudinal  chevrons  in  B.  Plate  II.  fig.  2,  and  may  perhaps  refer  to  a
shaggy  coat  of  hair.

A  roughly  attempted  delineation  of  a  short  tail,  hind  quarters,  and  belly-line
appears  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  stem ;  but  here  the  intended  head  seems  to
have  been  sacrificed  to  the  antler  brought  over  from  the  other  side.  On  this
side  also,  a  series  of  interrupted  linear  gashes,  and  some  less  distinct  scorings,
serve  for  ornament  along  the  remainder  of  the  surface.

On  the  other  side,  a  faintly  cut  outline  of  a  Fish  ornaments  the  space  between
the  Deer's  nose  and  the  broken  end  of  the  stem.

From  Laugerie  Basse.

In  the  '  Annales  des  Sciences  Naturelles,'  1864,  5me  s6r.,  Zoologie,  vol.  i.  p.  237,
this  specimen  is  thus  referred  to  by  MM.  Lartet  and  Christy  in  their  memoir
"  On  the  Existence  of  Man  in  Prehistoric  Times  :" —

"  Among  the  carved  specimens  found  at  Laugerie  Basse  is  a  rounded  stem  or
shaft,  made  out  of  the  beam  of  Reindeer  Antler,  and  having  a  lance-point  with
a  lateral  barb.  Was  it  a  tool,  a  weapon,  or  a  sign  of  authority  ?  We  cannot  tell.
Just  below  the  barb  there  is  a  Horse's  head  carved,  in  low  relief,  on  three  sides
of  the  stem,  with  the  ears  lying  out  flat,  rather  long  for  a  Horse,  but  not  long
enough  for  an  Ass.  Beyond  this  head  is  another  with  a  slender  muzzle,  and
with  branching  antlers.  The  brow-antler  projects  forward,  whilst  the  beam
and  palm  are  turned  backwards  along  the  stem.  The  slenderness  of  head  and
muzzle,  the  dilated  form  of  the  brow-antler,  and  the  general  physiognomy  are
referable  to  the  Reindeer  rather  than  the  Stag.

"  In  front  of  the  head  of  this  creature  the  stem  bears  a  slightly  scratched
outline,  which  we  may  regard  as  that  of  a  Fish."

This  specimen  is  also  described  (with  rough  illustrations)  by  MM.  Lartet  and
Christy  in  their  paper  "  On  the  Caverns  of  Perigord,"  reprinted  from  the  '  Revue
Archeologique,'  1864,  at  p.  30,  pi.  2.  fig.  10.  Here  the  dilatation  of  the  brow-
antler  is  especially  referred  to  as  a  distinctive  Reindeer  feature.

Fig.  2.  This  is  a  large  portion  of  the  palm  of  a  Reindeer's  brow-antler,  bearing  a
nearly  entire  engraved  outline  of  a  horned  animal  like  an  Ibex*  (Wild  Goat  or
Bouquetin).  The  horns  point  upwards  with  a  slight  backward  curve.  At  a

*  See  '  G'avernes  du  Purigord,'  loc.  supra  tit.  p.  29 ;  and  '  Ann.  Sc.  Nat,,'  he.  cit.  p.  237.


144


KELIQTJI^E


little  distance  behind  the  horns  is  an  indication  of  deep-set,  sharp,  longish  ears,
pointing  somewhat  backward.  Below  the  chin  appears  a  tuft  of  hair,  or  beard.
By  these  features  the  figure  is  referable  to  an  Ibex,  although  the  rather  full
forehead  and  the  swollen  crest  behind  the  ears  are  somewhat  opposed  to  this
conclusion.  The  smallness  of  the  horns  indicates  probably  a  young  or  female

Fig.  28.    (See  also  B.  Plate  XIX.  &  XX.  fig.  2.)


individual.  The  Woodcut,  fig.  28,  gives  the  shape  of  the  muzzle  better  than
the  lithograph.

The  ancient  artist  has  curiously  figured  both  hind  legs  of  the  animal  as
turned,  at  the  hocks,  abruptly  forwards  and  upwards,  so  that  the  hoofs  (distinctly
cloven)  touch  the  belly,  although  there  was  sufficient  space  on  the  piece  of  horn
for  these  limbs  to  have  been  given  in  their  natural  position.

"Whether  the  hind  legs  were  distorted  merely  by  bad  drawing,  or  at  the
engraver's  caprice,  or  from  his  recollection  of  a  ham-strung  or  otherwise
wounded  beast — or,  having  begun  with  a  sketch  of  a  recumbent  animal,  he
finished  it  otherwise — or,  meaning  to  indicate  an  animal  scratching  itself,  he
put  both  legs  inadvertently  in  one  position,  it  seems  impossible  to  determine.

The  figure  is  deficient  of  tail  and  croup  by  fracture ;  and  the  fore  legs,  stand-
ing well  posed,  are  truncated  above  the  fetlock  at  the  natural  edge  of  the  antler-
palm  ;  and  they  are  transversely  scored  by  accidental  slips  of  the  graving  tool.

There  is  no  drawing  on  the  other  side  of  the  specimen.

From  Laugerie  Basse.

"Fig.  3.  On  a  broad  palm  of  a  Reindeer's  brow-antler,  unfortunately  much  broken,
we  have  here  a  bold  and  characteristic  outline  of  a  Bovine  animal  *,  judging

*  See  '  Annales  Sc.  Nat.,'  he.  svprti  tit.  pp.  236,  237.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XIX.  XX.]      145

from  the  form  of  hock,  fetlock,  and  hoof.  The  outline  of  the  croup,  the  setting-
on  of  the  tail,  and  what  remains  of  the  nearly  horizontal  dorsal  line,  together
with  the  heavy  dewlap,  reaching  far  down  between  the  legs*,  have  reference  to
a  true  Bos  (possibly  Bos  primigenius).  The  legs  of  the  right  side  only  are
drawn.  The  withers  and  horn  (right-hand  side)  are  lost  with  the  wanting
pieces  of  the  specimen.

The  old  artist,  in  utilizing  the  angular  shape  of  this  antler-palm,  has  given
the  animal  a  constrained  position,  spoiling  the  effect  of  his  drawing,  and  espe-
cially interfering  with  the  natural  position  of  the  head.  This  is  thrown
upwards  and  backwards  to  allow  of  the  probably  short  and  slightly  curved
profile  of  the  terete-pointed  horn  being  included  within  the  natural  margin  of
the  palm,  and  between  that  edge  and  the  neck  of  the  Bull.  The  head,  too,  has
a  somewhat  indefinite  outline,  owing  to  the  upward  continuation  of  the  throat-
line,  parallel  to  a  short  line  starting  from  underneath  the  chin.  Without
these  unfinished  lines  below  the  muzzle  (which,  however,  together  with  the
short  parallel  lines  of  hatching  on  the  chest  and  dewlap,  might  possibly  have
been  intended  for  shaggy  hair),  the  short  subtriangular  outline  would  have
some  resemblance  to  the  profile  of  a  Chillingham  Bull's  head,  as  figured  in
Messrs.  Mennell  &  Perkins's  "  Catalogue  of  the  Mammalia  of  Northumberland
and  Durham,"  in  the  '  Transactions  of  the  Tyneside  Naturalists'  Field-Club,'
vol.  vi.  1864,  p.  145,  fig.  3.

On  the  back  of  this  specimen  two  imperfect  outlines  of  apparently  bovine
animals  are  rudely  sketched.  The  hind  quarters  of  the  one  interfere  with  the
fore  limbs  and  carcass  of  the  other ;  and  both  are  mutilated  by  the  imperfection
of  the  broken  antler-palm.  See  fig.  29,  page  146.

From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  4.  This  is  a  Reindeer's  brow-antler-palm,  broken  by  an  old  fracture,  and
bearing  a  bold  sketch,  made  by  no  uncertain  hand,  of  the  hind  quarters  and
barrel  of  a  large  Bovine  animalf,  as  the  smallness  of  the  tail,  straightness  of
the  hocks,  advanced  position  of  the  male  organ,  and  sudden  rise  at  the  withers
clearly  indicate.  The  last-mentioned  feature  is  characteristic  of  the  Aurochs ;
but  unfortunately  the  fracture  interrupts  the  outline  just  where  the  villose
mane,  or  long  shaggy  hair  of  the  neck,  characteristic  of  the  species  of  the
subgenus  Bison,  ought  to  commence.  There  is  no  drawing  on  the  other  side.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

*  "  Crook-knee'd  and  dewlap'd  like  Thessalian  Bulls."— SHAKESPEARE.

t  See  '  Cavernes  du  Perigord,'  supra  eit.  p.  28 ;  and  '  Annales  So.  Nat.,'  loc.  cit.  p.  236.

y


146


Outlines  of  Bovine


Fig.  29.

e  Animals  engraved  on  the  back  of  the  specimen  figured  in  B.  Plate  XIX.  &  XX.  fig.  £


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XIX.  XX.]      147

Eig.  5.  This  most  interesting  of  the  carvings  from  Laugerie  Basse  is  a  Poniard,
cut  out  of  the  beam  of  a  Reindeer's  horn — the  handle  being  shaped  as  a  Rein-
deer* out  of  the  lower  portion,  and  the  rest  of  the  beam  reduced,  chiefly  by
longitudinal  sawings,  to  a  tapering  blade,  rough,  and  irregularly  subtriangular
in  section.

The  workman,  or  artist  as  he  deserves  to  be  called,  has  here  shown  consider-
able cleverness  in  adapting  the  animal  form,  without  unnecessary  violence,  to
the  mode  of  handling  usual  with  such  a  weapon  as  we  have  before  us.  The
hind  legs  are  stretched  out  towards  the  blade ;  but  they  are  not  carved  in  detail.
The  front  legs,  with  disproportionately  short  forearm,  are  bent  without  effort
under  the  stomach ;  and  the  long  shanks  form  part  of  the  slightly  concave
lower  edge  of  the  handle.  The  head,  bearing  branched  antlers,  has  its  muzzle
so  raised  that  the  horns  rest  smoothly  on  the  sides  of  the  shoulders,  so  as  not
to  interfere  with  the  use  of  the  handle  by  a  very  small  hand  (smaller  than  ordi-
nary in  the  existing  races  of  Central  Europe),  with  the  palm  fitting  into  the
concavity  formed  by  the  neck,  back,  and  croup  of  the  animal.

The  attitude  given  to  the  head  did  not  allow  of  the  projecting  brow-tynes
being  expressed ;  these  are  wanting,  therefore,  as  a  specific  feature ;  nevertheless
the  short  ears  and  thick  neck  are  characters  pointing  to  the  Reindeer.  More-
over the  artist  has  left  a  thin  ragged  protuberance  underneath  the  neck,  which
aptly  resembles  the  tuft  of  hair  commonly  met  with  at  this  spot  in  the  male
Reindeer  and  never  present  in  the  Red  Deer.

Perhaps  this  Poniard  was  never  quite  completed  by  the  native  artist,  who
seems  to  have  been  capable  of  giving  greater  finish  to  his  work,  had  he  been  so
minded.  It  is  far  more  perfect,  however,  at  all  events  in  the  handle,  than  the
Poniard  figured  in  B.  Plates  III.  &  IV.,  with  which  it  may  be  compared  for  the
relation  of  the  parts  of  the  carved  animal  to  the  burr  and  tynes  left  untouched
in  the  other  implement,  the  croup  of  the  carved  Deer  corresponding  with  the
root  of  the  bez-antler.
Erom  Laugerie  Basse.

The  handles  of  three  similar  poniards  have  been  discovered  by  M.  Peccadeau  de
1'Isle  at  the  Montastruc  cave,  near  Bruniquel,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Aveyron,
Dordogne.  Two  of  them,  representing  the  Reindeer,  are  carved  in  Mammoth-
ivory  ;  the  third,  in  form  of  the  Mammoth,  is  in  Reindeer-horn.  These  are  figured
in  the  '  Revue  Arche"ologique,'  vol.  xvii.  (1868),  p.  218,  and  in  the  '  Mate"riaux
pour  1'Histoire  primitive  et  philosophique  de  l'Homme,'  vol.  iv.  (1868),  pp.  96, 97.

*  See  '  Cavernes  du  Perigord,'  supra  cit.  p.  31.


148


EELIQULE  AQTJITANICJE.


B.  PLATE  XXI.

This  Plate  exhibits  a  limited  assortment  of  carved  Implements,  formed  out  of
Reindeer-antlers,  from  Laugerie  and  La  Madelaine.
Figures  1  and  5  have  their  analogues  in  B.  Plates  IX.  and  X.

Pig.  1.  The  butt  of  a  cylindrical  tapering  Harpoon-head,  wedge-shaped  at  the
end,  with  chevron  scorings  on  its  sloping  face,  probably  to  make  it  fit  the  tighter
on  the  haft.  A  badly  drawn  outline  of  some  Herbivore,  with  a  long,  heavy,
somewhat  Elk-like  muzzle  (probably  a  very  badly  drawn  Horse),  ornaments  the
remaining  portion  of  this  broken  stem.
Prom  Laugerie  ?

Pig.  2.  A  piece  of  a  shaft  or  stem  of  some  implement  or  weapon,  broken  at  one
end,  tapering  at  the  other,  with  a  damaged  point.  It  has  been  neatly  smoothed
and  ornamented,  on  one  face  with  a  row  of  small,  raised,  equidistant  rhombs,
on  a  straight  ribband-like  band,  bordered  by  some  narrow,  longitudinal,  parallel
furrows.  A  similar  ornament  occurs  in  B.  Plate  III.  &  IV.  fig.  3 ;  and  modi-
fied in  B.  Plate  XVIII.  figs.  1  and  4.  The  other  side  of  the  specimen  is  flat,
and  shows  the  cancellous  interior  of  the  bone  (antler).
Prom  Laugerie.

Pig.  3.  A  curved  stick-like  Implement,  broken  at  one  end;  smooth,  slightly
tapering,  and  rounded  at  the  other,  which  is  narrow-tongue-shaped,  and  adapted
for  rubbing  and  smoothing  seams  in  skin  and  other  material.

The  concave  face  and  the  sides  are  ornamented  with  longitudinal  grooves
(figs.  3«,  36).  The  straight  portion  of  the  convex  face  is  hollowed  out ;  and  the
edges  are  scored  with  little  oblique  notches,  eleven  on  one  side,  and  thirteen  on
the  other  (fig.  3c),  nearly  opposite  to  each  other,  but  not  regular,  nor  offering
any  patent  explanation  of  their  origin  and  use  (if  really  made  for  a  purpose),
except  possibly  as  tally -marks  of  work  done  or  things  counted.

Prom  Laugerie.

Pig.  4.  This  is  the  sharp  end  of  an  Harpoon  or  Lance.  It  was  either  left  un-
finished— the  oblique  incisions  (eight  on  one  edge  of  the  fragment  and  three  on
the  other,  on  both  faces)  being  merely  the  outlines  of  intended  barbs,  never


RELIQULE    AQUITANIC^:  .
( DOEDOGNE.  )


/'


\     f  /

'


I    I


PL.  XXI


3°-


,


\


-Louveau  del.  e.t  lilh.


Imp  Becquet  j


RELIQUIAE  AQUITANIC^E.


B.  PLATE  XXII.

We  here  figure  a  group  of  the  barbed  and  grooved  Harpoon-heads,  bulbed  at
the  butt,  such  as  have  been  found  in  the  rock-shelter  of  La  Madelaine  in  large
numbers  and  with  endless  modification  of  pattern.  A  few  have  been  met  with  at
Laugerie  Basse.  They  have  been  carved  out  of  Reindeer-horn.  Some  have  evi-
dently been  repointed  (figs.  1,  2,  3,  4,  and  6),  and,  as  usual,  with  a  wedge-shaped
or  bevelled  point.  All  have  grooves  along  each  barb;  and  most  have  grooves
also  at  the  base  of  each  barb,  short  or  long,  and  either  parallel  with  the  stem  or
obliquely  across  the  root  of  the  barb.

Observations  on  this  kind  of  Implement,  ancient  and  modern,  are  given  at
pages  9,  49,  and  TOO,  with  the  descriptions  of  the  specimens  illustrated  by
B.  Plates  I.,  VI.,  and  XIV.

Fig.  1.  Slender,  with  the  usual  conical  butt  and  lateral  bulbs;  it  retains  six
grooved  barbs ;  but  it  had  more ;  for  the  remains  of  three  others  have  been
left  in  repointing  the  head.  The  grooves  at  the  base  of  each  barb  are  angular,
and  thus  enclose  it  with  a  lozenge-shaped  incision.

Fig.  2.  A  large  specimen,  broken  at  the  apex,  apparently  after  repointing;  seven
grooved  barbs  remain.  The  grooves  on  the  stem  are  short,  and  straight  across
the  roots  of  the  barbs.

Fig.  3.  Stout,  with  only  four  barbs :  it  has  been  reduced  in  length  by  fracture
and  repointing.  The  grooves  on  the  barbs  are  each  continued  straight  along
the  stem  to  the  next  barb  above.

Fig.  4.  Rather  slender,  with  only  a  pair  of  barbs  perfect ;  the  others  are  broken ;
a  long  interval  occurs  on  one  side  without  a  barb.  The  top  has  been  repointed.
The  barbs  are  grooved ;  but  the  stem  is  not  distinctly  grooved ;  perhaps  it  was
pared  down  when  repointed.

Fig.  5.  The  sharp  end  of  a  slender,  many -barbed  Harpoon.  Eleven  grooved  barbs
belong  to  the  fragment,  which  retains  the  original  tapering,  terete,  or  nearly
cylindrical  point.  Short  vertical  grooves  occur  between  the  barbs.

Fig.  6.  A  portion  of  a  slender  specimen ;  the  butt  is  gone ;  the  apex  has  been
repointed ;  seven  grooved  barbs  remain,  with  oblique  notches  at  their  roots.

Fig.  7.  Part  of  a  many-barbed  Harpoon ;  the  extreme  point  is  lost :  eleven  close-
set  grooved  barbs  remain  on  the  fragment ;  and  oblique  grooves  cross  their  bases.


RELIQULE   AQUITANICLE

( DORDOGNE  .  )

1  2


-LouveiLU  del.  et  liih.


Imp.Becyuet  A  Paris


RELIQUI/E


(  DORDOGNE  .)


A


PL  .  XXXV.


del.etlith.


Imp.-BectJiiet  it  Paris.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXXV.]


A.  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.

A.  PLATE  XXXV.

Five  specimens  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  comprising  two  pieces  of  large  spatu-
late  Scrapers  (figs.  1  and  2),  one  long  simple  Scraper  (fig.  3),  one  handsome
Scraper  with  both  ends  rounded  (fig.  4),  and  one  simple  flake  (fig.  5).

Fig.  1.  A  portion  of  such  a  long  spatulate  Scraper  as  that  drawn  in  A.  Plate  XIX.
fig.  5,  and  described  at  page  84,  but  larger.  The  edge  has  been  bevelled  by
chipping ;  but  it  is  probable  that  this  flat  specimen  was  one  of  several  flakes
successively  struck  off  an  already  dressed  block,  such  angular  specimens  as
those  described  at  page  1 1 8  (but  not  curved,  as  they  are)  being  first  removed
from  the  prepared  block ;  and  therefore  the  dressing  of  the  edges  may  be  due
to  the  dressing  of  the  block.  It  is  mottled  grey.
From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  2.  A  portion  of  another  long  spatulate  Implement,  slightly  arched,  and  with
dressed  edges.  It  has  been  tapered  by  chipping  to  a  point  at  the  thin  end.
Opaque  and  yellow.

From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  3.  A  narrow,  high-ridged,  slightly  arched,  drab-coloured  flake,   broken  at
one  end,  rounded  at  the  other.
From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  4.  A  neat  Implement,  of  banded  drab  and  yellow  flint.     It  is  a  stout  flake,
carefully  trimmed  at  the  ends,  worn  along  one  of  the  side  edges,  and  indented
on  that  border  with  a  semicircular  notch,  by  scraping  the  narrow  rounded
surface  of  probably  a  rod  or  stem,  whether  of  wood  or  bone.
From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  5.  A  simple  flake  of  dark-coloured  subtranslucent  flint.
From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.


152


KELIQULE  AQUITANIdE.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

1*.
2*.
3.
4.
5.

millitn.
[100]
[132]
124
159
125

inch.

[3-937]
[5-197]
4-882
6-260
4-921

millim.

[30]
[42]
22
30
20

inch.
[1-181]
[1-654]
0-866
1-181
0-787

millim.

[5]

[?

13
6

inch.

[0-197]
[0-354]  .
0-315
0-512
0-236

These  are  fragments.


Fig.  30.
A  portion  of  a  Tally-stick  or  Gambling  Tool  (?)  of  Eeindeer-antler,  from  La  Madelaine,  on  the  Ve'zere.


RELIQULE  AQUITANICE

. )


A.


PL.  XXX  VI


y


Louveiu  del.  et  lith


Jinp.Becjuet  i  Paris.


DESCRIPTIONS   OF  THE  PLATES — STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXXVI.]        153


A.  PLATE  XXXVI.

A  series  of  flint  flakes  from  the  Gorge  d'Enfer,  four  of  which  have  been  more
or  less  dressed  into  symmetrical  Implements  for  chiselling  (figs.  1  and  3),  or  for
Scraping  (figs.  1,  3,  and  4),  or  as  a  Spear-head  (fig.  2).  The  others  are  simple
flakes,  one  of  which  (fig.  5)  has  decidedly  been  used  as  an  Implement  ready  to  the
hand  of  the  Savage.

Pig.  1.  A  narrow,  somewhat  sigmoid,  and  arched  Implement  made  from  a  flake
of  grey  flint,  by  carefully  tapering  the  ends  and  dressing  the  sides.     One  end
(uppermost  in  the  drawing),  bluntly  chisel-shaped,  may  have  been  used  as  a
Chisel,  and  the  side-edges  for  scraping.
Prom  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Pig.  2.  A  broad,  drab-mottled  flake,  truncate  at  one  end,  and  once  tapering  in  a
lanceolate  form  at  the  other  (upwards  in  the  figure),  but  broken  now.     The
side-edges,  as  well  as  the  once  pointed  end,  have  been  dressed  into  symmetry.
Some  stalagmitic  adhesions  remain  on  the  flat  face.
Prom  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Pig.  3.  A  straight,  mottled-grey  flake,  slightly  but  neatly  dressed  at  the  bulb-end
(uppermost  in  the  figure) ;  and  once,  it  seems,  shaped  into  a  chisel-like  point  *
at  the  other ;  but  a  longitudinal  fracture  has  taken  off  half  of  the  point  and
some  of  the  corresponding  edge.
Prom  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Pig.  4.  A  slightly  arched  flake,  opaque  and  drab,  neatly  dressed  into  symmetry,
with  one  narrow  and  one  broadly  rounded  end ;  the  latter  damaged.
Prom  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Pig.  5.  A  simple  flake  of  grey-  and  drab-banded  flint,  untouched  on  the  straight
edge,  except  at  the  tip ;  but  worn  by  use  on  the  upper  half  of  the  naturally
jagged  edge.

Prom  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

*  No  I-  well  drawn  in  the  figure.


HELIQUI^E  AQUITANICLE.

Fig.  6.  A  simple  flake  of  dark-grey  transversely  banded  flint :  one  edge  is  jagged,
probably  by  accidental  breakage.
From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  7.  Another  undressed  flake,  mottled  grey.
From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

107

4-213

23

0-906

10

0-394

2*.

[111]

[4-370]

35

1-378

12

0-472

3.

112

4-410

24

0-945

10

0-394

4.

94

3-701

18

0-708

8

0-315

5.

105

4-134

20

0-787

7

0-276

6.

107

4-213

2o

0-984

0

0-236

7.

90

3-543

•26

1-024

(i

0-236

*  A  broken  specimen.     Its  point  was  lower  by  probably  |  inch  or  more.


KKUQULE

(  DORDOCNE .  )


A


PL.  XXXVI I


J-om-eau  del.ettith.


Jmp.£ccijuet  a  fin's.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XXXVII.]       155


A.  PLATE  XXXVII.

Three  simple  unused  flakes,  the  waste  in  dressing  blocks,  and  three  large  coarse
flakes  dressed  as  Scrapers  or  Strikers,  of  different  shapes,  are  here  represented.

Fig.  1.  A  simple  rough  flake  of  brownish-grey,  granular,  subtranslucent  flint.     It
retains  a  small  patch  of  stalagmite.
From  Le  Moustier.

Fig.  2.  A  simple  flake  of  dark  subtranslucent  flint.
From  Le  Moustier.

Fig.  3.  A  simple  rough  flake  of  dark-grey  flint.
From  Laugerie  if  aute  ?

Fig.  4.  A  thick  triangular  flake  of  dark-grey  flint,  trimmed  on  the  edges  towards
the  apex.     One  edge  is  straighter  than  the  other.     The  thick  butt  retains  some
of  the  original  crust  of  the  flint.     Serviceable  as  a  Spear-head,  Axe,  or  other
weapon  or  tool,  especially  as  a  strong  Scraper  for  coarse  wood-work.
From  Le  Moustier.

Fig.  5.  A  rough  flake  from  the  outside  of  a  somewhat  waterworn  flint-nodule,
which  has  been  reduced  on  the  back  (the  surface  figured),  and  carefully  trimmed
to  a  circular  outline  for  more  than  half  its  circumference  (the  right-hand  and
lower  part  of  the  figure),  the  bulb  portion  (on  the  reverse  of  the  left-hand  side)
and  a  neighbouring  projecting  point  being  left  to  form  a  nearly  straight  rough
edge,  for  holding  in  the  hand,  or  for  hafting ;  whilst  the  neatly  rounded  edge
would  serve  as  a  broad  Scraper  or  Chopper.

It  is  of  brownish  subtranslucent  flint,  mottled  grey  by  weathering.  Imbedded
in  the  remaining  portion  of  original  crust  lies  the  cast  of  a  small  Cyphosoma
(Turban  Sea-urchin),  not  well  rendered  by  the  artist.

From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  6.  A  thick  flake  of  greyish  flint  (the  bulb  is  on  the  reverse  of  the  upper  end
of  the  figure),  mottled  by  weathering,  and  retaining  some  of  the  opaque  whitish
crust  along  the  thick  edge.  This  constitutes  the  back  of  the  implement ;  whilst

02


;6  KELIQUI^:  AQUITAN1C.E.

the  thin  edge  has  been  trimmed  to  an  elliptically  convex  cutting  or  scraping
edge,  which  has  been  somewhat  used.
Prom  Le  Moustier.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.             English.

inillim.

inch.

inillim.

inch.

millim.                inch.

1.

108

4-252

46

1-811

11                0-433

•2.

64

2-520

35

1-378

10               0-394

3.

95

3-740

42

1  -654

7               0-276

4.

94

3-701

72

2-835

20               0-787

5.

85

3-347

73

2-874

15               0-591

6.

103

4-055

47

1-850

11               0-433

RELIQULE  AOUITANICLE

( DORDOGNE .  )


2b


B.


PL.  XX III.


10


11


-Zouveau  Jel.etlith.


Imp.Secquet  3  Pms.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XXIII.]      157


B.  BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  &c,

B.  PLATE  XXIII.

A  selection  of  imperfect,  ornamented,  subcylindrical  Implements  or  Weapons,
mostly  of  antler,  fig.  2  only  being  of  bone.  A  raised  fillet,  variously  sculptured,
is  the  characteristic  feature  in  most  of  them.  Laugerie  and  La  Madelaine  are  the
chief  sources  of  such  specimens.

Fig.  1.  A  fragment,  nearly  round  in  section,  ornamented  on  one  side  with  two
pairs  of  longitudinal  grooves  and  a  linear  series  of  angles  on  a  raised  fillet
between  them.     The  other  side  is  bare  and  rotted.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Figs.  2 a,  b.  A  portion  of  a  small  bone  Implement,  fluted  longitudinally  on  two
faces;  on  one  side  (fig.  25)  the  furrow  is  narrow;  on  the  other  (fig.  2«)  it  is  as
broad  as  the  bone.     The  floor  of  each  furrow  is  crossed  with  numerous,  oblique,
parallel,  incised  lines.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  3.  The  edge  of  a  conical  fragment  ornamented  with  a  series  of  equal,  deep-
cut,  close-set,  chevrons  on  a  raised  fillet.
From ?

Fig.  4.  The  edge  of  another  fragment  with  parallel  grooves  and  a  series  of  oblique
notches  on  the  raised  fillet  between  them.
From ?

Fig.  5.  An  imperfect  tapering  Dart-head  (?),  with  a  raised,  riband-like  ornament,
curving  round  towards  its  point.     This  scroll-like  fillet  is  vaguely  notched.
From ?

Fig.  6.  The  edge  of  a  fragment  similar  to  fig.  4,  cut  into  a  raised  riband-like
border,  with  a  wavy  incised  line,  and  some  short,  parallel,  obliquely  transverse
notches,  along  its  centre.
From ?


KELIQTJT^E  AQUITANICLE.

.  7.  Another  fragment  of  a  tapering  Dart-head,  with  a  pair  of  close-set,  parallel,
narrow  flutings  and  a  series  of  small,  raised,  oblique  rhombs.     We  have  already
seen  this  kind  of  ornament  in  fig.  3,  B.  Plate  III.  &  IV.;  figs.  1  and  4,  B.  Plate
XVIII.;  and  fig.  2,  B.  Plate  XXI.
From ?

Fig.  8.  A  fragment,  oval  in  section,  with  parallel  lines  enclosing  a  series  of  oblique
raised  rhombs,  which  thus  form  a  scolloped  fillet  on  one  edge,  the  other  being
round  and  smooth.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  9.  Somewhat  similar  to  fig.  8 ;  but  the  raised  spots  on  the  fillet  are  square.
From ?

Fig.  10.  A  sharply  tapering  Dart-point,  ornamented  on  one  side  like  fig.  8,  with  a
series  of  oblique,  raised,  widely  separate  rhombs,  becoming  triangular  below,  on
a  broad  fillet,  between  parallel  incised  lines.
From  Laugerie.

Fig.  11.  A  fragment  of  a  large  curved  subcylindrical  Implement.  The  convex  face
is  smoothed  and  carved ;  the  opposite  is  rough,  showing  the  cancellous  interior
of  the  antler.  On  one  edge  there  are  fourteen  oblique  notches  ;  and  on  the  other,
nineteen  transverse  notches.  Bordering  each  of  these  rows  is  a  series  of  small
rhombs  in  relief;  and  along  the  middle,  between  the  two  rows  of  rhombs,  is  a
line  of  closely  set  oblique  scorings,  much  finer  than  the  lateral  notches.  The
scoring  is  doubled  at  the  centre  for  a  short  distance ;  and  at  one  end  its  place
is  taken  by  a  waved  row  of  small  fine  notches.
From  Laugerie.


RELIQUIAE   AQUITANIOE  .

(  DORDOGNE.   )


B.     PL.  XXIV.


Zouveau  del.  et  liih .


Imp  .Becyuet  a.  Paris.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XXIV.]      159


B.  PLATE  XXIV.

Fragments  of  various  ornamented  subcylindrical  and  other  Implements,  mostly
of  Antler,  fig.  4  only  being  bone.

Fig.  1.  A  portion  of  a  carved,  rounded,  and  perforated  Antler,  of  small  size*.  The
ornament  consists  of  the  outlines  of  two  animals  in  sequence,  not  well  designed.
The  foremost  (Antelope  ?),  standing  with  outstretched  limbs,  is  spotted  on  the
body  and  neck  with  scattered  pitting,  and  has  a  small,  sharp,  nearly  featureless
head,  with  a  pair  of  short  straight  horns,  pointing  forwards  and  upwards.  The
second  figure  is  a  misproportioned  outline  of  a  Cervine  animal,  probably  a  Rein-
deer, if  the  vague  sketch  of  its  prominent  brow-antlers  be  accepted  as  a  trust-
worthy indication.  The  other  side  bears  the  continuations  of  legs  and  antlers,
poorly  executed,  together  with  vague  notching,  like  that  on  the  figured  face.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  2.  The  lower  portion  of  a  small  cylindrical  Dart-head  or  Arrow-point,  with
bevelled  butt,  ornamented  with  sequent  outlines  of  Horses  (two  and  a  portion
of  a  third),  poorly  drawn,  though  the  second  figure  is  not  without  some  toucli
of  nature.
From ?

Fig.  3.  The  bevelled  butt  of  a  Dart-head,  bearing  on  each  face  an  incised  outline
resembling  the  foremost  animal  (Antelope  ?)  in  fig.  1,  and  five  transverse  parallel
notches  between  the  backs  of  the  animals.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  A  fragment  of  carved  bone,  subtriangular  in  section  (3  millimetres  thick),
tapering,  crenulated  by  careful  notching  along  two  of  the  edges,  and  orna-
mented on  one  face  with  the  outline  of  a  Snake  (?),  and  cross-etching.  The
Snake-like  figure  (broken  off  at  the  tail)  is  filled  in  with  one  set  of  crossed  lines,
and  the  space  between  it  and  the  lower  edge  is  filled  in  with  another  set,  similar
to  the  other,  but  not  conformable  or  continuous  with  itf.  The  Snake  (?)  has
apparently  its  mouth  widely  open ;  and  an  eye  is  distinctly  given.  The  small
space  beyond  the  head  is  left  without  distinct  hachures.  The  other  side  of  the

*  See  pages  102  and  189  for  remarks  on  this  kind  of  Implement.

t  Such  slight  cross-etching  appears  on  some  of  the  common  pearl  card-counters  of  the  present  day.


160  RELIQUL&  AQTJITANIC^E.

specimen  is  somewhat  rounded  (not  quite  angular) ;  and  the  marginal  notches
are  still  more  distinct,  having  been  cut  further  over  on  this  face.  There  are
forty- three  notches  remaining  on  the  lower  edge  in  fig.  4;  and  the  last  six  to
the  right  hand  are  sharp,  though  not  represented  by  the  artist.  The  hollow
on  the  opposite  edge  is  due  to  a  recent  fracture.

The  use  of  this  notched  and  ornamented  piece  of  bone  must  remain  conjec-
tural. Its  crenulation  may  be  compared  with  that  in  fig.  10,  B.Plate  XII.;
and  its  ornamental  design  with  that  in  fig.  8,  B.  Plate  I.  But  whether  the
Snake-like  figure  had  a  special  meaning,  whether  the  notching  was  numerical,
and  whether  the  implement  was  made  for  use  or  for  ornament,  there  is  nothing
to  show.

From ?

Fig.  5.  The  lower  portion  of  a  bevelled  Dart-head,  ornamented  with  sequences  of
vague  figures — seemingly  young,  half-fledged  Birds,  running   and   fluttering
along — four  on  one  side  of  the  fragment,  and  three  on  the  other.
From  La  Madelaine.

Pig.  6.  A  subcylindrical  fragment,  shaped  by  the  aboriginal  artist  into  an  elon-
gated Horse-head,  with  ears,  eyes,  and  nostrils  more  or  less  distinct.  Vague
longitudinal  scorings  are  engraved  on  the  front  of  the  face  (shown  in  the  figure).
This  specimen  is  comparable  with  fig.  9,  B.  Plate  VII.  &  VIII.,  and  especially
with  a  part  of  fig.  1,  B.  Plate  XIX.  &  XX.
Prom  La  Madelaine.

Pig.  7.  A  piece  of  carved  and  perforated  antler,  ornamented  on  each  side  with  a
deep-cut  outline  of  a  Horse,  heavy-headed  and  "groggy."     In  the  figure  a
second  Horse's  head  is  indicated.
Prom  La  Madelaine.

Pig.  8.  A  fragment,  with  sketchy  outline  of  an  outspread  Animal  or  Skin.     A
more  carefully  executed  design  of  this  kind  is  shown  in  fig.  4,  B.  Plate  IX.
From  -    -  ?

Fig.  9.  The  bevelled  butt  of  a  Dart-head,  bearing  an  obscure  design,  possibly
intended  for  a  long-billed  Bird  with  a  small  head,  such  as  a  Heron.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  10.  A  fragment  of  antler,  dressed  and  ornamented.     Towards  each  end,  on
both  faces,  four  or  five  oblique  parallel  lines  have  been  cut,  so  that  the  stem  is


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.


161


there  encircled  by  a  group  or  band  of  short  incisions ;  and  on  one  edge  a  long
cut  nearly  unites  the  two  sets  (see  the  upper  edge  in  fig.  10).  The  middle  of
each  face  has  been  smoothed ;  and  on  that  shown  in  the  figure  an  outline  of
what  may  perhaps  be  supposed  to  be  a  Bird's  head,  with  open  mouth,  has  been
roughly  engraved.
From  Laugerie.


Some  of  the  chief  characters  of  the  barbed  Weapon-points,  with  lateral  knobs
below  the  barbs  (as  in  B.  Plates  I.,  VI.,  XIV.,  XXII.),  and  of  the  tapering  Wea-
pon-points, with  wedge-like  butt-ends  (as  in  B.  Plates  IX.,  X.,  XXI.,  XXIV.),
are  combined  in  some  modern  Weapons,  one  of  which  we  here  figure  (reduced)
in  illustration  of  the  subject.

Fig.  31.

A  Long  Harpoon  or  Barbed  Lance.     In  the  Liverpool  Museum.     (Reduced  in  size.)


a,  The  whole  weapon.  The  shaft,  15  feet  long  and  If  inch  in  diameter,  is  made  of  brown  wood;  and  one
end  is  slit  (e)  to  receive  the  barbed  head  of  bone.

l>,  The  barbed  head  and  its  fastening  to  the  shaft.  It  is  10  inches  long ;  thinned  away  on  two  faces
towards  the  point,  and  its  two  narrow  edges  are  barbed.  Its  butt,  squared  at  the  end,  is  wedge-
shaped,  being  bevelled  on  one  face,  and  rabbetted  on  the  other ;  and  it  has  an  oblong  knob  or  button
on  each  side,  below  the  barbs  (see  c  and  d).

e,  The  butt  of  the  barbed  bone-head.  d,  Side  view  of  the  same.

e,  The  split  top  of  the  wooden  shaft,  in  which  the  head  is  fixed.  This  being  secured  with  plaited  cord  of
cocoa-nut  fibre  (sinnet)  would  indicate  that  the  weapon  came  from  the  South  Sea,  probably  from  the
Society  Islands.

[Mr.  T.  K.  Gay  has  favoured  us  with  these  sketches  and  descriptive  remarks.]


2a


EELIQUI^E  AQTJITANKLE.


B.  PLATE  XXV.

Implements  of  Antler  and  Bone,  probably  illustrative  of  Tally-marks  (figs.  1,  3,
6,  and  perhaps  others),  Owner-marks  (?  fig.  7),  of  Gambling-tools  (figs.  2  and  5),
and  other  carving.

Fig.  1.  Sketch  of  the  edge  of  the  perforated  Implement,  fig.  1,  B.  Double  Plate  XV.
&  XVI.  (see  page  103),  showing  the  thirty-two  transverse  notches  or  scorings,
which  may  possibly  have  been  memoranda,  or  a  reckoning  of  periods  of  time,
of  the  results  of  a  hunting  expedition,  of  a  game  of  chance  or  skill,  or  of  other
circumstances.  Reduced  to  two  thirds  of  real  size.  See  page  189.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  2.  Bone  knife-like  Implement,  notched  and  scored,     a,  Concave  face,     c,  Con-
vex face,     b,  Edge  view,     d  and  e,  Sections  at  f  and  ft.     See  pages  185, 187.
From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  3.  A  triangular,  stick-like,  and  tapering  piece  of  bone,  probably  a  Tally-stick.
It  is  broken  at  the  smaller  end,  jagged  at  the  other,  with  opposite  notches  cut
roughly  on  the  three  edges  near  it,  to  serve  for  tying  on  a  string,  perhaps  for
suspension.  Towards  the  upper  end,  the  thin  edge,  and  one  of  the  two  corners
of  the  thicker  edge  or  back,  are  nicked  with  several,  small,  distinct,  regular  cuts.
Both  series  are  probably  imperfect,  from  fracture ;  but  one  of  them  shows  two
groups  of  four  notches,  and  one  of  three.  The  third  edge  of  the  fragment  is
cut  into  three  long,  shallow,  sloping  notches,  forming  three  distant  barblets
(not  shown  in  the  figure).  See  page  188.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  A  carefully  cut  stick-like  piece  of  Antler,  oblong  in  section,  broken  at  one
extremity,  and  diminishing  in  thickness  gradually  to  a  sharp  edge  at  the  other
end,  which  is  roughly  rounded  in  outline,  by  the  sides  having  been  cut-in  above
it.  One  of  the  broad  faces  bears  at  the  thin  end  six  rather  broad,  parallel,
oblique,  transverse  cuts,  the  four  upper  ones  somewhat  curved  or  nearly  angular
(fig.  46).  The  opposite  face  has  eleven  similar  transverse  cuts  nearly  parallel,
mostly  at  unequal  distances  apart ;  and  in  the  seven  upper  intervals  are  pairs  of
irregular  lozenge-shaped  incisions,  apparently  marks  resulting  from  an  attempt


KEL1QUIJ3   AQUITANICJE.

(D  ORL  O  GNE.)


B.


PL,  XXV.


,fl


/I


I/


fV


••"V.


6"


/A-  H7/(/«  ili-Iin   ft


Taylor  $r  Francit  e.rrtui.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XXV.]      163

to  cut  circles  or  ovals  with  a  stone  implement.     On  each  edge  is  a  series  of
distinct  open  notches ;  these  are  irregular  in  size,  and  in  position,  not  con-
forming one  with  another,  nor  with  the  series  of  transverse  cuts.     This  unfor-
tunately broken  specimen  was  possibly  a  Gambling-tool.     See  page  199.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  5.  A  piece  of  crushed  rib-bone,  in  breccia.  It  is  scored,  on  one  side  only,
with  twenty-two  transverse  parallel  scratch-like  cuts.  The  end  uppermost  in
the  figure  is  broken  at  a  cut ;  and  the  oblique  line  coming  down  from  it  is  really
a  definite  line  passing  on  to  the  second  transverse  line  at  an  acute  angle.  See
page  199.  Compare  the  scoring  on  fig.  2  a,  B.  Plate  XXIII.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Figs.  6  a,  b.   A  fragment  of  subcylindrical  Bird-bone,  with  a  series  of  parallel
nicks  on  each  side;  one  of  the  rows  of  little  notches  (fig.  6 a)  shows  obscurely
two  threes  and  a  six,  with  portions  of  other  groups.     See  page  189.
From  La  Madelaine.

Figs.  Ta-d.  Portion  of  a  Dart-head,  with  bevelled  butt.  Fig.  7  a,  natural  size,
shows  one  of  the  broader  sides  of  the  Implement ;  its  surface  is  covered  with
scraped  lines,  not  so  fine  as  on  the  sculptured  edge  (b).  The  lines  on  the  bevel-
slope  have  been  made  with  a  scraper  or  knife  having  small  irregular  notches  on
its  edge.  Fig.  7  b,  natural  size,  is  one  of  the  narrow  faces  or  edges,  sculptured
with  small  pits,  forty  of  which  remain.  Fig.  lc  shows  four  of  the  pits  and  a
portion  of  the  surface,  enlarged  to  show  the  lines  drawn  by  a  fine  scraper  to
receive  the  cuts,  and  to  show  the  roughly  crenated  straight  edge  of  each  pit,
with  some  traces  of  striaB  in  the  cavity,  as  if  the  tool  with  which  the  holes
were  made  was  rough  or  serrated.  At  fig.  7  d  a  portion  of  the  surface  is  seen
edgewise,  showing  the  obliquity  of  the  pits,  which  seem  to  have  been  excavated
with  a  small,  possibly  stone  gouge.  See  page  200.

From  La  Madelaine.

The  specimen  is  in  the  Oxford  Museum;  and  Professor  Phillips,  F.E.S.,  of
Oxford,  has  kindly  favoured  us  with  these  sketches  and  descriptive  remarks.


BELIQULE  AQUITANICLE.


B.  PLATE  XXVI.

Implements  of  cut  Antler  showing  Owner-marks  and  other  carving.

Fi".  1.  A  long  tapering  Harpoon  or  Dart-point  of  Antler,  oblong  in  section,  and
showing  on  one  edge,  towards  the  butt,  Marks  of  Ownership.  These  consist  of
a  set  of  curved  and  oblique  notches,  in  four  pairs,  each  pair  nearly  or  quite
meeting,  on  one  and  the  same  side,  at  a  sharp  angle  ;  and  all  are  surmounted
by  a  strong,  slightly  sinuous,  longitudinal  notch  or  furrow,  half  as  long  again
as  the  set  of  notches.  See  page  195.
From  La  Madelaine.

Figs.  2  a,  b.  A  small  lanceolate  Harpoon  Point,  with  its  base  slit  crosswise  for  the
insertion  of  the  bevelled  end  of  the  stem.  See  B.  Plate  XIII.  figs.  2-6,  and
page  97.  The  edges  of  the  upper  or  tapering  portion  of  the  weapon  are  scored
across  with  slight  notches,  which  occur  obscurely  in  pairs  and  other  groupings.
These  may  have  been  grooves  for  poison;  or  possibly  marks  for  recognition.
See  page  193.

When  fresh  and  sharp-pointed,  no  doubt  Ihese  lanceolate  points  could  be
propelled  with  sufficient  force  to  drive  them  into  an  object  beyond  their  widest
part,  which  would  thus  act  as  a  barb.  The  transverse  notch  or  slit  in  the  base
of  this  and  similar  weapon-heads  does  not  seem  calculated  to  retain  them  on
the  stem,  but  to  allow  them  to  be  left  in  the  wounded  animal,  whilst  the  shaft
could  be  regained  and  fitted  with  another  head.  Mr.  Gay  informs  us  that
some  savages  (New  Guinea  &c.)  in  the  present  day  prepare  their  arrows  so
that  the  heads  may  break  off  easily  at  incised  rings  or  notches  just  below  ;  for
the  stems  take  much  time  and  labour  in  preparation,  and  are  too  valuable  to
be  lost  should  the  prey  or  enemy  bear  them  off  when  wounded.

From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  3.  A  tapering  rounded  Harpoon-head,  broken  at  the  point,  bevelled  at  the
butt*.  This  bears  on  one  side  a  row  of  six  adze-like  marks,  consisting  of  six
pairs  of  notches  :  one  of  each  pair  is  transverse  ;  and  the  other,  cut  broader,
crosses  it  at  one  end  obliquely.  The  transverse  notches  are  parallel,  and  are,
as  it  were,  the  handles  of  the  adze-marks  ;  and  the  oblique  blade-like  notches

*  For  an  account  of  similar  Weapons,  more  or  less  ornamented,  see  pages  68-72,  descriptive  of  B.  Plates
IX.  &  X.


RELIQUIAE  AQUITANIC^E.

(D  ORD  0  ONE.)


U

DeWMe  delin.  at  sculjisit.


10


i<!

ft

IV


B.


PL,  XXVL


\
j

I


II


Taylor  fy  Francis  excud.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XXVI.]       165

are  also  parallel  to  each  other.      This  may  be  partial  ornament ;  but  it  looks
like  an  Owner-mark.     See  page  195.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.   A  tapering,  pointed,  rounded  Harpoon-head,  bevelled  at  the  base.     On
one  side,  towards  the  point,  there  are  four  roughly  made  crosses  in  a  row.     In
the  upper  two  crosses  one  of  the  lines  is  doubled.     This  seems  to  be  an  Owner-
mark.     See  page  195.
From  La  Madelaine  ?

Fig.  5.  The  bevelled  butt  of  a  broken  Harpoon-head  similar  to  figs.  3  and  4.     It
is  marked  on  one  edge  with  three  deep,  oblique,  parallel  notches,  the  lower  two
of  which  have  a  smaller  notch  meeting  their  upper  end,  from  below,  at  a  high
angle.     This  was  probably  an  Owner-mark.     See  page  195.
From  La  Madelaine  ?

Fig.  6.  Another  broken  butt,  like  the  foregoing.  It  shows  a  set  of  crossed  lines,
consisting  of  two  long  notches,  oblique  and  parallel,  but  one  a  little  in  advance
of  the  other,  and  four  shorter,  oblique,  parallel  notches,  crossing  the  others  at
a  sharp  angle.  There  is  other  ornamental  linear  carving  on  this  fragment ;  but
the  pattern  before  us  has  the  appearance  of  an  Owner-mark.  See  page  195.
From  La  Madelaine.

Figs.  7  a,  b.  Fragment  of  a  stem,  oblong  in  section,  probably  of  a  Dart-head,  with
a  continuous  ornament  of  incised  chevron  marks  on  one  edge  (fig.  7«),  and  on
the  other  edge  (fig.  76)  a  local  patch  of  five  oblique,  parallel,  slight  notches.
These  latter  may  be  an  Owner-mark.     See  page  194.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  8.  A  slight,  subcylindrical,  pointed  Dart-head,  with  a  little  shoulder,  or
open  notch,  near  the  butt  for  fastening.  On  one  side  of  the  stem  are  three
small,  oblique,  parallel  notches,  apparently  forming  an  Owner-mark.  See
page  194.

From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  9.  This  shows  one  edge  of  a  slightly  curved  stick-like  Implement  of  Antler,
with  a  broad-oblong  section  throughout  its  length,  and  a  bevelled  chisel-like
end,  reduced  in  thickness  by  the  two  faces  being  rubbed  down.  The  specimen
is  broken  at  the  other  end.  The  outer  or  slightly  convex  face  of  the  Imple-

26


j66


RELIQUIAE  AQUITANKLE.


ment  is  smooth ;  the  opposite  has  a  rotted  surface.  On  one  edge  of  the  frag-
ment two  long  and  deep  notches  have  been  cut,  one  following  the  other  along
the  stem;  on  each  side  of  the  lower  notch  twelve  small,  oblique,  parallel
notches  have  been  subsequently  nicked  out ;  whilst  only  one  edge  of  the  upper
furrow  has  been  cut  into  little  oblique  notches  (seventeen).  This  looks  like  a
designed  pattern  for  recognition  as  an  Owner-mark.
From  La  Madelaine  ?

Fig.  10.  This  shows  some  incised  markings  on  a  large  simple  Dart-head,  or  Har-
poon, with  bevelled  butt.  How  far  these  letter-like  cuts  were  intentional,  or
the  result  of  feeble  carving  after  some  intended  pattern,  it  is  difficult  to  say.
See  page  198.

From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  11.  An  imperfect,  large,  cylindrical  Dart-head  or  Harpoon,  with  numerous
transverse,  oblique,  subparallel  notches  on  one  side.  Like  the  foregoing,  it
suggests  the  idea  of  intended  lettering,  or  systematic  signs  for  communication ;
but  possibly  feeble  and  inexperienced  attempts  at  the  production  of  a  pattern
of  successive  pairs  of  notches,  one  notch  nearly  or  quite  transverse  and  the
other  oblique  to  it  (as  in  figs.  1  and  3),  may  have  resulted  in  these  quasi-
inscriptive  cuttings.  See  page  198.
From  La  Madelaine  ?


RELIQULE   AQUITANIC.E

( DORDOGNE.  )


B.


PL .  XXVII .


|


2ouveau  del.  et  liA.


hp.Secijuet  a  Paris.


DESCRIPTIONS   OF  THE  PLATES— BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XXVII.]      167


B.  PLATE  XXVII.

A  selection  of  barbed  and  grooved  Harpoon-  or  Arrow-heads,  cut  out  of  Rein-
deer-horn. See  pages  9  and  10.  Eigures  2,  5,  and,  perhaps,  6  are  of  the  short-
pointed  type ;  figs.  1,  3,  and  4  have  been  repointed,  perhaps  more  than  once ;  fig.  7
is  long-pointed.

Fig.  1.  This  has  only  four  barbs  (broken),  boldly  cut,  alternate,  and  deeply  grooved.
The  stem  has  two  parallel  deep  grooves  on  each  face.     Point  broken.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  2.  Neatly  subcylindrical,  with  six  barbs,  opposite  and  adpressed ;  short  grooves
obliquely  cross  the  roots  of  the  barbs.  The  point  and  some  of  the  barbs  are  im-
perfect.

From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  3.  Large,  with  five  pairs  of  grooved  barbs,  and  the  remains  of  another  pair,
reduced  in  repointing  the  weapon.     Point  and  one  barb  broken.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  Five  broad,  recurved,  grooved,  alternate  barbs  remain  on  this  repointed
Harpoon.  The  grooves  on  the  stem  are  oblique,  from  the  axil  of  one  barb
downwards  and  inwards  to  the  root  of  the  one  below,  sometimes  touching  the
inner  end  of  its  groove.  Other  oblique  opposite  grooves  or  ornamental  notches
are  cut  chevron-wise  lower  down  on  the  stem.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  5.  Upper  portion  of  a  slender  cylindrical  Harpoon-  or  Arrow-head,  with  six
alternate,  rather  short,  grooved  barbs,  and  with  short  oblique  grooves  crossing
some  of  their  roots.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  6.  A  pointless  barbed  fragment,  with  five  pairs  of  carefully  cut,  close-set,
recurved,  grooved  barbs.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  7.  A  long  terete  point,  with  four  alternate,  broad,  grooved  barbs,  and  the
root  of  another.  The  barbs  bear  two  grooves  on  a  face.

From ?

2*2


AQTJITANICLE.

B.  PLATE  XXVIII.

A  portion  of  the  outside  layer  of  a  Tusk  of  an  Elephant,  most  probably  a  Mam-
uioth  (Elephas  primigenius,  Blumenbach).  An  account  of  its  discovery  was  given
by  M.  Lartet  in  the  '  Comptes  Rendus  de  1' Academic  des  Sciences,'  1865.  See
page  206.  It  is  a  thin  oblong  piece,  convex  from  side  to  side  with  the  roundness
of  the  tusk,  and  somewhat  concave  in  the  longitudinal  direction,  owing  to  its  cur-
vature. The  outer  surface  presents  what  at  first  appears  to  be  a  medley  of  faintly
scratched  lines ;  but,  on  closer  and  more  careful  inspection,  they  resolve  themselves
into  a  characteristic  outline  of  a  hairy  Elephant,  with  some  of  the  lines  doubled  and
redoubled  apparently  by  the  old  artist's  repeated  attempts  to  sketch  out  the  main
features  of  his  subject.  The  lofty  skull  and  hollow  forehead  are  recognizable  as
striking  features,  characteristic  of  the  Siberian  Mammoth  at  St.  Petersburg  *,  of
the  skull  of  the  Mammoth  from  Ilford,  Essex,  preserved  in  the  British  Museum  t,
and  of  the  Belgian  Mammoth  at  Brussels  j.  The  small  eye  and  long  trunk  of  the
Elephant,  and  the  great  curved  tusks  and  shaggy  hair  peculiar  to  the  Mammoth,
are  easily  recognized.  The  upper  and  more  convex  sketch-lines  of  the  back  agree
with  the  high  withers  of  the  Mammoth ;  and  the  lower  and  sloping  dorsal  lines
probably  had  reference,  in  the  draughtsman's  mind,  to  some  special  attitude  of
the  animal,  with  which  also  the  outstretched  portion  of  the  hind  leg,  and  the
elevated  tail,  may  be  associated.

Mr.  H.  Woodward,  E.R.S.,  F.G.S.,  has  kindly  communicated  the  interesting
suggestion  that  the  attitude  of  the  animal,  together  with  the  vertical  position  of
the  trunk,  would  well  accord  with  the  idea  of  one  of  a  herd  of  Elephants  coming
down  by  moonlight  to  drink,  and  that  the  confusing  double  lines  might  then  be
explained  as  an  attempt,  on  the  part  of  the  artist,  to  represent  the  rest  of  the
herd.  In  running,  or  when  alarmed,  the  trunk  of  the  Elephant  is  always  raised.
And  he  adds  that  there  can  be  little  or  no  doubt  that  the  sketch,  rude  as  it  is,
was  the  result  of  a  life-study  of  the  animal,  and  is  consequently  of  the  highest
importance  as  attesting  the  actual  presence  of  the  living  Mammoth  in  Erance
when  the  Caves  of  Pe"rigord  were  occupied  by  Man.

*  See  Le  Hon's  '  L'Homme  fossile,'  1867,  p.  70,  woodcut.

t  Much  modern  information  on  the  features,  distribution,  and  general  natural  history  of  the  Mammoth,
together  with  references  to  other  authors,  will  be  found  in  the  Memoirs  by  Mr.  Henry  Woodward,  F.H.S.,  of
the  British  Museum,  in  the  '  Geological  Magazine,'  1864,  vol.  i.  p.  241,  and  woodcut ;  1868,  vol.  v.  p.  540,
plates  22  and  23 ;  1869,  vol.  vi.  p.  58  ;  and  1871,  vol.  viii.  p.  193,  pi.  4.

J  See  Dr.  E.  Dupont's  '  L'Homme  pendant  les  ages  de  la  Pierre  dans  les  Environs  de  Dinant-sur-Meuse '
(pi.  2),  8vo,  2nd  edit.  1872.


CQ


o

i—i

5


<      o

a  i


a

o


RELIQULE  AQUITANICvE


Louveau  del.  et  Iith.


C


[j


.  vii.  &  viii.


12


'


Imp.Bec(juei  a  Pans.


\


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES — SKULLS  AND  BONES.     [C.  VII.  VIII.]       169


C.  SKULLS  AND  BONES.

C.  PLATE  VII.  &  VIII.    (Double.)

In  illustration  of  the  habits  and  customs  of  the  Cave-folk,  with  respect  to  their
capture  and  slaughter  of  Reindeer  at  perhaps  all  seasons  of  the  year  and  in  great
abundance  *,  the  late  M.  Lartet  arranged  in  this  Plate  a  series  of  Reindeer
Antlers,  in  various  conditions,  of  different  ages,  and  in  several  stages  of  growth.
Two  only  are  perfect  (figs.  1  and  2);  and  only  one  (fig.  8)  has  been  naturally  shed,
the  others  having  been  broken  off  from  the  skulls  of  slaughtered  Deer  of  various
ages.  One  specimen  (fig.  10)  bears  marks  of  cutting  and  sawing  t,  such  as  are
very  common  among'  the  imperfect  horns  found  in  the  Caverns  which  have  been
occupied  by  the  Elint-folk  of  Perigord.

N.  Laurence  Austen,  Esq.,  E.L.S.,  E.Z.S.,  of  Croydon,  well  acquainted  with
the  Reindeer  of  Norway  and  Lapland  J,  has  favoured  us  with  some  systematic
remarks  on  the  Natural  History  of  the  Reindeer;  and  the  description  of  this
Plate  has  been  drawn  up  with  his  kind  assistance.

Eig.  1.  This  was  the  horn  of  a  very  young  Reindeer,  probably  a  male,  judging
from  the  thickness  of  the  beam,  and  about  two  or  three  weeks  old.  In  Norway
the  Reindeer-fawns  in  August  have  antlers  from  5  to  9  inches  in  length,  vary-
ing according  to  sex ;  and  by  November,  when  they  lose  the  velvet,  the  horns
measure  from  12  to  15  inches.
Erom  La  Madelaine.

Eig.  2.  A  fully  matured,  though  small,  antler  of  the  first  year's  growth,  probably
of  a  doe.

Erom  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  3.  Imperfect  horn  of  a  young  male,  full  first  year's  growth.
Erom  La  Madelaine.

•  See  '  Roliq.  Aquit.'  p.  147.  t  Lartet  et  Christy,  "  Cavernes  du  Perigord,"  1864,  p.  27.

i  See  "  The  Wild  Keindeer  of  Norway  (Tarandus  rangifer),"  by  Mr.  N.  L.  Austen,  in  '  Land  and  Water,'
January  and  February,  1871.


EELIQTJLE   AQUITANIOE.

Kg.  4.  Another,  of  larger  size.
From ?

Fig.  5.  Another,  differing  from  the  foregoing  in  size  and  curvature.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  6.  Another,  subtriangular  in  section.
From  Laugerie.

Fig.  7.  This  is  probably  an  abnormal  second-year's  antler,  wanting  in  develop-
ment of  the  brow-antler.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  8.  A  shed  second-year's  antler  (imperfect),  possibly  female.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  9.  Imperfect  full-grown  antler  of  a  doe  four  or  five  years  old.     The  broken
upper  extremity  on  the  left  hand  is  thin  and  flattish.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  10.  Imperfect  antler  of  a  Reindeer-stag  four  years  old.     In  this  specimen
the  beam  has  been  cut  and  sawn  on  the  figured  side,  at  the  upper  right-hand
extremity.
From


Fig.  11.  A  broken  antler,  not  fully  developed,  belonging  to  an  immature  male,
with  the  vascular  markings  unusually  pronounced ;  or  possibly  a  deteriorated
antler  of  an  old  Deer.  The  full  development  of  antler  is  not  attained  in  the
Norwegian  Reindeer  until  they  are  seven  or  eight  years  old ;  additional  "points"
do  not  appear  to  be  developed  after  that  period  ;  and  in  advanced  life  the  antlers
deteriorate  from  year  to  year.
From ?

Fig.  12.  Subcylindrical  portion  of  the  antler  of  a  full-grown  Deer,  aged  seven
or  eight  years  or  more.
From  La  Madelaine.


REUQULE  AQUITANIC.E

(  DORDOGNE . )


Zoaveau  del.  et  liih.


A


PL.  XXXVII I   &  \\\l\


Iap.Becijuet  i  Pa-is.


DESCKIFTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.   [A.  XXXVIII.  XXXIX.]    171


A.  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.

A.  PLATE  XXXVIII.  &  XXXIX.    (Double.)

Several  of  the  large  clumsy  Knives,  heavy  Side-scrapers,  Choppers,  or  one-edged
cleaver-like  flint  Implements  from  Le  Moustier,  are  here  shown.  Each  is  carefully
dressed  to  a  sharp  hatchet-edge,  usually  curved,  along  one  margin,  and  elsewhere
retaining  some  portion  of  the  surface  and  outer  crust  of  the  original  flint  nodule,
which  had  been  in  most  instances  somewhat  water-worn.  They  also  bear  patches
of  discoloured  calcareous  incrustation;  and  there  are  particles  of  mica  in  the
adherent  ochreous  earth.  The  unchipped  portion,  or  back,  of  these  Implements
fits  more  or  less  easily  to  the  hand ;  and  thus  they  are  adapted  for  hewing  and
splitting  wood,  cracking  bones,  scraping  skins,  and  other  purposes.  They  might
be  used  as  Hand-stones  (Casse-tetes),  in  close  fight,  or  as  Wedges.  Some  may  be
only  half-made  Implements — further  manipulation  producing  such  sharp-pointed
but  blunt-butted  tools  as  are  figured  in  A.  Plate  XVII.  figs.  1  &  2,  and  in
A.  Plate  XXVIII.  figs.  1  &  2  (see  pages  78  and  119),  and  still  more  labour  per-
fecting the  better  dressed  lanceolate  specimens  found  at  Le  Moustier,  such  as
A.  Plate  III.  fig.  2,  page  6.

Such  as  are  here  figured  are  not  rare  at  Le  Moustier  (see  A.  Plate  V.,  A.  Plate
XVII.  figs.  3  &  4,  and  A.  Plate  XXV.,  pages  17,  78,  and  114),  together  with  such
approximate  forms  as  are  shown  in  A.  Plate  XII.  page  39.  A  few  were  met  with
at  Les  Eyzies  and  La  Ma  delaine*.

The  small  specimen,  fig.  2,  differs  from  the  others  on  this  Plate,  not  only  in
size,  but  in  being  a  flake,  with  a  strong  "bulb  of  percussion  "  on  the  face  which
is  not  figured.  This  would  serve  for  a  Scraper,  Knife,  Chisel,  or  a  light  Chopper ;

*  Some  English  localities  for  these  Chopper-stones  have  been  mentioned  at  page  1 19 ;  and  we  may
add  that,  in  his  'Ancient  Stone  Implements  &c.  of  Great  Britain'  (1872),  Mr.  John  Evans,  F.R.S..
figures  one  from  Santon-Downham,  Suffolk  (fig.  437,  p.  505),  one  from  Brandon,  Essex  (fig.  443,  p.  511),
and  one  from  Stoke-Newington,  Middlesex  (fig.  453,  p.  525),  and  describes  the  probable  method  of  their
fashioning  and  their  uses.  M.  Mortillet  observes  that  analogous  flint  implements  have  been  found  in  the
Quaternary  Alluviums  of  the  Somme  and  the  Seine,  see  '  Materiaux  pour  1'histoire.  de  1'Homme,'  vol.  iv.
(1868)  p.  455,  fig.  110.  Sir  John  Lubbock  makes  mention  of  this  kind  of  tool  in  his  '  Prehistoric  Times '
(1865),  p.  251.  •;


172


RELIQUIAE  AQUITANIOE.


or  it  might  have  been  fastened  with  others  along  a  stick  or  staff  to  make  a  con-
tinuous cutting  edge,  like  an  Aztec  "  Mahquahuitl "  *,  or  other

"  Ugly  stone-set  things,

Most  like  to  knives." — W.  MORRIS'S  Jason,  p.  180.

Such  triangular  and  other  short  flint  flakes,  dressed  with  an  angular  or  curved
edgef,  are  common  in  the  Dordogne  Caves,  and  are  not  wanting  wherever  stone
implements  abound.  Seepages  117,  119,  120,  155.

Fig.  1.  Irregular  oblong ;  brownish-grey.

Fig.  2.  A  dark-coloured  subtriangular  flake,  dressed  to  a  curved  cutting  edge  on


one  margin.


Fig.  3.  Brownish  grey ;  subtriangular;  the  back  is  awkward  for  handling,  pos-
sibly from  inadvertent  fracture.

Fig.  4.  Dark  grey ;  subquadrangular ;  with  a  nearly  straight  edge,  and  a  natural
back  ready  to  the  hand.

Fig.  5.  Dark  grey;  subtriangular,  with  curved  edge.

Fig.  6.  Brownish  grey ;  acute-ovate ;  carefully  dressed,  so  that  the  elliptical  curve
of  the  cutting  edge  corresponds  with  that  of  the  natural  portion  of  the  flint
nodule,  which  remains  as  the  back  of  the  Implement,  fitting  easily  to  the  hand.


Figure.

Length

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.             English.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.                 inch.

1.

.       116

4-567

23}

o-floa

40                1-575

2.

80

3-150

53}

2-087

21

0-827

3.

140

5-512

98}

3-858

33

1-299

4.

127

5-000

107

4-213

47

1-850

5.

183

7-205

129

5-079

51

2-008

6.

119

4-685

82

3-228

49

1-929

e  These  stone-edged  War-clubs  are  described  and  illustrated  in  the  '  Smithsonian  Contributions  to  Know-
lodge,'  vol.  i.  p.  211,  note,  fig.  101 ;  vol.  ii.  p.  180,  figs.  62-64;  in  Col.  A.  Lane  Fox's  Lecture  "  On  Primi-
tive Warfare  "  (Journ.  United  Service  Instit.  1807),  p.  25,  pi.  6.  figs.  78-80 ;  Evans's  'Ancient  Stone  Imple-
ments '  &c.  (1872),  p.  265 ;  and  the  works  to  which  they  refer.

t  For  such  flakes  having  a  semicircular  edge,  see  Evans's  '  Stone  Implements '  &c.  pp.  270  et  seq.,  figs.
204  &c.,  and  pp.  454,  470,  562,  &c.  Triangular  dressed  flakes  are  shown  at  p.  454,  fig.  395,  and  p.  493.
fig.  425,  of  the  same  work.

See  also  'Materiaux  pour  1'histoire  de  1'Homme,'  vol.  v.  1869,  p.  461,  pi.  29.  figs.  4,  5,  10,  11,  &c.,  illus-
trative of  this  kind  of  dressed  flake  from  Chez-Poure  (Brive).

}  Broader  than  the  figure.


RELIOULE

(  LORDOGNE.)


A


PL.  XL


Lauvesiii  del.  et  A  (A.


L  Paris.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XL.]  173


A.  PLATE  XL.

The  Implements  here  figured  are  from  the  Moustier  Cave.  Fig.  1  is  a  ridge-
flake,  pointed  at  one  end  by  dressing  and  wear  as  a  scraping  and  boring  tool,
analogues  of  which  may  be  seen  in  A.  Plate  VIII.  fig.  8 ;  Plate  XV.  fig.  4 ;  Plate
XVIII.  figs.  2,  8,  9,  11;  and  Plate  XXI.  fig.  3.  Figures  2  and  3  are  broad  short
flakes  dressed  to  a  triangular  outline,  and  are  to  be  classed  among  similar  forms
referred  to  at  pages  136  and  172.  The  symmetrical  point  of  fig.  2,  turned  to  the
left  hand  upwards,  and  that  of  fig.  3,  turned  to  the  right  hand,  are  comparable  with
the  very  symmetrical  lance-like  points  of  the  similarly  prepared  flakes  A.  Plate
XXVIII.  fig.  2,  and  Plate  XXXIII.  fig.  3;  and  to  this  symmetry  of  proportion
even  the  larger  and  coarser  flake  Implement,  A.  Plate  XXXVII.  fig.  4,  also  from
Le  Moustier,  markedly  approximates.  Figures  5,  6,  and  7  are  flakes  dressed  care-
fully into  lanceolate,  plano-convex  weapons,  with  neat  butts ;  and  very  many
analogous  forms,  varying  from  the  narrow  specimen  in  A.  Plate  XIX.  fig.  1,  to  the
large  Implement,  A.  Plate  III.  fig.  1,  are  not  rare  at  Le  Moustier  and  elsewhere.
Figure  4  is  more  highly  finished,  dressed  on  both  faces,  biconvex,  oval,  and
trenchant  along  its  whole  margin.  Larger  tools  of  this  style,  but  more  lanceolate,
and  thicker  at  the  butt,  are  characteristic  of  Le  Moustier  (as  A.  Plate  III.  fig.  2  ;
Plate  XVII.  figs.  1  and  2 ;  Plate  XXI.  fig.  5 ;  and  Plate  XXVIII.  fig.  1),  and  re-
mind the  archaeologist,  as  has  been  before  remarked,  of  the  so-called  Drift-type
of  Implement  from  the  old  gravels.

Fig.  1.  A  mottled  grey  arched  flake,  pointed  at  one  end ;  chipped  on  one  edge,
and  retaining  some  of  the  original  crust  at  the  other.

Fig.  2.  Mottled,  dark-grey,  broad  flake,  carefully  dressed  to  a  triangle,  one  point
of  which  (to  the  left  hand  in  the  figure)  is  sharp  and  regular.

Fig.  3.  Somewhat  similar  to  fig.  2,  but  less  symmetrical.

Fig.  4.  Brownish-grey,  broad-oval,  biconvex,  sharp  along  the  edge,  and  dressed  on
both  faces.    The  notch  is  probably  of  recent  origin.

Fig.  5.  Dark-grey  flake  retaining  "bulb  of  percussion,"  shaped  by  dressing  on  the
ridge-side  into  a  sharply  pointed  Lance-head  (?),  with  thick  butt.    A  patch  of

2  c


'74


KELIQUkE  AQUITANIC^E.


original  crust  remains  on  the  convex  face,  and  some  tufaceous  patches  adhere
to  the  other.

Fig.  6.  Dark-grey,  bulbed  flake,  shaped  into  a  narrow  lanceolate  Tool  or  Weapon.
A  little  of  the  crust  still  remains.

Fig.  7.  Portion  of  a  dark-grey  flake,  very  neatly  dressed.     Some  original  crust
remains  at  the  greatest  convexity.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

English.

millim.

inches.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

i.

106

4-173

27

1-063

11

0-433

2.

56

2-205

60

2-362

10

0-394

3.

65

2-559

45

1-772

15

0-591

4.

50

1-986

41

1-614

13

0-512

5.

70

•2-756

50

1-969

15

0-591

6.

60

2-362

27

1-063

8

0-315

7.

80

3-150

35

1-378

13

0-512

RELIQUIAE  AQUITANICE

(  DORDOGNE . )


A


PL.XLI


Au  del.etlith.


(uet  3.  Paris.


RELIQUIAE  AQUITANlCyE.

Fig.  7.  Part  of  a  narrow,  brownish-grey  flake,  which  had  been  neatly  dressed  into
a  long  lanceolate  Weapon  by  chipping  chiefly  on  the  convex  face.
From  Laugerie.

Fig.  8.  An  arched,  cream-coloured  flake,  roughly  pointed  at  the  bulb-end.
From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  9.  A  small,  dull-yellow,  ridge-flake,  worn  on  one  edge  by  use  as  a  Side-scraper.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  10.  Part  of  a  narrow  flake  of  white  chalcedonic  flint,  worn  down  on  one  side
as  a  Side-scraper,  and  dressed  as  a  Saw  on  the  other.     It  retains  thirteen  notches,
and  is  broken  through  the  fourteenth.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  11.  Portion  of  a  flake  of  Rock-crystal,  irregularly  chipped.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  12.  A  small  narrow  flake,  mottled  cream-coloured,  worn  on  one  edge  as  a
Side-scraper,  and  dressed  with  four  broad  notches  on  the  other,  for  scraping
cylindrical  Needles  and  small  stems.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

Fig.  13.  Small  flake,  chipped  or  worn  at  the  point  as  a  Drill  (?).    (Lost.)

Fig.  14.  A  mottled  purplish  and  grey  flake,  dressed  at  the  broad  end  into  a  Drill,
or  worn  by  scraping  into  a  notch  and  point.
From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  15.  A  purplish-grey  translucent  flake,  carefully  trimmed  to  a  lanceolate  form,
with  a  cutting  edge  all  round.     Point  broken.
From  Laugerie.

Fig.  16.  Piece  of  a  honey-coloured  flake ;  the  edges  straightened  by  use  or  dressing,
and  the  end  pointed,  probably  by  use  as  a  Scraper.

From  Laugerie.
Fig.  17.  Small  dark  flake,  dressed  like  fig.  15,  but  narrow-lanceolate.     Point  lost.

From  La  Madelaine.
Fig.  18.  Dull-grey,  narrow  flake,  worn  down  along  one  edge  as  a  Side-scraper.

From  La  Madelaine.
Fig.  19.  Dark,  arched  flake,  dressed  or  worn  to  a  Drilling-point  at  one  end.

From  La  Madelaine.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.XLI.]  175

A.  PLATE  XLI.

A  miscellaneous  group  of  dressed  and  worn  Implements,  made  out  of  flakes ;
from  various  Stations.  Figures  1,  7,  15,  and  17  (all  broken)  are  lanceolate  Wea-
pon-heads, shaped  with  care.  Figures  2,  8,  13,  14,  16,  19,  21,  and  23  have  either
been  dressed  as  Drills,  or  have  been  worn  at  one  end  into  slopes  or  notches,  with  a
point  remaining  in  the  middle.  Figure  3  is  worn  into  two  deep  notches.  Figure  10
seems  to  be  a  Saw ;  figs.  5  and  12  have  a  series  of  broad  lateral  notches,  more  pro-
bably for  scraping  needles*  than  for  sawing;  and  these,  as  well  as  figs.  9,  13,  18,
20,  22,  and  24,  seem  to  have  been  used  as  Side-scrapers — fig.  22  on  both  edges,
and  fig.  24,  as  is  more  usual,  only  on  half  an  edgef.  All  these  kinds  of  Imple-
ments, or  their  analogues,  have  been  already  noticed  in  other  portions  of  this  book.
That  some  of  the  small  ones  may  have  been  tattooing -tools  has  been  suggested  by
our  friend  Mr.  Sydney  Webb,  of  Eedhill.

Fig.  1.  Brownish-grey  flake  trimmed  into  a  lanceolate  Weapon  by  chipping  chiefly
on  the  convex  face.    Broken.
From  Laugerie.

Fig.  2.  Portion  of  a  flake,  worn  at  one  end  as  a  Drill  or  Scraper.     (Lost.)

Fig.  3.  Bulb-end  of  a  small  mottled-grey  flake,  worn  into  a  notch  on  each  side  J.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  Piece  of  a  small,  simple,  ridge-flake  of  clear  Rock-crystal  §.
From  Laugerie  Haute.

Fig.  5.  Portion  of  a  narrow,  dark-coloured  flake,  worn  down  on  one  edge,  as  a
Side-scraper,  and  either  dressed  on  the  other  as  a  coarse  Saw  of  seven  teeth,  or
worn  into  five  notches  by  scraping  small  cylindrical  stems  and  Needles.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  6.  The  apex  of  a  yellowish-grey  flake,  slightly  chipped  on  edges  and  point.
From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

*  As  suggested  for  similar  specimens,  from  the  Trou  de  Chaleux,  by  Dr.  E.  Dupont,  '  L'Homme  pendant
les  Ages  de  la  Pierre,'  2nd  Edit.,  1872,  pages  149  and  151.

t  Some  similar  implements,  from  the  Trou  de  Chaleux,  are  figured  in  plates  6  and  7  of  Dr.  Dupont's
'  Notices  preliminaires  sur  les  fouilles  dans  les  cavernes  de  la  Belgique,'  vol.  ii.  1867,  and  reproduced  in  his
'  L'Homme '  &c.  1872.

i  Compare  figs.  4  and  8,  pi.  6,  Dupont's  '  Notices  preliminaires '  <fec.  vol.  ii.

§  Flakes  and  angular  pieces  of  rock-crystal  and  vein-quartz  have  been  met  with  also  at  Laugerie  Basse
and  La  Madelaine.

2<?2


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XLI.]          177

Fig.  20.  Brown  flake,  worn  down  on  one  edge  as  a  Side-scraper.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  21.  Coarse  cream-coloured  flake,  either  dressed  or  worn  to  a  point,  the  semi-
circular notch  on  one  side  of  which  seems  to  have  resulted  from  scraping  a
cylindrical  stem.

From  the  Gorge  d'Enfer.

Fig.  22.  Dark-grey  narrow  flake,  worn  at  both  edges  by  use  as  a  double  Side-
scraper,  or  purposely  blunted  for  use  as  a  hand-drill,  or  other  pointed  tool.
From  Laugerie  Basse  ?

Fig.  23.  Grey  flake,  worn  at  the  bulb-end  into  two  unequal  notches  and  a  central
blunt  point  (figured  downwards).
From  Laugerie.

Fig.  24.  Light-brown  narrow  flake,  worn  halfway  down  one  edge  by  use  as  a  Side-
scraper.

From ?


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.           English.

milHm.

inches.

mi'lhn.

inch.

millim.               inch.

1.*

54

2-126

22

0-866

5

0-197

2.*

40

1-575

18

0-709

3.

19

0-748

12

0-472

3

0-118

4.»

28

1-102

15

0-591

3

0-118

5.*

32

1-260

8

0-315

2

0-079

6.*

36

1-417

16

0-630

4

0-157

7.*

59

2-323

17

0-669

7

0-276

8.

75

2-953

20

0-787

7

0-276

0.

52

2-074

10

0-393

6

0-236

10.*

43

1-693

6

0-236

3

0-118

11.

51

2-008

28

1-102

12.

38

1-496

7

0-276

3

0-118

13.

39

1-535

8

0-315

14.

85

3-347

25

0-984

6

0-236

15.*

37

1-457

19

0-748

5

0-197

16.*

47

1-850

26

1-024

8

0-315

17.*

38

1-496

17

0-669

5

0-197

18.

56

2-205

7

0-276

4

0-157

19.

66

2-598

13

0-512

4

0-157

20.

62

2-441

10

0-393

4

0-157

21.

74

2-913

36

1-417

14

0-551

22.

67

2-638

8

0-315

3

0-118

23.

54

2-126

25

0-984

5

0-197

24.

52

2-074

8

0-315

4

0-157

*  Shortened  bv  fracture.


!-g  BELIQTJI^E  AQUTT  ANKLE.


B.  BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  &c.

B.  PLATE  XXIX.

Some  imperfect  and  unfinished  Harpoon-heads,  cut  out  of  Reindeer  antler.

Fig.  1.  Fragment  of  a  long-pointed  specimen.     The  bases  of  three,  doubly  grooved
barbs  remain ;  some  irregular  faint  grooves  mark  the  stem.
From ?


Fig.  2.  An  unfinished  weapon.     The  cutting  of  four  barbs  was  begun  uniformly
on  both  faces  at  one  edge.     Compare  fig.  4,  B.  Plate  XXI.
From  La  Madelaine  ?

Fig.  3.  The  lower  portion  of  an  Harpoon-head,  retaining  the  bases  of  four  grooved
barbs,  and  having  the  stem  ornamented,  on  one  face,  with  a  pattern  of  ten
nearly  symmetrical  notches, — three  being  straight,  successive,  and  median,
flanked  with  three  oblique  corresponding  notches  on  one  side,  and  with
four  smaller  oblique  subparallel  notches  on  the  other.  Compare  fig.  4,  B.
Plate  XXVII.
From  La  Madelaine  ?

Fig.  4.  A  small  and  repointed  weapon,  retaining  only  three  grooved  barbs  and  an
indication  of  another.  A  longitudinal  groove  and  the  trace  of  another  remain
on  the  stem  (compare  fig.  1,  B.Plate  XXVII.).  The  apparently  intentional
oblique  notch,  cut  across  the  butt  just  above  the  collar,  is  alluded  to  at  page  194
as  being  probably  an  Owner-mark.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  5.  This  (figured  upside  down)  is  apparently  an  unfinished  weapon,  or  rather
one  badly  begun  and  cast  aside.  The  pointed  end  is  analogous  to  the  usual
conical  butt,  with  its  knobs,  marked  out  by  the  two  large  notches,  above  which
the  material  was  not  reduced,  though  some  unskilled  hand  began  to  mark  out
the  place  of  some  barbs  on  the  ill-shaped  stem.
From  La  Madelaine.


RELIQUL£    AQUITANICLE

(  DORDOGNE .  )


B;


B.


PL. XXIX


'


LapJlecjuet  i  Paris.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.     [B.  XXIX.]      179

Fig.  6.  A  fragment  retaining  nine  close-set,  alternate,  long,  grooved  barbs  or  their
roots.    The  stem  has  continuous  or  broken  grooves  along  the  bases  of  the  barbs.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  7.  The  butt  of  a  broken  specimen,  retaining  two  sharp,  grooved  barbs,  and
marked  with  some  short  oblique  grooves.
From  La  Madelaine.


Figs.  32-34.

Three  bone  Harpoon-heads  from  Tierra  del  Fucgo,  obtained  during  the  Voyage  of  the  'Beagle'  in  1827.

(Christy  Collection.)


Fig.  32.  8f  inches  long.        Fig.  33.  15  inches  long.        Fig.  34.  12^  inches  long.


,8o  KELIQULE  AQUITANICLE.


B.  PLATE  XXX.  &  XXXI.    (Double.)

This  Plate  exhibits  some  fine  specimens  of  the  Aquitanian  Pogamagan,  or  Baton,
made  of  carved  and  perforated  antlers,  common  in  the  Caves  of  the  V6zere,  and
rare  elsewhere.  Besides  many  carved  pieces  of  antler  which  may  be  fragments  of
Pogamagans,  we  may  certainly  refer  to  the  following  figures  as  illustrative  of
these  interesting  Implements :— B.  Plate  II.  figs.  3,  7,  8 ;  double  Plate  III.  &  IV.;
double  Plate  VII.  &  VIII.  figs.  3,  6,  7;  double  Plate  XV.  &  XVI.  figs.  1,  2,  3 ;
Plate  XXIV.  figs.  1,  7;  and  figs.  1,  2,  4,  and  6  of  the  Plate  before  us.  M.  E.  Mas-
senat  has  figured  in  the  '  Materiaux  pour  1'Histoire  de  1'Homme '  &c.,  vol.  v.  pi.  20.
fig.  1,  the  carved  butt  of  a  Baton  of  antler  (with  at  least  two  holes),  representing
probably  the  head  of  a  Bear ;  and  another  carved  and  perforated  butt  is  excellently
well  carved  into  two  Bulls'  heads  (fig.  2,  p.  352) ;  these  are  from  Laugerie  Basse,
on  the  Ve"zere.  The  so-called  "Baton"  from  Mont  Saleve  ('Mate"riaux'  &c.,  vol.  iv.
p.  154,  figs.  39, 40)  differs  from  the  Aquitanian  form  by  the  central  position  of  the
hole  in  the  rounded  butt,  as  in  the  arrow-straightening  tools  of  the  Esquimaux
(Mr.  "W.  Boyd  Dawkins) ;  and  one  of  Dr.  Dupont's  Belgian  specimens  from  the
Cave  of  Goyet  ('Bullet.  Acad.  Sc.  Belgique,'  vol.  xxvii.  p.  274;  'L'Homme'  &c.,
2nd  Edit.,  p.  117;  and  'Materiaux'  &c.,  vol.  v.  p.  318,  pi.  16),  ornamented  with
a  Fish,  presents  that  character  still  more  markedly,  whilst  the  other,  though
rough,  also  has  the  perforation  in  the  broad  and  shortened  butt.  Those  found  at
Schussenreid,  in  Wurtemberg,  on  the  other  hand,  are,  like  some  of  the  Dor-
dogne  specimens,  rough  antlers  pierced  with  one  or  two  holes.  The  butt  of  a
Pogamagan,  not  perforated,  but  ornamented  with  incised  patterns  of  lines,  found
in  the  Magrite  Cave  at  Pont-a-Lesse,  Belgium,  is  figured  in  Dr.  Dupont's  'L'Homme
pendant  les  Ages  de  la  Pierre,'  2nd  Edit.,  p.  93,  fig.  9.

Some  at  least  of  the  possible  uses  of  these  ornamented  Implements  have  been
indicated  above,  at  pages  30,  32,  102,  37,  50,  and  189;  and  our  friend  Dr.  Broca,
of  Paris,  has  elaborated  a  theory  of  social  order  and  rank  among  the  Perigord
Aborigines,  and  of  grades,  whether  regal  or  official,  marked  by  the  holding  of
simple,  one-holed,  and  successively  many-holed  Batons,  either  in  home-society,
in  the  Chase,  or  in  War*.  This  wide  and  interesting  subject,  however,  we  may
still  regard  as  open  to  further  research.

*  See  Dr.  Broca's  interesting  Lecture  on  the  Cave-folk  of  the  Yezere,  before  the  French  Association  for
the  Advancement  of  Science,  at  Bordeaux  in  1872 ;  '  Eevue  Scientifique  de  la  France '  &c.,  2e  ser.,  2e  annee,
No.  20, 16  Nov.  1872,  pp.  457  &c.;  and  in  'Nature,'  1873,  pp.  369  &c.'


RELIQULE   AQUITANIC^l

( DORDOGNE .  )


Xoaveau  JeJ.et  lHh.


B.


PL.  xxx  a  xxxi


t  .  >  v

'' .. ., '  ~  r  '      '  .    .     ._


linp.Ilecjaet  a  Paris


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— BONE  IMPLEMENTS,  ETC.  [B.  XXX.  XXXI.]    MI

Fig.  1.  A  fragment  of  a  carved  stem  of  antler ;  it  is  slightly  curved,  oblong  in
section  towards  the  apex,  and  suhcylindrical  at  the  broken  end.  On  the  figured
face  is  an  isolated,  eared,  hornless  head,  possibly  Bovine,  with  a  shaggy  jowl,
succeeded  by  a  flower-like  outline.  On  the  other  face  two  somewhat  similar
flower-like  figures  are  seen,  succeeded  towards  the  apex  by  two  patterns  con-
sisting of  an  obliquely  transverse  furrow  crossed  in  one  instance  by  four,  and
in  the  other  by  three  short  and  slightly  curved  notches.  The  concave  margin
has  seven  transverse  unequal  notches  (perhaps  Tally-marks),  some  of  which
show  themselves  in  the  figure  above  the  head  and  flower.  The  convex  margin
has  a  long  shallow  notch  and  two  blunt  barb-like  projections,  beyond  which
it  is  partially  corroded  on  the  figured  side,  but  somewhat  polished,  perhaps  by
use,  on  the  opposite  face.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  2.  A  broken  Baton  or  Pogamagan,  made  of  a  shed  antler,  ornamented  with  a
row  of  Horses*  oh  each  side.  These  appear  to  be  standing,  have  large  heads  as
usual tj  hog-manes,  excepting  two,  one  on  each  side  of  the  butt-end;  and  their
tails  seem  to  be  rather  long  and  narrow.

The  perforation  interferes  with  the  head  of  a  Horse  on  each  side ;  also  with
the  tail  of  one,  and  the  head  of  the  other  Horse,  at  the  butt-end ;  for  one  of
these  is  reversed  in  position.  Both  have  the  mane  indicated  by  the  usual  line
parallel  with  the  neck.

The  concave  edge  of  the  antler  is  ornamented  with  a  shallow,  incised,  mesial
line  and  numerous  short  oblique  notches  set  off  on  each  side  of  it.

From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  3.  A  fragment  of  a  large  perforated  Pogamagan  or  Baton  of  antler,  orna-
mented with  a  shallow  spiral  furrow  encircling  the  stem.
From  Laugerie  Basse.

*  See  Prof.  Owen's  remarks  on  some  figured  Horses  from  the  Bruniquel  and  La-Madelaine  Caves,  their
identity  with  the  fossil  Equus  of  Auvergne,  and  the  evident  accuracy  of  the  prinueval  artist — '  Philos.
Transact.,'  1869,  pp.  517,  535-540.

t  Respecting  these  large-headed  Horses,  our  friend  Mr.  W.  Boyd  Dawkins,  F.R.S.,  obligingly  writes  :—
"  There  is  a  most  important  point  for  you,  which  I  lighted  on  in  the  Museum  at  Lyons.  The  figures  of  the
Horses  from  Perigord  are  remarkable  for  the  large  size  of  the  head ;  and  the  Horse  must  have  been  a  clumsy
pony  with  the  head  of  a  cart-horse.  That  this  is  literally  true  is  proved  by  a  skeleton  just  set  up  by  my
friend  M.  Lortet,  from  the  Station  de  Solutre.  It  is  that  of  a  pony  with  a  huge  ugly  head.  Your  palaeo-
lithic artists  had  an  eye  for  proportion,  and,  where  they  can  be  tested,  are  literally  accurate."  (Nov.  28, 1873.)

See  also  M.  E.  Piette's  account  of  the  similar  Horses  figured  on  bone  from  the  Gourdan  Cave,  Haute
Garonne ;  <  Materiaux  pour  ITiist.  de  1'Homme,'  2-  ser.,  vol.  v.  pp.  69  &  70 ;  and  '  Bullet.  Soc.  Anthrop.

Paris,'  1873.

2  a


182


RELIQULE  AQUITANIC^E.


1.  4.  Another  broken  Baton,  made  of  a  shed  antler,  perforated  with  one  hole,
and  ornamented  on  one  side  with  Horses,  standing  or  gently  moving,  in  very
close  sequence,  and  with  a  pattern  of  longitudinal  and  transverse  scoring*,  and
at  least  one  Horse  (of  which  a  portion  remains),  on  the  other.  The  round  hole
also  is  bordered  with  a  groove  on  the  side  not  figured,  and  with  a  partial  mar-
ginal groove  on  the  figured  face.  The  Horses  are  relatively  large,  with  rather
long  thin  tails,  and  heavy  heads ;  their  manes  are  indicated  by  the  usual  hori-
zontal line.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  5.  A  Pogamagan  or  Baton,  consisting  of  a  small  antler  (detached  by  force
from  the  frontal  bone),  pierced  with  a  single  hole.     Imperfect.
From ?

*  like  the  pattern  on  fig.  8,  in  B.  Plate  VII.  &  VIII.,  but  larger  and  of  better  design.


RELIQU1  !•:    AQUITANIC^E
(DORDOGNE.}


A  .  PL  XLII


M.i?cN.Haji'hAi-t.  imp.


DESCKIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.  XLII.]          183


A.  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.

A.  PLATE  XLII.

This  selection  of  specimens,  mostly  differing  from  any  figured  in  the  foregoing
Plates,  comprises  some  tools  which  must  have  been  in  use  with  the  old  Cave-folk
in  their  ordinary  work  of  flaying,  cutting,  scraping,  carving,  &c.;  whilst  fig.  10
illustrates  some  useless  splinters  struck  off  tools  already  used,  in  the  process  of
redressing  them,  or  converting  them  into  implements  of  another  sort.

Fig.  1.  A  broad,  thin,  triangular,  somewhat  curved  flake  of  light-brown  sub-
translucent  Flint,  with  the  bulb  at  the  blunt  corner,  on  the  flake-face  (not
shown  in  the  figure).  It  is  slightly  concave  on  that  side.  The  outer  face
retains  the  original  drab  granular  crust,  with  a  piece  of  shell  (Inoceramiis)
partially  converted  into  orbicular  silex.  There  are  some  parallel  striae  (not
shown  in  the  drawing)  on  the  old  crust,  probably  due  to  river-action  or  ice ;
also  numerous  small  calcareous  concretions,  due  to  minute  tubular  concretions
over  rootlets  (?),  of  later  date  than  the  scoring.

The  three  edges  of  this  large  flake  have  been  sharpened  by  flaking  (with  the
scaling  on  the  outer  face),  especially  near  and  at  the  two  corners  distant  from
the  bulb  and  lowest  in  the  figure,  one  rounded,  the  other  angular,  so  that,  held
by  the  thickest  corner,  the  implement  could  be  used  as  a  flaying  or  flenshing
knife.  A  somewhat  similar  implement,  of  thin  green  slate,  irregularly  oval,
6  by  3  inches,  in  the  CHRISTY  COLLECTION,  is  labelled  as  a  flenshing  tool  used
by  the  Esquimaux.  In  this  one  edge  is  made  fit  for  the  hand  by  wood-fibre  (?)
and  sinew  being  passed  to  and  fro  through  holes  in  the  slate  near  the  margin,
and  enveloping  some  straighter  parallel  strings  of  the  same,  intermixed  with  a
reddish  cement.  This  is  accompanied  by  another,  smaller  tool,  with  a  straight
edge,  also  from  the  Esquimaux.
From  Le  Moustier.

Fig.  2.  A  Double  Scraper,  made  from  a  subtranslucent  grey  flake  by  careful  and
neat  dressing  at  sides  and  ends  on  the  ridge-face,  similar  to  the  work  bestowed
on  the  Javelin-heads  &c.  in  A.  Plates  IV.  and  VI.

From  Laugerie.

2e


AQUITANICLS:.

Fig.  3.  Crescent-ended  Implement,  consisting  of  a  rough,  broad,  fossiliferous  flake,
drab  passing  into  light-brown,  hollowed  and  used  at  the  thin  end.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  4.  A  mottled-grey  Flake-scraper,  with  its  broad  end  squared,  perhaps  by  use  ;
the  narrower  end  has  been  partially  tanged  and  roughly  used.
From  Les  Eyzies.

Fig.  5.  Chisel-like  Implement  of  dark-grey  flint ;  the  broad  oblique  end  has  been
used;  the  narrow  end  has  been  partially  tanged  and  used  also.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  6.  Dark-grey,  spicular,  narrow,  arched  flake,  dressed  or  worn  on  the  sides  at
one  end  to  serve  as  a  Drill  or  Rimer.  The  scaling  is  from  the  flake-face  and  on
the  ridge-face  on  the  right-hand  side  of  fig.  6  a,  from  the  ridge-face  and  on  the
flake-face  on  the  other  side  (right-hand  side  of  fig.  6b).  This  would  be  produced
by  using  the  instrument  as  a  Drill  turned  one  way  only  (from  left  to  right) ;
or  by  applying  the  implement  as  a  Scraper,  and  using  the  two  edges  succes-
sively, with  a  turn  of  the  hand.  Evidence  of  use  is  visible  also  on  one  edge
near  the  bulb-end.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  7.  A  narrow  crescent-ended  Implement,  of  a  dark-grey  spicular  flake  neatly
dressed  to  a  uniformity  of  edge  on  the  sides  and  broad  end,  and  hollowed  and
used  at  the  narrow  end.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  8.  A  dark-grey  spicular  flake,  tanged  at  the  but-end,  sharpened  at  the  other,
by  dressing  or  by  use,  into  a  double  Angle-  or  Shoulder-scraper.  As  the
scaling  is  from  the  flake-face  on  each  side,  though  rougher  on  one  edge  than
the  other,  this  cannot  have  been  used  as  a  Drill  in  hard  substances.  The  sides
have  been  carefully  reduced  to  uniform  edges.
From  La  Madelaine.

Fig.  9.  A  small,  brownish-grey,  subtranslucent  flake,  deeply  notched  on  one  side
near  one  end,  either  by  use  as  a  Shoulder-scraper,  or  by  dressing  (scaled  from
the  flake-face),  and  ending  in  a  broad-angled  solid  point,  fit  for  drilling  holes,
or  rather,  perhaps,  for  engraving  lines.  [The  edge  of  the  notch  is  too  coarse
in  the  drawings  figs.  9  a,  96.]
From  La  Madelaine.


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES— STONE  IMPLEMENTS.     [A.XLII.]          185

Fig.  10.  A  Splinter  from  the  side  of  a  grey  flake,  which  had  been  used  as  a
Shoulder-  or  Angle-scraper,  or  some  similar  Implement.  Pig.  10  a  corresponds
with  the  left-hand  side  of  fig.  8  a.  These  ohlique  knife-like  Splinters,  triangular
in  section,  and  of  various  sizes,  are  common  in  most  of  the  Caves,  and  evidently
have  resulted  from  the  "tanging"  offtakes,  or  their  reduction  in  width  at  the
ends.  See  several  figures  in  A.  Plates  VII.  &  VIII.  &c.
From  La  Madelaine.


Figure.

Length.

Breadth.

Thickness.

French.

English.

French.

English.

French.

Englifth.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

millim.

inch.

1.

165

6-496

137

5-394

19

0-748

2.

62

2-441

29

1-142

12

0-472

3.

85

3-347

35

1-378

15

0-591

4.

65

2-559

19

0-748

7

0-276

5.

.      60

2-362

22

0-866

9

0-354

6.

85

3-347

13

0-512

5

0-197

7.

92

3-622

21

0-827

5

0-197

8.

83

3-268

23

0-906

7

0-276

9.

32

1-260

8

0-315

3

0-118

10.

70

2-756

10

0-394

8

0-315

EELIQUI^E  AQUIT  ANKLE.


G.  SKULLS  AND  BONES.

C.  PLATE  IX.  &  X.    (Double.)

[All  the  figures,  drawn  on  the  stone  from  the  originals,  are  reversed  in  the  plate.
They  were  sketched  in  geometric  projection  by  aid  of  Gavard's  diagraph,  and
reduced  to  half-size  by  Sauvage's  pantograph.]

Fig.  1  a.  Frontal,  from  La  Madelaine,  front  view.     1  b.  Internal  cast  of  the  same.

Fig.  2.  Half  of  the  Upper  Jaw  of  "  No.  4  "  from  Cro-Magnon,  with  the  second
premolar  and  the  first  two  molars  still  in  place  and  much  worn.

Fig.  3.  Portion  of  the  Lower  Jaw  of  the  Man  of  La  Madelaine.  (See,  in  the  text,
p.  267  ;  another  view  of  the  same,  fig.  94.)

Fig.  4.  Fragment  of  the  Lower  Jaw  of  "No.  4"  from  Cro-Magnon,  bearing  two
molars  much  worn.

Fig.  5.  First  lumbar  Vertebra  of  the  "  Old  Man  "  of  Cro-Magnon,  showing  the
separation  of  the  diapophysis  into  a  metapophysis  and  parapophysis.

Fig.  6  a.  The  Pelvis  of  "  No.  1 "  from  Cro-Magnon,  reconstructed  by  M.  Hamy :
represented  as  seen  from  above,  and  so  that  the  plane  of  the  upper  narrowing
is  horizontal.  66.  The  same,  seen  from  behind,  for  the  particular  study  of
the  sacrum.

Fig.  7.  Shaft  and  upper  extremity  of  a  left  Radius  from  Cro-Magnon,  view  of  the
anterior  surface.

Fig.  8.  Shaft  and  lower  extremity  of  another  Uadius  from  the  same  place,  view
of  the  posterior  surface,  to  show  the  depth  of  the  grooves.

Fig.  9.  Left  Ulna  of  one  of  the  subjects  from.  Cro-Magnon,  profile,  to  exhibit  the
incurvation  of  the  upper  extremity.

Fig.  10  a.  Eight  Femur  of  the  Man  of  La  Madelaine,  anterior  surface.  10  b.  Pro-
file of  the  same,  to  show  its  antero-posterior  curve  and  the  flattening  of  the


RELIQULE   AQUITANIC^.

('  DORDOGNE     )


,


-.

</•'


H.Formant  del.  et  lith.


c


ix  a  x


JupJjecauet  a  Pins


DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  PLATES  —  SKULLS  AND   J:i>M>.     [i  .  IX.  X.j        187

upper  fourth  of  its  outer  edge.     10  c.  Section  of  this  Femur  at  its  narrowest
point,  showing  the  projection  of  the  linea  aspera  in  the  form  of  a  small  column.


Fig.  11  a.  Right  Tibia  of  the  same  subject,  represented  in  profile,  to  give  an  i
of  the  amount  of  its  transverse  flattening.  11  b.  Section  of  the  same  bono  at
the  level  of  the  foramen  nutritium,  showing  the  lozenge-shape  resulting  from
platycnemism.

Fig.  12.  Right  Fibula  of  the  Man  of  Laugerie  Basse  "  No.  4,"  with  the  deep  groove
in  its  outer  surface.

Figs.  13  a,  13  6,  and  13  c.  The  left  first  Metatarsal  of  the  same,  views  of  the  dorsal
and  plantar  surfaces  and  profile,  to  show  the  extent  of  its  metatarso-phalangial
surface  of  articulation.

Fig.  14.  Astragalus  of  the  "  Old  Man  "  of  Cro-Magnon,  seen  from  above.
Fig.  15.  Cuboid  from  the  same  subject,  in  the  same  position.


INDEX.


[The  modern  arabic  numerals  refer  to  the  Esaays  and  Memoirs;  the  old-fashioned  ones  refer  to  the  Descriptions  of  the  PUfcs.  ]


Abies  Douglasii,  159.

Abramis  blicca,  224.

brama,  224.

Adams,  Mr.,  St.-Petersburg,  reference  to,  207.

Alauda  arvensis,  236,  245.

Alcedo  ispida,  238.

Alcyon  ispida,  245.

Alveolina},  35.

Ammonites  Fleuriausianus,  34.

Ammonites  in  the  limestones,  34.

Ampelis  garrulus,  237,  246.

Amulets,  55,  70,  41,  42.

Anas ?,  244,246.

-  boschas,  244,  245,  246.
—  querquedula,  244.

Anca,  Baron,  '  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  de  France,'  178.

Anderson,  A.  C.,  further  remarks  on  the  Reindeer;
and  on  its  assumed  coexistence  with  the  Hippo-
potamus, 153.

— ,  letter  on  Reindeer  from  P.  Maksoutoff  to,  57.
— ,  on  shell-ornaments,  296.
— ,  on  the  contemporaneity  of  Man  and  the  Mas-
todon, 286.

— ,  on  the  Germani  of  the  Roman  Period,  45.
— ,  on  the  range  of  the  Reindeer,  47.
— ,  on  trimmed  antlers,  67.
— ,  on  worn  teeth,  287.
— ,  remarks  on  the  Reindeer,  142.

,  remarks  on  the  similarity  of  some  implements


found  in  the  caves  of  Dordogne  to  some  used  by  the
North-American  Indians,  37.


Anderson,  Chief-Factor  James,  reference  to,  297.
Angle-scrapers,  249.
Antilope  rupicapra,  172,  181.

-  saiga,  172,  182.
Antlers  of  Reindeer,  215,  169.
Aquila  clanga,  227,  246.

—  fasciata,  227.

—  fulva,  226,  227,  245.
imperialis,  227.

navia,  227.

Aquitaine  and  Aquitania,  description  of,  1.

Area  Breislaki,  48.

Arcelin,  M.,  reference  to,  91.

Archiac,  M.  le  Viscomte  d',  <  Bulletin  de  la  Societe

Ge'ologique  de  France,'  27.

,  on  Cretaceous  limestones,  27,  33.

,  reference  to,  32,  34.

Archiac's  (M.  d')  '  Geologic  et  Paleontologie,'  L'7.

,  '  Hist,  des  progres  de  la  Geologie '  27.

Arnaud,  M.,  'Bulletin  de  la  Societe  Ge'ologique  de

France,'  27,  162.

,  on  Cretaceous  limestones,  33.

Arrow-heads,  94,  297,  298,  9,  49,  95,  97,  100,  167.

Arrow-straighteners,  180.

Art,  works  of,  in  the  caves,  22,  302,  142.

Arvicola,  sp.,  182.

Atherstone,  G.  D.,  on  tally-sticks  in  South  Africa,

192.
Audierne,  Abbe,  '  De  1'Origine  et  de  PEnfance  des

Arts  en  Perigord,'  164.
Aurignac,  arrow-heads  at,  94.


190


RELIQUIAE  AQUITANICJE.


Aurignac,  Bird-bones  from,  94,  246.
Aurochs,  figures  of,  14.

,  remains  of,  6,  21,  22,  177.

Austen,  N.  Laurence,  notes   on   the   Scandinavian

Reindeer,  213.
,  on  the  natural  history  of  the  Reindeer,  169.

— ,  reference  to,  218.

,  sketch  of  the  Glutton,  210.

Avesnes,  M.  Prisse  d',  on  a  darned  ancient  Egyptian

shawl,  128.
Awls,  96,  98.

Babiche,  32,  165,  276.

Badegoule,  30,  165.

Baer,  M.  von,  observations  on  the  Vogul  skulls,  89.
— ,  reference  to,  90.

Baines,  T.,  on  nose-ornaments,  295.
— ,  reference  to,  205.

Baird's  (Prof.)  'Description  of  North- American  Mam-
malia,' 210,  273.

Barkow,  H.  Carl  Leopold,  '  Comparative  Morpho-
logie  der  Menschen  und  der  menscheniihnlichen
Thiere,  116.

Batons,  189,  30,  102,  159,  180.

Bauerman's  (Mr.)  flint  lance-head,  119.

Bear  at  Cro-Magnon,  71,  93.
-  at  D'Arcy,  147.
—  at  Laugerie  Basse,  5.

Bear's  teeth,  223,  224.

Beaumont,  MM.  Elie  de,  and  Dufrenoy's  '  Explica-
tion de  la  Carte  Geologique  de  la  Prance,'  27,  28.

Beeche/s  'Voyage  to  the  Pacific,'  300.

Belcher,  Capt.  Sir  E.,  on  scoring  or  notching,  289.
— ,  on  the  making  of  stone  implements  by  the
Western  Esquimaux,  17.

,  reference  to,  298,  301.


Belemnites,  30.

Belgrand,  M.,  reference  to,  148.

Bertrand,  M.  E.,  discoveries  in  the  Quaternary  drift

at  Clichy,  103,  111.
Bickmore,  A.  S.,  '  Transactions  of  the  Ethnological

Society  of  London,'  190.
Bird  bones,  94,  226.
Birds,  figured,  160,  161.


Birds,  observations  on  the,  whose  bones  have  been
found  in  the  caves  of  the  South-west  of  France,
226.

Bison  europceus,  172,  181,  182.

prisons,  174,  285.

Blandy,  Dr.  A.  A.,  on  carved  antlers,  33.

Blasius,  '  Fauna  der  Wirbelthiere  Deutschlands,'  211.

Boar's  teeth,  42,  47.

Bodkins,  96,  98.

Bogg,  Mr.,  '  The  Fishing  Indians  of  Vancouver's
Island  and  British  Columbia,'  221.

Boiling-stones,  251.

Bone-caves,  contents  of,  21.
— ,  infilling  of,  7.

,  relative  chronology  of,  8.

Bone-  and  cave-deposits  of  the  Reindeer  period  in
the  south  of  France  :  introduction,  161 ;  the  valley
of  the  Vezere ;  river  and  cliffs,  162 ;  caves  and
rock-shelters  on  the  Vezere,  164 ;  Badegoule,  164  ;
Le  Moustier,  165  ;  La  Madelaine,  1 68 ;  Laugerie
Haute  and  Laugerie  Basse,  169;  Gorge  d'Enfer,
170 ;  Les  Eyzies,  170 ;  remains  of  animals  in  the
caves,  172;  relative  antiquity  of  the  caves  and
their  contents,  173.

Bone  and  other  implements  from  the  caves  of  Peri-
gord,  France,  bearing  marks  indicative  of  owner-
ship, tallying,  and  gambling,  183;  as  to  shape,
184 ;  as  to  the  marginal  notching,  185  ;  as  to  the
parallel  cuts,  187 ;  as  to  other  markings,  ornamental
or  otherwise,  on  some  implements,  199 ;  as  to  the
pitting,  200 ;  conclusion,  201.

Bone  needles,  133, 139.

Bones,  human,  found  in  the  cave  of  Cro-Magnon,  in

Dordogne,  73,  97.

,  in  the  rock-shelters  of  La  Madelaine  and  Lau-
gerie Basse,  255.

Bos,  172,181, 182,  41.

moschatus,  280,  281.

Pallasii,  231.

primigenius,  170,  174,  243,  145.

( Bison  priscus  ?),  182.

Boulanger,  '  L'Antiquite  devoilee  par  les  usages  '  &c.,
10.

Bouquetin,  figures  of,  15,  143.


INDEX.


Bourgeois,  M.  L'Abbe,  on  birds'  bones  found  in  caves,

94.

— ,  on  pestles,  60.

— ,  '  Revue  Archeologique,'  95.
Bourguignat,  M.,  on  Fusus  islandicus,  92.

— ,  reference  to,  151,  152.
Bovine  animals,  figured,  14,  1 45 ,  1 8 1 .
Brady,  J., '  Clavis  Calendaria,'  191.
Brandt,  Prof.,  reference  to,  95.
Bream  found  in  the  Caves,  225.
Brinkmann  et  P.  Gervais,  '  La  Caverne  Bize,  et  les

especes  animales  dont  les  debris  y  sont  associes  u

ceux  de  I'homme,'  95.
Broca,  Dr.  Paul, '  Bull.  Soc.  d'Anthrop.  de  Paris,  264.

— ,  on  a  cranium  from  Laugerie  Basse,  264.

— ,  on  a  tally-stick  or  hunting-score,  288,  298.

— •,  on  ornamental  markings,  291.

— ,  on  the  human 'skulls  and  bones  found  in  the

cave  of  Cro-Magnon,  near  Les  Eyzies,  97, 269, 287.

— ,  on  tibias  found   in   a  megalithic   monument

(Chamant),  84.
,  reference  to,  63, 123, 130,  256,  268,  270,  180.


Brown,  Dr.  Robert,  on  some  of  the  implements  from
the  Dordogne  caves  compared  with  North- American-
Indian  tools,  58.

— ,  on  a  gambling-implement,  183.
— ,  on  buried  weapons  &c.,  286.

— — ,  on  nose-ornaments,  295.

,  on  shell-ornaments,  296.

— ,  on  tally-sticks,  289.
— ,  on  trimmed  antlers,  67.

,  on  variations  in  form  of  implements,  302.

— -,  '  Proceedings  of  the  Zoological  Society,'  211.

,  reference  to,  200.

,  'The  Races  of  Mankind,'  184.


Brun,  M.,  discoveries  at  Montauban,  88.

,  reference  to,  52,  244,  58.

Brun's  (M.)  Reindeer-horn  harpoon,  52.

Bruniquel,  bird  bones  at,  245.

Bubo  maximus,  230,  246.

Buckland,  Dr.,  on  sheik  &c.  found  in  Paviland  cave,

93.  94-

,  on  the  infilling  of  bone-caves,  7.

Buckley,  M.  J.  C.,  on  a  wooden  knife,  186.


Buckley,  M.  J.  C.,  on  tally-sticks  and  tally-boards,

190,  191.

,  reference  to,  197.

Bulb  of  percussion,  204.

Busk,  Mr.,  on  platycnemic  tibias  found  in  the  caves  of

Gibraltar,  84, 103.
,  on  Ursus  prisons,  284.

— ,  reference  to,  270.
Buteo  vulgaris,  228,  245,  246.
Buteux,  '  Esquisse  Ge'ol.  De'p.  Somme,  9.
Butler,  Mr.  Lawrence,  on  two  round  flat  stones,  108.
Buvignier,  Amand,  '  Statistique  geologique  &c.  du

Departement  de  la  Meuse,'  30,  31.

Cabot,  Mr.,  on  the  making  of  stone  arrow-heads,  17.

Caesar's  notice  of  the  Reindeer,  44,  55,  143,  176.

Campbell,  Dr.,  on  tally-sticks,  191.

Canis,  sp.,  93,  182.

lupus,  174,  181,  182.

-  wipes,  181,  182.
Capercaillie,  bones  of,  241.
Capra  ibex,  94,  181,  182,  15,  46.
Caprince,  33,  35.

Carboniferous  rocks  at  Brives  &c.,  28.

Caribou,  48,  273.

Cartailhac,  M.,   'Bull,  de  la   Soc.  d'Hist.  Nat.  de

Toulouse,'  256.

— ,  '  Materiaux  pour  1'histoire  de  1'Homme,'  205.

— ,  observations  on  a  skeleton  found  at  Laugerie

Basse,  258.
Carved  implements,  5,  22,   124,   143,  157,   159,  et

passim.

—  pebbles,  127.
Cassis,  179.
Catalogue  of  the  Mammalian  fauna  found  at  the

several  caves  or  rock-shelters  in  the  Vezere  vallev,

explored  by  MM.  Christy  and  Lartet,  181.
Caton,  Judge,  reference  to,  273.
Cave-  and  bone-deposits  of  the  Reindeer  period  in

the  south  of  France,  161.
Cave-dwellers,  ancient,  10,  45,

-  of  Cro-Magnon,  71,  87, 120, 123.
-of  France,  11,  222.

-  of  Perigord,  a  burial-place  of  the,  62.


I  92


KELIQULE  AQTJITANKLE.


Cave  of  Les  Eyzies,  notes  on  objects  of  stone  from  the,

248.
Caves  of  Dordogne,  4,  20;  contents  of  the,  21;  the

old  fauna  of  the  country,  21 ;  works  of  art  of  the

cave-dwellers,  22;  hearths  and  cooking,  22 ;  former

climate,  24, 161.
t  on  an  engraved  figure  of  a  Glutton  from  one  of

the,  209.
-,  remarks  on  the  similarity  of  some  implements


found  in  the,  to  some  used  hy  the  North- American
Indians,  on  the  "  Germani "  of  the  Eoman  period,
and  on  the  range  of  the  Eeindeer,  37.
-,  some  of  the  implements  from  the,  compared


with  North- American  Indian  tools,  58.
Caves  of  the  south-west  of  Prance,  observations  on

the  birds  whose  bones  have  been  found  in  the,  226.

,  the,  in  the  valley  of  the  Vezere,  4, 27,  62, 161.

Cerastium,  213.

Cervidce,  143.

Cervus  capreolus,  172,  174.

-eUphus,  47,  94,  172,  174,  181,  182,  13,  14,

47,  66,  104.

euryceros  vel  Megaceros  hibernicus,  5.

: tarandus,  172,  174,  181,  182,  218.


Chalk-flint,  202,  249.

Chapman's  '  New  Zealand  Almanack,'  150.

Charadrius  cedicnemus,  242.

Cheadle  and  Milton's  '  North-west  Passage  by  Land,'

200.

Chever,  E.  P.,  'The  American  Naturalist,'  221.
Chisels,  104,  153.

Choppers  of  stone,  17,  78,  114,  171.
Choughs,  bones  of,  in  the  caves,  234.
Christy,  H.,  discoveries  in  the  caves  of  Perigord,  97,

120.

— ,  on  an  ornamented  Reindeer  antler,  32.

— ,  on  carvings  on  bone,  142.

— ,  on  hatchet-like  implements  of  flint,  78.

— ,  on  Stone  implements,  11.

— ,  on  the  Dordogne  Caves,  20.

— ,  on  the   prehistoric   cave-dwellings   of  South

France,  11.

— ,  on  the  presence  of  Man  in  the  fauna  of  La


Madelaine,  265.


Christy,  H.,  on  the  Eeindeer  period,  25.

,  reference  to,  27,  62,  120,  129, 161,  205,  206,

209, 226, 256, 280, 284, 288,  54,  55,  58,  59, 65.

,  'Transactions  of  the  Ethnological  Society,'  11.

Christy  and  Lartet,  MM.,  'Cavernes  du  Perigord,'

169.

,  'Comptes  Eendus,'  162.

,  observations  on  the  calcaneum  of  a  Eeindeer,  9.

,  reference  to,  165,  166,  168,  169,  170,  180.

,  '  Eevue  Archeologique,'  162.

Chub,  used  by  the  cave-folk,  225.

Cladonia  rangiferina,  213.

Clement's  (Dr.)  Stag's-horn  harpoon,  53.

Cliffs  of  the  Vezere,  63,  162.

Climate,  changes  of,  24,  56, 145, 147, 150.

Cock,  bones  of,  in  the  Caves,  241.

Collett,  Mr.,  reference  to,  232.

Collocation  of  various  remains  in  caves  and  drifts,  156.

Columba  lima,  238,  246.

Condat,  geology  of,  30 ;  section  at,  165.

Cooking  and  hearths  in  the  Caves,  23.

Coquand,  '  Bull.  Sociote  Geol.  de  France,'  27.

on  Cretaceous  limestones,  33.

Coracia  gracula,  246.

Cores  or  nuclei,  68,  203,  251,  I,  63.

Corvus  caryocatactes,  235.

corax,  233,  245,  246.

comix,  234,  246.

-  corone,  234,  245,  246.
graculiis,  235.

monedula,  234,  245.

pica,  236.

pyrrhocorax,  234.

Coues,  Dr.,  Elliott,  reference  to,  232.

Cowrie  shells,  48,  70,  179,  288.

Crane,  Bones  of,  243.

Crania  from  Cro-Magnon,  74,  99,  110,  258.

-  from  Laugerie  and  La  Madelaine,  260,  262,  266.
Cretaceous  strata  of  the  Vezere,  27,  31,  63,  66.
Cro-Magnon,  description  of  the  cave  of,  63  ;  geology

of  the,  66  ;  human  bones  found  in  the,  67,  73,  97,
123,  258 ;  remarks  on  the  fauna  found  in  the,  93.

Crossbill,  bones  of,  236.

Crows,  bones  of,  234.


INDEX.


Cygnusferus,  244,  246.
Cypraa,  179.

pyrum,  48.

—  sanguinolenta,  48.

Dace,  bones  of,  in  the  caves,  225.

Dallas's  (A.  G.)  ear-bone  (os petrosum)  of  a  Whale,  54.

Dana,  Prof.  J.  D.,  on  Koch's  discovery  of  a  Mastodon

near  the  Bourbeuse  river,  285.
Dart-heads,  294,  49,  58,  68,  125.
Darwin,  Mr.,  reference  to,  150.
Davis,  Dr.  J.  B.,  'Archaeologia,'  191.

— ,  'Crania  Britannica,'  93.

,  on  the  cranium  of  the  Lap,  88.

,  reference  to,  90.

Dawkins,  W.  Boyd,  '  Cave  -hunting,'  285.

,  ' Monograph  on  Ovibos  moschatus'  280.

,  on  a  flint  lance-head,  119.

,  on  British  fossil  Oxen,  284.

— ,  on  large-headed  Horses,  1 8 1 .

,  on  the  derivation  of  the  word  Reindeer,  144.

,  on  the  discovery  of  the  Glutton  in  Britain,  211.

— ,  on  the  Reindeer,  55.

,  on  the  relationship  of  the  cave-folk,  283.

,  reference  to,  143,  211,  180.

Dease  and  Simpson,  Messrs.,  examples  of  slings,  43.

Dekay,  Mr.,  reference  to,  222.

Delaunay,  M.,  on  birds'-bones  found  in  eaves,  94.

— ,  'Revue  Archeologique,'  95.
Delfortrie,  M.,  on  bone  needles  at  Bordeaux,  140.
DentaUum,  179.

entalis,  296.

pretiosum,  295.

Deshayes,  M.,  on  shells  from  Cro-Magnon,  92.
Desiioyers,  M.,  reference  to,  93,  128,  207,  243,  244.
Dinornis  and  the  Dodo,  156.
Dionnerie,  M.  Gaillard  de  la,  remains  &c.  found  in

the  cave  of  Chaffaut,  96.
Divination  Dice  of  South  Africa,  290,  291.
Dordogne  district,  features  of  the,  2.
Dove,  bones  of,  238.
Dresser,  H.  E.,  '  Birds  of  Europe,'  232.
Dressing  Reindeer  skins,  276.
Drills,  105.


Dubreuil,  M.,  reference  to,  152.

Ducks,  bones  of,  244.

Dufrenoy,  MM.,  and  Elie  de  Beaumont's  '  Explication

de  la  Carte  Geologique  de  la  France,'  27,  28.
Duparc  and  Lartet's  (MM.)  memoir  on  une  Se'pul-

ture  des  anciens  Troglodytes,  252.
Duparc,  M.  Chaplain,  reference  to,  223,  224.
Dupont,  M.,  on  lanceolate  arrow-heads,  297.

,  reference  to,  124,  161,  268,  180.

,  remarks  on  the  tibias  found  in  the  Belgian

caves,  103.
Dupont,  Dr.  E.,  '  L'Homme  pendant  les  ages  de  la

Pierre  dans  les  environs  de  Dinant-sur-Meuse,'

294,296,300,  168,  175,  180.
Dupont's  (M.)  discoveries  in  Belgium,  88.
Duruy's   (His   Excellency   M.)   verification   of    the

authenticity  of  the  cave  of  Cro-Magnon,  62.

Eagles,  bones  of,  226.
Edwards's  '  Natural  History  of  Birds,'  210.
Egede,  Hans,  'A  Description  of  Greenland,'  136.
Eglise,  1',  bird  bones  from  the  Cave  of,  245.
Egyptian  needles,  128.

Eichthal,  Louis  d',  on  the  long  canines  of  the  Musk-
deer,  41.

Elephant,  outlines  of,  292.
Elephant's  tusk  at  Cro-Magnon,  67,  94.
— — ,  on  a  piece  of  engraved,  with  the  outline  of

a  Mammoth,  from  La  Madelaine,  Dep.  Dordogne,

206.
Elephas  africanus,  149.

antiqwus,  9,  281.

primigenius,  5,  9,  94,  147,  149,  150, 151, 160,

169,  174,  179, 180, 181, 182,  207,  234,  281,  168.
Embroidered  mitten,  or  tattooed  arm,  figure  of,  K57,

69,  122.
Employment  of  sewing-needles,  on  the,  in  ancient

times,  127.
Equus  asinus,  174.

-  caballus,  172,  174, 181,  182.
Esox  ludus,  224.
Esquimaux,  habits  of,  &e.,  16,  18,  25,  43,  &c.

—  needles,  thread,  and  sewing,  130,  136.
owner-marks,  195.


194


RELIQUIAE  AQUITANICLE.


Kvans,  John,   'Ancient   Stone   Implements   &c.   of
Great  Britain,'  172,  205,  299,  135,  138,  172.
— ,  'Archueologia,'  115.
— ,  '  Journal  of  the  Geological  Society,'  35.
— ,  on  a  bone  weapon-head,  298.
— ,  on  flint  choppers,  171,  1 14.
— ,  on  flint  flakes,  1 16.

— ,  on  some  bone-  and  cave-deposits  of  the  Rein-
deer-period in  the  south  of  France,  161.
— ,  reference  to,  187,  65,  136.

,  John,  and  Prof.  Steenstrup,  discoveries  of  flint


Hakes  in  one  of  the  Danish  kjokkcnmiiddings,  26.
Ki-ni/i/ra  colmnba,  32,  34.

—  viiyida,  30,  34.

Eyzies,  cave  at  Les,  5,  20, 23,  36, 139, 170,  245, 248,
et  passim  in  Descript.  Plates.
— ,  notes  on  objects  of  stone  from  the  cave  of
Les,  valley  of  the  Yezere,  Perigord,  248.

Fairbairn,  Eev.  A.  M.,  remarks  on  the  Semitic  races,

291.

Falro  cenchris,  229.
communis,  228,  245.

— fulvus,  226.
milvus,  229.

-  subbuteo,  228,  246.

-  tinnunculus,  228,  229,  245,  246.
—  vidgaris,  228.

Falconer,  Dr.,  on  the  bone-caves  in  the  peninsula  of

Gower,  South  Wales,  9.
,  on  the  vertebrae  of  a  Spermophile,  93.

— ,  on  tibias  found  in  the  caves  of  Gibraltar,  84.

— ,  '  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.,'  203.

— ,  reference  to,  206,  207,  93.
Falcons,  bones  of,  228.
Fauna  found  in  the  Caves,  172, 174.

—  found  in  the  Cro-Magnon  Cave,  71.

— ,  the  Mammalian,  found  at  the  several  caves

or  rock-shelters  in  the  Ve'zere  valley  explored  by

MM.  Christy  and  Lartet,  21,  181.
Favre,  M.  Alphonse,  on  ivory  sewing-needles,  140.

— ,  on  worked  antlers,  102.
Felis,  93,  175,  180,  241.
spelcea,  5,  93,  172,  174,  180,  182,  208,  281.


Fenni  or  Fins,  Tacitus  on  the,  57,  91.

Ferry's  (M.  de)  discoveries  in  the  Maconnais,  88,  91.
— ,  reference  to,  81,  91.

Filhol,  M.,  reference  to,  233,  235,  242.

Finches,  bones  of,  236.

Fire-making,  59.

Fire-strikers,  248,  139,

Fischer,  Dr.,  on  fossil  shells  from  La  Madelaine,  43.
— ,  on  marine  shells  found  in  the  cave  of  Cro-
Magnon,  70.

Fish-remains  in  the  caves,  95,  220.

Fishes,  figures  of,  13,  16.

Fishing  during  the  Keindeer  period,  219.
-tools,  294,  9,  51,  55,  125.

Flakes,  flint,  251,  3,  34,  73,  75,  82,  107,  115,  117,
131,  133,  151,  153,  175.

Flat-worn  teeth  of  savages,  99,  101,  287.

Flaying-knife,  183.

Flint — its  nature,  character,  and  adaptability  for
instruments,  202.

-  at  Montignac  &c.,  31,  32,  202.

-  implements,  passim.

Floods  of  the  Columbia,  effects  of,  159.
Flower,  Prof.  W.  H.,  on  the  Reindeer,  273.
Flutings  of  the  cliffs  of  the  Vezere,  63,  163.
Fontan,  M.  Alfred,  '  Annales  des  Sciences  Nat.,'  130.

— ,  'Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.,'  177,  10.

— ,  reference  to,  132,  235.
Food  of  the  Reindeer,  213,  224.
Forbes,  David,  on  needles  made  of  Cactus  spines,  \'2'.t.
Forster,  G.,  reference  to,  283.
Fossil  Man  from  Cro-Magnon,  73,  97,  258  ;  from

La  Madelaine  and  Laugerie  Basse,  255.
Fossils  in  flint,  32,  202,  24,  25,  35,  36,  87,  155.
Foster,  J.  M.,  on  a  Burmese  tally,  191.
Fox,  Colonel  A.  Lane,  'Archaeological  Journal,'  19;.{.

— ,  notice  on  incised  marks,  284.

— ,  on  a  wooden  knife  from  Central  Africa.  1S6.

— ,  on  flint  choppers,  114.

— ,  on  flint  lance-heads,  1 19.

— ,  on  oghams  &c.,  190.

— ,  on  stone-edged  war-clubs,  172.

— ,  on  the  relationship  of  the  cave-folk,  2

— ,  reference  to,  187,  197.


INDEX.


Fox,  68  ;  figure  of,  64.

Fraas,  Oscar,  '  Staats-Anzeiger  fur  Wiirtemberg,'  94.

France,  South  of,  cave-  and  bone-deposits  of  the

lleindeer-period  in  the,  161.

— ,  Southern,  the  prehistoric  cave-dwellers  of,  11.
Franks,  A.  W.,  description  of  a  New-Zealand  carved

stick,  191.

— ,  '  Journ.  Anthrop.  Instit.,'  195.

— ,  on  a  mortar-stone  from  Guinea,  108.

— ,  on  a  notched  bone-knife,  188.

— .  reference  to,  50,  54,  162,  207,  65.
Fringilla  nivalis,  236,  245,  246.
Fregilus  graculus,  235.
Fusus  gracilis,  yz.
islandicus,  92.

Gallinula  chloropus,  246.

,  var.  major,  243.

Galloway,  W.,  '  Proc.  Soc.  Antiq.,'  187.
Gallus,  241,  245,  246.

•  Sonnerati,  242.

Gallon,  Capt.,  reference  to,  162,  65.
Gambling  marks  and  scores,  199,  201,  162.

— ,  Newfoundland,  278.

— ,  North-American  Indian,  184.
Garrigou,  M.,  needles   obtained  from    the  cave   of

Massat,  140.

,  reference  to,  132.

Gaulish  bronze  needles,  129.

Gauls  and   Germans,  emigrations  and  weapons  of,

46.
Gay,  T.  K.,  observations  on  an  arrow-point,  298.

,  observations  on  a  set  of  divination  dice,  290.

,  observations  on  tally-marks,  190.

— ,  on  arrow -heads,  164.

,  on  lanceolate  arrow-heads,  297.

,  on  scoring,  289.

— ,  on  South-American  dart-heads,  294.

— ,  reference  to,  50,  190,  197.

— ,  sketches  of  harpoon  or  barbed  lance,  161.
Geological  features  of  the  valley  of  the  Vezere  and

the  bordering  country,  sketch  of  the  chief,  27;  the

Granitic  and  gneissic  rocks,  28  ;   the  Carboniferous

rocks,  28 ;  the  Triassic  rocks,  28 ;  the  Infra-lias,


the  Lias,  and  the  Oolite,  30  ;  the  Cretaceous  rocks
31;  the  caves,  35.

Germani,  the  ancient;  45  ;  weapons  of  the,  47 ;  ana-
logy of  races  and  habits,  49.

Gervais,  Paul,  '  Histoire  nat.  des  Mammiferes,'  209.
— ,  on  the  cave  of  Pontil  (Herault),  178.

,  on  the  remains  of  the  Sai'ga,  287.

— ,  'Zoologie  et  Paleontologie  frangaise,'  231.

,  reference  to,  242.

—  et  Brinckmann,  '  La  Caverne  Bize,  et  les  especes
animales  dont  les  debris  y  sont  associes  a  ceux  de
1'homme,'  95.

Gesner,  M.,  on  the  derivation  of  the  word  Reindeer,  5(i.
Giebel,  M.,  on  the  skull  of  Ovibos  moschatus,  280.
Glaucidium  passerinum,  231.

•  pTialcenoides,  231.

Glutton,  an  engraved  figure  of  a,  from  one  of  the

Dordogne  caves,  209,  292.
,  figure  of  the  living,  210.

— ,  range  of  the,  211.
Gmelin's  'Travels  in  Siberia,'  53.
Goguet,  M.,  'De  1'origine  des  lois'  &c.,  129.
Goldfuss,  Dr.,  reference  to,  212.
Gorge  d'Enfer,  4,  35,  170,  245,  281.
Gorilla  tchego,  116.

—  Savagii,  116.

Gourdan,  bird  bones  from  the  cave  at,  246.
Granitic  and  gneissic  rocks  of  the  central  plateau  of

France,  28.

Gray,  Dr.  J.  E.,  '  Proc.  Zool.  Soc.,'  209.
Greenwell,  Rev.  W.,  on  notched  implements,  188.

,  reference  to,  138.

Gres  bigarre,  30.

Grewingk,   M.,    'Ueber   die   friihere   Existenz   von

Rennthieren  in  den  Ostseeprovinzen,'  56.
Grey,  Sir  George,  reference  to,  191.
Grindstone  for  making  bone  needles,  129.
Grouse,  bones  of,  in  the  caves,  238,  241.
Griiner,  Prof.,  sketch  of  a  Lapland  instrument  for

tapping  the  magic  drum,  53.
Grus  antigone,  243.
cinerea,  243.

—primigenia,  243,  245,  246,  247.
Gryplwece,  30,  294.


196


KELIQUL/E  AQUITANICJE.


Guerin,  IT.  Jules,  observations  on  the  tibias  from

Cro-Magnon,  106.
(fulo  antediluvianus,  211.

arcticus,  210.

luscus,  209,  210.

spelasus,  211.

Giinther,  Dr.,  reference  to,  222.
Gypaetus  barbatus,  229,  245.

Haematite  for  paint,  22.

from  Les  Eyzies,  251.

in  burials,  297.

Halioeetus  albicilla,  227,  246.

Haliotis  Nootkaensis,  296.

Hamilton,  Mr.  W.  J.,  reference  to,  162,  65.

Hamy,  Dr.  E.  T.,  fossil  Man  from  La   Madelaine

and  Laugerie  Basse,  255.
Hardy,  Capt.,  '  Forest  Life  in  Acadie,'  216.

,  on  the  Reindeer  of  Newfoundland,  273.

Harle,  M.,  'Bulletin  de  la  Societe  Geologique  de

France,'  27,  34.

,  on  Cretaceous  limestones,  33.

,  reference  to,  34.

Harpoons,  9,  49,  97,  100,  150,  161,  167,  178.
Hayden,  Dr.  F.  V.,  'Report  on  the  Geology  and

Natural  History  of  the  Upper  Missouri,'  57.
Hearne,  Samuel,  extract  from  'A  Journey  to  the

Northern  Ocean,'  50.

,  reference  to,  145.

Hearth-layers  at  Cro-Magnon,  67.

at  La  Madelaine,  257.

Hearths  and  cooking,  23.

Heaton,  Mr.,  reference  to,  211.

Hebert,  M., '  Bull,  de  la  Societe  Geol.  de  France,'  27.

— ,  on  a  molar  of  Ovibos  moschatus,  281.

— ,  on  Cretaceous  limestones,  33.
Heim,  Professor  A.,  reference  to,  279,  302.
Hernandez,  '  Rerum  Med.  Nov.  Hisp.  Thes.,'  17.
Hettangia  Broliensis,  30.
—  (or  Tancredia),  30.

Heuglin,  von,  on  the  Spitsbergen  Reindeer,  292.
Hippopotamus,  149.

—  major,  151.
,  its  assumed  coexistence  with  the  Reindeer,  153.


Hippopotamus,  range  of,  in  Europe,  147.

and  Reindeer,  notes  on  the,  147,  153.

Hippurites,  33.

cornu-vaccinum,  34.

organizans,  34.

Hirundo,  sp.  ?,  237.

rupestris,  237,  245,  246.

Hollowed  stones,  59.

Homo,  181,  182.     (See  Human  Bones  &c.)

Hon,  Le,  '  L'Homme  fossile '  &c.,  294.

Horn  chisel  or  ripper,  104.

Horse,  big-headed,  301.

,  long-eared,  300,  142,  143,  181.

Horses,  figures  of,  15,  65,  67,  70,  71,  142,  159,  160,

181,  182.
Hueck,  Dr.  A.,  '  Dissert,  de  Craniis  Esthonum,'  89.

,  reference  to,  90.

Hughes,  T.  M°Kenny,    Proc.  Soc.  Antiq.,'  205.
,  reference  to,  211

— ,  '  Report  Brit.  Association,'  205.
Human  bones  found  in  the  caves,  67,  70,  73,  87,  97,

123,255,258,89,  186.

figures  found  in  the  caves,  293,  1 6.

Hume's   'Essay   on    the   Populousness   of  Ancient

Europe,'  146.

Hunting  the  Reindeer,  40, 145,  217,  275.
Huxley,  Prof.,  on  Australian  dart-heads,  294.
Hycena,  5, 147,  281.
croatta?  or  spelita1!,  149.

-  spelaM,  9,  166,  174,  178,  180,  181,  234.

Ibex,  94, 147, 172, 177, 181;  figured,  15,  143.

Implements,  some  bone  and  other,  from  the  caves
of  Perigord,  France,  bearing  marks  indicative  of
ownership,  tallying,  and  gambling,  183.
— ,  similarity  of  some,  found  in  the  eaves  of
Dordogne,  to  some  used  by  the  North-American
Indians,  37.

,  stone:  their  wide  distribution,  11;  similarity

of  form,  13 ;  manufacture  of,  16.

,  stone  and  bone,  passim.


Infilling  of  bone-caves,  7.
InoceramMS,  183.
Irish  deer,  gigantic,  5.


INDEX.


I97


Isle,  M.  Peccadeau  de  1',  engraved  stones,  128.

,  handles  of  poniards,  147.

— ,  reference  to,  207,  209,  235.
Ivory  gambling  tool,  183.

—  implements  from  Paviland,  94.
ornaments  from  Cro-Magnon,  70.

-  slab,  with  outline  of  Mammoth,  168,  206.

Jal,  Vicomte  de  Lastic  St.,  reference  to,  179.

Jeanjean,  M.,  reference  to,  152.

Joly,  M.,  reference  to,  123.

Jones,  T.  Rupert,  flint — its  nature,  character,  and

adaptability  for  implements,  202.

— ,  notes  on  objects  of  stone  from  the  cave  of  Les

Eyzies,  valley  of  the  Vezere,  Perigord,  248.

— ,  on  an  engraved  figure  of  a  Glutton  from  one  of

the  Dordogne  caves,  209.
,  on  some  bone  and  other  implements  from  the

caves  of  Perigord,  France,  bearing  marks  indicative

of  ownership,  tallying,  and  gambling,  183.
,  on  the  geology  of  the  valley  of  the  Vezere,  27.

— ,  reference  to,  162,  65,  93.


Kamtschadale  needles,  thread,  and  sewing,  132, 137.

Keller,  Dr.,  on  the  outline  drawing  of  a  Reindeer,
278.

Keller's  (Dr.)  '  Lake-dwellings '  &c.,  184,  188,  293,
294,  298.

King,  C.  Cooper,  English  tally-stick,  192.

King's  (Dr.)  'Account  of  Back's  Expedition,'  273.

Kingfisher,  bones  of,  238.

Kingsley,  Rev.  Charles,  remains  of  Ovibos  moschatus,
280.

Kite,  bones  of,  229.

Kjokkenmoddings,  contents  of  the,  25,  26,  173.

Klemm,  Dr.  G.,  reference  to,  54.

Klemm's  (Dr.  G.)  implement  for  tapping  the  magic
drum,  53.

Knapping-stones,  248,  251,  60.

Knife,  stone,  134.

Knight's  (^Chas.)  '  Old  England,'  289.
—  '  Penny  Cyclopaedia,'  210.

Koch,  Dr.  Albert  C.,  on  the  discovery  of  Mastodon-
remains  in  the  State  of  Missouri '  &c.,  60,  285.


Laganne,  Alain,  'Ann.  d'Agric.  Sc.  et  Arts  de  la
Dordogne,'  63  ;  rate  of  erosion  of  the  Vezere  cliffs,
63.
— ,  reference  to,  66,  68,  70, 174.

Lagomys  ogotoma,  232.

Lagopodes  (Grouse),  239,  240,  247.

Lagopus,  241.

-  albus,  238,  239,  240,  245,  246.

,  var.  major,  vel  scotica,  240.


alpinus,  240.

vel  mutus,  239.


•  hemileucurus,  233,  239.
islandorum,  239.

.  mutus,  239,  240,  245,  246.

•  — — -  vel  alpinus,  239.


Reinhardti,  239.
rupestris,  239.
scoticus,  239,  240.
.  scotkusl,  245,  246.
scoticus,  var.  major,  vel  alba,  240.


Lambert's  (M.  1'Abbe)  molar  of  Ovis  moschatus,  281.

,  collection  of  teeth  and  bones,  9.

Lamont's  (James)   '  Seasons  with   the   Sea-horses,'

216.
Lamprey,  J.  H.,  on  the  marking  of  weapons,  190.

,  reference  to,  185.

Lance-heads,  7,  37,  119,  175.

Landesque's  (M.  1'Abbe)  objects  found  at  Laugerie

Basse,  288,  300.
Laplanders,  magic  drums  &c.,  54.

— ,  needles  and  sewing,  131, 136.
Lark,  bones  of,  236.
Lartet,  M.  Edouard,  'Ann.  des  Sciences  Naturelles,'

151, 175.
,  Catalogue  of  the  Mammalian  fauna  found  at

the  several  caves  or  rock-shelters  in  the  Vezere

valley  (Dordogne)  explored  by  MM.  Christy  and

Lartet,  181.

— ,  discoveries  in  the  caves  of  Perigord,  97,  120.

,  note  on  Ovibos  moschatus,  Blainville,  280.

,  notes  on  the  Hippopotamus  and  the  Reindeer,


147.


-,  observations  on  a  piece  of  forked  antler,  299.
-,  on  a  fragment  of  a  barbed  harpoon,  299.

2h


198


KELIQTJLE  AQUITANICLE.


Lartet,  M.  Edouard,  on  a  piece  of  Elephant's  tusk
engraved  with  the  outline  of  a  Mammoth,  from
La  Madelaine,  Dordogne,  206,  292,  168.

,  on  carvings  on  bone,  142.

5  on  engravings  on  Reindeer-horn,  170.

t  on  hatchet-like  implements  of  flint,  78.

t  on  perforation  of  Reindeer  antlers,  283.

,  on  Reindeer  antlers,  169.

;  on  the  employment  of  sewing-needles  in  ancient

times,  127.

5  on  the  presence  of  Man  in  the  fauna  of  La

Madelaine,  265.

,  on  the  Reindeer-period,  178,  179,  220.

,  on  the  remains  of  Reindeer,  9,  175.

,  on  the  remains  of  the  Musk-ox,  287.

,  on  the  Saiga  Antelope,  95.

,  reference  to,  226, 227, 228, 229,  231, 234, 237,


241,  242,  243,  256,  284,  59.
,  remarks  on  the  fauna  found  in  the  cave  of


Cro-Magnon,  93.
—  and  Christy,  MM.,  'Cavernes  du  Perigord,'  169.

— ,  '  Comptes  Rendus,'  162.
,  reference  to,  9,  165,  166,  168, 169,  170,


172, 180.

— ,  '  Revue  Arche'ologique,'  162.


Lartet,  M.  Louis,  a  burial-place  of  the  cave-dwellers
of  Perigord,  62.

— ,  discoveries  in  the  caves  of  Perigord,  97.
— ,  on  the  cave  of  Cro-Magnon,  63.
— ,  on  the  Mammoth  and  Glutton  from  Perigord,
292.


,  reference  to,  141,  223,  224,  241,  256,  258.

-  and  M.  Ch.  Duparc's  memoir,  'Une  Sepulture
des  anciens  Troglodytes,'  referred  to,  223,  224,  252.

Lastic,  M.  de,  reference  to,  139,  195.

Laugerie  Basse,  5,  137,  169,  256,  257,  258,  288,  et
passim  in  Descriptions  of  the  Plates.
and  La  Madelaine,  fossil  Man  from,  255.

Laugerie  Haute,  5,  169,  et  passim  in  Descriptions  of
the  Plates.

Lee,  Dr.,  on  the  derivation  of  the  word  Reindeer,  56.

Lee's  (J.  E.)  translation  of  F.  Keller's  '  Lake-dwel-
lings of  Switzerland,'  60,  97,  298,  299,  104.

Leidy,  Dr.,  on  the  skull  of  .Bos  Pallasii,  282.


Leplay,  M.,  observations  on  stone  mortars,  108.

Lepus,  93,  181.

cuniculiis,  181,  182.

-  timidus,  172, 181, 182.
Lherm,  bird-bones  from  the  cave  at,  246.
Lias  rocks  of  the  Vezere,  30.
Lichtenstein,  observations  on  divination-dice,  290.
Ligurinus  Moris,  236.
Lima  santonensis,  34.

Lisiansky,  Urey,  'Voyage  round  the  World,'  197.
Littorina  littoralis,  93.

littorea,  70,  92.

Lloyd,  T.  G.  B.,  notes  on  the  Reindeer  (Caribou)  of

Newfoundland,  273.

Local  abundance  of  stone  implements,  286.
Lockhart,  Win.,  on  Chinese  notched  wood,  290.
Longperier,  M.  de,  reference  to,  207.
Lord,  J.  K.,  '  The  Naturalist  in  Vancouver's  Island

and  British  Columbia,'  221.

,  reference  to,  223.

Lortet,  M.,  on  large-headed  Horses,  181.
Lourdes,  bird-bones  from  the  cave  at,  246.
Loxia  cUoris,  236,  246.

curvirostra,  236,  246.

Lubbock,  Sir  J.,  discovery  of  Ovibos  moschatus,  280.
,  on  the  relationship  of  the  cave-folk,  283.

— ,  'Prehistoric  Times,'  44,262,  284,  52,  59,  137.
,  reference  to,  162,  55,  65,  171.

— ,  translation  of  Sven  Nilsson's  '  The  Primitive

Inhabitants  of  Scandinavia,  &c.,'  57,  284,  298,  299,

104.

Lucina  nwsensis,  31.
Luynes,  Due  de,  reference  to,  141.
Lyell,  Sir  C.,  'Antiquity  of  Man,'  280,  282.
,  communication  from  Mr.  Cabot  on  the  making

of  stone  arrow-heads,  17.
,  '  Principles  of  Geology,'  177.


Macacus  priscus,  150.

Mackenzie,  Sir  Alexander,  extracts  from  the '  Voyages
through  the  continent  of  North  America  to  the
Frozen  and  Pacific  Oceans,  1789, 1793,'  52,  143,
220.

Mackenzie  River,  implements  from,  37,  50.


INDEX.


I99


Mackie,  S.  J.,  '  Geologist '  and  '  Geol.  Repertory,'  re-
ference to,  205.

Madelaine,  Dep.  Dordogne,  on  a  piece  of  Elephant's
tusk  engraved  with  the  outline  of  a  Mammoth,
from  La,  206.

— ,  rock-shelter  of  La,  5,  20,  137,  168,  206,  245,
255,  265,  et  passim  in  Descriptions  of  the  Plates.

and  Laugerie  Basse,  fossil  Man  from,  255.


Madgett,  A.,  on  flints  used  for  lighting  fires,  138.
Madsen's  (A.  P.)  '  Af  bildninger  af  Danske  Oldsager

og  Mindesmserker,'  294.
Magnus  Albertus,  on   the  derivation  of  the  word

Reindeer,  56.

—  Olaus,  on  the  derivation  of  the  word  Reindeer,

56.

Magpie,  bones  of,  235.
Mahquahuitl,  or  stone-set  club,  172.
Maksoutoif,  P.,  on  domestication  of  reindeer,  57.
Mammalian  fauna,  catalogue  of  the,  found  at  the

several  caves  or  rock-shelters  in  the  Ve'zere  valley

explored  by  MM.  Christy  and  Lartet,  181.
Mammoth,  outline  of,  206,  168.
Manufacture  of  stone  implements,  16,  203.
Marcou,  M.,  reference  to,  52.
Marion,  M.,  '  Premieres  observations  sur  1'anciennete'

de  l'Homme  dans  les  Bouches-du-Rhone,'  151.
Marks,  implements  bearing  significant,  183.
Marmier,  M.  X.,  on  the  Lapland  Reindeer,  292.
Marmot,  147,  208.
Marnes  irisees,  30.
Marrow-spoon,  125,  159.
Mars,  M.,  reference  to,  151.
Martin,  bones  of,  237.
Massat,  bird-bones  from  the  cave  at,  246.
Massenat,  M.,   figures   of  Horses  from  the  caves,

301.

— ,  fishing-hooks,  294.

— ,  '  Materiaux,'  261.

— ,  objects  found  at  Laugerie  Basse,  288.

— ,  reference  to,  207,  256,  257,  262,  1 80.

— ,  skull  and  bones  found  at  Laugerie  Basse,  258,

264.
Mastodon,  in  North  America,  Koch  on  the,  60,  285.

— ,  legends  of,  in  North  America,  60.


Matthieu,  M.,  on  the  bone  needles  found  at  Alise,  at

Corent,  129.

Mazois,  L.,  '  Les  Ruinos  des  Pompeii,'  53.
Measurements  of  human  crania  from  Cro-Magnon,

118,  90.

—  from  La  Madelaine  and  Laugerie  Basse,

272.

of  humeri  from  Cro-Magnon,  9 1 .

of  stone  implements  from  the  caves,  passim  in


Descriptions  of  the  Plates.
Megaceros  hibernictts,  vel  Cervus  euryceros,  5,  9,  16!),

172,  174, 181.

Mellin,  Count,  '  Natural  History  of  the  Reindeer,'  15.
Mennell  and  Perkins's  '  Catalogue  of  the  Mammalia

of  Northumberland  and  Durham,'  145.
Menyanihes  trifoliata,  213.
Merimee,  M.,  reference  to,  127.
Mork's  (Herr  K.),  '  The  Cave-find  in  the  Kesslerloch  '

&c.,  279.

Meyer,  H.  von,  reference  to,  242.
Meynier,  M.,  on  the  long  canines  of  the  Musk-doer,  41 .
Middcudorff,  M.,  reference  to,  232.
Milne-Edwards,  Dr.  A., '  Annales  des  Sciences  Natu-

relles,'  140.
,  on  a  bird's  bone  found  in  the  Cro-Magnon  cave,

94.

,  on  bones  of  the  Reindeer  &c.  at  Lourdes,  177.

,  on  the  birds  whose  bones   have  been  found

in  the  caves  of  the  south-west  of  France,  226.

,  on  the  fossil  birds  of  Pe'rigord,  208.

,  reference  to,  95,  229.


Milton  and  Cheadle's  '  North-west  Passage  by  Land,'

200.

Milvus  regalis,  229,  246.
Mitchell,  Mr.,  reference  to,  222.
Mongoloid  character  of  the  skulls  from  Cro-Magnon,

88,  91.

Montcombroux,  M.  P.  de,  on  arrow-heads,  297,  95.
Montifringilla  nivalls,  236.
Montignac,  geology  of,  31,  34.
Moore's  (Charles),  discovery  of  Ovibos  moschatus,  280.
Moorhen,  bones  of,  243.
Moretain,  M.  le  Cure,'  collection  of  worked  flints  &c.,

141.

2  h  2


20O


RELIQUIAE  AQUITANIOE.


Morris,  William, '  The  Life  and  Death  of  Jason,'  199,

172.

Mortar-stones,  250,  59,  108.
Mortillot,  M.  de, '  Materiaux  pour  1'hist.  do  1'homme,'

63,  205,  256,  102,  103,  1 08,  171.
,  on  a  chronological  classification  of  the  caves,


283.

— ,  on  Boar's  teeth  as  amulets,  42.

— ,  on  the  long-eared  figure  of  a  Horse,  300.

— ,  '  Origine  de   la   Navigation  et  de  la  peche,'


225.


-,  '  Promenades  prehistoriques  a  1'Exposition  uni-


vorsolle,'  209.

— ,  reference  to,  161,  53.


Morton's  collection  of  skulls,  89.

Moschus  moschiferus,  41.

Motacilla  pJuenicura,  237.

Moustier,  cave  of  Le,  3,  5,  20,  35,  165,  173,  245,  et

passim  in  Description  of  Plates.
Murray,  Alex.,  on  the  Eeindeer  of  Newfoundland,
273.

— ,  Andrew,  'The  Geographical  Distribution  of
Mammals,'  211.
Murray's  '  Journal  of  Natural  History  and  Travel,'

287.

Mus,  182.

Musk-ox,  or  Musk-sheep,  147,  148,  208,  280.
Mustela  gulo,  210.
Myodes  lemmus,  232.

Nassa,  179.

Natica,  179.

Needle-piercers,  134, 141.

Needles,  ancient,  127;  from  the  caves,  134,  122.

Nerita  littoralis,  79.

—  (Littorina)  littoralis,  87.
Newfoundland,  Reindeer  of,  273.
Newton,  Prof.  A.,  'Proc.  of  the  Academy  of  Natural

Sciences,  Philadelphia,'  239.

— ,  reference  to,  240.
Nilsson,  Sven,  on  the  Fenni,  57 ;   Sir  J.  Lubhock's

translation  of  his  '  The  Primitive  Inhabitants  of

Scandinavia,'  57,  205,  220.
Noctua  minor,  231,  245.


North-American  Indians,  implements,  fishing,  &c.,

24,  37,  39,  41,  43,  50,  53,  51,  52,  58,  220.
Nose-ornaments,  295,  296.
Novempopulania,  1.
Nucifraga  brachyrhyncha,  236.

caryocatactes,  235,  245,  246.

Nudeolites  oblongus,  31.
Nutcracker,  bones  of,  235.
Nyctea  nivea,  231,  233,  245,  246.
scandiaca,  232.


Obsidian,  203.

(Edicnemus  crepitans,  242,  245.

CEstrus  bovis,  214.

tarandi,  46,  214.

Ogle's  '  Colony  of  Western  Australia,'  295.

Oolithfs  miliaires,  30.

Oolitic  rocks  of  the  Vezere,  30.

Orbitoides,  32,  35,  36,  87.

Ornamental  carving  on  implements,  291,  124,  157,

et  passim.

Ornaments  of  the  cave-folk,  22,  55,  70,  87,  296,  41.
Ostrea  auricularis,  34.

biauriculata,  34.

carinata,  31.

proboscidea,  34.

vesicularis,  31,  33.


Otodus,  32.

Otus  brachyotus,  230.

Ovibos  moschatw,  9,  148,  150,  181,  182,  208,  281,

282.
,  Blainville,  note  on,  by  M.  E.  Lartet,  280.


Owen,  Prof.,  on  the  cave  of  Bruniquel,  178.
— ,  on  the  remains  of  Musk-ox,  280.
— ,  remarks  on  figured  Horses,  1 8 1 .


Owls,  bones  of,  230.

Owner-marks,  193,  290,  162,  164,  166.

Paint  in  the  caves,  22,  251,  297,  61.
Pallas,  '  Spicilegia  Zoologica,'  209.

— ,  'Zoographia  Bossico-Asiatica,'  210.


Parrot,  MM.  G.  and  P.,  reference  to,  188.
Parry,  Capt,  description  of  a  diadem  or  head-dress.
42.


INDEX.


2O I


Parry,  Capt.,  reference  to,  47.

,  remarks  on  thread  made  of  Reindeer-tendon,

132.

,  '  Second  Voyage  for  the  Discovery  of  a  North-
west Passage,'  130,  262.
Partridge,  bones  of,  241.
Pattison,  S.  R.,  on  tally-sticks,  tallies,  and  marks

190,  197.

Paviland,  human  remains  at,  93.
Pecten  quadricostatiis,  34.
Pectwncidus,  179.

glycimeris,  48.

Perdix  cinerea,  241,  245,  246.
Perforated  antlers,  30,  53,  102,  159,  180.

-  teeth  and  shells,  70,  223,  41 ,  92.
Perigord,  caves  and  cave-folk  of,  200,  et  passim.
Perkins  and  Mennell's  '  Catalogue  of  the  Mammalia

of  Northumberland'and  Durham,'  145.
Peruvian  needles,  129.
Pestles,  295,  60.

Petherick,  Mr.,  reference  to,  186.
Phillips,  Prof.,  on  a  pitted  dart-head,  163.

,  reference  to,  93.

Pica  caudata,  236,  245,  246.

Pierre,  Saint-,  '  Harmonies  de  la  Nature,'  155.

Piette,  II.  E.,  on  large-headed  Horses,  181.

,  on  the  cave  of  Gourdan,  in  the  Pyrenees,  222.

,  on  the  remains  of  the  Saiga,  287.

— ,  reference  to,  227,  228,  233,  234,  236,  242,

244.
Pike,  figure  of,  on  a  bear's  tooth,  224.

— ,  range  of,  and  used  by  the  cave-folk,  224.
Pinart,  M.  A.,  reference  to,  221,  225.
Pinus  canadensis,  44.
Platycnemic  bones  from  Cro-Magnon  and  Gibraltar,

104,  109.

Plot's  (Dr.)  'Nat.  Hist.  Staffordshire,'  191.
Ppgamagan,  33,  50, 189,  300,  30,  102,  159,  180.
Polished  stone  implements,  6.
Polyzoa,  32,  34,  249,  24,  36.
Polyzoan  limestone,  32,  34.
Poniards,  handles  of,  32,  147.
Poole,  Francis,  on  engraved  pieces  of  bone,  13.
,  on  gaming-sticks,  184.


Poole,  Francis,  reference  to,  225.

Pottery  almost  absent  in  the  caves,  24.

Powles,  Miss,  reference  to,  290.

Prehistoric  cave-dwellers  of  Southern  France,  11.

Prestwich,  J.,  on  Ovibos  moschatus,  280.

,  on  the  remains  of  Reindeer  with  worked  flints,

9.

— ,  '  Philosophical  Transactions,'  219.
Prevost,  Constant,  '  On  the  Infilling  of  Bone-caves,'  7.
Prichard's  '  Researches  on  the  Physical  History  of

Mankind,'  89.
Pruner-Bey,  Dr.,  an  account  of  the  human  bones

found  in  the  cave  of  Cro-Magnon,  in  Dordogne,

73,  89.

— ,  on  the  ancient  race  of  Cro-Magnon,  121.
,  reference  to,  63, 106, 107, 123, 130,  256,  259,

268,  41.

Prunieres,  Dr.,  reference  to,  114.
Ptarmigan,  bones  of,  240.
Puck-a-maugan  or  striker  (club),  41,  50.
Purpura  lapillus,  70,  92.
Pyrrhocorax,  235.

alpinus,  234,  245,  246.

primigenius,  235,  245,  246.


Quatrefages,  M.,  reference  to,  63,  207,  268.

,  remarks  on  the  human  remains  from  the  cave


at  Cro-Magnon,  123.
Quenstedt,  Dr.,  Ovibos  moschatus,  281.
Querquedula  circia,  245.
Quicherat,  M.  '  Diet.  Latin-Frangais,'  55.

Rachitic  state  of  cave-bones  discussed,  106.
Radde,  M.,  reference  to,  232.
Radiolites,  33,  35.

angulosus,  34.

cormi-pastoris,  34.


lunibricalis,  34.

Rae,  Dr.,  on  Esquimaux  tally-sticks,  289.
Rail,  bones  of,  242.
llallus  aquaticus,  242,  245.
—  crex,  243.


Ramorino,   'Atti   dell' Accademia   delle    Scienze    di
Torino,'  229.


202


KELIQULE  AQTJITANICLE.


Ramorino,  reference  to,  243.

Ramsauer,  M.,  on  talismans  and  amulets,  42.

llance,  Mr.  Charles  Ede,  on  the  relationship  of  the

Esquimaux  and  cave-folk  of  the  Dordogne,  284.
Ranunculus  gladalis,  213.
Raven,  bones  of,  233.
Redstart,  bones  of,  237.
Reindeer,  antlers  of,  169.

-figured,  14,  147,  159,  &c.
,  note  on  the  outline  of  a,  from  Thaingen,  278.

—  noticed  by  Caesar,  44,  55,  143.
of  Newfoundland,  273  ;  of  North  America,  48,

142  ;  of  Scandinavia,  213.

period,  the,  8,  25,  179.

-,  fishing  during  the,  219.


-,  range  of,  in  Europe,  9,  44,  56,  144.
-, ,  in  North  America,  47.


,  the  coexistence  of,  with  the  Hippopotamus,

147, 153.

Reindeer-moss,  213.
Relationship  of  the  Cave-folk  with  the  Fenni,  Fins,

Laps,  and  Esquimaux,  283,  284.
Relative  chronology  of  bone-caves,  8,  44,  73,  179.
Remains,  collocation  of  various,  156.
Renou,  M.,  '  Geologic  de  1'Algerie,'  149.
Rheno,  meaning  of  the  name,  45,  55,  142.
Rhinoceros,  241.

—  etruscus,  149.

hemitcechus,  9.

•  leptorhinus,  149.

-  MerUi,  148.  149,  152.

-  tichorhinus,  9, 149, 150, 174, 178, 179, 180, 281 .
Rhinoceros  and  Reindeer  contemporary,  148.
Khynchonella,  31.

-  alata,  31.
vespertilio,  66.

Rich,  A.,  on  a  bronze  needle  found  at  Pompeii,  128.
Richardson,  Sir  J.,  'Arctic  Searching  Expedition,'

285,  47.

— ,  on  the  remains  of  Ovibos  moscJiatus,  280.

— ,  reference  to,  9,  217,  222.
Richardson's   (Sir  J.)   'Fauna  Boreali- Americana,'

210,  211,  273.
Rickets,  Dr.  Pruner-Bey  on  bones  affected  by,  84.


Robert,  Dr.  E.,  discovery  of  remains  of  Ovibos  mos-
chatus,  281.

Robin,  Ch.,  'Journal  de  1'Anatomio  et  de  la  Physio-
logic,' 260.

Rock-crystal,  175.

Rock-shelters  on  the  Vezere,  4,  et  passim.

Roman  needles,  128.

Ross,  Sir  John,  'Voyage  of  Discovery'  &c.,  130.

Roulin,  Dr.,  on  the  "  os  petrosum  "  of  the  Dugong,  55.
— ,  on  the  use  of  hollowed  stones,  59.

Itudistes,  31,  32,  33.

Ruticilla  phcenicura,  237,  246.

Saiga  Antelope,  95,  287.

St.-Aeheul,  remains  of  Reindeer  and  Elephant  at,  1).

Salix  glawM,  213.

-  hastata,  213.

Salmo  fario,  vel  Trutta  fario,  222.

-  Gairdneri,  221.

lycaodon,  221.

paucidens,  221.

—  proteus,  221.

quinnat,  221.

salar,  221,  222.

Salmon,  range  of,  221.
—  used  by  the  cave-folk,  220.

Salmon-fishing  in  North  America,  220.

Sanford,  Mr.,  reference  to,  211.

Saporta,  M.  de,  reference  to,  148.

Sauvage,  Dr.  H.  E.,  on  fishing  during  the  Reindeer-
period,  219.

Scalaria,  179.

Scandinavian  Reindeer,  notes  on  the,  213.

Scandinavian  type  of  lance-heads,  7.

Scheffer's  (J)  '  Lapponia,'  or  'History  of  Lapland,'
54, 136.

Schmerling,  Dr.,  reference  to,  212,  242.

Schmid,  Prof.  E.  E.,  on  Ovibos  moschatus,  281.

Schreber's  '  Saugthiere  in  Abbildungen  nach  der
Natur  mit  Beschreibungen,'  209.

Schrenck,  M.,  reference  to,  232.

Sciurus,  172.

Scores  and  scoring,  289,  162,  164,  187.

Scrapers,  253,  22,  -9,  83,  1 1 1, 1 17, 138, 151, 155,  183.


INDEX.


203


Seal,  figure  of,  on  Bear's  tooth,  223.

Selkirk,  Earl  of,  reference  to,  144.

Semilunar  flint  tools,  135.

SemnopitTiecus  Monspessulanus,  150.

Sepulture  at  Cro-Magnon,  70.

Serres,  M.  Marcel  de, '  Geog.  des  Terr,  tert.,'  177.

— ,  reference  to,  152,  228,  230,  241.
Sewing-needles,  on  the  employment  of,  in  ancient

times,  127.

Shell-ornaments,  70,  87,  179,  294,  296,  43,  92.
Side-scrapers,  249.
Simonin,  M.,  on  mortars,  60.

Simpson  and  Dease,  Messrs.,  examples  of  slings,  43.
Simpson,  Thomas,  '  Narrative  of  the  Discovery  on  the

North  Coast  of  America'  &c.,  43.
Sinclair,  Mr.,  reference  to,  158.
Sinews  used  hy  the  Esquimaux,  132.

-  by  the  Laps,  131.

hy  the  North- American  Indians,  39.

-  for  thread  by  the  Cave-folk,  138.
—  in  Newfoundland,  277.

Sketch  map  of  a  part  of  the  ralley  of  the  Vezere,  19,

29,  126.

Skulls  and  bones,  human,  74,  99,  110,  89.
Smith,  J.  E.,  Linne's  'A  Tour  in  Lapland,'  274.
Smith's  'Dictionary  of  Geography,  176.
Snake,  figured,  159.
Spermophilus,  172,  175,  182.

dtillus,  93.

eryihrogenoides,  182.

eryihrogenus,  93.

Richardsoni,  93.

Sphasndites  Beaumontii,  34.

cylindraceus,  33.

• Ponsianus,  34.

radiosus,  34.

Sauvagesii,  34.

Spondylus  santonensis,  log.

Sponges  and  Spicula,  202,  et passim  in  Descriptions  of

the  Plates.

Sprout's,  '  Scenes  and  Studies  of  Savage  Life,'  287.
Squalius,  225.

cephcdus,  224.

leuciscus,  224.


Stag,  figures  of,  14,  66.

Stahl,  M.,  reference  to,  206.

Steinhauer,  C.,  reference  to,  283,  302.

Steenstrup,  Prof.,  reference  to,  238.

,  and  J.  Evans,  discoveries  of  flint  flakes  in  the

Danish  Kjokkenmoddings,  26.

Stevens,  E.  T.,  'On  Flint  Chips'  &c.,  205,  137.

,  reference  to,  187.

Stokes's  'Discoveries  in  Australia,'  193,  294,  295.

Stone  implements  :  their  wide  distribution,  11 ;  three
prehistoric  periods  of  the  stone-age,  12 ;  similarity
of  form,  13;  manufacture  of,  16,  et  passim.

Stone,  objects  of,  from  Les  Eyzies,  248.

Stone-Age,  first  and  second  periods,  6.

of  the  Drift,  Cave,  and  Surface  periods,  12.

Stone-chipper  used  by  the  Esquimaux,  18.

Storer,  Mr.,  reference  to,  222.

Strike-a-light,  248,  86,  139.

Strix  bracJiyotus,  230.

bubo,  230.

-fammea,  231,  245.

nyctea,  231.

passerina,  231.

Sun  scrofa,  94,  172,  181,  182.

Swallow,  bones  of,  237.

Swan,' bones  of,  244.

Tallies  and  tally-marks,  192,  288,  289,  162,  181.

Talus  of  the  cliffs  of  the  Vezere,  and  its  rate  of  in-
crease, 63,  64,  175.

Tancredia  (or  Hettangid),  30.

Tarandus  rangifer,  169.

Tattooed  (?)  arm,  137,  69,  1 22.

Tattooing  (?)  tools,  175.

Taxus  gulo,  144.

Tayac,  Rock  of,  4,  63.

Teeth,  perforated,  223,  224,  41.

Terebratula  alata,  34.

Tetrao,  241.

albus,  238,  245.

lagopus,  246.

—  lagopus,  var.  alpina  minor,  240.

perdix,  241.

scoticus,  245.


204


KELIQULE  AQTJITANIC^:.


Tetrao  tetrix,  241,  246.

urogattus,  241,  245.

Tetraones,  247.
Textularia,  25.

Thioly,  M.,  on  ivory  sewing-needles,  140.
— ,  on  worked  antlers,  102.

,  reference  to,  301.

Thomson,  Gordon  A.,  on  a  "  puck-a-maugan  "  from

Sitka,  50.

Thrush,  bones  of,  236.
Thuja  gigantea,  59.

—  occidentaUs,  38.

Thurnam,  Dr.,  '  Crania  Britannica,'  93.
Totem,  or  family-mark,  41,  198.
Trapping  Deer,  40,  145,  217,  276.
Triassic  rocks  of  the  Vezere,  28.
Trigonia,  31.
Troglodytes  Aubryi,  116.
— —  niger,  116.

Trout,  used  by  the  cave-folk,  225.
Troyon,  M.  F.,  on  Bear's  teeth,  41.
Trutat,  M.,  '  Materiaux  pour  1'histoire  de  1'Homme,'

205.

Trutta  fario  vel  Salmo  fario,  222.
Turdm  visdvoms,  236,  245.
Turritella  communis,  70,  92.

—  cornea,  92.
Tylor,  E.  B.,  '  On  the  Early  History  of  Mankind,'

12,  24,  44,  59.

Tylor's  (E.  B.)  '  Anahuac ;  or,  Mexico  and  the  Mexi-
cans,'16,  129,  191,  203,  115.

Ursus  (of  large  size),  182.

-  arctos,  174,  177.
priscus,  284.

-  spelieus,  9,  174,  178,  179,  180,  182,  241,  281.
Urus,  horns  of,  40.

Van  Beneden,   'Rapport  sur  les  collections   poly-
techniques  de  1'Universite  de  Louvain,'  95.
Variation  in  the  form  of  implements,  302.
Verneuil,  M.  de,  reference  to,  206,  282.


Vetancurt,  'Teatro  Mejicano,'  17.

Vezere,  the  caves  in  the  valley  of  the,  and  their  con-
tents, 4,  20,  162.

,  valley  of  the,  features,  62,  162 ;  geology  of,

27;  sketch  map  of  a  part  of  the,  19,  29,  126.

, ,  river  and  cliffs,  4,  20,  62,  162.


Vezere  valley,  catalogue  of  the  Mammalian  fauna
found  at  the  several  caves  or  rock-shelters  in  the,
explored  by  MM.  Christy  and  Lartet,  181.

Vibraye,  Marquis  de,  on  a  smooth  oblong  stone  and
other  remains  from  the  cave  at  d'Arcy,  147,  295.

,  pieces  of  Dentalium  from  Tayac,  297.

— ,  reference  to,  177,  207,  225.

Voluta,  179.

Vultur  albicilla,  227.

larlatus,  229.

—ftdvus,  230.

-  monachus,  230,  245,  246.

Vulture,  bones  of,  229.

Watelet,  Mademoiselle  E.,  reference  to,  53.

Waters's  (A.  W.)  review  of  Prof.  A.  Heim's  memoir
on  the  contents  of  the  Kesslerloch  at  Thaingen,
302.

Waxwing,  bones  of,  237.

Webb,  Sydney,  reference  to,  175.

Wells,  J.  C.,  on  the  Spitzbergen  Eeindeer,  292.

Whistle  made  of  a  phalange  bone,  44.

Whitney,  J.  J.,  on  the  "bones  of  Mastodon  ifcc.,  60.

Wilde,  W.  R.,  '  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Anti-
quities of  Stone  &c.'  in  the  Museum  of  the  Royal
Irish  Academy,  87.

,  on  a  shell  necklace,  93.

Wilkinson,  Mr.,  '  On  the  Manners  and  Customs  of
the  Ancient  Egyptians,'  128.

Woodward,  H.,  observations  on  a  carved  Elephont's
tusk,  1 68.

Worsaae's  '  Nordiske  Oldsager  i  der  Kongelige  Mu-
seum i  Kjobenhavn,'  187,  137.

Wrangel's  '  Polar  Sea,'  275.

Zimmerman,  'Specimen  Zoologies  Geographies,' 211.


PRINTED  BY  1AYLOR  AND  FRANCIS,  RED  LION  COURT,  FLEET  STREET.


LIST  OF  THE  PARTS,  AND  THEIE  CONTENTS,


IN  THE


ORDER   OP   PUBLICATION.


PART

I.  December  1865.— Pages  1-8 ;  pages  1-16.     A.  Plates  I.-IV. ;   B.  Plates  I.  &  II.

II.  March  1866.— Pages  9-16 ;  pages  17-32.     A.  Plates  V.-VIH. ;   B.  Plate  III.  &  IV.  (in  one).
III.  August  1866.— Pages  17-24 ;  pages  33-56.     A.  Plates  IX.-XII. ;   B.  Plates  V.  &  VI.
IV.  March  1867.— Pages  25-32 ;  pages  57-72.     A.  Plates  XIII.  &  XIV. ;  B.  Plates  VII.-X.

V.  April  1868. — Pages  33-52;  pages  73-80.     A.  Plates  XV.-XVHL;  and  SKETCHES  ON  THE
Nos.  1  &  2.

VI.  August  1868.— Pages  53-60,  73-78 ;  pages  81-92.     C.  Plates  I.-VI.

VII.  September  1868.— Pages  61-72,  79-94 ;  pages  93-96.     A.  Plates  XIX.  &  XX. ;  B.  Plates  XI.-XIV.
VIII.  April  1869.— Pages  95-102 ;  pages  97- 112.    A.  Plates  XXL-XXIV. ;  B.  Plate  XV.  &  XVI.  (in  one).

IX.  May  1869.— Pages  103-124;  pages  113-120.     A.  Plates  XXV.-XXVIII. ;  and  SKETCHES  ON  THE
VEZERE,  Nos.  3  &  4.

X.  February  1870.— Pages  125-140;  pages  121-132.     A.  Plates  XXIX. -XXXII. ;    B.  Plates  XVII.
&  XVIII.

XL  February  1873.— Pages  141-156;   pages  133-144.      A.  Plates  XXXIII.   &  XXXIV.;   B.  Plates

XIX.-XXII.

XII.  July  1873.— Pages  157-172 ;  pages  145-152.     A.  Plates  XXXV.  &  XXXVI. ;  B.  Plates  XXIII.  &
XXIV. ;    C.  Plate  VII.  &  VIII.  (in  one).

XIII.  November  1873.— Pages  173-188  ;    pages  153-164.      A.  Plates  XXXVII.-XXXIX. ;    B.  Plates

XXV.-XXVII.

XIV.  December  1873.— Pages  189-204;  pages  165-172.     A.  Plates  XL.  &  XLI. ;    B.  Plates  XXVILL-

XXXI.

XV.  September  1874.— Pages  205-224;  pages  173-182.     A.  Plate  XLII.
XVI.  May  1875.— Pages  225-256 ;  pages  183-187.     C.  Plate  IX.  &  X.  (in  one).
XVII.  October  1875.— Pages  257-302.     TITLE,  PREFACE,  CONTENTS,  INDEX,  &e.


DIRECTIONS  TO  BINDER.


The  earliest  Title-page  is  cancelled  and  replaced,
are  cancelled  and  replaced.


Pages  61  and  62]

.1'


„    89  „  90  J

Fly-slip  to  be  inserted  opposite  page  212.


The  Pages  numbered  with  ordinary  arabic  numerals  constitute  PART  I.,  or
the  ESSAYS  AND  MEMOIRS.

The  Pages  numbered  with  old-fashioned  arabic  numerals  constitute  PART  II.,
or  the  DESCRIPTIONS  OP  THE  PLATES.


Place  No.  1  Sketch  on  the  Ve"zere  and  its  title  opposite  page  166.

„     No.  2  „  „  „  „  170.

„     No.  3  „  „  „  „  172.

No.  4  180.


MEMORANDUM.

i

For  ERRATA  ET  CORRIGENDA  see  the  SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES,  pages  283-302.


f]


75


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
