*
the A d
W.
ES
OC
V
ri
SOOT. Kr hr
2 — - a — — —
—
— 2 ——
— — — — — . - — — — — —— >» - _— —
— — — —
* Pt ”
Ts. . Wn.”
+. 3 * 34 G4 aa RY R ©,
© 4
4a-
To the Reader.
Spaniſh cruelties and tyrannies,perpe-
trated in the Weſt Indies, commonly termed
The newe found worlde,
Bricfly deſcribed in the Caſtilian language, by the
Biſhop Tryer Bartholomew de las Caſas or Caſuu, 4
Spaniarde of the order of Saint Dominick, faith-
fully tranſlated by Ines Alggrode, t6 ſerue as a
Prefident and warning : to the xij, Prounces of
the lowe Countries, _ _ __ hp
Happie is bee whome other mens harmesdoe make to 8
beware.
= Ods iudgementes are ſo pro- lb
— : | found as mans wiſdome, no not 1
| the power of Angels is able to "70
Thou
Reader) in this diſs
enter into their
ſhale/frendly
courſe beholde ſo many milli-
ons oſmè put to death, a8 bard-
* | ly there haue been ſo many ſpa-
| IF 1 niardes procreated into this
| worlde fince their ſirſie farther
the Gorhes inhabited their Countries, either iner theit ſecood
progenitors the Sarazer expelled and murdered the moſt part
of the Gothes, as it ſcemerh that the Spaniardes haue murdered
and put to death in the Weſterne Indies by all ſuch meanes as
barbarouſneſle it ſelfe coulde imagine or forge vpon the anueld
ofcrueltie, They haue deſtroyed thrife ſo mach lande as chri⸗
C2 Kendome


To the Reader,


ſlendome doth competitions zorments haue they inuen ·


ted. yea ſo great hane thei ttecherie been, that the
poſleritie ſhall hardly chinke that euer ſo barbarous or ctuell a
nation have bin in the worde, if as you woulde ſay e had not
wich out eyes ſeene it, and with our hands felt it, confeſle that
I ncuer ſoudd chat nation generally, by reaſon of the ir intolleta⸗
ble pride, notwithſtanding I can not but comend & [one fund ry
excellent perſons that are among the, Howbeit,God is my wit- /
nes, hatred procureth me not to write thoſe things, as alſo theaus
thour of the bookeis by nation a Spaniard, and befides writer
farre more bicterly then wy ſelſe. E

But two reaſons haue moued me to pubſſch this preſace,
which I do dedicate to all the prouinces of the Lowe countreys:
The one, to the end, awaking theſclus out of their ſleep, may be-
gin to chinke vpon Gods iudgements : and refraine from their
wickedoes and vice. The other, that they may alſo couſider with
what enemie they are to deale, and ſo to beholde as it were in a
picture or table, what ſtay ey are like to bee at, when thtough
their rechleſneſſe, quarrels, controuerſies, and partialities them -
ſelues haue opened the way to ſuch an enemie : and what they
may looke for, Moſt mẽ do ground their opinion vpon the good-
nile of their cauſe, concluding, that in as much as God is iuſt,
he will graunt victorie to the right , and will ouerthrowe the
wicved. This was Iobes ftfeades diſputation, where they cone
cluded that for that Iob was afflicted, vndoubtedly he was wic⸗
led. Which reaſon is drawen out of aCertaine rule, which it ſee-
meth that nature hath printed in our hartes, thatis, that God
puniſheth the euill, and in mercie rewardeth the good deedes.
Thereypon did the inhabitants of Malta report that Gods ven⸗
geance would not permit S. Paul to liue, when after he had eſcas
ped ſo dangerous ſhipwracke, the Viper leaped vpon his hande,
Howebeic notwithſianding this rule be certaine and true, yet
do manie therein diuerſely deceive them ſeiues , concludiog,
thereby that G OD ſendeth no affliction but to the wicked,


' aSif hee laide not his croſſe alſo vpon the good: As lob, the


Prophetes, and Martyres yea, his owne ſonne Ieſus Chriſt,
and that for the mortifiyng of the fleſbe , and more and more ta
quicken man in good huing : and for his ſonne, to the ende in
bum to puniſh our ane which hee togke pon him Others doe


)


2


beleeve that God wil nedeꝛ ſuſter funde


* Dodo -*


*


notwichſladinꝑ þ baving long waited patiẽci
his clemencie is at length conuerted inro duſlicè.


4 tepen Seiter 23 *
that it is yopoſſible for the wicked to gette Sock in!
an cuillcauſe, notwithſtanding wee day ly ſee it fall ourcontra»!
ry:yndoubtedly the Turke: viQories & coaqueſtes ioChrifens
dome haue no ſoundation, but confilt ypoa weere tytanuie and


vſarpation, For although Chriſtians ſinnes, eſpecially the great as
doſe in Gods ſeruice, have bin the cauſes of out punifhmenr,yer


muſt we confcfle that the chriſtians, what errors ſoeuer ſome of


them do in their dactrine maintaio,are not neuertheles ſo farre


deuoid of the tab, as are the Turkes, ind yet do ve ſee howe
mightily in few yeres they haue red & encroched vpõ chri
ſendom. Alſo before * the Furkes, namely ſoone-
after the time of 1{ahamer, there came ſuch a flock of Satazins,
that they deuoured firſt Egypt len all 4frick, 8 rooting ous
Chriſtianitie out of the cd countries ſeaged vpon al Spaine: yea
proceeding forward, they camped ine I quutam vpon the river of
Toyre: inſomuch that it was to be doubred þ they might ſoone
haue caught hold vpon France, & ſo vpon the reſt of chriſtẽdom,
had not God raiſed vp that mightie Duke of Brabant, Charlot
Martel, who defeating them,driue them beyond the Pirenean
mountaines, But if weliſt to conſidet he examples contained:
in the holy Bible, whoſe reaſons are more exaclly expounded by
the prophets, we do find that in the time of K. Hezechias, als
though the head citie, namely Hieruſalem, was not forced, yet
the lefler townes being taken by the enemie, the flatte convey,
ſpoyled, the K. and theprinces of Iuda had no more left them
but the bare walles of Hieruſalem.Alſo, albeit God did matuei-
louſly ſtrike the armie of Senacherib, aud that his ownchildren:
flew him in his gods temples; yet were not gods people free from
{uffering much, and from ſceivg the ene mie enioy the moſt part
of their la w: their cõmons did beare that which nowe we know,
& more then we would, that is what an enemy entring by force
of armes into a land is able to do. But Nabuchadnezers victories
were far others, whe he toołe, burned, & ſacked eu the head ci⸗
tie, together wich þ p very temple of Hicrula,& took theit K. P.
& hie P. priſoners, & flu pulled out p cies, & ſettered ſome of the


forcing the cõmons during the ſiege to cate their own dong &
43 chile. Who


14 -
—_ CT — —


”
1 —


Tothe Reader?


Who is hee therefore that dare accuſe God of wrong, fich lach


eyrants be called the Axe in the Lordes hands, as the executio-
ders of his iuſtice? Further wee ſee, that thoſe that haue the moſt
right are by the wicked robbed ſlaine, & murdered, which is ne-
uertheleſſe Gods doing. For it is ſaid: Curſed be he that doth the
Lordes worke negligently, in which place the holy ſcriptures do
ſpeake of ſuch miniſters and inſtruments of God, In this dif
courſe of Don Bartholomew de las Caſas, wee do finde a mani-
feſt example. For I pray you what right had the Spaniards ouer
the Indians: (ſuing that the Pope had giuen them the ſaid land,


and 1 leaue to your iudgemente w hat right hee had therein:


for it is doubtfull whether his power doe ſtretch to the diſtribus
ting of worldly kingdomes, But admit hee had that authority,
was there therefore any reaſon that hee ſhould for crying in the
night,Tbere it a God,a Pope & 4 King of Caſtile who is Lord
of theſe Conntries,murder 1 2. 1 5. or 20. millions of poore rea-
ſonable creatures, created( as our ſelues) aſter the image of the li-
uing God: Heere doe I, as in the beginning I ſaid, ſee a bottom-
leſſe depth of Gods iudgements. For it is a ſmall matter to ſay
that the wicked doe moleſt bettet men then themſelues, for the
cauſes aſoreſaide: but to ſee a whole nation, yea, infinite nations
periſh ſo miſerablie, and as it ſemeth, without anycauſe is it that
maketh moſt ten to wander, yea euen aſtoniſheth ſuch as do ex-
amine theſe effects by the rule of their owne reaſons. Howebeit
we haue two examples in the Bible, though nor altogetherlike,
yet very neere. It is ſaide in the ouerthrowe of Schon: In thoſe
dayes wee tooke all bis rownes and deſtroyed men women and
childen in the ſame either left we any thing remaining, The
like ſentence is there alſo of Og king of Baſan, yea,Moles ſone
after allowerh all that was done, commaundeth 7oſwa to doe as
much to all the other kinges in his journey as was done
to thoſe two, If wee ſecke the cauſe of ſuch executions,
man will bee as it were at his wits ende and ſtande mute. A-
gaine,if men ſhould conſider the example of king Saule whom
God reiected, becauſe he did not wholy diſcomfit Amelec, but
ſaued their king, and reſerued the fatteſt of their cattell for
the lacrifices, their rnderſianding woulde giue ſentence cleane


contrary


TT


=> EF VV yy os


To the Reader,


contratie to gods. What wil they ty. was iz not a comtadadle, -
yea,a noble minde, for a king to ſpare his brother, cither for an
Iſrachte to ſpare the cattell to the ende to {2crifice them to the
God of Iſrael; yet was Gods ſentence pronounced by Samwel
cleane repugnant thereto , God /owerh obedrence better then
ſacrifice . And not long before God had commaunded boch,
namely, that the Cananites and Amalckites ſhoulde bee rooted
out: and therefore hee was to bee obeyed, and for their diſo ·
bedience the Cananites remained thornes in the eyes of Iſrael,
and the king of e Amalec whome Samuel nevenhelefſe hewed
in peeces, was the ſubuerſion of Saule and his royall familie. But
here may expreſſe reaſons be alleadged for ſuch iudgemenes of
God, which ſeeming ſevere to man are neuertheleſſe, in that
they proceeded from God,meere inſtice. Moſes ſaith, when
the Lord thy God hath reiected them before thy face, think not
in thine hearte, ſaying : The Lorde for my rightcouſneſſe hath
cauſed mee to enter poſſeſſion of this lande, ſeeing hee hath for
their wickedneſſe rooted out theſe nations before thy face,
For thou art not through thy rightcouſnes and vprightneſſe of
heart come to inherite their land, but it is for the abhomioatids
on theſe people, whom the Lord thy god hath expelled beforethy
True it is, that a: in acleeare ſunnie light we may more ea
diſcer ne all that is obiect to our ſight, euen ſo of things contei⸗
ved in the holy Scriptures commonly the cauſes are to bee
founde ; but for other matteis, as the deſtruction of divers .
tions among the Heathen : and finally for this ſo eruell and hor
rible example, contei ned in this boeke, there can bee alleadged
no particuler reaſon, other then that gods indgemets me boteõ-
leſſepits: alſo chat ſith he hath doae it, it is iuſly done, And yet
ace not the Spaniardes beeing the executors of this vengeance,
more excuſable then Pilate for condẽning our ſauiour, or Aws
nag or Caiphas for procuring his death notwithſtanding gods
counſaile and hand wrought thoſe things. For behold gods ſeu-
rence pronounced againſt the wicked, whom he vſeth in chaſte.
ning the good, whom by thoſe meanes he doth trie, and puni-
ſheth the wicked according to their deſarts: _


TothcReader;

Ob Aube the red of my wrath : and the ſtaffe in their hand
6 my indignation] will ſende him to a diſſembling nation, I
wil giue bim a charge ag «inſt the people of my wrath, to taks
the ſpeyle audto take the pray, & totreade them vnder foot
ue ibe nure inthe ſtreete. But he thmketh not ſo, neither doth
his heart efteeme it ſo, but he imagineth to deſtroy and to cut

not 4 few nations. For he ſaith, Are not my princes altoges
ther kings? Ir not Calno as Charcbemiſhi Is not Hamath lilę
Arpad: It not Semaria as Damaſcus: Like as my hande hath
found the kingdomes of Idols, ſeeing their idols were aboue le-
ruſalem & aboue Samaria : Shall not I, as I baue done to
Samariannd to the Idols thereof, ſo do to Hieruſalẽ & tothe
idalt thereof? But whenthe Lord hath accopliſhed al his worke
epõ mount Stõ & Ternſals, 1 wilvifht the frute of the pronde
bart of the K.of Aſbur. & his glorious & proud lookes becauſe
he ſaid,by the power of my own hand baue I done it, & by my
wiſdom becanſe I am wiſe, T berfore I haue remaued the bor.
ders of the people, & haue ſpoiledtherr treaſures, and b tue pul-
lad downe the inbabuants like a valiant mau. And my band
hath found as a neſt, hc. So that although the-wicked for a
time doe ttiumph, yet doth not God Jeaue cheir abhomioable
cruelties vnpuniſhed. But Gods iudgements being in the mean
time ſuch that hy che wicked he puniſheth thoſe that he wic-
ked:notwithſtanding their wickednes be ſomewhat leſſe, as al-
ſo the good bee chaſtiſed by the cruell and bloodthitſtie · it is
er taine that wee are not thereby to judge that our ſelyes ſhall
have the vidtorie ouer our enemies, becauſe our cauſe is the
better, for we are repleniſhed with vice enough, whereby to
leave vneo god ſufficient matter to puniſhe vs: And there»
fore as I ſaide two thinges mee thought, and yet mee ſeemeth
in theſe Countries - worthie admiration ; One is, that wee
truſling that the defence of our libertie is vnto vs a iuſte occa»
ſſon doe not in the meane time conſider that wee commit ng
leſſe faules, then choſe which Exech, caſt in the Sodowites teeth,
Beholde the iniquitie of thy ſiſter Sodom was pride, fulneſſe of
bread, and cle caſe of Idlenes: theſe were in her & inher daugh-


Co


7


Ren doh ne rs;


— ny pane and barbarous nation: and
let vs render thanks to god for ſending vs ſo good maiſters to
joftruce vs in our dueties in this ſo miſerable and wretched.
time, in hope chat we not quailing in aur office, he will alſo final:
ly graunt ys happie deliverance. |


TE:


Hy ® "'&.


Lig T


| O99 of this | 2154
24.905 58, hoof ft uw ga rants 2b arm t:
2 £25 ++ UINENIAT-I07 £4 nogy coo! twill

1 55105 57 £01102 B63 mot e i, 17 o) 14:22 m9) een -
1: Ho Dt Phtdmmmm :e: blong otro winertoos ts, {1
„ rin; : oolufdo nibongd ad ig e cid 101 ill of:


bot: o eu, t dd. han Uu 92wo iH m
e toliittn Loon obey gib il beg os e att: bam: 211
ar etie on 59 of evitgub 140 Di eveſogrt
Ta a 0927 1
„ « ® ol 9 .
. 32051201885


.


1 120 P
1


ITI


a 3


i
: 1

* os
ASS wt, . 7


CC Ce Ede 45


. *


' "
. 19 . 1 with —
f owe
* * 4 s& 3 4 4 ®
- 4 | » - , #5>4 - _
* 8 ”
8 4 , , 0 | " - * *
* : "=. * 1 , "IF : 12
o * . * 4 ö 2
1 ” + perient Sbm, 0 F,


Sb

n bk
n tha Nat 157 Nin but ez Df) ;
+3 ico: Aviradr y 202 00s 2h1::ciged)
20 n 0025 +19 275650 11491203Rq
; — 45 + tha! 099)” ub vii
um 07 2060] u
81 1 1.-35c5tary 16, 114710 t ihimazegnich 92 20
2; 260 16 457102019952 vlau An õꝙοανινẽẽ“?⸗ -


* It! 111 2091 N 9 q 109 42
, n 1 J .

8997 Dr * + 17 9111 8 N ” > TP TH viz -
" y Fy 7 LS N


' SEE


-
* 4


* ,


Sch nyo bt. y30eltb Ile yo tel

0: nom 5 i me: ld ohne

i lee 123d::207 Jo jn od o
«>a IK ren hen TY "Wh Y3AgDiil al zA er


1145409 a vim ioRtt ant yl an innit


97 nog bong wha 2d og nb con


- En > wy ' % al f K 7 * - j 4
6 | G . "= "3a by, + 4 404 . 21101 . , 4 a 11 1
4 * = 1 1 0 >. . C

4) . 31. .. . & © << : Ul 1 * 1
4 * 1

* p % "p+ . 75 pFfv * * y 7 Fr 11 8 | 1 ; 19

f + a 4 ®# + & F 700 - 22 44 Py 4 : * 41101.
. -


' ce te Ss. 1 =_ he. - _—_
Dir: 1115 19022 3.4 31151112. "163 & *% 3LL 4 11


*
=


Oc t


Fein
e


2 e = Aae,
ar 502 wP


rde, as god

. — the gui-

eee ofmankinde

| | Realmes and Pro-

ted kings to bee as fas

D | as Homer nameth them
— ſo conſgquegyy the moſt noble &
principall mẽbers of c ales ſo can we not
iuſtly doubt by reaſon of iggnpd willes that kings
and princes haue to miniſter iuſtice, but that it there


be any thinges amiſſe, either any violences or in-

iut ies committed the only cauſe that they are not re-

- e þ prio no notice of the ſame.

inely if th of them, they would

imploy all diligence and indeuour in the remedic

thereof, VW hereof it ſeemeth that mention is made

in che holy Scripture in the Prouerbes of Salomon,

where it is ſaid, Rex qu. ſedet in ſalis Iudicis diſſpat omne

malum iutuitu ſue, For it is ſufficiently to —
poſed euen ofthe kindly and natural vertueofa

thattheoaly notice that he taketh of any miſchieſe

rormenting his * is ſufficientto procure

him, if it bee poſſible, to roote out the ſame as being

a thing that hee cannot tollerate euen one ouly mo-

ment of time,


Conſidering therefore with my ſdfe moſt migh-


tie


|


bad wach Codandbboly Shnkchehane
eee
they mightgovetnobucrr,8 procars

Uca5well remporally define af

fy) being a nnn of experienct and fiftie y —
ot more, "ankle els emls/z20having eh
m cummũtted at my beim in thoſe dome
Ae thet yaurhighnes Havin3iaformation offt
ngwahle patticularicies; nright be med tot ear:
—— — — graunt or permit
to choſe tytadies ſüch conqueſtes as they haue found
out, and vrhich they do ſo name, M hetenmd if they
might beſſoffered choy would ter) Rely of
therplglbes,66 being maile againſt this To
ables lowly S mide ation which 6ftendeth none,
they bewwicket,tyranmons ; and by all lade ther


natyrall;Hamaine or diuine, vttetl. eStiderniied, de-


teſtedand aecuuſechi :I thodght irbeſt; Teal? elke


might boobn alſeguilie / by conecd loffe
af au inini te uunber both ot ſoules ae bon ſes whiz


_ chearefordanared, rd cafe few of their


which oh late I had ſelodted frõ amõ g inſinit others,
and that mighit erneiy bee reported te bee primed, ro


the ende your highnes might with more eiſeperuſe


ee Aid Whereas 5 erde |


maiſter the Kagelibilbor of T olersy whey b
biſl op o required chem at my handes.
and then proſodecd them to yo highneSperaduen -

2 ( C 3 ture


| theſe tyrauntsptacceding
5 5 tles and colours in thicirinftatteantd inipore


ce * a ooly through che auarice and


e prologue.


neon


ol eſtate wherein you haur hin buſied ———


haue not prooled-thes baue forgotten them, © and
inthe meage time theraſhand Ciſordinate-delire of
thoſe which thinke it nothing taYowrong to ſhe@
ſuch aboundance of mans blood; to małt deſo.
latetheſe ſo latge countries of theirmturall-inhabi-


tants and owhers, by ſlaying infiniteperſons; either
do purloyne ſuch incredible treaſures, doe dayly


vnder all con-


tunaty ſute, namely to haue the ſaid cõqueſts permit-
ted and graunted vnto them: Wi- hich in trurh can.
nat be —5 wirhout tranſgreſſing the lawe both
of natute and of God, and ſo c not with
out igcurt ing mortall ſune, ie moſt terrible
andeuctlaſtigtorments :I thaughtic expedient tt
docyourhi ſervice in thid bricke Summmarze
of 2 molt large — —— bee”
e laue
— your
— wo


5 the _ _ 11 Ti |
85 e Ae 3 1 Alte .

comminedagairlteliol poote inno-
Kats — er inthat they areſlaine and hewed inpee:


899 215


—


—


* 2 832
„ r err re i, *


The prologue.
ambitionofthoſe that pretend to the doing of
execrable deedes, being conſidered, It may pleaſe
our highneſſe to deſite, and effectually to
bis Maieſtie to _ an, 1 emaund
or requite ſo hurtfull an le enterpriſes: yea,
per bury any ſucheſuite or petition inthe inf
nall pit ofperpetuall filence , thereby ſhewing ſuche
terror & diſlike as hereaſter no man may dels bold,
as once to name or ſpeake thereof, And this(moſt
mightie Lord) is very expedit᷑t & neceſſarie, c the
God may proſper, preſerue and make the eſtate
ofthe royall crowne of Caſtile for euer to floxiſhe
both ſpirituall/ and temporally ·


3 * as # * n
' - | yr 4... _ A
% 4 b, a 5 A
*


1. ,


»
>. agua
2 4
a; wy
8


————
— ISS +


*
—
2 —— —
2


y
2
=”
—
2
5
Wy


unter x

A brieſe Narration deſtruction

| 0 ; —_— | Et mY A ao «„

ede gott: th | Dads © „ eee 4 1

* -— - 1 - he
' :, ret; 1 1

9 1 4 E f ES 50 1 23334601! . h 4 1

: —_— 4 14.4 p + .

2 1734770 d 1137 139207 141357 . 0

1 4 +4 5 Ss of & © Spatyardes. & 8 , ;
1 ou ; | . x . . | 5 M

E's ö 7 174 N , ad 1 ms . 2


an 0 that the ſome of them wet


cso choſe partes, Aud the firſt land

N chac cheyentered to inhabite, was the
—— ton
rounde —


cenne
be diſcourred


The Spaniſh cruelties.


—
en inces emen in
all commodities/eafe, 2 —— ſoft chen
choſe of that countrey: yea, althqugh they bee the childzen of las
bourers, They are alſo vety pode falke, which polleſſe licle,
neither pet do ſo much as deſire to haue much woꝛldly goodes,
therefore neither are they pꝛoud, ambitious, noꝛ couetous. Cheir
diet is ſuth as it ſeemeth)) ofthe holy fathers in the deſert hath
not been mote ſcarſe,no2 moe lireight,no? leſſe daintie, no leſſe
ſumptuous, Their appareling is commonly to : all
ſaue their ſhamekaft partes alone touered. And when they be clo-
cher, at the moſt , it is but of a mantell of bombacte of an elle and
a halle, o a two elles of linnen ſquare.'Their lodging is vpon a
matte, and thoſe which haue the belt: fleepe as it were vppon a
net faſtened at the foure comttn, which they call in the language
of the Ile ol Niſpaniola, Hatnaſas- They haue their vnderſtan-
dung very pure and quicke, being teachable and tapabie of all
good learning, very? apt to riteiue our holy Catholique
faich, and to be inſtructed in good and vertuous maners, hauing
leſle encombꝛances and diſturbances to the atteyning ther tinto,
chen al che folke ofthe woꝛlobeſids, and are ſo enflamed,irventc,
and impoꝛtune to knowe and vnderſtand the matters of the faith
after they haue but begunne once to taſte them, as likewiſe the
exerciſe ofthe Satraments of the Church, x the dinine ſeruice:
that in crutch, che religious men haue need of a finguler patience
to ſuppoꝛt them. And to make an ende. J haue heard many Spas
niardes many times holde this as aſſured, and that whiche they
could nat deny, concerning the good nature which they ſawe in
them. Undoubtediy theſe folkes ſhoulde be the happieſt in the
wotive if onelp they knewe God.


A pon theſe lantbes ſo meeke, ſo qualified g ende med of their
maker andcreato),as hath bin ſaid, entred the Spaniſh inconti-


nent as they kuewe them, as wolues, as lions, ę as tigres muſt
cruel of long time famiſded: and haue not done in thoſe quarter
— oh a this preſent, oughtels

in peeces,kill them, martpꝛe them, afflict them,
romencjempaceopzem by ff eget


*


7


cuba, in number — thieeſcoe
| and licle, whereofche very wards rr then kgo gr
| ar Oeulll, and the countrey the healthlomeſt in wade; —
- were in theſe ſame iles moꝛe then ius hundzechchouſand ſoules,
and at this day there See
all of them ſlapne. alter tha they had daa wen the out from chence
to labour in their minerals in the ile of Hiſpaniola, where chert
wert no more A of Gente Ret
A. fox che lpacaofchaee peers becwixe all chele.Cands
. ende ater the —ü—äé— —— R
+ — of hele falke(foz thera ne
as might be found)chere were noc found .
che J ſaw:other iles moze then 9


E


1770
: I


=


On ES enUguvree Gotatonnacaly =SC 2


TI nw wo TT *"* T9


POE rn
NEAR eg de nes ans ao
ew mo en tens lent ee
——
| 2 eravleae any ——
or dus earch t nations: The one is their vntult,
cruel, blodd ie and ty e / Chat othet maner is that
they haue llayne Ml thoſe which coulde and kinde of wayes ſo
muthe as gaſpe / bꝛeath, o thinke to ſet them ſelues at libertie, 07
but to nuthmawe them


ſales from che counentes whiche they
endure , ws are allthenacurall Lodes , and the men of valour


and courage, - pthey laffer not in the warres to
— un women opPieling; allo afterwarden
n


e paniche haue deffroyed

monely,chaethey haue he lde it kon their laſt
n and to enriche them ſelues in
e ſhonttyme. and mom at one leape co very high eſtates, in no
— — ſay in a wow, che cauſe
h been their auarice and ambition, whiche hath ſealer
tn chu worde in conſderutton or choſe
landes  andrith,audthe people ſo humble, ſo patient,
and (6 ealle co be ſuboued. Mom they haue neuer had any re⸗
ſpect, o made any mote actomꝑ of ( ſpeake the trueth of that
whiche J haus ſeene all che tyme chat J was there conurvſant)
1 would to GOD that they had em
amd effeerheb them dut as beaſtest) dut leſle chen of the
myde ol the krtetes. ind tun us muche cute is it has they haue
had of their lines and of their ſoules. Aud by chis meanes haue
ved to ma hte BA


hereof
chen


5 wu % 4 "SB. 47 , Fa
— . of in on.


07 the Th of. ed


Ache Jle Pilpaniola,which was the firſt ( as we bent m)
where ths Spaniardes arriyed, begauneche great laughters
nd ſpoxies ai people : che Spantardeghauing begupue t
take their wizes and childzen of the Judies,/fo2 io ſerve their
tur ne and to vie chem ill, and hauing to eati che nis
aue garen ernten weary and erau not contenting them
ſelueg with that which the Jupians gaue them of their dune
good willeuerp one after their habilitie , the which is algates
very ſmall, fozaſmuch as they are accuſfomed co hane nomoze
ſtoꝛe, chen they haue ozdinarilp neede ol, aud that ſuchas they get
wich litle crauell ;- And chat which might ſuffice fo2 choer houſe⸗
holdes,reconing tenne perſons fv3eche bouſhoide fo2 a moneths
ſpace,one ſpaniarde woulde gate and deſtrop in a bay.
No ue after ſundꝭy other foꝛces, violences, ondtozmentes,
which they wzought againſt them: the Indians beganne to per-
ceiue , chat thoſe were not men diſcended from beaucn, den
ol them therefoze hid cheir victuals: others hid their wiues and
chilmen: ſome others fledde into the mountapnes ,
them ſelues a farre off from a nation of ſo harde natured and
—7 228 The — —
48 baſtonades: peſſing handes von the
Lowes of the Townes. Aud cheſe raſes ended in ſa great an
bazarde and deſpexatenes, that a Dpaniſhe durſt ad-
uencure to rauh forcibly the wilt of the king aud L
ofthis Ale. Since whichecivre-che: Indians begun toſrarehe
*


2


are nomoze warres then the plapings of childzen, when as they
play at Jogodi Canne o Reedes.) The Spaniardes with their
ir ſpeares and launces ,beganne to commit murders,


and Uillages,ſparing neyther childꝛen, noꝛ old men, neither wo -
men with chilve, neyther them that lay In, but that chey ripped
their bellies, and cut chem in pieces, as ifthey has been opening
of Lambes ſhut vp tn cheir folde. They layed wagers with ſuch
as with one c<quſt of a ſwoꝛde woulde paunche oz bowell a man
in the middeſt,o2 with one blowe of a ſwoꝛde woulde moſt redi-
Jy and moſt deliuerly cut off his head, oꝛ chat woulde beſt pearce
hisentrals at one ſtroke, They tooke the little ſoules by the
beeles, ramping them from the mothers dugges , and cruſhey
their heades ag aintt che cliftes. Others they caſt into the riners
laughing and mocking. and when they tombled into the water,
cher layde,nowe ſhift ez thy ſelfe luch a ones toxpen. They put
ochers together with their mothers and all that they met, to the
ol che ſwozv, They made certayne Gibbets long and low,
in («ch ſoꝛt, charthe feete ofthe hanged on, touched in a maner
che ground , euery one enough foz thirteene; in che honour aud
worſhip of our Sautour and his twelue Apoſtles ( as they bſed
to ſpeake and ſetting to fire, burned them all quicke chat were
faſtened, Unto all others, whom they vſed to take and reſerue a-
lute, cutting offcheir two handes as neere as might bee, and ſo
letting chem hang, they lapd: Get you with thele letters to carry
tydinges co thoſe which are fled by che mountaines.'Thep mur-
vered commonly che Lozdes and nobilicie on this faſhion: Thep


am ſtraunge cruelties: they entred into Townes: Bowes,


- The Spaniſh cruelties, - |

pittoally which thing croubievche Caprayne ibu bet coutagot

then fleepe;hee commannded cofkranglethem. The Sergreaue,
— chen the har then
his name and |
gled,but him ſeſke putting nt | |
p they ſhouldnoecrie, put to che fire,vutll they were ſoftlyrolted --
after his deſire. I haue ſeene all the afozeſapd things and others
infinite, Andfozaſmuch, as all the people whichcoulde flee,
hid chemlelues in chemountapnes ; and mounted on the toppes.
ofchem, fled from the men ſo without all manhood, emptie of
all picie,behauing chem as ſauage beaftes, the flaughterersand
deadly enemies ofmankinde : they taught their houndes fierce.
dogs, co teate them in peeces at the firſt viewe; and tntheſpace
that one might ſap a Credo,afſapledand deuoured an ian as
if ichadbeen a wine. Theſe vogges wzought greatdeliructions
—— — — vpon good

put to

and lame of due Juſtice : they — —
3 they had to lay an hundeth Jud


The realmes which were in this Ihe of


Hiſpaniola.


Herewereinthis Ile uſpaniols, fine greate piincipail
realmes,and fine very mightie Ringes, vuto whome al-
moſt all che other Loꝛdes obeyed, whiche were wichont
number. There were alſo tertaine Lones of other feue»
r —— any
of cheſe Ringes: Dne realme was named is as
much to ſap, as the kingdome ofthe playne. plaine is one
ofthe moſt famous and moſt — ů —
the wozlde . Fa; it contapneth foureſcoze leagues of grounde,
from che South ſea vatothe Nozth ta: gow ode are


leagues, and eighevnco tune.
3 94 41


TheSpanitb ernelties.

; Jchach in dne five and | A
There entrech tuts it abonte chirtie thauſande riners and lakes,
of che which twelue art as great as Ebro, and Duero, and Gua-
dalqueuir. Ind all the riners which iſſite out of a Pountapne
which is cowardes the Melt, in number about fie and twentie
choulande, are very rich of golde. Jn the which mouncapne 02
mountapnes is contayned the pzouince of Cibao, from whence
the mines of Cibao take cheir names, and from whence
commeth the ſame exquiſite golde and fine of 24. karrets, which
is ſo renowme in cheſe partes, The Ring and Lende of this
realine was called Guarionex,which had vnder him his Uaſſals
and Lieges ſo great and migbtie, that enerp one of them was as


bleco ſec forth ch2eeſcoze thouſande men ofarmes fo; the ſeruice-


of che kiftg Guarionex, Ol the which Lowes A haus knowen
ſome certayne. This Guarionex was very obedient and her:
cuons, uaturally deſirous of peace, and well affectioned to che
deustion of the kings of Caſtile, and his people gaue by hiacum ;
maundement, every houſekeeper a certayne kinde of Damme
fallofgolve:buc after wardes being not able to fillthe Dzonune
tutte it off by the middeſt, and gaue thehalfe thereof full. Fox
the Indians of that Ile had litle oz none industrie o2 pꝛactiſe to
gather oꝛ zawe golde out of the mines. This Caceque pꝛeſen⸗


tedvnto the king ol Caſtile his ſeruite, in cauſing to be ed
all the landes from the Jlabella, tuhere 1 ne l ker,
vnto the Towne of Saint Domingo, which are fittie leagues
large, on condition that hee ſhoulde exact of them no golde : fo)
be ſayd, (andhes ſayde the trueth) that bis ſubiectes had not the
Ckillco mae it out. As foz the manuring wheeh he ſaydt hee
waoulde pzocuretobee dont: I knowe that hee coulde haue done
te very eaſely, and with great readineſſe, and that it woulde haue
been worth vato the king euer y yeere moꝛe then thꝛee Millions
of Caſtillama, beſtus that it would haue cauſed, that, at this houre
there had bin aboue fffrie Cities greater then euillee.

Tdepa ment that they made ta this gend king and Land,
la gracisus am ſo renten, mas towhonoine hun ta the per-
ſas Ai i anα¹,C ien, a Capcayurratiſpiag bet.
* king coulde haue attended the tun me νν,mſmtie cos ·
* 1 uenge


other extertng high mountayues..


2 * 4 „ 9 <a
nai,  ws.. n rege a.
N (a? 1 ue 4 —— APP 5 bn WH a.


Cignaios, * chere wagwpieat —— |


Jars foo or In n * |


+ Rn "HY
ENG Gn |
1 —


:


8 2 Ene
| — ery
* u wee are ©.


_— — —B —


2 —


r wx w—e—_— - <—_—_ -


|

|

:

:

8
FL
C


* ;
. 2 * f
*
ö


111


m Mrd


6 — Beule wär e!


— 2 ch nl. oy 0
ung


121. 1 = OP er


ED r canbelerne:01 |
hs buge monber


— pe ,


:
:


a „„


5
=
-
5
' }
| We
»; 5
14 p
' N
i :
: =
4
|} -
ö , 3
:
:
| '
*


as the milke o


the dees. Vy cheſt meanes wert confined and bye
theiromesſ{ huges number ofthe —v


che like pright de aboliſhed andexrerpace, allcheinhabirantegof |


geren


''Axcouching loving, they laxve vpon hems foureſege
Herh mens huydreth leagues: The Spaniſh
{elues tobe carried in lycres vppon men


—— oe — —


2 — — — p — _
—_— —
3 5 —_ —


org —
ofs ts ls S. IS And Taninyts,


T une Joh, ot 2297255 Ja
N arg nn


en Enocable critelties, killing burning, roſtingi-caſting the
. alterwards opyreſling,# bering them in
their minerals'# other trauel onto þrotting out of hole axe ty


6.C.P. ſoules


4

'

g

1
|

f U


* - *7
w45 wa


te whome
the


— |
ned nowe but thirtie, which wasthe tenth part. ——
rhey gaue hem as manp moe and moze, and choſe alſo he mare
hauocke ofin like maner,aud fill as many as they gaue him, ſo
— ſie, tharche ual ca
riedhim away." .

denen fre monrhes(me(ell bring Hrn

GE Sn wdde
were in the mountapnes , where they wougbe allo ghaltly
llangbterx, and thus lade waſte all chis Jle: which wet beheide
noclong after,and it is ä ſo diſpeopled and de⸗


Lolace as it is.


Of the firme lande. ;
N the peere one thouſand flue hund ed, and foureteene, there


5
certapne other tyꝛauntes had entred he lande,aud had ſpoyled,
murder tu, and cruelly encreated very many folke:yet was it not
dun on che lea coalt chat they lpopled', androbbed , amn diu the
wont thar they could. But thisſurpalledallthe others whiche
came befoze him, and all choſe of all the Jlandes , bowe curſed
amdabhominable ſoener ther were in all their doings, Ye noe
onelp waſted oz diſpeopled che ſea coaſt , but ſacked alſo great
realmes and —.— | heuockes by flaying and nur.
dering of pe ee ro bee n |


The Spaniſh cruelties, ”

caragua wichin being, which are moze then fiue hiidzedleagues
ol the belt and molt fertile grounde in the whole-wozlde, where
there were a gnod number of great Lojdes , wich a munber:of
cownes,dorowes, and villages;and ſtoꝛe of gold in mos ubun⸗
daunce then wasto bee founde on the earth vutpll chat preſent,
Foxalbeic char,Spaine was as it were repleniſhed wich gold, of
the fineſt that cum from the JleHiſpaniolaz the ſame had been
only dzawen out of the entrals of che earth by the Judians, of þ
mines,afozefain,wher then dien as hath been fande.
_ -» 'Thisgouernour with his men,foundout newe ſoꝛts ofcruel-

ties and tozments,to cauſe them tadiſconer and giue him golde,
There was a captapne of his, which flue in onewalke anvcourſe
which was made by his commaundemenc,torobbe androote out
more then fourtie chouſand foules, putting them to» edge or the
wad; burning th̃. c giuinꝑ th to 5 dogs,qcomfcing themdi-
- zaeſly;th alſo a religtous man ofthe oꝛder of . Francis; mo
w_ w him, beheld ib his eies and had to name frier Francis of


The molt pernicious blindnes, w hath al waies poſſeſſed choſe
who haue gouerned che Jndians'in ſtead ofthe care w they ſhold
baue fo2 the conuerſion & ſaluation of thoſe people, (w they haue
alwates neghecced, their mouth m painted fables ſpeakingone
ching, but their hear t thinking another ) came to Þ palle,as to cbs


wich, wouc any

not chẽſelues co þ —
namely ſucha one as whole
Which a thing toe
ch & mockerp,yea worthy of hel


-
4
- -
-


RRS


Deere


the end to make them ſeeme þ


| TheSpanih cruckties)”
charge, to put in txerutton che ſayde ozdinances ,to.


place: Beit kuowen vnto you, char there is one God,one Pope,
one king of Caftite, which is L. oftheſe landen: make your ap-
pearance,al delay ſet aſide, here ta du him homage, xc. Whichif
war vpõ you, and we wil kilyou, mae pou flaves, Herelipon
at the fourth watch in þ mojning, che pooze innocenes, fleeping
pet with their wiues and childzen : cheſe tyꝛantes ſet bppon the


place,caſting fire on the houſes which comiyonly

e ſohuru-by all quickmen,womZ# | cht
that they could al a great maux at
the inſtant thoſe that ſeemen thẽ gnod e thoſe


| wbb they cook pꝛi⸗
ſonners, they canſed the cruelly tu die vpõ h rack,to mals thẽ co
tell in what places there were anymore pode che they fennd W
them: and others which remaynedaliue, they made chem Hauer


tiechpecre


2 j


9 * TT ES ES.
” a - - 1 KW” 4 — _ . —_— —
* 1 , < Py - * pct On * *
een
*% „ 5 Php y 4


N l EE 1 We „ K.
4 Vow” Fon PAGAN. 14, me 4 nl, Pre


er
S.» 4


$6.5 n
N . * n


* N W ie © 1 * - *
. Y *. 4 4 *
y 5 \


 TheSpaniſheruelties,


- The Byſhoppe alſo, whichwasthe chiele in the Realme,
bee ſent his to baue his ſhare in the bootte: 2 They
ſpopledmoze golpe withinthe tyme. ann in this tealme, as farre
fooꝛch as J am able ta recken, then woulve amount to a mit᷑lion
of Ducates, yea, Jbeleene, that J make my reckoning with the
leaſt. Pet will it bee founde, chat of all this great thieuing, thep
neuer ſent to the king aughe ſane chiee thouſande Caſtillans ,
having there about killed and deſtroyed aboue eyght hundzed
thouſande ſoules, | nue

The other tyꝛaunt gouernours which ſucceeded after, vn⸗
to the peere chirtie and ther, flue , oꝛ at leaſt wiſt conſented, fox
all choſe which remayned co flap them in that tyꝛannicall ſlaue⸗
rie. |
; Amongſt an inſinite ſozte ofmiſchiefes, which this goner«
noure did, 102 confented vnta che doing during the time of his
gouermnent, this was one: To witte, that a Cacike oꝛ Lode
giuin xhim, eyther of his good will, oz whiche is rather to bee
thought foz feare,che weight of niene thouſande Ducates: the
Dpaniardes not content withall, tooke the ſaide Loe, and tyen
him to a Cake, fetting him on the earth, his feete ſiretched vp, a⸗
gamlk che whichthey ſet fire to cauſe him to giue thẽ ſome moꝛe
golde. Che Lene ſent to his houſe, mhence chere were ought
pet mozeoner tinet thouſand Caſtillans. They goe a freſhe to
giue him newe coymentes. And when che Lone gaue them no
moe, eyther becauſe he had it not, o becauſe hee woulde giue
them no moze,chep bent his feete agapult the fyye, vntill that the
Pe gs —ů—— the ſowles at his

therewich They t oftentimes exer⸗
ciſcd theſe kinde of tmentes
them giut them golde
An other tyme,a


enteing vp⸗
killed as many as they cou KL were J —
Themozrowe after, there aſſembled a great * of


—_ — —— 4 4 — — o—s


23 e een out 2 070 it


eee No


7 a 120! eee "$05 0 r

33 1 =
med, twentie

— — — 1

—.— fercilepronfife of Nicaragua,
— —
. — —
— z and frequencie,. 2
— beholve.howe well it was peo-


'townep ofthzee o? foure leagutꝝ in length, full of
whichfrutces werralſbrhecauſ;
— — e of the fre⸗
quencieofchepeople. people, fo
— — — — — — 2 —


hide chem, and ſoꝛ was i
o pleaſant andvelece
— meer rv ary ence be
grief. which aſheptherter endured
— IIs hoe 7 — the d paniche.
Alſo fo2 that vn thetr nacure they oe Span
were
peaceadle people, belt (fey) 1 —


—
'\ young


foz hunger 02 cid beraubt |
as to vnlocke the chaine, and to make the ſpeedierdilpatch; hee
cutoff che head from $ Goulaers, aud lo the heamumbled nowne


STS . 20060 or aa focus af en


when he woulda make


pouſſion , to nourthethemany

dyed of famine „ moꝛt then twentit 0thixtie

dene mee pattern fallen mavve wich he fame,
 ueherſonnecoeace him, other

'  -)Fozalmuch as excerpcowneſhipps,and places i
haben hath Spanrvrhn aj in —
them ſelues tuety une foꝛſooth in the plucꝭ eſcheated — in
partition (on as thep vle to ſpeake ) giuen him in commaund, and
did their affayzes ,' nouriſhing themſelues with the goods and
— — — —
landes and inhericaunces perticuler wbere with —
— — nt — adn
— — — —
| ableco boe: yea greater thinges wer
able co d. * ond


— — euerp one coulde obtayne =
0


1


EI


eee ene


Wanne


— —_ .


Thetyantth welas
1 renn
4 ans doe nat keepe lanes,
andit is muche if aue „
——


ern
dry 4 4
: ng
y 10 en
i i as : wo 4 1


7


amy 17% 337 107 Ait: 2 £37] 17937 1410 Ann 1. — 70110


fed h r —


Neha prerncve 3
125 Spaive diſcouered : at the diſcouerte! whereof —


1 ——
eee 2
thereweneSpanth


Eons
e eee


4


-


Couerieandopeſiionxoraiaey) er An


this hath bern alwapes their cullomary maney of

70 ng än everyche regions which they baut enered into, to exe⸗
cute tnoontigent vpon there ſtr ſtarriuaſt, : ſonte-notadlecruetl
aud innocent lunes


*
*
.
* =
r
2
A
4
4


e Rem ſelues


nn — ww —— —


IIS
— —


biene r
r Ls 1 "bras verey
1 Ti — s n ————


i!
x '


Mon ena Þ #1," $aage* r


founvean (hem n p

Ager eee Yen x — . me D 2 2m}
All theLopdes w

bounde, td Captan


— tne


. —


nr eee po


— 1
Sale Wert ar Erreger bes- bal


— —

all hte ng 311007 227 nut and mn
Anale: 230i nog 14330 2 2d 20978 13 hint ed
+ Mira Nevo de Targepe eee ſtr ha 2? 7.

55 Gritar As may oh 2:7.0) ds 8 09,9003 50; 5

£2610 ans sg 6 5 mein g 132 faded 276 205 ua
dhl gu m1 @hadiges d 2048] E 031001 an
a250.1 51) 905 21030 1191721103 5 Þh .2ncidn 562 2e. 208210


9115 . Nero gra: RoieehllBdathy's


amp: em? 85 Mt.


9 *4


*


. while babar Gd aewsr
coi 7 (1311 365.557 Col - 4 e ONS £55 1% 13501
ad ed . £37614 23356 1 pea tid oil I 22160 oJ


*. | 4 * oh; le;
201 71A $112753 163 9343 034 wo | 2 enk, 15 05


holves,


\'o 0 , *
—.—.—
— roms — Iurttrul mt rn
—


king Metenſum
ſenrcomereethemathoulanv eee en Lops, "aid
people,muukingrtoparturterhdychetin},


dof g:. fot


2which

CE ————7————
men to keepe the ſapde king Potenſuma: theſe ſame

with them falites to doe mother thing woozthuachy note
to the — ——— —— inallthole
regions che awe which they had ol them: a pyactiſe and ftrata-
geme which (as J ſayde belt) then haut often vſed. All this
meane while the — nc and the Lowes


ofthe hole Cicte ſoairht none othet

pleaſure and paſtime to — — eee
Ar. And antongeT ocher

their kriſ kes and daunces NEEDED xg —
— ——— —5r


—_—


"(NY A Weg.


CITI. mitte d: and | taule a
B30 10152060 533110 |


;
>
ns; s | 8; * * 5 Ty l
SLE LUODEE OG *


—


*


Pane, andappeedoe at houre vneo the afozeſarde kinges,and


The Spaniſh cruelties b
bet wulle : mn chat by che lawes ol nature,
— ne ior dfy of winde,to b
thing auaplable to any purpoſe whatlocuer,

ment and obligatlon which abideth chem iu the bottom ol hel
paſſe ouer the lofles and dammages which they doe to the king,
rare Gly
ag | ye #

| Theſe are nowe the whiche the Spantardes haue


man, any
make app
ſauing the paniſh-


Lom vnder the colour of this gallant title, ſo right


full, and ſo ſmoothly garniſhed. |
wich this goꝛgeous and pꝛetended


ted leagues diſtaunce from Mexico
and the ocher by ſea 2. both the one and the other carried with
them a maynie of trowpesto ſerue onhozſebacke and a foote,
Ain the trueth, chat ol the miſchitues which theſe two
baue wought , and piincipally hee whiche went to Guatt-
mala (fo) that other dyed ſoone after of an tuill beach,) chert
might be made a great booke,of ſo many villanies, of ſo manie
flaughters, ſo many veſolations, and af ſomanj outragrsand
1 » as were ee art

come. YI une neee
Foz certayne this man ſurpaſſed all the others. pꝛeſent ind
one befoze,in quantitie and in number, as well f che abomi ·
nations whiche hee committed, as fo; the peoples and countreps
whiche he lapde waſte and deſert. All che which changes wert
infinite. | 1 : Ian $2393 3911


» » WW ow ww oQ ww


=
ens


SS mT” HW. 7 2 ow & © % ww


the countrey diſpeopled and
f in reuenge ofche pammages
— wes


ues of the countrey ſquare- 5. butewdchoulanve peri
ime they fly as per daply inthe laypeopbnarl bondage:
Ag Nowe letvsrecurne to mtr ofthe nne ex?
tapne, which went to —— 2
en cepbennrtn neereto Peri, (arcopding


tein a letter to the piincipall 4
Ce neoprene uae


—
* *
8 *


putting ail tafireand blood... bf .


ile Prowince and realme


2089 it


* a


| 8, and
great aner ofthe Loves of


27


Tn EE —


-


flames : ſaying, they woulve herein

—— — ep
| yeere 24.butili the peere 31. Leeauyeſteeme, what
.


their turne, ) this


to

bears
all the ſea coaſteron che Souche , contayning
leagues ; ans likewiſe inthe Citie of Culcatau che mocher Ci-


»
*


[Within confutreCanniconſearyen, ets
— > po —Uñ——
—— pm
7k


vm a ten 02


— een lf —
thiymeanes het had in his campt: av. odtuarie Ganmbles ot


by
mans fleſhe, where, in his p}eſence they killed and rogſtey
Hen. They kflledmen,onelpcohatc ep Alley morn


theyhelde tobe che dapntieſtmo;-


— — ok other vuderſtaode of all
g conncreys
r —


| — [voings.chey cu int celwhateo da lot fright-


— wah fence ente uin in
om
which art an hund)ed Hecranſ-


the Souch, anſithircieleagues..
Ported after this rate greit ſtore of artillerie, which be loded vp-
onthe ſhoulders of theſe pdoze folke going naked: whereby 3
Save fetne ety maky ̃ — ˙·ü— byceaſun of
pelt | 303197 $21 01:5 247th Tf 577
= holbes;tprakira frond b

1 — plea chem chal
— — 2


= 1
- bite: AbiihelaſDoutbathee hay bes
| an. 1702
=
* . Y A * I Wo . 5
7 J: nne 310 10090 dene ee. $1


*


7 11 4- *
4% 5% &


— n 9 9 PX
- - -
;


„ -


=
*
% #
*
=


i: A- Feerthe exceeding cruetties am flaughrers af, and
fo Foie — —vy[v
redinchepjoutnces vfnewe Spayne and Payiteo t chere came


- *
- - -
= o


The Spaniſh cruelties .
'Infraclous turnen, ſu maniefiones, ſu many crueltien robbe-
Fies,andabhominations, chat aman can not beletue them to be
ſuch. Aud they ſet foxwarve alſo this countr ey into ſu extteme a
deſalation, that i So had not kept them by meanes of the re⸗
Kfance of the religious men of Saint Francis oder, and if that
chere had not been pzduided wich all ſperde a court ot audience,
andche kings counſaple in thoſe partes friende to all vertue,

| thephadlaide waft all arme Spayne, asrep hane done the le


Tbere was amm, amongtt choſe of the company of this
. „ garn
—————— — 8 them


lavi *
newes ofthe comming or che kinges i court of Audience: : hee


avuiſed with him ſelle to pꝛoceede into the innermoſte
partes ofthe genere b n
taſe, aus dewe byfoxce out of the pꝛouince of Mexico 15.09 20.


Millions of men to the ende, char chey ſhoulde carrie the loades
and carriages of the Spaniardes whiche went with him , of
5 N
g dead on
Bee came at che ouinte of Mechuacam, which is diſtant
from Mexico fourtieleagues, a region as bliſſefull and full uf
inhabitauntes, as is chat af Mexico. Che king ann M oe of
che countrep wene to receiue him with im inſinite companie of
people, which did vnta them a thouſande ſeruices and turtiſien.
Hee app2ebended him by and by, foxthathee han the bzade
to be very rich — ——— —
- Fine him great treaſures her begann — hl ory ker ire
7 and 7


of Xaliſco;, the
moſt bappte. Fozit iwonrofchemokle


countrey of che —


leaguts. As


WG? ; 23:33 4137


ance — |


4 bee red


—— —
————
ting off their feete handes, eau, ann beutg in-peace,:
duty ta ding them into a feare, to the ende
hun und guebongoweandtribuces;all this knowing, and ſet ·
tag this gentis tant, tuen to come tothe whippes; baſt o-
navsviowes, withocher forts of crueities: wherewich-hee vered,
andoppecliedebem waply,


Jets famenafhing:charbee bicbvelledyer nomduanedinthis
— ryghe june: bowougbes:. uiuiche ma the:
cauſr that the dudiaus beim fallen deſprrate, andſeringtbhoſe
—— — —


tiſtyng them lei urs von certapue rache.
— — — —


— — > Horing 80
A — Q361T ; 3972! 510 2ic61en fume :. 717 |


chac is G —— —-—
coew warten werbaechienes rightfiitprchus then reitet; unt
thanfſekios aw ume han unt Bovſo) their tynuntes: Aft
— — —— 2


Jachntis, truhe eteuench chapcert — * Ac:
Frede the ſheepe of tho ſluhghter, G hom
re 5


flay them, andate not grieued, and — th
r —— rr It 225
TL 10 22 — LY rf t

j 701 It. 7 4 fr? mon — ;


"Of The rence] we,


Ser.


urindur: and thatchy oughrebe es and @i(e re
ſelle had made bnto the king * cm kemaberas hath
3


atis of victuals,anv of fruitexmoze then Mex⸗

a erly exceeded for the aboundance of; honnie and

wre there to bee ſounde, moꝛe chen in any quarter of the Jn-

dies which dach berne lerne uncothis preſent. At contepnech

cout thnde bunnpet leagurn compafſe. The people of that couns

trie were the moſt notable ol allthe Indies, aſ well in canſidera⸗
. olicte and ) *


couecouſneſſe, : harde-
alſovnmogthie chey were of other:


> potke powdjed . And in lite maner hee woulde let chooſe out
ie


C


at this day
thoſe tet


of a peere olde,
Cartes, 'whiche come and:
tt that beine 1 " "> oy


Seba e fe ſlauen. 269370 115097 11116 EO 060 £1755 &/
—h— — —
451076 eee, aeg: cn. dogs on tzunting of
— —
hungrie@caudrogiea lurtef wert Bun


G7


| IU 7: 34 BY
2 decent sg,
which call chẽ


nia raabmt were. dene ny chaſe
een, and ſuch as no iudgement of man can ſuffic-
bun 3041 1


as mouedin ſpunte £9 — anane>> rens
(03 ca each to em. apd.tomin bntn geſua Chyiltehole which
mou ofthe:tuecheritgandcymmiousnuders,


A4 eee e


the


occaſion the Indians heide a
and infouming them ſelues
— —
any bjedhzen,

they differed


11

14

| 19 ————— — ——
.


king of Spain, fo their liege Soueratgne.Uherof alſothey
madecertaine iuſtrumentes iy theneconſigned, which J kerpe
in my charge eee thereunco of the


1 The Jnvian being danse in he wap of te lh
. wich che great ion, and good hope of the Religious bzethzen,
BCE

_—_— wicked warres paſſed: Thert en⸗
tred at a


— — — —
— D arr wma the An⸗

diani . The Capraine ofthole thirtie @paniards,called vuco
—U 77 390007 > 4


—— A.
* *


4 a 0 | K * . — 8 = . —— TOTO
ere e r uh us: RY
calls an


| and cdmmacinderh hint to cake choſe inols, andco viſperſe them
| hx conerie ſling exerp lo an Jndin


o ar! Indian woman,tomake ſlaues of chem, 'withthzeatening
chen, the if hee did not doe it, hee: woulde bidne them
battaſle; Chat ſaide Lope bee ing fozced by feare, diſtributed
thoſe Jdols chꝛoughout all the countrie, and commaunded all
his ſublecees; that they ſhould take them to avoze them, and
FhactheyYouloerecurnrinerchange that ware Jydies and


| eing
17 twachilmen gaue him one and he that had ch1ee gaue
1 bim two. "This was cheendeof this ſacrilegious —
1 „„ 5 AReeneenene he Spa-
i — That
| i" Oar ol theſe abhotninable chafferers;named lohn Garcia,
I il beetnix ike; anbneere his death, had bnder his bed two packs


IR eee


Chet bet the iel ei at abe |
Jntces;whichy of.euch


ns nr —— go
ſell: haue reneaged and da eeneage ae *


An


prefencvay:Chyift Jeſus. 1 1 . ws 42;
Ehe Jndianspercoiuing that, that, which<e


0 10 f.
"OLA


The Zpatiſicenecies.
haue you lyed bnto vs; @ by vets
hy — eee —


CE ny dara — gods
* good, an the gods of other mouintesd The ſryers pacifier


them in the be maner chat they coutb;nocknowing what to ans
ſwere them: and went to ſerke out


— — eto


get them thence. eee eee toonty bees
—— that thote religious men bad cauſes
then to come thither therkſolies ofthetr owne acco we, whiche
an extretme maltotoulneſſe. In the enn the In ⸗


plants,avvnew
ofthe peere: and this bytherurled


The Spaniſh crueleics:


which was na leſſe peopled chen
haue ſpoken ol. | 1]


15 Ueriipif A bad to make abedrolle ofthe vngraciouſneſſes,
of che leughters, ofthe deſolations,of |


pantardes
of aint Martha agaynſt God , the king, and agaynſt thoſe
innocent nations: A ſhoulde wiite an hiſtozie very ample.
But chat maye bee done if Sod ſpare mer lyfe, hercafter in his
good tyme : onely J will ſettedowne afewe woozdes of chat
which was witten in a letter by a Byſhoppe of this P2oumce
to the king our Soueraigne ; and the letter bearech date the
twentiech ol Pay, 1541, The whiche Byſhoppeamonglk
other woodes,ſpeaketh thus: J ſay, ſacred Maieſtie, that the
may to redeſſe this countrey, is that his Paieltie deliuer her
out ofthe power of Steplatherg and giue vnto her an huſbande
- whiche may increace her as is reaſon, audaccowing as ſhee de
— 2 — J am ſure hereafter a the tyꝛauntes
whiche gauernement, dot ,o2ment and copmoyle
; | ny


nA


W


The Spaniſh cruelties.
And a little belowe hee ſay 25 X.

leſtie ſhall knowe — — us —— —
quarters due deſerue co bee diſamoumaten, and depoſer from
their gouermnent, to the ende, thatthecommon wealesmaye-
bee relieued. That ifchat be not done „in mine aduiſe, they
can neuer —— — chetr diſeaſes, His maieſtie ſhal vnderſtand
mozeouer,that in choſe regions,there are notanyChaiftians but
diuels, that there are no ſeruantes of God and the king. butt tr ai ⸗
tops to the ſtate, and their king. And in truth the greateſt encom⸗
bzaunce that J finde in reducing the Indians chat are in warre,
and to ſet them at peace, and to lead thoſe which are at peace to
knowledge ot our faich,isvanaturall ę cruell entreaty, th chep
are in peace do receiue of ſpaniſh,being ſo deeply altered. la
ced p they haue nothing in more batred & hozro) ch the name of
chꝛiſtiãs,.̊ which in al cheſe countreys they cal in their liguage,
pares,þ is to lay,diuels. Fo2p ——— —
neither of chyiſtians. no of mt which haue che vſe olreaſõ: but of
duels, Mhereof it commeth to paſſe, p che Judies which doe ſee
theſe bthautozs to be generally ſo far eſtriged frd all humanity,
oe rm freed miner — —¾.
þ chechaiſtians do hold cheſe things foz a lam, e that cheir God,
their R. are p auchozschereof. And thẽ a ·
ther wile, were to endeuoꝛ in vaine, & to miniſter vnto thẽ moze
ample matter, to deride and ſcome Jeſus Chiſt # his law. The
Indians that are in warre, ſeeing the intreatie vſed toward the
Indians that are in peace: woulde chuſe rather to die once foz
all, then co endure ſundꝛie deathes, beyng bader the conamany
n knowe this by experience, molt victozous Ces

FC: © 3
De ſayth fo) a ſurcharge ina chapter a lttle lower, Hts
. hath in theſe parts moze ſeruants then u ſuppoſeth. Fo? here
is not one ſouldierof ſomany as are of them that dare not ſay 0»
penly & publtkly,þ ifhe roue, rob, walt, ſlay, o burne the ſubiccts
ofhis M. to the ende p they giue him ſome gold, he ſerueth there
in your . w this title, y he ſaith,therofredounderh co his P. his
part. Wherfoze, molt chziltia Ceſar, it ſhould be good, chat your
ge hemeovuperſtan, Freche dig ſme fag

_ |


mei * =,


reteinerh no ſeruice in oughe!, whereby Gods dilobeped and
piſhonoured. All che ze are the fozmall woozdes of the
ſaive Biſhoppe of Saint Martha: bythe which map bee ſeene
clearly, —— 5 amongeſt theſe pocꝑe innocent
ede Inpians in warre, thoſe which ſatedchem
ſeluesby flying into the mountames from the ſlaughters of the
nora Span
thoſe an 0 P z
maſſacres, haue been chzalled into che tyꝛannicall and hoꝛrible
ſeruitude and whereof in che ende they haue been ffs
ned out, ſlayne, as appeareth by that which hath
been ſaide by the Bilhoppe, which notwithſtanding ſpeaketh but
litle, tn compariſon of chat which they haue ſuffered.

The Jud(ans in chat countrey haue accuſtomed to ſap, it
when they are erauaypled aud dyyuen vy the mouncapnes loden,
they happen to fall downe,and to fainte fo) feebleneſſe, and fi
payne : fo) at that tyme they lay on vpon chem blowes with their
ne faces from heme 7 an

43 of
march onwichouctaking of heath, wich theſe worden, out vpon
thee, what a billanie art thou they(J lap)the Jndtanx, fo? their
partes are wonttoſap, I can uo moe: kill mee heere right. J
doe deſire to die heere:andehis they ſap with great ſighes', and
beeing ſcarce able to ſpeake, ſoꝝ hauing their heart dzawen toge⸗
ther,declaring a great anguiſhe and dolour. - But who were
able to gine to vaverſfande che hundzech parte of the afflicti-
ons and calamities, that people doe ſuffer ofthe
curſed Spaniardes? God make them to take knowledge of ic,
chat are able and bounde to redꝛeſſe it.


Of the Prounce of ( artha-


6 Pouince of Carb ne is fitnate nder“, and a fiftie
J leagues diſtant fromche fame of Saint Martha, towardes
che Weck, .


The


The Spaniſh uelties.
che Indians as they went. there acaptaine Router in che yeere,
1.110;accompnted with 60.03 70. cher p2tie theeues well aps
pointed: they publiſhed among the Judians by pzoclawations,
and other publike ſonmũs chat they Hould come and dwell and
laue wich chem in that Me. The Indians rertiued them as their
owne bowels and babes: and as well che Lopes as ſubiectes
ſerued chem with exceeding readines,bjioging them to tate fro
ko feede, as manie moe peo⸗
ality of all theſe Indians ofthe new
beffowon Spaniarvsof al that they haue in great
The Spanthh build a great houſe of timber, in the
ſhould dwell all together: foz the Spaniſhe
n


on their ĩ wondes they degan
they were, to kill chem if they did ſtirre, aud chen bound them.
And thoſe which fied they hewed them in peeres: Mowbeit fon
ofthe Indies which led, boch ofthe hurts not hurt, wich others
that had not come within the houſe,coke their buwes g arrowes
amd aſſembltd chemſe lues in another houſe about an voz
to hund ed perſons: And as they keyt the gate the @yoniarns
ſe: fire on the houſe y burntd them aliue ! After withedeir ur
chaſt, vuhich migbt bee of an bund2ed oz loureſtoꝛe perſous of
them which they had bounde they get them to che Aleol ſaint


ere they ſolide


— 4 — ANOOnre tothe ale of
 Piſpaninlazwh Ig


fou!s, as is the caſe at this day ofche Jnvdians : fi
luicentiate in diuinttit a m ve:


mat: of hi over his companion,
Countrie;ro trauorſe


knowledge of che religious
trie called Alfonſorwereit þ Friarshad
els others: Foz he Indies lone eveſire
Ehniſtiis deſiring


- 2+ „ ˙ „ „„ Here rr


OT
truſting that che —


op
e Hiſpowola with chem cer ſel⸗
ſeting that cheir Lojde 6
K 2 ap, theytum to the religious
ing Lier pom men ſeeing ſo greata
—— — fo) ſorrows: ad it
Gr Nin hens that thep wouldyrather haue gr.


wont of God. Vombeitz ther |
maner they could, ſaying chat they woulde wiite ru chem at hi
——— would take ſuche care and
oder in the matter, that their ſqueratgneſhouldbereſfozed them
againe with choſe that were in his tenwanie · Ood ſent ünme⸗
daacely.vpon: a ſhiy chitber, ao dont fen the grrater cunſirmuti
on of the damnation at choſe mbich there generned, and they

| 8 religious men that mere in the Alle of
— cry out, and call heauen and earth co witneſſe
agatult St, ſundxie tunes aſter: But the Judges of
the neuer giut them audience tu do tht᷑ tuffice,
— — ofthe andtãs. which
— — —

1

ther Lom Don Allonſa, with others ſpold come home. with the
rel} within foure moneths, ſering þ they tame not neicher in 4.
9. m. — ws! —


— — they; ſee thay;
thacphiche they hab certifiedand pꝛomiled them, tooke not
efec: uu, tha yin furemonethes they houlve bus


and woulve bee toamale men, by
hozibleneſle of the caſe, Wherefoze


being tod tedious)dncii


wichontchnt WE... 210 And fhortely
9 - the
boule um harbouy of enirp bovten 8 aduilcy
dem ſafe to outrage chat people ua, when as they thought
chem leinen ſure cnougb bim ton ſhippe, hee hay
number of to come [a baozde her
; they? | ———

r A grextolher people deingextrey e ber men nene.
amchen, det boyſer ſaples, aud went ae of Sar

— — Ile er Bam John, any
I —— — —
: rin reut ul long choſt


bominableauhtchhanebravſed move gt ey xe entre


ee eee eee a deres e
n E Þifpaniola,
about two millions of ſoules , ſeaſed vpon by their purchaſes in
chieuing and robbing: wbich alſo euery out ol them they baue

ch — ra — ders
| er 2 g

— ——
and able to make any heart co cleaue, wert it neuer ſo harde, co
Neallchsraat of acomerey mod fre, to bee fie allnake
am enptie ot people.

At is atried ele. chat they neuer couuey away their ſhippings
of Jnvians ſo robbed q purchaſed, as haue ſaid, but that chey
caſt the chird part into the ſea, beſidot choſe which they ſlay, whX
they will ſent ch to chiſelues foz their chaftr. The cauſe is, chat
wen as they will by all meanes atteine to che eade which chey
hane-popoſed ta them ſelues:they haut need ala grrat number
of people, fo; fo pat .

qu


\


h ele p


vryendeth the lawe and Che tyjannie whiche
2 x: colifhe f Perlen
287 br er: E te


SU Pe in :
ebnen ein eren tn


woꝛzlde, charmapbe compareyvnts * 3 lthoitghthatthe crade
| | [andberp niiſ


tdeho peatles.© They
full ok opfterstocake
— : neden rede —

Cocke boate, o e,and il the pooxe metches lay ntuer
them ſelues:they all to bee buffet them with


into the watt ko retürne


. =
t pe of ffockes A


EE ern our. army wa. b.


chem in a tate of life ſoHoqribl,
ende. and conſumie chem in a


out taking bꝛeath, the continuall cold perting chem: e ſo they die
commdly,parbjaking ot᷑ blood at i mouth :becauſe of the ki
together of their cheſtes, oz bulke ofthebyealt ariling chereof,
that they are ſo — arms vnder the water,
and of the blooddy fluxe, cauſed by the cold. They? haires, which
by nature are cole blacke,alter and become after a bzanded ruſe
ſerce,ttkeco thehaires ofthe ſeawolues. The ſale peecerHeakerty
'ouc ofcheir ſhouldiers, in ſuch loꝛt, that they ſeemero der a kind


ding it wert inhibited them. by the magiſtrate other wiſe vnmet .
cifull; fo the Lacayens were goodſwiummers. They alla. 4.
boutcheſe aur a number ofthe peofle. of orher


Of, the river Nua Pari.


ded him in his miſchieuoulneſles and ty2annies ; and yet at this
dich bole of hom he fron of God ſhed big blood.


Of the realme of Veneſ-


uela.


in the Andies: graunted and committed a great realme, greas
ter that Ueneſuela, with the gouernement
— — certapne Dutch Parchaunts, with
certapne capiculations and conventions accopded bertweene


-. Theſe ſame entring che countrey wich chhee hundꝛed ment
they found the people very amuble, 4 merke as lambes, as they
are all in choſe parties of che Indies, vntill the Spaniſh do out
. rage them. Theſe ſetvpon them wout compariſon a great deale

mode cruelly, chen any ol the ocher tyauntes, ol the whiche wee
haue ſpoken befoze :: ſhewing them ſelues moze bnnacurall:
and fierce;then raging tygars, o wolues, oꝛ rampingLions.
Jean they had che iuriſdictton ofthe whole countrey, poſſeſſing it |
with mode freedom, and vſing it with a greater care,anvftarker
blinde mannes ofcoueryſe, ſeruing cheirowne turues with all
practiſesandcheuiſaunces;to get and gather golde and ſiluer,
more then all they of whom hath bin ſpoken heretofoze:hauing
whoUy ſhaken off all feare of Gon, and of the king: yea, hauing
fozcottentbemleluestoheemen, * 11.0, 2193008 70-2310} 31]. *
- || Chele:divels incarnate bane laide deſolate; anddeftroyed; '
more then foure hunded leagues ol mot fertill lande, and there
tu ot p2ouinces exceeding and wonderfull, fayꝛe baples, tothe


Pros


- They came into another great povince,in che coulineg of
tene Dane Darth whte ee
Indians peaceable in cheit bozoghs,q nh. ir houle;doing their
buſines;thep continued along time wich them eating their ſtoze,
and the Indians ſerued them, as il they had to receiue ol them
their life and (afegarde,ſuppozting their continuall opmeſſions,
and vſuall autragiouſneſſes, which are intollerable: beſides that
one Dpaniſhe glutton,eateth moze in one day, then moulde ſul ·
fice an whole houſholde ofmoze then ten Indians. They.gaue
them at that time, a great quantitie of golde, o their owne good
will, ouer & beſides, other ſeruices innumerable, whichthey did
vnto them. At the ende as theſe tyꝛants would depart the place, .
they aduiſed to pay chem fo their lodging, in this manner,

The Almain tyꝛant gouernour, commaunded to take ſuche
e eee and that

ſhould ſhut them vp within an inclaſure, wounded in of purs
Ft them knaw that who ſo would come foꝛth, and bee
go free, that he hauld redeeme hunſelle at the pleaſure of the

vniuſt gouernour: in giuing ſs much galde foz hunſelfe, ſo much
foz his wile, and ſo much fo2 euery pollt of his childzen, And yet
to pzelle them the moze, he commanded ts giue them nothing to
eate,vntil ſuch time as they had perfourmed the quantity ol gold
tuflixced chem fa their raunſame. Manp ſent to their houſen
fo; gene. and bought out chemſelues as they were able, and
thoſe lame were delluered, and went abzoad about their buſines
to get their liuing. The ty2ant ſent certain Spaniſh chieues & :
robhers,co go take them againe the ſecond time, after they had

hf bays are carried to the percloſe. and there wung
with hunger and chirſt, to the ende, chat they ſhoulde pet once as
gan pay foz their freedom, And there were many amõgũt them,
which were taken and ranſommed two 02 (zee luntyy tunes.
Ochers which had not to giue,foz becauſe they had all they had,
he let them wichin the tople dye foz hunger,

3! Au m this maner bach bin deſtroyed a pꝛouince bery riche
eee

ues, | ent a the receite of a
ny | This:


—


which het hath llame⸗
which heehachcommittedbyche wap te mend
credible : howbeicverperucand wouverfull,


facred golden palace |
— —

chemſelues as very (pJances and fa-

{tood aſtoniſhed to (et


the. Indies, aud theeuwences
the ſame councell:
thoſe execrabls tpzants- And this


hate beent mought, and yet preſencly arewjoughtby the ty.
rants in the Indies: ſaue diy they will ſap, becauſe ſuche hath
cruelly intreated the Jndies, che king hath loft of his reuenews
ſo many thouſande Caſtilians in rent, and chis little verdict o-
uer general and confuſed, muſt ſuffice foxthe diſclaime ot ſo ma⸗
ny villanies; And pet that litie which they take vpon them. they
doe not auerr, no2 deut vpon, as they ought to do, Fox rf they
had regarde ol their dutieco God and the king, it woulde bee
founde, that choſe Almaine tyꝛants haue robbed the king of a
boue tee thouſand Caſtiltans uf gold, Fo2 thoſe pꝛouinces of
Ueneſuela withthe others which they haue laid waſte, and dil⸗
Peopled more then four hundzed lengues foxthright,as hath bin
ſaide,is a region che moſt bliſfull, and che richeſt ol golde, and
was the heſt penyled of any in the mode: in ſuch ſoꝛt. that chey
haue diſturned from the kinges colers, anvocciionedche loſſe
in this Realm of about two millions of rent, within ſeuenceene
yeeres ſichence by paſt, thatcheſe enemies of God andche king
baue begunne to deſtroꝝ it: neither is there any hope that euer
thoſe loſſes will be repay2ed as long as the woꝛlde ſhall indure:
vnleſſe it be, chat God ſhold mpjaculouſlp rayſe as many milli«
Ons of ſaules ag are deceaſed, It ſhall not bee outofche wap to
couſider,of what ſoztes and howe exceſſiue haue beene che da-
mages, diſhono intamies, which' Gov | his
Ive hath receined; And wherewichall may bee recouered x
recompenſed the loſſe of ſo many ſoules as burne in hell fire
chꝛough the auarice and crueltie ofthoſe tyzants Almains, ſhall
FI ſay, o All- uains:
\-* *@nelyJwill conclude the diſcourſe of their bngracioul
neſſe and crueltie heerewith. That is chat ſithence they entred
the country unto this pꝛeſent, chat is to ſap,theſe ſeu᷑teene peres
they haue ſent by Sea a great number of ſhips loaden & ſtuffev
wich Indians. to make ſale of them as ſlaues at B. Martha, at
che Alles of hiſpaniola, and of Jamayca, and at Saint Johns
Alle. moe then one million: and doe ſende dayly, as nome this
peere one thouſand, ſiue hunden, foꝛtie two: the Court ofthe
Audience ropali notwithſtanding ſtabliſhed, fox, aud at hilpani
ola, right well (reing all chis, and diſſimuling to ſee it yea, ſa⸗
| | uonring


beape vp goods like as hach hen all tbe reit


Of the Provinces of the firme lande,
or quarter that is called Florida.


-


33344 _ "I.


which othern, and vm
hone inother quarters


The Spaniſh crueltles.


fo) as much as God plagued them with death befoze they toutde
dot any moze;andkepe them from chis outrage in thisplace, to
che eis chat A knowe, aud haue ſeeue chat chey did ty other
partes of the Tuvtes.

: The fourthcpzant;thatcamelaſtin the pere. 153 8. cunning⸗
ly aduiſed, and bering fully furniſhed : it is thꝛee yeeres ſince
there is no tidinges concerning him. Mie are certaine that in«
continent after his entrie chither : hee hach behaued himſelf tru⸗
elly, and ſince hath beene as aman vaniſhed, That if he be aliue,
bee and his mainies haue deſtroyed theſt ther peeres a greac
many mightie peoples, if hee hach found any in his enqueſt as
heehath gone: foz ſure he is one of che notoꝛiouſeſt and bell ex,
perimented amongeſt chem chat haue done che. noſt hurts, miſ⸗
Lhieues,and deftructions in many Realmes with cheir tonſoꝛts:
— I beleeue that God hach giuen him like end vnto the

ers.

Thee q foure peereg after the wiiting ofthe aboue wit⸗
ten, came out af the Alida the head of che petie cy2ancs which
went thither wich chis captaine tyꝛant, that there left his bones:
— weeviderffovd che critelties and euilles, whiche
on ere during his life time pꝛincipailly, andvnder his i conduct
— rurſrd death, the bnnatura ;


— — — — by
mee ſet dome before at the begũming, chat che farther they pꝛo⸗
— audco waſte counctiesanvlandz:che-


a


r


TheSpaniſt:crnelties;”


any was fozeweericd on fozeſpenc, to the ende they ſhonlve noe
nerd to looſe the chain, in the which they were gtued tncollers,
befoze they come at him that fainted; they pare off the head from
che collar bymme, the Tr combling one wap, and the
chaine another : as we haue recounted to haut beene vſed
otherwiſe,

Entring a boꝛough, where they were receaued wich top;
the Indians giuing them to eate their fill, and giuing them
Indians moꝛe then ſixe hundzed co carry their farpels, carrping
the heafte ol beaſtes in their ſeruice, and meſling
ey2ants being departed thence, a captaine kinſman ofthe pztn ci⸗
pall tyꝛant returned to rob the people, being without diſtruſte E
without feare, and ſlue with the thauſtes of Launce the Londe
and Ryng of the Countrie , exttuting beũde other truei⸗
tes. 244 7 2 * .

In anscher bojough, fozaſmuch as it ſeemed them chat they
were a little coo neereneighbours,s ſtood moze on their warde,
fo the actes villanous and infamous, which they had hearve
pfthem: they put tothe edge ofthe ſwoꝛde and launce, young E
olde, great and little, ſubiect and ſoueraigne, caling to mercy na
The head txʒant cauſed to pare off the naſe and lips downe
to the chin ola great number of Indians, yea. moe then 200,
(as ia ſaid) p chey hav cauſed to bee ſent fo from a certaine ba⸗
rough, 92 it may bee came of their owne good will , Au
chus in this eſtate ſo rufuil, and in theſe ſxrowes and angubs
ſhes of blaodftreaming downe,chey ſent them away: to che env
chey might go carry newes of che holy woozkes and mpyarles,
which theſe yeachers of the lacred catholtke faith, x baptiſed,
had wionght. : unt f 277 10006 0 ge OP PTS CURING 4.

Let it nowe bee iudged, what kinde of peoplecheſe were,
What louechepbearttoche Chiiltians, and howe they doe be⸗
Jeeue chat Cod ia, home they ſap to bee perfectip mercifull
«and Tighteons, mn chat the lawe and the religion, of the
Wherherhey. make p. and doe baunt chemſeluts, is


wnthour blejaiſ. Tho miſthiefen are exceeding loje
Au K N 1 10


me Spaniſh cruelties;
whith thoſe vngratious caytiues, childzen of perdition there
commited. And thus the deſperate and vnluckie Captayne
without confeſſion : and we neede not to doubte but that he
lyech buried in hell : if algates God of his infinite mercy ſe⸗
cretly diſpenſed m his hidden wiſdome hath not pꝛeuented him,
not dealing with him,afcer his joy K reſpect of his up
3 lewdues, N


: Of theriner of la Plata, that it


0 ſay, ofſiluer.


A chence the peere, one thouſande ſine hundzed, and two 8p
thiee and twentie : certaine Captaines made thꝛee 0}
 foure vopages vppe the Riner of Plata, where there are
n and nations well o weren


Ike as chis Countrie is farre viſcoafted from che Judies moſt


famous, ſo we are not able, to quote the notableſt points in pars
ticuler , Mer doubt no whit notwithſtanding, but chat they
baue done and doe keepe as pet at this houre the 1 of


:that1 wichour ſpopitag,robbinge,
<= ern


The Spaniſh cruelties.


Of the niightie Realmes, and large


Prouinces of Peru.


Nthe petre 153 1. went another great tyꝛant with certaine
J other conſotes, to the Realmes ot Peru, where entring with

the ſame title and intention, and wich che ſame pꝛoceedings
as all che reſt befoze gone, fozaſmuch as hee was one of them,
which had of long time beene exerciſed in all kindes of cruel;
ties and murders, which had beene mought in the firme lande
ſithence the peere one thauſande fiue hundꝛed, and ten, bee tooke
encouragement to accrewe in cruelties, mur ders, & robberies:
beeing a man without loyaltie and truth, laping waſte Cities
and Countries, bzinging them to nought, and vtterly vndoe⸗
vng them by ſlaping the inhabitaunts, and beeing che cauſe
of all che euils, whiche enſued in chat Countrie: that J am
right well alſured, that there is not a man that can recounte
them and repꝛeſent them to the eyes of the Readers, as is requi⸗
fice, vntill ſuch time that wee ſhallſee chem and knowe them
at the day of iudgement. As touching mp ſelf, if J woulde
cake vppon mee, to recounte the defoꝝmitie, qualitie and cir⸗
cumftancesof ſome one, J were not able to decipher them.
acoꝛding to that which is conuenient.

Pee flue and laide waſte at his firſte arriuall with a mil
chiete certaine bozoughes, from whome hee pillaged a greate
quantitie of Golde. In an Jlanve neere to the ſame pꝛouin⸗
tes, namedPacrna, well peopled and pleaſant, the Loꝛd theres
of wich his people rectiued chem as it had been Angels from
deauen: and ſire monethesafter, when as the Spaniſhe had
eaten vppe all chep2 pjouiſion : They diſcoueredalſo vnto them
the cone whiche they kept vnder grounde, foz them ſelues,
their wiues, and their childzen , againſt a dzte time and bars
ten: making them offer of all, with ceers plentiful,
to ſpende and eate at theyꝛ pleaſure. The recompenee in
the ende whiche they made them, was to put to the edge of the
Nwopp and et great quanttzofchle people, 47

"7M


|


trueities great and nocable which chey.coumicted, diſpeopltng |
aut were all that Ale. u i 2 72
From thence they make tu che moninct of Tumbala,whiche
is in the firme lande, where they ſlay and deſtroyas many as
they coulde come by. And becauſe all the people were fled as
affrighted by their boy ible actes. they ſapde thatcheꝝ made an
imſurr ection, an rebelled agatmſt the king of Bent. This
tyꝛaunt had this policie, and hept this onder ut poceeding, chat;
vnto all choſe whom hee tooke, op vnto others which preſented
hum with golde oz filuer, mother thinges winch they had : hee
commaunded them ts ding moze, vntill ſuch tuneas hee percti⸗
ued that either they had no mae. oz that they bzought him no
moꝛe. And then hee woulde ſay, that her accepted them foz the
vaſſals and lieges ofthe kinge.af Spaine, 'andmademutche of
them: and woulde cauſe it co bee pjoclapmevatſounde otto
trumpettes, that from chence: fozth they woulde take them nos
moze, and that they woulde doe them no maner harme at all:
ſetting it downe foz good andlawfull , all that wharſoruer
had robbed from them. | By 37 | |
And that hee put them in feare with newes ſo abhominable
which hee ſpꝛedde amongſt them, befoze hee receiued them into
the ſafegarde and pꝛotertion of the king, as though that after
thep were retemed vnder the pꝛotection ofthe king, they woulve
not opꝑꝛeſſe them, robbe chem, lay them waſte and deſolace anp
moꝛe, yea and as though he had not deſtroyed them. ä
Afewe dayes after. the king e Emperour of choſerealmes,
named: Atabaliba, came accompanied: with a number off pa-
ther howe ſwozdes did carue, non ſpeares did pearce,n02 hozſes
did runne, no2 who o2 what were the Spaniardes : who if the
diuelles had any money, woulde ſec them ſelues in enquett to
goe robbe them. Pee commeth to the place where chep were,
ſaping : Uhereare theſe Spaniardes Let chem come, J will
notftirre a fooce; till they ſatiffie mee fox my ſubtecces whome
they haue [lapne, and mybojoughs which they haue viſpeopled,
a — The
3


TheSpanith crucites;
The Spanlarves ſet againft him, and flue and infinite


ute of his people : they tooke himails in perſon, who came ca-


wing
—


they condemned him co ber bent


notwithſtanding
altue : baut at che requeſt of ſome certayne; the Captayne cauſey
in co bee ranged : and beeingftrangled, hee was burned,
This vuverſtanding his ſentence


king , ſayde: Wherefore

will you burne mee 4 What treſpaſſe haue I done pee + Div
not pou p}omile mee toſetmee at libertie, if J gaue you the
— 017A mr pu iſed: See⸗
es you will nerdes haue it ſo + ſende mee coyour king of
Spapne:ſpeaking other thinges, ta che great confuſion and de⸗
teſtation ofthe great mongfulneſſe that the Spantardes vſed,
whom in che ende they burned, Pere let be conſidered the right
and title of chis warfare,che immiſoument of this pyince,the ſer⸗


£Fence,andche execution of his death, and the conſcience, where ·


by they poſſeſſe great treaſures , as in deed they haue robbed in
hole realmes from this king and other ſeuerall landes infinite.

As touching the innumerable cruelties,and notable,foz þmiſ-
chiefes and enozmities wichall commicted-in che rooting out of
thoſe peoples by them, who call them ſelues Chziltians: J will
here rebhearſe ſomecertapne , the which afrper of S. Frauncis


oder ſawe at the beginning, and the ſame certified vader his


name and ſigne : ſending them into all choſe quarcers , and as


monglkochersinto thisrealme of Caltile, whereof J recapne u
deln mn tecpung ta che which isis chus wiiteen:


2


The Spaniſh crvelties, | *
of Saint Frauntis, commiſſz*


arke,ofthe oer
friers in inc es of
other of the ſameſozder *


.
firſt ofall,J eyed witneſſe, and
— — of Peru, are a people the molt kinds bear-
ted chat hach been-ſeenamong all the Autan, beeing curtesus


TheSpatuſh craelties,
Allo they bꝛent in Quito Coſopanga, who was gouernout
df all the pzoninces of Quito, which vpon the requeſt co him firſt
made by Sebaſtian of Bernalcaſar Captapne vnder the goucr⸗
nour, was come tothem in peace: and onely becauſe hee gaue
them not golde ſo much as'heedemaunded of him, t hey burned
him with very many other Caciks and mincipall L ozds. And foz
ouche chat J can vuderſtand,che incente ofthe ®paniards was,
that there ſhoulde not bee lefte aliue one Lode in the whole
COUNcrep. $3,951 Mt
Item J certilie, chat the Spantardes caufed to aſſemble a
great number ok che Indians, and locked them vp in thꝛee great
bouſen, as many as coulde be pozed in, and ſetting to fire, they
burned chem all, without that they had done the leaſt thing that
might bee, oz had giuen tothe Spaniſhe the leaſt occaſion chere-
of whatſoeuer. And it came to paſſe, that a pitſt, whois na-
med Dcanna,viewe a young boy out of the fire, in the which het
burned, which per cetuing another Spaniarde tooke from out
of his handen che boy, and flunge ſhim into the middeſt of the
flames, where he was reſolued into aſhes together with others.
The which Spaniarde returning the ſame day to the campe, fell
downe dead ſuddenly , and mine aduite was het ſhould not bee
Item J affirme, to haue ſeene wich myne owne eyes, that
the Spaniſhe haue cutte the handes the noſes , and the eares of
the Indians, and of their women, without any other cauſe oz
purpoſe, ſaue onely that ſo it came into their fancaſie, and that
in ſo many plates and quarters, that it Houlde bee too tedious
to rehearſe, And J hate ſeene, that the Sp aniſhe haue made
rycir Pialtines runne vpon the Andians to retit them in pieces .


And mozeouer. & haue ſeene by them dent ſo many houles and
— iy nethippes, that J am nor able to tell the


number. Alſo it is true, that they violently plucked the little in
fants from the mothers dugges, and taking them by the armes,


did cho we them froni chen asfarre as they cdulde:
wich ocher enoymitten aud crurtittes without any cauſe , whiche
Seren hh ena wou be long


geem,


and that at the very
fewe ofche Spe


02 tenne peeres,
there were not as pet but ver *


.


3 the Whiche countrey hath
5 1 they ercuting = the ſelle ſame
others mor barbarous and cruel


pracciſes,and
Ot a'verttiv from chat dap 'vnco this 1 chere
dath beens deffrajed/anv auge ta deſolatiun moe ſoules
en her harh lettre: and then baue with leſſe reuerente
„ GD Daten: n abo⸗
| Uhevagreatparcofthelinage ofmankinde,
hey haue ſlayue vnto this day in theſe ſame realmes
ä — — mue then foure millions
: Mulm 03 1. 361,219 £1 53; 1 8 373% t 1G
Certayne dayes palled prick rene with
tuned rde


Ls 3.112 Js 13 142 I Wea
be eee * im fas hath beene
oo Bos — againſt all reaſon'and iuſtice, beeing greate

ch{lde as ſhte was,as it was ſaidonely tovexe her huſband


—

Ait d oudde bet expedient ecounce/xhe particularitics
eee baue com-
wirctu nan net daytydoe conunitte m Heru: without all doubt
they ſhoulde bee lo frightfull , and in lo great number, that all
rhat wer haue hitherto ſaide of the other partes of che Indies,
woalde bee ſhadowed:, and it woulne ſerme g ſmall mats
teu m e ee en


10


.. Ofzbenene 1575 an MIT
1,1 #1 ve - Grenada; 1414 61 Cns « C6317 £0; e.


8* are


5 $209, 2101p" ?% Bod 360 277127


— well or golde wol ſtones, which they
rauen 119177: m Nutten 51998 09 q uον — fis en


nene
— — rae ca ie eh he
Na Pens en er


Thic Spaniſbaruelntrr.
him with ſundzie witneſſes, vpon the fact of his flaughters, dil.


bab none, and voeth as pet vnco
Seren een ee eee
ces was read, and is kept incherrecopdes of the counſell ofthe


The witneſſes doe depoſe in the ſame enquirie that the laide
whole: rtalmt wes in pen, the Tudians ſerumg tte pant
ards,giuing them ta-eace ofcheir laboure.,. ans tau ng cou-
tinnaily, audmanring thegrounde,


genen ee ef} auen. g to bs 3000 HAU ha, c
ſubduedto th


Aud all beeing


1 — herchi king hutive bye ar-
— ——
kungofultchaccmmerep 2, ';
uath lencence,” den fin to bee: racked 2
/ >:


= i ET — —— hepia din
<6 . 5 4
_P


this they


ofhigpevple . Fi
if it might haue Neuem


-


-


The Spaniſh crneltles. *
Another time manie Indians beeing come to ſerue the Spa
miardes, and ſeruing them with ſuch humilitte and ſumplicme,
as they are accuſtomev to doe, reputing themſelues aſſurrd: be.
hold . the caprame ofthe towne where they ſerned, who commeth
ly uigdt commanuding chat choſe Andians ſhould be put to the
edgeof the ſwozde,when they had ſupped, and whiles that they
- were afleepe,cakingthetr reſt after the toyle which they ſuſtaw
ned the day time. And this hee did, fox: that it ſeemed him neceſ/
fary to do this maſlarre ca the end to engraue an ami of himſci
in che heartes or ulche peoples ol tint coamriti. Lt
Another time thecaptaine tommaundedto tube an othe of
the Spantardes, to wit, howe many everyone han in his ſer /
nice of the Caciks,andpzincipallLozys;and Jnviãs of the mea:
ner lozt: that mtuntinent they ſhoulde her Maugbt ro the molte
open plate ofthe citie,where he cummaunded that they ſhoulde
be beheaded:thus were there at that time
five hundzedſdules, |
. Pozeouer theſe witneſſes nepoſe
- Pet(ytpzants, thathehadexer


certaine Spaniardes into the P2ouinceofBogata,to bee tut ·
med bythe inhabitants what Loꝛde it was, that was ſueceſſour
vnto the chiefe Lowe;whom he had made to die þcruelb-veach
inchole tonnents ſponen of befozez Abo running along the
eountrie chzoughout ſundzie places. tooke as mand Indians as
be could cume by: Andfoz that he cauld unt learn of them, bat
de was that ſucceededthat Lozde, he mangled off ſome haudes,
be bid caſt others, men and women but who
rend them in peeces. And in this maner haut bern deſtroyrd ve-
ry many Indies, and Jndefſes. One time atthe daurth watch
or the night. he went to duerrunne Caciks oz gouernours ofthe
lande. with many of che Indians, which were in peace,and helde
chemſelues aſlured(fo2 he had ginen them his faith: & alſur ance
chat they ſhoulde receiue no harme no} damage ) vpon crentt


—. — —
woovknife cut ol their ——


bmeaf them picie0) cenpefen bum
eareth by the handling 9fcbole Pakt ocents
Wale is —— Syanilhby force preuailed
the mauncaine :

hem thae thep would —
partesſhoulde not war any longs


ans linted from theit or n deteule, che vile


The Spaniſhcruckiew +»
Spaniarves to take the fontes of the mountaine,and when they
ſhoulde get them to encloſe within chem che Jadians, They ſet
ten like vnto Tigers and Lions, vpon theſe lambes ſo merke,
and put them to the ed ge ofthe woꝛde, ſo long that they were
faine to bzeach and reſt themſelues, And after hauing reſted a
certaine ſeaſon, che captaine commaunded that they ſhoulde kill
and caſt downe from the mountaine, che which was very highe,
the reſidue that were aliue: that which mas dene. And theſe


— witneſſes ſap, that they ſawe as it were acloude of che Indians


Laſt downe from the mountaine, to the number by eſtimation
of ſeuenhundzeth men together, where they fell battered te


peeces. 0 |
atchieue all his great crueitie, they ſearched al the In,


And to
dlans that were hid amongſtthe buſhes: and hee commaunden
to cut ol their heads, at blackes ends: andſo they ſtue them and
ralt them downe the mountaine: et coulde nothee tuntent him
ſelte with thole ſaide chinges ſo cruel] but that her mould make
bimſelle a litle better knuume, angmenting his hoꝛrthle ſinnes,
when as hee cummnunde d that alithe Juvians men and womt,
whichſome p2iuate perfons had taken aliue{fo2 every ant in
thoſe maſſacres is accuſtomed to cull aut ſome one 02 ocher
mankinde and womankind, to the ende co become his ſeruants)
ſhoulve be put into a ſtramen houſe, ſauing and reſeruing chole,
which ſeemed neceſſarie to beeemploped in ear ſeruice, and
chat there ſhoulde be put co fire : chus were there burned fourty
o2 kiftie, Yee cauſedche reſtco bee ſlang to che carrionkinde
dogges, which rende them inpeeces,and deuouredthem,
Another time the ſelfe ſane tyzane went co a Citie called
— —ͤ— — _
diſmembyed dogs, kifteene 82 (wentieLows of
p2tncipal, and cut the handes of a great multitude of men & wo-
men: which ſaide handes hee hanged one by another on a pole,
to the ende che other Jnvians might lee that, which he had dont
———
of hands. He off beſides women and
decipher the


No creature lining and reaſonable, is able to
85 % miſchietes


The Spanish cruelties, -
miſchiefes and cruell dealings ofthis fellowe,
Foz they are wichouenumber,neuer otherwiſe hearve of, noz
fcene : choſe, A meant, which he harh done inthe —
mala, and all about whcre be hath become, ſoz there are a good
many perrs paſſed, in the which be hach bene pzofefſed in the mi⸗
1 renee net

£ a dealings e
flaughters which haue beene committed,auvare pet mn the ſave
Realme of new Grenado, by the captaines themſelues in perſon
and by their conſents giuen vnto all the other tyzancs, waſters,
and weeders of the nature ol man, which were in his company,
and the which hach laid all the countrie wilde & waſte, are ſuche
and ſo exceſſiue, chat if his maieſtte doe not take ſome o2der
therein tn ſometime (albeit that the ſlangbeer and diſcomficure
of þ Indians is done only to bereaue cyfof heir gold che which
they haue noneof, fox they haut ſurrendzevall chat which hey
had) they wil in a bort time make an endofthem ſo in ſuchſoze,
that there will bee no moze Andians to iuhabite the lande, but
— it wpll remaine in a wilderneſſe without bering mann


9 wet muſt note heere the truell and pellilent epzrannie
of cheſe curſed tyzancs, home raging and diueliſh ic hach beene,
chat in the ſpace of cwa oz chyee peeres,ſithence that this realme
hach bene ſirſt viſcouered (which as they ſap both thoſe that haut
beenthere . nd thoſt which vepoſe as witneſſes, was the molke
peopled of inhabitances,aspoſſiblie might bee any Countrie in
the woꝛlde, they haut raſed and emptied it wich flaughters,de-
claring themſeues ſo — —ͤ—e
rent feare of God and the Pꝛinte, that the opinion is, wich-
out the pꝛeſent ſucc our of his Maieſty. to ſtaytheſe vnnatural e
diueliſth wil not remaine as muche as one man
altue, I verily beleueit. m J baue ſeen wich mine own eyes
. — ü a (mall
— whichbomne vpon the
ſatveRealme, of newe Orenado, N IS


Cali, and ther i foure others, which containe moze then 700
leagues of ground, which they haue deſtroped and veſolaced in
the ſame maner ,asthep haue done others, robbing and ſlaying
with toꝛments, and the enoꝛmities afoze ſpoken of, Fo? the land
is very fertile,and thoſe that come from thence now daply, dot
repoꝛt, Þ it is a rutull ching to ſee ſo manie goodly townes bur⸗
ned and lapd deſolate, as they might behold paſſing vp & downe
that way: ſo as chere. here there was wont to be in one towne
a thouſand o2 two thouſand houſeholdes, they haue not found
liftie, and the reſt veterly ranſacked and diſpeopled. And in ſome
quarters they haue found two oꝛ thiee hundzed leagues of lande
diſpeopled and burned, & great cities deſtroyed: And finally,by
chat, chat ſithence into the Realmes of Peru, of the Pꝛouinct
five of Quito, are entred farre into the Countrie ſoze and fel ty⸗
rants, as far as to che ſaiv Realme of Orenado, # of Popayan,
tot Cali by thecoaſt of Carchagene,and Araba, ę other accury
ſed tyzants of Carthagene haue gone to aſſault Quito, and mote
ouer afterwards ofthe riuer ſive of td. John, which is on þ ſouth
ſide, all che whiche haue met to ioyne handes together in this
exployte: they haue rooted out and diſpeopled aboue ſire huts
der leagues of land, with che lolſe of an infinitie of ſoules, do⸗
ing ſtill the ſelfe ſame to the pooze weeches that vemain behind,
howſoeuer innocent they appeareto be.

Thus then is the rule which J ſet down at the beginning, by
them verified: that is, that the tyꝛannie, rage, and vngracioulſ⸗
neſle of che Spanithe, hath alwayes pzoceeved encreaſing in
their crueleie, vunaturalueffe,andmiſchiuoufnes amongſt thoſe
fo (weete lambes. That which is continued at this melent day
in chole Pzoutnces,amongſt other their doings worthy the fire
aud toꝛment, is this which followeth,

After the ends ofche flaughters and maſſacres ofthe warres,
they tying the people into the hozrible bondage aboue ſaide, and
giue them to the commaundment of Dinels, tu one an hundzev
Indians, to another thet hundzed, The chmaunder Diuel com ·
mandech that there come befoze him an hundꝛed Indians, which
n tie amongett them to haue their heads cut off: ſaith vnto che

_ Cher there preſent, J will ſerue pou of the (ame ſauce, if you:


doe not mee good ſerulce, m if ſo be, that you goe out of my light.


Chat fan the honour of God, all they that haue read this peere
el wazke, op ſhallgine it a reading, conſider nowe, uhether this
act, ſo hideous, fell and vanacural, doe not exceede all crueltie
and iniquitie,that map bee imagined, and whecherthe Sp mi⸗
ardes haue any wzong offered chem when a man calleth them
Diuels, whether were better, to giue che Andtãs to keep to the
diuels in hel, ; the Spaniards which art ar che Juden

After this A will rehearſe another diueliſd part, che which J
cannot tell whecher it be leſſe cruell g deuome of manhood, chen
are thoſe of ſauage beaſtes:chat is, that the @paniſh which are
in the Jadies,doe keepe certaine dogges moſt raging, taught
and trayned wholy to the purpoſe, to kill and rende in peeces
the Judias, That let all choſe þ are true chniſtians, ven, and alſo
thole which are not ſo, behold, if euer thert were ths like chinge
in che whole woꝛlde: chat is, to feedchole dogs.they led about w
them where ſoeuer chey goe a great nſiber of Indians in chatues
as ifthey were hogs,and kill them, making a ſhambles al mans
fleſh, And the one ol them will ſap to another, Lend mee aquar-
ter of a villaine, to giue mp dogs ſome meate, vutill J kyil one
nexte, altogether as if one ſhoulde bozxowe a quarcer of an hog
02 mutton, bee others which goe foozth a hunting in
the mozning with their curres,the which being returned to ear,
if another him: Howe haue pee ſped to day,” they aun-
ſwere, verp well: fo; J haue killed with my dogs to day, fifteene
q twentie viliacoes, All theſe Diabolicalldoings, with others
like haue beene pꝛoued in the ſutes of law, that the tyꝛants haue
had ane of them againſt another. Js there any caſe moe ouglie
92 bunacurall; $31 . —

J will here now depozt me ofthis diſcourſe,vacill ſuch tane,
p chere come other newes of things, in vngraciouſnes mode no-
toꝛious and remarkable if ic ſo be,p there can be any moze grees
uous)02 vntill ſuch time as wee map returne thither to beholde
them our ſelues anewe,as wee behold chem foz the ſpace of 42.
| peeresconciugallp wich mine owne eyes: Pꝛoceſting in a good

conſcience belone God, that I an and J holde ic foz

a 24 certaine


TheSpanith cruelties.
certalne, chat the damages and loſſes ar? ſo great, wich the vis
ſtructions andouerthzowes of Cities, maſſacres and murders;
withrhe cruelctes;hozridleans ougly, wich the rauins, iniqui-
ties and robberits, all the which things haue beene executed as
mongeſt thoſe people, and are yet dayly connnitted in thoſe
quarters: that in all che things, which J haue ſpoken and deti⸗
phered, as I was able che neereſt to the truth: J haue not ſaide
one of a thouſande,of chat which hath beene done, and is dayly
à doyng at this pzeſent, be it that vou conſider the qualitie, oꝛ bee
it, that pe conſider the quantitie.

And to the end that all Chiſtiaus haue the greater compaſſi⸗
on of thoſe pooꝛe innocents and that they complaine with mee
the mote their perdition and deſttuction, and that they deteſt the
greedinelle, loſtineſſe, and felneſſe ofthe @paniſh : chat all doe
holde it fo2 a moſt vndoubted veritie, with all chat hath beene a⸗
boue ſaive, that ſithence the firſt diſcouery of the Indies vntyll
nowe, the Indians neuer did harme vnto the Spaniſhe in any
place whereſocuer, vntill ſuche time, that they firfte receiued
wongs and miuries, being robbed and betrayed : but indeede
did repute them to be immoꝛtall, ſuppoſing them to bee deſcen
ded from heauen, and they receined them fox fuche, vntill fuche
time as that they gaue it fozth manifctly to be knowen by their
Botngs,what they were, and whereto they tenden.

J will adioyne heerevnta this, that from the beginning vn-
to this houre, che Spaniardes haue had no mote care to pzocure
tha: vnto choſe people ſhoulde bee preached the faith of Jeſus
Che. chen as il they had been curre dogs, oz other beaſtes: but
in lien thereof, which is much mozſe. they haut foꝛbidden by ex-
meſſe meanes the religious men to doe it, fo2 berauſe that that
ſeemed vn to chem an hinder ance likelyto bee, to the getting of
thefr golde, and thele riches which their auarice foꝛeg lutte d in.
And at thts day there is no moꝛe knowledge of God thzoughout
the Indies. to wit, whether hee bee of tymber, of the ayꝛe, o the
earth,chen chert was an hundzed peeres agoe, exc newe
Spaine whether the religrous men hane gone, which is but a
kite coꝛuer of the Judies : and ſo are they periſhed, and doe pe-
xiſhe all without faith. and without ſacra ——

| 2 er


ments.


rcdeemed by che blood of Jeſus Chzft, ſhoulde not periſhefog
euermo2e without remedie, hut that they might knowe their
creato} and bee ſaued : alſo fn che care andcouipaſſion that J
baue of mp countrep, which is Caſtile, cochecude that God de»
ſtrop it not fo2 che great ſinnes thereof, the
fapth aud his honour,and again am neighbours: fo) certaine
„22 touched with
compaſſion of theafflictions aud calamitiezof others, followers
——— — ER
not (6 ſoone haue done uall actupatians;
J acchieued this treatiſe and ſummarit at Ualencia , the 3.of
December, 15.42. the fojce beemg mouncedro the benden type
of extremitie,and all the violences, tpzannlcs; deſolations; ani
guithes,andcalamities aboueſayde, ſpjeadoucr alt the Andies;
where ther are any Spantardes, although they bee moze cruell
in one part thenthey bee in an other, and moze ſauage, and moze
1:

Mexico and her confines are leſle cuil intreatto. In truth,
chere th ey tan not exerute their outragegopenly, loꝭ that thet
and not elſe where, there is ſome fozme of iuſtice , as lender as
it is. Foꝝ becquſe that chere alſo they kill them with diuc liſhe
tributes: Jam in good hope. that the Emperour and Ring of
S payne our liege Soucraigne i ome, dun Char ita che ũſte of
that name, who beginneth to haue vaderſtanding of the miſchie⸗
ueg and treaſous that thert haue betu, an ut cemmuted 4.
gaiuſt choſe pooze peepit, egainſt the will of Sn. and dis owne,
(toꝛ they haue alwayts cunmngly concealed che crueth from
bum) will rocte out thoſe euilles, and cake ſome oder fen this
newe wo} lde that God hath giuen him, as vato one that loucth
AD aint ——— wh — the be
all, God vou to

en e r Thale


P3


| TheSpanihcrnelties,


matt opel Gule um. 0
- After hauing couched tu wniting iht „J vuderffood
of certayne lues and ozvinaunces, his Pateſtie hath


made about this time ac Barcellone, Anno. 154 2. in the moneth
of Nouember,and the ptere following at Mamill: by che which
endinaunces, chere is oꝛder let downe, as the caſe them ſermeth
to require: to the end co cut off the miſcheieues and ſinnes whi-
che are committed againſt God and our neighbours, tending co
the verer rutnt perdition ofthis nem woꝛlu. Vis Maieſtie hath
made theſe lawes,after hauing holdẽ manp aſſemblies of perſons
of authoꝛitie, ot learning and conſciente, and after hauing hav
diſputations and conłerences in Ualladolyd:and finally with the
aſſent and aduiſe of al tholt others which haue gtuen their avuiſe
in miting, m haue been lounde ntereſt appꝛoching vnto the
law of Jeſus Chiit ; and wichall fret from the cozrupcion and
fople of chetrealies robber from the Indians :c<e which trea⸗
ſures haue ſapledthe handen and unich moze the ſoules ol many,
ouer whom thoſe treaſures aud auaxite haue got the maiſterie,
and where hence hach pꝛocerdedche blinding, which hach cauſed
ſo to marre all without remoꝝſe. Thele lawes being publiſhed,
the creatures of thoſe tyꝛantes, who then were at the court, mem
put ſundꝛie copyeschereof{(fo2 it grieued them at the hearts: fo
that it ſeemed them that therebychere was a done ſhut vp vnto
them agaynſt their rauine and extortion afoze rehearſed) and diſ⸗
perled them tuto diuers quarters ot the Indies. Thoſe which had
the charge to robbe, roote out, and conſume by their tyꝛannies,
euen as they had neuer kept any good oder but rather diſozder,

ich as Luſifer himſeife might haue helde as they read thoſe co⸗
pies befozeche nem indges might come to execute their charge,
knowing it (as it is ſayd, and that very crediblie ) by thoſe who
vntill chis time haue ſuppoꝛted and mayntayned their crimes
and outrages to be likely that ſuch execution ſhoulde bee vſed of
choſe laws: they ran into a mutinie in ſuch wiſe, as that when
the good Judges were come to doe thetr duties, they aduiſen
with them ſelues ( as thoſe which had oft the feare and loue of
God) to caſt off alſo all ſhame, and obentence whichthey owe to
the king, and ſo tooke vnto them the name ol open and arrant
0 trap⸗


Ip this pete 1442+ are committed at


eg by n
ittev that they ſhoulde bee the


. andat theinſtant
perſonall
That which


moze,ſome leſle:
—


3


"The Authour his wordes fard er to
ing Philip then at the ume of
: Ker thereaf Prince af
— 1006 . * 771 Secu.


of a Muſſiue or ferter ſent, written by one,who him 2
was a partie in theſe voiages recounting the works the
which a did, and conſented to the dooing in
- the counerey, all the way as hee And albeit ſo, thatthe
faide miſſiue a.) aries binding in one booke with other
papers, the binder eyther erlorgot, orloſtaleafeor two : not ·
withſt:nding,foraſmuth as the ſaid miſſiue contayned things
fearefull,cuento aſtoniſhement, the which one of them thee
had done them had given me : and that Thad them all in my
ee I thought good to preſent you therwithall,ſach as
it isnowe, hwithoot beginning or ending. For that
thisfragment rem ug of the whole is full of notable
pointes : and therefore being reſolued that it ſhoulde bee ſo
ted,truſting that it will cauſe no leſſe compaſſ.on and
otrot in your highneſſe minde, then the other matters afore


12 E with a deſire forthwith to prouide for the res


ns hereafter rmmediarly is apart


The Miſſuue.
HERD Te gau licence to put them to the Chaine and
For 1 a bondage : That which chey div: and the Cap-
F er 1


we


1


in che high wayes. And
and fro the coaſt, laden


was the death b
one that arriued at the very coat eſcaped
ercefſiue heate ofthe countrey.
After this following the ſame
myudia was gone , bee


death : by


fuch a one had two handed,
according to


to warde young childden and
— — in
garners where the


Mahis in poulſion.
Hee ſuffered to bee done great outrages ,
teepe wichthe whichthey Bott and


* 2
*
8


The Spaniſh cruelties.


been loftahoneanhmd)ed thouſande head of cattell. By occaſi-
an whereofalſo, the countrey came into a greatnecefficie : the
natiue ofthe lande miſerablie dying of famine, And Quito,
which was furniſhed of ſo great ſtoze of Mahis, that it can not
bee well ſpoken: was bythis meanes ſo aſſaulted with famaine,
that a ſtrike oz buſhell of Pahis, was rapled to the piſe of 10.
duckets,and a ſheepe to as muche.
After that the ſayde Captaine was returned from the coaff,
hee determined to depart from Quito, and to goe ſeeke the Cap⸗
tayne John de Ampudia, leauing thereto moe chen two hundꝛed
of loote men and hozſe men, amongſt whome were a great many
inhabitauntes ofthe titie ol Quito. UAnto thoſe inhabitaunts the
captaine gaue licence to carrie with them the Cacikes, that wert
eſcheatedtheminſſharing, with as many Indians as they would,
That which they did and Alfonſa Sanches Nuita caried fozth
with him his Cacike, wich moe then au hundꝛed Indians beſids:
and in like maner Peter Cibo and his couſin; and they led out
moge then an hundzed and fiftie with their wines: and ſundꝛie al⸗
ſo ſped out their childzen, becauſe that in a maner tuery one died
fo hunger, Alſo Moꝛan inhabitant of Popaian.caried out moe
then two hunded perſons. And the like did all che reſt, citizens
and ſouldiers,cuery one after bis abilitie: the ſouldiers crauing
that they might haue licence giuen them to captiue thoſe Indi⸗
ans men and women, which they carried foꝛth: the which was
graunted vnto them vntyll the death of the ſayde captiues, and
thole deceaſed, to take as many moꝛe: fox if the Indians were
ſuhiectes athis Maieſtie. ſo likewiſe wert the Spamardes that
m_ the warreg as well as they.
;; Andafter this maner departed the ſapde Captapne df Qui⸗
gung tu a citie called Otaba, che which he held at that hourt
Bann and demanded of the Cacike, chat there ſhoulde bee
five hundged men to lead to the warres: which were
Sur ren g EI perlous ofthe Fudians.Yee


The Spaniſh crueleies;


Thus carried hee his ſonkdiers ſomepitiniond in chayniy,
and ſome tn caardes. When they departrd out ofthe }91onince |
of Quito, they carried out moe then ſire thonſande Judians men
and — ok al choſe there neuer returned home into their
countrey twentie perſons. Fo? they dpedall chozough che great
and exceſſiue trauell, whit bchey made themendure in choſe tao.
ling countreys contrary to their nature, 'At happened at that
tyme that one Alfonſo Sanches,whom the ſuibe Captayne ſent
fo2 chieſtayne ouer a certayne number of men into a uc
there, met with a good company of women, and poung boyes
laden with victuals: who ſtayed wayting fon them without mo⸗
uing from the plate to giue them ol that which they had and ha⸗
uing ſo done, che captaine commaunded that they ſhould bee pu
to the ſharpe of the l woꝛde. There happened here a mayuailous
thing: which was that a ſouldier ftriking an Indeſſe woman hin
ſwode hake a two in the middeſt, at the firſt blowe, and at the
ſeconde blowe there remayned nought in his handes, but the
pomell hauft without that the woman was hurt. And an other
ſouldier, willing to ſtrike another Indeſſe woman, with aſquare
dagger he had, che dagger bjake at the firſt choppe,the lengthof
foure fingers, and at the ſeconde, there remaxncd vnto hun no
moze ſaue the hauft.

At the ſame tyme the ſapde Captayne peeded fooꝛth of ui⸗
to, and dꝛeme out a great number of the naturallinboznes, vn;
marriyng them, and giuing their young wiues vnto his Indians
whom hee ledde along, and the others wiues hee gaue to others
which remayned in the citie,fo2 that they were tos olde.

There followed out of Quito a woman with a licle childe
in her armes, crying after him, and en treating him. that her
buſbande might nat bee foxcedco goe with him, fo2 that ſhee
had thiee little childzen , te whiche thee coulde not nouriſhe


hun
but were ready to dye fo} — : 3 —


And as gaue her
art fire. her returned the ſeconde time with greater crics, ſay⸗
*


2 | "an


-


 fruices, Shoztly after alſoallthe


_
. — -
FE «. % A »
* ***
72 KD
.
3 3
.
1
.


| | The Spaniſh cruelties.
And ſetiugthattbe Captapue gane her the xtpulſe. and that
bee woulde nocreſtozeher, ber huſhande: ſhee beat the childes
þead-agayult the tones, and ſiue it.

- Jeeametopaſle alſo, chat at the tyme that the ſapde
Capcapue came into the pzouice of Lili, to atowne called Palo =
neere bntache great riuer, where hee founde the Captayne
John de Ampudia, which was gone befoze to diſcouer, anvpa-
eiũe the countrey +the ſaide Ampudia kepte acitie by him p20»
uided af a garriſũ inthe name ofhis maieſty,aud of the marques
Frauncis of Pizarro: and had ſet ouer them fo2 gouernours oze
dinarie, one Petre Solano of Quennoues, and 8. counſellours,
Fall the reſt ofthe countrey was in peace ę ſhared out amongſt
them. Andas be knew that the ſayd captaine was ta the ſaid ti⸗
ner, he came to ſee him with a great number ofche inhabicances
ofthecountrey, and peaceful Indians, laden with victuals and

neighbour Indians came ta
fee him. bꝛinging him food, There were the Indians of Xamun-
di, and of Palo, and of Soliman, and of Bolo,

Nome becauſe that they 2ougheno Pahls which he mould
baue, hee ſent a great number of Spaniardes with their Indi⸗
ans to go ſtarch m Pahis : commaundingthem to bzing ſome
whereſoetter they founde any. So went they to Bolo, and to Pas
to, and founde the Juvians men and momen in their houſen in
— 7 ra ne ——.—
tooke them and robbed their Pahis, ide and couerings,
and all chat chey had, and bounde many,


he Spaniſh cruelties.
kings maicſice olftnded: and bythis means the countrieres:
mataed diſpeopled:foꝝ p che Olomas v the Panipos then tns⸗
mies which are moticaine people,  warltke,deſcended vayiy to
take and tob them, when they percetued the citie and places of
their abode left deſtitute. And amongſt them, hee who was the
ſtronger, did eate vp his fellowe, fo; all dyed fo2 famine, This
done, the capcain? came to the citie of Ampudis,where hee was
receiued fo2 generall, and ſeuen dapes after from thence hee vos
parcedto goe cowards the harbour of Lili and Pcti, with me
then two huudzed hozlimen and footemen , After this, that ſaive
is che ſatde chiefe gouernour ſent his capcaines of one ſide and
ocher,to bidcruell battayle to the natiue Judiis:flaping a great
number ofthem as wel men as wamen: burning allo their hou⸗
ſes, and ſpoling their goods, This indureda good many vayes,
And che ſaide captaine was gone towardes acitie named ct,
withallche Indtans whome chey had taken in Lilt, wirhont res
leaſing any one: and beeing come to the ſaide Yee, hee ſent in
continent Spaniardes to pilladge, take and ſlap all the Javians
men and women that they coulde take: chus they burned moe
then an hund ed. From this place they goe to Citie calleu
Tukilicui, from whence the Cacike ol the plare perded fon
incontinent in peace, a mumber of Fndians going befoze hin.
Che captaine demaunded golde of him and or his Indians. The
Cacik cold him chat hee had but a ſmall deale. and that whiche
be had ſhould be giuen him: & immediatly al began to giue him
all chat they had, TUhereupon the ſayde captaine gaue vato
euer y ol chem a ticket, wich che name ol the ſaide Indian fo2 a
teftimoniall that hee had giuen hin golve : affirming that het
Which Houlde haue neuer a ticket, {hould bee caſt to the dogs
to bee tenoured, becauſe hee gaue him no golde. Uhereupos
the Indians foz feare þchep were put in, gaue hum all tte gold
that they were able: & thoſe which had none fled into che moun⸗
taines and other townes fon feare to be ſlaine,Byreaſon whers
of periſheda great number of the natiue inhabitants ol che coils
trie. And ſhortly after the ſafd captaine commanvedche Cariks
to ſende two Indians to another citie named. Dagna, to null


e come in peace, and hm golde in as
Senrchat they ſhoulde com 3 hing - g


ce. And comming to another citie, he ſent that night mas
ny Spaniardes to take the Jndians, and namely of Tultlicui.
So as thepbzought the next moꝛrow aboueanhundyed perſons:
and all thoſe which could beare burdens,they cooke them fo2 the
ſelues, and fo their ſauldiers, and put them cothe chaine, wher⸗
of they dyed all. Andthe ſaide captaine gaue the little childzen
vnto the ſaid Cacik Tulilicui chat hee ſhould eate them: and in
truth the ſkinnes of thoſe childꝛen are kept in the houſe of the
faideCacik Tulilicui full of aſhes: and ſo departed hee from
thence without an interpꝛeter, and went towardes the Pꝛouin⸗
ces of Calile, where he ioyned himſel fe vnto the captame John
de Ampudia, who had ſent him to diſcouer another way, dooing
boch of them great outrages, and much miſchie le vnto che inha⸗
bicancs ol che countrie where they became. And the ſaid John
de Ampudia came vnto a Citie, che Cacik and Loꝛde whereof
called Bicacur had cauſed to make certaine ditches to deſende
bimſelfe, and chere fell into the ſame two hozſes, the one ol An⸗
tonie Rodondos, che other of Marc Parqueſis. That of Par»
cos Marquis died, che other not. Foz which cauſe the ſaid Am
pudia cummaunded to take all the Indians men and women
chat might be: Andtherupon tooke t laid together moꝛe then an
bund2ed perſons, whome they caſt aliue into thoſe ditches and
due chem, and bꝛent withal moze then an hundzed houſes in the
{aid cicie . And in that maner met in a great Citie, where with ·
out ſommoning (the Indians being at peace, and without anye
ſpokeſman to goe betweene them, )cheyiſlue with their ſpeares
a great number of them, making on them mozcall warre. And
as it is ſaid,ſoone after they were met the ſaide Ampudia tolde
the Captame what hee had done in Pitaco, and howe hee caſt ſo
manp into the ditches: and the ſapd captaineaunſwered, that it

was well done, and that he fon his part had done as much at the
riuer of Bamba when hee eutred the ſame, which is in the Pꝛo⸗
uince of Quito, and that hee had flong into the ditches moe then
two hundꝛed perſons, and there they ſtayed warring on all the
countrie,Soone aſter hee entred into the Pꝛouince of Bitu, oz
Anzermaz m making cruell warte with fire and blood till chey
cane


The Spaniſh cruekties7 |
rante as farre as vnto the ſalthouſes. Andfrontchenceheefent
Frauncis Garcia befozehim to pillavge,who made cruelwarre
on the nacurall inhabicanrs of che Countrit as hee had done bes
foze him. The Indians came unto him two and two, making
ſignes chat they demaunded peace on the behalfe of the whole
Countrie: alleadging that they woulde alooꝛd him, all that hee
coulde reaſonably demaund, were it golde, women, oꝛ victu⸗
als, only that they woulde not kill chem, as indeede it was a
troth. Foz themſelues afterwardes confeſled it to be ſo. But the
ſaide Frauncis Garcia, bid them get them packing: Telling
them mozeouer that they were a ſozt of dzunkardes, and that he
vnder ſtood them not, and lo returned hee to che place where the
aide Capcaine was, and they made acomploc, to ouerrunne all
the Pzouince,making cruell warre on all the Countrie,in ſpot-
lmg,rodbing,anv{laying all: and wich che fouldiers,which het
bꝛoughe with him dꝛewe thence moe chen two thouſand ſoules,
and all thoſe dyed in the chaine. Befoze departing the place
which he had peopled.chey flue moe then flue hundꝛed perſons,
And ſo returned to the Pꝛouince of Calili. And by the way if
any Inde 02 Indeſſe were wearp, in ſuchſaz that they could not
paſſe any further, then did inconcinently head them, paring it off
from the ſhoulders enen with the chaine to the ende not to take
the paines co open the locke thereof ; and to the end that others
which went the ſame way ſhoulde not make wiſe to be ſicke, and
by this meanes dyed they all: and in the high wayes were lefte
all thoſe people whichhe made his purchaſe of out of Quito, e
of Juto, and of Quilla Cangua. and of Para, and of Dopapan,
and of Lili andi Cali, andof Knzerma, and a great number
of people dyed. Alſo immediately vpon them returne vnto
che great Citie, they entred tuts it ſlaying all that thep could:
taking in that day moe then thee hundeth perſons.

Pee ſent from the Þzouince of Lili, the ſaide Captaine
ohn de Ampudia, wich very manye ſoulviers vnto the lod-
gvnges and peoplen placts f Lili: to the ende that they
thoutde take nl the Judes amn Indeſſes they coulde: Aud
that they [ſhoulve tying chem vuto him to ſerue fo} *


x Speniſhcroelties.
for becauſe that al thoſe which he bzought him bekoze time from
Anzerma & from Alli, were dead,whiche were great numbers,
And che ſaive John ve Ampudia bzoughe moe then athouſands
perſons , andſlue very many. The captaine thus tooke as many
as he needed to ſerue his turne, and gaue the reft vnto the ſoul-
diers, which confined them to the chapne in whiche they dyed.
Oo diſpeopling the ſaid citie of Spauiar des and inboznes of
the countrie, both in ſo great a number, as appeareth by the few»
neſſe ofthe kalke that are remanent: he deparced thence to got
to Popapan, ſ left in the way a Spaniarde named Martine A-
guitr, who was noc able to follow the reſt. And beeing come to
Popayan,he placed there a garriſon, and began to root out and
rob thoſe Indians there, in the ozder that he had kept tels where.
And hee erected there a mynt ropall, melting all the golde het
coulde come by, with all that, chat John de Anzpuptahad befoze
became vntohim,and without keeping any ather audit oz recko
ning. and without giuung any part to any ſouldier, taking the
whole to his owne vſe, except a little as came in his headto giue
vnto ſuch as had loft cheyz hoꝛſes. And this dont, bereauing the
kings Pateſtie of his fiſt part, ſaid he went to Cuſto, thereto
giue in his account and audit unto the gouernour, But in deede
he went to Quito taking by the wap very many Indians, men
and women, which all dyed by che wap, o ar the place at Quito.
Duer and beſides that, he alteren the coyne royall of che mynt,
which he had uiade. Here is tobe remembzed a mand, which this
man ſpake ofhimſelfe,as one not ignozanc ot ſo many euils any

ee

ap. and heere e

ſhall ſap, This way went a Ty1anc |

Your highnes may know and be well aſſured chat theſe entries
and aſſaalts made vnto theſe realmes and this maner ofviſiting
the Andians, which liued in ſecuritie in their regions, and the
vngraciouſneſſe which he did in choſe ſame, haue dern pꝛactiſen
and executed by the Spantards, which haue alwapes followey
che ſame traine andmaner of doing, from the time that they ſirſt


- to diſcouer vato this preſent day tgoughout all the Aw


8 tt. „ Mi Poon Acc Rm nw an_-=*


To the Reader,
Mong divers the remedies by Fryar de la


. ] Caſas Biſhop of the royal townecalled Che-
. propounded in the aſſembly of ſundrie
Ty prelates named Parſons, by his maieſties cõ-
OL AN) [aandement gathered together in therowne
of Valladolid the yeereof ous Lotd 1 542 for

order and retomauion to bee obſerued in the Jadies 3 the cighe
in order was this inſuiag, which conſiſteth vpou twentie reaſons
& motions, whereup6 he did cõclude, 7 bat the Indies ong bt not
ts be giuen to the Spaniardes in Commendam, fee farme, or
wvaſſelage neither under any other tule whatſoener : if his mas
ieſtie will according to his alefare eaſe them of ſuch tyranmes
and loſſes 4s they doe ſuſteme deltwering them as it were out of
the Dragons throate:leaſt they doe wholy conſume and ſlay the,
& ſo all that world remame deſart & voide of the naturall me
babitants wherewith we baue ſcene it repleniſhed, |


He eight remedie, is among all other principall and moſt in

force,as without which all the reſt are to go purpole, for
that they all haue relatio n therunto,as every motion to his proe
per end, in whacfocuer toucheth ot is of any import2uoc= vote
your Maieſtie which no man can expreſſe: in as uch as therup-
on dependeth at the lcaſt che whole loſſe or preſetuation of the
Iodies. And the remedic that 1 Peale of is this, that your Maie-
ſtie do decermio, decreegedm ard, & ſolẽnely in your ſoveraigne
Courts ordeia by pragmaticall ſactions & royal ſtatuts pall the
Indies as well alreadic ſubducd,as heerea...cr to bee ſubdued, may
bee inſerted, reduced, and incorporate into the reyalcrowne of
Caſtile c Leos, to be holden in chief of pour maicſlie as free ſub /
ies & vaſlals ,as they are. Likewiſe that they bee not giver: in
commend vnto the Spaniards; but that it ſtand as an inuiolable
conſtitution, determination and royalilawe, that they never, nei ·
cher at this timo, neither hereafter io time to come, may bee


alienated or taken from the (aids royall cd Vn, neither that they

bee giuen, commanded Jemiſed in fee fame, by depoſt, comman-
dement or alienatiõ, either ynder any other title or maner what
ſoeuer, aad bee diſmembred from the royall crawne, for any
whatſoever theferuice or deſart of any, either ypon any neceſ-
fitie that may happen, or for any cauſe orcolqurwharſocuer that
may be pretended, For the inuiolable obſer Non, or cftabliſhe.
ment of which law, your maĩeſtie ſhall formally ſweare by your
faith, and on your worde and royal crowne, and by all other ſa-
cred thinges, whereby Chriſtian Princes doeuiſnally ſweare, that
at no time neſther your ſelſe, neither your ſueceſſours in theſe
10, Dominious, or in the Indies ſo farte as in you ſhall lie, ſnal
reuok e the ſame: and you ſhall further ſet downe in expreſſe
wordes in your royall will and teſtament, that this decree be
euer kept, mainteined, and vpholdentalſo that ſo fatre as in your
ſelf or in them ſhal lie, they ſhallc6firme and continue the ſame
And for porofe of the neceſſitie hereof, there bee tweatie reaſons
to be alleadged:out of which twentie we haue draweu and put
in writing ſo many as may ſceme to ſerue to our pupoſe.


Extratt out o f the ſecond reaſon,


r Top Spaniardes through their great auarice and couetouſnes
to get, doe not permit any religious perſons to enter into
their townes and holdes which they poſſeſſe, alleadging that they
receiue double loſſe by them. One and the principallis, that res
lugious perſons do keepe the Indies occupied when they gather
them togethar to their Sermons, ſo as in the meane time their
wor ke is omitted, while the Indians being idle, labour not i yea,
it hath ſo fallen out, that the Indians being ia the Church at the
Sermon, the Spaniarde comming in ia the face of all the people,
hath taken fifrie,or a hundred, or ſo many as he hath needed to
carty his baggage and ſtuffe, and ſuch as would not goe, he hath
loden with ſtripes ſpurning them foorth with kis feete, thereby
to the great griefe both of the Indians and of the religious per-
ſons troubling & moleſting all that were preſent, & ſo defeating
mae al of che beneſt of their ſaluatis, Theit oder hinderance that

N FRE


they fayalicydoeſultcine, is chat after the LIodisti ire ti chi &
deteme Chriſtiads, they tale vppon them as maſters / pretending
more knowledge then they haue, & therefore will not be ſo ſer-
uiceable as afore, | |

The Spaniards require no more of the Indians but authority
to commaund them, and that they worſhip them as Gods.
The Spaniards openly and of ſerpurpole,do hinder the courſo
of the goſpel, and keepe thgJndians from Chriſtendome,

Sometime itfalleth ſo oi that a towne of borow isgiuen bee
eweene three or foure Spamiardes, to one more, to another
leſſe, ſo as ſometime one hath for his portion the hufband,ano-
cher the wife, and the third the childre,as they were (wine, Thus
doe they poſſeſſe the Indians, One appointeth them to labour a
peece of lande: another ſendeth them to the mines loaden like
beaſtes: another hyreth them by two and two as they were
moyles to carry burdens thirtie, fortie, fiftie, a hundred or two
hundred miles out right, And this haue we ſeen to be a daily vie:
heereofcommeth,ic that the Indians cannot heare Gods word,
or bee inſtructed in Chriſtian faith: they make them of free me
very ſttange bondſlaues. They haue ſubuerted and diſpetſed
great townes, and a whole worlde ofpeople, ſo as they haue not
left any houſes ſanding together, no not ſo much as the children
wich the fathers. The Spaniards make no more account, neither
Raue any more regard ofconuerting the Indians, then if al thoſe
reaſonable ſoules ſhouldperiſhe with the bodies, and were not
hereafter to receiue immortall lite, gloty, ot paine, no mote chen
beaſtes,


Out of the thirde reaſon,

He Spaniards arecharged to inftrud che Indians in our ho-

1 tycatholikefaith; whereupon on a time hen weexzmined

Toh Colmencre of S. Marthe, i fantaſſic al ignorant, and ſoo-
liſn man, v ho had gotten a great cownein commendam, and had
a charge of ſoules, he could not tell how so ble ſſe himſelſe: and
a ing him what doctrine he taught the Todians cõmitted to his
oharge, he ſaid he gane chẽ to the diuell: alſo that it was 9
. gout Oz tor


for hins to ſay Per ſquim ſaocl in Crucer, Howe can the Spanis
acdes chat traualle to the Indies,howe noble or valiant ſo euer
they bee, haue any care of the ſoules, when the molt of them
are ignorant of their Creede aud ten commandements, & kuow
not the matters perteining to their o wne ſaluatios, neither doe
erauaile to the Iadies for any other purpoſe but to ſatis ſie their
owne deſires and couetous affeddions, being for the moſt Parte
vicious, corrupt, vnhoneſt, and diſordinate perſons : ſo as he that
would way them in an equal ballance, & compare them with the
Jadians, ſhovulde findethe Indians without comparifon , more
v2reuous and holy then them, For the Indians what infidels ſoe -
uer they bee, doe neuercheleſſe keepe them to one and their own
wife, as nature and neceſſitie teacheth, and yet we ſee ſome Spas
piarde haue foureteene or more, which Gods commandementes


do forbid, Tue Indians deuoure no mans goods, they doe no


man wrong: they doe not vexe, trouble, or ſlay anywhere them
ſelues doe ſee the Spaniard es commit all fianes,iniquities, and
HUG can commit againſt all equitie and iuſlice.
To bee briefe, the Iadians doe not beleeue any thing, but doe
mocke at all that is ſhewed t hem of God, beeing in true ch fully
tooted in this opinion of our God, ch at he is the worſt, the moſt
vniuſt, and the moſt wicked of all Gods, becauſe he hath ſuch ſers
vants:alſo concerning your maieſtie, they thinke you the moſt
vaiutt and croell of all kinges,becauſe you doe both ſende thither
and keepe heere ſuch euill ſubiectes, ſuppoſing that your maieſtie
doth feed ypon humane fleſh and blood, We know theſe things
to be very new and ſtrange to your highnes, but yet there they
be very vſuall and auncient. Many like matters which with our
eyes we haue ſcene, might we ſpeake of, but they would be offens
fiue to your maieſties eares, and would beſides feare men, forcing.
the to M onder that euer God ſtaicd ſo long from plaging Spaine
io the bottomleſſe pit. This title, to giue the Iudians to the Spa-
nia tds i ncomeda, was neuer invented to any other end but only
to finde occaſion to briug them into bondage, One Spaniard be-
ing Lorde, or hauing the charge of ſome rowne or village, will
do more harme by his example and wickedlife, then a hundred


good rcligious perſons can do good by edifing or coauerting.
| RET TI.


n


*,y Ay CW. 8


Out of the fourthreaſan.


2 Spaniardes hauing authoritie to commaunde, or parti.
cular intereſt in the Indies, cau not by reaſon of their great,
eouetouſnes abſtaine from affliing,troubliog,dilquieting,vex. +
ing, or oppreſſing the Indians, taking away their goodes,landes, |
wiues, or children, and yſing among them many-other kindes of |
iniquitie, ſor the which theyxcan haue no redreſſe, ſanclion, or
warrant at your Maictties chieſe iuſlice, becauſe the Spaniardes
doe make them afraide: yea ſometimes doe kill them, leaſt they
ſhoulde complaine, as wee haue had certaine notice: and there ·
vpon it is euident, that they can haue no reſt or quiet, to tende to-
matters pertainipg God, but doe ſuſtaine a thouſande lets, ans
guiſhes, tormentes, ſorowes, afflictions, heauineſſes, and cares,
hating your Maieſtie, and abhorring Gods lawe, which they
finde ſo heauie, bitter, and intollerable , as alſo your Maieſties
yoke and dominion ſo inſupportable, iyrannous, worthie to bee
reiected and caſt off, that they curſe God and fall into deſperatis
on, attributing to him all the aforeſaide euils, becauſe that vnder
the colour and title of his lawe, they do receive ſuch miſhappes,
which hee doth beare withall, and doth not correct or chaftice
thoſe which boaſting to be his ſeruanntes , doe put them to all
this. They doe night and day mourne after theirgods , thin-
king them to bee better then ours at whom they ſuſlaine ſuche
harmes, while contrary wiſe of their owne they reape there ſo
many commodities: and there is nothing that croubleth them ſo
much as the Chriſtians,


Out of the fifth reaſon.


\ a 7 Ecan ſhewe to your Maieſtie, that the Spaniardes |
/ have within 38. or 40.yeeres flaine of iuſt ccompe, 1

aboue 12. Millions of your ſubiectes : Iwill rt ay howe migh · b

uly this worlde of people migh haue mii tiplied. This eouatiey
| 03 being,


being the fert Jeft;wherher for cattel,or mankinde, that is in the
votlde: the ſoile beipg for the moſt part, more temperate and fa-
uourable to humaine generation. All theſe iunumetable perſons,
and all theſe people haue the Spaniards ſlaine, to the end to beare
ſway, gouerne, & cõmaund ouer the reſt; & when in iniuſt wars
they haue ſlaine them, then doe they vſe the reſt, who iuſſly haue
withſtood them, in drawing gold & filuer, yoking them together
like beaſts, to make them carry their burdens, hiting thẽ & bur-
dening them with all that they can gaine, and liue or die it is a
one to them, ſo that they may teape any benefite or coine. I ſpeak
but the truth, and yet do leaue out much vnſpoken of that all the
world knoweth : and wWhoſoeuer woulde other wiſe perſwade
your Maieſtie, ot would endeuour to excuſe thoſe offences, wee
will even by force of the truth, driue im to kaowledge him ſelfe
guiltyof treaſon, & that he is partaker in theſe murders & robe -
ries commi tied in the Indies, or els hopeth ſo to be.

What plague of peſtilence, or mortalitie could there haue fals
ten from heauen that had been able to conſume or make waſt a:
boue 2500.JexZues of flat countrey, repleniſned with people, and
would not haue left either trauailer or inhabitant?


Ont of the ſixt reaſon.

He Spaniardes only for their temporall commoditie, haue
blemithed the Indies with the greateſt inſamie, that any
man euen among the moſt horrible and villanous perſons in the
world, could be charged withal, & whereby they haue ſought to
take thẽ out of the degree ofmankinde:namely that they all were
polluted with the abhominable ſinne againſt nature: which is a
wretched and falſe ſlaunder. For in all the great Iles, Niſpaniola,
F. Iohn, Cuba, & Lamaica: Alſo in the 60,1les of Lucayos,whis
che were inhabited with an infinite nomber of people, the ſame
was neuer thought vpon, or once mentioned, as our ſelues can tes
ſtifie, who made diligent inquiſition & ſearch, euen from the be-
pinning, Moreover through all peru, there is oo ſuch ſpeachjnei-
ther is thete any one Iadiã throughout þ whole realm of Vucnã
ſported with thatcrime,neither generally throughout all the In-
dies: ſaving that in ſome other part there is a voice ofa few: for
whoſe ſakes neuertheles all that world is not tobe condemned,
We may ſay as much ofthe eating of maus ficſh, which likewiſe


thoſeplaces that T haue named ire free of: although chat iao4
tker places they do it in deed, They be alſo charged with their is
dolarrie,as if for being idolaters,men ſhould take vpon them to
puniſh them, & not referre them to God only, againſt wh they
fn, whiles they haue both lands & dominions ſeuerall to them
ſelues, which they hold not of an other ch cheit natural Lords:
beſides that our anceſlets were allo idolaters before rhe faith
was preached ynto them, & that all the world was gachered to
Chtiſt. The Spaniardes haue purpoſely, & effeQually hindered
the teaching of the law of God and leſus Chriſt with all other
vettues among the Indians, & driuen away the religious perſons
out of townes and fortreſſes, kaſt they ſhoulde {ee and diſcloſe
their eyrannies: yea, they haue by their euill example, io fected &
corrupted the Indians, teaching them many odious behaviours
and vices, which before they knew not, as blaſphemicg the name
of leſus Chriſt, practiſing of vſerie, lying, & many other abhomty
nations Wholy repugnant to their nature, Aꝑain, o eommit the
Indians to the Spaaiards, or to leave them in their handes, is va»
doubtedly as much as to giue ot leaue them to the ſe that will
deſtroy & bring them to nought, as well in body as ſoule.
The Spaniatds hauĩng fraudulently petſwaded K Ferdinand, be
ſuffered the Indians to be traſported out of the lles of Lutayos
into Hiſpaniola,and ſocontrary to ali reaſon, either natutall or
divine, diſpoſſeſſed them of their own houſes and lands, u herby
thereperiſhed aboue gocoo.ſoules:ſoas in above 30, Illes, whetof
ſome were greater then the le of Canary, which before-were te.
pleniſhed with people as an Ante heape afterward there were to
be found not aboue eleuen perſons, as our ſelues can teſtiſie. To
let your Maieſtie vndetſtand the goodnes and vpright dealing of
the inhabitants of the ſaid: llandes called Lucayos: Al ſo of the
ſlaughters, cruelties, and ſpoyles that rae Spaniardes, theſe good
chriſtians made among them, wee might make yoyr royall eares
to gloe, and your boyels to lament, and ſo your ſelſe rodepart,
That the Spaniardes haue warred vpon the Indians, that they
haue killed them, taken away their wiues, children, fringes, and
kindred ; allo that they haue robbed them ol all thewgoodes,
2 HORN 04, *


is alteadie ſufficiently proved, as alſo the eountrey being vtter
ly diſpeopled and deſert, doeth ſhewe ir:the worlde crieth out
vpon it : the Angels doe bewaile it, aud God himſelfe doth dayly
teach it vs by the great puniſhments that he lay ech vpon vs,


Out of the ſenenth reaſon,


He Spanĩardes doe ſucke from the Indians the whole ſubs

ſtaunce ofrhcir bodies, becauſe they haue nothing elle in
their houſes, They make them ſpitte blood: They exhibite them
to all daungers: They lay vpon them ſundrie and intollerable
trauailes:aud more then al this, They loade them with torments,
beating, and ſor owings: To be brieſe, they ſpoile and conſume
a thouſaade maner of waies.

To put the Indians into the Spaniardes handes, is, to giue
the childes throate to a frantict and mad man when he hath the
raſorin his hande: or it is as much as to deliver meu into the
power of the furious or capitall enemies, who long time haue
verye defirouſly wayred to put them to death. It is as a man
ſhoulde commit a faire young virgin to the guiding of a young
man ſnated, tranſported, and doting in her love, whereby ſhea
ſhoulde be ſpoiled and deflowred, vnleſſe ſhee were miraculoul-
ly preſerued, To be briefe, it were as good to throwe them as
moag the hornes of wilde Bulles, eyther to deliuet them voto
hunger ſtarved Wolues, Lions, and Tygres, and as much good
ſhoulde they geite by any lawes,preceptes, or threates made to
the ſaide hungrie beaſtes, for the forbidding of them to deuoure
them, as much do we ſay and affit me will any lau es, threates,
or preceptes, ſtay the Spaniardes, when they haue authoritie o-
uer the Indians from murdering them for their golde. Tea by
great and Jong experignce that we haue, wee doe certific your
highneſſe, that notwithſtanding you ſhoulde commaunde to ſet
vpa Gibbet before euety Spaniardes gate, and ſweare by your
Crowne, that for the firſt Iudian that ſhouldebe miſled ot ſlain,
you woulde haue them all hanged, yet would they not for feare
thereof abſtaine from laying the Indians, in caſe your Maieſtie
ſhould graunt or giue them fupreme po wet and authoritie ouet
them,


. or otherwiſchoweſoever, | Fa
Out of of the right reaſon, .

Efides all chat the Indians doe indure in ſeruing and pleating
the Spaniarde, there is yet a butcher or crudll hangman, ts
keepe them in awe appointed in every towne and place, and is
teamed Eftanciero ot Calpiſqne : who bath authoritie to lay
his clawes vpon them, and to make them labour,and doe what
the Lorde Commaunder, or chiefe thiefe will, So as ifin hell
there were no other torment, yet were this incomparable. This
hangman whippeth them, hee ladeth them rr hee ba⸗
ſteth them with ſcalding greaſe, he afflicteth with continu
all cormences and trauelles, he ſorceth & ech their daugh-
ters and wiues, diſnonouring and abufog them: hee deuoureth
their hennes whiche are . greateſt treaſure, not bee-
cauſe them ſelues doe eate them, bat that of them they offer pre
fents and ſervice to their greateſt Lorde and chieſe tyrant : hee
vexeth them with innumerable other tormentes and griefes :&
kaſt they ſhoulde complaine of ſo many iniuries and mileries,
this tytant putteth them in feare, ſaying: that he will aceuſa
them, and lay that he fee them commit idolatrie. To bebaieſe
they muſt pleaſe and content aboue twentie diſosdinate and
vureaſonable perſons : ſo as they haue ſoure Lordes and
maiſters YourMaieſtie, their Cacique, him that hach them in
commendam, and the E/anciers ofwhom I laſt pale, whiche
Eſtanciero is to them more grieuous to beare then a quintallof
lead, among which we may alſo in truth adde all the Aſochaches
and Mores, that do ſerue eee *


ene 3 L


| gut of the temh reaſon.

JTisgready to be ſeared, leaſt God will lay Spain defolare,eues

for thoſe horrible finnes that this aatiomhath cõmittod im ii
Indies,wheroof we do euidendy beholde the Corge; andaitthe
world dgab ſee & oonſeſſe thas already irtiagecb — —.—
wher with Cœddo th aff et & ſhew rbat
thoſe parts chrosgii che ———
youn * 3 tbe


*


rs, 5
LN Lad - *
» —_—
1
2 2 * 8 ky
n ' .
Le 4 Y 7
D
1 4
= = A


Indes into Spaine (che like quantiticofpolde #n#Maee, neys
ther K. Salomõ, neither anpother world prince ever bad, ſawe,
er heard of) there is none leſt, beſids h̊ oſ that that was here be ·
fore che Indies were diſcoueted, ther is nowe none to be foũd,
no neter a Whit, Hereofit commeth that thinges are thriſedea-
rer then they were, the poore that haue want doe ſuffer great
miſcries; and your maieſtis can not diipatch matters ofgreat im-
pottaunce, E ä


Out ef the eleuenth reaſem.


80 long as Lares bare ſway and ruled, that was ix. yeeres, there
"was no more care of teaching or bringing the Indians to ſal⸗
nation, seither was there any more labour employed, or once
. thovghe of, to that purpoſe, chen if they had been trees, flones,
dogges;or cats He waſled great townes and fortreſſes, hee gaue
to one Spasiard 100. Indians, to another fiftie, to another more
or leſſe, aseuery man was in liłing or favour, and as ĩt pleaſed
him to graunt. He aue children, & old men, women with child,
aud in childbed, men of countenance and commons, the naturall
L ond of the tow us and countreys, he parted them among thoſe
towhom he wiſhed moſt wealthand commoditie , viing in his
derters ofcommaund this ſpeech ſollow ing: To you ſuch aman,
are giuen ſo many [ndrant with their ( acique them to vſe in
your mines and aſfayret. So a8 all, great and ſmall, young and
oldexhavcould ſtand on their feete, men, woten with childe, or
in childbed, one ot other, travailed and w rough ſo lorgas they
had any breach. in pheir hodips. v gaus lehio to take away maried
men, and to make them drawe . golde, ted, twentie, thirtie, fourty,
or eightie leagues, or farther: The women remayned in farme
houſes and graunyes, in gyeat labours about gathering bf great
heipes ſonthe making of cho bread that they dos ente, hict is,
wo heeꝶ together the eatth whiche they doe dige, und rryſe
teure has dſull hie, and twelae ſoote ſquare, that Is ahdts H=
e eve with niattockes or fho#

, :\; 212 1 In otherplaceg they ſhinde corres; and
——— — pe and rayſing of


* Tx ee coyne,


—


c6yne,ſo that the man aud wife ſhonld not ſee one another io,
ar ia. monethes or a Whole yere, And at their meeting they were
ſo vorne wich labour and hunger, that theyhachuo minde ofco- |
habitation, whereby their generation ceaſed, their poore chil i
dren periſhed, becauſe the mothers through hunger and trauaile
had aatulke wherewith to nouriſh them: This was 2 cauſe
that in the Ile of Cuba, one of vs being there, there periſhed in
the ſpace of three moneths for hnoger 7ceo, children, ſome de-
ſperate women ſtrangled aud killed their one children, others
hading them (clues with childe, did eate certaine hearbes there ·
by to looſe their fruit, ſo that the men died in the mines, the wo-
mẽ petiſhed in the farme houſes, theirwhole generati6 in a ſhore
ſpace decayed, and all the countrey lay deſolate, The ſaide go -
uernour, to the ende without releaſe to keepe them in continu-
all labour, ſtil gaue them away, and yet beſides theit greatlabours
he ſuffered them rigoroully, & very auſterely to be miſuſed. For
the Spaniardes thathad them in commaund, appointed certaine
hangmen ouer them, ſome in the mines whom the termed Mi-
nierg,other in the farmes, that were called Eſtanciero: vnnatu-
tall and pitileſſe perſonsthat beate them with Naues and cords,
boxing themypricking them withneedles, and il calling them
dogs:ncitherdid they euer ſheweany ſigne of humanitie or cle-
mencie; but all their dealings did conſiſt ofextreame ſeueritie,
rigor, andbitterneſſe, ſo as in troth it might be thought great
crueltie ſo to entreat or gouerne the verie Moores, being the
cruelloſt of all others, for allthe damage that they haue done to
the Chriſtians : where the Indians are more treatable, curte-
ous, gentle, and obediemt, then any other nation in the woilde.
Farther, when becauſe of theſe Eſlancieros and Minieros,foges
ther with ſuch labours as they pur them vnto, ſome of thery-fled
into, the mountaines, as making fullaccoumpt to bee killed,
the Spaviardes choſecertayne officers wh6 they termed eA/pirr
ail del Campo, that ſhouldepurſue and hunt them out ofthe

mountaines. 5 bees Nn
| + Thegouervour had alſo in the Spaniſh rownes awd fortes,
certayne of the, moſte honourable and printipall perſons
| te null P 42 boar”


—


\


about him home hee called Viſitort, vnto whome alla befiden

their other ordinatie pottioas that he hadꝑinen them, he gaue in
reſpeRofcheir offices 100, Indians to ſerue them. Theſe in the
townes were the greateſt cxecutioncrs,as being more cruel then
the reſt, before whom Athu⁊Liles del cammo brought all ſuche
as had bin taken ia this chaſe. The accuſer, hee that had them in
commauad, was pꝛeſent, and accuſed them, laying: This Indian
er thoſe Indiant are dogs, & wil do no ſermice, but do day y run
to the mount aine ti bere to became leyterert & vagaboundes,
And ther fore required they might be puniſhed, Then the viſieos
with his owa hands boſid thE to a pale, & taking a pitched cord,
in the Gallies called an Ele, which is as it were an iron rod, gaue
them ſo many ſtripes, & bet them ſo cruelly, that the blood run-
ping downe divers parts of their bodies, they were left ſor dead.
God is witne ſſe of the truelties committed among thoſe lambs:
] am perſwaded that of the thouſãd part Ican not rehearſe one,
neither can any other tell it as ĩt ought, Ie labour that they
were put vnto, was to draw egolde, w hereto they had need haus
men of uon, For they muſt turne the mountaines 1000. times
vpſide dowoe diggiog and hewing the rockes, and waſhing, and
clenſing the gold a lelſe in the rivers, where they ſhall contiau ·
ally ſtand ia the water vutill they bruſt, and rent their bodies e-
at ia pieces, Allo whe the Mines peraduẽture doe flow with was
ter, then muſt they alſo beſides all other laboures, dra we it out
with their armes. To be brieſe, the batter to comprehend the la⸗
hour chat is emploid about gathering golde and ſiluer, it may
pleaſc your Maieſlie to conſidet that the heathen Emperours{ exs
cept to death) neuer condemned the Martyres to greater tor ·
mentes, then to mining for mettall- ſometimes they were kept
à⁊ wholeyeere at the mines: but afterward perceiuing howe ma
vie periſhed there, they decreed that they mine ſot golde but
fue moneths, which was ſourtie dayes in melting, during which
ume they tooke ſome teſt.


And what was their reſt ? They during thoſe fourtie dryes,

made heapes of that which they ſhoulde este, that is, they dips

ted the earth, and caſtit on heapes at is aſoreſaide, whichelas
hourdpeth cccede, drefling of vines, or tiling of theearth,

| 33333 Through;


Throughout the yett they never knew bald o, deiſher ib
fuffcred from labour little or n
toyle, hey never had ſufficient food, no not of Canebiwhiche is
the common countrie hread, and being made of rotes doth bug
ſmally nouriſh except there be ſome fiſh or fleſh to ente withal,
Moreover, they gaue them of that countrie yepper,and eres,
which be rootes like vnto nauetes, roſted or ſodden. But ſom
Spaniarde, peraduenture meaning to ſeeme libezall in theix
diet woulde weekely killa hogge for 50, India, whereof the
Alinier 0 would confumetwoquarters, and part the other two
among the Iudiaut, giuing daily to euery man as great a peece as
the [acehinsdoe gine of holy bread in their Chusches Some
there were that throught figardlineſſe. wanting meate to give
them, woulde ſcad theta two or three dayes abtaade into the
neldes and mountaines, to feed where they might ſais fie ihem :.
ſelues with ſuch fruice as hang ou the trees, and then vppon the
force of that which they brought in their guttes, V force-
them to labour two or three dayes more without giuiag tk any
one morſell to eate. For the love of God thereſore, let your
Maieſtie thinłe what ſubſtaner os ſltength thoſe bodies naturally
ſo delicate and ſechle, and nove almoſt conſumed and oppteſſed
with theſe tranailes, could gather of this food: alſo how it were
poſſible for choſs that lined ſo ſorowfull, hea tie and woeful alife,
in ſuch labour without food ſhoulde live long. The gouernour
commanded they ſhoulde bee paide their day wages and expen-
ces for any labour or ſeruice that they ſhoulde doe to the Spani-
arde, andtheit wages was three blanckes euery two day es, whis
cho in the yeere amounted to halle a { afteliwthatis worth 225
Aarmediermwherewith they might buyea Combe, a looking
plafſe, and apaireofdiew or greene beadcs, | Yea, many yeeres
they had nothing at all paide them, but hunger and firipes did ſo
abound, chat the /ndrex; regarded nome of this, neither ſouaht
any more but euen once to geta good meales meat, ot todie for
A, as wiſhing to forſake fo deſperate a liſe. He deprived them of
their libertie, ſaffering the Spaniards to keepe them in ſuch bitter
bondage and priſon as no man that had ſoentir, would or coulde
oace thinks for ; not leauing .
3. -


ns > -


to vic ur their pleaſures : yea, norwithſtandiog the beaſtes haus
ſome time te ind bee faffered to feede abrode in the fieldes, yet
vote nov eheſe Spaniards that we ſpeale of; graunt the Indis
ans any time or leaſure ſo to doe: but the gouernour himſel fe
would fotet them to an obſolute, perpetuall, fo reed, & vn willing
bondage. For they neuer had theit free wil to do any thing at al of
themſelue s, beenuſe the Spaniards conctouſnes, crueltie and ty»
tanaie, was filforrivgchem ro ſomelabour,noras captiues, but as
beaſts, that ate Jed boundto do wharioeuer man will appoint. A-
gairic,ifar avy time they were ſuffeted to depart to their houſes
to reſt them, chen ſhould chey chere find neither wife, children,
Hor food : as alſo although they had there found any meat, yet
ſhould chey nor haue had time to make it readic 2 ſo that there
as no remedie but death. Thus grew they into ſicknes through
long and grieuous trauailes,and that was ſoneraught among thẽ
vs beiog(asis aforeſaid) ofa very delicate and tender cõplection,
de much\againft their nature it was io be thut ſodenly, contrary
to cheir wont, d vunmerciſully put to ſuch labours, & to be beats
wich ſtaues, & ſpurned at, beſides the calling of thẽ ateuery word
Viilacot, & vpbraiding th, that they counterfeated ſickneſſe like
3 — they would notlobour. When the Spas
niards perceived the ficknes iucreaſe, ſo as there was no profit or
ſeruice tobe ſood for at their hands, then wuld they ſend the
home to theit᷑ kouſes,giuing th to ſpend in ſame 30 40. 0 80.
leagues trauaile, ſome halfe doſen of Radith or Reforres;that-is 2
kinde of nauet roote, t a little Cacabi, wherewith the poore
men trauailed not far before they ſho!d deſperately die, for went
2 or 3.-agues;ſome 10,0r 20. ſo deſirous to get to their owne
home there to ſiniſh their helliſh life that they ſuffered, that they
ent fel down dead by the waies:fo as, mavy times we haue foũd
ſom dead, others at deaths doore, others groning & pitiſully to
their powers -pronouncingthis word, hunger, hurp er. Then the
goueruaur ſeeing that the Spaniard had in this wiſo ſlaine, half or
two 3. patts of theſe Indians, whò he had gien them in com-
maund he came afreſh to drawe new ottes, and make a newe
diſtribution of {adians : fill ſupplying the number of his-firſte
ift, aud this did hee almoſi euety yeete. |
—


Pedrarias


Huus ebtred — ſ—
berus ſtirued doch into a locke of quiet and inntcent ihe ep


lambs: & as Gods wrath and ſcourge, comminting inũnit ſungto.
ters tobberies, oppteſſions & cruekies; togetherwith thoſe ſpa-
niards hom he had levied, and laid w aſi ſo many-townes and
villages, which before had bin repleniſhed wich people, is it were
ane hilles, as the like was neuer ſoene, heard of ritten by any
that io ourdayes haue delt in hiſtories, Are bed his maictie
& ſubiecis with thoſe whom hetooke wich ini ;and the ha:me
that he did amounted to abone four;yta.fixe illions of gold:be
laid aboue a0. leagues of land defart, namely froin.Derien,where
he firſt arriued vnto the prouiate of Marga one of the fruit
fulleſt, richeſt and beſt ĩnhabited lands in the warid. From this
curſed wreich ſprang fr ſt che peſtionce: ofgiaing the Ladizns in
com mautd, which afterw ard hart infected Acheiſe ladies whera
any-Spaniards doe inhabire;” apy by vhRipm All abeſe nations aro
conſumed i ſo that from him and his comtnandes haue proœeied
the certaine waſte and deſolation chat yaut uimeſtie baue ſuſtei-
ned in theſe ſo great lands aud dominions ſince the yeere 1 504.


pt org ao mae 9 1


— is uo body heit, heruuſe tł
all the na turall —— the
to woes. & hooſes there remaĩneth obly d bam ales; enen a3
if Spain were all diſpeopled, and at eee eee
there remained valy the walles df citicdypaw'nes and. calltes2...


[110321 zun 957 15:31 1671 51 3111231033 up ale,


Opeefthe alte, I obo .

7 Mio rent
.
certaine perpetuall & ſerrent; dati whale 410


23 ]eaves a0d ſiraw gathered vpob thænah, winch beeing 0908
gathered vp dogrow no mere: Eues ois all the teat that no


maieflie hath inthe Indies æaln &dfaxſmialc$1iduce 23.8 bla
af wind, ix p procredeth ee e


ALS


in nd they doedayly fayandrod. Welle.
unte, ſo muſtic necrſſarilie enſue that ee rights and
tente doc waſte anddimigiſhe,
The b of Spaine in is greatdangee tobee lol, tob⸗
bed, oppteſſed and made deſolate by forraigne nations, namely
by che Turks and Moores, becauſe that God whe is the moſtiuf,
true, and ſoucraigne king ouer all the worlde, is wrath for tha
great ſinnes and offences that the Spaniandes haue committed
throughout the Indies, hy afflicting, oppreſſing, eyrannous dea -
hogs, robbing and laying ſuch and ſo many people without la w
or equititie, and for the waſting of ſuch and fo large landes in
fo ſhort a ſpace, whole inhabitams had reaſosable ſoule s, and
were created and framed to the image and libeneſſe of the ſoue⸗
raigne trĩnĩtie, and becioggeds vaſſals, were bought with bis
moſſ precious blood, who keepeth account, and forgetieth not
one ofthem :. but had choſen Spaine as his miniſcer and infiru.
ment, to ilumioace and bring them to his knowledge, and as ie
had bia ſot a worldly -beſides the eternal reward,had
grauntcd bet ſo great natural riches, and diſcouered for her ſuck
&lo rfull andpleaſanciandes and wich at ſuch artificial
9 incompatable mines of geld ſil-
uer, lone and pteciou ith inſinite other commodities,
—— neuer ſerue ne heard of. i all which not⸗
withſtaading,ſhee bath ſhewed herſelfe fo vnthankſull, in yeel-
ding euil for ſo many benefices which ſhee had receiuned. And
God ordinarily vſeth this rule in exccuting his ĩuſtice &puoiſh-
mente, iat is, that he chaſtizeth fince- with tlie lame, nut with
that which is quite contraric 0 _ whervich the ſiane is com-
mans. | SYS. Vd 46
The defiruBiions.griefes,vio! des amides and
murders done nd cbmmitted uꝑninſſ choſe ptople, ate ſo great
horrible pubtiko & ouidena at che teates, lametations & blood
ef ſo many iunooem periom doe aſbendt to tahigh thtone of
heaucts, && doo not return before they du ue ſoundedl inp very
dees of God from-whence they after dcſcebd,and ſitayicg auet
Gre face of theearth doe tig lu the cares of al uc cations,
herbe and inhumaine as may be;whervpon calueth —


e & 20667 dvota
42% "waa boy bi 208 $01.3 L
eee an


AP, has. 221221 — 101 eee


*
.


n


oed FY Sanne 2


2 123
* / veal and hear t thoybeare!


4


— — : — =


xvod in | wriring,to fer |
mouth I haue heretofore that tou-
ching the title and claime that the kings of Caſtile doe make to
nn not-
wichſtanding,ſomedid ar iie, who miſliking t and tra-
— ͤ — je
— — TY EY


neſt nud wink 78 ——
eee eee ſores


What d eniaiſh theſaidrojalitideand right, THEN 13
acede us a taſtimocit ae


5 bulauela f — :
robtoutpribes-
— —— ceo:
en dopecduetvader'sfaincd/and


dounmertetkindaef
— — thiclues.nktwally ire endued with


$4 @wplamniodes and — Hs eReP


2
A ettall drinke not anhy walls king-
domes & common wealthes, in procuring their cefull galami-
ties & dolorous deſtruction: but alſo doe _ euen the kinges


our bak 55 he RAY S Ms hop ledetri⸗


doe in-
ans lieth.thagood & godly aſfeceus o kings,
and Fr ls enen — ſtudies, Here-
of did ſometime thasmoſ}mighcie king Avtaxerxes otherwiſe
teamed Aſfveras rd a= appeareth in the booke of He»
The 1 Ab euere t now
haue


2 nn erg va ns, e


. W
1 4


- 0
— 7
7


3 K —  C—— * o-


N c vater aftheking f -Gafiles
wlicezis herexesy herexesy eafic: 26 ho iudged.;] babagogee Wiz
+ Who fargtagentcheir matzerodon comm errot your:


Aead., thes oxher thiaga boch abſurd, wicked

Rs ——.— —
t x Fer

— Da ——.— — —


that ſiy, becauſe n
on chem, eithes for cus the Iadiaas ate iufeclod with fuche and


pe [tharGaally.chey lay all in
the duſt. To the end a: 499 his maieſtie may bee cer-
tficd ol albafateſaid, ind as a moſi Chriſliã and iuſi prince may
diſceroe bm uren the hort andcotrupt: alſo bet wene: right. &
vrnnge. and wicballtbat hemay kname who ſeiuetli iui ſaith-
Siljjabd rhofarbar hange vppon him only to ſaciefiethcir owne
zii ons and far their private pro t doe inuent and deviſe new
titles for bis ladies, vhich he neithet probable nor of any affaſt,
& {odd hope tp come to do their duties before. that I were able.
kumbeg {far abt abering this ticatiſe ve your bighnes, his mas
indie ſhillbtoſervtd thereby, ſih himiel ſe ſhall haue ſuch lentes
there zu he gor doe nini bumblybeſcech your highnefſein
haue td cenept it: alſo xo examine liſcerne, and undetſtande
it w ich fucꝰ u edome ani clemencie as you holde of his maie-
ſte;andas Himſelf woulddoc, ſoeing it is ſo;¶ that Gods prouis
dence hach appoibred your highneiſe to inbetie, as we oe hope
be n ni in he empire & priocipalitianſthrt beſides if it
ſertnanbde f ro behuhlrhed ther places onrof this realm
Iv, if uur higboeeiſo command me, ꝓutit in latin: & although
it ſhould not deferyd to be chſperſed cher in latin ar otherwiſe,
yet were nor che fuſfagrea tin that beauſed i it to beptinted onlie
to the end your highneſſe might with mote eaſe ade the ſamt


The font Lito:


oa las Caf [as «
n 2121 Base


* t dli 102112 Nn 210


—


— IA: 25 in Fry —— |
learned and
ypon two principal concluſions { The one, that the Spaniardes
warres againſt the Indians, were 25 concerning the cauſe and,
equitie that maued thE thereto very iuſt: alſo that generally the,
like war may & ought to be cõtinued. His other concluſiaa, that
the lodians are doutid to ſubmiti them ſelues to the Spaniards
gouemment, as the ſvaliſue / to the wiſe: if they will not ycelde,
then chat the Spaniards mayſ a be affirmeth) warte vpon them.
Theſe are the two cauſes of the loſſe and deſtruction of fo inſia
nite numbers of people : alſo that above 000. leagues. of the
maine lande, arc by ſuodrie newe kindes oſ Spaniſn cruelties
and jnhumainedealivges bin lefredeſelatein the Mands: nimen
ly by couqueſles and comma undes 2s he nawenameadehel
which were wone to be called Pattitions. |

The ſayde Doctor Sepulueda coloureth his aeacibunader the
pretence:of publiſhing tbe title which che kisges of Callileand
Leon due chalenge in the gouem ment aud yaiucriallſoueraigns
tie of this Indian world, jo ſecking tu cloale that doctrine ia


che he endevaureth to diſperſe and ſcatter as well in che ſe lands,


at alſo throughout the kingdomes af the Iadians, This booke he


exhibited to the royal cuumſaile forthe Indies, very earneſſiy
and importunately lying. vpon them ſor licence to print it, which
they ſundry times denied him in teſpett of the oſſenc e, dangers,
& manifeſt detiimant, chat it ſcrmed to bring to the common ·
24 (2202 NE al: Qz- . | wealth,


">
E


chat heere hee coulde not publiſhe his
93 of the Indies woulde not ſuffet


— — followed the Em-
e ne whereby his Maie⸗
ſtie directed him to the royall counſa Caſtile, who knewe
— ñ — a d ommintg oſ thilgſer-


ar Aranda id Duero, rhe yecre
ee de


Caſas or Caſuus, Biſoppe

oftho royal cowne df Chiapa , by happo arriued chere, comming

fro the Indians, and hacing intelligence of Door Sepulueda

his driſtes und deviſes; had aviice ao bf the tvatentes of his

oled oo bat vnderſtandinꝑ, the authourxpernitious blind:

nes, asa)fo the irrecouerabls loſſes chu might enſur vpon che
printing of this booke, wich might & maicewithftoodir, diſcos
„ee e eee irabounded,,, and
Ow it pretended.

Te Lordes of ther ojaliconnkel! of Callie; ax wiſeaad
jott indges, —— fayde'booke to
the Vaiuerſitie v of Salamanca & Alcala, the mattet being for hs
moſt part therein Theologically handled, wich commaundement
to examine it, and if it might be printed, to ſigne it + which Vni-
verſitiet after many exact and diligent diſputatioas, concluded,
tkat ĩt might not be printed as contayning cotrupt doctrine.
The Doctoui nos ſo ſatiſſed, but complayniog of the Vniuerſi -

ties aforeſayde, determined, notwithſtaading fo many denialles
and repulſes at both the royall connlaijes,xo ſende his rocatile

to his friends at Rome, to the ende there to print it, having firſt
transformed it into a certayde Apologie written to the Bilhop
ofSegouia, becauſ⸗ the ſame Biſhoppe hauing peruſed the trea-
tie and boobe afoteſaide, had brotherly and charitablie as his
friende by letters reproouedandcounfayled him. The Emperor
vaderitandiog of che impreſſion of the ſayde booke and Apo-
logie, did immediatly diſpacche his letters pateues, for the cal»
Log in and ſupteſſion ofthe ſame, com mauadirę like wiſo to ga.
ther in agayue al copics thercof dluouout Caſide. for the ſaid
©, Dottourhadpoblihedallogpikc Caſtilean language a certaine
8 ic 1 of che ſaide booke , thereby to make it more common
1 to


—


_ "x NP"


r
av vnderſtood no iatina might une ſums wit
a matter and toothſome to ſuche vs coueted e


ches , and ſoughe wayes to clyme to other eſtates, then eyther
the their


f 2 7 l 291 IQ, — 16 |
| Which whearheBiſhoppeof raderſtood e. hee de-
wake Chiapa


chunſaile of che JodiceMdoulde argu; and among them con-
„ pr
Erhalt conneries, without any menen
ted theit inũdelitie encepted.
Doctor — — —
coulde, and being entred the counſayle chamber, did at abs ſicſ
eon vtter hs whole minde. Thea was abe layde h oy
Ide vile called, who for the ſonce of baedayes, cootinuolly did
reade his Aybloꝑiet long, the Diuinesaud
Lawyers there aſſecubled, beſoug ht the learned and reverende
father Daminicke Soto kis Maieſties confeſſour, and adoming
can Fryer, who was there preſent, t reduce is iatoa ſummarie
and to make ſo miey copies as there wers Lordes , that is four
teene, to be endo chey eee
afterwarde in the feare of God ſay their mindes. 57
The ſayde reuerend father and Maſter Soto, ſer . in the
faide ſummarie, the doctors reaſons, with the By
1o the ime, Then had the docteus as his Wand


delivered him $9 auh{yvery ; out of , whiche Summarie
e he


hepichrrdrevier ——
ores,” eee
veplies, © 5 S 22311 |


D ee, bis ee tte


Dodo
1 of the ſlemb b bas


3 ,s boost O iD coords x 1 Pad


dee ben ar Loeddipptencd
indges ſor che ſpace of fine of ftixedayes
heardehs LordenidhopofChiaprientiharbooke, v hereindo he


3 297


hath caanypeeres laboured 2ogacticr all the reaſons thar-either
himſelf,or orhers could


therdqneſtobrhe Indien
to bevajaſty>25 ſeeking fit 40 ſabdue $arbarour nocions he-
fore wepreach the mem which haue been tfic v-
— crreſpons ent to the gtdunt made by Pope Alexan-
kiages aud nation uaue hetherto taken &

obſerued: it ir moet, and Idee ſo deſire you, ut I wh tale
unt und auchortticof

r Wick eh8 honour of our kioget.and n-
— ey haue the hike grande, ind chat it may pteaſe youditi:
gend to give me audience, vhile briefly and madiſeſiliy i do au-
ſwere Hr b biecion and ſubtilties: ſo doe I hope in God ; and
rhe tracth which I take vpou me to defende, thatl ſhallplainely


eee ſhewyod that a in poten vn the con⸗
rarie part before ſo noble and wiſe ho at not any way
to bo ſuſpected of preſertiog wha may bo alleaged before


truth and equitie which ate of och importance doth conſiſt on-
1y vpon frinefous and vayne reaſons. I will therefore, cutting
off my ſpeectcome to thepurpoſe. Fot ir is ſmall honour or cur-
tefie to vie rediouſnes among ſuche perſons,becing occupied in
bn ny affaires, tlamely , in eee e pr pr
W ,


T5 Bill


em oe 25


v4


ppeof (3 . his prologu 7


5. 55 oftchenſſennblie


Moſt


fainborngmeitelus Chriſte; in u. latter confotmable-roGitt
Cixiſtias h wezalſo that ſue Watrevare iu aid, wheres
of it ſeemeth that the reuerende and worthie Doctor Sepriums
Ba hathinoweopenedand Yedared him felfe ft principall
houldtranddefendour, in this hee anfwereth to thola reaſohx,


detefing the lande we, du te e bade fe Ihe thör th


ſame becing by another name culled Cote
thrabaons, | tave'drawen iato this our A
: : Abdſcrivgher hath ſoughrto diſcloſe him £lfe;' 2nd feared
pot do his taken for(che awchour of ſoenkerble inipiede,;
whichedootedownde' to che ſlaunder of the fWkh;* th#tififoe
uml porall ofthemoſtpart ofmanikiode! !? I thorght᷑ it
verie meets it is, io openly toimpugoe it, and for ebeting ot

of thepoylontdcancker hiche hee ſeeketh to diſperſe 5broade
is zhcſe.countreys, to the deſttuction andſabverfiorr of rhe
lame taſet o ſelſe as an aduerfaric bad partie ul him.
„beer fo te i he eech your noble.Lordeſhippes' kee: and fa.
therhoodes, tu may this ſo waightie and daungerous matter,


netaſany peculiar canſe, ſos Ipretende no farther, but to de-
dec N 88 fade


:
1 2 :
3 :
4 .

3
4
-* „ * 3
; */ 2 '
| .
Wa,

= I!

;


4


had erbte ena


+ © a+
y :
» Y +447 \


4 q — *


n — i +
layed eee * ＋


ded his deſences, by partic father Soroes ſammarie into twelue


Wee diele eGo :b 0D 3x» o) 512 |
amndaynon noch do noutulsl ef 2112014 bagawers on 1541119 4
vionigy al eob t tony. nyrmvenartguath 101 1c og 5
1 n ef mibob raphrr; hen
did wezoibe dh o: art bull
H 900m: b57369 25d, 0132103 . 201 bas R doch


base, Wd 124) 2 1 tos bas ' * |


«a
r


le: and therefore the R
—— to deteine ſo many of the
Iodians as eſcaped the oppreſſion and deolation ofthe full view
tage, in bondage and tyrannie. But we may more trucly ſay, that
the Spaniards during their aboade in the Indies have yeerely ſa-
are mee e -:


—


8
allo how we haue nowe laide it waſte, and dipeopted the
feare of God. wee willyer ſecke to colour and er-
A — —
getting wealth and riches, wee haue in 45,08 48, yeeres, waſted


andcoalunedmore landithen ll ee Aſa Al.


-
5 Y
a *
fr
* *
. 4
o F pe
*


vn em an len e i 8

* ar 781 be 4a ht — och 00121543 bas 222054
8 xo re btb n oIdikferq32ind; diu bur Af
uslolb bas noili>iqqo >d2 * 26 2n6tbol


iboT wy Di abaoc's ri: zatimbed: mow 800
12933 has ν,“iuxd ach Sten 01 652715


1
1


| 2 —
« # 7/; 7 7
er a
* & 1
1


*


ics
2208 — F of oll
Vs Bu wuig ned, 7 Sluldn5ys-1d:irm 5547
-»x5 bins tolog o n ui . bod Io 2152?
"© 208 <4 La ads  nanohitnonjzuucremgd alder ol 100 Stach At
* 5 10% % u¹ ur 2996, 22h bas fee gung


OED don 4 oom, bas |


1
