Authority in the Modern State (Harold J. Laski, 1919)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/authorityinmoder0000haro_l6m9). Laski's pluralist attack on state sovereignty — authority dispersed among groups, not concentrated.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

co1537918 |
|


hae
Laski, Harold
Joseph


} Authority in the |
modern state.


Library


University of Texas
at San Antonio


RENEWALS 458-4574
NATE DIF


WITHDRAWN


UTSA LIBRARIES


AUTHORITY IN
THE MODERN STATE


AUTHORITY IN THE
MODERN STATE


BY
HAROLD J. LASKI


ARCHON BOOKS
1968


COPYRIGHT 1919 BY YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS
COPYRIGHT © 1946 BY HAROLD J. LASKI
REPRINTED 1968 WITH PERMISSION
IN AN UNALTERED AND UNABRIDGED EDITION


LIBRARY


University of Texas
At San Antonio


LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER: 68-21685
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


TO
MR. JUSTICE HOLMES
AND
FELIX FRANKFURTER


THE TWO YOUNGEST OF MY FRIENDS


- amer eu v Le re


I am tempted to believe that what we call necessary in-
stitutions are often no more than institutions to which we
have grown accustomed,.and that in matters of social
constitution the field of possibilities is much more exten-
sive than men living in their various societies are ready


to Imagine,
Recollections of de Tocqueville,
Page 101.


PREFACE


problem of sovereignty which I published in March,

1917. It covers rather broader ground, since its main
object is to insist that the problem of sovereignty is only a
special case of the problem of authority, and to indicate what I
should regard as the main path of approach to its solution.
Where, therefore, the previous studies were, in the main, nega-
tive and critical, this book is positive and constructive. In the
main, the evidence upon which its conclusions are based is
French. That is because an earlier study of de Maistre con-
vinced me that it is in France, above all, that the ideals I have
tried to depict are set in the clearest and most suggestive light.
I had originally intended to follow this volume by a third
essay on the political theory of the Conciliar Movement. But
it now seems to me more useful to attempt a definitely con-
structive analysis of politics in the perspective set by the first
chapter of this present volume. Accordingly I have planned
a full book on the theory of the state which I hope to have
ready within a reasonable time.

For so modest a volume this book, like its predecessors, has
debts too immense to go without acknowledgement. Among
the dead, I would like to emphasise how very much I have
learned from Acton and Maitland; their writings have been
to me a veritable store-house of inspiration. Among living
men, I owe much to Professor Duguit of Bordeaux, to Dr.
Figgis, and, in spite of, and perhaps because of, our differences,
to Professor Dicey. My old tutor, Mr. Ernest Barker of New
College, is the unconscious sponsor of this, as of my earlier
book. Indeed, if it has merit of any kind, it is to the teaching
of politics in the Modern History School at Oxford that I would
ascribe it.

Friends have been generous in their counsel. My colleagues,
Dean Pound and Professor MclIlwain, have been untiring in
their constant encouragement; and from Dean Pound’s own


Tx volume is in some sort the sequel to a book on the


x PREFACE


writings, soon, one may hope, to be collected in some more
permanent form, I learned the value of a pragmatic theory of
state-function. My friends of the New Republic, particularly
Mr. Francis Hackett, and Mr. Herbert Croly, have given me
generous assistance. Mr. Graham Wallas has lent me great
aid by friendly and suggestive counsel; and I found his “Great
Society” an invaluable guide to many difficult paths. To an
unknown critic in the London Times I owe the debt that keen
comment must always create.

But the great obligation of the book is to Mr. Justice Holmes.
It goes too deep for words; and I can only emphasise my con-
sciousness that I shall never know how much I have in these
years learned from the talks we have had and the letters he has
written. They are things that come but once or twice in a
lifetime.

One more personal word the reader will perhaps allow me.
I began my other book with a sense that it might give pleasure
to my friend A. R. Herron. He was killed before I could finish
it. This book would have gone to my friend Frank Haldinstein,
scholar of Christ Church and captain in the Royal Engineers.
But his name, too, has been added to the list on which the
Oxford of my generation will, with undying pride, write those
of Arthur Heath, of Nowell Sievers, and of A. D. Gillespie—
all of them of New College. When I look back on certain magic
nights at Oxford and re-read these pages in the light of their
memory, I realise how halting they are compared to the things
they would have said. But I take it that for them the one
justification of this conflict would have been the thought that
we who are left are trying in some sort to understand the
problems of the state they died to make free. To have known
them was an education in liberty.

Lastly, as also firstly, every page of this book has in it the
help my wife has given me. But to do more than mention that
is unnecessary for either of us.

HAROLD J. LASKI.

April 21, 1918.

Harvard University.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER ONE: AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


E

II.
TTI.
IV.
V.
VE
WEE.
VIII.
IX.
X.


CHAPTER
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.
VIII.
IX.
X!
XI.


The Qrigins of the Modern State
State and Government

The Nature of Obedience

The Limitations of Power

The Attack on the Secular Siate.
The Division of Power

The Organisation of Power .
The Significance of Freedom
The Direction of Events
Conclusion


Two: BONALD

The Implication of Theocracy
The Basis of Traditionalism

The Political Theory of Bonald
The Attack on the Individual
Implications of the Attack . ;
The Religious Aspect of the State
Criticisms ;
The Revival of Traditiomalism
The Traditionalism of M. Brunetiére
The Traditionalism of M. Bourget
The Significance of Variety


Tarse: LAMENNAIS


The Problem of Lamennais

The Church in the Napoleonic Age
Early Ultramontanism

The Glorification of Rome :
The Attack on the Secular State .
The Transition to Liberalism

The Foundation of L’ Avenir

The Appeal to Rome .

The Condemnation . :

The Red Cap on the Cross .


19
26
32
42
52
69
81
89
109
119


123
127
131
136
143
157
161
166
171
177
187


189
191
199
205
217
225
232
241
247
255


16 CONTENTS


XI. Implications ; , t d . 259
XII. The Inheritance : : : : . 267
XIII. Conclusion y : i l . 280

CHAPTER Four: ROYER-COLLARD :
I. The Significance of the Restoration ; -281

II. The Theory of the Charter . ; : Ea Zo

III. Necessary Freedoms . ‘ : : . 293

IV. Implications ; ; : : : . 301

V. Ethics and Politics : : ; 310

CHAPTER Five: ADMINISTRATIVE SYNDICALISM IN
FRANCE

I The Right of Association . ; , oak

Il. The Complaints of the Civil Service f . 3826

II. The Claims of the Civil Service . À : 336

IV. Implications ; ; : : . 842

V. The Attack of the jie : : ; 353

VI. The Attack of the Politicians ; d j 365

VII. The Movement Towards Reform : 376
APPENDIX: NOTE ON THE BIBLIOGRAPHY OF LA-
MENNAIS 2 À i 388


INDEX... x ; , P ; f š ; 391


AUTHORITY IN
THE MODERN STATE


CHAPTER ONE
AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE
I. THE ORIGINS OF THE MODERN STATE


AN is a community-building animal: it is by reverent
contact with Aristotle’s fundamental observation that
every political discussion must now begin. We start

with the one compulsory form of human association—the state—
as the centre of analysis. Yet there are few subjects upon
which enquiry is so greatly needed as upon the mechanisms
by which it lives. Outside our state-context we are, after all,
largely unintelligible, must be, as Aristotle so scornfully pro-
claimed, beasts or gods who defy interpretation. Even in
birth we inherit the qualities of unnumbered generations so
that a bias is present before ever it has obtained expression.
This emphasis upon state-life has become more vital as the
scale of existence has become progressively greater. To the
unity of interdependence, at least, the world has been reduced,
so that, today, the whim of a New York millionaire may well
affect the lives of thousands in the cotton-mills of Bombay.!

Not that state-history can in any adequate sense be made
the biography of great men. We can even less today accept
the epic-theory of Carlyle than that so characteristically con-
tributed by Bolingbroke to Voltaire when he found in the
interplay of personal fantasy the true source of events. Not,
of course, that history will ever be an exact science in the
sense that exactness belongs to mathematical enquiry. It is
only magnificent sciolists like Machiavelli who dare to look
upon history as an endless cycle. For most it will mainly
be what Thucydides strove to make of it—the great store-
house of political wisdom. For all history that is not merely
annalistic must lead to the formulation of conclusions. It has
in it the full materials for a state-philosophy simply because


1G, Wallas, “The Great Society,” p. 3 f.


20 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


the evidence we possess so largely relates to political life.
From Aristotle down to our own time the one constant effort
has been the determination of the conditions upon which that
life should be lived. And, where the effort has been most
fruitful, it has been induction from experience. Systems have
helped us little enough. The vague ideal of a revolution, the
chance phrase of an orator, the incisive induction of some
thinker more deeply-seeing than the rest—it is upon these
that, for the most part, our creeds have been builded. The
sources of our principles are as varied as human experience
simply because there has, from the outset, been no large tract
of human life with which the state has not concerned itself.

Certainly the state has about it the majesty of history; and
it is old enough to make its present substance seem permanent
to the mass of men. It has become so integral a part of our
lives that the fact of its evolution is no longer easy to re-
member.2. It has almost passed beyond the region where
criticism may enter by reason of the very greatness of its
mission. Aristotle’s formula for the expression of its purpose
has lent it a great, if specious aid. The realisation of indi-
vidual virtue in the common good? is a conception fine enough,
in all conscience, to suffuse with a glamour of which the treach-
ery is too late discovered the processes by which it moves along
its way. The conception is yet inadequate because it fails to
particularise those upon whom it is intended that benefit shall
be conferred. Aristotle himself had certainly what the modern
age would regard as an impossibly narrow conception of citizen-
ship; and Plato’s virtue is so confined to the special experiences
to which it is annexed as to limit to but few the full enjoyment
of capacities. The nature of the state, moreover, has become

2 A book that would do on the grand scale what Mr. Edward Jenks so
brilliantly attempted in his “Short History of Politics” is badly needed;
but it would need the learning of Lord Acton combined with the large-
vision of Mr. Graham Wallas to write it.

§Cf. T. H. Green, “ Collected Works,” Vol. II, pp. 550-1.

4“ Politics,” 11, 5. 1264 p,

5 Cf. the admirable remarks of Mr. Barker in his “Political Thought
of Plato and Aristotle,” p. 113. I think his argument is even more strongly
reinforced when the attempt of the Meno to specialise dper% into a purely
functional quality is remembered.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 21


so intimately involved with that of society that we tend, like
Hegel, to speak of it less in terms of logic than of rhapsody.’ -

Yet the very fact that it has a history should surely make
us cautious. The state is no unchanging organisation. It is
hardly today either in purpose or in method what it was to the
Greek philosophers, or to the theologians of the medieval time.
The medieval state is a church; and the differentiation of civil
from religious function is a matter of no slight. difficulty.” In
the form in which it becomes immediately recognisable to our-
selves the modern state is, clearly enough, the offspring of the
Reformation, and it bears upon its body the tragic scars of
that mighty conflict. What it is, it has essentially become by
virtue of the experience it has encountered. Upon its face is
written large the effort of great thinkers to account for the
unique claims it has made upon the loyalties of men. Nor is
their thought less clearly present, even if it be but by impli-
cation, in the policy of those who have directed political
destinies.

The modern state, we urge, is the outcome of the religious
struggle of the sixteenth century; or, at least, it is from that
crisis that it derives the qualities today most especially its own.
The notion of a single and universal authority commensurate
with the bounds of social life was utterly destroyed when Luther
appealed to the princes in the interests of religious reform.
External unity was destroyed to be replaced by a system of
separate unities and the weapon of divine right was the instru-
ment he forged to that end. What, virtually, he did was to
assume the sacredness of power, and thus, by implication, the
eternal rightness of its purposes. He builded better than he
knew. The religious disruption synchronised with the full

6 Cf. “ Philosophy of Right” (trans. Dyde), p. 278. The very brilliant
paper of Mr. Bosanquet printed in the International Crisis, p. 132 f.,
hardly speaks a different language. Cf. also the amazing citation from
Sir Henry Jones in J. A. Hobson, “Democracy after the War,” p. 118.

7 As Dr. Figgis has very brilliantly shown, ‘Churches in the Modern
State,” Appendix B.

8 Or perhaps rediscovered. The political theory of the early fathers
never, of course, dissented from the sacredness of secular power. It is only
in the excitement of the investure controversy that its indirect derivation
began to be seriously urged.


22 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


realisation of national consciousness in Western Europe, and
the modern state is clearly visible as a territorial society divided
into government and subjects. The great preamble to the
Statute of Appeals’—the one statutory example of English
Byzantinism—is no more than official announcement that the
English state permits no question of Henry’s complete sover-
eignty. Government, for the most part, was royal; for over the
free towns of Germany, and the Italian cities, was cast the du-
bious cloak of imperial suzerainty. Holland had not yet arisen
to suggest the problems of a sovereign republic.

But state and society are not yet equated. That is the work
of the thinkers of the Counter-Reformation. The church might,
as in England, assume a national form; but religious difference
went deep enough to limit state-absorptiveness. France learned
a partial toleration from the misery of civil war; and almost a
century of social and economic confusion was necessary before
Germany took a similar road. Not that this early toleration is
at all complete; it is born too painfully for that. It is, at most,
the sense of the French politiques that the state must not perish
for religion’s sake. It admits the impossibility of making men
sacrifice their consciences upon a single altar. The task of con-
viction was no easy one, and the lesson was only partially learned.
Europe, in what at least the medieval thinkers deemed most
fundamental, had become accustomed to unity of outlook.
Unity of outlook was secured by reference of power to a single
centre. The partition of Western civilisation into a medley of
religious systems developed problems of the first importance.
A man might owe allegiance to Rome in one set of opinions and
to London in another. He might think as Pius V bade him in
matter of transubstantiation, and in those great political ques-
tions of 1588 take the fleet into the English channel against the
papally-approved might of Spain. Your Catholic might be a
member of the English state, but there was always, for him a
power outside. For some, it might preside over all indirectly ;°
for others it might only in its own sphere be supreme. But,
where conflict came, men like Parsons would show that to


925 H: VIII, c. 19.


10 As the Jesuits argued. Cf. Figgis, “From Gerson to Grotius” (2d ed.),
p. 203 f.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 23


attack the state was not an onslaught on the fabric of society."

Thus, from the outset of its modern history, the problem is
raised as to the authority to be possessed by the state. Not
Romanists alone doubt its absoluteness. Archbishop Whitgift
set the keynote to the temper that is turned into theory. He
was by nature inapt to grasp the niceties of political meta-
physics, and a Presbyterian theory which, like that of Cart-
wright, struck at the root of state-omnipotence aroused him to
fierce anger.* From the threshold of the seventeenth century
what the state demands is the whole of man’s allegiance lest,
in seeking less, it should obtain nothing. James I had at least
a logician’s mind. Aiming at supreme power for the state he
deemed himself to personify, he could not doubt that Presby-
terian structure was subversive of his whole position. If the
ultimate seat of authority were not with himself, he seemed
already on the threshold of anarchy. The only difference be-
tween Parliament and the Stuarts was as to the place in which
that supreme power resided; and Parliament made the Civil
War the proof of its hypothesis. Hobbes only got his volume
printed under the Commonwealth because it conveniently
applied to any form of despotism.

The medieval worship of unity," in fact, is inherited by the
modern state; and what changes in the four centuries of its
modern history is simply the place in which the controlling
factor of unity is to be found.. To the Papacy it seemed clear
in medieval times that the power to bind and loose had given
it an authority without limit or question. The modern state
inherits the papal prerogative. It must, then, govern all; and
to govern all there must be no limit to the power of those instru-
ments by which it acts. Catholic and Nonconformist are alike
excluded from citizenship simply because they denied, as it
deemed, the fulness of state authority. They refuse absorption
by its instruments, and the penalty of refusal is exclusion.“ The


u Cf, Prof. MclIlwain’s brilliant introduction to his edition of the “Political
Works of James I” (Harvard University Press, 1918).

2 Strype, “Life of Whitgift,” II, 22 ff.

13 Cf. my “Problem of Sovereignty,” p. 2.

u This is what Mr. Seaton, in his admirable book, calls the second stage
of religious persecution. ‘Toleration under the Later Stuarts,” p. 6 f.


-24 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


representatives of the state must be sovereign, and if the Stuarts
abuse their prerogative, the result is, not its limitation but its
transference to Parliament. Always the stern logic of theory
seems to imply that the dominating institution is absolute.
Locke, indeed, saw deeper, and argued to a state that thought
it had already won its freedom that power must be limited by
its service to the purposes it is intended to accomplish.* But
the accident of foreign rule gave that power a basis in what
could, relatively at least to continental fact, be termed popular
consent. Thenceforth the sovereignty of Parliament became
the fundamental dogma of English constitutionalism. With-
out, there might be the half articulate control of public opinion;
but that, as Rousseau said,!* was free only at election time. Its
control was essentially a reserve-power, driven to action only at
moments of decisive crisis. “ʻA supreme, irresistible, uncontrol-
lable authority, in which the jura summa imperii or rights of
sovereignty reside”! is, as Blackstone says, the legal theory
which lies at the root of the English State. For practical pur-
poses, that is to say, the sovereignty of the English state means
the sovereignty of the King in Parliament.®

France travelled more slowly, but, always, it was in the same
direction she was travelling. Her earliest political speculation
was, as Bodin bears witness, already of a sovereign state; and
it is, as he emphasises, a state which boasts a royal organ to
declare its sovereign purposes. Bossuet makes it clear that the
centralising efforts of her. three great ministers had not been
vain; and it was not merely Voltaire’s acid humor that made
him equate the sovereignty of France with the will of Louis XIV.
But, sooner or later, abuse involves disruption. The atmos-
phere of the eighteenth century was not favourable to the
retention of a belief in divinities. The profound speculation of
Montesquieu, the unanswerable questions of Rousseau, herald
a transference of power similar to that of England. The people
becomes master in its own house, and the dogma of national


16 Second treatise, Ch. XI, Sec. 14 f.

16 “Contrat Social,” Bk. III, Ch. XV.

17 Comm. I, 48.

18 I think this would express, somewhat differently, the point made by
Professor Dicey in the famous first chapter of his “Law of the Constitution.’’


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 25


sovereignty becomes the corner stone of the reconstructed
edifice.” But as in England, the sovereign people is too large
for continuous action. Its powers become delegated to the
complex of institutions we call government. Thenceforth, for
general purposes, it is through this channel that the state-will
is expressed. Parliament is the nation, and its sovereignty is
there given adequate fulfilment.” Only on rare occasions, as
in 1830 and in 1848, is there sign of clear dissent from govern-
mental purposes. Only then, that is to say, can we argue a
revocation of powers.

Nor is American evolution at all different, though here there
are more checks upon the exercise of the governmental power.”!
The people is ultimately sovereign in the sense that, sooner or
later, it may, through proper reforms, or, in the last resort,
through revolution, get itself obeyed. There is no immediately
sovereign body, as in England or in France. Certain limitations
upon state and federal government are taken as fundamental
and continuous expressions of popular desire; and the rights
thus enshrined in the constitution it is the business of the
Supreme Court to maintain. Yet, even here, it is, for most
purposes, a governmental will that we at each moment en-
- counter. The problem of authority may ultimately resolve
itself into a question of what a section of the American people,
strong enough to get its will enforced, may desire. But such
continuous resolve as the business of state daily requires one
hundred million people cannot directly undertake. What here
becomes essential is the device of representation. Sovereignty,
therefore, in America, as elsewhere, is the acts of government
as the people and the Supreme Court acquiesce in their enforce-
ment. The multiplicity of governmental powers demanded by
the federal system makes no difference; it is merely a question

19 Cf. the suggestive brochure of Hauriou, “Du Souveraineté Nationale.”

20 The reader can get a clear idea of this article by comparing the speeches
of M. Barthou, March 19, 1909; of M. Ribot, May 14, 1907; of M.
Deschonel, May 2d, 1907; and of M. Clémenceau, March 13, 1908—all
in the Chamber of Deputies. I have discussed them below in the chapter
on administrative syndicalism.

2 Cf. the interesting remarks of Boutmy, “Studies in Constitutional
Law” (trans. Dicey), p. 159 f.

2 As in the Civil War.


26 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


of administrative convenience. The fundamental fact is that
when we speak of acts done by America the actor is a govern-
ment of which the subjects are more or less inert instruments.
In that sense American evolution, though superficially different
in form is, in substantial character, similar to the development
of the European system.


II. STATE AND GOVERNMENT


Ir is, then, with a sovereign state that we are today confronted.
For its fundamental agents, that is to say, there is claimed a
power from which no appeal is to be made. The attributes of
sovereignty have been admirably described by Paley. Its
power, he says,” “‘may be termed absolute, omnipotent, uncon-
trollable, arbitrary, despotic, and is alike so in all countries.”
Limitation of any kind it does not therefore admit; it acts as
it deems adequate to. its purposes. But the state, of course,
may assume a variety of forms. It may, as in the France of the
ancien régime, be an absolute monarchy. It may, as in the
England of the eighteenth century, be a narrow oligarchy, or,
as in modern America, its form may be democratic. The sub-
stance of the state, however, does not so vary. It is always a
territorial society in which there is a distinction between gov-
ernment and subjects. The question of form must, of course,
affect the question of substance; but its real reference is, in
fact, to the prevailing type of government. That is, in part, a
question of those who share in power; in part, also, a question
of the basis upon which responsibility is to rest.

Such a definition excludes the equation of state with society.
The exclusion is made because there are obviously social rela-
tionships which can not be expressed through the state. It may
be true that man’s nature is determined by the environment
in which he lives, but that environment is not merely a state-
creation. No one would claim in England, for example, that
the Roman Catholic church is a part of the state; but it is yet
obvious that it acts upon its members as a social determinant.
The family is an institution of society, and no one will doubt
that the state may affect it; but it is not merely a part of the
state. The state is concerned only with those social relations

% “Moral and Political Philosophy,” Bk. VI, Ch. VI.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 27


that express themselves by means of government.” That is not
to say that the province of the government may not be wide;
and, indeed, as at Geneva under Calvin, there may be almost
no element in life with which it may not attempt to concern
itself. But immediately it is perceived that there are relation-
ships that in fact escape its purview, it becomes obvious that
the state is only a species of a larger genus, and the nature of
its especial problems begins to emerge. For churches, trade-
unions, and a thousand other associations are all societies. They
refuse absorption by the state and thereby raise, sometimes in
acute form, the definition of their connexion with it. Churches,
certainly, have denied to the state any absolute sovereignty;
by which they mean that the canons of their life are not subject
to the control of its instruments.” Trade-unions have been
hardly less defiant. The state, indeed, has rarely hesitated to
claim paramount authority, even if, on the occasions of conflict,
it has not been overwhelmingly successful.22 The claim is
naturally important; but, manifestly, if it has not, in the event,
been able to prove itself, it demands more rigid enquiry. .

It makes clear, however, the point upon which insistence
must be laid. Whatever power the state may assume, we have
always its division into a small number who exert active power,
and a larger number who, for the-most part, acquiesce in the
decisions that are made.” Obviously, of course, the fact of
acquiescence is vital; for Hume long ago made it a common-
place that ultimate power is always on the side of the governed.”
The fact of power may be most variously justified. Divine


24 Mr. Cole, indeed, actually defines the state in terms of government
only (“Self-Government in Industry,” p. 70 f.), but though this is a result
largely true it seems to me, for reasons explained below, the second and
not the first state of the process.

% Cf. Hansard, 4th Series, Vol. 115, Sep. 2d, 1902, p. 1014. Mr. Perks,
“The question whether a Nonconformist will be justified or not in resisting
the rate is a matter for each individual conscience, and having settled
that question for himself, we will not be likely to be influenced in the
slightest degree by the fact that he may lose his right as a citizen.”

2 Cf. my ‘‘Problem of Sovereignty,” Chs. II-V for some instances.

27 Cf. Duguit, “L’Etat: Le Droit Objectif,” pp. 242-54.

28 “Essays: of the First Principles of Government” (World’s Classics ed.,
p. 29).


28 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


right, utility, or social contract are all methods that have on
occasion been used to demonstrate legitimacy. What, in gen-
eral, we assume is an identity of interest between government
and subjects. We lend to government the authority of the state
upon the basis of a conviction that its will is a will effecting the
purpose for which the state was founded. The state, we
broadly say, exists to promote the good life, however variously
defined; and we give government the power to act for the pro-
motion of that life. Its acts, then, in our view, are coloured by
the motives that lie behind it. It wins our loyalty by the con-
tribution it can make to the achievement of the state-purpose.

We can, then, distinguish between state and government.
Rousseau quite clearly grasped this difference. The state, for
him, was the collective moral person formed by the whole body
of citizens; the government was merely an executive organ by
which the state-will could be carried into effect.? He realised
the clear possibility of disparity of effort. A government that
sought to usurp power for selfish ends has not been unknown;
and Rousseau therefore reserved sovereignty—for him the
ultimate right to do anything—for the state alone. Power
was authority that had not yet been dignified by moral attri-
butes; and that alone the government possessed until judgment
of its motives had been made.*! Where he went wrong was in
his effort to ascribe a necessarily beneficent will to the state
itself—a view that, largely dependent as it was upon his identi-
fication of state and society—was in reality no more than an
a priori assumption.” There is no will that is good merely by
self-definition; it is actual substantiation in terms of the event
that alone can be accepted as valid. To introduce, as he did,
a distinction between the “general” will and the “will of all,”
is, in reality, simply to take refuge in mysticism. A will that
fulfils the purpose of the state is, of course, good where the end
of the state is, by definition, good also; but that is a question
of fact upon which opinions may differ. What Herbert Spencer
thought for the good of the state Professor Huxley dismissed as

29 “Contrat Social,” Bk. III, Ch. 1.

30 Ibid., Bk. III, Ch. X.

31 Cf. Ibid., Bk. III, Chs. XVI and XVIII.


32 Cf. the admirable appendix in Professor Maciver’s recent volume,
“Community,” p. 413 f.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 29


administrative nihilism. Numbers, certainly, even to the point
of unanimity, make no difference. They may justify political
action; but they will provide no guaranty of its rightness.
Since Rousseau wrote, moreover, a new complication has been
introduced in the problem of size. In the Greek city-state, in
Geneva, in the republic of Andorra, it was comparatively easy
to discover an effective popular opinion; today, as John
Chipman Gray so admirably said, the real rulers of a society
are undiscoverable. The new Chancellor of the Exchequer
may be dependent upon a permanent official whose very name
is unknown to the vast majority whose destinies he may so
largely shape; and, indeed, the position of the English civil-
servant has been defined as that of a man who has exchanged
dignity for power. Public opinion may be the ultimate con-
trolling factor; but not the least complex of our problems is,
as Mr. Lowell has said,” to discover when it is public and when
it is opinion.

Accepted theory tells us that the state is sovereign. It is,
that is to say, the supreme embodiment of power. What its
will has determined it has the right to enforce. Yet in the only
sense in which this is an acceptable theory, it in reality tells us
nothing. The state exists as the most adequate means we have
yet invented for the promotion of an end we deem good. If by
the emphasis of its sovereignty we mean that it must be obeyed,
the thesis is self-evident when its act is in accordance with that
end; but no one, surely, would urge that the state must be
obeyed if the methods it followed were those of Machiavelli’s
prince. How are we, save by individual judgment, to tell if the
state-act is in truth the adequate expression of right purpose?
Rousseau resolved the difficulty by making his state call fre-
quent meetings of its citizens and assuming rightness where
moral unanimity was secured.*4 Yet there are few who have
lived through this age of blood and iron who will be willing to
attribute infallibility even to an unanimous. people. Nor does
Rousseau meet the difficulty that, in sober fact, the modern
state cannot function save by selecting certain of its members
for the fulfilment of its task; and that selection means that our


3 “Public Opinion and Popular Government,” Part One.
34 “Contrat Social,” Bk. III, Ch. XVIII.


30 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


obedience, in reality, goes to a government of which we accept,
for the most part, the decisions. But few who accept on the
ground of high purpose the sovereignty of the state will urge
that government is similarly sovereign. The difference of funda-
mental moral emphasis may well be vital.

To postulate the sovereignty of the state, therefore, is hardly
helpful unless we know two things. We need, in the first place,
to enquire by what criteria the consent of the state to some
course of governmental action is to be inferred. We need also to
have information as to the coincidence of the action with what
is termed right conduct. But it is surely obvious that these
criteria and this information are, in fact, established by each
one of us. No matter what the influence which constrains us
to refusal or acceptance it is, at bottom, an individual act of
will. The real basis of law, therefore, is somehow in the indi-
vidual mind. Our attitude to it may be most variously deter-
mined. An Irish peasant of the seventies may have gone moon-
lighting less from an opinion that violence alone would teach
the British government its lesson than from a fear of local dis-
approval. But, politically, we can be concerned not with the
hidden motives but with the overt acts of men. In that sense
the basis of the state is clearly a reservoir of individualism be-
cause each will is something that ultimately is self-determined.
What determines it to act is a different and far more complex
question; but there is never in the state an a priori certainty
that a government act will be obeyed. The possibility of an-
archy is theoretically at every moment present. Why it is
rarely operative demands more detailed investigation.

A realistic analysis of the modern state thus suggests that
what we term state-action is, in actual fact, action by govern-
ment. It is a policy offered to the people for its acceptance.
It becomes state-action when that acceptance is predominantly
operative. The passive resistance of the Nonconformists to
Mr. Balfour’s Edueation Act, for example, was not sufficient to
make the Act void. It was able to be put into operation and
was therefore accepted by the English state. There have, of
course, been periods when this twofold stage of political action
was only partially necessary. The Greek city-state acted not
by means of representative government but, at least in certain


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 31


periods of its history, by the voice of its whole citizen-body.
It thus fulfilled Rousseau’s ideal of a continuous exercise of
sovereign power. But that can no longer be the case. The
modern state, for good or ill, has outgrown the possibility of
government by public meeting, and it is upon some system
of representation that reliance must be placed.® The repre-
sentative organ is, directly or indirectly, government. State-
action, in such analysis, is simply an act of government which
commands general acceptance. This M. Esmein has clearly
perceived. ‘‘Although’’, he says,* “the legislative power is the
true regulator of sovereignty, it is above all by the executive
power, that its action is felt by the citizen body.” Such a theory
has at least the merit of fitting the actual facts. It makes no
moral presumptions. It takes account of the fact that the state
as a whole may repudiate, as in 1688, the acts of its representa-
tives for reasons that it deems good. It admits, what the situ-
ation itself compels us to admit, that the exercise of authority,
whether we call it power or sovereignty or what we will, is, in the
vast majority of cases, in the hands of government.

In such an aspect, several results are immediately obvious.
An adequate theory of the state must examine not so much the
claims of authority but their actual validation in terms of prac-
tice. Its assumptions are naturally important; but it is rather
as an a priori index to achievement than as a definitive measure
of it that they must be regarded. It is, that is to say, helpful to
be told that the object of the state is to secure the good life. But
however important may be the knowledge of purpose, much
more important is the knowledge of function. The state, for
instance, to its members is essentially a great public service
corporation; and itis, to put it bluntly, upon dividends that the
mind of the public is concentrated. The question we must ask
is not what the state set out to do, but what, in historic fact, has
been done in its name. In terms of prediction, we do not ask
the moral programme of a state: the more fruitful method is


3 On the comparative value of large and small states of the remarks of
Freeman. “Hist. of Federal Government in Greece and Italy” (ed. of 1893),
p. 39 ff.

3 “Eléments du Droit Constitutionnel” (ed. of 1906), p. 22, and cf.
Jellinek, ‘System der Oeffentlichen subjektiven Rechte,” p. 28.


32 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


by the patient analysis of its practices, to discover their probable
result. The problem of authority then becomes clear. We
want to know why men obey government. We want the causes
that explain the surely striking fact of a voluntary servitude of
a large mass of men to a small portion of their number. We
want to know also the way in which authority should be organ-
ised if the results of the state-purpose are best to be attained.
Do we need, for instance, one authority, or many? Is it, as
Rousseau conceived, dangerous to divide our power? Must
the force at the command of authority be, as the timid Hobbes
assumed, without limit of any kind? Is the individual, in other
words, absorbed in the state? Does his freedom mean, as
Hegel makes it mean, to live the life that authority ordains?
Or does freedom mean the recognition that there are certain
reserves within the individual mind about which ultimate re-
sistances must be organised? Has man, that is to say, rights
against the state? If he belongs to a church, where must his
obedience go if there is conflict of authority? Is he interstitial
no less than social, and must we protect his denial of complete
submergence in his fellowships? To none of these questions can
we yet obtain in any sense an adequate response. Yet it is
these questions we must answer if we are one day to have a
working philosophy of the state.


Ill. THE NATURE OF OBEDIENCE


Any political speculation thus involves an enquiry into the
nature of obedience to government. It is an enquiry which no
political’ philosopher may yet dare to answer. One day, we
may hope, the social psychologist will give us insight enough
into the factors of human association to enable us to emphasise
the main elements involved; and we as yet can say little more
than Hume when he insisted that obedience is necessary to
the existence of society. Some things, indeed, we can already
vaguely see. Imitation must count for much.” The tendency
in men—which Mr. Graham Wallas has even dignified into an
instinct—to accept leadership is vital.8 We can hardly ap-

31 But see an important warning as to its influence in G. Wallas, ‘The
Great Society,” Ch. VIII.


38 Cf. the admirable chapter of Dr. MacDougall, “Social Psychology,”
Ch. VII, esp. p. 194 f.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 33


prove the account of Sir Henry Maine which makes of it a
habit bred into the tissue of the race by countless ages of
subservience to the state; though it is no doubt true that to an
extent which greatly neéds analysis the state is built upon the
inertia of men. Macaulay, in an interesting passage, has
told us how naturally the Duke of Wellington took for granted
the courageous discipline of the soldiers on the ill-fated Birken-
head; and, in a less degree, this sense of discipline that results
from training must play a large part in ordering life. But it
is not the whole answer to the problem.!

Political thinkers are, for the most part, ika in their
answer (at best Paaa) into two schools. The most funda-
mental, because it is that which has most subtly influenced the
results of juridical enquiry, is perhaps the school of Hobbes.
In that view, obedience is founded upon fear. Government is
able to exert the authority it possesses because it has behind
it the ultimate sanction of force. Men obey its dictates be-
cause the pain of disobedience makes them cowards.’ Law is
thus the command of government, and we obey the law because
the penalties of disobedience are, for most of us, too serious to
be endured. The theory does not, perhaps, take the highest
view of human nature; but the fear-psychologists, from Thras-
ymachus to Hobbes, are rarely generous in their outlook.
That the theory has an element of truth is, of course, indubi-
table. But that it is obviously only a partial explanation
immediately the history of coercion is studied is surely not less
clear. No one can watch the slow rise of toleration into ac-
ceptance, can see how dubiously it was proposed, and how
suspiciously it was put into operation, without realising that
if, ultimately, acceptance came, it can only have been because
the attempt to use fear as a method of compulsion proved, in
the event, to be worthless. If fear was the real ground of obedi-
ence, the early Christians could hardly have survived; and
certainly the failure of the Penal Laws against Catholicism in
England becomes inexplicable. The fact is that a unity pro-
duced by terror is at best but artificial; and where the deepest


39 H. Maine, “Popular Government,” p. 63.
40 “Life,” by Sir G. Trevelyan (Nelson’s ed.), 11. 293.
41 Cf. Mr. Wallas’ remarks, “The Great Society,” Ch. V.


34 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


convictions of men are attacked terror must prove ultimately
worthless.”

The school of which the name of Rousseau is deservedly the
most famous adopted an entirely different attitude. For it,
the basis of obedience is consent. Men obey government be-
cause the return for their obedience is the “‘real” freedom it
is the object of the state-life to secure. Unless that obedience
be general, anarchy is inevitable; acceptance of the govern-
ment’s command is therefore essential that its purposes may
be made secure. For Rousseau himself, perhaps, it is the will
of the citizen-body alone that must be binding; but it is difficult
to see how that will can be directly known in the modern state.
And for political purposes it is probable that this is the most
fruitful avenue of approach. It needs, indeed, a singularly
careful statement. The idea of a social contract itself we have
to reject as fiction; and it is perhaps safer not to make use of
the term contractual in the determination of state relations.
For contract, after all, is a definite legal term to which precise
meaning is attached; and to apply it to the vague expecta-
tions raised by the acts of government is to shroud ourselves
in illusion. But the emphasis of consent is unconnected with
such difficulties. It emphasises, what needs continual iteration,
that the end of the state is fundamental. It throws into relief
the striking fact that while the government of the state must
endure, if its own existence is to be possible, its purpose is at
each stage subject to examination. Members of the state we
all may be, but it must exist not less for our welfare than its
own. It is here, perhaps, that we have been led astray by the
dangerous analogies of the nineteenth century. When we
accept the idea of the state as an organism, what is emphasised
is subjection of its parts to the welfare of the whole. But, in
sober fact, the welfare of the state means nothing if it does
not mean the concrete happiness of its living members. In


42 Cf. Sir F. Pollock’s interesting essay on the Theory of Persecution,
“Essays in Jurisprudence and Ethics,” esp. p. 175.

4 This, I think, would equally apply to the school of M. Leon Bourgeois
which explains the state as founded upon quasi-contract. Every lawyer
knows what quasi-contract is, but in the realm of politics it only serves to
give a specious exactness to inexact notions.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 35


that aspect, the concept of an organism is, as Dr. McTaggart
has brilliantly insisted,“ inapplicable, For the individual re-
gards himself as an end not less than he so regards the state;
and we are here again confounded by the important fact of
a refusal of absorption into the whole that is greater than our-
selves. If we are fundamentally Catholics, for instance, we do
not the more truly realise ourselves by obeying the Clarendon
Code; what we do is to make ourselves different, to destroy
ourselves for the state by making for it meaningless the per-
sonality that is our contribution to its well-being. And that
can only mean that acts which touch us nearly must be de-
pendent for their validity upon the consent they can secure.
Legally valid they may well be in the sense that they emanate
from the authority that is empowered to enact them. But no
student of politics can stop there. A political judgment is not
a pronunciation of legal right alone. The law of the British
constitution may not give to Englishmen the right-of free
speech; but that does not mean that an English Prime Min-
ister will not encounter difficulties if he fails to regard that
right as real. We must, indeed, discuss the grounds upon
which consent may be given or withheld; but that does not
disturb the fact that the element of consent i is ; essential to any
adequate analysis.

In the theory of obedience, then, the element of consent to
policy, however indirect, is of the first importance. We are,
in some degree sufficient to prevent rebellion, satisfied with the
provision made by government to fulfil the purposes of the
state. But the fact of broadening demand is here sufficiently
remarkable to merit attention. The state, we have said, exists
to promote the good life of its members; government is the
mechanism by which that purpose has been translated into the
event. But the question of actual translation is always a
question of fact. The motive of statesmen, the objective merit
of their acts, demand continuous enquiry. No one can survey

44 See his fine essay on the Conception of Society as an Organism in
his “Studies in Hegelian Cosmology.”

45 For a refusal to obey the Defence of the Realm Act on this ground
see an interesting note upon the action of the executive council of the


Quakers in the London Nation for December 8, 1917, and see the report
of the trial in New York Evening Post, June 24, 1918.


36 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


the history of the English state without being impressed with
the way in which the basis of its government in consent has
been progressively extended. Government, under William the
Norman, is the king; the purpose it has in view in his reign
is to achieve the thing he wills. The good life of its members,
in any abstract ethical sense, the full realisation, for example,
of the personality of the conquered Saxon churl, is here in all
conscience meaningless enough. Magna Charta limits royal
despotism by the controlling factor of baronial interest; yet,
here again, to introduce a concept of general welfare is a dan-
gerous anachronism. When the country gentlemen begin to
rule, the state is a bigger and finer thing than when its law was
a variation upon the selfish aims of William Rufus; but no one,
to take a single instance, can read the record of its game laws
and enclosure acts, and mistake its devotion to the interests
of the squire. With the Industrial Revolution, power passes
to the middle classes; but the long record of Combination
Acts and of antagonism to such measures as would have given
an unpropertied labourer an interest in the state, have a mean-
ing which no honest observer can misunderstand. When
Hannah More can tell the women of Shipham in 1801 that the
charity dispensed to them is to show them their dependence
upon the rich, and comes “of favour and not of right’’* it is
clear that the attitude she represents does not visualise a state
in which the concept of the good life has or obtains any general
application. The acutest of political observers in nineteenth
century England, Walter Bagehot, regarded a ‘permanent
combination” of the working classes as an “evil of the first
magnitude,” and he did not hesitate to say that the way in
which ‘‘the electors only selected one or two wealthy men to
carry out the schemes of one or two wealthy associations”
was “the only way in which our own system could be main-
tained.”“ No one, indeed, can read Mr. Bagehot’s gloomy
prophecies of the probable effects of the Reform Act of 1867


46 Hammond, “The Town Labourer,” p. 229. I know no more vivid illus-
tration of the way in which the state-purpose changes than this brilliant
book.

47 “Collected Works,” Vol. V, p. 120. The quotation is from his
“English Constitution.”


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 37


without feeling that for him Government is something that
carries out the will of the “higher classes.” When a distin-
guished connection of the English royal family can explain the
advent of compulsory military service as “necessary at this
time when the people were getting out of hand’ it becomes
clear that scrutiny must be made of the way in which the pur-
pose of the state gets translated into acts of government.

In such a scrutiny certain obvious facts clearly emerge. No
one claims that in the modern state the good life, in any reason-
able definition, is realised by any but a small minority of its
members. Liberty in the sense of the positive and equal oppor-
tunity of self-realisation we have hardly in any genuine sense
established. That is not a cause for repining but a simple fact;
and it is to be set in the perspective of the remembrance that
far larger numbers share in what of good the modern state can
secure than.at any previous period of history.“ But whether
we consider the patent inequalities in the distribution of wealth,
the results of the competitive struggle in industry, the hopeless
inadequacies of our educational systems, the one thing by which
we must be impressed is the absence of proportion between
political purpose and its achievement. We no longer believe
that a simple individualism is the panacea for our ills. “ The
mere conflict of private interests”, said Ingram thirty years
ago, “will never produce a well-ordered commonwealth of
labour”; and on the other hand it is not less clear that the sim-
ple formulae of a rigid collectivism offer no real prospect of
relief. The truth is that in the processes of politics what,
broadly speaking, gets registered is not a will that is at each
moment in accord with the state-purpose, but the will of those
who in fact operate the machine of government. They are, it is
true, selected for that purpose by the electoral body of the state;
and it is increasingly obvious that universal adult suffrage, or


48 Quoted in J. A. Hobson, “Democracy after the War,” p. 67.

49 Even in a gloomy period of English history Francis Place could in
his “Improvement of the Working People” record the great change for
good that he had observed in his own lifetime.

50 “ History of Political Economy,” p. 298.

51] mean in the simple sense that would transfer all industrial activ-


ities to government.


38 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


some close approximation to it, will be the electoral system of
every country that shares in the ideals of Western civilisation.
Theoretically, doubtless, the conference of universal suffrage
places political power in the hands of that part of the state which
has not enjoyed, or at least only partially enjoyed, the benefit of
its purposes. Nor is the reason for this hidden from us. It is
more than three centuries since Harrington enunciated the law
that power goes with the ownership of land; and if we extend
that concept, in the light of the Industrial Revolution, to capi-
tal in its broadest sense, it is now a commonplace that political
power is the handmaid of economic power. In that aspect, it
is not difficult to understand why the easy optimism of the re-
formers of the first half of the nineteenth century has been so
largely disappointed. They were not, in fact, attacking the
real root of the problem. No political democracy can be real
that is not as well the reflection of an economic democracy; for
the business of government is so largely industrial in nature as
inevitably to be profoundly affected by the views and purposes
of those who hold the keys of economic power. That does not
necessarily mean that government is consciously perverted to
the ends of any class within the state. So to argue is to project
into history a malignant teleology from which it is, in no small
degree, free. But when power is actually exerted by any section
of the community, it is only natural that it should look upon its
characteristic views as the equivalent of social good. It is, for
example, difficult to believe that John Bright opposed the Fac-
tory Acts with a view to his own pocket. It is not less impossible
to assert that Dr. Arnold opposes the emancipation of the Jews
out of a selfish desire to benefit his own church. But it was then
natural even for a humane factory-owner to believe that good
conduct consists in maintaining the prosperity of the manu-
facturing classes, and that whatever, in his judgment, is fatal to
that prosperity is mischievous. Dr. Arnold believed the English
nation to be by definition Christian; and to admit the Jews to
Parliament would thus, in his views, have been a contradiction in


82 “Works” (ed. cf. 1747), p.39, ef. Bonav’s remarks, “Philosophy of Politi-
cal Economy,” p. 90.

88 Cf. Mr. Graham Wallas’ superb analysis, “Human Nature in Politics,”
passim.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 39


terms. It has been necessary for Mr. Justice Holmes to remind
the Supreme Court of the United States that the Fourteenth
Amendment does not enact Mr. Herbert Spencer’s Social
Statics. The fellow-servant doctrine could never. have won
acceptance in an industrial democracy. The Osborne decision
is naturally to be expected from a group of men whose circum-
stances and training would have obviously tended to make
suspect the methods and purposes of trade-unionism.*”

This is a truth perhaps somewhat difficult to perceive in our
own day because it tends to be obscured by the mechanisms of
the democratic powers. But the examination of past history
makes it more than clear. No one can analyse the social and
political conditions of the ancien régime in France without
perceiving that the whole effort of its structure was towards the
maintenance of aristocratic interests. Whether we regard the
form of the States General, the composition of the Parliaments,
the privileges of the nobility, it is, as Acton said, “class gov-

. ernment” that they imply, “the negation of the very idea of
state and nation.’®® The episcopal opposition to Catholic
Emancipation is a similar phenomenon; it is grounded upon
the conviction that it was detrimental to the interests of the
Established Church.*® The same problem confronted the au-
thors of the American Constitution. ‘The most common and
durable source of Factions,” said Madison,® “has been the
various and unequal distribution of property. Those who hold

-= and those who are without property have ever formed distinct

interests in society. . . . The regulation of these various and
interfering interests forms the principal task of modern legis-
lation and involves the spirit of party and faction in the
necessary and ordinary operations of government.” It does
not, generally speaking, seem inaccurate to say that the proc-
54 Cf. my “Problem of Sovereignty,” p. 89.
55 Lochner v. New York, 198 U.S. 45, 75-6. The whole opinion throws
a flood of light upon this question.
56 Cf. A. Birrell, “Law of Employers’ Liability,” p. 20.
57 Cf. Webb, “History of Trade Unionism,” Introd. to the 1911 edition,

esp. p. XXV.

58 “ Lectures on the French Revolution,” p. 41.
59 Cf. my ‘‘ Problem of Sovereignty,” p. 123 f.
60 The Federalist, No. 10.


40 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


esses of politics are a struggle between the possessors of a cer-
tain power, and those who desire to share in its exercise. The
grounds of exclusion have been very various. Often we meet
with suspicion of those unpossessed of property. Sometimes
membership of a religious creed is held as a disqualification.
The general fact is that, whatever the grounds of exclusion,
those who have possession of power are not lightly persuaded
to part with it, or to co-operate in its exercise. Admission te
rights is the gate most difficult of entrance in the political
citadel.

It is yet obvious that if the democratic synthesis be perma-
nent—and it is upon that assumption alone that this analysis
is valid—in the matter of rights there can be no differentiation.
Government exercises power not in the interests of any party or
class within the state but in the interest of the state as a whole.
But that is undisguised idealism. In sober fact, government is
exerted in the interests of those who control its exercise. That
is, indeed, progressively less true. A modern parliament would
not dare to debate a Factory Act in the style of 1802. Few mod-
ern statesmen would venture to analyse a Reform Bill in the
caustic fashion of Bagehot or Robert. Lowe. No responsible
statesman would now speak of atheists in the style of Edmund
Burke. But once the fact is clear that the result of govern-
ment is in practice different from what theory makes it, the
necessary inference is a suspicion of power. What use is the
sovereignty of the state if it means the aristocratic privileges of
the ancien régime? What use is the sovereignty of the state if
if it permits the maintenance of the slums of the modern city?
The conclusion, surely, is forced upon us that the state permits
a sinister manipulation of its power. It is the habit of govern-
ment to translate the thoughts and feelings and passions with
which it is charged into terms of the event and deem them the
achievement of the state-purpose. But so specialised a welfare
as that which is achieved is obviously different from the ideal
end so vigorously emphasised by philosophy.

Not, indeed, that the record of government is an unrelieved
catalogue of perversions. Few would be so malicious or so


& Cf. for instance, the second ‘‘ Letter upon a Regicide Peace.” “Works”?
(World’s Classics ed.), Vol. VI, esp. p. 192 f.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 41


stupid as not to believe that there are numerous instances of
statesmen who have pursued a general good wider than their
private desire because they believed the times demanded it.
That, surely, was the case of Sir Robert Peel in 1846. He de-
stroyed, almost consciously, his party in order to achieve an
end he thought more splendid than its own fortune; and he
did not falter even when his policy involved his political down-
fall. It would have been simple, to take a different problem,
for John Hus at Constance, or for Luther at Worms, to have
recanted. In either case the desertion would have been easy—
as easy, for example, as Luther’s desertion of the peasants
some five years later. But the individual action does not
destroy, even if it may mitigate, the general tendency. There
has been yet no state in history in which the consistent effort
has been towards the unique realisation of the common good.

If the state is sovereign, what, in such an aspect, does its
sovereignty imply? It is, we are told, an absolute thing; and
the most generous of modern German theorists has allowed it
only the limitation of its personal grace. But this theory of
auto-limitation is in reality meaningless; for to be bound
only by one’s will is not, in any real sense, to be bound at all.
Now sovereignty, we are told,® “‘is that power which is neither
temporary, nor delegated nor subject to particular rules which
it cannot alter, nor answerable to any other power on earth.”
What this really means is less formidable than the appearance
seems to warrant. It implies only that for the courts the will
of a sovereign body, the king in Parliament for example, is
beyond discussion. Every judge must accept unquestioningly
what fulfils the requirements of the forms of law. But, for the
purposes of political philosophy, it is not so abstract and a priori
a definition we require. What we desire to know is not what
has the legal right to prevail, but what does in actual fact pre-
vail and the reasons that explain its dominance. Here, it is
clear enough, the legal theory of sovereignty is worthless.
Once we are in the realm of actual life it is upon the limitations


62 The best defense of this theory is in Jellinek, “Recht des mod. Staates,”
p. 421 f.

6 Pollock, “History of the Science of Politics,” p. 52. I ought to add that
Sir F. Pollock is here stating a view in which he does not himself share.


42 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


of sovereignty that attention must be concentrated. What
then impresses us is the wide divergence between legal right
and moral right. Legally, an autocratic Czar may shoot down
his subjects before the winter palace at Petrograd; but, morally,
it is condemnation that we utter. Legally, Parliament could
tomorrow re-enact the Clarendon Code; but what stirs us now
is the injustice of its policy. There is, that is to say, a vast
difference between what Dean Pound has admirably called
“Law in books” and “Law in action.’’ It is with the latter
alone that a realistic theory of the state can be concerned.


IV. THE LIMITATIONS OF POWER


In actual life, then, the sovereignty of the state is subject to
limitation. The power it can exert, either directly, or through
its instruments, is never at any moment absolute. Attention
must be ceaselessly paid to the thousand varied influences that
play upon the declaration of its will. Power, that is to say, is
held upon conditions.. The members of the state look to it for
certain conduct. as alone capable of justification. They think,
in brief, that there are certain principles by which its life must
be regulated. Few would urge that those principles can at any
moment be regarded as unchanging. It is a matter of the
simplest demonstration that moral ideals cannot escape the
categories of evolution. Conduct that would distress one gen-
eration is regarded with equanimity by its predecessor. But
that does not alter the vital fact that for authority a way of
life is prescribed. It is not, indeed, laid down in a written
code, though it only lies the more profoundly in our nature
because it is inarticulate. For every statesman knows well
enough that there are certain things he dare not do because the
sense of the public will be against him. That system of con-
ventions is important. It emphasises the conditionality of
power. It means, in other words, that so deep is the expecta-
tion of what, broadly speaking, may be termed the right con-
‘duct of authority that its antithesis ensures the provocation
of penalties.

This can, perhaps, be more usefully expressed in another
way. Whatever the requirements of legal theory, in actual

6444 American Law Review, p. 12.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 43


fact no man surrenders his whole being to the state. He has
a sense of right and wrong. If the state, or its instruments,
goes too consistently against that sense, he is pricked into an-
tagonism. The state, that is to say, is for him sovereign only
where his conscience is not stirred against its performance.
Nor is this all. He expects from the state the fulfilment of its
purposes. He expects it to make possible for him the attain-
ment of certain goods. Again, the degree of expectation is
subject to serious change; an Anglo-Saxon chur! will have hopes
different from those of an English workman of the twentieth
century; Mrs. Proudie will exert a different power in the
Barchester of one age than will the wife of her husband’s suc-
cessor. When the realisation of these hopes is keenly enough
felt to be essential to the realisation of the purpose of the state
we have a political right. It is a right natural in the sense that
the given conditions of society at the particular time require
its recognition. It is not justified on grounds of history. It
is not justified on grounds of any abstract or absolute ethic. It
is simply insisted that if, ina given condition of society, power
is so exerted as to refuse the recognition of that right, resistance
is bound to be encountered. By right, that is to say, we mean
a demand that has behind it the burden of the general experi-
ence of the state. It is, as T. H. Green said,‘‘a power of which
the exercise by the individual or by some body of men is recog-
nised by a society either as itself directly essential to the com-
mon good, or as conferred by an authority of which the main-
tenance is recognised as so essential.”

But this, it may be argued, is a claim hardly less theoretic
than sovereignty itself. It may not be able to get itself recog-
nised The government may, through malice, or in honesty,
doubt its wisdom and oppose it. But a right admits of en-
forcement. There are, in the first place, the ordinary channels
of representative government; in a democratic state, for in-
stance, periodic reference is made to the people for the refresh-
ment of power. At an English general election, for example,
ministers are returned to or rejected from office either to per-
form certain things, or because it is believed that the opposing
party will better represent the purpose of the state. The


6 T. H. Green, ‘“‘Collected Works,” 11, 419.


44 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


Labour party in England today is demanding for “every member
of the community, in good or bad times alike (and not only to
the strong and able, the well-born and the fortunate), the
securing ‘‘of all the requisites of healthy life and worthy citi-
zenship.”® A large portion of the British state is thus striving
to achieve certain things as rights because without them life
is not deemed worth the living. By rights it means the recog-
nition that every member of the state must without distinction
possess certain goods, and that the situation implied in that
possession is too fundamental to be subject to the whims of
authority. These rights are to be written into the fabric of
the state. They limit what authority can do by making them
a minimum below which no member of the state must fall.
They are, normally, written into the fabric of the state by the
constitutional processes provided by law; and it is perhaps
well, as Green has suggested,” to emphasise the desirability
of achievement by this means. But the reserve power of revo-
lution always exists. The American War of Independence
is the vindication of a claim to a certain right of self-govern-
ment; and in that case territorial conditions made possible
the foundation of a new state separate from the old. The French
Revolution is the assertion of a lack of confidence in the holders
of power, and the change in the form of the state that the claim
to certain rights might be fulfilled.

In the case both of the American and the French Revolution
we have the programme upon which the new order was founded:
in neither case can it be said that it was in any full sense
achieved. But this does not lessen the significance of the moral
that is to be drawn from the study of the problem of rights.
Whenever ina state a group of persons large enough to make its
presence felt demands the recognition of certain claims, it will
not recognise a law which attempts defiance of them; nor will it
accept the authority by which that law is enforced. Recent
events have thrown this attitude into striking relief. The atti-
tude of Ulster before 1914 was a refusal to accept the sovereignty


6 “Labour and the New Social Order, Report on Reconstruction by the
Subcommittee of the British Labour Party” (Reprinted in The New Republic,
Vol. XIV, No. 172, Part II, p. 4).

87 “Works,” II, 417 f, cf. Barker, “Political Thought from Spencer,” p. 60.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 45


of an Act of Parliament which granted self-government to
Ireland. The refusal was made in the name of conscience; and
whatever be thought of the penumbra of passions and personal-
ties by which it was surrounded the fundamental fact has to be
recorded that Parliament and the ministry found themselves
jointly powerless in the face of an illegally organised opposi-
tion. The women suffragists were able, over a period of eight
years, to set at defiance the ordinary rules of law; and few
people today seriously doubt that the reason why that defiance
was so successfully maintained was the fact of its moral content.
Those who refused obedience to the Military Service Act of
1916 were able to prove the powerlessness of the state to force
them into subjection. Convinced of the iniquity of war, they
claimed the right to be absolved from direct contact with it;
and it is highly significant that in America the Quakers should
have received express exemption from that contact. That is
the tacit admission that where the means taken by the state
to achieve its purposes conflicts with the ideals of another
group there are occasions when the state will find it wise to
forego the claim of paramountcy. And, here again, the real
fact involved is that of consent. No state can act in the face
of the active opposition of any considerable portion of itself.
No state will venture in practice to claim control over certain
areas within the competence of other groups. Acts of authority
are thus limited by the consciences that purposes different from
that of the state can command.

That is to affirm that government dare not range over the
whole area of human life. No government, for instance, dare
prescribe the life of the Roman Catholic Church. Bismarck
made the attempt, and it is doubtful if it will be repeated.®
Where alone the state can attempt interference with groups
other than itself is where the action of the group touches terri-
tory over which the state claims jurisdiction. There is no
certainty that the state will be successful. There is even no
certainty that it merits success. It may, indeed, crush an
opponent by brute force. That does not, however, establish
right; it-is merely the emphasis of physical superiority. The
only ground for state-success is where the purpose of the state


68 Cf. my “Problem of Sovereignty,” Ch. V.


46 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE

is morally superior to that of its opponent. The only ground
upon which the individual can give or be asked his support
for the state is from the conviction that what it is aiming at is,
in each particular action, good. We deny, that is to say, that
the general end of the ideal state colours the policy of a given
act of a special state. And that denial.involves from each
member of the state continuous scrutiny of its purpose and its
method.

It deserves his allegiance, it should receive it, only where it
commands his conscience. Bismarck failed in the Kulturkampf
precisely because he could not convince the German Catholics
of the moral superiority of his position to that of Rome. It
was right that he should have so failed; for the basis of his
position was virtually the assertion that the duty of the indi-
vidual conscience is a blind and impulsive obedience to govern-
ment. He did not understand that to put a minister in office
does not permit the citizen body to cease all interest in affairs
of state. On the contrary, because it is in the name of that
citizen-body that power is exerted, it is essential that they
should have convictions about the goodness or badness of the
particular end that power is intended to serve. We can make
no distinction, except in possible aspiration, between govern-
ment and subjects, so long as there is acquiescence by the one
in the policy of the other. An act of government becomes a
state-act whenever the members of the state do not attempt at
least its repudiation.” For power is held not for evil but for
good, and deflection from the path of right purpose ought to
involve the withdrawal of authority for its exercise. |

This, clearly enough, must make an important difference to
the emphasis we place upon rights. Once we insist upon con-
sent as the most fruitful source of the claim to obedience, there

69 This amends somewhat the argument of my first book (Ch. I, p. 11).
I there argued that we have no right to identify the citizen with the state;
but I now think it is better to emphasise the possibility of distinction and
to argue for the identity of moral responsibility where there is passive
acquiescence. Liebknecht, in such a view, does not share in the responsi-
bility of the German state for the destruction of Belgium.

1I say “attempt”; for it is conceivable that the members of a state
might desire and aim at, repudiation, but fail because the government
was too powerful to be immediately resisted with success.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 47


is cast upon the individual member of the state the duty of
scrutinising jts policy; for if he ought ultimately at least to
protest, and perhaps to disobey, where his conscience is in-
volved, an active interest in polities i is the most indispensable
condition of citizenship. Nor is that active interest an easy
matter. It is scarcely difficult for the son of a political family,
brought up, like the younger Pitt, to regard politics as the one
adequate pursuit of the mind, to cateh the vision of its devious
bye-ways. But, for the average voter, there is scarcely the
same infallible source of understanding in questions of state,
and the opportunity of training is essential. Few would now
interpret training to mean the weekly discussions of Harring-
ton’s Oceana; but it is undeniable that some satisfactory sub-
stitute has still to be found. An illiterate man has no real
means of performing the functions of citizenship. A man who
is exhausted by excessive physical labour is similarly debarred
from the opportunity of adequate understanding. If the ner-
vous and mental energies of men are exhausted in the sheer
effort of existence, as they so largely are exhausted, it is plain
that the most efficacious well-spring of political improvement
is poisoned at its source. One of the main evils of the history of
government, indeed, has been the tragic fact that over a great
period politics has been the concern of a leisured class simply
because no other portion of the community has had the time
or the strength to devote itself in any full measure to these
questions. That is not in any sense to suggest misgovernment;
but it is to suggest the impossible narrowness of the source from
which the dominating ideas of government have been drawn.
It is to suggest that if the state is to be in any real sense repre-
sentative of the wills and desires of its members, their wills
and desires must have some minimum physical basis of material
and intellectual adequacy upon which to function. That in
turn implies that means must be taken to safeguard the expres-
sion of their hopes. Rights are no more than the expression of
this minimum and its safeguards in broad terms. The right
of free expression, for example, is obviously essential if desires
are to be made known. If governments can suppress whatever


71 Cf. Webb, “Industrial Democracy” (ed. of 1911), pp. 766-84 and the
Report of the Subcommittee of the British Labour Party cited above.


48 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


they may dislike, as in the lean period of English radicalism,”
the result is obviously to put a premium upon the maintenance
of the status quo. The right to freedom of association is simply
the recognition that community of purpose involves community
of action. The right to education is simply the registration
of a claim to understand in civilised terms the ways and means
of social life. A power that fails to achieve these things, much
more, a power that aims at thwarting them, has abused the
trust that has been placed in its hands. Power has thus to be
limited by rights because otherwise there is no means, save
continual revolution, of achieving the purpose of the state.

And it is important to recognise in full measure the curious
limitations of power. Even if we grant, for the purpose of
argument, its general disposition to good will, there are two
great means by which it may suffer perversion. It may, in
the first place, be deliberately misused for selfish ends. There
have been periods, for instance, in the history of American
states when it is matter of common knowledge that the machine
of government was. disgracefully exploited. The histories of
Tammany Hall, of Mr. Kearney in California, of the Phila-
delphia gas ring, are all of them infamous enough to need no
comment.” “Some states,” Lord Bryce has written,” “. .
have so bad a name that people are surprised hen a good
act passes.” No observer of American politics, indeed, can
fail to emphasise as a fundamental fact in the life of the com-
monwealth the general suspicion of all who are interested
by profession in the business of government. A justice of
the Supreme Court of the United States has written a vehe-
ment denunciation of the influence of high finance upon Ameri-
can political life. Nor is such perversion confined to America
alone. The connection of great financial concerns with foreign
policy is a problem old enough to have its importance recog-
nised by every fair-minded observer. If a German firm can

72 Cf. Veitch, ““Fhe Genesis of Parliamentary Reform,” Chs. IX-XIV—
an invaluable book.

73 Cf. Bryce, “Am. Commonwealth,” II, 406-448.

4 Ibid. II, 163.

3 L. D. Brandeis, “Other People’s Money.” Mr. Justice Brandeis was
not, of course, a member of the Supreme Court when this was written.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 49


use the force of its government in order to coerce a foreign
power into granting it a share, dishonestly gained, in spoils
of doubtful moral validity,” obviously the considerations which
affect the foreign policy of a state demand an exact scrutiny.
If the Russo-Japanese war can even partially arise from the
private ambitions of interested courtiers,” measures have
obviously to be taken to limit the scope of abuse to which the
power of government is subject. Phenomena like Mr. Cecil
Rhodes, who deliberately set aside the consideration of nice
moral issues,” raise problems of the first importance.

But deliberate perversion of power brings with it, in the
long run, its own downfall. What is more difficult of enquiry
is the devotion of governmental authority to narrow purposes
which are deemed good by an irresponsible controlling minority.
The Combination Acts are a notable instance of this kind.
They reflect, of course, the general tendency of the French
Revolution to regard all associations as evil? but they rep-
resent also, in more sinister fashion, an entire failure on the
part of government to understand the problems of the work-
ing-class. The House of Commons refused, both in 1824 and
in 1826, to allow the abuse of man-traps and spring-guns to
be remedied; and it was only after a long struggle that, in
1836, a prisoner on trial for felony was at last allowed to have
the benefit of counsel. ‘‘The existence of unjust and foolish
laws,” says Professor Dicey,” ‘‘is less remarkable than the
grounds upon which these laws were defended. Better, it
was argued, that honest men, who had never fired a gun,
should be exposed to death by spring-guns or man-traps than
that a country gentleman should fail in preserving his game.
A prisoner, it was suggested, though he might occasionally,
through inability to employ counsel, be convicted of a murder
or a theft which he had never committed, had no reason to
complain, for the very absence of an advocate turned the


7 Brailsford,“ The War of Steel and Gold,” p. 38.

77 Ibid., p. 52.

78 As in the Glen-Grey Act for example, Cf. Hobson, “Imperialism” (ed. of
1905), p. 236.

19 Cf. chapter V. below.

80 “Law and Public Opinion” (2d edition), p. 88.


50 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


judge into a counsel for the prisoner. The plea was notoriously
untrue; but had it been founded on fact, it would have im-
plied that injustice to a prisoner could be remedied by neglect
of duty on the part of a judge.”

The process of administration has been beset by similar
difficulties. Everyone knows of the Circumlocution Office
immortalised in “Little Dorrit;” and the remarkable experiences
of Mr. Edmund Yates in the Post Office are not without their
suggestiveness.*! Sir Henry Taylor explained the evils of the
irresponsibility that existed in his day. “By evading decisions
wherever they can be evaded,” he wrote,” “by shifting them
on other departments and authorities whenever they can be
shifted; by giving decisions on superficial examination, .
by deferring questions till, as Lord Bacon said, they resolve of
themselves; by undertaking nothing for the public good which
the public voice does not call for; by conciliating loud and
energetic individuals at the expense of such public interest
as are dumb and do not attract attention; by sacrificing
everywhere what is feeble and obscure to what is influential
and cognizable . ~- .the single functionary may . . .reduce
his business within his powers, and perhaps obtain for himself
the most valuable of all reputations in this line of life, that of
a safe man.” The complaint of Charles Buller is similar,*
and the final consequence of the bureaucratic process was
given its permanent expression by Carlyle. “The mode of
making the service efficient,” said a distinguished civil servant
of the fifties, “seems never to have entered their minds.”
The routine of habit, in fact, is impermeable to the normal
channels of change; and so important a critic as Sir Charles
Trevelyan actually thought that it was the spirit of 1848
which induced England to put its house in order. There

81 See his amusing “Recollections,” Vol. I, pp. 96 f, 106.

2 “The Statesman,” p. 155.

8 Cf. his character of Mr. Mothercountry in his “Responsible Govern-
ment in the Colonies.”

% “Latter Day Pamphlets” (ed. of 1885), p. 47.

8 “Civil Service Papers,” 1854-5, p. 272. He is speaking of the House
of Commons.


8 “Second Report of Commission on Civil Service.” Parl. Papers, 1875,
Vol. XXIII, p. 100.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 51


has, of course, been vast improvement since that time; but
the tendency to which administration is liable is a constant
factor in the exercise of authority.

In all this, the argument of deliberate malevolence is as
inaccurate as it is obvious and certain that the result is the
perversion of the end the state should serve. It is perhaps
dangerous, as Burke suggested, to go back too often to the
foundations of the state; but it is at least no abstract question
upon which we are engaged. If we find that, in the event,
authority has certain habits, and that they result in evil, we
have to seek means of their effective change, or at least some
safeguard against the evil. And it is in events alone that we
must search for our truths. It is useless, as Burke rightly
saw,” to discuss “the abstract right of a man to food or medi-
cine. The question is upon the method of procuring and ad-
ministering them.” If we find that, however good the intention
of those who hold the reins of power, that intention is somehow,
if not frustrated, at least inadequately realised in the event,
we have to examine the elements involved in such translation
into practice. All kinds of factors may complicate the problem.
If the member of Parliament, for instance, be Sir Pitt Crawley,
it is hardly useful to force upon his attention the rights of
man. If the member of the House of Lords be a promoted
Archdeacon Grantley assuredly he will not grasp the social
problem in an adequate perspective.*® The fact here is that
to many of those who are engaged in the task of government,
the problem of authority is either unknown, or is uncon-
sciously set in terms of the status quo. That Duke of Newcastle
who desired to do what he would with his own, was probably
completely unaware that there was a theory of the state in-
volved in his attitude. Queen Victoria’s refusal, in 1859, to
make Mr. Bright a Privy Councillor on the ground that ‘it
would be impossible to allege any service Mr. Bright has ren-
dered, and if the honour were looked upon as a reward for his
systematic attacks upon the institutions of the country, a
very erroneous impression might be produced as to the feeling


87 ‘Reflections on the French Revolution.” ‘‘Works’’ (World’s Classics,


ed.), Vol. IV, p. 66.
88 Cf. Mr. Wallas’ comment, “The Great Society,” p. 332.


52 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


which the Queen or her government entertain towards those
institutions’? is, in reality, an expression of the conviction
that the middle class had better know its place, and not meddle
with the business of its superiors. The implication surely is
that Bright’s long attack on institutions only partially democ-
ratised was, in the royal opinion, no contribution to social
improvement.

In every phase of the general social question the real assump-
tion is the belief for which Burke so strenuously argued. “‘ Prop-
erty,” he said,” “. . .never can be safe from the invasions
of ability unless it be, out of all proportion, predominant in
the representation.” It is, as he said, a simple truth that
“the same quantity of property which is, by the natural course
of things, divided among many, has not the same operation.”
But that is, in reality, to argue that power goes with the dis-
tribution of property, and it supposes power to be rightly
used only where it is exerted in the interest of property. In
a period of revolution it was perhaps natural for him seriously
to over-estimate the dangers to which property is subject.
Mr. Gladstone, at least, was less fearful. ‘‘There is a saying
of Burke’s,” he told Lord Morley,” “from which I must utterly
dissent. ‘Property is sluggish and inert.’ Quite the contrary.
Property is vigilant, active, sleepless; and if it ever seems to
slumber, be sure that one eye is open.” That surely is the
lesson of history; for every class which possesses property
will claim that it has an abstract right to power. Yet Burke,
more than any man of his time, would have thought little
enough of so abstract a claim; and he would have insisted that
the real test of property, as, therefore, of the power which it
controls, is the way in which it functions.


V. THE ATTACK ON THE SECULAR STATE


In our own time it is in general felt that the result of the demo-
cratic process is unsatisfactory. The authority that is exerted
in the name of the state fails to result in accomplishing that

89 Trevelyan, “Life of Bright,” p. 283.

9 “Reflection on the French Revolution.” “Works” (World’s Classics
ed:). Vol. IV., p55.

% Morley, “Life of Gladstone,” III, 352.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 53


for which the state exists. It is into the cause of this discrep-
ancy that we are examining. Virtually, the answer that we
make is an insistence upon the humanity of men. ‘A nation
or a state,” Professor Dicey has written,” “means, conceal it
how you will, a lot of individual selves with unequal talents
and in reality unequal conditions, and each of these selves
does—or rather must—think not exclusively but primarily
of his‘own self. The old doctrine of original sin may be totally
disconnected from the tale of Eve and her apple, or any other
religious tradition or theological dogma, but it represents an
undeniable fact which neither a statesman nor a preacher can
venture to ignore.” Certainly even if we make no assumptions
as to the psychological factors involved, it is true enough thus
to urge that the system, social, economic, political, under which
we live, emphasises drastically the principle of self-interest.
In such perspective, the object at which the state aims must be
made superior to the private ideals of its constituent parts,
except insofar as they coincide with that larger object. And
if authority is thus subject to exploitation, it must be subject
to limitation also. It can act without restraint only where
its end is in fact coincident with its ideal object. Its policy,
that is to say, is only sovereign where it is serving the sover-
eign purpose.

That raises an immediate difficulty. Upon the rightness of
its policy it is clear that doubt may exist. On the theory of
taxation, for example, there is a clear line of distinction in
England between the Liberal and Conservative parties. Broadly
speaking, Liberalism stands for direct, Conservatism for in-
direct taxation.” In such a difference there is no ground for
repudiation of government action in terms of revolution. The
special tax involved might, indeed, well have such consequence;
resistance to a head-tax on Roman Catholics, for example, is
an argument not difficult to justify. The point at which re-
sistance becomes an expedient factor is not a matter for defi-
nition or prophecy; it will vary with the circumstances of
each age. All we can say is that at times in the history of a
state there may well come a point where the maintenance of


2 “Law and Public Opinion” (2d ed.), p. LX XX.
% Cf. Jéze, ete., “Problemes de Politique et Finances de Guerre,” p. 27.


54 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


order seems to some group of men worthless as an end compared
to achieving, by other than constitutional. means, some good
deemed greater than peace. That is the reservoir of anarchy
of which resistance to oppression is the most fertile source of
supply. It is not in any sense a denial that the large purpose
of the state is supreme. It rather insists: on its supremacy
and denies that character to governmental acts on the ground
that they do not achieve that end in any adequate fashion.
Nor is it necessarily an arid persistence on behalf of some ab-
stract theorem remotely capable of realisation. It is not for
such things that revolutions have been made. Most men who
have taken part in practical politics will admit that a theoretic
preference for an abstract system does not involve their imme-
diate effort after the destruction of an existing government
which, on all reasonable showing, suits the conditions of its
age.”

It is this perhaps that best sets the background for the
constructive answer to our questions. What, in actual fact,
are the social forces over which the power of the state ought
not to be extended? What are the limits to its authority?
In what way ought its power to be organised? There are two
obvious kinds of limitation to be discussed. Both are connected
with the fundamental problem of liberty. Its definition is
perhaps the subtlest question the political: philosopher has to
confront. The truth, of course; is that the meaning of liberty
will vary with every age. Each generation will have certain
things it prizes as supremely good and will demand that these,
above all, should be free. The permanent elements of liberty
we shall hardly know until some inspired investigator gives
us that history.of which Acton dreamed. To our own genera-
tion it seems almost certain that the insistence upon absence
of restraint is in no sense adequate. A liberty to enslave one’s
self becomes immediately self-contradictory; and Mr. Justice
Holmes has finely insisted, in one of the most significant of
his opinions, upon the intimate connection of liberty with
equality.” Nor does Mill really aid us much in his distinction

%* Cf. Gwynne and Tuckwell, “Life of Sir C. Dilke,” I, 177.

% See his dissent in Coppage v Kansas, 236 U. S., I, 26-7. The best


defence I know of the idea of liberty as absence of restraint is in Seeley’s
“Introduction to Political Science,’’ 101 f.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 55


between self-regarding and other-regarding qualities; for the
fact is that we can have no information as to the social rele-
vance of any act until we consider its consequences.% ‘When
we speak of freedom as something to be highly prized,” said
T. H. Green,” “we mean a positive power of doing or enjoying
something worth doing or enjoying, and that, too, something
that we do or enjoy in common with others.” That is more
valuable than the negative conception because it insists on
what, in this age, we feel to be fundamental in liberty—the
power of adding something to the quality of the common life.
But it does not, of course—though Green had elsewhere an-
swered that question*—tell us what it is worth while to do
or to enjoy; and here again, acute difference of opinion is
possible. It was as a historian that Acton approached the
problem, and his answer had a connotation not to be mis-
understood. ‘‘By liberty,” he said,” “I mean the assurance
that every man shall be protected in doing what he believes
his duty against the influence of authority and majority, cus-
tom and opinion.” To a practical statesman that will seem
perhaps a counsel of perfection; and, certainly, it is a counsel
that, at every stage, will encounter acute difficulties of practical
operation.

It yet sets, in the background of Green’s conception, the
idea we need of the internal limitation upon the action of the
state. It insists upon the greatest truth to which history bears
witness that the only real security for social well-being is the
free exercise of men’s minds. Otherwise, assuredly, we have
contracted ourselves to slavery. The only permanent safe-
guard of democratic government is that the unchanging and
ultimate sanction of intellectual decision should be the con-
science. We have here, that is to say, a realm within which
the state can have no rights and where it is well that it should
have none. No state, in truth, is ever firmly grounded that
has not in such fashion won the consent of its members to


æ Cf. Prof. Dicey’s comment. “Law and Public Opinion,” p. XXVIII.
97 “Works,” III, 371.

98 Jn the “Prolegomena to Ethics.”

99 “History of Freedom,” p. 3.


56 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


action. The greatest contribution that a citizen can make to
the state is certainly this, that he should allow his mind freely
to exercise itself upon its problems. Where the conscience of
the individual is concerned the state must abate its demands;
for no mind is in truth free once a penalty is attached to thought.
Nor will consent so won be real consent. It is patent to the
world that the inexhaustible well-spring of democratic resource,
as against any other form of government, is that no other
system can be certain of itself. The methods by which an
autocracy must secure consent are today, or should be, tolerably
well-known; and while they may seem at times to have the
efficacy of poison, they result always in death or violent remedy.

Freedom of thanght, then, the modern state must regard
as absolute; and that means freedom of thought whether on
the part of the indjvidual or of a social group. Nothing is
more stupid than for the state to regard the individual and it-
self as the only entities of which account must be taken, or
to suggest that other groups live by its good pleasure. That
is to make the easy mistake of thinking that the activities of
man in his relation to government exhaust his nature. It is
a fatal error. The societies of men are spontaneous. They
may well conflict with the state; but they will only ultimately
suffer suppression if the need they supply is, in some equally
adequate form, answered by the state itself. And it is tolerably
clear that there are many such interests the state cannot serve.
The growth of religious difference, for example, makes the
state-adoption of any religious system a matter of doubtful
expediency; and that means, as has been before insisted, that
the internal relations of churches will in fact deny state-inter-
ference. A society like the Presbyterian Church, which recog-
nises only the headship of Christ, will resist to the uttermost
any external attempt at the definition of its life; and experience
seems to suggest that the state will lose far more than it can
gain by the effort. Where the fellowship is economic in nature
the problem is, indeed, far more complex; for the modern
state is at every turn an economic organisation. But, even
here, the impossibility of absorption is shown by the tragic
history of such things as the Combination Acts. The state
may well exact responsibility for the thought such fellowships


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 57


may have where it seeks translation into action; but it will
establish its exaction only where the individual, himself judg-
ing between conflicting claims, is driven to feel that the effort
of the state is more valid than the other.


That is to say that for the state there are found subjects of
social rights and duties. They are not the creation of the state;
the state is simply an organisation existing for the realisation
ofanend. The subjects of those rights are sometimes individual
human beings; sometimes they take the form of fellowships
of men. Those fellowships possess a personality into the nature
of which it is not here necessary to examine. The funda-
mental fact for the state is that they present an activity that
is unified and must be treated as involving the possession of
rights. But the individual stands above and outside them.
The only way the state can truly prosper is by sweeping into
itself the active assistance of his mind and conscience; and it
will succeed in that effort only insofar as it respects them.
Whatever, therefore, concerns the conscience of man, what-
ever brings its activity into operation, must, for the state, be
sacred ground. That this involves difficulties in practice is
unquestionable. But if the action of the vital agency of gov-
ernment arouses such conscientious opposition as to be incapa-
ble of application, it seems, to say the least, possible that it
needs re-examination in terms of its moral character. If a
measure has so wrought upon the natural political inertia of
men as to prick them into insurgency, it has probably inter-
preted with maleficent purpose the end of the state. Even
where the opposition is small, it is probable that more is gained
by the possession of that energy of character which is willing
to offer challenge than by destroying it.! A state which op-
presses those who are antagonised by the way in which govern-


100 The bibliography of the subject is enormous. Its most fruitful treat-
ment seems to me the two volumes of Léon Michoud, ‘Theorie de la Per-
sonnalité Morale,” with which I am largely in agreement. I have tried to
indicate the nature of the problem in an article in the Harvard Law
Review for February, 1916.

101 I should like to refer to Prof. G. Murray’s really noble introduction
to Mrs. Hobhouse’s “I appeal to Caesar,” with which I am in glad
agreement.


58 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


ment interprets its purposes is bound to drift slowly into
despotism.

It is asserted that such an attitude is impractical. A man
may think as he pleases; but opposition to government is
the coronation of anarchy. It is, to say the least, uncertain
whether the assertion is so formidable as it appears. Disorder
may be better than injustice. It was assuredly better for
England that the Civil War asserted the impossibility of the
Stuart claims than that humble obedience should be offered
to them. Every government is a de facto government except
insofar as the rightness of its effort makes it de jure. A man
has, above all, to be true to himself; for, once the fatal step
is taken of humbling himself, against his inner promptings,
before the demands of authority the way to acquiescence is
easy. Nor must we be misled by the effort at confusion that
is implied in the division of the state into minority and ma-
jority. The lever of public opinion is a weapon too easily
brought into use. We rarely analyse it into its constituent
parts. We rarely estimate how far a majority-opinion is in
fact active consent, and how far it is in reality no more than
the inert acquiescence that prefers slumber to challenge. In
a problem like religious education, for example, the amount of
conscientious and instructed opinion on either side is small;
and the real truth is that a bill like Mr. Balfour’s measure of
1903 wins acceptance rather because the mass of men is unin-
terested in the technical problems involved than because the
particular solution of the church of England makes to them
some transcendent appeal. When Sir Frederick Smith can
stigmatise the Welsh Disestablishment Act as “a bill which
has shocked the conscience of every Christian community
in Europe,” he must be aware that the phrase is no more
than vulgar rhetoric, and that in fact any estimate of the
Act’s popularity it is impossible in that fashion to make. In
the process of government the importance of this inert factor
can hardly be too greatly emphasised. It needs some vivid
action to stimulate to resistance a body of men large enough
to make its presence felt in the state. We probably tend
seriously to underrate the effort that is needed to embark upon


102 Cf, Mr. Chesterton’s “Poems” (1914) for the comment on this remark.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 59


such resistance. Certainly the remark may be hazarded that
it is never aroused without deep causes to which attention
must be paid.

The assumption here made is that every individual is above
all a moral being and that the greatest contribution he can
make to the state is the effort of his moral faculties. That is
in reality an assistance to society. A state in which the con-
sciences of men are alert and energetic will hardly embark
upon the path that may lead, for example, to the invasion of
Belgium. A government which knows the existence of those
consciences will hardly allow its mind to wander in the direction
of such wrong. It is when there has been systematic training
in effortless acquiescence, that there is the easiest opportunity
for injustice. It is in such case that the state, perhaps even
civilisation, may feel the nemesis of that docility. In that
sense, by preventing the senses of men from being so sodden
as to mistake legality for moral right, we have the surest safe-
guard against disaster. The active conscience of the members
of a state acts as a self-operating check against perversion
from its purposes.

But conscience is not a thing which reacts instinctively to
any set of circumstances. It needs instruction. It has to be
trained into the fine perception of the complex issues by which
it will be confronted. The mind with which it interacts needs
nourishment to be energetic. Here, indeed, is the significance
for the state of Socrates’ great plea that virtue is knowledge.
An untutored people can never be great in-any save the rudest
arts of civilisation. Here, again, we have the elements upon
which to base a limitation of state-power. No state can through
its instruments deny education to its members. It must pro-
vide them, that is to say, with means at least adequate to a
full perception of life; for, otherwise, the purpose of the state
is at one stroke negatived for them. Even Adam Smith put
education among those activities it was well for the state to
undertake; and Mr. Graham Wallas has wisely insisted
that the growing interest of the workers in the fruits of learning
is one of the surest tests we have of progress. That does


103 “Wealth of Nations” (Everyman’s ed.), II, 269.
104 “The Great Society,” p. 302.


60 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


not condemn the state to any particular system. It does not
even suggest that there is a radical wrong in giving one man
the advantage of a classical training while his brother is sent
to a technical institute. It merely suggests that the provision
of some agreed minimum of what is adequate to the purpose
of citizenship is essential and that no state is satisfactorily
organised where this condition does not obtain. It is the more
urgent because political problems are so vast that no state,
least of all a democracy, can hope to deal with them unless
each member is sufficiently articulate to transfer the judgment
of his experience to the increase of the common store. ‘An
autocratic sultan,” it has been happily remarked, “may gov-
ern without science if his whim is law. A plutocratic party
may choose to ignore science if it is heedless whether its pre-
tended solutions of social problems. . .u!timately succeed or
fail. Buta democratic society must base its solutions upon the
widest possible induction open to its members. That is not
less American experience. Indeed, it may be claimed that
the recent experience of the whole world has very strikingly
demonstrated the need of associating the active assistance of
men with the policy of the state; and it has been found that
such assistance is more active the more highly it is trained.
That is, in fact, to emphasise that by neglect of its resources
the state has wasted the opportunity of their richest increase;
and that, surely, must involve the erection of safeguards against
the continuance of such neglect.

We are indicating avenues of possible approach rather than
detailing the exact use to which they shall be put; and it is
perhaps better to analyse the general bearing of this attitude
than to catalogue its constituent factors.” It is an attitude
‘which primarily suggests that the study of social life will in,
any scientific perspective, suggest some minimum rule of social
conduct.! Immediately the interdependence of men is real-


105 “Report of the Sub-Committee of the British Labour Party,” last
paragraph.

106 Cf. “The Report of the President’s Mediation Committee to the Presi-
dent of the United States” (1918), p. 21.

107 This will be attempted in a later work on the principles of politics.

108 Cf. Duguit, “L’Etat Le Droit Objectif,” Ch. II.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 61


ised there is ethically involved the notion of a minimum equal-
ity. That is not to say that all men are born equal. It is
simply to say that the unity involved in the mere concept
of social purpose must prevent the unnecessary degradation
of any individual. Nor is it for one moment to suggest that
this rule of conduct is an unchangeable thing. The needs of
each age, no less than its potentialities, are, of necessity, differ-
ent; and with every age our rule of conduct will therefore vary.

Nor are we, like Adam Smith, suggesting the existence of
“natural laws of justice independent of all positive institu-
tion;’’ for that, in truth, is to put ourselves outside the realm
of scientific speculation. The body of principles which can ad-
mit of an immutable and inflexible application to politics would
be so generalised in character as to be of little practical worth.
The life of politics, as of the law, lies in its functioning. Theft
may be bad and punishable by law; but we cannot apply the
criminal code until we near the penumbra which surrounds the
case. And that penumbra may well make the principle inappli-
cable. What we do is to deposit hypotheses that have come to
us from the facts of life; we declare that their application will
enrich the content of the social life. These hypotheses are not
the mere whims of chance opinion. We cannot, at least in poli-
tics, where decision is necessary, take refuge in a scepticism
which, logically followed, makes conduct impossible. We urge
that the argument for one principle can in fact be better than
another. It is today, for example, broadly believed that the
case for factory acts is stronger than the case for industrial
laissez-faire. The governmental regulation of factory-condi-
tions has by now become a part of our rule of political conduct.
That has not been universally the case. But our experience has
grown with time and we today think in other terms than the
early nineteenth century. When the hypothesis that sums up
such a general experience becomes generally enough accepted


109 “Theory of Moral Sentiments” (ed. of 1759), p. 549. A theory of natu-
ral law independent of change is defended by one of the most brilliant of
the younger school of philosophical jurists, Professor M. R. Cohen, in an
article, “Jus Naturale Redivivum,” in the Philosophical Review Vol. XXV,


p: 761.
110 Cf, Mr. Justice Holmes in Lochner v. New York, 198 U.S. 45, 76.


62 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


it gets written into the code of principles that we in general
regard as beyond the realm of ordinary discussion. The prob-
lem here is not very different from the growth in the law of torts
of liability without fault. We have penal statutes which directly
conflict with the older concept of that category. The statutes
aim, for social reasons, at securing the mass of men against cer-
tain dangers. Workmen’s Compensation, for example, throws
the burden on the employer in the belief that it is more socially
advantageous for the burden so to fall. What is here done is to
withdraw an area of social action from the ordinary concepts of
law by making it statutory. It places a statutory clause—the
provision, in certain cases, for accident—as one of the conditions
a master must observe if he wishes to engage in business.”
Workmen’s compensation is thus simply a regulation of exper-
ience. It is a principle withdrawn for the general good from the
operation of industrial competition. The general rule of conduct
is in nowise different save that its substance is perhaps more
fundamental.


That is the sense, for example, in which a real value may be
attached to the Bill of Rights in an American constitution.
Misinterpreted as it often may be,!? perverted as it certainly
has been, it yet testifies to the vital character of a solid body of
social rules. To write into the body of a constitution not imme-
diately accessible to amendment principles which are the result
of social experience is to put them beyond the reach of ordinary
mischance. Nobody who has at all examined the character of
American political life can doubt that this vague well-spring
of. idealism has not only had, but still potentially possesses, a
profound influence. The constitutional provisions against an
established church, for instance, are of course derived from a
bitter experience of Anglican persecution. They have undoubt-
edly prevented the growth of the social status connected in Eng-
land with the official religion, which still leaves a deep mark


11 Cf. my paper on the “Basis of Vicarious Liability” in 26 Yale Law
Journal 105 and Cf. Pound, 25 International Journal of Ethics, p. 1.

12 For the way in which the Fourteenth Amendment has been misinter-
preted, for example Cf. Collins, ‘‘The Fourteenth Amendment and the
States.”


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 63


upon English life. The way in which every state constitution-
ally insists upon the subordination of the military to the civil
power is the safeguard against the aggression involved breeding
into the mind of a people the thought that the army is a thing
apart, not subject to the rules of justice. No one can doubt that
Magna Charta means to an Englishman something that is not
easily to be over-emphasised; sufficient, indeed, to make it
possible for a distinguished judge to insist that only the specific
declaration of Parliament can secure its annullment.4 The
psychologic background of provisions such as these is an im-
mense preventive against the abuse of authority. They give
to doctrines the arms which make possible resistance to oppres-
sion. They sanction the effort of legisative idealism. They
represent, however vaguely, the moral desperation of a people.
“A poetical adage” may not, as Bentham sneeringly said,”
“be a reason;”’ but it is likely, if it have root in experience to
provide one; and he himself goes on to explain to what vast
results a simple phrase like ‘‘mother-country”” may give
rise.

Obviously, of course, such an attitude as this is in the closest
relation to the modern revival of natural law."° We are well
enough able now to see the main source of the discredit into
which it fell during the nineteenth century. It had tended, in
the previous age, to regard the problems of law as far too simple
and their solutions as accordingly at hand. It shared the dis-
credit which the dissatisfaction with the French Revolution
inflicted upon an optimistic outlook. It was too highly abstract
and too little careful of the forms of law. It over-emphasised
the degree to which reason is finally operative in the determina-
tion of an adequate ideal. In the result, as Dean Pound has


113 For the remains of its influence in Oxford Cf. Dicey, “Law and Pub-
lic Opinion,” 479-83.

114 Rex v. Halliday (1917). A. C. 261, 294. Cf. my comment in 31
Harvard Law Review, 296.

us “Theory of Legislation” (translated by C. M. Atkinson), Vol. I, p. 92.

16 On this cf. the great essay of Saleilles, “Ecole historique et droit
naturel” in Revue Trimestrielle de droit civil 1902, I. 80-112. Charmont “La


Renaissance du Droit Naturel.”


64 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


shown,” the pessimism of the historical school triumphed over
what seemed as more than a metaphysical miasma. But, in
fact, the effort made by the theorists of natural law enshrined
a truth of which too great neglect is possible.


That truth consists in the realisation that one of the great
mainsprings of human effort is the realisation of a good greater
than that which is actually existent. The eighteenth-century
theorists made the error of regarding that good as unchangeable.
The facts, of course, proved too strong for so rigid an outlook.
But this insistence upon idealism in law is not open to the same
difficulty if, with Stammler, we regard the ideal of natural law
as continually changing in content."® We have, as he has
pointed out," a twofold problem. We must know the relation
of law and morals. That is, of course, the ordinary problem in-
vestigated by the legal philosophers. It is not, however, the
crux of the question. We need to understand how a legal rule
is to be made just in the special conditions it is to confront.
That is a purely functional problem. It is clear, for instance,
that into the idea of justice arbitrary control cannot enter;}?°
but it is not less clear that opinion may differ as to what is arbi-
trary control. Professor Dicey, for example, has attacked the
French system of administrative law as fatal in practice to the
triumph of objective principles; and Maxime Leroy has ex-
pressed his discontent with the English rule of law.’ What
surely, we can alone admit as dogmatic is the fact that justice
is somehow to be attained yet, granted the fact of institutional
evolution it is clear that the content of justice is bound to vary.
The balance of forces in a community is subject to sufficient


u7 “The End of Law,” 30 Harvard Law Review, p. 221. I owe my whole
understanding of the background of this problem to the really noble edifice
Dean Pound has erected in these papers.

18 See above all his “Lehre von dem richtigen Rechte” and his “‘Wirth-
schafts und Recht” (2nd ed.), 119. “Lehre von clem richtigen Rechte,” pp.
13 ff. 120 Ibid pp. 208-9.

us “Lehre von dem richtigen Rechte.” pp. 13ff.

120 Thid pp. 208-9.

121 “Law of the Constitution,” Chap. XII.

122 Libres Entretiens 4me series, p. 368. I have tried to deal with this
question in some detail below.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 65


variation to make the conflict of ideals inevitable. A process
of internecine selection secures the triumph of some attitude.

This theory of internal limitation upon the action of authority.
is essentially a pragmatic one. It admits that any system
which failed in practice to secure what is largely termed the
end of social life would be inadequate. It is sufficiently alive
to the importance of stability to seek to place the fundamental
notions of each age beyond the temptation of malicious enter-
prise. It is such notions that we have termed rights. It is
such notions we have denied the power, at least in theory, of
government to traverse. For we say that their realisation is
essential to the end of the state; and government is itself
only a means to that end. The state, in fact, must limit its
instruments by the law of its own being. Sovereignty, in such
an aspect, can never belong to the government if we term it
the supreme power to do what is thought necessary. Govern-
ment, it is clear, will have a power to will. But that will may
come into conflict with other wills; and the test of the alle-
giance it should win is the degree in which it is thought to be
more in harmony than its antagonists with the end of social
life.

And this, it is clear also, envisages a pluralistic conception
of society. It denies the oneness of society and the state. It
insists that nothing is known of the state-purpose until it is
declared; and it refuses, for obvious reasons, to make a priori
observations about its content. It sees man as a being who
wishes to realise himself as a member of society. It refers
back each action upon which judgment is to be passed to the
conscience of the individual. It insists that the supreme ar-
biter of the event is the totality of such consciences. It does
not deny that the individual is influenced by the thousand
associations with which he is in contact; but it is unable to
perceive that he is absorbed by them. It sees society as one
only in purpose; but it urges that this purpose has in fact
been differently interpreted and is capable of realisation by
more than a single method. In such an analysis the state is
only one among many forms of human association. It is not
necessarily any more in harmony with the end of society than a
church or a trade-union, or a freemasons’ lodge. They have,


66 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


it is true, relations which the state controls; but that does not
make them inferior to the state. The assumption of inferi-
ority, indeed, is a fallacy that comes from comparing different
immediate purposes. Moral inferiority in purpose as between
a church and state there can hardly be; legal inferiority is
either an illegitimate postulation of Austinian sovereignty, or
else the result of a false identification of state and society.
The confusion becomes apparent when we emphasise the con-
tent of the state. When we insist that the state is a society
of governors and governed, it is obvious that its superiority
can have logical reference only to the sphere that it has marked
out for its own and then only to the extent to which that
sphere is not successfully challenged.”

Here, indeed, is the source of a serious confusion in the
recent developments of the neo-Hegelian theory of the state.
“Will not force,” said Green,! “is the basis of the state.”
That, in a sense, is true enough; but it obscures the real prob-
lem of discovering upon what will, in actual fact, the policy
of the state is based. The search is perhaps an endless one.
Certainly we must, in its course, bear in mind Green’s own
caution that “the idea of a common good which the state
fulfils has never been the sole influence actuating those who
have been agents’ in its life1?® They can never realise it,
as he thinks, except in some imperfect form. Here, surely,
is a fundamental point. For even if it be true that we are
watching in the state the slow process of a growing good which,
despite error and wrong, will somehow be realised, the growing
good cannot, by sheer assumption, necessarily be said to be
situate in one set of men rather than another. That, surely,
is a matter for examination. Few would now be found to urge

13 For an interesting suggestion that the state has the right to insist
upon fair dealing in the internal life of other societies ef. Professor Sa-
bine’s review of -my book in the Philosophical Review for January, 1918.

124 Particularly in Prof. Bosanquet’s very brilliant volume on the “Philo-
sophical Theory of the State.” I may perhaps be allowed to say that
criticism does not preclude the recognition that this book is, with the single
exception of Green’s “Principles of Political Obligation,’’ the greatest con-
tribution made by an Englishman to political philosophy since Mill.

125 Works” II, 426 f.

126 Thid. 434.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 67


that the administration which ruled England after the peace
of 1815 had a conception of good denied, for instance, to Fran-
cis Place and the radicals. .


The state is based upon will; but the wills from which its
will is eventually formed struggle amongst each other for sur-
vival. The idea of a “general” will that is necessarily good
emerging from that struggle seems, on the whole, to contribute
but little to our understanding of the event. A will is “good”
if it is a good will; but it is difficult to see why any character
should be affixed to it until we have had time to watch it in
actual operation. That was the merit of Green’s attitude. He
did not for one moment deny that in the transition from theo--

_retic purpose to practical realisation a significant transforma-
tion may occur. The lofty splendour of Mr. Bradley’s “My
Station and its Duties” may well suffer translation into the
station of the Anglican catechism. It is, indeed, the inherent
defect of idealism that it never enables us to come to grips
with facts. It incurably tends to blur them over. It thinks
so largely in terms of a beneficent teleology as to soften the
distinction between political opposites. It beatifies the status
quo by regarding each element as an integral part of a process
which it insists on viewing as a totality. But, in the heat and
stress of social life, we cannot afford such long-period value.
We may well enough regard the lean years after 1815 as the
necessary prelude to the great reforms of the thirties. But
that does not make them the less lean. We may urge that
society is in fact one and indivisible; but the dweller in a city-
slum cannot, in the nature of things, transgress the unseen
barrier which, for him, is far more real than the philosophic
bonds perceived by the abstract observer. He is surely to be
pardoned if, for example, he regards class distinctions as real
when he sees the tenacity with which privileges he does not
share are defended. He may well insist that if they are rela-
tively necessary to the construction of the whole, it is against
that whole that he is then in open revolt.

The method of realism has at least the merit of a greater
simplicity. It would not regard the South African war as
necessarily good because the Union of South Africa Act has
been a superb triumph. It is interested in judgments upon


68 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


the links of a chain not less than in the chain itself. Theoret-
ically, it can perceive how every act may move in unity down
the endless stream of time. Practically, it insists that the fact
of discontinuity is vital. It perceives at least two such basic
centres of discontinuous action. There is the individual mind.
There is the mind, that is to say, of man considered in refer-
ence to personal self-realisation without involving in that
process the self-realisation of others. There is the group-
mind also. There is the mind, that is to say, of a number of
men who, actuated by some common purpose, are capable of
a unified activity. From both of these, in their myriad forms
there of course proceed acts of will. If a “general will” meant
anything, it would only mean the totality of those wills inso-
far as they realised the general social purpose. But no one
knows immediately where that purpose is, by some individual
act, about to be realised. The assumption that it is so realised
must be a generalisation not from purposes but from results.
An Act of Parliament may differently affect different men.
Because it means well to them all, because it achieves good as
a majority of legislators conceive it, does not mean that in
fact it is therefore good. The realist interpretation of politics
does not, for one moment, insist upon a divergent interest
between the desires that have secured historic fulfilment and the
desires that would have secured the social good. But it does
deny the idealist contention that there is any necessary rele-
vance between them.


From that twilight world it is surely better to emerge. Let
us judge an institution not by its purposes but by its achieve-
ment in the terms of those purposes. Let us judge, for ex-
ample, the Roman Catholic Church not as the earthly embodi-
ment of the body of Christ but by what it has made of that
body in the history of its earthly form. If we remember St.
Francis we must not forget the Inquisition; if we insist upon the
wrong of Hus’ condemnation, we must not neglect the splendid
ideals of the Cardinal of Cusa. We have to remember, in brief,
that the realisation of the Kingdom of God involves the holding
of property, the making of contracts, the appointment of offi-
cers, the determination of dogma. The fact that the Pope is the
vicar of Christ does not exclude scrutiny into the details of his


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 69


election. And our judgment upon the state must be in similar
terms. The step is easy from talk of state to talk of community,
but it is an illegitimate step. The state may have the noblest’
purpose. The objective at which its power aims may be un-
questionable. But it, too, at every moment, is acting by agents
who are also mortal men. The basis of scrutiny becomes at once
pragmatic. The test of allegiance to established institutions
becomes immediately the achievement for which they are
responsible. The foundation of our judgment must incessantly
be sought in the interpretation of historic experience. We know,
at least in general terms, the aim of the state. We can measure,
again at least in general terms, the degree of its divergence
from the ideal end. That is why no method is at all adequate
which seeks the equation of the ideal and the real. That is why
the first lesson of our experience of power is the need of- its
limitation by the instructed judgment of free minds.


VI. THE DIVISION OF POWER


But, after all, this is an internal limitation. It seeks its root
less in any formal constitution than in the effort to secure in
the state the expression of a certain spirit. It is in no sense
a full safeguard against the dangers by which the state is
consistently confronted. We have also to erect a more positive
and external limitation upon authority. Not, indeed, that
such machinery alone would be in any sense an adequate
thing. No system of government has been yet devised not
capable of perversion by maleficent men. It cannot be too
emphatically insisted that important as may be the policy of
any government, the character of those who operate it is hardly
less fundamental. A single instance will perhaps suffice in
demonstration. No one denies that the massive ability of
Bismarck puts him in the first rank of statesmen during the
nineteenth century. But it is not less obvious that he con-
sciously acted upon a system of political principles in which
the ordinary canons of ethics played no part. When he em-
barked upon his campaign against socialism the method of
which he availed himself was the deliberate application of
principles in which he did not believe and to which he had
formerly announced his opposition; and it is clear that those


70 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


principles became different by reason of the spirit he infused
into their application. Half the difficulty of democratic govern-
ment consists in the choice of leaders; and in a quasi-democ-
racy where, as in Germany, leadership is imposed from above,
ideas that may in one context be admirable, will, in their new
atmosphere, serve only as a dangerous soporific. Few things
have been more easy than for an able and energetic govern-
ment, which was willing to pay the price, to bribe a whole
people into slavery. Here is a matter where rules of any kind
are simply inapplicable. There are a thousand elements in
the problem; and no student of political psychology can avoid
the admission that we have hardly approached even the be-
ginnings of a satisfactory solution.”


When the choice of governors has been made, the question
yet’ remains of confining them to the business for which they
have been chosen. We have so to arrange the machinery of
the state as to secure not merely the most efficient safeguard
against its perversion from theoretic purpose, but also to ob-
tain the fullest promotion of that end. Here is the real hinter~
land of political enquiry; for the one obvious method by which
the past sought refuge from the dangers of authority has proved
in fact delusive. That method was the separation of powers.
It was from the time of Aristotle conceived that the elements
of public business admit of a natural classification into legis-
lative, executive, and judicial.’ The danger of combining
the two latter was forcibly insisted upon by Bodin; and
Locke seems to have been the first to point out the value of
their active and general separation.“ But it was Montesquieu
who, basing his attitude upon a mistaken interpretation of the
English constitution, first urged that the separation of powers
is the secret of liberty.“ Supported by his immense authority,
the idea was everywhere propagated with eagerness; and in
France and America especially its truth was accepted with


127 I have, of course, to deal with this problem in a later volume on the
theory of politics.

128 “Politics,” IV, 14, 1297b.

129 “De la Republique,” I. X.

130 “Second treatise,” Secs. 143-6.

131 “Esprit des Lois,” Bk XI, Chap. 6.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 71


enthusiasm. The constitutions of the Revolutionary assem-
blies wrote the principle into the fabric of the French state.
In America the constitutions both of the federation and its
constituent parts unhesitatingly adopted it. Madison in-
sisted that the “accumulation of all powers . . . . in
the same hands . . . . may justly be pronounced the
very definition of tyranny,” and the Supreme Court of the
United States asserted such separation to be ‘‘one of the chief
merits of the American system.’’4

It is in fact a paper merit for the simple reason that in prac-
tice it is largely unworkable. Cromwell discovered that to
his cost;> and there has been no state in which methods have
not been used to break down the theoretic barriers. In France
the judiciary has largely been regarded as a delegate of the
sovereign governmental power. In America the development
of the standing-committee in Congress provided a simple sys-
tem of communication between the cabinet and the legislature.
In Massachusetts, even before the war of independence, the
powerful “Junto” of Boston practically made itself an execu-
tive committee. The truth is that the business of govern-
ment does not admit any exact division into categories. It
has been found increasingly necessary to bestow judicial powers
upon English government departments.” The system of pro-
visional orders may depend upon a genial fiction of generous
delegation; but if the work of the Local Government Board
is not, in this particular, legislation, there is nothing that is
worthy of that name. “The work of a taxing department
today,” the chairman of the Board of Customs told a recent
Royal Commission, “is an absolutely different thing from


12 Cf. Duguit, “La Séparation des Pouvoirs” and Esmein’s classic
discussion. “Eléments du Droit Constitutionnel” (8rd ed.). pp. 358 f. The
most general treatment is that of Saint-Girans, ‘‘Essai sur la séparation des
pouvoirs” (1884).

133 The Federalist, No. 46.

134 Kilbourne v. Thompson, 103 U. S., 188.

135 Cf. Esméin’s analysis, Revue de Droit Public, 1899, p. 8 f.

136 Harlow. “Legislative Methods in the Period before 1825,” p. 25 f.

137 Cf, Prof. Dicey’s “Comment,” 31 Law Quarterly Review, p. 150.

188 “Fourth Report of the Royal Commission on the Civil Service,” 1914,
Cd. 7338, p. 28.


72 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


what it was twenty or even ten years ago. In those days Par-
liament, when it fixed a tax, settled every detail, leaving to the
department only the administration of the tax on the lines
laid down by Parliament. The tendency of Parliament now-
adays . . . is to lay down only principles, leaving
matters of difficulty to the discretion of the department. I
think it fair to say that a department like mine nowadays exer-
cises powers which are often judicial and which sometimes get
very near being legislative.” Nor must Professor Dicey’s
insistence on the value of judicial legislation be forgotten.’


No one, moreover, who has watched at all carefully the
development of the English cabinet in recent years can mis-
take the evident tendency of the executive—a tendency of
course strengthened by the fact of war—to escape from Par-
liamentary control.“ It is not less significant that both In-
surance and Development Acts have given quasi-legislative
and fully judicial powers to commissions who are expressly
excepted from the ordinary rules of law. This evolution,
whether or no it be well-advised, surely bears testimony to
the breakdown of traditional theory. The business of govern-
ment cannot in fact be hampered by the search after the exact
branch into which any particular act should fall. And it may
even be urged that recent American history bears testimony
to the further conclusion that the breakdown of the doctrine
has nowhere proved unpopular. Certainly an external observer
sees no sign of lament over the Presidential control of Con-
gress; and there has been, in recent years, a clear tendency
in England to look for the active sovereignty of the state out-
side of Parliament. We have in fact come to believe that the
loss in formal independence may well be compensated by a
gain in the efficiency of government.

The theory yet contains an important truth of which per-
haps too little notice has been taken in our time. We have


339 “Taw and Public Opinion” (2d ed.), pp. 483 f.

40 See the very interesting debate in Hansard, Fifth Series, Vol. 92,
p. 1363 f.

141 Cf. Dicey, “Law and Public Opinion” (2d ed.), pp. XXXIX-XLIV,

12 Cf. my note in The New Republic on the “Future of the Presidency”
in the issue of September 29, 1917.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 73


become so accustomed to representative government as to
realise only with difficulty the real basis of its successful opera-
tion. It presupposes an educated and alert electorate which -
is continually anxious for the results of that system. It ought
not to involve, as it has within recent years so largely involved,
a divorce between the business of government and the knowl-
edge of its processes. Aristotle’s definition of citizenship as
the “sharing in the administration of justice and offices’!
implies the understanding of some sense now lost—that active
participation in affairs of state will alone cause adequate per-
formance even of the humblest civie function. Power, that is
to say, which is largely concentrated at a single political centre
will produce a race of men who do not display interest in its
consequences. In some sort that is a fact that les at the root
of our problems. And it is important simply because the lib-
erty of a state depends so largely upon the situation of power.
We realise this, for example, in our awareness of the danger of
star-chamber methods; we look with suspicion upon executive
justice.“ We insist that the independence of the judiciary
is fundamental to liberty. It is only within recent years that
the French courts have been able to free themselves from a
narrow worship of governmental power. The supposed devia-
tion of its activities from a theoretic sovereignty made govern-
ment intolerably careless of its ways and means.“ The simple
rule that no man shall be judge in his own cause stands as one
of the few really fundamental truths of political science. And
the emphasis upon division of powers leads to the perception
of what is becoming more and more obvious as the facts of
social life become more widely known. We are beginning to see
that authority should go where it can be most wisely exercised
for social purposes. That is to say that there is no natural
control inherent in the state. It is to suggest, for example,
that it may be wise to put certain avenues of social effort out-


143 “Politics,” III, 1, 1275 a.

14 Cf, Pound, ‘“‘Address to the New Hampshire Bar Association,” June
30, 1917.

145 Cf, Duguit, “Les Transformation du Droit Public,” Ch. VII. In this
respect at least Professor Dicey’s strictures upon administrative law seem
to me unanswerable.


74 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


side the control of the state legislature. It is to argue that,
conceivably, industrial enterprise is better settled by those
who are engaged in it, than by the representatives of certain
geographical areas with no necessarily expert knowledge of the
problems involved.


It is thus no rigid classification of power upon which insist-
ence is laid. Power is regarded simply as the right to will acts
of general reference, and the suggestion is made that it should
be conferred where it is probable that it can be most usefully
exerted. In this aspect it becomes not unlikely that we have
in the past, over-emphasised the necessity for its concentra-
tion at a single point in the social structure. We have been so
concerned, particularly as lawyers, in demonstrating the para-
mountcy of the state, that we have taken too little regard of
the life lived outside its categories. We ought rather to seek
a different perspective. What is alone essential is the fullest
achievement of the general social purpose. What is at once
then evident is the necessity of organising authority with a
view solely to that end.


Such an organisation implies a conception of society as basic-
ally federal in nature. In that sense the paramount character
of the state is ipso facto denied. For if it is once clear that
there are regions into which the state cannot usefully enter, it
is obvious that there are realms over which its authority ought
not to be exerted. That is to foreshadow a division, not of
powers, but of power upon the basis of functions. It is to pic-
ture a society in which authority is not hierarchical but co-
ordinate. Nor is the basis of its definition in any sense matter
of a priori definition. It must change as social necessity may
demand. It must have in constant view the possibility of inno-
vation not less vast, for example, than that produced by the
Industrial Revolution, or that which seems involved in the
more recent experience of war.


To insist upon the federal nature of society is less paradoxical
than may at first sight appear. Thirty years ago, indeed,
Seeley pointed out that the difference between federal and
unitary states was valuable only “as marking conveniently
a great difference which may exist . . . . in respect


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 75


of the importance of local government;’’“* and, indeed, the
difference here between England and the United States is
hardly greater than the difference between England and France.
What is true here of the state is, of course, even more accurate
of society as a whole; and once we regard the state merely as
one of its constituent parts, however fundamental, what be-
comes obvious is the fact that its dominion must be strictly
relevant to the problem of what purposes it can best fulfil.
Indeed, much of the problem has been greatly obscured by
thinking of federalism not in terms of a division of functions
upon some rough basis of useful performance but in terms of
territorial contiguity. Such a reference is, of course, intelli-
gible enough. Everyone understands why so vast an area as
the United States involves some system of decentralisation.
The attempt to govern territories so diverse as Arizona and
New York by uniform methods would be fraught with disaster.
The facts geographically refuse such reduction to unity. The
problems of government are in each case so diverse that their
local study and solution alone proves efficacious.


The same necessity has been increasingly apparent in the
relations between Great Britain and her daughter-nations. It
has become obvious that the complex of interests we call Canada
and Australia can be better governed from Ottawa or from Mel-
bourne than where, as in the first part of the nineteenth century,
commands radiated outwards from a single centre at Whitehall.
“Government from Downing Street” came to have a sinister
import simply because the interests involved were not less real
and self-sufficing than the interests of the empire to which they
belonged. The conference of self-government was bound to
follow immediately the truth became apparent that the pos-
session of kindred interests by a-.group of men will sooner or
later involve the self-management of those interests. The
reasons are manifold enough. Downing Street was, in the first
sixty years of the nineteenth century, literally unable to cope
with the complex problems that confronted it; and the attempt
to construct, as notably in the colonial administration of Lord


146 “Introduction to Political Science,” p. 95. The whole lecture is most


instructive.


76 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


Grey,” an uniform and equal, policy for things that were
neither equal nor uniform was bound to result only in constant
and dangerous irritation. Nor was it for long conceivable that
community like Australia would be content to leave the centre
of its ultimate political power, in any sense save that of legal
dignity, outside the chief residence of its economic interests.

It is, indeed, argued that within these territories unity is
bound in some sort to develop.“8. In the United States, at
least, this has in no sense been the case. What, in truth, may
be urged is that the original distribution of power has not fitted
the development of nearly a hundred and fifty years. But it is
surely true in America that what is developing is less complete
unity, as in France, as the emergence of new administrative
areas. It is probable that the historic system of state-govern-
ment has, in many cases, broken down; but that has not in-
volved the disappearance of the fundamentalidea. It would be
clearly impossible to force such conflicting interests as those of
agriculture and industry into a kind of Hegelian harmony by
the over-simple device of legislating from Washington.’ Nor
is this less true of Canada. No observer of its conditions can
fail to note the way in which, commercially, the wheat-produc-
ing territory of the West is developing a system antithetic to
that of the industrial East; and it is at least not improbable
that the West is destined to swing over the balance of political
power exactly as in the United States.“° But in both countries
the real need is not for less local government, but for more. In
both countries one of the real sources of danger has been to
develop a kind of local stagnation by regarding Ottawa and
Washington as reserve powers which could be brought to bear
upon a recalcitrant community. What is at least as evident is
the failure of recent centralisation to solve the administrative
problems involved. It is continually found that they are in
fact not simple and general, but specialised and local; and the


47 Cf. his two curious volumes, the ‘‘Colonial Policy of Lord John Rus-
sell’s administration” (London, 1853).

48 As Prof. Dicey argues, “Law of the Constitution” (8th ed.—), p.
LXXVI.

49 Cf. my ‘Problem of Sovereignty,” Appendix B.

150 Cf. F. J. Turner, American Historical Review, Vol. XVI, p. 217.


AUTO R I IY IN ERE MO DERN STATE 77


spectacle of a harassed official at Washington trying to adjust
the thousand varying strands the size of America involves, is
not more exhilarating than to see how the Congress permits of
dangerous manipulation in the interests of locality.

There is, in fact, a fundamental principle involved in such an
attitude upon which too much insistence can hardly be laid. It
is the truth that in administration there is a point at which, for
every increased attribute, an obvious diminution of efficiency
results. Where a government department is overloaded with
work what it will tend to do is to pay attention not to the par-
ticular circumstances of the special problem involved, but to its
general ruling in broad cases of the kind. There is bound to be
delay and the price of delay in such matters it is difficult to over-
estimate. Groups, in fact, must be treated as independent units
living, however minutely, a corporate life that gives birth to
special considerations. The official at London can hardly enter
so closely into the unique penumbra of a Manchester enquiry
as fully to satisfy it. What he will do is to look up the records
of his department and apply some rule laid down for similar
conditions at Liverpool. This has been strikingly illustrated in
our own day by the reports of the British Commissions on in-
dustrial unrest. The attempt, as the commissioners for the
North West discovered,'” “to regulate every petty detail of the
industrial machinery of the area from offices at Whitehall im-
poses upon the men who are asked to work it an impossible
task. The trenches of industrial warfare are in Lancashire
.. . . it is not a business proposition to try and command the
great industrial army of these areas with a staff 200 miles from
the base . . . . there is overcentralisation and... . this is a
cause of unrest. .... It should be considered whether it
would be possible not only to leave employers and workmen to
settle more matters themselves, but to arrange that high offi-
cials . . . . should live in the area and be within close touch

. at the earliest possible moment.” Hardly less suggestive
was the conclusion of the American Commission which had the
same problem in view. Here, indeed, the industrial control was


161 Cf, Beard, “American Government and Politics,” p. 269 f.
152 Report (“Bulletin 237 of the U. S. Bureau of Labour’), p. 49. Cf.
p. 77, 110, 118, 185, 214.


78 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


private and not public in nature; but it was again insisted that
“distant ownership . . . . creates barriers against the oppor-
tunity of understanding the labour aspects, the human problems
of the industry, and solidarity of interest among the various
owners checks the views of any one liberal owner from prevail-
ing against the autocratic policy of the majority.” In a still
larger industry the same difficulty is noted. “The element of
distance, creating managerial aloofness, thus played a very
important part. For the employees, the labour policy of ‘the
company’ was what local officials in towns distant from the
executive offices made it, and not what the general officers in
San Francisco might have wished it to be; distance insulated
the general offices from intimate knowledge of industrial rela-
tions of the Company. The bonds of confidence and co-opera-
tion between company and employees were therefore tenuous.
Moreover, the fact that the company, despite its bigness, was
part of a national system, qualified all solutions of labour diffi-
culties by consideration, on the part of the company, of the
bearing of such solution however intrinsically irrevelant, upon
other parts of the country. 154

This, is, in fact, the inherent vice of centralised authority.
It is so baffled by the very vastness of its business as necessarily
to be narrow and despotic and over-formal in character. It
tends to substitute for a real effort to grapple with special
problems an attempt to apply wide generalisations that are
in fact irrelevant. It involves the decay of local energy by
taking real power from its hands. It puts real responsibility
in a situation where, from its very flavour of generality, an un-
real responsibility is postulated. It prevents the saving grace of
experiment. It invites the congestion of business. And all
this is the more inevitable where, as in the modern democratic
state, the responsibility for administration lies not in the hands
of the civil service but in the statesmen who hold office. What
is thereby engendered is an attempt not so much to provide solu-
tions as to evade them. Ina great strike, for example, govern-
ment arbitration will not mean so much a genuine effort after
justice as the purchase of a solution on any terms. That is in


163 Report of the President’s Commission, p. 4.
154 Ibid., p. 10.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 79


the nature of things inevitable. Where basic industries are con-
cerned the government knows full well the unpopularity that
will attend it if there is any interference with the normal’
process of consumption. In industry as a whole, the govern-
ment is, from the nature of things, interested in the main-
tenance of order and it knows well enough that the main-
tenance of order is in inverse ratio to the duration of the strike.
What it is driven thus to do is to seek the manipulation of
disharmony that its credit may be thereby least injured. And,
at the worst, it may suffer itself to be used for the purpose of
one of the contending parties. Where picketing, for instance,
is concerned, the knowledge that government stands fora
certain theory of order, necessarily operates to minimise the
strength of the men.


It is noteworthy in this connection that the most highly
centralised of modern states should have realised the inade-
quacy of its system. The most striking development of France
in recent years is towards an increase of administrative decen-
tralisation. The causes of this change are profound. Very
largely, it is due to the increasing dissatisfaction of the civil
service with Parliamentary control; and that has heralded
the commencement of an effort at the conference of respon-
sibility outside the traditional categories. The decentralisa-
tion of higher education is particularly interesting in view of
its success.” The erection of certain public services into auton-
omous establishments with separate budgets has not excluded
governmental control; but it has, by the association in their
operation of non-governmental interests, involved a real change
in the atmosphere of their functioning. Nor is it at all doubt-
ful that the revivification of local life after the war is one of the
first problems by which the new France will seek the renewal of
its former richness.!°**


155 Cf, the remarks of Mr. Cole, ‘World of Labour,” Ch. IX.

186 Cf. Chapter V below.

157 Hauriou, ‘‘Principes de Droit Public” (1916), pp. 745 f.

158 Cf, Hauriou, “‘Précis de Droit Administratif,” p. 342 f (ed. Cf. 1914),
and Michoud, “Théorie de la Personnalite Morale,” Vol. II, Ch. VII, esp.
Sees. 247-54. i

158a Cf, the interesting essay of Lachapelle, “L’Oeuvre de Demain” (1917).


80 AUTHORITY IN “DEO ODEON Sar


Such decentralisation is fundamental enough; for it can
hardly be too earnestly insisted that to place the real centre of
political responsibility outside the sphere in which its conse-
quences are to operate is to breed not only inefficiency but
indifference. The only way to make municipal life, for example,
an adequate thing is to set city striving against city in a con-
sistent conflict of progressive improvement. A man’s pride
in being a citizen of London or New York can only be made
real by giving to London and New York the full responsibility
of self-government. The only way in which a new and needed
interest in the problems of such areas can be achieved is by
giving to those who handle them the full power of effective
achievement. What, in despite of trammels, an able man can
in this particular accomplish Mr. Chamberlain demonstrated
in the case of Birmingham. And it is surely evident that by
such a process we do much to relieve the congestion of public
business which today stifles the public departments. Nor need
we fear parochialism. That, in truth, is the offspring of a
time when distance had not been annihilated by the improve-
ment of transportation. It is possible today to go from Man-
chester to Liverpool in less than the time in which London
itself can be traversed. When neighbouring example is thus
contiguous a narrowly local sense is‘ but a figment of pessi-
mistic imagination. And with such a change what we open
up is one of the fundamental sources of training in the busi-
ness of government. When the last word has been said about
‘“‘vestry-narrowness,” or the pettiness of local affairs, it is
surely evident that, in truth, the real guarantee of adequacy
in national affairs is the proper performance of public func-
tions in a smaller sphere. That has been one of the great
advantages of the federal system in the United States. Mr.
Roosevelt and Mr. Hughes in New York, Mr. Wilson in New
Jersey, proved their fitness for high national office by service
of a kind that demonstrated their ability to handle public
issues. And it is at least not impossible that one day a similar
qualification will be demanded as the basis of membership in
the House of Commons. It seems, to say the least, not un-
likely that the trained servant of a municipality will prove a
fitter member of that Chamber than a young and freshly inno-


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 81


cent peer whose triumphs have before been confined to the
debating societies of Oxford and Cambridge.


VII. THE ORGANISATION OF POWER


Tuis at least indicates, even while it does not touch, the real
heart of the problem. Its crux is the position of the state
relative to that of other groups within society. What we have
thus far denied is the claim of the state to represent in any
dominant and exclusive fashion the will of society as a whole.
It is true that it does in fact absorb the vital part of social
power; but it is yet in no way obvious that it ought to do so.
It is in no way obvious immediately it is admitted that each
individual himself is in fact a centre of diverse and possibly
conflicting loyalties, and that in any sane political ethic, the real
direction of his allegiance ought to point to where, as he thinks
the social end is most likely to be achieved. Clearly there are
many forms of association competing for his allegiance. Clearly,
also, the vast part of them express the effort of men to achieve
the broad aim of social existence. Labour associations aim
at the control of production because they believe that with
its passage into their hands the life of the masses will be richer
and more full. Religious associations are the expression of a
conviction that to accept certain dogmas is to secure induction
into the Kingdom of Heaven. The state, as we have seen,
is in reality the reflexion of what a dominant group or class in a
community believes to be political good. And, in the main,
it is reasonably clear that political good is today for the most
part defined in economic terms. It mirrors within itself, that
is to say, the economic structure of society. It is relatively
unimportant in what fashion we organise the institutions of
the state. Practically they will reflect the prevailing economic
system; practically also, they will protect it. The opinion of
the state, at least in its legislative expression, will largely re-
produce the opinion of those who hold the keys of economic
power. There is, indeed, no part of the community of which
economic power is unable to influence the opinions. Not that
it will be an absolute control that is exerted by it. The English
statute-book bears striking testimony to the results of the
conflict between the holders of economic power and those who


82 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


desire its possession; and, often enough, there has been gen-
erous co-operation behind the effected change. But the funda-
mental truth remains that the simple weapons of politics are
alone powerless to effect any basic redistribution of economic
strength.

That is to say that the political organisation of a state may
well disguise its true character. The liberal and conservative
parties in England, the republican and democratic parties
in the United States, do not the less represent a capitalist
control of politics because they are national parties. Mr.
Osborne’s dislike of a labour party with a political programme
did not prove a general truth that the historic lines of party-
division in England represent a satisfactory alignment of eco-
nomic power to the working-man. It did not prove that
there was in fact a possible harmony of interest between trade-
unions of which the dominant purpose was the control of in-
dustry in the interests of democratization and employers who
deny the utility of such control. It is true that the labour
party has entered politics; and it has been argued with some
plausibility that it ought by the slow conversion of the elec-
torate to its creed to arrive by a slow evolution at the control
of the processes of the state. But that analysis is, in fact,
entirely unreal. It mistakes the important truth that the
interests to which the House of Commons attends is, in reality,
the interests of consumers as those are capable of being har-
monised with the demands of the prevalent economic system.
The interest of the constituencies of the House of Commons
is predominantly in the regular functioning of economic proc-
esses. They want a proper postal service, or railway system,
exactly as the citizens of a municipality will look to the town-
council for gas and tramways and electricity. With the internal
organisation of industrial affairs they will not concern them-
selves save as disharmony will force them to the recognition
of their importance. Sometimes, indeed, a sudden fit of hu-
manitarianism, as in the Trade-Boards Act, will result in legis-


159 By Mr. A. E. Zimmern in The New Republic, September 15, 1917.
Cf. Mr. Croly’s article in the same issue, and the editorial comment on
Mr. Zimmern’s letter. Mr. Zimmern’s rejoinder is to be found in an arti-
cle on “Freedom and Unity” in the Round Table for December, 1917.


AUTHORITY IN. THE MODERN STATE 83


lative control. But, primarily, it is in regularity of industrial
service that the House of Commons and government are above
all interested. And, as a careful observer has pointed out, this
is predominantly true of local government.!®

When, therefore, the functions of the state undergo close
scrutiny, it is found that the aspect upon which they concen-
trate their work is the use by the community of industrial
resources. It is not interested in the processes of production
as such; it concerns itself in securing due provision from in-
dustry for the needs of society. It deals with men in the capac-
ity that is common to them all. It regards them as the users
of certain goods. It is uninterested in men as engaged in any
function save that of consumption except, of course, insofar
as the performance of their duties hinders the achievement of
its own basic effort. Clearly, for instance, the state, through
its government, would be vitally interested in a railway strike;
for it is vitally interested in securing to the members of the
state the uninterrupted use of railway facilities. But an anal-
ysis of the part played by the government in settlements of
industrial disputes can hardly fail to suggest that the primary
concern of the state is not in the cause of the dislocation, but
in the dislocation itself. Causes are important only insofar
as they seem to imply a renewal of disturbance. In that aspect
the relation of the state to a member of the railway unions is
very different from its relation to the ordinary member of the
public. For its main concern with the trade unionist is to get
him back to work; whereas that at which he aims is some re-
distribution of economic power within a group only the results
of whose functionings concern the state as a whole.

That is why it is impossible to regard the state as capable,
in any general view, of absorbing the whole loyalty of an in-
dividual. It can only secure his loyalty insofar as he does not
think that, in the given situation, the railway union has in
fact a superior claim. It is just as possible, for instance, for


160 Cole, ‘Self-Government|in Industry,” p. 77. With much of Mr. Cole’s
chapter on the state I should find myself in admiring agreement, though
with certain changes of fundamental emphasis.

160a This is avowedly the motive underlying the Canadian Industrial
Disputes Investigation Act.


84 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


a man to make the decision that, balanced against the industrial
dislocation, the end of a railway strike is worth the cost, as
it is to conclude that the sacrifices of a great war are worth
the great price they involve if the result safeguards the liberty
of nations. At a stroke, in brief, the hierarchical structure of
society is demolished. We have, instead, a series of co-ordinate
groups the purposes of which may well be antithetic. What
has happened in the history of the state is, on the contrary,
the assertion that it enjoys a unique position for its power. It
claims the right to judge between conflicting associations and
to interpose its will between them. It claims that the rights
of societies other than itself are, in fact, within its gift; and
their existence is conditioned by its graciousness. The fear
of group-persons in English-history is at least as old as Richard
of Devizes;*! and Blackstone only put into legal form the con-
tempt that Hobbes had poured upon them.!@ “With us in
England,” he said, “the king’s consent is absolutely necessary
to the creation of any corporation’; and the Combination
Acts are the proud vindication of the state’s claim to exclusive-
ness. But here, as elsewhere, life in fact overflows the narrow
categories in which the dogmas of state-sovereignty would
enshrine it. The truth is more and more apparent that these
groups live a life of their own, and exist to support purposes
that the state itself fails to fulfil. From this it was that Mait-
land drew the obvious conclusion. “Some would warn us,”
he wrote in a famous sentence,! ‘that in the future, the less
we say about a supralegal, suprajural plenitude of power con-
centrated in a single point at Westminster—concentrated in
one single organ of an increasingly complex commonwealth—
the better for that vision may be the days that are coming.”


161 Richard of Devizes’ ‘‘Chronicle 416.” Cf. Stubbs’ ‘‘Const. Hist.” (6th
ed.), I, 455.

1 On the early history of the English corporation ef my paper in the
Harvard Law Review, Vol. XXX, p. 561.

163 Com. I, 472.

164 Introduction to his translation of Gierke’s ‘Political Theories of the
Middle Age,” p. XLIII. On some of the difficulties that the “Concession ”
theory must encounter cf. my paper on the ‘Personality of Associations,”
in the Harvard Law Review, Vol. XXX, p. 404.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 85


It is no more than that vision we are seeking to translate into
the event.

If, then, we view the state as primarily a body of consumers
whose will, over the course of history, has been largely controlled
by groups within itself, it clearly follows that the producer
who does not share in the ownership of means of production
must safeguard his special interest in his personal function in
such fashion as will prevent its subordination to the purposes
of government. So, too, and in another sphere, a Roman
Catholic must arm himself lest his interest in his church be
unjustly attacked by a state that has made with some alien
religious body an alliance for reciprocal assistance.! The
main value of his church, indeed, must for him consist in the
fact that because it is a church it gives him a guarantee he
could not otherwise possess against the invasion of a religious
interest. For the individual is lost in a big world unless there
are fellowships to guard him; and even those associations may
well prove powerless unless they deny that their rights are
state-derived. Excommunication, for example, would not seem
to him a sentence open to the revision of a state-court.1 This
is in no sense a denial of membership of the state. It is merely
an insistence that the aspect in which he is related to his church
is an aspect different from his relation to the state. The spheres
of each are, in his own mind, distinct; the powers of each are
then divided in the light of that separation. In the Presby-
terian Church, again, no denia! is made of the supremacy of
the state in civil matters; but, said Chalmers, ‘‘in things eccle-
siastical we decide all.” ” Here, again, the emphasis is upon
co-ordinate function. What is essentially denied is the deriva-
tion of church rights from the grace of the state.

The position of trade-unionism is in the closest relation to
this attitude. It is held that the purpose of that movement
emphasises an aspect of the worker’s life which is different


165 Or, as in France, the non-Catholics may have to aim to prevent the
state from becoming a branch of the Roman Catholic Church.

166 Cf, the very interesting opinions in St. Vincent’s Parish v. Murphy,
83 Nebraska 630, and Parish of the Immaculate Conception v. Murphy,
89 Nebraska, 524.

167 Cf. my “‘Problem of Sovereignty,” p. 39.


86 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


from the aspect emphasised by the state. The trade-union is
concerned with the business of production; the state is, above
all, concerned with the general regularity of the supply for
consumption. What, then, the trade-union is compelled to
deny is the subordination of the function he fulfils as a producer
to his interest in the supply of his needs. It is, in any case,
painfully clear that the state does not in any full sense secure
that supply. It ensures production; but the distribution of
the product is weighted in the interest of those who wield eco-
nomic power. That is the main reason why the worker sees in
the productive process a lever that will react upon the state
itself. True political democracy is, as he realises, the offspring
of true industrial democracy. If he were to admit the para-
mount character of the consumptive process no strike would
ever occur. But, obviously, the judgment is constantly made,
and that in industries of basic importance, that the attainment
of a new equilibrium in industrial relations is worth the heavy
price invariably paid for it. The worker, that is to say, is no
more inclined than the Roman Catholic to admit the supremacy
of the context in which the state is placed. He refuses to regard
it as in any permanently valid sense the sovereign representa-
tive of the community. He bases his refusal upon the belief that
the results of its functioning bear witness to a grave malad-
justment. It is used to support a status quo with which he is
dissatisfied. He might even urge that the new equilibrium
at which he is aiming is worth more to the community than
the fulfilment of what the state at present regards as its duties in
the consumptive process.


Here, immediately, a division of power is implied. The
business of consumption, it is suggested, is proper material
for the authority of the state. It is immediately a matter
where the interests of men in their capacity of consumers may
be taken as substantially equal; at least in the sense that
there are certain goods a minimum supply of which is, for each
individual, essential to social existence. But somewhere be-
tween production and consumption a line must be drawn. The
interests of men in production are rarely equal because the
share of its results suffers widely varying distribution. There
is a broad distinction, for example, between the interest of the


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 87


owner of capital and the interest of the unpropertied worker.
There is at present, also, a distinction, which the sectionalism
of trade-unions makes unfortunately manifest, between skilled’
and unskilled labour. There is a clash of interest, at least
in certain trades, between the male and female labour em-
ployed.’® It is probable, indeed, that sectional antagonism
within the labour movement is capable of removal by wise
activity; and certainly the great English amalgamations of
recent years, most notably that of the transport workers,
point increasingly in this direction.

But between the interest of capital and that of labour it is
difficult to see any permanent basis of reconciliation. They
want antithetic things. When the utmost that a capitalism
can concede is measured, it still falls short of what labour de-
mands; for the ultimate object of labour activity is democratic
self-government in industry, the determination, that is to
say, of the methods to be employed at each stage of the produc-
tive process, the settlement of tasks and hours and wages by
the men themselves. It involves, therefore, the disappearance
of a super-imposed hierarchical control. It takes the trade-
union as the single cell from which an entirely new industrial
order is to be evolved. In such an aspect, the suspicion of
labour towards a state that is predominantly capitalist in
character is inevitable. For whether the state, through its
instruments, seeks, by maintaining order, to prevent the possi-
bility of redistribution; whether it attempts to discover some
possible basis of temporary reconciliation; what always emerges
from either synthesis is the determination of labour to use the
equilibrium so created as the foundation of a new effort towards
its ultimate objective. The method of which use is made may
vary but the purpose is unchanging.

Labour, therefore, could admit the complete sovereignty of
the state only if it could be assumed that the state were on
its side. The only thing of which it can in this context be cer-
tain is that the power of the state will be predominantly exerted


168 Cf. Cole, ‘World of Labour,” Chs. VII and VIII. What is said here
of over-lapping is even more true of the United States than of England.

169 On the general problem cf. Webb, “The Restoration of Trade Union
Conditions” (1917).


88 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


against its interest. For the social order of the modern state
is not a labour order but a capitalist, and upon the broad truth
of Harrington’s hypothesis it must follow that the main power
is capitalist also. That will imply a refusal on labour’s part to
accept the authority of the state as final save where it is satis-
fied with its purposes. It means that it will endeavor so to
organise the process of production as to hand over the chief
authority therein to the trade-unions which express its inter-
ests. It means, in short, the conquest of productive control
by labour; and when that control has been conquered it is
not likely that it will be easily surrendered.1”°

What, on the contrary, is possible is that some adjustment
will be slowly made between the groups which represent the
interests of producers and the state, in all its constituent local
parts, as representing the consumer. We do not admit, that
is to say, the attitude of the anarchist who denies, like William
Godwin, the need for authority at all,” or the attitude of the
syndicalist who emphasises only the producer’s interest. The
case against syndicalism Mr. Graham Wallas has felicitously
expressed in a single sentence. “It proved to be more import-
ant”, he has written,!” “that under syndicalism men loved
each other less as citizens than that they loved each other more
as gild-brothers.”” We cannot, in fact risk the possibility of
disorganisation upon the basis of narrow selfishness. However
the productive process is in the future arranged within itself
provision must be made for some central authority not less
representative of production as a whole than the state would
represent consumption. There is postulated therein two bodies
similar in character to a national legislature. Over-great pres-
sure of consumer on producer is avoided by giving to the pro-
ducers as a whole a legislature where the laws of production
would be considered. The legislature of the consumers would
decide upon the problems of supply. Joint questions, in such


170 T am not here, of course, concerned to point out the steps by which this
control is to be achieved; but I have indicated in the next section some of
the more obvious directions along which it is moving.

171 A reprint of his “Political Justice” is an urgent need.

12 “The Great Society,” p. 328. See the whole passage from p. 324
onwards.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 89


a synthesis, are obviously matter for joint adjustment. Nor
is the central authority within either division to be envisaged.
as uniquely sovereign. Certain functional delimitations, the
cotton-trade, the mining-industry, the railways, shipping,
immediately suggest themselves. From the consumer’s stand-
point, municipalities, counties, even whole areas like the North
of England, may have group-demands to be settled by group-
action. A balance of internal powers would functionally be
sought. Arrangements would require a system of collective
contracts upon the basis of collective bargaining. Law, as
now, would be matter for the courts. The judiciary could settle
a dispute between a bootmakers’ gild and the authorities of
an orphan asylum in Manchester as well in one system as
another. Probably, indeed, a special system of industrial
courts would be developed. Probably, also, just as in the
United States a court of special and pre-eminent dignity de-
cides controversies between the separate states, disputes be-
tween a producers’ authority and a consumers’ would need a
special tribunal. That is why, as M. Duguit has pointed
out," jurisprudence will occupy an important place in the
federalist society towards which we are moving.!


VIII. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF FREEDOM


So complex a division of powers as this seems at first sight con-
fusing to one accustomed to the ordinary theory of state-sov-
ereignty. It is not difficult to urge that co-ordination implies
the possibility of conflict and to insist that only by an hierachi-
cal structure of authority can the danger of disturbance be mini-
mised. Yet it is, to say the least, tolerably clear that disturb-
ance is not avoided by the conference of supreme power on the
state. The rejection of that claim to sovereignty, moreover,
involves an attitude to politics which has at least some merit.
There is a sense in which the vastest problem by which we are
faced is the very scale of the life we are attempting to live. Its
bigness tends to obscure the merits of real freedom. And, indeed,


173 “Te Droit Social, le Droit Individuel,” p. 157.
174Qn the whole of this Cf. Cole, “Self-Government in Industry,”
Ch. III, and Paul-Boncour, ‘‘Le Fédéralisme Economique,” pp. 372-423.


90 AUTHORITWIIN: THE MODERN SPATE


there is industrially abroad a certain suspicion of liberty against
which safeguards must be erected. The individual suffers
absorption by the immensity of the forces with which he is in
contact. That is true not less of the House*of Commons, of
Congress, of the French chamber, than it is of an industry which -
has largely suffered depersonalisation. There are few signs of
that energy of the soul which Aristotle thought the secret of
happiness. There is little work that offers the opportunity of
conscious and systematic thought. Responsibility tends to
coagulate at a few centres of social life; so that the work of
most is the simple commission of orders it is rarely their busi-
ness to reflect upon. We are clearly tending to be overawed by
our institutions; and we can perceive, in a way different from
the perspective set by Lecky and Sir Henry Maine, a genuine
danger lest we lose hold of that chiefest source of happiness.
Clerks and teachers and tenders of machines, for each of whom
there is prescribed a routine that fills the most eager hours of
life, dare not be asked for the effort upon which new thought is
founded. An expert in the science of factory management has
even assumed that for the purpose of productivity a man “who
more nearly resembles in his mental make-up the ox than any
other type’’'” is desirable. Happiness in work, which can alone
be fruitful of advance in thought, is, as Mr. Wallas has noted,!" a
phrase for most practically without meaning. The problem to-
day, as the problem at the time of the French Revolution, is
the restoration of man to his place at the centre of social life.


That is, indeed, the real significance of freedom. It alone
enables the individuality of men to become manifest. But
individuality is bound to suffer eclipse if power is unduly cen-
tred at some single point within the body politic. To divide it
upon the basis of the functions it is to perform is the only guar-
anty for the preservation of freedom. We too little remember
that the appearances of politics have obscured the emergence in
our time of new and sinister forces of compulsion. The pursuit


175 Taylor, ‘‘Principles of Scientific Management,” p. 59. Mr. Hoxie has
noted this authoritarian tendency throughout the “efficiency” school.
‘Scientific Management and Labour” passim.

176 “The Great Society,” pp. 345, 363 ff. A very thorough collection of
data upon this subject would be invaluable.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 91


of an ideal of efficiency, for which, in part at least the New

World is responsible, has led men to make a fetish of centralis-

ation. They have not seen that the essence of free government
is the democratization of responsibility. They have not realised

_ that no man can make his life a thing worthy of himself without

the possession of responsibility. It is useless to respond that

men are uninterested in politics. They are interested in any-

thing which nearly touches their lives, provided only that they

have a share in its application.


They can develop that control only by preventing the con-
centration of power. Ina society so great as ours, some system
of representation is inevitable; and it is only by dividing func-
tions that we can prevent those representatives from absorbing
the life-blood of the body-politic; exactly as in France decen-
tralisation alone can cure the dangerous overprominence of
Paris. To divide industrial power from political control is to
prevent the use of the latter influence against the forces of
change. It removes the main lever by which the worker is
prevented from the attainment of self-expression. It makes the
chief well-spring of progress not the chance humanitarianism
the spectacle of an under-paid employment may create, but the
earnest and continuous effort of the worker. It thereby gives
to him a training in the business of government which other-
wise is painfully lacking. For, after all, the one sphere in which
the worker is genuinely articulate is the sphere of production.
To admit the trade-union to an effective place in government,
to insist that it is fundamental in the direction of production,
is to make the worker count in the world. He may be then also
a tender of machines; but where his trade-union is making
decisions in which his own will is a part he is something more
than a tender of machines. His very experience on this side of
government will make him more valuable in his quality as citi-
zen. He will see the consumptive process more realistically
because its details have been illuminated for him in trade-union
activity. The very divisions of society will hinge upon the
different aspects of his own life. It is upon him that the basis
of the state must then be founded.

It has been urged that no society could endure in such a syn-
thesis. Unless, so we are told, there is within it some unique


92 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


centre of power, a conflict of authorities may well prove its de-
struction. A state cannot live unless it possess the absolute and
undivided allegiance of its members. To depict, therefore, a
community in which allegiance is co-operative seems, in such
perspective, to destroy its efficient life. But we have already
in fact discussed this question. We have already shown that
no man’s allegiance is, in fact, unique. He is a point towards
which a thousand associations converge; what, then, we ask
is that where conflict comes, we have assurance that he follow
the path of his instructed conscience. Once grant the individual
rights against the state, and it follows that the state must win
his loyalty by the splendor of its effort. What, mainly, is needed
is some source of guarantee against perversion of the state-power.
Partly, that is needed in the relation of churches to the state;
partly, also, and today, primarily, it is needed if the certainty of
industrial progress is to be secured. For we have seen that the
state-will tends inevitably to become confused with that of gov-
ernment. Government is in the hands, for the most part, of
those who wield economic power. The dangers of authority
become intensified if the supreme power be collected and con-
centrated in an institution which cannot be relied upon uniquely
to fulfil its theoretic purposes. That is-why the main safeguard
against economic oppression is to prevent the state from throw-
ing the balance of its weight into the side of established order.
It is to prevent it from crying peace where in fact the true issue
is war. For, important as may be the process of consumption,
it is in nowise clear that the state treats equally those who are
benefited by the process. It is by no means certain that the
standard of life of the worker is not better safeguarded by his
trade-union than by the state.


Yet of one thing we must beware. It is not difficult to pro-
ject a wanton idealism into our view of the trade-unions. Itis
not difficult, when they are contrasted with the policy, for ex-
ample, of the National Manufacturers’ Association of the
United States, to regard them as little short of perfect. We have
ceaselessly to remember that the retention of economic anti-
quarianism by the trade-unions is at least as possible as its reten-
tions by the manufacturer. The attitude of the Lancashire
cotton-operatives to child labour, the attitude of the Pearl but-


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 93


ton makers to apprenticeship,!” are instances of this kind. It
is at least possible that we shall have more and more to evolve _
bills of rights in which the fundamental nations of social justice
are put beyond the reach of peradventure. The Lancashire
cotton-operatives, indeed, might be voted down in a gild-parlia-
ment on a question of child-labour; but it is important that
they should be a priort prevented from getting into the frame of
mind where the interest of the citizen in education can be sacri-
ficed to a demand for cheap labour.


From one difficulty, indeed, we may at the outset free our
minds. “A state,” writes Mr. Zimmern," “in which the ma-
jority of the citizens, or even a substantial minority, doubted
to which external authority their supreme allegiance was due
would soon cease to be a state at all.” This, surely, evades the
point at issue. A state in which a “substantial minority’’ of
the citizens did not feel, in a crisis, the call of allegiance would
probably be embarking upon a policy at least open to the grav-
est doubt. It cannot be too emphatically insisted that the real
merit of democratic government as opposed to any other form
is exactly this dependence upon consent. The very difficulty
which caused the breakdown of the policy of international
socialism in 1914 was its failure to give to its recognised repre-
sentatives in the belligerent countries the authority needed to
make the German state halt before its policy of aggression.
It was precisely because the authority of the German state is
paramount that those who manipulate its destinies can without
serious question pervert it from the path of right conduct. The
safeguard of the English state is the knowledge that there is
without its instruments a critical opinion capable of organised
expression. Nor is there reason to fear that a state where dis-
sent may organise itself is less capable of unified defence than
an autocratically-controlled régime. For a democratic com-
munity has its heart in the business that it undertakes. It
fights, not with mechanical obstinacy, but the intensity of a
conviction derived from the process of free thought. Its vic-
tory may be delayed; but unless the odds are overwhelmingly


177 Cf, Webb, “Industrial Democracy,” Ch. X.
178 Letter to The New Republic, September 15, 1917.


94 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


against it, the spirit it can infuse into its purpose is bound, in
the end, to give it victory.”

There are at least two directions in which the danger of
over-concentrating the power of the state has received a strik-
ing emphasis in the last few years. The necessities of war have
immensely increased the area of state-control. Social needs
broke down the quasi-anarchy of a competitive industrial
system, and its place has been taken by two separate forms of
management. On the one hand we have the continued man-
agement of industry by private enterprise, with, however, a
rigid supervision exerted by the state. The danger here is
obviously immense. The need of the state in war-time has
been increasing productivity and the whole orientation of con-
trol has been towards that end. So, even if rules have been
laid down, profits taxed, priority of supply enforced, still the
situation has in reality involved a state-guarantee of the con-
tinuance of the present industrial régime. That has meant
an immense increase of centralisation. It has changed at a
stroke the whole and elaborate system of safeguards by which
labour had sought protection against the dehumanising forces
of capitalism.*° It does not seem doubtful that this change
has been in a high degree beneficial. But it has had two grave
results. On the one hand there is the problem of giving to the
trade-unions safeguards that shall, in the new synthesis, be
equal to the power of the old. On the other there has taken
place an immense concentration of capital not merely in in-
dustry itself, but in finance also. Nothing will be easier in the
years that le ahead either for the owners of capital to demand
the continuance of government control, or to insist that natur-
alisation upon the basis of adequate compensation is alone a
fair return for its services. In either case we have a guarantee
of interest made a fundamental charge upon the resources of
the state. That burden, without a time-limit, may well prove
a fundamental obstacle to the democratisation of control.

Nor is the alternative of complete state-management more
inviting. Indeed, it may without exaggeration be suggested


179 As is forcibly pointed out by my critic in the London Times of May
7A Mabe j
180 Cf. Webb, “The Restoration of Trade Union Conditions,” passim.


AUTHORITY iN THE MODERN STATE 95


that the evils such a régime would imply are hardly less great
than those of the present system. For to surrender to govern-
ment officials not merely political but also industrial adminis-
tration is to create a bureaucracy more powerful than the world
has ever seen. Itis to apotheosise the potent vices of a govern-
ment department. Itis to make certain a kind of paternalism
which, perhaps above all other systems, would prevent the
advent of the kind of individual freedom we desire. After all,
we have had no light experience of the state. Municipally it
certainly is no less efficient than private industry; but, humanly
speaking, there is little or no evidence that its administration
is more democratic. The attitude of the London County
Council to its carmen is hardly encouraging.!:t The Holt
Report on the postal service must give pause to every observer
who occupies himself with the consideration of these prob-
lems.: The long story of grievances in the French civil service
is a record that no believer in state-absorptiveness can con-
template with equanimity. The permanent official is no
more blessed with an immediate appreciation of that hunger to
determine the rule of his own life which is the source of demo--
cratic aspiration than the private employer. Nor can anyone
examine his record in the present war and feel confident that
he has any real contribution to offer. On the contrary, the one
complaint of which we on all hands hear is lack of confidence
in him from those whose confidence is essential to the right
conduct of industry.’ The centralisation state-management
would imply would mean the transference of all power to a
class of guardians within the state whose main object, even
more than today would, at all costs, be the maintenance of
regularity of supply. There would, inevitably, be an effort to
play off group against group, to purchase office by favour, to


181 Cf. Cole, “Labour in Wartime,” p. 160 ff.

182 So far as France is concerned cf. Beaubois, “La Crise Postale et les
Monopoles L’Etat,” and the note on the American post-office in The
New Republic, Vol. XIII, p. 167.

183 Cf. Chap. V below.

184 Cf. the Reports of Mr. Lloyd-George’s ‘Commissions on Industrial
Unrest” (American Bureau of Labour edition), pp. 77-8, 88-9,110-12, 25,
119, 162, 217.


96 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


lack inventiveness, by which in every age a bureaucracy is dis-
tinguished. Then, as now, the trade-unions would be com-
pelled to fight against an established order for the opportunity
of industrial self-expression; and the fight against a state is
notoriously more difficult than the fight against private capi-
tal. Inevitably, moreover, the public character of the state
as employer lends it a factitious popular support against which
it is difficult to make headway. And, indeed, government, even
less than private enterprise, is hardly prepared to tolerate
democratisation of control.

Nor is it prepared to tolerate a democratic judgment. We
here touch a vital element in modern government. Our state
is a sovereign state, and about the acts of its agents the cloak
of its supremacy is cast. In nothing, indeed, has the falsity
of such an outlook been more strikingly manifest than in the
doctrine of its irresponsibility. We place governmental acts
in a different category from private acts. If A harms B the
courts always lie open for remedy; but if A be government, it
is with problems of a different kind that we become immediately
concerned.

The explanation is probably simple. To sue the king in-his
own courts has about it an air of unreason; for, at least in
theory, he is present there, and to sue him is to ask him to be
judge in his own cause. When the doctrine of his legal infalli-
bility becomes added thereto we have all the materials for an
evasion of justice. For, to the courts, there is no such thing
as the English state. There is a king, and the state can shrink
behind the personality he will lend for its protection. It does
not matter that since the eighteenth century he has been no
more than the shadow of a great name. The old form is pre-
served, and it lends its content to the government by which he
has been replaced. An action for breach of contract, indeed,
can, by the disagreeable formality of a Petition of Right
be instituted; but into the category of tort the concept of
liability has not yet entered. Miss Bainbridge may be run
over by the mail-van of the Postmaster-General; but the irre-
sponsibility of the state prevents an action against anyone but
the humble driver of the van.! The Lords of Admiralty may


18 Bainbridge v. Postmaster-General (1906), I, K. B. 178.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 97


infringe a patent but they remain inaccessible to justice.
Sir Claude Macdonald may dismiss an official whom he has, as
Her Majesty’s Commissioner for the Niger Protectorate en-
gaged for a definite period of years before its expiration; but
the ample cloak of state authority is cast about him.! “The
maxim that ‘the king can do no wrong’,” said a strong court,!88
“applies to personal as well as political wrongs, and not only
to wrongs done personally by the sovereign (if such a thing
could be supposed possible), but to injuries done by one sub-
ject to another by authority of the sovereign. For from the
maxim that the king can do no wrong it follows, as a necessary
consequence, that the king cannot allow wrong to be done;
for to authorize a wrong to be done is to do a wrong; and as the
wrongful act done becomes in law the act of those who author-
ize it to be done, it follows that the petition of right which
complains of a tortious or wrongful act done by the Crown or
by servants of the Crown discloses no right to redress, for as
in law no such wrong can be done no such right can arise. . . .”
So when the Sultan of Johore puts off his sultanship and makes
an offer of marriage to Miss Mighell in the guise of an Albert
Baker, his sovereignty prevents recovery of damages for breach
of promise.! The whole thing is a positive stumbling block
in the path of administrative moralisation.

Nor is this irresponsibility confined to England. Many of
the local jurisdictions of the United States expressly limit them-
selves from being sued in their own courts even though, as the
Supreme Court has said, “it is difficult to see on what solid
foundation of principle the exemption from liability to suit
rests.” In France it is only painfully, and after long hesita-
tion, that a category of state-responsibility is being evolved.!*
We have not taken to heart the great words of Maitland that
“it is a wholesome sight to see the ‘Crown’ sued and answer-


186 Feather v. Regina, 6 B & S, 257.

187 Dunn v. the Queen (1896), I, Q. B. C. A., 116.

188 Feather v. Regina, 6, B. & S., 257.

189 Mighell v. Sultan of Johore (1894), I, Q. B., 149.

190 Ọ. S. v. Lee, 106 U. S., 196, 206.

19 Cf, Duguit, “Transformations du Droit Public,” Ch. VII.


98 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


ing for its torts.” It is true that an increasing tendency is
apparent to provide statutory. remedy for wrongful acts.
Where government dissolves into a dock company the cloak
of sovereignty may well suffer withdrawal. But the essen-
tial thesis that a state act—which in practice means a govern-
mental act—gives rise to no liability remains untouched. It
is the price we pay for refusing to look facts in the face. The
state in this context is a group of officials who may act not less
harmfully than a private individual. It is difficult to see why
their acts should be excused where harm is caused. And that
the more in an age that has witnessed the immense growth of
administrative law.1%

Upon its dangers, indeed, too much insistence can hardly
be laid. The most striking change in the political organisation
of the last half-century is the rapidity with which, by the sheer
pressure of events, the state has been driven to assume a posi-
tive character. We talk less and less in the restrained terms
of Benthamite individualism. The absence of governmental
interference has ceased to seem an ultimate ideal. There is.
everywhere almost anxiety for the extension of governmental
functions. It is probably inevitable that such an evolution
should involve a change in the judicial process. The admin-
istrative departments, in the conduct of public business, find
it essential to assume duties of a judicial character. Where,
for example, great problems like those involved in government
insurance are concerned, there is undoubtedly a great conven-
ience in leaving their interpretation to the officials who are to
administer the act. They have gained in its application an
expert character to which no purely judicial body can pretend;
and their opinion has a weight which no community can afford
to neglect. The business of the state, in fact, is so much like
private business that, as Professor Dicey has emphasised,}%6

192 “Collected Papers,” III, 263.

198 Cf. Mr. Maguire’s very able paper in Harvard Law Review, Vol. 30,
pp. 20 ff., and see especially Canadian Revised Statutes (1906), C. 140,
Sec. 20, for an interesting example of legal remedy for injury by negligence
on public works.

194 Mersey Docks v. Gibbs, 11, H. C. L. C., 686.

19 Cf. E. Barker in the Political Quarterly for May, 1914, esp. pp. 125 f.

1% Law Quarterly Review, Vol. 31, p. 150.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 99


its officials need “that freedom of action necessarily possessed
by every private person in the management of his own per-
sonal concerns.” So much is at least tolerably clear. But
history suggests that the relation of such executive justice to
the slow infiltration of a bureaucratic régime is perilously close;
and the development of such administrative law needs at each
step to be closely scrutinised in the interests of public liberty.197

The famous Arlidge case in England" is a striking example
of what the seventeenth century would have termed Star-
chamber methods. It was there decided by the highest Eng-
lish tribunal that when a government department assumes
quasi-judicial functions the absence of express enactment in
the enabling statute means that the department is free to em-
bark upon what procedural practice may seem best to it; nor
will the courts enquire if such practice results, or can by its
nature result, in justice. In such an attitude it is clear that
what Professor Dicey has taught us to understand as the rule
of law 1” becomes largely obsolete. If, as in the Zadig case,”
the Secretary of State for Home Affairs may make regulations
of any kind without any judicial tests of fairness or reasonable-
ness being involved, it is clear that a fundamental safeguard
upon English liberties has disappeared. Immediately admin-
istrative action can escape the review of the Courts it is clear
that the position of a public official has become privileged in
a sense from which the administrative law of France and Ger-
many is only beginning to escape.

Nor is it likely that these issues have become significant
merely in relation to abnormal conditions. American administra-
tive law, in the sense of a law different in content from a mere law
of public offices, goes back to the Ju Toy case,” where a ma-
jority of the Supreme Court, perhaps somewhat doubtfully,


197 Cf, Pound, ‘‘Address to the New Hampshire Bar Association,” June
30, 1917.

198 (1915) A. C. 120, and see Dean Pound’s comment in the address
cited above.

199 “The Law of the Constitution” (8th ed.), p. 179 f.

200 R. v. Halliday (1917). A. C. 226. Cf. especially the dissenting opinion
of Lord Shaw and the comment in 31 Harvard Law Review, 296.

21 U. S. v. Ju Toy, 198 U. S. 253.


100 AUTHORITY | IN THE MODERN STATE


held the courts powerless, in view of the Chinese exclusion Act
of 1894, to review a decision of the Secretary of Commerce and
Labour. But no one would object to action by a government
department so long as assurance could be had of absolute fair-
ness in the methods by which a decision was reached; it was ex-
actly the absence of that fairness which constituted the source
of grievance and disquiet in the Arlidge case. A recent decision
of the Supreme Court? very strikingly comparable with the
issue in the English case, suggests that the Supreme Court will
be careful of those safeguards as, indeed, the due process clause
obviously demands it must be careful. The Public Service
Commission of New York ordered a gas company, after a hear-
ing in which witnesses were cross-examined,testimony introduced
and the case argued, to provide gas service for a certain district.
The company believed that, relative to the expenditure re-
quired, a sufficient return would not be had. It therefore ap-
pealed on the ground that the order of the commission “was
illegal and void in that it deprived the Gas Company of its prop-
erty without due process of law and denied to it the equal pro-
tection of the laws in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment
to the Constitution of the United States . . . . and, after
the requisite intermediate stages, the issue came before the
Supreme Court on this single ground of error. Mr. Justice
Clarke upheld the action of the Public Service Commission.
He admitted, for the Court, that the finding of an expert com-
mission is final and will not be discussed again by the courts.
Such, of course, has been the general practice of the Supreme
Court;?% and, so far, the decision in no sense differs from the
bearing of the opinion rendered in the Arlidge case by the House
of Lords.

But there is, at this point, a significant departure. ‘This
court,” says Clarke J. “will nevertheless enter upon such an
examination of the record as may be necessary to determine
whether the federal constitutional right claimed has been denied,
as, in this case, whether there was such a want of hearing, or


202 New York v. McCall et al, 38 Sup. Ct. Rep. 122.

203 Baltimore & Ohio R.R. Co. v. Pitcairn Coal Co., 215 U. S. 481: Inter-
state Commerce Commission v. Union Pacific R.R. Co., 222 U. S. 541,

204 New York v. McCall et al, 38 Sup. Ct. Rep. 122, 124.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 101


such arbitrary or capricious action on the part of the Com-
mission as to violate the due process clause of the consti-.
tution.” No one, it may be suggested, who studies the history
of the due-process clause can deny that, on occasion, it has been
sadly perverted from its orginal purposes. But here at least,
and in the perspective here outlined, its value must be obvious
even to those who are suspicious of the rigidity of a written
constitution. The Supreme Court, as the learned judge points
out, does not purpose to go into issues probably better settled
by the administrative tribunal; but it does, and rightly, purpose
to examine into the fundamental question of whether the means
taken by that tribunal to attain its end were such as were, on
the plain face of things, adequate to the securing of justice.

That, of a certainty, is a safeguard to which the courts will
more and more be driven with the expansion of administrative
law. Under the Defence of the Realm Considation Act, for in-
stance, the Home Secretary may issue a regulation which pro-
hibits publication of any book or pamphlet relating to the con-
duct of the war on the terms of peace without its previous sub-
mission to the censor who may prohibit such publication with-
out the assignment of? cause. That is to say that the merest
and irresponsible caprice of a junior clerk of determined
nature might be actually the occasion of suppressing a vital
contribution to the understanding of the war. So ridiculous
a proceeding is at least prevented by the system of the Supreme
Court. In the first place, and above all, a due publicity is se-
cured. It would have to be shown to the Supreme Court that
the methods taken to secure the decision were such as to war-
rant it; and in so vital a thing as freedom of speech one may feel
tolerably certain that the methods would be subject to closest
scrutiny. It has been the habit of past years to sneer rather
elaborately at Bills of Rights.2% It may yet be suggested that
with the great increase of state activity that is clearly fore-
shadowed there was never a time when they were so greatly
needed. Here, as elsewhere, the human needs the satisfaction


205 Regulation 51. Cf. London Nation, December 8, 1917.

206 A habit unfortunately intensified by Professor Ritchie’s “Natural
Rights,” which, dismissing them historically, was held to dismiss them
politically also.


102 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


of which history has demonstrated to be essential must be put
beyond the control of any organ of the state; that, and no more
than that, is what we mean today by natural rights.” Govern-
mental power is a thing which needs at every stage the most
careful regard; and it is only by judicial control in terms of
those rights that the path of administration will become also
the path of justice. The problem of responsibility can be ap-
proached with profit from another.angle. The purpose and
the character of government as a trust leads us to regard it as
in reality an institution for translating purposes into the event
without regard to the fact that the men who operate those pur-
poses give to them a personality of their own. The belief in
the reality of corporate persons, indeed, only slowly makes its
way into the general body of Anglo-American law. Its progress
is at every stage impeded by the general refusal of the courts
to recognize the corporate character of the trust. It is nearly
thirteen years since Maitland demonstrated with all his pro-
found scholarship, and even more than his wonted charm, that
the trust has, above all things, served historically as a screen
to promote the growth of institutions which, for a variety of
reasons, have found inadvisable the path of corporate adven-
ture.2° Especially true of the state, this may perhaps receive
its simplest illustration in the case of charitable trusts. “A
trust,” said Bacon there centuries ago,” “is the binding of the
conscience of one to the purpose of another’’—a fit enough des-
eription of the process of government. But we have failed to
see how that purpose must take account of the categories of
time and space. In its legal perspective, the doctrine is most
largely a supposed deference to the rights of propriety; and it
has paid but little attention to the admirable remark of John
Stuart Mill’ that no man ought to exercise the rights of pro-
perty long after his death.

This tendency to regard as adequate and all-excusing the
purpose enshrined in the trust without at the same time em-


207 W. Wallace, “Lectures & Essays,” 213 ff.

208 “Collected Papers,” III, 321 f.

209 “Reading on the Statute of Uses,” p. 9.

210 Essay on “Corporations and Church Property” in Vol. I of his “Dis-
sertations and Discussions.”


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 103


phasising the life that trust engenders has received an interest-
ing illustration in a recent American decision.“ A fireman
who was engaged in extinguishing a hospital fire was injured
through the defective condition of the hospital fire escape.
He sued the hospital for damages, and relief was denied on the
ground that the doctrine of respondeat superior does not apply
to charitable institutions. The basis of the decision seems to
be the opinion?” that the funds of a charity are not provided
to liquidate the damages caused in its defective administration;
and the funds are therefore not applicable to the redemption
of the torts committed by the agents or servants of the char-
ity. This doctrine, indeed, is not worked out with entire
consistency in other parts of the law, since a charitable insti-
tution, like the state, is liable in an action for breach of contract.
Nor is it an universal doctrine, since it is not applied by the
English courts.” It in reality involves a whole series of as-
sumptions. It starts out from the belief that a charitable
institution is in a different position from other institutions in
the fact that its purpose is not one of profit. But this is en-
tirely to ignore the administrative aspect of the problem. To
fulfil the purpose of a charity involves all the usual features
of an ordinary corporate enterprise. It acts by agents and
servants. It harms and benefits third parties exactly as they
are harmed or benefited by other institutions. Where fault
is involved it is difficult to see why the exception should be
maintained. It is small comfoit to an injured fireman to know
that even if he has to compensate himself for his injuries, he is
maintaining the strict purpose of the founder of the charity.


21 Loeffler v. Trustees of Sheppard and Enoch Pratt Hospital (1917)
100 Abl. 301.

22 The result of the case could be justified on the ground that there is
no liability for an injury sustained by a licensee when the injury is brought
about by a condition of the premises.

23 Overholser v. National Home for Disabled Soldiers, 68 Ohio St. 236;
McDonald v. Mass. General Hospital, 120 Mass. 432; Jensen v. Maine
Eye and Ear Infirmary, 107 Me. 408; Downes v. Harper Hospital, 101
Mich. 555.

214 Duncan v. Findlater (1839) 6 Cl. & Fin. 894 was decided in American
fashion, but since Mersey Docks Trustees v. Gibbs, (1866) I H. L. 93 the
rule has happily been the other way.


104 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


To him the case appears simply one of injury and he suffers
not less, but, in the present state of the law, actually more,
from the sheerly fortuitous fact that his accident has occurred
not at a factory but at a hospital. The thing of which the law
ought. to take account is surely the balance of interests in-
volved; and the hospital is far more likely to look to the con-
dition. of its ladders if it pays the penalty of its negligence than
if it saves a certain percentage of its income.

It would, in fact, be an intolerable situation if the only pro-
tection afforded the public against the torts of charities were
that of the pockets of agents and servants.” Those who
founded the charity intended it to be operated; and they, or
their representatives must, logically enough, pay the cost of
its operation from the funds provided for that purpose. There
are, indeed, some signs that the courts are beginning to appre-
ciate this. Relief has been granted to a claimant against the
Salvation Army which negligently allowed one of its vans to
run wild.” The inadequate protection of dangerous machin-
ery has suffered its due and necessary penalty.” The mjury
which resulted from the employment of an unskilful nurse has
not gone unrequited.”

Not, indeed, that any of these decisions really touch the
central issue that is raised. We have, in fact, a twofold prob-
lem. We have, in the first place, to inquire whether the crea-
tion of a charitable trust does not involve the creation of a
corporate person exactly in the manner of a business enter-
prise; in the second place the question is raised as to whether
there is any ground for the exclusion of a charity from the
ordinary rules of vicarious liability. The answer to the first
question is clearly an affirmative one. The Salvation Army,
an orphan asylum, a great hospital, are just as much persons
to those who have dealings with them as a private individual
or a railway company. Differentiation, if it is to be made,
cannot be made on the ground of character. If it is, the courts
will go as fatally wrong in the results of litigation as did the


215 Cf. Yale Law Journal Vol. 26, p. 124 ff.

26 Hordern v. Salvation Army, 199 N. Y. 233.

217 McMerney v. St. Luke’s Hospital, 122 Minn. 10.
28 St. Paul’s Sanitarium v. Williamson, 164 S. W. 36.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 105


House of Lords in the great Free Church of Scotland case.2"9
It was the insistence of the Lords upon the nature of the church
as a pendant to a set of doctrines which made them fail to sée
that more important was the life those doctrines called into
being.”° The life of the Salvation Army is, in precisely similar
fashion, more important than the doctrines that it teaches;
and we must legally judge its life by what in fact it is, and not
by the theories it proclaims.

Herein is found the answer to our second inquiry. The only
reason why a charity should not be liable for fault is its public
character. But that, surely, is no adequate reason at all. It
is probably a simple analogy from the irresponsibility of that
greatest of modern charities the state. It is the merest justice
that if the public seeks benefit, if men seek to benefit the pub-
lic, due care should be taken not to harm those interests, not
directly public, which are met in the process. A charity’s
personality will suffer no less detriment if it is allowed to be
irresponsible than a private enterprise. A hospital, for instance,
ought to be forced to take as much care in the selection of its
. nurses as a banker in the choice of his cashiers. We have found
that the enforcement of liability is the only adequate means to
this latter end, and it is difficult to see why the same is not
true of every other sphere. French law has not hesitated to
hold a county asylum liable for the arson of an escaped lunatic;
and we may thence be sure that the prefect of the department
concerned is not a second time guilty of negligence.”! The
whole problem is another illustration of the vital need of in-
sisting as much on the processes of institutions as on their
purposes. A negligently administered charity may aim at
inducting us all into the kingdom of heaven, but it is socially es-
sential to make it adequately careful of the means employed.”

The argument, surely, is applicable to the state; for upon

219 See the report of Mr. (now Lord) Haldane’s speech in the special
report by Orr and the comment of Dr. Figgis, “Churches in the Modern
State,” 19 ff.

220 Cf. Canadian Law Times, Vol. 36, p. 140 ff.

21 Sirey, 1908, III, 98 with a note by M. Hauriou

22 This and the preceding paragraphs are practically reproductions of
some notes of mine in the Harvard Law Review for January and February,
1918, and I am indebted to its editors for leave to make use of them.


106 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


a vaster theatre it is yet similar functions that its agents per-
form. For what, after all, is here contended is the not unrea-
sonable thesis that service in governmental functions does not
make men cease to be human. Public enterprise is not less
liable to error than private; and its responsibility should on
that account be not the less strictly enforced. Nor do we
perhaps sufficiently realise the possible ramifications of an
exclusion of the state from due responsibility. It begins as a
legal exclusion; but, sooner or later, that legal category will
pass over into the moral sphere. The fact of achievement will
become more important than the method by which attainment
is reached. Once an end is set up as in itself great enough to
set its exponents beyond the reach of law the real safeguards
of liberty are overthrown. Irresponsibility becomes equated
with the dangerous explanation of public policy; and that,
as is historically clear, is the first step towards an acceptance
of raison d’etat. The forms of protection the law has slowly
evolved may be inadequate as the realisation of ideal morality;
but they are none the less forms of protection. They repre-
sent rules of conduct which have behind them the sanction of
social experience; and in that sense it is in a high degree dan-
gerous to exclude any category of men from subjection to
them. For the release of the state from the trammels of law
means in practice the release of its officials from the obliga-
tions to which other men are usefully subject. Sooner or later
that release operates as an excuse for despotism. It breeds
the worst evils of bureaucracy. It makes those so released
impatient of criticism and resentful of inquiry. It is fatal to
the real essence of democratic government which involves the
conversion of the mass of men to the realisation that some
special programme is coincident with right. It neglects, as
Dr. Figgis has so well said,” “that care for the gradual edu-
cation of character, which is more important than any given
measures, is always so easy to ignore or thrust aside in the en-
thusiasm of a great cause, and is yet at the basis of all true
liberty, whether religious or civil.”

For the assumption of an unique concern in government for
ideal good is as easy as it is certainly fatal. Nothing is more


228 “From Gerson to Grotius,” p. 95.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 107


simple in the heat and stress of political’ life than to assume the
equation of one’s desire with what ought to be the ultimate
object of state-endeavour; yet nothing is at the same time
more certain than that the equation is a false one. We need
not accept Lord Acton’s dictum that great statesmen have been
almost always bad men to admit that the conference of un-
limited authority is at every point attended with danger. The
real guarantee of freedom is publicity; and publicity, to be
adequate, involves subjection to the control of general rules
of right and wrong. That is why the action of the state cannot
be put upon a different footing from individual action. The
controlling factors of good conduct are thereby loosed. Men
who in the ordinary processes of everyday life are gentle and
tender and kindly, become in their corporate aspect different
beings. But the inference therefrom is not that we should
judge that aspect differently; rather does it involve the in-
ference that it is our business the more sternly to apply what
standards time has painfully evolved:

Herein, also, we may discover another reason for the division
of power. The only way in which men can become accustomed
to the meaning and content of political processes is by acquain-
tance with them. Mr. Graham Wallas has noted” the dis-
appearance with the advent of machinery of the “essentially
political trades,” like tailoring and shoemaking, where pro-
duction went on under conditions that made possible the
organisation of thought. ‘The modern factory has destroyed—
for good or ill—that possibility; and that distinction clearly
must transfer the centre of social importance outside the fac-
tory in each man’s daily life. But that, in turn involves
making the groups to which he belongs politically real in the
only sense of the word that today has meaning. His groups,
that is to say, must become responsible groups; yet responsi-
bility can only come where some social function is definitely
entrusted to the group for fulfilment. It is in the performance
of such tasks that the personality of men obtains its realisa-
tion. It is in such tasks that their leisure can be made in a full
sense rich and creative. That is not the case today. Everyone
who has engaged in public work is sooner or later driven to


24 “The Great Society,” p. 299.


108 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


admit that the great barrier to which he finds himself opposed
is indifference. To the comfortable classes he is liable to seem
an “agitator”; to the mass of toiling men he commits the last
sin of interference. Here, perhaps, there is a sense in which
Rousseau’s paradox becomes pregnant with new meaning and
it may in the end be true that men must. be forced to be free.
Certain at least it is that the temptations to leave alone the
real problems by which we are confronted is almost insuperable.
We make every provision to maintain the status quo. Nothing
is more simple in the great society than to be lost amongst one’s
neighbours; nothing is more dangerous to the attainment of
the social end. For if the good life is one day to be achieved
by the majority of men and women it is only by the preserva-
tion of individuality that it can be done; and individuality,
in any generous perspective, does not mean the rich and in-
tense life of a few able men.

That is why, at every stage in the social process, we are
concerned to throw the business of judgment upon the indi-
vidual mind. That does not, it ought to be insisted, mean
inefficient government. It does not mean that we shall not
trust the expert; but it does mean the clear conviction that a
judgment upon the expert is to be a democratic judgment. We
have had too much experience of the gospel of efficiency to place
any reliance that is final upon what promise it may contain.
The great danger to which it is ceaselessly exposed is the eager
desire of achievement and a resultant carelessness about the
methods of its programme. It sacrifices independence to the
machine much in the way that party discipline aiming, above
all, at victory at the polls, sacrifices conviction, with its possi-
bility of discoveries, to uniformity of outlook. It becomes at
once impatient of the exceptional man who cannot be reduced
within its categories; but, sooner or later, it becomes im-
patient also of the average man. For it cannot respect, over
any length of time, the slowness with which his mind moves,
the curiously intricate avenues along which he travels. It may
be true that in any group of men oligarchical government is
bound, in the end, and in some degree, to develop;?5 or, at


26 This is the thesis of Professor Michel’s well-known book on political
parties; but J feel that he has only discussed half the problem.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 109


least, we need not deny the patent virtues of a man who can
guide his fellows. But that is not to say that the leaders are
shepherds whom the flock is inthinkingly to follow. It means
that safeguards must be erected lest the mass of men become
mere units in a sheepfold. It means the insistence that liberty
consists above all in the full opportunity for active citizenship
wherever there are men with the will to think upon political
problems. It means that a democratic society must reject the
sovereign state as by definition inconsistent with democracy.


IX. THE DIRECTION OF EVENTS


Sucu, at least, seems the direction in which the modern state
is moving. We stand on the threshold of one of those critical
periods in the history of mankind when the most fundamental
notions present themselves for analysis. In England, in France,
and in America, it is already possible vaguely to discern the
character of that dissatisfaction from which a new synthesis
is ultimately born. The period when a sovereign state was a
necessary article of faith seems, on the whole, to be passing
away. Society is freed from the control of any special religious
organisation; and the birth of scientific theology in the nine-
teenth century seems destined to complete that process of
disintegration which began with the advent of Luther. It is
in social and not in religious theory, that is tod say, that we shall
search for the sources of new insight. The moral dogmas we
shall adopt seem likely to remain unconnected with any special
church or school of religious doctrine. It was primarily to
prevent such danger that the sovereign state came into being.
With the general acceptance of Darwinism the success of its
mission seems achieved. For the state itself, not less than the
church is subject to the laws of evolution. It survives in any
given form only so long as that form with adequacy summarises
a general social experience. It has here been urged that it
is no longer adequate. The form of organisation it involves is
neither politically useful nor morally sufficient. The time has
come for new discoveries.


No one who has observed the course of English politics
since the triumph of socialised liberalism in 1906 can have any


110 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


doubts upon this head. It was an epoch which began with
immense promise; and, at its close, it seemed likely to end in
something but little short of disaster. It began with a gigantic
effort to make the categories of state-life more socially inclu-
sive than at any previous period. It ended in a drift towards
bureaucratic control from which thinkers of the most diverse
schools drew back in distressed scepticism. The state had al-
ready begun to overload its instruments with business. The
exigencies of government had so strengthened party-control as
virtually to destroy the independence of the private member;
or, at least, to leave him a pitiful Friday afternoon in which to
spread his curtailed wings. No one could doubt that the state
would long retain its positive character without some system
of decentralisation being devised. For the pressure on Whit-
hall had involved the growth of a new bureaucracy which gave
rise to a doubt whether the régime it involved was compatible
with individual freedom.2® Parliamentary democracy had
broken down; sovereignty had patently suffered transference
from the House of Commons. With both women and trade-
unionists alike sources of new loyalty other than the state
could be detected; and in Ulster there was a striking deter-
mination to deny the finality of a government decision. Moral
and economic dissatisfactions were on all hands evident. It
was to the foundations of the state that men were going back.
They looked upon their handiwork and did not pronounce it
good. The great demand of the time was for religious and so-
cial innovation; and the benevolent feudalism of the Insurance
Act proved, in the event, in no sense due response to the new
desires that sought expression. Labour was declaring that the
state was essentially a middle-class institution—a difference
indeed from the optimistic days when Macaulay could claim
that the middle classes were “‘the natural representatives of
the human race.” The state-regulation of Germany seemed
less and less applicable to the sturdy individualism of the
English mind. The one great object of enquiry was from what
sources new discoveries in government were to be had. We


26 Cf. Prof. Ramsay Muir’s “Peers and Bureaucrats,” and the inter-
esting but grossly exaggerated volume of E. S. P. Haynes: “The Decline
of Liberty in England.”


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 111


had evolved the great society, as Mr. Wallas has pointed out,22”
without planning institutions at all adequate to its scale of life.

That some real progress lay concealed beneath the appear-
ance of this chaos it would be difficult to deny. Yet what
emerges, in a perspective that the events of the last four years
seem now to have made final, is essentially a bankruptcy in
liberal ideas. Nor is it possible to make a claim of greater
profit for Conservatism. It was doubtless overburdened by
the weight it had to carry in the support of an obsolete second
chamber; but on every essential political problem it had noth-
ing acceptable to contribute. Lord Hugh Cecil, indeed, had
realised that laissez-faire was not without its merits; but its
scope was limited by him to fields too narrow and specialised
in character to be attractive to the mass of men. The state,
in fact, had come to the parting of the ways; but to none of
its fundamental difficulties could it offer any comprehensive
solution. Ireland, the second chamber, education, poverty,
agriculture, the position of women—about all of these there
was a plethora of debate; but about all of them the policy of
statesmen was to prevent a half-response in the hope that,
despite them, a new equilibrium would emerge. And, behind
all and beyond all, there loomed the gigantic problem of a
labouring class growing ever more self-conscious and ever more
determined to control its own destinies. It repudiated the
solution of social welfare implied in such a measure as the In-
surance Act. Its strikes revealed a more fierce hostility to the
forces of capital than had been manifest since the early years
of the Holy Alliance. In the famous Dublin Transport Work-
ers’ strike it showed a solidarity unique in labour history. The
Labour Party seemed to it hardly more instinct with hope
than the traditional political forces of the country. It was in
workshop and factory that the new ideas were being forged.
They showed a striking renaissance of that attitude which, as
in Owen and Thompson and Hodgskin, believed that the di-
version of labour power into political rather than into economic


227 “The Great Society,” Chap. I. In a paper published in the Smith
College studies on the “Problem of Administrative Areas,” I have tried to
note the significance of this.

228 Cf. Prof. Foxwell’s classic introduction to Menger’s “Right to the
Whole Produce of Labour.”


112 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


fields was mistaken. Its influence was securing the reconstruc-
tion of social history.” It was insisting upon the need of new
and wider educational ideals. It was demanding a complete
revision of the distribution of wealth. It was thinking out new
categories in the productive process. It rejected state-arbi-
tration of its difficulties with capital. It looked with grave
suspicion on the use of the army in the maintenance of social
order. It emphatically underlined such differentiation of treat-
ment as that meted out to Sir Edward Carson, on the one hand,
and to that significant portent Mr. Larkin, on the other. It
was, of course, like all renaissances, the work of a minority.
But it was a minority that had caught the vision of a life that
might be made more splendid and more spiritual than the old.
It had realised that the basis of its ideal must be the conquest
of economic power. It was upon that mission it had embarked.

Professor Dicey, whose interpretation is the more valuable
from his hostility to these ideas, has suggested that the two
outstanding characteristics of the time are irreverence for law
and a new belief in natural rights. The reason of this surely
lies in the general truth that parliamentary government had
reached the zenith of its achievement. The complexity of social
problems had made them too vast for discussion by debate in
the House of Commons to be a sufficient test of legislation. No
single legislative assembly in the world had stood the test of
the nineteenth century well enough to make men hopeful.
Everywhere the tendency had been more and more towards
the development of an invisible bureaucracy, until the state
itself had seemed, in the last analysis, no more than what the
French, in an intranslatable phrase, call a syndicat des fonction-
naires—a syndicat, moreover, which, as John Stuart Mill
saw,” is largely controlled by men without understanding of
working class ideals. And in this context it is of the first im-
portance to realise that the movement for social reform was
less perhaps a genuine effort towards the reconstruction that
had become essential than towards a discovery of the minimum
conditions of change necessary to the maintenance of the
present society.

29 As in Mr. Tawney’s “Agrarian Revolution in the Sixteenth Century,”
and Mr. and Mrs. Hammond’s studies of town and village labour.

230 “Representative Government, ’’Ch.III (Everyman’s edition) ,p.209-10.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 113


But the fact has been that the theoretic purpose of the state
did not find adequate fulfilment either in governments or legis-
latures. We were simply forced to the realisation that majority-
rule could not be the last word on our problems. So long as
political power was divorced from economic power the jury of
the nation was in reality packed. Wherein representative gov-
ernment had been supremely successful was in the securing
of general political rights in which rich and poor alike have
been interested. But once the transference has been made
from political rights to economic interests the basic sectionalism
of society has been apparent to anyone with the patience to
observe the facts. Wherever economic freedom is to be se-
cured, certainly legislative experience does not give us the right
to expect it from that quarter. Men and womíen resented a
state of which the law neither expressed nor fully attempted
to express the need for translating their desires into effective
political terms. They resented and resisted it; that is the real
root of lawlessness. The Osborne decision of the House of
Lords,”*! for example, destroyed at a stroke the confidence of
labour in that judicial tribunal. Everyone knew that the polit-
ical activity of the trade-unions was an integral part of their
functions; everyone knew also that manufacturers’ associa-
tions did virtually the same thing in virtually the same way.
Yet the House of Lords tried politically to strangle the unions
within the four corners of an outworn doctrine. The under-
standing of obvious trade-union implications was at every
point absent from its enquiry. But if the highest tribunal of
the state can so misinterpret the challenge of its age, lawless-
ness and the revival of natural rights are not difficult to under-
stand. They are, historically, the perennial symptoms of
discontent. They make their appearance at every transitional
epoch. They are the invariable heralds of a new time.

England shows her temper only in vague hints and chaotic
practical demands; the more logical structure of the French
mind makes possible a sharper contrast between opposing at-
titudes. The one certain thing in the France that came into
being with the close of the Dreyfus controversy was a revolt
against the centralised state.” That revolt was evident in at


231 (1910) A. C. 87.
232 This is worked out in detail in Chapter V below.


114 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


least three general aspects. The contempt for politics was in
France more widely spread than in any other European coun-
try. Distrust of the chamber, suspicion of statesmen, a doubt
if the struggle was more than the exchange of one faction for
another, are everywhere presented to us. There is no more
creative literature in the last generation than that in which
men like Duguit, Leroy and Paul-Boncour have depicted for
us the fall of the sovereign state through parliamentary in-
competence. Nor does the trade-union movement emphasise
any dissimilar lesson. It lacks the sober and practical caution
of English labour. It is frankly idealist and, on the whole, as
frankly revolutionary. Those who have most clearly outlined
its aims, men like Pelloutier and Griffuellies, those who have
analysed its rules and customs like Leroy,” point always to
the capture of economic power by the proletariat and the
emergence of a new society created in federalist terms. Even
more striking is the revolt of the civil service. Here the state ©
is attacked at the very root of its sovereignty; and where the -
bureaucracy joins hands with the worker the path lies open
for a new synthesis. Proudhon has displaced Marx as the
guiding genius of French labour; and it-is above all his feder-
alism that is the source of the new inspiration.”

Even those who reject this attitude are largely sceptical of
the future of the older ideals. Some have frankly taken refuge
in a royalist and aristocratic solution; some, like M. Brune-
tiére, have urged that only a religious revival can restore France
to a satisfactory condition. The coalition of the Left dissolved
when the separation of church and state had been effected;
and it cannot be said that M. Jaurés’ presence in the Chamber
concealed his frank sympathy with a proletarian revolution.
M. Esmein stood out as the solitary political thinker of dis-
tinction in France who had not renounced the ancient ways.
The strikes before which the state was largely powerless; the
endless proposals for decentralisation and proportional repre-

233 His “La Coutume Ouvrière” is one of the fundamental books of
our time.

234 For the revival of interest in Proudhon Cf. Pirou in the “Revue d’His-
toire des Doctrines Sociales et Economiques,” 1912, p. 161, and the books
there cited.

235 Cf. Chapter II below.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 115


sentation; the growing tendency of the Council of State to
deny in practice the theory of national sovereignty promul-
gated by the Revolution; the attempt of sociologists like
Durkheim to penetrate through the artificial classification of
rights by the state to rights derived from a solidarity based
on group-needs and group-services;”* all these, surely, herald,
as in England, the transition to a new equilibrium. France,
like England, has had her period of lawlessness and a revival
of natural rights. But she has wisely rejected the over-simple
formule of Rousseau as an attempted analysis of social rela-
tionships. Rather, as in 1789, she is setting Europe the example
of a new perspective in political organisation. The discipline
of technical co-ordination, with the liberty it implies, is re-
placing the authoritarian hierarchy of the Napoleonic state.”
Nor is this the idle hypothesis of theorists. On the contrary
it represents the sober analysis of everyday life drawn from
men peroccupied with the practice of law and industry. That
is the real basis of its promise and importance.


Generalisations about America are notoriously dangerous;
for it is tempting to deny that, in the European sense, there is
yet any such thing in America as the state. Rather is the ob-
server confronted by a series of systems of economic interests
so varied in character and, at times, so baffling, as to make
inquiry almost impossible.8 It is only within the last genera-
tion that America has emerged from the uncritical individual-
ism of a pioneer civilisation. It is little more than a decade
since she began directly to influence the course of world-poli-
tics. Yet even in a civilisation so new and rich in promise it
is difficult not to feel that a critical era is approaching. The
old party-divisions have become largely meaningless. The
attempt to project a new political synthesis athwart the old
formule failed to command support enough to be successful.
Yet, even in America, that point of economic organisation has
been reached where the emergence of a proletariat presents the


236 See especially the second edition of his ‘‘Division du travail Social.”
It badly needs translation into English.

27 Cf. Leroy, “Les Transformation de la Puissance Publique,” p. 286.

238 Mr. Herbert Croly’s “Progressive Democracy” is by far the best recent
analysis.


116 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


basic social problems. A political democracy confronts the
most powerful economic autocracy the world has ever seen. The
separation of powers has broken down. The relation between
executive and legislature cries to heaven for readjustment.
The decline of Congress has become a commonplace. The con-
stituent states of the republic have largely lost their ancient
meaning. New administrative areas are being evolved. A
patent unrest everywhere demands enquiry. Labour is becom-
ing organised and demanding recognition. The men who, like
Mark Hanna and Mr. Root, could stand ona platform of sim-
ple conservatism are already obsolete. The political literature
of America in the last fifteen years is almost entirely a literature
of protest. Political experimentation, particularly in the West,
is almost feverishly pursued. Discontent with old ideas was
never more bitter. The economic background of the decisions
of the Supreme Court was never more critically examined;
and, indeed, anyone who analyses the change from the narrow
individualism of Brewer and Peckham to the liberalising scep-
ticism of Mr. Justice Holmes and the passionate rejection of
the present order which underlies the attitude of Mr. Justice
Brandeis, can hardly doubt the advent of a new time.

What, in a sense, is being born is a realisation of the state;
but it is a realisation that is fundamentally different from any-
thing that Europe has thus far known. For it starts out from
an unqualified acceptance of political democracy and the basic
European struggle of the last hundred years is thus omitted.
So that it is bound to make a difference to the United States
that its critical epoch should have arrived when Europe also
confronts a new development. American economic history
will doubtless repeat on a vaster scale the labour tragedies of
the old world and think out new expedients for their intensi-
fication. But there are certain elements in the American prob-
lem which at once complicate and simplify the issue. Granted
its corrupt politics, the withdrawal of much of its ability from
governmental life, its exuberant optimism, and a traditional
faith in the efficacy of its orthodox political mechanisms that
may well prove disastrous, there are yet two aspects in which
the basis of its life provides opportunities instinct with profound
and hopeful significance. It can never be forgotten that America


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 117


was born in revolution. In the midst of its gravest material-
ism that origin has preserved an idealist faith. It has made the
thought of equality of opportunity and the belief in natural
rights conceptions that in all their vagueness are yet living
entities no man may dare to neglect. When the dissatisfaction
with economic organisation becomes, as it is rapidly becoming,
acute enough to take political form, it is upon these elements
that it will fasten. Americans, in the last analysis, believe in
democratic government with a fierce intensity that cannot be
denied. They may often deceive themselves about its forms.
They may often, and very obviously, suffer an almost ludicrous
perversion of its expression. The effort of their workers may
be baffled by the countless nationalities which have yet to
complete the process of Americanisation. Their trade-unions
may be as yet for the most part in a commercial stage. Yet,
from the confused chaos of it all, one clear thread may be
seized.

It is towards a new orientation of ideals that America is mov-
ing Exactly as in England and France challenge has been
issued to theories of organisation that have outlived their use-
fulness. That was the real meaning of the Progressive Move-
ment. It symbolised a dissatisfaction with the attitude that
interpreted happiness in terms of the volume of trade. The
things upon which interest become concentrated are the fund-
amental elements. It is the perversion of political power to
economic ends that above all receives analysis. The economists
demand a re-valuation of motives.” ‘Why should the masses,”
asks an able recent inquirer,” “seemingly endowed with the
power to determine the future, have permitted the development
of a system which has stripped them of ownership, initiative
and power?”’ and his answer is virtually a sober indictment
of capitalism. “The fundamental division of powers in the
United States,” says President Hadley,” “is between voters

239 This is the work that has been performed by Mr. Veblen with some-
thing like genius in his “‘Theory of the Leisure Class;” the “Instinct of Work-
manship;” the ‘“Theory of Business Enterprise; and the great book on
“Imperial Germany and the Industrial Revolution.”

240 W, H. Hamilton, the Price-System and Social Policy. Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. XXVI, p. 31.

241 Quoted in Hamilton, op. cit. p. 37.


118 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


on the one hand and the owners of property on the other. The
forces of democracy on the one side... . are set over
against the forces of property on the other side. . . . Demo-
cracy was complete as far as it went, but constitutionally it was
bound to stop short at social democracy.” It is against this
condition that the liberal forces of American life are slowly
aligning themselves. A law that is subservient to the inter-
ests of the status quo is overwhelmingly unpopular; the use of
the injunction in labour disputes, for example, has actually
been a presidential issue.42 The Clayton Act, with all its
defects, is yet a wedge that organised labour can one day use
to good purpose.” Things like Mr. Justice Holmes’ dissent
in Coppage v. Kansas“ deposit a solid sentiment of determination
that will not easily pass away. The lawlessness that is com-
plained of in American labour is essentially the insistance that
the life of the workers has outgrown the categories in which
traditional authority would have confined it. The basis of a
new claim of rights is in America autocthonous. Nor is it poss-
ible to doubt that only concessions large enough to amount to
the admission of its substance can prevent it from being made.
In either case, we have the materials for a vast change in the
historic outlines of American federalism.

It is thus upon the fact that ours is an age of vital transition
that the evidence seems clearly to concentrate. The two char-
acteristic notes of change are present in the dissatisfaction with
the working of law, on the one hand, and the reassertion of nat-
ural rights upon the other. The validity of the acts of the legal
sovereign everywhere suffers denial unless its judgement secures
a widespread approval; or, as with the South Wales Mines in
England and the Railroad Brotherhoods in the United States,

-an organised attempt may successfully be made to coerce the
action of government in a particular direction. Violence, as
with, the militant suffragists in England may well come to be
regarded as a normal weapon of political controversy; nor have


42 Cf. Groat, “The Attitude of American Courts in Labour Cases,”
passim.

243 Its defect is-that it still leaves American trade unions at the mercy
of the common law doctrine, Cf. conspiracy. The act is, U. S. Statutes,
1913-4, C. 321.

PBA IU, fois Ih, YAO


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 119


those who suffered imprisonment for their acts regarded the
penalty as other than a privilege. In such an aspect, the sover-
eignty of the state, in the only sense in which that sovereignty
-can be regarded as a working hypothesis, no longer commands
anything more than a partial and spasmodic acceptance. For
it is clearly understood that it in practice means governmental
sovereignty; and the need for the limitation of governmental
powers is perceived by men of every shade of opinion. Nor is
the reassertion of rights less significant. It involves in its very
conception a limitation upon the sovereignty of the state. It
insists that there are certain things the state must secure and
maintain for all its members, and a state that can not secure
such rights as are deemed needful by a minority as important,
for example, as organised labour, will sooner orlater suffer a
change in form and substance. The basis of law in opinion is
more clear than at any previous time; and the way in which that
opinion is fostered outside the categories of the normal political
life until its weight is great enough to make heedless resistance
impossible is a fact of which every observer must take account.


X. CONCLUSION


It is difficult to see how such potentialities at any point har-
monise with the traditional theory of the state. The lawyer may
still manipulate that theory for the purposes of judicial enquiry;
but, beyond that narrow usefulness, its day seems to have de-
parted. We have been taught that the state is sovereign; yet
it is in practice obvious that its will is operated only by a portion
of its members and that to this portion the possession of sover-
eignty is denied. Itis urged that the state aims at the good life;
and, again in practice, it is clear that the realisation of its pur-
pose is so inadequate as to render at best dubious the value
of such hypotheses. It is insisted that the state can be bound
only by its own consent; yet, in practice also, and unless we
wish merely to play upon words, it is clear that throughout its
recent history groups other than itself have compelled its adop-
tion of a policy te which it was opposed. The books tell us that
it is irresponsible; yet, in practice also, what mainly confronts
us, especially in France, is the growth of a state-responsibility
which, however reluctantly conceded, is still responsibility. We


120 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


are told that sovereignty is indivisible; yet, unless again we wish
merely to play upon words, the fact of its broad partition is on
every hand obvious. Nor is the notion of the state as funda-
mentally representative of society in any sort more acceptable.
It is true where it fufills the broad objects of a social life that
is now conceived in ethical terms; but, more and more, men are
coming to doubt whether the result of the state process is, in-
variably or even normally, the achievement of what such an
ethical perspective must demand. It is rather towards another
attitude that men are turning. It is rather of other categories
they are beginning to make use. For the orthodox theory of
the state has proved largely without basis in the event. It may
be true as a dream; and it is doubtless undeniable that dreams
are often enough capable of realisation. But it is for those who
cherish the dream to give proof of its relation to the facts.


The basis upon which we proceed is the simple truth that
men and institutions are possessed of power. It is clearly per-
ceived that, in itself, power is neither good nor bad; its use
alone affords material for judgment upon its ethical content.
It is held that its concentration at any special point within
society increases the possibility of its perversion to dubious
purpose. That has involved the increasing insistence that our
general notions of right and wrong be put beyond the reach of
danger. The state, in a word, is to be subject to law; and that
is no more impossible in a political democracy than when, for
state, Bracton could use the name of King. The interdepend-
ence of political and economic structure is, moreover, not less
potent than in the past; and it is thus sheer anachronism to
regard as adequate an industrial order in which power is not
in democratic fashion distributed.

The individual, that is to say, is to become increasingly the
centre of social importance. Otherwise, in so vast a world,
his claims may well! suffer neglect. After all it was for his
happiness that the state, at least in philosophic interpretation,
existed from its origins; for if the good life does not bring
happiness to humble men and women it is without meaning.
So that it is upon the happiness he is able to attain that our
judgment of its processes must be founded. It is in this con-
text obvious that such judgment could not in our time be an


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 121


optimistic one. The merely materia] conditions of happiness
are today achieved for too few of us to give any right to satis-
faction. Freedom, in the sense that it has been here maintained,
is alone real, is a good attained only by a small part of society.
Nor have we evidence that such limitation is inherent in the
nature of things. On the contrary, the evidence we possess
points so emphatically in the opposite direction as to justify
the assumption of its inadequacy. Yet, without that general
freedom, the state is a meaningless thing. The problem of
authority becomes, above all, the duty. so to organise its char-
acter and its processes as to make it, in the widest aspect, the
servant of right and of freedom. But to make it the servant
of freedom is already to limit its powers.


The emphasis upon freedom is made because it is believed
that only in such fashion can the ethical significance of per-
sonality obtain its due recognition. For the harmony we need
between rulers and subjects it is not upon outward law but
inward spirit that reliance must be placed. The social order
of the present time tends more and more to destroy the per-
sonal will of each member of the state by asking from him a
passive acquiescence in its policy on the ground of generous
purpose. It is here argued that such uniformity is the negation
of freedom. It is neither active nor vital. It in reality denies
perhaps the ability and certainly the justice of the mind that
tries to fathom the motives of government. It is thus the
death of spontaneity; and to destroy spontaneity is to prevent
the advent of liberalism. We have thus to deny that right and
wrong are state-created dogmas which shift with the interest
of those who control the state. We do not, like Lord Acton,
postulate an unchanging content of goodness; for the very
essence of this theory is the acceptance of the fact of evolu-
tion. But it is denied that right is what is subjectively so
deemed by government. A certain objectivity, to be estab-
lished by argument and experience, is made inherent in it.
The one thing in which we can have confidence as a means of
progress is the logic of reason. We thus insist, on the contrary,
that the mind of each man, in all the aspects conferred upon
him by his character as a social and a solitary being, pass
judgment upon the state; and we ask for his condemnation of


122 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


its policy where he feels it in conflict with the right.

That, surely, is the only environment in which the plant of
liberty can flourish. It implies, from the very nature of things,
insistence that the allegiance of man to the state is secondary
to his allegiance to what he may conceive his duty to society
as a whole. It is, as a secondary allegiance, competing in the
sense that the need for safeguards demands the erection of al-
ternative loyalties which may, in any given synthesis, oppose
their wills to that of the state. In the ordinary acceptance of
the term, such an attitude denies the validity of any sovereign
power save that of right; and it urges that the discovery of
right is, on all fundamental questions, a search, upon which
the separate members of the state must individually engage.
We ask, in fact, from each the best thought he can offer to the
interpretation of life. For we have proceeded far enough in
its understanding to realise its complexity. We know that no
solution can be permanent or adequate that is not in each
detail based upon the widest possible experience. But we know
also that such experience must be free and capable of influence
if it is to receive its due respect. The slavery of inertia is a
weed that grows everywhere in wanton luxuriance; and we
are, above all, concerned to make provision against its intrusion.

In the external relationships of the state it is clear that the
Machiavellian epoch is drawing to a close The application
of ethical standards to the foreign policy of nations is a demand
that has secured the acceptance of all who are concerned for
the future of civilisation. Yet it is assuredly not less clear that
the internal life of the state requires a similar moralisation.
We realise now the danger of a state that makes power the
supreme good and is careless of the purpose for which it is
exerted. We have sacrificed the youth of half the world to
maintain our liberty against its encroachments. Surely the
freedom we win must remain unmeaning unless it is made
consistently effective-in every sphere of social life. This gen-
eration, at least, can never forget the ghostly legions by which
it is encompassed. It ought also ceaselessly to remember that
it is by those legions its effort will be judged. They will meas-
ure our achievement in terms of their supreme devotion. They
will accept no recompense save the conquest of their dreams.


CHAPTER TWO
BONALD!
I. THE IMPLICATION OF THEOCRACY


HE theocratic system seems to have found an eutha-
nasia the more tragic in that it proceeds unobserved.
It shares therein the fate of half a hundred political
systems which have failed to base themselves upon the fact
of evolution. For no theory can now hope for survival which
is not based upon the changing necessities of social life. The
obvious generalisation that the creation of dogma carries with
it, in grim Hegelian fashion, its own negation, confronts the
observer at every stage of the historic process. And of theocracy
this has been the case in a peculiar degree. The claims of its
representatives have grown as their acceptance has become the
more impossible. It was at the very nadir of his fortunes that
Hildebrand made claim to the lordship of the world. It was
when Garibaldi and his redshirts were thundering at the gate
that Pius IX registered his infallibility. The garment has been
the more royally displayed that the shrunken body may be the
better concealed.

Yet two great truths theocracy has enshrined; and, of a
certainty, no estimate of its character would be just which did
not take account of their value. More, perhaps, than any
similar system of ideas theocracy has understood the worth of
dogma. It has seen that the secret of existence is the preserva-
tion of identity. It has realised the chaos of instability. Nor
is this all. Its believers have grasped, perhaps more fully
than any thinkers save the doctrinaire liberals of the nine-


1 On Bonald the best descriptive account of that of Moulinié (Pari
1916) which is, however, weak in its criticism. There are famous essays
by Sainte-Beuve in his “Causeries,” Vol. IV, and by Faguet in his “Politiques
et Moralistes,’’ Vol.I. See also Bourget, ‘Etudes et Portraits,” Vol. III,
Montesquieu, “Le réalisme de Bonald.”’


124 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


teenth century, the difference between the essence of a political
system and the accidental principles which arise from the
method of its application. They have ceaselessly insisted on
the importance of securing beyond peradventure the funda-
mental notions of their age. They did, indeed, go mistakenly
further. They did take the fatal step of arguing that an ideal
to be true must be unchanging. Of the relativity of ideas they
had no notion; or, if they dimly ‘seized its importance, they
denied its philosophic rightness. For they deemed it the busi-
ness of speculation to search for absolutes. They had no
patience with anything save the eternal. If, in the result, a
changing civilisation has been compelled to desert their stand-
ards, that does not mean the total error of the ideals for which
they fought. On the contrary, that of which the historian
must take constant account is not merely the sharpness of
their vision, but the accuracy of their prophecy. Again and
again they cast a vivid light upon the conditions of their time.
The fact of their failure is not proof of their ineptitude. On
the contrary; they brought powerful support to a theory of
politics for which, on other grounds, strong and insistent jus-
tification can still be made. What in brief they suggested was
the apotheosis of authority. Liberty to them was error. They
tried to find its falsity in the divinity of its antithesis. It is
rather in the emphasis of their application than its source that
modern criticism tends to begin its attack. And at least one
powerful school of political enquiry has rejected its premises
rather than its conclusions. In that sense it is still a living
influence at the present time.


The source of its curious revivification in the nineteenth
century is in no sense difficult to discover. They who returned
from exile in 1814 believed that their experience was the final
condemnation of liberal principles. They had seen the tri-
umph of anarchy in the name of freedom. They had been the
victims of an egalitarianism for which history afforded no prece-
dent even if it offered an ample justification. The institutions
they had inherited had been ruthlessly overthrown. The ideals
they had cherished were cast aside in an unpitying contempt.
Tradition had been butchered that Reason might have its
Paris holiday; and to tradition they were united by every tie


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 125


of kinship and of interest. Their exile had been the breeder
of hate rather than of understanding; and it was in a spirit
of revenge that they returned. The age which the twenty-five
full years of revolution had turned into antiquity became for
them the Saturnia regna of an earlier time. That for which
their kin had paid with blood became hallowed because it had
been the cause of suffering. They came not to amend but to
restore. As they had forgiven nothing, so they had failed to
learn the lesson of their banishment. They deified the past;
and in that vision of enchantment they discovered a little
easily the principles of a theocracy.

This was in a particular degree true of the Roman Church?
No institution had had a more singular history in the period
of revolutionary misfortune. The States-General, at the out-
set of its deliberations had been in no sense an anti-clerical
assembly. The mass of the people was passionately catholic;
and their confidence in the clergy is proved by the fact that the
cahiers of the Third Estate had been largely entrusted to
their hands. They had ample opportunity to win for them-
selves the urgent confidence of those in whose hands would
lie the destinies of the coming revolution. The idea of a sepa-
ration between Church and State was, in 1789, present in the
mind of no single practical statesman. The Church was re-
sponsible for its own misfortunes. To the popular dislike of
Ultramontanism it gave ground for action. Its support of the
extreme reactionists earned for it the distrust and anger of
moderate men; while the hatred which the upper clergy earned
no less than they received was thereby extended to the mass of
its members, From the outset the clergy seemed to threaten
the Revolution; and when the Revolution created a Republic
their Roman allegiance threatened its unity. The onset of war
and its early disasters gave an opportunity to the enemies of
the Church of which they did not fail to make good use. Sus-
picion turned to intolerance, and from intolerance was born
an implacable persecution.


2 On the character of the Roman church at the time of the Restoration
see the essay on Lamennais below. Even allowing for its anti-clerical
bias M. Debidour’s “L’Eglise et L’Etat en France de 1789-1870” is easily
the best treatment.


126 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


Yet the ills of the Church under the Convention and the Assem-
bly would have given no grounds for the ultramontane passions
of the Restoration. What secured their onset was the cal-
culated policy of Napoleon. True to the principles which have
made the name of Erastus the mistaken symbol of oppression,
he saw in the church no more than an admirable political weap-
on. He declared himself a Gallican; and his absorptive temper
made of Gallicanism a doctrine to which no self-respecting mem-
ber of the church could give adherence. It is, indeed, possible
that before the Napoleonic era the declaration of 1682 probably
represented the normal clerical attitude. But when the princi-
ples of 1682 resulted in a papal captivity and the Organic Arti-
cles the temper of the church was bound to change.

It became evident to most that a trust in Rome was not in-
compatible with a faith in France; and the transition from com-
patibility to dependence was almost fatally easy. There is
something of poetic justice in the fact that a nominal appli-
cation of its own principles should thus have taught the French
clergy their inherent error. When Louis XVIII came back to
Versailles the church which accompanied him had new prin-
ciples to maintain and new standards to enforce. The tenets of
a royalist faith they had always upheld; and of his support they
were from the outset assured. But they had learned from a
better experience that only (so they deemed) an exclusive and
ultramontane church was certain of security. They did not
perceive that Napoleon had only attempted the enforcement
of the very principles they were themselves to preach. They
did not know that they, like him, were encompassing the im-
prisonment of the mind, and that they, like him, were to fail
because their task was from the outset impossible. The mind
of man may demand the ease of dogma, but it so demands only
that it may destroy. The church made the fatal error of their
persecutor and assumed that in unity alone can strength be dis-
covered. They came back to enshrine in law the uniqueness
of their sovereignty and they only fashioned thereby the instru-
ment of a second Revolution.

They had learned nothing in their exile save to brood upon
their misfortune. It was patent to them that what had occured
was the fruit of human wickedness: That of which they had


AUTHORITY IN THE-MODERN STATE 127


need was a political organisation whereby the errors from which
they had suffered might become but a hideous memory. They
needed a political theory which ensured the permanent satisfac-
tion of their demands. Their life was based upon their tradi-
tions. It was from their traditions that they drew their claims.
So it was that they erected their history into a philosophy that
they might destroy the category of time.


Il. THE BASIS OF TRADITIONALISM


Tarne has refused the title of philosophers to the Tradition-
alists of the Restoration; and in the sense that it was their busi-
ness rather to refute than to make enquiry there can be no doubt
that he was right. Their fate, indeed, has been in every way
somewhat curious. The literary effectiveness of De Maistre,
the skill with which he presents his pessimism, the acuteness
of his reflections—all these have combined to give his work the
permanence that is undoubtedly its historic due. The tragic
interest of Lamennais’ life would of itself be sufficient to
arouse increasing speculation; but he becomes of even greater
importance from the fact that the most vital aspect of nine-
teenth century Catholicism is in a special sense his creation.
The conciliatory spirit of Ballanche gives to all his speculation
a.singular charm that is absent from the work of his compeers.

Bonald has been less fortunate; and, in truth, it is but
within recent times that the value of his uncritical and unin-
spired dogmatism has been fully understood.t The rebirth of
a sceptical suspicion of the worth of the Republic tended, in-
evitably, to send men back to him whom De Maistre signalled
as his master, and from whom, in the early days of his fame,
Lamennais was proud to receive high commendation.®

Bonald, indeed, lacks all the stigmata of popularity. His


3 I have discussed the political theory of De Maistre in the last chapter
of my “Problem of Sovereignty.”’

4 The real understanding of Bonald probably dates from Comte, Cf.
“Politique Positive” III, 605.

5 Cf. the very interesting correspondence in Vol. XII. of De Maistre’s
collected works and ‘Principe Constitutif.’’ p. 493.

6 Boutard, ‘‘Lamennais,”’ I, 154.


128 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


life was the ordinary career of an emigrant noble. Not even the
fear of the guillotine came to give it a touch of momentary ex-
citement. He wrote badly, even harshly, with all the ruthless,
pettifogging logic of the medieval scholastics.’? He lacked even
the supreme merit of brevity. He was totally out of accord
‘with the spirit of his time. All for which it came to stand he
branded as the utmost sin; all for which he cared was lost at the
barricades of 1830. The monarchy for which he cherished so
passionate an affection destroyed itself by acting on his prin-
ciples. He urged nothing that history, if it did not falsify, at
any rate failed to respect. He did not, like De Maistre, die be-
fore the course of events had proved the impossibility of his
ideals. He did not, like Lamennais, find in the events of his
age the basis of a better philosophy. He belonged always to the
eighteenth century, not, indeed, in the essentials of its intel-
tectual attitude, but in its dogmatic and inflexible spirit.2 Once
he had arrived at his principles, he did no more than devote
himself to their elaboration. He never examined his time.
He was satisfied to search the past and to misread it that the
justice of his claims might be made manifest. A single event—
and it is impossible to understand his attitude save on the as-
sumption that to him the Revolution was no more than a point
in time—served as the basis of everything he thought andfeltand |
dared so greatly to hope. He is the prophet of an outworn
gospel, so that his very watchwords have been almost forgotten.
That which he so solemnly preached is, for the most part, that
against which a democratic society has been most solemnly
warned. Yet he is hardly to blame for his conclusions. He did
no more than sum up with remorseless logic the result of the
reaction of authoritarian temper with egalitarian revolution.

He represents the amazement of the aristocracy at the chal-
lenge of a people whose existence it had forgotten. He put
its case vigorously, bluntly, sincerely. He failed completely
to understand that the principles of the Ancien Régime could
ever return. He could regard the Revolution only as a hateful
episode, and he tried to explain why it was essentially a warn-
ing and an example. It is perhaps a little difficult to explain


‘7 Cf. Sainte-Beuve, ‘“‘Causeries,’”’ IV, 330.
8 As M. Faguet, in his brilliant study, so strikingly points out.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 129


his influence. He said only what the émigrés desired to hear.
But he wrote the epitaph of Bourbon Kingship and it was
assumed that between his philosophy and the creed of Rousseau
there was no alternative. For thirty-five years he reiterated
his principles under half a hundred forms. The principles of
philology, the marital relation, the theory of knowledge—from
the analysis of all these he constructed his tremendous sociology.
When the last criticism has been made, there remains some-
thing almost of splendour in the courage and the determination
with which he applied himself to his task. If, in the light of
modern change, all that he has written reads like a bitter de-
fence of special creation by one who has sadly encountered the
Darwinian hypothesis, much may be pardoned to one who
loved his ideals so greatly. And, as with De Maistre, it may
even be suggested that he the better served human freedom
when he threw the implications of his attitude into a relief so
striking and so logical.

Nor is this all. The basis of his philosophy must be inter-
preted from the angle of its chronological significance. He
began to write, as Sainte-Beuve? has pointed out, on the mor-
row of the Terror. He had been a witness of its tragedies;
and because so many of its victims were of his order, it was
inevitable that it should have bitten deeply into his soul. It
was then natural for him to translate that bitterness into polit-
ical terms. He could see in the Revolution no more than the
coronation of anarchy. It had shattered the temple of political
science and he must lay his hand to its restoration. And it
was no less natural that he should start from a disbelief in
man and in reason. It was for their redintegration that the
Revolution had been effected. The individualism of the eigh-
teenth century had been traitorous to every rational principle
of social order. It had dared to proclaim the rights of man,
and it had embodied its principles in a Declaration. It had
declared the sovereignty of reason and the Directory was to
prescribe a confidence in faith. So he came to hold that the
very foundations of such an attitude were conceived in sin.
The Rights of Man meant the execution of the King; the
Sovereignty of Reason meant the persecution of the Catholic


9 Sainte-Beuve, op. cit., p. 324.


130 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


Church. Equality wrote its formule in letters of blood, and
the blood was the blood of his friends. An attitude to his age
other than that of hate was thus impossible. That he should
have undertaken a polemic against the eighteenth century was
logically the result of his humanity. To the rights of man he
would oppose the rights of God.!° To the sovereignty of rea-
son he would oppose the sovereignty of faith. Since the eigh-
teenth century had created a new philosophy, he would go
back to its precursors that he might uproot its errors. Every-
thing for which the Revolution stood he would ceaselessly
denounce, so that he does not even spare the generous intelli-
gence of Madame de Stael. He sought a universal formula
against Revolution and he outlined a theodicy that he might
apply it. He never, like De Maistre, admitted the relativity
of history. He never, like De Maistre, allowed an influence
to the God-directed exertions of great men on the one hand,
or to the cumulative effect of minute causes on the other.”
The diminution of universality seemed to him the admission
of weakness. The eighteenth century must not be spared but
‘slain. Every dogma for which it had argued he denounced
with remorseless hate. He erected, in fact, the negation of its
principles into an alchemically mingled compound of antago-
nisms’ he chose to call a philosophy.

He deserted the eighteenth century; and that he might the
better refute its canons of truth he went back to that which
is most alien to its spirit. The seventeenth century in France
is the very embodiment of his temper. A centralisation which
culminated in the unquestioning promulgation of divinely-
ordained monarchy was the very synthesis for which he was
contending. The theories of Bossuet were but those of a De
Bonald who had not yet encountered the Revolution. They en-
abled him to take firm hold of the theory of Divine Right—a
theory which, through Suarez and Bellarmin, took him back to
the great days of scholastic authority. It is, indeed, vital to
judge him in this context. For De Bonald was the last repre-
sentative of that great tradition. His very method was the


10 “Legislation Primitive,” p. 93.
u Çf. his “Considerations.”
12 “Principe Générateur,” p. 15.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 131


dialectic parrying of text with counter-text. He wrote, as he
said," not as an orator but as a logician. The Revolution gave
him his premises, and from the seventeenth century he drew
his conclusions. The neat geometrical arrangement of his
material and his pride in a sort of mathematical logic send
him back to the days when men slew truth with a syllogism.
The writers whom he loved were to him a constant and en-
during influence, so that he seems sometimes almost to have
expected that the name of Bossuet would spring from cold
print to the eager confirmation of the living tongue. He felt
those dead who had thought as he thought as part of a living
society, and it was thus that when he went to their ideas for
confirmation that he felt the justification of contemporary his-
tory. And since the thought of the reformers’and the ideo-
logues were absent from their pages, he could not but feel for
his opponents the impulsive hatred of strangeness. The
Revolution was due to the rejection of the natural laws, he had
discovered in his teachers.!® And it was simply for the restora-
tion of their activity that he was concerned. He did not see.
that thus to deal with man in no more than his medieval con-
text was to shut himself off from a vital human experience and
to demean man into an abstraction. “Man,” he said,” “is
the same everywhere,” and it was upon the basis of that mis-
taken generalisation that he began his work. The ‘‘incontest-
able authority” he granted to history in political judgment
became the authority of medieval history, just as his religious
text of truth became the axioms of the medieval church. But
no theory could hope for acceptance of which the inductions
were based on so factitious and arbitrary a disdain of men.


II. THE POLITICAL THEORY OF BONALD
Ir would be possible to reconstruct the political theory of Bo-


13 “Théorie du Pouvoir,” I, 3.

4 Cf, “Théorie du Pouvoir,” I, 1, 3, p. 146. ‘Essai sur ordre social,”
p. 282.

15 ‘Observations sur Condorcet,” p. 309.

16 “Théorie du Pouvoir,” Bk. III, IV, p. 153.

17 “Théorie du Pouvoir,” I, III, p. 146.

18 “Théorie du Pouvoir,” p. 289.


132 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


nald by asserting the antithesis of every doctrine for which the
eighteenth century stood sponsor. As it asserted the individu-
ality of man, and emphasised the importance of his unique
separatism, so Bonald urged that only in his social context
is man at all significant. As it had deserted the ways of
God, so he proclaimed that only by treading in his path could
salvation be attained. As it was fascinated by the theory of
a social contract, so did he find in that theory the head and
centre of political disaster. The eighteenth century is essen-
tially an age of the sceptics; and Bonald, as a consequence,
constructed a philosophy that begins and ends with God.
There is nothing of perverseness in all this. It is the natural
reaction of a stern temper from the experiences of an alien
ideal. He asserted the primacy of God because he did, in fact,
believe that all science must begin in this fashion. God, for
him, was essentially the directing force of the world and he
has not ceased to govern his creation.?? Indeed Bonald ‘almost
overwhelms us with the varied arguments which are intended
to demonstrate the necessity of a belief in Divinity. Power-
ful arguments they are not; and of them it is perhaps best to
say that they above all demonstrate his inability to pursue
metaphysical enquiry. They are frequently confused and,
more rarely, contradictory. But to this he would have doubt-
less replied that in any case he made entire abstraction
of philosophy.

He made abstraction of philosophy because it was basic-
ally individualist.24 It spoke not in the name of God, but of
reason; and reason, as the Revolution had taught him, had
done nothing save provoke a vain and fruitless debate.
Reason meant the Convention and the Directory; Reason had
executed the fine flower of the French nation. It was clearly
the destruction of stability; and he significantly comments
that in the stable theocracy of the Jews as in the unchanging
Spartan kingdom the philosopher had found no place. For
them tradition had been enough, and yet on the basis of that


19 “Essai sur l’odre social,” p. 282.

20 “Théorie du Pouvoir religieux,” I, 1, Ch. 3. Cf. I, 1, VII, note on
p:177;a0d Walp 132:

2 “Théorie du Pouvoir,” II, VI, V, 356, 357.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 133


ancestralism his age condemned they had enjoyed a prosperous
history. Nor was this all. There was no unity in philosophy.
Pythagoras, and Thales, Zeno and Epicurus, Bacon and Des-
cartes are all in fundamental disagreement. What message
does philosophy bring that philosophy does not also contradict?
So that therein there is no authoritative utterance. But he
who speaks in the name of God speaks a language that is com-
mon to all.”

He is thus without interest in individual thought. The only
important thought is that of society, and the thought of so-
ciety is the reflexion of the mind of God. So that when he is
concerned to examine man as a social being he is, in fact, oc-
cupied with the relation of man to his creator. If he can
discover the laws by which God has created the world, and by
which he continues to govern it, his problem is solved. All
he has then.to do is to deduce the consequences of those laws.
His method of enquiry is what might have been expected from
one in whom the authoritarian temper had been schooled into
rigidity by the subtle hardness of the Oratorians. Like a good
medievalist, he uses his texts as cannon to provide a continuous
fire against the enemy. The unreality of his atmosphere at
the outset clings throughout to his conclusions. He does, in-
deed, make use of history; and an admiring critic has therein
sought to discover an exponent of political realism.” But the
history is no more than a philosophy teaching by arbitrarily
selected examples. He sought only for that which would
prove the danger of variety; and the only history for which he
cared was that which illustrated its misfortunes. He wanted
no more than a stick wherewith to beat the philosophers of
the Revolution. His fundamental starting-point makes clear
his whole direction. The dependence of the world upon God
makes the desertion of his laws the zenith of social treason.
The Revolution committed that sin; and he had thus no other
task than to enounce the rules which will give ground for his
accusing hate.


2 “Théorie du Pouvoir religieux,” I, 11, 9.

23 “Théorie du Pouvoir religieux,” I, 11, 9.

24 Montesquieu, “Le réalisme de Bonald;” and cf. M. Bourget, “Etudes
et Portraits,” Vol. III, pp. 23 ff.


134 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


He- has, of course, to justify the ways of God to man.” He
achieves this end in his own grim fashion by preventing the
escape of the world from the influence of natural law.* His
God has desired man’s happiness, and the laws he has laid down
are the expression of his will to that end. But the will of God
is unchangeable, so that the universe is governed by an iron
law. Here, of course, Bonald departs in striking fashion from
the attitude of the eighteenth century. He has none of the
flexibility of Montesquieu.” God may create and he may
destroy; but all that he accomplishes he must achieve on the
basis of his preliminary definitions. So that the nature of
man, for instance, is independent of God. He could not create
a soulless humanity. The logic of contradiction is an univer-
sal principle, in order that the authority of Bonald’s deductions
may be maintained. Miracles, as a consequence, are outside
the realm of possibility; and though Bonald allowed them
later in his thought a grudging entrance into life, he seems
always to have resented their occurrence.” It is true that
too-zealous Christians have based a scheme of existence upon
them. But the true philosopher “is freed by thought from the
restriction of space and time;”? and while Bonald admits that
miracles are not metaphysically inconceivable, he yet denies
that God will so constantly intervene in the affairs of men as
to attempt the abrogation of his own ideas. It is sufficient
that he has organised the universe. The business of men is to
discover the method of its organisation that they may apply
its principles to their governance.*°


Bonald has, perhaps wisely, nowhere given us any consistent
account of these natural laws. They result, of course, in opti-
mism, since, as the work of God, they must be perfect. His-
tory then becomes a progress towards their realisation, and the
problem of the statesman is mainly shifted to their applica-
tion. Bonald, indeed, has the simplest of formule for that so-


% Cf. “Essai sur l’ordre social,” p. 35.

26 Tbid., p. 70.

27 Nor even of Bossuet. Cf. the “Politique,” VII, art. VI, prop. V. and VI.
28 “Essai sur l’ordre social,” p. 67.

29 Ibid.

30 “Essae sur l'ordre social,” p. 110.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 135


lution. The means of enquiry are reason and tradition. The
study of nature will give each man the opportunity of their
acquaintance. He will at once observe, for example, that the
rights of a father over his children, of a master over his servants,
partake of the order of nature. They are necessary to life,
and what is necessary is divine. So, too, in politics, the prince’s
search for necessary governmental relations will result in their
immediate discovery. And it is important to emphasise that
what he means by discovery is essentially a declaration. Man
does not make laws; he only declares them. The obyious test
of the rightness of his policy is whether the state over which
he presides is in revolution or at peace. If it is in revolution
the prince has clearly embarked upon a policy that is contrary
to natural law. The meeting of the States-General in 1789 is
an example of such error. It resulted in revolution. Its mem-
bers endeavoured to make law, instead of remaining content
with its promulgation. They broke, that is to say, with tra-
dition; and Bonald would doubtless have urged that the
execution of Louis was the penalty of attempted innovation.
But God has gone further.’ He has been even more gener-
ous to men in his gift of the means of perception. Language
is a method whereby the understanding of divine law may be
made apparent. It was given to the first men that they might
communicate the truths they discovered. And the further
gift of writing committed tc a permanence more objective
than memory the secrets of each age. It made possible, for
instance, in the Bible the positive enshrinement of moral and
political truth. Nor are these divine laws few in number. The
truths of logic and of mathematics are of this order. And
those of politics are so important as to require especial means
for their enforcement. They clearly involve, for instance, an
absolute and hereditary monarchy; yet many people, as his-
tory shows and as Bonald in his exile at Heidleberg can not
forget, have lived in a republic. Such nations, indeed, have
paid the penalty for their defiance. It is the habit of nature
to exact her compensations. Inevitably, since without such
application society cannot exist in its normal form. A return
to what is‘:good has thus the continuous assurance of victory.


31 Cf, the “Dissertation sur la pensée de l’homme.”


136 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


Thus even in the midst of these gloomy dogmas, De Bonald
can find ground for hope. Revolution is God’s medicine to
bring men back to his ways. That is, at any rate, one method
of interpreting the significance of the Restoration.

The source of this philosophy is obvious.” Non est potestas
niso a deo might well serve as its watchword; and it is under
the shadow of Bossuet that it has been conceived. He hardly,
indeed, admits the latter’s influence. But from the standpoint
of one who hated the eighteenth century a return to the ideals
of Bossuet was inevitable. Nor is it difficult to understand
how a profound Catholic, impregnated with an hereditary loy-
alty to an unfortunate house, should have let his fancy roam
to the zenith of its fortunes. Odd sentences of the New Testa-
ment might well serve to set the Divine seal on that retrospec-
tive adventure, and the pain of exile would do the rest. If it
was objected that in this annexation of God he was grounding
his system in intolerance, he might well reply that the alterna-
tive to intolerance is intellectual anarchy.** The forces of
social cohesion cannot have fair play if men think as they will.
Given his God as the creator of necessary law, it was inevitable
that he should cease to regard the world as self-determining.
Nor was it less inevitable that the experience of Bonald should
colour his interpretation of that law. All political philosophies
are the reaction of temperament upon its chronological per-
spective. If God has made the world power must come from
him, and power in any legitimate form Bonald could hardly
concede to men for whom he had so profound a hate. So that
he could admit legitimacy only to the house with which he
had associated his fortunes, and he was then willing to identify
the legitimate with the divine. Per me reges regnant et legum con-
ditores justa decerunt received a new beauty when applied to the
House of Bourbon. But to have admitted its application to Na-
poleon would have been a self-condemnation to perpetual exile.


IV. THE ATTACK ON THE INDIVIDUAL


His God is clearly one who will restore an order that he loves.
Bonald has been terrified at the results of individualism; and


32 Cf. “Romans,” XIII, 1, with Théorie de Pouvoir, I, 1x, p. 135.
33 “Oeuvres,” X, 258.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 137


authority is the chart by which he is to find the haven of relief
from its burdens. It is perhaps for this reason that the God he
depicts is so much more stern and far off than that of his mas-
ters. With both Bossuet and Aquinas God is one who continually
influences the course of life; but they had not, like Bonald,
lived in a time of revolution. Change to him has become the
synonym of evil and he binds his God to act but seldom that
the rightness of a static organisation may be manifest. And
since it is individualism that he is concerned to combat he must
elevate the value of society. It is necessary to the existence of
man. It is true that a certain individualism results from the
relation of God with him whom he created in his own image;
yet that very relation leads man to contact with his fellows
that they may in common fulfil the principles of their origin.


And, indeed, man cannot live alone. All that he is he owes
to society and only as a member of it is he intelligible. His
theory of language is used to confirm this attitude.” For an
individual who stood without society could not inherit the
means of grasping the laws governing the universe by which he
is confronted. The only real being is the social being. The
only man who has the opportunity to develop his powers is a
member of a group. Bonald is thus able, and with much force,
to make short shrift with Rousseau’s state of nature. To picture
a world without organisation is, for him, to misinterpret the
whole meaning of creation. It is to picture a world without law,
and the one thing that can be posited is the existence of law. He
points out acutely that when Rousseau urged men to live accord-
ing to nature, he did, in fact, make tacit acceptance of principles
inherent 1n its order. But it is difficult to understand how prin-
ciples of this kind can be discovered and maintained in the un-
genial terrors of savage existence.” For the attainment of the
life Rousseau desired a social existence is essential; and its at-


34 Cf. “De. Reg. Prin.” III, VII, and Bossuet, ‘“‘Politique,” VII, 6, V and
yI.

3 “Législation Primitive.” I, 156. This theory of language has been
effectively criticised by M. Ferraz in the first volume of his “Histoire
de Philosophie.”

36 “Législation Primitive,” II, 170.

37 “Théorie du Pouvoir,” II, IV, V, p. 329-30.


138 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


tainment would be undesirable unless the primary fact of society
were at the outset admitted.


For Bonald, indeed,—and here he differed radically from
Aquinas—society is prior to the individual. The latter derives
his meaning simply from his social context, where to Aquinas
the function of society is not to create but to perfect the life of
man. But for Bonald this is too narrow a conception. His
society is in a real sense a person. It is not a mere algebraic
bracket, linking men together into an artificial unity. It is
one, and indivisible. It is organic, and, like an organism,
it has a will whereby to make manifest its desires.4? Society
is thus rendered independent of individuals. It exists of and
in itself and they do no more than contribute to the richness of
a life from which they in turn draw nourishment." The general
will of this society, moreover, is the divine will conscious of
those necessary laws upon which he lays such striking em-
phasis. But will must be directed that it may become manifest
in action; and it is to the monarch that he confines its direction
that it may take form in legislation. The social will so ex-
pressed, moreover, is superior in its claim to all other. It is
further freed from the embarrassment of superiority, since than
society there can be no higher being. Nor will it act unwisely.
“The general will of society,” he wrote, “is necessarily con-
servative in character.” That is to say it is conservative
when it is freed from the dangerous influence of individual or
national wills which in their search for substantive form take
shape in revolutions. If it is somewhat mystical, it is none the
less an intelligible attitude. That it derives from Rousseau it
is certainly difficult to doubt; but whereas Rousseau drew from
it the principle of national sovereignity the whole point of
Bonald’s conception is to urge cause against that principle.
For national sovereignty is, in its essence, an individualist
doctrine; and it is from the organic character of society that


Cola Nike ls dle 3by Pst

39 Ibid., II, IV, V, p. 329-30.
lbid., EE LVS p- 128.

4 Ibid., I, ii, passim.

2 “Essai sur l’ordre social,” p. 33.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 139


Bonald is anxious to deduce the a priori impossibility of that
attitude.

He has made the individual but a link in a chain. Society as
a whole is thus the real founder of civilisation. Great men are
no longer entitled to credit for their discovery since it is by
reason of their social gifts that they have attained to greatness.
They could not have worked without the instrument of lan-
guage that their thought might receive expression; and the ob-
ject of language was social enrichment. So that for him a great
man is no more than the reflexion of his time, a servant of its
needs. It is therefrom that he should draw his inspiration. Inso-
far as he follows the path of his own fortune he deserts both his
genius and his function.

It is impossible not to feel that he has in mind those daring
spirits of the Revolution whose ability might so easily have
been deflected into channels less tragic in their consequence.
But they followed the call of their ambition and he is accord-
ingly tempted even further in the direction of their control.
He does not merely limit individuality. He insists upon its
socially dangerous character. Wherever he sees the exercise
of personality he urges that it is the root of crime. For, at the
outset, he has the material for its condemnation. He has in-
sisted upon the supremacy of society. He has reduced men to
no more than unimportant functions of its power. Thereby
he has the right to attack all which might in some sort detract
from its omnipotence.

He equates individualism with anarchy, and he makes some
misuse of history to demonstrate the truth of his attitude. The
Reformation to him is no more than the idle pride of a monk
engaged in the defence of his order.“ Luther called to his aid
all the evil passions and avid interests alike of men and princes.
‘He cast a torch into a sea of oil and the result was the ghastly
conflagration of the sixteenth century. Here was the influence
of individual talent refusing to take its stand on the firm basis
of tradition. Luther sought out novelty; and society paid the
penalty for the passion of his misinterpreted conclusions. So


43 Cf. Mauduit, “Les Conceptions Politiques et Sociales de Bonald,”’
p. 83.
“ “Théorie du Pouvoir,” II, v, vi, 283-4.


140 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


with Calvin and with Henry VIII.“ In each case we have a
man determined to give the freest play to his self-will; and in
each case a reign of terror is the consequence. For they put
their trust in an opinion to which age had failed to give the
sanction of traditional affection. They urged a cause based
on no more than reason. It was inevitable that men should
arise to contradict their conclusions and to sacrifice the blood
of others in the pursuit of proof. They made a fatal error.
They did not attempt the preservation of what had been
proved by time. They attempted to examine and of this the
social consequence is dispersion. But of dispersion the eldest
child is anarchy.

This, too, is the cause of that ceaseless multiplication of
Protestant opinion he deemed so vast an evil. For what in
truth Luther achieved was to make each man the sole judge
alike of belief and practice. But that is to preach a mental
equality which can only result in the degradation of principle.
Little by little each will pare away from the body of accepted
tradition that which he cannot accept until atheism is the
result. Between catholicism and atheism he sees no half-
way house.” To reject the one is to embrace the other. To
reject the one is to replace divine invention by the fiendish
ingenuity of men.*° For those who once question the funda-
mental dogmas fail entirely to perceive that the principles of
social religion have been established for all time. Critically
to estimate their validity by the degree of their personal inac-
ceptability is to strike a fatal blow at the root of morality. For
no blow can be struck at the foundations of religious order which
does not react on the political structure.*' Political and reli-
gious strife always develop along parallel lines. So, for example,
the real source of the French Revolution is to be found in the
teaching of Calvin. To urge the priesthood of believers in the


4 Ibid., II, i, IV, 38.
4 Tbid., 292.

47 Ibid., 296.

48 Ibid., 350.

49 Ibid., 353 f.

50 Ibid., 177.

51 Tbid., 306, 340.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 141


sixteenth century is to send Louis XVI to the scaffold in the
eighteenth. So closely is religion embedded in the framework
of society that he who develops religious change is bound to
seek political change also that the structure may be altered to
meet his religious needs. So the supposed constitution which
limited Louis’ power was no more, in sober truth, than an at-
tempt at the provision of opportunity for Calvinist growth.
It thus is the destruction of that unity which alone makes possi-
ble the continuance of social order.


Nor is this all. The grandchild of reform is philosophy and
from its impassioned curiosity has been born the most deadly
error. Philosophy—so Bonald urges—has no function save
that of destruction.” Its guides are self-interest and passion.
It dethrones God to replace him by nature, and each of her
devotees interprets differently her meaning. Religion becomes
unnecessary. The people dethrone power to crown law. The
old love of one’s neighbour is removed to give place to some
philanthropy he can hardly bring himself to describe. The
philosopher dispenses with the Atonement; and man thus
being by definition good society is reduced from the necessary
condition of existence to no more than a business association.
It is asked to justify itself by the terms of its contractual insti-
tution. Yet the very sceptics who thus remorselessly examine
are refused by their own logic. A contract supposes power for
otherwise its enforcement is impossible. But a contract can-
not constitute that which would be its own negation. A con-
tract involves the ideal of equality between the contracting
parties; but that very equality is born of power. Those who
would make the possession of power dependent upon its useful
exercise forget its origin. Power comes from God, and he alone
can set conditions to its use. If men could so limit it, it would
no longer be itself. Its identity would be destroyed. It would
be sheerly arbitrary in character—the creature of popular whim
and fantasy. But the power which is instituted by God is in
essence different. It assures man freedom for it has been insti-


82 Ibid., 22.
53 [bid.,335.

54 “Principe Constitutif,’’ p. 450.
55 (“Essai sur l’ordre social,” p. 99.


142 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


tuted upon the basis of the fundamental principles of the
universe.

And a further consequence must be drawn. If the true sover-
eign of the universe is God then everyone, no less the sovereign
than his subjects, have duties towards him. He has set the
rhythm of Life and they must make possible the fulfilment of
its motif. Their right thus becomes no more than the right to
fulfil their duty, the right to act in‘accordance with the will
of God. In such an aspect the folly of those who would draw
up a Declaration of the Rights of Man is self-evident. For while
they affirm the equality of men’s rights they affirm no less the
right to property. But what becomes of property where some
men, equal in the theoretic possession of rights, are yet without
the means of subsistence? Clearly the denial of the rhythm
Bonald has postulated creates a deadly rhythm of its own. The
acceptance of individualism crushes into atoms the very basis
of society. By making the social question something to be
resolved by reason, instead of admitting that it is from the
outset dependent on God, and is thus justified without the
need of social response, it leaves open a path for every method
of anarchic destruction.” No one, he urges, dare accept the
claim of science to make men better by making them intellec-
tually enlightened. On the contrary, the result of increasing
knowledge is the desire of domination: The individual seeks
rather for means to satisfy his faculty of self-absorption than
to accomplish social good. To proclaim the existence of rights
is to make of each man a potential tyrant. The philosopher
who proclaims the advent of liberty only ensures the régime of
anarchy. For to question is to destroy. To question is to
satisfy one’s whim and though such caprice has not made the
world, it may yet destroy it. And when caprice has been iden-
tified with individuality the transition to traditionalism has
been made. For each man then contributes his own restless-
ness to the disturbance of the social fabric. The logical result
of the eighteenth century is thus obviously the horrors of the
Revolution.

It is, of course, obvious that the source of this criticism is


56 “Essai analytique,” p. 57.
57 “Théorie du Pouvoir,” iv, v, 356.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 143


the famous polemic by Bossuet against the Reformation.®
“Those who create revolt in the name of freedom become them-
selves tyrants.” So it was Bossuet wrote, and his words might
be the text of Bonald’s examination. Urging as he does the
unity of society, he denies the validity of all enquiry, political
no less than religious, on the ground that it destroys that unity.
He searches out each pretext of the eighteenth century for the
denial of the dogmas of the ancien régime, and erects their
negations into new dogmas. Fundamentally he attacks that
individualism which Comte, in a fit of temper,®® once dismissed
abruptly as the disease of the Western world. Without unity
of opinion and belief there cannot be hope of social survival.
The very fact of the Revolution is the evidence of this truth.
To insist on the value of the individual, to erect.into a system,
as Rousseau did, his right to self-development is to misinter-
pret the organic nature of society. An organism presupposes
nervous co-ordination, and of that co-ordination freedom of
belief is the main antagonist. So there must be but one re-
ligion in France; for the very existence of other confessions
secretes the germ of social disaster. And this is for him the
more true in the case of Protestant dogma, since its basis is
the primacy of the individual. It thus becomes the business
of the statesman to ward off the danger of anarchy. He must
insist on the necessity of uniformity. ‘‘Unless” he wrote in a
tremendous sentence, ‘‘unless we have a religious and political
unity, man cannot discover truth, nor can society hope for
salvation.” 60


V. IMPLICATIONS OF THE ATTACK


A cuRIOUS trinitarianism pervades the whole speculation of
Bonald, and it is upon its basis that he erected his social philos-
ophy.* For the number three he seems to have cherished a
peculiar weakness, so that, like the devotees of the beast in
Revelations, he is everywhere able to discover the operation of


58 Cf. Bossuet, “Hist. des Variations,” Bk I, pp. 316, 340, 419, ete.
59 “Politique Positive,” ili, 614.

60 “Essai sur l’ordre social,” p. 33.

61 Cf. Faguet, op. cit., i, p.


144 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


a threefold cause. For some abstract reason the source of
which remains strangely obscure, he believed that from a be-
lief that the cause is to the means, as the means is to the effect,
the mind can solve all political questions. The business of
society, whether domestic or political or religious, becomes then
the realisation of that relationship. Perfection is simplified
into its permanent attainment.®*

He had no difficulty in deciphering its details.* Domestic
society is clearly composed of three elements. The father is
the cause, the mother the means, the child is the effect. Since
the father is the cause, he must clearly have power, for, other-
wise, the division of it would destroy its efficacy. Nor can
that power be abrogated. In the eyes of its parents, for ex-
ample, a child is always a minor. That is why primitive society
gave to the head of the family the power of life and death. That
is why the woman taken in adultery may be slain without
mercy by her husband. The wife, indeed, does no more than
receive from her husband the power of reproduction. Her one
duty is to obey him. As she is midway between child and man,
so she partakes of the nature of both. To the one she issues
commands, to the other she offers submission. The child itself
has no function save to obey. Were it otherwise the unity of
family power would clearly be destroyed. Nor is this unfair
to the child who, in receiving from his parents the gift of lan-
guage owes to them his most precious possession. For without
them thought would thus have been impossible, and his obedi-
ence is the price he pays for so unique a privilege.®


The function of domestic society he regards as simply re-
productive. Man may be mortal, but the society to which he
belongs is imperishable. He thus owes to it the duty of repro-
duction and it is for that purpose the family has been estab-
lished. Bonald has thus the greater reason for denying the
importance of the individual. It is only as a member of the
family-group that he is entitled to consideration. It is essen-
tially that group which is the real unit of society. Only from
it does social function spring. Man himself is only an incident


8 “Principe Constitutif,” p. 441 f.
8 Tbid., p. 445.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 145


in a succession of births so vast as to make him infinitesimal
in comparison.
If the family is thus the social unit one can clearly discer
therein two types. The ordinary family does no more than
guard its daily interests. The care of its needs exhausts its
time and its capacities. It has no more to do than to maintain
itself in existence, without being a burden upon its fellow-men.
It is important only from the point of view of population. It
is the broad base upon which a finer and more complex structure
may be made to rest. The noble family is different. The
credentials of birth demonstrate that it has passed the stage
of the worker’s inevitable inertia. It is occupied with the
defence of society, the student of its problems, the resolver of
its doubts. It may thus rightly demand the privileges that
come from this self-sacrifice. It has leaped beyond the toil-
some and narrowing cares of daily existence. It alone is really
fitted to deal with the great problems of men. There is nothing
sordid or meagre in the subject of its contemplation. It thinks
on a higher plane of life. It is accustomed to that objectivity
of attitude which alone makes possible a social existence.
The argument is as old as Aristotle, and no better than when
he made it. What in truth he was attempting was the discov-
ery of a basis for the family organisation of the ancien régime.
His “famille ordinaire” is no more than the peasant-family of
eighteenth century France and because it was then powerless
he strives to demonstrate that it is in fact actually unfitted for
political faculties. It was with a similar purpose that the
“famille noble” should have the typical attributes of a family
such as his own. The army and the magistracy were recruited
from its ranks; what more natural than to assume that they
are so recruited because their capacity fits them for that type
of labour? He insists on the value of an hereditary nobility
merely to ensure the permanence of that order and where he
argues for its indispensability he means no more than that he
could not wish it otherwise. So, too, is to be understood his
contempt for property and age. He rejects the latter as a
classification of service “because it is necessary to choose use-


6 Cf, what is said below of M. Bourget’s reconstruction of these
arguments.


146 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


ful men,”® and utility depends on class and not on maturity;
moreover an indiscriminate choice would result in disorder.®
He rejects property because it will open the path to indiscrimi-
nate ambition. He is, in fact, locking back on the Revolution
and fearing the advent of the middle class. So, too, may be
explained his insistence on the superiority of the agricultural
family.” Industry is the enemy of order. It is the captains
of industry who continuously insist on the value of independ-
ence. It is commerce which has been the parent of wars and
of the mad doctrine of liberty. From it has sprung that yearn-
ing for luxury which is the mother of decay. It gives rise to a
superabundance of population. It results in the dispersion of
family unity. With agriculture all is different. The soil nour-
ishes those to whom it gives birth. Almost in the manner of
the Physiocrats, but without their glowing discrimination, he
paints a picture of the serene joys of agricultural existence.®
He insists on its solidarity. It unifies by the nature of the
occupation it affords. It makes no distinction between master
and servant. It permits of ancestralism and of a common toil.
It achieves a kinship with nature and the production of all that
men truly require for their satisfaction.” He shows no small
contempt for the industrialism of Adam Smith,” and, at least
by implication, the idealising reforms of Saint-Simon. The
division of labour is the coronation of individualism and he will
have none of it. He loves too deeply the solid conservatism
of the French peasantry to be willing to depart from their ways.
For, after all, it was they who supported the king and the church.
It was from the cities that sprang disturbing thoughts. It was
business men who had quarrelled with the old economic order
and erected their impatience into a vicious philosophy. He
could compare Paris with Brittany and he could hardly doubt
the reason for their distinction. Paris was industrial and in
Paris had been born the wildest theories of social organisation.


% “Théorie du Pouvoir,” V, vii.

66 “Principe Constitutif,” Ch. IX.

67 Pensées Diverses, p. 6.

68 La famille Agricole et Industrielle.”
69 Cf. “Mélanges,” p. 441.

70 Tbid., p. 505.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 147


But in Brittany men inherited the ideas of their fathers and
to question had become not less than to sin.


The union of families is the State; and it was here, perhaps
most vividly, that Bonald showed in his narrow traditionalism
the influence of the Revolution. “When God wished to punish
France,” he once wrote in an amazing sentence,” “he with-
drew the Bourbons from its governance.” His whole effort,
in fact, is simply the attempt to discover a political structure
which should obviate the possibility of their expulsion. He
desires the construction of a static society on the principles of
the ancien régime. He thus makes the object of the state
essentially conservation. Just as the family provides society
with its members, so does the state aim at the preservation of
peace between them. But to that end it has need of an instru-
ment. It has to prevent the conflict of individual wills from
resulting in the destruction of the body politic. It has to see
to it that a continuous progress is made towards the realisation
of those necessary relations that are the declaration of the will
of God. It is not easy to mistake their nature; for all Bonald
has really attempted in their statement is to idealise that which
the Revolution came to deny. If he has succeeded in conceal-
ing his particularism in a fine cloud of apparent abstractions,
that does not hide the fact that it is a particular problem he
has in mind. The “constituted” society upon which he lays
so much emphasis may be one in which “necessary relation-
ships” are observed; but what Bonald means by “necessary
relationship” is simply an obedience to his prejudices. A “ non-
constituted society” is but one that has striven to work out
its own political salvation, and in the process has discovered
that there are truths of which even the great Bossuet did not
dream.

He is at any rate right in the assertion that society is given
and that since it is given it must be organised. For whatever
society is, an inchoate and discrete mass it is not. The funda-
mental question of politics is thus a problem in the method of


7 “Pensées Diverses,” p. 172.


148 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


organisation. What is the nature of sovereignty? Why should
one man rule over another? Bonald sees clearly enough that
the problem of sovereignty is not merely a question of power
but also that, in some sort, it is a question where only the argu-
ments of reason can apply. For him all theories of sovereignty
reduce themselves, in the main, to two types. Men rule
either by virtue of divine right or from the authority of a social
contract. Bonald, of course, has no choice in such an alterna-
tive. Society is the creation of God. Omnis potestas est a deo;
and we may cease the vanity of argument. Power is a social
institution and the divinity of social institutions is simply ob-
vious. He has no patience with the theory of a social contract.”
It is obvious to him that the idea not merely most repugnant
but in truth most inconceivable to men is that of their subjec-
tion to equals. It is contrary to human psychology. Only
where some are in the position of inferiors is there a willingness
to accept so hard but so necessary a fact. Nor does he believe
that a social contract can arise before there is power; for a
contract implies the idea of organisation and to organisation
power is already essential. That a social contract is impossible
once the existence of power has been admitted is of course
obvious; for once it is present there is no longer that equality
of status which permits of its institution on valid terms.”

He urges the necessity of power because he is convinced of
its naturalness. It arises in society just as in a crowd it is
always the custom for some one man to take charge. He has
no confidence in the disposition of a mass of men. It lacks
direction and wisdom. It cries out for a leader. It can only
be transformed into a society when someone has given it func-
tions to perform, orders to obey.“ Until then it will be found
always to be unhappy and in confusion. He urges that the
primary desire of a people is for safety and that it is their habit
to seek for the leader who is most likely to secure it. The crowd
without a leader is like a child without its parent. It lacks the
raison d'être of its existence.” It has none of the elements of


72 “Principe Contitutif,’”’ p. 449.
173 Ibid. p. 450.

7 “Tyemonstr. Phil.,”’ p. 108-9.
% “Pensées Diverses,” p. 12.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 149


self-preservation. Power is thus the offspring of necessity.
There must be some master of men in order that men may be
saved.

It cannot be denied that there is much of truth in such an
attitude. But Bonald could not, of course, fail to realise that
he has done no more than push his enquiry back rather than
solve it. If all that society required was leadership, the usurpa-
tion of Napoleon would be justified. The problem clearly has
been that of the organisation of power. The need is to discover
the seat of an authority which must be postulated as essential
to existence.

Bonald’s answer to this question has in it but little original-
ity. His theory of political organisation is little more than a
restatement of Bossuet’s, but of a Bossuet whom the Revolu-
tion has made a little plaintive and almost tragically unreal.
He starts out from two fundamental principles. Princes are
the ministers of God.” They are the ministers of God, no
doubt, that their position may be unassailable by a bourgeoisie
which has listened to the blasphemies of Rousseau. And it is
because they are the ministers of God that their interests are
at one with those of the people. For the welfare of the state
is essentially an unity, which transcends the welfare of particu-
lar members. Here, clearly, he has the opportunity to slay the
obvious facts of social life with the amazing abstractness of
his passion for the trinity. Since the cause is to the means as
the means is to the effect that relationship must be discovered
in political society, and, desiring its presence, he has no diffi-
culty in finding it. King, minister, subject—these are the
obvious triad which gives supreme power to the prince.” It
gives supreme power; and, for its maintenance, there is clearly
required hereditary kingship on the one hand, and hereditary
nobility on the other. They are required because they are
naturally good. They are naturally good because they have
been tested by the experience of time. They are good because
without them there would be anarchy. The absolutism of the
crown is essential, in fact, to the unity of the state.” Society,


76 “Observations sur l’ouvrage de Madame de Stael,” p. 128.
7 “Legislation Primitive,” Bk. II, Ch. iv, p. 228.
78 “Théorie du Pouvoir,” Vol. I, Bk. i, Ch. ii.


150 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


like an organism, is one, and, being one, it can have only a single
head. One man must therefore dominate lest all men should.
be destroyed.

He can therefore reject that division of powers which Mon-
tesquieu had postulated as the safeguard of liberty.” Hecan
reject it for the good reason that he does not believe in liberty.
‘He will, indeed, accept Montesquieu’s dictum that power is
the general will of the state; but he argues that the will of the
state must necessarily be single, and that it can aim at no more
than self-preservation. So to limit it is to obviate the danger
that the fascinating questions discussed by Montesquieu
should fall within the purview of his thought. He realised
clearly enough that Montesquieu was entirely out of sym-
pathy with the ancien régime and that his speculations tended
to its dissolution. He believed that the separation of powers
was the dogma most hostile to the unification of sovereignty.
He saw that once men were prepared to parcel it out the result
must inevitably be an implicitly federalised state. But such
a political organisation tended to the republicanism which his
experience of the Revolution led him to identify with impiety.
To separate powers was to confound them. To separate pow-
ers was to give a handle to every dissident element in the state.
When Louis XVI summoned the States-General he committed
exactly this error; and he paid the penalty with his life. What
Montesquieu thus attempted was, in his eyes, the provision
of a permanent basis for royal execution and he was compelled
to reject his philosophy. l

The fundamental tenet in his creed is thus the nature he
ascribes to sovereign power. He was a worshipper of its unity
because the experience of its opposite had been fatal to the
ideas he most deeply cherished. It can never be too greatly
emphasised that the thought of Bonald was virtually completed
in 1796. There is nothing in his last work which is not, at
least impliedly, in his first. Neither the history of the Napo-
leonic adventure—after all, the practical expression of his
attitude—nor the tragic misapprehensions of Charles X in any
wise altered his outlook. He cared for nothing save stability.
He naturally admired the environment of his time, and: he


19 “Théorie du Pouvoir,” Bk VI, Ch. III, p. 411.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 151


_ sought the conditions of its permanence. He conceived that
an unified absolutism would achieve that end because under
Louis XIV his ideals had found a full expression. He believed
that there is no remedy for disorder save uniformity of thought.
Men had to be kept in subjection because the price of their
freedom was too immense. It is, of course, a common enough
attitude. We have ourselves, for the most part, done’ no more
than transfer from king to state his erstwhile divinity. The
king’s need has become raison d'état and we have simply mul-
tiplied the basis of sovereignty. Bonald would have urged
the inherent error of such a policy on the ground that it was
unworkable. He saw in the free expression of opinion the
conditions of misfortune. Where men begin to question he
could not doubt that they begin also to destroy. For they
question essentially that they may reconstruct, and the method
implies a period of disturbance. Toleration is thus the negation
of order.*! Sovereignty cannot be dispersed simply because it
cannot ‘then be exercised. To disperse it is to make it fallible;
and the possibility of error is the excuse for anarchy.

This, indeed, is his generalisation from the experience of the
eighteenth century. When it questioned traditional institu-
tions it overthrew them.” Little by little it exacted from the
crown the instruments of power. The admission to political
privilege of the Hugenots in 1788 was the destruction of reli-
gious uniformity. The summons of the States-General two
years later gave to the unrealised welter of accumulated griev-
ance the power which translated it into action. For the States-
General was a human institution; and where its advice was
neglected, its pride stirred it to compulsion. Where before
order had been possible, the doubt Louis had cast on his right
to the full exercise of his sovereign power meant that jealous
men would usurp it. To him, in fact, every event in the Revo-
lution is the logical result of that single error. Once loosen the
strict bonds of power and there is no check to the passions of


80 Cf, the interesting little work of M. Léon de Montesquieu, ‘Raison
d'Etat.” This is, of course, the whole basis of M. Duguit’s theories. See
especially his ‘Transformations du Droit Public.”

si “Théorie du P. Religieux,” Bk. VI, Ch. II.

82 Cf. “Pensées Diverses,” p. 33.


152 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


men. Here, clearly, he feels like De Maistre, that the execu-
tioner is the corner-stone of society. And he emphasises the
virtues of tradition exactly for this purpose. Men cannot
venerate what is new, because where they understand they are
sceptical. But veneration is the corollary of obedience. The
unity of power has behind it all the overmastering sense of
antiquity. It is the one dogma of government which has sur-
vived. It is the one dogma which has received the continuous
respect of men. Moreover, it alone is the basis of solidarity.
The very fact that there is only one elevation to which none
save the sovereign can pretend creates a common bond of
interest between men. It sets outside the range of ambitious
exertion the hopes which may inspire social discontent. It
keeps society ordered neatly in ranks and stations by urging
men to fulfil the duties to which their class and birth tradi-
tionally call them. It suggests that necessary interdepend-
ence of function which keeps the minds of men from straying
into dangerous paths. Its very neatness suggests to the major-
ity a disharmony in novelty of outlook. It is thus a guarantee
of social peace. The king wills; and his command is binding
upon every element in the body politic. There is thus generated
a perception of equality which has all the advantages and none
of the inherent dangers which a pluralistic sovereignty possesses.

To say that the king is absolute sovereign is not, of course,
to postulate an arbitrary tyrant. Here, again, the origin of
his thought is the speculation of Bossuet. Just as the latter
was endeavouring to find a justification for the absorptiveness
of Louis XIV, so was Bonald attempting to show that abso-
lutism is not an excuse for the accusation of arbitrary power.
Arbitrary power was, for him, a power exercised independently
of the necessary laws of social organisation. It was the power
of one who, like Napoleon, sought his own good and failed to
make it coincident with the good of France. Absolute power
is exercised for the benefit of the people. It is the instrument
by which laws in conformity with the will of God are promul-
gated. Here, obviously, is a defence against their degeneration
into tyranny. For if the object of absolute power is no more
than the translation into legislative terms of the will of God,
the function of the king is not creative but declaratory. He


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 153


is thus in no sense omnipotent. He is limited by the laws of
his being. And he finds the laws it is his duty to declare not
by any inherent revelation, but by the research of reason on
the one hand, and by a selection among existing institutions
on the other. The king will continually exercise his mind on
the problem of political organisation. He will search out among
the achievements of men those which have the better contrib-
uted to social improvement. Here is a source of the wisdom by
which such a political order may find its justification. For since
this is an order of reason the people may themselves discover
the wisdom of its enactments. Nor does Bonald, on the whole,
have any fear that absolutism may degenerate. A wise ruler,
he urges, will immediately preceive the harmony of interest be-
tween himself and his subjects, and his policy will of necessity
adjust itself to the enrichment of their common purpose. He
insists, moreover, on the importance of realising that the uni-
verse is teleological. There is behind it the mighty and benefi-
cent purpose of its maker. To that all institutions and all men
are, in the end, subordinate. So that ultimately good may be
expected even from bad institutions. Social defect is self-cura-
tive by the inspiration it affords to a reaction from its errors.
Nor does the king stand alone. It must never be forgotten that
there exists the ministerial body through which the king acts.
He has the benefit of their advice and of their criticism. They
can warn him of impending-dangers. They can urge him against
unwise courses. Society has thus given itself an admirable
and self-regulating check against kingly error.*


Not that, in any case, kingly error would justify deposition.®
The good Bonald glows with passionate indignation at the
mere thought of its possibility. If our king is a bad king we
must endure him. An attitude of hopeful resignation is alone
possible to Christians. For to admit the rectitude of deposi-
tion is to admit the justice of social scepticism. It is to admit
a virtue to that which destroys. It is to give to jealous men the


83 “Essai sur l’ordre social,” p. 65.

& “Principe Constitutif,” Ch. X, p. 465.

85 “Théorie du Pouvoir,” Bk. I, Ch. IX. Cf. Bossuet, op. cit., Bk.
VI, 1 and 2.

3 “Principe Constitutif,” Ch. XI, p. 468.


154 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


hope of a share in power by enabling them to misrepresent
motive and achievement for their own base purposes. The in-
stitution of kingship is divine, and to allow men to question
it is to allow them to doubt the work of God: It is this which
makes him insist also on the necessity of hereditary monarchy.
Where the succession to the throne is at the outset guaranteed,
we have an assurance of stability. We have that foreknowl-
edge of events which is a safeguard against interested schemers.
Not only is primogeniture natural—how otherwise could it be
of so marvellous an antiquity—but it is a vital assurance of
continuity in national life. To deny it is to admit the roots of
division within the state. He reasonably points to Poland as
an instance of the paralysis which results from an elective
system.’ There, power has been in fact divided and the fate
of Poland is the measure of its error. There is no surety for
existence without integration. To establish beforehand the
natural order of events is clearly to minimise the dangers of
transition.

The whole: purpose of these elaborate safeguards is obvious
enough. Bonald has been impressed by the diverse aims the
will of man can encompass, and he searches the means to mini-
mise the disharmony of their interplay. That which he most
greatly fears is the influence of unorthodox opinion.” He
regarded democracy as per se an effort after political defiance
which seeks to transfer power to itself. But the weapon of
democracy is discussion and from discussion is born intellec-
tual perversity. “Avec des mots,” he wrote, “on pervertira
la raison des peuples;’’ and propaganda he thus did not hesi-
tate to brand as sin. He denied,” indeed, that the influence
of the press can secure the passage of great measures. For not
only do they consistently misinterpret a public opinion that they
do not understand, but they serve only to darken counsel and
so to hinder action. A censorship of the press is thus a necessity
that power may have adequate protection.” Only in this way
can men of evil disposition be prevented from attacking every


87 “De la liberté de la presse,” p. 3.
88 Ibid., p. 13.
89 Tbid., p. 16.
% Ibid., p. 29.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 155


necessary institution of society. ‘Ces jeunes anonymes,” he
wrote scornfully,” . . . . exploitent à leur profit, et comme.
une industrie ou une proprieté patrimoniale la religion, le gouv-
ernement, les lois, |’administration.”” They erect their private
opinion into the will of the state and are thus the very harbin-
gers of revolution. Control of opinion is then no more than the
paternal regard of the Crown for the welfare of its subjects.
It has had brilliant results and antagonism to it he ascribes to
the insensate pride of malicious spirits. Nor does he doubt”
that all liberty is in fact simply the concession of instituted
power which, may set the terms of reason to its benevolence.
To him® the whole demand for the right of discussion under
the Restoration was simply the inevitable consequence of. that
representative government instituted by the Charter of 1814.
For, as he urges,” the result of that measure is to inaugurate
a rivalry between royalty and the populace for power. It is
an endeavour of the other to usurp what it has no right to re-
tain. It has a tragic outcome. It results in the creation of two
powers and hence of two societies. They cannot live in tran-
quillity within the same state, and the disturbance from which
France suffers is the effect of their collision. He looks back
regretfully% to the times of the Grand Monarch when unity of
political outlook was the first law of life. He mentions® with
the tenderness of affectionate agreement the custom of the
Roman Senate which.was wont to banish those philosophers
whose theories threatened the harmony of the state. They
realised the fundamental truth he is here concerned to incul-
cate” that society perishes not by the absence of truth—that
is at the basis of social existence—but by the presence of error.
The nourishment of man is his ideas, and to allow him free
access to a food that has not been examined is to run the risk
of social poisoning. “Un écrit dangereux,” he declared with

% Ibid., p. 44.

® Ibid., p. 61.

3 Thid., p. 117.

% Ibid., p. 137.

% Thid., p. 142.

% Ibid., p. 143.


97 Ibid., p. 148.
° [bid., p. 156.


156 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


passion, % “est une declaration de guerre à toute l’Europe;”
and it was no more than an obvious duty to suppress it.


Freedom is thus a dangerous chimera and remedies against
its pursuit must be found. It is for a return to the ancient ways
that he is most deeply concerned. The misfortunes of France
have come because her king abandoned the natural path of
royalty.10 They bowed before the erection of a system and
the consequence is their submission to its continuous examina-
tion. Such an endeavor to reduce to written form the elements
of social life seems to him profoundly erroneous. Popularisa-
tion he always held as a grave danger for it prevented the
unification of opinion. To write out the basis of government
is to defeat the end for which it was made. Trouble is the
eldest child of knowledge. He puts his trust rather in a decent
mystery which alone makes possible an adequate veneration.
To write the constitution is to tempt the passions of men.
It is to suggest that there are limits to the royal power. Tt is
to tell the people that certain rights are theirs by nature and
they will have no sense of proportion in their demands. For
royalty he demands an invisibility and an omnipresence.” In
business and pleasure alike the ways of kings must be mysteri-
ous and hidden. Bonald even blames lightly the action of
Louis XIV in appearing publicly at the fétes of Versailles;
while he is certain that the raillery of Marie-Antoinette made
the pleasures of the Court insupportable to the mass of men.
The king must try!” adequately to mirror the divinity of which
he is an image. He must be simple, severe, dignified. His
nobility must cease! that vain pursuit of titles which incites
jealousy without invoking respect. It must instead set itself
to the creation of a reverence for the solemn fact of power.!%
Unless that is done, the destroying angel of envy will cast its
baneful influence over France. But to this end one means alone
is at all adequate and effective.


99 Ibid., p. 157.

100 “De la Justice Divine,” p. 132.
101 Tbid., p. 145.

102 Thid.

103 Tbid., p. 149.

104 Thid., p. 150.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 157


VI. THE RELIGIOUS ASPECT OF THE STATE
RELIGIOUS passion was the supreme influence of Bonald’s life.’
Only in its acceptance could he see that elevation of heart and
loftiness of spirit which are the basic conditions of progress.!%
The people that respects religion is a happy people, for it is
certain to respect authority. Religion he believed to be essen-
tial to the intellectual satisfaction of man, for otherwise its
universality was inexplicable.!% Only by reason of the assump-
tions it makes can the world be understood. Even Rousseau
admitted it to be essential; and Bonald seeks no further
justification. When the devil admits the worth of right, good
men have no more duty than its translation into action.

Religion for him was the basis of political stability. It helps
the statesman by its insistence on moral ideas. It gives birth
to a standard of conduct. It gives a definite context to the
vague ideas of right and wrong which results in.a test of action.
It creates justice by its emphasis on the necessity of applying
its standard to the facts of life. This a priori test, indeed, he
deems the most valuable preservative of the social order. For
when one deals in a mystic absolute the time for discussion has
passed. We cannot waste our time in argument against the
decrees of God; and it is their support that Bonald brings to
his ideal of the state. He brings it because his order is divinely
ordained and he desires the sanction of God for his canons of
political wisdom. He does not, of course, lack texts to prove
his point; but his scholasticism is more profound than the su-
perficial casuistry of quotation. He is satisfied that no good
man can be without religion. He looks upon religion as the
sole sanction of moral activity. Clearly, therefore, he must
make religion interchangeable with politics. What in society
man above all needs is that which will enable him to bear the
burden of life. His troubles are so vast and so manifold, that
consolation is essential if he is to find them supportable. Only
religion can assuage his cares. It softens the disharmonies of
social existence by directing the interests of men rather to the
life that is to come than to the life that is. It gives to politics

105 Thid., p. 155.

106 “Théorie du Pouvoir,” I, VI.

107 Thid., I, IV.


158 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


the basis of a necessary mythopoiesis. It acts, in fact, as a
social chloroform to dull the hearts of men against the pain
of truth. It is the justification of the present by its reference
to a divine past. So is it a preventive against discontent.

Religion, of course, means the Roman Catholic religion.
Protestantism, by its very definition, is fatal to these mighty
purposes. It is out of accord with the realities of sovereignty.
Lutheran ideals beget oligarchy, and Calvinism the govern-
ment of Geneva. Each, in fact, destroys the unity which is
the essence of a monarchic system. Such forms of faith are
for him comparable only to that pleasant feeling of internal
satisfaction which Rousseau mistook for religion. Its true
basis is the fundamental fact of sacrifice.1° Its true basis is
the tacit acceptance of your environment even though that
acceptance give pain. Religion is thus pre-eminently social,
for the necessity of sacrifice is born from the fact of society.

The object of religion is clearly to repress the evil and indi-
vidualist passions of men, to make them capable thereby of
social existence. Only the Catholic faith can do this at all
adequately because only the Catholic faith is truly one. It
insists on the repression of the individual will. It has only a
single sovereign, since that which the pope commands is at
once universal law. Obedience to his command is the basis of
membership of his church. So that Catholicism does not follow
the fatal path of Luther and of Calvin. It forbids man to
think for himself. It prescribes the belief he may alone ac-
cept. It thus secures within itself the constant exercise of that
general will of which the operation is the condition of social
permanence. Religion, for Bonald, is thus a training in social
conduct. It is the great defender of society. By teaching
men resignation, by preventing them from following the will
o’ the wisp of their private intellectual whim, it safeguards the
maintenance of principle. It thus interacts with the state.
There is very clearly a joint relation between two institutions
so obviously complementary in character. Civilised society,
indeed, is simply religion in its political aspect. It is religion
considered in its human emphasis.

If that is true, then Bonald cannot doubt that religion must


108 “Théorie du Pouvoir,” II, Bk. I, Ch. II, p. 22.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 159


be the guiding factor in the state. Religion has given to the
state the assistance which makes its life possible. Religion.
must then be restored to its erstwhile sovereignty over men.
The chief cause of political decay is the contempt which evil
men have poured upon it for their own base purposes. The
obvious policy of enlightened government is to restore it to
the fullness of its power." Such a restoration would posit as
axiomatic the principles of his faith. Education would minis-
ter to its needs. It would preach the gospel of duty and therein
find the sanction of tradition. It is Catholicism alone, in fact,
which has the sure proof of excellence which comes from anti-
quity. It alone has preached an unchanging social doctrine.
To ensure its dominance is to give to France the religion most
in accord with her history. Tradition associates French glory
with Catholic success and its rehabilitation would give to the
throne the proud weight of its incomparable power.

He would go even further. He would not permit the exist-
ence of more than one religion in a country. So to do is to
destroy the fundamental unity which Catholicism predicates.
Without identity of belief the gate is open for civil war; but
where men think alike the tragedy of dissident action is im-
possible. Intolerance is thus essential to his outlook, and, like
Lamennais in the earlier phase of his thought, he saw no dis-
tinction between toleration and indifference. To allow the
preaching of other faiths was for him only to proclaim that
you are uncertain of the truth avout your own. Men tolerate
only where they do not love. Those who have firm hold of
Catholic truth know that its alternative is unthinkable. For
once Protestantism is given a foothold, it treads the primrose
path to anarchy. Men cease then to believe in the necessity
of sacrifice, and the vaunting pride of jealous ambition strikes
a fatal blow at the solidarity of the political fabric. Only in-
tolerance, in fact, makes possible the “philosophie de nous”
with which he proposed to replace the egocentric creed of Vol-
taire and of Rousseau." In this aspect, of course, nothing was
less wise than the Edict of Nantes, nothing more politic than


weg. Prim.” 11, 115.
10 Thid., i, 180.
11 “Oeuvres,” XII, 65.


160 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


its reversal. For the edict split the French state into two irrec-
oncilable halves and destroyed the unity of power. Richelieu’s
attention was diverted from the necessities of foreign war
simply because he could not depend on the support of the
people. The seed of opposition had been planted and La Ro-
chelle was its harvesting.

He has thus a simple and mechanical view of the interaction
between religion and politics. ‘Quand il (le pouvoir) manque
d’un côté” he wrote,!2 “il en faut d’avantage d’un autre.” Re-
lax the bonds of religious discipline and he did not doubt that
the result would be written in the records of crime. And
religion is the real basis of all because it gives the sentiment to
men upon which their fortitude is founded. It bids them do
their duty, where, otherwise, they would not hesitate to act
from motives of self-interest. It thus draws men’s minds to the
great end. It insists on their social context. It points to unity
as the plain object of their endeavour. It is favourable to
monarchy by that very reason. But unity is always in dan-
ger of attack from malicious ambition. That is why liberty
of thought, no less in- politics than in religion, must be re-
strained. The really intelligent man is he who knows that
what he preaches is so supremely important that he will per-
mit no divergence from his opinion. Enlightenment for him
is only the subjective aspect of intolerance, and Bonald did
not doubt that he was enlightened. And because he thought
government as necessary as food,"* he welcomed religion as a
means of stimulation where the appetite might otherwise be
lacking. The Catholic religion became in this aspect the more
vital since it alone insisted that the source of nourishment
must be single. So convinced was he of the virtue of the unity
it so rigidly prescribed that he found the sovereign safeguard
of civilisation in the return of Protestants to the Catholic
fold.* Otherwise, it was clear, the power of the world would
continue to be divided. But power was to be compared to a
seamless tunic which cannot be torn asunder.!6

12 “Pensées Diverses,” p. 33.

13 “Oeuvres,” X, 258.

14 ‘Pensées Diverses,” p. 12.


116 Oeuvres,” X, 296.
us “Oeuvres,” XI, 121.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 161


Very clearly, what he was eager to discover was the sover-
eign remedy against thought. He welcomed the Catholic
religion simply because it rendered all speculation a superfluity.
It asked men only to believe and it named faith the proudest
of the virtues. He genuinely feared the declaration of prin-
ciples founded upon intelligent enquiry. To give privileges
was to admit rights and to admit rights was to extend them.
So that once reason was set to work there was an end to the
stability of the state. The religion that made of reason an
unnecessary luxury was thus naturally in accord with his
temper. “Le seul allié,” he wrote," “dont la France ait le
désir et le besoin (est) le pouvoir.” But, for Bonald, to put
one’s trust in God was to accept the existing world as necessarily
perfect because it was the divine handiwork. To preach Cathol-
icism was thus to steel men’s hearts against thought and, as a
consequence, to turn them away from revolution. Wisdom
and religion became thus politically interchangeable terms.
The only charter necessary to a well-constructed state was the
charter of religious enthusiasm. It makes a people prosperous
and happy, above all, it makes them contented and peaceful.
The one object of the state-must then be its promotion. The
government which has not learned this lesson is already doomed,
and has become the accomplice in its own destruction.“%& But
a state that is wedded to religion has discovered the secret of
permanence. It has destroyed all doubt of itself. It has at-
tached to its existence the emoticn of necessity. It has woven
itself into the stuff of other men’s lives,


VII. CRITICISMS


To such an attitude the Revolution of 1830 supplied the only
possible answer. But it supplied an answer which, apart from
its possibility, was at the same time decisive. For it showed
clearly enough that whatever the Revolution of 1789 had failed
to achieve, it had at any rate made men out of temper with
despotism. The monarchy of the Restoration had not con-
cealed its sympathy with Bonald’s ideas. The spasmodic at-
tempts it had made after the pale ghost of an attenuated lib-


u7 “La Justice Divine,” p. XIII.
Us Tboid., 22.


162 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


eralism did not in any way destroy its essential continuity
with the ancien régime. It even butchered the Charter to make
a theocratic holiday and the men of Paris turned once more
lightly to their barricades. For it is useless to answer unreason
with reason. A spiritual prejudice can only be eradicated by
the spectacle of passionate events. That which it attacks is
the very basis of all that cannot be harmonised with its dogma
and to the protests of the spirit the spirit alone can fling its
ringing reply.

The detailed criticism of Bonald’s ideas, in fact, would be
an useless task. What he represents is not a system but an
attitude. What he represents is the intellectualism of vivid
emotions realised in a fashion peculiarly intimate and keen.
He could never change his principles, and, indeed, he made
proud boast that the world of politics is a changeless world
which knows neither spring nor autumn.'!® His temperament
was too unyielding to permit him the understanding of politi-
cal philosophy. His mind was tragically inflexible. One who
could see the Revolution and the Restoration unmoved was
assuredly not created for the tasks of statesmanship. Sainte-
Beuve, in an illuminating passage;!° has compared him to a
Roman of the ancient time, and the-analogy explains much.
For what fundamentally interested Bonald was character and
by character he meant the strength to accept a given environ-
ment. His life was an unceasing protest against any effort
after change. The meaning of intellectual or moral aspiration
was unknown to him. All he could do was to postulate his
principles and he attained them by the hypostatisation of his
public passions. The man who could honestly believe that the
exile of the Bourbon was God’s punishment!! on France for
its national sin was assuredly unfitted to cope with the practical
questions of so sensitive a time. He did not realise that the
Revolution had marked an epoch in the history of man. Be-
cause he was able to blot it out of his thought and go back to
the golden days of Louis XIV he imagined that- others, too
would forget. That they would choose to remember seems never


19 “Pensées Diverses,” p. 29.
120 “Causeries,” IV, 330.
121 “Pensées,” p. 172.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 163


to have entered his mind. That Rousseau might in fact have
been_more than a poetic will o’ the wisp who spent fine phrases
on inadequate thought he would not for one moment con-
template. The Revolution attacked the fundamental preju-
dices of his heart—religion and kingship—and all with which it
was connected he came to regard as tainted at its source. He
had, in any case, a narrow and unyielding mind. His letters
reveal the courteous pedant who goes through life like a foot-
man at a court function. For it must be admitted that there
is something of the servitor in Bonald’s nature. Honest, in-
corruptible, earnest—all these he may have been. No one can
doubt that he felt deeply and had pondered much on the
fundamental questions. But he was too easily content with
the life he found to have the courage to examine its rectitude.
He mistook his country estate for the Garden of Eden and the
Revolution seemed to him little less than the expulsion from
Paradise. He had been schooled severely by church and state.
The pupil of the Oratorians and the royal guard never forgot
the training he had received. Everything he wrote was con-
ceived in full dress and wears the air of having been written in
the ante-room of a royal levée. He has none of the light touch
of de Maistre so that his words, if they are sharp, are not yet
winged.’ There are few instances in the history of political
ideas of so able a man being so completely deceived as to the
character of his age. He differs from de Maistre in that the
latter, as his pessimism revealed, was essentially hurling a pro-
test at a thing for which he could feel nothing save hate. But
Bonald is optimistic, and if he does not spare the Revolution
he has no doubt whatever of the curative effect of his remedies.

His simplicity, in fact, is the sole cause of his charm. That
he was proposing the bitterness of despotism to a people which
had enjoyed the fruit of liberty he seems in nowise to have
realised. It did not in the least move him that the men he
attacked should have written books which commanded the
profound respect of able men. He had so childlike a faith in
the nobility of his cause that he did not hesitate to ascribe
disagreement to malicious egoism. He did not see that his
king and his God could no longer exert the old fascination.


122 Sainte-Beuve, “Causeries,” IV, 330.


164 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


He did not see that a dynasty which had mounted the scaffold
lost thereon the secret of its superiority, that a Pope who had
suffered imprisonment thereby proclaimed his desertion by the
God of whom he was the appointed vicar. The old watchwords
had lost their magic. They had been dulled into argument and
they could not justify themselves by debate. Whatever it
had failed to achieve, the Revolution had taught men the
splendour of speculation. It had become an impossible task
to preach that thought was disease.


It is true that Bonald had the past on his side. It is true that
the experiment against which he so passionately inveighed had
all the danger of novelty. But because he clung so tenaciously
to his traditions he shut himself off from the future. What
in hard fact he was demanding was simply that the system which
satisfied his emotions should be the accepted method of gov-
ernment. What he entirely failed to perceive was the still
more indubitable fact that the majority of thinking men in
France were dissatisfied with that system. It seems never to
have entered his mind that there might have been cause for
the Revolution. If Taine condemned it no less wholeheartedly,
he had at any rate adventured some sort of examination.!”
It is not necessary to etherealise the Revolution like Michelet
to perceive how inevitably it is the consequence of the system
for which Bonald stood sponsor. He saw that system given a
second trial; and he did not in the least understand how tragic-
ally it repeated its old errors. The simple truth is that with
the march of mind absolute government is necessarily anachro-
nistic. The will of man is an individual will; and it sweeps
into the general will only to the point where the degree of
fusion makes possible a social existence. But even while it
accepts it questions and by its doubts it dissolves. So that,
in any final analysis, democratic government is the only prac-
tical government simply because it is only in a democracy that
an individual will can safeguard its reserves. !%


123 I say ‘‘some sort” because after M. Aulard’s relentless examination
in his “Taine, Historien de la Révolution Française” it is impossible to
have any confidence in Taine’s authority.

1% This has been brilliantly asserted in Lord Morley’s “Notes on Politics
and History.”


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 165


No man, in fact, will live a life ordered for him from without
unless the state of which he is part has accepted a swine-phil-
osophy. It has beatified order at the expense of thought. It’
has endeavoured to give men the minimum basis of material
satisfaction and dignified their acquiescence by the name of
citizenship. But that is not merely a stunted ideal; it is also
an impossible experience. A state may have every perquisite
of sovereign power. It is yet the clear lesson no less of history
than of philosophy that the basis of sovereignty is the opinion
of men. That was why, in the end, even the emperor of the
great Roman kingdom came to depend upon the chance whim
of his obscure soldiery. That was why, also, the word of an
unknown monk commanded a respect and exerted an influence
which shook to its foundations the proud edifice of papal power.
Continuous order is the expression less of peace than of death.
The Paz Romana was less the measure of civilisation than of
sterility; and there came a time when men exercised their
right to pick and choose among its benefits. What every
unique sovereignty will sooner or later attempt is the control
of mind. Yet it is equally certain that sooner or later it will
exert its effort after control by the material pacification of
men. But liberty has her compensations; and the result of
that very pacification is the stimulus to intellectual effort. The
men who have been fed into peace are nourished into exami-
nation. The offspring of food is revolution.

Bonald made the mistake which has been fatal to every
system of politics thus far in history: he took no account of the
progress of mind. He assumed an abstract man and confounded
him with men. It is a mistake as easy as it is disastrous; for
every abstract creation becomes its creator’s Frankenstein.
Men somehow refuse to accept the categories in which philoso-
phers would chain them. Their world, whether for good or
evil, is a dynamic world; and they accept no moment in history
as its apogee. But the result of such kinesis is clearly to make
every political ideal adequate only for the moment when it is
formulated, insofar as it is a system which claims a practical
application. And because men are various they move in varied


1% That is to say that the effort to depict him as a realist is without
basis in fact.


166 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


direction. Their effort is different and their interpretations of
life refuse reduction to a single scheme. The result is to demand
a system of government of which the essential condition is the
distribution of power. Political good refuses the swaddling-
clothes of finality and becomes a shifting conception. It can
not be hegelianised into a permanent compromise. It asks the
validation of men and actions in terms of historical experience.
For whatever history is not, the ancients were right when they
insisted that it is philosophy by example. And since each age
has different memories, there is no constancy of form or sub-
stance possible over, at any rate, long periods of time. Every-
thing that is systematised becomes a category that is capable of
decay. -The peasant of Norman England who saw himself
bound to the soil assuredly did not dream that one day there
would be an England wherein the law would know neither bond
nor slave; yet we who analyse the course of those events in
which he played a part recognise the inevitability of the process.
The king’s will is law only so far as men will consent to its exer-
cise. The king’s will is law in the France of the ancien régime;
but those men who in the summer days of 1789 gathered in the
tennis-court of Versailles knew how lightly a monistic sover-
eignty is founded. Bonald may have been right in his contempt
for all who were not of his order; he may have ground for his
worship of Bourbon kings. The church in which alone he be-
lieved salvation to be found may in fact have possessed an
exclusive right to its conference. Yet the world believed none
of these things, and because it disbelieved, his theory of the
state was no more than the emptiest of dreams. His social
philosophy drew its importance from the fact that it summed
up a vital epoch in the history of government. It explains,
even if it does not justify, the effort of the Revolution. It
makes intelligible the watchwords and the achievement of the
nineteenth century. It shows why men had ceased to be satis-
fied with the formule of absolutism. For it is at war with every
permanent reality of human life.


VIII. THE REVIVAL OF TRADITIONALISM
THE dead still speak, as M. de Vogué has aptly reminded us;


12 His “Les Morts qui Parlent,” indeed, is nothing so much as a hymn in
praise of tradition. Cf. M. Bourget’s essay in “Etudes et Portraits” Vol. III.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 167


~ and the doctrines of Bonald have found a curious revivification
in our time.” The age when it was permissible to adore the
Revolution passed away with the Franco-German war; and-
with its scientific interpretation a decisive challenge was flung
at the pretensions of democracy. The authoritarian tradition,
in fact, is far from dead; and it is only within the most recent
times that the Third Republic has won the secure confidence of
the French people. Even today its claims are rejected by
thinkers of no light significance. To them it represents an in-
tellectual attitude not merely distasteful, but even out of ac-
cord with the facts of social life. They look upon the Revolu-
tion as the starting point of the democratic adventure. They
accept the enquiries of M. Taine as authentic history, and they
have not hesitated to condemn the fundamental dogmas
for which it stands. The idea of national sovereignty appears
to them a flagrant mistake, and as a consequence, they have
been driven back to the ancien régime. Tt is in the idealisation
of its political formule that they search the avenue of social
salvation. They deny the validity of the democratic state. For
them, it results in a partition of power which is wasteful. It
makes pretence to an egalitarianism fundamentally incapable
of realisation. It allies itself to a febrile nationalism which is
no more than the momentary confidence born of a premature
faith in the possibilities of science. The things they believe
essential to the right ordering of society-religion, unity of power
inequality, the mysticism of faith—all these they rightly per-
ceive are out of accord with the traditions of democratic ré-
gime.’” The transformation of the modern state thus seems to
them fraught with the gravest dangers to its welfare. It is the
spirit, at any rate, of Bonald; and few things have a more
curious interest than this renewed enthusiasm for his dogmas.

Historically, indeed, the bond of intellectual filiation is log-
ical and clear. The traditionalist and ultramontane schools

127 M. M. Bourget and Salamon have edited a selection of his works
with a preface by the former. Cf. also L. Dimier, ‘Les Maîtres de la Contre-
Révolution” and the two laborious articles by C. Marechal in the “Annales
de Philosophie Chrétienne” for 1910 and 1911.

28 Cf. M. Bourget’s study, “Etude et Portraits,” III, 82-113.

129 Cf. the very able and suggestive analysis of their attitude by D.
Powdi, “‘Traditionalisme et Démoratie.”’


168 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


exercised upon Combe the profoundest influence; and positiv-
ism, accordingly, had no sympathy with democracy. He be-
lieved in the value of integrated organisation; and it was from
that starting-point that he began his assault upon individualism.
He was impressed, like Bonald, with the inequalities of men;
and in the distribution of power he saw its dissolution. lube
seemed to him the most fatal of errors, and the yearning for it
no more than a disease of the Western mind. He equated lib-
erty with anarchy, and the Declaration of Rights he dismissed
as private metaphysics. He desired a science of experimental
politics amd its criteria of good were to be based upon the status
quo.8° When there was added to his quasi-scientific contempt
for individualism, his worship of order and of unity the mate-
rials for the modern protest were already prepared. But to his
analysis the illusions of the Franco-German war added the
pessimism of Taine and the subtle pyrrhonisms of Renan.
The corner-stones of that edifice the nineteenth century had so
patently erected seemed thus to be overthrown. It then seemed
legitimate to go back to an era untroubled by the necessity of
accepting democracy as axiomatic.

It is this restoration which modern traditionalism has effected ;
and if the assault has been confined to a small group of thinkers
it is impossible to deny the ability with which it has been made.
Historical circumstances, moreover, have helped it much. The
last twenty-five years have seen a steady decline in the vitality
of parliamentary government. The struggle against the
church, the development of a labour party hostile to the state,
the patent deficiencies of the civil administration, the relation
between the army and the fanatic clericals have all combined

130 Cf. the remarkable essay of M. Faguet in the third volume of his
“Politiques et Moralistes.”” The historically, but not intellectually, important
volume of M. Maurras—‘“‘L’Avenir de ]’Intelligence’’—is useful in this
connexion.

131 On the anti-democratic theories of Renan, M. G. Strauss’ “La Politique
de Renan” is of great importance.

182 Works like Ostrogorski’s ‘‘Democracy and the Organisation of Polit-
ical Parties,” Walla? “Human Nature in Politics,” Michel’s “Political
Parties” and Walter Lippmann’s “Preface to Politics”? show this attitude


very remarkably. Cf. also M. Charles Benoist, “La Crise de l’Etat Mo-
derne,” Vol. i. í


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 169


to throw the most unworthy characteristics of a bourgeois
democracy into its ugliest perspective. Even the stoutest
defenders of the Republic have been eager for the adoption of .
new methods, for the discovery of a more effective synthesis.
In the result, it has not been difficult to construct a case against
the accepted axioms of democratic. government. The science
which overthrew the antiquated theology of the ancien régime
erected no adequate system in its place. The political methods
of modern government were found to be worthless instruments
so long as they were not based upon the simultaneous possession
of economic power.!3 ‘The spread of popular education achieved
far less than had been predicted for it. In the consequent dis-
illusion protest was inevitable. Nothing was easier, and nothing
was more natural, than to reject the political theory of the
Revolution. But where the protest failed was in its inability
to understand—as Bonald failed to understand—that the true
course was rather to utilise the experience of the nineteenth
century and to temper it by logical innovation than to dismiss
the experience of a hundred years. The disillusion was less
disgust than dissatisfaction; and it was not difficult to perceive
that to the majority of men the cure for democratic failure was
more democracy. However ugly might be the perversion of
its forms it still, for most, at any rate, wore an aspect more
politically acceptable than that of any other system. The dis-
tress which gave rise to renewed enquiry was born rather
from a realisation of the eventual certainties of democracy,
an impatience with its hesitations, than from any thorough-
going rejection of its postulates. But those who denied its
adequacy had at the least a superficial basis for their attack.
It is perhaps not surprising that it is from men of letters
rather than from students of politics that the assault has
mainly come; and they have therein finely maintained the
great French tradition of making criticism a commentary
upon life. What is fundamentally important in their attitude
has been best represented by Brunetiére and Bourget. M.
Brunetiére, indeed, is less a political than a moral analyst, and


133 This is really the starting-point of the syndicalist attack on the state.
See, above all, the very brilliant articles of M. E. Berth in the ‘“Mouve-
ment Socialiste” for 1907-8.


170 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


less an analyst than a superb master of intellectual controversy ;
and it is rather with the moral implications than with the polit-
ical structure of democracy that he has been concerned. He
represents essentially the reaction against the scientific move-
ment of the nineteenth century, and what he has brilliantly
performed is the relentless examination of its claims. But he
has never forgotten that science and democracy are twin sis-
ters;. and his criticism of the one has been, in fact, a veiled
assault upon the other. M. Bourget seems almost a reincar-
nation of Bonald—of a Bonald, indeed, who has read his Comte
and his Darwin, and emulated the literary charm of Joseph
de Maistre. He has occupied himself with the political foun-
dations of the modern state, and he has attempted to undermine
them by means which Bonald would assuredly not have re-
jected. Nor has able assistance been wanting to their en-
quiry. With every virtue except moderation and clearsighted-
ness M. Maurras seems to have been endowed; and his ruth-
less polemic has given birth to a school of thought which is
doing nothing so much as the reinterpretation of the ancien
régime in terms of modern life.%4 M. Barrés has lent the support
of his delicate nationalism to the reaction; and what his work
has lacked in vigour and power has been more than compen-
sated by the clearness and sincerity of its expression.“ The
conversion of M. Lemaitre to this school is only the most
striking of many similar changes.! It is hardly too much to
say that the protagonists of the reaction remain unequalled
in France for the power with which their cause has been
advocated.


Complete unity of purpose, indeed, the traditionalists can-
not be said to possess. They are agreed rather upon what they
deny than upon their affirmations. The pagan eclecticism of


134 The important work of M. Maurras is scattered over “L’Action Fran-_
çaise.” But see his “Enquête Sur La Monarchie” (1909), his “Dilemme
de Mare Sagnier” and his “Trois Idées Politiques.” An interesting crit-
icism is that of Descoqs, “A Travers l’Oeuvre de M. Maurras.”

135 Cf. his ‘‘L’Ennemi des Lois” and his “Scènes et Doctrines du Na-
tionalism”’ especially the preface. There is a brilliant critique of his
work in M. Parodi’s volume.

138 Cf. Maurras, “Enquête,” 427 ff.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 171


M. Maurras can hardly live in permanent comfort with the
strict religious orthodoxy of M. Bourget; nor has the religious
doctrine of either any necessary or coherent connexion with the
positivist Catholicism of Brunetiére. But a school of thought
they have been able to create, and the hypotheses for which
they stand are a logical and adequate whole. They derive,
indeed, a certain factitious interest from the political life of
modern France. They are so passionately in antagonism to
its fundamental outlines as to demand, almost of necessity, a
careful examination. Their ideas are the ideas of men who have
not hesitated to hold themselves aloof from a world with which
they feel no sympathy. There is a certain self-satisfaction in
the completeness of their paradoxes which makes them again
and again willing to make a holocaust of truth that their logic
may have her victories. But therein they are no more than
true to the traditions they represent. They elevate their de-
sires into principles in the'approved fashion of Bonald. They
follow their master in making their dissatisfaction with the
age the foundation of their system. Every theory of the state,
indeed, must in some degree be the expression of private thought.
But it has been in a special degree true of traditionalism that
it has, albeit unconsciously, apotheosised the subjective atti-
tude. Its doctrines have been singularly more personal than
those of any other school. Insofar as that has been the case,
traditionalism has been, inevitably, a narrow and transient
expression of discontent. It has resulted in an unreality which
is entirely inadequate for the purpose of practical politics.
But a weakness for the unreal and the impractical is perhaps
one of the indulgences permitted to the upholders of the theo-
cratic system.


IX. THE TRADITIONALISM OF M. BRUNETIERE


Tue starting-point of Brunetiére’s attitude!” seems to have
been his dissatisfaction with the naturalism of the later nine-
teenth century. In art and in letters alike, he found that the


137 Qn Brunetiére’s work generally see Parodi, op. cit. 31-71, and the
powerful essay by V. Guiraud, “Les Maitres de l Heure,” 59-141.
138 Cf, “Le Roman Naturaliste’”’ passim.


172 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


standards of authority evolved in the classical period of French
literature were no longer accepted. This absence of tradi-
tional criteria seemed to him to result in dangerous consequences
to social life. Not only were the naturalists pessimistic in their
general philosophy, but they had surrendered all interest in,
and all effort after, moral judgment. They became purely
individualist in outlook, and they proclaimed the worth of
experience for its own sake, without reference to its moral
character. Their esthetic was entire'y subjective, and they
seemed to cla'm, at whatever cost, the right to cultivate to
the full their own personality. They trod, in fact, the primrose
path to anarchy. Nor was this all. They did not hesitate to
affirm that scientific progress had justified their pretensions.
They were doing no more than to claim for art and for litera-
ture their right to the fullest enquiry. In rigidly scientific
fashion, they were accumulating observations upon life. They
were largely indifferent to the consequence of their examination;
for it was not the business of the scientist to concern himself
with practice. It seemed to Brunetiére in the most dangerous
sense immoral and unrealistic thus to disregard the reaction
of enquiry upon life. It showed an absence of social feeling, a
failure to understand that it is the bonds, rather than the in-
terstices of existence that must be emphasised. The lesson of
the naturalists would loose the chains of social cohesion. The
overthrow of this critical anarchism was the business of every
thinker concerned for the welfare of the state.

But an examination of the basis of naturalism led him, obvi-
ously, to the discussion of its historical foundations." He
could not hope to understand its origins without going back to
the eighteenth century. It was here, essentially, that the root
of the trouble was to be found. Voltaire, Diderot, the Encyclo-
pédists, these were the first men who had not hesitated to peer
into every nook and cranny of the social fabric. For antiquity
they had less a sense of reverence than of distaste. They had
taught men to be dissatisfied with their condition, and they
had overthrown the traditional foundations of society. He
could not but compare the confusion of the eighteenth century

189 Cf. “Etudes Critiques,” 4th series—the essays on Montesquieu,
Voltaire, Rousseau.


AUTHORITY IN THE:MODERN SLATE 173
with the meticulous sense of order so characteristic of the
seventeenth century. He liked its air of neatness. He liked
its confidence in objective standards of conduct. He was
charmed by its a priori lack of discontent. The authoritari-
anism of Bossuet, in particular, took fast hold of his affections.“
He began to trace back to its influence all that was effective
for good in the moral life of France. Unity, faith, authority,
order—these were the watchwords he evolved from his re-
searches. Their absence from the creations of naturalism was
the cause of its maleficent influence. It was clearly his task
to erect an objective system of critical enquiry of which these
should be the essential principles.

But more than this was demanded. Some part, at any rate,
of scientific achievement, Brunetiére was compelled to admit,
and since naturalism threw around itself the cloak of scientific
enquiry, it was vital to set limits to the domain of science.
Here, indeed, he was confronted by the difficulty that while
he was anxious to oppose man and nature, art and science, he
was himself the urgent defender of the doctrine of evolution in
the forms of literature. It was clearly necessary to escape
that conclusion, or, at the least, to bend it to his purposes.
It was here, perhaps, that Brunetiére made his most brilliant
effort. The causes of variation are unknown. Change is
simply a fact—for which no reason can be ascribed. Aristotle,
Moliére, Darwin—we can postulate no adequate cause for
their emergence. They are simply given us; and their effort
is the starting-point of each new direction evolution may take.
What Brunetiére did was to deny the applicability of causation


40 The posthumous volume on Bossuet edited by M. Guiraud is de-
cisive testimony on this point.

u Cf, “L’Evolution de la poésie lyrique” and ‘“‘L’Evolution des genres”
and “La Doctrine evolutive” in the sixth series of “Etudes Critiques.’

142 What follows is in reality a summary of his four volumes, the “Dis-
cours de Combat” and the “Sur Les Chemin de Croyance.”” The funda-
mental articles are “La Renaissance de l’idéalisme,”’ ‘‘L’Art et la morale,
Le besoin de croire” in the first, ‘“‘L’Idée de solidarité?” in the second,
“La Renaissance du paganisme, l’action sociale du Christianisme, |’ Evo-
lution du concept de science” in the third, volume of the “Discours.”
See also his “Après le procès” in Revue des Deux Mondes for 1898.

143 Cf, “Génie dans l'art” in Revue des Deux Mondes for 1884.


174 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


to this field. Ignorabimus he wrote large over the entrance to
it. But immediately that admission is made there is room for
a system of ethics which, above all, has objective standards of
conduct. When we postulate the impossibility of knowing the
causes of variation, there is need of the dogmas of Christianity.
It seems, at least to the outsider, an amazingly scholastic
syllogism; but, after all, the syllogism was the invention of
the scholastics. For variation is caused by chance, and chance
is only the name the eighteenth century coined for Providence.
Evolution makes us a mosaic of ancestral virtue and ancestral
vice—and that is essentially the doctrine of original sin. Here
is the basis of the Christian teaching, and we accept it because
its main achievement is to promise salvation at the cost merely
of repressing the evil influence of our natural origin. We have
to cease, in fact, to follow the reckless will-o’-the-wisp of individ-
ual desire. The main need of life is discipline, and we require
discipline that social life may be possible. The worth of any
doctrine thus consists in its social utility which Brunetiére
equates with its morality. But the demands of discipline are
clearly order and unity; and order and unity can only be
acquired by the recognition of the worth of tradition.“ For
tradition is the soul of a nation, the deposit of those traditions
whereby its life has been guided. More, it is even a national
protector, for it acts as a safeguard against the revolt of in-
consistency. To accept tradition is to accept something which
gives to life an objective logic, a guarantee against divergent
aims and contradictory desires. Because we need discipline
we must have tradition. But tradition is the twin-sister of
religion and gains therefrom the adequate sanction of self-
sacrifice. The one religion which rightly insists upon their
worth is Catholicism, and it was the liberal wing of the Catholic
party to which, accordingly, Brunetiére offered his support.™

There is not an element in this doctrine which Bonald would
have failed to recognise. Its insistence on discipline as the
safeguard against moral anarchy is only a more pleasing form


m “Les Hnnemis de l’Ami Française” in the first series of the ‘‘Dis-
cours.”

145 Cf. “Tradition et Développement” in the “Annales de Phil. Chr.”
for 1906.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 175


of the emphasis laid by the earlier thinker on self-sacrifice.
And Brunetiére in essence rejected Protestantism for exactly
the same reason as Bonald—that its foundations already im-
ply anarchy. It was for that reason that he denied the funda-
mental formula of Descartes, exactly as Bonald, a century be-
fore, had urged the worthlessness of metaphysics. Both
thinkers agreed that faith was the primary need—the willing-
ness to leap into the dark hinterland of mental action beyond
the limits justified by rationalist logic. And, like Bonald, this
attitude led him to turn to the church as the best instrument
of moral unity. It would provide, in his view, the objective
criterion of conduct by the enunciation of its dogmas. He even
believed that freedom of thought would thereby be assisted,
since the thinker, having at his disposal an infallible test of
good, would have the assured means of right thought. It
would thus bring peace to men’s souls, a refuge from the tor-
tures of uncertainty which drove the nineteenth century into
an acceptance of moral indifferentism. Here lay the supreme
merit of orthodoxy, that it gave life the integration of doctrinal
consistency. That, indeed, was the virtue de Maistre and
Bonald had claimed for their theories. They had been con-
fronted by an age of disruption, and they had found in infalli-
ble unity the only relief from doubt. They had urged, as Brune-
tiére urged, that without the sanctions of authority, the indi-
vidual soul is cast chartless on an unending ocean. It was
because he cared so deeply for right and wrong that he was
willing to enchain the reason of man; but he made the mistake
of his predecessors and identified his private theory of right
conduct with the public needs of his age.

_ His whole work, indeed, is a protest against democracy
simply because he has so overwhelming a sense of the dangers
of moral error. He deems the fabric of society so fragile that
he offers worship to the forces which, at whatever cost, have
prevented its overthrow. It is a philosophy that is unwilling
to take risks. It refuses all experiment of which the results
are not merely predetermined, but are also pronounced good
by a tribunal which faith has accepted as infallible. But such
a theory can only end by taking things as they are as the ideal;


146 Cf, “Après une visite au Vatican” in “Questions Actuelles.”


176 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


for anything else would be out of accord with tradition, above
all, out of accord with the oldest of traditions which is his
own tribunal of enquiry. It matters, perhaps, but little that
the progress of psychological science should run directly counter
to Brunetiére’s ideas. What is mainly of importance is the
realisation that the political implications of his thought are
the exclusion of liberty on the one hand, and of equality on the
other. It involves the exclusion of liberty because it insists
that men shall think only in directions pronounced ‘good by
external enquiry. It thus takes no account of freedom of con-
science. Its standard of morals has reference only to the gen-
eral need. It sacrifices the individual to its sense of absorp-
tiveness. It involves the exclusion of equality because the
infallibility it confers upon its tribunal must inevitably be
extended to the men who operate it.

We declare, in fact, the divine right of Rome, and the only
equality men can then enjoy is the equality of intellectual
servitude. It thus does more than release men from thought.
It is determinist in.that its fundamental principles are already
known, and, as with Bonald, the only business of the thinker
is deduction. It demands the unity of power; and, thereby, it
asks from each of us exactly what the modern world has pro-
claimed its most priceless heritage. It is basically a static
philosophy. It puts the mind of men into leading-strings and
makes of Rome their driver. But it has been the whole lesson
of experience that the development of Roman doctrine is, for
the most part, a development forced from without; and by
universalising the dominion of Rome Brunetiére was, in effect,
erecting a barrier against intellectual advance." That the
price of order can be too high seems never to have crossed his
mind. Nor did he occupy himself with the problem of how
order was to be attained. Like Bonald, he seems to have taken
it for granted that there would be no period of transition from
the anarchy of which he complained to the unity he exalted.
He seemed satisfied that principles are accepted by the mere
fact of their enunciation.

But, after all, the first fundamental truth is the existence
of difference, and to ignore it is to avoid the central problem.


47 As he himself realised. Cf. “Discours,” 3rd series, p. 229.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 177


What Brunetiére did was to repeat the error of his predecessor
and so to dislike his age as to misinterpret the conditions of
action. He failed to understand that the problem in moral as
in political life is a problem of guarantees. All that men are
willing to sacrifice to society is the lowest and not the highest
common factor of their intimate beliefs. For they are not
simply members of a herd; they are something more. They
are individuals who are interested passionately in themselves
as an end, and no social philosophy can be adequate which
neglects that egocentric element. That, indeed, is merely to
say that no social philosophy can be other than pluralistic.
Ragged and disjointed as a consequence it may be; and con-
tinually out of accord with venerable tradition. But this,
after all, is a ragged and disjointed world, and it continually
is guilty of unhistorical innovation. Sovereignty, in fact, has
necessarily to be distributed in order that the purposes of men
may be achieved. The test of their achievement, whether
moral or intellectual, or political, is not an immediate reference
to a permanent and external canon, but the consequences of
action in the elucidation and enrichment of life. It is this,
after all, which makes the loyalties of men so diversified; for
they are bundles of conflicting aims.“ It is this too, at bot-
tom, which gives to the loose sovereignty of the democratic
state its ultimate justification: that alone of all governmental
conceptions it admits the adequate realisation of personality.
A theory which would sacrifice them to its cross-section of
logic is at once forced and unnatural. It has value, maybe,
insofar as it throws light on the tendencies of the time; but
it is out of harmony with its inevitable direction.


X. THE TRADITIONALISM OF M. BOURGET


Tur work of M. Bourget is little else than an assault upon the
foundations of the nineteenth century.“ It is from an analysis

48 Cf. Mr. Lippman’s note in The New Republic for April 14, 1917, and
my “Problem of Sovereignty,” passim.

49 Tt is very difficult to particularise. But no one who reads ‘‘L’ Etape”
and “Un Divorce” with the three volumes of “Etudes et Portraits” can
mistake the direction. There is a very clever attack on M. Bourget in
Jules Sageret’s “Les Grands Convertis.” See also V. Guiraud, op. cit.,
and Parodi op. cit.


178 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


of what he believes to be its character that he has come to the
acceptance of traditionalist doctrine. Brought up in the school
of Renan and Taine, he has all their quasi-scientific precision
of statement and of temper. His starting-point has been the
disillusion they suffered after the events of 1870. They came
to believe that democracy was a political deception, and it was
upon the basis of their pessimism that Bourget has erected his
theory of aristocratic Catholicism., Its resemblance to the
ideas of Bonald is little less than startling; and, indeed, it is
important that M. Bourget should retain for him so striking
and peculiar an affection.“! For him Bonald remains one of
the great masters of political science, and no one has been more
responsible for the resuscitation of the earlier thinker. It is
Bonald, alone, moreover, who has surpassed him in his con-
tempt for the eighteenth century. To them both the Revolution
is the crystallisation of moral and political error. The Declara-
tion of the Rights of Man they both dismiss as a puerile exercise
in metaphysics.“ Both are contemptuous alike of logic and the
attempt to deduce a theory of politics from the abstract con-
ceptions of individualism. For M. Bourget has no confidence
in reason. For him it is an instrument of destruction, and he
goes back to instinct, tradition, prejudice, for the real sources
of events. He is uninterested in the idealism of the Revolution.
It seems to him so contrary to the facts it encounters that he
can have no patience with its trifling. When he has described
the facts he has seen, he believes that he has been given the
vision of actual society, and it is in his personal inductions that
he has placed his confidence. M. Bourget, indeed, differs from
his predecessor in that he is able to clothe his doctrines in a form
of singular literary charm. He has at his command the specious
terminology of modern science, so that, often enough, what is
in truth no more than a plea can appear in the guise of a state-
ment. He never wanders far from reality, even if his realism is
essentially selective. His work is a powerful polemic against
the democratic state. Just as Bonald composed his attack in


150 Cf. “Lettre Autobiographique.”’

161 Cf. “Etudes,” III, 23 ff.

182 Cf. “Etudes,” III, the essay on Le Péril Primaire.

153 Cf. the curious first essay in the first volume of the “Etudes.”


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 179


terms of the Revolution, so does M. Bourget express his attitude
in terms of parliamentary government. But the real defect
of Bonald’s teaching was its completely subjective character.
He built a state on the power of his own order, and deemed that
he had thereby rendered service to the ideal. M. Bourget,
indeed, is less selfish; for his satisfaction with the bourgeoisie to
which, by truth, he belongs, goes‘no further than the admission
that it has its place in any scheme of political construction.
But not less than Bonald, his argument is at the service of his
desires; and he has the less excuse than the earlier thinker sim-
ply because he did not write under the shadow of 1789.

No one, in fact, can study the work of Bourget without being
convinced that the recognition of certain temperamental char-
acteristics is fundamental to the understanding of his atti-
tude. If M. Bourget is not a snob, it is at any rate upon the
life of a leisured and cultivated aristocracy that he lavishes his
affections. There is no virtue with which he is not prepared to
endow it. Delicacy of taste, beauty of person, fineness of per-
ception, clarity of insight—into the hereditary possession of these,
his aristocracy comes by the simple fact of birth. It alone
is capable of cultivating all that is rich and delicate in life.
Nothing is more bitter than Bourget’s contempt for those who
would seek to usurp the functions of an aristocracy. His ple-
beians are always devoid of the qualities which can make them
acceptable as other than obedient subjects. They always end
miserably when they seek to raise themselves above their class.
For, by the mere fact of birth they are excluded from the full
understanding of elegance and refinement. The ordinary affairs
of commerce and agriculture—for these they are hereditarily
endowed.. But for the larger spheres of life, social, political,
intellectual, they have no aptitude. Thus the real tragedy of
life is the exclusion of the men of talent from their rightful place
in the world.

It must, indeed, be confessed that the refinements of M. Bour-
get’s aristocracy are a little exotic. Most of his aristocrats are


154 Cf, especially the ‘“Crise du Parliamentarisme” in Vol. II of “Pages


de Critique.” i
155 On all this the earlier pages of M. Sageret’s book are both apt and


amusing.


180 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


a little weary, and they have drained the cup of life to the dregs.
So that they have need of that which will enable them to main-
tain existence in its proper perspective. It is thus that they
come to adopt the Catholic religion—as a kind-of perfume for
the soul. Itis thus, too, that they possess themselves of the mor-
al superiority which distinguishes their mind from that of the vul-
gar herd. For they wear their religion as a beautiful garment,
and they have none of the intense realisation of its presence by
which the lower classes deface it. Their acceptance of relig-
ion is largely a result of their world-weariness on the one hand,
and their recognition of its social utility on the other. They
accept it elegantly, in the spirit of an academician awarding a
prize of virtue. They do not trouble themselves with dogmas.
They do not, as German peasants have attempted, undermine
its social character. They recognise its function in the promo-
tion of social well-being, and they accept it out of duty to the
position they occupy.

For the fundamental fact in their character is the unique-
ness of their position. M. Bourget has continually insisted
that the virtues he extols in the aristocracy are peculiar to
that class. They form an élite, a caste. Study the world of
politics or of industry, and those qualities are notably absent.
And their absence is the more notable since the one object of
the bourgeoisie is their cultivation. The simple fact is that
nowhere is there present outside the aristocracy the milieu
appropriate to their development. And since it is clear that
these are the qualities demanded of a governing race, it is
obvious that the aristocracy, reinforced, he will admit, by the
upper class of the bourgeoisie, ought to have charge of govern-
ment. They alone have the faculties which will take from the
business of politics its modern uncleanliness. A class-strati-
fication of society, at once formal and fairly rigid, he deems
essential to its well-being. It is true, of course, that this class
does not rule today. It is true also that its qualities are de-
voted to any save political ends; but that, after all, is the fault
of the system to which we submit. Such superior beings can-
not be expected to ask the suffrages of the mob, or to mingle
with the modern politician. It is true, indeed, that men may


156 “Etudes,” III, 264.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 181


be met who, though not of the aristocracy by birth, seem to
partake of its quality. They, however, are exceptional; and
the race from which they spring is rapidly exhausted by the
effort it expends in the production of such imitations. We
cannot erect a theory upon the chance fact of their occasional
emergence. That would be to consider man as an individual
and to give him rights in virtue of his own personality. But
that is a doubly false conception. Social rights M. Bourget
denies; it is upon social duties that he lays his emphasis. It is
the duty of the aristocrat to accept luxury and refinement just
as it is the duty of the peasant to accept his lot to toil. They
accept it, because as individuals they are unimportant. The
main need is to promote the solidarity of society and that is
effected by the expression of its needs in terms of the family.
Now of that the individual is but part and his personal tastes
are thus insignificant. The fundamental fact, indeed, upon
which Bourget’s system of ideas is founded is the denial of an
individual régime. For immediately we admit its claims we
remove the basis of a horizontal social structure. We cast
confusion into the state. Birth becomes unimportant. Culture
is a matter of purchase and sale. Competition becomes the
order of the day and an inelegant dynamic is the basis of the
state. But that is the basic error of which the nineteenth
century has been guilty.

It is clear enough—it is also unimportant—that such an
attitude is out of accord with the current of thought in our time.
But when M. Bourget left his romances to restate his social
theories in a more formal guise it was upon the basis of these
sentiments that he wrote. Nor did he fail to claim for his doc-
trine the benison of science. The fundamental virtue of Bonald,
he pointed out, was his realism. He based his theories on the
facts of social experience and his tremendous inductions have
thus the validation of life. Such a method M. Bourget deemed
finely experimentalist in temper. He compared it to the dis-
coveries of Le Play, and, indeed, the researches of the latter
have long been annexed by the traditionalists." What M.
Bourget did not understand was the simple truth that the im-


157 M. Léon de Montesquieu has, indeed, edited an anthology of Le
Play’s writings on this principle.


182 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


portant contribution, both of Bonald and of himself, is not the
facts collected, but the interpretation that is based on those
facts. Bonald may emphasise the excesses of the Revolution
just as M. Bourget himself insists on the deficiencies of parlia-
mentary democracy. But the problem does not end there.
There is a side to the Revolution which is not outrageous just
as there is a side to parliamentary government which is not
deficient. Where the scientific temper is not evident in the
work of either critic is in the modification of his observations
be facts which, however unwelcome, are still important. The
experimentalist method, if it is to be valid, must consist in an
accurate report of the experiment.

Nor is there more ground for satisfaction in the results of
the enquiry, which, also, are for M. Bourget in accord with the
discoveries of science. They are summed up in a plea for re-
ligion, for aristocracy, and for monarchy. That is to say that -
M. Bourget finds the real need of the nineteenth century to
consist in the destruction of its own achievement. Nor is he
at all uncomfortable in his denial of the Revolutionary assump-
tions. It is so easy to take its watchword as an abstraction
instead of as a programme, that M. Bourget considers it refuted
by the mere statement of the difficulties it encounters. Lib-
erty he identifies with anarchy. He cannot understand the
enthusiasm for its attainment. He seems to regard it as no
more than the product of the uncritical enthusiasm of the
eighteenth century for individualist doctrine. But individu-
alism in only an endeavour to escape from the consequences
of the social bond, and he is thus happy in his right to dismiss
it. It is hostile to order and security. It shatters the exercise
of legitimate authority. Nor is he less confident about the
folly of equality.%8 This is obviously out of accord with the
facts of every day life. But the mistake of M. Bourget is to
think that equality is the expression of anything save an op-
portunity for the full development of personality. The study
of his own master, Taine, should have taught him that obvious
lesson. To proclaim that men are born equal is not in the least
to proclaim, as M. Bourget would have us believe, that they
are born identical. Equality so defined it is, of course, easy


168 “Etudes,” III, 140 ff.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 183


to scatter to the winds; and where it is absent there is no real
ground for fraternity. Brotherhood is born of similarity. of
function, and where there are the barriers of class, there is no
ground for its existence. So that when the Revolution has
been thus dismissed, it is at last possible to attempt the re-
construction of a France which has been untrue to herself.

To M. Bourget, indeed, the whole problem is as simple as
an algebraic equation, with the consequence that his work has
all the specious exactitude characteristic of Taine. The life of
a nation is its tradition. That has in it elements of truth. But
M. Bourget would use the tradition of France as a dogma and
he will not allow the nineteenth century to form any part of
it. For him, indeed, tradition is not a living thing, but a series
of dead, inert principles to the logic of which the national life
must be chained. The tradition of France is monarchical,
regional, catholic, aristocratic. So at least it is if one neglects
its history since the Revolution. But that M. Bourget will do
without difficulty because the nineteenth century has been a
century of novel experiment and he is dissatisfied with its
results. Disorder, individualism, scepticism, corruption, these
have resulted from the adoption of the Revolutionary ideals;
and M. Bourget is unsparing in his denunciation of their
source. Disorder is bad because only in stability can se-
curity be found. Individualism is contrary to the obvious
structure of society. Scepticism is evil because the nature of
the social bond demands the sanction of religion if it is to oper-
ate at all adequately. Corruption is the clear consequence of
the method a democratic society must evolve for its govern-
ance. It is the natural result of a parliamentary régime and
to him this is the head and centre of disaster. Legislation is
passed in haste to suit the transient whim of the electorate.
The most sacred rights of society are lightly violated. Promises
are wantonly made and as wantonly broken. Personalities
replace principles, and national institutions are dishonourably
perverted to private ends. Party spirit replaces public spirit.
The only fruit of universal suffrage is the pathetic manipula-


159 Cf. his letter to M. Maurras in the “Enquête,” and the latter’s com-


ment.
160 “Pages de Doctrine,” Vol. II, 52 ff.


184 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


tion of the electorate. The pretended establishment of self-
government brings with it only the erection of a sinister oli-
garchy the more dangerous because it is invisible. The elective
system fails to pick out those who can best serve the interests
of the state. Argument is stifled by the development of a
colossal bureaucratic machine. Within the chamber, talk has
replaced action. The purely idle belief in equality has resulted
in the. withdrawal of the most capable from public life. The
vital elements of the state, in short, are poisoned at their
source. Heroic remedies are essential if so terrible a malady
is to be counteracted.

It is, of course, undeniable that there has been a decline in
the parliamentary life of democracies in the last quarter of a
century. That has been true not merely of France but of every
country in the old world and the new. But where Bourget’s
criticism is erroneous is in his suggestion that it is the root idea
of democracy which is mistaken. The real truth is rather that
we are working with a machinery adapted to deal with a civili-
sation immensely less complex than our own. It is only in our
time that the full fruit of the Industrial Revolution has been
gathered. Only since 1870 has it been fundamentally necessary
for the state to relate itself to industrial problems. The decline
in the parliamentary life of France is the decline that is natural
to an organisation hampered by a multitude of unnecessary
business. France has had to deal with constitutional problems,
the Separation, the problem of administrative efficiency, a
vast revolution in foreign policy, a new era’ in the history of
labour. The whole centre of her life has been readjusted at the
very moment when the mechanism of government has been
most inadequate. But there is certainly not perceptible a
decline in the quality of French life. Rather does the outsider
see a gain in solidity and effectiveness. Her political thought
has never been richer. Her economic ideas have rarely been
so profuse. Her literary achievements have been immense.
The condition of her people has been vastly improved. And
beyond the traditionalist group of which M. Bourget is so


161 Tt is hardly necessary to mention names. But the work of Duguit,
of Geny, of Paul-Boncour, of Leroy and of Hauriou constitutes an achieve-
ment of which any nation might well be proud.


ACU aE ECO REE Tay: IN THE MODERN STATE 185


effective a sponsor, it does not seem that there have been any
doubts of democracy.

Certain new truths, indeed, France has been compelled to
learn. We have too long regarded the discovery of represen-
tative government as a panacea, and nothing is today so greatly
needed as new methods of administration. It is undeniable
that what is vaguely termed the general will of society does not
find complete expression either in governments or in legisla-
tures; we are simply forced to the realisation that majority
government cannot be the last word on our problems. The
real crux of the democratic difficulty is the fact that political
power is divined from economic power. Wherein representa-
tive government has been supremely successful is in the se-
curing of general political rights in which rich and_poor alike
have been interested; but once the transition has been made
from political rights to economic interest the basic sectional-
ism of society has been apparent to anyone who has had the
patience to observe the facts. What has happened is simply
a growing consciousness on the part of the workers that the
concepts of democracy are as applicable to industry as to poli-
tics, and we have lived in the time of criticism and unrest which
is naturally symptomatic of the search for a new synthesis.1%
But the orientation of the problem is as different as possible
from that which M. Bourget has given it. He is so obsessed
by the political vices of democracy that he has neglected
altogether their real source. He has failed entirely to see that
capitalism on the one hand and the present form of parlia-
mentary government on the other are nothing so much as
historic categories which disappear when they have served their
purposes. In the result the solution he suggests reads less like
an answer to our questions than an interesting survival from
an ancient time.

He demands a monarchy." One of the follies of democracy

162 Cf. Berth’s articles cited above. Æ’s “National Being” is an impor-
tant landmark in this connection. Cf. The New Republic, Vol. X, p. 270
and the first chapter of my “Problem of Sovereignty.”

13 Of which M. Paul-Boncour in his “Fédéralisme Economique”
(1901) has brilliantly sketched the outlines. Cf.: also Maxime Leroy’s


‘Transformations de la Puissance Publique.”
164 On all this M. Maurras’ “Enquête” is fundamental.


186 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


is its distribution of power of which the only consequence is
its nullification. But M. Bourget has only to study history to
see that the distribution of power is only the expression of cer-
tain social facts which are inherent in the nature of society.
It may be true, as he says, that monarchy unifies that power;
but that is exactly why monarchy is more and more rejected
as a form of active government by intelligent men. It may
stand as the symbol of the national soul; but it stands as the
symbol of the national soul only in its antiquarian moments.
The self-interest of monarchy may demand, as M. Bourget
claims, that it serve the national well-being. But the test here
must be historical and it is precisely because of its failure so
to validate itself that the monarchical solution has been re-
jected. Supple it may be; but there are other forms of gov-
ernment no less capable of elasticity. M. Bourget, indeed,
would urge that if the monarch be deceived error, after all, is
inherent in all human endeavour. He suggests that the very
elevation of the monarch’s position, his dynastic interests,
will make his evasion of error the more essential as his responsi-
bility is the greater. He finds in the monarchy the power of
selection in which democracy has so signally failed. For what
is here necessary is continuity which implies the removal of
certain families from the mass of the people that they may serve
the state. The corollary of his monarchy, in fact, is aristoc-
racy—not, indeed, closed to external access. The man of the
people will be permitted to ascend above his station, but he
must demonstrate his right and not assume it. Here he goes
back to the ideal of the ancien régime and finds in a hierarchy
of classes to each of which its functions are attached the true
method of social distribution. Of course it goes without saying
that the members of his aristocracy will be rightly chosen. In
mind and attitude, in taste and in desire, they will have all
that goes to the making of a brilliant civilisation. Such quali-
ties it must possess since, otherwise, it will prove unacceptable.

Criticism of such demands is as unnecessary as criticism of
Bonald’s ideas. Nor is it easy to have sympathy with Bour-
get’s plea for a restoration of the Catholic system. It is, of
course, true that Catholicism is social and orderly and mystic.
It would assist his political schemes in that it has no room for


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 187


divergent belief. It acts as the consolidation of faith. It ex-
alts the heart over the head; and Bourget, like Bonald, has
no doubt that what comes from the Catholic heart is noble.
He demands the Catholic religion as a safeguard against the
disruptiveness of rationalism.’ It will provide men with a
sanction of self-sacrifice. Its hierarchical organisation makes
it well fitted to stand sponsor for the monarchical idea. It is
zealous for authority, it has continuity, it has discipline. For
the purpose of protecting his antiquarian state he could hardly
have chosen better. But the very choice is simultaneously
demonstrative of M. Bourget’s failure to understand his age.
The glamour of the theocracy he postulates no longer haunts
the minds of men. The worship of unity is dead. The oneness
we seek is the oneness of effort and not of purpose. We are
not willing to set conditions to men’s dreams. We are not de-
sirous of returning to the orthodoxy of medieval time. Tolera-
tion has been the parent of liberalism, and liberalism has effec-
tively destroyed conceptions of society which leave no room for
its innumerable variations of form and desire. With the power
that monarchy implies we cannot trust any man in so complex
a civilisation. We cannot mark off class from class in face of
the social and biological evidence we possess. M. Bourget has
to account for the structure of American society and the trans-
formation of the English aristocracy before we can accept his
static theories.' The invitation he issues to intolerance an
age which finds its surest guarantee of progress in the freedom
of the mind dare not for a moment consider. Loisy in France,
Tyrell in England, stand out as the achievements of a democ-
racy which has rejected the moral guarantees a rigid Catholi-
cism has proffered. It is otherwhere we shall search for new
hopes.


XI. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF VARIETY


So we are led to the rejection of unity. And it is worth while
to emphasise the grounds upon which we reject it. That for

165 Cf. “Pages de Critique,” Vol. II, p. 110 ff.

166 The illogical character of his “Outre-Mer” is one of the strangest of
M. Bourget’s many inconsistencies; for the aristocracy he found there
is barely fifty years old. `

167 Cf. the essay on Lamennais below.


188 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


which we are concerned is the preservation of individuality.
It is fifty years since John Stuart Mill pointed out its relation
to human improvement.!® Certainly if there is one truth to
which all history bears witness it is that unity is the parent of
identity. But it is almost an equal commonplace that where
men seek the ease and sloth of uniformity they are, in fact, if
unconsciously, attaining the bitterness of stagnation. That was
the error of the Eastern world. It was the secret which the
great thinkers of Greece taught us by their example to avoid.

It is particularly important at this hour to prevent so grave
a disaster. Democracy has made termendous progress in this
generation. But the destruction of social and political privi-
lege has a fatal tendency to extend itself into the sphere of
mind. It is, indeed, difficult for a state at once to accept
difference of opinion and to be effective as a striking unit.
But that, after all, is the price we pay for our achievement of
freedom. Nor is it unessential to insist upon its worth. “ Man-
kind,” says Mill in a famous sentence, “speedily become
unable to conceive diversity when they have been for some time
unaccustomed to see it.” To establish the singleness of politi-
cal sovereignty is certainly to assist in its suppression. Politi-
cal reality is never at bottom single, and there is no right
purpose in its coercion to unity. Let the mind once bow itself
to that yoke, and truth, at a bound, is sacrificed to comfort.
Thus to submit to the pressure of a peace that must inevitably
be temporary is, indeed, the subtlest form of self-indulgence.
Thought is by nature revolutionary, and to the consequence
of a great idea it is obvious we can set no limit. But, after all,
thought is the one weapon of tried utility in a difficult and
complex world. If it is to be effective we must place power in
its hands; for to withdraw from it the means of active exertion
is to blunt its effort after good. Therein, it is clear, the dis-
tribution of sovereignty is involved. Yet the forces that make
against our progress are so great that it is hardly less than
treason to our heritage thus to deprive ourselves of what serv-
ice thought may render. Nothing, at any' rate, is so certain
to make our corporate life devoid of its richness and its elevation.


168 “Liberty,” Chapter III.
169 Tbid. (Everyman’s ed.), p. 131.


CHAPTER THREE


LAMENNAIS
I. THE PROBLEM OF LAMENNAIS


HE enigma of Lamennais remains still a problem for those
who seek to probe the secret of the human mind.! The
winds of controversy that so sorely swept his troubled
life even yet are far from stilled. To many, he remains the arch-
apostate of the nineteenth century; and to them, his abandon-
ment of beliefs for which he had at one time so stoutly fought
is, without exception, the greatest treason of which we have
evidence.” He did not, like Newman, live to receive the homage
of his friends, even while he retained the respect of those who
rejected his philosophic outlook. He did not, like Tyrrell,
create in his death a reformation of which, even now, the con-
sequence can be but dimly conceived. It was by hard and
tortuous thought that he abandoned the beliefs of his youth;
and those on whose affection his life had been founded, left him
to an end of which the proud courage could not conceal the
lonely despair.’

There is a sense, indeed, in which his career is little less than
the mirror of his age. For the course of his life represents not
merely the reaction of Catholicism from the destructive assault
of the French Revolution, but also the dawning perception in
the minds of able men that when due rejection of its errors has
been achieved, it still embodied political truth which is funda-
mental to the creative understanding of modern life.t The high-
priest of the Catholic reaction, it was his fortune, partly, no


1] have appended to this essay a critical note on the more important
discussions of Lamennais.

2 Cf. Guillon, “Histoire de la Nouvelle Hérésie du XIX me siècle,” and
the work of Lamennais’ friend, Gerbet, ‘‘Réflexions, sur la chute de M. de
Lamennais” (1838). Lacordaire’s “Notice sur le rétablissment en France
de l’ordre des Frères Prêcheurs,” p. 68 f. is in the same tone.

3 Cf. the comment of the Duchesse de Dino, “. . . . et l’abbé de
Lamennais qui meurt comme un pauvre chien aveugle.” Chronique, Vol.
IV, p. 159. (3 March 1854).

4 The paper below on Royer-Collard endeavours to illustrate this thesis.


190 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


doubt, by what he wrote, but, above all, by what he was and
what he symbolised, to forge the mightiest weapon in its undoing.
By an intellectual evolution of which it is difficult to deny the
logic,’ he came to argue that all for which in his earlier days he
had stood as so passionately the protagonist, was out of accord
with the need of his time. Little enough is left now of the great
edifice he so laboriously constructed. Pages, indeed, there are
in his work of which Renan said’ that no more brilliant anthol-
ogy exists than that which could be gathered from it. But his
books are no longer read;’ for they were written essentially for
a series of specific situations and the great work he dreamed of
writing he did not live to complete.

Yet he remains as the champion of two mighty causes which
still battle for the empire of the mind. The eternal struggle
between order and liberty has received no more arresting em-
bodiment than in his own febrile and tormented soul. The
memory that remains not even the dull weight of time can, in
the result, deprive of its fascination. He strove to answer prob-
lems of which we are still searching the solution. If we now
state them differently, their fundamental content has in no
sense been altered. That he wrote in an age before theology
had been made scientific’ has in no wise disturbed the basic
principles of his plea. That he did not grasp the true basis of
the democratic faith hardly weakens the argument he made on
its behalf. He stood at the parting between two worlds. He
strove to arrest the onset of forces he was at the last driven to
recognise as irresistible. It is the dramatic quality of his chal-
lenge to those whom he had so splendidly led which gives him
in the nineteenth century a place at once exceptional and im-
portant. He dare not be forgotten so long as men are willing to
examine the principles upon which their life is founded. For
few have faced so courageously the difficulties of existence.
None has suffered more nobly in the effort to confound them.


5 Cf. Janet, ‘‘Philosophie de Lamennais,” p. 56 f:

€ “Essais de Morale et de critique.” M. Maréchal has edited such an
anthology for his strictly ultramontane years.

1 Most of them are now unprocurable except by accident.

2 Renan has emphasised the significance of his lack of a critical spirit.
“Essais de Morale et de Critique,” p. 154.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 191


Il. THE CHURCH IN THE NAPOLEONIC AGE


Hz had grown to manhood in the most complex and troubled
age the church had known since the cataclysm of the sixteenth
century. If the papacy had refused to make of itself the un-
questioning instrument of Napoleon’s purpose, it could not
withstand the fury of his onset. He had proclaimed himself the
protector of the ideas of 1682,° and the principles of clerical
nationalism were invoked to justify an Erastian régime. Napo-
leon, in fact, looked upon the church as no more than an effective
political weapon,!® and thereby he gave to ultramontanism a
new reason for existence. A church which lay at the heel of a
military adventurer must search out afresh the foundations of
its being. The localism upon which it had built so much seemed,
in the result, likely to prove fatal to its sense of tradition and
of personality. It was not unnatural that those who were at-
tached to it by the closest of personal ties should turn from the
old Gallican theories to principles which seemed to give it a
wider basis for its claim to freedom. Sons of France its priests
might be: but, above all, they were citizens of a religious so-
ciety. To own allegiance to one who persecuted their church
was to admit that the ecclesiastical power was inferior to the
secular. But that involved the betrayal of a fundamental
tradition. It seemed, too, to suggest that the events of which
Napoleon was the symbol had won from them an adherence
that was logically impossible.: They dare not reconcile them-
selves with the Revolution.’2 Many of them it had sent to the
scaffold; many were in exile. Of those who remained in France
not the least part had refused to take oaths which seemed to
them the denial of their faith. For them, the church was itself
a state, and they would not bargain over the nature of their
citizenship with an organisation hostile to its purposes. And
of that revolution, Napoleon was the heir. If he had restored
a clerical order, it was clear that he did not love it. The Pope


9 Nielsen, “History of the Papacy in the XIXth Century,” I, 317.

10 Tiid. I, 223 f.

11 Cf. the speech of Pius VI printed in Theiner’s “Documents,” I, p. 1 f.

12 Tn this aspect it is important to remember that the Concordat of 1801
was in truth an ultramontane victory and was generally so regarded. Cf.
Debidour, “L'Eglise et L’Etat,” p. 210 f.


192 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


was a prisoner in his hands. Many of the cardinals were in
captivity; and those who stood by his purposes were no more
than the weak creatures of his defiant ambition.“ What, above
all, Napoleon taught the church was the impossibility of re-
maining a function of the state. It must work out again the
principles of its freedom. It must re-establish its separateness
that it might regain its purity. A church could not claim cath-
olicity if it became the instrument of a single and jealous power.
Nor did Napoleon render it the homage of an unique affection.
To Jew and Catholic, to Protestant and Mohammedan he
proffered his goodwill indifferently. But in the credo of the
Roman Church such toleration found no place. A new syn-
thesis was required if it was to be true to its ancient heritage.

So it was that men began to turn their minds to the task of
its reconstruction. In that mission which was in truth the most
tragic of exiles, De Maistre was forging the new weapons of a
regenerated papacy. Bonald had already asserted in his
tremendous, if tedious syllogisms, the old dogmas of the ancient
conflict between Rome-and an earlier empire. The new ultra-
montanism, indeed, was no more than a different aspect of the
old. Nor was what it preached absent from the hearts of thou-
sands, even if the iron hand of Napoleon’s crafty minister
stifled it at the utterance.” But de Maistre and Bonald were
concerned less with the church 'than with the state. If each
adopted the theocratic solution it was not because they realised,
a priori, that the starting-point of inquiry must be the rightness
of ecclesiastical control. They approached the problem as
statesmen, and their establishment of the papal sovereignty
was, for them, less a principle than an induction. It was from
the tremendous experience of an age so full as to make the
previous generation already antiquity that they went back to
Rome as to the parent of all social order. They urged the neces- .
sity of an ultramontane policy rather as an effective supple-
ment to other means than as itself the basis of all things. Loy-


13 Though Maury, of course, had great talents.

1 I have discussed. De Maistre’s solution of the problem of the Revo-
lution in the previous volume of these studies.

1 For Fouché’s work as censor see D’Haussonville, ‘‘L’Eglise Romaine
et le premier Empire,” passim.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 193


alty to, and passion for its splendor they of course in no sense
lacked. But what was needed was a philosopher who should
speak in the name of the Church, and deny the principles of the
Revolution solely as the servant of its claims. If Bonald and
de Maistre served that end, it was the accident of good fortune
rather than of design. But it was in the name of the Church
that Lamennais came to do battle with the Revolution, to deny
its principles and to refute its purposes. He came to vindicate
the church from the trammels of state-control. For secular
politics he had no interest. It was religion alone which held
his allegiance. With the state, with Napoleon, he in no con-
scious sense concerned himself, save insofar as they affected
the subject of his enquiry. How to regain for the church her
ancient sway over the minds of men,—this and_this only was
his problem. It was in the answer he made that he created the
Roman Church of the nineteenth century.

He was a child of the Breton country, and his family inherited
the simple loyalties of that primitive race.” But Lamennais,
from the outset, was different. His temperament was morose,
and the fits of nervous anger to which he was liable account,
in some sort, for the solitude of his childhood. Books and the
sea were his main companions, and to the end of his life he
retained a passionate affection for the wild coast of Brittany.
Away from it, indeed, he was never really happy, and once, in
Paris, he compared himself to those exiles who sat down in
ancient days by Babylonian waters.!8 He read much and
widely; and it is difficult to doubt that his early acquaintance
with Rousseau and Voltaire must in some degree have influ-
enced his mind.’® His own theories on education, indeed, show
distinct traces of the influence of Hmile;?° but the pressure of
events must have effaced the early impression of such dis-
turbing thoughts. It was to his family that priests fled from
the persecutions of the Jacobins, and in their house that they

16 Note, however, the eulogistic passage in the “Réflexions sur |’Etat de
l’Eglise,”’ p. 21.

17 Lamennais’s ancestry has been copiously studied by M. Maréchal in
his “La famille de Lamennais” (1913).

18 Spuller, “Lamennais,” p. 27.

19 Cf. Duine, “Notes de Lamennais” (1907).

20 “Correspondance” (ed. Forgues), i, 61.


194 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


celebrated, at dead of night a mass the more sweet because it
was surrounded by danger.”! It is not difficult to understand
how firm an impression such scenes should have imprinted on
his mind; nor can one hesitate to trace to them the secret of
his hatred for the Revolution and its works.

But though he was deeply attached to the Catholic faith, he
did not shrink from questioning it; and it was not until the age
of twenty-two that he made his first communion.” That the
erosion of his doubts was mainly the work of his brother it is
not difficult to assume; and once they had passed Lamennais
was able to accept the dogmas of his faith not merely in full
sincerity but with some surprise that he had ever doubted
them.” But that early hesitation is important, because it
shows that his attachment to Catholicism was never unthinking.
If, at the behest of his brother, he plunged into the bottomless
abyss of theological apologetics, he still, even at this time, had
a deep affection for Plato and Malebranche, for Cicero and
Montaigne. We know too little, indeed, of these early years
to do more than vaguely guess at their intellectual nature.
Royalist he was, of course, by inheritance. Catholic he could
not fail to be in the sense that he accepted it as superior to all
other religions. Yet there is no trace of fanaticism in his atti-
tude, and the one certain passion which these years evoked was
a hatred of the University in no degree traceable to any save
personal causes.” The real starting-point of his religious adven-
ture came in 1807 when he went with his brother to the little
house at La Chénaie which was their joint inheritance. Jean
Lamennais had only one object in life, the service of his church;
and his indefatigable energy spurred on the undertaking of a
common task. The result was the appearance, in 1808, of a
joint-work on the condition of the Church. That is the true
beginning of his career as a servant of ultramontanism.

We do not, of course, know how much of this early work is


21 Cf. Spuller, op. cit., p. 35.

2 The story of these early difficulties is fully traced in Maréchal, “La
Jeunesse de Lamennais,” pp. 31-87.

23 Cf. Laveille, “Vie de J. M. de Lamennais,” I, 47-8.

2% One cannot help feeling that M. Maréchal’s fine book is marred exactly
by this assumption of a logical sequence in Lamennais’s ideas.

% Spuller, op. cit., p. 67.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 195


the product of Lamennais’ own thought. That it enshrines
much hard work on the part of his brother is clearly unques-
tionable; and in the fact that Lamennais himself refused it a
place in his collected works, is perhaps evidence that he did
not regard himself as its principal author.” Certain it is, how-
ever, that it contains no doctrine which he would in his Catholic
days have disavowed. Already its one clear effort is for the
advancement of the church. Already he has a vivid sense of
its corporate independence. Just as the experience of political
pressure led Newman to the passionate denunciation of Eras-
tianism,* so does Lamennais’ dislike of ecclesiastical subjection
lead him to demand an extensive cleric freedom. He stands
at the outset as the avowed champion of its extreme claims,
and he seems to enter the list as a knight who will encounter
all adversaries with gladness. It is not a book of criticism but
of assertion. It does not argue; it only pretends to refute.
It is simply a statement of principles made on the assumption
that they are axiomatic in character. It attacks the heresies
from which the church has suffered. It paints in vehement
colours the evils of liberty of thought.” It derides, almost with
passion, the incompetence of the human mind. The whole
achievement of the eighteenth century is dismissed with bitter
contempt. The church is pictured as standing where it stood
after the civil wars of the sixteenth century. What is needed
is a new effort after freedom. The church must be released
from the meddling of Jansenist magistrates.2° There must be
an end of the deadly egoism of the philosophers.*! What can
be hoped where the Revolution has spoiled, and the Directory
persecuted.*? If with Napoleon the Concordat has come that
is the beginning and not the end of virtue. Not until the
church is restored to the fullness of omnicompetent power is

26 “Correspondence” (ed. Forgues), i, 10.

27 This would seem the net result of M. Maréchal’s laborious researches
Cf. his “Jeunesse de Lamennais,” Bk II, Ch. 1,

28 Cf. my “Problem of Sovereignty,” Ch. III.

29 “Réflexions,” p. 49.

30 Ibid., p. 59 f.

31 Ibid., 46-59.

32 Ibid., 67-90.

3 Ibid., 95-100.


196 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


there real hope for its future. What is needed is a regenerated
clergy which, now that the storm shows signs of passing, can
attempt the work of reconstruction. The life of the church
must be renewed in all its richness. The corporate vigour of
its institutions must be restored.*4 In scholarship and in
education it must resume its leadership and its control. The
enemies are indifference and atheism, and without knowledge
they cannot be combated.*® The book is clearly a programme;
and it is interesting to note how admirably it fits into the effort
of his liberal years. But it is also, on the whole, a moderate
book, nor does it, save by implication, attack the Napoleonic
settlement. Rather does it, not without much shrewdness,
suggest the inevitable lines upon which that settlement must
develop. Congregations are to be increased, missions are to
be multiplied, the faith more stoutly avowed. He was propos-
ing, in fact, a church that should be worthy of the empire.
But that innovation must have been unacceptable to the im-
perial plans; for the book was confiscated by the police imme-
diately on its appearance. The Pope had just hurled his
excommunication at the empire, and it was no time to think
of Catholic freedom.*”


It is probably from that confiscation that Lamennais’ hatred
of Gallicanism is perhaps most certainly to be traced. It
suggested to him that a strong church was not desirable to the
emperor. Napoleon desired to keep it in its chains; and he
boasted of their connection with the national tradition.’ La-
mennais could then but draw the conclusion that the result of
Gallicanism was the subjection of the church, and that only in
its abandonment could freedom be found. There is not, it is
true, anything in the “Réfléxions” directly incompatible with
Gallican doctrine. But the events of Napoleon’s last years
were to force Lamennais to the conviction that a free church
must henceforth mean a Roman church, and he did not hesi-
tate to draw the inference. It is in the light of this attitude


34 Ibid., 116-34.

35 Ibid., 134-42.

36 Ibid., 142-50.

37 Debidour, op. cit. 263.
SS bid i 2O.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 197


that the study of episcopal origins is probably to be explained.
The difficulties over the papal confirmation of Napoleon’s
nominees to the vacant bishoprics*®® gave to such an effort a
peculiar importance. For to show the direct dependence of
the bishops upon Christ is to argue, even if tacitly, that imperial
interference is without justification. Apostolic succession in-
volves apostolic independence; and Lamennais can urge that
when the edifice of freedom is threatened, the time is not ripe
for concession to the civil power. The church must revolve
on her own axis, and that the more proudly because of her
divine origin. The two works, though they excited but little
comment—Lamennais himself complains of the indifference
with which they were received‘—nevertheless are important
in that they reveal a thought that is already formed. They
did not, indeed, bring him reputation; nor did they still the
tormenting doubt of his vocation which still caused him deep
concern.” But they gave him a sense of his powers and were
to prove the stimulus to further effort.

He had, already, in 1809, been received into minor orders,
but he found no comfort in the thought of his priesthood.
Already his letters are full of that bitter sadness from which
he never obtained release. ‘JI n’y a plus pour moi,” he wrote,
“Pautre saison que la saison des tempétes;’ and the thought
was truer than he could then have conceived. He was uncer-
tain of his career. Moments of confidence were succeeded by
long periods of hesitation in which thinking and reading were
alike impossible.“ The earnest efforts of his friends could
bring no peace to his agitated mind. In 1812, he seemed de-
cided that the final step must be taken; but he could not
bring himself to act upon it. Meanwhile he continued to write.
In 1814, he published, just before the Hundred days a passion-


39 Thid., 265-8.

40 Cf. Blaize, “Oeuvres Inédites de Lamennais,” I, 108.

41 Spuller, op. cit., p. 55.

4 Blaize, op. cit. I, 106.

43 Cf. the pathetic letter printed in Roussel, “Lamennais,” I, 22 f.
4 Blaize, op. cit., I, 107.

4 Ibid., I, 89.

46 Forgues, ‘‘Correspond.”’ I, xvi.


198 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


ate attack on the university as a servile instrument of the state.
He re-edited the “Tradition de l’ Eglise” and made it the
occasion of a vehement attack upon the emperor.” He dreamed
of a journal which should support the papal cause. He
thought of spending his days with his brother in perpetual
collaboration.” But the mood soon passed. Even the Res-
toration gave him no pleasure; it was but the exchange of a
strong tyrant for a feeble despot. -He disliked the antagonism
of the Gallican bishops to Rome.” Ultramontanism seemed to
him the one sure means of restoring Catholicism to its rightful
position in France. So he re-edited his “Réflexions” in such a
manner as to make more evident its Roman bias. A clergy
with its own means of subsistence obeying only the sovereign
and infallible pontiff seems to him now the one sure means of
success.” It was the begining of that tremendous assault which-
sought to rewin for Rome the ancient dominion she had lost.

But the dream was not to last. Napoleon suddenly returned
from Elba, and Lamennais, convinced that he was in personal
danger, fled to England. He found little consolation there. His
friendship with the abbé Carron, indeed, strengthened his reso-
lution to enter the priesthood, and he seems even to have
thought of a missionary enterprise in America. But Napoleon’s
effort was broken into pieces at Waterloo; and Lamennais’
return to France made his path inevitable.

But it was with a bitter heart that he strengthened himself
for the last step. There is in his letters no sign of any gladness,
no admission of any satisfaction. Rather does it seem to have
been a response to the urgency of his friends. If it caused. him
anguish, they seemed even happy that he should be thus given
so splendid an opportunity of self-sacrifice. He was almost
dragged to the altar by his brother and the abbé Carron; and

47 See esp. “Tradit.,” II, 306-8. M. Maréchal places their composition in
1813. “Jeunesse de Lamennais,” p. 423.

48 Blaize, 1, 136.

49 Blaize, I, 168.

50 Ibid., I, 150.

81 Tbid., 1, 170.

2 “Refléxions” (ed. of 1814), p. 96.

5 Blaize, op. cit., I, 215.

51 Tbid., I, 259.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 199


there is no single fact to contradict the view that his decision
was in truth wrung from him against his will. Nor is it less
certain that for him the step seemed to end all prospect of his
happiness.*© But it was, at any rate, a decision, and from the
knowledge that it was irrevocable he may have derived some
comfort. Henceforth, he was dedicated to the church and it was
his function to do honour to her service. It was partly to drown
the memory of his pain, partly, perhaps, that he might by
work convince himself, that he took up with vigour his old po-
lemic. A new era had dawned for France; and it might be
that he could shape it to his purposes.


Ill. EARLY ULTRAMONTANISM,


Ir the Bourbon restoration seemed a triumph for the Catholic
Church, it was, in truth, a victory to which the facts themselves
had set conditions. It was true that everywhere the union of
throne and altar seemed the indispensable condition of national
safety.” Nor was it likely that men who had suffered so piti-
able an exile would allow the ideals of the Revolution to obtain
political or religious expression. But two fundamental facts
stood in the way of a restoration of the ancien régime. The
Charter was a guarantee of religious toleration; without it
Louis XVIII could never have returned to the French throne.
Whatever privileges the Catholic Church might, in the future,
receive, it could not, as in the past, be the religious body to
which the French State extended a unique protection. It would
be compelled to endure the criticism of other religious societies
which were no longer excluded from political existence. Nor
was this all. The Charter had pledged Louis to the irrevoca-
bility of the sale of those national possessions in large part de-
rived from ecclesiastical confiscation; and if this meant any-
thing it meant that the restoration of church wealth would
depend upon the doubtful generosity of an almost bankrupt


state.
Nor was it a united church which returned to power. While


55 Cf. Spuller, op. cit., p. 87.
56 Cf. the tragic letter in Blaize, op. cit., I, 263.
57 See, for instance, the remarks of the Bishop of Troyes in “L’Ami de


la religion,” I, 101.


200 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


men like Lamennais urged that ultramontanism had been justi-
fied by the experience of the Revolution, there were not wanting
able and influential men who insisted on the rectitude of Gallican
theories. The French clergy, as a body, would admit neither
papal absolutism nor papal infallibility.*® They relied on the
generosity of the crown as the bulwark of their future. They
had no sympathy with the Romanising tendencies of de Maistre
and of Bonald. They were satisfied with the régime of a charter
which, whatever its defects, had declared Catholicism the reli-
gion of the state. They were content to believe that historic
necessity would result in the restoration of what the Revolution
had destroyed. They had none of the intractability of the
Petite Eglise; they lacked the deep sense of corporate independ-
ence by which the Ultramontanes were distinguished. Where
they erred was in their failure to perceive that the promises of
the Charter were a fundamental stumbling-block in the path-
way of their dreams. Whatever they might in substance a-
chieve—and of concessions they were to have a plethora—the
formal recognition of their desires had become impossible.
Louis XVIII might love to call himself the eldest son of the
Church, but he was a son who by no means recognised the
patria potestas. The spirit of criticism had gone too far to make
it possible for their ideas to obtain acceptance. Their ambition
was bound up with an age that was past. The future of the
Church lay with newer conceptions.


It was the signal merit of Lamennais to have perceived, even
before the Restoration, that it did not, in fact, promise real
hope for the church. The Revolution had taught him the
futility of placing confidence in the state. He suspected its
motives, and he felt that it was guilty of a silence upon eccle-
siastical problems which, indicated its lack of identity with
the interests of Catholicism.*! The fundamental problem was
the general indifference to religious matters which character-
ised the age. If the temper of the people remained profoundly


58 Cf. Frayssinous, “Les Vrais Principes de l'Eglise Gallicane’’ (ed.
of 1826), p. 89.

59 Debidour, op. cit., p. 332.

60 Cf. Blaize, op. cit., I, 152, 159, 170, 177.

61 Blaize, op. cit., i, 201.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 201


Catholic, it did not find expression in dogmatic channels. The
essential task was to analyse the conditions of such an attitude
and to attempt their remedy. Chateaubriand had, indeed,
sketched in magic prose the glories of Christianity; but he
had conveyed an emotion rather than resolved a problem.”
What Lamennais desired was to indicate the means whereby
the Catholic church might regain its institutional integrity.
It was without reference to the state that he desired to write.
He would consider men as members of his church, and discuss
the terms upon which its empire might be restored. The
“Essay on Indifference in Matters of Religion” was published at
the end of 1817, and its result was to make Lamennais the first
theologian in France. Forty thousand copies were sold in a
few months. The veteran de Maistre wrote of it with pas-
sionate enthusiasm,“ nor were Chateaubriand and Bonald
less generous in their praise. If there were some who detected
grounds for theological suspicion, most men, as Lacordaire has
told us,® looked upon its author as a new Bossuet. Hence-
forward he was the uncontested chief of the Ultramontane
party; and the government itself was anxious to win the
adherence of one who had thus, in a single day, attained so
notable a fame.”

The plan of the book is simple in the extreme. It is an
attempt to show that social salvation depends upon the su-
premacy of Catholicism, and it demands intolerance as the
price of that victory. It is the work of a man disturbed by the
bewildering lack of unity in his time. Everywhere there is
indifference to fundamental dogma; everywhere men have
erected their system of private alternatives. On all sides there
is an evident neglect of spiritual truth. Reason and the senses
fight once again their eternal combat. But the fight against
reason is the fight against order;® and the result has been the


62 Cf. Spuller, op. cit., p. 92.

& Boutard, “Lamennais,” I, 152.

64 “Oeuvres,” XIV, 224.

6 Boutard, op. cit., I, 152-4.

66 “Considerations sur le système philosophique de M. de Lamennais,”
Ch. I.

67 Blaize, op. cit., I, 285.

£8 “Essai,” I, 9 (ed. Gannier).


202 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


pitiful lack of moral and political certitude. He does not,
indeed, claim that this is a novel situation. Christianity—
which for him is the combination of the spiritual truths thus
far known to man—has struggled continuously to secure the
paramountcy of reason. It fought the selfish interests of
imperial Rome; it triumphed over the persecutions of the
decadent pagans; the attacks of protestant sects revealed the
unbreakable strength ofits foundations. Deism, atheism,
philosophy—all these have left it unmoved.’”°

But the age in which he lives differs from its predecessors in
the contempt for all belief by which it is characterised. La-
mennais insists on the danger of this attitude. Action is the
consequence of opinion, and when we know the faith of men
we can predict their conduct.” Every idea reacts upon the
social structure.”2 But every doctrine, being as it is either
right or wrong, is therefore, of necessity, dangerous or bene-
ficial to the well-being of society. The essential basis of an
adequate social order Christianity had, at any rate before the
Reformation, been able to supply. It had given a sanction to
obedience. It had purified the customs of men. From its
fountain the law had drawn its strength.” But with the Ref-
ormation there came a change. It was-no longer admitted that
authority was the basis of faith, and intellectual libertinism
had replaced it. The Divine reason had been compelled to
abdicate, and the human mind had not shrunk from the sac-
rilege of replacement.” Each man had become intellectual
emperor over himself, and the spirit of independence erected
anarchy into a social principle. It is obvious that society
cannot acquiesce in its virtual annihilation.

The indifference he castigates so passionately has taken dif-
ferent forms in the life about him. Some deny religion for
themselves, but admit its political value. They regard it as
an admirable means of popular restraint. But Lamennais

69 Thid., p. 11.

70 Tbid., p. 12-18.

1 Ibid., p. 30.

32 Ibid., p. 31.

3 Ibid., p. 33.

%4 Ibid., p. 35.

5 Ibid., Ch. II.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 203


has no patience with this atheism. It cannot, so he claims,
account for religious origins. It cannot explain the universal
basis of society in religion.” It cannot explain the strength
of the religious sanction not less in politics than in law.” He
insists on the evil of the hypocrisy that would force upon men
a faith in fact untrue.” Nor will he admit the natural religion
of Rousseau. Humanity, he urges, has never been content
with deism which is, in fact, only the vestibule of atheism.”
It is no more satisfactory in its social result, and he cannot re-
sist from heaping contumely upon its foremost representative.
He does not, moreover, find Protestantism any less unsatis-
factory. It is the apotheosis of religious individualism. It
destroys the unity of the church.* It has no answer to those
who, like itself, take their stand upon the teaching of scripture.®
It cannot have fundamental articles—whether sentiment or
unanimity, or the admission of decisive significance. It in
fact denies the inspiration of God by substituting for his guid-
ance the results of human interpretation. But, as a conse-
quence, it leads in the end to atheism; for both claim to speak
in the name of reason, and they are alike confounded by its
social inadequacy.


He had thus; in substance, denied the logic of any attitude
distinct from that of Catholicism. What he had next to at-
tempt was the constructive demonstration of its necessity.
He had to show that religion was socially invaluable, and that
by religion could only be understood the position he himself
maintained. The end of man is happiness; but the condition
of happiness is repose. Here is the first reason of religious
utility for without it there is no contentment. Surely the


16 “Oeuvres” (ed. of 1834), i, 32.
11 Ibid., 34.

78 Ibid., 35-8.

79 Ibid., Ch. IV and V.

80 Ibid., Ch. VI and VII.

81 Tbid., I, 62 f.

82 “Oeuvres,” I, 60.

Sbid., 1, Go f-

84 Ibid., I, 73 f.

85 Ibid., I, 82.


204 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


cause of such a pronouncement is to be found in Lamennais’
own troubled soul. He had gone into the church that he
might find peace. It was then but natural that he should in-
sist upon its splendour. But repose can come only when man
has discovered the laws of his being. Without them men cannot
realise their end. But those laws are religion and it is thus
that without religion men cannot attain their end. Philosophy
is useless for that purpose. What it does is to make of man a
God, and thus to destroy the bonds of social existence.** That
is an attitude socially impossible. All that we are, all truth
that we can know, comes in its origin from God.” We have
to put trust in him simply because from nowhere else is to be
derived the certitude and faith which are the conditions of
existence. The result of religion is thus to put man in a
right relation to his environment. It assures that order and
fixity he so passionately desired. It centralises his life, and the
great object of human endeavour must be the discovery of
unity. That, indeed, is, for him, the whole object of order.*®
To see life in terms of a single principle was to see it in the one
context that is socially adequate.


But unity demands its conditions. It can only be estab-
lished by a system of relations. It necessitates the abolition
of interstices. The structure of society must be monistic.??
Lamennais has little difficulty in showing that this demands
an hierarchical organisation. The individual must be sacri-
ficed simply because he has no interest except in relation to
the larger whole. The real unit, in fact, is society itself and man
becomes no more than a fragmentary moment of its existence.*!
But the equilibrium must be maintained and power is its in-
strument. It is, indeed, the fatal error of philosophy that it
destroys that power; for when it proclaims the self-mastery
of men it in fact removes the foundation of authority. No


8 Tbid., I, 85.
87 Ibid., I, 90.
88 Tbid., I, 91.
89 Thid., I, 97.
% Thid., I, 98.
1 Thid.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 205


one will, he urges,” has any real right to assert its superiority
over another. That is the flaw in Rousseau’s social contract.
To make will the basis of society is at once to admit anarchy.
But to derive society from God, to coerce its elements into
oneness by the force of religion is to find a basis for the beliefs
he cherished so deeply. It is then not difficult to urge that
man exists for the glory of God and that the perfect and eternal
society is that in which the glory of God is most amply pur-
sued. The littleness of the individual beside so infinite an
end is clear; and Lamennais can take comfort in the pain that
he has suffered by the thought that he in fact ministers to a
harmony to which his very pain contributes.

It is here, moreover, that the church emerges; for man has
to relate himself to God, and it was through Christ that the
mediation was accomplished. But the fundamental achieve-
ment of Christ was the foundation of his church, and we have
then the text of the whole argument, For the church was
clearly founded that Christ might preserve those rules of social
order he had revealed in his gospel. When he confided their
preservation to the church he in fact entrusted it with the
government of society. He made it the vital link in that sys-
tem of relations which Lamennais had postulated as funda-
mental. That is why the denial of Catholic sovereignty is a
crime; for it is the denial through human pride of an order
established by God. All power, in its origin, must then be
derived from the church. It is the guardian of social relation-
ships. But the church means Rome, and Rome, as Lamennais
was soon to argue, means the Pope. So it was that he went
back to Rome that he might discover there the lordship of
the world.


IV. THE GLORIFICATION OF ROME


Ir is not difficult to trace the origin of the first section of his
essay.” To Bossuet and Pascal but, above all, to Bonald, it


21 bidari; 99.

%Tbid., I, 99.

94 Toid., I, 184.

% Tbid., 1, 137.

% Ibid- I, 139.

97 Cf. M. Maréchal’s fine analysis, op. cil., 577-634.


206 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


is immensely indebted. It reflects the general reaction from
individualism so characteristic of his age. Its exaltation of
authority, its insistence on philosophy as socially disruptive,
its translation of man into an entirely religious context—these
are the terms upon which Bonald and de Maistre had proposed
to rebuild the world. Like them, even if by implication only,”
it was to Rome that he was driven back for his answer. But
the book is everywhere distinguished by the magnificent orig-
inality of its spirit. No one save Lamennais could have
written it simply because it bears in every line the intense
expression of the bitter struggle through which he had lived.
His denial of the importance of the individual is simply the
self-knowledge that he must sacrifice his ambition to the de-
mand of his friends. His picture of the evils of philosophy is
the angry farewell to one of the delights of his youth, the
attempt to convince himself that the sacrifice has been worth
the making. The book, in fact, is essentially a personal docu-
ment. But it is also more than that. Its implications are far
more significant than the results it expressly declares. Lamen-
nais is laying the foundation of an argument of which the con-
clusion is an ecclesiastical imperialism based upon independence
of the state. He is, in truth, insisting that for centuries the
centre of world-importance—a centre, moreover, distinguished
in his eyes by the divinity of its origin—has been Rome. In
that aspect it is but a step to the demonstration that the
ecclesiastical federalism in which the Gallicans put their trust!
has no root jn historical reality. It subjugates the church to
the state. For if power is Roman in its derivation, there was
good ground for the tremendous claims of Gregory VII, and
the minimising efforts of 1682 are so much error. Such an
attitude, moreover, has even deeper immediate significance for


98 Lamennais, indeed, speaks with immense admiration for the latter
throughout his work.

9 It is to be noted that it was only later final attack on Gallicanism in
1825 and the following years that Lamennais expressly drew the obvious
conclusions from the “Essay on Indifference”.

100 A federalism, of course, which goes back to the conciliar movement.
Cf. Dr. Figgis’ classic analysis in “ From Gerson to Grotius” passim, but
especially pp. 16, 92.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 207


the France of his time. It condemns the Revolution out of
hand. It is the text-book of intolerance, for it proclaims the
importance of orthodoxy in its liberal meaning of correct doc-
trine. That is, perhaps, in some sort due to Lamennais’ own
character. Whatever he believed, it was essential for him to
believe wholeheartedly. He was above all things a great pam-
phleteer, and it was thus fundamental to his work that he
should be capable, granted’ his passionate temperament, of
seeing but a single side of any problem. The vivid eloquence
of the book gives it, even after a hundred years, a sense of
burning life which but little literature of its character possesses.
“Ce livre,” wrote de Maistre, “ce livre est un coup de
tonerre sous un ciel de plomb.” But that thunderclap was,
in truth, no more than’ the vague herald of the storm.

For a decade after the publication of the first part of the
“Essai” Lamennais, while he was never friendly to the French
state, was at any rate not in active opposition to it. Nor is
the reason far to seek. If the Bourbons did not yield to the
enormous pretensions of the church there was always hope of
their surrender. The history of the Restoration, indeed, is
little more than a continuous effort of the church to capture
the political machinery of France. If too much was not to be
expected from Louis X VIII—after all a good-humoured sceptic
of the eighteenth century!°—it was known that his heir dreamed
of nothing save a return to the golden days of the ancien régime.
And even Louis was willing to do much to efface the results
of the Revolution. The Concordat of 1817, whatever the
defects of its application was, after all, a great victory for the
church. An extensive attack was launched against the uni-
versity—in a sense not the least fundamental of all Revolu-
tionary institutions.!% The Jesuits came out of their hiding-
places and made of the Rue du Bac a seat of government which
challenged comparison with that of the crown.! Missions

10. Boutard, op. cit., I, 152.

102 Cf, Debidour, op. cit., p. 331.

10 It is indeed possible to make the struggle for educational control
between church and state the central thread in the history of France since
- the Revolution. Cf. the admirable book of Grimaud, “Histoire de la


liberté d’enseignement”’ (1898).
14 Cf, G. de Grandmaison, ‘‘La Congregation,” passim.


208 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


and congregations multiplied with extraordinary rapidity.
Members who sat on the Parliamentary Commission which
examined the Concordat of 1817, did not hesitate, as a duty,
to inform the Pope of its proceedings.!% When it became clear
that the project, in its original form, did not meet with the
approval of the Chamber, its amelioration was effected by an
act of grace from Rome and, even then, not through the ordi-
nary diplomatic channels, but by a representation to the
French government by the Grand Almoner of the French
church.!% When the Concordat of 1817 was finally abrogated,
the clergy did not hesitate to stigmatize a ministry of which,
from its own point of view, the sole fault was surely no more
than weakness, as atheist in character.” Men like Bonald
even affirmed that the creation of new bishoprics—in part, at
least, a financial matter—depended not at all upon the wishes
of the Chamber, but entirely upon negotiation between Louis
and Rome.! When Richelieu resigned in 1821, it was per-
missible to doubt whether the state had not been reduced to
the police department of the church.

It was as a journalist fighting for these ends that Lamennais
is remarkable in these years. But he was clearly dissatisfied
with the hesitations of the government.!° He seems to have
considered that the end of its weakness must be a new and more
terrible revolution. So that he was not illogical in giving his
support to those who were fighting for the most extreme claims
the church could put forward.!° But association with Villéte
and Chateaubriand inevitably meant the confusion of religious
with political ends, and upon the latter Lamennais had no
opinions. It is clear, moreover, that Lamennais disliked the
use of religion as a political weapon. The extreme Right had,
after all, ends to serve which made the religious question only
a single aspect of its policy; nor was he certain that in those


1% Debidour, op. cit., 353.

106 Thid., 355.

wrid Soi.

108 Tbid., 361.

109 Cf. the letter of November 10, 1819, to Benoit D’Azy Laveille, op. cit.
p. 83.

uO Boutard ella:


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 209


other aspects he agreed with its aims. He had already come
to regard opposition to the political results of the Revolution
as impossible!" His own thought was almost exclusively oc-
cupied with very different things.

What, obviously, he was trying to do was to work out the
principles upon which the French church could be regarded
as itself a state—or rather part of the Roman Catholic state—
of which the French government must not diminish the sover-
eign rights. He denies, for example, the right of the Minister
of the Interior to ask for account of its charitable donations;!2
that is simply, for him, the irrelevance of unnecessary despot-
ism. He insists that Gallican doctrine is subversive of the
government of the church; and to postulate the inferiority of
the Pope to the canon law he identifies with a spirit of license
and rebellion.’ He admits that the exercise of the clerical
function is. essential to the welfare of the state; but he is
anxious for the church to build up, by means of foundations,
its own revenues rather than depend upon official subvention."
He wishes to free the sacrament of marriage from its connexion
with the civil law; for the marriage of Catholics concerns only
the church which does not extend the admission of legitimacy
to any other act of union. He seeks to free the observance
of Sunday from any reasons that are not purely religious in
character." When a Protestant is prosecuted for his failure
to place a carpet before his hovse on the occasion of a religious
procession, Lamennais agrees with the accused that the ex-
tension of toleration under the charter releases the state from
any attempt to assist the church.” The state, he insists, is
now non-religious in character, and where there is not complete
fusion it is necessary that there should be the recognition of
complete independence. So the civil authority may not force
upon the church the burial of those who have violated its laws.”


11 Laveille, op. cil., p. 94, letter of March 2, 1820.
12 “Oeuvres,” I, 604.

13 “Oeuvres,” I, 606.

u4 “ Oeuvres,” I, 614.

15 “Oeuvres,” I, 616-23.

us Thid., I, 625.

u7 Tbid., I, 626.

us Tbid., I, 618.


210 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


The church has its own code of legislation and its self-suffi-
ciency must be recognised." From the principles of religious
freedom that the charter has consecrated he draws the inference
that the right to form associations is fundamental; for without
them the Catholic church cannot prosper.!”2° Because man be-
longs to two societies, the religious and the civil, his education
is the function of both alike; but he denies that government
can in any sense act as the controlling agent in the process.
The real decision must rest with the family, whose rights in
this aspect no government may invade.'!” Clearly he is seek-
ing to make of the allegiance of men to his church a thing in
nowise distinct from that which the state may demand.

Nor is other proof of this attitude lacking. His interpreta-
tion of the Concordat of 1817 casts a special illumination upon
his doctrines. The royal nomination to the bishoprics it estab-
lished he looks upon as the concession made of grace by one
sovereign to another.’% It would, in his view, be impossible
for the Chamber to create bishoprics or to define their functions.
“Un pareil pouvoir,” he declared,’ “. . . serait une
sacrilège véritable de l’autorité oriwa He goes even
further. He denies that the Chamber. had the right to deal
with the Concordat at all. In his view, the virtual withdrawal
of that agreement was due not to its refusal by the represen-
tatives of the people, but by their unwillingness to provide
the funds for its application. The Concordat itself he regards
as no more than a piece of private legislation for the Roman
church which the Pope, out of courtesy, had communicated to
the king of France. Certain relations between the two required
a readjustment of financial arrangements, but that was all.
The analogy between this conception and the Catholic inter-
pretation of Wiseman’s famous pastoral of 1851,!” is of course


19 Tt is interesting to compare this situation with the similar contro-
versy in England over the Deceased Wives’ Sisters Act. Cf. my “Problem
of Sovereignty,” p. 118 n: 23.

120 Thid., I, 629 f.

121 Tbid. I, 649.

12 Ibid., I, 656.

123 “Oeuvres,” II, 123.

VAT bid.

2 Cf. my “Problem of Sovereignty,” p. 145 f.


PUTHBORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 211


clear. Each looks upon the church as containing within itself
all the essential elements of a state. That the field of terri-
torial action is the same as that of the state proper it regards as
unessential; for the content of its regulation is purely mental
in character. But insofar as men give allegiance to the papal
crown it has the right to exercise a sovereignty over them.
“Le Christianisme,” he wrote,” “est une société . . . . mais
‘point de société sans pouvoirs et sans devoirs, sans commande-
ment et sans obéissance; donc il existe un pouvoir et des de-
voirs spirituels, une autorité ayant droit de commander aux
esprits, qui sont tenus de lui obéir . . . . qui n’admit pas
un pouvoir souverain, perpétuel et permanent, ou ne s’entend
pas, ou nie l'Eglise.” Obviously, such a conception of the
church leaves no room for secular interference. Rather does
it almost challenge it by the infinite power to which it lays
claim. And that was the more inevitable since Lamennais
makes continual insistence of the necessity of religion to the
state. At the same time to deny the state the right to sug-
gest conditions upon which that relation may be established
is virtually to deny the right of the state to settle the terms
upon which it may exist.

Not even from that conclusion did Lamennais shrink. The
state has to decide between atheism and religion. If it chooses
to admit the latter it must not attempt the control of its asso-
ciations. It must submit, where the influence of the church
is concerned, to the discipline it demands.!”” That is, in effect,
to submit to the Pope; for he accepts with eager gladness the
conclusion of de Maistre that the power of the sovereign pontiff
is illimitable.8 To put one’s confidence in councils is not
merely heretical, but even destructive of the basic conception
of the church. For the church above all things is an unity, and
to suggest a power above, or concurrent with, that of the Pope
is to destroy that unity.’ So he does not hesitate to define
religious liberty as obedience to the civil power and to argue


126 “Oeuvres,” Ii, 129. The article is particularly important as it is an
enthusiastic review of de Maistre’s‘‘Du Pape” which had then just appeared.

127 Oeuvres,” II, 156 ff.

28 Tbid., II, 135.

129 Thid., II, 134.


212 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


that liberty is greatest where that obedience is most complete."
To free man from religious obedience seems to him not different
from his erection into God; for from whom does power originate
if not from God?! He denies the sovereignty of the people
because its consequence is the subversion of all social order,
and a doctrine cannot be true of which the results are so dis-
astrous.82 So, too, tolerance becomes impossible; for it makes
of power the plaything of ambitious pride, and thereby destroys
at once its object and its function.!8

It is a powerful assault against both individualism and the
foundations of the modern state. But what it lacked was the
demonstration—which neither Bonald nor de Maistre pro-
vided—that individualism is as a fact defective in its philo-
sophic foundations. It was easy to dismiss the right of free
enquiry as the basis of belief; but the real necessity was to
show wherein its error consisted. It was to that task that
Lamennais addressed himself in the second part of the “Essai
sur l’indifférence’”’ which he published in 1821. The volume,
indeed, made nothing like the sensation of the earlier portion;
and so careful a judge as Barante seems to have found it
tiresome.!*4 But the book has an important place in the intel-
lectual history of Lamennais since the theory by which he
sought to refute individualism, is, in fact, that which contrib-
utes most singularly to the destruction of his ultramontane
ideas. It is in reality Cartesianism that he is attacking. The
philosophic analogue of protestantism, it is the parent of social
disorganisation. So immense was the authority of Descartes
that practically unaided he had given a passport to rationalism
in theology. What Lamennais strove to show was the bank-
ruptcy of philosophy, its inability to solve the central problems
by which man is faced. He urges that the core of life is, in
fact, not doubt but certainty and that the basis of this certainty


Bood. ILGS:

BUToid., MSG:

182 Tbid., II, 188. In this he agrees with the famous speech of Chateau-
briand, Journel Officiel, 25 February, 1823.

1383 Tbid., II, 193.

souvenirs, Vol. IIT p. 120: CHp 28:

185 MRa A Pt. 11, Ch, 1.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 213


is the unanimous testimony of men. In such an aspect, truth
is easily obtainable. It is no more, but no less, than the gen-
erality of men believes. It is not a system that he expounds.
What he does is to take those dogmas most necessary to his
system and to proclaim their truth by the demonstration of
their common acceptance. Men have‘faith in God, and
therefore God exists." The religion which rests on the broad-
est basis of visible authority is the Roman Catholic which there-
fore is the most incontestably true.%8 But if it is true it must
be revealed from God; and: that is to give it the authority
it had claimed for its principles in the earlier portion of his
essay.

Of the philosophic weakness of such an argument it is not
necessary here to speak.° It occasioned the most vehement
controversy, and there were not a few who regarded it as hereti-
cal. The fundamental point was the fact that it left open the
road to liberalism. For Lamennais, after all, had only to con-
vince himself that the majority of men disbelieved in ecclesias-
tical conservatism to be able to urge its untruth. At the moment
he might be the defender of ultramontane doctrine, but it was
the defence of a passionate individualist who thought that most
men believed it was right simply because he did so himself.
Rome, indeed, gave a tacit admission of the theological recti-
tude of his doctrines by permitting the appearance of an Italian
translation. Whatever Rome may lack, she has the virtue
of abundant patience; and she was content to tolerate the un-
certainties of theological novelty where the political conse-
quences were at the moment so beneficial.

Meanwhile, the political situation was giving new determin-
ation to the extreme royalists while it made the radicals more

Tee Works: TAITI T.

137 Tbid., I, 186 f.

138 Thid., I, 229 f.

149 Tbid., L237, f.

140 Cf. Janet, “La philosophie de Lamennais,” p. 26 f, and Ferraz, op. cit.,
II, 180-210.

11 Cf, Laveille, op. cit., p. 121. Letter of November 9, 1821, and Bou-
tard, op. cit., Vol. I, Ch. XIV.

42 “Correspond” (ed. Forgues), I, 41 f, and Cf. Boutard, I, 217, for a list
of distinguished Catholics who accepted it.


214 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


desperate. The seeds of the Revolution would have their harvest
and if the retirement of Decazes meant the surrender of the king
to the Right, it was evident enough that the intransigeance of
that party was leading to disaster. Lamennais, certainly, did
not deceive himself. The violence of the ministry seemed to him
to be no less threatening than that of the Revolutionaries;
and he found their theory of a state-religion in every sense
embarrassing. Between political atheism amd spoliation he
was not anxious to make a choice. The only sure remedy was
the frank adoption of Christianity as the basis of society, and
for that step the government lacked the necessary courage.”
It was impossible, as he urged,* to give any sanction to au-
thority without the establishment of a régime almost anti-
thetic to that of the Restoration. He saw fear and jealousy as
the guardians of national policy.” The principles of the Holy
alliance seemed to him worthless; and already he foretold the
onset of a new revolution.“@ The dislike of the Jesuits seemed
to render impossible a genuinely religious policy such as he
desired.“ When men like Courier and Béranger were willing to
undergo prosecution for their cause the unity he cherished was
clearly far-off. The press might be controlled; but the passion-
ate opposition of the liberals showed that patience would have
its limits. It was easy to attack such papers as showed a
contempt for the State religion, and to deliver up the university
to the priests. But each step that was taken only showed more
clearly how utterly the old régime had passed. Guizot and
Cousin might cease to lecture;! but it was impossible perman-
ently to silence such men. Nor did the Spanish policy of the
ministry prove as efficacious as might have been desired. The
restoration of absolutism might be preached as a crusade, but

143 “Corresp. entre Lamennais et Vitrolles,” p. 86. I cite this volume as
Vitrolles.

144 “Vitrolles,” p. 93.

145 Tbid., 99.

146 Tbid., 100.

147 Tbid., 120.

48 Jbid., p. 125, letter of Jan. 1, 123 cf., p. 132.

149 Laveille, op. cit. 164, letter of Jan. 24, 123.

150 Debidour, op. cit. 369.

151 Bardoux Guizot,” p. 34.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 215


the war was everywhere realised to be a disastrous failure which
served only to make more evident the impossibility of royalist
extremism. Lamennais might justify the Inquisition; but he
knew in his heart the folly of such efforts. So high did passion
run that the minister of the interior actually invited the clergy
to preach Gallican doctrines, and particularly the articles of
1682, in the vain hope of assuaging men’s anger.4 When
Charles X mounted the throne in the autumn of 1824 the cler-
ical party may have obtained the king it desired; but it was the
tragedy of his accession that his ideas made a successful reign
impossible. For Charles was still the Count d’Artois and he
was incapable of understanding the age in which he was to rule.
The man of Coblentz could not govern a France which had
tasted the sweets of Revolution.

The demands of the clerical party, in fact, were inconsistent
with the charter which had been the express condition of the
Bourbon restoration. What churchmen like Clermont-Ton-
nerre desired was simply the absorption of the state by the
church; and if his audacious programme resulted in his prosecu-
tion, it was symptomatic of the temper of his party. Charles’
ministers might draw up new projects of a code of sacrilege in
the manner of the middle ages; but in the long run they could
not meet the arguments of men like Constant and Royer-
Collard.” The king might be given power to authorise by
ordinance the establishment of new congregations.® But this
in fact, was not a church-policy to which Lamennais could give
his adhesion. It was Gallican to the core since it emphasised
by its very nature the dependence of the church on the goodwill
of the king. Villéle with his law of sacrilege seemed to him like
the serpent tempting Eve in Paradise. It seemed less like

182 “Works,” I,.193.

153 As the whole of his correspondence with Vitrolles from 1822-4 makes
evident.

154 Debidour, op. cit. 376.

155 Tbid.


156 Tbid., 379.
157 See his great speech in Barante, Royer-Collard, TI, 242 f, and the


following essay.
158 Debidour, op. cit. 383.
159 “Correspond” (ed. Forgues), I, 191, March 13, 25.


216 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


service to the church than an act of devotion to the crown.*°
“On pousse de toutes parts” he wrote,'“‘a une rupture avec
Rome et l'établissement d’une Eglise national, d’une Eglise
representative.” What he desired was an opportunity for the
church to live freely its own life. One may imagine that he felt
this the more keenly since his reception at Rome in the previous
year had been all that his heart could have desired; the man
who found in the workroom of the Pope no other decoration
save the image of the Virgin and his own portrait’ was not
likely to belittle the value of Roman influence, and that at a
time when Rome was more than suspicious of the Gallicanism
of French ecclesiastical policy.’

Nor, from his own standpoint, was he wrong in his suspicions.
The Gallican church had embraced the cause of royalism with
a fervour which suggested nothing so much as Anglican enthusi-
asm for the house of Stuart. Their bishops no less than their
priests seem to have convinced themselves that in the estab-
lishment of a royal despotism they would find the means of
ecclesiastical triumph. It is true that they did not hesitate to
make their victory the condition of their support; and it is
even possible to argue that many of them went further in their
demands than Lamennais himself would have done.'** But the
fundamental fact remained that they were satisfied to work out
their own salvation through the state. What they wanted was
the exclusive establishment of the ancien régime; and they in
no sense realised that they were separated from their ideal by
the flaming sword of the Revolution. Lamennais saw more
deeply and more truly. He was far from certain that the cause
of monarchy was destined to triumph;!® and he was unwilling
to prejudice the church by alliance with an institution which,


160 Tbid., I, 195, April 30, 25.

161 Tbid., I, 208, October 12, 25.

12 Boutard, op. cit. I, Ch. XVI. It is impossible to know how much
credence may be attached to the famous story that Leo XII made Lamen-
nais a cardinal in petto.

168 Artaud, “Hist. de Leon XII,” I, Ch. 20.

164 Cf. the judgment of Viel-Castel, “Hist. de la Restauration,” Vol.
XIV, p. 29.

16 “Corresp.”” (ed. Forgues), I, 208, October 13, 25.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 217


after all, would profit more than it would confer benefit by the
alliance. He was acutely conscious of the important dissensions
within the ranks of those who were eager to rebuild the ecclesi-
astical edifice. Clermont-Tonnerre might demand an ultra-
montanism expressed in terms of state-control; but there were
men who, like Montlosier,! while earnest supporters of a church
as the Jansenists conceived it, were yet bitter in their reproaches
of a government which, as they urged, had surrendered itself to
the clergy.'” In any case, he did not like the idea of state-
dependence. What he was convinced of was the power of the
church to stand on its own foundations. It could reach the
minds of men without the intervention of secular government.
It was to the demonstration of that fundamental belief that he
turned his energies.


V. THE ATTACK ON THE SECULAR STATE


Waar, clearly, Lamennais feared was the sovereignty of the
state; and it was to avoid its control over religious affairs that
he elaborated in his discussion of the relations between religion
and politics the basis of that theocracy which reached its inevit-
able culmination in the decrees of the Vatican Council. He
submits every sort and kind of question to the authority of the
church, and the judgment of the church he equates with the
papal judgment. The whole work, in fact, is a passionate pro-
test against the implicit federalism of 1682. He does not, like
de Maistre, attempt a historic justification of the ultramuntane
theory. Rather does he assert the simple doctrine that only,
as a practical question, in the unified sovereignty of Rome can
relief be found from the dangers by which the church is con-
fronted. Every idea which tends to discredit the necessity of
its unique control is, as he insists, a fatal blow at the whole
ecclesiastical structure. What, of course, he is attacking is
essentially the principles of liberalism. He attempts to dis-


166 See Bardoux’s able monograph, “‘ Montlosier et le Gallicanisme.”’

167 ““Corresp.” (ed. Forgues), I, 209.

168 The “De la Religion Considerée dans ses rapports avec Hordre poli-
tique et civil” was originally published in two parts, the first four chapters
as a volume in 1825 and the last set in 1826. I have discussed them as a
single work.


218 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


credit them by proof that they are the logical precursor of
anarchy. He denies the adequacy of any system which does not
base itself and its rights upon the authoritative pronouncement
of a single and supreme power. Without a centralised govern-
ment he believes that every safeguard of orthodoxy is open to
destruction. And since religion is the safeguard of the whole
social edifice, it is clear that upon the acceptance of ultramonta-
nism the salvation of society itself may without difficulty be
made to depend.}® l

Lamennais, at any rate, so makes it; and it is interesting to
reflect that when his own change of attitude was so near at hand
the starting-point of his attitude should have been a distrust of
democracy. The régime of the time he regarded as already—it
seems incredible enough—no more than a representative
republic,!” and it was with a grim picture of its defects that he
began his survey. The existence of the chamber he insisted
was already the division of the sovereignty of the state. The
king was no more than a great memory of the past. His func-
tions had passed from him to a ministry dependent upon Parlia-
ment. But that Parliament itself derived its powers from the
people, so that France was already that democracy which is the
source of political illusion.”? But democracy lacks stability.
It has no principles and it is irresistibly in a condition of per-
petual agitation. You cannot teach it. It is contemptuous of
authority and it trusts no one of superior talent. Those who
attain its favours are always the mediocre, and they win their
position by servility and dishonest adroitness. Democracy
destroys christianity; for the latter centres itself round the idea
of a single and supreme authority which is alien from the spirit
of democratic government. And while christianity is conser-
vative, democracy is by nature liberal so that there is already
a fundamental incompatibility. It is thus that he explains the
hostility of the Revolution to the church; for to strike at the
guardian of orthodoxy is to prepare the way for that egalita-
ranism which he regards as no more than the parent of universal


169 For a useful discussion of the whole work cf Janet op. cit. pp. 37-54.
170 ““Corresp.”’ (ed. Forgues), Vol. I, p. 209.

171 “Oeuvres,” II, 15.

12 [oido M, 16.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 219


confusion.'% There are, of course, minor confusions also,
corruption, the destruction of all sense of right, atheism and a
highly-flavoured type of despotic rule are sooner or later inevit-
able. Legislation means no more than the triumph of special
interests, administration is the victory of caprice and incoher-
ence.” There is no longer room for virtue, and the multipli-
cation of private speculation and invention results in the con-
fusion of public prosperity with the progress of civilisation.1”6

Such an exordium does not promise well for particularisation.
When he applies these generalities to the France of the Restora-
tion, it is at once clear to him that the state is atheist.” It is
true that the charter declares Catholicism to be the religion of
France, but these are words without meaning. It has become
essential to conciliate, and the real purpose of the charter can
no longer be maintained.’”® The result of this political atheism
has been to destroy the hold of religion on domestic society.
No one can now hope for a religious revival; indifference,
negligence, avowed disbelief are the characteristics of the time.!”
Public instruction has become a political institution; and Bos-
suet’s Defense of the articles of 1682 has become a text-book for
the young.!° The law has come to look upon religion simply as
a political weapon; it is now a thing to be administered, a
public establishment which is recognised out of courtesy because
some millions of French men happen to believe in a certain form
of it.48! It has thus become essential to regard Catholicism with
defiance, for-alone of all religions does it pretend to set limits to
the sovereignty of such anarchic doctrines.’ Protestantism is
in different case. Lacking as it does both dogma and discipline
it has no corporate bond. It is by its very nature destined to
dependence upon the ciyil power. But the duration of Cathol-

178 Tbid.

174 Tbid., 17.

175 Tbid., 18.

176 Thid., 19.

177 Tbid., Chap. II.

178 Tbid., 20-21.

179 Thid., 25 f.

180 Toid., 29.

181 Thid., 33.

182 Thid., 34.


220 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


icism would alone prove it to be the strongest of societies. It
has, however, other and decisive virtues. It is divine in its
institution and independent by its nature. It has its own hier-
archy, its own laws, its inalienable sovereignty: It has remained
unchanging from its origin. It has the noblest of.missions. It
teaches in the name of the greatest legislator of all. Whatever
of stability the modern world possesses it owes to the Catholic
church. Yet the exercise of its rights is hampered on every side
by jealous men; and they seek to dissolve its unity as a corpor-
ate force. In such a situation the one object of men’s efforts
must be the preservation of its oneness that it may remain as the
life-giving force of civilisation.}**

What, then, he has to.discuss are the conditions under which
the existence of Catholicism is possible. He fastens at once
upon its unity as the fundamental safeguard of its continuance.
For him the whole motive force of the church has been Rome.
It is he insists, 1 the constituting power of christianity. Only
the name of Rome deters the enemies of social order from their
fatal work. “Point de pape, point d’ Eglise,” and that whether as
a matter of history or of dogma. The church is a corporation in
which true religion finds its resting place.!5 But,fundamentally,
as it has been universal and perpetual, so it has been always one.
But it could not be one unless it had a centre of unity, and that
centre is to be found in the sovereign pontiff. So that.if the pope
is thus to be identified with the church—Ubi Petrus ibi ecclesia!*®
—the consequences are clear. The Pope must be infallible and
none must contest his authority. He is a supreme monarch, for
once his decisions are called into question his sovereignty is
worthless. But the syllogism is more tremendous even than its
premiss. Point d’Eglise, point de christianisme. Idle dreamers
have thought to revise the religion of Christ by reforming the
church, but the result of their efforts has always been to destroy
the principles of religion itself.! For to deny a single dogma is
to destroy the structure of the whole; and what man cannot


183 Thid., 85.

184 Ibid., 44. The phrase is De Maistre’s.
185 Tbid., 47.

18 Ambrose’s comment on Psalm XL.

187 Tbid., 48.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 221


prove by his reason he must believe on faith.'8 So we are led
to our conclusion. Point de christianisme, point de reli-
gion . . . . et par conséquent point de société. Once we de-
clare ourselves independent of christianity duty is destroyed
and vague sentiment takes its place.'8? Everyone, as in his own
time, does as he pleases; the obligatory character of faith ceases
to bind the conscience of men. But thus to loose the bonds of
religion is to deprive society of the sanctions upon which its
existence depends. So to attack the pope is a crime against
society, an attempt at the destruction of the very principle of
civilisation.!°° That we may be men, we must, in such an analy-
sis, embrace ultramontane doctrine; and he will show from the
examination of its antithesis how deadly are the effects of its
rejection.

It is clear that in such an analysis whatever seems to diminish
the strength of papalism is a severe blow at the roots of the
church. Here is the real root of Lamennais’ distrust of Gal-
lican doctrine. It lays emphasis on the particular church in-
stead of the universal. It fore-shadows a federal instead of a
unitary organisation of its powers. What, above all, arouses
his distrust is the fact that Gallicanism is not ecclesiastical but
political in its origin.®! It may demand “‘liberties” forthe French
church, but it asks them only that the state may the more com-
pletely destroy its independence. Gallicanism speaks of liberty;
but the liberties of the church are rights that the pope concedes,
and he would not concede the freedom of doctrine or of govern-
ance to a body which cannot meet save by secular permission.1%
But his objections go even deeper. The real effort of Gallicanism
is summed up in two propositions each of which is fatal to
Catholicism. It asserts the independence of temporal sover-
eignty. It assumes the superiority of a general council to the
Pope. But he will admit neither of these conclusions. For to
assert the independence of temporal power is at once to assert
the duality of the world and thus to render impossible that reduc-


188 Thid., 49.
189 Thid., 50.
190 Thid., 52.
191 Thid., 53.
192 Ibid., 55.


222 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


tion to unity for which he was so anxious. Moreover since the
church and the church only is the source of the divine law such a
doctrine assumes that a law made by men is to rank as of equal
worth with what comes directly from God." It does not even
admit that God’s law must be supreme since it conferssovereign -
power upon what is by definition non-religious in nature. He
does not deny the existence of the two powers; but he insists
on the dogmatic and historical inferiority of the secular. Nor
will he admit that a council can control the papacy. That is to
establish a collective sovereignty and thus to transform the
church from the monarchy it ideally is into a republic such as
Rome or Venice.’ But a collective sovereignty is no longer
unified, and to postulate it is thus to destroy the fundamental
fact that the church is one.!® Lamennais embarks upon a long
and acrimonious dissection of the tendencies towards church
nationalism so notably represented in his time by bishops like
Frayssinous and laymen like Montlosier.%” He denies that
popes can ever err. He insists that the decrees of 1682 simply
deliver the clergy into the royal hands.’ But that is to weaken
the allegiance they owe to Rome, and to weaken that allegianceis
to destroy the corporate character of the church. It is therefore
not merely uncatholic, but in its very nature it is the kind of
church that tends to dependence upon the good will of the
state. Even in the France of the Restoration, that good will
is apparent in the lack of fixity in the relations between the
church and the government.?°° Today the church receives its
subvention, but no one knows the possibilities of the morrow.
The law passes an annual judgment upon the advisability of its
continuance; and its educational desires are frustrated by the
existence of the university. The whole mechanism of church
government, in fact, is operated tentatively and with difficulty

198 Thid., 57.

194 Thid., 61.

1% Tbid., 65.

196 Thid., 67.

197 Cf. Frayssinous, ‘Les Vrais Principes de |’Eglise Gallicane” (1818);
Montlosier, “De la Monarchie Française au ler Janvier,” 1824 (1824) and
Bardoux op. cit.

198 “Oeuvres” II, 73.


199 Cf. Chapter VIII, passim.
200 Thid., 85.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 223


when such continual account of the state has to be taken. It is
only in complete independence that the terms of a satisfactory
existence can be found.2

So he drives us back to the dreams of Hildebrand. There
is but one pope and all kings are his subjects. The Pope must
rule because, without his guidance there is no alternative but
anarchy.?” Where men erect themselves the judges of every
social dogma, the fall of civilisation is certain. He deems that
cataclysm already at hand; and it is to protect France against
its onset that he proposes this pitiless solution. But, as with
Bonald, Lamennais in nowise suggests the means by which
that solution is to be applied to events. Nothing is more fatally
easy than the diagnosis of social evils and their removal by
heroic remedies. Lamennais lived at a time when the principle
of authority could no longer command the widéspread assent
of men. If Royer-Collard and Guizot could find no comfort
in his theories, it was assuredly not because they were hostile
to the division of sovereign power. It was simply because an
immense political experience had taught men that the safe-
guard against its abuse was its partition. Lamennais was
striving to breathe new life into a loyalty that was already
dead. The alliance of throne and altar no longer possessed the
magic of the eighteenth century to support it; and he was
profoundly right in his insistence that in such a partnership the
throne would most greatly benefit. The dissolution of the
alliance would, as he urged, give the church a new sense of-
freedom. She would cease to be chained to the wheels of the
monarchic chariot. But the deduction from separation is not
supremacy. It is one thing to believe that Rome is mistress
of the world; but the fundamental fact remains that the
greater part of men are unwilling to concede her right to domin-
ion. He was right in his urgent assertion that Rome was a
world-state and that the attempt to federalise her governance
would be out of accord with her historic traditions. Rome has,
since the Conciliar movement at least,? been consistently

201 Cf. Chap. IX, passim.

202 Tbid., 93.

203 Cf. Figgis,‘‘ From Gerson to Grotius,” Lect. II. N. Valois “Le Pape
et le Concile” is a magnificent analysis of the whole attempt at, and failure
of, the revolution in organisation.


224 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


Austinian in temper. She has set the model for centralised
government, and not even the catastrophe of a Reformation
or a Revolution could sway her in the direction of change.
But she has been more and more compelled to surrender her
position as a temporal power. She has been more and more
compelled to confine her jurisdiction to the spiritual control
of those who are willing to submit to her guidance. Even in,
Lamennais’ own time she was losing that temporal expression
of her penalties which, in the middle ages, had made what we
now call the state, rank as no more than her constable. Luther
had a final retort to her claims when he invented the divine
right of kings.2 Effective she still might be within her sphere
—how effective the greatest of her advocates was himself
within a decade to learn. But the effectiveness of her effort
was no longer external; it had come to depend upon the con-
sent of men. Membership of the state was no longer condi-
tional upon baptism within her communion; and that, after
all, was the final blow to her widest claims.2% Her sovereignty,
in fact, had been reduced from the universality of pre-Reforma-
tion times to’a will, still, indeed, great, but now compelled to
struggle not so much to advance, as actually to maintain
its position. Men had freed themselves from the notion that
power is justified by the mere fact of its existence. They had
learne d—and it is here that Rousseau has a claim on our grati-
tude that we have still to pay—that the fundamental problem
in politics is not the description or maintenance of the organs
of authority but the inquiry into their legitimacy.2 In that
light the claims of Lamennais were already obsolete.

Where, indeed, there was much to be said for his attitude
was in his firm refusal to base his theory of social organisation
upon no other consideration than that of public policy. Here,
it is true, he was obviously medieval; for the abandonment of

204 Of course it is much earlier in origin; but what Luther did was
finally to make it effective as against Rome.

205 Cf. for this view or in its most extreme form the “Summa” of Augustinus
Triumphus (1473) X XVI, 5.

206 Cf. the remarks on the distinction between Montesquieu’s theories
and his own in the fifth book of the Emile; and for his insistence that force
gives no right the “Contrat Social” Bk. I, Chs. III and IV. I think T. H.
Green accepted this view. Works II, 396 f.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 225


the attempt to discover a natural order founded upon divine
right is the chief political characteristic of the modern world.
We ‘have come to see that not the least significant criterion
of any political structure is its expression in terms of the gen-
eral happiness of common men. It is, perhaps, a more terrestrial
standard than that which Lamennais adopts. He was above all
anxious that men should be right; and he meant by right the
acceptance of the extreme limits of Catholic doctrine. It is
obvious, of course, that intolerance is implied in such an atti-
tude and the modern rejection of intolerance seems based upon
two assumptions of which Lamennais could take no account.
Weare too uncertain of the truth of any spiritual interpretation
of life to give it the final sanction of complete authority; and
we find that the historical results of intolerance in no sense
justify its exercise. It is, in some sense, the banishment of
God from politics; and in that sense we live in an anti-theocratic
age. We have passed, as Mr. Figgis has finely pointed out,?”
“from the defence of rights to the realisation of right,” and
it is from actual experience that we give to right its modern
connotation. What Lamennais did not realise was the historic
fact that the multiplication of authority arose from exactly
that process. Catholicism had abused its powers; and in the
political no less than the religious sphere—he would, of course,
have denied the legitimacy of such separation—new institu-
tions arose to defend what men, if wrongly, at any rate sincerely,
had come to regard as fundamental. The very existence of
such diversity had relegated to the impossible the theory for
which he stood. The old high-prerogative notion of sovereignty,
three centuries of a history of which the Revolution was only
a dramatic climax, had securely slain. His own theory of cer-
titude by universal consent should surely have made him ap-
preciate the significance of that diversity of opinion he so deeply
regretted. But the time had not yet come when that realisa-
tion should be driven relentlessly into his soul.


VI. THE TRANSITION TO LIBERALISM


Ir was, at any rate, a striking protest; and if it met everywhere
27 From ‘“‘Gerson to Grotius,” p. 17. The whole lecture is. a very
precious possession.


226 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


with a doubtful reception?® it was yet a challenge which no
weak government dare allow to pass unanswered. That was
the more certainly the case since the very month before the
publication of its second part the veteran Montlosier had
charged the ministry with a cowardly surrender to the clerical
party and even if the accusation were only in part the
truth, yet Lamennais’ arraignment of the alliance between
throne and altar seemed to give colour to his pretensions.
The only step they deemed it possible to take was his prose-
cution; and his virtual acquittal,” after an argument in which
his counsel, the great Berryer, denied that the decrees of 1682
were a part of French law, was in every sense a personal tri-
imph.2 But it was noteworthy. that he had already arrayed —
against himself the episcopal powers of France. The bishops,
headed by Frayssinous, addressed a declaration to the crown
which was unexceptionally Gallican in sentiment; and it was
henceforth clear to Lamennais that neither from the crown
nor from the episcopate was help to be expected.

That is the real source of his later liberalism. Disappointed
by officialism in church and state, his only resource was the
general mass of men. But, as yet, he had other hopes. He
was still prepared to stake everything upon the action of Rome,
and his letters show how much he built upon the accession of
an energetic nuncio to the charge of French affairs.” Not
that he concealed from himself the gravity of the situation.
A long struggle was in front of him. From all sides there
poured forth acrimonious criticism of his principles.2 He
believed, indeed, that the body of the clergy was well-disposed
to him, and he still insisted on the glorious future of the church.”
But that made him the more insistent on the need for a direc-

208 Cf. Boutard, op. cit. I, 302-3.

209 “Memoire à consulter sur un système,” etc. (1826).

210 Tt is denied, not without some interesting evidence by Grandmaison
in his interesting work “La Congrégation.”

211 He was fined thirty francs.

212 See Lamennais’ own description of the trial in his “Corresp.” (ed.
Forgues), I, 246.

213 Boutard I, 334 f.

214 “Corresp.” I, 241.


216 See an account of these attacks in Boutard, I, 345 f.
216 ‘‘Corresp.”’ I, 253.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 227


tion of their enthusiasm. “Tous les yeux,” he wrote," “sont
fixés sur Rome . . . . quelle continue de se taire,
qui osera, qui pourra, parler?” ;

He had ceased to expect aid from the state. His condemna-
tion had completed in him a long process of disillusion. He
could not interpret it otherwise than as a determination upon
the part of government to use the church for its purposes. So
that Rome only was left, and it was upon the issue of that
confidence that his future depended. He seems to have thought
highly of the Pope, and though he declared that the idea of
a national church was in everyone’s mind, he did not doubt
that once a frank word came from Rome, the loyalty of the
provinces to the true conception of Catholicism would assert
itself.9 Rome, as he thought, could not long endure the
supervision of its decrees by the government.”° “So great was
the servility of the Gallican party that it had disgusted even
the honest liberals.. He was already prepared to believe that
they would lend a new support to his cause if Rome would
but do its duty. “Le monde a changé,” he wrote to a friend,”!
“il cherche un maitre: il est orphelin, il cherche un père. Le
trouvera-t-il? Voila la question.” For, on all sides, the ultra-
montane position was menaced. Men who held his opinions
were ruthlessly dismissed.”2 A society for the propagation of
pious books was attacked because he supported it.?3 Orders of
which the bishops did not approve were prevented from under-
taking missions. People even went so far as to whisper that
at Rome itself Lamennais’ opinions were held in little esteem.??4
It is little wonder that he should have begun to feel a deep
distrust of his opponents and that there should have crept
into his writings that note of acrimony which made a distin-
guished Jesuit protest against his bitterness.”° Even in the

217 Tbid., I, 257.

218 Tbid., I, 273.

29 Thid., I, 274.

20 Thid., I, 276.

21 Tbid., I, 288.

22 Thid., I, 279.

23 Thid., I, 270.

224 Ibid., I, 274. Cf. Boutard, op. cit. I, 350..

25 Thid., I, 355.


228 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


Jesuits he had lost all confidence. Attacked as the society was
on all sides, it had not ceased to intrigue with every party; and
its declared ultramontane opinions were, for him, no excuse
for the hatred it engendered in the minds of honest men.”
The nuncio listed with politeness to his expositions of policy;
but his responses seem to have been no more than diplomatic
expressions of the papal difficulties.” If the ideas for which he
stood sponsor were gaining widespread acceptance he still
feared greatly the influence of authority against them.”

More and more he was driven to distrust the state. “Il
faut d'avance,” he said, “poser les bases d’une nouvelle
societé . . . . Cest folie de compter sur les gouverne-
ments qui ne sont plus des gouvernements, qui ne peuvent
plus le redevenir. Il sagir de faire des peuples.” It is a note
which constantly recurs. Government might attempt the con-
trol of the press,” but he saw in it only a weapon by which
ultramontanism might receive its deathblow. He was appalled
at the incapacity of the clergy. Only a great reform could
effect the requisite change.”*! More and more he feared that
religion had ceased to exercise an influence over the minds of
men. Europe had become simply a vast alliance of the strong
against the weak and a system of principles gave way to a
system of interests. Only when they regained their empire
would it be possible to hope. Only one man could draw the
attention of the peoples to their existence, and he was silent.?22

That silence is the fundamental fact in Lamennais’ transi-
tion to liberalism. Rome seemed to him too temporising in
her attitude.” If she showed signs of compromise, that would
be false to the future.%4 A new generation was arising which
needed her direction. The progress of revolutionary ideas was
evident on every hand. The government interfered with in-

226 ““Corresp.’”’ (ed. Forgues), I, 295.

27 Tbid., I, 298-9.

228 Ibid., I, 309.

29 Ibid., I, 310-1.

230 Debidour, op. cit. 397 f.

31 Vitrolles, p. 180.


232 Spuller, op. cit. 144. ‘Corresp.” (ed. Forgues), I, 348-9.
233 Ibid., I, 436.
234 Ibid., I, 466.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 229


creasing enthusiasm in clerical affairs. Speed, above every-
thing, was necessary to the church’s safety. ‘Une immense
liberté,” he wrote towards the close of 1828, “est indispensa-
ble pour que les vérités qui sauveront le monde.” But that
liberty could come only when Rome should speak. Lamennais
did not understand the thousand political considerations which
were the cause of her silence. He was asking her to devote
herself to spiritual empire alone; but that was to invite her
to surrender a faculty of temporal interference to which she
held firmly. Nor did he yet understand that for Rome he was
himself less the guardian of a truth which meant everything
to her future than the head of a party within the French church
of which the success was more than doubtful. Rome would
probably have agreed to many elements in his programme.
But she must have realised that what he demanded”* she
would not attain without a struggle far more bitter than La-
mennais can even have dreamed. He was, after all, free; and
he could follow his principles to their logical conclusion. But
Rome had a hundred warring interests to conciliate and in-
numerable traditions to obey. In the result, an abyss devel-
oped inevitably between their views. His influence was grow-
ing and many of the younger generation were rallying to his
side. The “Ecole Menaisienne”’ was already conceived at the
end of 1828. Men like Gerbet and de Salinis were already
his firm friends. Little by little he was coming to see that
authority, even in the church, may be poisoned at its source.
It was with this feeling already deeply rooted that he pub-
lished, early in 1829, his “Progrès de la Révolution.”

It is not so complete a rupture with his earlier views as he was
presently to make; but the book marks in a real sense the
birth of liberal Catholicism and there are few of its doctrines
one may not implicitly find there. In a society that is really
Christian, Lamennais points out, the unity of the people is
secured by spiritual ties; as they submit to the prince so should
they submit to God.”’ But from the time when Louis XIV


235 Tbid., I, 486.

2336 His programme is briefly summarised in the letter of Jan. 26, 1828.
“Corresp.’”’ (ed. Forgues), I, 416.

237 “Oeuvres,” II, 242.


230 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE.


proclaimed the destruction of the two powers the realisation
of that ideal has become impossible. Two theories at least
have arisen which aim at or result in its destruction. A
liberalism so logical as that of the Globe, must break every
social bond; for while it denies sovereignty either to king or
people, it replaces them only by individual opinion which is,
in truth, to let loose the floodgates of anarchy. Nor is it
favourable to liberty; for the condition-of liberty is the ex-
istence of a legitimate power which shall act in accordance with
the eternal principles of justice.4° Nor is Gallicanism in better
case. It is, in truth, a gloss for servitude. It does no more
than free kings from the moral code and leads to their deifica-
tion. It makes men think of religion as the natural ally of
despotism and thus dissipates their affection for it. What is
needed is a Christian order. After all, it is under the egis of
Catholicism that liberty was first born; and the guarantee of
its continuance is the submission of the temporal power to the
spiritual. If men turn once more to the church the destructive
combat between liberalism and the Gallicans will cease.*4!
With neither should the clergy ally itself. Rather should it
proclaim its entire dissociation with all political life, and its
connexion only with Rome. It must assert its ancient rights.
The bishops must resuscitate the diocesan synods and the
provincial councils. The mismanagement of the state in edu-
cation and worship must cease. The clergy must free itself
from the reproach of ignorance and take account of the march
of knowledge.” The reign of the church will be the work of
liberty; from freedom only can truth be born. Liberty of
conscience, liberty of the press, liberty in education—these
and not less than these are his demands.** “Sortez de la
maison de servitude . . . . entrez en possession de la lib-
erté.” It is a cry that the church had not heard in two hundred
years of her history.

238 “Les Progrès,” ete., Ch. II and III.

239 The paper of Royer-Collard and the doctrinaire liberals. Cf. the
admirable paper of Paul Janet in the Revue de Deux Mondes for 1879.

240 “Oeuvres,” II, 249.

241 “Oeuvres,” IT, 251 f.

242 “Oeuvres,” II, 290 f.

243 Cf. the preface to the Progrès de la Revolution.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 231


The book is the logical consequence of his earlier work.
Where, before, he had trusted kings, he now trusted the people;
where before he had trusted Rome, he now puts his confidence
in the collective power of the priesthood. He has seen that
kingship has traditions which make its reconciliation, in any
full sense, with Catholic ideals impossible. And if monarchy
is thus held back in the state, his experience of Rome’s hesita-
tions suggested that the condition of the church is not different.
To be driven back as he was to the general body of its members
was to find its real meaning in the life that it led. It is surely
this that explains the almost complete absence of dogmatic
discussion from his enquiry. He is interested in Catholicism
as a spirit which may become again the mistress of men’s
souls. Indeed, he is so far cognisant of the changing intellec-
tual perspective that he insists on the necessity of the clergy
being fully abreast of progress in scholarship. It is here,
clearly, that the tenor of his liberalism is evident. That for
which he is seeking is the conditions upon which the Christian
church—for him that societas perfecta which seems destined
eternally to haunt the minds of men—may develop unheeded.
Doubtless he is still anxious that she may win the empire of
the world. He is still—as he remained to the end—in the full
sense of the word a theocrat. But he has already come to
understand that the realms of church and state are by their
nature distinct. He is already, even if, in some sort, uncon-
sciously, admitting that authority cannot be single. He had
hardly, as yet, worked out the implications of his admission.
He perhaps did not then realise that he was thereby reducing
the church to the condition of a voluntary society which, even
if it had the features of a state, was nevertheless distinct from
the territorial character of the secular organ. He no longer,
as in 1818, spoke of government as all-powerful. He had not,
indeed, as yet embraced liberalism in any full sense of the
word. He appealed to it as men who are persecuted always
make appeal to the principles of freedom. But he had come to
understand that without it the guarantees of progress would
be lacking. He disliked its vagueness; and he hoped to abro-
gate it by establishing his demand upon the basis of an accept-
ance of the Christian faith. He believed then, as he always


232 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


believed, that only in the acceptance of the spirit of Chris-
tianity could Europe find its salvation. That was what he
meant by saying that unity would be reborn in the struggle
for freedom. That was why he welcomed the onset of the
revolution he so clearly foresaw. Renovation must be the
child of destruction; the tempest, as he said, would purify the
air. But he did not yet know that he was speaking the lan-
guage of revolutionary democracy as he was abandoning the
ideal of papal Rome.


VII. THE FOUNDATION OF L’AVENIR


“When a certain number of men,” Lamennais wrote early
in 1829, “keenly conscious of those truths which are the
basis of social security shall unite among themselves, then we
shall have the germ of a new order . . . . for that end two
things are essential: we must enlighten men’s minds by dis-
cussion, and we must strengthen their hearts by fighting. From
that it follows that liberty, whether we have it, or whether we
merely seek it, is today the first need of the people as it is the
indispensable condition of our salvation.” That is, in brief,
the whole method and programme of Liberal Catholicism as
Lamennais conceived it. The opposition to his attitude was
passionate and strong. The Archbishop of Paris preached and
wrote publicly against him; the nuncio regretted the violence
of his attitude.” His fierce determination was ascribed on
every hand to pride and an overweening confidence in his own
conclusions. Few realised, as did Lamennais himself,” the
magnitude of the task he had undertaken. With the bishops
unitedly against him, the silence of Rome was ever more ex-
asperating; and the death of Leo XII deprived him of one who
was perhaps his friend. The church seemed to him as one
given up in the arena to gladiators and wild beasts. Not


244 ““Corresp.” (ed. Forgues), Vol. II, p. 6. .

245 See his two letters in reply, ‘“‘Oeuvres,”’ II, 323 ff.

246 Dudon, “Lamennais et le Saint-Siège,” p. 76. Lambruschini himself
seems not to have disagreed with his arguments.

247 “Corresp.” (ed. Forgues), II, 27.

248 Ibid., II, 15, and cf. his remarks on p. 18.

49 Ibid., p. 51.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 233


even the Revolution of 1830 seems to have stirred him very
deeply. He had long prophesied its coming; and he valued it
only as a sign that his prevision was not mistaken;=° nor did
he conceal his view—nor his satisfaction—that the crisis must
eventually end in a republic. The situation mainly interested
him as a means to the greater freedom for which he was now
so anxious. ‘‘Chacun,’’ he wrote,”! “chacun doit aujourd’hui
chercher sa sûreté dans la sûreté de tous, c’est à dire dans
une liberté commune. La liberté, c’est le droit et la faculté de
se défendre contre toute volonté arbitraire et oppressive.” The
problem was the translation of that attitude into terms of
Catholic life.

He did not embark upon its solution unprepared. His re-
treat at La Chénaie had for some time been a kind of communal
retreat for those few close friends who, like Gerbet and Salinis,
thought as he did upon the fundamental questions. As early
as 1825 he had dreamed of opening there a kind of institute,
where, with a few chosen comrades, he might work and think
and pray. At Malestroit he had founded the little Congregation
of Saint Peter which won the highest praise from Leo XII.”
Its object was, above all, to harmonise the results of science
and religion. ‘‘Lorsque l’Eglise tenoit entre ses mains le scep-
tre de la science,” he wrote,” “c'etait une des causes de |’ascend-
ant qu’elle avait sur les esprits.” That was, perhaps, a some-
what chimerical ambition to anyone who had any historic
sense of the Catholic church. But over his companions, as

-even a hostile witness like Wiseman bears testimony,” his
ascendancy was amazing. It was under his egis that Rohr-
bacher began that history of the church which, if its lustre be
dim now, was for its time a mighty undertaking. Boré came
there; the grim Lacordaire who came to doubt remained to
bless; Sainte-Beuve felt its influence; and the letters of Maurice
de Guérin bear witness to the joy that tender and graceful spirit
20 Tbid., II, 161.


251 Toid., II, 160.
222 Dudon, op. cit. p. 70. M. Dudon attributes this praise to mere


politeness on the Pope’s part; but when one considers the general relation
between Leo and Lamennais that conclusion seems unduly sceptical.

253 Spuller op. cit., p. 161.

254 Cf. his “Four Last Popes,” p. 301 f.


234: AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


felt in the friendship of his master. And a little later towards
the end of November, 1830, there came to his aid the ablest
and most renowned of his disciples in Montalembert.”° With
such men as these he could indeed face the future without fear.

If, at first, the Revolution of 1830 seemed hostile to the
Catholic forces, it soon became evident that this was in fact
a passing mood.”* The nation, as a whole, found its full sat-
isfaction in having deposed the king who had broken the
Charter of 1814; and it was sufficiently Catholic in character
to indulge in no more than sporadic and momentary excesses.
Nor did the government show itself more inimical. The new
dynasty was, after all, too frail to embark on the troubled seas
of religious persecution; and if the Charter of 1830 was more
liberal than its predecessor it in nowise deprived Catholicism
of its pre-eminence. Lamennais did not disguise from himself
that difficult times lay ahead; but he believed that the sup-
port of the Orleans dynasty would lead to the protection of
those rights by which alone the existence of religion was possi-
ble.” Almost immediately the means of active propaganda
were to hand in the foundation of that journal L’ Avenir which
in its feverishly brilliant career, did nore, perhaps, than any
other weapon to fasten the roots of liberal doctrine deep down
in the soil of Catholicism. “Son but,” Lamennais told his
friends, “ (est) d’unir, sur la base de la liberté, les hommes
de toutes les opinions attachés à Pordre.” At almost the same
time there was instituted a society for the defense of religious
liberty.” It undertook to support every religious school. It
protected the clergy from wrongful prosecution. It safeguarded
the right of association. It desired to act as the common link
by which all religious societies in France should be linked
together for mutual protection against all attacks on the liberty
of their faith.” Both journal and society are simply Lamennais;
nowhere is there any thought in either of which he is not the

25 The first volume of Lecanuet’s admirable “Life of Montalembert”’
details the history of their relations in full.

256 Cf. Debidour, op. cit., p. 412.

257 “Corresp.”’ (ed. Forgues), II, 168 f.

28 Tbid., II, 173.

29 Tbid., II, 185, and Boutard, op. cit., II, 181 f.

260 See their statutes summarised in Debidour, op. cit., 421.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 235


directive inspiration. His letters take on a note of optimism by
which, in general, they were rarely distinguished.” He seems
clearly to have felt the greatness of the work he had undertaken;
nor was he any longer possessed by the old terrors of its futility.


_ The Avenir lasted for a year, when the hostility of Rome com-
pelled its suspension. Certainly no journal has ever more
splendidly fulfilled its programme. Its very disappearance
was important; for it marked the first of the three great defeats
suffered by liberal Catholics in the first century of their exist-
ence.**? Yet in the short period of its existence it was able to
elaborate a political theory of which no one can as yet foretell
the complete potentialities. Lamennais himself has told us the
essence of the doctrines he therein preached. It started out
from the assumption that the right to command, which he calls
sovereignty, belongs to God alone; every one is dependent
upon Him and therefore no person can possess, in the strict
sense, sovereign powers. As a consequence, all men are equal
in their rights; for their rights are derived from their nature
which come equally from God. Liberty is thus the essential
condition of civil institutions. The power which is given to
rulers is derived from the agreement of men to arrange for the
protection of their liberties. Rulers, as a result, possess only
that power which is judged by the citizens of a state necessary
to the conservation of the law of their being.” Men have thus
imprescriptible rights and it follows that liberalism must always
be the basis of their existence. The Revolution and the Restora-
tion alike denied these truths; it was by a policy of concerted
violence that in their different ways each sought to govern.
The monarchy of the Restoration, moreover, used religion as a
political weapon and thereby brought it into discredit.” They


21 e, g. ‘‘Corresp.”’ (ed. Forgues), II, 177, and cf. Laveille, op. cit., 258.

262 T suppose it would generally be admitted that the history of liberal
Catholicism can reasonably be divided into the Lamennais period; that
which culminates in their defeat at the Vatican council; and that which
culminates in the issue of the encyclical pascendi. I have discussed the
significance of the second episode in the fourth chapter of my ‘‘Problem
of Sovereignty.” The last is discussed below.

263 Oeuvres, II, 362.

264 Ibid., II, 363.

265 Tbid., II, 366.


236 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


deprived it, in fact, of the character of a religion by taking from
it its character of independence. They used it as a means
against that democratic régime which is always incompatible
with monarchy; and they bought its compliance by the gift
of money, of dignity and of power. But a struggle inevitably
arose when the people came to realise that the state was being
used for the interest of a privileged class. The people demanded
their rights and they did not hesitate to take them. A new
order was born; and it was to preserve Catholicism from the
evils by which it was threatened that the Avenir came into
being.” It is upon that foundation that its effort was made.
It insisted upon the separation of religion and politics; a reli-
gion which is endowed by the state is no longer a religion but an
establishment. It asked for the right to establish schools, the
abolition of episcopal nomination, the complete independence
of church and state. For the essence of their doctrine was to
look upon Catholicism as in itself a sufficient way of life, bound
not to earth but to God. So, by separating itself from the
world, it secured the conditions of its freedom. So it became
the mirror of that which it was destined to enshrine.?®

There is no article in the Avenir throughout its history which
is not faithful to this programme. It is difficult to do full jus-
tice to the eloquent passion with which it is throughout advo-
cated. It is clear enough that Lamennais was happy in the
work of propagation. His letters reveal a new faith in things
which triumphs over the difficult physical conditions under
which he laboured. He saw the work grow on every hand. The
response to his charitable appeals was remarkable.” The
demand for men of letters whom he could trust came from every
part of France.?° They gave active support to the Belgian
Revolution and the. Polish insurrection.” They followed the
efforts of O’Connell in Ireland with eager enthusiasm.2” They
had feelings of deep sympathy for the kindred ideals of Gorres

266 Tbid., II, 367.

27 Tbid., II, 368.

eT bids Wl, oO.

69 Cf. “Oeuvres,” II, 368.

270 “Corresp.”’ (ed. Forgues), II, 193.


27 Avenir, no. of Sept. 17, 31. “‘Corresp.” (ed. Forgues), II, 189.
272 Boutard, op. cit., II, 202.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 237


and Dollinger.?* They dreamed of a general union of Catholic -
forces throughout the world of which the end was to be the

attainment of a general freedom for all peoples.? They pro-

tested against the enmity of science and religion; for Cathol-

icism dare not fear truth otherwise it was not worthy of preser-

vation. Nor is it difficult to see that in the process of work

Lamennais became more and more convinced of the rightness of

his attitude; certainly not even in the dark days of his suspen-

sion did his conviction for a moment falter.

It is not easy to mistake their system. On the morrow of a
revolution they saw, as they deemed, but two things still firm
amid the universal disorder: the action of providence and the
need for liberty. It is with their integral reconciliation that
they are, above all, concerned.” It is in effect, a demand that
the spiritual future of the church be based upon an acceptance
of what, in the most liberal estimate, the Revolution may be
taken to mean; with the addition that where the Revolution
misunderstood the significance of corporate freedom,” Lamen—
nais insists upon its attainment. From that basis they make
their judgments. Their connexion with Rome must be uninter-
rupted and direct; to attempt the control of such communica-
tion is an intolerable and oppressive surveillance. For it means
that the papal power over the church is reduced to a nullity,
and without that power the church can have no real existence.?”
They insist on the right of association. The holding of opinions
implies the right to take means for their protection. Man is so
pre-eminently a social being that without such right his life is
deprived of half its meaning.” They demand liberty of instruc-
tion; for it is surely clear that without the opportunity to educate
their children in Catholic principles they have no means of en-
suring what they believe to be their salvation.” Nor does their
demand end there. They recognise that religious liberty is the
offspring of political liberty. That was why they rejoiced at the

273 Avenir, Nov. 21, 30; Dec. 2, 30; May 11, 31.

274 Boutard, op. cit., II, 213 f.

275 Avenir, Oct. 16, 1830.

276 Cf. the essay on “Administrative Syndicalism.”’

277 Avenir, Oct. 26, 1830.


278 Avenir, Oct. 30, 30.
279 Ibid., Nov. 26, 30.


238 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


Polish insurrection.2%° That was why the power of government
was by its very character an object of suspicion in their eyes. It
was the very power of government which really lay at the bot-
tom of their advocacy of separation. It was an historical deduc-
tion from their experience that a church so fettered cannot from
the nature of things be free. Their desire for liberty of the press
is only the implicit translation of liberty of thought into terms of
action. Their insistence on such a form of election as will en-
able the suffrage to be exercised by the humblest men is a result
of their desire to give power the broadest basis of consent; and
it was for that reason that Lamennais declared himself opposed
to the existence of an hereditary chamber.”*! Nor was it less
consistent with his theory of power that he should have de-
manded administrative decentralisation. It was part of the
natural right to self-government that he should desire to mini-
mise the evil influence of the absorptive effect of the Napoleonic
system. If we once admit the right of a people to look after its
own affairs it becomes sufficiently obvious that federalism more
nearly meets the needs of a complex society than the unitary
state.78 Nor was he illogical in his view that. only in the in-
creasing application of intelligence to public questions, the contin-
uous realisation that this is a changing world and that Catholicism
must meet the implications of its changing perspective, could
there be a victory for his principles.?3 In theend, itistothat con-
ception that all liberal Catholicism goes back. The idea of a de-
veloping tradition was for him the simple deduction from the
obvious fact that Catholicism was a living personality which, if
true to itself, was surely destined to conquer the world. If he
states his belief, less in terms of a dissatisfaction with its narrow
dogmas than of discontent with its narrow political outlook,
that only means that he was the child of his age. The
need of the moment was political; the scientific criticism of
Catholic dogmatics began to penetrate only a quarter of a
century later. Yet his anxiety for a learned priesthood is suffi-
cient evidence that he was not without some understanding of
the need that one day would come.

280 Tbid., Sept. 17, 31.

281 Tid: May 28, 31.

282 Tbid., June 28, 31.

283 Tbid., June 30, 31.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 239


` What, then, emerges from it all? The real problem by which
he was confronted was the problem of government. He did not
for one moment doubt the eternal truth of the fundamental
maxims for which Christianity stands. But he had come to the
stage where it was necessary to distinguish between the collec-
tive conscience of Christian society—the general will which lay
buried beneath the appearance of evil and misunderstanding
—and the consciously formulated practice of those who actually
governed it. He had come to disbelieve that the church could
be fully represented by her ministers. What she was, no one
body of men could claim to be. She was essentially a brother-
hood of a life to be lived on certain principles and the fundamen-
tal test of her worth was theregulation of her conduct in theterms
of those principles. That was why he was prepared to reject
the authority of the state. As a consistent Christian he could
not regard himself as linked to what was in idea neither religious
nor free. And that sense of antagonism to secular things made
him anxious to insist in every particular upon the distinct and
corporate life of the church—its self-sufficiency, its own right
to freedom, to government, to development. It was for the
expression of its personality that he above all cared; and he did
not greatly mind that the sense of power a state-relation might
add to it should be withdrawn. It did not greatly matter to him
that he did not—perhaps could not—attempt the definition of
Catholicism. For him the vital test was—as it is the vital test
of every society—that he felt its meaning deeply enough to be
able to share fully and richly in its life. He would never—cer-
tainly, at least, before 1834,—have denied that the church must
actively organise her strength; his passionate defence of ultra-
montanism is the sufficient proof of that. But he was virtually
claiming already a right to judge it, was reserving for himself
the power to insist that, when the last order has been issued,
it was, after all, a matter for his own judgment whether he would
accept it. All his work had gone to show that he had, as much
as any Catholic authority, a deep sense of the disintegrating
effect of schism, a wish that there should be unity of purpose
even if there were variety of effort. He had the deep and abiding
sense of the church as an apostolic society of which the mission
was the preparation of the city of God. But that is clearly a


240 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


Catholicism distinct in a fundamental sense from the sectarian
orthodoxy of the schools or the political ambitions of Rome. It
is, as the greatest of his successors said of the true Catholicism of
his own time, ‘‘simply a spiritual society organised purely in the
interests of religion and morality.’’*4

Such an attitude, of course, involves the living of one’s faith
rather than the observance of its dogma or its ritual. Here,
surely, is one of the keys to Lamennais’ hatred of Gallicanism;
for, as he interpreted it, it rendered impossible any full realisa-
tion of the Christian life. For Gallicanism, as it had developed
under the Restoration,” had become an exclusive and intolerant
search for power. It had lost sight of the significance of the
spirit of the church, in the effort to re-assert a specialised and
departmental control over a section of the thoughts of men;
and it was not very careful as to the means it used to that end.
With such an attitude he had no sympathy. As an essay in the
ideal church for which he lived it seemed to him abortive by the
very fact that it trod the path of the state. The desires he
cherished were different. A free church in a free state was re-
served for other and greater destinies. It would link itself to
the current of social change which was to fashion a new world.
Science and liberty would be its comrades, and it would advance
in kinship with the profoundest hopes of democracy.” If it
rejected the sovereignty of kings, it was only that it might be
true to itself. If it is suspicious of authority, it is only because
it has experienced its evils. If he was prepared still to maintain
extra ecclesiasm salus nulla, what he meant by the church was
no longer obedience to a single power. He believed, it is true,
in the unified governance of the church; but he believed in it

284 Tyrrell, “A Much-abused Letter,” p. 64. I do not think there is a sen-
tence in this magnificent justification that Lamennais would have repudiated.

285 One has to distinguish between different hands; that of Grégoire, or
that which goes back to Porte-Royal, are very different from that of
Frayssinous.

286 It is interesting to note Macaulay’s deep indignation against the
church of the Restoration. On the margin of Paul-Louis Courier’s pam-
phlet “Response aux Anonymes,” No. 2 he wrote “Worthy of Demosthe-
nes. It makes my blood boil against that accursed tyranny.” Trevelyan,
Life (Nelson ed.), II, 502.

287 “Oeuvres,” II, 372.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 241


only so long as that governance was in accord with liberal doc-
trine. It is clear that he is already in the stage when in a choice
between what Tyrrell called “the only absolute duty and the
highest sort of conditional duty’ there could be no alternative.
That is not to say he was a Protestant. His sense of the dangers
of religious individualism were far too keen for that to be pos-
sible. It meant only that his sense of the church was such that
he could give to her only the best that was in himself. The real
problem was her attitude to his gift.


VII. THE APPEAL TO ROME


Hap Lamennais been content with the composition of a hymn
to liberty it is possible that his views, if they involved discussion,
would yet have avoided condemnation. But, from the outset,
both he and his disciples were anxious to promote their utili-
sation. Within a month of its first publication, Lacordaire
urged the French bishops not to accept the nominations of
Louis Philippe,?8? while Lamennais demanded the immediate
abrogation of royal control. The result was a prosecution by the
government in which both were acquitted.”° If, as Lamennais
himself thought, the verdict wrought immense good,™! it was yet
only the beginning of their difficulties. His own sense of their
contingency is clear from his letter of a month later to Cardinal
Weld. It assures him of their entire good will towards Rome,
their humble dependence upon the papal commands.” He was
soon repudiating calumnies which accused him—as falsely as
intelligibly—of a desire to destroy the episcopate.* But more
serious was the attack on their democratic principles from the
Father-general of the Theatines, Ventura; not only was he a
friend of Lamennais, but he was well acquainted with Roman
opinion.” Lamennais, indeed, more than refuted his objections
but the criticism, published as it was in the most intransigeant


288 Tyrrell, op. cit. 99.

289 Avenir, Nov. 25, 30.

29 Boutard, op. cit., II, 216-223.

291 “Corresp.”” (ed. Forgues), II, 197.
292 Toid., II, 198, Feb. 27, 131.

293 Tbid., II, 199-202.

2% Dudon, op. cit, p. 94.


242 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


of the Gallican journals, was full of significance.” Bishops
began to urge him to cease his propaganda.”* It was bruited
abroad that the late nuncio had denounced him as one of the
greatest enemies by which the church was confronted.” The
Jesuits began to cast subtle doubts upon the orthodoxy of his
principles.” Dupanloup, then on the threshold of his immense
influence, had begun to intrigue for his condemnation. Lamen-
nais, he said,” “entraîne les jeunes prêtres dans l’indépendence
politique et la rébellion religieuse.” Nor did Rome speak as he
had hoped. “Là on ne voit rien,” he wrote of the papacy,?
“on ne comprend rien encore; on est plongé, perdu dans les
ténébres exterieures des intéréts terrestres, qui ne laissent pén-
étrer aucun rayon de lumière.” Priests who were suspected of
adhesion to his doctrines were attacked; and the clerical sub-
scriptions to the Avenir suffered a forcible decline. They were
threatened by interdict and intrigue, and Rome gave support to
those accusations. Their demand for encouragement from Rome
met with no response.” The note of sadness begins to reappear
in his letters. \“‘Ce n’est pas le courage que je perds”, he an-
swered a friend who-urged him not to lose hope,?® “mais la voix;
je prévois que bientôt elle nous manquera aucun moyen de
résister à l’ opposition épiscopale.” In October of 1831 he wrote
to Montalembert that it was hopeless to continue in the face of
such relentless antagonism.” Lacordaire urged that they go
to Rome to justify their attitude; and though Montalembert
seems already to have feared condemnation, Lamennais him-
self insisted that it was impossible. On the 15th of November
the Avenir was suspended, and the three friends set out, “‘as did


295 Lamennais’ reply is in the Avenir for Feb. 12,31. Ventura published
his criticism as an open letter in the Gazette de France.

296 “Correspondence,” II, 214.

297 Tbid., II, 225.

298 Dudon, op. cit., 95.

299 Lagrange, ‘“Dupanloup,” I, 121.

300 ““Corresp.”’ (ed. Forgues), II, 213.

sor pid: Mil, 22 te
wae bid., II, 228. This is doubtless a reference to the letter to Cardinal

eld.

303 Thid., II, 230.

304 “Lettres à Montalembert,”’ pp. 6-7.

3% Boutard, op. cit., II, 255.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 243


the soldiers of Israel” to convince the papacy of the honesty of
their intentions and the justice of their cause.3%

The Roman adventure is to Lamennais what, three centuries
before, the visit of Luther was to that greatest of schismatics.
It is the real turning-point of his life. It brought to the final test
his theory of the part that Rome was to play in the governance
of the world. He had never denied the omnicompetence of the
Pope. He had always insisted that the plenitudo potestatis was,
in this realm, at least, justified by its exercise. At the distri-
bution of religious power he had frankly scoffed. He had again
and again been urgent as to the necessity of monarchical and
unified direction by the church. Not even when he had come,
by 1829, to realise the necessity of liberal principles had he
changed his convictions in this regard. Nor did he doubt that
Rome would welcome the opportunities that freedom offered.
There is not a tithe of evidence that Lamennais expected an
unfavourable reception; but the amazing dishonesty of his
treatment completed in him a disillusion of which the first seeds
were already sown. What he learned was the danger of unified
authority even in the Catholic church. He was defeated by pa-
pal unwillingness to separate the spheres of temporal and spirit-
ual. He found that, in thought, at any rate, the papal ideal
was still the dream of a worldly dominion against which three
centuries of reformers had uttered in vain their protest. He
learned that the papacy regarded itself as a temporal power
which had benefited by the possession of certain valuable spirit-
ual weapons. The Rome of which he dreamed vanished the
more speedily as he contemplated it in actuality. It was a
Rome which was unwilling to regain a spiritual empire if secular
dominion must be sacrificed.

It is, in fact, clear enough—even when the evidence arrayed
against him by Rome itself is considered?”—that the main
grounds of his condemnation were not religious but political in
character. Religious they could not be, for the sufficient reason

‘that to the composition of his liberal Catholicism no element of

306 “Oeuvres,” II, 480. Cf. Corresp. (ed. Forgues), II, 231.

307 Cf. Dudon, “‘Lamennais et le Saint-Siege” for the orthodox Roman in-
terpretation of this time. It is such criticism as his that has led me to use
Lamennais’ “Affaires de Rome” only as a check upon the immediately
contemporaneous documents.


244 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


dogma contributed. Gregory XVI sacrificed him to the fear
that the prolongation of his active career might embroil him
with the governments of Europe. The age was not liberal in
its outlook. The papal states themselves were the centre of
national disaffection. The English administration of Ireland
was rarely more harsh and never more unpopular. Russia was
breaking into pieces the men who dreamed of a reconstructed
Poland. Under the shadow of liberal phrases the Orleanist
monarchy was erecting a despotism not less ugly than the old.
In Prussia an omnicompetent bureaucracy was codifying the
maxims of Machiavelli upon the relations of religion to the state.
Austria seemed, under the oppressive reactionism of Metternich,
to confound the application of the penal code with that of the
Beatitudes. It was the antithesis of such doctrine that Lamen-
nais came to urge; and what he offered to Rome was an alter-
native in which the nobler choice could have been taken only
by men who did not deem themselves bound by the ordinary
canons of secular diplomacy. :

The powers themselves did not fail to urge Rome along this
course. Simultaneously with his arrival in Rome, the French
ambassador demanded his condemnation; and he was able
to report to his government that the pope was as compliant as
he could desire.2° The weight of Metternich’s -incomparable
authority was used to the same purpose. “Elle appartient,” he
wrote of the Avenir, 3? “au désordre, comme les feuilles dé-
vouées au pur radicalisme.” The Archbishop of Paris was
urgent in his request for immediate and adverse action, while
he skilfully mingled praise of intention with hostility to result.34
Even Russian influence was exercised for the same end.3?2 The
commission appointed by the Pope to deal with Lamennais’
doctrines could by no possible fortune have been favourable
to him. Ventura had already published his suspicions. Lam-
bruschini was, to say the least, distrustful of the whole tend-
ency of which Lamennais was representative. Soglia had, to-
wards the end of 1830, written to Lamennais urging him to

308 Dudon, op. cit., 110 f.

TERT, Miley.

310 Ibid., 118.


3u [bid., 122.
12 Thid., 129.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 245


retrace his steps.’ Means were taken to prevent direct access
to the Pope; and if they were allowed to present a memorial in
which their position was defended, still Lamennais began to
feel the amazing falsity of his position. What, after all, could
Gregory do, a simple monk caught, as they were caught, in the
meshes of a labyrinthine system?’ The sense of embarrass-
ment on both sides was very painful. ‘Notre démarche,”
wrote Montalembert,*% “si catholique et si simple, a jeté la
cour de Rome dans un embarras qu’elle ne nous a pas pardonné;
uniquement occupés de leurs intérets temporels, qui se trouvent
dans la position du plus critique, les cardinaux et les prélats qui
entourent le saint-pére voient avec le plus grand mécontente-
ment les efforts que nous avons faits pour détacher la réligion et
l Eglise de la causes des rois qui sont, a leurs yeux, la Providence
vivante de ce monde.” It was no more than the simple truth.

On every side, indeed, the situation conspired against them.
If the pope was uniquely sovereign he still had need of his dele-
gates and he was compelled, in some degree, to give ear to their
complaints. So, even before any decisive action was taken, he
accused Lamennais of sowing discontent among the French
clergy,*!® and to rid himself of a troublesome visitor, he fore-
shadowed a long examination of doctrine which made his con-
tinued stay in Rome inadvisable. The fact of the matter was,
as Lamennais began to realise," that Rome had a choice be-
tween the liberalism of her original inception and the temporal
interests resultant on her massive organisation, and she was not
prepared to sacrifice substantial material possessions. Before
the pilgrims separated, they were allowed to see the Pope; but
discourse on the weather and the sardonic offer of snuff stifled
from the outset all effort at discussion.*!® Lacordaire returned
to France, Montalembert set out for Germany. Lamennais
himself, for the moment, remained in Rome. His stay there
was only serving the more firmly to convince him that it was
essential to continue his work. He began with almost feverish


313 Thid., 135.

34 Blaize, op. cit., II, 92.

315 Dudon, op. cit., 151.

316 Tbid., 154.

317 Blaize, op. cit., II, 99.

318 See Montalembert’s account of the interview in Lecanuet’s life, I, 228.


246 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE
energy to draw up programmes of detailed future activity.3”
He began to write a treatise on the ills by which the church was
oppressed. Meanwhile the French ambassador was able to
inform his government that Rome was set firmly against all
such liberalising innovation.?2° The revolt that simultane-
ously broke out in the papal states was not without its lesson.
If liberalism involved the occupation of Ancona by an Austrian
garrison—a, step which seemed likely to embroil Gregory with
the rest of Europe®—he would have none of it. The French
bishops gave him all the help he could desire. Lamennais’
enemies, to the papal satisfaction, drew up a formidable list of
his suggested heresies.?22 Upon their basis Lambruschini re-
ported in favour of action. The sacred Congregation at last
settled down to the final stage and recommended formally that
his programme should be condemned.*

It meant the rejection of a church which should pursue a
religious avocation. It meant insistence upon the belief that
Rome, whatever her interests in the other world, has a very
definite connexion with the secular problems of the present. No
one who reads the correspondence of Lamennais in Italy can
doubt that this was the foremost impression defeat would make
upon his mind. Rome already seemed to him, morally, a desert
where none could breathe.®4 He did not in any sense blame the
Pope for his silence; but he regarded him as the tool of corrupt
and ambitious men.” It is certain that at this time at any rate
he had no other thought than obedience to the church. But
he would have been less than human if he had not felt bitterly
the intrigues against him. Yet some hope he must have re-
tained almost to the end, since he was insistent that funds should
be obtained for the continuance of the Avenir.” How should
he not who had boasted so long of the splendour of Rome, and

319 Blaize, op. cit., II, 115, 122.

320 Dudon, op. cit., 163.

321 Nielsen, op. cit., II, 60 f.

32 Dudon, op. cit., 168 f.

323 Ibid., 177.

324 “Corresp.” (ed. Forgues), II, 235.

3% Ibid., II, 236.

826 Ibid., II, 238.

827 “Lettres à Montalembert,”’ p. 9.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 247


could not but feel certain of the rightness of his cause? He was,
indeed, saddened by the self-effacement of the papacy, its
general deafness to popular desire, the ambition of the cardinals,
and their absorption in secular interests. It was, to him, humil-
iating to find Rome completely dependent upon the good will of
the European concert, painfully without answer for the new prob-
lems that confronted men. He could not avoid the thought that
its preoccupation with politics was the root cause of its blindness
to a new world. Nor did its internal condition make for bet-
terment. The secular ecclesiastics were too ignorant, the very
means of instruction were uselessly difficult of access. Rome
was suffering from intellectual deterioration, and her attempt at
the control of new opinion resulted in oppression. He drew a
striking picture of the suspicion with which the papacy was
everywhere regarded.*” He insisted again that only in the
assertion of her permanent alliance with the forces of freedom
could she restore her ascendency over the world, But he was
asking too much of an institution so securely wedded to her
past traditions, and he realised that it was useless to linger.
He left Italy, and, with Montalembert, who joined him at Flor-
ence, he set out for Munich. There he met Görres and Dollinger,
and found in their ideas a fine kinship with his own. It was
that same Dollinger who, a quarter of a century later, was to
bring the whole weight of his incomparable learning and magni-
ficent honesty to the service of ecclesiastical liberalism. There
is a dramatic fitness in his presence at Lamennais’ side when
the news of the latter’s condemnation was published tothe world.


IX. THE CONDEMNATION


Tue encyclical Mirari Vos,’ is the first step on the road which
led, first through the Syllabus of 1864 and the definition of papal
infallability ,*82 and later through the condemnation of modernism
in the Pascendi, to the proclamation of war on the basis of mod-
828 “Oeuvres,” II, 573 f.
329 Thid., II, 378.


330 Boutard, op. cit., II, 325. ;
331 See the text of the encyclical in Lamennais, “Oeuvres,” II, 603 ff,


or Dudon, op. cit., 389-400. l
32 I have tried to point out the significance of these in my ‘‘Problem of


Sovereignty,” pp. 176 f.


248 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


ern society by Rome. To Lamennais’ plea that the cause of the
church and the cause of society are one, it virtually replied that
while that was undoubtedly true, the church would only permit
the triumph of the social cause upon its own terms. But those
terms were themselves the hard-won creed of a democratic time;
and by their rejection the papacy declared its determination to
stand aside from modern progress as we generally conceive it.
No one will deny the greatness of that defiance. What, in fact,
it has involved, is a claim to a complete lordship over the minds
of men. Pius X only completed, on the dogmatic side, what
Gregory XVI outlined on the political. In that aspect the work
of de Maistre, and of Lamennais before 1830, has borne its due
fruit. The papacy has given birth to a political and intellectual
system of which the broad outlines are perfectly clear. The
Roman Catholic church has become a centralized and, for its
members, an infallible despotism. It has insisted that the life of
the world must be written in religious terms; which is virtually to
pronounce that the pope is its sovereign since to him has been
confined the control of religious destinies. GregoryXVI, at the
very outset of his encyclical, repudiated as noxious the notion
that the church was in need of regeneration.*** He lightly casti-
gated those who attacked the celibacy of the clergy and the
indissolubility of marriage.” But the great evil of the time was
indifferentism, and from that every species of intellectual de-
lirium is born. Liberty of conscience is impossible; in result
it isan invitation to erroneous opinion. It leads to a contempt
for sacred things and for laws that demand respect. It is the
root of all social evil. Nothing has so much contributed to the
decay of great empires than such immoderate freedom of opin-
ion.” It of course follows that the liberty of the press is like-
wise condemned; it is no more than the instrument which
secures the expansion of monstrous errors.**8 He insists on the

383 It is interesting to compare Tyrrell’s judgment on this episode at the
time when his orthodoxy was unquestioned. See his,“ Faith of the Millions,”
Vol. II, p. 86 f.

334 Lamennais “Oeuvres,”’ II, 604.

335 Tbid, II, 608.

336 Thid., II, 609.


337 Ibid., II, 610.
338 Ibid.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 249


necessity of submission to princes. To deny their right to au-
thority is to deny the divinity of power. Nor must men preach
the desirability of separating church from state. That union
results in benefit to both and only the partisans of a boundless
license can deny its virtue.*® He attacks the association of
catholics with men of other religions; it results only in the
demand for impossible liberties and the destruction of worthy
authority.*° Such doctrines he condemns as the reasoning of
an insolent pride, the confidence of men in a reason that by its
nature is weak and broken. Perhaps the most significant clause
in the encyclical is its ending. That which Lamennais had de-
manded was, above all, the freedom of the church from secular
interference, its independence from all external institutions by
the very fact that it was a church. Of all this. Gregory makes
not merely abstraction but denial. It is upon the princes, whom
he calls his children, that he lays the task of executing his theo-
ries. They have their authority not less for the protection of
the church. It is in them that he puts his trust.*t

Not even Metternich could have desired a more complete
condemnation. The direction which Lamennais had endeav-
oured to give to the forces of Catholicism was repulsed to the
minutest detail. He was offered a clear alternative. Either he
must continue his work outside the church or he must submit
to a catholicism in which he had ceased to find spiritual consola-
tion. He could not take refuge in the propagation of his politi-
cal ideas; for the religious implications of catholicism were so
defined in the encyclical as clearly to include the whole field of
political inquiry. That doctrine of the two kingdoms which,
in reality, lay at the bottom of the philosophy of the Avenir
could draw no sustenance from the papal pronouncement. He
did not conceal its significance from himself. ‘‘ Les princes et le
pape,” he wrote,’ “ont crut qu'en s’unissant, ils arréteraient
le mouvement des peuples et les maintiendraient sous le joug.
Grégoire XVI, comme vous avez vu, vient de proclamer cette
grande alliance, et de condamner par là les catholiques à Pin-


89 Ibid., II, 612.
#40 Tbid., II, 613.

%1 Tbid., II, 613-4.

342 “Corresp.”’ (ed. Forgues), II, 245.


250 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


action. Ils ne peuvent pas défendre l'Eglise contre la volonté
de son chef; nous nous tairons donc.” The Avenir and the
Agence Générale were suppressed with perfect submission to the
papal authority; and the pope had written in approving
acceptance.*# Not, indeed, that he had surrendered any of his
opinions. He had simply agreed to silence because one who
had the right to command him had so ordered. He was not less
fearful for the future of catholicism than before; the tempest
he had descried would yet shake Christianity to its founda-
tions.*® Meanwhile he asked only for peace.

But it was exactly peace that his opponents were not willing
he should enjoy. Vague-whispers began to be bruited abroad
which were calculated to do him harm at Rome. It was suggested
that his submission had been merely formal and that he did not
mean it. Men pointed out that he had made no formal abjura-
tion of his principles. It was the hounding of the wounded lion
to his lair. He was reduced to the utmost poverty ;* the pope
had condemned him; the bishops still treated him as their
enemy. He had, of course, a gigantic problem before him. If
an infallible pope condemned a liberalism he believed to be es-
sential what must be his attitude?“ It was simple enough for
him to say that infallibility came only when the papal voice was
that of the whole church,** but who was to judge the occasion?
He seemed himself uncertain. ‘“Laissons aller,” he wrote to
Montalembert,*” “le pape et les évêques . . . . iln’y ariena
faire par le clergé, ni avec le clergé,” and there are surely few
who cannot pardon that weariness of spirit.

į The event which seems to have precipitated the catastrophe
was the publication by Montalembert, early in 1833, of his
translation of Mickiéwicz’s hymn to Polish liberty in which
he passionately defended the late insurrection. Since Rome
had approved its suppression, the enemies of Lamennais did
not hesitate to draw the conclusion that they were contemptu-

343 Boutard, op. cit., II, 340.

34 Ibid., II, 346.

45 “Corresp.” (ed. Forgues), II, 250.

346 ““Corresp.” (ed. Forgues), II, 264.

347 Cf. the letter to Count Kzewuski. ‘“‘Corresp.” (ed. Forgues), II, 270.

348 Ibid. II, 272.

49 “Lettres à Montalembert,”’ p. 43.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 251


ous of papal authority. Accusations were scattered broad-
cast that he was guilty of insincerity; and Gregory himself
made protestations to the Archbishops of Toulouse. All his
friends begged him to be silent and to submit once more. He
was willing enough where religion alone was concerned. But
outside the church he demanded an absolute freedom. ‘In
purely temporal affairs,” he declared,?” “particularly where
France is concerned, I recognise no authority with the right
either to impose opinions upon me or to dictate my conduct.
I say boldly that in this sphere—which is unconnected with
the spiritual power—I will never abdicate the independence
that comes to me in virtue of my humanity, and that alike in
thought and action I will take counsel only of my conscience
and my reason.”


It was undoubtedly a defiance of Roman sovereignty, an
assertion of the supremacy of that last inwardness of the
human mind which resists all authority save its own convic-
tion of rectitude. He wrote to Rome that so far as the church
was concerned no speech or writing of his would discuss it;
and he asseverated his acceptance of papal control in faith and
morals.*3 He insisted that all he had promised in the Munich
declaration had been fulfilled and more than fulfilled.*4 He
resigned the headship of the Congregation of St. Peter and the
little society of La Chesnaie was dissolved. But the pope was
not satisfied. He insisted that a new submission was essential
when the affront of Montaleinbert was borne in mind. The
letter was written privately to the Bishop of Rennes who
promptly published it with some comments which were simply
calumnies. Lamennais replied by another appeal to the
pope in which he emphasised his submission in all that religion
demands as well as his eagerness to please him so far as his
conscience would allow; but he insisted on his right to freedom


350 Boutard, op. cit., II, 366.

351 “Corresp.”’ (ed. Forgues), II, 306-7. Boutard, op. cit., II, 368.

32 ““Corresp.”” (ed. Forgues), II, 307.

33 Tbid., II, 309.

34 Ibid., IL, 312-4. The letter is clearly written to a Roman Cardinal.
35 Boutard, op. cit., II, 378.

356 Tbid., II, 379.


252 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


in purely temporal affairs.” “I have defended the rights of
God and of the church,” he wrote to a friend, “I will not in-
sult God by deserting those of humanity; and he insisted
that to proclaim the twofold sovereignty of Rome would be
to surrender men to an insupportable tyranny. Nor could the
urgency of his most intimate associates move him from that
position. “My conscience will not allow me,” he told Monta-
lembert,™ “to abandon the traditional doctrine of two socie-
ties, each distinct in its own sphere, and I will make no declara-
tion which suggests even my implicit abandonment of it.” To
Rome such a limitation seemed entirely unsatisfactory.®©
Lamennais has told us himself that at this juncture he began
to feel uncertain as to the very basis of Catholic authority.
He wished only for peace and he would sign any declaration
they chose to exact from him.**! A plenary submission was
exacted and Rome congratulated itself on a magnificent
victory.

But Lamennais’ own mind was still tortured by doubt. He
was distressed at the abuse Rome would make of such power
as she claimed when she came to exert it over temporal inter-
ests. He had signed the declaration because he desired,
above all, not to be regarded as a rebel and a schismatic. He
saw in the situation simply the necessity of peace, and to that
end he would, as he bitterly said,* have been willing to identify
the Pope with God. What the event had impressed upon him
was the urgent necessity of distinguishing between the divine
and human elements in the church that the confusion of their
demands might be avoided. For himself he was determined
to avoid for the future all contact with ecclesiastical affairs.3®
He was beginning to make plainer to himself that distinction

357 “Oeuvres,” II, 555.

358 Laveille, op. cit., p. 308.

359 See the fundamental statement of his position in the letter to Monta-
lembert of Nov. 25., 33. “Lettres à M.,’’ p. 219 f.

360 “Oeuvres,” II, 558-9.

361 Ibid., II, 561.

362 Dudon, op. cit., 292 f.

363 “Lettres à Montalembert,”’ p. 229.

364 Tbid., p. 231.

365 ““Corresp.” (ed. Forgues), II, 351, 353.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 253


between Catholicism and Christianity which had for some
time impressed him. He angrily repulsed some curious at-
tempts to attract him to Rome.” But even in this difficult
position his antagonists did not cease to annoy him. The
Archbishop of Paris was insistent that he should thank the
Pope for the acceptance of his submission. A priest of Saint-
Sulpice published an acrimonious attack against him to which,
by the nature of his agreement, he could make no reply.*® His
health was broken, and so generous a soul as Maurice de
Guérin was moved to indignation by his sufferings.** He
needed something that would restore his self-confidence and
make him feel that he had not deserted his ideals. After all,
he was certain of their truth; and peace at the price at which
-he bought it was not worth the purchase.” He was deeply
moved by the cruelty with which the Lyons insurrection was
suppressed ;*4 and that seems to have been the last pain he
could bear. He was not a man to whom silence came easily
and where he felt profoundly his thought took expression in
his pen. By the end of April, 1834, the ‘‘ Paroles d’un Croyant”’
was ready for the press. He seems to have had no illusions as
to the bitterness it would arouse; but the time had come when
he could contain himself no longer. “I have seen,” he wrote,’
“the tears which becloud the eyes of the people; I hear their
cries of pain, and my heart yearns to comfort them.” He did
not doubt that he would be attacked. Men would tell him
that he ought to have kept silence. The simple answer was
that he could not. ‘How could I be silent,” he asked,” ‘“sur-
rounded, as we are, by such iniquity, such tyranny, such pain,
such want? I have felt that deeply; I have said my say.
Could I consent to allow future generations to lay to my


366 “Lettres à Montalembert,” p. 124.

367 ““Corresp.” (ed. Forgues), II, 351.

368 Boutard, op. cit., II, 403.

369 “Lettres,” Jan. 10, Feb. 1, May 10, ’34.

370 This feeling comes out very clearly in his letter of March 29, 734, to
the Archbishops of Paris, ‘‘Corresp.” (ed. Forgues), II, 360.

$71 Tbid., II, 362-4.

372 Ibid., II, 367.

373 Thid., II, 369.


254 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


memory’s account one of those iniquitous silences which harm
not less, and often more, than direct connivance at wrong?”
He felt this the more keenly since his thought had now reached
a point where he looked for salvation in purely political propa-
ganda. He reported to Montalembert—still faithful to him
when Lacordaire had already deserted his ideals—a rumour
that the Russian ambassador had accused him of desiring to
make Catholicism a power once more, an effort which Russia
would never permit. “I am glad,” he said,* “that he will not
permit it. That way we shall find no solution.”

Only those who read day by day the letters to his closest
friends can realise what the decision must have cost him. He
did not hide from himself that he was burning the bridges
behind him. To write a hymn to the splendour of democracy
was indeed, after all that had passed, to hurl defiance at Rome.
It is useless to blame him. It is too fatally easy to ascribe his
determination to pride, to self-confidence, to an overweening
sense of his own rightness for such analysis to be satisfactory.
The issue is far more complex. Rome had extorted from him
the admission of dogmas to which, in his heart, he could give no
assent. If, like Tyrrell, like Dollinger, he strove hard to stand
by the ancient ways, to make himself one with what he believed
to be the real splendour of a Catholicism that enshrouded itself
in an appearance of evil, there came at last the realisation that,
in any final examination, he must take for truth and right conduct
that which his conscience told him he might identify with truth
and right conduct. Rome, he admitted freely, had the power
to demand obedience from him; but the power to exact it she
did not possess. It was the simple fact that in the last resort
only his own conscience could be sovereign that he asserted.
Wrong remained to him wrong however much his masters
might proclaim its rectitude. He counted the cost of measur-
ing his forces against the greatest of ecclesiastical institutions.
It might bend him; certainly if he remained subject to its
strength it would absorb his forces as the rivers are absorbed
in the endless sea. But he was too confident of his own soul
thus to mangle it. What Rome called a submissive sacrifice
he branded as an unrighteous desertion. What she called the


374 “Lettres à Montalembert,” p. 254,


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 255


victory of her collective wisdom he denounced as the blind-
ness of her past. So he took the privilege of every human
being to think out for himself the conditions of his intellectual
striving.


X. THE RED CAP ON THE CROSS


WHERE even the magic of Sainte-Beuve has failed to give
adequately the significance of the ‘Paroles d’un Croyant,”
none else may attempt its analysis. It is a lyrical version of
the “Communist Manifesto.” It denies the legitimacy of all
authority that is not based upon the widest liberty and heralds
in its destruction the onset of a brighter dawn. It is written
in a style that has a splendour and elevation not merely unique
in Lamennais’ own work, but in the whole range of French
literature. It is instinct with a passionate generosity, and its
flaming mysticism has in it much of the exquisite character of
à Kempis. Sainte-Beuve has told us how the workmen respon-
sible for its composition could hardly continue for their ex-
citement.*> New editions could hardly keep pace with the
demand. Lamennais himself has written how workingmen
contributed from their savings to buy a copy that they might
read together at night; and how it was read aloud in the
workshops. Students declaimed its finest passages in the
Gardens of the Luxembourg; and even the members of the
Chamber of Deputies forgot the pressure of public business
in their anxiety to feel the throb of its eloquence.*”

But no one can attack the foundations of an existing order
without waking the slumbering vigilance of property.** “It
is the apocalypse of Satan,” wrote his friend, the Baron de
Vitrolles.3 “It is the red cap of liberty upon a cross.” The
Duchesse de Dino was amazed at his Jacobinism.*° A dis-
tinguished journalist denounced him as the herald of insurrec-


375 “Nouveaux Lundis,” Vol. I, p. 39 f.

376 “Lettres à Montalembert,” 316.

377 Thid., 270.

378 Mr, Gladstone has an interesting reflection on this attitude. Morley,
“Life,” III. 352.

379 “Vitrolles,” p. 248.

380 “Souvenirs de Barante,” Vol. V, p. 137.


256 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


tion.! Guizot has left us a curious and involved expression
of horror at Lamennais tergiversations.*? De Rigny, the
minister of foreign affairs, wrote to Rome at the universal
astonishment that such ideas should emanate from a priest.
The Gazette d’Augsburg declared that if the devil visited the
world, he would come with the “Paroles” in his hand.** There
was no question of defence, nor did Lamennais desire it. He
had written, as he said, to salve his conscience and to cleanse
his soul from its association with an insupportable tyranny.*®
Refutations poured in on every side. The book was speedily
prohibited at Rome, though Lamennais at first thought it
doubtful whether the pope would pronounce officially against
it. Lacordaire, with a cruelly indecent haste, had signalised
it as the end of the Menasien school, and his own brother
did not dare to read it. If there were favourable voices they
were nowhere those of authority. It is clear enough that this
adverse opinion failed to move Lamennais from the certainty
that he had done right. Once he was certain of that, he cared
little for their praise or blame.*®?

Rome, as always, moved slowly. The reports that came to
Lamennais seemed, on the whole, to suggest that she would
keep silent.” But it was, in reality, impossible for the papacy
not to pronounce its judgment. The encyclical “Mirari Vos”
was hardly two years old; and its plea for political obedience
was implicitly set at naught by Lamennais’ work. The French
government itself was in a quandary. Had it prosecuted La-
mennais for sedition it was more than doubtful if a jury could
have been persuaded to convict him, and it dare not risk the
chance of failure. Metternich, indeed, did what the French
ministry did not feel able to do, and sent a passionate denun-

3831 S. M. Girardin, “‘Souveniers,” p. 270.

382 Cf. his “Memoirs” (Eng. trans.), Vol. III, Ch. III, passim.

383 Boutard, op. cit., III, 39.

384 bid: III, 48.

38 “‘Corresp.” (ed. Forgues), I, 115.

386 Tbid., II, 380.

887 “Considérations sur le système philosophique de M. de La Mennais.”

388 Boutard, III, 51.

389 “Lettres à Montalembert,” p. 260.

390 Ibid., 287., Lavalle, op. cit., 324.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 257


ciation of the book to Rome, and Russia also made its protest.3%
It is doubtful enough if Gregory needed such persuasion. His
secretary of state, Bernetti, looked already upon Lamennais
as a Catholic Luther.’ The Pope himself spoke freely of the
pain the book had caused him; and in the encyclical “Singulari
nos” of June 25, 1834 the condemnation was published. It
rightly recalls that Lamennais had agreed to obey the teach-
ings of the “Mirari vos” and that the “Paroles” was a defiance
of its letter and its spirit. It excited disobedience to kings,
contempt for law and order, destruction as well of religious as
of political power. Its attitude to authority was denounced
as an outrage to the civil and ecclesiastical hierarchy—a mere
cloak for the attainment of freedom of conscience and the
press. It attacked Lamennais’ call to the peoples of the world
to unite, its justification of tyrannicide, the astute temerity
with which it had cited scripture to its purpose. ‘Its proposi-
tions,” said the Encyclical,* “are false, calumnies, rash, con-
ducive to anarchy, contrary to the word of God, impious,
scandalous, erroneous and already condemned by the church
in such heresies as those of the Waldenses, the Wyclifites and
the followers of Hus.” It was, in fact, a doctrine totally out
of accord with the political direction that Gregory had finally
chosen.* The historical relation of Lamennais’ teaching is, after
all, mere verbiage; his democracy had as much connexion
with the doubtful communism of Wyclif as with the antagonistic
safeguard of the Fourteenth Amendment; though Lamennais,
like the great. English heretic, did sever the action of the church
from that of the world by reason of his deep sense of its un-
earthly dignity.” If it is a sin to love the church so greatly
as to be fearful of its degradation, assuredly no one will question
the rightness of the papal condemnation.

If Lamennais was surprised, the blow seems to have hurt
him less for himself than for his friends.*% He did, indeed, feel


391 Boutard, op. cit., III, 76-8.

392 Thid., 82.

393 See the integral text in Dudon, Op. cit. 427 f.

394 Cf. Nielsen, Op. cit. 11, 64 f.

39% Cf, Mr. Poole’s comments, “Illustrations of the History of Medieval
Thought,” p. 302 f.

396 “Lettres A Montalembert,’”’ p. 306.


258 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


deeply indignant that a power he had served so well and so.
deeply loved should speak of him as the basest of men. He
hated the low intrigues which had led to his fall. He objected
to the condemnation of a book in terms so vague as never to
specify wherein its error consisted. He did not for a moment
believe that the blow could at all arrest the onrush of forces
which were working towards the destruction of an intolerable
régime.” He was, indeed, unfortunate in his attempt to dis-
tinguish between the voice of Gregory the pope, and that of
Gregory the man; Rome has given us no criterion for making
such delicate distinctions.*% His complaint that Lamartine
and Chateaubriand spoke as he did and yet escaped condemna-
tion misses the point that they were not, after all, priests, and
the measure of authority that could be exacted from them
was therefore different. It was useless to hope that peace
could be made. The fact was that so long as Lamennais made
his conscience the supreme arbiter of his faith there was no
place for him in the church unless his doctrine coincided with
that of Rome. He saw in the fight the same old struggle of
medieval time; and not even the most earnest solicitations
of Montalembert could induce him to withdraw from his posi-
tion. At the end of 1834 even Montalembert deserted him so
that the last of his disciples was gone:*°° He was now alone
and there remained only the task of completing the defence of
his ideas. The “Affaires de Rome”, which he published to-
wards the end of 1836, was the narrative of his difficulties with
the Papacy. It is a magnificent piece of dispassionate analysis,
unanswerable as it has gone practically unchallenged. Only
at the end does he permit himself reflections and it is then only
to prophesy that since the victory of democratic principles is
certain, Rome must embrace liberalism or perish. But Rome
had chosen another path and the break between them was
final. Henceforth he devoted himself entirely to the cause of
the people. There is a certain dramatic irony in the thought
that, almost simultaneously, Newman had entered upon that


397 “Corresp.,”’ II, 386.

398 “Lettres à Montalembert,” p. 307.
399 Ibid., 324.

400 Boutard, op. cit., III, 103.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 259


struggle against dogmatic liberalism which ended in his adop-
tion of the Catholic faith.‘


XI. IMPLICATIONS


Ir is an astounding evolution. Yet it is an evolution condi-
tioned at every stage by the logic of a bitter experience. La-
mennais started out with a firm belief in royalism and the
church. He was the envenomed antagonist of the Revolution,
and few have drawn up, from his standpoint, an abler indict-
ment of its tendencies. He distrusted the people and he found
no comfort in the dogmas of individualism. He came, in the
end, to see that all for which he had previously contended was
a tissue of error. Nor is clarity wanting to the basis of his
change. He saw the church used as no more than a political
instrument, and, like Chalmers and Newman, he made insist-
ence upon its corporate independence. It was here that he
found the means of a sympathetic acquaintance with liberal
doctrine. But he soon found that ecclesiastical liberalism is
only part of a larger whole. He discovered that, when the
government of men is despotic, religion is too valuable an in-
strument in the security of servitude to be left untrammelled.
So he was led to the examination of the political basis of des-
potic government and thence to its rejection. He came to
understand that a free state was the condition of a free church,
that he had, in fact, allies exactly in that party for which he
had earlier professed the deepest hostility. He urged upon the
church an adventure in liberalism. Let it once make the people
free and its own triumph must inevitably follow. If Rome
would abandon the pursuit of earthly power and devote herself
to the liberation of those who loved her most deeply, she could
save herself from the contamination that came from alliance
with the apostles of political tyranny.

He did not, at the outset, doubt that such an appeal must
win response. But he had totally mistaken the character of
the church. He had himself been the protagonist in the defi-
nition of her Austinianism without, as it seems, understanding
the real significance inherent in such power. For Rome could

401 “Apologia” (ed. Ward), p. 150; and cf. my “Problem of Sovereignty,”
Chapter III.


260 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


not embrace the cause of the people and remain blind to her
own condition. The men who directed her government were
too deeply fond of power ever to submit to its partition. To
make alliance with liberalism would be to condemn the church’s
past, to lessen the empire to which her greatest governors had
for eight centuries laid claim. Herself rigidly authoritarian
in temper, her natural affinity was with those powers which
were struggling against the tidal wave of democratic advance.
What, in truth, Lamennais asked was that she should be un-
true to her special ethos. Of dogma, indeed, he might make
entire abstraction; but to ask the church to concern herself
with the discoveries of modern civilisation was to demand her
admission that there was a truth of which she was not the
appointed guardian from the dawn of her history. She would
not suffer such diminution of her sovereignty. If the choice
was between a claim to the widest powers and an alliance with
the unknown future, she would take her stand by that past
which had given her those powers. Her situation was consistent.
Lamennais would have made a newer and a different Rome.
He would have turned a state into a church. For Rome is the
one fundamental institution of medieval times which has re-
tained the indicia of her universal dominion. Today, perhaps,
they are no more than a magnificent gesture, but they bear
witness to the tenacity of her memory.

Her expulsion of Lamennais was the registration of her sover-
eign power. Yet, by that very exercise, she demonstrated her
impotence. Even the mightiest prince, as Hume pointed out
in a famous essay, is dependent upon his ability to lead men
by their opinion. It was herein that Rome failed. For while
she possessed the external sanction, she could not exact passive
obedience. She might command, but she lacked any security
that she would be obeyed. She demonstrated once more not,
perhaps, so much for herself as for the world outside, that a
final control of opinion rests always with each individual mem-
ber of an association, and that whatever the penalties attached
to its adoption. Nor was this all. The rejection of Lamennais
from a society he so deeply loved is, when the last criticism of
him has been made, still a tremendous tragedy, and it is well
to enquire into its conditions. For what, basically, was he


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 261


condemned? He had no faith in any creed except Catholicism.
No man of his generation had more eloquently repelled the
seductions of alternative creeds. He was unequalled, save by
de Maistre, in the unlimited hope he placed in the benefits of
papal sovereignty. It is, as an acute observer noted at the
critical epoch of Lamennais’ life, little less than astounding
that it should have repulsed the one man of genius who then
lent it the service of his powers.!

The answer involves the most gigantic problem by which we
are confronted: the nature of corporate personality. Where-
in that personality consists is sufficiently matter of strenuous
debate. The claim of Lamennais was that the real basis of the
church was not its doctrines but its life. He saw in it a living
society which, even in change, remains true to itself and not a
mass of individuals united by a chance agreement upon certain
formule.‘ The conception of Rome was far more akin to the
legal interpretation of the English courts. The members of
the church were to it simply an associated body of benefici-
aries who profited by the commands enjoined by a governing
court. In such an aspect, the withdrawal of Lamennais was
inevitable. If he could not obey the commands, he could not
profit therefrom. If he was out of sympathy with its dogma,
he was out of accord with its principles. Yet no one who reads
what Lamennais has written can deny his essential sympathy
with the broad aims of Catholicism. If Lamennais had lived
in the time of Leo XIII his condemnation would have been
extremely dubious; but that, to say the least, is to assert that
there is an integral part of the Catholic church with which he
was at one. To deny the validity of dissent is to prohibit the
growth of corporate opinion, to insist on changelessness as the
basis of the church. Yet it is impossible to deny that the church
has changed, impossible, at any rate till answer has been made

402 Cf. the very interesting comments of d’Herbelot, “Lettres 4 Monta-
lembert,”’ pp. 88-9, 146. These were written as early as 1829.

403 I have discussed this question partly in my paper on the ‘‘Personality
of Associations,” 29 Harv. L. Rev. 404, and partly in that on “the strict in-
terpretation of ecclesiastical trusts” in 36 Canadian L. T. 190. The whole
force of the distinction between the two views will be apparent to anyone
who compares the judgments of Lords Halsbury and Macnaghten in the
Free Church of Scotland case as published in Mr. Orr’s verbatim report.


262 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


to its own historian’s account of its councils, or to the masterly
polemic of Dollinger. Newman’s ‘Doctrine of Development”
is not yet on the Indez; and it is simply a plea for the recog-
nition in dogma of that which Lamennais demanded in politics.


For, after all, he was asking no more than the opportunity
to convince the church of the superiority of one way of life to
another—as Saint Francis made his plea for poverty, as, in
another sphere, the Jesuits made demand for the dogmatisa-
tion of the Immaculate Conception. He did not ask it to
change its personality, any more than Gerson did when he
would have federalised its government, or Mariana when,
contrary to the later teaching of Gregory XVI, he issued a
justification of tyrannicide.* For, after all, the collective
experience of the church, the sense of its collective experience,
is a greater thing than its interpretation at any given moment
of its history. Papal infallibility meant something very differ-
ent to Newman from what it did to Manning; yet, somehow,
the church was wide enough to include them both.*% It is
characteristic of any society, whether or no it be religious in
its nature, that it should contain elements in some sort diverse.
We cannot, in fact, avoid the incessant evolution of doctrine
so long as man is a thinking animal. To each one of us the
fact appears somehow different and, as a result, the interpre-
tation can hardly coincide.‘

It means, perhaps, that within every organisation, as within
each individual, there must be a continuous struggle between
life and tradition. In that sense, the career of: Lamennais
would be intelligible as the expression of a moment in which
tradition was victorious. But the larger problem still remains.
To ascribe the whole life of a society entirely to one element or
the other is a dichotomy that is wanting in perspective. It is
to mistake life for anatomy or physiology. The body cannot
function without its background; and a skeleton is still dead


404 Cf. Figgis, “From Gerson to Grotius,” pp. 191-3. On all this his fourth
lecture in “Churches in Modern State” is invaluable. See also a very good
little book by Mr. Richard Roberts, “The Church in the Commonwealth.”

405 Cf. My “Problem of Sovereignty,” Chapter IV.

406 On all this the reader will find invaluable assistance in the two famous
books of M. Loisy, “ Autour d’un petit livre” and “Quelques Réflexions.”


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 263


matter, even if it have living form. The principles of any so-
ciety are not and can not be an expression of the totality of
motives by which men bind themselves into a community. For
community is like friendship in that it lies too deep for words.
Its relations do not end with their formal utterance, and it
subsists even where majority and minority conflict. The funda-
mental thing is to remain true to the life of the society. It has,
indeed, principles so fundamental that their violation involves
the rejection of that life. One could not deny the historic
existence of Christ, and yet remain a member of the Catholic
church. If the basis of Lamennais’ condemnation be found
here, then it would be argued that the alliance of Catholicism
and the political system of the French Restoration is funda-
mental to membership of the church; but it is evident that
this is not the case. That, indeed, is the weakness of Lamennais’
ultramontane teaching. He equated the church with its head,
and he found himself, in the result, compelled to deny the truth
of his infallibility. From the standpoint of organisation he
discovered that while it might have its conveniences it was not
free from grave difficulty. For, once admit the fact of variety,
and the “tradizione son io” of Pius IX may be heresy in a
coming generation. It is the distinction which Rousseau makes
between the ‘‘general”’ will and the will of all. The “general”
will, in this aspect, is the will that is true to the social life not
at any given moment, but in the broad perspective of its his-
tory and its prospects. The “will of all” is the will that, at
a given moment, gets itself obeyed. In an Austinian system
like that of Rome the “will of all” becomes concentrated in
the person of the pope. We judge its identity with the will
of the church in the light of the years that le ahead.


The quarrel of Lamennais with Rome, in fact, goes back to
one of the decisive moments of the fifteenth century. The de-
feat of the federalising efforts of Gerson and Nicholas of Cusa
at the great council of Basle in 1449 resulted in the erection
of a papal absolutism. It is the decisive step on a road that lead
logically to the definition of papal infallibility in 1870. But
the result was to give to Rome exactly those powers against
which Lamennais made complaint in the modern state. When
the Reformation split Europe into a collection of diverse sover-


264 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


eignties each state inherited the shattered fragments of the
Roman imperium. It was in that sense that the obsequious
Parliament of Henry VIII declared the realm of England to be
an empire. But the history of the ensuing three centuries is
the record of a transference of sovereign power from a single
head to the general body of the state. By Rome alone, in
Western Europe, was this tendency successfully resisted; and
by Rome alone has the maintenance of absolutism been con-
sistently secured. The knowledge of her vast pretensions was,
throughout the nineteenth century, a fertile source of diplo-
matic difficulty. It was from those pretensions that, little by
little, the states of Europe were compelled to build up what is
essentially an alternative scheme of civic life. It was those
pretensions which made of toleration the ultimate dogma of
modern politics. It was those pretensions which resulted in
the stern control of Catholic life. The Roman church was
nowhere free. Her claim to statehood was on all sides met by
the response that her competing system of allegiance was in-
compatible with the sovereignty of the state. It was against
the assumption that the sovereignty of the state must be unique
that Lamennais made his first protest in the name of liberalism.
It was a claim made in the face of an external power. It did
not discuss the conditions of an interior life within the church
itself. It sought only to show, as de Maistre had attempted
to demonstrate, that in her corporate freedom Rome will find
such means of dominion as will enable her to govern the world.
But corporate freedom was not a synthesis in which a system
of which Metternich was the symbol could find comfort or
hope.


From the protest against external bonds Lamennais turned
to the internal life of the church. But here, too, he found him-
self confronted by a similar problem. The virtual apotheosis
of the Roman pontiff stifled on every side the initiative of the
individual. There was no limit set to the bounds of papal
authority, and, as a consequence, there was no room in the
church for any save those who agreed with the expressed
declaration of its will. Loyalty was interpreted to mean not
faith in the future of the church, not belief in the principles
of its creeds, but acceptance of the political principles


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 265


by which its sovereign chose to be guided. Of course such a
sovereignty must, in practice, have been limited by the obvious
facts of life. But where, as in Lamennais’ own case, the indi-
vidual was forced to dissent from the conclusions of authority,
no choice was offered between obedience and expulsion. He
felt that the Roman theory was false. The liberalism he had
applied to the external relations of the church he endeavoured
to insist must be true of her internal relations also. To be a
true church her will must be the will of her whole personality
and not of a part of it. It must synthesise the whole, and not
a part, of her purpose. It must, in actual terms, be something
more than the voice of a feeble old man dominated by an ambi-
tious and grasping bureaucracy. They substituted their private
advantage for the public need, and the church paid the penalty
of such prostitution of its purposes.

He learned, in fact, what has been one of the fundamental
lessons in the history of the modern state. Disguise it how we
will, the sovereignty of the state will mean, in the long run,
the sovereignty of the rulers who govern it.” On occasion, in-
deed, the exercise of power by those who misrepresent the
general will may result in their dethronement; but history is
sufficiently uncatastrophic to make revolution the exception
rather than the rule of political life. Lamennais might protest
that the sense of the church was against the decision of Gregory;
but the only defence he could make was an appeal to the future.
That, for the most part, is the defect of any distinction between
the will of the state and of those who govern it. The latter,
at any given moment, possesses the formal attributes of sov-
ereign power. There is no means of questioning it save the
means of patience. But, after all, the counsel that truth will
eventually prevail is a maxim for eternity rather than for
mortal men. Lamennais found that the concentration of power
in the hands of the papal government deprived him of every
normal means of protest and of argument. In the result, there
is every cause to understand why the protagonist of ultramon-
tanism should have become the tribune of the people.

Nor was his second discovery less important. He had him-


407 I have discussed in detail this contention in the first chapter of this
book.


266 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


self suggested that the centralised system of French civil ad-
ministration neglected the welfare of the provinces. He found
that the centralisation of the Roman church was not less un-
fortunate. Here, again, it is to the conciliar movement that the
main thread of his ideas goes back. He confronted, intellectu-
ally, exactly the situation that the Europe of the fifteenth
century confronted in matters of organisation. An England
that had passed its statutes of Provisors and Premunire knew
the dangers of a unitary government. The plea of Gerson was
frankly utilitarian and he argued that “solus populi suprema
lex” cannot safely be interpreted in terms of centralisation.*%
So, too, did Nicholas of Cusa speak in the name of Germany
when he made his striking plea against the reduction of a
Christian community to papal serfdom. The difficulties of the
sixteenth century were material difficulties—problems of finance,
of jurisdiction, of place. Those of the nineteenth century by
which Lamennais was confronted were spiritual in character,
but it is to the same source that they are to be traced. So long
as the powers of the constituent parts of the Roman church
were derivative and not original it was useless to contend
against the papal will. The Roman bureaucracy had every-
thing on its side. It was useless to appeal to history or to
tradition for of these the Pope was the appointed interpreter.
It was unmeaning to accuse him of error, for he had been made
the church and the church had been dignified by infallibility.
It was useless to protest that, after all, the Pope was a man and
thus subject to error. It was the future to decide whether
he had spoken with the Jovian thunder of an ez-cathedra
decision. The whole problem was but one instance of the
fundamental truth upon which Dr. Figgis has insisted that
“wherever blind obedience is preached, there is danger of
moral corruption.’’4° The institution, in fact, which can safely
deny the necessity of criticism, the value of dissent from its
conclusions, the resultant good of a re-examination of its foun-
dations, is thus far unknown to human history. The claim of
perfection is a common error among societies, but it is never


408 Cf. Figgis, “From Gerson to Grotius,” p. 64f; and for the whole
problem of Valois, “Le Pape et le Concile,” Vol. I, Ch. II-III.
409 Figgis, “Churches in the Modern State,” p. 154.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 267
made save where there is evidence of decay. The omnipotent
autocracy of Rome revealed its ignorance of the real conditions
of social existence when it made that claim. For the totality
of influences, spiritual, intellectual, historic, that. go to the
building of a community are not to be resumed in the dicta of
authority. There is no loyalty compelling enough to absorb
the affections of men. All that we can hope is so effectually
to exclude the possibility that its demands may be rejected
as to minimise the dangers of anarchy. But that is only to
urge that the basis of our institutions must be liberty.


‘XU. THE INHERITANCE


ONcE again in her history Rome was given the opportunity
to make her peace with modern life. The modernist movement
was, of course, for the most part, and directly, a theological
movement. But, indirectly at least, the problems it raised
were not theological questions at all, but governmental ques-
tions, and it was a discussion as to the nature of a particular
form of community that was in reality the main issue. The
critical work of men like Loisy may have provided the move-
ment with its intellectual penumbra. He doubtless expressed
its yearnings after a more adequate scholarship with an ability
that has made him one of the most striking figures of our time.
But the thinker most representative of the modernist spirit
was not Loisy but Tyrrell.“° For it was Tyrrell, above all, who
realised from the outset that what was in fact in debate was
the nature of communal authority. He never denied the
fundamental necessity of order in a state; where he was in-
sistent was upon the limits that may be set to its demands.
He was not a scholar; and the technical details of M. Loisy’s
researches he doubtless would have been willing to concede as
beyond his purview. What he essentially urged was the fact
that Catholicism was a life, and that the only unchanging
principle of life is the fact of change. Like Lamennais, the


410 Miss Petre’s biography is our main authority. His most important
worksare (1)‘‘A Much-abused Letter;” (2) “Through Scylla and Charybdis;”’
(3) ‘Medievalism;” (4) “Lex Credendi.”” The reader will also find much of
importance in the two volumes of essays collected under the title “The
Faith of the Millions.”


268 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


fundamental burden of his protest was a regret that the end
of Catholicism should have perished in pursuit of means.*!
A member of the most ultramontane of ecclesiastical founda-
tions, he had an unique opportunity to study its objects and
to test its purposes. It was by the deliberate choice of conscience
that he took the road which led eventually to his excommuni-
cation. But in his travelling he had evolved a theory of social
structure which is one of the most precious possessions of our
time.

The real problem that confronted him was the place of
liberty in organised life. With unlimited individualism he had
no sort of sympathy; for the rights of one man must inevitably
conflict with the claims of another and order is essential to
the maintenance of a just equilibrium. So he saw that the
Catholic church is not a group of men who can believe any-
thing they please. ‘‘As to dogmas and Catholic truths,” he
wrote,‘ “all loyal sons of the church are bound to accept
them.” That is no more than to say that the Catholic church
has a certain personality loyalty to which is essential to mem-
bership. But he saw also that loyalty to the Catholic life was
not the same thing as loyalty to its government. Where that
government seemed to him false to the church he was bound,
as Newman held himself bound, to proceed by the light of his
conscience. “I am driven on,” he wrote, “by a fatality
to follow the dominant influence of my life even if it should
break the heart of all the world,” and thereby he proclaimed
the truth which lies at the bottom of every scheme of social
arrangement. Rome seemed to him to be suffering from a
feverish worship of authority, and to demand as a consequence
an uncritical and unquestioning obedience from Catholics which
it is not in human nature to give.4® The problem then con-
fronted him as to whether he should obey those who had the
technical right to demand his submission, or follow what he
believed to be the truth. Like Lamennais, he came to see
clearly that in such a choice there was in fact no real alternative.

site eet les (4s

42 “Life,” II, 129.

413 Tbid., II, 141.


44 Tbid., II, 142.
415 Thid., II, 146.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 269


What baffled him was the unqualified absolutism of Rome.
She was not amenable, as he deemed,“* to the arguments of
truth and justice. The seal of orthodoxy was set upon views
which virtually denied all personality to the church as a whole
to concentrate it in the Pope alone.” But such a view, as
Dollinger had long before shown, was totally out of accord
with the history of the church. “It is in the collective mind of
the church,” he says,“8 “not in the separate mind of the Pon-


tiff that the truth is elaborated . ... . so the Pope cannot
be conceived to speak excathedra except when he professedly
investigates the ecumenical mind.” Infallibility, in fact, is


reserved for those occasions where the papal will interprets the
“real” will of the church. Obedience then becomes due not
to the Pope as a person, but to the Pope as the registering
centre of a general consensus of opinion. But, it is clear enough,
such a consensus would take account of minds like Loisy and
Tyrrell and their direct condemnation would be thus impossi-
ble. So that he can draw a distinction, often, indeed, an antithe-
sis, between obedience to authority and obedience ta the church,
precisely as Lamennais had done when he urged that Rome
only was against him. Moreover such an absolutism was obvi-
ously bound to result in stagnation. “A creed and a theology,”
he wrote, “ought to have been merely and only the product
of her spiritual life and its exigencies.” But in such an aspect
it would be necessary for dogma to undergo continuous adapta-
tion to the varying needs of each age. The difficulty with Rome
was exactly her use of sovereign power to prevent the exercise
of that adaptive faculty. She claimed to project her decisions
without the category of time; and by claiming an immediately
eternal character for her pronouncements she misunderstood
the nature of society. For the ‘‘only adequate organ of re-
ligious development” was to him “the recognition of the entire
Christian people as the true and immediate Vicarius Christi.’’#°

The distinction, of course, is fundamental; it is the distinc-


416 Thid., II, 149.
“17 Tbid., II, 156.
418 Tbid., II, 156.
419 Thid., II, 185.
#20 Tbid., II, 191.


270 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


tion between autocracy and democratic government. The
“consciously formulated mind and will of the governing body
of the church” could not obtain his final allegiance just because
in his view, it mistook its class interest for the interest of the
whole.#! That governing body was endeavouring to make the
life of the church run into channels which were, in fact, not
wide enough to contain it. To him the unconscious self of the
church was, equally with the conscious, the personality to
which he owed his allegiance.“ The fault of Rome was to
neglect that deeper life and it had thus far failed in its work
of the improvement of civilisation. To Rome, then, he would
owe no duty save that of doing what in him lay of bringing
her back to a sense of her greater mission. Nor was he con-
founded by the obvious difficulty that if the government of
the church had failed no one could officially record her nature.
“When authority,” he wrote,’ “is dumb or stultifies itself,
private conviction resumes its previous rights and liberties.”
For authority is based upon trust and the violation of trust is
duly resultant in its dissolution.

Such a distinction between clericalism and Catholicism is
obviously fundamental enough. The weakness of individual-
ism is admitted, and the purpose of submission to collective
organisation is to remedy it. “Our courage and hope and
confidence,” he said in a noble passage, “are measured by
our sense of the strength of the army to which we belong, of
the history of her past victories.” But the victories must be
the victories of truth and the strength the strength of virtue.
To share in a collective experience is not to be assured of sal-
vation effortlessly. The soldier upon whom there is borne in
a sense of purpose so wrong that the whole personality of the
army becomes for him an evil thing has no alternative save to
lay down his sword. That does not mean that his original
membership was wrong. ‘‘On their spiritual side,” he said of
societies in general, “and in so far as they are freely self-

421 “A Much-abused Letter,” p. 58.

#2 Cf. the very beautiful passage in Ibid., p. 52 f.

#3 Tbid., 47.

424 Ibid., 66.


4% Ibid., 83.
#26 “Through Scylla and Charybdis,” p. 13.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 271


forming, their future evades all prediction since it is not con-
tained in or predetermined by their present . . . . spiritual
development is not a process of passive unfolding, of which
each step is vigorously determined by the preceding; but a
process of active reconstruction, conditioned by the chance
materials furnished by the quite incalculable succession of
experiences.” Life, in fact, refuses the categories of a formal
syllogism, just as Lamennais’ ultramontanism broadened, by
actual contact with chance experience, into a liberal doctrine
so wide that his theology was absorbed into its expanse. So
Tyrrell understood, as Lamennais came to see, that the vital
fact in membership of any society was not the actual bond but
that of which the bond was symbol. He was compelled by his
standards of right not merely to be a member Of his fellowship,
but also to stand outside and judge it.

Nor was that dualism insignificant since it formed the basis
of the society’s authority. ‘‘It is not their red robes,” he said,#2”
“but my own judgment about them that gives the pack of
cardinals any title to distinction. Like Elizabeth, it has frocked
them, and can unfrock them. It is they who are in peril, not
we.” The ability to withstand such a judgment is surely not
the test of social worth. It is obvious enough, in religion
above all things, that the judgment will not be made save in
the most decisive conflicts of interpretation; and the only
criterion of adequate compromise is the conveyance, on one
side or the other, of genuine conviction. Nor does it matter
where the problem of conflict shall arise. We too little realise
that the fundamental principles are so important as inevitably
to challenge an incessant discussion. Nor is it less inevitable
that the existence of variety in temperament should result in
diversity of interpretation. Newman and Manning could
never have agreed in the meaning they attached to the dogmas
of the church any more than it would have been possible for
Cromwell to make his peace with Charles I. What is required
on both sides is a willingness, not, at the final conflict, to use
the bludgeon of authority instead of the rapier of argument.
It was exactly the lack of that willingness on the part of Rome
which resulted in her mistaken conception of authority. So


“7 “Life,” II, 196.


272 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


long as she held that her governmental interpretation of dogma
was not a phase but eternal, she could not, as Tyrrell saw,
but be hostile to intellectual liberty. Partly, of course, her
hostility was the result of her belief in the divinity of her mis-
sion; but even when the temperamental consequences of that
attitude are admitted grave difficulties remain. For even if it
be granted that the Roman church is an eternal society, it
has had periods in its history which are not the expression of
a golden age. Did she not forget, as Tyrrell asked,#* “that
development means death and decay as well as growth, that
it means continuity only by way of reproduction in a new gen-
eration?” Even if Rome expelled from her principles the idea
of development she could not destroy it; for even she must be
bound by the laws of nature.

The problem Tyrrell thus confronted in the church he found
not less acute within the Society of Jesus itself. In the whole
range of theological literature there are few analyses more in-
comparable at once in their subtlety and their simplicity than
the account he penned of his relations with the Society.‘
Nothing of the splendour of Newman’s own Apologia seems
wanting to it; and it has the additional merit of being written
from an impersonal attitude that only adds the greater weight
to its authority. It begins by a refutation of the ordinary
charges against the Jesuit order. ‘‘I do not see in the Society
of Jesus a monstrous and deliberate conspiracy against liberty
and progress in religion and civilisation.”° What he attacks
is the attitude of those within the order who object to criticism
on the ground of disloyalty. One who loves the society to
which he belongs must inevitably work for it; what he found
was that to work for the interests of Catholicism, as he under-
stood them, was to invoke the hostility of his superiors. To
defend liberalism, as he defended it, was to be the upholder
of a cause to the destruction of which the whole forces of the
Society were devoted. Nor could he change its purpose. ‘‘The
alterations needed to adapt it to our days,” he wrote," “were

“817bid., II, 220.

#29 Ibid., II, Ch. XII, and the letter to Father Martin printed as Ap-
pendix III.


48° Ibid., II, 272.
431 Ibid., 277-8.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 273


too radical to be ever recognised or carried out by a body whose
supreme government was vested in the rare assembly of a
senate of men . . . . of whom only about one-eighth repre-
sented the living and progressive nationalities of the world.
Unable to progress with its environment, the Society could only
hope to live and to retain its ascendency in the church by keep-
ing its environment unchanged.” He did not blame it com-
pletely. ‘Corporations and crowds are non-moral agencies,
and, judged by the standard of individual ethics, seem to com-
mit atrocious crimes which, in fact, are no more crimes than
the ravages of sea and storm, or of brute passion, or of other
natural forces.’’#? He rather dissented from the whole idea for
which it had come to stand.*? He objected to its exaction of
“a slavish, unintelligent military obedience” which destroyed
the whole purpose of the true submission to society.“4 He
regards it as importation from state to church and as “wedded
to principles subversive of . . . . social order and prog-
ress.’”4*5 It has become less a zeal for progress than an enthu-
siasm for mechanical uniformity. It has abandoned its trust
in unity of spirit to replace it by a juridical compulsion.*® It
has neglected the manysidedness of personality. ‘‘Even a
soldier,” he finely says,” “has a life outside his barracks in
which he is a man and not merely an instrument . . . . he
does not, like the Jesuit, deliberately, as a matter of religion and
principle, merge his whole life in his profession, nor of set pur-
pose disown his personality and rights as a free spiritual individ-
ual.” Yet it is to this obedience that society drives its mem-
bers. It sets as the correlative of its autocracy an obedience
that is blind and uncriticising. Such a method ‘is the worst
and most profoundly immoral forms of government that the
world has yet known. For the essence of all vice and immorality
is the destruction of spiritual liberty.’’4**


432 Ibid., II, 279. Cf. his essay on the Corporate Mind in “Through
Scylla and Charybdis.”

433 “Life,” II, 465.

434 Ibid., II, 467.

435 Ibid., II, 469.

486 Tbid., II, 476.

437 Ibid., II, 479 f.

438 Tbid., II, 481.


274 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


He does not, it has been pointed out, blame the society as
he would blame a man. “So far,” he writes, “as a society
has a self at all, it must be self-assertive, self-complacent,
proud, egotistical;” but it is just because of its inherent openness
to these dangers that the loyalty of its members dare not be
unlimited. ‘A sane and healthy loyalty, far from blinding a
man, will make him keenly critical of his regiment and observ-
ant of its defects and weakness, and will check any sort of
dangerous complacency and optimism.” He insisted on the
significance of the influence exerted by the corporate action of
the society upon the character of its members. He denounced
its corporate complacency. “The first condition of progress
and improvement,” he said,*° “is a confession of fault or of
fallibility.”” But this the society virtually refused to admit
since it would have been an invitation to thought upon the part
of its members. But thought was incompatible with passivity,
and it was that deadly negation of personality which, above
all, the society desired.


What was the result? “I see in Jesuitism,” he wrote,“

. just the counter-extravagance of Be on on
fie side liberty misinterpreted as the contempt of Buona
on that, authority misinterpreted as the contempt of liberty.
The aa boast is to have stayed the spread of Protestant-
ism and to have saved half Europe to the church. Its success
has been its ruin; its action has been met with reaction; in
buttressing, it has crushed liberty and established Absolutism
: . The true synthesis of liberty and authority is still to
seek.” Assuredly, Tyrrell himself did not pretend to supply it.
But where he insisted upon the extravagance of absolute power
he was surely correct in his assertions. His own case is the
clearest proof of the dangers of a system which regards itself as
immune from attack. The fact is that Nature expresses herself
less in absolutes than in compromises. It may be true, as a
distinguished French thinker has argued,“ that only in the


as


439 Tbid., II, 482.

440 Tbid., II, 485.

441 Ibid., II, 497.

4 Cf, M. Sorel’s preface, p. 12, to M. Berth’s “Les Méfaits des Intel-
lectuals.”’


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 275


absolute affirmative can the seeds of progress bə discovered;
yet the penalty of such formulation is the inability to supply
more than a temporary need. Such lack of elasticity is surely
in itself evidence of an unfitness to survive in an environment
where the true criterion of worth is an adaptability to a chang-
ing environment.

Nor is this all. No discussion of social organisation is satis-
factory which does not take account of the inherently plural
character of human personality. That was what Tyrrell meant
by his urgent insistence upon freedom. For however rich may
be the genius of a man for fellowship he has also an inwardness
of perception which no association can absorb. Few men have
been more passionately at one with the church than was Lamen-
nais before 1829; yet even amidst the fever of a passionate activ-
ity he remained a brooding and lonely being. It is the existence
of that intimate and precious arcanum of the soul which makes
loyalty, in the last analysis, in every case a matter of the private
judgment of each of us. Organisation may attempt, as Tyrrell
urged that the Society of Jesus attempted, to root out the
recesses. Doubtless a long training in subjection to despotism
is more powerful than the individual will. Yet the experience
of nations seems to suggest that the effect is one rather to be
stamped afresh upon each generation than to be inherited by
the memory of a people. Excessive authoritarianism breeds
less affection for, than suspicion of, a government. For it is
guilty of one of the gravest fallacies in the business of adminis-
tration by its effort to treat men as uniform machines. No
government is secure which fails to remember the uniqueness
of the individual. Practical legislation may take the greatest
common measure of consent or of desire, but where men are
driven back to first principles it is only moral unanimity that is,
as the fathers of the church were wise enough to realise, in the
full sense effective. Every Ireland will have its Ulster’ where
fundamental human emotion is at stake and no theory of
society that neglects it will be adequate because it will be then
no more than a theory of coercion. A papal condemnation may
drive a Montalembert and a Hefele into acceptance of ideals to
which they have been a stranger; but a Lamennais and a


443 This must not be taken to indicate a belief that Ulster has been right.


276 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


Dollinger will remain unmoved, and it is the protest that will
live rather than the acquiescence.

In the last instance, then, the individual can make his appeal
beyond that tribunal which, for practical purposes, is clothed
with sovereign power. ‘Above the constitutional headship,”
wrote Tyrrell,“ “there is the pre-constitutional, which is a
necessary fact and not a doctrine. It cannot be denied that in
the life of that formless church which underlies the hierarchic
organisation, God’s spirit exercises a silent but sovereign
criticism; that his resistlessly effectual judgment is made known,
not in the precise language of definition and decree, but in the
slow manifestation of practical results; in the survival of what
has proved itself life-giving; in the decay and oblivion of all
whose value was but relative and temporary.” It is, perhaps,
an appeal to the future; but it is an appeal to which judgment
must be rendered, since it takes its stand upon the basic char-
acter of the institution involved. It means, of course, ulti-
mately, a refusal on the part of men to accept the reduction of
social form to unity; for such reduction implies, as we have
learned, the destruction of what is living and vigorously in-
dividual to be replaced by a meaningless uniformity. A Lamen-
nais who surrendered his liberalism otherwise than by the slow
arrival of a conviction of its error would be no longer, in any
real sense, the Lamennais we know. That is why, despite its
practical efficiency as a working instrument, authority must, at
every stage of its activity submit to the closest scrutiny. It
must not so exert itself as to involve treason on the part of its
members to their consciences. From some, doubtless, that
treason will not be difficult to secure; but there will always be
those who, like Lamennais and Tyrrell, feel themselves bound to
show “that resistance was still a contingency to be reckoned
with . . . . that Rome was trading on the assumption that
the idea of actual obedience had so triumphed that she might
say or do anything, however reckless.’’“4 The choice has its
difficulties and, as Tyrrell finely said,‘ “the deliverers of the
crowd will be stoned and crucified by the crowd . . . . (but


“4 “Through Scylla and Charybdis,” p. 381
45 “Life,” TI, 340.
446 Toid., Il, 347.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 277


when) . . . . the religion of the crowd is corrupted .

there we cannot be with the crowd.” Both of them saw that
Rome had gone beyond the boundaries of her real purpose, that
she was asking’from her children an allegiance to ends in fact
unconcerned with the true ethos of catholicism. To Lamennais
she was the ally of despotism as to Tyrrell she was the assailant
of civilisation and each saw the fatal prospects of her effort.
“Rome,” wrote Tyrrell in a letter that might have been Lamen-
nais’ ,“*” “ Rome cares nothing for religion—only for power... .
Hine illae lacrimae! she will never yield willingly. But her power
will soon be broken to pieces by the pressure of modern govern-
ments—weary of her turbulence and sedition; and then per-
haps she may have no reason to oppose modernism and may
remember her true raison d'être.” But until that return had
been made obedience was impossible. “I rightly or wrongly
hold,” Tyrrell said to one who consulted him in distress,“
“there is a limit to ecclesiastical as to civil authority—a time
when resistance is duty and submission treason. If I believe
the captain is unawares steering for the rocks I wil not obey
him. I am not infallible; he may be right; but I must go by
my own moral certainties.” That is still the watchword of the
deepest freedom.

Yet there is one weakness in Tyrrell’s attitude upon which
it is worth while for a moment to insist. There are few things
more dangerous than the effort to evolve for corporate person-
ality a standard of judgment different from the criterion by
which we judge of the conduct of men. It is, of course, true
enough that the unity of corporate life is less strong, in the sense
that it is less tangible, than that of individual personality. Yet
it is clear enough that in law, in politics, in economics, at the
present time, the emphasis of our needs is driving us to an
insistence upon vicarious liability. We are forced more and
more to recognise that while, in the last resort, a corporate
relation is, basically, a relation of individuals, nevertheless, for
most practical purposes, it is of the fact of their unity that we
must take notice. How Rome is built up matters, to outsiders,
but little; but the influence of the Rome so built upon modern


“47 Thid., II, 355.
“s Tbid., II, 405.


278 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


life matters to all of us very greatly. A modern corporation
acts as an individual would act in a similar situation; that is to
say by agents and servants. Surely, if that be the case, an
adequate interpretation of their activities must take account of
the real unity whence they derive.*”

It is not an adequate reply to answer as certainly Tyrrell,
perhaps Lamennais also, would have answered, that the “real”
will of an institution may differ from that of those who operate
it, that the will of the Roman Church is not the will of its sov-
ereign pontiff. The will upon which our judgment must be
expressed is surely the will that is promulgated and obeyed.
The dumb and enforced acquiescence of a people may be
tragedy enough; but if the cohesive force of their acquiescence
is bent to the corporate purpose it is difficult to see how the
separation of their acts from its own may be made. For, after
all, it is precisely the fact of their acquiescence which permits
the registration of wrong. The only course is active dissent
from the conclusions of authority, as both Lamennais and
Tyrrell implicitly admitted when they withdrew from the
Roman Communion rather than follow it in paths they deemed
mistaken. Lamennais could easily have urged that it was folly
to pit his strength against Rome and have acquiesced in the
condemnation of democracy. Tyrrell could similarly have
insisted that his single effort would not avail to teach Rome the
inevitability of modernist doctrine. Yet they would not have
been Lamennais and Tyrrell if they had been silent even where
they loved so greatly.

For the fact is that to argue, as Tyrrell argued, that a social
will is by its nature more liable to egoism than an individual
will means surely no more than the answer that we must then
be more vigorous in the application of our standards. Our
judgment that corporate sin is more easily to be excused is
probably no more than an inference from the separation
Machiavelli effected between politics and ethics. How fatal
that step has been Lord Acton has magistrally demonstrated in
a famous argument.“ It is, in short, a simple excuse for wrong-


449 Cf. my papers in 29 Harv. L. Rev. 404 and 26 Yale Law Journal 122 f.
460 Cf. the great inaugural lecture, reprinted in his “Lectures in Modern
History” with the introduction to Mr. Burd’s edition of “The Prince.”


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 279


ful conduct. Because, as in the famous Taff Vale case, men will
do things for their trade union which they would hesitate to do
in private life, that is no reason to excuse an institution of which
the nature demands illegal activities from its agents. Because
the church of Rome was anxious to discredit the efforts of the
French republic, that does not justify the activities which
culminated in the curious tissue of falsehood and corruption
revealed by the publication of the nuncio’s dispatches.**! If we
are definitely wedded to a complex scheme of group-loyalties,
the only method of moral safety is to demand from each grour
the standards exacted from its individual member. The argu-
ment so often and so unthinkingly made about the non-existence
of corporate mind misses the point completely. We are dealing
with unified action and we cannot mistake the real character
of its personality. We have too recently had demonstration of
the tragic evil which comes from elevating it without the moral
law, to be willing to allow it release from the penalty of its cor-
porate offences.

Such an attitude, indeed, would serve to strengthen the posi-
tion of Lamennais. It is no more than the affirmation that
what, above all, we need is the democratic interpretation of the
principles of authority. We refuse to reduce the individual to a
nullity simply because he is a human being. The basis of our
social organisation is living and not mechanical; it is founded
upon the consciences of men. It does not conceal from itself
the dangers to which it lies open. Consciously, it is a threat
against order. Consciously, it offers a loophole to what may
well resolve itself into revolution. But that is only because we
are certain that the supreme thing in the modern world is the
love of what men deem to be right. A society which is able to
admit the protest of its members has already safeguarded itself
against the shock of disruption. If the principle of its life be
the exclusion of fundamental dissent, that life is already poisoned
at its source. That was why Tyrrell flung abroad his flaming
protest against the evil of absolutism. The individual doubt-
less, will often be mistaken just as authority itself has never
been free from error. Yet in the clash of ideas we shall


451 Cf, the collection of documents published as “Les Fiches Pontificales
de Monsignor Montagnini” (Paris, 1908).


280 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


find the means of truth. There is no other safeguard of
progress.


XIII. CONCLUSION


LAMENNAIS never returned to the Catholic church. He lived
and died and suffered with those for whom he had chosen the
path of exile. His ideas grew more and more liberal until,
towards the end, he found himself in close kinship with the
apostles of communism. Of the love the common people bore
him there is evidence enough; and his pen was ceaselessly
employed in the task of their liberation. He found new friends
who, in some measure, at least, healed the wounds that had
been caused by the defection of the old. The church made
divers efforts to secure his conversion but always without
success. His death seems to have meant but little to a democ-
racy that was being fed on the dangerous fruits of imperial
adventure. Yet even as it was, so great was the honour of his
name that the government of Louis Napoleon compelled his
interment in the earlier hours of dawn. He was buried, as he
had wished, without any religious ceremonial; and it was by
his request that Auguste Barbet refused the usual offer of a
cross. That was perhaps less an epitaph than a prophecy.


CHAPTER FOUR
THE POLITICAL THEORY OF ROYER-COLLARD!
I. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE RESTORATION


HE restoration of the Bourbon House created more
problems than it solved. It was intended by the allies
less as a consecration of political doctrine than as the
refutation of the Napoleonic idea. It had, indeed, the merit
of preserving, to some extent, the self-respect of the French
nation by returning to it a ruler supported by every historic
tradition in France anterior to the Revolution. But it was
exactly therein that its error is to be found; for to make ab-
straction of the Revolution had already become impossible.
The new system, in fact, was, from the outset, incapable even
of understanding the problems with which it was called upon
to deal. Those who had returned with Louis from exile in
nowise perceived that new and acceptable dogmas had already
replaced the prejudiced privileges of the ancien régime. They
came not to fulfil but to destroy. They did not realise that
even the despotic system of Napoleon had taken due account
of the revolutionary spirit. They were, above all things, eager
to restore the social and political edifice of the eighteenth cen-
tury. They did not understand that their principles, no less
than their methods, were already obsolete.
For the Revolution, despite its excesses, had been a fruitful
epoch in political thought. It had been an incredible experi-
ence in the formation of political habits. Those who had


1 The fundamental authority is the life of de Barante which collects the
text of Royer’s speeches. M. Faguet has a brilliant study of him in the
first volume of his “ Politiques et Moralistes’’ to which I am much indebted.
There is a useful little life by Spuller; and M. Nismes-Desmarets has
recently published a laborious and exhaustive analysis of his political
doctrines. The essay by Scherer in the first volume of his “Etudes” and
that by C. de Rémusat in the second of his collected papers are both of
much value.


282 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


tasted the sweets of national sovereignty were not willing to
resign their power because Napoleon had been beaten upon
the battlefield. From the thousand strands of the complex
web of the Revolution, a certain order and meaning had eventu-
ally emerged. The idea of privilege had suffered a final shock.
The sovereignty of the state had been transferred from king to
people. The Declaration of Rights had embodied an enthusiastic
belief in the dignity of human personality which suggested the
potentialities of a new and profitable organization of society.
The idea of toleration, if it had been bent by the oppression of
Napoleon and the unclean craftiness of Fouché, was far from
broken. The third estate had arrived at manhood; from being
nothing it had come, as in Sieyés’ superb prophecy, to demand
all. If it was a serious limitation upon democratic growth that
the workers should have been excluded from power still, when
nobility and bourgeoisie stood face to face, the prospects of
advance were fortunate. For no one could doubt where the
victory must one day lie.

Little enough, indeed, of all this was perceived by those
whom the downfall of Napoleon had swept into power. What
rather is remarkable is the rapidity with which the old order
was established again. The reaction was as thorough-going as
the Revolution; and even if the essential work of the Revolu-
tion had penetrated too subtly into the structure of the social
fabric to be overthrown at all speedily, signs are not wanting
that it was not for lack of ill-will towards it. The Restoration
divides itself clearly into three periods; and only in one brief
moment was there the faint hope that a compromise with
liberalism might be effected. No justification save that of
revenge can ever be found for the pitiless extravagance of the
reaction which followed the Hundred days;? not even the com-
bined efforts of a king and government which alike took no
satisfaction in persecution were able to withstand the brutality
of its effort. From 1816, when the moderation of M. Deecazes
stayed for a period of four years the desire of royalism to come
to death-grips with the remaining factions which clung to the
ideas of 1793, there was hope of peace. But the period was


2 M. Viviani has finely described it in his contribution to Jaurés’ “His-
toire Socialiste.” See Vol. VII p. 99, 103.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 283


full of troubles and dissension; and the assassination of the
Duc de Berri persuaded Louis that a compromise with liberal-
ism was an invitation to disaster. Henceforth, as M. Scherer
has finely said, it was already Charles X who ruled. The
system that the charter had endeavored to inaugurate was
struck at its foundations. The reactionary efforts of the Roy-
alists only spurred their opponents to greater violence. It was
the old antagonism between the émigrés and the Revolution
in which the former had learned that the methods of parlia-
mentary government can be used to effect an administrative
despotism. Henceforth they had no other object; and the bar-
ricades of 1830 were the one possible answer to their pretensions.

It was an assault upon individualism that they attempted;
and thinkers were not lacking who were willing to invent a
theory upon which to embroider the necessity of oppression.
Nor is the passion by which they were inspired unintelligible
to a generation which has felt the shock of an European catas-
trophe. They proclaimed the superiority of society to the in-
dividual and drew therefrom the inference that their own self-
interest might be equated therewith. To the revolutionary in-
sistence that only by his own efforts could man create an ade-
quate civilisation, they retorted that the only true creation
could come from the hands of God. Where the Revolution
had asserted the significance of novelty they affirmed the su-
preme value of tradition. They sought out the true principles
of social order and discovered them in the antithesis of revolu-
tionary doctrine. Whether their interest was in politics, as
with Bonald, or in religion, as with Lamennais, it was always
the secret of unity for which they were searching. They were
convinced that the source of the Revolution had been the
weakness of authority and they sought to re-establish it upon
an unshakeable foundation. They had no experience of a
world in which power might be safeguarded by its dispersion.
All they could understand was its expression in the ancient
terms. They considered the problem of the relation of the in-
dividual to the state and answered unhesitatingly that he must
be absorbed by it. It is the beatification of the status quo and
it is very intelligible. Their fundamental desire was to safe-


3 “Etudes,” I, 68.


284 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


guard a system which they believed essential for social salva-
tion. That it happened to coincide with their retention of the
control of the state was perhaps rather accidental than the
result of set purpose. For they were, in some sort, empirical
in their outlook. They had a real sense of the growth of insti-
tutions.4 They set themselves firmly against a political theory
which should fit its facts to an a priori system. But their em-
piricism was essentially emotional and, in reality, it signified
no more than the translation into facts of their political desires.
Their sense of development was limited to their respect for
certain well-worn and traditional avenues of growth. They
were almost amazingly unable to understand that the Revolu-
tion was a fact no less than a tragedy; and their effort to ignore
its meaning was only evidence of their intellectual limitation.
The truth simply is that they were in no real sense seekers
of truth. Political ideas for them were essentially offensive
weapons. They held themselves at liberty to misinterpret
ideas, to falsify conclusions, to distort purposes. Their view
of human nature was uniformly low and they were never logical
enough to admit that their vilification must apply equally to
themselves. They seized upon a single fact in the political
history of France and made of it a gospel of defiance. Power
was theirs, and the efforts of philosophers and evil men had
hurled them from what was rightly their own. What, then,
they had to do was to search out the conditions upon which
the maintenance of its restoration might be possible. Of the
obvious change in social perspective they took no account.
That commercial growth and intellectual discovery was ren-
dering obsolete the paternal system for which they stood spon-
sor they had no shadow of perception. That the source of au-
thority in anything so complex as a political society can never
‘in fact be single they did not in the least degree understand.
They wished the people well; but the possession of will they
restricted to themselves. They did not grasp the basic fact
that the state is in truth no more than a will-organisation and
that if, on occasion, that will may result in unified activity
that gives no guarantee of permanent unity. They misunder-
stood the conditions of state-life. They did not perceive that


4 Cf. H. Michel, “L’Idée de l'Etat,” p. 167 f.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 285


there are always limits to the exercise of power. They were
so nicely tender of their own consciences that they did not
admit the existence of conscience outside their own order.
They were so satisfied with their manipulation of the state
that they mistook their private good for the general welfare
and Paris retorted in its usual fashion to that error.

Their theocracy, in brief, was as violent as the passionate
democracy they so virulently condemned. Yet it is important
to remember that their ideas were not confined to France.
The war of liberation resulted in England in seventeen abortive
years of stagnation and distress. The very poets who had
written hymns to liberty found excuses for the deferment of
its application. The typical English statesman of the age
was Eldon; and the toryism he represented was not less pro-
found than that of France. The English bishops adopted an
attitude to Catholic emancipation which suggested nothing so
much as a belief that England was the private appanage of
the English church. The Duke of Wellington was little more
able to appreciate the drift of opinion than the Prince de
Polignac. If England avoided a theoretical revolution, the
Reform Act of 1832 was symbolical of a new era in the history
of political structure. It was the admission that Toryism was
dead, and when Sir Robert Peel became Prime Minister his
first act was to recognize that a revolution had been silently
effected.

Nor was the reaction less marked in Germany. The effort
of Savigny was toward nothing so much as the dethronement
of the rationalism by which the eighteenth century had been
distinguished. “Law,” he said in effect, “cannot be made at
the behest of men;” and if he was justified in his emphasis on
the thousand forces that go to its construction he was yet as
surely transforming the doctrine of evolution into a defence of
conservatism. His theory of legislative function is so precisely
the antithesis of that of Rousseau as naturally to occasion the


5 Cf. my “Problem of Sovereignty,” p. 123. The intellectual current of
time is finely analysed in Professor Dicey’s classic “Law and Public
Opinion,” Lect. V.

6 The really admirable essay of R. Haym “Die Romantische Schule” is a
mine of wisdom upon this problem.


286 AUTHORITY. IN; THE MODERN STATE


suspicion that he was answering the latter. His sacrifice of
the individual to the state, his insistence upon the superiority
of its life to that of its constituent parts’ could be used, in the
hands of Hegel, as the high road to a thoroughgoing absolutism.
Herder and Schelling could find sufficient beauty in the romance
of Rome to disguise the direction in which its ideals were bend-
ing. Fichte did not hesitate to absorb.the individual in the
state. In such an analysis personality becomes no more than
the opportunity to become part of an immense organism in
which no interstices are to be found. But such negation of the
individual mind is, in fact, no more in its results than a the-
ocracy in which God has been replaced by the King of Prussia.
Germany, in fact, threw off the bonds of Roman despotism only
to demonstrate that the root of her objection was less to the
despotism than to its foreign character. So she, too, could
forge the weapons which, in Bismarck’s hands, were to stimu-
late the ideal of a world reduced to an unity expressed in terms
of German dominion.

Liberalism, in such an attitude, was clearly difficult enough.
Much of this distrust of freedom was, of course, intelligible.
It was a dictum of Sir Henry Maine’s that progress is the
exception in history; and certainly in each epoch of novel
ideas the universal tendency of those who hold the reins of
power has been to insist upon the virtue of traditional system.
They feared so greatly the movement, of liberal ideas that it
seems never to have occurred to them that they might be
harnessed to government. They met the proclamation of belief
with an emphatic defiance; and demonstrated once more the
danger that is inherent in the very fact of power. Those who
stood by the cause of freedom in these difficult years had
much obloquy to undergo. To accept the fact of the Revolu-
tion was held to be synonymous with a justification of its ex-
cesses. To put the individual outside the state, to deny his
absorption by the various loyalties by which he was bound,
was regarded as giving a handle to every sort and kind of
dangerous ambition. Anyone who reads the long list of legis-


1 Cf. his “Heutige System das Rém. Rechts,” Bk. I, Ch. II, Sec. 9.
8 His “Geschlossene Handelstaat’’ (1800) is a striking example of this
attitude.


AUTHORITY IN orHeE MODERN STATE 287


lative efforts during the Bourbon Restoration can make no
mistake as to its nature. Control of the judiciary, censorship
of the press, restriction upon the right of association, laws of
exception, limitation upon the right of franchise, a system of
military privilege’—by these on every hand we are confronted.
The idea of toleration seems almost dead. The generous en-
thusiasm of 1789 is hardly to be perceived. It is a cynical
generation, mistrustful, wearied, without conviction of prog-
ress, without courage to experiment. It is a generation that
has seen its parents gamble for their lives and conceived a
natural distaste for adventure. Yet it is also a generation re-
deemed from unrelieved suspicion of men by the devoted eager-
ness of some few of its most distinguished figures. A generation
in which Guizot learned the principles of representative gov-
ernment and in which Royer-Collard united to ethics the poli-
tics from which it had been too long divorced, is not entirely
without its fascination. It serves, at any rate, to enforce the
lesson that even the most vicious of political systems contains
within itself the germs of self-destruction.


IJ. THE THEORY OF THE CHARTER


THERE is little or no dramatic interest in the life of Royer-
Collard. He was a typical member of the bourgeosie whom
one at least of his opponents did not hesitate to characterise
as jealous of the ancient nobility.” He sat in the National As-
sembly, and his deep opposition to the Jacobin policy resulted
in a narrow escape from the guillotine.!! With the coming of
more moderate days he sat in the Council of Five Hundred and
was, for a time, the cherished adviser of the exiled Bourbons.
In the Napoleonic régime he withdrew from political life and
occupied himself with the study of philosophy as a lecturer at
the Sorbonne. With the return of Louis XVIII he took a dis-
tinguished place in the lower house of the Chamber of Depu-
ties and remained there almost to his death. Apart from a
place on the Council of State, a directorship in the council of


9 Cf. the speech of Royer-Collard, Barante, 1, 371 f.
10 Villéle, “Mémoires,” I, 346.
11 See the splendid story of his escape in the Life by Spuller, p. 29-30.


288 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


Public Instruction and a brief Presidency of the Chamber, he
held no political office. He was in sympathy with no adminis-
tration save at a single, moment in his career. Save for his
association with Guizot, De Serre and Camille Jordan, it is
not untrue to suggest that he never belonged to a political
party in the sense of merging his convictions with those of a
group of men. His authority came from the power of his elo-
quence, the impressive distinction of his personality, the sub-
stantial splendour of his convictions. He was, indeed, a difficult
colleague. He had a sufficient sense of his power to make others
realise a little acutely his awareness of it.? He was regarded
for so long as infallible by a group of admiring friends that he
came, in the end, almost to share their convictions upon that
question." His spirit was difficult alike from his mistrust of
power and of its exercise, as from his persistent and disdainful
refusal of office. Whether Villéle is right in his Suspicion that
his aloofness came from a pride that had been hurt by the
ingratitude of Louis XVIII"* the fact remains that while he
was willing to disturb ministers he was never eager to construct
them. Of his private life we know little or nothing; and though
his love of Pascal is evidence enough of his sincere attachment
for the somewhat mellowed jansenism amidst which he was edu-
cated, we have little enough evidence whereby to estimate its
influence upon his opinions. All that can be said of the man
himself is that he was sincere, that he was honest, and that he
was deservedly eminent. There have been few men in history
whose life is so completely to be sought in the doctrines that
he preached.

The name that has become attached to his school is, in truth,
in no small degree misleading. We tend to think of the Doctrin-
aires as a body of men who applied arid principles to circum-
stances for which:they are unsuited. It is much more accurate
to compare them to that Fourth Party which rendered so great
a service to English politics in the last century. Different as


12 Cf. Vitrolles, “Memoires,” III, 73.

13 Cf. remarks of the Duchess de Broglie in Barante, “Memoires, ” II, 374-
4 Cf. Guizot “Memoires” (Eng. trans.), I, 117.

16 Spuller. op. cit. 154

16 Villéle op. cit. II, 46.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 289


were their constituent personalities, the four men in each were
invaluable alike from the independence as from the ability of
their criticism. Each continually drove back government upon
the principles from which it took its vise, principles too often so
implicit in the business of deliberation as to be forgotten by
those whom they inspire. Not that the Doctrinaires were any
clearer than Lord Randolph Churchill in their ultimate meta-
physic. What surrounds them is less a theory than an atmos-
phere, so that M. Michel could without injustice claim that
what they attempted was simply the analysis and justification
of a certain interpretation of circumstances.” Yet the assertion
is perhaps less true of Royer-Collard than it is of his colleagues.
Anyone who compares the political theory of Guizot with his
policy as minister will not be inclined to doubt the grotesque
flexibility of his ideas. Royer-Collard’s attitude was in every
situation consistent. If he seemed to be effecting a compromise
between the ancien régime and the Revolution, he would
probably have explained his effort by justifying it. The whole of
his life was spent in the insistence that government depends upon
rational principles of compromise. He was alike opposed to the
gloomy extravagances of royalism as to the democratic- pre-
tensions of the disappointed heirs of the Revolution. Each
signified for him the party of a despotism and he endeavored to
search out the philosophy of a juste milieu. It was thus that he
was led, as Guizot has aptly remarked, to the maintenance of
interests rather than the affirmation of rights. That was why
he equally condemned the Chambre Introuvable and the ideas
of 1793. For he believed that the true analysis of political
structure renders impossible any conception of national inter-
ests which suggests their unified nature. He on the contrary
insisted that the state is composed of interests often antag-
onistic between which an equilibrium must be maintained by
compromise. The maintenance of that balance was the busi-
ness of government and it was in that very absence of unity that
he therefore discovered merit; for, by its very nature, it set,
as he deemed, a limit to the abuse of power.

What, in fact, is the keynote of his whole doctrine is the


17 Michel, “‘L’Idée de L’Etat,” p. 291.
18 Guziot, “Memoires” (Eng. trans.), I, 154.


290 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


denial of the existence of sovereignty. He admitted the exist-
ence of power, but he was always, as Guizot remarked,” a mor-
alist who was suspicious of its exercise. The result was his
insistence that its necessary limitations should be discovered
and it was to that search that he devoted himself.2° The pecu-
liar expression of policy for which he stood was embodied in the
charter. To him the charter was not so much a compromise
as a solution. He never seems to have realised how unwillingly
it had been drawn from the restored king. He did not feel,
with so many of his contemporaries, its lack of clarity. He did
not understand their refusal to believe in its certainties. “For
all of us,” Barante has said,” “it was simply a formality exacted
by circumstances and destined to perish with them. The Lib-
erals saw with what repugnance and, consequently, with how
little good faith, submission had been made to the necessities of
the Revolution.” Royer-Collard did not regard it in this way.
Sceptical. of all things he may have been by nature;?? but in the
virtues of the charter he put complete confidence. It was for
him a touchstone by which the rightness of all action might be
tested. He looked upon it as the crystallised experience of the
whole of French history.

It was the expression of such limitations upon the exercise
of power as the past seemed to suggest. Sovereignty of king
and people it alike rejected. The one presupposed a despotism
and the other a republic. But France by her political nature
was a monarchy in which the king governed by means of his
ministers. He chose his ministers and his will was law. But
upon his action a vital check was laid. The Chamber of Depu-
ties was a deliberative council resort to which gave government
the means of realising wisdom in legislation.” Since the object
of royalty was to translate into action the balance of interests
within the Chamber the result was to limit the possibility of
despotic government. Neither king nor Parliament was therefore
sovereign for the simple reason that the power of each was lim-


19 “Memoires,y’ 1, 117.

20 Barante, “Life,” II, 130.

21 “Memoires,” Vol. I, p. 385.
2 Ibid., III, 20.

23 Barante, I, 219.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 291


ited, either in practice or in theory. To each was assigned func-
tions which, while they might involve the exercise of will, never
admitted the possibility of a will without control. The king
was government, and government might involve the exercise
of force; but the problem was always the extent of force to be
used and the test was the principles of the Charter. Nor did
he admit an uncontrolled right in the people. They represented
only the brute mass of men and he would not admit that the
mere agglomeration of numbers would justify the exercise of
sovereign powers. The despotism of many was for him still
a despotism, and he rejected it.24 He would no more admit that
principles so fundamental can be contradicted by tradition or
number than he would have admitted the justice of extrava-
gance.

The psychological background of this attitude it is not diffi-
cult to discover. The abuse of sovereignty under the ancien
régime had resulted in the despotism of the Convention. In
each case the claim of uncontrolled power had resulted in the
destruction of liberty. It did not matter that in one case that
lack of limitation could give itself historic background. It was
unimportant that in the other men were tasting, for the
first time, a right which they had been too long denied. He saw
clearly that some system of checks and balances was essential
if order and peace were to be safeguarded. That safeguard he
discovered in the Charter. It was the connective tissue of the
body-politic. It represented the principles upon which the state
could with security lead its life. To say that the charter was
the source of law was to say that any specific exercise of power
was in accord with the tradition of France. And the charter
divided power. If it gave the king the power of government,
it gave power of criticism, of suggestion, of grievance to the
aristocracy and the delegates of the people. So complex is its
scheme of contribution to law-making that when the act is on
the statute-book none can in reality say whence, exactly, it is
derived. But that is to show that the charter is successful. It
is to admit that varying interests have combined in a result
which, because limited by all, is acceptable to all.


2% Ibid., II, 152, 463.
% Cf. Faguet, op. cit., I, 263.


292 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


It is the whole history of France that he finds in the charter.”
Long centuries have gone to its painful elaboration. It was
needful that he should urge the accuracy of this fiction in order
thereby that he might counterbalance the strength of royalism.
For, clearly, that upon which he was engaged was the substitu-
tion of a rule of law for a rule of force. Unless he could gain the
admission that the strength of a law is not the chance acquies-
cence of a majority behind it the administration of power would
be therein deprived of its moral significance. But, to that end,
it was essential that he should not have to struggle against the
past and he prevented that catastrophe by annexing it. He saw
quite clearly that two powers stood face to face. The monarchy
had elaborated the dogma of personal sovereignty; the Revolu-
tion had transferred it to the nation. If he could emphasise the
legitimacy of the one, by which he meant its full accord with the
national tradition, he could then insist upon the significance of
the other. He could point out that the decline of royal absolu-
tism was only the growth of a condition already inherent in the
ancien régime, France was the synthesis of many sovereignties
which need not always claim a royal origin.” They had lived
together; and that was to say that the conception of a balance
of internal powers was already old. What the Revolution had
done was to abolish those sovereignties and to leave the indivi-
dual face to face with the state. “Nous ne sommes pas citoy-
ens,” he said in an effective phrase, ‘nous sommes des admin-
istrés,” and the problem was to prevent the submergence of the
individual that had been effected by the centralisation of power.

That, in effect, was the object of the charter. The path from
the despotism of the ancien régime to the new despotism of
the Revolution was largely accidental but equally dangerous.
“La démocratie,” he said in a famous sentence, “coule à pleins
bords”? and there was for him no need to suspect it of needing
safeguards any more inherent than the ancient monarchy had
possessed. What then it clearly became necessary to do was to
put certain states of fact beyond the reach of ordinary adminis-


2 Ibid.

27 Barante, II, 13.
28 Ibid., IT, 131.
29 Ibid., II, 134.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 293


tration. France had become egalitarian and centralised. The
pressure of its parts must not overwhelm certain principles that
safeguard the fullness of life. These principles are rights in the
possession of which the individual will find protection against
absorption.® These rights will be general in character; Jacques
Bonhomme has been made the center of the French state by the
Revolution. They will be private rights in the sense that they
attach to individual personality. But they will be general in
that unlike the rights of the ancien régime they will not be ex-
ceptional in character. They will replace the old privileges that
the flood-tide of 1789 had borne away upon its eddies. They
will be a centre of inviolability and thus a limitation upon power.
Therein he finds of course, the main source of their virtue.


IHI. NECESSARY FREEDOMS


BRoADLY speaking, the liberties which lie at the base of his
system were four in number. Liberty of the press he would
perhaps have regarded as most fundamental. It was, for him,
not merely a condition of political liberty, but, even more, its
very foundation.*! That it might result in abuse he would cer-
tainly not have denied any more than he would have refused to
punish the violation of the right to publication.*? The problem
for him was to find the conditions under which the right could
be most wisely exercised. It was wrong to dispair of a solution.
It was wrong because the result of so desperate a conclusion must
result either in an anarchy or in despotism.* But it was only
by means of the press that the ideas of the mass of men might
become known. Such knowledge clearly must set limits to the
exercise of power. It is a safeguard; for it is from popular
silence that, above all, the idea of despotism draws its richest
nourishment. ‘‘ Power,” he said in a striking sentence,** “like
the individual, has its temperament, its manner, its natural
instinct.” But that is to say that it is capable of being influ-
enced, and freedom of the press was a valuable weapon to that


30 Tbid., I, 298.
31 Ibid., I, 340.
32 Barante, II, 500.
33 Ibid., I, 341.
34 Ibid., I, 349.


294 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


end. Its inconvenience to government he in no sense denied;
but he attributed that inconvenience less to the inherent nature
of thought than to the absorptiveness of power. So long as a
desire for arbitrary action is checked at every point of its ad-
vance by those whose business it is to examine its justification,
its translation in fact is sufficiently remote to ensure the general
security. That in practice it will become the possession of a
few he knew. But he was unwilling to leave at the mercy of
government the surest method of criticising it. It was a barrier
against absolution. In his eyes it needed no further justification.

It was, indeed, for him the replacement of those old checks on
the abuse of monarchy which had characterised the ancien
régime. Just as the independent magistracies of ancient France
had limited the full exercise of sovereignty for the common
good, so is freedom of the press a political institution which
safeguards the rule of law. ‘‘The day on which it perishes,”
he said,‘ is the day on which we shall return to servitude.” He
insisted, moreover, upon its necessity for another reason. The
democracy of France was full of spirit and energy. It was pos-
sible to direct, it was impossible to destroy its progress. What
it meant was the admission of an ever greater number of men to
the full benefits of civilisation.’ Nothing so surely prevented
the growth of wrongheaded thinking in a changing society as the
free interchange of thought. Democracy had power; and
nothing was more useless than the failure to recognise that the
possession of power meant influence in the work of government.
The whole problem by which they were confronted was the
instruments by which that power should be exerted. To de-
prive the people of a liberty which had taken such deep root in
France was to destroy the surest guarantee of peace. It was to
drive underground ideas which must then translate themselves
into action without the purifying influence of criticism and of
correction.*® It was to offer no alternative between conquest
and resolution. It resulted in the profanation of Justice. “The
only remedy for liberty,” he said in a magnificent speech,

3 Ibid., II, 132.

36 Barante, II, 133.

87 Ibid., II, 134.


38 Tbid., II, 138.
39 Ibid., II, 293.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 295


“is prison, the only remedy for intelligence is ignorance.” But
upon both of these it is only the most dishonourable of gov-
ernments that takes its stand.

In similar fashion he demanded freedom of religious belief.
Every church was a power in the state and its danger to the
body politic could only be mitigated by the admission of its
freedom.“ That was why a privileged church resulted in dis-
content as it was why a theocracy was the most dangerous form
of absolute rule.* For to add to political power the sanction of
religion was to make captive the intelligence of men. That was
why a church to which freedom had been guaranteed was a per-
petual pledge of private liberty. It was the admission that
there is no institution so vast as to absorb the complete alle-
giance of man. It made him conscious of his duty to his intel-
ligence which, in fact, is his duty to his humanity. It results in
the freedom of his soul. It insists upon the development of his
conscience. It enables him to refuse submission to wrong by
the creation of a criterion of right which is not merely the judg-
ment of the state. It is a powerful safeguard of originality
because, by reminding the citizen of the perpetual duty of polit-
ical judgment, it guards that individualism which makes him
adamant against the assault of absolute power.

Nor is he less insistent upon the influence of religious freedom
on the church itself. Where the church is free it is an association
of consciences and at once a moral element is introduced into
its composition.* It is a republic within the state, an associa-
tion which sets limits to the demand the state may make upon
its members. But once its freedom is changed into state-union
the conditions of value disappear. Inevitably it becomes offici-
alised. Inevitably those who direct it are compelled to subvert
it to their purposes from the very temptations it offers. It lives
on the bounty of the state and the price of its maintenance is at
least its silence and in general its support. It brings to the cen-
tralised power a source of authority of which the possession is
fraught with danger. It gives a religious sanction to state-de-


40 Barante, II, 99.
4 IL, 103.

42 Ibid., II, 100.

4 Ibid.


296 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


cisions which are in fact entirely without relation to ecclesias-
tical purposes. It aggravates the possibility of despotism by
tinging government with the suspicious colours of theocracy.
It offers temptation in another direction. It asks, inevitably,
for privileges.“ It desires to exalt itself at the cost of its com-
petitors. It ceases to regard any conscience other than its own.
It puts itself under the protection of the political police. It sub-
mits the choice of its rulers to government.* It meddles in the
appanage of temporal power. What it may gain in dignity it
loses in independence. It becomes a social magistracy, and the
basic purpose of its existence is diverted to temporal ends. He
cannot resist the comparison between the simplicity and effec-
tiveness of the catholic church in England and the stately gran-
deur of the Anglican Church.“ The latter he regarded rightly
as no more than the creature of the civil power. It had ceased
to be a church and had been debased into an establishment.
“Let a religious organisation,” he said,” ‘‘be exclusive or ever
dominant and one may rest assured that its ministers will be
rich and important in political life, that they will exercise a vast’
dominion and intervene without cessation in civil life to bring
it under their own control.” No one who reads the history of
the Church of England in the first half of the nineteenth century
can doubt that it is an illustration of this general principle. No
one who is acquainted with the history of the Catholic Church
in France under the ancien régime can mistake the fact that it
was exactly from these vices that it suffered. It was nonsense,
in his eyes, to argue that a state which does not profess some
definite religious belief is already atheist.“ The choice is not
between infidelity and theocracy. The choice is between the
use of an illegitimate weapon for wrongful purposes and the
admission that the function of religion does not enter into the
field of politics. The charter, as he insisted, had recognised its
value by giving it the means of independence. It offered them
the protection of the law; but it realised so far the danger of


44 Barante, I, 321.
3 Mbid., LI, 101.

46 Tbid., II, 100.

47 Toid., IL, 101.

48 Barante, II, 250.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 297


choosing out some form of faith for especial favour that it pre-
ferred the loneliness of a complete impartiality between them.”

The recognition of literary freedom and religious independence
is the admission of impalpable influence. Both result less in
the control of practical power than in the creation of an at-
mosphere in which it may be suitably restrained. The one
throws the full glare of public criticism on governmental ac-
tivity. The other, by its refusal to admit the entire absorption
of the individual in the state, gives him a certain externality
which quickens the public conscience by its insistence on the
significance of the elements which go to the constitution of the
whole. But more than that is required. Power that is uncon-
trolled in practical affairs.can hardly be limited by theoretical
criticism. It is only when opposition becomes materialised
into a legal barrier that we have real safeguards against abso-
lutism. Such a safeguard he believed to exist in the immova-
bility of the magistrate. Just as the admission of freedom of
conscience puts a conscience outside the state that account
may be taken of its actions, so does the permanent tenure of
judicial office involve the admission that not even the state
can transgress the principles of justice. It is the guarantee of
impartiality in the fundamental process of the state. The
judge is the guardian of all the natural and social rights of
man.” It is upon his integrity alone that they depend. The
whole existence of society is dependent upon the satisfactory
administration of his office. But even a judge is human and
he needs protection against his frailties. If the fear of dismissal
is before his mind he must inevitably be affected in his decisions
by the result they will exercise upon his career. He is given
permanent tenure in order that he shall be free from such a
possibility. He is immovable because he is then in a position
to protect the principles of the charter even against those who
appointed him to office.» His immovability simply connotes
his independence. It is a recognition of the fallibility of the
state. It sets a limit to the temptations of power. Undoubt-
edly, he is a functionary of the state; but he is a functionary


49 Ibid., II, 252.
50 Barante, I, 171.
5l Tbid., I, 172.


298 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


appointed for the express purpose of protecting society against
itself. It is the guarantee of those privileges that reason
demonstrates to be necessary to social welfare.

Yet all these liberties he counts as nothing compared to the
supreme privilege of parliamentary government. This, above
all, is the final check upon absolutism. This, above all, pro-
vides the mass of men with the material means of guaranteeing
a régime of liberty. For what, in the last analysis, is meant by
parliamentary government? The right of self-determination
in finance and of its supervision when the vote has been made.*
Liberty, at bottom, is a matter of hard purchase. You keep
the government in the path of right conduct by the potential
refusal of the means of its subsistence. Should its foreign
policy displease you can refuse the funds for its support. If its
domestic administration is unjust, you may keep your hands
in your pockets. It is, perhaps, somewhat rude as a govern-
mental method; yet, of all, it is the most efficacious. It effects
a practical revolution without the destruction of a single life.

Of course it is itself a power that has its dangers; and few
have sketched more vividly than Royer-Collard the inherently
sinister potentialities of a parliamentary system. It tends, by
its nature, to absorb the very power it limits. Instead of
making laws, of applying the principles of the Charter to the
political situations which may arise, it desires to invade the
executive function and to undertake the actual work of admin-
istration. That is, of course, simply a manifestation of the
thirst for power which is common to every person and institu-
tion. But when a parliament attempts it, it steps outside its
proper sphere. Government requires rapid decision, secret de-
termination, continuous resolve. It must in the last resort
be unified action, the action of, at the most, a small group so
single in thought as to act as one will. With a modern parlia-
ment he denies that such action is possible. It is responsible
to the nation and, by its very nature, it must discover the will
of the nation before it can act. A deputy is thinking less of


8 Barante, I, 172.
63 Tbid. I 22;

54 Ibid., I, 219.

55 Barante, II, 132.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 299


the governmental decision that has to be made than of the
verdict that will be passed upon his decision by his constituency
at the next election. He cannot work swiftly and silently.
What he is demands at once deliberation and prominence. But
that is to say that his business is the elaboration of general prin-
ciples which is in no sense the business of administration.

Royer-Collard is naturally led to examine the roots whence
this theory of usurpation takes its origin. It starts out from
the assumption of the sovereignty of the people. It suggests
that the Chamber of Deputies as the representatives of the
sovereign people is the recipient by delegation of their sover-
eignty. But that is to assume the identity of parliamentary
government with representative government and he hotly
denied the equation. The deputies do not represent the na-
tion. They represent the interests of the nation, and he insists
upon the vital character of the distinction.” Were they to
represent the nation no form of government save a republic
would be possible. To represent the nation is to represent man,
an eager, passionate thinking being, who possesses in himself
an atom of power. But you cannot, so Royer-Collard argues,
delegate that power. It rests where it originates and each
can only exert it for himself. Representative government is,
he sees clearly enough, majority government and power goes
to the party whom the greater part of the citizen-body sup-
ports. But that is already direct government which is not the
government of France. The deputies depend for their exist-
ence not upon the people but upon the charter.*® The charter
conferred rights upon the people but it did not give them rep-
resentation. What it did was to create a body of men who
should represent in the constitution of the state the divers
interests of the nation. To represent the historic unity of
France it gave the government to the King. To represent the
upper classes it created the House of Peers. But from each of
these there is a distinct interest—that of the people and the
charter represented that interest in the Chamber of Deputies.

66 Thid., I, 228.

57 Ibid., I, 229.

58 This is the whole tenour of the speeches on electoral reform.


59 Barante, II, 20.
60 Tbid., I, 230.


300 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


It was careful to insist upon indirect representation for the
very reason that it is from the charter that the Chamber
derives; had it been intended to create representative govern-
ment only universal suffrage would have been logically defen-
sible.‘ In such an analysis the chamber is simply a function
of the state. It is not coeval with it. It cannot pretend to
override the two checks upon the exercise of its powers.

For Royer-Collard saw clearly that the effort of the popular
chamber was aimed at the possession of sovereignty. If that
sovereignty did not exist, it was clear enough that its effort
was vain. It is clear that it was not intended from the mere
fact that there are two chambers. There are two chambers
because there are two interests and neither of them can uniquely
be sovereign. He emphasises that conclusion the more ve-
hemently because of every aspirant to supreme power it is of
parliament that he is most suspicious. It hides itself behind
its corporate personality and thus lacks the responsibility of
actual office. It is the maker of laws and so continually en-
croaching upon authority that is not its own by very reason
of that favourable situation. It can obtain control of the
executive, as it can break the independence of the judicial
power. It can destroy the external guarantees of freedom by
curbing alike thought and conscience. That is why limits
have been placed to its activity. That is why, for example, the
charter did not establish single-chamber government. Had it
done so, it might equally have established a plébiscite. But
each alike is the manifestation of a supposed popular sover-
eignty and of its existence he has already made denial. For
whatever sovereignty we recognise is a depositary of force and
from it will originate law. Since his effort is to trace the origin
of law to a reasonable interpretation of conditions in the light
of certain fundamental principles of justice, it is obvious that
he cannot admit that conclusion.

What then, he asked himself, is the people? He had no
doubt of the reply. The people, like the King and like the
aristocracy, is simply the depositary of a function in the state.®4

81 Tbid., I, 222 f.

® Barante, II, 18-20.

8 Tbid., I, 472.

& Barante, I, 212.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 301


It has to set a limit to absolutism. But it has, simultaneously,
to be prevented from usurping that power which it has itself
come to limit. That is why it is counterbalanced by king and
nobles. That is why it cannot vote at pleasure but.only as the
fundamental law may permit it. That is why the charter
did not recognise universal suffrage. That is why the chamber
is only partly renewed at a general election; for a total renewal
would be a plébiscite, and the force behind a plébiscite would,
whether for good or for evil, be too massive to make effective
resistance possible. It would then engender the creation of
a sovereignty, and in that creation would be involved the
denial of the charter. It would be an ochlocracy of the most
dangerous kind, and it is with vehemence that he repudiates
its consecration. ý


IV. IMPLICATIONS


M. Facuer has insisted that the political system of Royer-
Collard is in no sense a metaphysic and there is certainly a
sense in which this is entirely true.” For what it clearly de-
sires to do is to effect the canonization of one fundamental
truth derived from his own experience. He had learned alike
from history and his own share in the Revolution that the use
of power is poisonous to those who exert it. That for which he
was anxious was the prevention of its exertion for dangerous
ends. He did not care greatly whether the wielder of it were
one or many. What he desired was to prevent the recurrence
of a time when the personality of men should be stifled by the
authority of the state. That does not mean to say that he was
in any sense anarchistic in outlook. Again and again in his
career he accepted the necessity of repressive legislation when
occasion for its passage seemed to him evident. But for the
normal state he was clear that political life would be intolerable
unless certain limitations of power were postulated as funda-
mental. The individual must have certain liberties no matter
what inconvenience may flow from their possession. He must


& Tbid., 211, 298.
66 TI, 32 f.
67 Faguet, op. cit., I, 285.


302 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


have certain liberties because once their possession is denied
the result is either Louis XIV or the Convention. That is what
he meant by his famous doctrine that liberties are the capacities
to resist. It is an opportunity to deny the validity of en-
croachment. It is a chance to insist upon the submission of
any given situation to the analysis of reason. It was, on the
whole, a simple and practical attitude, intelligible enough when
one reads it in the light of his time. For he was witnessing,
after all, a gigantic struggle between two parties anxious on
the one hand to maintain, on the other to destroy, the work
of the Revolution. He saw clearly enough that their collision
must inevitably be violent. What he sought to outline was a
political method under which an orderly progress became pos-
sible. He had no sympathy for those who, like Villéle, regarded
the work of government as the privileged possession of king
and nobles. His defence of legitimacy shows how little he ap-
preciated the spirit of democracy in his time. His philosophy
was one of checks and balances, derived, perhaps, from an
admiration of the way in which the British constitution had
preserved the equipoise of interests without a revolution.

Not that he desired to see France governed upon the English
model. Few of his speeches are more admirable than that in
which he insists on the specialist character of a national tradi-
tion. France cannot import the English constitution simply
because she is France; to do so would be to reverse the signifi-
cance of a thousand years of history. His mind was essentially
compromising in its outlook and the rigidity with which he is
usually credited comes not from his enunciation of a system
of dogmas as from his constant search for the conditions under
which a compromise may be effected. When there was hope
of a moderate liberalism under Decazes he did not object to
the grant of extraordinary powers; it was under the oppressive
absolutism of Charles X that his insistence upon the value of
liberty found its full strength.

The influence of Montesquieu upon his mind is, of course,
obvious enough. That separation of powers upon which the
former insisted as the key to liberty became in Royer-Collard’s


68 Cf. Faguet, op. cit., I, 291.
69 Barante, I, 216 f.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 303


hands the corner-stone of his political edifice.” But in his
hands it also underwent a vast extension. He desired not so
much the separation of powers as the separation of power.
What he wanted was to prevent the supreme force of the
state from being concentrated at any single point within it.
So long as the possibility of effective resistance had to be con-
sidered there was a reasonable certainty that power would not
be abused. His insistence that sovereignty is no more than
a peculiar synthesis of power is immensely valuable. It pre-
vents the attribution to the state of any mystical rights or
functions. He saw that while the state as a whole has, from
the nature of things, the theoretical possession of all power,
actually that power is always distributed among its constituent
elements. The sovereignty of the state then comes to mean in
actual practice the amount of power that is exerted by the
governing ‘body of the state. What Royer-Collard emphasised
was the danger of permitting that power to become so great
as to override all possible expression of difference within the
community. What you have to do is not to strangle opinion
but to persuade it. Hence, for example, his postulation of
liberty of the press as fundamental. A government that is
continuously subjected to the raking fire of criticism is in fact
a limited government; it cannot become a despotism save by
the real consent of its subjects—which is to say that it cannot
become a despotism.” For, to its subjects, two appeals are
already addressed and the question of obedience becomes a
problem of how far the decision of authority outweighs in the
strength of its appeal the moral force of organized opposition
to it.

It is difficult to deny the validity of such an argument.
The separation of powers is admittedly a cumbersome concep-
tion. Translated into the practical expression of the American
Constitution it may result, as an acute observer has emphasised,
simply in the confusion of powers.” But that is simply because
in its orthodox form it forces a natural assumption into an un-
natural classification. The threefold division of governmental


70 Barante, I, 207 f.
n Cf. Barante, II, 15 f.
7 Cf. Mr. Lippmann’s remarks, The New Republic, Vol. X, p. 151.


304 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


power into executive, legislative and judicial, is only the rough
apportionment of convenience and does not exist in the nature
of things. Indeed the profoundest student of the American
Constitution has recently and expressly emphasised the conclu-
sion that the logic of judicial review involves ipso facto the ex-
ercise of legislative power.” But what Royer-Collard saw
clearly is that our inability to force so muddle-headed a classi-
fication upon government is not equivalent to the conference
upon it of absolutism. What on the contrary it suggests is
the need of setting limits to its power by the admission that
without it there exist rights which, on occasion, will call its
activity into serious question. Admittedly those rights are
only vaguely defined. Admittedly, he did not lay down the
conditions under which they may justifiably be exercised.”
But that only means that he refused to prophecy the future.
It only means that he recognized how difficult it is to forecast
the precise manner in which events will shape themselves.
He laid down the general principles upon which the conduct
of authority must be judged in each situation; but his own
career as a member of the chamber revealed how clearly he
understood the compulsion of circumstance. He knew that
the France of the Restoration must confront its problems dif-
ferently from the France of 1789.5 The exact nuance of the
change he dare not have predicted. What he saw was that
so long as the existence of the state was not threatened there
must be an eternal conflict between its constituent parts.
Events have not thus far contradicted the general correctness
of his interpretation.

In such an analysis, of course, the conception of an unitary
state must disappear. Where there is sentient existence, there
will be judgment; wherever there is personality. there will be
power. The state then becomes multicellular in character. It
develops features traditionally associated with what we term
federal organisation. The vast claims of legal theory for any
single organ of the state begin to lose their substantiality.
Not, indeed, that they lose their legal correctness. No court


73 See the dissent of Holmes, J. in Southern Pacific v. Jenien, 244 U. S. 221.
“4 Barante, II, 237, 309.
7° This is indeed the whole essence of the Doctrinaires’ position.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 305


will question the legal right of parliament to work its will-in
whatever way may to itself seem most necessary.” Our doubts
of its authority must obtain a sanction in every case extra-
judicial. Yet it is surely clear that a theory so little connected
with the reality of political life is unsatisfactory enough.
That is where the force of Royer-Collard’s analysis becomes
obvious. The rights he demanded as the guarantee against
absolutism are rights which, sooner or later, no state can
afford to disregard. He may, indeed, have been vague enough
in his conception of liberty; though here it might justly be
argued that those who have been most precise in its defini-
tion have usually been unable to make their concept stand
the test of analysis. The simple fact is, as he seems to have
perceived, that liberty is less a tangible substance than an
atmosphere.” We know what it is less by its presence than by
its absence. It is the sense of a cramped personality, the arrest
for spiritual development, that signifies encroachment upon its
necessities. To Royer-Collard certain rights might be defined
which would prevent the onset of despotism. He defined those
rights; and their fundamental object was to prevent the con-
centration of power at any isolated centre of the state. That,
surely, is the fundamental characteristic of federal government.

He insisted upon its value less for the reasons we should
today assign to it than for the single cause that it prevented
the absolutist tendency of government to have its sway. But
it is of interest to note that the milieu in which he sketched
the nature of power should have swung so exactly upon the
lines he suggested. He lived in a period of developing parlia-
mentary power. It was the Chamber of Deputies which over-
threw the government of the Restoration just as, in England,
the fortunes of the ministry depended upon the goodwill of
the House of Commons. But there has been an interesting
divergence at this point between the experiences of France
and of England. Right down to our own day the great fact
in French administrative history has been the increasing power
of the Chamber of Deputies; and the demand for administra-


76]. e What Professor Dicey calls “legal sovereignty;” my whole
point is that this is an entirely unnatural conception as a separate fact.
77 Cf. the eloquent remarks of Mr. Philipps, ‘Europe Unbound,” Chap. II.


306 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


tive autonomy on the part of the fonctionnaire is simply the
effort to restore a balance of power that has been regrettably
lost.” The instinct of tyranny which is so nourished by ac-
quaintance with power has led in France to an impossible situ-
ation.” Today, as a consequence, the rights that the civil
servant is claiming are exactly calculated to take from the
Chamber of Deputies all power save that regulation by the
proclamation of general principles which, fundamentally, was
Royer-Collard’s conception of its function.®

In England the evolution has been in an almost antithetic
direction. Where Bagehot could note the overwhelming su-
premacy of Parliament the fact which confronts the modern
observer is the even greater power of the executive body.*
The House of Commons has come to depend upon the cabinet;
and as yet, at any rate, we have discovered no means of re-
storing an effective balance of power. Yet here, too, the result
has been exactly what one who accepts the general analysis for
which Royer-Collard stood sponsor might have predicted.
More and more the executive organ has attempted to free it-
self from the trammels of the rule of law. The development
of a specialised administrative code was probably inevitable;
and certainly French experience suggests that its growth can
well harmonise with the simultaneous acceptance of the idea
of responsibility. The fact still remains that, as yet, the in-
creasing power of the bureaucratic side of English government
has not brought with it its compensations in the safeguarding
of general liberty.” It is more than absurd to talk thus early
of a transition to the servile state. Yet it is difficult not to
analyse the latest fruits of English legislation in terms of a
movement from contract to status. Synchronously, indeed,
may be observed the appearance, in half-articulate fashion of

78 Cf. Lefas, “L’ Etat et les Fonctionnaires.”

79 Asis admirably pointed out by M. Leroy in his “Transformations de
puissance publique.”

80 Barante, II, 193 f.

81 Cf. Low, “The Governance of England,” passim.

® Cf. Dicey, “The Growth of Administrative Law,” in the Law Quarterly
Review for 1916. There is some interesting material in a curious volume
by E. S. P. Haynes. “The Decline of Liberty in England.”

8 Cf. Pound in Harvard Law Review for January, 1917.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 307


the attitude which the French call solidarist—the attempt to
interpret political life in terms of function instead of terms of
property. The growing distrust of étatisme is, doubtless, sig-
nificant enough in this regard; and it is worth while suggesting
that it is in the conception of a fundamental social -interde-
pendence which an étatiste régime obscures that we shall
regain the synthesis we require.*

Nor must the significant moment of American development
be disregarded. Of the conflict between centralised and local
authority it is not necessary here to speak. But due attention
must be paid by any observer who would grasp the real nature
of sovereignty to the process of American government at the
present time. Observers have long insisted that the traditional
institutions of 1787 would prove unequal to the strain of crisis;
and if the Civil War seemed, in some degree, to negative that
conclusion, it is emphatically accurate at the present time.
The original suspicion of executive authority threw the burden
of power into the hands of Congress, and so long as the ordinary
conception of representative government reflected with accuracy
the conditions of American life, the emphasis of authority
began slowly to move away from that centre. It has become
commonplace to assert that the President is today more powerful
than at any time in American history. It is still more obvious
that congressional debate has largely ceased to influence the
character of public opinion. New instruments of opinion are
everywhere in the making. The conventions of the American
Constitution already merit examination. New administrative
organs are already in process of construction. Much of what
has come into being has no popular mandate for its rulings;
it depends on what seems to have become the far more effective
sanction of expert confidence. Congress, it is clear, would be
chary enough of risking a total collision with its opinions. No
one can estimate the future of these novelties except to feel
dimly but decisively that they have a future. The individual
congressman has undergone an eclipse as complete as that of
the private member of the House of Commons. The Congres-
sional committees have become less the moulders of legislation


% Cf. my introduction to Duguit’s “Transformations du Droit Public” in
its English form and his “ Droit Social, Droit Individuel.”


308 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


than its pathetic because grudging recipients. The key to the
whole has come to lie in the president’s hands and in the dis-
cernment of the few chosen councillors he has gathered about
him. This is not, it is clear, the government envisaged by the
constitution. Equally certainly, it is not a government which
meets with the approval of Congress. In some sort issue has
been joined between the two; but the fact that it is already
a government which functions suggests the inevitable outcome.®

Observation, then, seems to tend in the direction of confirm-
ing the conclusion at which Royer-Collard arrived. It would
seem to demonstrate that the legal theory of sovereignty is
without root in actual existence. It would suggest that there
exists rather a broad thing we call power and that sovereignty
is simply its exercise in actual terms of life. Sovereignty, then,
is simply an act of will. It depends upon the consent of the
members of the state for its effectiveness. Generally speaking,
what decisions the organ of sovereignty may make will obtain
acceptance; and Royer-Collard most certainly would not have
doubted that government is so vital a thing as to make the
refusal of obedience the extreme marginal case. But the con-
secration of a region into which government may not normally
enter is the guarantee of a reservoir of resistance which con-
firms his theory that no conception of power is adequate into
which the element of morality does not enter; and that is
already to say that no power can in any event be absolute.%6
What we do, then, is to remove the check upon the exercise of
sovereignty from without the organ which exerts it. We insist
upon the externality of the individual. We make of him a
complete personality who, while he is a member of the state,
and thereby contributes to the justification of its authority, is,
at the same time, something more. It is an affirmation of
political pluralism, the belief that while the state is responsible
to itself, is a moral being from which self-judgment is expected,
the nature of power demands also the retention of the safe-
guard that we, too, as beings with personality, are compelled


% There is no better comment on this change than Mr. Croly’s articles
in The New Republic from April to September, 1917.

86 As Lord Bryce has noted, Cf. his essays on ‘Obedience and Sovereignty”
in his ‘‘Studies in History and Jurisprudence.”


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 309


not merely to passive reaction to its decisions but to active
registration of our dissent therefrom. What, of course, it sug-
gests is a type of government very different from anything we
have thus far known. If the spirit of decentralisation is im-
plicitly present in every state, it would seem an economy of
organisation to give it distinct existence in form.

That problem, indeed, Royer-Collard did not face, for the
sufficiently good reason that he was not confronted by it.
Those who occupied themselves with the politics of the Restora-
tion had a different task from our own. The nations of Europe
had made holy alliance against democratic principles and the
main problem for all who recognised, as did Royer-Collard,
that the basic demand of the Revolution was right, were occu-
pied in the affirmation of it. That involved a different and
simpler struggle from our own. The distinction between the
ancien régime and the Revolution was, after all, clear even to
the least acute spectator of events. The whole problem was
simply whether the basis of government should be the will of
one or a generalised representation of the will of all. The
Restoration answered that question in two antithetic ways.
The Royalists proclaimed loudly that the intellectual teachings
of the Revolution had produced such disastrous results as to
be inacceptable to honest men. They desired for that cause
the return to the conception of power by which the ancien
régime had been governed. Those who may broadly be termed
liberal in outlook suggested what was in effect a compromise.
While they distrusted the dogmas of royalism they were a little
sceptical of the full and logic consequences of its negation.
What they sought was the synthesis of the potentialities of
both; and it was by the limitation of authority-in the recogni-
tion of individual rights that are, generally speaking, inviolable,
that they sought to effect it. The solution, of course, was too
simple. The ancient institutions of France could not be at
once idealised and modernised. The practical defect of Royer-
Collard’s own outlook was that he did not take sufficient
account of the legacies of hatred that had been inherited. His
own confidence in the charter was pathetically unique. To
Charles X it was a subject of abhorrence; to Barante it was


310 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


useless because it was operated without good will;*’ to Chateau-
briand it was merely the material for an elegant, if capricious,
pamphlet. The charter did not, as Royer-Collard had hoped,
reconcile the institutions it had established; it merely provided
a basis for their more violent division. The fact was that it
sought the unification of two permanently irreconcilable prin-
ciples—an active monarchy and a democracy. Until the tri-
umph of the one or the other had been secured, their collision
was unavoidable.


V. ETHICS AND POLITICS


Ir the main motive of this outlook is the effort to solve a fairly
definite and practical problem, the answer has an ethical impli-
cation which it is worth while for a moment to examine. Royer-
Collard was the philosophic disciple of Reid,® and, like the
latter, his metaphysical work was really an attempt to find
means of escape from the scepticism of Hume. That to which
his analysis led him was an insistence on the worth of conscience.
Few theorists of his time have so greatly emphasised the im-
portance of what contribution each individual can make to the
general fabric of state-thought. He had realised that the in-
sistence the Revolution had laid upon the worth of human
personality was in some sort its most vital work. For it im-
mediately involves on the part of the state an effort to organise
means whereby that personality may obtain expression. Here,
clearly enough, emerges the real significance of the connotation
he attached to freedom. Liberty, for him, is the hindrance of
attack upon the development of personality. That is why he
is so anxious to put beyond the area of ordinary interference
certain rights without which personality is worthless. That
was why, also, he was suspicious of authority. For where
authority encroaches beyond the domain that circumstance
will, in a rational analysis, ascribe to it, it negatives the mean-
ing of personality. That was the defect of the ancien régime.


87 “Mémoires,” II, 180.

88 “La Monarchie Selon la Charte.” For the circumstances of its origin
ef. Daudet, “Louis XVIII et Decazes,” pp. 153-5, 169-70. Viel Castel,
“‘Histoire,”’ Vol. V, pp. 240-53.

89 Barante, II, 70 f.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 311


It confined humanity within certain bounds and the richness
of which it was capable failed to obtain adequate recognition.
Of course Royer-Collard had here the defects of his time.
His perception of the value of the individual conscience did not
go far enough to make him see the necessity of universalising
its political expression. He was so wrapped up in his doctrine
that what obtains representation is not will but interests that
he failed to realise that interests are no more than the material
expression of will. He did not push far enough his analysis of
the basis of the state. Had he done so he would have grasped
firmly what, in fact he only dimly perceived; that it is in actual
life impossible to test the legitimacy of a will that clamors for
expression merely by the discussion of its origin. His own
theory, indeed, was one of function; and he satisfied himself
that the interests of the French people were sufficiently ex-
pressed in the power of the middle classes to which he himself
belonged. The day of the workers had not yet dawned; and
the attempt to explain the economic significance of class-dis-
tinction certain English thinkers had only begun to attempt.
It is, of course, an inconsistency in his thought to have stopped
at a point where the conference of political power would then
have prevented the violence he hated so passionately. But
his thought was always limited by the necessities he encount-
ered; and he did not pursue its implications into the realm of
abstract possibility.

Whatever that limitation, his insistence on the value of per-
sonality as the real source of political power is very important.
It is difficult not to feel that it is derived, above all, from
Kant. Henri Michel has pointed out how greatly Guizot, at
any rate, was influenced by the German speculation of his
time; and what influenced Guizot would not have been un-
known to Royer-Collard. His own spiritualist philosophy led
him to attach great weight to the idea of the soul; and he
realised early that it is an attitude favorable to liberty.” If, as
he was never weary of insisting, man alone, of all creatures, is
given the faculty of judgment, no state can be adequate in


90 This, I think, is the real defect of his interpretation of the charter.
9 Op. cit., 298.
2 Ferraz, ‘Histoire de la Philosophie,” III, 157.


312 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


which provision is not made for its exercise. Indeed, it is that
faculty of judgment which in fact lies at the basis of society.
What it demands is the recognition that certain ideal rights
are inherent in the fact of individual existence. The self can-
not be itself unless it is given material upon which to pass
judgment. But the provision of that material is already the
recognition of liberty of conscience. It involves the conception
of a personality that is more than the sum of its relations.
It is not, of course, in any sense a legal conception. That
which, in any state, is the accepted organ of ultimate power
may refuse the recognition in its code of such rights. But
there is set alongside the legal conception of right a moral
claim of which it is difficult to make denial of the inherent
superiority. Actual law and ideal law may never coincide;
but where they come into conflict there can hardly be doubt
as to where the ultimate allegiance is due. But such an analy-
sis must surely mean that the claim of the state upon us is
emphatically subjective, depends, for its validity, upon the
moral appeal it makes to our conscience. Where its policy seems
to step beyond right, it becomes, as Royer-Collard realised in
1830, a moral duty to warn those who are exercising its control,
that the acquiescence of its constituent wills has become at
least matter of doubt.” And, in the last resort, the refusal of
obedience is inevitable. That refusal, indeed, may involve pain
to him who thus makes his challenge; and, indeed, as Mr.
Barker has argued,” it may well be that the presumption is
against us.

Yet the duty surely remains. There are few rights more
precious than the right to be wrong. For once we accept the
idea of the state as not merely the whole of ourselves, but
a thing without us of which we are compelled to take ceaseless
account, it is clear that we can accept no doctrine that would
derive our rights from the state and condition than by the
decisions of its will. That is, in fact, to postulate for the state
a kind of centralised infallibility of which we have thus far


% Barante, II, 293.

% Cf. Barante, II, 419.

% “English Political Thought,” p. 60. The whole chapter is immensely
valuable.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 313


had no experience. It is difficult to conceive of its decisions
as having in any sense “a final moral value,” for that is to
confer upon ourselves too vast a relief from thought. Here,
surely, is the real meaning of the new form given by Kant
to the fundamental principle of law. Before his time law
had attempted no more than the preservation of order. The
condition of society had rendered peace the vital social in-
terest. Dissent then clearly becomes an attitude contrary to
law; for dissent is nothing if it is not the disturbance of peace.
So there comes a strife between the interest. of the individual
who would make his protest and that of the state which would
prevent him. What Kant did was to insist that the problem
we have to solve is the reconciliation of government with
liberty. Justice, for him, was simply the opportunity for the
good-will to obtain its fullest development in action; and he
sought to find wherein the balance of individual interest and
social interest might be discovered. Our own problem is in
nowise different. If our greatest need is, at the moment, or-
ganisation, that does not in any sense lessen, rather does it
increase, the value of individual responsibility.” A state in
which the liability of its members is shifted to the shoulders
of government is not likely long to remain free. Organization
may, indeed, leave room for initiative; but the very condition
of its preservation is in the understanding of individualism.
It would, indeed, be a simple world if all of us could be swept
into the vortex of an all-embracing personality like the state.
But a truer analysis seems to suggest that, as James said,
“every smallest bit of experience is a multum in parvo plurally
related.’ Because experience is many and not one the indi-
vidual personality can not engulf itself in a single expression
of one of its aspects. When, that is to say, you have described
man as a member of the state you have not exhausted his
nature. He refuses that reduction to unity. He refuses it for
the simple reason that it does not represent the facts. He is
not merely a member of the state. His capacity for fellowship


æ Cf. Janet, “Science Politique,” II, 576 f.

97 Cf. the suggestive paper of Dean Pound in the American Journal of
Sociology for May, 1917.

98 “A Pluralistic Universe,” p. 321.


314 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


is not so meagrely exhausted. Above all, there are moments
when the Athanasius element in his nature must have its way.
But that is to admit already breakage and ignorance in the
world, to postulate a discontinuity which impels decision as to
where the leap shall be taken.

Here, surely, is the moral background of the liberty that
Royer-Collard envisaged. It is the one certain guarantee
against absolutism. It denies perfection by the very fact of its
insistence that the object of individual judgment is to secure

moral progress. It does not deny personality to the state. On
the contrary, it is the ascription of moral purpose to the state
which it deduces from the fact of personality. But it realises
that, like the individual, the will of the state is not a simple
effort after good. It would, perhaps, be simple if we could base
our activity upon such an analysis. But the will of any being
may be perverted to wrong ends; and exactly as the state will
judge us for the use we make of our personality, so, reciprocally,
we must judge the state. For, after all, our own will is swept
into the strength of its decisions; and where we deem it wrong
only the active registration of dissent can excuse us from par-
ticipation in its crimes. Royer-Collard had experience enough
of a state that wrought its own purposes without the hindrance
of dissent. He realised the uselessness of any doctrine that,
merely for the sake of survival, would confuse pacific conduct
with good conduct. It is, indeed, clear that a state in which the
only effective will is that which at the moment of expression
has to be taken for the general will can never be a democratic
state. For the very condition of democratic organisation lies in
the realisation that self-government means something more
than to contribute one’s mite of personal agreement to the vast
whole of which one is part, and, in this aspect, it is surely
significant of much that what time the democratic state seemed
to waste in the effort to attain unity of action in fact gave to
that action a moral strength denied to unthinking acquiescence.%

But, in such a conception, it is clear that the object we ascribe
to the state is something more than survival. It is to that end
only that acquiescence is directed. A freedom of conscientious


99 Even the most zealous advocates of state-unity seem to have admitted
this, ef. London Times, May 17, 1917, p. 231.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 315


objection such as Poland knew, may have been the inevitable
precursor of partition. We may have, as Royer-Collard realised,
to sacrifice the rigidity of our theory to the changing perspective
of events. But that simply involves our realisation that the
cost of survival may be too great; to perish, as he once bitterly
remarked,'' may also bea solution. A state may,as Machiavelli
said, go to work against good and charity, but assuredly the
result of its effort will be written deeply in the life it will thence-
forth lead. That was the point of Huxley’s oft-misinterpreted
dictum that the cosmie process is opposed to the ethical. For
all that the state is primarily concerned to do is to secure sur-
vival and that means fitting its methods to a non-moral end.
But if the environment be bad, the ethical process suffers as a
consequence. In a world of murderers the survival of any one
man does not guarantee an ethical superiority. That was surely
the meaning of Aristotle’s distinction between the good man
and the good citizen. Herr von Bethmann-Hollweg may have
saved his state when he agreed to hack his way through Belgium;
but he himself admitted that it was a crime. The state was
working its end through him; but most of us are agreed that its
end was not a moral end. It is interesting to speculate as to our
judgment of one who, in such a crisis, should fearlessly challenge
the state-decision. In our own time, certainly, it seems to have
profited it but little to aim at the conquest of the world at the
cost of its soul.

This does not mean that the ethic of the state must be dis-
tinct from that of the individual. Anyone who studies the
historical consequence of such a difference will be convinced of
its impossibility. It means rather that we must reject the test
of state-life which insists on its quantitative expansion and look
rather to its qualitative intensity. In that aspect we are com-
pelled to stand outside the state and judge it. There will come
to us clearly the knowledge that there is an end greater than its
survival and perpetuation. Most of us would rather have
perished with Leonidas at Thermopylæ than have survived with
the Persian tyrant; but Persia survived. Was the end its sur-


100 Barante, I, 302.
101 The dilemma is in reality worth more consideration than is usually
given to it; but the instinct of state-life is very strong.


316 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


vival served more ethical than the end that would have been
served by its downfall? Most of us would doubt it. And it
then becomes surely arguable that one of the results of recent
evolution has been to make the individual bi-partite—no less
himself an end than contributory to the end of the state. The
test of value in an institution may be rather its advantage to
the state than to the individual, but who is to judge its value if
not ourselves?! An individual may decide on a course which
enables justice to be done even though the state perish in the
doing of it. From the standpoint of survival that may not serve
the state. But that only leads to the insistence that even if the
ethical process be the derivative of the cosmic it is not one with
it, any more than a man is one with the father from whom he de-
rives. ‘‘The simple truth has to be told,” says Meredith of
Nevil Beauchamp, “how he loved his country, and for another
and a broader love growing out of his first passion, fought it.’’

It is at least a conceivable attitude, even if it is rare. Un-
deniably, of course, it is an attitude fraught with elements of
danger to the body politic. The state-life cannot be lived if its
members may make rebellion against its authority. But the
rarity of their dissent is a factor of vital consequence. No one
could have predicted that the Royer-Collard of 1814 would, in
1830, have acquiesced in the overthrow of legitimism; yet the
sequence of events drove him to an opposition upon which he
entered with grave distrust.1% The fact is that the business of
the state is the service of men, and where her defection from that
course imperils the rightness of her conduct somewhere or other
the protest will be made. And it may then be urged that a state
which is in fear of revolution by reason of its policy is less likely
to be wrong than a state whose citizens have ceased to aim their
consciences against it. Ambition, tyranny, selfishness, these
men will fight in whatever guise they may be discovered; and
it is in their willingness so to do battle that the real safeguard of
morals is to be found. A conception of the relationship between
rulers and ruled which does not include the possibility of


12 This, as I conceive, is the real defect of such idealistic interpretations
of the state as that of Mr. Bosanquet. Cf. the first chapter of this volume
and the first essay in my ‘‘Problem of Sovereignty.”

103 Cf. Barante, II, 34 f.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 317


renouncing the relation is always incomplete; for it is demanding
a measure of loyalty and unselfishness from subjects far greater
than is sought from their governor.

The difficulty of anarchy must, of course, be faced;! and no
consideration of politics would be adequate which failed to take
account of its dangers. No one was more convinced then Royer-
Collard that government is necessary; no one, assuredly, would
have more willinging admitted the vastness of the problem. If
Luther may take upon himself the purgation of the world-
church, how shall she retain the splendor of her empire? Yet
the problem is, in fact less simple. It is important to remember
that creative opposition has come, less from those either fatally
certain of their opinion, or eager to play the martyr, than from
those who, with Luther, can simply retort that they cannot do
otherwise. Yet such wholehearted antagonism will not come to a
state which seeks the path of justice. It is when a fundamental
choice must be made between right and wrong that men like
Luther grow daring enough to shake the world. It is when, asin
1830, warning has been neglected and principle trampled under-
foot that men like Royer-Collard, fitted by nature for the part of
order rather than that of change, will be content to remake the
institutions of the state. The danger of anarchy intervenes
when wrong has become unendurable. It remains where the
path of right conduct is yet uncertain. It is useless to hope that
such moments will never come. None can say where the su-
preme twinge of conscience may be felt. A supreme issue may
be clothed in the garb of an army-officer accused of espionage ;!%
it may be found in the exaction of an educational tax. Yet few
can read the long history of protest against state-policy without
feeling that, on the whole, the fact of its existence has been pro-
ductive of good. The Lamennais of the nineteenth century may
vainly choose the path of exile; but he will inspire the victorious
Lamennais of a later age as he will instruct the institution which
cast him forth. Great events such as this become so intimate
and vital a part of the state-tradition that none can measure the
efficacy of their result. We shall not write in the future the his-


10 This is the difficulty felt by my able reviewer in the Times Literary
Supplement, May 17, 1917.
1% Cf, Halévy, “Apologie pour notre passé” (1910).


318 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


tory of a second Galileo. The state, no less than the church,
must learn that is not paramount in the realm of ideas. Few
things are more fatal than the triumph of authority over
truth.

The great fact that Royer-Collard perceived was that in the
denial of infallibility to authority we may prevent that disas-
trous victory.! When we insist that, in the last analysis, only
the individual is sovereign over himself, we make it possible for
him to contribute his best to the sum of social life. But his best,
assuredly, is not blind obedience. His best is the utmost insight
of which his judgment is capable. Compared to that, the chance
of disorder is relatively unimportant. For the probability is
that a view which men will so embrace as to ask the final test
of its survival is a view that responds to some inherent need of
nature. Christianity, in its early history, was exactly a danger
of this kind to the empire it was slowly permeating. The christ-
ian had choice between his civic obedience and his religious
loyalty. He saw, on the one hand, the vast authority of an
empire so great that its very limits were hardly conceivable by
him. He saw on the other a little fellowship of souls driven un-
derground, testifying its faith only at the cost of suffering, sus-
pected on all sides of crimes the mere thought of which was a
stain upon their reputation and their opinions. In the perspec-
tive of time the weight of authority as against what the christian
deemed to have been truth seems almost unutterably large; to
have cast his handful of incense was so pitifully easy a thing.
Yet, also in the perspective of time, it is impossible to doubt
that the christian did service to civilisation when he counted the
empire of authority without meaning as against the empire of
what to him was truth. “The worth of a state,” Mill finely
said, “in the long run is the worth of the individuals compos-
ing it; and a state which pospones the interests of their mental
expansion and elevation to a little more administrative skill, or
of that semblance of it which practice of it gives, in the details
of business; a state which dwarfs its men, in order that they may


106 As Lamennais and Tyrrell saw in their sphere.

17 This is the whole point of Lord Acton’s fine protest. “History of
Freedom,” p. 151.

108 “Liberty” (Everyman’s ed.), p. 170.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 319


be more docile instruments in its hands even for beneficial pur-
poses, will find that with small men no great thing can really be
accomplished; and that the perfection of machinery to which
it has sacrificed everything will in the end avail it nothing, for
want of the vital power which, in order that the machine might
work more smoothly, it has preferred to banish.”’


We dare not, in brief, surrender the individual conscience.
Only upon its continuous exercise can our state be securely
founded. Only therein can we discover the essential compromise
between fundamental principles which is the real nature of pub-
lic policy. Here, surely, lies the greatness of Royer-Collard’s
doctrine. For he came to importance in public life at a time
when two antithetic systems of political organisation stood face
to face. He was able to understand that neither was of itself
strong enough to triumph. He was quick to perceive that the
unlimited victory of either would be in no sense an unmitigated
benefit. He opposed the theory of the royalists because it made
the state the privileged possession of a single interest. He op-
posed the theory of democracy because, as he conceived, France
was not ready to accept pretensions alien to what had thus far
been the historic system of her institutions. But in each he per-
ceived a truth which might, in combination, work for good. The
value of royalism lay in its insistence upon continuity. Royer-
Collard himself admitted that no rational interpretation of
national existence can ever be catastrophic and he accepted the
fact of monarchy as the basis of the state. But he simultan-
eously realised that the danger of monarchical government lies
in its natural tendency to absolution. The apocryphal equation
of Louis XIV had become already an anachronism. What was
needed was the impetus of a doctrine which should take account
of the personality of each member of the state, and give to that
personality the opportunity for self-expression. He saw that so
limited, no monarch can aim at absolute power without invoking
disaster. Yet he saw, too, that a personality of which the
exercise was at every stage limited by the will of the state was
in no real sense capable of activity. So it was that while he
admitted that the idea of national survival was fundamental,
he insisted also that the individual by reason of his humanity
has certain rights no state may contravene. He defined those


320 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


rights; and he pointed out wherein they tend to the guarantee of
liberty. It was a noble effort nobly sustained.

That it had defects and inconsistencies is undeniable.. It is
too often the speculation rather of an orator than of a philos-
opher. It is the speculation of a man of affairs in that it limited
itself to the analysis of situations which actually confronted the
chamber of Deputies. It is a system rather by implication than
by statement. It had not the coherent prevision of the possibil-
ities of labour, or, if it suspected its advent, it was curiously sus-
picious of the result. It tended too often to express itself in terms
of a mathematical balance from which the facts are in the real life
remote. But it remains, even when these defects have been
noted, a constructive advance upon the ideas of his age. It is
not a mere collection of unreasoned prejudices like the attitude
of Villéle; :t is more than the uncritical opportunism of Guizot.
It was based upon an immense experience, and it was an experi-
ence that had been deeply felt and carefully understood. It was
an experience which taught him that however valuable may be
the benefits of order, they. are useless so long as they stifle the
spontaneity of the human mind. It led him to insist that tradi-
tion is of today as well as of the centuries that are past. He tried
to free a generation that had suffered from the ills that had been
inherited. He sketched the foundations of a state that should
base its order upon freedom. There are few higher claims to the
enduring gratitude of men.


CHAPTER FIVE
ADMINISTRATIVE SYNDICALISM IN FRANCE!
I. THE RIGHT OF ASSOCIATION


RENCH tradition has not been favourable to the growth
of associations.2 Man may be, even in France, a com-
munity-building animal, but the state has watched nar-

rowly his efforts at construction. It is only within the last
thirty years that the bonds of a restraining vigilance have been
finally relaxed. The right of association was, before the Revolu-
tion, strictly dependent upon the monarchical will. The royal
sovereignty towered above all, so that even the natural tend-
ency to labor organisation became nothing so much as a vast
secret society living less by governmental benison than by defi-
ance of it. It seems clear enough that what associations,
whether religious or secular, were able to exist, were the offspring
of a privilege tardily given and illiberally exercised. For to
exert even the legislative powers implied in the concession of
recognised personality seemed to the jurist no less than to the
political theorist to involve a derogation from state-power. The
king must be master of his estate; and he will not hesitate to
teach his subjects that sovereignty knows no limits save his
good pleasure. The ancien régime implied a monistic state;
and when for the crown was substituted the nation, the worship
of a unified indivisibility underwent no change. Rather did it
increase in intensity; for the associations of that period which
the Revolution made at a stroke antiquity were the symbols of
a hated privilege. So it was that Le Chapelier could take to
heart the teaching of Rousseau;? and when corporate freedom

1For a very complete bibliography cf. P. Harmignie “L’Etat et Ses
Agents” (1911) and M. Leroy. ‘“Syndicats et Services Publics” (1909)
to both of which I am greatly indebted.

2 For a history of the right of association in France from 1789-1901, see
the very able doctor’s thesis of M. Faget de Casteljau (1908).

3 “Contrat Social,” Bk., II, Ch. III. Faget de Casteljau, op. cit., IIT f.


322 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


interposed a loyalty between state and individual, it could not
avoid destruction.

It was hardly a generous outlook even if, in the event, it has
its explanation. For where the state attempts the absorption
of the loyalties of men, what it effects is either to drive them
under ground or to transfer their energies to a sphere where the
restraint is mitigated. The law might forbid the Jesuits to pre-
form their religious functions in the state; but the historian has
no difficulty in discovering their presence under a variety of
different forms.t Nor is it unmeaning to suggest that the divi-
sion of French parties into a plethora of groups owes its origin
less to any inherent naturalness or to a proved benefit in the
performance of party-functions than to the possibility such
division affords for the erection of a system of loyalties external
to that of the state. Certainly no such phenomenon has been seen
in Anglo-Saxon countries where, on the whole, the right of asso-
ciation has found but little legal hindrance;> and it is surely
notable in this connection that when de Tocqueville visited
America, within half a century of the foundation of the Republic,
what should, above all, have impressed him was the astounding
wealth of American group-life.®

Such suppression was, in fact, no more than a decadent inheri-
tance from the Roman conception of the state.” It might be
necessary when the restored Bourbons were aiming at the de-
struction of the Revolutionary ideals. It had its value when
the effort of Guizot was towards the erection of a quasi-despot-
ism under democratic forms. The brief history of the second
republic shows an immediate restoration to men of the forms
under which their natural instincts may obtain the satisfaction
of unconcealed gregariousness. But the plébiscite which en-
abled Louis Napoleon to renew the system of his great ancestor
involved the adoption of that ancestor’s attitude to all loyalties
which might stand between him and his subjects. The third


4 Cf. Debidour, “L’Eglise et L’Etat de 1879 à 1870,” p. 329 f.

5Cf. M. H. E. Barrault’s very able thesis, “Le Droit d’association
en Angleterre.”

6 “Democracy in America,” Part II, Bk. II, Ch. V.

7 Cf. Duguit, “Les Transformations du Droit Public,” Ch. I.

8 Constitution of 1848, Art. 8.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 323


republic, in its early history at least, was too precariously estab-
lished to venture on a freedom which, in the result, might well
have proved too costly. It was not until 1884 that M. Waldeck-
Rousseau took his courage in his hands and allowed what was
virtually freedom of professional association. It was not until
seventeen years later that the ideals of 1848 were at last fulfilled
and a general right of association established. Yet, even today,
the significant limitations that exist bear testimony to the stub-
born persistence of the older ideas.

Into one branch of the state the idea of a freedom of asso-
ciation penetrated with even greater difficulty. A civil servant
was, in the ancien régime, above all a servant of the king; and
in that centralised system which de Tocqueville has so magis-
trally shown to be anterior to the Revolution, the idea of a
reciprocal relation between master and servant seems not to
have entered. For down to the very eve of 1789 the govern-
ment of France possesses, at least to an external observer,
many of the characteristics of the king’s household.’ The king
cannot have about him servants displeasing to his majesty.
He may, indeed, like a fourteenth century king, announce that
he will look not to the man but to the office; but when sover-
eignty is no more than the royal pleasure this is but a counsel
of perfection. It does not, at any rate, seem to have been en-
forced, and the principles of administration were left un-
changed by the Revolution save that the genius of Napoleon
secured an efficiency before unknown."

It is not until the later years of the nineteenth century that
signs of a change could be observed.” Whatever breach in
hierarchical systems the tidal wave of democratic advance may
have made, in the administrative régime it did not progress.
Divine right may have been overthrown. A new and more
fruitful conception of the state may have forced its way to
general acceptance.’ The irresponsibility of public power may


9 Flach, “Origines de l’ancienne France,” III, 504.

10 Quoted from G. Demartial, “Le Statut des Fonctionnaires.’ The re-
mark is from a royal edict of 1356.

u Cf. Leroy, “Les Transformations de la Puissance Publique,” p. 143 f.

2 Lefas, “L’Etat et les Fonctionnaires,” Introduction.

133 Cf. the first chapter of this work.


324 ACY PHORITEY TNATH MODERN STATE


have been at last reduced to the admission of limitations; but
behind the veil of the internal processes of governmental ac-
tivity no force could penetrate. The picture drawn by Balzac
in the third decade of the nineteenth centúry was as true, in
all its essential details, at the beginning of the twentieth."
A complete and arbitrary control over the details of adminis-
tration was, after all, an idea that had behind it the weight
of a long, if not an honourable tradition. It had survived,
within a century, no less than seven régimes—which seemed at
least a progmatically adequate test of its efficacy. Nor was it
a system which might be expected to arouse much popular
interest. Mr. Graham Wallas has made it a commonplace to
observe that a democracy is but rarely interested in the processes
of administration. What compels its attention is not so much
methods as results. Where it is, largely speaking, indifferent
even to the more dramatic aspects of its own political ad-
venture, it could hardly be expected to concentrate its mind
on the mechanical routine in which, from day to day, the civil
servant is engaged. So long as the services of government were
performed with what seemed an adequate efficiency, the sover-
eign elector was content to allow his sovereignty to go by
default. It is a political maxim of some import that what is
unseen does not exist. Public attention was not concentrated
upon the problem of administration simply because its existence
as a problem went unrealised. It was only when it became
obvious that the transformation of the state had affected no
less its organization than its functioning, that it became clear
that a new administrative synthesis was being in fact effected.

It was an inevitable synthesis to anyone who had observed
at all accurately the evolution of the state. Its sovereignty
might go unquestioned so long as the functions it endeavored
to perform were hardly related to the positive side of national
existence. A state which limited its services to the provision
of police, defence and justice had hardly need of new concep-
tions. But with the advent of what Professor Dicey has called


14 Scènes de la Vie Parisienne, “Les Employés” (1836).

6 For two very different demonstrations of the difficulty of obtaining a
really public opinion cf. Lowell.“Public Opinion and Popular Government’
with Mr. Wallas’ “Human Nature in Politics.”


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 325


the collectivist- age the infallibility of public power was no
longer acceptable. The state itself became an industrial instru-
ment; and it was inevitable that those who worked for it should
be unable to regard it differently from any other employer.
Just as the private entrepreneur was being more and more sub-
jected to a new legislative status,!® so did the worker desire
that the state should recognize the superiority of law to itself.
Nor was this all. On all sides, pressure upon the political
mechanisms of the state assumed almost alarming proportions.
Parliaments seemed, often enough, little more than bodies
which registered the will of a successful combatant in a conflict
where it had no voice.” Fiction might declare its will national
and sovereign; but that lighthearted sacrifice to tradition was
not in fact deceptive. The life of the state, in fact, had over-
flowed the boundaries in which political organisation would
have encased it, with the natural result that voluntary effort
of every kind began at once to enforce and to supplement
political action. It was impossible even for French tradition
to resist the impulse implied in these changes; and the loi des
associations of M. Waldeck-Rousseau did no more than en-
shrine popular aspiration in legislative form.

In actual fact, it was simply logical that the growth of asso-
ciations should change the perspective of the life of the state.
Once new loyalties had been established they became for their
members sovereign within the mit to which they fulfilled the
purposes with which they sympathised. It became clear, for
example, that in a choice between loyalty to his fellow-workers
in a trade, and loyalty to a state which aimed at preventing
those workers from attaining certain ends they deemed good,
there was no inherent certainty that the average trade-unionist
would feel a deeper claim on the part of the state. Raison
d état lost its magic exactly at the point where the variety of
group-life made it clear that the will of the state is operated
by its agents and that those agents, whom the dissentient
worker might himself help both to choose and dismiss, could


16 Cf. my “Basis of Vicarious Liability” in the Yale Law Journal for
Nov. 1916, for a discussion of the nature of this change.

17 Ag was very strikingly evinced in America in the railway crisis which
resulted in the Adamson Law.


326 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


lay no claim to infallibility. Indeed, where they came from
a class with which, mistakenly or no, he believed himself in
permanent conflict, he might even cease to believe that the
state had any claim upon his loyalty at all. It would become,
for him, the instrument of men with whom he was at war, and
his effort would be directed towards its destruction.

It is in the light of such a development that the growth of
a demand for autonomy in the French public services must be
understood. When the old notion of sovereignty showed signs
of decay, it was inevitable that those most greatly affected by
its control should seek release from its trammels. With the
growth of state-enterprise in industry 1t was even more in-
evitable that the state-proletariat thus brought into being
should refuse the surrender of privileges it had fought so hard
to win outside the public service. And in an age when the no-
tion of authority itself was, in its old acceptance, assailed on
every hand, to the servants of the state there seemed little
enough reason to abstain from additional criticism. It might
be true that the entrance of these revolutionary ideals into the
civil service was hardly perceived by the mass of men. The
democratisation of institutions had become so general that it
is doubtful if men were aware of the retention of despotic ideals
in the internal organisation of government. Where, indeed, it
did, it was easy for statesmen to lull the awakening suspicion
by depicting revolt as an attack upon that process upon which
the life of the state depended. Government was democratic in
its origins. Its birth might thus be used to throw a cloak of
saintliness about it. So that even if the administration of
France remained arbitrary in method and hierarchical in struc-
ture it had some sort of popular sanction for its retention of
an antique custom. A far more radical effort was needed if
public opinion was to realise the significance of administrative
corporateness.


II. THE COMPLAINTS OF THE CIVIL SERVICE


Tue claim of the civil servant of the right to association has
raised legal and political problems of a magnitude so immense


18 Cf. the very able essay of M. Berth, “Marchands, Intellectuels, et
Politiciens” in the Mouvement Socialiste for 1907-8.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 327


that it is almost impossible to set limits to their implication.
They have been very variously regarded. To some the herald
of release? from a state dangerous because it is as inefficient
and arbitrary as it is unintelligent and all-powerful, to others?
it is little less than an invitation to anarchy. If the civil servant
claim the right to defy the state from whom can obedience be
expected? Yet, in fact, the problem is less simple than such
statement seems to make it. The effort of the civil servant is
less towards defiance of the state than towards the discovery
of means whereby the challenge may be rendered unnecessary.
In that aspect the movement is less towards anarchy than to-
wards order. And a demand so widespread must, after all,
have had its causes. The claim put forward by those who
advocate the right to association is simple. It is that the
abuses from which they have suffered are inherent in the pres-
ent system: It is impossible, in their view, at all effectively to
mend the civil service. What has become essential is its com-
plete reconstruction. It is a technical ideal they have in view—
an insistence that administration is a professional service so
expert in character as to demand a regulation beyond political
control of the ordinary kind.” But their critics see in their
cause no more than an effort which may well paralyse the
national life. They urge that what is demanded is derived less
from an enthusiasm for administrative efficiency than from
the ordinary phenomena of corporate selfishness. Nor is pub-
lic opinion more sympathetic. A people which sees on every
hand great increase both in the number of civil servants and in
the budget they entail, has not the patience, even if it had the
time, to examine those demands in detail. The civil service
seems to the average man the most comfortable of existences.
The salary is fixed and certain. There is no fear of unemploy-
ment. Economic crises leave it unaffected. Provision is made
against both accident and old age. In a period of growing


19 Cf. Leroy, “Syndicates et Services Publics,” Ch. III.

20 F, Faure in Revue Politique et Parlementaire 1907, “Les Syndicats
des Fonctionnaires et le projet du Governement.” I have discussed these
various attitudes below.

2 Cf. Book IX of M. Leroy’s really noble book, “La Coutume Ouvrière”
(1918).


328 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


taxation what he tends to see is less the grievance than the
privilege of such labour. He remembers not the services he
has secured from public administration so much as the ills he
has suffered from its suspension. What impresses him is less the
result of uninterrupted routine than the disasters which may
attend such dislocation as the famous postal strike of 1909.
He knows that there are close upon a million civil servants in
France, and Guy de Maupassant has with genial irony con-
vinced him that they have causes for other sentiment than
grievance.” Complaints are for him no more than the unusual
accompaniments of a process in which he has no interest. They
represent the failure of services which he pays taxes in order
to guarantee. They thus defeat for him the end of the state;
and he finds it difficult to understand, much less to condone,
the ambitions they imply.

Yet the problem cannot be thus easily dismissed. More than
a thousand societies testify to the determination of the civil
service to protect its interest against abuses. They constitute
essentially trade-unions, and, like trade-unions, they aim above
all at the defence of the economic interests of their members.
They have, too, the additional object of safeguarding profes-
sional standards, exactly as similar organizations among lawyers
and doctors. Nor can it be denied that their grievances are
real. Not, indeed, that they have developed in any special
degree in the last ten years. Rather it is that during the last
ten years there has come an increasing consciousness of the
way in which they may best be removed. So long as the sover-
eignty of the state went virtually without challenge, it was
hardly conceivable that where others were silent, its own serv-
ants would resist. It was only with the visible transformation
of the very nature of public power that a realisation came of
what weapons lay in their hands.”

The main abuse of which the civil service complains is nat-
urally favouritism. Positions of trust are at the mercy of the


2 On the numbers and salaries of the Civil Service cf. Lefas, “L’Etat et
les Fonctionnaires,” Chap. II.

23 For the number of associations and their growth see the official report
to the Chamber of M. Jeanneney (Hachette, 1908), p. 230 f. But he does
not count the societies formed prior to 1901 and suppressed by authority.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 329


government. Partisanship is the test of public advancement;
and even so distinguished a statesman as M. Waldeck-Rousseau
did not hesitate to assert that confidence could be given only
to those of whose political views the government had the
assurance implied in support. Irregularities of every kind
are committed, so that the very rules by which the different
departments of the civil service are governed become in fact
worthless. An official may be nominated to the police service
without passing the necessary examination. A distinguished
historian like M. Delisle can be dismissed from a lifelong post
at the Archives to make room for a young political nominee
ignorant of even the rudiments of his profession. An inspector
in the ministry of education is almost at the mercy of a deputy
who can not only destroy his career, but that of the teachers
with whose supervision he is charged.” Similar complaints
come from the post-office, the government arsenals, even the
magistracies. France has what has been in England unneces-
sary since 1870, its Black Book of political nepotism.” In a
single year, M. Simyan, the under-secretary of state for posts
and telegraphs, received more than one hundred thousand let-
ters recommending candidates for office almost entirely on
political grounds. M. Steeg has given numerous instances
in the Chamber of Deputies itself of nominations that have
been granted in every part of the civil service for reasons other
than merit, and without regard to the regulations involved.”
Against the political power a deputy can exert the fact is clear
- that few officials dare hope to compete. They cannot make
headway against the influence of a man upon whose vote the
government is counting for its very existence, and that the
more certainly in a country where, as in France, the executive


24 See the famous Toulouse speech of Oct. 28, 1900. For an almost
exactly similar American utterance of the speech cf. Mr. Johnson, a con-
gressman for Kentucky, in the Congressional Record for Oct. 10, 1913.

% Leyret, “La République et Les Politiciens,’’ p. 29 f.

26 On this last evil of the very able speech cf. M. Louis Martin in the
Chamber, Journal Officiel, Nov. 10, 1905.

27 Cf. “Le Livre d’or Des Fils à Papa.”

28 M. Thibault, “Les Syndicats de Fonctionnaires” (1909).

29 Journal Officiel, May 9, 1907.


330 INAV TU AE KOR ILIE SS TIN. AE sls MODERN STATE


has not yet made itself master of the legislature. It is surely
clear that the civil servant is literally driven to combine against
the minister to preserve the very regulations by which the
department is supposed to be governed.


The private opinions of the civil servant are subject to a
degrading surveillance. ‘‘The state,” says M. Leroy-Beaulieu
with graphic emphasis,®° “strangles its personnel.” It seems,
indeed, to imagine that it has the right completely to control
the personal life of its officials in every particular. M. Briand’s
ministry, at the time of the Separation, refused even to guar-
antee officials freedom of religious worship. A teacher was
dismissed for visiting the curé of his commune, and not even
the unanimous petition of its inhabitants could secure his rein-
statement.*2 A postmistress was transferred on the ground of
reactionary opinions because one of her sons was a priest, and
the other employed by a notorious conservative. An in-
spector was dismissed for refusing to answer political letters
of recommendation.** And one distinguished politician, M.
Clémenceau, does not seem to doubt that what the govern-
ments pays for is intellectual servitude. ‘The government,”
said M. Dubief, a former minister of commerce, “will not
surrender the right to know the attitude of its servants to the
republic.”


It of course follows that if private opinions are so carefully
scrutinised their public expression is rigidly suppressed.” Lib-
erty of action is necessarily denied’ if private opinion is to be
controlled. Teachers have been dismissed for making pacifist
speeches.® Officials who take a leading part in the work of
professional organisation find themselves interrogated, sus-


80 P. Leroy-Beaulieu, ‘‘L’Etat Moderne et Ses Fonctions,” p. 81.

31 Journal Officiel, Nov. 20, 1905.

32 Journal Officiel, Jan. 31, 1909.

33 P, Harmignie, “L’Etat et Ses Agents,” p. 31.

34 Réforme Social, April 1, 1909, p. 417.

3 Ibid.

3 Journal Officiel, Feb. 8, 1905.

37 On this problem in England cf. the Report of the Royal Commission.
Parl. Papers, 1914, Vol. XVI, p. 95.

38 Guiraud, “D’Ecole et La Famille,” p. 103.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 331


pended, even dismissed. A teacher was dismissed for attack-
ing the prefect of his department in the press. The maritime
prefect of Toulon refused to admit into the arsenal the trade
paper of the Marine Workers’ Federation. A clerk who proph-
esied in the journal of his association that conditions in the local
treasury must eventually result in a strike was dismissed for
so doing. Discipline, it was argued in all these cases, is im-
possible if the right to criticise anything relating to government
is assumed. Yet when the administrative means of individual
protest are deemed inadequate it is difficult to see how, on the
one hand, the technical journal of a profession can avoid the
discussion of a technical problem, or why it is more inappro-
priate for a civil servant to have opinions on pacifism than it
is for Mr. Disraeli to make epigrams about Darwin.

Problems such as these are the most complex the adminis-
trative issue affords, for their solution involves the regulation
of parliamentary government in a way that has thus far been
unknown.*? The questions raised by the material situation of
the civil servant are far less complex in character. It is natural
enough that all kinds of grievances should exist in relation to
the physical conditions of service. Wages are often low; the
hours of labour are deemed over-long; vacations do not come
at a time when they can be adequately profitable. Not, in-
deed, that the civil service has not involved a constantly-in-
creasing expenditure. In the post-office, for example, where
the intensity of grievance has on two occasions led to a serious
strike, the expenses have increased in ten years from 177 to
297 million francs, and the receipts have not risen proportion-
ately.*1 The same is true, in some degree, of every government
department,” and that at a time when it is claimed by M.
Clémenceau that they are all overstaffed. The problem of
pensions is no more than a variation upon a similar theme.


39 Revue Socialiste, 1909, p. 388.

4 Except at England where they have largely been met. But for a
recrudescence of the evils of patronage see an article in the Civilian for
Nov. 23, 712.

4 Cf. the Report to the Chamber on the Budget des Postes of M.
Noulens, in 1908.

4 Bulletin de Statistique du Ministère des Finances, July, 1905.

43 Journal Officiel, May 15, 1907.


332 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


The problem of administrative discipline and promotion is
far more complex, and the report of every commission that
has discussed the subject shows that it has nowhere been satis-
factorily solved. The right to discipline a civil servant has as
its aim the repression of such conduct as may hurt the condi-
tion of the public service. That, after all, is simple and obvious
enough; but the way in which the repression is to be exercised
involves immense difficulties. Is it action taken by the minis-
ter in the name of the state? Does he therein occupy the posi-
tion of an employer who settles at his pleasure how he will deal
with an inefficient workman? Is it action taken by the minis-
ter in the name of the state, as the head, for instance, of a
railway company may act as the representative of the corporate
person? Or is it, as the civil servants claim, action taken still,
indeed, by the minister, but acting as the head of a professional
and technical service temporarily placed under his control?
The tendency of ministers themselves is to act upon the first
hypothesis; it is only natural, when the evolution of the idea of
public service is borne in mind, that this should be the case.
Every minister is in theory charged with the compilation of
rules to deal with the officials in his department. It is not,
then, difficult for him to assume that if he can make and un-
make them at his will, his power is autocratic. The hierarchical
structure of French administration tends, in any case, to
identify order with a somewhat arbitrary exercise of power.
Discipline, it has been argued, is impossible if democratic co-
operation on the part of the civil service is admitted. That
autocracy is naturally a matter of grave suspicion to the official.
He desires to replace it by a method which will enable him to
share in the determination of punishments. He has, indeed,
already a certain share in the councils of discipline; but this is
always minority representation and rarely elective.“ He is
anxious, moreover, that official control should be strictly lim-
ited to acts done in the course of public employment. If M.
Nègre, for example, displays a poster containing an open letter


“ For a brilliant analysis cf. Duguit, “L’Etat,” Vol. I, p. 475f, and the
caustic analysis of M. Leroy in the third chapter of his ‘“Transformations
de la Puissance Publique.”

4 Cf. Bonnard, “‘De la Repression des Fautes.”’


AUTHORITY IN. THE MODERN STATE 333


to the Prime Minister of a somewhat critical character, he
ought not to be penalised for an act obviously done, so it is
claimed, in his capacity as a citizen. The civil servant demands
the replacement of such arbitrary power by a system of guar-
antees. The entrance to public employment should be so regu-
lated as to put it beyond the reach of ordinary ministerial
control. Fairness should be guaranteed by communicating to
every civil servant the documents upon which his position
depends. Punishments should no longer be arbitrary and acci-
dental. They should be applied not secretly and from above, but
openly, and from below. The council of discipline should cease
to be a mere board of advice composed of the minister’s nomi-
nees. Itis only by the removal of these grievances that the civil
service can recover its confidence in the goodwill of government.
And as with discipline, so with promotion. If there is perhaps
a tendency among officials to lay too great emphasis on length
of service—the natural tendency of the expert to confuse an-
tiquity with experience—some safeguard is surely needed
against the abuse of favouritism. Unless a bulwark is erected
against promotion at pleasure, the deputy, as now, will pick
out his candidates for promotion. There are numerous instances
of the acceleration of advancement for purely political reasons.
At present there is too little guarantee that a meritorious con-
tinuity of service may count at all. No precautions are taken
to see that those whose names are accepted for promotion are
really worthy of it. A vacancy in a higher position is filled in
the most arbitrary fashion. Where seniority counts, it counts
absolutely instead of relatively, so that no precaution can be
taken to see that it is coupled with efficiency. No system
exists which regulates the transference of officials from one de-
partment to another. If a civil servant advances, as he thinks, too
slowly in one department, he uses politicalinfluenceto obtain a po-
sition two or three grades higher in another. It is obvious enough
that thus to remain at the mercy of what is practically the minis-
ter’s whim should make the official demand the security of pro-
fessional standards organised under a charter of independence.”


46 “Libres Entretiens,” 4th series (1907-8), p. 230 f.

47 Cf, Demartial ‘‘Les Statut des Fonctionnaires” (1909) and Georgin.
“Les Statut des Fonctionnaires.” (1911). I have discussed below the sig-
nificance of these claims.


334 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


No one can doubt the broad conclusion implied in these
grievances. Each of them is too vast to make individual effort
in any probable sense productive. Hach of them demands
concerted action if speedy redress is to be obtained. That is
why the last decade has seen the immense growth of trade-
unionism among the civil servants. That growth was itself
the effect of an intolerable situation, and without it the crisis
would never have occurred. But it is one thing to form asso-
ciations and another to secure their recognition. The law of
1884 admitted association for the purpose of safeguarding pro-
fessional interests; but it is absolutely clear that its extension
to the civil service was at no moment intended. The law of
1901 permits the formation of societies for any general purpose
not contrary to public well-being; but it lacks the professional
and economic connotation that attaches to the law of 1884.4
It is the benefit of the first law that the civil servants demand.
Without it, and all that it implies, the right of association would
be fruitless. For ministers have been prodigal in their prom-
ises; and it is sufficiently clear that the mere formation of
amiable and well-intentioned groups who have neither threats
to make, nor the weapons with which to fulfil them can prove
at all effective.®°

The result has been to drive the lower grades of the civil
service more and more in the direction of the syndicalist move-
ment. Teachers, postal workers, hospital warders, have formed
trade-unions despite the legal prohibition that seems to exist.
They attempt to join the Bourses de Travail.. The more
eager spirits do not hesitate to claim, and sometimes to secure,
affihation with the Confédération Générale du Travail; and
thus to make proclaim of their eager desire to overthrow the
bourgeois state.” Prohibitions and dismissals have made little
difference. Dismissals can always be recalled by pressure in
the chamber, and since they are the only means by which the


48 Cf. below.

49 Paul-Boncour, “Les Syndicats de Fonctionnaires,” p. 15.

50 Alibert, “Les Syndicats de Fonctionnaires,” p. 84.

51 Cf. the prohibitive decree of August 11, 1905.

52 Cf. the Open Letter to M. Clémenceau reprinted by Leroy in “Syn-
dicats et Services Publics.”


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 335


prohibition can be enforced it is not surprising that they remain
ineffective. Nor are the different departments remaining
distinct. Federations and congresses, sometimes even interna-
tional in character, testify to the community of feeling by
which the civil service is penetrated.

The implication of the demand to associate under the law
of 1884 is, of course, perfectly clear. When the association be-
comes a recognised trade-union it possesses the right to strike;
and certainly there are few among the more advanced fonc-
tionnaires who deny their appreciation of this weapon. If it is
answered that the strike is not only brutal but often ineffective,
the civil servant makes reply, just as the syndicalist; that
nothing is so likely to give his colleagues their proper sense of
class-consciousness. Indeed, the emphasis on the law of 1884
is, above all, an emphasis of sentiment.” The humble fonc-
tionnaire cannot help feeling that to call him a member of the
governing classes is an absurd mis-application of terms. Rela-
tive to the government, his situation is exactly the situation of
an ordinary member of the working-classes and the equation
of position demands, in his view, the equation of methods.*®
Arguments derived from legal theory rather naturally leave
him a little cold. When he is told by so sympathetic an ob-
server as M. Duguit®’ that a strike in the civil service is sub-
versive of its very nature he is not likely, until his grievances
have received their fundamental remedy, to be overwhelmed
with a sense of shame. He will say quite simply that he is im-
mediately interested not in the functioning of a service for
ends of which he does not approve by methods from which he
suffers, but in taking the shortest route to a transformation of
the whole system. He has technical ideals without doubt;
but one cannot have technical ideals until an adequate milieu
for their application has been obtained.


5 Cf. Journal Officiel, July 11, 1906, March 10, 1908, June 22, 1909.

54 Beaubois, Mouvement Socialiste, April, 1909, p. 291.

55 Bouglé, “Syndicats de Fonctionnaires,” Revue Metaphysique et Morale.
1907, p. 671.

56 Fourniére “Les Fonctions de L’Etat,’’ Revue Socialiste, 1907, p. 40.

57 “Droit Social, Droit Individuel,” pp. 134-7.


336 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


Ill. THE CLAIMS OF THE CIVIL SERVICE


Wuat, obviously enough, is important in all this is the end it
has in view. It is not so much a revolt as a revolution, and it
it at the heart of the unified state that it is aimed. The reality
of the grievances under which the civil service has laboured is
unquestionable; but the sentiment to which they have given
rise is no longer to be assuaged by their amendment. For the
real problem that has been created is not a doubt of the end to
which the state is directed, but a doubt whether the present
mechanisms of government can in fact attain that end. The
need of authority is undoubted; but challenge is issued to that
authority simply because the fonctionnaire no longer believes
that its autocratic exercise can achieve the purposes for which,
theoretically, it exists. The fact that authority depends on its
acceptance by those over whom it is exerted no longer needs
demonstration. Here, as elsewhere, the capital fact is demon-
strated that the fundamental problem of political science is
not how power originated, but how it can be justified. What
the theorists of this: movement have done is to divide the state
into rulers and subjects and to proclaim to the latter that the
object of the state cannot, in the present synthesis, be fulfilled.
So that they are compelled by conviction to join hands with
the revolutionary elements of modern society that, from their
joint efforts, a new state may be born.

Even so barely stated, the argument is far-reaching enough;
but the method of its detailed presentation gives it a strength
that is even more striking. Unquestionably, of course, the
movement contains men of moderate opinions who did not
sympathise with the active enmity to the state displayed in the
postal strike and desire no more than an improvement in their
position.®® Undoubtedly also, as in every great movement, the
opinion of the associations has, for the most part, been guided by
the ability and energy of a few. But, equally clearly, it is this
active minority that has formulated the accepted principles of


68 Cf. Berth, “Marchands, Intellectuels, Politiciens,”’ in Mouvement
Socialiste,” 1907-8.

59 As Rousseau and T. H. Green clearly perceived. I have discussed the
problem in the first chapter of this book.

60 Pouget, ‘Les Bases du Syndicalisme,” p. 21.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 337


the movement, and their leadership is responsible both for the
direction it has taken and the successes it has attained.*! Their
attitude is simply that of the militant proletariat. They look
upon the administrative world as basically akin to that of indus-
try. The class-struggle is no less real there. The humbler civil-
servant there, as in industry can free himself only by his own
efforts. His triumph will come only from the strength and
power of his associations which must more and more attempt
the domination of the services to which he belongs. By the
strength of those groups he can attain the desired reforms, if
not peaceably, then by the accepted methods of direct action.
The result will be the transformation of the state.


It is an arresting analogy that is not without its fascination.
The humbler fonctionnaires seem, undoubledly, to constitute
an administrative proletariat. The hierarchical control exer-
cised over them by their technical superiors is in no sense likely
to produce any real sentiment of co-operation. The attitude
adopted to them by the parliamentarians is in every sense lam-
entable. It is only at a crisis that they obtain a hearing; but
the promises so prodigally made are rarely, if ever, fulfilled. The
statesmen are too occupied with the mechanisms of politics to
care for the processes by which their decisions are fulfilled. And
within the administration itself there is a hierarchy of classes
which corresponds to that of the general social organisation.”
The division between the privileged few who are well-paid and
the mass whose salary is inadequate is very marked. The aver-
age civil-servant cannot hope to arrive at those posts; and
where promotion is secure, it applies only to the central admin-
istration and not to the provinces.® There is, in fact, a general
disproportion between labour and reward exactly as in private
industry.“ And if the higher fonctionnaires thus reap the profit
of their subordinates’ work, the state itself is for the mass of
civil servants simply an employer. That is, of course, clear


61 Cf. Harmignie, op. cit., p. 145, Journal Officiel, May 14, 1907 (M.
Briand).

&2 Cf. Fourniére, Revue Socialiste, 1907, p. 40.

& Cf. Economiste Français, Nov. 18, 1905, p. 737 (a civil-servant’s
letter).

«4 Leroy, “Transformations de La Puissance Publique,” p. 222.


338 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


when it makes matches or builds ships. It is not less an em-
ployer when it takes charge of public instruction. Its work of
administration requires a manual and intellectual proletariat
just like any business house. Even in its judicial aspect, so
M. Leroy has claimed,® the reality of this character is apparent.
Clearly, if the state is an employer its servants are wage-earners,
and they cannot, through the accidental choice of employment,
deprive themselves of means which will prevent their exploita-
tion. Their position, as M. Millerand has said, is no more than
a particular instance of a general industrial problem. The fight
is a struggle against privileges, whether, as in industry, those of
the rich, or as in politics, those of the government.”

If they are a proletariat, they must, like the workers, accom-
plish their own salvation. To that end a sense of unity is vital
and nothing can be gained until it has been created. So the
fonctionnaires have nòt only formed what correspond to craft-
unions, but also federations of workers in the different depart-
ments. They have seen that an injury to one may affect the
strength of the whole; and they have not hesitated to make
corporate protest against individual injustice. They have
supported one another at times of crisis. They have held con-
gresses where assurances of fraternity have been exchanged.
And their feeling of identity with the working-classes has led to
an important rapprochement between them. Its basis, indeed,
was already prepared in the existence of an undeniable prole-
tariat in the state-monopolies;® and the steps thence to civil
servants who in the technical sense are associated with the
administration was not a great one. The teachers were the first
to take action. Not only did they attempt to join the Bourses
de Travail—despite ministerial prohibition’”“—but they have
gone so far as to seek affiliation with the Confédération Générale
du Travail which is avowedly revolutionary in purpose. Un-
doubtedly, indeed, that action has failed to secure unanimous


& “Syndicats et Services Publics,” p. 187.

66 See Le Temps, Feb. 25, 1906.

67 Revue Hebdomadaire, August 3, 1907, p. 13.

68 Harmignie, op. cit., 91. i

69 Cf. Beaubois, Mouvement Socialiste, Jan. 1909.
10 Decree of August 11, 1905.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 339


support. But what is important is the fact that it should have
won any support at all. ‘We shall march by its side,” said
M. Nègre, the outstanding person in the movement,”! “to work
together for the emancipation of the industrial and intellectual
proletariat.” M. Nègre is a teacher, and his attitude is the more
striking in that the intellectual position of the teacher in France
would seem to relate him to the middle class; but the avowed
exponents of official syndicalism have at length accepted their
adhesion.”

Nor is there any distinction of method between the militant
fonctionnaire and the militant proletariat. The whole purpose
of their desire to benefit rather from the law of 1884 than from
that of 1901 is the ability the former affords of using the weapon
of the strike. “The collective suspension of work,” says M.
Briquet,” “is the indispensable aim of every labour-group which
desires effectively to promote the collective interests of its mem-
bers.” Indeed, a simple association, the Association of Postal
Workers, has not hesitated to disregard the technical distinction
between the two laws. It is for them simply a sterile discussion
of doctrine with which they have no concern.” The police of
Lyons did not hesitate to go on strike, and, after the face of the
government had been saved, it appears that they were success-
ful.” The teachers, indeed, in some respects the most advanced
of all the fonctionnaires, have not proceeded so far; for it is
clear that in their case the temporary suspension of a public
service that would be involved, does not relate with sufficient
intimacy to the necessary conduct of the national life. If these
strikes have not had the large results of which their leaders
dreamed, they have at any rate shown the powerlessness of law
to prevent them. They have demonstrated the all-important
fact that a challenge can be issued to government. They have
suggested, since the movement is only at its beginning, that it is
a challenge to which there may one day be no possible reply.

It is, then, essentially a revolutionary spirit with which the


n Harmignie, op. cit., p. 105.

72 Beaubois Mouvement Socialiste, 1905, p. 505.

73 Mouvement Socialiste, 1903, p. 147.

14 Though it has discussed.

% Journal Officiel, May 23, 1905. cf. the London police strike of 1918.


340 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


government is called upon to deal. Exactly as the ultimate aim
of the industrial movement is an attempt to create an industrial
democracy, so do the fonctionnaires aim at’ the creation of an
administrative democracy. They are compelled, therefore, to be
suspicious of power. The state is to them, as it is to the workers,
the real citadel to assault. To attack the government is to sap
the foundations of an authority the basic purpose of which seems
to them illegitimate.” The present system of administrative
organisation seems to them unsatisfactory simply because its
underlying principles are inconsistent with the aims they have
in view. So long as the hierarchy is maintained, the democrati-
sation of administrative power is impossible. So long as the
present division exists between the higher civil service and the
humbler fonctionnaires, the former, whose position is, for the
most part, secure, are bound to gravitate towards the deputies
and make the civil service political instead of technical in char-
acter. That is why the fonctionnaire refuses his confidence to
the Chamber. Its object is too different to be compatible with
his own. It is, so to speak, itself a trade-union and its adminis-
trative exertions are only one of the ways in which it promotes
the interests of its members. It also, then, uses a kind of direct
action for its purposes; and the gesture of the civil service is
thus not distinct in quality from that of the politician. This
discontent with authority expresses itself in many ways—open
contempt for administrative regulations,” vituperation of the
_Parhament,” distrust even of the republic itself. “We no
longer believe in words,” said an able representative of this
attitude,” “we demand realities; we have lost our attachment
for forms. We calculate their worth and measure their produc-
tivity. We no longer sacrifice ourselves for sentiment, we con-
sult our interests. The heroic times have passed away; the hour
of practical effort has arrived.”

The civil service, indeed, has not stopped its effort at the mere
criticism of the administrative system. It has been compelled
to realise that the administrative system is, in fact, but the re-


76 Cf. M. Jaurés in L’ Humanité, May 1, 1908.
77 Cf. citations in “Harmignie,” op. cit., p. 126.
78 Ibid., p. 128.

79 And ef. Ch. Dupuy in Le Soleil, April 5, 1909.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 341


flex of a larger whole. There are other institutions within the
state which equally constitute its stalwart defences. Its mili-
tary organisation is essentially a reservoir of state-power. To
become a soldier is so it is argued, to lose contact with the work-
ing-class, and to destroy a system which thus uses that class
against itself is clearly fundamental. A congress of teachers
has pledged itself to pacifism, and some of them have suffered
dismissal for the violence of their antimilitarist. propaganda.®°
As is usually the case, the offspring of pacifist doctrine has been
internationalism, and at any rate before 1914, many members
of the civil service had gone far towards its adoption.

The fonctionnaires, in fact, do not conceal from themselves
that it is nothing less than an entire social reconstruction at
which they are aiming. That they can effect it alone, they do not
for a moment profess to believe; but they urge that government
normally disposes of so great a power that without their assist-
ante a successful revolution can be hardly accomplished. Nor,
given the conditions, is that an exaggerated assumption. Each
group of them, moreover, has its function in the task. It is the
duty of the teacher to begin in childhood the revolutionary
education of the people; while those actually concerned with
the technical work of administration can overthrow the whole
machine at the critical moment of its functioning. M. Jaurés,
indeed, was in nowise disturbed by the character of the move-
ment. ‘The affiliation,” he said,® of civil servants to the labour
movement, to the class-struggle, is a revolutionary fact. It is
not less than a revolution when the servants of the state work
to reconstruct the basis of that social order of which the state
is the expression and the guardian.” It isa movement which
has penetrated every section of the civil service. It is ably or-
ganized and its propaganda is conducted with relentless energy.
It has a brilliant literature, and a press of its own. It has definite
ends to pursue, and it is evolving means by which those ends
may be attained. It is a movement which at every stage of its
progress, has been marked by the courageous termination of its
leaders. Certain it is that one who is at all interested in the


80 Journal Officiel, June 27, 1908, Guiraud, “L’Ecole et La Famille,”


p. 111.
81 Journal Officiel, May 15, 1907.


342 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


development of political processes dare neglect the richness of
its possibilities.

For, after all, no social movement is unique in its age. Politi-
cal change has links with the past so strict and so far-reaching
that it is rarely possible to ascribe novelty to what the heralds
of an idea themselves deem striking innovation. Certainly this
is the case with administrative syndicalism. It represents a
crisis for which there has been long and careful preparation. It
is part of a larger federal synthesis which has ramifications
throughout the industrial world. The very solutions it proposes
have intellectual ancestors which were themselves the product
of their time. This is not, indeed, to argue that administrative
syndicalism is a phenomenon so ordinary that it can with safety
be neglected. It draws a special importance from a situation
which has of necessity tended to throw it into striking relief.
It has succeeded simply because the evolution it summarises
is beginning at last to translate itself into terms of practical
achievement. It is a variation upon the theme of economic
federation which is itself the offspring of a breakdown in the
machinery of capitalist organisation. It represents in relation
to the state simply what the large aspects of syndicalism repre-
sent in industrial change. It gives a new connotation to sover-
eignty. It federalises the will of the state. The lines, indeed,
of its evolution can not yet with any certainty be drawn. We
can use descriptive terms, suggest tendencies, discover signs of
change. In the elements of opposition are to be discovered the
means of more intimate analysis. From whatever source they
are derived, it is a crisis that the facts suggest. The tidal wave
of democratic advance has at last reached the inmost recesses
of the imperial state. Our task is the measurement of the energy
it conveys.


IV. IMPLICATIONS


Ir is usual to distinguish three different systems of administra-
tive organisation. What has been called the monarchical so-
lution would leave the civil service at the mercy of the execu-
tive power. The present régime, that is to say, might be
altered in its accidentals, but its fundamental features would


® Salaun, Revue Politique et Parliamentaire, Jan. 10, 1908, p. 148 seq.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 343


remain unchanged. Such a method, it is clear, would leave
the main cause of the present unrest entirely unsolved. It
would involve a patent contradiction between a democratically
organised political system and an autocratic administrative
system. It would withdraw a whole field of social activity
from the dominant influences of the time. It would look, not
to the organisation that is to be, but to the past history of the
state. It could be maintained only by violence, and probably
at the sacrifice of administrative efficiency. The second means
is its direct antithesis. It proposes to hand over to the civil
service the control of administrative functions. The political
head of a department would state his demands, and his orders
would be fulfilled by the fonctionnaires themselves. The de-
partment would be in every way autonomous, so that there
would be no room left for the grievances by which the service
is oppressed. This, clearly enough, is the organisation which
meets with most favour among the civil servants themselves.
It transforms them into a technical profession, and it leaves
no opportunity for personal causes external to the service to
interfere with its functioning. The third solution is midway
between the two others. It envisages a statutory organisation
of the civil service. The minister will remain in control, but it
will be a legally conditioned control. Every step of his policy
will be conditioned by statute. The method of promotion, the
redress of grievance, administrative responsibility, the mechan-
ism of suggestion, will be at every stage controlled by legal
regulations. The vise of the monarchical system will thus dis-
appear while the danger of administrative independence of the
national life is sufficiently safeguarded. The justice of the com-
plaints urged against the monarchical system is admitted, but
it is not felt that they justify so great an innovation as admin-
istrative syndicalism would entail.

Very clearly, the starting-point of any enquiry must discuss
the origins of modern centralisation. That is in nowise doubt-
ful: We need not agree with Taine’s theory that the Revolu-
tion resulted in the deterioration of human nature to agree
that the general chaos prevented the employment of the mech-
anisms of liberalism. Where the very existence of power was


83 “Régime Moderne,” Bk. II, Ch. I.


344 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


threatened, it was only by its concentration that it could sur-
vive. What Napoleon did was to synthesise that power within
himself; and the equality that remained was the equality of
a common subjection to his will. He realised that action in
the modern state must be as certainly unified as deliberation
must be multiple. He demanded from the civil service an
absolute abandonment of their personality.“ It was the fulfil-
ment of Siéyes’ prevision. “Power,” he had said,® “will come
from above; from below there will be simply confidence,” and
that was no more than a simple statement of fact. And cer-
tainly his administrative system was not his least durable work.
The country was satisfied with an administration that was at
any rate efficient; and the reaction upon it of political democracy
was as yet too novel to be at all impressive. So that Napoleon’s
successors could not only use his system but even extend it..
‘Ce sont des administrés,” writes M. Chardon, “qui de propos
délibérés, étendent chaque jour l’empire de l'administration,”
and, indeed the fact is obvious enough; for not the least im-
portant result of the extension of collectivism has been the
general expectation that government not only can, but must,
meet every conceivable emergency.”


But while administrative power was thus extended, its exer-
cise underwent no democratic percolation. The executive
power retained its imperial purple. Nothing in the whole path
of the nineteenth century seemed able to influence its organisa-
tion. Government, as in the time of Napoleon, is the repre-
sentative of the sovereign people, and to confide power to
those who are not elected would be to create a state within a
state and destroy the unity of the whole. That is why Taine’s
brilliant description of the Napoleonic prefect remains not less
true today than of the time of which he wrote. The civil
servant is not an actor in the events of which he is the admin-
istrator. He is a kind of perpetual secretary; and M. Chardon


84 See Tarne’s impressive remarks, “Régime Moderne,” Vol. I, p. 170.

8 Ibid., I, 168.

æ “T Administration de la France,” p. 2.

87 This was very strikingly evinced in the food crisis of 1917 which led
to Mr. Hoover’s appointment as administrator.

88 “Régime Moderne,” Vol. II, p. 240 f.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 345


insists that there are able and competent men who never have
a single decision to take throughout their career. The service
is recruited in exactly the same way as at the Revolution;
everything is controlled by the central power. If France has
no longer Napoleon, she has his ministers, and they are less
successful in their psychology in the degree to which they lack
his personal fascination. Here, again, it was Taine who per-
ceived the real crux of the problem. “They do not,” he said,”
“Jook upon human association . . . as concerted initiative
generated from below . . . but as a hierarchy of authorities
imposed from above.” Where the fundamental change in the
modern state is an evolution almost directly antithetic to this
attitude, it has left untouched the civil service. Not even the
admission of corporate freedom has penetrated within the
executive realm.”

It is a persistence as difficult to justify as it is easy to under-
stand. It is difficult to justify because it is an apparent and,
as it seems, unnecessary contradiction of democratic govern-
ment. It is surely an erroneous attitude to separate compe-
tence and responsibility; and that, in fact, is the result of the
present system. It is easy to understand because, from a long
historical chain of events,” the average citizen in the modern
democracy seems anxious, above all, to perform his political
functions vicariously. What he asks from the professional
politician is orderly government and he rarely examines the
means by which it is attained. Whether M. Clémenceau ever
really remarked that he could remain in office so long as he
wanted,” the fact remains that he epitomized very neatly the


89 “T Administration de la France,” p. 9.

90 “Régime Moderne,” Vol. I, p. 213.

% Cf. the admirable remarks of M. Seignobos, “Hist. of Cont. Europe,”
p. 222 f.

%2 They have been brilliantly analysed, psychologically, for England by
Mr. Graham Wallas in his “Human Nature in Politics” and for American
Society by Mr. Lippmann in his “Preface to Politics.” In institutional terms
of the magistral analysis of Ostrogorski,‘‘Democracy and the Organisation
of Political Parties.” I do not know of any similar. French work, but the
syndicalist criticisms of the modern state, as M. Lagardelle’s “Socialisme
Ouvrier” esp., Part I, are very valuable on this point.

% Duguit, “Droit Social, Droit Individuel,” p. 129.


346 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


typical governmental attitude to the civil service. Democracy
seems to have considered that the security of its life depended
on the retention of the hierarchical system. That may, per-
haps, have been true before the separation when the safety of
the republic was still matter of debate. But with the assurance
of its survival, the Napoleonic system is already obsolete. |

That, indeed, is the real meaning of the growth of adminis-
trative syndicalism. It has come because there is now no rea-
son to restrain it. Antiquity is not a reason; and democracy
is, internally at least, in little danger of disappearance. The
executive power can not make a plea for its autocratic exercise
when the army is no longer a source of disloyalty, and the
church has been reduced to a shadow of its former influence.
The only reason for the retention of the present system is the
power it places in the hands of statesmen. It enables them to
corrupt both the civil service and the electorate. The one he
can hold by the fear of dismissal, the other by the hope of
office. But it is too obviously humiliating for the civil servant
to remain subject both to public and private control. The only
justification of arbitrary power is the impossibility of demo-
cratic power. That impossibility the civil servant denies. He
maintains that it ts based upon an entirely false conception of
the implications of sovereignty. The theory that the state
must, by its very definition, be irresponsible seems to him
without root in political fact. He knows what that irresponsi-
bility has meant in the past. He has weighed it and rejected it.
The hour has come for new systems.

It is in some such fashion that the monarchical system is
rejected, and, psychologically at least, there seems every rea-
son for its rejection. No administrative system can be ade-
quate in which power is concentrated and not disturbed. No
service can attract ability where the influence it offers is hidden
and potential, not real and responsible. Nor are the syndi-
calists more enamoured of a status that is guaranteed by
parliament. They are too suspicious of the state to feel secure
at what emanates from its organs.® It is, after all, from the


% Journal Officiel, M. Clémenceau, Speech of March 13, 1908.

% Mr. Wallas’ admirable remarks, “‘The Great Society,” pp. 285-8, 290 f.

% For interesting evidence of a similar suspicion in England cf. Bulletin
of U. S. Bureau of Labor, Vol. 5, p. 36.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 347


Parliament above all that they have suffered; and it is largely
by the manipulation of the civil service that the majority in
the chamber retains its power. They do not believe in the mod-
ern state simply because theirs has been the most intimate
experience of it. What laws have been suggested are all of them
conservative in character. They attempt the compromise of
two irreconcilable theories. The administration wants to exer-
cise a final control where the civil service demands autonomy.
Nor are they eager for a special position in the state. That
suggestion is for them no more than an erroneous idea derived
from the original irresponsibility of the sovereign state. It is
a decaying theory,” and they will not found their relief upon
it. Nor is it, in any case, destined very long to survive. Every
day, the jurisprudence of the Conseil d Etat makes one more
inroad upon its life.8 The dogma is already too seriously
compromised to be capable any longer of valid application.
It would still leave their relation to the state non-contractual
in character to regulate their position by statute. What they
desire is a service on equal terms, a right to make their situa-
tion a part of the common law. Nor are they—and this is of
supreme importance—willing to enjoy a situation which would
in fact break the bonds of their friendship with the industrial
proletariat. For to attach themselves to the present state is
to surrender the right to work for its transformation. It was
exactly the need of that change they above all felt at the time
of their original revolt against its excesses. Clearly, to accept
a favour from its hands would be to desert not merely those
who stood by them in their need, but also the original and
avowed purpose of their movement. They will not share in so
great a self-stultification.

So that for them there is no alternative save the monarchical
and syndicalist solutions. They reject the first because an
organization which deprives the workers of .a voice in the
determination of their labour is in fact psychologically and
morally inadequate. The second alone is satisfactory because
there only is there guarantee that the humanity of the admin-
istrative proletariat is recognised. There only can the method


97 Cf. Duguit, “Le Droit Social, Le Droit Individual,” Da2:
98 Cf. Duguit, “Les Transformations du Droit Public,” pp. 65-73.


348 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


of action be in such-fashion a fusion of wills that every
voice can find representation in the result, can make admin-
istrative personality democratic in a corporate sense. They
believe, moreover, that institutional evolution is far more in ac-
cord with the position they have taken up than with the pro-
posal of a statute. The parliamentary solution does not, after
all, depend upon an improvement in the condition of the people
as a whole. Thereby merely to base government upon number
is still to leave it open to the pathetic manipulation by which
it has been traduced during the nineteenth century,'°° for we
are less confident than before that majority-rule is a final
solution. They point to the increasing development—common
to the whole world—of a political life outside the ordinary
cadres of parliamentary systems.!* Not only are they, as it
seems, determined to make the government inferior to law by
making it responsible, but also, by associations of every kind,
they bring pressure to bear upon the legislative process. It is
‘a new and striking effort to bring authority within the bounds
of popular control.!? It makes it less likely to remain merely a
weapon in the hands of those who exercise it. Nor can the
significance of the elaboration of legislative projects by those
who have a professional relation to their functioning be under-
estimated.'% What we are beginning to see is virtually law-
making by those over whom the particular statute will exercise
its empire. To say that the system is in its infancy is in nowise
to belittle its implications. It is a new source of legislative
power, even if it be an indirect one; and it clearly bears, in very


99 Cf. the speech of M. Sembat at the Congress of the Agents des Postes,
June 5, 1905; and his paper in Documents du Progrés, May, 1909, p. 408.
_ 100'This dissatisfaction with the merely numerical solution is admirably
expressed by a publicist who cannot be accused of syndicalist ideas, M. Ch.
Benoist; cf. his ‘Crise de l'Etat Moderne.”

10 Cf. the very important remarks of M. Maxime Leroy, “Libres
Entretiens,” 4me series, p. 385 f.

102 Cf. M. Leroy, “La Loi,” p. 346 f.

108 This is not less true of America than of France. Cf. Leroy, “La Loi,”
p. 212 f, with the fact that men like Professors Williston and Brannan of
the Harvard Law School have been charged with the drafting of statutes
which political bodies pass into law. The influence of such professional
autonomy as that of doctors and lawyers is, of course, analogous.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 349


decisive fashion upon the nature of parliamentary authority.
For the preparation of law by the private initiative of experts
is the preparation of law by men whose opinion it is difficult
to neglect.'* Public opinion may be a reserve power, but. no
one can mistake the ultimate control it can exert, and public
opinion tends more and more to appreciate the evolution of
this technical legislation. It almost seems, in fact, that a de-
mocracy which has been thwarted of its authority by its unifi-
cation has found new means of its assertion by dividing the
source of power.

In such an atmosphere, the attitude which regards the state
as in any sense an institution of a special character can hardly
survive. Once the equality of citizens before the law is postu-

_ lated, it is evident that their internal relations must be demo-
cratically organised. We have passed, as M. Duguit has in-
sisted, from a régime of subjective rights to a régime of objective
duties. That, from those duties, rights may find a secondary
justification does not alter the fact that the real defence of
authority is to show the objective necessity of its exercise.!®
Let it be granted that the personality of the state is real, it
yet does not follow that corporate personality begets rights
superior to individual rights. What each state-action must
show is that the force it entails produces a result so valuable that
the life of society would be the poorer for its absence. But that
is to say that the real test of state-theory is not the principles
upon which that theory is based so much as the manner in
which they function. ‘The principle, in fact, cannot be sepa-
rated from the process; its teleology is, at bottom, inductive.
Its intentions may be admirable; but judgment cannot be made
until the intention is realised in conduct. Exactly where the
modern state is being transformed is at the point where the
judgment upon its action has led to new methods of political
life. Since the only justification of government is the quality
of life its policy secures, the members of the modern state are


104 Cruet, “La Vie du Droit,” pp. 289, 332.

105 Cf. Chapter I, supra, on this point.

1066 M, Duguit has denied this; but, as I have elsewhere tried to show,
on insufficient grounds.


350 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


seeking new centres of power. Administrative syndicalism is
an effort towards their realisation.

It is thus a kind of decentralisation for which the fonction-
naire is anxious. But it is not merely the reconstruction of
ancient territorial groupings for which he is concerned. It has,
indeed, to some extent been tried already in France; and its
connection with the ancien régime has led the monarchist party
to lend it a somewhat eager support.1” But territorial decen-
tralisation does not touch the real root of the problem. The
‘real question to be resolved is that of internal organisation
within the different groups themselves. Decentralisation of a
purely territorial kind is no guarantee of autonomy. Local
control might be as difficult and static as centralised control.
The desire of the syndicalist is different. He urges that the
business of government has now become so complex that it
cannot maintain at once unity of purpose and unity of method.
The explanation that the interest of the state is single, does
not, even if it be true, involve the need of unified administra-
tion. On the contrary, the administration of the state cannot
be satisfactory so long as it is so organized. What is desired
is to confide the operation of the different branches of the
state to technical services acting under government control.


But that control would be a declaration of purpose and no
more. Its actual execution would be the business of the de-
partment concerned. Administrative autonomy would thus
become real and effective. The department would execute a
law for government exactly as a contractor builds a ship for the
admiralty. It would know what was required and take the
necessary measures. But its life would be self-determined.
Its method of response would be spontaneous and not auto-
matic. It would realise the spirit Rousseau envisaged when he
made the social contract binding because it was mutual.1%


107 Cf. above all J. Paul Boncour and Charles Maurras, ‘‘Un Nouveau
Débat sur la Décentralisation” passim. A curious book by H. Cellerier,
“La Politique Fédéraliste” has much of interest on this point. The short
remarks of M. Duguit, Droit Social, Droit Individuel, p. 144 f, give the
pith of the matter; and M. Charles Brun, “Le Régionalisme” is a useful
summary of the whole attitude.

108 “Contrat Social,” II, IV.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 351


For the worker who had a certain power of independent re-
sponsibility would obtain, in such a system, exactly that psy-
chological situation which makes administration a human
thing. He would take part in deliberation. He would have
ample means of discussion, of suggestion, of experiment. His
task would become democratic even while it remained profes-
sional, simply because the compulsion of a purpose to be ful-
filled would not, by its method, obscure the possibility of a
free co-operation in its fulfillment.)

It is natural enough that where the evolution that is thus
envisaged is itself but on the threshold of its first dumb begin-
nings, detailed plans should be lacking. After all, this is not
an evolution that will be accomplished in a moment of time.
It is bound to proceed by stages, and to be temporarily deter-
mined by the fluctuations of its failures and successes. Whether,
for example, promotion would be self-regulating, or a matter
of internal choice, or of election by the members of the particu-
lar service, is not a matter for deliberate prophecy. Most of
the leaders of the movement have been wisely careful to ab-
stain from it. That upon which they have mainly laid insist-
ence, from their standpoint assuredly with commonsense, is
the fact of autonomy. What they have emphasised is the fact
that this autonomy must act as the destroyer of what is unac-
ceptable in the modern hierarchical system. Above all, they
have pointed out that self-regulation is the only effective guar-
antee of equal opportunity. What has been admirably termed
an inexorable subalternism is impossible where the administra-
tion is in fact a republic, imbued at every stage with the demo-
cratic spirit. The conduct of the service will be better simply
because men will obey with greater willingness a chief whose
position is itself the proof of competence than one of whose
powers they have had no reasonable demonstration.

The aim is not the abolition of society. The syndicalist
does not wish to make the administration a closed system im-
permeable to outside influence and outside control. To give
the schools to the teachers, the postal service to the postal
workers in full ownership is a solution that only a few of the
more extreme enthusiasts have claimed. For they are suffi-


109 Cf, Berthod, Revue Politique et Parlementaire, March 1906, p. 428.


352 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


ciently alive to Mr. Wallas’ grave warning™® not to desire a
restoration of that feudal structure which sought to solve the
problem of society by the unthinking and purposeless multi-
plication of groups. They recognize that society has its place
in every human equation, and that, as a consequence, it has
a right to an indirect control over everything that is related
to a social function. The teachers, for example, have not
hesitated to ask for the assistance of parents in the redaction
of their educational programmes.'!! The very method of or-
ganisation adopted by the Confédération Générale du Travail
is in fact a guarantee against the dangers of separatism.'?
Indeed, as M. Leroy has aptly pointed out,!! the very situation
of the workers makes a federal structure as necessary as the
bourgeois organisation of society demands a centralised sys-
tem. The complete independence of any department would be
strictly limited to those problems which do not directly touch
the business of any other. Where common problems arise,
they must be settled by common decision. The state, in some
form or other, must persist to protect the common interest,
and it must retain a certain measure of power for that purpose.
There are some, indeed, who would make wages and prices a
matter for general control; and M. 'Fhomas has lent the great
weight of his authority to the suggestion that the interest of
the consumer must obtain adequate representation at every
stage of the new administrative process.'4

The problem of the strike then remains. It is clear enough
that the operation of a public service must be in the general


10 “The Great Society,” p. 324 f. On the place of the state in the most
recent system of social reconstruction cf. Orage (ed.) ‘‘National Guilds,”
150, 263, and Cole, “Self-government in Industry,” esp., Ch. III.

1 Resolution of the Lyons Congress, 1908. Cf. Laurier, ‘‘Les Instituteurs
et Le Syndicalisme” (1908).

12 The best account of its structure is in Leroy, ‘‘La Coutume Ouvrière,”
pp.481-575. Cf.also A. Pawlowski, ‘‘La Confédération Générale du Travail.”
The real secret of the difference between American trade-unionism and that
of France will be apparent to anyone who examines the structure and pur-
pose of the kindred groups in either country.

u3 “Les Transformations de la Puissance Publique,” pp. 272, 278.

14 Revue Socialiste, Oct. 1905, cf. the very able article by M. Bourget,
Revue Politique et Parlementaire, 1908, p. 365.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 353


interest of society. If its care is entrusted to the members of
that service is the suspension of work at all capable of justifi-
cation? If the operation of the state is put into the hands of
its servants is not that autonomy the correlative of a respon-
sibility for which there must be adequate guarantees? It is
difficult to avoid this conclusion. “It is simply elementary
prudence,” says M. Hauriou,™ “that the relation with the
public, above all upon the fundamental problem of responsi-
bility, should not be broken.” It is surely obvious that the
privilege of autonomy logically implies the acceptance of the
purpose for which that responsibility is given. Once the pro-
fessional group is given the means of independent action, it
must be fully and stringently responsible for the causes of its
acts." That syndicalists are but little inclined, at present, to
admit the extension of the corporate responsibility of their
groups does not touch the real point at issue. For the narrow-
ness of their responsibility is, for the moment, simply a weapon
forged to meet a special industrial situation. Once the cause
for that narrowness is removed, there is no reason for such re-
striction to continue. The state could not confide the inter-
ests of society to men who would not accept the responsibilities
of their trusteeship.


V; THE ATTACK OF THE JURISTS


Ir was inevitable that such an attitude should provoke a violent
hostility. The dogmas it attacks are too consecrated by his-
toric tradition to surrender at all easily to an opposition in
part, at least, the product of an ideology. The changes it in-
volves are too far-reaching to be accepted without criticism by
the conservative forces of the state. And, after all, such an-
tagonism is natural enough. For the dogmas that administra-
tive syndicalism has endeavored to undermine have behind
them this justification that they are the source from which the


115 Cf. his note in Sirey, 1908, Vol. III, p. 83.

u6 Cf, Rolland, Revue de Droit Public 1909, p. 301. Duguit, “Droit
Social, Droit Individuel,” p. 147. M. Hauriou's remarks are very striking,
“Principes de Droit Public” (ed. of 1916), p.745f. For the theoretic basis
of vicarious liability see my papers in 29, Harv. L. Rev. 404 f, and 26,


Yale Law Journal, 105 ff.


354 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


modern state has derived its strength. The two great theories
of sovereignty and the unitary state are, for the most part,
the offspring of the great controversy between church and
state, matured by the influence of the classical jurisprudence
of Rome."” They are the weapons whereby the state attained
its freedom from ecclesiastical trammels. And they are even
more than that. For, with the growing independence of the
civil power, it was possible to transfer the seat of sovereignty
from monarch to people. National sovereignty thus came to
mean something akin to the vindication of popular freedom.
To attack it was to imperil the progress for which the Revolu-
tion stood as the proof and symbol.

Nor was the history of the unitary state less striking. The
great danger from which, in its recent history, France has
suffered is the diverse allegiance of its citizens. There were


many whose membership of the nation did not seem to involve
them in loyalty to the Republic;and they did not hesitate to find,
sometimes in Rome, sometimes at the half-tragic court of some
barely remembered royal exile, the real dwelling-place of their
affection. There was thus a danger to be confronted-external
to French society. Concentration of power might then, with
some show of reason, be deemed a vital thing. If a citizen
did not stand by the Republic, if the Republic did not possess
the power to make upon him the fullest demand, its survival
was, to say the least, uncertain. Its sovereignty was strikingly
asserted; the fact of unity was at every point displayed. It
was not, therefore, difficult to charge administrative syndicalism
with a purpose that might well destroy the state. It would
render vain the whole purpose of the nineteenth century. It
was the coronation of anarchic effort; and compromise with so
sinister a movement was thus almost logically deemed fruitless.

Such, for the most part, has been the spirit in which admin-
istrative syndicalism has been met. It is an opposition that
is rarely constructive in character. It tends to take its stand
less upon the analysis of future possibilities than upon the
adequacy of the present inheritance. But, in sober truth, that
is to say no more than that it at no point fully meets the effort
of the fonctionnaire towards the transformation of the modern


117 Cf. my “Problem of Sovereignty,” pp. 27-9.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 355


state. What it has rather tried to do is tò demonstrate that
such purpose is illegal and unpractical. It is held illegal by the
lawyer because the categories of nineteenth century jurispru-
dence have no place for so novel an effort. It is held unprac-
tical by the: statesman because it is a problem he has never
before confronted. To the central principles it enunciates, they
unite to return an unqualified negative.


There are, of course, both in law and in politics, exceptions
to this general rule. There are some who have been able to
see that the present conception of the state is in no sense per-
manent, and it is, for them, natural to expect that the develop-
ment of its jurisprudence will be coeval with its political evo-
lution. There are statesmen who have been able to realise that
administrative conservatism is already obsolete. The crisis of
the public services has gone too deeply to the root of the body
politic to be solved by an uncompromising denial. The more
timid spirits have, as is natural, suggested the wisdom of com-
promise. And, in the sense that reforms will do much to
remove the bitterness that has been manifested on both sides
during the past ten years, reform has a merit that is undenia-
ble. But the claims, both of one side and the other, are too
divergent to admit of compromise. There is no half-way house
effectively to be occupied between the present administrative
control and the full independence demanded by the civil serv-
ice. The criticisms, indeed, are important; for they show,
alike from the standpoints of legal and political philosophy,
the defences of modern authoritarianism. And while they are
in essence distinct, they both have the merit of an obvious sim-
plicity. They thus serve to throw into a clearer light the
significance of the competing claims.

The juristic attack upon administrative syndicalism origi-
nates in the attempt to find a legal basis for the claims of the
civil service. There are some who have not hesitated to assert
that the movement is in no sense opposed to the existing law.
On the whole, the lawyers have united to reject that assertion.
While they are unanimous in their agreement that the law of
1901 provides a clear path of association which the civil servant
may take, they are almost equally unanimous that the law of
1884 applies to a type of professional association with which


356 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


the civil service can have no connection. Their fundamental
criticism is based on an interpretation of the nature of the
state on the one hand, and the relation to it of the civil servant
on the other. They insist that the régime of administration
can at no single point, except one, be approximated to: the
modern system of industrial organisation. It of course logically
follows that the position of the civil servant is in no sense
similar to that of the worker. The attempt is made to show
that once we are in the domain of state-activity we are in the
presence of special facts to which the ordinary formulae of
private law are inapplicable. From jurisprudence, therefore,
administrative syndicalism has nothing to expect.

It seems legally unquestionable that so far as the relation of
the laws of 1884 and 1901 really affects the fundamental issue,
the legal critics are absolutely in the right. . There is not a
shred of evidence that it was ever intended to apply the law
of 1884 to members of the civil service; rather, on the contrary,
does it seem to have been the express intention of the legisla-
ture to exclude them from it.!8$ The law of 1884 was simply
an effort to equalise the bargaining power of labour to that of
capital; and those who passed it no more dreamed of its appli-
cation to the problems of the state than did Mr. Justice Holmes
when he enunciated a similar proposition."® Indeed, the syn-
dicalists themselves have admitted, on occasion, that the civil
service has a privileged position.”° Not, indeed, that the argu-
ment which denies that the state can be equated with the
private employer has been very vigorously supported. For, if
it is true that the minister is limited by his dependence upon
the legislature, that is more and more coming to be the case
with the private employer, especially in those industries where
the public interest is most directly concerned;”! and the result


us Cf, Mermeix, “Le Syndicalisme contre le Socialisme,” p. 83.

119 Coppage v. Kansas, 236 U. S. I, 26.

120 Cf. Beaubois, Mouvement Socialiste, 1905, p. 480, and Montbruneaud
in ibid., p. 295.

121 The action of Congress in the passage of the Adamson Law is, of
course, a very striking example of this. On the theoretic issues involved
ef. for Anglo-Saxon countries, the remarkable paper of Mr. E. A. Adler
in 28 and 29, Harv. L. Rev.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 357


of a ministerial regulation in regard to the civil service, is not
very different, whatever its nature, from the collective agree-
ment that is coming to be characteristic of modern business.
Nor does M. Briand’s insistence that the state does not possess
the elasticity of initiative by which private industry is distin-
guished in any way destroy the validity of the comparison.!”

Not, indeed, that the analogy is in any sense fundamental
to duci issue. The main fact, after all, is that the Penal Code
still makes it a criminal ofen for dal servants to plan a
strike; and this has been more than once ratified by the
courts; nor have they hesitated to declare illegal the forma-
tion of such trade-unions in the civil service as they have had
occasion to judge.’ Nor is parliamentary opinion less clear.
The two efforts that have been made to give teachers a right
to form unions have not even been discussed. A similar
proposal in regard to the medical profession made in 1894 was
expressly negatived, at the urgent request of M. Loubet, then
President of the Council, on the specific ground that doctors
are continually performing services which bring them into
relation with government. Where permission has been given,
as in the case of the state-railways, and the state tobacco
monopoly, it is simply because, in that aspect, the state has
definitely undertaken the functions usually performed by a
private employer.” M. Waldeck-Rousseau, the author of the
law of 1884, has expressly declared that he did not have the
civil service in view when he proposed it,’ and M. Clémenceau,
one of its leading advocates, has equally insisted that it had
in view only those whose wages are subject to the variations of
economic law.!”

There remains the law of 1901; and, despite the criticisms


12 Journal Officiel, May 14, 1907.

123 Code Pénale. art, 126.

14 Duguit, “Traité de Droit Constitutionel,” I, 519 f.

1% Cf. Gazette des Tribunaux, July 9, 1903, Revue des Grands Procés
Contemporains, 1909, no. II, contains a full report of the leading case.

126 Journal Officiel, March 24, 1886, Ibid, 1890, p. 1533.

127 Cf. M. Ramel in Jowrnal Officiel, May 23, 1894.

128 Cf. Mouvement Socialiste, March, 1905, p. 320.

129 Cf. his reply to the teachers’ manifesto cited above.


358 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


of M. Berthelémy,° it seems clear that it is sufficiently broad
to cover the associations formed within the civil service.’
The lawyers, moreover, have been eager to point out that there
is little or no juridical difference between the two systems of
coalition; for the one serious benefit the trade-union seems to
possess, the power to receive legacies and gifts, is hardly very
likely to be exercised by the civil servants;“? and M. Saint-
Leon has shown that even this difficulty can be avoided.
Yet the invalidity of the legal argument rests here precisely
on the fact that it remains merely legal. For the real question
involved is not legal at all, but psychological, and the main
advantage that the advocates of administrative syndicalism
seem to expect would be purely moral in character; for, as
the great strike of 1909 made apparent, a mere matter of words
will not prevent the use of weapons deemed, for any reason,
desirable. For the real purpose of this insistence on the law
of 1884 is the advantage it would give of contact with the
working-class. It is one more proof of the fact that the move-
ment has become far wider than a simple protest against par-
ticular abuses of a definite authority and has broadened into
an attempt to dethrone a whole system from its controlling
eminence. That is why the choice of methods will have more
than verbal results; for to admit that the civil servant can form
a trade-union is to give him increased opportunity of empha-
sising the relation of his demands to those of the workers.

The lawyers have not, of course, failed to perceive the bur-
den of this manoeuvre, and it is in this aspect that they have
erected their ablest means of opposition to administrative syn-
dicalism. For, juristically at any rate, the real problem in-
volved is that of the legal status of the civil servant. If his
relation to the state is one of contract, it is clear that the
problem admits of an obvious solution; for once we are dealing


130 Revue de Paris, Feb. 15, 1906, p. 883.

131 Cf. M. Hauriou’s admirable note, Sirey, 1909, 3, 17.

132 Cf. Revue Générale de V Administration, 1906, I, 203.

138 Cf. his interesting comparison in “Annales du Musée Social,” 1906,
p. 61, and the paper of M. Perrinjaquet in Annales de Faculté droit
d'Aix 1910, p. 133.

134 Cf. Bougle, “Syndicalism et Démocratie,” p. 27 f.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 359


with contract it is legitimate to apply the ordinary rules of pri-
vate law. If it is, on the contrary, a matter of public law, if
it bears upon the nature of the sovereignty of the state, then
it is clear that the position of the civil servant is specialised in
character. Or, as has been urged, it may well be that the
state is only in part a specialised institution in that aspect, it
is only those who work within the area of its specialised activity
who are subject to a special law.1*

Naturally enough, the advocates of administrative syndical-
ism have insisted that the relation between the civil servant
and the government is one of contract. His position would
then be analogous to that of the worker in private industry
and most of our difficulties would have been solved. But the
question is, in fact, less simple. A civil servant cannot resign,
or, at least, the government need not accept his resignation."
The civil servant who throws up his’ post to go on strike re-
mains a civil servant despite himself until it should please the
authorities to dismiss him.” If this is a contract, it is clearly
contract of a kind unknown in private law. A contract ought
to be the source of rights; and it is clear that against a govern-
ment which can change his position, his salary, his work, or
even dismiss him at will, he is not protected in any contractual
fashion. It is, of course, true that he has what may be called
a mediately contractual position; that is to say the ministerial
regulations are binding upon the parties concerned. But since
they can be altered at will, that is no great guarantee. The
will of the state as expressed by its ministers clearly predomi-
nates in the situation.

Nor is the problem made easy by distinguishing between
different kinds of civil servants, as M. Berthelémy has urged
us to do. Any one can see that the position of a judge is suffi-


135 This is the well-known distinction of M. Berthelémy. ‘Droit Ad-
ministratif”’ (5 ed.), p. 78, between fonctionnaires d’autorité and fonction-
naires de gestion. Cf. Nezard, ‘“Théorie juridique de la fonction publique,”
p. 461; and for criticism of it see Duguit, “Traité de Droit Constitutionnel,”
I, 429 f, where, as I think, its impossibility is effectively demonstrated.

136 Rolland, “Revue de Droit Publique,” 1907, p.722. The analogous
position of a member of the House of Commons is, of course, suggestive.

137 Cf. the note of M. Hauriou in Sirey, 1909, 3, 145.


360 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


ciently different from that of a worker in a state match-factory
as to give each different rights and duties; but to draw a broad
line between the two becomes impossible immediately we take
certain critical instances. A prefect, for example, is a civil
servant who is charged by delegation with the exercise of cer-
tain sovereign powers; but he is also the recipient of orders which
it is his duty unquestioningly to fulfil. Mining engineers are,
for the most part, technical experts who have no connection
with the semi-political problems of the service; but where they
draw up notes on the contravention of government rules in the
mines, their position is immediately changed. Nor is it possible
to obtain any large measure of agreement as to where technical
service ends and the detention of a part of public power begins.
M. Hauriou does not doubt that teachers and postmen are
fonctionnaires d’autorité; M. Fontaine hotly denies it.¥* One
government official seems to imagine that any civil servant
who reports infractions of the law is a holder of some delegated
portion of sovereign authority.“ The distinction is thus obvi-
ously too difficult to make its application as helpful as is sug-
gested by its external simplicity.

If the legal assumptions are admitted, they constitute, then,
a complete refutation of the syndicalist thesis. They imply
the satisfactory proof that the relation is not in any real sense
contractual. The lawyers, however, have been, perhaps, some-
what less happy in the theories by which they attempt to
replace the notion of contract. No one—at least in Francet’
—now accepts the principle of Rousseau that the citizen, hav-
ing surrendered all his rights to the state, must undertake at
its behest whatever functions it should choose to ordain.™!
M. Hauriou has suggested what is, in reality, a feudal notion of
this relationship. He regards the tenure of office as a kind of
fragment of the public domain, and he suggests that the true


138 Sirey, 1907, 3, 49.

189 Cf. the report of M. Malepeyre, D.P., 1905, 1,259 ‘“‘(L’ Affaire
Belloche).”’

40 But it is accepted by many very reputable German authorities, cf.
Perthes, “Die Staatsdienst in Preussen,” p. 55, and the authorities there
cited.

141 “Contrat Social,” Bk. II, Ch. IV.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 361


analogy is that of the feudal lord, investing his vassal with a
fief. That public office was, in medieval times, essentially a
property-right is a fact which admits of little denial; but it
does not fit the facts of the modern situation. The hereditary
butler was, after all, a household servant of the crown, and
- the concept of property is, in that aspect, intelligible enough.
But the modern civil servant owes service to the head of the
state in his official“ and not his personal” capacity. The feudal
lord gave to his tenant a portion of sovereignty; and certainly
where, as in modern French law, the inalienability of sover-
eignty has been, since the Revolution, little less than a religious
dogma, such indivisibility cannot be equated with a property-
concept. Nor is M. Larnaude’s theory that the situation is
entirely specialised and can be explained, like the bond created
by naturalisation, by a presumption of lex specialis. For
lex implies statute, and the idea of a statute is the merest fic-
tion. Nor is the analogy of naturalisation very happy; for
if ever there was a legal relation in which contract was implied,
it is surely the relation created by the adoption of citizenship.
To explain the problem by insisting that it is exceptional is,
in reality to urge that it cannot be explained at all. Such a
mystery might well account for the advent of administrative
syndicalism, but it would hardly meet its problems.


M. Duguit explains the situation in a fashion which, while
analogous, at the same time attempts to meet the difficulties
involved in the hypothesis of exceptionality. In his view,
the whole field of administration is settled by statute or by
general ministerial regulations which are akin by nature to


12 Strey, 1899, 3, 6.

13 My friend Prof. MclIlwain will shortly publish a paper in which this
fact is demonstrated for the whole of medieval English history. He has
already hinted at it in his paper on judicial tenure in the American Pol. Sct.
Rev. for May, 1918.

144 Cf. Duguit, “L’Etat, les Gouvernants et les Agents,” p. 392, for a
very complete criticism.

15 Revue Pénitentatre, 1906, p. 830.

46 Duguit, “L’Etat, les Gouvernants et les Agents,” p. 4, 13 ff.
Cf. “Berthelémy, Revue de Droit Public,” 1904, p. 20 f, and Jéze, ibid.,
p. 517, esp. the latter for a very clear exposition of this attitude.


362 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


statute. We have, in fact, a purely objective law which settles
the whole relationship with regard to the general end that
administration is to serve. Nomination is a power of bringing
some citizen within the purview of this law in order that he
may fulfil its purposes. The act of nomination derives its
whole force therefrom; and the acceptance of nomination sim-
ply completes the process.. Yet it must surely be admitted
that the theory is far less satisfactory than appears on the
surface. If the nominee may reject the preferred position it is
surely therein implied that whatever takes place has about it
a contractual nature. The nominee is agreeing to submit him-
self to the regulations of the service in return for the enjoyment
of a position he desires. He may not have named the conditions
of his employment. The contract, that is to say, may be uni-
lateral in character. But it still remains a contract; and it is
difficult to see how this element can, in the circumstances be
explained away.

For the simple fact is that all these legal theories are, from
the standpoint of administrative syndicalism, vitiated by one
grave defect. They are all built exactly upon that conception
of the state against which the fonctionnaire has made his vehe-
ment protest. They do not take account of the psychological
fact that if the situation of the civil servant has a certain spe-
cialised character, it is yet a character from which the concep-
tion of a contract can hardly be excluded. The state may say
that it makes no contract; but if it fails to provide what its
servants deem reasonable conditions of labour they will not
work for it. It may theoretically demonstrate that its will
dominates the situation, but the fact will still remain that the
will of its servants is not less relevant. For while they identify
themselves in a special sense with the state, they do not so
finally merge their personalities with its own as to be incapable
of active opposition to it. The state may make its laws for their
governance; but if it finds that they refuse obedience to its laws
they will prove of no avail. It may proclaim its sovereignty;
but a sovereignty that cannot win the assent of those who are
to be the subjects of its control is not impressive.

And the change in the status of the civil servant is surely
indicative of an important innovation. More and more the


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 363


status is coming to be settled as the result of discussion and
bargaining in which the civil servant takes his full share. The
French Railways are governed by an agreement which is the
result of joint deliberation between the political and adminis-
trative personnel.” That is the beginning of an evolution of
which the end may well be the erection of self-government
within each department. It is perfectly true that the status
so determined must receive the official sanction either of the
minister or of Parliament. It draws its sustenance from an
enabling statute. But that enabling statute is itself based
upon a prior agreement. It does not create so much as regis-
trate. A sovereignty that merely accepts what has been agreed
upon outside of itself is, it may be suggested, a sovereignty that
has been deprived of its sting.


The truth is that the character which the lawyers attempted
to attach to the state dates from a time anterior to the advent
of democracy. It is impotent in the face of administrative
coalescence. It might work when the right of association had
not yet so far advanced as to give the civil servant the oppor-
tunity to organise his corporate interests. But immediately
he had discovered what had been released by the law of 1901,
the concept of a sovereign state which determined his situation
without reference to his wishes and without the recognition
that he had rights it could not infringe became impossible. It
was exacting from him the surrender of exactly that which he
had combined in order to attain. The sanction of law is not
its existence but its ability to secure assent.’ The civil servant
refuses to admit the vast authority which is claimed by the
state simply because he has suffered too greatly from the
effects of its exercise. He finds himself in a position to bargain
with the government. Whether the result of their joint de-
liberation affects him only, or involves also the rest of the com-


47 Cf, Duguit, “Les Transformations du Droit Public,” p. 114. The
system of self-government instituted in 1896 for the French universities is
full of fascinating suggestion in this regard. Cf. Hauriou, “Principes de
Droit Public” (ed. of 1916), p. 745 f.

48 The similar relation of Congress to the railway situation of 1916 is of
interest.

49 Cf, my “Problem of Sovereignty,” p. 12 f.


364 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


munity, the relation that is slowly being established is, clearly
enough, no longer unilateral. Certain states of fact are arrived
at by agreement. They are deferred in regulations. If in
theory the state retains the power to alter those regulations in
practice that power is as valuable as the sovereignty of the
English king. It is a tribute to a great tradition rather than
an admission of its present operation.

And that, after all, is only to say that the legal theory which
rejects the notion of contract is, by that definition, an inade-
quate theory. Law cannot persistently neglect the psychology
of those it endeavours to control. So long as the fonctionnaire
refuses to be at the mercy of the government, it is useless for
jurisprudence to evolve a theory which implies his subjection.
Nor does it matter in what kind of subtleties that subjection is
concealed. We may talk of an objective law that is removed
from the clash of personalities and securely grounded in the
facts themselves.“° But that, in the end, is to do no more than
transfer the discussion to the nature of the objective law.
Anyone, for instance, who reads the history of the postal strike
of 1909 will not doubt that M..Simyan’s conception of the
objective law by which the service should be governed would
differ very markedly from that of M. Pouget. Whether we
found our demands on the desire or the duty that lies before
us, we cannot escape the problem of rights. The civil servant
very clearly feels that he can make certain demands which the
state ought not to refuse. In the eighteenth century they were
a deductive claim; today they are an induction from the expe-
rience of a bitter illusion. But the fact still remains that they
are rights and, as such, they evade the categories in which
authority would enshrine them. No legal argument against
the claims of administrative syndicalism can therefore be valid
that is based upon the theory of the state as it presents itself
in the orthodox currency of today. For, in the first place, the
syndicalist would deny its validity, and, in the second, it is
clearly a theory that is passing away. The task that confronts
the jurist is still the same. He has still to reconcile adminis-
trative autonomy with a state of which the authority is made
subject to the strictest limitations. He has to show how law


160 Cf. my note on M. Duguit in the Harvard Law Review for Nov., 1917.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 365


can maintain responsibility while it admits a reasonable inde-
pendence. But it is with new weapons that he must come to
his task.


VI. THE ATTACK OF THE POLITICIANS


Ir was hardly to be expected that so novel a phenomenon as
administrative syndicalism could meet with approval from the
politicians. It was, in the first place, too alien from their tra-
ditional theories of politics to be acceptable. The very griev-
ances of which it made complaint were the outcome of the
parliamentary system. Their approval of it would have in-
volved self-condemnation; it would have been the tacit admis-
sion that the criticisms passed upon the system of which they
are at once the founders and protectors, were firmly rooted in
reality. Yet a curious distinction is to be noted in the political
attitude. In principle, it has proved adamant against the
introduction of novelty. When the resources of argument were
exhausted, resort was had to the copious reservoir of rhetoric;
and there have been few more brilliant debates in the chamber
than those in which MM. Clémenceau and Briand have vin-
dicated the sovereign state from the pitiful assault of its an-
archist detractors. Yet alongside this immovable determina-
tion in theory, there has gone a consistent pliability in practice.
The statesmen of France have never dealt with fonctionnarisme;
but they have always been careful to reckon with it. They
have been consistently gentle at election-times; and their ear-
nest eagerness to find a basis for compromise with principles
they have steadfastly declared impossible has not been without
its pathos. It is a noteworthy distinction; for it is the expression
of a genuine effort on the part of the state to find ways and
means of admitting in practice the advent of a fundamental
transformation in its nature even while the terminology of the
past is preserved. How far it is likely to prove a successful
effort is dubious matter for the most dangerous kind of proph-
ecy. The war intervened exactly at the point where it was
beginning to be possible to catch the first clear signs of the
new evolution; and the clouds have not yet sufficiently drifted
to make again visible the rays of the political sun.


366 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


Yet the theory upon which this political antagonism has
been founded is, throughout its history, unmistakably clear.
The nation, in their view, enjoys a sovereignty which is com-
plete and in no degree subject to limitation. Its personality is
at every point superior to that of its constituent members.
The nation, in its political expression, is the state; and thus,
obviously enough, upon the institutional organs of the state,
the majesty of the national sovereignty descends by delegation.
To threaten the state, is thus to strike at the heart of the
national existence. And this is even more truly the case with
the civil servant whose very powers are derived from his posi-
tion as a state-instrument. He negatives the whole purpose
of his existence once he rebels against that from which he derive
all that makes him different from the ordinary citizen. Admin-
istrative syndicalism thus becomes a particularly reprehensible
variation upon an anarchic theme. To make concessions to it
is to derogate from the national power. A refusal to bargain
with it thus becomes the preservation of all that makes the
nation a self-governing instrument. Once concede internal
autonomy and the national unity is at a stroke destroyed.

It is a simple theory, upon which every conceivable variation
has been made. It seems to have been born in 1887 with
M. Spuller who, in a famous circular, insisted that it was
inconceivable that a group of public officials could enjoy a
corporate personality outside their membership of the state.
Twenty years later the argument is in nowise different. “ Off-
cials,” said M. Rouvier,! then Prime Minister, “who exercise
any portion of sovereign power, are members only of one
corporation—the state; and the state is the nation itself.”
M. Briand drew the obvious inference from that attitude.


“What,” he asked, “is the democratic state? . . . Is it
the government? . . . That cannot be because government
is only an agent which executes orders. . . . The civil service


has against it the national representatives, that is to say the
nation itself.” M. Clémenceau has pointed what he regards


161 Cf. Cahen, “Les Fonctionnaires,” p. 59., M. Spuller was then Minister
of Public Instruction.

182 Journal Officiel, May 23, 1905.

163 Journal Officiel, May 12, 1907.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 367


as the moral of the argument. “Government,” he said, ‘ig
under the control of the chamber; the chamber is controlled
by universal suffrage; but neither government nor the chamber
is under the control of the civil service.” The great postal
strike of 1909 did not suggest any new synthesis to M. Barthou,
the minister most concerned. “The postmen,” he told the
chamber, “are in revolt against you, gentlemen, against the
entire nation, . . . what we have to determine is whether
a government which represents the sovereign nation can
abandon the care of general interests before a rebellious civil
service.” M. Ribot has insisted that while the ordinary citizen
can plan the transformation of the state, the duty of the public
official is at all costs to defend its present. organisation.15¢
M. Deschanel seems to regard the civil servant as the delegate of
the nation for the performance of certain functions; clearly,
therefore, anything that does not involve their performance
is a transgression of his powers.” And M. Poincaré has again
and again uttered the warning that a new power, irresponsible
in its nature, confronts the sovereign nation. He seems to
consider its advent as nothing less than an attack on the life
of the French republic.

All this, of course, is a purely theoretical argument. It
simply insists that the authority of the state is final without
at any point examining the basis upon which that insistence is
founded. It does not, therefore, meet the argument of ad-
ministrative syndicalism; what it rather does is to lay down
certain counter-assumptions of which the truth is still de-
bateable. It does not seem to have realised that the fonction-
nariste movement is nothing if not a challenge to these con-
ceptions; and it is not, to say the least, particularly helpful
to have the whole discussion shelved in this facile manner.
Far more important is the argument derived from the needs
of practical administration. Here, at least, the politicians have
had a real case to urge and they have put it with no small skill.


154 Ibid., March 13, 1908.
185 Tbid., March 19, 1909.
156 Jbid., May 14, 1907.

187 Ibid., May 12, 1907.

188 Speech of April 27, 1907.


368 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


This, they point out, is pre-eminently a period in which the
functions of the state are undergoing continuous extension.
More and more it is coming, if not to take actual charge, at
least to regulate, the conduct of great departments of public
life. In that aspect, the main problem by which it is con-
fronted is to ensure to its constituents the regular and continu-
ous operation of the services under its control. Whether it
purveys railway or postal facilities, whether it sells matches
or procures an adequate police, obviously the one thing the
public has a right to demand is their efficient operation. For
where these services are managed as public utilities by com-
panies or individuals working for gain a special system of law
is instituted of which the cardinal point is the guarantee of
continuity.

It is at least partly in the light of this attitude that the
political opposition must be interpreted. “I am here to af-
firm,’ said M. Sarrien, “that no government, even if it
were formed of the very persons who now beg us to permit
freedom of association to teachers, to postal officials, and other
civil servants, could possibly consent without committing suli-
cide, without imperilling the very existence not merely of the
Republic, but any regular and normal political régime.” M.
Clémenceau has again and again insisted that the first task of
a minister is to compel the civil servant to accomplish his duty
to the state.° M. Briand has affirmed that the operation of
government does not permit the constitution of a privileged
nation within the ranks of the nation itself.®t Their attitude
was the more interesting since both they, and some of their
colleagues had, before taking office, urgently upheld the right
of the fonctionnaire to enjoy the benefit of the law of 1884.162
But it is to be assumed that the experience of office has dissi-
pated these idle dreams.

The real difficulty in the analysis of this argument is to know
exactly where a beginning of criticism should be made. It im-


169 Journal Officiel, Nov. 8, 1905.

160 Tbid., March 14, 1906.

161 Ibid., July 12, 1906.

162 Cf. the speech of M. Willm, in Ibid., May 11, 1909, and of M. Sembat,
May 14, 1909.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 369


plies that there is a golden rule of administration which succes-
sive governments have laboured earnestly to follow; and the
cardinal principle in that rule would seem to be the refusal of any
minister to permit for one moment the organisation of the civil
service within his department. Yet, in fact, no such policy has
ever been followed. M. Bendist has justifiably complained of
the alternation of strength and weakness in the governmental
attitude.!® It is a matter of common notoriety that the defiant
challenge to administrative syndicalism undergoes a sensible
diminution at election time. What is legitimate in the Ministry
of Public Works is fraught with grave danger in the Ministry of
Public Instruction.“ The ministers dismiss civil servants in
order to emphasise their authority, but, sooner or later, they
always take the vast majority back. And it is difficult to dis-
cover whether this high degree of control is necessary to main-
tain the service as it now is; or, on the other hand, whether it is
the basis of a future improvement. If the first hypothesis be
the correct one, it is difficult to reconcile with expert opinion
that the condition of the civil service is simply lamentable.!®
If the second interpretation be correct, it is still more difficult
to see why the government should be preparing to abandon
that control in order to institute a general status which shall
put the majority of these problems beyond the reach of the
ministerial whim; and it is not less hard to know why the
government is prepared to admit the jurisprudence of the Coun-
cil of State which is more and more tending to give the civil ser-
vant and his associations protection against arbitrary treat-
ment.197

But the greatest irony remains. Those who thus profess
themselves so anxious for the quality of the civil service are the
persons most responsible for its corruption. Even if it be true
that their responsibility is mainly weakness in the face of parlia-


163 Tbid., March 26, 1909.

164 Cf, Paul-Boncour, “Syndicats de Fonctionnaires,” p. 20 f.

165 Cf. Cahen, “Les Fonctionnaires,” Ch. IV.

166 The government has several times introduced proposals towards this
end and the whole problem, seemingly with ministerial approval, has been
discussed often in the Chamber.

167 Cf. Cahen, p. 317 f.


370 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


mentary pressure, the fact still remains that it was in their power
to remedy these grievances and that they have deliberately ab-
stained from so doing. No one denies that the business of gov-
ment must be carried on; but it is at least open to the gravest
doubt whether the different ministers have ever tried so to
organise the civil service as to assure the absence of the griev-
ances which might, above all things, interrupt it. It is not a
solution to take refuge in the necessity of a rigid authoritarian-
ism. The position of the civil servant in the modern state may
be a specialised one; but he does not surrender his human impul-
ses in becoming a civil servant. That the grievances of which
he complained were real the government tacitly admitted on the
different occasions when it embarked upon the task of reform;
but even when the difficulty of its accomplishment has been
admitted, no impartial observer can doubt that there has never
been any genuine intention to give effect to the reforms pro-
posed. For the real doubt must remain whether, in the present
situation of French parliamentarism, the reforms so postulated
can in fact be achieved. Any system in which the executive is
at the mercy of the legislature is, in the nature of things, bound
to search for means whereby it can control its master. That is
the secret of the corruption of English politics in the eighteenth
century. Sir Robert Walpole only did more crudely what the
average French minister is compelled to attempt in a more deli-
cate fashion if his government is to remain in office. So long as
no single party dominates the chamber it is necessary to buy the
support of groups numerous enough to constitute a majority;
and patronage is the obvious means to that end. So that, in
practice, the real implication of the vast authority the minister
tends to demand as essential, has, as its object, not the efficient
operation of the public departments, but the retention of a con-
venient means to power. In that light, the anxiety for the regu-
lar conduct of public business appears a less noble aspiration.
A minister naturally dislikes the dislocation that follows upon
the assertion of grievances simply because its consequences in
the Chamber are, as a rule, inconvenient. He can be certain at
least of an interpellation; and of a French interpellation no one
dare prophesy the outcome. But it is in the highest degree
difficult to see that an analysis, not of governmental pretensions,


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 371


but of the steps actually taken by government towards the ame-
lioration of the actual state of affairs, could lead to the conclu-
sion that control has as its purpose the end that rhetoric implies.

Nor, after all, is it possible to feel that the psychology of ad-
ministrative control is so simple as governmental theory would
make it. It is, of course, undeniable that the continuous func-
tioning of the civil service is fundamental to the modern state.
‘It is as obvious as can be that inefficiency in a government de-
partment, hardly less than actual dislocation of service itself, has
evil consequences that reverberate throughout the body politic.
Yet the doubt must remain whether the way in which the civil
service in France is organised can secure the results that modern
government must achieve. No one who reads.the literature of
the French fonctionnaires can doubt that the authority of the
minister is too overshadowing. The motives it leaves to the
official are simply not adequate. The reports that either no one
ever sees, or that lie buried amid the official archives, do not
call forth the best qualities of which the official is really capable,
He does not come into contact with the chamber, or, if he does,
it is only to persuade some friendly deputy to use his influence
for his promotion. The whole effort is towards making thought
a routine instead of an invention. There is too little certainty
that effort will obtain its reward. There is too little opportunity
for the exercise of those creative faculties which responsibility
alone will call into play. There is too little chance that the
official will be able, if not to decide, at any rate to deliberate,
those great public questions which, from their very nature, must
serve to quicken the imagination. Too much energy is occupied
in the writing of minutes upon the minutes of other people, and
too little upon the defence, in the verbal interchange of thought,
of the ideas which those minutes contain. If the civil servant
knew that to make himself an authority upon some public ques-
tion was bound to result in bringing him into direct relationship
with those who frame the answer to it, the general picture of the
civil service would not be that which the curious can find in the
novels of Balzac and de Maupassant. He can do none of these
things simply because they in reality make him essentially an
expert who must, because of his expertness, be given the right
to at least a measure of independence. That independence,


372 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


from the nature of his position, will tend to grow until it absorbs
the group to which he belongs. But where that is once achieved,
not only is the main demand of administrative syndicalism con-
ceded, but at the same time, the future of parliamentary govern-
ment in France becomes even more problematical than it is at
the present time.

And this, in fact, is the real crux of the governmental attitude.
Safety and permanence are not the distinguishing features of
French ministries; but at any rate the minister knows the tech-
nique at present in vogue. To change it is virtually to set him
out on an uncharted sea. He will have to discover new methods .
of manipulation in the Chamber. His relations to his depart-
ment will undergo a total reconstruction. He will retain the
direction of its activities. He will still be able to say what he
wants, to determine the large outlines of policy. But he will
suggest administration rather than actually operate it. It is a
break with tradition so large that everyone can understand why
he should feel suspicious of the readjustment. And he is moved
by another consideration. At present he is responsible for his
department. For whatever the humblest of his officials may do,
he, and he only, must answer to the chamber. That, in his view,
is not the least reason why he has the right to autocratic control.
For if the policy of the department may result in his downfall,
clearly he has the right to demand that, in, principle and in
detail, it shall be his own policy. To make the civil service inde-
pendent of him is to make him suffer for faults that will not be,
even in theory, his own.

Certainly, to an Englishman who has been brought up to see
the ample cloak of ministerial charity cast around the erring
official on every occasion, there is much plausibility in such an
attitude. But, equally certainly, it is a meritricious plausibility
simply because it ignores the essential factors involved. There
are obviously two kinds of fault of which the civil servant may
be guilty. His fault may be due to the inherent nature of the
work he is called upon to execute; or it may, on the other hand,
be due simply to some blunder of his own. In the first case, it is
clear that the minister is responsible. If a minister should order
the police to tear down a Roman Catholic Church, the resultant
noting is surely to be ascribed to the stupidity of the minister.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 373


But it is not less clear that no one could hold the minister respon-
sible for a personal blunder of an official. If, for instance, a
teacher in a school should deliberately go out of his way to break
the regulations which deal with educational neutrality upon
religious questions, that would in no way affect the minister’s
position. It would, perhaps," be his business to see that dis-
cussion of the teacher’s act was made by the proper authorities
concerned. But there his functions would end. Personal fault,
that is to say, would involve on the part of a minister nothing
more than the duty of seeing that the regular disciplinary proce-
dure was at every point observed. Faults that are derived di-
rectly from a policy which the minister has conceived must be
laid no less directly at his door. Now it is true that, again and
again, difficulties will arise in interpretation, no classification
can pretend even to be perfect. But, in such a division of re-
sponsibility as this, it is surely evident that an adequate safe-
guard exists for protecting ministerial interests. It is not diff-
cult to imagine that the average statesman would even feel
relieved if he did not bear the burden of every departmental
care. Undeniably, the result of such a change upon parlia-
mentary life would be far-reaching. Not less clearly, if minis-
terial responsibility is divided, means must be created for the
. adequate protection of the public against the faults of the
official. That, however, is in no sense an impossible task.

In such an interpretation the political answer to administra-
tive syndicalism is at no point an answer at all. What, un-
doubtedly, it has effectively done is to show the determination
with which the upholders of the present system will maintain
their defences. But there is an implication in the argument that
is put forward that cannot be too strongly denied. ‘‘The state,”
writes M. Fernand Faure,’ “cannot, . . . . in the measure
of its functions, be too strong.” It must act, that is to say, at
every instant as a sovereign authority whose demands can brook
no question. ‘‘The state alone,” says M. Larnaude!”? “can re-


168 “Perhaps,” because it is possible to envisage an organisation of the
civil service in which even this intervention is unnecessary.
19 Cf, his long attack in the Revue Politique et Parlementaire, March,


1906.
170 Revue Penitentiare, 1906.


374 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


main master of the event,” and M. Berthelémy seems" to
regard the whole movement as nothing more than an unworthy
effort, clearly deserving only of suppression, to exploit the state
for private purposes. But, surely, in criticism such as this it is
not really the state that is in question. What the civil servant
attacks is the group of men who, at the moment, possess the
fused power the state possesses. It is a revolt against govern-
ment of which they are complaining. The transition from state
to government, is, of course, a fatally easy one; but it is a transi-
tion of which each step demands the closest investigation. No
one would object to a strong state if guarantees could be had
that its strength would be used for the fulfilment of its theoretic
purposes. The real problem involved is the suspicion of those
who watch the actual operation of its instruments that they
have been, in fact, diverted from the ends they were intended
to serve. To admit the sovereignty of the state, in the sense
in which statesmen understand that concept, is simply to give
added power to the government. It is, that is to say, to mistake
the private will of a constantly changing group whose interests
are at no point identical with those of the nation, for the inter-
ests of the state as a whole. A strong state does not mean a
state in which no one resists the declared will of government;
or, if it does, we need new political terms. For, in that event,
change would never be justified except insofar as it met with the
approval of those who held the reins of power; and it is his-
torically obvious that any general acceptance of such an atti-
tude is entirely subversive of progress.


A state, after all, is no mysterious entity. It is only a terri-
torial society into which, from a variety of historical causes,
a distinction between rulers and subjects has been intro-
duced.” The only justification for a claim by government
of its obedience is the clear proof that it satisfies the material
and moral claims of those over whom it exercises control. We


1n Revue de Paris, Feb.-15, 1906.

172 T owe this conception to M. Duguit, but I think that he has never
emphasised sufficiently the territorial character of the state as opposed to
other societies. I have tried to suggest the implications of this distinction
in the first chapter of this book. It is impliedly present in the first chapter
of my “Problem of Sovereignty.”


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 375


cannot wander on blindly with self-shut eyes, merely because
order is convenient and rebellion attended by the gravest
dangers. The whole case for administrative syndicalism goes
most clearly to show that government has not been able to give
proofs of that satisfaction. So widespread a movement must
have had causes more profound than the antagonism of its
opponents would suggest. It is, above all, a problem in organisa-
tion. What it suggests is inherent error in the mechanism of
the modern state. It suggests a redistribution of power. It
indicates a conviction that certain of the demands now made
by government are in fact unnecessary to the fulfilment of its
purposes, cannot, further, be made if the purposes of govern-
ment are to be fulfilled. It is in the highest degree difficult to
understand what exactly is gained by the empty insistence that
the state must be strong without giving the valid demonstra-
tion of the purpose for which that strength is to be used. Gov-
ernment is only a convention which men, on the whole, accept
because of a general conviction that its effort is for good. Where
the machine breaks down, where the purpose of those who drive
it becomes to an important class sinister, it is humanly inevitable
that an effort towards change should be made.

To those who hold the reins of power it was perhaps inevita-
ble that such an effort should be regarded as the coronation of
anarchy. To oppose the government is, for them, to destroy
the state. But it is, in fact, anarchy only in the sense in which
the replacement of the nobility as the governing power at the
Revolution was anarchy. The seat of authority therein passed
to the middle classes. But government remained at once a
narrow and irresponsible power. It has been attacked at two
points since that time. Economically, the workers show in-
creasing sign of dissatisfaction with the fulfilment of its pur-
poses; administratively, the civil service rejects the notion of
its authority. The change that is implied in this impatience
is not less profound than that of a century and a half ago.
Whether the change that accompanies every great transforma-
tion in the seat of authority can be accomplished without vio-
lence is a problem to which the answer has still to be discov-
ered. Certainly: there is no need to becloud the question by
representing revolution as a rare exception in historical pro-


376 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


cedure. Aristotle realised that well enough when he devoted
a book of the “‘Politics’’ to its discussion. If we endeavour to
stand outside the historic process it is not difficult to see that
this, like so many of his general maxims, remains not the less
true two thousand three hundred years after his time.?”


VII. THE MOVEMENT TOWARDS REFORM


OBVIOUSLY enough, a movement so widespread as this must
have swept some effort at reform into the eddies of its current,
and both in politics and in jurisprudence it is possible to find
signs of a changing temper towards the civil service. A serious
attempt was in process, at least before the outbreak of war, of
which the general purport was to limit the arbitrary character
of ministerial discretion. That, after all, is the fundamental
point; for ministerial discretion was essentially an inheritance
of the ancien régime which stamped the whole system with its
peculiar and vicious character. It was an assertion that the
minister, as an agent of the state, partook of its sovereign
nature; assault upon his powers was therefore a priori fruitless.

That attitude is already dying. The courts have shown
signs of an important eagerness to insist on regarding as ultra
vires any infraction of the departmental regulations. The
minister might make his own rules, but, until he changed them
he was at every point bound by the clear purpose they had in
view. The government itself was proposing perhaps, indeed,
with a heart less determined than the situation made desirable,
to bring the position of the civil servant within the scope of
statute within the civil service itself. The faint and fitful de-
velopment of a new autonomy has not as yet been sufficiently
clear to be suggestive. It was, it is true, an auto-limitation.
It did not involve derogation from the sovereign power of the
state. No one was bound by the action that has been taken.


178 “Politics,” Bk. V. 1301 a. “All these formsof government have a kind
of justice, but tried by an absolute standard, they are faulty and therefore
both parties, whenever their share in the government, does not accord with
their preconceived ideas, stir up revolution.” The plea of administrative
syndicalism would seem to be that the absolute standard of justice cannot
even be approached without a radical change in the distribution of the
share in government. i


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 377


The effort that has been made is in every event indicative of
the advent of a new epoch rather than the actual inauguration
of it. But auto-limitation has an historical habit of giving way
to an objective law. Administrative admission becomes admin-
istrative practice; sooner or later the convention becomes strong
enough to resist the force of pressure. Those who have wit-
nessed the substitution of rule for discretion will not easily go
back to the chaos of an earlier time.

Parliament has discussed proposals which have endeavoured
to give a definite status to the fonctionnaire. None, as yet,
has reached the statute-book; but the mere fact of their pro-
posal, and the wealth of superlative discussion they have
evoked, are in themselves indicative of much. The two projects
derived from government sources had not, indeed, high value.
They were not based on adequate consultation with the fonc-
tionnaires themselves; and the attempt to make the Council
of State.an advisory, but not a compulsive body, was a clearly
hopeless one.’ The denial of the right of federation meant
the retention of the hierarchical system and of departmental
separatism. Defects like these struck at the root of any
possible concord; and, in fact, they only produced the famous
Open Letter to M. Clémenceau which brought clearly into the
light the inability of his ministry to appreciate the real facts
at issue. The government proposals aggravated a schism rather
than healed it. They made clear the certainty that sooner or
later the movement must be dealt with; but they made it also
not less evident that it was already too strong to be deceived.

Far more serious in character, because far more comprehen-
sive, have been the efforts of the chamber itself. The commis-
sion of which M. Jeanneney was the reporter has, at any rate,
understood the significance of the movement. If its report
was, on the whole, a somewhat unsatisfactory compromise,!”*
that was less from the spirit it displayed than from the fact
that between the aim of the government and the ideal of the
fonctionnaire there is no possible compromise. No solution
can be satisfactory which does not take account of the unity


174 Cf, Leroy, “Syndicats et Services Publics,” p. 267.
175 Cf. M. Leroy’s acute comment, Ibid, p. 269.
176 Tt has been published separately by Hachette.


378 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


of the civil service; and from the fact of that unity alone, any
attempt to insist on departmental separatism is doomed to
failure.” No prohibition of the strike can be effective which
does not envisage the cause of recourse to such a weapon. It
is true enough, as M. Jeanneney reminds us,’ that the object
of the civil servant is to ensure the operation of the service
with which he is charged; but equally fundamental is the con-
dition under which he is to perform his duty. The Commission
seems to have grasped this fact; and it was yet prevented from
dealing firmly with the obvious implications of its admission
by the fear of government opposition. The chamber, in any
case, has not been able to take up the project, and later dis-
cussion, while it has clarified the problem, has not advanced
the answer to it.

But it has served to make two things clear. It is obvious,
in the first place, that the problem of the civil service is only
part of the far wider problem of governmental reform. In
every aspect, the instruments of the state are in need of re-
construction. Some of its mechanisms are expensive and out-
worn. Others demand autonomy or decentralisation for their
adequate operation. The sovereign state, as M. Duguit has
repeatedly emphasised, is becoming a great public service cor-
poration; and its organs demand readjustment to the new
purposes it is to serve. It is, moreover, clear, that, in such a
perspective, the first demand to bè made of government by its
subjects will be the continuous and undisturbed’ performance
of its functions. That, it can hardly be doubted, involves
something in the nature of a status for those who are employed
by government. They may see the element of contract in their
situation; but the element of duty will be not less sharply
defined.!”

The problem, in such an aspect, becomes very largely a
psychological one. It is the problem of translating a psy-
chological satisfaction into definite legal terms. It will be
useless to prohibit strikes by statute'®° so long as the mass of


17 Rapport, p. 98.

178 Thid, p. 109.

179 Cf, Duguit, ‘““Tiunsf. du Droit Public,’ p. 156 f.

180 Or by injunction as, impliedly, in the Adamson decision.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 379


the civil service feels itself sufficiently oppressed by its griev-
ances to refuse obedience to the law. The history of the last
few years has notably demonstrated the powerlessness of
statute in the face of great popular movements.*! That is
not because of any inherent or growing disrespect for law.18?
It is simply that we are living in an age of change so vast that
administration can not keep pace with its demands. Law fol-
lows popular sentiment rather than creates it; and the modern
disparity has been notably widened simply because our jurists
have been working with the instruments of an earlier time.
A theory of law which endeavours, in such a synthesis as this,
to frame its solution in the pragmatic terms of the conflicting
interests involved has alone the opportunity to make a con-
venient unity out of this multiplicity of principles. It will
start from the acceptance of what is, in theory at least, per-
haps a fundamental novelty—the notion that the interests of
government are in no instance paramount. It will not deceive
itself by the too-facile belief that the primary interest of law
is in the preservation of order. There are times when the
business of law is not the maintenance of an old equilibrium
but the creation of a new one. It is to that task that our
efforts must today be directed.


And what is here significant is the perception by the supreme
administrative tribunal of France of the implications of this
new orientation. The time has already passed when adminis-
trative jurisdiction could be regarded as distinct from the or-
dinary judicial power, when it could be regarded as simply
executive justice by act of grace. It is coming to be nothing
so much as an organ of protection for such non-governmental
interests as are affected by ultra vires acts. It is coming to
insist on the responsibility of the state for its acts as a dogma
not less necessary to our own time than state-irresponsibility
could be regarded as essential by the nineteenth century. It
is modifying, gradually, it is true, but also with a steady and


181 Cf, my “Problem of Sovereignty,” p. 27.

182 As Professor Dicey seems to think, “Law of the Constitution” (8th
ed.), p. XXxvii.

183 Cf, Pound, Address to the New Hampshire Bar Association, June 30,
1917, p. 14 f.


380 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


almost marvellous persistency, the relations of the state with
its officials on the one hand and private citizens on the other.
It is no longer possible for the state to defend its acts on the
ground that they are clothed with the mystic power of sover-
eignty. Not only the form, but the contents also, of an act
may be impugned. The state, in short, has become a private
corporation which must act in accordance with its fundamental
and general purpose on the one hand, and its special instruc-
tions for each immediate situation on the other. Its law, that
is to say, is no longer the subjective command that issues from
its sovereign will; it is an objective interpretation of necessity
drawn from the study of the facts of each issue that may
arise.184


This evolution is likely, within certain well-defined limits,
completely to revise the time-honoured relation between the
state and the fonctionnaire. It is not in any sense a final
revision. So long as the power of regulating civil service con-
ditions belongs to the minister as the head of his department
it is a revision at each stage liable to reversal. The time, of
course, will come when this auto-limitation will no longer be
deemed adequate, and the minister will then, no less than his
humblest official be subject to the rule of law. But, for tem-
porary purposes, it is an advance; and it points the way to
a time when the scope of sovereignty ‘will be limited by a
system less liable to interruption than the régime of whim and
caprice. Since 1903, at any rate, it has been impossible to
uphold an irregular nomination. So long as there are rules the
Council of State will enforce them. It has been admitted that
those who are technically qualified to fulfill certain functions
have sufficient interest in appointment to them as to prevent
men who are not qualified from nomination. It was no
more than a natural deduction from that advance to prevent


18 On this general evolution cf. Duguit “Les Transformations du Droit
Public,” Chaps. V and VII, and for details, G. Teisser “La Responsabilité de
la Puissance Publique.” I have dealt with its implications in the first
chapter of this book.

18 Arrêt Lot et Molinier, II, Dec., 1903, cf. Duguit, “Traité de Droit
Constitutionnel,” I, 474.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 381


irregular promotion and dismissal. It was clearly wise to
insist upon the observance of the rule that a civil servant must
be informed.of the grounds upon which any disciplinary meas-
ure is taken against him.! Before 1907, it was by individual
action that these rights were guaranteed. Since that time a
great step forward has been taken by the permission given to
civil service associations to appear as parties in actions where
they can prove that they are directly interested.18 Nor is it
without significance that one court at least should have been
willing to receive the plea of a federation of teachers against
an alleged libel of the Archbishop of Rheims;!* and even
where other courts have hesitated to admit such a plea the
existence of corporate prejudice has been recognised. Eng-
lish experience suggests that the further step is inevitable;!!
and it is hardly too much to say that these decisions mark
an epoch in the history of administrative law.


Nor is the organisation of private citizens less important in
its ultimate consequences. Alongside the growth of these pro-
ducers’ organisations we have an evolution of consumers’ con-
trol. Its effort is directed towards almost every conceivable
object of governmental activity. The subscribers to the na-
tional telephone system have organised a society which not
only protects its members in their complaints against inade-
quate operation, but also insists that the government pay
regard to the most modern scientific improvements. The
Catholic church has welded into a formidable organisation the
fathers of families who belong to that religion to insist upon
the due observance of scholastic neutrality. The -taxpayers
have grouped themselves together with the object, among


186 Arrét Warnier, July 7, 1905, (promotion); Arrêt. Fortin (Aug. 6, 1908)
dismissal.

187 Arrét Vilar, Aug. 6, 1909.

188 Arrét of Dec. 11, 1908. “Association Professionnelle des Employés
Civiles du ministère des colonies,” Sirey, 1909, III, 17, with note of M.
Haurion.

189 Cf. Cahen, op. cit., p. 325.

190 Tbid., p. 326.

191 Brown v. Thomson & Co. (1912) S. C. 359. Cf. my article in Harvard
Law Review Vol. xxix p. 242f.


382 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


others, of insisting upon due economy in the performance of
governmental functions. The League of the Rights of Man
undertakes the most laborious inquiries into alleged miscar-
riages of justice. Nor is this all. On every hand the govern-
ment is beginning, tentatively, indeed, and without evident
understanding of its ultimate significance, to associate the pri-
vate citizen with the business of administration.“? The Supe-
rior Council of Agriculture is a board of expert council. The
Consultative Committee on Railways, instituted by the min-
ister of public works, comprises within its membership repre-
sentatives of most of the great industries by which the railways
profit. It is a committee with genuine functions and a growing
power. It speaks with a representative suggestiveness that is
far too powerful to be ignored. Nor is this less true of com-
merce or of charity. On all hands there are growing up asso-
ciations of every kind which aim directly at supplementing the
work of parties on the one hand, and directly controlling the
business of administration on the other. They in nowise
supplant the ordinary mechanisms of party; but they are often
enough important in-the direction they can give to the forces
of public opinion. They are the beginning of what will event-
ually be the definite organisation of every interest that is af-
fected by the action of the state. They are the admission of
elements within the national life that refuse to find their ordi-
nary satisfaction in the accepted methods of politics. They
represent the growing emphasis upon the diverse elements that
go to make up citizenship,-and, in particular, the insistence
upon the importance of function. They are at the beginning
of their evolution and not at the end of it; for the definite
organisation of the consumer’s interest in the state has a sig-
' nificance scarcely capable of exaggeration.

Ultimately, indeed, what such a movement implies is the


12 Tt is, of course, profoundly suggestive to compare this tendency with
the organisation of the Council of National Defence instituted by Congress
after the outbreak of war.

19 On all this cf. Cahen, op. cit., pp. 266-95.

1% Its beginnings in England and the United States in such organisa-
tions as the Navy League, the Housewives’ League, etc., are of course,
well-known.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 383


advent of a consumers’ syndicalism—the organisation of the
consumer’s interest in the product of an industry exactly as
there is today the organisation of the producers’ interest. It
is unquestionable that a public opinion so created would tend
to assist the claims of the civil service. It would, in the first
place, be obvious that the abuses of which the fonctionnaire
complains are productive of waste and inefficiency. It is
hardly less clear that the whole basis of good administration
is the possession of a contented civil service. It is difficult to
say whether a public opinion would today admit fonctionnariste
autonomy; the probability is that a long process of education
would be needed before that end could be achieved. But it is
hardly possible to doubt that the organisation of opinion upon
the problems of the civil service would lead to striking reform.
Certainly this has been the lesson of English experience in this
regard. No large step could be taken which would not in-
volve its freedom from the control of political interests; and
that is likely to prove a first step on the road to the autonomous
decentralisation that is claimed.

It is impossible to prophesy in the face of a cataclysm.
What alone emerges as immediately certain is the growing im-
portance of the administrative function. It is certain that for
long to come the state must burden itself with a far fuller con-
trol of the social life than it has ever before assumed. Obvi-
ously enough, in such an analysis, the position of the civil
service becomes one of the greatest significance. It will be
fundamentally impossible to go back to the epoch before the
outbreak of war; the only question will rather be what measure
of satisfaction the fonctionnaire will obtain. Never before will
the need of efficient administration have been so great; never
before will the penalty of discontent have been so heavy. The
evolution of administrative syndicalism in modern France
connects itself logically with this outlook. For the task of
government is likely to prove far too vast to make possible an
efficient and centralised control. In administration, not less
than in economics, a law of diminishing returns is applicable.
There comes a point in the business of government when the


1% Cf, the report of the Royal Commission on the Civil Service (1915),
especially the separate memoranda signed by Mr. Graham Wallas.


384 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


further burdening of the central authority does not produce an
adequate return for the outlay it involves. Decentralisation
becomes at that point: essential. It is the only way in which
the congestion by which all unitary governments are oppressed
can be relieved. It provides the only method by which the
necessary attention can be given to special and local needs.’
That is true not less of special occupations than of special
areas. No one, for instance, can study the problem involved
in the fixation of railroad rates without feeling at once the
immense difficulties that are involved in the assumption of
any necessary desirability in a uniform system.” .We are on
all hands faced by the questions of diversity and delimitation.
The erection of distinct and autonomous authorities is the
logical outcome of that recognition.

The mistake we have made in the past is to think of federal
government in terms simply of area and of distance. Federa-
tions in the past have been so naturally the outcome either of
vast size on the one hand or of the coalescence of historically
separate communities on the other, that it has been difficult
not to translate our federal thought immediately into spatial
terms. We must learn to think differently. Even in America,
the classic ground of federal experiment, it is a new federalism
that is everywhere developing.“ If, as with the districts of
the Federal Reserve System, and of the Rural Credits Board,
it is at least partly a matter of area, it is not less obvious that
a federalism of functions is at hand—that is to say that exactly
as in the past we attempted delimitation by area, so, today,
we are attempting the delimitation of purposes. There is a
clear tendency upon the part of industrial and professional
_ groups to become self-governing. Legislation consecrates the
solutions they evolve. They become sovereign in the sense—
which, after all, is the only sense that matters—that the rules
they draw up are recognized as the answer to the problems
they have to meet. They are obtaining compulsory power


1% Cf, my “Problem of Sovereignty,” Appendix B.

197 Cf, the remarkable evidence of Mr. Justice Brandeis before the inter-
state Commerce Commission of the U. S. Senate, Sixty-Second Congress,
1911-12, pp. 1267-72.

198 Cf. Mr. Croly’s article in the “The New Republic,” Vol. IX, p. 170.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 385


over their members; they demand their taxes; they exercise
their discipline; they enforce their penal sanctions. They raise
every question that the modern federal state has to meet and
their experience is, governmentally, a valuable basis for national
enterprise.1®°

But their assumption of sovereign powers is important in
another aspect. To make the state omnicompetent is to leave
it at the mercy of any group that is powerful enough to exploit
it. That has been, indeed, one of the main historical causes
of social unrest. It transforms every political struggle into an
economic conflict. It inevitably introduces the bitterness of
a fight between interests which, in such an aspect, dare not
offer compromise with their antagonists. The only way out of
such an impasse is the neutralisation of the state; and it cannot
be neutralised saved by the division of the power that is today
concentrated in its hands. For to proclaim, to take a single
example, the supreme interest of the state in preserving order
in times of strikes, is already to make it take sides. The su-
preme interest of the state is in justice, and it does not neces-
sarily follow that justice and order are in perfect correlation.
No one who has studied the relation between the state’s interest
in the preservation of order and the exploitation of that interest
in Colorado will find room for serious doubt in this regard. To
make the state universal and paramount is to make it the
creature of those who can pcssess themselves of its instruments.
What obviously must be done is to secure the limitation of its
activities, on the one hand, and the independence of its instru-
ments on the other. But the functions so delimited demand,
in their turn, their organisation and we are thus driven back to
federal government.?”

It is in such an aspect as this that the movement towards
administrative syndicalism must be interpreted. It is not a
revolt against society but against the state. It is not a
revolt against authority but against a theory of it which


199 Not the least powerful argument against direct government, for
example, is the experience from early trade-union history, cf. Webb, ‘‘In-
dustrial Democracy,” pp. 1-71.

200 On all this M. Paul-Boncour’s “Fédéralisme Economique” is an ad-
mirable mine of information.


386 AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE


is, in fact, equivalent to servitude. For the obvious fact is
that men will not peacefully endure a situation they deem in-
tolerable; and any theory of politics which denounces their
action out of hand at once stamps itself as inadequate. The
truth obviously is that the state must organize itself on lines
which admit to the full the opportunity for the realisation of
personal and corporate initiative; and it is simply an induction
from the experience of the last century that a sovereign state
can be driven so to organize itself only by compulsion. That
is the real importance of the theory of this movement. The
federalism and the decentralisation it implies” are, in fact, the
basis upon which the state of the future can be erected. They
are the sign-posts of its new orientation. They take account
of the obvious fact that the sovereignty of the state is a power
to will; but they insist upon the limitations of that power.
For a study of the processes of the state convincingly demon-
strates that without such limitation there is no real security
for liberty. The purpose of the state may be good; but more
important than the doctrine that it inculcates is the actual life
that it leads. It is the experience of its life, the contact with
its personality, that has made the fonctionnaire refuse absorp-
tion by it. He is unwilling, even in theory, to leave it as Levia-
than. For sovereignty, it cannot too often be emphasised,
implies the possession of legal rights; and by its legal rights—
in theory limitless—the state will define its moral powers.?
The individual gets caught in a complex web of rights and
duties where morality is confounded by the ambiguity of terms.
To limit state-power is to suggest at once that its action is
capable of judgment. It is to exalt the importance of indi-
vidual personality and thus to give to citizenship a profounder
value. It is to make the use of power at every moment a
moral question by demanding enquiry into the end it is to
serve. It is, in Mr. Figgis’ phrase, to replace the study of
rights by the study of right; and if that attitude is frankly
medieval, it is none the worse for that.2%


201 Though related they are different things, cf. Duguit, “Manuel de Droit
Constitutionnel,” p. 77 ff.

202 Cf. my “Problem of Sovereignty,” p. 20.

203 Figgis, “From Gerson to Grotius,” p. 153.


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 387


For authority, after all, must depend upon internal roots if
it is to be of any avail. We too rarely consider how difficult is
the decision to combat the state. The presumption in general
opinion is, for the most part, on its side. Order is the accus-
tomed mode of life, and to betray it seems like enough to social
treason. There is probably no epoch in social history where
organised resistance to state-decision has not its root is some
deep grievance honestly conceived. It was so in 1381; it was
so in 1642; in 1688 and in 1789. “Reform that you may pre-
serve” is, as Macaulay said, “the voice of great events.”
The state has barely heeded that constant warning; and the
beatification of the status quo is ever its main source of danger.
Administrative syndicalism is simply a step towards translating
into effective terms the programme of democratic government.
It is its statement as a process instead of as a claim. Above
all, it has realised that to preserve the play of mind, whether
in the government of the state or of more private enterprise,
its active exercise is the one sure path of safety. The real
danger in any society is lest decision on great events secure
only the passive concurrence of the mass of men. It is only
by intensifying the active participation of men in the business
of government that liberty can be made secure. For there is
a poison in power against which even the greatest of nations
must be upon its guard. The temptation demands resistances;
and the solution is to deprive the state of any priority not fully
won by performance. That is what is implied in the fonction-
naire’s demand. He can, as he thinks, make the state a fuller
and richer thing by the dispersion of its sovereignty. He can
preserve his own respect by securing an effective voice in the
determination of events. He can prevent the exploitation of
the administrative services by making their processes objective
in character. It is a movement that is as yet but at its begin-
ning; and it is as dangerous as it is fascinating to depict its
end. Of this only we may be certain, that there is no phase
of social life in which its motives are not, however dimly mani-
festly penetrating; and it will one day mean, perhaps for the
first time, a state wherein the basis of citizenship will be the
active intelligence of enlightened men.


204 “Trevelyan’s Life,” I, 149 n.


APPENDIX
NOTE ON THE BIBLIOGRAPHY OF LAMENNAIS


Any full list of the books on Lamennais would itself make a
small volume. All I propose to do here is to suggest the most
valuable sources for the period covered by the preceding essay
(A). For his actual works I have used the quarto edition in
two volumes published just after his excommunication. This
contains everything of importance up to that time, including
his articles in L’ Avenir. Hardly less important is the corre-
spondence of which there are several volumes. (I) Those edited
by M. Forgues. (II) Those edited by his nephew, A. Blaize.
(III) The “Letters to the Baron de Vitrolles” ed. Forgues.
(IV) The “Letters to Montalembert’”’ ed. Forgues. (V) “Un
Lamennais inconnu.” ed. Laveille; (the letters to Benoit d’ Azy.)
(VI) “Lamennais d’après des documents inédits”? ed. Roussel,
contains many unpublished letters, but the commentary by their
collector is ignorant and prejudiced. (VII) “Lettres à la baronne
Cottu” ed. d'Haussonville. Those volumes edited by M.Forgues
are by far the most valuable, though the correspondence edited
by Blaize has much significance for the early years; the rest
of what has been published has, except for odd letters, mostly
a literary or psychological interest (B). The most complete
life of Lamennais is that by the Abbé Charles Boutard in three
volumes (1913). It is, however, severely hampered, as a critical
study by the necessary theological limitations. The life by
Eugene Spuller (1892) errs almost as much on the side of anti-
clericalism, but it is the best brief study we have. On the early
years the full study by M. Charles Maréchal is admirable. On
the conflict with Rome I have used the essay by Pére Dudon,
“Lamennais et la Sainte Siège,” as it collects all the relevant
documents, but its polemical object is obvious throughout. The
best philosophic criticism is still that of Janet, “La Philosophie
de Lamennais” (1890), but there are good studies by M. Faguet
in the second volume of his “ Politiques et Moralistes,” and


AUTHORITY IN THE MODERN STATE 389


by M. Ferraz in the second volume of his “Histoire de la
Philosophie en France.” That by Renan, in his “Essais de Mo-
rale et de Critique” is by far the most sympathetic psychological
analysis; though the more famous essay of Sainte-Beuve in
the Revue des Deux Mondes for May 1834 was one of the first
to seize the real significance of his life; see also the essay re-
printed in Portraits Contemporains. I have seen no adequate
study in English, though there exists a book by the Hon. W.
Gibson on “Lamennais and Liberal Catholicism” which I have
been unable to procure.


INDEX


A


Acton (Lord), on states-general, 39;
definition of liberty, 55; nature
of good in politics, 121.

Aristotle, sets the perspective of
political science, 19; on the pur-
pose of the state, 20; on separa-
tion of powers, 70; value of his
definition of citizenship, 73; on
secret of happiness, 89.

Arnold (Dr.), on Jewish emancipa-
tion, 38.

Authority, justification of, 32f.;
limitations of, 42f.; perversions
of, 49f.; problem of, often un-
known to government, 51; must
be divided, 69 f.; judged by pur-
poses, 74; danger of, where cen-
tralised, 78 f.; should be divided
for sake of ethical achievement,
107 f.; Bonald derives from God,
141; necessary in Bonald’s theory,
148; division of rejected by
Bonald, 150; not justified by
mere existence, 224; cannot have
implicit obedience, 266; mis-
taken use of, by Rome, 271 f.;
relation to liberty, 274; must be
democratically interpreted, 279;
must be widespread, 305; de-
rives from individual personality,
311; dependent on popular ac-
ceptance, 336.


B


Bacon (Francis), definition of trust
quoted, 102.


Bagehot (Walter), on danger of
labor combination in politics, 36;
criticism of reform, 40.

Bentham (Jeremy), sneers at natu-
ral rights, 63.

Béranger, prosecution of, 214.

Berryer, denies that the articles of
1682 are a part of French law,
226.

Bismarck, failure of his attack on
Roman Catholic church, 45; his
canons of conduct, 69.

Blackstone, on sovereignty, 24;
attitude to corporations, 84.

Bodin, on sovereignty, 24; on
separation of powers, 70.

Bonald, character, 128 f.; theories
derived from 17th century, 130;
his political theory, 130f.; at-
tack on individualism, 136 f.;
implications of his attack, 143 f;
his religious philosophy, 147 f.;
on danger of discussion, 151 f.;
on importance of religion in state,
157 f.; criticism of his views,
161f.; later influence, 166f.;
debt of Lamennais to, 205.

Bossuet, the inspiration of Bonald,
130-1; his attack on the reforma-
tion, 143.

Bourget (P.), a reincarnation of
Bonald, 170; his traditionalism,
177 f.; conception of aristocracy,
180; attack on parliamentary
régime, 183; wants a monarchy
in France, 185.


392 INDEX


Bradley (F. H.), defect of his ideal-
ism, 67.

Brandeis (Mr. Justice), significance
of, 116.

Briand (A.), on lack of initiative in
State, 357; vindicates sovereign
state, 365; on nature of state,
366; on significance of govern-
ment, 368.

Bright (John), opposition to factory
acts, 38; Queen Victoria’s view
Of, ol.

Brunetiére (F.), on need for religious
revival in France, 114; accepts
Bonald’s theories, 169; his politi-
cal philosophy, 171f.; accepts
the authoritarianism of Bossuet,
173; on value of orthodoxy, 175.

Bryce (Viscount), corruption in
American politics, 48.

Butler (Charles), on civil service, 50.

Burke (Edmund), dislike of atheists,
40; on danger of examining the
state, 51; on property, 52.

Carlyle (T.), epic theory of history,
19; on consequences of bureau-
cracy, 50.

Cecil (Lord Hugh), defends laissez-
faine, 1E


C


Chalmers (T.), on church and state,
85.

Charles X, character of, 215; nature
of his rule, 283.

Chateaubriand, relations with
Lamennais, 208.

Church (Roman), limits power of
state, 45; history of, during
Revolution, 125 f.; value of, to
statesman, 158; virtue of its
unity, 176; under Napoleon,
191 f.; during Restoration, 199 f.;


Lamennais argues that all other
churches are illogical, 203; glori-
fication of, by Lamennais, 205 f.;
entirely separate from French
state, 210 f.; needs unity for its
existence, 220; as a world-state,
223; as a voluntary society, 281;
appeal of Lamennais to, 241 f.;
condemns Lamennais, 243 f.;
meaning of her expulsion of
Lamennais, 260 f.; dissent in,
261; conditions of its internal
life, 264; what loyalty to, means,
268; Tyrrell’s analysis of, 270 f.

Civil Service, experience of, in
relation to power, 50; grievances
of, 95; demand for autonomy in
France, 326; complaints of, 327 f.;
favouritism in, 328; control of
opinion in, 330; physical condi-
tions in, 331; discipline and pro-
motion in, 332; direction of its
ideas, 334; claims of, 336f.;
class-structure in, 337; revolu-
tionary spirit of, 340; methods
of organising, 342-3; attack of
jurists on syndicalism in, 353 f.;
nature of office in, 360-1; attack
of politicians on syndicalism in,
365; weakness of this attack,
368 f.; attempts at reform of,
376 f.

Clarke (Mr. Justice), on control of
administration, 100.

Clemenceau (G.), on overstaffing of
French departments, 331; power
to remain in office, 345; on law
of 1884, 357; vindicates sovereign
state, 365; on nature of state,
367; on power of government
over civil service, 368.

Comte, influence of Bonald on, 168.

Conscience, denies sovereignty of


INDEX


393


state, 45; controls the exercise
of power, 55; the root of indi-
vidualism, 59; attack by Rome
on freedom of, 248; supremacy
of, in last instance, 251; de-
-termines right and wrong, 254;
significance of, as reservoir of
right, 265 f.; Royer-Collard in-
sists on value of, 311; cannot be
surrendered, 319.

Courier (P. L.), prosecution of, 214.


D
Dicey (A. V.); on penal code of


nineteenth century, 49; on state.


and individual, 53; attacks
French administrative law, 64;
on judicial legislation, 72; on
administrative law in England,
98; on the characteristics of the
age, 112.

Dollinger (1.), kindred ideas to those
of Lamennais, 236; with Lamen-
nais at his condemnation, 247.

Duguit (Leon), importance of juris~
prudence in new state, 89; on
decline of the sovereign state,
114; denies right of civil servant
to strike, 335; on passage of era
of rights, 349; on nature of public


office, 361; on nature of state,
378.
Dupanloup (Bishop), intrigues


against Lamennais, 243.
Durkheim (E.), on rights as classi-
fied by state, 115.


E


England, development of state in,
23-4; development of adminis-
strative law in, 72; problem of
colonial relations, 75; problem
of industrial groups in, 77; cor-
porations in, 84; irresponsibility


of state in, 97; growth of admin-
istrative law in, 99f.; recent
political change in, 109 f.; decline
of Parliament in, 300.

Esmein (A.), on relation of execu-
tive to sovereignty, 31; stands
alone in French political theory,
114.


F


Figgis (J. N.), importance of char-
acter, 106; on anti-theocratic
character of politics, 225; on
right and rights, 386.

France, development of state in,
24; decentralisation in, 79; re-
sponsibility of state there de-
veloping, 97; recent political
change in, 113 f.; need of new
institutions in, 185; Restora-
tion in, 281 f.; power of Chamber
of Deputies in, 305; right of
association in, 321 f.; civil service
‘in, 321-85.

Freedom, definition of, 37, 55, 310;
of thought must be absolute, 56;
significance of, 90 f.; reasons for
emphasising, 121 f.; dangers of,
156; essential to progress, 231;
place in organised life, 268; rela-
tion to individual conscience,
275; in practical terms, 293 f.;
of press, 294; of religious belief,
295. :

French Revolution, attack of
Bonald on, 128; main evil of, 133;
as an attack on Catholicism, 189;
as an epoch in political thought,
281 f.; attacked by thinkers of
Restoration, 283.


G


Gladstone (W. E.), on power of
property, 52.


394


Godwin (William), denies need for
political authority, 88.

Government, differentiated from
state, 28 f.; who really control it,
36; economic aspect of, 38; does
not possess sovereighty, 65; dis-
tribution of its powers, 70 f.;


irresponsible as agent of state,.


96 f.; as a trust, 102; depends on
religion for its stability, 157 f.; a
chimera to Brunetiére when
democratic, 175; parliamentary
government criticised, 183 f.;
Lamennais attacks democratic,
218; main problem of, 239; value
of parliamentary, 298; distinc-
tion between representative and
parliamentary, 299; must be
reconciled with liberty, 313; par-
liamentary, declining, 348.

Green (T. H.), on nature of rights,
43; value of constitutional
methods, 44; definition of liberty,
55; on the basis of the state, 66.

Gregory XVI, issues encyclical
against Lamennais, 248; feeling
of Lamennais about, 249; pro-
tests against Lamennais’ refusal
to submit, 251; excommunicates
Lamennais, 257.

Grey (Lord), mistaken colonial
policy, 76.

Guerin (M. de), influence of Lamen-
nais on, 233; indignation at
sufferings of Lamennais, 253.

Guizot (F.), forbidden to lecture,
214; indignation against Lamen-
nais, 256; relations with Royer-
Collard, 288.


H


Hadley (A. T.), on purpose of
American constitution, 117.


INDEX


Hamilton (W. H.), on price-system,
TL.

Hanna (Mark), obsolete character
of his ideas, 116.

Harrington, on relation of political
to economic power, 38; on politi-
cal discussion, 47; significance of
economic power, 88.

Hauriou (M.), on strikes in the civil
service, 353; on types and powers
of civil service, 360.

Hegel, on state and society, 21.

Hobbes, his theory of the despotic
state, 23; necessity for unlimited
power, 32; on fear as basis of law,
33; fear of group-persons, 84.

Holmes (Mr. Justice), on fourteenth
amendment, 39; on relation
between liberty and equality, 54;
significance of, 116, 118; on
bargaining power of labor, 356.

Hume (D.), on power of public
opinion, 27; on obedience as the
necessary basis of society, 32.


I


Ingram (J. K.), on inadequacy of
self-interest as basis of the state,
37.


J


James I, on the political aspect of
Presbyterianism, 23.

Jaurès (Jean), sympathises with
the proletarian revolution, 114.


L


Lacordaire, friendship for Lamen-
nais, 233; leaves Lamennais at
Rome, 245.

Lamennais (F.), Tragic interest of
his life, 127; problem of, 189 f.;
early life, 193 f.; difficulties with


INDEX


396


Catholicism in his early years,
194; attack on Gallicanism, 196;
in exile, 198; early ultramontan-
ism, 199f.; sudden rise to fame,


201; danger of religious indif-
ference, 202f.; glorification of
Rome, 205f.; accuses French


state of atheism, 209f.; urges
absolute power of pope, 211f.;
attack on philosophy, 212; sepa-
ration from the Royalists, 214;
attack on the secular state, 217 f.;
need of unity in the church, 220f.;
declares Rome a world state,
223 f.; transition to liberalism,
225 f.; distrust of the state, 228;
new confidence in the masses,
230f.; foundation of L’Avenir,
232f.; its programme, 234 f.;
statement of the problem of
authority, 239; appeal to Rome,
241f.; visit to Rome, 248f.;
sense of the ills of the church, 246;
his condemnation, 247 f.; accusa-
tions against him, 250f.; his
protest, 253; the break with
Rome, 255f.; his excommunica-
tion, 257 f.; implications of his
attack on the church, 259f.;
causes of his quarrel with Rome,
263; results of his teaching, 267 f.;
later career of, 280.

Lemaitre (Jules), converted to
traditionalism, 170.

Law, natural, revival of, 63 f.

Leroy (M.), on rule of law in Eng-
land, 64; on the decline of the
sovereign-state, 114; on state as
employer, 338; on need for
federal organisation, 352.

Local Government, value of, 76f.

Locke, on the limitation of power,
24; on separation of powers, 70.


Lowell (A. L.), on problem of public
opinion, 29. $
Luther, the founder of the modern
state, 21; on right and expedi-
ency, 41; attack of Bonald on,

139 f.


M

Macaulay (Lord), on importance
of middle-classes, 110; on value
of reform, 387.

Machiavelli, on history as a cycle,
19.

MacTaggart (J. E. M.), on society
as an organism, 35.

Madison (James), relation of fac-
tions to property, 39; on separa-
tion of powers, 71.

Maine (Sir Henry), on habit, 33.

Maistre (Joseph de), his literary
power, 127; affinity with Bonald,
152; part in ultramontane revival,
192 f.; praise of Lamennais, 201,
207; the fruit of his work, 248.

Maitland (F. W.), on dangers of
centralisation, 84; need for re-
sponsible state, 97.

Maurras (Charles), his significance,
170.

Metternich, intrigues
Lamennais, 244, 256.

Mill (J. S.), definition of liberty, 55;
on rights of property, 102; on
inability of House of Commons to
understand workers, 112; on
value of variety, 188.

Montalembert, joins Lamennais,
234; his visit to Rome, 245;
translates hymn to Polish liberty,
250; desertion of Lamennais,
258.

Montesquieu, on separation of
powers, 70; attack on his doc-
trine by Bonald, 150.


against


396


Montlosier, significance of. his doc-
trine, 222.


P


Paley, on nature of sovereignty, 26.

Peel (Sir R.), on right and expe-
diency, 41.

Pitt (William), his political train-
ing, 47.

Plato, on the nature of virtue, 20.

Pound (Roscoe), law in books and
law in action, 42; on decline of
natural law, 64.

Protestantism, attack of Lamennais
on, 203; counter-extravagance
of Jesuitism, 274.

Proudhon, the genius of French
labour movement, 114.


R


Reformation, source of modern
state, 21; Bonald’s view of, 139.

Renan (E.), significance of his
scepticism of democracy, 168;
estimate of Lamennais, 190.

Rights, defined, 43; significance of,
46f.; origins of, 61f.; relation
to right, 225; value of the right
to be wrong, 312; relation to
duties, 349; new methods of
defending, 381 f.

Rhodes (Cecil), disregard of moral-
ity in politics, 49.

Root (Elihu), obsolete character of
his ideas, 116.

Rousseau, on freedom in England,
24; on residence of sovereignty,
28; difficulty of his view, 29; on
consent as basis of state, 34; on
the paradox of freedom, 108;
attack of Bonald on, 137 f.; in-
fluence on Lamennais, 193;
raises fundamental question of
politics, 223; and Savigny, 285;


INDEX


on associations, 321; on mutual
character of social contract, 351;
view of citizenship rejected, 360.

Royer-Collard, early life of, 287;
character of, 288; function of his
party, 289; denies the existence
of sovereignty, 290f.; on the
Charter, 291; its history and
objects, 292f.; on freedom of
press, 294; -of religious belief,
295; on independence of magis-
tracy, 297; on value of parlia-
mentary government, 298; on
danger of Chamber of Deputies,
300; danger of power, 301; in-
fluence of Montesquieu on, 302;
on value of defining rights, 305;
defects of his outlook, 309; on
moral inadequacy of state as
mere agent of survival, 314;
estimate of, 320.


S


Sainte-Beuve, influence of Lamen-
nais on, 233; on the “Paroles
d’un Croyant,” 255.

Seeley (J.), on federal government,
74.

Smith (Adam), on education as a
state-activity, 59; on natural
law, 61; attacked by Bonald,
146 f.

Smith (F. E.), on Welsh Disestab-
lishment Bill, 58.

Sovereignty, denied to state by
churches and trade unions, 27;
meaning of, 29; implication of,
41f.; theory of, rejected, 89;
needs new definition, 119-120;
of nation as individualistic, 138;
must be unified, in Bonald’s view,
150; why it needs distribution,
177; and government, 265; in-
dividual is beyond, 276; exist-


INDEX


ence of, denied by Royer-Collard,
290 f.; legal theory of, invalid in
actual life, 308; checks on, 309.
Stammler (R.), on natural law with
changing content, 64.


State, character of its history, 19;


origins of modern, 21; inherits
papal prerogative, 23; differen-
tiated from. government, 25f.;
real nature of, 31f.; relation to
individual will, 47f.; possible
perversion of, 48f.; significance
of resistance to, 53; necessary
units of, 54f.; different from
society, 65; realistic analysis of,
66f.; is basically federal, 74 f.;
cannot absorb individual alle-
giance, 83; primarily a body of
consumers, 85; must be based on
representative government, 91;
relation of, to criticism, 93; rela-
tion to industry, 94f.; extension
of powers, 98; should be made
responsible, 105; its modern
direction, 109 f.; must be moral-
ised, 122; religious aspect of, in
Bonald’s theory, 147; must
choose between atheism and
supremacy of Rome, 210; attack
on its sovereignty by Lamennais,
217 f.; Lamennais’ distrust of,
228; Royer-Collard’s view of,
289; must not establish a church,
296; must divide power, 303; is
pluralistic, 304; rights not de-
rived from, 312; nature of its
ethics, 315; worth of, consists
in its individual members, 318;
as an industrial instrument, 325;
reconstruction of, by civil service,
341; centralisation in the modern,
343 f.; civil service desires re-
sponsible power in, 347; im-


897


possibility of sovereign, 363;
French defence of, 373 f.; rights
of, 374; as public service cor-
poration, 378; responsibility of,
380; federalism developing in,
384; significance of change in its
direction, 385.


T


Taine (H.), significance in tradi-
tionalism, 167; his pessimism,
168; on origins of centralisation
in France, 343 f.

Taylor (Sir H.), on process of ad-

stration, 50.

Theocracy, decline of, 123; value
of, 124.

Thomas (Albert), on consumers’
representation, 352.

Thucydides, on history as a store-
house of political wisdom, 19.
Tocqueville (A. de), on right of
association in Anglo-Saxon coun-
tries, 322; on centralised ad-

ministration, 323.

Trevelyan (Sir C.), on cause of
civil service reform, 50.

Tyrell (George), as successor of
Lamennais, 267; on loyalty to
church, 268; on limitations of
authority, 269; nature of his
problem, 272 f.; insistence on
freedom, 275; on weaknesses of
Rome, 277; on nature of social
will, 278.


U


United States, development of
state in, 25; involves decentralisa-
tion by its size, 75; problem of
industrial groups in, 78; irre-
sponsibility of state in, 97; ad-
ministrative law in, 99 f.; recent
political change in, 115 f.; sepa-


398 INDEX


ration of powers in, 303; growth
of executive power in, 307.
Unity, Medieval worship of, 23; of
state demands absolutism, 149;
achieved by religion, 157 f.; why
rejected, 187f.; conditions of,
204; Lamennais learns danger of,
243; search for principles of,
283; juristic attitude to, 354.


vV


Ventura (Father), attack on La-
mennais, 241.

Vitrolles (Baron), feeling against
the “Paroles,” 255.

Vogué (M. de), on importance of
tradition, 166.

Voltaire, identifies king and state,
24; influence on Lamennais, 193.


wW


Wallas (Graham), on leadership of


men, 32; on importance of
workers’ interest in education,
59; on syndicalism, 88, 352; on
happiness in work, 90; on politi-
cal trades, 107; on need for new
institutions, 111; on lack of
interest in the administrative
process, 324.


Whitgift, on Presbyterianism, 23.


YA


Yates (Edmund), experiences in


postoffice, 50.
Z


Zimmern (A.), on danger of dis-


unity, 93.


oe


See SS
Sijaissscse age poe
SS


SS SSS
