A Grammar of Politics (Harold J. Laski, 1925)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/dli.ernet.523623). Laski's systematic political theory: the state, liberty, equality, and democratic government.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

By the Same Author


George Allen Of Unwin
A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

fifth Edition, Ninth Impression

PARLIAMENTARY GOVERNMENT IN ENGLAND
REFLECT IONS ON THE REVOLUTION
OF OUR TIME
Fourth Impression

THE STATE

IN THEORY AYI> ORACriCk
Second Impression,

LIBERTY IN THE MODERN STATE

DEMOCRACY IN CRISIS
Third Impression

THE RISE OF EUROPEAN LIBERALISM

THI FOUNDATIONS OF SOVEREIGNTY
a nii firm'll essays
( heaper Edition , Second Impression

MI DIES IN Ij\W AND POLITICS

\N IN I RODUCT ION lO POLITICS
fourth Impression

KARL MARX

I HE son M.IS I I RADII ION IN THE
FRENCH REVOLUI ION
1 HE DANGER OF BEING A GEN I LEMAN

AND OTHER PSHAYS

AMERICAN DEMOCRACY
I HE AMERIC AN PRESIDENCY

AN INIFRPKPTAIION

“second Impression
Oxford I nil crsity Press

AUIHORITY IN I HE MODERN SI VIE
THE PROBLEM OK SOVEREIGNTY

In the Horne l diversity Library
POLITICAL THOUGHT IN ENGLAND

I ROM ICX-KT TO BENTHAM

COMMUNISM

Harper and Brothers

THE DANGERS OF OBEDIENCE

AINU OTHER ESSAYS


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


BY

HAROLD J. LASKI


LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LtO


First published. June U) 2 $

Second Impression, January iqi/fi
rhird Impression, Eebruan i')?8
Second Edition (Fourth Impression \ January fyp>
Fifth Impression Second Edition > ( \pnl iiyp
Third Edition [Sixth Impression,, fun? r(fjj
Fourth Edition .Seventh Impression Eebruarv
Fourth Edition {Eu>hth Impression , l>oember ntfJ
Eifth Edition |/u nth Impression , ityS


Printed tn i ioli.mil
for Georg*' Aden <C • Wn**m ( ti


To


Ihe London School of Economics and Politicai Science

AMI TO

Sid.nev a.nt Beatrice Webb,

I is I OUNDERS


For freedom, we know, is a thing that we have to conquer
afresh for ourselves, every day, like love ; and we are always
losing freedom, just as we are always losing love, because,
after each victory, we think we can now settle down and
enjoy it without further struggle. . . . The battle of
freedom is never done, and the field never quiet.

Henry W. Nevinson,

Essays in Freedom, p. xvi.

The great question is to discover, not what governments
prescribe, but what they ought to prescribe ; far no prescription
is valid against the conscience of mankind.

Lord Acton,

History of Freedom, p. 24.


PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION

(Seventh Impression)

I have taken advantage of a reprint of this book to add a new
introductory chapter which seeks to survey developments
in doctrine since 1925. Otherwise the book remains un¬
changed.

H. J. L.

November x, 1937.


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

(Sixth Impression)


In the nine years that have passed since the publication of this
book little has occurred which seems to rne to call for any
change m its essential doctrine Indeed, time has, I think,
reinforced rather than diminished the truth of the ceutial
-'rinciples it sought to lay down The necessarily federal
character of society, the incompatibility of the sovereign State
with that economic world-oider so painfully struggling to be
born, the antithesis between individual pioperty rights tn the
essential means of production and the fulfilment of the demo¬
cratic idea, the thesis that liberty is a concept devoid of real
meaning except ui the context of equality. the refusal to
regard law as valid merely m terms of the formal authority
from which it emanates, the argument that in any society,
even when based on equal and universal suffrage the existence of
senous economic inequalities biases the incident r of govern
ment in favour of the rich all these ae<-m to rr.e to have
received explicit confirmation fiom the event 1 - o f the last
decade

For the interpretation of this period is bound to proceed
upon two assumptions (r) It is clear that Fascism, m its
various national forms, is simply the expedient adopted by
capitalism m distress to defeat the democratic pohurai founda¬
tion with which it could be successfully linked in us period
of creative expansion Democratic institutions are as Tocque-
ville insisted a century ago, mseiiarably associated with the
drive towards economic equality, and when, as now, that
drive encounters an epoch of economic decline, the democratic
institutions are attacked in order that the owners of property
may be safeguarded against the consequences of their operation.
Only in this way can we explain the widespread attack on
principles like freedom of speech, due process m political
offences, (so remarkably illustrated by Hitlerite legislation and
activities), and the grave attack on the right of labour to strike.
Wherever the movement of democratic opinion seeks to revise
the traditional foundations of economic individualism, the
owners of property seek to change the system which makes


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

that movement possible. The survival of political democracy
today is, all over the world, definitely impossible unless it
can conquer the central citadel of economic power. There
cannot, in a word, be democracy unless there is socialism.
That does not mean the necessary victory of democracy. Its
expansion in the nineteenth century into a world-ideal now
appears, in the perspective of post-war events, to have been
simply a function of capitalism in prosperity; with the eclipse
of capitalism it is not improbable that civilisation may have
to pass through an age of dictatorships which, whatever their
formal professions, will, in fact, simply seek to inhibit the
emergence of egalitarian institutions for the benefit of the
invested interests.

(a) It is clear, also, that capitalism in distress makes
impossible the effective operation of international institutions;
it is, therefore, fatal to the creative functioning of the League
of Nations For capitalism (though in many aspects itself
international) is organised on a national basis; and, since this
is the case the owners of capital in each national community
utilise the framework of State power for their protection Since
capitalism forces them to press ever more strongly to the
capture of foreign markets the State largely becomes for them
a means of protecting aad extending their investments abroad.
The outcome of this tendency is the clash of competing economic
imperialisms which arm themselves to the teeth to secure
their gains Fear, luspiciou and hatred are bom of this
atmosphere; the sovereign Mate will not, in these terms, be
persuaded to submit its will to a power outside itself. That
is what is meant by lailures like that of the World Economic
Conference in 1033 and the Disarmament Conference in 1934-
The interest of the world community has to give way before
the interests of powerful States protecting their national
capitalists in some special advantage they propose either to
maintain or secure. This is the history, for example, of the
Japanese adventure in Manchuria; Japan has preferred to
sacrifice the hope of peace and international security to the
imperial ambitions of her governing class. Capitalism, in a
word, is rooted in a system which makes power the criterion
of right and war the ultimate expression of power. No re¬
conciliation is possible between its necessary policies and the


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

idea of a world-community founded upon the sovereign State s
surrender of its right to be judge in its own cause.

A considerable literature upon these themes has appeared
since the first edition of this book. Here I would like only
to draw attention to a few works which seem to me of special
significance. Mr. H. N. Brailsford’s Property or Peace (London,
1934), Dr. H. Lauterpacht’s The Function of Law in an Inter¬
national Community (London, 1933), Professor R. H. Tawney s
Equality (1931) have all cast a brilliant light upon fundamental
political questions. They do not stand alone. The work of
Gurvitch in France; of Kelsen, Verdross and Kunz in Vienna;
of the late Herman Heller in Germany, have been of profound
significance. Nor is it unimportant to emphasise the changing
temper in English juristic thinking which seems to portend
the coming of a new epoch of legal reform. In this context
the work of my friend and colleague Dr. W. I. Jennings, and
especially his Law and the Constitution (London, 1933). mar ^ s
a decisive change in the legal approach to fundamental problems.

HAROLD J. LASKI-

Lohdon,

May 18, 1934.


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

(Fourth Impression)

It is four years since this book was first printed; and the time
has not, I think, yet come when I dare venture upon any drastic
revision. But I have added some notes, chiefly of a bibliographical
character, where they seemed likely to be helpful.

On two definite points I have changed my mind In 1925 I
thought that liberty could most usefully be regarded as more than
a negative thing. 1 am now convinced that this was a mistake,
and that the old view of it as an absence of restraint can alone
safeguard the personality of the citizen. I have taken advantage
of an invitation from Brown University to deliver the Colver
Lectures, there to work out afresh and in greater detail than is
here possible the whole problem, in a book entitled Liberty in the
Democratic State, to be published in the spring of 1930.

The last chapter, in earlier impressions, spoke of the League
of Nations as a superstate (p, 588). This was, of course, an error;
and I have accordingly excised it. Further experience of the
League at work, and, especially, discussion with my friends Pro¬
fessor W. E. Rappard, Dr. H. Lauterpacht. and Mr. K. Zilliacus,
have convinced me that the grave problems involved can only be
thoroughly understood by a reconstruction of the philosophy of
international law I have been working at this problem for the
last few years; and I hope within a reasonable time to be able to
publish the results. Meanwhile, I may perhaps venture the remark
that the reader who seeks to grasp the implications of Dr. Lauter¬
pacht's brilliant Private Law Analogies in International Law (1927)
and Dr. A. Verdross's Die Einheit des Recktlichen Weltbildes (1923)
will *e in what direction the debate is tending.

Despite the demand of the Mond-Tumer Conference (1929) for
a National Industrial Council 1 remain unconvinced, especially in
the light of further German evidence, that it would serve any use¬
ful purpose. I have accordingly left unchanged the argument at
pp. 72 f. and 83 f. which deals with the matter.

The kindness with which this book has been received, not
merely in England, but also in Germany and America, has been
far greater than I could ever have dared to hope; I only wish it
were more worthy of the friends it has been fortunate enough to
make. His death impels me to add how much it owes to the
friendship of Lord Haldane; there are few of the outstanding
problems of which it treats of which the discussion does not bear
the impress of his kindly wisdom and affectionate generosity.


London,

October 15. 1929.


H J I


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


This volume completes an effort, begun in 1915, to construct
a theory of the place of the State in the great society- Earlier
volumes (The Problem of Sovereignty, 1917 ; Authority in the
Modem State, 1919 ; The Foundations of Sovereignty, 1921)
were either mainly critical or intended to discuss somewhat
technical issues in political philosophy. The present book is
more positive and general, since it attempts to outline the
institutions which my researches have suggested as desirable.
I have sought, so far as I could, to discuss the objections of
those who criticised the earlier volumes , and I am anxious
to note my obligations to the generosity with which they have
been received. I am particularly indebted, in America to
Professors M. R. Cohen. W. J. Shepherd and F. W. Coker,
and in England to Mr. L. S. Woolf, Mr. Bertrand Russell and
an (to me) unknown writer in The Time ,Literary Supplement,
for indicating difficulties I ought to analyse If I have not
always accepted their views, they will not. I am sure, attribute
differences to obstinacy, but to genuine disagreement I have
done my best to learn better ways.

Of one great gap in the volume I ought to warn the reader
at the outset. I have said nothing in this book about agri¬
culture and the land problem That i e because 1 know nothing
directly of either , and it has seemed to me setter rrankly to
confess ignorance than to ronstrui t, out of l>ooks, a paper
scheme inevitably unrelated to experience.

My book owes an immense debt to friends. Among my
colleagues, Professors L. T. Hobhouse <*nd Graham Wallas.
Mr. M. Ginsberg and Mr. R. H. Tawney. both by their books
and in conversation, have been endlessly helpful ; and, of
others, I should like especially to thank Lord Haldane, Mr.
Justice Holmes, Dr. Josef Redlick, Professor Felix Frank¬
furter and Dean Pound.

Chapter Eight was originally delivered as lectures at
Magdalene College, Cambridge; and it is a special pleasure


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


to an Oxford man to place on record his sense of the gracious
hospitality dispensed there by the Master and Fellows.

My wife has helped me at every stage of the book . and
she will. I hope accept it as an apology for long hours of
silence.

It J L

The London School uf Economics
and Political Science


PREFACE TO SECOND IMPRESSION


In the few months that have passed since this book was
published, there has been neither time nor opportunity to
make any substantial alterations But I may note that the
Committee on Civil Research, created by Mr Baldwin while
the book was m the press follows almost precisely the model
here {p 373) suggested while the Food Council, under the
able chairmanship of Lord Bradbury, has already shown the
value of the advisory committees the creation of which was
here (p 377) strongly urged I have corrected obvious mis¬
prints and one or two trifhng errors the existence of which
was kindiv pointed out by various friends

A. buck whr.-h lOvt-is so wide and so controversial a field
as tins offers many temptations to critics of different views.
Perhaps 1 may therefore emphasise my sense of the uniform
kindness with which it has been received


November, 1915


H J. L,


CONTENTS


Introductory Chapter—The Crisis in the Theory op the State

Part One


nun


Chapter One—The Purpose op Social Organisation . . ij

I, The change of scale . .15

II. The necessity of government .17

III. The end of the State.25

IV State and society.29

V. The nature of political power.35


Chapter Two—S overeignty.

I. The general nature of sovereignty .
II. Legal Sovereignty
III Political Sovereignty . . . .

IV. Sovereignty in international affairs

V. State and Association

VI. The State as responsible
VII Government as consultation


VIII Certain limiting factors


44

44

5 «

S

66

74

80

»5


Chapter Three—Rights.89

I. The nature of rights.89

II. Rights and the State ....... 97

III Particular rights.102

IV The realisation of rights.131

V Rights and power.134


Chapter Four—Liberty and EguALiTY.142

I The nature of liberty .142

II The safeguards of liberty ..149

III Liberty and equality.132

IV The international aspect.165

V Liberty and Government.170


Chapter Five—Property.173

I The present system.173

II. The moral basis of property .... 183

it'll. Property and effort.189

IV. Property as a theory of industrial organisation. 201

V The problem of incentive.211

VI The movement towards a new order .... 215


Chapter Six— Nationalism and Civilisation .218

I The nature of nationalism 218

II Nationalism and right 226

III Difficulties of Internationalism 231


n

A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


>aoe

ruatTBR Seven — Authority as Fbdbrai


24«

I.

The place of consent in politics


24*

II

Authority and allegiance


248

III

Representation for authority


263

IV

Co-ord ination and federalism


2 JO

V

Law as a source of authority


286'


Part Two


Charter Eight—Political Institutions


J05

I

The forms of political power


2d5

11

The organisation of citurns


3 i«

III

The citizen and Ins re pi tentative


A1&-

IV

The Legislative Assembly i Organisation


3 * a

V

The Legislative Assembly 11 Membership and


functions


54®

VI

The Executive i Political


35 *

VII

The Executive u Administrative


468

VIII

I'he control of the Administrator


3*7

IX

The position of the public official


m

X

The principles of local government


410

XI

Conclusion


421

Chapter Mine-

—Economic 1 vstitutionn


433

I

The purpose of industrial organisation


133

II

Socialised industries


43 s

III

The sphere of consumers co operation


■it*

IV

Private enterprise


475

V

The regulation of private enterprise


^,>48

VI

Vocational organisation


NOW

VII

The Principle of Social Insurance


3 *o

VIII

Property and inheritance


3*4

IX

Conclusion


537

X


519

Chapter Ten—

-Ihb Judicial Psoci-ss


5»‘

I

The importance of the judiciary


34 1

II

The judiciary and the e^fji.


53 ®

HI

The ;udieiar> am! the ivivmai


55®

rv

Equality befori the law


5®4

V

The reform oi the fen*


57 *

VI

Qmas* juduta! m the crtmti'w


5 ®*

Chapter Eleven—Internationa! Organisation


5*7

I

The basis of international organisation


387

II

The functions of lruernational organisation

1 Poll


tical


5*9

m.

The function* of international organisation a

Social

6O6

IV

Tha fonctLons f * Internationa! org«ir nation ui

Econo-


mic


bio

V

The institutions f inter national organisation


624

VI

Conclusion


bhl


66?


INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER

THE CRISIS IN THE THEORY OP THE STATE


I'

No theory of the state is ever intelligible save in the context of
its time. What men think about the state is the outcome always
of the experience in which they are immersed. The massacre
of Saint Bartholomew produces Whiggism in the author of the
Vxndicia ; the Puritan Rebeffi'on sets Hobbes searching for the
formula of social peace; the " Glorious Revolution ” of 1688
enables Locke to affirm that the power of the Crown is built
upon the consent of its subjects. Rousseau, Hegel, T. H.
Green, all sought to give the mental climate of their time the
rank of unive rsal vali dity. And the more critical the epoch
in which we live the more profound is the emphasis upon
universality. Men fight grimly for the status of ideologies
lest the experience they seek to validate be denied by their
opponents.

Our age, in this regard, is no different from its predecessors.
It is an age of critical transition in which, as at the end of the
fifteenth and the eighteenth centuries, a new social order is
struggling grimly to be born. Our scheme of values is in the
melting pot, and the principles of its refashioning have not
yet been determined. As always, in such a time, men have
gone back to the foundations of politics; and they seek anew
to explain the nature and functions of the state. There is
a confusion in the atmosphere of discussion which betokens the
advent of a revolutionary age. War, and a peace that it is
not easy to distinguish from war, an economic crisis of un¬
paralleled intensity, in Russia the foundation of a socialist
society, in the Far East the birth of a new and aggressive
imperialism—these have compelled new approaches to prob¬
lems which, hardly a generation ago, seemed to men settled

la


ii A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

beyond dispute. What is in issue now is not the minor matter
of the state's form; what is in issue is the nature of the state
itself. We cannot, as I conceive, understand the profundity
of the debate unless we realise that it is a crisis which involves"
the ultimate substance of society’s constitution.

There is no avenue of politics into which it does not enter.
The limits of state intervention, the validity of the democratic
hypothesis, the place of the executive in the scheme of govern¬
ment, the relation of expert to amateur in the processes of
administration and legislation, the nature of law in general,
and of international law in particular, the claims of reason
in politics, the function of leadership—all these, to take only
some outstanding examples, have been found to require re¬
assessment and re-definition. In all of them, we are at the
beginning only of what will unquestionably prove an epoch
of decisive importance m the history of political philosophy,
and it is too early, as yet, to predict with any confidence what
stability will be attained. It took nearly three hundred years
for the idea of the liberal state to grow to a mature expression.
Its supremacy lasted for less than a century All that, as yet,
we can say of our own tune is our certainty that the challenge
to the liberal doctrine is clearly a decisive one. There is no
evidence to indicate with clarity on what side the victory
will rest.

Ours, as I say, is an epoch in which the characteristic
confusion of a transitional time is the main feature of specula¬
tion. The call is loud for a new social philosophy , the prophets
are many I cannot attempt within a brief compass even to
set out, much less to estimate, the chaos of competing doctrines.
All that this chapter will seek to do is to state, as plamly as I can,
what seems to me the fundamental issue as it is begmnmg to
emerge, and I shall then attempt to illustrate its character
by reference to four essential fields of enquiry These are
(i) the nature of law;, (2) pluralism, (3) the attack on the
democratic state; and, finally, (4) the special problems to
which the emergence of an international order in whose fate,
for good or ill, we are all involved, has given rise.


CRISIS IN THE THEORY OF THE STATE iii


II

The fundamental issue, at least, is straightforward; what
is challenged is the liberal theory of the state. This, as it was
fashioned by three centuries of discussion, assumed that in !
every political society where anarchy was to be avoided there'
must be a supreme authority which gives orders to all and
receives orders from none. This authority was the sovereign
power; and it was exercised in the name of the state by the
government to whom its operation was entrusted. The
justification of this power was variously conceived. Broadly,
we may say, as a liberal democracy based upon universal
suffrage became, before the war, the mam objective of Western
civilisation, it was argued that the title of the state to obedience
lay m its performance of three functions: (i) it secured order,
(2) it provided a technique of peaceful change, and (3) it enabled
demand to be satisfied on the widest possible scale.

There was, of course, dissent from this view, both m detail
and m principle But, predominantly, this was the view
which commanded assent This, also, is the view which has
been fundamentally attacked 111 the last twenty years, and so
widely that its title to predominance may now be regarded
as doubtful. The mam ground for the attack does not he in
a denial that the state-power secures order, this is universally
admitted What is argued is that what the order maintained
by the state secures does not provide a technique of peaceful
change and does not permit demand to be satisfied on thq
largest possible scale.

The state, it is urged, is, in fact, the supreme coercive
jxiwer in any given political society, but it is, in fact, used to
protect and promote in that society the interest of those who
own its instruments of production. The state expresses a will
to maintain a given system of class-relations. It does so by
the use of its supreme coercive pow'er to that end. In the last
analysis, this power'consists of the defence forces of the state.
These are used, m ultimate challenge, to impose the will of
the owners of the instruments of production upon those
excluded from such ownership Whatever the philosophic
purposes attributed to the state-power these, it is said, are


IV


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


the naked facts. There may be more or less of coercion at
any given moment, according as the economic condition of
society enables more or less concessions of materia) well-being
to be made to those excluded from the privileges of ownership.
But any state in which the instruments of production are
privately owned cannot, by its inherent nature, achieve either
the second or the third of the objectives I have listed above.

It does not provide a technique ot peaceful change. For
-men who have the privileges of ownership seek to maintain
them, the more vehemently as they contract; and they are
certain to be resisted by those excluded from them as these
find their expectation of increasing material welfare dis¬
appointed. The only way open to the latter if they wish to
avoid this disappointment is to capture the state-power in order
to use it for a re-definition of class-relations Theoretically,
no doubt, this can be done peacefully m a constitutional system
based on universal suffrage. Fn fact, historically, whenever
an attempt at such re-definition ha* been made, it has always
been resisted by the owners of pnq-erty who, thereby, have
been possessed of the state-power The sesult of the incom¬
patibility of the views <>i the use to which the state-power
should be put is revolution this, m its nature, is essentially
a battle for the maintenance or change of the objectives to
which the state-power is devoted. The battle is inescapable
(whatever its result) so long as the state-power is used to
confirm a body of legal postulates which stereotype an)’ given
system of class-relations in a condition where their economic
and psychological results are regarded as unjust by those who
do not conceive themselves to profu from the privileges it
maintains.

The state, further, cannot in this context achieve its end of
satisfying demand on the largest possible scale For the de¬
mand satisfied in terms of its legal postulates is effective
demand; and the nature of this depends upon the system of
property in the given society. Where, as m the capitalist
state the essential incentive to production is the making of
profit, it follows that in the process of distribution there will
ndrbe either («) an equal claim upon what there »s of common
w elfare or ( b) such a rational justification of deferences in
reward as will relate them to a good in which the welfare of •


CRISIS IN THE THEORY OF THE STATE v


those discriminated against is involved; in a word in such
i society the distributive process has no inherent connection
with the end of justice But this is to say that in such a society
the coercive power of the state is used to promote differences
in relation to the satisfaction of demand which may be (and
in fact often are) unjust Only the capture of the state,
followed by the re-dehnition of its legal postulates, could
remedy this condition.

This, as I understand it, is the challenge issued to the
classic theories of the state in recent years, In its general
outline, it was first formulated by Marx and Engels, and it
received its classic re-statement by Lenin in his State and
Revolution . I am not aware of any adequate answer to it from
opponents of the challenge. The idealist theory 7 of the state
(as, for example) in its famous formulation by Bosanquet
remains a formulation of a conceptual state i« posse rather
than of the states we know. The liberal and anti-idealist
view, as expressed by L- T Hobhouse, assumes, but does not'
prove, that, given tune, reason will always be victorious in
matters of social conflict. Neither Bosanquet’s view 7 , nor that
of Hobhouse, fulfils the scientific canon of prediction. Broadly
speaking, the Marxian theory of the state has so defined its
nature and functioning as to enable us to predict with assurance
the course its operations will follow As an index to the prob¬
lems of our age it decisively, m my judgment, holds the field.

On this basis, it follows that those who defend the classic
theories of the state must be able to show not that an ideal
state which exists only in their own construction, but the
actual states, England, France, Germany, the United States
of America, that we know, are inherently capable, granted the
class-relations they maintain, of fulfilling demand on the
largest possible scale, and that, therefore, they have a moral
claim to the allegiance of their members on this ground. I do
not myself see how this could be argued logically for, say, a few
in Hitlerite Germany, or a socialist in Fascist Italy; each
refuses to take the announced purposes of the state as embody¬
ing intentions related to his actual good. For the individual
member of any political society is bound to infer its ends
not from its proclamation of purpose, but from his judgment,
based on his own experience, of that purpose in action. From


VI


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


this angle, we are in a psychological condition comparable,
as I have said, to the end of the feudal period, or to the epoch
of the French Revolution, when men seek to reconstitute the
foundations of society. This they are now, as then, unable
to do unless they redefine its class-relations. They cannot
re-define them without possession of the state-power since it
is in the use of its coercive authority that the means of re¬
definition are to be found.


Ill

This, as I see it, is the general problem that we confront.
I propose now to apply the result of my argument to the
problem of the nature of law. The lawyer approaches the law
as a body of rules binding upon those who come within its
jurisdiction. The explanation of its binding force is, of course,
of a varying character. To Hobbes and Austin it was the
;power behind the rules, the coercive sanctions which could,
in the last resort, be brought into operation against those
who infringed it. They sought to make, as, in our own day,
Kelsen has sought to make, a self-consistent theory of pure
law into which neither ethical nor sociological considerations
could perietrate. Law, on this view, was completely separated
from justice on the ground that this latter concept introduces
non-juristic postulates foreign to.the nature of law. On this
view, the authority of law ultimately derives from the final
norm in a series—the state—and this norm, in its turn, is
a postulate incapable of examination since, as the supreme
source of authority, it cannot be called into question.

Granted its postulates, I believe the pure theory of law to
be unanswerable, but I believe also that its substance is an
exercise in logic and not in life. For we know in fact that
the law of any given society is the expression of the push of
social forces in that society; and we cannot explain its substance
or its operation without regard to those forces. That is why,
in the last forty years, there has been a growing movement
towards a less formal, and more realistic, jurisprudence. The
relation between sociology and law has grown ever more
intimate; and a jurisprudence of formal concepts now satisfies
few save the veterans of an earlier age.


CRISIS IN THE THEORY OF THE STATE vii

What is to replace it ? Law is regarded as binding because
it is useful, or because it embodies reason, or because it expresses
the general ends of society in particular rules, or because it
is a search for those canons of behaviour the observance of
which will maximise the satisfaction of demand. From the
angle of this chapter, none of these answers is satisfactory. To
say that law is useful is to ask at once to whom it is useful;
and that is always a question to which the most various answers
can be given. To say that it embodies reason is merely to
raise the enquiry of whose reason it embodies. To say that it
expresses the general ends of society is to ask as conceived
by whom ? At every point, in short, the ideal purpose of
law is not necessarily identical with the actual purposes of law
as these are experienced by those who receive the law.

But the law is, normally, obeyed. What explains the fact
of normal obedience ? Is it fear, or habit, consent or utility ?
No doubt, in some degree, it is all of these. Yet to offer them
as explanations does not explain the nature of law. To under¬
stand it we must grasp the nature of the authority upon which
it rests. In the last analysis, this is always the supreme
coercive power of the state; for it is this power which is called
into operation to prevent br to punish infractions of the law.
But since, again in last analysis, the object of the state is to
maintain some given system of class-relatioijs in society, the
laws behind which it puts its supreme coercive power will have
this end also. Law, ultimately, therefore is a body of rules
which seek to fulfil the object of the state. The rules are
maintained because, normally, those who dissent from the rules
are not in a position to challenge the authority which lies
behind them.

From this standpoint, we can answer the questions I have
already put. Law in a feudal state is made as law because it
is useful to the owners of land; the reason it embodies is their
reason; the general end of society it seeks to fulfil is their
conception of what that general end should be; the canons
of behaviour it will seek to enforce will derive from their
conception of how demand may best be maximised. In a
capitalist society, like Great Britain, for instance, the substance
of law will, similarly, be predominantly determined by the
owners of capital. In a socialist society, like Soviet Russia,


viii A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the substance of law will be determined by the fact that the
common ownership of the means of production subordinates
the interest of a class to the interest of the society as a whole.

Recent work in jurisprudence gives this view a status with
which the last generation was unfamiliar. The proceedings of
the American courts, to take a notable instance, in the use of
the injunction, in the interpretation of the Fourteenth Amend¬
ment, in their reading of industrial conspiracy into the category
of tort, in their attitude to free speech and fref assembly, are
all pervaded by the notion, often hardly conscious in the
individual judge, that the purpose of the law in fact is, whatever
its ideal professions, to maintain existing class-relations. It
represents the use of the state's supreme coercive power for
this end and for no other end. American constitutional law
is, no doubt, elastic enough as a broad statement of principles.
Wlien it falls to be applied by the judges it is. in general, per¬
meated by a philosophy which prevents a change in class-
relations being introduced through the interstices of law.

The same is true of Great Britain. The interpretation of
trade union law, of much of the jurisprudence surrounding
workmen's compensation, the law of search, the law relating
to freedom of speech and assembly (especially in these last
critical years) derives its meaning from judicial belief that the
existing social order (that is, the existing system of class-
relatioris) must be maintained At bottom, only the Marxian
interpretation of law can explain the substance of law There
cannot, that is, be equality before the law, except in a narrowly
formal sense, unless there is a classless society. For the un¬
stated assumption of all law in any society in which the
instruments of production are privately owned is the inherent
necessity of maintaining the system of class-relations through
which the privileges of private ownership are secured to their
possessors.

This conclusion, it should be added, is not invalidated by
either of two considerations. The lawyer’s search for con¬
sistency seeks always to build a legal system that is internally
logical; the history of the law of torts is an interesting example
of this effort. But the essential shape of his effort, is, despite
the reaction of the search for consistency upon the material,
inescapably set by the relations of production in any society


CRISIS IN THE THEORY OF THE STATE ix


at any given time. Nor is it invalidated by the fact that
lawyers, like most other men, search for the good of society
ir» the rules they evolve They search for the good of society
as they see iland they see the good, broadly speaking, in
terms of an experience in which they are placed by the relations
of production in which they are involved. The economic
philosophy of those who made the Napoleonic Code, of Chief
Justice Marshall, of Baron Bramwell. and Lord Farwell is
stamped unmistakably on the whole fabric of their work.
Each of them was serving the law to the best of his great
ability, but each brought to that service a body of class-pre¬
possessions of which he was definitely the prisoner. Here and
there, a remarkable individual, like Mr. Justice Holmes, may
show a noteworthy power to transcend those limitations. But
such remarkable individuals are rarely lawyers successful
enough, granted our technique of judicial appointment and
promotion, to reach the Bench.

Just, therefore, as there is a crisis in the theory of the
state, 3o, also, there is a crisis in the theory of law. None of
its characteristic landmarks has gone unchallenged. It is
especially notable that liberal theories of the law, which seek
to utilise the new sociological relationships of law, are not less
helpless than the older theories to grapple with the central
problem. Dean Pound, for example, has, with great learning
and energy, proposed an “ engineering " theory of law. This
he defines as “ thinking not of an abstract harmonising of
human wills, but of a concrete securing or realising of human
interests ?”* But Dean Pound nowhere discusses the relation
of this " concrete securing or realising " to the inescapable
consequences of a society whose class-structure predominantly
confines the “ human interests " realised or secured to those
who have effective demands to make— t.e., the owners of
property. At bottom his whole philosophy, like that of
Kohler, is really an Hegelian plea that the law should be
penetrated by that mystic entity the spirit of a new, rime.
He wants law, as it itere, kept up to date; but he has wholly
failed to see that this is, in fact, like all Hegelian philosophy,
merely a beatification of the status quo of any given society
at any given time. By refusing to see, with Marx, that legal
1 Spirit of the Common Law, p. 195.


X


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


relations are rooted in class relations, Dean Pound has thrown
away the essential answer to the problem of what “ human
interests ’’ will be “secured or realised ” in a society of given
class-relations or one in which the power of class over class has
been abolished.

The new approach has, necessarily, a different technique
of analysis. It conceives of law always in the context of a
state supporting a given system of class-relations and it is in
this context, always, that it finds the clue to its necessary
substance. Law, in this view, is those rules of behaviour
which secure the purposes of the society’s class-structure and
will be, if necessary, enforced by the coercive power of the
state. They are obeyed so long as the relations of production
enable the full potentialities of the society to be exploited;
they will be challenged when the forces of production are in
conflict with the relations of production and this exploitation
is no longer possible. Whenever this conflict occurs, the
foundations of law are called into question. A struggle for
their reconstruction takes place , and, if those who challenge
the law are successful in their effort, they move to the use of
the state-power to redefine the legal postulates of society
It is upon the basis of this conception alone that the movement
of juristic thought can, in its fundamental outlines, be
explained.


IV

During the war, and its immediate aftermath, an attack
was made by a group of thinkers usually called the pluralists
fipon the sovereignty of the state. As I was myself perhaps
as much concerned as anyone in the formulation of the doctrine,
it will perhaps not be wholly out of place for me to explain
the nature and purpose of the attack.

It was born essentially of two things. The state claimed
legal omnicompetence; and it claimed the allegiance of its
citizens on the ground that it represented the total interest of
the society within its territorial jurisdiction. The pluralists
pointed out that legal omnicompetence was a purely formal
concept often invalid in fact; and they argued that the claim
to allegiance could not be a priori valid since the allegiance of


CRISIS IN THE THEORY OF THE STATE xi


men was, in fact, plural and not single; that they were fre¬
quently presented with choices in which they made their
decision without regard to the formal, pre-eminence of the
state. The pluralists therefore argued that, however majestic
and powerful, the state in fact was only one of many associa¬
tions in society, that, in experience, there were always limits
to its powers, and that these were set by the relation between
the purpose the state sought to fulfil and the judgment made
by men of that purpose. They insisted that the state’s title
to obedience lay, not in the fact of its willing, but in the sub¬
stance of what it chose to will as this met the experience of
men seeking to satisfy the demands bom of their experience.

In part, as a matter of history, it is clear enough that this
pluralism was bom of reaction from the Moloch-like demands
of the state in war-time. In part, also, it derived from the
realisation that the state’s claim to pre-eminence always
means, in fact, the sovereingty of a government composed of
fallible men whose intentions alone are not a sufficient justifica¬
tion for so vast a claim. There went into the making of
pluralism an historic analysis derived from the conflict between
churches and the state, between trade unions and the state,
between, as in the case of the conscientious objector to military
service, the individual and the state.

What, as I think now, was right in the pluralist doctrine,
were its perceptions (i) that a, purely Ifegal theory of the state
can never form the basil of an adequate philosophy of the state;
(2) that the state is, in fact, no more entitled to allegiance
than any other association on grounds of ethical right or
political wisdom; and (3) that its sovereignty is, at bottom,
a concept of power made valid by the use of a coercion which,
in itself, is morally, neutral. Society as a complex whole is
pluralistic; the unified power of the state which we call
sovereignty, that legal right, as Bodin put it, to give orders to
all and to receive orders from none, is made monistic (as in the
classical legal theory) by the fact that it has behind its will, on
all normal occasions, the coercive power to get its will obeyed.

The weakness, as I now see it, of pluralism is clear enough.
It did not sufficiently realise the nature of the state as an
expression of class-relations. It did not sufficiently emphasise
the fact that it was bound to claim an inriivkihjf anrj ime-


A GRAMMAR OP POLITICS

Sponsible sovereignty because there was no other way in which
it could define and control the legal postulates of society. It
was through their definition and control that the purposes of
any given system of class-relations was realised. If the state
ceased to be sovereign, it ceased to be in a position to give
effect to those purposes Its pre-eminence was, therefore,
inevitably claimed on that ground. The ethical characteristics
attributed to it by philosophers like Hegel were nothing more
than a protective colouration for the end the state was bound
to fulfil as the expression of the relations of production in any
given time and place.

That realised, I submit, the purpose of pluralism merges
into a larger purpose. If it be the fact, as I have here argued,
that the state is inevitably the instrument of that class which
owns the instruments of production, the objective of the
pluralist must be the classless society. In (hat event there is
no room for, because there is no need of, its supreme coercive
jxiwer. It then becomes possible to conceive of a society in
which («) men have an equal claim on the common good and
(6) differentiation in response to that equal claim can be so
made that the good of those differentiated against is involved
in the good of those in whose favour differentiation is made
In such a society we remove those conflicts based on property
which, as James Madison saw and said, are "the only true
source of faction.” It is these conflicts which render normally
necessary the vast apparatus of state-coercion. If the main
ground of conflict is thus removed, it becomes possible to
conceive of a' social organisation in which the truly federal
nature of society receives institutional expression And in
such a social organisation, authority can be pluralistic both
in form and expression. The prospect of immense institutional
changes comes at once into view.

This is not the place for me to venture upon any full treat¬
ment of the problems to which this outlook gives rise. It is,
perhaps, sufficient for me to say here that I now recognise
(so far at least as I am concerned) that the pluralist attitude
to the state and law was a stage on the road to an acceptance
of the Marxian attitude to them. Only by means of Marxism
can I explain phenomena like the state as it appears in Fascist
countries. That state seeks the total absorption of the


CRISIS IN THE THEORY OF THE STAfE xvii


in fact, has been able, so far, to change its class-basis without
revolution. The crisis in democracy is due to the fact that in
the present phase of capitalist contraction its alliance with
democracy is dangerous to the owners of property who, as in
the past, prefer to tight for their privileges rather than give
way. The history of Soviet Russia since IQ17 lends additional
weight to this interpretation.'


VI

The centred problems of post-war international law lie in
the economic relations in which they are involved. Scientific
advance, especially in the means of communication, has
produced a world-market, and in that situation no state can
live a life in which it affects itself alone. American silver
policy may determine the economic position of China; the
Canadian monopoly of tungsten may determine the effective¬
ness of German re-armarnant. Great Britain’s departure from
the gold standard, or her taritf-(>ohcv may shape the economic
life of the Scandinavian countries We have reached so
intense a degree of international interdependence that the
theory of sovereignty huts consequences, in foreign relations,
of an entirely different eh.uacter from those of the period when
Grotius and his suivesso's laid the fundamental bases of inter¬
national law

The world is divided into sovereign states, each of which is,
m formal fact, the sole aibiter of the policy it will pursue.
The making of peace and vui, the scab of it'- armaments, its
financial and economic policies, its attitude to colonial ex¬
pansion, till these, to Kike examples only, aie matters upon
which it recognises no will superior to its own. What, then, is
international law. and how- fn is it binding upon states ■'
International law may be defined as Hie body of rules which
govern the relations between states; and its binding force
depends upon their consent to observe the rules it imposes.
If it is objected here that this attitude to the nature of inter¬
national la>¥ fails to fake account of the existence of a wolt-

1 I have dealt at length with the piutdems here summarised briefly
in my Democracy in Crssu (imy) and my State in Theor\ tind Practice
U935)-


xviii A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

settled body of rules by which all states conceive themselves
as bound, the answer is that, in any final analysis, states
regard themselves as free to break the obligations to which
they are committed whenever they choose to do so. The
existence of a body of juristic rules which, m minor matters,
states accept because it is convenient for them to do so is not
sufficient to give international law a status independent of their
wills. For in matters oi major corutrn as Japan has shown
over Manchuria, and Italy over Abys-,,ma, they are not pre¬
pared to sacrifice what they concetvt to be their sovereign
interests to the claims of international law They do not
recognise its validity as suprrior to the will they make for
themselves. There is no organic community with a law of
its own to which their own law is subotdinate The validity
of international law depends upon their consent to its operation.

This view is not. 1 think, destroyed either bv the existence
of the League of Nations, or by the fact that an adequate
international life is now impossible unless at least tiie major
wars are detinue ly outlawed, i or what the experience of the
last sixteen years has surely shown is tin- incompalability of
the League with the co-existence of sovereign states, and the
latter display no sign of a serious willingness to abandon
then sovereignty They need it, in fact, for the protection
of interests which cannot be promoted or maintained save by
the technique of war The ambitions of Japan and Germany,
of Italy and Hungary, to take some obvious instances, assume
a period when they will make demands upon othc states which
only the arbitrament of the swoni can enforce, and recent
experience seems decisive that they are willing to break legal
obligations, however morally profound, in order to realise
them. The answer of the League should lie opposition in
terms of collective security; but both ihe Manchurian and the
Abyssinian incidents make it plain that collective security
assumes the existence of an international community able and
willing to act as an effective unit against an aggressor. No
such possibility appears to exist within the framework of the
present system. And while it does not exist, the binding
force of international law is as great, or as small, as the strength
of the aggressor who breaks it. It is a function of the power-
politics which express the modern relationships of states; and


CRISIS IN T 1 IE THEORY OF THE STATE xix

power-politics cannot give rise to a social older m which inter¬
national law has a status inch pend*, nt of the states that assent
to it

It is, in fact inherent u, tin i,!u of law that those who live
under it should !>• homd to obey As ord« rs independently
of their own will and ihit their infractions ol its pnnciples
should he punished l>v tin indie t'on of penalties For inter¬
national law no see h situati ai < xist sive as individual states
choose to asmiru anr! to hi bound by obligations of this
kind Inb maternal lav., thcreton is built upon postulates
that are raflur mctajin.dical than truly legil, m their nature
Granted the postal itc-, TH tin lesulfs that follow are of a truly
legal kind but iht s >vereigu ruture of tht st ett, m relation to
tin postulates strike-, them w'th impi ttnet as soon as in
crin»i 1 uisf mo s they k ;<> assume the full eharacter of 1 iw.

Why is this'" Th< > swtt 1 C ugge->1 in-, m the under-
»landing of the nature <>t tie tat. Sum i* exists to protect
a given s\stun o f < lass r > 1 itie ns, r < ainiot i sCupe from the
implications emit nut ! ui the n Onu > senary lives by the
profit rnotivi and d< p law up ,n i,, l< o ,gn nurhets for

its s.it’sfei tu n i‘ s brnisd a- o * i > r u] it n of its own well¬
being to ]>■ lift vne< vronii t* " it amv it l tit n becomes
involved ui (hit comp!*' v b t i im.pen ilnn. wtncti means the
aujuisiti m of < olon <■ < hi 'pmn , of influence with military

md n iv d force t pint i tl e icquisit’on \> the undeveloped
tent mes <>' *hs worl i '-hi "k he malne- between states for
acusx to i rarkc ( s Cm, a-, v i ion acute Its purpose
stucs hold / >ad .mus ih< whole ps\, hologvcat contact
b(tvvc*n piojiti' \htio-i incU p< i ! «h n‘l\ i'u wills of states¬
men as n>o't nut ibii ip h * win' iipj tin ci \'h of objectives
cannot 1>*‘ s<t*lid m limisot pe*<ttul negotiation The neces¬
sary note ome of Hit s\'tt m a ( some si-n is war and war,
it must bo rei'K r nbeu , d is the highest < vpiossion of the state's
sovcteignty

To il« price the 'tatt of soveniuntv, in e woitl, is to depuve
it of the powei to e nfoice the logic that is inherent in its
ei onomic sy stint tiimt Britain m India, and Fgypf, I* ranee
in Moreirco and Indu ( Inna, Japan m Kotea and Menehuria,
become impossible save m that > on text I'm sovereignty
means supieme coercive power, and, without this, the state


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


cannot enforce a will to which it is compelled by the class-
relations it exists to maintain. No doubt each state wants
peace. But, given the consequences of its class-relations, it
wants, also, objectives which it cannot obtain or safeguard
without the power to make war on their behalf; and it must
retain its sovereignty in order to retain the right to make war.
But once it retains its sovereignty it cannot be bound by
any rule of international law save by its own consent. For,
were it so bound, it would cease by definition to be sovereign.

The inference from this view is twofold. On the one hand,
it implies that, given the class-relations of the modem state
it is impossible to realise the ideal of an effective international
community. A body like the League of Nations is bound to
remain partial and incomplete, both as to structure and
function, simply because, in order to achieve its aims, it must be
able to transcend the sovereignty of its individual members.
This it cannot do since, if they were to surrender their sovereign¬
ty, they would cease to be able to maintain those class-relations
for which they exercise supreme coercive power. On the
other hand, it implies that the sanctions of international Jaw
are bound to remain, also, partial and incomplete since their
ability to get themselves applied depends upon the consent
of those who infringe that law to their application; the alterna¬
tive, when the transgressor refuses such consent, is the use of
a force against him from which, as the cases of Manchuria and
Abyssinia have made evident, other states will shrink. There
is no way of making international law more than what Austin
tailed a species of positive morality save by the abrogation of
state-sovereignty; and this involves a revolution in the economic
structure of the modem world.

This conclusion is not weakened by the effort of the Austrian
school of international lawyers to remake the foundations of
international law by postulating its primacy over municipal
law. Their effort, which, given its postulates, is logically
sound, is nevertheless unrealistic. It is, for practical purposes,
an essay in the optative mood. So long as the individual state
remains sovereign the question of primacy remains a matter
upon which it is itself, in each individual instance, free to
decide; and post-war experience is surely decisive that such
primacy will be disregarded by any state (if it can afford to do


CRISIS IN THE THEORY OF THE STATE xri


so) once it considers that such recognition will jeopardise
interests it regards as fundamental. It is, no doubt, true that,
among modem states, Spain has actually written into its con¬
stitution the recognition that international law has primacy
over municipal law. But it is important to realise, first, that
Spain has a lonely pre-eminence in this regard, and, second,
that states which have signed either the Kellogg-Briand Pact
or the Optional Clause have, for the most part, done so with
significant reservations which amount, in sober fact, to the
retention of that right to make war, or to refuse arbitration,
in such instances as they think fit. They have agreed, that is,
to abrogate their sovereignty in those, matters upon which
they do not think it worth while to fight; but, for all funda¬
mental matters, they remain not less distinctively sovereign
than before.

We may agree that, granted the fact of international
economic interdependence, this is an unsatisfactory position.
It is unsatisfactory because we are living in a world in which
the relations of production are in contradiction with the forces
of production. A sovereignty which, in its origins, served the
important purpose of freeing bourgeois society from the
trammels of medieval canons of conduct, now operates to
prevent the transcendence of the contradictions of bourgeois
society. The sovereignty of the great state today is a tech¬
nique for the protection of its imperialism. That imperialism
is the outcome of its own internal relations which, given the
distribution of effective demand within its boundaries, is
driven to the competitive search for markets abroad in order
to realise profit. Its sovereignty is the protective armament
of that adventure The international law it can recognise is,
therefore, always hampered and frustrated by the logical
requirements of imperialism, It cannot part with the control
of any vital function, the scale of its armament, the right to
make war, its hold on colonies and spheres of influence, its
power over tariffs, currency, migration, labour conditions,
because to do so is to threaten, internally, the relations of
production its sovereignty exists to maintain. But an inter¬
national community, and therefore the law' of such a com¬
munity, cannot be real or effective unless it can control these
functions independently of the Wilis, of Lhe siales.which are


XX11


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


its constituent parts- To achieve the necessary consequences,
that is, of the world-market, we have to go beyond the power
of the individual state to veto international action We
cannot, in fact, go beyond that power while the state remains
sovereign; and we cannot deprive it of its sovereignty so long
as, outside of Soviet Russia, the present class-structure of
society remains undisturbed.

The development of international law tn modem times,
and, especially, in the post-war period, is an admirable example
of the lawyer's effort to retomde consistency wnh postulates
which deny the possibility of its full attainment I he l»est
examples ol this ellort m n-a-n’ ve.us have been those of
Lauterpaoht m England, and of tin- Amman school' Each
has striven to make of mt< rnatserial luv a tiuiy legal system
by discovering foi it a power to bipu its subjects indiherently
to their will. Each has been abh t<> lmd a moss nl illustrative
material—the existence of internal? cm! servitudes is a notable
illustration—which appeals to In.n out his case put ea< h
effort has broken down liefoi** Hie i nioal fact that ’he postu¬
lates from which it ha.-> to st trl are not broad enough to Lieut
the weight of the supetstructure founded upon them. At some
point, the state may choose not to accept the obligations
it has assumed, and, at that point, it always emerges find the
validity of the obligation is self-determined. Once that is the
case, the incompleteness of the sam tiorn behind international
law emerge with momentous clarity Thej art operative only
so far as states choose to make them operative, and this willing¬
ness depends Upon factors so powerful a- to prevent inter
national law from being, like municipal lav.', a complete and
self-sufficient system

The reason for this inadequacy is. of course, a simple one
Law r cannot transcend the relations it is intended to enforce.
Its ultimate postulates ate never self-determined, but given
to it by the economic system of which it is tin expression.
Once the driving-power of an economic system depends upon
the profit derived from the private ownership of the means of

1 Ins rVi.-o/. Lav . J i ndlagi ts *« international law (1^/4) and i he
humlion r-f 1 alt in rht international ( ommur.rty (1035), ft ji the Austrian
school cf especially A \ entrust., Die Lmheit des reckthehen Weltbildes,
t)ii the whole problem cj m> LI ait m 1 he cry and Practtce.


CRISIS IN THE THEORY OF THE STATE xxiii


production withm a state, tlic sovereingty of that state must
organise the relations of production within the framework
born of that purpose. To its ^consequences, ail the habits of
the society dominated by the state will be necessarily adjusted,
as well in the international, as in the municipal sphere. To
alter those habits, there must be an alteration, also, m the
relations of production upon which they depend. So far, at
least, that alteration hu^ not beer, attempted, outside of Soviet
Russia, m the modem world The result is to confine the
international lawyer to a medium in which his work is inevitably
incomplete simply because the postulates from which he starts
do not themselves (omditutt a complete system To achieve
that completeness, he would have to dtaJ with states which
accepted the findings ol law as tuily as the citizen in a municipal
community. The st.irting-pnmt ot his adventure is the fact
that this is not. and within the present relations of production,
cannot be, th*' <as* The international law he operates is, no
doubt, inadequate to the purposes it now sieks to fulfil, but it
wdl require a complete change- m the foundations of our,
economic system to adjust its postulates to the new needs it
encounters.


VII

The crisis m ^tuuhUhre that I have here described will not
be solved m teirns of discussion alone, ideas must wait upon
the events which give them birth. The Liberal ideology
which, both in the old world and the new, is now challenged,
becomes, in the pel specie, e of history the expression of a
particular economic system upon whose fati it is dependent.
That system made the individual ownership of the means of
production the pivot of its way' of life, and to the realisation
of that end it shaped, first the culture, and then the political
institutions, of the medieval woskl it displaced By reason
of its emphasis upon such individual ownership, it shaped ail
the foundations of law, both public and piivaffc, to that end
Its validity, as an ideology, deptuded upon its power so to
exploit the forces of production as to satisfy, on the largest
possible scale, the demands that it mcuunteied So long as
it seemed to fulfil that condition it v.ns able, though m fact


xxiv A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

a theory limited by a specific environment, to represent itself,
and to be accepted, as a universal. But as soon as its power
of satisfaction diminished—which, roughly, has synchronised
with the contradiction between its power to produce and its
power to distribute—its adequacy as an ideology became
doubtful to all whose expectations of material benefit from its
operations was disappointed.

No doubt its achievements were great; the increase in the
standard of life that it has universally affected is beyond
discussion. But, once it ran into the period of its material
contradiction, what was revealed was the narrow and formal
character of the institutional system by which it lived. Its
political democracy, even on the basis of universal suffrage,
did not mean, hardly, indeed, pretended to mean, a recognition
of an equal claim to a share in the common good; what political
democracy could secure was always limited by the power of
an economic oligarchy to exact privileges prior in status to the
claim of the masses to benefit. Its equality before the law was,
again, almost always more substantial in form than in practice;
for the simple reason thaTthe principles (5T the law were always,
if rarely consciously, anchored in the assumption that the
protection of private ownership was the fundamental purpose
of the law. The ideology, in a word, of the liberal state
favoured reason and toleration only on the implicit condition
that these, as they worked, did not threaten the economic
foundations of the regime itself.

But reason and toleration are attitudes of mind in human
beings. They depend upon an environment about which
men feel passionately. Their empire functions only as legiti¬
mate expectations are fulfilled by those who have formed them.
When those expectations are insecure, men are no more capable
of service to reason and toleration than they have been in past
ages. Their ideas of right and wrong are largely bom of
their position in society; and when this, with its profound
habituations, is challenged, now, as in the past, they go forth
to do battle in behalf of their ideas of right and wrong.
Liberalism is challenged in our own day for the same reason
that feudalism was challenged at the end of the fifteenth
century; within the framework of the class-relations it imposes,
it is unable adequately to exploit the forces of production.


CRISIS IN THE THEORY OF THE STATE xxv

So challenged, it defends itself, and the conflict between the
forces it represent^ and those by which it is attacked has led
to the crisis m state-theory which has been here analysed
What the outcome of that crisis will be, it is as yet too
early to say Much, clearly, depends on whether the capitalist
system has latent powers of recovery more profound than
have yet been made apparent, much, also, upon whether the
experiment of Soviet Russia is able, within a measurable
period, to develop for its citizens a standard of life which
compares favourably with that of capitalism Certain it is,
also, that the capitalist system, in its imperialist phase, must
avoid the danger of war if it is to preserve any vestige of liberal
ideas For war means an organisation of social life so rigorous
that the conception of individual rights cannot hope to survive
its onset. Were it to come, the private ownership of the means
of production could be maintained only by a Fascist dictator¬
ship so stark as to resemble m its intensity the worst forms of
Oriental despotism Even then, it may be argued, it is
doubtful enough if such a dictatorship could, over any con¬
siderable period, attain stability For its relations of pro¬
duction would continue to exhibit that contradiction with the
forces of production that is the cause of the present crisis
It would be a government of naked coercion, and, thereby,
it would fail to meet that essential test of all governments
which is the transformation, at some stage, of the processes
of coercion into the processes of consent. But, historically,
this transformation is only achieved m those epochs where
the relations of production correspond to the forces of pro¬
duction this correspondence, inherently, a Fascist state is
unable to attain Its emergence, therefore, offers no more
to the owners of economic power than a temporary and
hazardous breathing-space before they encounter a new
challenge For power is always held upon the condition
that its possessors are able to confer increasing material well¬
being upon the masses This no Fascist system is able to do
for the simple reason that it starts from a premiss incompatible
with the achievement of that increase It is, by its nature,,
an attempt only to arrest in the interest of privilege the decay \
of that capitalist enterprise which has now passed into its
phase of final contraction


XX vi A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

This position need cause us no surprise. All the character¬
istics of our age have always marked the last phases of an
economic system in decay. ^Scepticism of accepted values,
lack of self-confidence in the ruling class, increasing hostility
to traditional authority, the making of new social principles
to fit new needs, the attack, m a word, upon the foundations
of the old order, these were symptomatic of the Reformation
and the French Revolution as they are symptomatic of our
own time. Then, as now, the traditional social discipline —
which is another phrase for the system of class relations—
inhibited the full exploitation of scientific discovery. Then,
as now, this incompatibility produced profound social
antagonisms which issued m widespread conflict Then, as
now, a rising social class assumed the offensive by denying
the right of those who lived by the traditional ways to the
privileges inherent in their position. Then, as now, also,
those whose right was denied were so convinced of the
legitimacy of their claim that they preferred, as they have
always preferred, rather to fight than to give way hi essence,
the histone movement from the Reformation to the French
Revolution is the history of the advance of the middle class to
full political status. As it advanced, it transformed political
and legal philosophy to satisfy the claims it had formulated.
Once it had captured the state, it sought, as all classes seek,
to make rigid and unassailable the boundaries of its empire
For something like sixty years it was successful in that effort
because it was able to confer increasing material benefit upon
the workers, hence, in that period, its feelings of security and
self-confidence. __ But, for something like the last generation,
and, with immense rapidity since the war, its ability at once
to satisfy its own claims and those of the workers has declined
With real decline has come doubt, increasing in volume, of the
system by which it lived An alternative social hypothesis
has come into the field which, as in Soviet Russia, has assumed
the significant panoply of an armed state. Russia represents
a new way of life, built upon foundations which threaten the
supremacy of the traditional order. Its challenge awakens
in that order the sense of insecurity and danger which has
always made a privileged class arm itself for defence. The
crisis^ in the theory of jthe state is no more than the ideo-


CRISIS IN THE THEORY OF THE STATE xxvii


logical expression of this conflict between traditio n and ex¬
periment.

iTsfiows itself as a crisis in the theory of the state simply
because when a new class is advancing to power, it is bound to
capture the state for the achievement of its ends. Thereby it
becomes possessed of the ultimate authority in society; thereby,
that is, it can give orders to all, and receive orders from none.
To capture the state-power is to have authority to re-define,
for new purposes, the legal postulates of society. These, at
bottom, are always no more than principles which determine
in what way the social product shall be distributed. They
attach to the claims men make the sanctions supreme coercive
power in society is able to enforce Our age is watching
a debate m legal philosophy, the intensity of which measures
with some precision the degree to which the traditional con¬
ception of the state-power is in jeopardy. As always in the
past, a challenge to legal ideas is the harbinger of a revolution¬
ary time The supreme problem for the jurists of this epoch
is the need to awaken to the responsibilities of the issue they
confront. For only a realistic awareness of what that issue
fully implies can save us from the grim rigours of a new dark
age.

HAROLD J. LASKI.

London School or Economics

.AND PolITKAI SCIENCE.


PART ONE


CHAPTER ONE

THE PURPOSE OF SOCIAL ORGANISATION


I

A n ew p olitical philosophy is necessary to a new world. The
perspective of social thought has shifted in a direction different
from the horizon set for it by Bentham and Hegel in the last
century. If the large aims we have in view are not dissimilar
to theirs, the materials at our command and the scale upon
which we live are both, for good or ill, vaster than at any
previous time. We have, above all, lost confidence in the
simplicity of the earlier thinkers. We are even coining to
recognise that any theory of society which avoids complexity
will be untrue to the facts it seeks to summarise. Bentham
was a philosopher living in retirement from the world; it was
easy for him to lay down a universal code of conduct so long
as he drew his assumptions from observation of the handful
of eager rationalists who regarded him as their master. It
was easy, even, for Hegel to universalise the Prussian monarchy
into the ultimate expression of the time-spirit when we
remember how relatively small was the number of wills
regarded in his age as significant. So, too, with Rou ssea u
and Karl Marx. The one had grasped the im^rtaaSSffijMhi
making the State find place for the personalities of primary 1,
men; but when he was confronted with the problems of an
institutional expression for that insight, his soJ^tioO was, in
fact, an evasion of it. Marx in his turn showed Wth indomit¬
able energy the weakness of “a Stajte hujlf upon the sandy
foundation of a division into rich ^pbojr, ■- But the recon¬
struction he suggested was largely’a prophecy of inevitable
conflict, and the prospect he envisaged was less a remedy than
an unexplored formula.

Our task is at once more various and less straightforward.
W<LjJeal with a world in which many of fhe’’iSSampttons


16 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

which the nineteenth century fought for seem so obvious that
men can scarcely realise either the novelty they represent
or the anger to which they gave rise. For Western Europe,
at least, democratic government has become a commonplace
beyond discussion Political power is, as a matter of theory,
built, not upon birth or property, but upon the personality
of men. That does not mean that birth has ceased to count
or that property is not still certain of a predominant influence
m the State It means only that we have no longer to battle
for the assumption that the ordinary man is instinct with
civic quality. That is, doubtless, gain of an unquestionable
kind. No statesman of our own day would dare, whatever
his thought, to speak of the “ swinish multitude ’’ In the
theory of politics the " swinish multitude ’’ is enthroned in
the seat of power. But the problem still remains of making
the possession of power a fruitful thing by determining the
ends to w"hich it should be devoted; and the question of ends
is simple compared to the further problem of the methods by
which those ends may be attained.

Clearly, we must abandon the optimism with which the
Benthamites approached the issue They did not doubt"that
the possession of the franchise would, in combination with
the natural reason of mankind, build a State in which effort
would secure the reward of liberty and equality We have
no such assurance now We have been taught by long
experience that the part played by reason in politics is smaller
than we have been content to suppose Nor is the facile
equation by Hegel between social status and governmental
capacity likely to carry conviction even to his avowed disciples;
the political art is unrelated to the social structure of the
time. Our task, assuredly, is to give to reason the largest
possible place in the conduct of affairs, either we must plan
our civilisation or we must perish. But the result of reflection,
even on the largest scale, is not to bring within the ambit
of political activity the fnass of men and women who, at the
electoral period, give the ultimate direction to the event.
They are scarcely articulate about their wants; and even
when they are articulate, they are not trained to judge whether
the solutions suggested are in fact an adequate response to
their desires.


THE PURPOSE OF SOCIAL ORGANISATION 17

Democratic government is doubtless a final form of political
organisation in' the sense that men who have once tasted power
will not, without conflict, surrender it. But not the less
certainly democratic government is less a matter for eulogy
than for exploration. We still need to know what working
hypothesis it involves and what institutions can effectively
embody their purpose. We need to know these things in the
perspective of a realisation that the administration of the
modem State is a technical matter, and that those who can
penetrate its secrets are relatively few in number. The
problem of democratic government is not less a problem of
finding men apt to the use of its machinery than the problem
of a monarchy is to find a race of kings fitted by their
endowments to benefit the State, v-Any system of government,
upon the modem scale, involves a body of experts working
to satisfy vast populations who judge by the result and are
careless of, even uninterested in, the processes by which those
results are attained. If, therefore, we want a plan of political
organisation to meet the basic condition that ultimate power
must be confided to those who have neither time nor desire to
grasp the details of its working, it is clear that we are driven
back to the foundations of the State '

II

Man finds himself, in the modem world, living under the
authority of governments ; and the obligation to obey then-
orders arises from the facts of his nature. For he is a com¬
munity-building animal, driven by inherited instinct to live
with his fellows. Crusoe on his desert island, or St. Simon
Stylites upon his pillar, may defy the normal impulses which
make them men ; but, for the vast majority, to live with others
is the condition of a rational existence.

Therein, at the outset, is implied the necessity of govern¬
ment. If the habits of peaceful fellowship are to be main¬
tained, there are certain uniformities of conduct which must
be observed. The activities of a civilised community are too
complex and too manifold to be left to the blind regulation
of impulse ; and even if each man could be relied upon to
act consistently in terms of intelligence there would be need

2


18 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

for a customary standard by which the society in its organised
form agreed to differentiate right from wrong. Jha* theory
of philosophic anarchy is impossible, in fact, so long as men
move differently to the attainment of opposed desires. The
effort involved m the peaceful maintenance of a common life
does not permit the making of pnvate decisions upon what
the society deems essential to its existence. At some point,
that is, spontaneity ceases to be practical, and the enforced
acceptance of a common way of action becomes the necessary
condition of a corporate civilisation.

Nor is the absence of such spontaneity a limitation upon
freedom ; it is rather its prima ry saf eguard. For once it is
admitted that no man is sufficient unto himself, there must
be rules to govern the habits of his intercourse His freedom
is largely bom from the maintenance of those rules. They
define the conditions of his personal security They maintain
his health and the standards, spiritual, not less than material,
of his life. Without them he is the prey of uncertainties far
more terrible than the uniformities by which the sea oi his
experience is charted No society is known in which the
individual can, in any final way, mould the tradition to his
desires. Everywhere the historic environment shapes its sub¬
stance and limits its possibilities It is only on the moon
that men can cry for the moon.

f Man is not, m fact, bom free, and it is the price he pays
for his past that he should be everywhere in chains The
illusion of an assured release from captivity will deceive few
who have the patience to examine his situation. He comes
into a society the institutions of which are in iarge part beyond
his individual control. He leams that they will inevitably
shape at least the general outlines of what fortune he may
encounter. The organised effort of a determined gToup of
men may, with patience, change the character of those
institutions; but the individual who stands apart from his
fellows is unlikely to be their master. The capacity, indeed,
of most men will be exhausted by the mere effort to live ;
and the search to understand life will lead them into com¬
plexities they have rarely the energy, and seldom the leisure,
^lo penetrate. For it is a grave error to assume that men in
general are, at least actively^ancf^continuously, politica l


THE PURPOSE OF SOCIAL ORGANISATION 19

®«turg. The context of their lives which is, for the majority,
tWSSosTimportant is a private context. They are conscious
of their neighbours; they rarely grasp the essential fact that
their neighbours are, in truth, the whole world. They set
their wills by the wills of institutions they rarely explore.
They do not examine those wills to give their own a rational
relationship to them. They ftlTcy t,fr£ jjrcJers o f governm ent
f rom inertia ; and .eyendjcir resis^ui^ is. jBK^^d
resentment rather than a reasoned desire to sectjjk an alter¬
native No faculty, indeed, is more rare tlhan that sense of
the State which enables a few thinkers—Hobbes, Locke,
Rousseau, Marx—to move their fellows to the measure of their
thought. With most, even the interest to grasp the expression
is uncommon. The characteristic of social life . un¬

thinking obedience of the many to the will of the few! It;
is the sudden invasion of our lives by unwonted experience
that drives most of us to realise the vast discipline in which
we are involved

In a sense, that unawareness will appear human enough
to anyone who recognises the complexity of civilisation. A
civil war in America may cause starvation in the cotton towns
of Lancashire The labours of a physicist who investigates
the nature of the ether may span the distance between London
and New York An injury to the credit structure of Germany
may involve a panic on the Bourse of Pans. Not less sig¬
nificant is the pace at winch change proceeds. Feudal Japan
may become, as it were overnight, the modern State. Men
are still living to whom the railway was an incredible inno¬
vation , nor are they yet dead to whom compulsory education
seems a grave attack upon personal responsibility.

Science, in bnef, has changed the whole scale upon which
we live. In less than a century we have entered upon a world
different m final texture from that upon which our ancestors
gazed after Waterloo We no longer live in those placid
villages where the visitor from London seemed a stranger
from another planet Where prayer and incantation were the
weapons of the last age against disease, we may, if we are
i wise, use the microscope and the sanitary engineer. Nor can
we depend any longer for the necessaries of life upon our own
productive system. The inhabitant of the great society is


20 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

accustomed to have at his ea>i commodities fashioned by every
nation of the earth. He thinks less of a voyage from London
to Peru than, a century ago, his ancestor thought of a visit
to Paris or Rome. The,.y.hple world bA5 been reduced at
least to the unity of interdependence; and the politicians
of ToEo make social decisions not less momentous for New
York than those of Chicago or Washington. And tfejjbysical
mutuality is supported by an economic system the mere
description of which is sp intricate that specialists hardly agree
either ugoiTifs character or the results of its working.

It is a big world, about which, at our peril, we have to
find our way. For the theory upon which the government
to which we give our obedience acts is that its will somehow
embodies the wills of us all. It professes, if not in detail,
then at least in large outline, to embody within its general
purpose the individual purpose we believe ourselves to embody
at moments of clearest consciousness. The faith of civilisation
is built upon the assumption that by reason of its mechanisms
an increasing number of human beings realise at their best
their highest faculties. To the extent that those mechanisms
fail, so do our faculties, at their best, remain unrealised. In
such a background, it is clear that the prospects of civilisation
depend, in large degree, upon our ability to work its institutions.
Our awareness of their nature will be, also, the degree in which
we perceive their fragility. For we can have none of the
comfortable assurance of a century ago that, whatever our
errors, we may rest confident in the knowledge of progress.
Our civilisation is held together by fear rather than by good
will. The rivalry of States, the war of classes, the clash of
colour—these haunt its margins as prospects instinct with
disaster. It is not uncommon for men to sacrifice the welfare
of their fellows to a private end. It is not infrequently that
from the analysis of their relationships, honourable and selfless
men have judged that modern civilisation is vicious at its
foundations. Science may have given us the weapons of a
creative life; but those weapons are, as we have become
aware, the instruments of destruction. It does not seem
likely that society will, in any coherent form, survive their
devotion to ends of conflict.

In such an analysis, the study of modem politics can


THE PURPOSE OF SOCIAL ORGANISATION 21

hardly avoid becoming an inquiry into the dynamics of peace.
We seek to know what will bind men's allegiance, not inertly,
but with passion, to its preservation and enlargement. We
seek to find the ways in which their impulses as men may be
satisfied at a level which secures the enrichment of the common
life. We begin with the State because the context of men's
lives is set most firmly in the background of its institutions.
For there is no area of activity that is not, at least in theory,
within the ambit of its control. The modem State is a terri J
t mial societ y divided into, government and subjects cterojpg.
ty ithin its allotted physical area, a supremacy over all other
nstitufforis. Tf Is, in fart, the final legal depository of the
jodaT will. It sets the perspective of all other organisations.
It brings within its power all forms of human activity the
control of which it deems desirable. It is, moreover, the
implied logic of this supremacy that whatever remains free
of its control does so by its permission. The State does
not permit that men should many their sisters; it is by its
graciousness that they are allowed to marry their cousins.
The S tate is the keyst one jaL the social arch. It moulds the
form and substanSToffhe myriad human lives with whose
destinies it is charged.

This does not mean that the State is an unchanging
organisation. It has been subject at every point to the laws
of an unceasing evolution. New forms of property, an
alteration in the character of religious belief, physical con¬
ditions at the moment of their coming beyond the control of
men—these and things like these have shaped its substance.
Nor are its forms unmoving. It has been monarchic, aristo¬
cratic, democratic; it has been in the control of the rich and
of the poor. Men have ruled it by reason of their birth or
by their position in a religious fellowship.

What, as a matter of history, can alone be predicted of
the State is that it has always presented the striking pheno¬
menon of a vast multitude owing allegiance to a comparatively
small number of men. Thinkers since the time of Socrates
have sought to explain that curiosity. To some it has seemed
that men obey their masters because, at least ultimately, the
will of the few is sufficiently the will of the many to secure
obedience. Consent, it is said, is the basis of the State. But


82 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

if by consent be meant anything more than an inert acceptance
of orders obeyed without scrutiny, it is clear that there has
not yet been an epoch in the history of the State in which
this is true. Nor can we accept as obvious the view of Hobbes
that men obey the State through fear. Something of this,
indeed, may colour the attitude of men to particular laws. I
may refrain from murder upon a nice balance of consequences.
But I send my children to school from motives far more
complex than that of self-interest built upon fear. It is far
nearer the truth to urge, as Sir Henry Maine would have us
admit, that the St^te is built ugorTRabit; hut this still leaves
unexplored the dispositions which enter into habit, and the
point at which their infraction, as in the France of the
Revolution, becomes possible. And if, as with Rfntham and
''the Utilitarians, we ground the whole upon utility, the difficulty
arises of explaining to whom the particular State is useful,
and why (as in pre-Revolutionary Russia) the character of its
utility should not provoke dissent instead of obedience.

The answer to the problem of obedience is, of course, that
ail theories which strive to explain it in purely rational terms
are beside the mark ; for no man is a purely rational animal.
The State as it was aruLis finds the roots of allegiance in all
t he com pkx facts of human nature , and a theory of obedience
wo uld nave to " weight them differently ToF'eacK”e^>ch in the
State if it were to 'approximate to the truth.
In a social situation which made thought itself a danger, it
was natural for Hobbes to seek in fear the ultimate source
of men s acts ; just as the eighteenth-century moralist tended
to make of benevolence the basic spring of action. In fact,
nothing is gained by the postulation of separate forces of this
kind as socially predominant. Distinct impulses,, pf whatever
* 9 . Is&d. men to. .obey the State are as unreal
3 ?, ex planation of the facts they resume as a fire-principle
ts worthless as an explanation of the character of fire. Wg
ma11 as a bundle of impulses which-act .together as a
personality. He will want to live with his fellows. He
wll build churches that he may worship with them, and clubs
that he may enjoy the peace of silence. He will fall in love
and marry and have children; and he will fiercely protect
what he deems their interests against the demands the world


THE PURPOSE OF SOCIAL ORGANISATION tt

will make upon them. He will be carious in the face of nature,
and that cariosity will lead in most to a constructiveness
which, as William James said, is " a genuine and irresistible
instinct in man, as in the bee and the beaver." He will seek
to acquire things, and that collector's rest will, for the majority,
translate itself into whatever forms the society holds of greatest
worth. A hatrwi of insecurity, a desire to build a home, a
yearning to move into unknown regions from the place where
he was bom, a hunter's impulse which may take him to the
African desert, or, less romantically, satisfy him by saturation
in detective stories—all these are yearnings written into the
fabric of our institutions. Man is a pugnacious animal; and
the task of finding an outlet for that fruitful source of
destruction is omnipresent. He desires to master his envi¬
ronment, to be the leader in his platoon; yet, under fitting
conditions, he finds pleasure also in submission which, as in
military organisation, can be turned to effective ends. He
is a vain creature, seeking, as Veblen has shown, to waste
his substance conspicuously, anxious, often enough, to be
judged by the transient display rather than the solid achieve¬
ment ; so the workman will buy the piano he cannot play as
an index to respectability, and the society leader will offer
to the Moloch of fashion the income which might educate her
children to social usefulness.

Hunger, drink, sex, and the need of shelter and clothing
seem the irreducible mini mum of human wants. All else is
capable of transmutation into forms as various as the history
of society. All that we know with certainty is that the wants
are there. Some, as hunger, we cannot deny in general
measure if the society is to live ; others we can meet with
response so complex as almost to conceal the true desire
beneath. But what, abo ve all, is urgent is that we should
realise that our institutions are the response to the tot alit y
of thesrttmmlses“ Theii arelnMplicable sav<T!n terms of their
form idable complex ity.

It is, ofcourse, vital to the structure of political philosophy
that man should be not merely a creature of impulse, but
also the possessor of reason . He can reflect upon his conduct.
He can observe disharmonies, correlate means and ends. He
can, that is to say, so observe the results of his activity as


24 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

to rectify the ills from which he suffers by directing into there
a principle of conduct that increases his chance of self-ful¬
filment. Where the tiger and the cuckoo hit upon that
principle by accident, men can achieve its discovery by
deliberate thought. It is here that there enters ..the concept
of a social good. For good, it must be emphasised, is either
social, or it is not good at all. I f man ia laiixeinxQroinunitv
withThis feHows it is a necessary condition of his life thaijrftat
hV attains should, at least in the long- run. involve benefit
Slsb"to others. Social good, therefore, seems to consist in the
unity our nature attains when the working of our impulses
results in a satisfied activity.' It is a full response to the
forces of human nature as these work in the lives of the myriad
men about us. I The substance of that good may vary; a
changing tradition implies a difference from age to age. As
the body of our knowledge grows we become, at least as a
matter of doctrine, the better able intelligently to organise
the method and degree of response. The unification that is
achieved demands, of course, close scrutiny lest falsehood be
mistaken for truth. In the long run, for example, the desire
to acquire property is hardly satisfied by the consistent
flotation of fraudulent companies. What is rather wanted is
a certain balance of forces within our nature that, when
achieved, relieves the pressure of gnawing want and, more
positively, makes possible the continuous satisfaction of
initiative. It is not a question of attaining a static environ¬
ment in which immobile habits may be satisfied. All situations
that we confront are ultimately unique ; and experiment is
the condition of survival. Since the same good never occurs
twice, immobility uj .ft. changing world must spell disaster;
and the unification we must seek is one that intelligently
anticipates the future as it reasonably interprets the past.

All this, it may be noted, is a special adaptation of the
Benthamite theory to the special needs of our time. It follows
Bentham m its insistence that social good is the product pf
RBijrikjWtesl jqtelligence; that, though the difficulties be
admittedly great, we must plan our way to the end in view.
It follows Bentham, also, though from a different basis, in
urging that soci al goo d means the avoidance o f mis ery and
attainment .pTfappmess. It applies reaionTThat is, to


THE PURPOSE OF SOCIAL ORGANISATION *5

***• discovering ways in which wants can be satisfied;

and it evaluates the quality of wants according to the degree
in which, when satisfied, they minister to the permanent
happiness of the whole community. Where it differs from the
Utilitarian outlook is in its rejection of the egoistic nature of
impulse and the elaborate calculus of pains and pleasures
which, though couched in the terminology of the Industrial
Revolution, was in fact derived from evangelistic assumptions.
QSLXWK is rather, first! that individual good cannot, over a
long period, be usefully abstracted from the good of other
men and, second, that the value of reason is to be found in
the degree to which it makes possible the future not less
than the inuftediate, harmony of impulses. For, otherwise,
these war within us to~lrustrate the realisation of what is
best both for ourselves and others. Social good is thus such
an ordering of our personality that we are driven to search
for things it is worth while to obtain that, thereby, we may
ennch the great fellowship we serve.

Ill

From such an outlook we may derive a sense of the
purpose embodied} in the State. In this aspect it becomes
for enabling the mass

good on the largest possible scale. Necessarily, it is clear,
ifs functions are confined to promoting certain uniformities
°l_£flnduct; and the area it seeks to control will shrink or
enlarge as experiment seems to warrant. There are obvious
regions of life into which it has no thought of entry. It will
promote a minimum of courtesy between neighbours as that
minimum is set by the observance of order; but it will not
compel Jones of Belgravia to invite Robinson of Brixton to
dinner, whatever may be the social ambitions of Mrs. Robinson.
It is less and less likely, as time proceeds, to set special store
by the religious opinions of its citizens ; it has discovered by
painful experience that social welfare is unthinkable in terms
of religious intolerance. It seems to be driven more and
more to control, in some shape or form, those obvious com-
j modi ties, water, power, transport, on which the welfare of
its members so intimately depehds; but it is equally driven to


w A GRAMMAR OP POLITICS

Mstune that the manufacture, say, of perfumes and cosmetics
way be left, within certain limits, to the play of private
enterprise. What it is and does will be determined by the
history it encounters.

%S^tAte Jlw therefore,. donnot set out to corals ft* I&ple
SaK-Pli 1 !®" 1 activity. Tham-i* «. <fffffrp»nqB fr—we ea th e
society. The State may set the keynote of the social
or P?r>, but it is not identical with it. And it is fundamental
to the understanding of the State that we should realise the
existence of this distinction. That is apparent from an
analysis of the way in which the State acts; as a source of
reference the will of the State is the will of government. The
teeming millions it seeks to organise cannot be deliberately
articulate about the mass of decisions that are required;
for the most part, they can do no more than indicate in a
vague fashion the general direction in which they wish to see
events move. They desire to see houses built; but the policy
which brings houses into being cannot be formulated by
twenty million people. Granted that, in any ultimate analysis,
the real rulers of a State are undiscoverable. the legal source
of daily power is resident in those who legislate A State
"■°f course ' conceivable in which the whole citizen-body
takes part in the making of decisions, as ancient Athens
gathered the members of the State into the market-place.

ut to the modem State of forty, seventy, or even one
hundred millions, that experience is impossible in any con-
r In Practical life, therefore, the effective source

the Snu11 number of men Hose decisions
are legally binding upon the community. They are at once
the trustees and governors of the whole. It is their business
o glean the needs of the society and to translate those needs
mto terms of effective statutes. The purpose of the State
Hifejts^erspnificatipn ip them. ~ '>

But there is a difference between thepurpose they embody

TbL was a

difference between the philosophic theory which sought to

t£ rLi h V nSt,t ? ti ° nS ° f the Anc,en Ri gmc in France and
So ETZ * ** ^ in the facts. Our^bligaS
tt-flh^the.State is, lasLapgjt, at u a hlig a tinn .depe n de nt . upon
—a££T&-tftjyfeich the State Achieves its purpose. Wft art


THE PURPOSE OF SOCIAL ORGANISATION 87


t he judges a/-hi»vgmgnf What it is, and the difference

therein from what it has the actual power to become, is written
into the innermost fabric of our lives. We must obey the
State, not because its theoretic purpose is a splendid one, but
because of our conviction that it is genuinely seeking to make
that purpose valid in events. Power is thus in rtselinaocally
heutr^l; what gives it colour is the performance. At can
4&nonstrate. Our ultima te allegiance is always to the ideal;
and'To' the legal power that seeks to bind us our loyalty is
conditioned by the purpose and substance we can .discover
in its effort.


TE L perform ance..of the State, moreoyciiJs Sighihcaotiot
ea ch one of us. H seems clear therefore, that unless wp ran
assume an V gnop? knowledge, of th«. .social value of .each
citizen , the state m ustjbe^ democratic. We shall, of course,
differ^is to what is implied in the notion ot democracy. What,
at the moment, is here alone intended is the argument that
every man and woman is entitled to act upon what experience
of the State is theirs. (The final case against the gove rnment
of one or a few is that either will" in the end, identify “theii
private good with the good of the conuriiinify. Ntf diks less
than the adult population is entitled to consider its experience
final The judgment of Poplar is as urgent and imperative
as the judgment of Mayfair. The purpose of the State affects
each alike in its working, and its performance is therefore oi
equal interest to each. This has been the obvious lesson oi
history.^Classes excluded from a share in power have always
been classes excluded from a share in benefits. The limitation
in the number of those upon'whom social good is conferred,
whose personality, that is to say, finds satisfaction in the
working of political institutions, has always meant, in the end,
an assault upon the foundations of the State by those excluded
from its directionA/For . the iden tity, of .men's, natorc wakes
them need a common minimum of sa tisfaction, for their wants.
The impfica6on~or^6iat common minimum is a share in"powei
that tHey'may^rotect the fulfilment of their desires .X//
VAh¥ eo uaTmterest' nTmra" of its Working

Ithus implies a responsible State.^ft does not
without condit ions. It

i to enable men, at least potentially, to realise the best


88 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

that isinthejaaelves. It is judged, npt by what it is in theory,
but by wKat it does in practice.State, accordingly, is
Subject to a moral test o i.Jtdeauacy. There is no a prion
nghtriesi^about its decisions. It issues orders in the back¬
ground of seeking consistently to make possible the expression'
of those impulses by which the common life is ennched. It
is dangerous, of course, to exaggerate its powers in this regard.
No State will directly lead its members to appreciate the best
in life. But it is at least equally dangerous to underestimate
the influence it can contribute. A State which builds, for
example, an educational system which regards its citizens, not
as helots, but as men, in which, as Plato desired, the Minister
of Education is more important than the Minister of War,
can at least mould conclusively an environment in which an
appreciation of the best lies open to its members. orders ,
gierefore. must be scru tinised in terms of its powers. Ife tru e
purpose is that which lies implicit in the achievement it
encompasses by its actions.

To discuss the actions of the State involves, in the first
place, knowing precisely what the State is. And here we must
avoid the elementary confusion of identifying the State with
the whole hierarchy of social institutions. Any true theory
of political action must be a theory which visualises the men
who operate the daily administration of its machinery. _A
theory of State, that is to say, is essentially a theory of the
governmental act. To understand the latter we must doubt¬
less consider all the influences which play upon it. The will
it expresses may be thejaxgeft will, we normally encounter.
But it is nojjthe .will oi JWCiety as a whole. Tne interests,
social, artistic, religious, personal, political, which make up
the substance of civilisation cannot be reduced to a single
category. The will of the State is a particular aspect ,of the
whole. It is an ufgehf "aspect, In the same sense that the
skeleton is a vital aspect of the body. But it is n ot on e with
the will of sodmore than the life of.. the bydy i g in its
s u PJ».rt«ig,sk^ston.

f. N or ^i nJ act, can the_.Stale. claim such universalityas its
identification with society would imply. For churgfap s have,
always asserted their right not merely to transcend national
limits, but to go beyond a given social order to the expression


THE PURPOSE OF SOCIAL ORGANISATION 29


of a world-ideal. An English Roman Catholic does not find
his religious allegiance enfolded within the margins of his
political loyalty. So, too, with organisations like the Labour
internation al. Its members would admit a measure d
allegiance to the State; but they would insist that they owe
allegiance also to the theory of right embodied in an organisa¬
tion which reaches outside the boundaries of the State. They
might agree with the State-will. But the chance of disagree¬
ment does not involve an ultimate^moral right in the State
to exact obedience from them. J?iheir ultimate obedience is
To a conception of ri ght which the State may seek, to attain
bury falcfeJa lsoTit mayfail in serious measure.tp gxjgess.
tie will" of the State, therefore, SfigBSjft mean the. will
__ aent as the orders of that will are accepted by .. the
atizen bodyv/Clesuriy, such a will, however important, has
no special moral claims. It is doubtless a will to which is
attached”force of a peculiarly majestic land. But the exercise
of that force is always a moral issue, and the judgment passed
upon it is a judgment made by each one«tf us. '^ Citizenship
that is to say, means the contribution of our instructed, judg¬
ment fO thfc p ublic goo d.-f It may lead us to support the
State ; but it may lead us also to oppose it. The will of-the
State is only my will in so far as I freely lend my judgment
to its enforcement. I make my own obligations from scrutiny
of its demands, or they are not, in any real sense, obligations
at all. My support must be freely given, for, obviously, if
I am penalised in weighing right and wrong, I become,
sooner or later, a merely vacant recipient of decisions and lose
the qualities which make me distinctively a person. I am a
part of the S tate, but I a m not one with it. An adequa te
t heory of social organisation must always, begin by recognising
that the individual i$ finite. If he is a member of the herd,
he is also outside it and passing judgment upon its actions.


IV

This is, of course, a purely realistic view of the State;
and it is worth while to inquire what is involved in the
o pposite vi ew. Broadly speaking, this view goes back to the
Gree k equation betwe en State and society, and it has been


80


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

redefined in successive generations by ijo ussea u. H^l and
Bosanquet. It seeks in the individual that real ww of which,
^cTSetnow all the facts, he would without doubt be the
expression. For could each of us count the cost of wrong,
and reason out in detail its meaning and consequence, it is
obvious that we should choose the right. We are, it is urged,
most truly ourselves when this real will finds embodiment in
our actions. This will, moreover, is the same in every member
of society; and this identity exists because, at bottom, the
Veal will in each of us is part of a common will which finds
Its highest form in the State. In such an aspect, therefore,
the State is the highest part of ourselves. What it is and
does represents the thing we would strive to be if the tem¬
porary, the immediate, and the irrational were Stripped from
the wills we desire. It is, so to say, the long and permanent
end tEatTTn The long run, we come individually to will after
a private experience of wrong direction and erroneous desire.

From such a standpoint* the p.ro]^ni.Qf .political obligation
can, of course, be easily resolved. We obey the State because
mT OiT'en d it most truly represents ourselves. We discover
the identity of our will and its own the more clearly we
grasp the nature of social relationships. What it does, it is
doing always in the expression of that good which we ourselves
would seek if all the facts were open to us. When we obey
it we are, in truth, obeying ourselves ; or. rather, we are
obeying that best self whic h mak e s ps on e with and of our
fellows. The State is thus the universal in which each of
us, as particulars, finds our meaning. Whefe'our knowledge
and ?Ke wffl'we TiuHd iiponTt are limited in range and purpose,
it is compounded of the myriad intelligences from the inter¬
play of which social organisation derives its ultimate form
Liberty * in such a context* is a, kind -of permanent tutelage
to the r eal self embodied ip the Sjate • and I may, in fact, be
free even when I am suffused with the sense of compulsion.

The argument is an attractive one , and in the form given
to it by Rousseau particularly it has had an immense influence
upon the substance of State-action. But it is important at
the outset to insist that a true theory of politics depends
above all things upon its rejection. For what, at least
ultimately, is involved in its acceptance is essentially the


THE PURPOSE OF SOCIAL ORGANISATION 81

paralysis of will. If the citizen is not to find the source of
his judgments in the contact between the outer world and
himself, in the experience, that is, which is the one unique
thing that separates him from the rest of the herd, h e cea ses
t0 hay^meMiiR£„as_aR mdividnal in. any. creatiYs^eaje. He
is what he is not merely by reason of the contacts with the
world that he shares With others, but, above all, because
those contacts are reached through a channel which he alone
can know. His true self, that is, is the self that is isolated
from his fellows, and contributes the fruit of isolated meditation
to the common good which, collectively, they seek to bring
into being.

Let us take separately each assumption of this theory.
My true self, it is argued, is the self that I would be if I were
consistently so rational in my conduct that means and ends
were always perfectly correlated for good. But, in fact, no
such self exists in me. and, if it did, it is unlikely that I should
recognise it. My true se lf is fh? total impression I produce
upon the leUowsnip^ofwETch I am part. It is a n impr ession
produced by a bewildering variety of acts, gooH and bad and
indifferent. For the memory of some I am grateful"; others
come" from a mood, a sudden fit of anger, perhaps, which is
a permanent source of regret. But they are all of them the
self which relates me to my neighbours; and even those
which seem outside the normal experience of what I am are
so only because an expectation uniform enough to be recog¬
nised has, on some occasion, failed to secure the wonted
realisation.

Nor is it true to say tnat the soli that is willed by this
rg al self is identical .ip. every, member of society. For the
starEEg-point of ev er y p olitical philosophy is the inexpugnable
variety bf h'uIfilfi' wQls There is no continuity between them.
There are common objects of desire. City aldermen may will
with equal intensity a low municipal rate. Chancellors of the
Exchequer may will the boon of an unexpected surplus. But
each alderman and each Chancellor is distinct from every
other. The objects they encounter may affect them similarly.
The wills those objects may arouse may be kindred in each.
Rut kindred sensation and kindred will do not unite to produce
a single will in any sense that is not purely metaphorical.


S3 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


The wil ls converge . Ao-a., oo wunon.- purpose; but they are
segarate'm everytbingsave the substance of the thing,willed-
j:Pthe’will itself is separate in each member of society,
it is still more clear that it does sot form a single arid common
yST Anyone, indeed, who looks at the character of modem
lute would find its most distinguishing feature in the existence


of a multiplicity of wills which have no common purposes
which drive them to identity. The will of a good Roman
Catholic to whom membership of his Church is the condition
of salvation is for him the most real part of himself; and it


has nothing in common with the will of a member of a secularist
society. The will of the average English banker has no
identifiable relation with the will of a South Wales Communist


engaged in promoting the objects of the Third International.
These wills, doubtless, act upon one another. Their conflict


produces restatement of the substance to be detected in the
purpose of each. But they are not at any point part of a
common general purpose which lies, somehow, at the back
of the myriad purposes to be discovered in the general flow
of action. It is true that, in classifying the wills we encounter
in politics, we describe them in terms of unity. We speak
of the will of the Conservative Party, the will of England,
the will of the Anglican Church. But that predication of
unity is a predication of wills so united as to give a pre¬
dominant appearance, not of some will over and above The


separate wills of which it is compounded. The unity is the
recognition by me of the way in which the wills I shall


encounter are related to each other.

toWS, a unity, not of object, but of subjec t. It is not a unity
in the sense that my personality, or that of Brown or Jones,
is unified, (^jtpo^tepersgaahjy, and the will that it embodies,
is jeal in the sense that it makes those upon whom It acts
different from what they were before. B ut it remains (Effere nt
from the uniqueness which makes me separate from the rest
of the universe. Tlre"un$y of England is in the historic
tradition which orientat<!&„a vast number of wills in a si milar
direction ; it is not in some mystic -super-wilLbuilt-from their
fusion.


The rejection of this notion of a common will has an
important bearing upon the problem of freedom. If my real


THE PURPOSE OF SOCIAL ORGANISATION 88

will is not the will that appears, bat the common will that
is embodied in the State, I may legitimately, as in Rousseau’s
famous phrase, be forced to hie free. For to express what I
{truly desire is to be most truly myself; and to be most truly
myself is of the essence of freedom. Yet if there is one thing
fundamental to the life of the spirit it is the absence of force.
In the view here combated, there is ultimately no real con¬
straint when the prisoner in the dock is sentenced to penal
servitude. He would, in fact, will his own imprisonment were
he in full possession of the facts upon which his will is based.
Yet the tnith surely is that thesis jdi .the difference in the
world between a restraint I put upon myself and a restraint
put upon jne by others. If I voluntarily refrain from the
use of tobacco for twenty-four hours, the force I put upon
myself does not seem to me a violation of my freedom. I
have myself willed a certain harmony of impulses; and if
that harmony does not work, I can alter the substance of my
will, can, in other words, alter the balance of impulses at
which I am seeking to arrive. But that is not the same thing
as to be restrained from the use of tobacco by a will I do not
recognise as my own. Force, that is, means imposition from
without in a sense entirely antithetic to freedom because it
is not welcomed as sel£desired. It is the compulsory, sub-
jection of the individual to an experience he would not
voluntarily, sh^re,,..

That does not mean, of course, that the use of force is
wrong. There are rules, the law of school attendance for
example, which I ought to obey even if I disapprove : for,
obviously, if each man is to follow his every impulse wherever
it leads, an organised s ocial hfe w ould be impossible. It means
that force must be used in those directions only, where the
common sense of society is on the side of the type of conduct
14 s eeks to comp eL But it means also that, m extreme cases,
I may decide that I shall disobey the law and accept whatever
punishment it inflicts. That is the only way, at least ultimately!
in which I can make the unique contribution of my personality
to. the life of the community. Luther is Luther because he
defied the Roman Church at Worms; Nevil Beauchamp was
not less truly a citizen when he fought against his country
because he loved it. M y freedom, in fa ct, consists in emphasising

8


84 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

my differences from the rest of society, and in. noting upon
the basis of those differences. Some of them may be, most
will be, too trivial to be the cause of conflict; but the surrender
of those I deem to be fundamental to a will m which my own
discovers no apparent identity is the frustration of personality
and not its fulfilment.

, Still less than the notion of a common will can we accept
th e doct rine that it finds embodiment within the State. It is
argued, to use a phiase of Dr. Bpsanquet, that ail State-
action is, at bottom, the exercise of the real will of society.
But if this means that social life is ultimately the product
01 a single and rational mind organising its activities in terms
of a logical process, it is contrary to every fact we encounter
in daily experience The th ings about us, customs, institu¬
tions, beliefs, grow up in haphazard, semi-conscious fashion.
Deliberation there often is, but it does not inform the whole.
He would be an optimist indeed who could discover any
system of governing principles applied to civilisation. Xh e
paths we tread are too often the result of accidental experience
for us to dignify them as rational searches for the right
direction.

•''Nor are they based upon the eftort of some unified will.
What, rather, exists is an amazing welter of wills which press
upon each other. What, in fact, we call the Mate is simply
a source of ultimate leference which makes a decision upon
grounds that it deems adequate It is not a will unified in
the sense that mv will is unified when, for example, I send
for a book I have seen m a bookseller's catalogue. There
I have weighed cost of purchase against desirability of
acquisition and counted the balance a= advantage But the
decision of a State to act has no such simple environment
When England declared war in iqiq, a majoi ity of the Cabinet
decided first that they must repei the invasion of France and
Belgium, and second that they could cairy their fellow-citizens
with them in so doing But in fact the decision was not a
unified act, but the coherence in varying degrees of separate,
wills so to act as to achieve a single end. The unity was in
the objective purpose at which they aimed. And, as a rule,
the decision to make war is a simple one because the emotional
penumbra it implies is hostile to difference of outlook. If


THE PURPOSE OF SOCIAL ORGANISATION 85


we take domestic legislation—an Insurance Act, for instance
it is clear that there goes to the making of the will it embodies
influences, compromises, amendments, pressure, which clearly
reveal how chaotic and indeterminate are the sources of its
origin. The will of t he State, in short* is. .the will which is
adopted out of the co jnflict of m yriad wills which contend
with each other for the mastery of social fotc.es. It is never
deliberate in the sense that it is always determined by rational
considerations. It is never single, in the sense that it derives
from a unanimous agreement of those to whom it applies.
Often enough, as in the Ancien Rdgtme in France, it is not
even instinct with good will And if this is the case we have
not the right to attach any special moral attribute to the will
of the State until we have estimated the results of that will


at work. It is a good will when it c ombines -good. intention
with Jbeneficegtconsequence. B ut it is to . he judged mot by
the purpose it embodies in theory so much as byjhe effort


that it makes in practice


V

A working theory of the State must, in fact, be conceived
in administrative terms. Its will is the decision arrived at
by a small number of men to whom is confided the legal power
of making decisions. How that power is organised is rather
a matter of form than of substance. It may, of course, be
organised in such a way that it cannot, as in Czanst Russia,
attain the end which theory postulates for it. Power, that
is to say, is always a trust, and it is always held upon con¬
ditions. The will of the State is subject to the scrutiny of
all who come within the ambit of its decisions. Because it
. moulds the substance of their lives, they have the right to
! pass judgment upon the quality of its effort. They have,
> indeed, the duty so to pass judgment ; for it is the plain
lesson of the historic record that the wants of men will only
secure recognition to the point that they are forcibly articulate.
iThe State is not ourselves save where we identify ourselves
j with what it does. It becomes ourselves as it seeks to give
: expression to our wants and desires. It exerts power over us
that it may establish uniformities of behaviour which make


M A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

possible the enrichment of our personality. It is the body
of men whose acts are directed to that end. Broadly, that
is to say, when we know the sources from which governmental
acts derive we know the sources of the State’s will.

But as those sources are not in themselves either good or
bad, so the will of the State is in its nature morally neutral.
It secures recognition from its members from a wide variety
of causes. Some obey from conviction that the particular act
is right. To others, the act arouses so feeble an emotion
that indifference does not create the sense either of support
or opposition Others, as with the Education Act of 1902,
actively oppose because they believe that the given act
represents an abuse of power What we are always given is
a senes of actions about which we have to make up our minds.
Th£ _wil_ls of j,hose persons, w ho f orm a f^up.rnin fntroalPcrA
to make a decision , and that m its turn becomesthe"\ftll of
the State as it is translated into terms of daily' administration.

A view such as this has at least the supreme ment of
It admits that acts emanate from persons, and it
insults that those persons are subject to the scrutiny of their
fellow-citizens It does Jint p ost ul a te ~ »hr-n g h taew -of
acts It does not even postulate that t\ ]r di'»y of ic3""y
andacceptan cejwill J)g_ undertaken . by the mass of men It
argu es only that t he actS-of ^-gnv£nunenl_-ai£-ijuilt_upon
their oE 5 g ati on to labour that the citizens of the State may
have foil op portunity to realise the best mTEem^Yf * That
is w hat gives a moral support to gover nment p olicy But
it is an hypothesis that can be proved true only by histone
experience The^power oj gover nmen t is th e right of govern-
Bl ent m the degree to whlch_.il as exercised for the end

There is a note of interrogation at the end of every
governmental pronouncement It is for the citizen to decide
in what manner the question shall be answered.

Ihc.,great advantage of this attitude UeS m the importance
it attaches to individual personality For since the State
is seeking to realise the fruits ol social experience, it must
c ear y act upon the largest interpretation of experience that
is open to it It can neglect no source that, even potentially
has hints and ideas to contribute XbaUaThe release fm
1 < *« T >ocratic government. Once every adult member of (fie i


THE PURPOSE OF SOCIAL ORGANISATION 87

community finds unbarred the access to self-expression, there
is at least the avenue open to its attainment. That implies
two things. I t iO ft a n s - lhal. the. quality, of _any State will
depend upon the dcgree to which men ransrirmcjy tq give
tfisJjtatejhs, jraport of .the ra&ajun.g,they find in their lives.
It means, secondly , that, the..first, effort of the State must
be to place its members in that situation where the analysis
ol their experience is; creatively possible. Men whose whole
lives, for instance, are passed in the daily struggle for bread
will not, on any large scale, know how to explain why that
bread is for them ground from a bitter com. Eyjyy^State'
hXgs.upon the cha racter of its citizens; a nd it can use thatj
ch aracter only as it is informed bv articulate knowicHFeT
Tjie_ 5 tate is thus a fellowship of men aiming at the enrich-
of the common lite. It is an association like. Others:
churches, Irade unions, and the rest.” It differs from them!
in that membership is compulsory upon all that live within
its territorial ambit, and that it can, in the last resort, enforce
its obligations upon its subjects. But its moral character is
no different from that of any other association. It exacts
loyalty upon the same grim condition that a man exacts
loyalty from his friends. It is judged by what it offers to
its members in terms of the things they deem to be good. Its
roots are laid in their minds and hearts. In the long run,
it will win support, not by the theoretic programme it
announces, but by the perception of ordinary citizens that
allegiance to its will is a necessary condition of their own well¬
being It must offer them assurances that it seeks to protect
that well-being. It has no moral claim upon their loyalty
save in so far as they are offered proof of its realisation.

There is even a sense in which the judgment of State-
effort ought to be more radical in its nature than the judg¬
ment upon other associations. The width of the functions
that it exercises, the extent of the power it brings to their
control, the difference it can make in the happiness of men—all
o these give to its acts a penumbra of significance more vital
than that of any other body. If I do not obey the injunctions
o* the Church, I can always leave it 1 may suffer social
ostracism from those whose friendship I cherish. I may be
threatened with anathemas at which I tremble. But so far,


88


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

at least, as earthly and perceptible consequences are con¬
cerned, I shall be protected in my normal source of conduct
by all the resources of law and order. So, too, with any
other fellowship to which I choose to belong. It cannot
compel me to accept its jurisdiction. I can even, at certain
points, invoke the resources of society against its interference
with my actions. With the Stat^ foe case is different. I
can dissent from its conclusions only at the cost of penalty.
I cannot, in any fundamental way, withdraw from its junsdic-
tipn. I cannot, as the world is now organised, appeal from
the tribunals it has created. It is the ultimate source of
decision within the normal environment about which my
life is Jived". Clearly, that attaches to its will an importance
for me greater than that which belongs elsewhere. It may
choose to tax me out of existence. It may refuse to allow
me to practise my religion It may compel me to sacrifice
my life in a war that I believe to be morally wrong. IXiUay
r efuse me those means of intellectual training without whi ch.
i n the modern wo rld, I can hardly hope to realise myse lf.
In such a background, the price., oi power ought, obviously
Jo be a special vigilance about its exercise.

It is also, surely, obvious that such a vigilance is to-day
worthless unless it is organised If the modern State were
no larger than ancient Athens, the individual citizen might
hope to make his voice penetrate to the seat of power. He
cannot do so with ourselves. He may, in concert with others,
exercise a pressure to which, in the end, adjustment will be
offered. But it is. still more urgent that the forms of the
State assume such a shape that the power of governpigat can,
at every, point, be trade responsible Here the experience of
history must in large part be the guide of our methods.
Certain ways of governmental life are excluded from the area
of acceptance because they have proved incompatible with
responsibility That was the case, for example, with States
in which the franchise was bestowed upon a limited class
alone. It is the nature of men to identify, over a short
period, their private good with the welfare of others. Unless
t heir conception of the comm^n'*'^ 1 -^ subject «»■
c heck, its misuse is probable. Power, in other words, is in
its nature dangerous to those who exert it; and whatever


THE PURPOSE OF SOCIAL ORGANISATION 89

may be the reasons for. its extent, they are reasons also for
the creation of safeguards against its misuse

There is in such a doctrine as this at least a hint of anarchy.
It is, in the first place, an individualistic doctrine It makes
the reasonable satisfaction of my impulses the test of institu¬
tional adequacy. It insists that if the State exists to protect
the interests of other persons, it exists also to protect my
interests ; and if it fails to do so, it assumes on my part a
moral duty to inquire into the giounds of failure Further,
it urges that the results of my inquiry oblige me to take action.
Contingently, that is, analysis of the State may ethically
compel me to seek its ovrrthiow If I hold that its power
is being m fact exercised, not for the ends implied in its nature,
but for the ends incompatible therewith, the ( ivic outcome
of such perception is the duty of resistance. For I am a
member of the State in order that, in common with my
fellows, I may be myself at my best. 1 ought not to resist
if f am convinced that the State is seeking, as best it may,
to play its part; and for most that perception will doubtless
result from what inquiry they undertake. I ought not,
further, to resist unless f have reasonable ground for the
belief that the changes I advocate are likely to result in
the end 1 have in view ; I must, moreover, be certain rhat the
methods I propose to realise my end wrli not, in their realisa¬
tion. change its essential character : men have often enough
sought power for good and ended by exercising it for its own
sake. But my citizenship is, within the ambit of these pre¬
cautions, either a moral adventure or it is nothing. It gives
me my perceptions of right and wrong. I most truly serve
its purpose when I act by the i^oral certainties it conveys.

This view may be stated in another way. I have, as a
citizen, a claim upon society to realise my best self in common
with others That claim involves that I be secured those
things without which I cannot, in Green's phrase, realise
myself as a moral being 1 have, that is, rights which are
inherent in me as a member of society ; and I judge the
State, as the fundamental instrument of society, by the
manner in which it seeks to secure for me the substance of
those rights. They are, of course, counterbalanced by the
duties J owe, in. return. I am given rights that I may enrich


** A GllAMMAR OF POLITICS

the common life. But if those rights fail of realisation, I
am entitled to examine the State upon the hypothesis that
its will is directed to ends other than the common good. I
egard its power as force exercised in order to secure those
hts. Its moral character is known to me bv the riehts


If I see it make possible a full and rich
existence for others, I am justified in seeking to know whether
that rich and full existence is open to myself. I have, in a
word, rights against the State because I am a citizen. I am
entitled at any given moment to the fullest potentialities it
can offer my moral self, the most satisfactory harmony of
impulses I can attain. As I have no meaning, save as a
slave, without those rights, so the State which fails to secure
them for me is devoid of meaning for myself.

.arfc-Uie g roun dwork of the State .
They are the ., qua hty-wfucfi gives.toohe exercise nf , ts pq W e r
WnoiaLchaiacter. And they are natural rights in thesense
that they are essential to the good life. As they remain
unfulfilled, so am I, socially not less than personally, deprived
of the chance to serve the fellowship of men. A State which
neglects them fails to build its foundations in the hearts of
its citizens. It becomes known to them by the rights it
maintains; and, over any long period, it wins their allegiance

by the effort it makes to give those rights increasing substance.

They are objective as well as natural, in the sense that
scientific investigation may be able to demonstrate their
necessity for nght living, and the view that social action may
reasonably seek to secure their attainment.

It follows from the conception here outlined that this
Vlew of J i gi t iiiaJ_unctional 9 ne We do not possess them
asjivenues of personal enjoyment. We do not realise them

E ause we are only and merely ends in and for ourselves.
Possess them because each part of us is suffused with
lal implications. Whatever we do affects the life about
uv Our joys and soitows are in a real sense historic events
which, minute as they may be in the record of the political
fabric, are collectively urgent in the test of its future, By a
jiunctional theory of rights is meant that we are given powers
[ at we may so act as to add to the richness of our social
heritage. We have rights, not that we may receive, but


THE PURPOSE OF' SOCIAL ORGANISATION 41

that we may do. Granted that we shall contribute unequally
to the store of social well-being, it is yet imperative that the
means of contribution shall be there. Some, doubtless, what¬
ever the barriers in their path, will hew their way to achieve¬
ment. Others, whatever the powers that are offered them,
will remain historically unrecognisable from the mass of their
fellow-men. But any society is ultimately tested by the
manner in which it offers avenues of creative service to any
who are willing to utilise them. That, broadly speaking,
was the test which France failed to meet in 1789 and Russia
in 1917. The rights they recognised were unrelated to the
lives of most of their citizens. When the State was challenged,
it could not rely upon them to defend a fabric unconnected
with the organisation of their interests.

This theory of rights sets the perspective of the powers
attributed to the State. It claims to be a sovereign organisa¬
tion ; it has, that is to say, the tight ultimately to demarcate
the boundaries of its action. The test of such a claim i s
ULthe vicw here set, out, -a-■purely j^g mar|p-onc. We hav<
to decide what powers the State should enjoy, and how v
should organise those powers, if it is to serve the end implies
in its philosophy. The test of any social organisation i
not an absolute logic to which is accorded a prion rightness
1 but the experience by its members of the logic it maintains
It will, in that aspect, be important to remember that even
claim has an historic environment which, more than any
other consideration, will explain its substance. It will be
important, also, to remember that if the State is in fact that
small body of men to whom the actual operation of its will
is confided, the analysis of such an ultimate power as
sovereignty implies is a far more serious task than when,
for reasons here rejected, we assume it to be, in some mystic
fashion, the best part of ourselves That organisation of
society is best which is most likely to produce a race of erect-
minded men. There may be involved in such an effort a
single ultimate centre of control. It may be also that the
ethical limitation upon the use of power involves an admin¬
istrative limitation also. That view, certainly, must be
maiitaned by anyone who regards power as in its nature a
trust subject to continuous scrutiny because it is subject to


42 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

continuous abuse. If the State is known by the rights that it
maintains, clearly it needs the power to maintain those rights.
But there is always present the danger that a power which
exists to secure good may, from its very strength, be used
to frustrate it, Certainly the assurance of good intent is no
longer adequate. Those who sit in the seat of government
must be iudged by their elevation of humble and ordinary men.

Ore other remark must be made. A thesis such as this
depends upon too assumption that the average man is, in
fact, a political animal. It involves the argument that he can
be made to show interest in affairs of State and that such
interest may be made to coincide with understanding adequate
to the democratic conduct of affairs It ought, at the outset
of anvpcbtical discussion, to be admitted that these are large
assumptions Any vnv or modem society reveals how large
is the number of men from whom a sense of the State is absent.
They remain obstinately enfolded m a narrow sphere of private
interest. They make no effort not merely to grasp the
general stream of social tendency, bur even the way in which
that stream flows through the particular position they occupy
They view the political conflict as a diama in which they have
no part. They show no inteiest in its actors or its scenes
They ask only that their pnvate atiairs remain unfettered by
public interruption.

Such a situation might mean one of two things. It
might mean that we can discover a body of persons to whom
the guardianship of the State might, as a matter of nature,
be entrusted. Tiie relationship between master ar.d slave,
which Aristotle commended, might, in tfiat view, be the ideal
solution of this difficulty But in fact we (annot discover
natuial ' masters and 1 natural slaves save bv the method
of trial and error , and that involves a democratic system of
government. It is, in the second [dace, clea: that the private
affairs of men have mfait a consistent public connotation, they
can be kept unfettered only by attention to politics and not
by indifference to them. More urgent, perhaps, is the question
of understanding. The complexity of the modern State doesnot
yield its secrets without long study But if we regard citizen¬
ship as a discipline in which men can be trained, at least
its large outlines are intelligible to all who are interested in


THE PURPOSE OF SOCIAL ORGANISATION 43

life itself Our error in the past has been to oppose an abstract
man to an abstract community, to the common injury of both.
The truth is that our immersion in political affairs extends,
whether we recognise it or no, to the intimate substance of
our lives The only privacy man can hope to enjoy is that
of judgment ; and even judgment entails consequences of
social import

Men, in fact, are, in their evtiv context, making political
decisions , and the real qm tion for them is simply to what
authority the dectsion i*> rt fi iahl< i he tornpb xitv, doubtless,
means that their judgment ran l c a'Trd for only on the larger
issues; and, very certainly, that those issues, to be decided,
must he consistently rt diced to the simplest terms A
democracy, in other words must, if it is to work, be ar
aristocracy by delegation But the fact of delegation is vital.
Men grow to their fulFstature only in the environment of
responsibility Their character, as Got the said, is formed
upon the billows of the world' ^^T re ale e life, th ey must
control life , to control it. they must make articulate to their
fellow-citizens what intuition they have of the experience
they have emo\ed It is the hugest task before civilisation
to tram men to the coherent statement ol what their experience
imphe


CHAPTER TWO
S O VEREIGNTY


I

The modern State is a. sovereign State. It is. therefore,
independent in the face of other communities. It may infuse
its will towards them with a substance which need not be
affected by the will of any external power. It is, moreover,
internally supreme over the territory that it controls. It
issues orders to all men and all associations within that
area ; it receives orders from none of them. Its will is subject
to no legal limitation of any kind. What it purposes'is right
by the mere announcement of intention.

But such a theory ol sovereignty has at least three aspects
from which it demands a careful scrutiny. It needs, in the
first place, historical analysis. The State as it now is has not
escaped the categories of time. It Has become what it is by
virtue of an historical evolution. That development both
explains the character of its present power and, at the last,
offers hints as to its possible future. It is, secondly, a theory
of law. It makes of right merely the expression of a particular
will, without reference to what that will contains. Such a
definition, as will be seen, has about it an unquestionable
logic ; but the assumptions upon which it is compelled to
build make it valueless for political philosophy.

The modern theory of sovereignty is, thirdly, a theory of
political organisation. It insists that there must be in every
social order some single centre of ultimate reference, some
power that is able to resolve disputes by saying a last word
that will be obeyed. From the political angle, such a view,
as will be argued, is of dubious correctness in fact; and it is
at least probable that it has dangerousjmoral consequences.
It will be here argued that it would be oriasting benefit to


SOVEREIGNTY


43

political science if the whole concept of sovereignty were
surrendered. That, in fact, with which we are dealing is
power; and what is important in the nature of power is
the end it seeks to serve and the way in which it serves that
end. These are both questions of evidence which are related
to, but independent of, the rights that are bom of legal
structure. For there is, historically, no limit to the variety
of ways in which the use of power may be organised. The
sovereign State, historically, is merely one of those ways, an
incident in its evolution the utility of which has now reached its
apogee. The problem before us has become, because of the
unified interests of mankind, that of bending the modern
State to the interests of humanity. The dogmas we use to
that end are relatively of little import, so long as we are
assured that the end is truly served.

The territorial and omnipotent State is the offspring of
the religious struggles of the sixteenth century. Before that
time Western civilisation was regarded as a single Common¬
wealth in which sovereignty, in the modem sense, had no
existence. Ultimate power was, at least in theory, the posses¬
sion of a view of right which found embodiment in Pope and
Emperor. The two powers clashed; and the imminent
victory of Rome was frustrated by a moral degeneration
coincident with the growth of nationality. The appeal
against a Church which remained obstinately deaf to demands
for reform involved the creation of the national State. For
when Luther appealed against the divine Church, he was
driven to assert the divinity of States, that the right of a
secular body to interfere might be made manifest. There
were European princes ready to accept his views; and when
they met the challenge of a reviving Church, insistence upon
their sovereignty and the unified allegiance it implied was
the simplest theoretic justification they could discover. The
State became incarnate in the prince What he willed was ,
right because it was his will. Right ceases to mean, as in
the MiddleTXgesT'a 'particular aspect of universal justice ; it
comes to mean that which emanates from a single centre in
the body p bEtirandhy its predo minating. mtj^y^trgngth
and decisiveness to the striking power of the community.
The Refi'um STBoSm, in which the theory of sovereignty is


46 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

first treated in modem terms, shows dearly the urgency of
this perspective to his generation. For Bodin was making
a plea for peace in an age of war Jus est quod jussum est
is the direct high road to the goal. If men can be persuaded
to accept the will of the sovereign organ as pre-eminent,
opposition is deprived of its main pretensions, and Henry IV,
for example, may restore to France the prosperity religious
conflict has endangered.

The sovereign State thus emerges to vindicate the supre¬
macy of the secular order against religious claims; and it
forces the clerisy into the position of subordinate authority
from which, after the Dark Ages, it had itself so painfully
emerged. It is argued by Bodm, as later by Hobbes in a
period of similar disintegration, that if the State is to live
there must be in even- organised political community some
definite authority not only itself obeyed, but also itself beyond
the reach of authority This was the root of Hobbes’ argu¬
ment. The will of the State must be all cr nothing If it
can be challenged, the prospect of anarchy is obvious. So,
too, in their different ways, with the views of Rousseau and
Chief Justice Marshall A sovereign people, they argued
cannot suffer derogation from the effective power of its
instruments. Its will must be unimpeachable if it is to direct
the destinies with which it is charged We must not forget the
atmosphere, not merely m which the theory of sovereignty was
born, but also in which, at the hands of each of its great
exponents, it has secured new emphasis. That has been
always, from Bodin to Hegel, a period of crisis in which the
State seemed likely to perish unless it could secure the unified
allegiance of its members That allegiance might be secured
if legal superiority were vested in the sovereign organ. So
long as religious intolerance was a European habit, it was
difficult for the suppressed minority to accept the view that
legal superiority implied moral authority. With the coming
of toleration, however, that difficulty was removed. The fact
that religious difference was now permanently recognised
left the State the sole association with an identical claim
upon those who dwelt within its boundaries. It provided a
ground where, as it seemed, all who possessed citizenship
might meet in common. There, at least, there seemed to be


SOVEREIGNTY


47


neither Jew nor Greek, neither bond nor free. The social
bond seemed to find, particularly as the forms of democratic
government made their way, its ultimate expression in a
State which, differently from all other associations, had no
partial character about it. The State embraced all rnen
because it tvas the one compulsory form of association. It
was easy to identify its sovereignty with pre-emmence.

Another cause contributed to this elevation. Driven by
the Reformation from a position of universal competence,
the papacy sought the compensation of an international
position As the French King wa.-> to Frenchmen abroad, so,
the Jesuits argued, was the papal relationship to Roman
Catholics behind that claim, indeed, there lurked certain
shadowy vestiges oF supremacy which disappeared only with*
the regretful mognition of permanence in the secular State
What was important m.-. the notion that rules were necessary,
for the regulation of affairs between the organs of sovereign
powers The hinterland between nations rould, so Grotius
magistrally declared, become the subject of agreements not
less morally binding than the will of Mute* was binding upon
their subjects ft was agreed that the State was, through
its governmental organ the natural unit through which
such agreement might he made When States became, in the
course of the seventeenth century, the natural and ultimate
channels of diplomatic intercourse, the final safeguard of the
rights of their subjects abroad, the last link in the chain of
then predominance was complete. 'Ihenceforth, their will
knew, legally at least, rio external check of any kind. The
sanction of international law was their assent to it . and thei
ini[>1 icafiorT'drUssent was a withdrawal as free as the original;
assent What was called, in brief, the comity of nations 1
did not imply, except as metaphor, the redintegration of the
mediaeval Respubhca Christiana. The acknowledged rights
of humanity became simply those rules which States agreed
to observe, rules which, as in the case of Belgium in 19x4,
States were legally free to break if they so pleased. The
chain was then complete. The individual could then read the
details of his rights and duties in the list of orders and pro¬
hibitions enforced by the government under which he lived.
At home he could have those powers implied in the fabric


48 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

of its statutes. Abroad he could use those privileges its
dexterity bad wrung from the courtesy of other States.

Yet what in all this is most striking to the observer is
the fact that it represents, not an absolute but an historical
logic. Internationally, it is not difficult to conceive the
organisation of an allegiance which reaches beyond the hnuts
of the State. To leave with a handful of men, for instance,
the power to make war may well seem anachronistic to
those who envisage the consequences of war. When State
sovereignty in international affairs was recognised, there
was no authority existent to which that type of control might
be entrusted. It is at least arguable now that an authority
predominant over States may be conceived to which is
entrusted the regulation of those affairs of more than national
interest. That is clear in the case of war. It is, for most,
clear also in the case, for example, of those native races who
cannot pit their skill in exploitation against the genius of
the modem trader. Vl'herever, in short, the interests of a
unified and interdependent world seem to demand an inter¬
national standard of conduct, the corporate organisation of
that standard, and its corporate application, are at least
conceivable. We shall discuss later what is implied in such
a notion. Here it is sufficient to insist that it involves,
at any rate on the international ride, the abolition of State
sovereignty. It sees the State simply as a unit in a society
of States, the will of which would then be set by a process
in which it would have no final say. It even implies, as the
acceptance of this doctrine grows, a duty on the part of
the individual citizen of a recalcitrant State to look beyond
the emotional penumbra of patriotism to the issue of conflict.
He might then, perhaps, choose to declare that obedience to
the will of the society of States is, in the given instance, the
highest duty that he knows.

The logic of this evolution is not dissimilar on the inter¬
nal ride. Any study of the working of the State will be
compelled largely to concern itself with the history of the
limitations upon the exercise of power. Those who practise
the theoretic substance of sovereignty find themselves sooner
or later deprived of it. For the State must work through
persons. The government which acts as its sovereign organ


SOVEREIGNTY


49


never, as a matter of history, has the prospect of permanence
if it consistently seeks to be absolute Civil war and revolu¬
tion in the England of the seventeenth century, 1789 in
France, 1917 in Russia, are all of them Inotnotes to the problem
of sovereignty. What they seem to mean is the fact that
power has always to be organised for action m accordance
with rules, and that the obedience of the community has
been proffered to the government only when it abides by
those rdtgsi Power, that is to say, when vested in a number
of persons, is not only limited as to method, but also as to
the objects to which it can be directed. Sovereignty, that is
to say, is historically conditioned always* by the environment
it encounters. It is secure only wbfn it is so exercised with
responsibility. But the definition of sovereignty is that it is
unlimited and irresponsffife ; and the logic of its hypothesis
is thus directly antithetic to the expenence it has encountered.

Another point of interest may here be made Those who
have most powerfully shaped the theory of sovereignty—
Bodin. Hobbes, Rousseau, Bentham and Austin—were, with
the exception of Austin, all of them writing before the nature
of a federal State had been at all fully explored Either, like
Bodm, they thought in terms of the unlimited power of the
prince, or. like Bentham, in terms of the unlimited power of
the legislature , and they might, like Rousseau, deny legiti¬
macy to any act which emanated merely from a representative
organ. The difficulty of fitting their assumptions to a State
like the United States is obvious The congress is a limited,
body the powers of which are carefully defined . the separate
States are similarly cabined within the four comers of the
Constitution , and even the amendment of the Constitution
is limited by the exception that no State shall, without its
own consent, be deprived of its equal suffrage in the Senate.
In the theoretic sense, therefore, the United States has no
sovereign organ ; for the Judges of the Supreme Court, being
overridden by Constitutional Amendment, are clearly only a
penultimate court of reference. A peculiar historical experi¬
ence has therefore devised the means of building a State
from whiclbjEeT6hceg|Ion”orsovereignty is absent We may
of course, as certain German theorists have done, prize so
highly the theory of sovereignty as to urge that a society

4


80


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

which does not possess it is not a State at all. But a political
philosophy which rejects the title of the United States to
Statehood is unlikely to apply to a world of realities.

II

The legal aspect of sovereignty is best examined by a
statement of the form given to it by John Austin. In every
legal analysis of the State, he argued, it is first of all necessary
jto discover in the given society that definite superior to which
[habitual obedience is rendered by the mass of men. That
[superior must not itself obey any higher authority. When
iwe discover the authority which gives commands habitually
obeyed, itself not receiving them, we have the sovereign
power in the State. In an independent political community
that sovereign is determinate and absolute. Its will is
illimitable because, if it could be constrained to act, it
would cease to be supreme, since it would then be subject to
the constraining power. Its will is indivisible because, if
power over certain functions or persons is absolutely and
irrevocably entrusted to a given body, the sovereign then
ceases to enjoy universal supremacy and therefore ceases by
definition to be sovereign. Its will is also clearly inalienable
for the obvious reason that if a sovereign authority parts with
its sovereignty it cannot of its own will resume it. Law,
therefore, is simply the will of the sovereign. It is a command
obliging the subject to do, or to refrain from doing, certain
acts, failure to obey being visited by a penalty. The sovereign
itself is unlimited by positive law because it is its creator.
Within the sphere of law, there is therefore, as Hobbes
bluntly said, no such thing as an unjust command. The
sovereign being unlimited, he has the legal right to will what¬
ever he may happen to desire.

It may be useful to emphasise the threefold implication
of this view. The State for Austin is a legal order in which
there is a determinate authority acting as the ultimate
source of power. Its^aj^iioyity, secondly, is unlimited. It
may act unwisely, or dishonestly, or, in an ethical sense,
unjustly. For the purpgse pf.J^gaJ theory. th,e...cbftiacter of
its acUfins.. is.. .unimportant. If they emanate from the


SOVEREIGNTY


51


authority competent to issue the particular command, they
are the law. Command, thirdly, is of the essence of law.
You must do certain things; you must not do other things.
Failure to fulfil in either direction your obligation is punished
by a penalty.

Within the narrow field that it covers, the Austinian
view is a correct analysis of what flows from certain definite
assumptions. If the lawyer regards sovereignty as important
only as a form of command, he is obviously entitled to discuss
it in that aspect. He may, further, assume that the force
which lies at the disposal of the sovereign is unlimited, and
that force need be considered only as it is applied by the
courts of modem and relatively orderly States. But these
assumptions make it worthless as an explanation of the modem
State for political purposes. There it is clear that the
sovereign power is engaged in work which cannot at all
reasonably be reduced to the form of a command. It is
obvious, further, that no organisation disposes in actual fact
of unlimited force ; and we shall fail completely to understand
the character of society, unless we seek to grasp exactly how
the sovereign is compelled to will things desired by bodies in
law inferior to itself.

On the historical side, of course, it was sufficiently shown
by Sir Henry Maine that the Austinian theory is artificial
to the point of absurdity. There is nothing genuinely com¬
parable between the sovereignty of the King in Parliament,
of an Eastern theocracy, and the people of ancient Athens.
Nor, as we saw in the case of America, can a determinate
sovereign body always be found. No sovereign has anywhere
possessed unlimited power ; and the attempt to exert it had,
always resulted in the establishment of safeguards. Even
the Sultan of Turkey in the height of his power was himself
bound down by a code of traditional observance, obedience
to which was practically compulsory upon him. In law there
was no part of the field of social fact he could not alter ; in
practice he survived only by willing not to will those changes
which might have proved him the sovereign of Austinian
jurisprudence.

To think, moreover, of law as simply a command is, even
for t he lluH slT Tb~ stfam ?efiiution to the verge of decency.


52


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

For there is a character of uniformity in law in which the
element of command is, practically speaking, pushed out of
sight. This is true, for instance, of all enabling statutes.
When the Lord Chancellor is directed, if he so decide, to sell
the presentation to benefices of which he has the advowson
according to 26 and 27 Vic. c. 120, the statute is undoubtedly
a law, but the element of command is very indirectly present.
The Lord Chancellor is not directed to do anything; unless
he takes certain action, there is no obligation of any kind ;
and if he acted contrary to the terms of the Act, its only
sanction is that the courts would treat his sale of the advowson
as void When a Franchise Act conferred the vote on women,
it is an exceedingly circuitous way of explaining its nature
to resolve it into terms of command. No obligation is
imposed, unless we regard the duty of the registration officer
to accept women as voters as an obligation. No law has
probably aroused so much discussion as the Rule in Shelley’s
case. That rule simply lays it down that when an analogous
case occurs certain words shall be construed in a particular
way. The notion of command is contingent and indirect ;
and the idea of penalty is, again save in the most circuitous
way, notably absent. And it is very difficult to see how the
exercise of delegated authority can be brought within the
ambit of the Austinian definition. A royal warrant regulates
the pensions and pay of the army. It is a command eman¬
ating from a qualified authority; but the Secretary of State
for War cannot be compelled to obey it.

The most perfect example of the Austinian view is, of
course, the position held by the King in Parliament. Any
command which issues therefrom will, as Dicey pointed out
in a classic analysis, be obeyed by enforcement through the
courts. But everyone knows that to regard the King in
Parliament as a sovereign body in the Austinian sense is
absurd. No Parliament would dare to disfranchise the Roman
Catholics or to prohibit the existence of trade unions. If
it made the attempt, it would cease to be a Parliament. That
is to say that in practice legally unlimited power turns out
jto be power exercised under conditions fairly well known to
leach generation. There is probably a larger degree of obedi¬
ence from the sovereign Parliament to its constituents than


SOVEREIGNTY


53


there is the other way round ; a series of by-elections, for
instance, produce with amazing rapidity a change in the will
and temper of the sovereign. Behind, that is, the legally
omnipotent authority it is not very difficult to discern an
electorate to whose opinions and desires increasing deference
must be shown. That notion of an increasing deference is
important. As the community becomes organised into associa^
tions with the end of bringing pressure to bear on government,
the sovereign organ becomes, as a general process, little more
than a machine for registering decisions arrived at elsewhere.
All the forms of an Austinian arrangement are preserved;
but it is upon their saving condition that their substance is
surrendered.

It has been pointed out that the discovery of sovereignty
in a federal State is, practically, an impossible adventure ;
but that difficulty is not confined to federal States. It is
doubtful, for example, whether, in the Austinian sense,
Belgium may be termed a sovereign State at all. The Con¬
stitution guarantees certain rights to every Belgian citizen.
He may exercise his religion as he thinks fit; his property'
may not be taken without due compensation ; he has the
right freely to assemble so long as he does not cany arms and
does not meet in the open air. Now it is quite true that these
and similar rights are all of them alterable by the Belgian
Assembly. But before the Constitution can be altered the
decision of one Assembly must be ratified by a new one
rechosen by the electorate for that purpose. There is no
guarantee not merely that the new Chambers will in a sitting
at which two-thirds of the members are present and two-
thirds of these vote for the change, ratify the constitutional
alteration ; even more, there is no guarantee that the new
Assembly will have the same complexion as the old, and, it
might, as a matter of theory, prove impossible to alter the
Constitution. In that background either Belgium is not a
sovereign State in its internal affairs (though it is a sovereign
State for the purpose of international law) or its sovereignty
resides in the electorate. But any electorate is an indeter¬
minate body which is legally bound to act through organs and
agents ; and it is, according to Austin, the characteristic of
sovereignty to be determinate and illimitable.


54


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Difficulties such as these Professor Dicey attempted to
meet by dividing the notion of sovereignty into two parts.
The King in Parliament, he suggested, might be regarded as
the legal, the electorate as the political, sovereign. But this
is at once to imply that the notion of sovereignty is divisible, \
which is entirely contradictory of the original definition.
Nor is the case improved by accepting Austin's own suggestion
that the sovereign in England is the electorate which exercises
its powers through representatives. For, in the first place,
the Crown and the House of Lords are not representative
of the Commons in any sense to which precision can be
attached, and when Austin goes on to argue that the sovereign
electorate may delegate its powers either " subject to a trust
or trusts " or “ absolutely and unconditionally,” he fails to
remember the logical meaning of a definition which implies
the impossibility of alienation. If the electorate merely
created a trust, the latter would not be a sovereign body.
If it created a sovereign body, in the sense Austin gave that
term, it would itself cease to be sovereign.

The maze, in fact, to which Austinianism ultimately leads,
implies in the modem State the theory of popular sovereignty.
It is well to urge at the outset that it is impossible to give
precision to this view. The people cannot govern in the
sense of acting continually as a unit; for the business of the
modem State is far too complex to be conducted by perpetual
referenda. If popular sovereignty simply means the para-
mountcy of public opinion, this is an abstraction of the most
vicious kind. For we need to know when public opinion is public
and when it is opinion. The elicitation of a popular will is
always a delicate task to the result of which grave uncertainty
attaches. If we attempt to enshrine it within institutional
forms, as when the American Constitution sought to make
certain notions fundamental, we may end, not by enthroning
public opinion, but what five out of nine judges consider to
be reasonable, which is a very different thing. And if, as
with the French Constitution of 1791, we say that the nation
is the source of all powers which are to be exercised by
the legislative body and the Kin g , we are reducing popular
sovereignty to a metaphor. We should then encounter on
the one hand the argument of Rousseau that to part with


SOVEREIGNTY


paramount power is to betray it, and, on the other, thd
of Burke and Mill that a restricted mandate is fat
the moral character of the representative. All, in fact,
the theory of popular sovereignty seems to mean is that vnei
interests which prevail must be the interests of the mass of*
men rather than of any special portion of the community;
and it is further an implicit insistence that the prevalence of
this general interest is the criterion of political good. But this
is to raise debate, not to settle it ; for the real problem is
not the announcement, but the realisation, of the substance of
this creed.

In the background of difficulties such as these it is
impossible to make the legal theory of sovereignty valid for
political philosophy. We are given the State and, from the
fact of its existence, we can proceed to discuss what are its
organs, and in what fashion they work for the purpose it has
in view. Any attempt, as with Austin, to discover the
sovereign is a difficult, and often an impossible, adventure j
It postulates for the sovereign the possession of qualities
which cannot in fact be exercised. It narrows down the
meaning of vital terms to a content which, if maintained,
would be fatal to the existence of the society. Political
philosophy must, doubtless, consider law as an important
factor in the life of the State. But it must also bear cease¬
lessly in mind that the method of approach to the nature
of law is, for itself, either akin to that suggested by Montes¬
quieu, or else more likely to deceive than to assist. Law, for;
j*he student of politics, is built upon the general social environ¬
ment. It expresses what are held to be the necessary social,
relations of a State at some given period. The organ by;
which it is declared to be law is, for politics, incomparably;
less important than the forces which made that organ act:
in the particular way.


HI

We here verge upon the political nature of sovereignty.
What, fundamentally, is involved is the question of whether
there ought to be, in any State, a power subject to no limits
of any kind. But it is first necessary to remember that


50 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

unlimited power is nowhere existent. Attention has always to
be paid to the thousand varying influences which go to shape
the nature of the sovereign will. Here we are in thejealm
rather of fact than of theory ; and the attempt to trace out
the sources of any single decision would lead most to declare,
as John Chipman Gray insisted, that the real rulers of a society
are undiscoverable. A realistic analysis would probably
content itself with saying that the will of the State is, for
practical purposes, the will which determines the boundaries
within which other wills must live. The will of the State, in
fact, is the will of government as that will is accepted by the
citizens over whom it rules.

Clearly, in such a background, the will of the State cannot
be an irresponsible will. It is no more than the judgment of a
small body of men to whom, in an organised way, have been
entrusted the reins of power. What they conceive to be
right may clash with the community’s notion of right. It
may be built upon assumptions controverted by historic
experience. It may be a deliberate perversion of the end of
the State. That is why it has been the judgment of most
modem communities that the term of power enjoyed by
any government must be subject to periodical renewal. The
community over which they preside must be given the chance to
decide that it prefers a different body of men as governors.
'There is, that is to say, no permanent right to power. Every
/government must submit itself to the judgment of those who
feel the consequences of its acts. The reason for such sub¬
mission is the simple historical fact that unconditional power
has always proved, at least ultimately, disastrous to those
over whom it is exercised.

The notion of such periodical submission implies two
things. It involves, firstly, a measureless importance in the
method of submission. The way in which the popular judg¬
ment is elicited must be such as to secure a valid expression
of public opinion. It involves, in the second place, the
certainty that, in the period of office, a normal government
will seek so to act that it keeps, so far as it can, the balance
of the popular judgment in its favour. But that is in fact
to say that its will is la rgely determined from outside itself.
Government, for example, might in Great Britain confer a


SOVEREIGNTY


57


peerage on every butcher in the community; but it would
not do so, because it would be overwhelmed in the ridicule
certain to be heaped upon it by its opponents. As soon,
therefore, as we know that any government is largely con*
trolled by the need to defer to wills outside itself, we have
to ask two questions. We have to know what wills direct
the will of government in any actual State. We have to know,!
further, what environment is urgent to the will of government
if the end of the State is, in any large degree, to be attained.

It is better to take the second question first. Each
individual, it has here been argued, is entitled to expect from
the performance of the State an environment in which, at
least potentially, he can hope to realise the best of himself.
If power is exercised in any given State so as to differentiate,
for this purpose, between its members, we have a denial of
the condition which legitimises governments. It thus becomes
necessary that the conditions of legitimacy be postulated as
the primary limitation upon governmental power. We
postulate them by translating them into a system of rights r
by which is meant a set of demands which, if unrealised,
prevent the fulfilment of the State-purpose. We shall have,
later, to discuss the substance of those demands. Here, it is
enough, for the moment, to say that every government in its
working must seek to translate them into the daily substance
of men’s lives. Every government is thus built upon a contin-i
gent moral obligation. Its actions are right to the degree tha^
they maintain rights. When it is either indifferent about]
them, or wedded to their limitation, it forfeits its claim tci
the allegiance of its members.

When, of course, we turn from such a conception to the
actual character of States, this notion may seem hardly less
abstract than the legal theory of sovereignty itself. For a
given right may be refused recognition. A government may,
either honestly or dishonestly, doubt its wisdom and refuse to
it statutory form ; and since any normal government is likely
to dispose of the greatest amount of available force, it will
probably be able, except in the event of successful revolution,
to maintain its refusal. That does not give its action validity..
It means only that the preponderating material force of the
community refuses to exercise its proper functions. The


58 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

reasons for that refusal are usually of the most complex
nature ; but, almost always, they are derived from a view of
right which denies to all save a section of the State the
Opportunity of equal participation in its benefits. If the
refusal is persisted in over any length of time, it results in
the organisation of an opposition which may grow until it is
itself powerful enough to become the government. It is the
jhistoric nature of ideal right to gather power unto itself that,
! m the end, it may cease to be merely ideal.

But a right, in the sense defined above, which is seeking
realisation is not the bare and empty thing such a refusal
would seem to imply. Rights admit of organisation in two
ways; and each of them is a limitation upon the acts of the
government. They may in the first place, be written into
the constitution of the State. The sovereign power, that is
to say, may be compelled to act in certain ways. It may, as
in Belgium, be unable to limit religious freedom ; or, as in
England by convention, it may be unable to placr> its officials
in a category different from that occupied by ordinary citizens.
Every government may, in this fashion, be placed under the
rule of laws which it is in actual fact powerless to change.
And the more such laws lie at the root of social cohesion,
the more powerless will be the government to alter them.
"Whether that ought to imply, as in the United States, a
difference legally recognised, between constitutional and
ordinary statutes, the government being hampered in its
ability to alter the former, is a nice point of historical interpre¬
tation. Certainly freedom of speech has been more amply
protected in England, where no such difference obtains, than
in the United States, where it does. What seems to be the
fruit of historical experience is that the more directly a govern¬
ment is related to a public opinion accustomed to self-
expression in political terms the more difficult it will be to
avoid observance of the standard of conduct expected by the
citizen-body. Legally, for example, the King in Parliament
may outrage public opinion ; practically, it can do so only on
the implied condition that it ceases, as a consequence to be
,the King in Parliament. Wherever legislation, therefore, is
; defining the sphere which other wills than that of the govern¬
ment may occupy, it is doing so upon the terms that it wins


SOVEREIGNTY 89

. sufficiently the assent of those wills as not to provoke them
to rebellion.

But, in the second place, to think of the attitude of a
government to rights in terms of their acceptance is to imagine
that it is in fact more free than is, as a rule, the case. Men
are members of the State; but they are members also of
innumerable other associations which not only exercise power
over their adherents, but seek also to influen ce the conduct
of government itself. All voluntary societies are seeking,
to make solutions peculiar to themselves general solutions
accepted by the State. They are minority-wills seeking,
through the channels of legislation, to become the legally
declared will of the majority. Things like the Trades Disputes
Act of 1906 stand out as examples of what they can achieve;
or, in another sphere, the way in which a small body like
the Workers' Educational Association has won from the
State the recognition of its principles, is an extraordinary
example of the power of opinion to organise its way to success.
That is not true of England alone. The National Consumers'
League of America has driven State after State into the
acceptance of the limitation of the hours of labour and the
establishment of a minimum wage for women. These are
instances in which the will of government has been altered by
direct action upon it. But not less important as a limitation
upon its power to determine itself is the control exercised
over their own sphere of activity by different associations.

For it is integral to the proper understanding of any
given society that it should be regarded as essentially federal
in its nature. It has activities of which the nature interests
every weniber of the society; it has activities also that are
primari ly sp ecific in their incidence. General activities of the
first kind belong to the State, though that does not imply an
identical form of organisation. Activities of the second kind
interest the State only in so far as their results bear upon the
rest of the community. No State, in such a background,
has the right to interfere with the dogmas of chinches.
The Roman Catholic Church, for example, may deny that
all outside of its communion are deprived of their title to
external salvation, but unless it acts, as with the Inquisition,
upon the thesis that they are damned also in an earthly


«0 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

existence, that belief is outside the power of the State to alter.
It is, in short, outside the competence of the State to interfere
with any conduct from which general consequences do not
flow. If the Quakers preach the moral wrong of military
service in a society where conscription is the rule, the State
has the right to punish the individual recusant, but it has
not the right to punish the Society of Friends. If foreign
Jews resident in England seek to live by the divorce law
of the Bible, the State has the right to punish individual
nffenders against its marriage laws, but it has not the right
■to punish the Jewish synagogue. Associations of this kind
are as natural to their members as the State itself. What,
of course, they lack, and wherein their difference from the
State consists, is the power to inflict corporal punishment
upon their members. They may assess them for fines ; they
may inflict spiritual penalties; they may expel from the
given society. Herein their power is, and ought to be, as
original and complete as that of the State itself. Interference
with them by the State almost always fails to win either the
right consequences or the consequences that are expected.
For these associations are, in their sphere, not less sovereign
than the State itself, with, of course, the implication that
their sovereignty is similarly limited by the refusal or willing¬
ness of the individual member to accept their decisions.

Nor must we forget that when we speak of “ the will " of
the government we are postulating, especially in a democratic
State, an artificial unity which has qo existence. For no
government attempts to take into the hands of a single group
of men the whole direction of affairs. Centralisation may
vary as with the two extremes of France and America ; but it
is becoming generally recognised that efficient administration
is impossible unless the diffusion of power creates a wide
sense of responsibility. Men who do no more than cany
out the will of others soon cease to be interested in the process
of which they are part. It is only when they can themselves
shape the will that is to be applied that it becomes in any
real measure creative. A local authority that has the power to
make mistakes is more likely to do useful work than a local
authority which merely carries out the will of a central body.
It is necessary, indeed, to pick out the subjects in which


SOVEREIGNTY


61


mistakes can be made. It is, for example, legitimate to allow
a town to decide whether or not it desires municipal electricity ;
it is illegitimate to allow it to decide whether it desires an
educational system. In services, that is to say, of which
the incidence of interest is almost entirely local, the right of
the central government to intervene is the better exercised
the less it exists. What is required is rather advice and
comment and investigation than actual direction. In concrete
terms, the question of whether the tramway service of Man¬
chester is adequate ought never tc engage the attention of
the King in Parliament. The interest of its proper functioning
touches a specific, and not a general, sphere. Practically,
that is to say, we can lay down a system of territorial functions
in which a final devolution of powers by the central govern¬
ment upon the authorities of local areas is the best method
known of securing responsible government.

That is true not merely of territorial areas. It is possible
to entrust to functions of a non-territorial kind the control
of their internal life. That is true in England of such profes¬
sions as the Bar and medicine. They are allowed to regulate
their own qualifications and, thereby, the rule of admission to
the trade. They create their own standards of professional
conduct. They elect, along predetermined lines, those by
whom their rules are to be administered over a given period.
And it is fundamental to this method of organisation that
there should be no way of appeal from decisions at which
they have arrived. If, for instance, a candidate for the Bar
has failed in one of his examinations, the courts of the State
will not lie open to him save for inquiry into some abnormal
circumstance. The area covered by such functional self-
government is constantly increasing. Every trade has come
to have its customs worked out by those engaged therein.
It is even possible to conceive of industries to which would
be confided the power to legislate for themselves over a vast
variety of subjects, the State accepting as final the results of
such legislation. Functional devolution, in fact, has exactly
the same case for itself as territorial decentralisation. It creates
a corporate sense of responsibility. It is a training in self-
government. It confides the administration of powers to those
who will feel most directly the consequences of those powers.


OS A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

It is, of course, both true and important that at the back
of this delegated authority there should be the ultimate
reserve power of the State. But it is not less urgent to realise
the circumstances under which that reserve power is brought
into play. It is not a will exercised against an inferior will,
merely as an exhibition of legal competence. It is a will
exercised because those who urge the need for reform in the
control of some delegated authority have been able to persuade
the government either to undertake inquiry or to attempt
deliberate change. But here, again, the will of government is
very largely a compromise between opposing views ; and that
compromise rarely involves the direct control of the given
function by the government. It rather means that the social
interests of the community are not held by those upon whose
counsel the government relies to be adequately protected
under some existing scheme; and the direction of change
is towards a new experiment in which, as it is thought,
that social interest may be more fully realised.

In such a perspective as this, the theory of sovereignty
in its political aspect begins to assume a very different shape
from what its orthodox claims imply. It becomes clear that
if the State is to be a moral entity, it must be built upon the
organised acquiescence of its members. But this demands
from them the scrutiny of government orders; and that, in its
turn, implies a right to disobedience. Such a right is, of
course, reasonably to be exercised only at the margins of
political conduct No community could hope to fulfil its
purpose if rebellion became a settled habit of the population.
But, at least equally, no community could hope to fulfil its
purpose unless the will of its government were limited in a
variety of ways. It must answer at stated periods to those
from whom it derives its powers. It must be powerless to
touch certain fundamentals (of which freedom of speech is
the supreme example) without which the benefits of social
life will not, as a matter of history, be widely shared among
the mass of men. It must be legally responsible for its mis¬
takes. Its officers, that is to say, must be personally suable in
the courts; and where they have clearly acted as agents the
party whom they have unduly injured ought to be able to
secure compensation from public funds.


SOVEREIGNTY


68


It has been here insisted that no man can be a good citizen
unless he personallyTnferest himself in the affairs of the State.
That conception is important if we are to realise, in any
organised way, the notion of an equal interest in the results
of the political process. While it is too much to say that
minority-action is always selfish action, it is beyond doubt
that unhampered enjoyment of power by a minority will
always result in a selfish use of power. That is why the
conception that authority not merely is, but ought to be,
limited, is fundamental to political philosophy For if we
once admit that a body of men can enjoy unlimited power, we
are, in geographical fact, exalting the local divisions of man¬
kind above all other aspects of the human fellowship. That
is an illegitimate exaltation. Logically, there is no reason to
suppose that any one set of men is likely to be right as
against any other. The real constraining force upon ourselves
is not the legal obligation to obey government, but the
moral obligation to follow what we regard as justice. There
is no a priori conduct implied by such a moral obligation.
All that can be said is that the individual is, ultimately, the
supreme arbiter of his behaviour ; and that he most fully
realises the purpose of the State when he offers to it the
substance, whatever that may be, of his judgment.

This, it may be said, is to push rationality to an impossible
point. No Englishman will ever thmk that France is right
as against England ; and no Frenchman will fail to surrender
his dislike, say, of France's diplomatic policy to her call for
aid in the hour of supreme need. It would, of course, be
folly to deny the emotional penumbra which surrounds
allegiance to the national State. Men will die on the battle¬
field for England to whom the justice or injustice of its cause
is hardly matter even for understanding. We must not evade
the fact of such loyalty. Rather we must seek a method of
organisation which can direct the power of sacrifice to an
ideal into channels of use to society as a whole. For action
built upon uninformed impulse is always, at bottom, anti¬
social action ; and policy which uses uninformed impulse for
its purposes is always hostile to the well-being of society.
That is why those who, for example, obey their government
because it has declared war, cease to be moral beings. The


64 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Germans who marched through Belgium, the Hungarians who
have watched the deliberate butchery of their liberal fellow-
citizens, have betrayed that which makes them men. Nor is
it an answer to say that protest will involve severe penalties.
To perish, as Royer Collard said, is also a solution ; and those
who, especially in a crisis, respond with passion to the
Athanasius-element in their nature are likely to be the truest
servants of civilisation.

Externally, surely, the concept ol an absolute and inde¬
pendent sovereign State which demands an unqualified
allegiance to government from its members, and enforces
that allegiance by the power at its command, is incompatible
with the interests of humanity. If we are to have a morally
adequate theory of political obligation, we must approach the
problem from a different angle. In a creative civilisation
what is important is not the historical accident of separate
States, but the scientific fact of world-interdependence, “ihe
real unit of allegiance is the world. The re:.l obligation of
obedience is to the total interest of our fellow-men. And
granted that the discovery of where that interest lies is
difficult, granted also that it is obscured by complex passions
of every kind, that only makes the obligation more real and
urgent. Our problem is not to reconcile the interest of
humanity with the interest of England ; our problem is so to
act that the policy of England naturally implies the well-being
of humanity. If we are to achieve that end, we must regard
society as a complex of functions none of which is, for its
government, limited by the concept of final allegiance to a
given State. We may, indeed, assume that the larger the
degree of self-government we can confide to a specific area
within some given function, the better it is likely to be adminis¬
tered. But we have to assume also that no function can, in any
final way, be entrusted with ultimate powers. At some point,
co-ordination in the interests of those who live by the results,
as against the interests of those who live by making the
results, of the function is essential. We cannot, to take a
simple instance, leave the government of a Church solely to
its priests, or the government of coal-mines solely to the
miners. Nor can we, in the sphere of international facts,
leave England or France to decide in an absolute fashion upon


SOVEREIGNTY


65


the way in which each should live. There are problems of
which the impact upon humanity is too vital for any State to
be left to determine by itself what solution it will adopt.
The notion of independent sovereignty, for example, leaves
France free to invade Germany when and how she pleases ;
and the only retort that can be made is either a dissent which
does not alter the fact, or a war which destroys civilisation.
Once we realise that the well-being of the world is, in all large
issues, one and indivisible, the co-ordmate determination of
them is the primary condition of social peace

IV

In such an aspect the notion of an independent sovereign
State is, on the international side, fatal to the well-being of
humanity. The way in which a State should live its life in
relation to other State' is clear!) not a matter in which that
State is entitled to be the sole judge. That way lies the long
avenue ot disastrous waifare of which the rape of Belgium
is the supreme moral result in modern times. The common
life of States is a matter foi common agreement between
States. International government is, therefore, axiomatic in
any plan for international well-being But international;
government implies the organised subordination of States to
an authority in which each may have a voice, but in which,(
also, that voice is never the self-determined source of decision.’
How best to translate this conception into institutional terms
is a matter to be discussed later. It is enough, for the
moment, to postulate the disappearance of State-sovereignty
as the conditions without which the life of reason is impossible
to States. England ought not to settle what armaments she
needs, the tariffs she will erect the immigrants she will permit
to enter. These matters affect the common life ot peoples ;
and they imply a unified world organised to administer them.

The argument against such a view as this is ultimately
the argument of despair. It assumes that men will always
love blindly the little platoon into which they are born ; and
it forgets that irrational passion now plays with instruments
too dangerous to be called into use. No one doubts that it
is a difficult task to fit the interests of the world into institu-

5


66 A G RAMMAR OF POLITICS

tions which can express its needs. But no one can read the
history of States which have regarded their private welfare
as the supreme end without the sense that the outlawry of
the power of exclusive decision is the most urgent need before
us. If men are to live in the great society, they must learn
the habits of co-operative intercourse. They must learn to
think of their platoon as a part of the great regiment of man¬
kind. They must grow accustomed to sinking immediate
1 and temporary good for the last mg benefit which comes from
l peace. For, at least over a long period, the victories won in
international intercourse by violence are rarely of permanent
value. Germany did not gain by the annexation of Alsace-
Lorraine in 1871 , Austria did not profit by her sovereignty
over Bosnia and Herzegovina. The traditions established by
conduct of this kind are, ultimately, as materially fatal as
they are morally disastrous. They are built upon the notion
that the State is sovereign as against other States. They
assume, as Hobbes said, that the hinterland between organised
peoples is a bellum omnium contra omnes Inat assumption
is a betrayal of the reason which distinguishes man from his
animal kindred , or, rather, it is to devote that reason to
ends which would destroy the distinction between man and
the brute The fact that in the great society actions ramify
until Tokio and Pans become cities of a single community
implies the organisation of Statehood for that community. In
a world-State, however it be built, and whatever the measure
of decentralisation that obtains, there is no room for separate
sovereignties I hose functions which influence the life of the
great society must be subject to the common and concerted
^decision of men.


V

When we turn from the external to the internal sovereignty
of States, we meet a more complex situation. The problem
.of the power of a State over its own members is, very largely,
a problem of representing wills. If social institutions permit
me so to express myself that my life acquires a satisfactory
balance °f impulses, I am, in a creative senseTTree. "But it is
obvious that, taken merely as an individual, my will is lost


SOVEREIGNTY


67


amid the myriad competing wills which strive with my own
for expression. That is why men build associations that,
from the collective strength of the wills fused there, they
may secure the chance of self-determination. Associations
exist to fulfil purposes which a group of men have in common.
They support and imply functions. Wills, therefore, as they
secure expression in the State, are essentially of two kinds.
There is the will of the individual as himself a final unit, a
universal of which each act and each intention is a particular.
There is the will, also, of the individual as the member of
some special association seeking, through its means, to fulfil
some definite purpose.

Here it is important to realise two things. To exhaust
the associations to which a man belongs is not to exhaust the
man himself. You do not state the total nature of Jones by
saying that he is a Wesleyan barrister who belongs to the
Reform Club and the Ancient Order of Oddfellows. You have
to take account, also, of the Jones who builds from out those
varying aspects of his life a self which effects, or seeks to
effect a harmony between them. The Jones who realises that
some part of himself lives in each of these associations, who
seeks by means of them to shape the lines of his wants and
hopes, is the ultimate Jones who belongs only to himself.
That intimate, unabsorbed personality is the thing he seeks
to satisfy by the system of lelationships into which he enters.
Its will is compounded, doubtless, of the innumerable single
acts he performs. It yet stands over and above them and
judges not merely the acts, but the society they influence, by
the degree to which they produce a satisfied and co-ordinated
life as the result.

Nor, in the second place, can the will of any single associa¬
tion be made a final will. To leave to the Bar, for instance,
the ultimate control of itself is to leave a single aspect of man
the power to mould his total aspect. Man is not merely a
barrister. A given function is always a narrow purpose,
alongside the full end of realisation as a complete human
being. We have, therefore, to find a plane in which the wills
of men are given powers of expression in their aspect of centres
ofuniversil decision as against the particular decisions from
wN^I these centres are compounded.


68


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

So stated, oi course, the issue is unduly simplified. The
Jones who is to will upon a universal plane may, in fact, be
unable to free himself from a sense of overwhelming import
implicit in some special aspect of himself. No ability is so
rare as the power to look into one’s own mind and judge the
totality of one’s effort as an ordered whole in which, as a
matter of social logic, good can only come when the parts are
related to the well-being of one's fellow-men. That ability is
made the rarer by the complexity of motives which reside in
the purpose of any association as it works. Associations
which seem purely acquisitive in nature will often acquire a
view of social welfare which modifies their ministration to
appetite. There is no such thing as a purely political associa¬
tion if by that we mean a body dealing with functions which
arise solely from the personal relationships of men. For
those relationships are affected and coloured at every, stage
by the push of the total order in society Economic and
social facts, intellectual and religious considerations, influence
them, consciously and unconsciously, at every stage. The
universal plane of which we have spoken is, therefore, simply
mythical so far as its existence in a puie form is concerned.
The will which receives expression there cannot, in the nature
of things, be directed solely to the interests over and above
the private decisions from which its motives take their final
shape. A general will, in Rousseau’s sense, is, therefore, an
impossibility.

But because we reject a general will in this ideal form,
we are not driven to rely upon a system of associations as
the method in and through which the end of society can be
best achieved, Each association, we may agree, ought to
have its chance to influence the conduct of the social order.
But where orders are issued which, until their revocation,
determine the character of that social order as a whole, we
have to receive them for scrutiny upon a plane of equality.
Each person, that is to say. must be taken by society as of
equal value with every other person. If the will that effects
the harmony between associations were merely compounded
of them, that equality would be impossible. diamond
cutter cannot, as a diamond cutter, influence society yj t^e
same degree as a miner can influence society as a


SOVEREIGNTY


60


The problem of so weighting associations that each receives
n&Tmerelx im equil, buL^oreV its du^place in "institution
which congeals them into unity is an insoluble one. Nor does
Jones secure the thing at which his will aims by taking frag¬
ments of the will and giving to each a power of influencing
decisions in the sphere to which it belongs. For what is
important for him is the way m which those fragments are
co-ordinated. It is their relationship, not their isolation,
which determines the degree to which his nature is satisfied.

Social organisation, therefore, does not present a single
problem in relation to its government On the one hand, it
is fairly simple to constnici a government for each function m
society in terms of the particular purpose each embodies. But
no man’s activities are confined to a single function. It is
necessary to safeguard his interests as a user of services he
has no part m producing. It is essential, in other words,
to protect bun as a ‘consumer. The co-ordination of functions
is the sphere in which, to that end, the State must operate.
It has so to organise the conditions of their lives that the
individual members of the State are assured of reasonable?
access to those goods without which they cannot fulfil theuj
vocations as men Where their needs are identical as undif-j
ferentiated persons, at least at some minimum level, it isf
essential to have a single centre of control to achieve them}
That does not mean that the State itself will, as the con¬
trolling body, provide directly the response to such needs.
It means only, that it will so direct the functions which
produce the required services as to secure effective conditions
of response

In an aspect of this kind, the State is obviously a public'
service corporation It differs from every other association
in that it is, in the first place, an association m which member¬
ship is compulsory It is, in the second place, essentially
territorial in nature The interests of men as consumers are
largely neighbourhood interests ; they require satisfaction, for
Jjp most part in a given place. And, at a given level, the
interests of its members are identical interests. They all
need food and clothing, education and shelter. The State
is t£|e body which seeks so to organise the interests of con¬
sumers that they obtain the commodities of which they have


TO A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

need. Within the State, they meet as persons. Their claims
are equal claims. They are not barristers or miners, Catholics
or Protestants, employers or workers. They are, as a matter
of social theory, simply persons who need certain services
they cannot themselves produce if they are to realise them¬
eselves. Clearly, a function of this kind, however it is organised,
involves a pre-eminence over other functions. The State
controls the level at which men are to live as men. It is,
in administrative terms, a government whose activities are
tshaped by the common needs of its members. To satisfy
those common needs, it must control other associations to
the degree that secures from them the service such needs
(require. The more closely a given function—education, for
example, or the provision of coal— lies to the heart of the
society, the more closely it will require to be controlled. Each
function, that is to say, must be so organised in the interest
of the consumer that it permits him access to a full civic
life. There is a limit to the number of hours of labour a man
can work and yet remain a human being. There is an income
below which no man can be allowed to fall if he is to maintain
himself as a decent citizen. The State is regulating, directly
and indirectly, to secure common needs at the level which
the society as a whole deems essential to the fulfilment of
its general end.

That is the function of the State in society. It is the
association to protect the interests of men as citizens, not
in the detail of their productive effort, but in the large outline
within which that productive effort is made. But we must
differentiate sharply between State and government. To
define the function of the State is not to define the powers
of government; it is to define only the purpose it is the end
of government to secure. Here we meet the problem of
internal sovereignty in its sharpest form, fit is possible to
argue that because the State implicates, in James’ phrase,
the universal aspect of men, the fiat of its agents is by itself
adequate. It is possible to argue also that since every actios
taken by those agents in the name of the State is ultimately
a question between the State and some given function, the
fiat of those agents is inadequate, since to make it final is
ultimately to make them judges in their own cause. Thisj


SOVEREIGNTY


71


without question, is the central issue in the organisation of
internal power. If, as has been argued here, the nature of
the State makes it akin to other associations, even if different
and greater in the range it covers, to leave to its agenis-th e*
final discretion in what action they may chqpiK 1 * n talf<> i« a<t
i ntpossShl e as to leave to the~legal profession the complete
control over its destinies. For it is to imply that judgments
made by the agents of the State differ from the judgments of
agents of other associations in uniquely regarding the welfare
of the members of the State. It is to suggest that their will I
is, a priori, a general will in a sense that cannot be predicated'
of any other will that we encounter in social life. That is l
not, in fact, the case. The agents of any State are not dif¬
ferent in character from the rest of its members. They
are liable to the same temptations. They are fallible for
the same reasons. Their outlook, like that of any other
person, is limited by the experience they encounter. They
exert power for purposes always limited by a system of
assumptions derived from the environment about them. The
squirearchy in office protects the country gentleman from a
whole-hearted belief that his interest is identical with the
public welfare. John Bright remained unable to the end of
his life to see grounds for the limitation of the hours of labour.
William Windham could not understand that the working-
classes had the right to educational facilities. The danger of
leaving to the State a sovereign position among other associa¬
tions lies in the fact that it must always act through agents
and that those agents are drawn from a body of experience
which is not necessarily coincident with the general interest
of the community. They will even tend, as a rule, to identify
their own experience of good with the common needs of man¬
kind ; for it is, as Rousseau said, the natural tendency of
all governments _to deteriorate. Power has the habit of
corrupting even the noblest of those who exercise it; and it
follows that to leave to the State the final control of all other
wills in the community is, in fact, tolifave to a small number
of men an authority it is difficult not to abuse.

Any State must therefore be, internally, a responsible
State. The problem of making suchresponsibility creative
may be approached uffwcTways." We may seek scffo organise


72 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS|

the various functions other than the State that they may
join with it in a co-ordinate body for the making of final
decisions. This, broadly speaking, is the view that has been
urged by guild, socialist theory. (Its difficulties, however, are
insurmountable. There is, first, the question of whether
functional units can be built up which, proportionately to
other units, will enable an adequate representative body to
be created It is possible to construct a representative body
which will fairly contain the needs of any given class of pro¬
ducers ; but the problem here is the very different one of
weighting functions one against the other in orde’- to secure a
just numerical relationship It seems very doubtful whether
this can be done '' Anyone who has followed, for example, the
difficulties which attended the composition of the German
Economic Council will be driven to the belief that the rough
adjustment reached prevents it from functioning as anything
more than an advisory body. It seems to be useful as a vehicle
of advice upon particular industrial issues , it d^es not possess
moral authority as an organ entitled to speak for the
vocational world as a whole -

The same, it may be pointed out, is true of the Trade
Union world m England No one doubts the authority of the
Miners’ Federation to speak for its members on all issues
which concern coal, but it is legitimate to doubt whether the
resolutions of the Trade Union Congress possess, outside a
narrow industrial area, any binding force over its individual
constituents It is, similarly, difficult to see how exactly a
body in which business men and trade unionists were com¬
bined would usefully construct general industnal legislation ;
especially if, as seems inevitable under a capitalist regime,
they were combined in equal proportions And this, it must
be noted, is to omit the grave problem of finding how to
combine the reality of the industnal unit with the due
emphasis of fairness to the vocations within some given unit
of this kind A medical guild, for example, would undoubtedly
be dominated by generi^practitioners , but they are hardly
entitled to make their voice the final statement of expert
knowledge upon issues which concern as well the interests of
nurses, of dentists, of bonesetters and medical masseuses./

The value, in other words, of vocational organisation lies


SOVEREIGNTY


78


the contribution it can make to the particular problems of
the craft, not in the help it has to offer upon general social
questions. Immediately these are in issue, the members of
some particular vocation either approach them in the spirit
of their craft, in which case no special validity attaches to
their judgment, or they approach them from a larger stand¬
point, in which case they are no longer speaking as members of
their craft. Vocational bodies, therefore, have value for the
resolution of functional problems ; but they are not, by their
very nature, built to deal with the general issues which must
be faced by society as a whole.

The second problem involved m this question is not' less
complex than that of structure Even if we suppose that a
satisfactory functional representation could be secured, the
question remains of developing its relations with the political
State. There is first the question of deciding how the general
boundaries of subject-matter are to be fixed between them.
That is, clearly, a judicial matter which some such body as
the Supreme Court of the United States is best fitted to settle.
In such a background, final decisions belong, not to the com¬
petence of elected assemblies, but to that of an appointed
body which decides whether some given statute is ultra vires
or no. For we know too much of the electoral process to trust
to its hazards the choice of men who are to decide the most
delicate of all social tasks Mr. Cole, indeed, proposes to
surmount this difficulty by leaving the processes of law and
police to the control of a joint body composed of " essential ”
functiosal organisations. That, in fact, only increases the
complexity of the issue. What functional organisations are
“ essential ” ? What are to be the numbers"qf“such a joint
body*?—"Xre they to choose the members of a Supreme Court
by voting 5 Where is the initiative of nomination to be 5
Immediately, it is clear, we seek to make the political State a
body on the same footing as the Miners’ Federation, we destroy
the chance of that direct intelligibility in. social, organisation
which is of decisive importance if it is to remain democratic.
For any governmental system not capable of being grasped by
the ordinary elector is certain sooner or later to be perverted
by those who have the secret of its manipulation.

Any such view as this of the place of functions in social


74


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

organisation must take account of the vital fact of capitalism.
If all industries were socialised, their government would, so far
as structure is concerned, be, at least relatively, a straight¬
forward matter. But in fact we are faced by a division into
employers and employed in almost every industry of
importance; and, short of revolutionary catastrophe, it is
unlikely that the majority will pass from the sphere of private
enterprise in any period it is now necessary to contemplate.
If this be the case, the government of every industry not
publicly administered requires at once the twofold representa¬
tion of employers and employed ; and the complexity of the
functional assembly built from all industries which would
result would probably be fatal to its effective working.

When, in other words, men vote as men, and the postulate
of the franchise is identity of need, a working simplicity results.
As a matter of influence, the great employer is, of course, more
powerful than the individual worker; as a unit of governmental
reference, they meet upon the same plane. But when the
postulate of the franchise is difference, and not identity, the
shades of variation are so manifold that the body which results
is too intricate and too unwieldy to be useful. It falls, like
the Trade Union Congress, into the hands of a small number
of large bodies who dominate its policy, or into those of a group
of men who, like the " bosses ” of an American party, are
skilful at the art of electoral manipulation.

VT

If this argument be valid, we must stek the institutions of
a responsible State in other directions. It is, in the first place,
essential to note that to divide responsibility as a method of
limiting power may result in its total destruction. To divide
it as, for example, it is divided by the separation of powers
in the United States, may be to evade it altogether. In any
.effective administration it is urgent that the orders issued may
'be ultimately traced to a small group of persons. Its responsi¬
bility is secured in three ways. It is made effective, in the
first place, by adequate methods of dismissing it from power.
It is made effective, in the second place, by the sources of
organised consultation with which it is surrounded. It is,


SOVEREIGNTY


75


thirdly, fundamental that those who are to pass ultimate
judgment upon the acts of the State should be in a full position
to make that judgment intelligent and articulate. A State,
that is to say, must be composed of citizens between whom
there are no vast disparities of education and economic power.

The will of the State cannot, in this view, be made legally
co-ordinate with wills that in fact cover a lesser area than
its own. Moral co-ordination may be achieved; legal co¬
ordination is impossible because the State, through its agents,
defines the manner of vocational life. And however much we
may reduce the direct administrative capacity of the political
State, the fact remains that once it is charged with the pro¬
vision of services of which men stand in common need, it has
their interests in trust to a degree with which no other body
can, at least in a temporal sense, compete. Even if we
abstract from the modem State the final control of inter¬
national affairs, the civic area of internal matters that is left
seems, in any casual glance, overwhelming. Education,
public health, housing, the preservation of order, the
regulation of vocations at that point below which their
operation is detrimental to the public interest, merely, it is
obvious, to state these functions in a broad way is to make
the voice of government important in a very special manner.
Practically speaking, what it surveys is the interest of man as
citizen, the point at which he ceases to be a producer of services
that he may live, and seeks from the result of that production
to give meaning to his life.

It is here argued that production and consumption cannot
be placed upon an equal footing so long as the division of
labour makes no man sufficient unto himself. Put in a broad
way, the protection of the interests of the consumer as citizen
are paramount. However far decentralisation may go in
leaving producing functions to govern themselves, at some
point their will becomes subject to the will of those who, in the
leisure-period, are seeking to make of life an art and not the
fulfilment of a special task.

To grasp this point of view, it is most useful to take the
individual citizen and build, so to speak, the community from
his relationships. He lives upon the services of other men.
For him, they exist that his leisure may be rich and fruitful.


76 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Only as they provide in a full degree the commodities of which
he has need can he realise the impulses of his nature. For
him, that is to say, the aspect of consumer is the predominant
aspect. It is what he will enjoy, not what he can produce,
that is important for the fulfilment of himself It is true, and
it must be emphasised, that there are those to whom the
aspect of producer is fundamental The artist, the statesman,
the man bom to write, to administer, to teach, find all of their
best in the daily task from which they denve the means of
life. No theory of social organisation would be complete that
did not endeavour to find ample room for the expression of
that creative faculty.

It is jet only a minority to whom the effort of production
contains the die upon which their personality is imprinted.
In a civilisation which, like our own, is built upon large-scale
production, most are inevitably destined to find their best
selves outside the categones from which they secure their liveli¬
hood The clerk who copies entnes in a ledger, the printer
who sets the type for a journal, the waiter who carries plates
from kitchen to table and table to kitchen, the stoker who
feeds the engines of a great ship—these are most themselves,'
not m the hours of productive toil, but when the day’s work is
done And for them, accordingly the thing that is supremely
important is the opportunity their leisure affords What they
desire is that the productive effort should use as little as may
be of their energy, and that it should result in as much as
possible of the means to use that energy in the fashion that
pleases them best Society, for them, is essentially judged by
what it does towards that end Government becomes the
arbiter between the parties to production, not as an end in
itself, but as a means to the end for which men produce

This does not, of course, imply that men can, or should, in
their daily labour be regarded as the mere tenders of machines.
But it cloi s mean that, if we are to continue our civilisation
upon the present scale, it is important to realise that, whatever
the form of industrial organisation, the number of those who
wall find a creative channel of activity m their daily work is
inevitably small. Even if one grant the satisfaction that
comes to the craftsman m his effort, machine-technology
destroys for most the prospect of any work that is not the


SOVEREIGNTY


77


mere repetition of a routine. There are, of course, those to
whom the conduct of industrial direction is, at one point or
another, confided ; and there will always, doubtless, be the
masterless craftsman who lives by satisfying the personal
taste of a few. Yet when we measure these numbers against
the serried masses of the general population, they remain
pitifully small. They are the source of much discontent ; and
social change is, on the side of productive reorganisation,
mainly an effort to satisfy impulses of leadership for which
there is inadequate room in the present system. For the rest,
the interest lies, not in the process itself, but in the results of
the process. They watch, so to say, not the details of the
strategy, but the fruits of the \ictory. By them, accordingly,
the State is judged as it makes that victory meagre or ample.

The State, then, serves its members by organising the
avenues of consumption cn their behalf. It effects that end
in part by direct expenditure of the proceeds of taxation,
in part by regulating the conditions under which commodities
are produced. It is made responsible to its members in a
variety of ways. Its government is, firstly, subject to dis¬
missal by its constituents. That dismissal may be secured by
different methods. The period of office may be limited ; and
the legislature itself may, through the pressure of public
opinion, compel the resignation of the executive by which it
is itself directed. The limitation of the period of office means
that at a fixed term all who are legally to direct the affairs of
State are subject to the choice of an electorate which has now
come, generally speaking, to include the adult population of
most communities which live under the Egis of modern civil¬
isation ; and in States where orderly government is a general
habit, that test can hardly be evaded save under penalty of
revolution. Governments are therefore driven, within limits
of real importance, to defer to popular desires if they wish to
remain in power.

Deference to popular desire is, of course, a vague term ;
and the degree to which it is effective depends naturally upon
the degree to which public opinion is organised and, through
its organisation, can make its will known. We shall discuss
later the problem of satisfying that opinion in a legislative
assembly; obviously the methods by which it is elected are


78 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

of extreme importance. It Suffices to say here that election
does not mean that I choose Jones to represent me in the sense
of feeling that my will is embodied in his ; it means only that
I believe Jones likely, over a period after which I can judge
his activities, to vote for a policy I can broadly approve.

But, clearly enough, if I am to pass judgment upon him,
I must be so instructed that my judgment may be adequate
and articulate. The education of the citizen, in other words,
is the heart of the modem State. Most of the disgust which
even the adherents of democratic government have felt with
its working is due to the fact that it has never been trained to
the understanding of its functions; most, also, of the diffi¬
culties which social theorists have sought to meet by changes
in the machinery are largely due, less to defects in the
machinery itself, than to the fact that it is seeking to cope
with a population which often passes through life without
even the knowledge of its existence. Children who are herded
into industry at the age of fourteen, when the problem of
knowledge has scarcely begun to exert its fascination, can
hardly be expected, under the conditions of modem industrial
life, to understand, much less to work, the complicated
technique upon which their well-being depends. The defects
of democracy are most largely due to the ignorance of
democracy; and to strike at that ignorance is to attack
the foundation upon which those defects are built. In the
presence of that ignorance, it is inevitable that those who can
afford the luxury of knowledge will alone be likely, or even
able, to make their desires effective. A State which fails to
offer an equal level of educational opportunity to its citizens
is penalising the poor for the benefit of the rich There cannot
be a responsible State until there is an educated electorate.

But even an educated electorate will not secure the essential
conditions of responsibility. The individual in the modem
State is, after all, a voice crying in the wilderness unless he
acts with those whose interests are kindred to his own. The
individual worker, for example, cannot, as a normal rule,
bargain with the individual employer for reasonable terms ;
equality of bargaining power is the necessary prelude to
freedom of contract. And equality of bargaining power can
only be secured by means of association. The individual who


SOVEREIGNTY


79


seeks an economic master and yet strives to stand alone
destroys the standard of satisfaction that his fellows can hope
to secure. He acts as a reservoir from which power may be
drawn to compete against some standard urged as a necessary
minimum ; and that is still more true in a system which, like
that of private enterprise, compels the maintenance of a
reserve of unemployed. The compulsory recognition of
trade unionism is essential if decent working conditions are
to be maintained ; and this, in its turn, means the disappear¬
ance of that unassociated worker who has been supposed, by
an unamiable fiction, free to sell his labour in the dearest
market. The worker who does not stand by his fellows is in
fact destroying their access to proper standards of life.

On the other side, the anarchy of modem trades is fatal to
any attempt properly to cope with their conditions. The
variations in the sanitary quality of factories, of book-keeping,
of estimation of cost, of methods of sale, of research into the
technique of production, of engagement and promotion, of
access by the workers to some share in the direction of the
enterprise, are all of them fatal to the proper conduct of
the industry. We have combinations to diminish the share the
worker may hope to obtain from his part in production. We
have combinations to wring the highest possible price from
the consumer. We have not yet had a combination to build
some given industry into what can be recognised as a public
service. It seems clear that if the relations between the
State and industry are to be upon an equitable footing, each
trade must have its associations for organised and coherent
consultation with the government. Anything less than a body
to which, on either side, each worker and each employer must
belong, leaves the opinion inadequately explored through the
expression of which a government finds its policy. It leaves,
also, influential men with access to the sources of power that
is consistently liable to abuse.

We can imagine such an organisation of industry in modem
society as gives to its working the character and responsibility
of constitutional government. It will have standards,
statutory and traditional, to maintain ; it will have channels
through which those standards may be enforced. It cannot
be too emphatically insisted that the maintenance of those


80


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


standards is, as to their ultimate definition, always a matter
for the State. For whatever may be the vehicles of their
administration, those standards are maintained to protect the
interest of the consumer. They mean, of course, that no man,
to use the current phrase, can be left to conduct his own
business in his own way ; the context of citizenship always
determines the methods by which it is administered. And that
context is defined by the State. The problem, therefore, is to
find channels through which the relationship of the State to
industrial functions may make consistently explicit the civic
interests of men


VII

There are three clear avenues towards that end. The first
great need of the modem State is adequately to organise
institutions of consultation. The weakness of the present
system, and one of the real roots of its irresponsibility, is that
a government is compelled to consult, not an association which
represents the interests affected by some statute, but those
only whose protest against its action it chooses to deem
important. If industry were given such a constitutional form
as that here outlined, it would be possible to compel the prior
consultation of authoritative bodies before any policy was
given statutory 7 form.

The advantages of such a method are obvious. It secures,
in the first place, effective access to the government by the
interests involved. Their wills, that is to say, at the least
receive authoritative exposition. They are placed in a posi¬
tion where they can learn, in detail and in principle, the
purpose a government has in view They are thereby enabled
the more effectively to oppose or support such measures.
They can appeal with the confidence of knowledge to opinion
outside. They can seek from an assured basis to influence
the supporters and opponents of the government in the legis¬
lature. They can supply to the minister information of real
value in the construction of the details of his measure. They
can offer him suggestions as to its probable working. They
form, in brief, a deposit of expertise upon the different aspects
of policy which, effectively used, create an atmosphere of


SOVEREIGNTY


81


responsibility about governmental acts If the minister acts
upon their opinion, he is at least building upon a foundation
of experience , if he rejects them, the creation of an opposition
and, as a consequence, of the discussion that is the life-blood
of democratic governance, is adequately assured

The issue here at stake may perhaps be usefully stated in
another way The responsibility of modem governments is
largely a subjective responsibility The interpretation that
prevails is not controlled m any organised wav b> the interests
it directly affects Such control can only be introduced if
those interests art given immediate institutional access to the
seat of decision A government which must summon advisory
committees, which must place before those committees the
policy it proposes to enforce, which listens to the criticism of
men who are entitled to speak on behalf of organised associa¬
tions, is in a very different position from a government which,
as m the United States, remains in power for a fixed term, or,
as in England, can threaten its supporters into acquiescence
by the fear of a general election It is not necessary to divide
power in order to make it responsible , what is essential is to
make coherent the organs of. reference^ to wliich- that power
must defer

ForTio government can have contact with bodies of men
entitled to speak with authority and remain uninfluenced by
their views No member of a legislative assembly could learn
that a government decision had awakened widespread expert
dissent without feeling that an unconsidered vote was out of
place If informed public opinion is to surround the activities
of the State, that opinion must be given channels through
which it flows to the seat of power A letter to a journal, the
publication of a pamphlet, the holding of a public meeting,
are all, doubtless, useful methods of ventilating some special
view, but they do not directly reach the will of government
They do not necessarily evoke that official duty to respond,
that moral need to explain, which are the root of responsible
action And the atmosphere of such advisory bodies is very
different from that, for example, of a modern cabinet There
the minister must think of issues not necessarily connected
with the public good He must say, for instance, that he
cannot adopt conscription because to do so is political suicide ,

6


» A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

where the inference is not that the advisability of conscription
is the basic issue, but that the life of the government is itself
the highest good. In the cabinet the minister is driven to
think of interests not necessarily coincident with the public
welfare. He must keep in mind the need to preserve party
unity, the knowledge that the resignation of a powerful
colleague must be prevented, the hundred queer shades of
distracting occurrence which develop in personal relations. In
an advisory committee of experts which has the character,
of a permanent institution these disturbing influences are
absent. The discussion is rooted in the principles of its
subject; personal considerations are, a priori, out of place.
The minister is dealing directly with minds and only indirectly
with votes. He is being driven to counter reason with reason.
He is being trained in responsibility to those whose desires
must shape his will.

We shall later analyse the forms that such advisory
institutions might reasonably assume. But it will be useful
here to explain why the notion of leaving the government of
the State to decide, and compelling it only to consult, seems
preferable to the system either, as in guild socialism, of
attaching power to a functional body, or, as in the German
Economic Council, retaining the theory of advice, but building
that theory into a single institution instead, as here urged, of
att a c hin g separate advisory organs to the different units of
the government. The difficulties of the guild theory are
fourfold. There is, in the first place, the fact that while it is
practically possible to discover adequate units of consultation,
it is practically impossible to discover practical units of govern¬
ment. And there is no reason to suppose, secondly, that a
union of all guilds into a single functional body charged with
the ultimate control of production would be superior in
character to, for example, the House of Commons. Guild
officials would tend, just as ministers tend, to become bureau¬
cratic and conservative. They Would lose touch with their
constituents in much the same way as now. There would be
the same risks attaching to majority-rule. Nor, as Mr. Cole
seems to think, would any of this be remedied by the device
of the recall . 1 It is the plain lesson we have of the experience

* Except in the limited eenie suggested below. See Chapter VIII.


SOVEREIGNTY


88


of its working that it decreases the sense of responsibility in
elected persons. It makes them more subordinate to interests
that they believe to be powerful. It sways their decisions
through motives at least as inadequate as those upon which
their present judgment is based. It produces, as in the United
States, a race of men who subordinate care for principle to the
desire for place. Nor, in the third place, is there any way in
which a distinction can be drawn between the area of the
guild congress and the area of the territorial assembly. The
one which taxes persons will, sooner or later, dominate the
other. If the division, fourthly, be made through the channels
of judicial interpretation, on the one hand, the two bodies
are a clumsy source of appointment, and, on the other, the
judges become the ultimate repository of social power. It is
surely the clearest inference from the history of the American
Supreme Court that while judges are invaluable for saying
what statutes mean, they do more harm than good when they
determine whether statutes ought to be made. The latter
office, in fact, is the replacement of the communal will by their
own notions of social justice.

The objections to the German system rest upon considera¬
tions of a different kind. The Economic Council is a purely
consultative body. It is barely three years old. It is yet
already clear that its best work is done not on general, but on
particular subjects, and, further, not in plenary session but in
the intimate discussion of its various committees. Its weak¬
nesses he in a variety of directions. Its initiatory power tends
to lead it to multiply suggestions for legislation without having
the responsibility to carry them into effect. It entails upon
ministers a serious burden of extra labour. The need to
appear and speak before it, the knowledge that its activity is
always encroaching upon the margins of the Reichstag’s
competence, the satisfaction of its immeasurable appetite for
documents and information, are rather a hindrance than a
help to the channels of administration proper. It seems clear
that when a measure is sent to the Economic Council, the
proper committee can help the minister concerned by its
special knowledge. It does no* equally appear that the
Council as a whole performs this function. Its independent
authority makes it appear, both to the ministers and their


84


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

officials, a source of competition rather than an avenue of aid.
It does not, through the absence of parties, secure that con¬
solidated unity of decision which is vital to the success of
representative assemblies. It may be true, as Rathenau
declared, that we need to emancipate ourselves from the
principle of popular choice and move towards the prin¬
ciple of ability. But it is necessary to remember that
in a democracy the ultimate principle is, after all, self-
government ; and that means, in the fast resort, that final
decisions must be made by elected persons. Where ability
is required is in giving advice to the persons elected ; and in
nine cases out of ten that advice needs to be special rather
than general. It needs, that is, to be ability connected with
a sphere of narrow competence ; it does not gain by being
congealed, with other expertise, into a unity that has no
driving power. It is, moreover, notable that the debates in
the plenary Economic Council tend to become eloquent
expositions of class-ideology rather than careful explorations
of the formulae in dispute. Nor should we omit the immense
opportunity such a body opens to the growth of what the
French call paperasserie. If the German Economic Council
continues to increase the subjects of its attention at the present
rate, a period will soon arrive when every department of the
State will be driven to erect a special bureau merely to supply
the information demanded by the different committees. There
is yet a limit to the number of officials any State can hope to
afford; and the area of investigation must surely have as its
reasonable boundary direct contact with a policy related to
the will of government. The present system multiplies
projects most of which, like the bills in an American legis¬
lature, simply exist in a vacuum. What we require to make
government responsibility real is the clarification of projects
that are, or may immediately be, in legislative debate.

•} The territorial assembly built upon universal suffrage
seems, therefore, the best method of making final decisions in
the conflict of wills within the community. That assembly, it
should be noted, could not, at least in theory, act in an
irresponsible fashion. It would, in the first place, be the
creature of electoral will; and the more fully that electorate
was infbTrfred,~the -more fully the legislature would respond to


SOVEREIGNTY


85


its desires. It would, in the second, be subject to the need to
consult the- organised wills of the community, before it.acted
upon them. Its executive would be responsible before the
courts in exactly the same manner as any other citizens. If
there is added to these controls decentralisation both of area
and of function there is secured as much as may legally be
secured, of limitation upon political power.

VIII

Underlying this argument is the assumption that no body
which represents the community as a whole whether, as in
guild socialism, it represents the producers or, as in a terri¬
torial assembly, it seeks to represent the consumers, will ever,
by itself, adequately safeguard the right of the individual to
realise himself. That can only be done by organising those
who seek to secure some special interest into an association
which is prepared, in the last instance, to resist the will of
government. In any State where there is an absence of the
criti cal spiri t in the attitude of the citizens to their rulers, the
preservation of rights is a difficult matter. An attitude of
contingent attack involves, it may be, the possibility of dis¬
order, but it makes government itself vigilant to the opinion
about it; and men who prefer, in the internal life of a State,
the path of perpetual peace to that of organised protest will,
sooner or later, lose the habit of freedom. For, in the endl
governments are made responsible less by the laws they must
obey than by the character they will encounter. A public
opinion that is informed and organised is worth, for this
purpose, all the checks and balances that have ever been
described by political philosophers. For as governments
degenerate unless they are forced to live at a high level, so,
also, they improve where they meet the alert and erect
intelligence of meny

It is integral to this conception of the mechanism of
political responsibility that every State should possess a
vigorous and independent ludiciar v. The government must v
be suable in the courts for tort and breach of contract in the
same fashion as the most humble member of the community.
The judges themselves, if they are appointed by, must also'


66 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

be irremovable by, the executive. Nor can there be any
administrative law which permits the final interpretation of
statutes to be made by government officials. Their powers,
especially in a period which has seen the vast growth of
administrative discretion, must always be powers directly
traceable to statute. They must be so exercised that they
fulfil, in their operation, the obvious canons of reasonableness.
Whether this involves the writing of a Bill of Rights into the
Constitution, those rights being accessible only by special
procedure, is a delicate question. Certainly Bills of Rights
have served this purpose in the United States that they have
reminded men of things for which, because they were precious,
they had to fight and may yet again be driven to do battle for.
They create a tradition of conduct the habits of which are
valuable. Here it is enough to say that the principle that
no man shall be judge in his own cause applies as well to
government as to any other institution in the community.
Only when the judiciary is accorded a special pre-eminence
can it act as the guardian of a freedom which the least measure
of dependence will at once cause to suffer encroachment.

Two other considerations are here of the first importance.
The avenue to responsibility lies along the road of critical
publicity. The freedom of a people depends, to a degree we
axe only beginning to realise, upon the quality of the news
Vith which it is supplied. Its press must be free to attack
authority in whatever manner it thinks fit, to publish what it
please, to defend what programme it desires, the only limita¬
tion being the law of libel. How best to secure the supply of
adequate and truthful news is a question to be discussed later.
But anyone who has watched, for instance, the way in which
newspapers can turn the public mind to the direction their
proprietors desire will realise that an alliance between the
government and the press might be fatal to the very heart of
democratic government.

f The other consideration is equally urgent. We have
justified the concept of a territorial State on the ground that
it provides the most direct method available of organising
that plane of life where the interests of men, as the users of
services, are relatively identical. The territorial State, that is
to argue, can in theory protect the interests of consumers


SOVEREIGNTY


87


better than any other association. But it can only do so on
the essential condition that there is, broadly speaking,
approximate economic equality in the community. For,
ultimately, the possession of wealth means the power to
determine what is produced for consumption ; and if society
is divided, as it is now divided, into a small number of'rich
and a struggling mass who exist upon the very margins of
adequacy, it is obvious that the State, whatever its theoretic
purpose, will always be weighted against the interests of the
poorcrcjtizens. They fail to secure access to all .which makes
life Worth living. Their houses will be mean, their education
of low quality. The conditions of their existence will never,
afford them that resiliency of mind which comes from the
possession of material comfort Any State which hopes for
permanency must at least abrogate the struggle for bread.

This seems to involve either some form of communism or
else such a control of private enterprise as mitigates in every
direction the harsh results of its operation. The experience
of Russia has shown us that the establishment of communism
is not likely to come rapidly ; men will sooner part with their
souls than with their possessions. Social change in the direc¬
tion of equality is more likely to be the result of slow and even
painful experiment. We are not faced by the prospect, at
least over a long period, of the communal ownership of the
means to wealth. But if government is to be morally
legitimate, we are certainly faced by the need so to control
the production and distribution of wealth that the general
interest of the community is not regarded as the happy result
of a mere sum of private interests, but is a recognised minimum
in which each citizen has an equal share.

We shall inquire later into the institutional implications
of this view of equality. What mainly follows from it, so far
as the State is concerned, is the doctrine that all systems of
property are justified only to the degree that they secure, in
their working, the minimum needs of each citizen as a citizen, i
No legal rights, therefore, are ethically valid which do not
arise from a contribution made to that need. I ought to have
what I enjoy on ly as the re sult of the sfiyiresJUpwOTmT" My
property is, from the standpoint of political justice, the
measure of economic worth placed by the State upon my


88 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

personal effort towards the realisation of its end. Obviously,
^therefore, there can be no property-rights without functions.
I ran poftsgss only became^! serve; I cannot, morally, possess
b ecause so meone, else., has, .served. There is no justice in a
State which exacts labour from some of its members as the
price of their life, and allows others to live upon labour in
which they have had no share. Property is therefore never
justified, as Burke believed, in a special representation in the
State. The only representation there entitled to find place is
the representation of persons; and these are entitled, for
common needs, to be considered as of equal worth. This does
not mean that the bricklayer will win the same reward or the
Jsame esteem as the great artist; but it does mean that the
human impulses we can hope to satisfy by social organisation
are of equal importance, whether we meet them in bricklayer
or in artist, the degree of success that any State-can win is
measured by its power to. realise that equality irr-the event.

J One last remark may be made That the Str.te is, in some
form or another, an inevitable organisation will be apparent
to anyone who examines the human nature that we encounter
! in daily life. But to admit that it is inevitable is not to admit
that it is entitled to moral pre-eminence of any kind. For,
after all, the State is not itself an end, but merely the means
to an end, which is realised only in the enrichment of human
lives. Its power and the allegiance it can win depend always
upon what it achieves for that enrichment. We are, that is to
say, subjects of the State, not for its purpose, but for our own.
Realisable good means always some happiness won for the
lives of persons, or it means nothing. Power, therefore, must
seek the widest possible distribution of such happiness. We
are entitled to suspect the State save as we see under its aegis
the unfettered growth of human personality. We are entitled
to condemn it save as its powers are used deliberately to defeat
the forces which stand in the way of that growth. Ultimately,
at least, the minds of men can give service to no end less than
the realisation of what is best in themselves. They can give
allegiance to no lesser ideal. They exercise most truly their
citizenship when they seek with wisdom a release from the
servitude, alike material and spiritual, that is bom of the
perversion of power.


CHAPTER THREE


RIGHTS

I

Every State is known by the rights that it maintains. Our
method of judging its character lies', above all, in the contribu¬
tion that it makes to the substance of man's happiness {[he
'State, therefore, is not, at least for political philosophy, simply
a sovereign organisation with the power to get its will obeyed )
It cannot, save in a narrowly legal sense, demand allegiance
from its subjects save m terms of what that allegiance is to
serve. The citizen, that is to say, just because he is a citizen,
has the duty of s crutinisin g both the motive and the character
of govermnenTaT"acts They are not right merely by reason
orfRe'authority from which they emanate. There is a standard
by which they are to be tried. There is a purpose with which
they must be invested. The State, briefly, does not create - ,
but recognises, rights, and its character will be apparent from
the rights that, at any given period, secure recognition./

The theory of rights is the avenue to a creatne view of
politics, and it is therefore essential to define with some care
the meaning they embody. We do not mean by rights the
grant of some historic conditions possessed m the childhood
of the race, but lost in the process of time. Few theories have
done greater harm to philosophy, or more violence to the facts
they seek to summarise, than the notion that they represent
the recovery 7 of a lost inheritance There is no golden age
to which we may seek to return. The protection afforded to
men by the modern State is, at least in Western civilisation,
at all points more ample and more adequate than it has been
at any previous time.

Nor do we imply by rights the reflection of a natural order
which lies behind the shifting appearance of contemporary


90


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


society. For such an order cannot be permanent in a world
which science changes at a pace so rapid as we have come to
expect. yThe natural order of what was- a swamp *in the
Illinois of the eighteenth century cannot be the natural ordei
of the Chicago of our own day. The idea of a natural order is,
of course, intended to convey some quality of the imperative
tqjights. But these, in fact, must always change with the
facts, of time and place. It is absurd to emphasise their
supposed identity in Anglo-Saxon England and the England
of tiie twentieth century It is not less absurd to suppose that
the natural order of a generation of Englishmen implies the
same rights as that which distinguishes the primitive races of
Melanesia. Our natural order is, at any moment, a problem
for pragmatic analysis. Its only permanence lies in the
certainty that it will change. ;

Nor do we mean by rights the power, as Hobbes urged,
to satisfy desire. For there are desires, as to murder, for
example, which cannot be grounded in rights. All of society
is dependent upon the desires which, as we recognise, have a
claim to satisfaction. They are never equally valid ; and the
effort made by the State for their satisfaction must depend
in large degree upon the results that effort involved. 'For,
obviously, no State would long survive in which the law sought
room to respond to the homicidal impulse of its members.
The first condition of adequate living is security of life; and
the first term, therefore, in a definition of rights is the limitation
of desires.

_It is easy, in such a background, to take the step urged

jupon us by Hobbes and Bentham and to define rights as
idaims recognised by the State. My right is then that claim
which the force of the State will, upon order of its courts, be
used to substantiate.- Here, at the least, is certainty; for
the body of statutes and legal rules will give to the observer a
means of laying down with some precision exactly the rights
each citizen of each State may expect to enjoy. Changes in
the law then produce changes in the substance of rights, and
an annual scrutiny of statutes and decisions gives us the
rule of judgment.

It is an attractive theory; for since the courts enforce the
will of the State is they discover that will, we know what


RIGHTS


91


claims are immediately entitled to recognition. Butso purely
legalistic_ajview has nothing to contribute to an adequate
political philosophy./A legal t heo ry of rights will tell us what
in'fantThe character oi a State is ; it will not tell us, save by
the judgment we express upon some particular State, ( wheth er
the,rights there recognised are the r ights which need recogniti on.'
A legal theory oi righfsTsay in the England of 192 j, needs, for
its understanding, a test in terms of a criterion external to
itself. When we say that a man has the right to bestow his
possessions as he will, we state a fact; but we do not thereby
determine whether he ought to have that right. When we
say that a deaf-mute has the right to marry, we mean that no
church and no registrar can refuse, in propei circumstances,
the performance of the necessary ceremonial; but we do not
mean that we think he ought to have the right. At the back*
of any legal theory there is a system of presumptions each one
of which requires a careful examination before it can be
admitted as valid for politics. Laws, in fact, a re no t, as'
Montesquieu said, the necessary relations of society. They
become those relations as they reflect something beyond the
merely barren will of an authority competent to enact them,
s NRights, in fact, are those conditions of social life wuhoufc
which no man can seek, in general, to be himself at his best |
For since the State exists to make possible that achievement,
it is only by maintaining rights that its end may be secured.
Rights, therefore, are prior to the State in the sense that,
recognised or no, they are that from which its validity derives.!
They are not historical in the sense that they have at some time
won their recognition. They are not natural, in the sense that
a permanent and unchanging catalogue of them can be com¬
piled. They are historical in the sense that, at some given
period and place, they are demanded by the character of its!
civilisation ; and they are natural in the sense that, under those
same limitations, the facts demand their recognition. That'
does not mean they will be recognised. A revolution, as in
eighteenth-century France, may be necessary to wring their
recognition from the existing legal order. But a legal system
is surrounded by the penumbra of an attainable ideal which it
must reach as the price of its preservation. Rights are asserted
in new form as the rights which have gained the cognisance of


92 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

lawj^figQ0ie_inadequate or outworn. They have a content
which changes with time and place. They win their way the
more securely they can justify themselves in the facts about
them. _/

^i^'tThey are rights because they are useful to the end the State
seeks to serve. They may, indeed, controvert exist ing legal
rights; for it well may be - that an order preserves privileges
jwffich cannot be defended upon the existing fact.O] So, for
example, the demand for the right to vote contravened the
outworn political system before the Reform Act of 1833 ; and
it was the pressure of the facts behind the demand which
secured the recognition of a new claim. The same thing is
true of the Ten Hours Act of 1844. The same thing, upon a
wider scale, is true of the right claimed by the American
colonies in 1776 to determine of themselves the character of
their taxation. Any given State is set between rights that have
been recognised and rights which demand recognition. There
is no better historic test of its adequacy than the temper in
which it confronts the new demands.

We are making the {estof rights utility ; and that, it is
dear, involves the question of those to whom the rights are to
be useful. There is only one possible answer. In any State
the demands of each citizen for the fulfilment of his best self
must be taken as of equal worth ; and the utility of a right is
therefore its value to all the members of the State. The right,
for instance, of freedom of speech does not mean for those in
authority, or for members of some special church or class.
Freedom of speech is a right either equally applicable to all
citizens without distinction or not applicable at all. For the
plane upon which men meet with identical claims upon the
common good is that of which the State fixes the horizon. It
cannot set bounds to those upon whom the enjoyment of the
right is to be conferred. It must assume, at some point in its
policy, a sufficient identity of nature in men to secure identity
of response Where it differentiates between them, whether
in terms of the kind of property they hold, as in feudal society,
or in terms of the religion they profess, as in the France of the
Ancitn Regime, it is, to the degree of differentiation, denying
its claim upon the allegiance of those excluded from the enjoy¬
ment of rights. For in any adequate view of citizenship a


RIGHTS


93

State which refuses to me the thing it declares essential to th«
well-being of another is making me less than a citizen. Itjj
is denying that which invests its power with moral authority j
It is admitting that its claim upon me is built, not upon its*
ethics, but its strength.

It is dear, in such a view, that the citizen has claims upon
the State. It must observe his rights. It must give him those
conditions without wfilcITTie* cannot be that best self that he
may be. This does not mean the guarantee that his best self,
will be attained. It means only that the hindrances to its
attainment are removed so far as the action of the State can
remove them. Here, obviously enough, the clue to the interpre¬
tation of rights becomes an historical one. The claims, that we
must recognise are those which, in the light of history, involve
disaster when they are unfulfilled That is the case, for
example, upon which a democratic polity is most securely
founded. For it has been the obvious lesson of history that
when the experience associated with power is less than that
of the adult population, the welfare secured almost always
is less than that of the citizen-body. My personality, in other
words, cannot be adequately protected when others, but not
myself, have access to the sources of power. I cannot secure
for myself a harmony of impulses unless the balance that is
struck in the ultimate rules of political conduct is one that
builds upon my experience not less than upon the experience
of others. History, in this sense, is assuredly a philosophy of-
rights built upon example. We do not gam from its survey
the power to predict the exact effort men will make. We do
at least gain, the knowledge that, over a period, certain uni¬
formities of conduct in the rulers of a State will be followed by
certain uniformities of conduct in those over whom they
rule. We can, from the record we obtain, draw up a code of
rights. Its general outline will alone possess validity; and
the method and level of its application will depend upon the
special conditions of each State. But for Western civilisa¬
tion, at least, the outlines of such a code begin to formulate
themselves with some distinctness.

But the possession of rights, in the sense here used, does not
mean the possession of claims that are empty of all juries
We have rights to protect and to express our personality.


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

We have rights to safeguard our uniqueness in the vast pressure
oi social forces. But our rights are not independent of society.
We have them because we are members of the State. We
have them by reason of an organisation through which, in the
world as it is, the contribution of that uniqueness can alone
be made. Our rights are not independent of society, but
Inherent in it. We have them, that is to say, for its protection
4 s well as for our own. To provide for me the conditions which
enable me to be my best self is to oblige me, at the same time,
to seek to be my best self. To protect me against attack
■from others is to imply that I myself will desist from attacking
others. To give me the benefit of education is to imply that I
will so use the advantages education confers as to add to the
common stock. I do not exist solely for the State ; but neither
does the State exist solely for me. My claim comes from the
"fact that I share with others in the pursuit of a common end.
My rights are powers conferred that I may, with others, strive
for the attainment of that common end. My personality, so
to speak, bounds and limits the law of the State. But that
boundary and that limitation are imposed upon the condition
that in seeking to be the best self of which I am capable I seek,
in virtue of the common end I share with others, their well¬
being in my own.

a Rig hts, therefore , are corre lative withJfun ctions . I have
them that I may mate my contribution to the social end. I
have no right to act unsocially. I have no claim to ret ive
without the attempt, at least, to pay for what I receive,
iFunctio n is thus implicit in rig ht. In return for the conditions
with which I am provided, I seek to make possible a contribu¬
tion that enriches the common stock. And that contribution
must be personal, or it is not a contribution at all. I do
noFcontribute by being the child of my parents. I do not
contribute by withdrawal from my fellow-men. I have to
1 do something that is worth doing in order to enjoy that which
I the experience of histoiy has proved to be worth enjoying.
I may pay my debt to the State by being a bricklayer or an
artist, or a mathematician. Whatever form my payment takes,
it is essential that I should realise that the rights I have are
| given to me because I am performing some given duties. He
{that will not perform functions cannot enjoy rights any more


RIGHTS


M


than he who will not work ought to enjoy bread. The useful¬
ness of my personality to the social order the State can recognise
only in terms of what I do on its behalf. I must recognise
the civic equation of which I am part, or forfeit my citizenship.

I have, therefore, no right to do as I like. My rights are
built always upon the relation my function has to the well¬
being of society ; and the claims I make must, clearly enough,
be claims that are necessary to the proper performance of my
function. My demands upon society, in this view, are demands
which ought to receive recognition because a recognisable
public interest is involved in their recognition. That does
not mean that I must, in Mr. Bradley’s phrase, accept without
repining the duties of ray allotted station. It is the primary
fact in personality as such that it has no allotted station. It
wins, or ought to win, the station in which it may best fulfil
itself. It can do so by experiment alone. It must be trained
that it may be able to interpret the meaning of experiments
For in any system of rights the ultimate uniqueness, and,
therefore, isolation of the individual, is the basic starting-point.
Any attempt at the division of society into " natural ” classes
with " natural ” functions is bound to break down. We
discover what we naturally are in terms only of what we seek
to become. And the discovery is intimately our own. Others
may glimpse our sense of failure and success. But the real
meaning of our experience is known only to ourselves. That
is what makes essential in the modern State a minimum
basis at which rights are realised. Whatever I am, whether
the statesmen who directs the commonwealth or some humble
hewer of wood, I must realise my rights at the level which makes
possible the interpretation Of my experience to myself. I must
be trained, that is, at least to the point at which l can make
my desires articulate as life unfolds them. And if that is true
for me, it holds equally for all. Rights, therefore, regardless oi
the exact function to which they relate, are at a minimum
basis, identical. The State, at that level, must secure them
for each of its citizens. Differentiation arises only when the
elementary needs of each individual have been satisfied.

We build rights upon individual personality because,
ultimately, the welfare of the community is built upon the
happiness of the individual. I cannot have rights against the


•• A GRAMMAR OP POLITICS

public welfare, for that, ultimately, is to give me rights against
a welfare which is intimately and inseparably associated with
my own. But that is not to say that I cannot have rights
against the State. For the State, at any given moment, means
a body of men and women in possession of actual power ; and
1 their judgment of the rights that ought to be recognised may
be mistaken. It was judged, for example, that Galileo had no
right to suggest hypotheses contrary to accepted Catholic
doctrine ; but it is Galileo's right that we now admit. The
situation is, of course, reciprocal. The State has rights against
me. It has the right to exact from me that conduct which
secures to others the enjoyment of the rights it secures to
myself. For the community, the interest of each citizen is of
equal importance. No claim of mine, at least at the minimum
level of rights, can be recognised by the State which involves
the surrender by some other person of rights without which
jhe, also, cannot be his best self. The mutual claims of the
[State and of its citizens must be claims clearly justifiable by
‘reference to a common good which includes the good* of all.

In a sense, indeed, it does not matter whether that common
good is recognised by an existing State. My duty is to act as
though it ought to be recognised. My citizenship implies
^conduct on my part which attempts the enforcement of that
(recognition where it is denied. 1 may, of course, in such action
encounter the hostile forces of the State. I may—I probably
shall provoke hopeless defeat, or a victory which is purchased
only at a terrible price. I must yet make the choice, in and of
myself, of the conduct that citizenship implies. Tojafii.pther-
■'wise is_tg subordinate truth to authority ; and it is historically
evident that Jhis habit of subordination ultimately makes men
indifferently accept the orders of authority without regard to
their substance.

I My duty, therefore, to the State, is, above all, my duty to
|the ideal the actual State must seek to serve. There are, then,
circumstances in which resistance to the State becomes an
•obligation if claims to right arc to be given validity. We can
lay down no general rules, either of time or situation. Anyone
who studies at all carefully the history of revolution will be
convinced that the element of chance is too large to admit the
entrance of prediction. We can only say that a general order


BIGHTS


97


becomes moral only in the degree to which it is built in the
conscience of its citizens. Antagonism to the demands of
authority will always be the exception in history; b ut t hose
demands will win their way_from inert acceptance rather than
active consent unless, over a period of time* they after sendee
to the theoretic purpose of the State, for any social order
which fails consistently to recognise the claims of personality
is built upon a foundation of sand. Sooner or later it will
provoke the dissent of those whose nature is frustrated by its
policy. Its disasters will become their opportunity. For to
deny the claims of right is to sacrifice the claim to allegiance.!
The State can exercise moral authority upon no other basis. I

II

Rights so discussed seem to imply a State and an individual
which strike a balance between theif mutual claims. This is,
in fact, to state the problem of rights in a fashion too narrow
to express with accuracy the environment we encounter. For
it is not merely as a member of the State that the individual has
rights. His personality expresses itself in a hundred other
forms of association. Wherever men are banded together to
perform a’task that is part of the common welfare the body so
formed has rights as real, and as compelling, as the rights of
the State. The community, so to say, is a federal process ;
and the division of power is achieved by the natural expression
taken by man’s gregarious impulse. To limit his rights to the
single category which membership of the State involves is to
destroy his personality and not to preserve it. The Roman
Catholic Church must bve its life unhindered by the State
because invasion of its sphere means the destruction of the
quality it brings into the life of its members. And nothing is
gained by urging that the rights of the State as such are superior
to those of other associations. Any such decision is a pragmatic
one ; it must be made in terras of the particular conflict that
has arisen. It must be made, further, in the background of the
knowledge that when, and if conflict comes the individuaEwill,
whatever the law, choose his own course of action ; Throg¬
morton will decide one way and Howard of Effingham another.
The sphere of rights to be enjoyed by any corporate body cannot

7


98 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

be determined in a priori fashion. Their powers must be set
in the light of our knowledge of how those powers will be used.
t This is not to“ 3 ethrone the State from the position it now
occupies of the co-ordinating factor in the community. But
It is at least to indicate the way in which its power of co-ordina-
ft ion should be used. The State cannot, for instance, allow a
religious association to determine the belief of those who do
not belong to its communion ; but it has no moral, and therefore
at least ideally, no legal right to determine what the members
of a given association are to believe. The spectacle, for
example, of the House of Lords settling the religious doctrine
of the Free Church of Scotland is a ludicrous one; it is an
invasion of rights for which no justification can be attempted.
It is a survival of the period when the Church had ceased to
be a State, but when men had not yet seen that a State cannot
at once realise itself and retain the character of a church. So,
too, with a trade union. If the members of such a body decide
that political representation is a function they should seek to
support, the remedy for those of their members who dissent
from that policy is not in the courts of the State but in
resignation. Within the ambit that it seeks to cover, any
fellowship is, to the degree that it is real, as original and as
compelling as the State itself. To make the powers of the State
supreme over all other bodies is possible only when we have
the certainty that the rights through which alone the individual
can realise his best self are amply secured to each member of
the community.

This is to suggest, of course, that there is differentiation in
the manner in which rights are now secured. It is to imply
that men do not share equally in the gain as well as iruthe toil
of living. If we may say broadly that the personality of men
can now hope for a larger expression than at any previous
time it still remains true that the number of those to whom
happiness is open in a creative sense is still pitiably small.
•The State, in other words, is biased in the emphasis it places
upon the attainment of rights. It does not adjudicate impar¬
tially between its members. Its decision is weighted on behalf
4 >i the actual holders of power. It tends to identify the thing
that is right with the thing to which it has grown accustomed.
It does not distribute equally the means—especially knowledge


RIGHTS


99


and economic power—to influence the policy that is adopted.)
The older views both of liberty and of order can hardly be said
to benefit the masses of men. The wealth of the community
increases, but it does not in a critical way relieve their wants.
Our knowledge increases by leaps and bounds ; but those who
have genuine access to the intellectual heritage of the race are
still but a fragment of the people. Religion, doubtless, has
brought to its devotees immeasurable comfort; but it has not,
in a vital sense, affected the substance of the social order. The
rule of the rich, whether of landed men or of those who owned
industrial capital, has been devoted firstly to the accumulation
of wealth, and secondly to preventing its diffusion. The whole
character of social life and, therefore, the whole character of
the State, is above all determined by its division into a small
number of wealthy persons and a large number who dwell
upon the margins of subsistence. We enjoy security and
order. But the security we enjoy means the protection of
most in their impotence, and the order is, very' largely, the
safeguarding of the few against the demands of the many for
a richer and a fuller life.

The prescriptions of the State are never, therefore, final
prescriptions. The guide to our conduct is not the voice of
authority, save in so far as the results of authority go. to the
realisation of ideal right. A State must give to men their_due
as men before it can demand, at. least with justice,. theii
loyalty. And it may be urged that in a period when active
citizenship is coincident, broadly speaking, with the adult
population, the test to which the State is submitted becomes
more serious than at any previous time. Men who are granted
political power sooner or later become insistent that the jesult
of power be rights. They will seek the institutions through
which the substance of rights can be best secured. They will
either universalise privilege, or else abolish it. They will insist
that liberty and equality are inevitable corollaries of a demo¬
cratic system. They will seek the diffusion of those notions
through the whole fabric of the community, at least to the
point where the power of the State is placed with approximate
fairness at the disposal of all. In the end, resistance to such
demands is difficult; for, as Acton pointed out, there is a reserve
of latent power in the people which few minorities have either


100


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the strength or the cohesion to overcome The State, therefore,
which seeks to survive must continually transfoim itself to the
demands of men who have an equal claim upon that common
welfare it is its ideal purpose to promote
i^We are concerned here, not with the defence of anarchy,
but with the conditions of its avoidance Men must learn to
subordinate their self-interest to the common welfare The
'privileges of some must give way before the rights of all
indeed, it may be urged that the interest of the few is m fact
(he attainment of those rights since in no other environment
is stability to be assured ' ( Russian aristocrats who earn a
precarious livelihood after being the spoiled children of fortune
have learned, like the emipres of 1789, the penalty that is
ultimately paid when the mass of mankind is deprived of
access to its inheritance The guarantee of a stable civilisation
is that men in general should have at k ast that minimum
without which the) cease to be men ^ Rights are ideas more
strongly armed than the most efficient despotism , and they
are, above all most powerful in a democracy where the universal
'character of their application is the assumption upon which
Ithey are built It is possible—it is perhaps even desirable —
to maintain degrees of freedom and equality in a democratic
.civilisation But it is certainly necessary that the minimum
amount of freedom and equality shall be such as to ensure to
leach citizen the full opportunity of personal development
There is too rarely that opportunity now Mean environments
beget mean children, and the fmit rottens as it ripens The
protest evoked by modem conditions is the natural challenge
of men who are deprived of the things that make life worth
living, and n othin g is really gained, as Burke pointed out,
by the ascription of popular violence to agitation or conspiracy
Man is m general too little of a public creature, the force at
the disposal of any government is. as a rule, too powerful,
for either agitation or conspiracy to make its way unless there
existed an atmosphere of frustrated impulse which made for
their reception The demand for the realisation of rights only
secures a hearing when the absence of those rights is felt as
injustice The demand may be postponed , it may suffer
temporary defeat , but any demand that is genuinely related
to the basic impulses of men must, sooner or later, be given


RIGHTS


101


response To reform if we wyuld p reserv e is, as Macaulay
said, the voice of great ev ents

This contention is not answered by the argument that m a
democracy the people have power and that whatever legal
rights obtain the people wills their existence There is all the
difference m the world between a power informed and conscious
of its strength and a power so latent and suppressed that its
holders are hardly aware that they ma> exercise it People as
ignorant as the modem citizen body is left by our social system
make of it a picture for themselves which deludes them in their
search for the causes of their misfortune They are not trained
in the relation of cause and effect They are not educated to
see that institutions are histone ideas the utility of which dies
with the cessation of the circumstances which gave them birth
They are, for the most part, brought up in an atmosphere of
inferiority Subordination to their lot is the one creed in which
they are trained to believe Myth and legend surround them
on every side , and it is no part as yet of modem educational
effort to confer the ability to be sceptical upon those who are
bom within its ambit The disparity of influence between
those who defend and those who attack an existing system is,
therefore, immense The one can appeal to a solid and tangible
reality , the othtrs ask for a leap into a dark hinterland which
requires effort and imagination to be understood The members
of a democracy cannot be truly said to possess their power
until they have been deliberately trained to use it We are
still far from such a time

That is why the formidable centralisation of the modern
State is so great an enemy to an ideal system of rights For
only where power is distributed widely is there any effective
restraint upon those who wield it To multiply the centres
of authority is to multiply the channels of discussion and so
promote the diffusion of healthy and independent opinion
But, to this end, it is necessary to regard the social order as a
whole We cannot attempt the democratisation of political
authority and leave it there Adequately to work the instru¬
ment we have created, we must democratise whatever auxiliary
powers affect that instrument in any important way Any¬
thing, that is to say, which is directly related to that minimum
basis of rights we have been discussing can never be left to the


102


A GRAMMAR OP POLITICS

control of a few. A man clearly must have the opportunity
to share in the disposition of whatever makes him, at least in
pn intimate way, a member of the citizen body; liberty and
equality, therefore, are at the very base of the political system.

We shall discuss in detail later the implications of liberty
and equality. Here it is enough to emphasise two things.
Neither of them is an unchanging notion. Each has a special
perspective which relates it to the special environment of
any given time and place. Liberty in the France of the
later sixteenth century meant, above all, the power of a citizen
to worship God in his own way, as liberty in the seventeenth
century in England meant, above all, the absence of arbitrary
taxation by the monarch. What seems to be of the permanent
Essence of freedom is that the personality of each individual
[Should be so unhampered in its development, whether by
Authority or by custom, that it can make for itself a satisfactory
harmonisation of its impulses. In this perspective the thing of
importance is that the harmonisation should be self-effected .
The rules laid down by the State should not bar the way to
any individual as distinct from another. They should leave
room for trial and error . They should not, as now, unduly
penalise the indi viduafoecause he has not been careful in the
selection of his parents. Equality, in other words, seems to
mean the minimisation of the handicaps our present social
;order imposes. We cannot offer identity of opportunity. On
the average, the son of Charles Darwin will have a better chance
of displaying an interest in science than the son of a stock¬
broker or a tailor. But at least we can seek to make it generally
possible that the son of a stockbroker with scientific leanings
should not be driven to sell bonds. We can make it possible
for each member of the State to try out what he believes to be
his special faculties. Most, doubtless, will be more than content
with security and a routine. Our task is to assure what pioneers
we have the avenue to inventiveness.

Ill

Yet all this, it may be said, is to dwell upon the heights
of theory. It is one thing to show the notions a State must
recognise if it is to move to the achievement of its purpose;


108

it is a very different thing to show how that purpose is in fact
to be achieved. It is even easy to insist that States which fall
consistently below the standard of ideals men think at some
definite period to be attainable will, sooner or later, be chal¬
lenged at their foundations. Such a declaration of right
provides neither a catalogue of actual rights which demand
recognition, nor the institutions through which their conquest
is made possible. The argument, though important, is less
formidable than it appears. Though we can never determine
with exactitude the level at which the demand for rights ought
to be satisfied, we can, at least, infer from the historic record
the rights which will claim recognition. Though we can never
say that any definite institutions are bound to result in their
recognition, we can at least postulate that, without certain
institutions th< rights which seek fulfilment will never gain
it. We cannot, that is, ever positively assure the fulfilment
of the State-purpose ; but, at least negatively, we can point
out the conditions which destroy the chance of such fulfilment.

What, at the very outset, needs to be emphasised is that,
rights are not merely, or even greatly, a matter of the written-^
record. Musty parchments will doubtless give them greater'
sanctity; they will not ensure their realisation. The first
amendment to the American Constitution legally secures
freedom of speech and of peaceable assembly; the fourth
amendment legally secures the citizen that his house shall not
be searched except upon a warrant of probable cause ; the
eighth amendment legally secures the citizen against excessive
bail. Yet in one hysterical week the action of the executive
power rendered all these amendments worthless ; 1 and the
fifteenth amendment, which sought political equality for tfie
coloured citizens of the South, has never been applied either by'
the executive or by the courts. A case like Ex Parte O'Brien 1
in England, and the Pluckard Case ^ in France, both go to show
that the maintenance of rights is much more a question of
habit and tradition than of the formality of written enactment.
This does not imply the worthlessness of the latter. It is always
valuable to be able to attack the executive in terms of a law it
has clearly offended; and the written enactment always

■ Cf. L. Post, The Deportations DaHrinm.

‘ (’ 923 ) s K.B. 13, 361. S Sirty, iqio, p. 1029.


104 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

serves to remind a people that it has had to fight for its rights.
But, at least ultimately, only deliberate challenge will be
successful in breaking the purpose of a government determined
upon unlawful conduct. It is the proud spirit of citizens, less
tiparthe letter of the law, that is their most real safeguard.
X^Nor is the necessary' protection to be found in that separa¬
tion of powers which both Locke and Montesquieu thought to
be the secret of freedom .^J) That classic doctrine enshrines the
vita, truth that the more independent a judiciary, the more
adequate are the safeguards of rights ; but since any judiciary
is ultimately appointed by the executive, its independence is
rarely final. Kjhe separation of powers acts as a check upon the
undue expansion of each authority's allotted sphere; but
it does not determine the quality and extent of the powers that
are allotterf^ Nor, moreover, is it possible to define with any
precision the boundaries between the three divisions into which
it is customary to divide the power of the State. Judges are
compelled to make the law; 1 when legislatures confirm
nomination to office they are acting within the executive sphere ;
and the ordinance power of the modem executive is not only
genuinely legislative, but has reached dimensions more
formidable than that of Parliament itself.3 To separate powers
with the theoretic nicety of the American Constitution may well
be rather to confound them than to make them clear. At best,
such separation is merely an index to competence ; but the use
made of the index wjlLdepend upon the prevailing atmosphere
of the given State. ' It is the legislature of modem Italy which
has made of Mussolini an executive and legislature in one.

The problem, in short, of the realisation of rights is best
approached by discussing particular rights. We can, then, build
from their sum a system of limitations upon the jx>wer of the
State. Such a method serves several purposes. It indicates,
in the first place, the position occupied by the individual in
the community. It shows what he must possess if he is, in any
creative way, to contribute his share to the common stock of
welfare. It is the approach, secondly, to the meaning of

* On this general question see Artur, Separation des Pouvosrs, and Fair lie,
The Separation of Pouters in the Michigan Laut Review for 1912.

■ Cf. J. Holmes, in Jensen v. Southern Pacific, and B. Cardoso, The Nature
of the Judicial Process, lect. in.

J Cf. Carr., Delegated Legislation, lect 1.


RIGHTS


105


liberty and equality. When we know the rights we desire
to maintain, we are in a better position to judge the positive
institutions those concepts involve. And, thirdly, to define
in outline particular rights is to indicate, at least in a general
way, the necessary character of political structure. From such '
an outline we can begin to fashion the way in which the
co-ordinating power of the State should be executed. We shall
perceive that the State, in such a background, is essentially,
a communitas commumlatum, and not the crowning-point of
a hierarchical structure. It is not the body from which other
bodies derive ; its relationship to them is pre-eminent only as
it is so judged by citizens upon grounds of moral rights. Its
authority, accordingly, becomes dependent upon the way in
which it maintains such a system of rights as is here outlined.
These, therefore, are not bom of the State, but with it. They
are the primary condition upon which, if not its existence, at
least its quajjty, riepends Not, we say, its existence ; for a

State may well, like Czarist Russia, go to work against all
decent justice and yet have power over a long period to maintain
itself without serious challenge

Let us first remind ourselves of what will be involved
in a theory of rights to which we now seek to give concrete
expression. A State, it has been argued, is a territorial society
divided into government and subjects. It exists, it exert^
authority, it claims allegiance, in order that those citizens
may realise in their lives the best of which they are capable.
To that end they have rights. These are defined as the con¬
ditions without which no citizen can hope to achieve the
best that is in him. Obviously, therefore, rights are not the
creatures of law, but its condition precedent. They are that
, which law is seeking to realise. Institutions are, then, bad or
good in proportion as they fail or succeed in the promotion of
the purpose of rights. At the back of those conceptions there
is a view of society as a system of finite selves, each unique and
precious by reason of its uniqueness. That self seeks embodi¬
ment in a society the cohesiveness of which endangers the
preservation of its special individuality save as the maintenance
of its rights enables it to carve out its own channel of expression.
It does not possess its rights as an empty and formal claim.
It possesses them that the fulfilment of diversity may maximise


106


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the richness of social effort. It has rights because it has duties.
Our society is a functional society in which the test of structure
is the service it can render. And service is personal service.
It is the deliberate and conscious striving of each self in each
generation that makes possible the increase of our social
heritage. We are justified, not by what we are, but by what we
can become. We experiment with our powers. We mould an
environment in which those powers secure always an ampler
field of play. The citizen has a right to work. He is bom
into a world where, if rationally organised, he can live only by
the sweat of his brow. Society owes him the occasion to
perform his function. To leave him without ccess to the means
of existence is to deprive him of that which makes possible the
realisation of personality. This does not mean the right to
some particular work. A prime minister who has been over¬
thrown has not the right to be provided with labour of an
identical character. Society cannot afford each man the choice
of the effort he will make. It cannot, in any ultimate way,
afford undue emphasis upon occupations which carry with them
special dignity of recompense. It needs a supply of goods and
services to maintain its life. The right to work can mean no
more than the right to be occupied in producing some share of
those goods and services. Alternatively, therefore, the man
who is deprived of the opportunity actively so to share is
entitled to the equivalent reward of that opportunity. And
since it is clear that no society couid, over any long period, bear
the cost of paying that equivalent to any large proportion of
its members, it follows that the principle of insurance against
unemployment is integral to the conception of the State. We
must year by year abstain from consuming some due proportion
of what we produce, that, in the lean years, those who, either
temporarily or permanently, are deprived of the opportunity
to labour may not, also, be deprived of the means to live.
How such a system of insurance is most wisely organised is,
with all its importance, rather a question of detail than of
principle. What is fundamental is the recognition that to be
his best self a man must work, and that the absence of work
must mean provision until employment again offers the oppor¬
tunity of work, What is here urged is not a defence of
parasitism, but a recognition that the performance of service
is implicit in the nature of social life


RIGHTS 107

A man has not only the right to work. He has the right
also to be paid an adequate wage for his labour. By the work
that he performs he must be able to secure a return capable
of purchasing the standard of living without which creative
citizenship is impossible. In such a notion there can be no
fixity of amount. He needs the food which keeps him physically
fit, the clothing and shelter which make him begin life at least
at that level where his energies are not wholly engaged in
attention to purely physical wants. He needs the little comforts
that make of life something more than a mean satisfaction of
ugly wants. The right to an adequate wage does nqt imply
equality of income ; but it does, it may be urged, imply that
there must be a sufficiency for all before there is a superfluity
for some. The contrast in the modem world between men and
women who have never known a decent house, a decent meal,
and clothing that barely protects them against the elements,
and those who have never known what it is to have unsatiated
a want that the possession of property can supply is an
intolerable one.

t Ethically, at least, it is no answer to this demand to argue
that the productivity of the world makes impossible the
realisation of this right. The statistical proof that an equal
division of the product of industry would hardly better the
condition of the worker 1 only means the condemnation of the
present system of production. It only means that the method
we require? for our end is different from the method we now
use. It means that we must reorganise the instruments of
production that they may satisfy the human demands made
upon them. Obviously, also, there is involved in the realisation
of this right the grave problem of population. We must chain
the " devil ’’ of Malthus if we are to satisfy our needs. We must
makq the increase of our numbers proportionate to our ability
to satisfy the right of those numbers to an adequate standard
of living. Here it is important to realise how closely the prob¬
lem of population is related to the standard of life. Where the
presence of numbers is most apparent, there, also, the human
wants are most appalling. 1 Immediately, the standard.of life
is sufficient to cover the purely material appetite, the number

1 A. L. Bow ley, The Division of the Product of Industry,

* As shown dearly by investigations hke those of Booth and Rowntree.


108 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

of children ceases to act as a source of economic depression.
It would seem the logical inference that the more rapidly we
recognise the right to this adequacy the more rapidly wf shall
realise the most effective condition of its maintenance.

But, it may be said, even supposing that we can grapple
with the problem of population, it is still dubious whether
industrial productivity is sufficient to meet the problem of
this adequate standard. The answer to that scepticism is,
at the least, a twofold answer. Our industrial organisation
has not, thus far, been devised to meet a demand of this kind.
It has been devised to satisfy the owner of capital; it has
sought to fulfil not the function of service, but the function of
acquisition. We do not know of what our industrial system
is capable until we organise it for use and not for profit. Any*
one who studies, for example, the facts of the coal industry
in Great Britain will be appalled at the wastage the present
technique of ownership involves. Anyone, to generalise, who
regards the casual and haphazard character of the modem
business man will realise how rarely he is competent for the
proper performance of his task. We demand proof of compe¬
tence from the lawyer and the doctor ; from the business man
there is demanded nothing save the ownership of property or
the power to obtain credit. We do not allow a doctor to
hand over his practice to his son unless the son has obtained
the necessary qualifications; but the son of a business man may
succeed to his father’s enterprise without regard to the quality
of his mind or his knowledge of its processes We take no
steps to direct the flow of capital into socially necessary pro¬
duction. We rarely—there are honourable exceptions—seek
to enlist an interest in production from those concerned with
manual effort. We are only beginning to realise that research
into the processes of manufacture may improve them as
surely as science has increased the power of modem warfare to
destroy. Until, in brief, experiment with the character and
constitution of industry has proceeded upon a far vaster scale
than we have so far known, the function we must seek that it
fulfil is still the realisation of adequate standards for those who
live by its results.

Nor is that all. If it were true that the productivity of
industry offers no hope of an adequate standard of life for all


RIGHTS


109


citizens we should be faced by a dilemma which perhaps
Hobbes only in the history of political philosophy would have
had the courage to confront. For in that event, either the
social process must be a blind struggle to acquire, uninformed
by moral purpose, or else those upon whom adequacy was con¬
ferred would have to be selected upon some rational principle.
In the first case all political philosophy would be superfluous
We might, indeed, have an art of politics akin m character
to the maxims of Machiavelh, but it would be totally devoid
of ethical content In the second case, the present system
would stand self-condemned. For no one would seriously
claim that the rewards of the modern State are distributed upon
any recognisably organised basis They are not, m the mass,
a return to character or ability or service Men succeed
because they have chosen their parents with foresight, or
because some product they manufacture happens to satisfy
the public want The incommensurable difference of the
reward to a great artist like Meredith and a great pill-maker
like Sir Joseph Beecham is at least evidence that the method of
valuation does not now proceed by ordered reason

The fact surely is that we have so little attempted the
conscious control of social organisation that we have hardly
sought to inquire into the principles it involves. If we start
from the assumption that we must either, over a period, satisfy
the basic impulses of men, or court disaster, it becomes obvious
that we must organise the processes of production with the
purpose of satisfying those basic impulses To that end we
must end the anarchy of the modern scheme From the mere
competition of private and selfish interests we cannot secure a
well-ordered society From combination effected, as we have
recently learned in detail, 1 to le\v financial blackmail from the
wants of society, we shall never secure a service conceived in
terms of justice. Either the State must control industrial
power in the interest of its citizens, or industrial power will
control the State in the interests of its possessors. The first
need of the masses is to realise the right to adequate payment
for their effort. The first principle, therefore, of industrial
organisation is a system of institutions directed to that end
We shall discuss later the forms such institutions might take.

* Cf Report of the Committee on Trusts (Great Britain), 1918-


110 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Here it will be sufficient to indicate certain obvious possibilities
involved. The State must be regarded as the protector of the
standards of industrial adventure. It must control the opera¬
tions of capital at least to the point of making the rate of profit
contingent upon the payment of an adequate rate of wages.
Just as stringent legislation prevents the sale of impure food,
so must stringent legislation prevent the payment of wages
below a reasonable standard of living. Already in the Trade
Board system in Great Britain 1 and the minimum wage
legislation of the United States,* we have the dawn, at least,
of the recognition of this principle. What it means in theory
is the restriction of the field covered by freedom of contract
to a definite area. Industry, in Sir Frederic Pollock's phrase,
is regarded as a dangerous trade which can only be entered
upon conditions. Men may agree to work, or to pay for work,
only above that level of reward which the State deems necessary
to the performance of its functions. Obviously the minimum
so fixed will vary with time and place ; though it may be hoped
that the growth of international control will tend to make
the highest State average the general average of civilisation.
But no State will permit business men to conduct an enterprise
where the cost of that effort can be paid for only by the sacrifice
of the essential conditions of citizenship. The labourer is
worthy of his hire because he is a human being. He must
receive the reward which makes possible the realisation of his
humanity.

Nothing in this, it should be added, involves either uniformity
in the method or similarity in the technique of payment; it
involves only the establishment of an adequate wage as the
basis of the industrial adventure. It may well be that
inequality of payment, above that level, is demanded if the
incentive to effort is to be sufficient. Certainly the persistence
of habit will probably make it necessary to give differential
rates to the rare ability of the few for a long period of time.
What we seem to require, wherever it is practicable, is the
payment, at least in manual labour, of a basic wage which offers

■ Dorothy Sells, The British Trode Boards System

* d. the evidence collected in Professor Frankfurter’s brief in Sletltler
v. O'Hara, published separately by the National Consumera’ League in
New York.


RIGHTS


111


adequacy and of a piece-rate in return for effort above some
average standard. Iu that event what is clearly of the first
importance is to secure an impartial authority to fix that
standard. It cannot be left to the employer, since it is too
greatly to his interest to fix the standard unduly high. It
cannot be left to the worker who, similarly, would tend to fix
it unduly low. We require an external body which can by
research discover a basis from which an effort may be made
to render a return to each man according to his powers. But
those powers, where they are especially remarkable, can only
be satisfied after the general wants of all have been supplied.

The obvious corollary of the right to an adequate wage is
the right to reasonable hours of labour. The thing that makes
a man a citizen is thought. He must, therefore, so distribute
the period of labour that he may have leisure for creative tasks.
Obviously there is a physiological limit to the energy a man can
afford to expend. But there is a rivirjimit to the amount the
State can, for its owiusake, permit him to expend. Those who
devote their energies to attendance upon a machine become, as
Aristotle saw, disqualified for the nobler tasks of life unless they
have ample leisure to be other than the tenders of a machine.
Certainly the frustration of personality involved, in the long
hours of toil characteristic, for instance, of the first part of the
nineteenth century has been made obvious by inquiry into its
results. Men and women came home from their daily toil
incapable of thought and even of feeling. Their machines were
their masters. There was no leisure in which they could find
themselves. They knew only a life of endless toil. The right
to reasonable hours of labour is the right to discover the land
of the mind. It is the key to the intellectual heritage of the
race.

The interpretation of “ reasonable " in the analysis of this
right has no fixity about it ; its content will depend upon the
technique of production at any given time. Certainly in a
world so complex as this, the eight-hour day has become
the maximum a man dare work at manual labour and still
hope to understand the life about him. It will be possible,
almost certainly, to decrease that maximum as mechanical
invention progresses ; the application of science to industry
is, after all, only a hundred and fifty years old. But whatever


US A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

be the improvements we can here expect, the notion of such a
maximum is essential. A man may hope to write or paint, to
administer or to teach, even to be employed in the handicrafts
where the personal factor is important, and still remain
conscious of creative powers ; wherever he has to plan of him¬
self the deadening effect of toil is mitigated, with a consequent
gain to his contingent social utility. But as soon as his sphere
of effort is mainly the repetition of a mechanical routine, the
evidence is decisive that such labour is a barrier to happiness.
He ceases to be able to experiment with himself. The world
outside does not appear a mystery he would explore. What he
desires is simply to deaden the senses, to find, rarely in the
realm of beauty, the means of forgetting the pain of toil. Any¬
one who reads the description 1 of the factory worker in the.
early period of the Industrial Revolution will realise how|
fatigue expressed itself in terms of a brutal coarseness fatal
to that fine and free perceptiveness which comes to men whose
creative faculties are given room for expansion.

But it is not enough, on the industrial side, to limit the
hours of labour and to make the reward of effort adequate
to the basic needs of life. A man might possess both these
rights and yet remain fettered by the conditions of his service.
Any theory of rights in the modern State must take account
of the implications of large-scale industrialism. It must realise
that the institution of private property, of which we shall later
examine the consequences, leaves the control of the industrial
machine to the owners of capital, and that individual freedom,
jas when the singlejiandicraftsman worked for a master, is no
[longer possibleT Obviously, in such a background, we must
prevent that ownership of capital from degenerating into
dictatorship. Exactly as the evolution of political authority
has been concerned with the erection of limitations upon the
exercise of power, so also with economic authority. There is
a right, that is to say, to be concerned in the government of
industry as there is a right to be concerned in the government
of politics. In a sense not less urgent than that in which Lincoln
used it, no State can survive that is half-bond and half-free.
The citizen as an industrial unit must somehow be given the

' Cf J. L. and Barbara Hammond, 7 he Town Labourer and the Shilled
Labourer.


RIGHTS 118

power to share in the making of those decisions which affect ,
him as a producer if he is to be m a position to maximise his
freedom.

We must not unduly maximise the power he will have The
work of the world has to be done , and the number of people
who will be able to hope for genuine significance in their daily
toil is probably smaller than some are eager to imagine What,
certainly, we can mitigate is the unlimited power which the
ownership of capital has conferred. We can compel discussion
before action is taken where, for instance, it is proposed to
dismiss a worker. We can compel discussion before changes
are made m the technique of production We can erect
institutions upon which the workers are represented for the
governance of industry, and compel reference to them for
the settlement of industrial method We can umversalise the
standards exacted from industrial direction, and give to the
workers such share as we choose m the fixation of those
standards. We can transform the power of industrial capital
from that in wmch it becomes the residuary legatee of the
industrial process to one in which it receives a fixed remunera¬
tion determined by agreement for the service it contributes.
Just as the holder of government bonds has no control, as such,
over government policy, so it is possible to prevent interference
with the direction of an industrial enterprise by the loaners
thereto of capital. What is here being urged is that the present
system of private property does not m the least involve the
present technique of industrial direction , while that technique,
above all with the largely unqualified right to hire and fire
that it involves, is simply a mitigated form of slavery. The
right to a representative government m industry is the right
to channels through which, in the necessary toil of life, the
personality of the worker may find expression In a demo- -
cratk system it is impossible to maintain political freedom with
industrial autocracy , and that the more clearly when the
system of ownership so largely controls the substance of State-
policy.

Citizenship has been defined as the contribution of one’s
instructed judgment to the public good. It follows therefore
that the citizen has the right to such education as will fit
him for the tasks of citizenship. He mast be provided with

8


114


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the instruments which make possible the understanding of life^
He must be able to give articulate expression to the wants he
has, the meaning of the experience he has encountered. There
is no more fundamental division in the modem State than that
between those who have the control of knowledge and those
who lack such control. In the long run, power belongs to those
i who can formulate and grasp ideas. Granted that such ability
exists in a wide range of inequality, there is yet, once more,
a minimum basis of education below which no one of average
intelligence can be permitted to fall For unless I can follow
with understanding the processes of politics those things which
effect my life will be effected without my having the opportunity
to make my will enter in to the result " First of all things,”
said Antiphon the Sophist, " I place education " , certainly
in the modern world the citizen who lacks it is bound to be the
slave of others He will not be able to convince his fellows.
He will not be able to restrain his nature into those paths
along which it is best fitted to travel He will not nse to the
, full height of his personality. He will go through life a stunted
being whose impulses have never been ordered by reason into
creative expenmen t |

The nght to education does not mean the right to an
identical intellectual training for all citizens It involves the
discovery of capacity and the fitting of the discipline conferred
to the type of capacity made known Obviously, it would be
foolish waste to give an identical training to Meredith and
Clerk-Maxwell But obviously, also, there is a minimum level
below which no citizen can fall if he is to use the necessary
intellectual instruments of our civilisation He must be trained
to make judgments He must learn to weigh evidence He
must learn to choose between the alternatives between which
he is called to decide He must be made to feel that this is
a world in which he can by the use of his mind and will shape
at once outline and substance

And it may be said here that any examination of {he
standards attained by modern States will reveal their inade¬
quacy. The child who is turned at fourteen into an industry
the organisation of which rarely admits of mental creativeness
in any save those few who direct it is unlikely, as a general rule,
to have been provided with the equipment necessary to the


RIGHTS


115


proper use of his native intelligence. A first-class mind may well
fail to realise its powers simply because it has never been trained
to the point where it is conscious of them. Genius, it may well
be, will always make its way whatever, or in spite of, the training
afforded; but the talent of the average man demands the most
careful cultivation if it is to bear its due fruit.

A democratic system, it has been argued, is one in which the
will of the average citizen has channels of direct access to the
sources of authority. There is, therefore, a right to political
power. This right may be said to contain three derivative
rights. There is, in the first place, the right to the franchise,
however that be organised. Every adult citizen has the right
to indicate what persons he desires should undertake the task
of government. That right will clearly involve a choice of
institutions. The basis of the franchise may be industrial
or geographical; citizens may even be grouped, as Hare
desired, by their voluntary choice. 1 shall argue later that for
the purpose of ultimate political decisions, the geographical
method has the maximum advantage; in this connection it
is sufficient to establish the existence of the universal claim.
Neither sex nor property, neither race nor creed, ought to
prevent the citizen from aiding in the choice of his rulers;
If it be argued that his choice is often wrong, the answer is
that democracy lives by the method of trial and error. If it
be said that he rarely has the knowledge necessary to give a
reasoned choice, the answer is that the State must then organise
on his behalf access to that knowledge. For, as has already been
pointed out, whenever the body of voters is limited, the welfare
realised usually excludes that of the persons excluded. No test
has been devised which enables us to limit the franchise in such
fashion as to equate civic virtue with its possession. Its limi¬
tation to property-owners was disastrous to those who did not
own property. Its limitation to a creed or caste meant always
special privilege lor that creed or caste. Even Mill’s test of
education,' is, beyond simple literacy, unrelated to the qualities
we require. An historian, for example, whose expertness in the
dissection of an early charter may be exquisite, may lack
completely a sense of evidence when it is a question of deciding
the merits of tariff reform. A scientist whose discoveries make

> Representative Government, chap, viii


118 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

possible the development of oceanic telegraphy may be utterly
useless when it comes to the practical expression of his ideas,*
Certainly in the present state of our knowledge of human nature
we have no warrant for limitations of any general kind.

But it is not enough to admit a general and unlimited
right to the franchise. I vote in order that I may choose
my governors. 1 decide between points of view the qualities
of which 1 am trained at some level to appreciate. But just
as those who choose cannot be drawn from any special class
in the community, so, also, t hose whq are chosen cann ot b e
members of a limited section only, We have need, in the first
place.of governors who represent the widest possible experience.
No class can ever successfully give the law to another class; ’
no class, indeed, is ever good enough to legislate for another
class. The absence of limitation is more urgent than in previous
periods for the simple reason that the entrustment of power
to the mass of people means, inevitably, a more stringent
scrutiny of the results of legislation than in the past. And it
is, moreover, clear that to limit the right to share in the exercise
of power is always, at least ultimately, to limit the numbers of
those who share in the benefits of power. The exclusion,
for instance, of the Nonconformists from the franchise has
left its definite impression upon the character of the older
universities of Great Britain. The political habits of the
land-owning class in England have profoundly affected the
methods of its taxation. The right to represent becomes,
in the background of historic experience, the logical result of
the right to choose.

That does not mean that any person may, whatever
qualifications he may lack, submit himself for choice without
conditions. Rights, as has been insisted, are always relative
to functions ; and there is no evident reason why the impli¬
cations of the representative function should not define the
conditions of assuming it. So long as the limits made do not
press unequally upon different sections of the population, they
are capable of defence if they aim at the improvement of the
function concerned. An example will make this clear. It
has been the custom of the English aristocracy to send their
sons into the House of Commons at an early age. Training

* E St. J Hankin, The Menial Limitations oj the Expert.


RIGHTS


117

has often been absent; little has been known of aptitude;
but the power of family has usually been sufficient to discover
a means of access to Parliament. Obviously there have been
real advantages in the system ; cases like those of Fox and
the younger Pitt show that it has not been devoid of benefit.
But it would be no invasion of the right to be elected to the
House of Commons to make it contingent, for example, upon
three years’ service in a local public authority. It would be
perfectly legitimate to hold that service in the central legis¬
lative assembly is so important in its results that proof of
aptitude and experience must be offered before the claim to
represent can be admitted. A limitation of this kind would
press equally upon all members of the community ; it would
benefit no special section. If the use of a right can be improved
in this fashion there is no need to regard it as thereby weakened
or destroyed. No democracy can afford to neglect the proved
sources of efficient service. That is the basis of its life. Therein
it differs from either monarchy or aristocracy, since these bring
to their maintenance a certain quality of the mysterious a
democracy does not contain. A monarchy, for instance, may,
as in the France of the eighteenth century, win affection for
its institutions, even when they are in fact obsolete, simply
because the facts about them are unknown. It removes its
foundation from the field of popular choice, where the bases of
a democracy are, in the nature of things, revealed by the
necessity of public analysis. Inevitably, therefore, the rights
of a citizen are circumscribed by the needs of the community
of which he is a part. What he is entitled to demand is that
su ch circumscription be arTequallv upon all other citizens.

The right to be chosen as a governor implies as well the right
to be chosen for political office. Wc do not, it will be noticed,
argue that the right to vote implies the right to choose more
than the representatives of a political assembly. So chosen,
there cannot be limitations against the right to be chosen as
a member of an administration. But the experience of demo¬
cratic systems does not lend weight to the beliet in a multiplied
electoral power. Direct government of this kind, whether in
the choice of men or of measures, may have worked with some
success in the restricted area of the city-state. There a man
might hope to be genuinely known to his n eighb ours, and a


118 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

judgment based upon sufficient intimacy to be real became
possible. That is not the case with States of the modem
size. Even the plebiscite of the American Commonwealth
results in the selection of a ruler distinguished rather by
negative than by positive virtues ; the system may produce a
Lincoln, but it is by accident rather than by design. The ruler
of the modem State needs to be chosen by men who have
familiarity with his mind, who have tested him m the intimate
fellowship of daily politics They also, as the case of Lord
Goderich testifies, will make mistakes. But there is larger
room in the indirect method for the recognition of quality
than in the direct method. That has been made fully evident
in those American States where the judiciary is elected by
the people. And since they are the choosers of those from whom
the leaders will be taken, restnction is not a limitation which
involves privilege for a few. The equality is there, though the
road to it ascends more steeply.

A political system in which the pivot is the right of the
citizen to be articulate about his wants clearly requires to
safeguard his articulateness There must be, that is to say,
freedom of speech with all that makes freedom of speech effec¬
tive. What is the substance of the right to such a freedom ?
It cannot merely mean the protection of a man m what he
says, for thought is too closely interwoven with action to
be dissociated from it. It cannot merely mean, either, the
protection of a man as an individual, for much of what he says
that is most urgent comes from his speech m concert with
others Freedom of speech is a right that, clearly, needs defi¬
nition m terms of the function it seeks to serve A man’s
citizenship, as I have argued, is the duty to contribute his
instructed judgment to the public good. He cannot make
that contribution if a penalty is attached to the expression of
his thought. The case against persecution for opinion deemed
wrong at some given time is perhaps the clearest issue m the
whole course of history. The impalpable barriers of custom
and convention will almost always be sufficient to deter men
from originality unless they possess qualities of an extraor¬
dinary kind. To allow a man to say what he thinks is to give
1 his personality the only ultimate channel of full expression and
his citizenship the only means of moral adequacy. To -act


RIGHTS


119


otherwise is to favour those who support the status quo, and
thus either to drive the activities of men into underground and,
therefore, dangerous channels, or to suppress experience not
less entitled than any other to interpret publicly its meaning.

In general, the Western world, outside of politics, has grown
to the acceptance of freedom of speech. A man may now
be an atheist or a vorticist without fear of legal penalty. It
does not seem, however, to be realised that religious toleration
cannot be fully attained so long as a State maintains special
relations with a given Church. For, in that case, whatever
the law, there is bound to be a special prestige for those who
belong to the official connection. F'or the State to stamp
with its approval some special religious doctrine is to offer
privilege to that doctrine even if the privilege does not assume
institutional form If the Church of England were separated
from thtTState, Anglican theology could not maintain itself
at Oxford and Cambridge against scientific theology. If the
Church of England were separated from the State, a single
form of religious belief would not hold a privileged position in
the educational system of the community A State Church is
bound to receive privileges in some shape or form ; and no
citizen enjoys genuine freedom of religious conviction until
the State is indifferent to every form of religious outlook from ,
Atheism to Zoroastrianism.

The real source of conflict in the recognition of this right
lies in the field of politics. The position of the modem State
seems to be that opinions which strike at the existing order are
illegal and must be suppressed The grounds for that sup¬
pression assume very varied forms Sometimes the opinion is
penalised because it is held in itself to be evil; sometimes the
opinion is attacked because it is held to threaten the structure
of the State ; sometimes it is penalised because it is held to
involve disorder. We must distinguish here with sharpness
between the expression of these opinions, whether by a citizen,
or by a group of citizens, and the doing of overt acts to give
effect to their substance. We must, further, consider separately
the important issue of the power to control the expression of
opinion in time of war or similar crisis. The relation of action
to opinion is a separate question from the nature of opinion
itself. The needs of an abnormal period have, in our own day


ISO A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

been so strikingly illustrated that their discussion serves to
throw special light upon the general problem.

The view I am concerned to urge is that from the standpoint
of the State the citizen must be left unfettered to express either
individually, or in concert with others, any opinions he happens
to hold. He may preach the complete inadequacy of the social
order. He may demand its overthrow by armed revolution.
He may insist that the political system is the apotheosis of
perfection. He may argue that all opinions which differ from
his own ought to be subject to the severest suppression. He
may himself as an individual urge these views or join with
others in their announcement. Whatever the form taken by
their expression he is entitled to speak without hindrance of
any kind. He is entitled, further, to use all the ordinary means
of publication to make his views known. He may publish
them as a book or pamphlet or in a newspaper ; he may give
them in the form of a lecture ; he may announce them at a
public meeting. To be able to do any or all of these things,
with the full protection of the State in so doing, is a right that
lies at the basis of freedom.

For consider the alternatives. All criticism of social
institutions is a matter of degree. If I prohibit X from
preaching violent revolution, I shall ultimately prohibit X
from suggesting that the given social order is not of divine
origin. If I begin by assuming that Russian communism
is politically obnoxious. I shall end by assuming that language-
classes to teach English to Russians are a form of communist
propaganda. 1 There is never sufficient certitude in social
matters to make it desirable for any government to denounce
it in the name of the State. American experience of the last
few years has made it painfully clear that there will never be
present in constituted authority a sufficient nicety of discrimi¬
nation to make it certain that the opinion attacked is one
reasonably certain to give rise to present disorder. Men who
are prevented from thinking as their experience teaches them
will soon cease to think at all. Men who cease to think cease
also to be in any genuine sense citizens. The instrument
which makes them able to make effective their experience rusts
into obsolescence by disuse.

■ Post, op at., p, 31,


RIGHTS


121

It is no answer to this view to urge that it is the coronation -
of disorder. If views which imply violence have a sufficient
hold upon the.StateTo""disturb its foundations, there is some¬
thing radically wrong with the habits of that State. Men
clxng'~scT persistently to their accustomed ways that the
departure from them implied in violence is almost always
evidence of deep-seated disease. For the common man has
no interest in.disorder; where he either embraces it, as in
revolutionary Russia, or is indifferent to its occurrence, as
in Sinu_£cia-4reland, it is because the government of the State
has lost its hold upon his affections , ynrl nn g ove nim^t loses
the a ffection of its su b jects sav e fropi^a- mu r a l ca use! The
degree, in fact, to which a State permits criticism of its
authority is the surest index to its hold upon the allegiance of
the community. Almost always—thereare rare cases in which
persecution has proved successful—the result of free expression
is such a mitigation of the condition attacked as to justify
its use ; almost always, also, to prohibit free speech is to drive
the agitation underground*: What made Voltaire dangerous
to France was not his election to the-Academy, but his voyage
to England. Lenin was infinitely more dangerous to Czarist
Russia in Switzerland than he would have been in the Duma,
Freedom of speech, in fact, with the freedom of assembly
therein implied, is at once the katharsis of discontent and the
condition of necessary reform A government can always
learn more from the criticism of its opponents than from
the eulogy of its supporters To stifle that criticism is—at
least ultimately—to prepare its own destruction.

Two related questions demand a note of explanation.
Freedom of speech means freedom to express one’s view of
general subjects. It means the absence of all powers of censor¬
ship in the government of the State. It does not mean any
right to insinuate that Jones murdered his mother-in-law, or
that Robinson, if justice were done, would be charged with
embezzlement. The statements for which I have the right
to demand the absence of control are either general statements
or personal statements of which the public import is immediate
and direct. The right of free speech does not include the right
to free scandalmongering. The only pain I have the right
to inflict oh individuals is a pain which the public welfare


132 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

demands. Obviously, if the use of that power is abused by
me in the case of some individual, he ought to be able to seek
his remedy in the courts. He is as entitled to protect tie
interest of his personality in privacy 1 as 1 am to invade it ;
and the common sense of an average jury ought, in such a
case, to decide between us. This limitation, it should be
added, does not extend to general questions such as the puhli
cation of blasphemies or of obscene literature. These are tot
much matters of dubiety to make it possible to erect criteria
of satisfactory judgment. A dramatic censorship prohibits
Mrs. Warren’s Projession and a literary control excludes
Boccacio from the public library. It is wiser to trust the free
exercise of the mind than to seek, ex cathedra, to put it
in swaddling clothes.

I have argued that the right to freedom of speech carries
with it the right to freedom of association and of public meeting.
Each of these aspects deserves a separate word. In the modem
world the individual cannot impress his views save by acting
with his fellows. In the vast majority of cases, so to act
entails no harm of any kind. What of the cases where as with
the communists, the object of the association is the violent
overthrow of established order, or, as with the Salvation Army
in its early days, freedom of assembly almost always involved
a breach of the peace ? Neither of these rights is as secure
to-day as it seemed a decade ago^ The American Statute-book,
for instance, is littered with statutes against a variety of political
groups; and there are even more political bodies which are
forbidden to meet in public places. I submit that all such
restrictions have no warrant in an adequate theory of the
State. Legally to prevent men from associating as com¬
munists does not prevent them from so associating; it serves
only to make the forms of communist activity more difficult
to discover. To prohibit a meeting on the ground that the
peace may be disturbed is, in fact, to enthrone intimidation in
the seat of power ; and it is noteworthy that the~EHgIish law
has sanctioned the notion that a peaceful demonstration does
not become illegal because other people are incited to disorder
thereby,»

‘ Cf. Branded, The Right to Privacy in 4 Harvard Law Review, 193.

* Cf. Beatty v. CtUbanks, 9 Q.B.D. 308, and the classic comment of
Professor Dicey, Law of the Contttiulion (8th edition), pp. 270 ff.


RIGHTS


128


The situation is, of course, different when an association
aims at, and proposes to act towards, the overthrow of the
State. The problems raised by this issue belong rather to the
art than to the theory of politics. Every government must
assume that its continued orderly existence iSj. withia the ambit
of such a system ofthaTTiere outlined, a desirable
thing ; every government is, within that ambit, entitled as a
consequence, to take steps to protect itself. It is, therefore,
entitled to destroy any group which seeks definitely and
presently to usurp its authority. But no government ought,
in its purely executive aspect, to be the sole judge of whether
its action is right. J It ought always to be compelled to the
submission of proof; and it ought always to be compelled to
the submission of proof under the fullest judicial safeguards.
There is no more reason to suppose that the judgment of an
executive will, in this aspect of the issue, be right than there is
to suppose rightness in the judgment of any body of thoughtful
citizens. tThe test ought to be the ability of the executive
to convince a court of law that there is the imminent danger
of unlawful acts inherent in the continued existence of the
association^ There ought, that is to say, to be the provable
danger ofconduct and not merely the influence of conduct
from opinion. Anyone who studies the treason trials of 1794,
or, even more decisively, the trials under the Espionage Act
of 1917 in America, will be convinced of the danger of allowing
the executive an undue latitude in this regard 1 At a time of
crisis judicial protection is a fairly slender safeguard, but it
is at least a protection. We do not want a clumsy minister
to assume that a society of Tolstoyan anarchists is likely to
attempt a new gunpowder plot. We do not desire to give
license to those amazing citizens who see in every movement
of unconventional thought a cover for the unscrupulous assassin.
The State, clearly, has a right to self-protection, but it should
be in obvious danger before it is given leave to act.

These hypotheses, it is argued, are untenable in time of
war or such similar crisis. It is obvious that they are untenable

1 Cf. Brown, The French Revolution m English History, especially chap vi,
and J H Rose, William Pitt On the Espionage Act see Chafee and Post.
of> at During 1917-19 there were 1900 cases relative to freedom of speech
The climax of war-mentality was the Sacco-Vaniettt Tragedy, on which Prof.
Frankfurter’s book is the final word


124 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

in a period of civil war, when armed forces contend internally
for the possession of the State. They are untenable for the
sufficient reason that no one will observe them. Violence
always makes the play of reason impossible; and political
philosophy cannot contribute hypotheses to a period of
unreason. Revolution, in fact, means the suspension of
any existing system of rights. Whatever authority comes to
the exercise of power will, until it permits the renewed choice
of governors by the citizens, build its acts upon the force it
exerts, and not upon the rights it seeks to represent. That
has been evident in the history of every revolution in the
modem time. It is, indeed, the hypothesis of revolution
that confidence in the persuasive power of reason is misplaced. 1
It would, then, be absurd to expect respect for rights under
such circumstances. But an unsuccessful revolution raises
the problems, than which none are more difficult or delicate,
of the treatment of rebels by the government and of the acts
of those who destroy the revolution.

Here, surely, different considerations emerge. The hypo¬
thesis of any government which successfully defends the
State against attack is the desirability of its system of rights.
If, then, that system contain such elements of judicial pro¬
tection as are contained, for example, in the English insistence
upon the rule of law, it immediately becomes obvious that
the character of governmental acts becomes subject to the
control of that principle. Laws that have been broken then
demand either punishment or indemnity; and there are
occasions on which an indemnity ought to be refused. It is,
above all, urgent that the superiority of the civil courts over
the naked force of military law be emphasised ; in that aspect
the Wolfe Tone case* and the dicta of ex parte O’Brien3 are
of the essence of a State built upon the notion of right. For,
otherwise, the citizen is powerless against the authority of
the executive, unless the unlikely event occurs of the executive
being overridden by the legislature ; and in the vast majority
of cases any such attempt at control will come too late. An
executive that is liable to continuous scrutiny by an inde-

1 Cf L Trotsky, The Defence of Terrorism, passim And see my Com¬
munism (1927), chaps, iv and v.

* Robertson, Select Constitutional Documents, p 354.

3 Ut supra


RIGHTS


135


pendent-minded judiciary is far more likely to observe the
substance of rights than an executive which can, as under
the Defence of the Realm Act in England during the European
War, practically suspend the guarantees of the consti¬
tution. The experience of Hungary in the years since 1919
is evidence of the danger implicit in the absence of those
guarantees,

The problem of freedom of speech in wartime raises quite
different considerations But it is first of all important to
urge that the scale of operations makes no difference to the
issue. The rights and duties of an English citizen in a period
of struggle with a minor nation like the Boers in South Africa
remain the same as his rights and duties m a struggle with
a first-class power like Germany, His business, as I have
insisted, is to contribute his instructed judgment to the public
good. He must, that is to say, support the war if he think it
right and oppose it if he think it wrong. That the executive
has embarked upon an adventure m which unity of opinion
is a condition of strategic success does not alter the moral
position that he occupies ftso executive has a right to move
on its way, whatever the opinion of its citizens Those
opinions must be made known in order to affect its activities.
To penalise them at a time when it is above all urgent to
perform the task of citizenship is fatal to the moral founda¬
tions of the State. If a man think, like James Russell Lowell,
that war is but an alias for murder, it is Ins duty to say so,
however inconvenient be the time of his pronouncement.
Indeed, there is ground for the view that an inconvenient
time is not unlikely to secure a closer attention to the substance
of such opinions. And what can be urged on the other side ?
It is said that the utterance of hostile opinion hinders the
successful prosecution of the war But this, in fact, is to
raise not one, but several, issues

Does " hostile opinion " mean hostility to the inception
of war, to the methods of its prosecution, to the end at which
it aims ? In the last European struggle the opponents of the
war were divided into camps of each of those views. Is
criticism of military or naval commanders an attack upon
the prosecution of the war ? If a statesman not in office
thinks, for example, that the diplomatic policy of the executive


188 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

will be attended with fatal results, must he confine himself to
private representations, lest public avowal of his opinion
hinder the national unity ? If a man believes that peace by
negotiation is preferable to victory in the field because of
the human cost that victory entails, has he no obligation to
his fellow-citizens who are paying that cost ? It is, surely,
evident that to limit opinion in periods of war to opinion
which does not hinder its prosecution is first to give the
executive a completely free hand, whatever the policy it
pursues, and, second, to assume that while the armies are in
the field an absolute moral moratorium is operative. That
is an impossible position. No one who has watched at all
carefully the process of government in time of war can doubt
that criticism was never more necessary. And to limit criti¬
cism is to stifle criticism. An executive that has a free hand
will commit all the natural follies of dictatorship. It will
assume the semi-divine character of its acts. It will deprive
the people of information upon which it can be judged. It
will misrepresent the situation it confronts by that art of
propaganda which enables it, as Mr. Comford has said, to
deceive its friends without deceiving its enemies. It will be
obtuse to suggestion. It will regard inquiry as menace. It
will be careless of truth. An executive in wartime is, in fact,
moralised only to the degree to which it is subject to critical
examination in every aspect of its policy. And to penalise
the critic is, if the struggle be severe, to poison the moral
foundations of the State.

Freedom of speech in wartime involves, therefore, the
same rights as freedom of speech in peace. It involves them
the more fully because a period of national trial is above all
the period when it is the duty of citizens to bear their witness.
Their activity will doubtless be unpopular ; the answer is, of
course, that/it is easy to be a martyr when authority refuses
"crucifixion./Zjf the policy of a State in making war does not
command the assent of its citizens in general, it has no right
to make war. If those hostile to it are a considerable pro¬
portion of its citizens, the policy is, at the least, a dubious
one. If the number is small, there is no need to attempt
suppression in the interest of success?\ The one way, in other
words, to attain the right is by free discussion; and a period


RIGHTS 1*7

of crisis, when the perception of right is difficult, only makes
more fundamental the emphasis upon freedom.

The view here taken may perhaps be illustrated by refer¬
ence to one of the decisive factors in the Peace of Versailles.
It is usually agreed that its worst elements were the result
of the Secret Treaties by which the Allies, exclusive of America,
bound themselves before the latter’s entrance into the con¬
flict. 1 Nowhere, moreover, amongst them was the desire for
a just peace more widespread than in America ; nowhere also
was the discussion of peace-aims more rigorously curtailed as
a hindrance to the full prosecution of the war. Had discussion
of the peace been full and effective in those critical years,
the liberal instincts of President Wilson might, when rein¬
forced by the weight of informed opinion, have compelled at
least their mitigation. The Secret Treaties were published
in the American press after their issue in Petrograd in the
second Revolution of 1917 ; full discussion would have revealed
their inadequacies and enabled the President to counteract
what of evil there was in their substance. But the destruction
of free opinion acted as a smoke-screen to conceal them, and
Mr. Wilson did not know of their existence until he reached
Paris. 1 It was then too late to undo their consequences.
Uncontrolled power, in other words, acts like a miasma to
conceal that atmosphere in which truth is made manifest.
Governments cannot do their duty because the means are
wanting to inform them of their duty.

I have argued that freedom of speech is a right that war
does not mitigate. It is important, however, to discuss a
special case of this aspect of that right. If Belgium is invaded
by a foreign army, the maintenance of free speech may be
fatal to the continued existence of the State. Is, therefore,
an invasion an exception to the general rule ? This, first,
must be said, that, ultimately, war and democratic govern¬
ment are incompatible. The emotions to which conflict gives
rise do not tolerate the presence of reason; and the more
urgent the danger, the greater will be the demand for its sup¬
pression. Invasion is the supreme example of this situation.

1 Cf. Gooch, History of Modern Europe, p 661, and the references cited
throughout the chapter

* Sec Chafce, op. ctt , p. 37.


138 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

To discuss the origins of the war of 19x4 while the Goman
siege-guns hammered at the defences of L&ge would have
been, in any case, an academic exercise. But Belgium in
19x4 was blameless. France in 1870 was hardly less to blame
than Bismarck himself. It was morally open to any French¬
man, if he conceived it to be his duty, to denounce the
Chauvinism of Napoleon III. He had the right to press for
a rapid peace. He had the right, if he so wished, to denounce
the premature negotiations of Jules Favre. He had the right
to urge, like Gambetta, the duty of France to fight to
exhaustion. In each case he was entitled to the full protection
of the law in his effort. In each case he was contributing,
according to his lights, his instructed judgment to the public
good. The more acute the danger to be confronted, the more
urgent is it to build the view of government upon the largest
available structure of opinion. The greater the heed that
opinion is given, the more likely is a government of civic
support. For, ultimately, the most sure resource against
foreign oppression is the zeal for the State of erect-minded
men and women.

I have spoken of the protection of the law. It is integral
to the notion of a State built upon right that the citizen should
be surrounded by full judicial safeguards. If he is accused,
he should be entitled so to be tried that his innocence, if he
be guiltless, has the full chance to emerge; he cannot, there¬
fore, be imprisoned without trial. 1 If he disputes with another,
he should have reasonable access to his judicial remedy. No
State can be free unless its Courts arc accessible and swift
and certain. I shall discuss later certain forms that are
essential to these conditions. Here I can only say that there
is rarely a better index to the quality of the State-life than
the justice it offers to its citizens. It must be a justice without
discrimination. It must not be harder upon the poor than
upon the rich. It should not denominate as mental disease
in a resident of Kensington what it calls petty theft in a
resident of Whitechapel. It must organise the fullest means
of defence for those charged with the commission of crime.
It must not set apart the acts of its officials into a category
different from that of other men. It must itself answer in its

■ A Habeas Corpus Act is, therefore, of the essence of rights.


RIGHTS


129


own courts. The sovereignty of the State must never mean
that it is not amenable to law. A tort is none the less a tort
because it is committed in the name of the sovereign. The
judiciary must be able to deal with every complaint of offence
without distinction of persons The rule of law, in brief, is
fundamental; and the rule of law means that no person, and
no office, however exalted, are exceptions to the rule of law.

There are two obvious corollaries to this doctrine. The
first is the genuine independence of the judiciary. For what-
they do in the~process 6F rffaKlR^aiTd'^applying the law, they
must be answerable to no one except their own consciences.
They must not be removable because the executive dislikes
their decisions Thev must not be changeable because some
judgment has offended the whim of the public In no other
fashion is it possible to secure the impartial administration
of law. I shall show later that attempts, as in America, to
make judges responsive to popular opinion by short-term
appointments is a fatal error Election, in any case, is not
a sovereign specific for all members of a government , and
when rights are to be protected, the first thing essential is to
multiply the safeguards of those who are to protect the,
assurance of rights

The second corollary is that the union of the executive
and the judicial fnuction is inadmissible Every citizen
needs the amplest protection against the danger that the
administrator will himself interpret the meaning of the law
that he applies. The concentration of the power to interpret
in the same hands as the power to administer has always,
historically, been associated with tyranny It was the
characteristic hall-mark of Oriental despotism. Even with a
bureaucracy so generally impartial as that of British India
it has not been free from grave objection 1 Where the subject
to be administered is in its natuie so complex—as when, for
example, an attempt is made to hx a “ fair ” gas-iate in a
municipality—those who adjudge fairness ought never, even
if they are not the ordinary courts, to be those who usually
administer the service. It may be necessary, given the
intricate nature of the modem State, to create special courts
for special subjects Whatever the solution, the separation

1 See Joseph Chat! lev Administrative Problem \ of Bntisk India pp 442 f
For another view of K N Gilchrist 1 he 'separatum of Powers (iq 2*0

9


180 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

and supremacy of the judicial power is integral to the main¬
tenance of rights. For, otherwise, those who serve the State
are governed by rules different from those under which their
fellow-citizens must live. They are made judges in their own
cause ; and however hard they may strive to do justice they
cannot hold squarely the balance between themselves and
other men.

It remains to be discussed whether there is such a thing
as a right to property. If property must be possessed in
order that a man may be his best self, the existence of such
a right is clear. But it is also obvious that such a right is
immediately susceptible of stringent limitations. Rights, as
I have argued, are the correlative of functions. I have the
right to property if what I own is, broadly speaking, important
for the service I perform. I have the right to own if what
I own can be shown to be related to the common welfare as a
condition of its maintenance. I can never justly own directly
as a result of the effort of others. I can never justly own
if the result of my ownership is a power over the life of others.
For if the personality of other men is directly subject to
changes of my will, if their rights as citizens, in other words,
become the creatures of this single right of mine, obviously
they will soon cease to have any personality at all. Mo man,
in such a background, has the right to own property beyond
that extent which enables the decent satisfaction of impulse.
After that point, it is not his personality that he contributes
to the community, but the personality of his property. He
will be guided not by his interests, but by its interests^ He
will act not to be his best self, but to win through his'posses-
sions the influence which maximises their safety. Exceptions,
of course, there are ; and the value of that munificence which
Aristotle commended 1 deserves more scrutiny than it has
received. But in a general system of rights the response to
the acquisitive impulse is a response that, of necessity, does
not require a level of which zest to acquire is the only limit.
It is set in the background of the function served by the person
of whom it is part.


1 Politics, u. 5; and cf N. Ethics, IV. i. J,


RIGHTS


131


IV

So armed, the citizen might hope to confront the State
with at least the prospect of self-realisation. But it is, of
course, one thing to postulate these rights as essential; it is
another thing to ensure their realisation. And that raises the
central issue of the position of the State in the community.
Legally, it is inescapable that there must be in every organisa¬
tion of men some body which enforces the acceptance of the
common rules. Those rules, as the previous discussion has
sought to show, are concerned with the erection of a minimum
basis of civilisation for the members of the community. They
seek to make them conscious of the art of life. But it is one
thing to urge that there must be a body enforcing the accept¬
ance of the common rules; it is another thing to urge that
this body is th e State. For the State is, for the purposes of
practical administration, the government; in England, that
is, the State in its daily appearance is the King in Parliament.
If it is legitimately to exercise its functions, it must be upon
the basis that it moves consistently to the realisation of
rights. It sets the conditions within which other associations
move only because its mission is to enable the citizen, through
those associations, to be that best self of which he is capable.
It is not exercising unlimited power. It is exercising a power
conceived within the terms of a definite function. It is pro¬
tecting the plane upon which the interests of men, and there¬
fore their rights, are, broadly speaking, identical. It co¬
ordinates the activities of other groups with a view to that end.

In this aspect there clearly comes into view a State which
is not identical with the community. It is a State, for instance,
which can prevent the Roman Catholic Church putting a man
to death for heresy; but it cannot force the Roman Catholic
Church to surrender the dogma of papal infallibility. Il
could prevent Jones from practising in the education of his
children the belief that ignorance is bliss; but it could not
refuse education, say on the ground of expense, to any class
or section of its members. It could not pass legislation which
relieved itself of the obligation to provide, either directly or
indirectly, work or maintenance for its members. It could
not invade the activities of any other association unless it


132


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


could show in a court of law that such activities were directly
hostile to the system of rights it was its own business to
maintain. The State fulfils a function in the community just
like every other association; its powers are set by the nature
of that function. It is not, therefore, the reserve-power in
society. Its will (which means in effect the will of the central
legislature) is not a will charged with special or pre-eminent
authority. To release, therefore, any system of rights such
as I have outlined, it is necessary to work out with care
the conditions under which the authority of the State is
exercised.

These conditions are, generally, three in number. The
Sta(e must be a decentralised Stale. The organs which
exercise power must not be concentrated at a single point in
the body politic. Local questions must imply local control.
There may be the duty of central inspection , but the problems
of which the decision predominantly concerns Lancashire—
whether, for instance, it shall have art-galleries—must be
settled in Lancashire and not m Whitehall, h i«. moreover,
urgent that the local authority shall exert a power which is
general in nature and not limited by specified delegation from
the central government. If the London County Council, for
instance, desires to spend money on taking the children in its
schools to see Shakespeare's plays, its own resolution to do
so should be sufficient legal warrant. Obviously, the exercise
of local originality mus t nut involve invasion of a sphere that
is obviously central ; the list of legal poisons must, "Tor
axaffiple, be unified in Whitehall and not drawn differently in
Aberdeen or Aberyswyth. But it is the outstanding virtue of
decentralisation that not only does it prevent the application
of uniform solutions to different things , it also, by multi¬
plying the centres of the administrative act, ensures.j r ful ler
participation the . responsible business of government?
ResporisiBTIIfy' in other words, is bom of a definite share in
the exercise of power. To concentrate power at any point
where it can, without danger to the system of rights, be
diffused, is to open the door to the abuse of authority. And
it must be remembered that it is the nature of authority to
abuse its power unless it is consistently surrounded by the
mechanisms of control.


RIGHTS


183


It is necessary, in the second place, to surround the central
government in particular with bodies it is comp elled to consult.
That does not mean merely the consultatioiToFtfie Tegislative
assembly by the executive. It means the organised and prior
consultation of all interests which are affected by a decision
it is proposed to take. It means, for example, that a govern¬
ment which proposes to alter the pay of teachers must first
submit its proposals for scrutiny to the bodies which represent
those teachers. It is important, also, to insist that consulta¬
tion ou ght not-tQ ..mean selective consultation. An executive
can always secure a biased expression of opinion by the careful
choice of biased representatives Consultation means eliciting
opinions from representatives nominated by the bodies con¬
cerned. If a government, for instance, wishes to appoint a
commission to inquire mto the advisability of a protective
tariff, the representative of the cotton industry ought to be
chosen by the cotton industry and not nominated therefrom
because he is a tariff reformer If a Labour government
desires to examine a proposal for a capital levy, it ought not
to select a banker already in its favour, but to ask the Institute
of Bankers to name its representative And the corollary of
consultation is, at some stage of action, publicity. A govern¬
ment which embarks upon a policy must offer the means of
judging that policy The opinions it has elicited by organised
inquiry are fundamental to that end The evidence it has
collected, the facts at its disposal, can never be refused to its
subjects if it is to build its opinion in the reasoned judgment
of its citizens

Not less integral to the proper control of its powers is
the limitation upon its authority to intervene in the internal
life of other associations That power must be circumscribed
by the principle that intervention is built upon the infraction
by the association of a right that is essential to citizenship.
The best field from which illustrations oi illegitimate inter¬
vention may be taken is that of the relationship between
Church and State. It ought never to be competent for the
State to intervene in the settlement of ecclesiastical doctrine.
It ought never to be competent for the interpretation of
ecclesiastical trusts to be left to the secular courts. That
has always involved an attempt by the lawyers to reduce a


134 A GRAMMAR of politics

church to a body of associated beneficiaries * and to refuse
to its members the power to change their opinions. A church
is never a body of men bound by an unalterable contract to
the worship of certain doctrines; its purposes have a life
embodied in the wills and opinions of its members. If the
latter change, the purpose changes also ; and the disposal of
the property which supports the doctrine is clearly and
unmistakably a matter for the constituted authorities of the
Church. That, at least, is dear so far as property derived
from the dead is concerned ; to rule as the English courts have
ruled is to refuse to a church the right to move outside the
four comers of its original title-deeds. Similarly, too, with
industrial bodies. If trade unions choose to devote their
funds to maintaining their members in the political legislature,
the State has no right to intervene. Associations, in brief,
do not act ultra vires so long as what they do is demonstrably
the act of the assodation and leaves untouched the rights
the State is to protect; and the question of what is an act
of the association is a question to be answered, not by the
scrutiny of doctrinal purposes, but by examination of the organ
that is competent to act in its name. 1

V

We reach here a problem perhaps as difficult as any in
the realm of political sdence. A government, I have argued,
is limited by the purposes that it serves. It has no moral
authority to act ultra vires those purposes. It has no authority,
for instance, to invade the right to freedom of speech, to
protect the employer who enforces impossibly long hours upon
his workers. But how can its acts, whether of omission or
of commission, be adequately scrutinised ? Is the remedy,
as in the United States, to postulate fundamental rules in a
written constitution, and to make them difficult to change

1 See Free Church of Scotland Case Report (ed Ott), p 113; and on the
whole question, my paper on the strict interpretation of ecclesiastics] trusts
in Canadian Law Times, vol 36. pp, 190 S.

• Churches could, I think, easily safeguard the problem of minority
rights to which this theory gives rise by a provision in their constitution
that secession on doctrine shall involve the right to a proportionate share
in the church property


RIGHTS


185


by the temporary holders of power ? Is it necessary, as in
Australia and the United States, to make the judiciary the
guardian of constitutional right, and to confer upon it, as in
those countries, the power to declare void such acts of the
legislature as seem to infringe it ? Or is the answer that of
Mr. Cole, who would, as it seems, construct a special organ
for the exercise of coercive jurisdiction, and find, somehow, a
place therein for the representatives of functions other than
the State ?

The attempt to weigh the respective advantages of what
Lord Bryce has called “ flexible " and " rigid " constitutions
is an impossible one. The balance of merit depends always
upon factors in the State-tradition which are inapplicable
elsewhere. The advantages of rigid constructions are very
great. They enable us to define with some exactness the limits
of legislative power. They prevent some sudden gust of
public opinion from overturning what it is, on a long view,
important to maintain. They enable the nature of institutions
to be more easily apprehended by the mass of men. They
emphasise in a striking manner the things that are deemed
of fundamental import ; 1 and even when, as with the First
Amendment to the American Constitution, the thing of
decisive import suffers serious invasion, the fact that it is
postulated as urgent both mitigates the attack it might
otherwise suffer, and allows its supporters a valuable basis in
tradition for their plea of sanctity.

Yet in actual historic experience the safeguards afforded
by a written constitution are not so straightforward as they
might appear. Things that appear fundamental to one age
appear unnecessary to another ; yet the fact of their appear¬
ance in the framework of the constitution acts as a serious
lever against what may well be desirable change. The con¬
stitution, secondly, will need interpretation. If that is left,
as in France and Belgium, to the legislature, it is in fact
merely confided to the holders of power. If it is left, as in
the United States, to the judiciary, five out of nine judges have
actual control of the constitution ; and the death of a single .
judge may well shift the whole balance of interpretation.

' See the admirable remarks of Bryce, Studies tn History and Jurispru¬
dence, pp, 200 f.


186 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Certainly the Supreme Court of the United States has been
amazingly divided on what is meant by the first and the
fourteenth amendments , and the use of the latter to prevent
the enactment of a minimum wage suggests that there is a
stage at which judicial interpretation means in fact political
pronouncement,' The American system means, in short, that
the ethos of legislation depends on the character of those
appointed to the Supreme Court. It does not seem that this
safeguard of rights is necessarily less frail than that of a
legislative assembly which is checked by the action of an
alert public opinion outside.

Not, indeed, that a flexible system is not open to serious
criticism. If we take the British Constitution as the chief—
to-day almost the sole—example of flexibility, some obvious
considerations emerge. The English constitution is built
upon the unlimited sovereignty of Parliament. It knows no
such thing as fundamental laws , the statutes which govern
the succession to the throne are changed m the same way as
statutes which regulate the sale of intoxicating liquors. The
system of limitations upon the power of government, infer¬
ential^, therefore, of the State, cannot be gleaned at a single
view. Sometimes, as m, lbs Habeas Corpus Act, they are
embodied in a statute , sometimes, as m Eniick v. Carrington,
they aie embodied m a judicial decision. The absence, that
is to say, of a single centie of reference makes the grasp of the
meaning of authority a difficult task in a flexible constitution.
The maintenance there of an ideal system of rights will depend
—supposing that the State in fact embodies such a system—
upon th^existence in the community of one of two condi¬
tions 1 ^ Political power must rest with a minority that is both
upright and educated /citizens must be able, while retaining
supreme power, to choose rulers who are anxious to observe
the theoretic end of the State. In fact, for the most part,
the second only of these conditions is immediately practicable
in Great Britain

But it is at once obvious that such a power as it implies
is a matter beyond jxisitive institutions altogether, though
positive institutions may be important. The quality of rulers

■ Ct Cardozo, Ml supra , Brooks Adams in Centralisation and the 1 aw,

* Bryce, op at , p 160


RIGHTS


137

is always a function of the geneial social character of a people,
and, whatever the checks and balances we may invent, it is
the pressure of the total forces in a community which will
determine that character. The State, in other words, reflects
the complete environment it encounters, and not merely a
section of that environment. It is easy to invent ways and
means of limiting authority ; it is even easy—as in the new
constitution of the German commonwealth—to postulate
magnificent ideals as the purpose at which it aims. But no
amount of institution-making will accomplish the achievement
of that purpose unless the general mass of the people is educated
to appreciate, and therefore to enforce, its meaning; unless,
also, there is in the community approximate equality of
economic power. If those conditions generally obtain, the
system of rights is likely to be realised. Short of them, no
rights of a positive nature can find security of an institutional
kind. We cannot, for instance, so frame the nature of self-
government in industry as to make it a right capable of being
used as the test of statutes. Nor can that be achieved with
a right like the right to work. The mechanisms of their
protection must be sought, not in the State itself, but, as I
shall show later, in the pressure brought to bear upon the
State by other institutions.

That is not, however, the case with rights of which the
essence is a matter of outline rather than of detail. We can
safeguard things like the right to the franchise and the right
to freedom of speech at least to the point where revolution
supervenes to make all rights temporarily cease. Take, for
example, the Habeas Corpus Act of 1670. Everyone agrees
that its presence upon the statute-book is the chief pro¬
tection against, for instance, such an access of terror as
Pitt displayed in the French Revolution. It is possible to
make especially important statutes of that kind capable of
suspension by special procedure. They might be a matter for
such a majority as the Senate of the United States now demands
for treaties. There might be a period of compulsory delay
between their passage and their application. If they are
passed, a special administrative court might be created to deal
with the problems to which they give rise. The penalties for
the invasion of such rights might be so framed as to make


188 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the habit oi Acts of Indemnity rigorously difficult of access
by the executive. I do not think it likely that a referendum
would be of much assistance in this issue. With the weapons
at the disposal of the interests which control a State, the
average population is only too likely to be stampeded into
panic by executive pronouncements. The real needs are two.
There must be an interval in which criticism of authority
can make itself heard. There must be a certainty that the
mere possession of a majority in the legislative assembly is
not the basis of an abuse of power. Beyond these checks, the
main safeguards against abuse lie in the temper induced by
the standard of popular education and the power of organised
groups other than the State effectively to protest against
unwarranted invasion of rights.

The view urged by Mr. Cole is not without a real attractive¬
ness. To postulate a unified interest in the State as an
attainable ideal is one thing; to postulate modem States as
representing that unified interest is not only another, but
also without basis in fact. So long as men share with such
vast inequality in the gain of living, it is obvious that there
is a basic disharmony of interest; and the legal institutions
of the modem State, especially its laws of property, might
well seem devised to maximise that disharmony. It is natural,
therefore, to seek, as Mr. Cole seeks, an organ for the exercise
of the coercive power of the community which prevents its
legal concentration in political institutions. I agree with
Mr. Cole that, in the present phase of social development,
the concentration of coercive power is bound to act as a
hindrance to the transformation of the State. I agree also
that in the State as it now is we have an institution which
cannot make good its claim equally to represent the interests
of its members. It is, frankly, weighted against the poor in
favour of the rich.

But I do not think that a joint ,l Congress of the supreme
bodies representing each of the main functions in Society ” 1
will really solve the problem we confront. For the real issue
is not the paper-construction of such an organ, but weighting
the functions which compose it. Mining it an essential
function; so also is medicine. How are we to decide on

' Social Theory, p. 135 .


RIGHTS


139


the number of members each is to have in such a Congress ?
How are we to weigh the interests of men as members of a
given neighbourhood—men, for instance, in search of an efficient
system of main drainage—against men as members of the
different professions they practise in and out of their neigh¬
bourhood life ? The adventure, as I argued earlier, is an
impossible one. It means that the aspect of man in which
his needs as consumer are broadly identical with his fellow’s
must be selected as the ground upon which co-ordination
takes place. That does not mean the pre-eminence of that
aspect in the sense that it is entitled to a special allegiance.
It does not mean that it is, so to say, invested with the power
compulsorily to arbitrate between the various functions of
men. It means only that, for the purpose of convenience, the
administration of the general rules of the community are
probably better managed by a simple than by a complex
institution, granted the necessary safeguards.

The thing, in fact, at which Mr. Cole aims—the wide
dispersion of authority—can be achieved in simpl er fas hion
than he is prepared to admit . The organ of registration may
remain a legislative assembly. Its power may be mitigated,
as I have suggested, (i) by decentralisation at once functional
and territorial; (2) by building about it organs of prior and
compulsory consultation ; (3) by making the invasion of such
rights as freedom of speech an adventure of the highest
difficulty. These, in the background of an adequate educa¬
tional system and a revised property system, afford as full a
guarantee of natural rights as it is likely that positive insti¬
tutions can affect. It is not necessary, in our anxiety to
prevent the present perversion of the territorial principle, to
sacrifice the obvious administrative convenience it contains.
What is necessary is that territorial unity shall not destroy
functional independence and individual freedom. A State is
not made responsible merely by the subtraction from it of
coercive power. That still leaves the problem open of the
principle upon which coercive power shall be exercised. That
principle will, in fact, be variously interpreted ; and parties
will arise to support and maintain the most antithetic views.
It is, I think, significant that none of Mr. Cole's discussions
of this issue contain a reference to the problem of party ;


140 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Stand the reason, I think, will be found to lie in the fact that
his edifice is inaccessible to an electoral scheme with the
two vital merits of simplicity and intelligibility. A State is
made responsible by informing its co-ordinating power with
notions of justice. It is made to play its due part in the
communal synthesis by making it directly accessible to the
interests which compose that synthesis. It then becomes a
one which partakes of the nature of a many because the many
enter into it and transform it.

All this, of course, is only to assert, as Alexander Hamilton
insisted, that the raw materials of an adequate theory must
be found in human nature. We ought probably to assume that
our best-devised schemes will only produce a small portion
of the beneficent results we expect. We ought certainly
to insist that in seeking to transform the present system we
shall bring into play factors which make possible adjustments
we cannot now foresee. But, at least, for the immediate
future it seems clear that we must surround the adminis¬
trative self-determination of functional units with the territorial
control of the State. It is, of course, true that territorial
propinquity is no longer coincident with community of interest.
A Bolton weaver has more in common with a weaver in
Oldham than he has with a doctor in Bolton. But it is as a
weaver that he has more in common. As a person to whom
the drains and schools of Bolton are important he has more
in common with the doctor than with his fellow weaver. We
must supply the territorial function with its means of response
no less than the vocational function. That means, put briefly,
rights conceived in territorial, as well as rights conceived in
vocational terms; it means that Bolton must be a basis of
representation as well as the weaver’s union. Nor must we
forget that the doctor has an interest in good weaving, as
the weaver has an interest in the existence of a competent
medical profession. While each naturally desires a dominant
administrative control over the interests of his special
vocation, it is obvious that there is also a mutual interest
which requires an institution to maintain it. That mutual
interest is the sphere within which the large outlines of a
system of rights must be defined. I have argued here
that the territorial State is the unit within which, under


RIGHTS 141

adequate safeguards, they are most likely to receive effective*
definition, 1

Any system of rights, therefore, has three essential aspects
from which it must be regarded. There is the interest of the
individual, always, at least ultimately, finally isolated from his
fellow men. There is the interest of the various groups in
and through which his personality finds channels of expression.
There is the interest of the community which is the total
result of the whole pressure of social forces. We cannot
leave the groups within the community to define their rights
by conflict, any more than we can permit individuals so to
determine their rights. We must live by common rules. We
must build an organ which enforces and interprets those
common rules. We must so build it that both group and
individual are safeguarded in their freedom and their equality
so far as institutions can provide a safeguard. For it is well
to realise at once that no system will ever fail to be weighted
in some special interest. There will always be either powerful
individuals or powerful groups who make their way against
others less apt to assertiveness. Our effort must be a search
to the compromise which allows to the largest possible number
a life that is worthy of our resources.


CHAPTER FOUR

LIBERTY AND EQUALITY


I

By liberty I mean the eager maintenance of that atmosphere
in which men have the opportunity to be their best selves.
Liberty, therefore, is a product of rights. A State bnilt
upon the conditions essential to the full development of our
faculties will confer freedom upon its citizens. It will release
their individuality. It will enable them to contribute their
peculiar and intimate experience to the common stock. It
will offer security that the decisions of the government are
built upon the widest knowledge open to its members. It
will prevent that frustration of creative impulse which destroys
the special character of men. Without rights there cannot
be liberty, because, without rights, men are the subjects of
law unrelated to the needs of personality.

Liberty means absence of restraint ; it is essentially a
i negative thing. But regulation, obviously enough, is the
I consequence of gregariousness; for we cannot live together
. without common rules. What is important is that the rules
made should embody an experience I can follow and, in general,
accept. I shall not feel that my liberty is endangered when I
, am prohibited from committing murder. My creative impulses
I do not suffer frustration when I am bidden todriveon*a given side
> of the road. I am reasonably restrained when the law ordains
that I must educate my children. Historic experience has
evolved for us rules of convenience which promote right living;
and to compel obedience to them is a justifiable limitation of
freedom. To permit such compulsion is to invade liberty;
but it is not necessarily to destroy the end liberty seeks to
serve,

142


148


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY

That is not, of course, to argue that every such prohibition
is justified merely because it is made by an authority legally
competent to issue it. Govenugepts mayin fact invade
liberty even while they claim to be acting in the common
interest. The exclusion of Nonconformists from full political
privilege was an invasion of liberty. The restriction of the
franchise to the owners of property was an invasion of liberty.
The Combination Acts of 1799-1800 destroyed the liberty of
working men. They could not realise their best selves because
they could not unite in the effort to translate their experience
into terms of statute. It is, in other words, essential to freedom
that the prohibitions issued should be built upon the wills of
those whom they affect. I must be able to feel that my will
has access to avenues through which it can impress itself
upon the holders of power. If I have the sense that the orders
issued are beyond my scrutiny or criticism, I shall be, in a
vital sense, unfree.

Liberty, therefore, is not merely obedience to a rule.
My self is too distinct from other selves to accept a given
order as good unless I feel that my will is embodied in its
substance. I shall, of course, be compelled to endure irksome
restraints. I must fill up income-tax returns; I must light
the lamps upon my own motor-car at a set time. But no
normal person will regard restrictions of this kind as so
unrelated to his will as to constitute coercion of it. Where
restraint becomes an invasion of liberty is where the given
prohibition acts so as to destroy that harmony of impulses
which comes when a man knows that he is doing something
it is worth while to do. Restraint is felt as evil when it frusJ
trates the life of spiritual enrichment. What each of us
desires in life is room for our personal initiative in the things
that add to our moral stature. What is destructive of our
freedom is a system of prohibitions which limits the initiative
there implied. And it is important that the initiative be a
continuous one. The minds of citizens must active minds.
They must be given the habit of thought. They must be
given the avenues through which thought can act. They
must be accustomed to the exercise of will and conscience
if they are to be alert to the duties implied in their function
as citizens. Liberty consists in nothing so much as the


144 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

'encouragement of the will based on the instructed conscience
of humble men.

In such a background, we cannot accept Mill’s famous
attempt to define the limits of State interference. All conduct
is social conduct in the sense that whatever I do has results
upon me as a member of society. There are certain freedoms
I must have in order to be more than an inert recipient of
orders; there is an atmosphere about those freedoms of
quick vigilance without which they cannot be maintained.
Liberty thus involves in its nature restraints, because the
separate freedoms I use are not freedoms to~ 3 estroy the
freedoms of those with whom I live. My freedoms are avenues
of choice through which I may, as I deem fit, construct for
myself my own course of conduct. And the freedoms I must
possess to enjoy a general liberty are those which, in their
sum, will constitute the path through which my best self is
capable of attainment. That is not to say it will be attained.
It is to say only that I alone can make that best self, and that
without those freedoms I have not the means of manufacture
at my disposal.

Freedoms are therefore opportunities which history has
shown to be essential to the development of personality.
And freedoms are inseparable from rights because, otherwise,
their realisation is hedged about with an uncertainty which
destroys their quality. If, for example, my utterance of
opinion is followed by persecution, I shall, in general, cease
to express my mind. I shall cease, in fact, to be a citizen ;
and the state for me ceases to have meaning. For if I cannot
embody my experience in its will, it ceases, sooner or later,
to assume that I have a will at all Nothing, therefore, is so
likely to maintain a condition of liberty as the knowledge
that the invasion of rights will result in protest, and, if need
; be, resistance. Liberty is nothing if it is not the organised
and conscious power to resist in the last resort. The implied
threat of contingent anarchy is a safeguard against the abuse
of government.

I have set liberty here in the context of opportunity, and,
in its turn, opportunity in the context of the State, That
is the only atmosphere in which it admits of organisation.
We can create channels; we cannot force men to take advan-


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY 145

tage of those channels. We can, further, create channels only
in limited number. A man may feel that all that he cares
for in life depends upon success in love ; we can remove the
barriers of caste or race or religion which, in the past, have
barred his access to that love. But we cannot guarantee to
him that his plea will be successful. The avenues which
organisation can create are always limited by the fact that
the most intimate realisation of oneself is personal and built
upon isolations which evade social control.

Yet the social control is important. If, in the last resort,
the State cannot make me happy, certainly it can, if it so
will, compel unhappiness. It can invade my private life in
wanton fashion. It can degrade me as a political unit in a
fashion which distinguishes me from other citizens. It can
protect an economic order which " implicates,” in William
James’ phrase, unfreedom. None of these things is, of course,
a genuinely separate category ; at most the distinction is one
of convenience. For liberty is a definite whole, because the
life I lead is,a totality in which I strive to realise a whole
personality as harmonious. Yet each of these aspects is
sufficiently clear to warrant a separate word.

But it must first be urged that in this context State-action
is action by government. It means the maintenance of rules
which affect my liberty. Those rules will be issued by persons,
and, normally, those persons will be the government. Theories
which seek to differentiate between State and government'
almost always ignore the substance of the administrative act.
Rights withheld mean rights which the holders of power
withhold. To say that in a democratic theory the mass of
citizens are the holders of power is to miss the vital fact that
the people, in the pressure of daily affairs, cannot exercise
that power in detail in States of the modem size. They may
have influence and opinion; but these are not the power of
government. It is the cumulative force of administrative
acts which are the heart of the modem State. The principles
behind these acts are, of course, of prime importance. But
principles may be invalidated by the method of their ap¬
plication ; and it is governments which have the actual
administration of them.

Liberty, therefore, is never real unless the government

10


146


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

ran be calle d to account; and it should always be called to
account when it invades rights It will always invade them
unless its organisation prevents it from being weighted in
some special interest The three aspects of liberty I have
noted are always relative to this situation. By private
liberty, for example, I mean the opportunity to exercise
iireedbm of choice in those areas of life where the results of
my effort mainly affect me in that isolation by which, at least
ultimately, I am always surrounded Religi on is a good
instance of this aspect 1 am not truly free to decide without
hindrance upon my creed unless there is not merely no penalty
on any form of religious faith, but, also, no advantage of a
political kind attached to one form rather than another
When the government of England denied public employment
to Dissenters it invaded private hbertv It did not directly
punish ; but, at least, jt offered special benefit to an alter¬
native faith When France repealed the Edict of Nantes it
invaded private liberty , for the honourable precession of
religious conviction involved political outlawry *

These are simple instances In the complex modern State
invasions of private liberty mav be more subtle Private
liberty may be denied when the poor c lt!Zen lb unable to
secure adequate legal protection in the Courts of Justice.
A divorce law, for example, which gives the nch access to
its facilities but, broadly, makes them difficult, if not impos¬
sible, for the poor, invades their -private freedom So does
fthe demand for excessive bail, so, too, when the poor prisoner,

S nth inadequate counsel, confronts the legal abilit\ at the
ommand of government Private liberty is thu.- that aspect
f wtnch the substance is mainly personal to a man's self
It is the opportunity to be fully himself in the private relations
of life It is the chance practically to avail hnr.self of the
safeguards evolved for the maintenance ol those relations
, Political liberty means the power to be active in affairs
• of State It means tha“t I can let my mind play freely about
the substance of public business I must be able without
hindrance to add my special experience to the general sum of
experience I must find no barriers that are not general
barriers m the way of access to positions of authority I
must be able to announce my opinion and to concert with


147


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY

others in the announcement of opinion. For political liberty
to be real, two conditio ns are essential. I must be educated
to the poinfwEere I can express what I want in a way that
is intelligible to others. Anyone who has seen the dumb
inarticulateness of the poor will realise the urgency of educa¬
tion in this regard. Nothing is more striking than the way
in which our educational systems train the children of rich
or well-born men to habits of authority while the children
of the poor are trained to habits of deference. Such a division
of attitude can never produce political freedom, because a
class trained to govern will exert its power because it is
conscious of it, while a class trained to deference will not
fulfil its wants because it does not know how to formulate
its demands. Combination in the period of experience will,
of course, as with trade unions, do something to restore the
balance ; but it will never fully compensate for the defect of
early training. For the inculcation of deferential habits will
never produce a free people. It is only when men have
learned that they themselves make and work institutions that
they can learn to adjust them to their needs.

The second condition of political liberty is the provision
of an honest and straightforward supply of news. Those who
are to decide must have truthful material upon which to
decide. Their judgment must not be thwarted by the pre¬
sentation of a biased case. We have learned, especially of
late years, that this is no easy matter. A statesman can
sometimes be made what the press chooses to make him. A
policy may be represented as entirely good or bad by the
skilful omission of relevant facts. Our civilisation has stimu¬
lated the creation of agencies which live deliberately on the
falsification of news. It would, indeed, not be very wide of
the mark to argue that much of what had been achieved by‘
the art of education in the nineteenth century had been frus¬
trated by the art of propaganda in the twentieth. The problem
is made more complex than in the past by the area over which
our judgment must pass. We have no leisure to survey that
area with comprehensive accuracy. We must, very largely,
take our facts on trust. But if the facts are deliberately
perverted, our judgment will be unrelated to the truth. A
people without reliable news is, sooner or later, a people


148 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

without the basis of freedom. For to exercise one s judgment
in a miasma of distortion is, ultimately, to go disastrously
astray,

By e conom ic liberty I mean security and the opportunity
to find reasonable significance in the earning of one’s daily
bread. I must, that is, be free from the constant fear of
unemployment and insufficiency which, perhaps more than
any other inadequacies, sap the whole strength of personality,
i must be safeguarded against the wants of to-morrow I must
know that 1 can build a home, and make that home a means
of self-expression I must be able to make my personality
flow through my effort as a producer of services, and find
m that effort the capacity of enrichment For, otherwise, I
become a stunted and shrunken being in that aspect of myself
which lends colour and texture to all that I am Either I
must, in this sense, be free, or I become one of those half-
souis who are found in the slums and prisons as the casualties
of civilisation Nor is this all 1 must be more than the
recipient of orders which 1 must obey unthink Jigly because
my labour is only a commodity bought and sold m the market,
like coal and boots and chairs Without these freedoms, or,
at least, an access to them, men are hardly less truly slaves
than when they were exposed for purchase and sale

Economic liberty, therefore, implies democracy in industry
That means two things It means that Industrial government
is subject to the system of rights which obtain for men as
citizens, and it means that industrial direction must be of
a character that makes it the rule of laws made by co-operation
and not by compulsion Obviously, the character of those
laws must depend upon the needs of production Those needs
leave less room for spontaneity than is true ither of private
or of political liberty A man is entitled to be original about
his politics or his religion , he is not entitled to be original
wnen he is working with others, say, in a mtro-gl>cerine
factory But he is entitled to co-operate in the setting of
the standards by which he is judged industrially and in the
application of those standards Otherwise, he lives at the
behest of other men His initiative becomes not the free
expression of his own individuality, but a routine made from
without and enforced upon him by fear of starvation A


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY


149


system built upon fear is always fatal to the release of the
creative faculties, and it is therefore incompatible with liberty.


II

Freedom, therefore, will not be achieved for the mass of
men save under special guarantees It can never, firstly,
exist in the presence of special privilege Unless 1 enjoy the
same access to power' as others, I live in an atmosphere of
contingent frustration It does not matter that I shall
probably not desire to take full advantage of that access
Its denial will mean that I accept an allotted station as a
permanent condition of my hfe , and that, in its turn, is fatal
to the spontaneity that is of the essence of freedom Anyone
who has seen the political inertia of Enghsh rural life will
have realised how slow to mature is the plant of initiative
The Enghsh agricultural labourer lived for so long m an
atmosphere of frustrated impulse that, when he was raised
to the status of citizenship, he rately, in general, knew how
to take advantage of his opportunities The genius of a
Joseph Arch might stir him into angry and sudden revolt
against intolerable conditions, but he was too habituated to
uncritical inertia to persist when opposition came So, too,
the endurance of oppression by negro daces w r as the outcome
of their wonted subjection to a regime of privilege They
lost the habit of creativeness They became, m fact, those
“ animate tools ” which Anstotle described as the charac¬
teristic of the natural slave Men who see others selected to
govern by a principle other than their own choice tend, over
a period, to believe that these have come to govern by nature.
They will lose both the will and the power to act for them¬
selves They will learn to think that institutions made by
their ancestors are the necessary foundations of the State. '
They will think it their duty to accept where, in truth, it is
their duty to inquire. Whenever men accept, their habits,
sooner or later, come to be formed at the will of others They
lose the ability to realise their own good Their personality
lies at the disposal of others whose action is not instinct, at
least inherently, with a desire for the good of all; for those


180 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

who desire the good of all begin by the abolition of special
privilege.

Nor must we omit here the influence of such privilege
upon those who possess it. They are free in the sense that
they can build their own system of restraints. But their
restraints will be manipulated for their own advantage. They
will come to regard those outside their own circle as inferior
beings. They will insist that their subordination is part of a
natural order. They will even argue, like the slave-owners
of the South, that exclusion from privilege is a benefit to
those so excluded. They will discover special virtues in
themselves, as when Macaulay argued that the middle class
is " the natural representative of the human race.’’ They
will tend to identify demands for the admission to power of
the unemandpated as the very definition of evil. They will
part with their power, too often, only at the point of the
sword; for voluntary abdication from spedal privilege has
been the exception, and not the rule, in history. They will
therefore seek at all costs to maintain their authority ; and
that will mean, most often, die further depression of the
unfree. So Lord Sidmouth passed the Six Acts lest incon¬
venient criticism be made of an effete political regime. And
the reaction from such policy will, as in France and Russia,
tend to be proportionately violent to the degree of repression
it has encountered. Spedal privilege is incompatible with
freedom because the latter quality belongs to all alike in
their character as human beings. We cannot differentiate
between men until we have shown those excluded from a share
in power that thtir exdusion is in their own interest. There
seems no reason to suppose that the demonstration can be
made.

Nor, s econdly, can there be liberty where the rights of
some depend upon the pleasure of others. Our common rules
must bind those who exercise power as well as those who are
the subjects of power. No groups of men must be in a. position
to encroach upon my enjoyment of the rights which attach to

J? a citizen. That is not the case to-day. My livelihood
may be destroyed by the whim of an employer. The m ining
of my wage-standard may be injured by the cornering of the
market in some essential commodity. The whole quality of


151


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY

my citizenship may be impaired by the manner m which the
wealth of the community is distributed ; and while I seem
to enjoy political freedom, the absence of economic freedom
may, in fact, render illusory my hope of a harmony of impulses.
At every point, therefore, where the action of a man or group
of men may impinge upon the exercise of rights a control is
wanted which will frustrate their power so to impinge. That
control, I submit, is, above all, a matter for the State, because
it is upon the plane of citizenship that the undifferentiated
interests of men come most clearly mto view. State control
means, in daily fact, control by go/emment. It ther efore
followsJhat the action of all men who* by what, they do, have
the fate of others in their hands, is set in the perspective of
limitation by the power of authority.

■fhis, it should be added, does not necessarily mean inter¬
vention by the government at every turn and twist of individual
life. It means the planning of the principles of social action.
It means the absence from social organisation of those uncer¬
tainties which result in. social loss and are deliberately planned
by mdividuals. We cannot abolish the uncertainties due to
such natural phenomena as earthquakes; but we can at
least destroy the uncertainty that comes when, say, the
Standard Oil Trust drives competitors out of the field by
making an agreement for differential rates with the Pennsyl¬
vania Railroad . 1 We can at least prevent the dismissal of
teachers from their posts because some utterance has proved
displeasing to the trustees they serve . 1 Our principles of
control are general principles ; but because their application
will need to be as various as the problems they indicate, they
will, as a ruie, require decentralised administration.

All this is to assume, thirdly , that the incidence of State
action is. unbiased. In a full sense, douBtlessj we aanilot
achieve that ideal. In any society the varied personalities
of which it is composed, the weight of the different interests
involved, the degrees of effort men will make, the amount
of knowledge they will possess, are certain to bend its authority
in the support of some special interest. The most we can

1 Cf. H. D. Lloyd, Wealth against Commonwealth, pp 87 S.

' Cf. Ligbtner Witmer, The Nearing Case , and, m general, Upton Sinclair,
The Goose Stop.


152 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

do for the maint enan ce of freedom is to seek that system
which will minimise the bias involved. That is why rights
assume so vast an importance; they are the guarantee of a
minimum bias. They give us what assurance we may have
that the State power will not be perverted to the use of some
few. But it is important to insist that it is bound to suffer
perversion unless men ar e unce asingly.-yigilant—about its
exercise. Those who consented to the passage in 1917 of the
American Espionage Act did not realise that it would become
the parent of similar legislation destined to protect the most
powerful industrial autocracy in the world from criticism of
its foundations. Those who voted in the House of Commons
for the Restoration of Order in Ireland, October 1920, can
hardly have expected that it would be used to deprive British
citizens of the ordinary resource of justice. 1 Obviously, few
things are more urgent than the scrutiny of the problem of
liberty in the terms that are most likely to prevent the opera¬
tion of that bias. A citizen-body that is quick to resent its
presence, and willing, in the last resort, to compel its repudia¬
tion, has the most obvious guarantee that it will be minimised.
But even such a body of citizens as that of ancient Athens,
to whom, as Pericles said in the great Funeral Speech, “ the
‘‘secret of liberty is courage," will have need of the channels
through which courage may flow to its appointed purpose.

Ill

Those channels converge towards the concept of equality. *"
No idea is more difficult in the whole realm of political science.
To minds so ardent for liberty as T ocque ville and LorcLActon
liberty and e qua lity were antithetic things. It is a drastic
conclusion. But it turns in the case of both men, upon a
misunderstanding of what equality unplies. Equality does
not mean identity of treatment. There can be no ultimate
identity of treatment so long as men are different in want and
capacity and need. The purpose of society would be frustrated
at the outset if the nature of a mathematician met an identical
response with that to the nature of a bricklayer. Equality

■ Though, of course, Re*, v O'Brien fortunately prevented the fulfilment
of the Home Secretary's desire.


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY 15 S

doe s not even imply identit v-ol-rewatdior effort so iong_as.lhe
differ ence in re ward d oes not jmahle-mc, by Us magnitude, to
invade the rights of oth ers.

Equality,, broadly, is a coherence of ideas each one of which
needs special examination. Undoubtedly, it implies funda-
frientally a certain-level ling proc ess. It means that no man
shall be so placed in society that he can overreach his neighbour
to the extent which constitutes a denial of the latter’s citizen¬
ship. It means that my realisation of my best self must
involve as its logical result the realisation by others of their
best selves. It means such arc ordering of social forces as will
1 balance a share in_the toil of liv ing with a shar einits gain
lalso. It means that my share in that gain must be ade¬
quate for the purposes of citizenship. It implies that even
if my voice be weighed as less weighty than that of another, it
must yet receive consideration in the decisions that are made.
The meaning, ultimately, of equality surely lies in the fact
that the very differences in the nature of men require mech¬
anisms for the expression of their wills that give to each its due,
hearing. The power, in fact, of the ideal of equality lies in
the historical evidence that so far in the record of the State the
wills of men have been unequally answered. Their freedom,
where it has been gained, has accordingly been built upon the
unfreedom of others. Inequality, in a word, means the rule
of limited numbers because it secures freedom only to, ..th ose
whose will is secure of respect. They will dominate the State
and use its power for their own purposes. They will make the
fulfilment of their private desires the criterion of public good.

Equality, therefore, means first of all the absence olspecial
privilege. I have already discussed the general meaning of
that phrase. In the penumbra of equality, it means, in the
political sphere, that my will, as a factor in the_counting of
heads, is equal to the will of anyjjther. It means that I can
move forward to any office in the State for which men are
prepared to choose me. It means that I am not to find that
there are persons in the State whose authority is qualitatively
different from my own. Whatever rights inhere in another
i by virtue of his being a citizen must inhere, and to the same
extent, in me also. There is no justification in such a view
for the existence of an hereditary second chamber. For,


154


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

obviously, in the second generation of such an assembly men
exercise political authority not in virtue of their own qualities,
but by reason of parental accident. So, also, no office that
carries with it power can ever be rightly regarded as an incor¬
poreal hereditament, for that is to associate impor tant functions
with qualities other than .fitness for their, perf o rm ance. The
sexclusibiTof ahy man, or body of men, from access to the
kvenues of authority is always, that is to say, a denial of their
'freedom.

Equality means, in fhe.second place, thaLadequate oppor¬
tunities are laid open t o all. By adequate opportunities we
eannot^^y 'eqi^ opportunities in a sense that implies iden¬
tity^ orig inal chance. The native endowments of men are
by no meani equal. Children who are brought up in an
atmosphere where things of the mind are accounted highly
are bound to start the race of life with advantages no legisla¬
tion can secure. Parental character will inevitably affect pro¬
foundly the quality of the children whom it touches. So
long, therefore, as the family endures—and there seems little
reason to anticipate or to desire its disappearance—the varying
environments it will create make the notion of equal oppor¬
tunities a fantastic one.

But that is not to say that the opportunities created may
not be adequate. We can at least see first that all men are
given such training as seems, in the light of experience, most
likely to develop their faculties to the full. We can at least
surround those circumstances with the physical media without
which the training of the mind can hardly be successful We
can, where we discover talent, at least make it certain that it
does not perish for want of encouragement. These conditions
do not exist to-day. Children who come hungry to school
cannot, on the average, profit by education in like degree to
those who are well fed. The student who is trying to do his
work in a room which serves for the various tasks of life cannot
find that essential isolation without which the habit of thought
can rarely be cultivated. The boy or girl who has to assume
that at fourteen they are bound to pass into the industrial world
rarely acquires that frame of mind which searches with eager¬
ness for the cultivation of intelligence. In the modern world,
'broadly speaking, opportunity is a matter of parental drcum-


155


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY

stance. Boys of a certain social status may assume that they
wHTpass from the secondary school to the university. Boys
whose parents are, broadly, manual workers will in the vast
majority of cases be inevitably destined to manual work also.
There is no reason to decry either the value or the dignity of
manual work ; but there is every r eason to examin e the social
adequacy of a system which does not at every point associate
the best Training available with those whose qualities.-most
fit them to benefit by that training We do not want—
possibly we cannot afford—to prolong the period of education
unduly. But no State has established conditions of reasonable
adequacy until the period of education is sufficiently long, first,
to ensure that the citizen knows how to use his jnind, and
second, that those of special capacity are given that_further
training which prevents the wastage of their talent.

No one can deny that this wastage to-day is enormous.>
Any student of the results of adult education in Europe will
have realised how great is the reservoir of talent we leave
unused until it is too late The sacrifices to-day involved
when the average manual worker seeks the adequate education
of his children are sacrifices we have no right to demand.
Often enough, the training of one child is built upon the
conviction of others to a life of unremitting toil. The circum¬
stances which those who live by intellectual work know to be
essential to its performance are, as a matter of definition almost,
denied to the vast majority of the population. And since
citizenship is largelyajnatter of the use of trained intelligence,
it is obvious, accordingly, that its substance is denied to all
save a fraction of the community. Our business, therefore, is
to assure such an education to all as will make every vocation,
however humble, one that does not debar those who follow it
from the life of intelligence. That certainly means an exten¬
sion of the period within which the earning of one’s living is
impossible. It means also that even after the earning period
has commenced there are full opportunities for the devotion
of leisure to intellectual ends. It means, thirdly, that those
who devote themselves to the business of teaching represent
the best minds at the service of the community. In the
modern State the teacher has a responsibility far greater than
that which devolves upon any other citizens; and unless he


156 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

teaches from a full mind and a full heart he cannot release the
forces which education has in leash.

Nothing in all this denies the probability that mental
qualities are inherited and that, other things being equal, the
children of able parents will be abler than the children of
average parents. But it does deny the equation, characteristic
of the modem State, between ability and material position.
The average trade-union leader cannot afford to send his sons
to the university; but the ability of the average trade-union
leader is probably not inferior to that of the average banker or
the average bishop. Where, that is to say, the inequalities of
our system are not due to natural causes, there is a clear case
for their remedy. Nor can we hope to discover the existence
of capacity unless our system provides for its discovery. It
may do so to-day in the case of the rich ; assuredly it does not
do so in the case of the poor. And it is urgent to remember
.that, important as nature may be, it requires an adequate
nurture if it is to function satisfactorily. The present in¬
equalities are not referable to principle. We have therefore to
define the outlines of such a system as build the inequalities we
admit upon the needs of society. At present they most largely
arise from the impact of the property system upon the structure
of the State. But what is reflected by the property system is
less ability to serve the community than ability to gain
economic power without reference to the quality of wants
supplied.

The provision of adequate opportunity is, therefore, one of
the basic conditions of equality, and it is mainly founded upon
the training we offer to citizens. For the power that ulti¬
mately counts in society is the power to utilise knowledge; and
disparities of education result, above all, in disparities in the
ability to use that power. I am not pleading for equality of
function. I am pleading only for the obvious truth that
without education a man is not so circumstanced that he knows
how to make the best of himself and that therefore, for him,
the purpose of society is, ab initio, frustrated. Once men are
in that situation where they can know themselves,- the use
they make of their opportunities becomes subject to principles
of which equality is only one.

But if we agree, as I have argued earlier, that a democratic


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY 157

State regards its members as equally entitled to happiness, it
follows that such differences as exist must not be differences
inexplicable in terms of reason Distinctions of wealth or
status must be distinctions to which all men can attain and
they must be required by the common welfare If a State
permits the existence of an hereditary aristocracy it must be
because it is capable of proof that an hereditary aristocracy
multiplies the chances of each man’s realising his best self.
If we are to have an economic system m which the luxury of
a few is paralleled by the misery of the many, it must be
because the common welfare requires that luxury In each
case the proposition is open to historical disproof An here¬
ditary aristocracy is bound, sooner or later, to use its political
power to general disadvantage, unless, like the peerage of
France, it has ceased to be anything but a faded memory A
State divided into a small number of rich and a large number of
poor will always develop a government manipulated by the
rich to protect the amenities represented bv their property.
It therefore follows that the inequalities of any social system
are justified only as it can be demonstrated that the level of
service they procure are obviously higher because of their
existence It is obvious that a general must have larger
powers than a private because, thereby, the purpose of an
army is more likely to be fulfilled It is obvious that a states¬
man in office must be so remunerated that he is not oppressed
bv narrow material cares . and that might well involve placing
him m a higher financial rank than a bootmaker or a shop
assistant In each case the measure of difference is con¬
ceived in social terms It is set in a principle which is demon¬
strably rational It is fitting the circumstances of function to
the environment of which it has need

Such a view admits, at least as a matter of theory, of fairly
simple statement in institutional terms The urgent claims
of all must be met before we can meet the particular claims of
some The differences in the social or economic petition of
men can only be admitted after a minimum basis of civilisation
is attained by the community as a whole That^mimmum
basis must admit of my realising the implications of person¬
ality Above that level, the advantages of the situation I
occupy must be advantages necessary' to the performance of


166


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


ft social function. The advantages I enjoy must be the result
of my own effort, because they are the return to me for my own
services, and I am clearly not entitled to enjoy them as the
result of someone else's services. One man is not entitled to
a house of twenty rooms until all people are adequately housed ;
(and one man, even in that environment, is not entitled to a
(house of twenty rooms because his lather was a great advocate
tor a large industrialist. The things that are due to me are the
pghts I must enjoy in order to be a citizen, and the differential
jadvantages which society adjudges inherent in the particular
occupation 1 follow. We may, in other words, have Bel-
gravias. if their existence is a necessary condition of social
welfare; but we are not entitled to have Beigravias until we
have secured the impossibility of Poplar’s existence.

If all this is true, equality is most largely a problem in
proportions. There is an aspect in which the things without
which life is meaningless must be accessible to all without
distinction in degree or kind. All men must eat and drink
and obtain shelter. But those needs are, in their turn, propor¬
tionate to what they do. My wants are my claims to find a
harmony of impulses. I do not Want the same harmony if I
am a miner as I shall want if I am a surgeon. But the system
which obtains must not satisfy the claims of the surgeon at
the expense of the miner’s claims. My urgent needs are not
less urgent than the needs of any other person, and they are
entitled to equal satisfaction. Once urgency is satisfied
superfluity becomes a problem of so fixing the return to
service that each man can perform his function with the
maximum return to society as a whole.

In this aspect, the problem of proportions is largely an
^economic problem. It is a question of the methods we use to
determine the claim of each citizen upon the social dividend,
and of the environment which surrounds the application of
those methods. There have been famous answers to this
problem. We have been told that response should be made
in terms of need, or in terms of contribution ; it has been
insisted that identity of response is alone adequate. Of these
solutions that which would reward me by what I do for society
is certainly the least satisfactory. For it is impossible in any
genuine way to measure service. We cannot say what Newton


159


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY

or Lister, Shakespeare or Robert Owen were " worth " to
their fellow-citizens We cannot measure the contribution
of a banker against the contribution of a bricklayer. Often
enough, as m the case of Galileo, for example, we may not be
able to see how vast in truth the contribution is Nor, it may
be argued, is the communistic solution adequate For, in the
first place, there is no total identity of needs between men ,
nor is their effort so equal as to merit an identical return Thq
communistic principle is adequate up to the point wherq
human urgencies are in question , it is not adequate after that
point And it is adequate only so far as its application wins
the result of a deliberate effort on the part of those whose
needs are satisfied to do work of civic quality And since to
do work of civic quality involves differentiation of function,
it is, I think, clear that when the primary needs of all men
are met, the differences they encounter must be differences
their function requires , requirement involving always the
context of social benefit

But this, it will be argued is to assume sufficiency It
implies that there is in fact enough fo go round, whereas we
know that the productivity of men does not suffice for their
wants What we ought rather to do is to allow the free play
of capacity to win response to its need and let those prosper
who show the power to tnumph in the race The answer
involved m this attitude is far less simple than it seems. If
the State exists for social good, " capacity,” can only mean
capacity to add to social good It is not m the least certain
that the exercise of talent in a society like our own does in
fact result m social benefit Capacity, in short, must run in
the leading-strings of principle It must be excited to the
end our institutions have in view And since that end is the
achievement of happiness for each individual, it seems obvious
that we must, if the margin be insufficient, suffer equally by
its insufficiencies We can never, therefore, as a matter of
principle, justify the existence of differences until the point
is reached when the primary claims of men win a full response.
I have no right to cake if my neighbour, because of that
right, is compelled to go without bread Any social organisa¬
tion from which this basis is absent by denying equality denies
all that gives meaning to the personality of men


160 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Equality, therefore, involves up to the margin of sufficiency
{identity of response to primary needs. And that is what is
smeant by justice. We are rendering to each man his own by
Igiving him what enables him to be a man. We are, of course,
therein protecting the weak and limiting the power of the
strong. We so act because the common welfare includes the
welfare of the weak as well as of the strong. Grant, as we
may well grant, that this involves a payment by society to
men and women who limp after its vanguard, the quality of
the State depends on its regarding their lives as worth pre-
v serying. "TcTact otherwise is to regard them not as persons,
but as instruments. It is to deny that their personality
constitutes a claim. It is deliberately to weight institutions
against a section of the community. If they are to harmonise
their impulses in the effort after happiness, such bias is inad¬
missible. For it is utilising their service not for their own
well-being, but for the well-being of others. That is essen¬
tially the definition of slavery.

It is no answer to this view to urge that ii bases social
organisation upon a principle hitherto inoperative in history.
The decay of previous systems has been most largely based on
the fact that it was inoperative. Men have seen institutions
pass, or have co-operated to destroy institutions, precisely
because they did not see in them the forces vHiich sought
response to what made them men. Nor are we seeking to
compel all citizens to win from life an identical response. . We
seek identity only up to the level where the facts insist upon
identity. W'e argue that some will not starve quietly if others
have abundance. We urge that the conference of knowledge
upon some while others are excluded from its benefits is, in
fact, their exclusion from the purpose of ^he State. And
no other principle, as a working system, will effect.the results
the State has in view. For immediatel y w e admit privilege
within the area of equal ne.ed, it will use every weapon at its
disposal to multiply its access to special benefits. The history
of privileges is not a history of voluntary abdication in terms
of social welfare; it is rather the history of a careful limita¬
tion of the idea of social welfare to those who enjoy the
opportunity it offers. It is only, as a consequence, by making
identity the basis of our institutions, and differences an answer


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY 161

to the necessities of social functions that we can make our
society call into play the individuality of men.

I shall inquire later into the principles upon which those
differences may be organised. Here it is immediately
important to insist on certain conditions upon which alone
that basis of identity may be maintained. A first essential'
is approximate equality of wealth. I do not mean by that
the absence of varying rates_of payment for effort. I mean
only that the rates oFpayment shall not so differ that merely
in virtue of those differences men can exert an unequal pressure
upon the fabric of institutions.

That unequal pressure obviously exists to-day. There are
men in every community whose power is built not upon what
they are or do, but upon the possessions they embody. The
influence they exercise is not a tribute to themselves but an
onering to their wealth. They act by owning. They com¬
mand the service of others to the performance of functions
.built upon a private will not necessarily relevant to the social
welfare. They cajrdirect the flow of production into channels
notable only fot^their wastefulness. They can dominate the
supply of ne^ws, and so influence to their own ends the working
of pqbtfcal institutions. They can adjust the economic
po\yet of the community to purposes fatal to the welfare of
those\who have nothing but their labour to sell. The desire,
for instance, of the great iron masters of France to dominate
the heavy industries of Europe may well send the next
generation to die on the battlefield. Where there are
great inequalities of fortune, there is always inequality of'
treatm ent. It is only when no man merely by virtue
of his possessions can influence the course of affairs that 1
the equal interest of men in the results of the political
process can secure validation. The surest way to that
end is to prevent..those disparities of wealth which.permit
the owners of fortune to manipulate unfairly the m echanj sms
of power.

Broadly, I am urging that great inequalities of_ wealth
myake impossible the attainment of freedom. It niean^ the
dictation of the physical and mental circumstances which
surround the less fortunate. It means the control of the
engines of government to their detriment. The influence of‘

11


103 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

• the great corporations upon the legislative system of the
United States is only a supreme example of that control.
Hardly less deleterious is the way in which it controls the
i ntellectual environment it encounters. It is able to weight
the educational system in its interest. It is able, by the
rewards it offers, to affect the propertyless brain-worker to
its service. Since the judiciary will be largely selected from
its paid advocates, legal decisions will largely reflect the
lessons of its experience Even the Churches will preach a
gospel which is permeated by their dependence upon the
support of the wealthy.

Political equality,-therefore, is ne cer reaj unless it is accom-
\ panied by virtual economic equality; political power,
'otherwise, is bound to be the handmaid of economic power.
The recognition of this dependence is in the main due to the
explanation of historic evolution, and it is, indeed, almost
as old as the birth of scientific politics. Aristotle pointed out
the equation between democracy and the rule of the poor,
between oligarchy and the rule of the rich The struggle
"to remedy economic disparity is the key t> Roman his tor/ ,
jit is at the root of English agrarian discontent. It underlies
the sermons of John Ball, the Utopia ox More, the Occam of
Harrington. The early history of socialism most largely
the record of a perception that the concentration of property
other than labour-power in a few hands is fatal to the purpose
of the State. It was that perception which Marx, in the
Communist Manifest, made the foundation of the most
formidable political philosophy in the modem world For
though the materialistic interpretation of history is an over¬
emphasis of one link in the chain of causation, it is the Lnk
most intimately related to the experience of oidinary men.
It is overwhelming!v right \n its insistence that .either the
State must dominate property, or property will dominate, the
State. '

For, as Madison wrote,' " the only durable source of faction
is jjroperty.’' But it is obvious that to Txase the differences
between men on a contest for economic wealth is to destroy
the possibility of a well-ordered commonwealth. It is to
excite all the qualities in men—envy, arrogance, hatred,
* Tht Fcdaratist, No. X.


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY 168

vanity—which prevent the emergence of social unity I Lis
to emphasise a competition based on their separation^nstead
of a competition based upon their mutual interest As soon
as we postulate approximate equality of wealth, our methods
of social organisation enable us to respond to men’s needs m
terms of the substance of those needs We are the more
bound to this effort immediately we admit the logic of universal
suffrage For to confide to the mass of men the control of
ultimate political power is broadly to admit that the agencies
of the State must be utilised to respond to their needs They
mvolve, if they are to be satisfied such a distribution of
influence over authority a*- will balance fairly the incidence
of its results among the members of society It means, that
is, that I must adjust rm scale of wants to so. :al welfare as
that is organised in terms of a valuation which equally weights
the primary needs of citi7ens and that valuation remains
ineffective if my power is a function not of my personality,
but of my property

But vir tual equality in economic p ower means jraore than
approximate equality of wealth I* means that the .authority
which exerts that pow~er must b r subject to the rules of demo
e ra tic governance It mean' the abrogation of unfettered
and irresponsible will in tin industrial world It involves
building decision* on pnnciphs which can be explained, and
the relation of those principles to th« service any given
industry is seekmg to render The authority qf a medical -
officer who eders the isolation of an infected bouse is
intelligible , he is relating his powers to the preservation of
public health But the authority of an employer is not
intelligible except in terms of self interested motives His
demands cannot be scrutinised They are not referable to his
capacity foi lus post They are not relevant to the well
being of his servants If a worker refuses to adulterate the
product made by an employer, he may suffer dismissal He
may be penalised if he refuses to falsify his accounts, even
when the suffere r by that falsification is the pubbe revenue
the burden of which he himself partially bears There is,
that is to say, all the difference in the world between an
authority which grows naturally out of functions which are
set consistently in a public context, and an authority which,


144 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

equally consistently, is the outcome of private and irresponsible

will.

The existence of this latter type is fatal to the civic implica¬
tions of equality It poisons industrial relations. It makes
the position of master and servant one of waiting npon the
threshold of war. Above all, it is intolerable wherever the
function involved is one where continuity of service is
essential to the life of the community. That industries like
coal and electric power, transport and banking, the supply of
meat and the provision of houses, should be left to the hazards
of private enterprise will appear as unthinkable to a future
generation as it is unthinkable to our own that the army of
;the State should be left to private hands They must be
subject to rules as rigorous as those which govern medicine,
simply because they are not less vital to the national life.
That does not mean direct operation by government as the
inevitable alternative It means the planning of constitutions
for essential industries , and the possible types of constitutions
are as various m industry as elsewhere

I shall discuss in a later chapter the forms such constitutions
may usefully take Here it is enough to emphasise the urgency
to freedom of making the relationship between men in industry
'one m which no will affected by decisions is regarded as insig¬
nificant. That does not mean that all wills are to be weighed
equally , all men, obviously, are not equally entitled to give
orders. But it does imply that those who exercise authority
can. like the minister in office, or the trade union official, be
called to account for the orders they issue My freedom is not
hampered if I have the sense that I have access tc> the source
of authority The members of a trade union feel " free ”
because they „n governed by men made by, and responsible
to, themselves That rannot be the case where authority, as
in modem industry, is unconstitutional in its nature The
inequalities of status, the power which results from status,
are unrelated to the interests of personality The worker is
involved in a hierarchy in which he has no spiritual recognition.
The university teacher, the doctor, the lawyer, are all of
them involved m hierarchies, but these breed equality because
they are established by co-operation Their members feel
that they contribute to the definition of their working lives.


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY 165

We cannot secure professional standards in industry until
room is found there also for principles which destroy the
present irresponsible autocracy

IV

So far, I have discussed conceptions of liberty and equality
as though they raised problems soluble within the confines of a
single State But in fact the issues go far beyond that tern-
tonal limitation World co operation, as I argued earlier,
has advanced to the point where we must legislate for
civilisation as a whole We have, therefore, m matters of
common world concern, to apply methods which affect the
Bantu in Afnca and the Melanesian in the Pacific as well as
the Englishman and the Frenchman What do liberty and
equality mean in the presence of such complexities 3 The
Dutchman m Java finds his freedom m the application of all
his powers to an intense labour for wealth built upon a supply
of native workers The Javanese means by freedom such
spasmodic effort as will give him the food he wants, and,
otherwise, leave him to lie out m the enjoyment of the sun
How are these different wants to be reconciled 3 How are
we to assure, for instance, equality of treatment between
black and white in tropical Afnca, when the fact from which
we start is that of unequal power 3 How are we to ensure
in a conference of European States that the interests of,
Switzerland will be considered equally with the interests of
England, or Russia, or France 3

Until the Peace of Versailles, the common method was to
assume the equality of States In international law, and to
leave each State free to discover by what means it would,
its own salvation , and force resided m the background as
the sanction most likely to secure the ultimate solution But
it is obvious that, for example, Nicaragua and the United
States, Venezuela and England, cannot really, in vital matters,
bargain on equal terms Fven the most genial fictions of
law cannot make a small State equal to a great one

The possibility of equal consideration and consequently,
of freedom, depends upon two things It depends first upon
the outlawry of war. Concepts like free3om"ire devoid of


166 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

meaning so long as a State is free to force its solution upon
its neighbour But the outlaw ry of war depends, in its turn,
upon tne building of mteinational institutions which are
capable of mobilising the autlioritv of the weald against any
belligerent That will be the ouUome onh of a proof that
international institution fan be built which take the problems
wmch give rise to war on to a pi me of discussion wheit they
can be analysed in terns of reason Such institutions will
not, I think be discuertci by counting etch State as equal
n voting power to wm othu Stdc It wilt be impossible to
make a aague of data itiutm L\ the malntuiance of that
firti in Ih s lutio.i citncr lu-, in choosing the subjects of
intonation 1 control an 1 tindm 0 t method of proportional
representao m for thc«r gi'emim Hierc wdl emerge lor
instance, the view tha f only 1 no --h kii tan choc sc the Prime
Mmistu of F n^lann but tha* the si?, ,>f the British Navy is
a matter for internUiond dt tc imm iin n 1 ranee may settle
the foreign bnguagis till tain ht n hei schools but the
charactci cl ha foreign 1 ans wih In -ettluf b\ international
consent T uh state wdl b< intiti d (o oargairi to criticise
to object lnt when the Jc i nn is given agunst her she will
be compelled to give wu 1 qualitv the n w 11 mean (u that
the method o f d rus-nmi giv s tuM waglit t > the facts < nch
State puts f rw ud (z, tli it the u c it ft r * is ruled out fi >m
consideration I rtec om wi 1 „< m tnat w’*h mt the ambit
of international contn I nc.i s,ati is entitled to decide its
own lift Just t tint is no m Imdu d c ui bn 1 freedom out-
sicle the common inles i his six n tv s <dso no 'state e in find
freedom save bv accejung limitation of its sovc.mj.ntv by
the will formed by the common dccisi in oi a soi tety of States
That this habit of ration d sc tilement will be low in growth
needs no emphrp At the moment 1 am concerted only to
argue that the sc lutmn Ju n concaving of th< world as a
federal State, the member', of which do not possess equal
voting power I he pi obit m I ■nigged, is one of starting a
tradition of inquiry and judgment and finding the apjiropriate
institutions for the range of cjut stains ‘uch a federal Stat" will
have to administer When once a great State accepts a vetch' t
given against her w< dab at lead have begun the exploration
of such a tradition When once a great subject the pro


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY 167

tection of the native races, for example—is administered with
competence by an international authority we shall have begun
the building of a belief in its possibilities. Freedom will
come to mean only self-determination in the things peculiar
to a given State ; outside that sphere it will mean freedom to
state a case and not the right to begin war. Equality will
mean that the solutions adopted—say in access to raw
materials—seek the statistical measurement of need in one
range of pioblems with assurance of response to it; m another
it will mean the protection afforded by the presence in an
international organisation of other States whose representatives
assist in the making of dteds»ons.

The more these issues aie brought before international
authorities, the more they will be found susceptible of such
treatment. The responsibility of Serbia for the assassinations
of Sarajevo was a subject obviously capable of intellectual
inquiry The action of Austria settled nothing about the
facts , she used her power and her prestige to make judgment
impossible Had Serbia, upon investigation, been found
guilty, punishment could have been assessed in a way which
would have made equality real, in that both States, though
unequal in power, would have been equally bound by a body
external to them both If she was innocent, a world-war,
which involved the destruction of Austna-Hungary, was a
heavy piUe to pay for a mistaken notion of prestige.

Those in truth, who talk of non-justiciable disputes do
sorry service to civilisation. They speak in terms of a historic
condition which no longei fits the facts of the world. To
suggest that a nation is humiliated by being pioved in error
is as wise as to suggest that trial by battle is likely to result'
in justice. A power, indeed, which urges its prestige as a
means of evading international jurisdiction is fairly certain
to be wrong. The prestige of England was not diminished
when she submitted the Alabama incident to arbitration;
what lowered her prestige was the administrative carelessness
in permuting the incident to occur States, like inen, never *
protest their honour loudly unless they' have a bad case to
argue. And if it be said that this is to over-rationalise a
problem in which the ex ercis e of reason is inadmissible, the
answer is that our choice .is between the deliberate adoption


168 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

of reason and an anarchy which, by the weapons at its disposal,
is like to make civilisation itself a legend buried beneath the
ruins of its discoveries,

TKe' situation is somewhat different in the case of subject-
peoples. No institutions can give genuine equality to a
discussion between a European race and, say, the Bushmen
of Australia. The problem here is rather the discovery of
principles which, when applied, will enable the backward
races to draw from life such means of happiness as they desire ;
adding thereto the benefits that scientific discovery will
enable us to confer upon them. We must, it seems clear,
prohibit slavery, and human sacrifice and tribal warfare. We
must reserve for them the lands of which they have need. We
must prohibit all forced labour save where it is devoted to such
public matters as the making of roads. We must utilise the
tribal organisation for all the purposes to which it seems
obviously suited. We must prevent such traffic—that, for
instance, in drink—as we know to be destructive of native
morale. We must allow no traders to make contracts with
the native save under supervision of officials, and that the
more particularly when natural resources are in question.
Above all, it is essential that those who enter the public service
among these subject-peoples should be fully trained in that
knowledge which can only be real when the results of anthro¬
pological science are behind it. It is no use sending out a
man to Africa who has not already learned the true method of
approach to its problems. He will not learn it from the
European society there. He will only learn it adequately
from the native himself if he has been given beforehand that
point of view which is the clue to its sympathetic interpreta¬
tion. Most native customs, weird as they are to the European
mind, have their roots deep in the tribal consciousness. To
adjust them forcibly to a point of view the native finds
inexplicable is to destroy for him all that gives his life its
meaning. The result is a psychological malaise which ruins his
happiness.

Nor can we allow any State the full control of territory
mandated to it. What it does there, the method and the
results of its administration, it must answer for to an inter¬
national organisation. That involves, 1 think, something


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY 169

more than the issue of a report by the mandatory power. It
means some such institution as the presence of an international
minister at the capital of the territory who will vatch the
interests of the natives in the same way, for example, as the
French Ambassador watches the interests of Frenchmen in
London. He will be entitled to inspect and to report. His
word will carry weight against the pronouncement of the
• mandatory power. He will be able to suspend projected action,
to warn, and to encourage. He ought, it is clear, only in
rare cases to be of the same nationality as the power in actual
control. Only when, for example, South Africa knows that
there is independent authority to report upon its activities
will the suppression of an imeute like that of the Bondelwarts
rebellion become definitively impossible.

This is, of course, frankly to abandon the meaning of
freedom and equality in the sense those terms possess in the
context of Western civilisation. On any realistic analysis,
it is necessary to abandon them. The formulation by the
native of his wants deserves all the response we can give ; but
it must be admitted that the dash of backward and advanced
civilisations means that the wants formulated must be met by
special considerations. There is, I think, more likelihood
that the Zulu or the Hottentot will achieve what he will regard
as a full life under such conditions of protection as those
outlined than if we proceed upon the basis that he is being
made ready for Western institutions. What Graham Wallas
has called " the optimistic ethnology of Exeter Hall ’’ is the
most fatal attitude in which to approach these questions. It
destroys all that has meaning for the native by denying, at
the outset, all that gives colour and substance to the hfe he
knows. It seeks to prepare him for another life in which,
in general, it is unlikely that he wall find meaning. His
freedom, therefore, must l>e relative to his peculiar situation.
It must mean all that he can be given without the destruction
of the basic Western ideal. It means, above ail, his protection
against what has too often been the result of those ideals
in operation.

Mote —On the material of tins set hop stt* I S V\noil hupmah am and
CntlnnitOH an<l E D ihiki.jMm / m Li/uafU\ of N tales (11U4I


170 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

V

This view of liberty and equality lays cardinal importance
upon the powers of government and the mechanisms by which
they may be made to respond to the wills of those affected.
I do not argue that the action of legislation can make men
free and equal; but unless some such conditions exist as those
here"'urged, it is certain enough that the effect of legislation
will be to keep the majority unfree and unequal. To make
ihe personality of the ordinary man creative, it is necessary
to build the conditions within which creativeness is possible.
That can only happen when ordinary men are made to feel
.significant, and this, in the absence of liberty and equality,
we cannot hope to achieve. Where there is in a community
the absence of those factors which make the interests of men
so differently considered, there is likely to be the means at
hand for the development of personality. Th e enfo rcement
of equality by the State has the_ great merit ftf^promoting
'freedom by”preventing the private, person. from. the. exercise
of force., jot his o wn ends. By iorce I do not necessarily
mein physical violence, but the use of a differential ad¬
vantage to hinder another from the opportunity to be the
best he can.

But it is also important to remember that whatever adds
to the power of government is always attended by contingent
danger. The individual in the modem State tends to feel
impotent before the vast administrative machine by which
he is confronted. It seems to itave absorbed all initiative
towards a single centre and to have deprived him of the power
to make, or to share in making, responsible decisions. That
is a real difficulty. In relieving the individual from the power
of his fellow, we may well seem to subject him to a collective
power under which he seems hardly more tree than beiore.
That was the danger which made Rousseau insistent that
liberty is the product of the small State only, and to find
in a modern Athens the area within which alone democratic
initiative is possible.

We cannot adopt that view because the nature of modern
economic organisation makes it impossible to return to the
city-State. But in States of the modern size the mere achieve-


171


LIBERTY AND EQUALITY

ment of equality would be harmful without the maximum
decentralisation. That is the solution to the paradox by
which Rousseau was haunted. It solves the dread of constraint
by making men m wider numbers the authors of the power to
which they are subjected, and, through that authority, the
utilisation of power to liberate the creative energy which is
in them Ultimately, at least, any laws save those which men
make for themselves are devoid of meaning. But to make
laws for themselves at all adequately, they must have the
instruction to judge what laws they ought to make and the
character to operate those laws bomeone, doubtless, they
will have to trust; the artist will have no desire to scrutinise
each act of the policeman But they must be so intimately a
part of the system as to know that they ran trust with safety
or, if there is abuse of confidence, to be able to apply pressure
to its correction In that sense, liberty is the organisation
of resistance to abuse , and the c hief_safeguaxd against the
emergence of abuse is such a wide dis tribut ion of p ower as
makes cerfain and effective the onset of refusal to obey.

But the utmost fhat the action of government can achieve
will be worthless save in so far as its action is paralleled by
effort on the part of individual men Ultimately, each one
of us has^suffiaent of the Athanasius m him to make it certain
that the true liberty we build for ourselvts The State is
built so certainly upon the charade! of men that they can
only mould it to their desire by consistent devotion to its
activities If men are indiffeitnt or caieless, if they are satis¬
fied to withdraw from the arena, not the most ingenious
mechanisms can ultimately prevent abuse of power. That
was the meaning of Thoreau’s great sentence that " under a
government which imprisons any unjustly, the true place foi a
just man is also prison ” 1 Men must learri that the actions of
the State are their own They must learn that they will
realise justice only to the degree that they bend their etforts
to the making of justice ir, very man is essential to the State
if he has a mind and will Fveiy man can make that State
responsive to the things he needs only by making his know¬
ledge of life accessible as a basis for its actions He can be
tree, ultimately, only bv willing to be fiee No State will bt

* Thoreau On the Duly of Ci oil Disobedience


172 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

governed by that reason which alone guarantees him signifi¬
cance save as he makes his mind a part of its possessions.

But if the individual is thus, in concert with his fellows,
the author of his own freedom, he cannot exert himself to
build it save as he is prepared for that constructiveness. He
must know what it means to find himself before he seeks the
advenfure. That is no easy task in a world encumbered by its
traditions. There is never likely to be an enlightened State ,
until therp is respect for individuality; but, also, there will
not be respect for individuality until there is an enlightened
State. It is only the emphasis upon equality which will
break this vicious circle. When the source of power is found
outside of property, authority is balanced upon a principle
which bases prestige on service. At that stage, the effort of
statesmanship is the elevation of the common man. A
society which seeks to protect acquisition is replaced by a
society which seeks to protect the spiritual heritage of the
race. We cannot assure ourselves of an entrance to that
heritage, but at least we can discover the pathway to the
goal.


CHAPTER FIVE


PROPERTY

I

The root instinct of man is self-preservation Because he
must guard himself from danger he has developed an acquisi¬
tive faculty which now forms the basis of all Western institu¬
tions The world over, States are divisible, into those who,
out of that impulse to acquire possess property which is a
safeguard against the wants of the morrow, and those who,
lacking that property, are uncertain whether the morrow
will give them the means of life

For from the possession of property there comes that which,
above all, man seeks as the means to harmony in the shape of
security The man of property has a stake in the country He
is protected from the fear of starvation He need not accept
the work he does not desire He can take the leisure in which
most men must now find the opportunity of significance He
can, if he so will, surround himself with that environment
which makes of life an artistic thing He can avoid the gnm
routine, and become an explorer in that intellectual hinterland
where the creative faculties most readily discos tr their channels
of self-expression He can protect his children against the
dread of want He can develop m them the tastes which give
them also joy in the life creative He has direct and imme¬
diate access—should he desire it- to the social heritage of
Western civilisation

I do not mean to imply that a man with property will
necessarily possess these things, or that the propertyless man
is necessarily deprived of them Those who have security
often luxuriate in a life devoid of meaning , and those who
are poor can sometimes know the rarest things that life can
offer But the latter are exceptional men , poverty for most


174 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

—and most are condemned to poverty—means a life passed
amid mean things with but a fleeting moment, like the first
hour of love, when the creative impulse receives a full response.
Those who have security may, in fact, live a life as solid and
as pointless as the ugly mahogany with which they are sur¬
rounded, But at least their existence is freed from the spectre
of fear.

If they sought, in any general way, to understand the
civilisation about them, they would be impressed by certain
obvious facts. They would discover that the number of those
in any community who own property, enough to be significant
is always small. They would find that such ownership is not
necessarily related to the performance of duties or the possession
of virtues. The owner might be the fortunate descendant of
a mistress of Charles II, to whom was given a royalty on all
coal exported from the Tyne ; or he might be an outrageous
moneylender who lived by extortion upon the unfortunate.
He would find that the ownership of property involves the
control of capita!, and that in a regime of free enterprise the
control of capital involves the power to direct the lives of those
who depend upon +>>e application of capital to production.
He would discover that the development of industry in the
scientific period has made the power of capital greater than
in any previous age, in part because of the greater unit of
production, in part because of the more integrated character
of social life. He would discover, in short, that a regime of
private property makes the State very' largely an institution
dominated by the owners of private property, and that it
protects the will and purpose of those owners. In the absence
of other considerations, a political system in which rights
are built upon property is one in which the propertyless man
will have no rights.

There axe, of course, mitigating circumstances which have
prevented the owners from realising their rights to the full.
The power of combination has enabled the worker to establish
certain minimum standards of wages and hours of labour
which, however inadequate, do represent a real gain.
Humanitarian sentiment has wrung from the owners of property
•uch safeguards as Factory Acts, the prohibition of dangerous
materials, and, in a limited way, adulteration. Education


PROPERTY


175


has enabled a few in each generation either to escape from the
category of poverty or to utilise their knowledge to press for
further concessions But, fundamentally, the regime of private
property, in the background of industrialism, perpetuates the
division into rich and poor, and separates the poor from the
conditions which make possible their effective citizenship.

The results of the system may be summarised briefly.
Production is carried on wastefully and without adequate
plan. jTlie commodities and services necessaiy to the life of
tfie~community are never so distributed as to relate to need
or to produce a result which maximises their social utility^ We
build picture palaces when we need houses. We spend on
battleships what is wanted for schools. The rich can spend’
the weekly wage of a workman on a single dinner, while the
workman cannot send Ins children adequately fed to school.
A rich debutante will spend on an evening frock more than
the annual income of the workers who have made it. We have,
m tact, both the wrong commodities produce, and those
produced distributed without regard to social urgency. We
have a large class maintained in parasitic idleness, whose
tastes demand th< application of capital and labour to the
satisfaction of wards unrelated to human need. Nor is that
class set apart from the rest of the community. Because it
has the power u make demand effective u stimuhtes the
slavish mutation of those who seek to join its ranks do be
rich becomes the measure of merit ; and the reward of wealth
t s the ability to set the standards of those who seek to acquirt
wealth. But those standards arc set. not by the satisfactior
ot moral purpose, but by the satisfaction of the desire to i>«
rich Men may begin to acquire pro;<ertv to safeguard theii
lives from warn, but they continue to acquire it because o.
the distinction which comes from its possession It satisfeei
their vanity «tnd their lust for {*nw r, it enables them t<
attune the will of society to their own

The result is what might be logically expected from sue!
an atmosphere. They produce goods arid services, not i<r
ne, but to acquire property from their production. Tbei
produce not to satisfy useful demands, but demands whid
can be made to pay. \ They will ruin natural resources. Thej
will adulterate commodities They will float dishonest enter


176 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

prises. They will corrupt legislatures. They will pervert the
sources of knowledge. They will artificially combine to
increase the cost of their commodities to the public. They
will exploit, sometimes with hideous cruelty, the backward
races of mankind. They infect with their poison those who
work for the wages they offer. They induce sabotage in its
varied forms. They compel strikes which result in serious
damage to the community. And it is the grim irony of the
system that the vaster part of those engaged in its promotion
have little or no hope of enduring gain from the process they
support. They may destroy the quality of political life.
They may possess themselves, as in America, of the educational
instruments of the community. They may even pervert
religious institutions to the protection of their ideas. They
do not, nevertheless, secure a well-ordered State. It remains
historically obvious that a community divided into rich and
poor is, when the latter are numerous, built upon foundations
of sand.

For the basis of the State is envy, and envy is the nurse
of faction. A State so divided is compelled to use its instru¬
ments to protect the property of the rich from invasion by
the poor. It comes to think of order as the final virtue. It
neglects its larger aims. It perverts the equal aid it owes to
ill in the effort to afford the special advantage required by
some. That advantage—in the law, for example—may take
the form of the fellow-servant doctrine, as in England, or, as
in the United States, of the use of the injunction in labour
iisputes. It may limit the right to a share in political power
:o those only possessed of a certain property qualification.
It may model its constitution so as to limit the power to
criticise the existing regime or to prevent the passage of
itatutes which limit the power of property. It may keep
he non-possessing classes deliberately ignorant, as William
Windham urged, in 1810, that they be kept ignorant. It
nay, as in Czarist Russia, so fiercely stifle protest that the
nass of men is, over a long period, stricken into dumb inertia,
t may even confer political power on the masses, and then,
>y the control of opinion, frustrate the full use of that powei
o its own needs. It may, as with tyapoleon, seek by military
dventure to divert attention from domestic concerns. Yet


PROPERTY


177


the State remains divided into rich and poor ; and men, after
a period, refuse to suffer quietly. Then revolution supervenes
to alter the balance in the State.

The system, indeed, is prolific in self-justificatio n. Some¬
times the defence is psycholog ical m character. Men in
general, it is said, need an incentive toTaiEourT The power
to acquire property is such an incentive. It makes them
work, and, in their working, the good of the community is
involved. But there are two primary difficulties here. Labour
only involves the good of the community if what is produced
is related to that good and secures good in being distributed.
Those who traffic in harmful drugs may work and acquire
large fortunes, but what they produce is not for the good of
the community. If, moreover, I am pre-eminently successful;
in my business, the fortune I acquire may actuallyjnhibit my
descendants from working at all; and the power to acquire
property may defeat more incentives than it creates. The
mere fact that there is a property-instinct does not go to prove
that the present method of response to its demands is anything
more than one of the ways in which it may be answered. The
present method is a problem for analysis, not a solution of
the problem. 1 '

Sometimes the ius.tiflcaUoj?_. has been ethical . Property,
it has been argued, is the return made to the individual for
effort . The builder of a railway, the inventor of a safety-
razor, the discoverer of a patent medicine, have all worked
hard, and their fortune is the result. But, obviously, certain
additional factors must be considered. The fortunes of many
who labour unceasingly never become other than insignificant.
Property then becomes the reward for abili ty ; the argument
that it is the reward for abstinence has long been abandoned
as too shameless for any save the ignorant. But, obviously
again, it is the reward only for that particular kind of ability
which consists in the capacity to make profit; and that alto- >
gether evades the problem of the value_jd—su ch abil ity to
society, and the type of effort in which it is desirable that
profit sRould be made.

Or, it is urged, property is the nurse of v irtues essential,
to socie ty—l me of one’> fa mily, generosity, inventiveness, <
energy. But if this is true it argues that the majority of

12


17B


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

mankind is unable to satisfy the impulses essential to social
well-being. That is untrue, for these virtues have been
present in persons who have never amassed property at all.
No one can be generous in the way that Mr. Rockefeller has
b$en generous unless he has the property of Mr. Rockefeller;
but society has to weigh against the ability so to be generous
the cost of arriving at the point where the generosity is possible.
Professor Huxley never amassed a fortune, but his energy was
outstanding even in a vigorous age. The inventiveness of men
like Newton and Clerk-Maxwell and Laplace was not the
outcome of an attempt to satisfy their property-instinct,
love of one’s family cannot be the basis of the yearning for
property in the mind of any who know the lives of the poor.

Sometimes, as with Lord Hugh Cecil, any attempt at an
ethical basis is abandoned altogether, and p roper ty becomes
simply the result o f supplying effective demand.’ That is a
view without utility for social theory For we must obviously
kcpnsider whether the demand ought to have been effective,
rand the results which occur when it is supplied. There is a
demand for slaves in Abyssinia ; but most men will, I think,
agree that response to the demand ought never to be allowed.
There is a demand for obscene literatuie; but few would
respect those who trafficked in it. There is a demand for
prostitutes; but the law has a definite answer to those who
live by satisfying it. Lord Hugh Cecil's theory merely identi¬
fies good with the existing order by the simple process of
admitting that in no other way can if be proved morally
adequate.

A.histmiaaLargaromt is.jfso.Eut forward, T^e progressive
Societies, it is said, are those built upon the regime of private
property ; the Backward societies are, iff general, those founded
upSiTa collectivist basis of some kind. There is, I think,
an important truth in this view. Societies built on private
property have gone farther towards the control of their environ¬
ment than societies of a collectivist type ; and they have been
able to achieve a greater margin of freedom for individual
personality than collectivist forms of social organisation.
This does not mean, at least necessarily, that individualist
societies attain a greater degree of happiness than is possible

■ Conservatism, chip. v.


PROPERTY 178

under alternative forms ; we know too little of the mentality
of backward peoples to generalise, so far. But it does mean
that Western civilisation is far less subject to the tyranny of
Nature than is true, say, in Melanesia, or India before the
British conquest.

But the historical argument is fallacious if it regards the
regime of private property as a simple and unchanging thing.
The history of private property is, above all, the record of
the most varied limitations upon the use of the powers it
implies. Property in slaves was valid in Greece and Rome ;
it is nalong£r-V.«did to-day. In England there is great freedom
of testamentary disposition ; in France inheritance is regulated
with much stringency. Until the Marned Woman’s Property
Act, the unity of person between husband and wife gave the
former complete control of his wife possessions ; to-day that
control is dependent upon her pleasure. The power of eminent
domain may offer a not ungenerous compensation to the owner
of private property, but its essence is that the State may
annex Naboth's Vineyard on reasonable terms. The Public
Health Acts do not allow me to build as I like on my own
land ; I must satisfy a local authority and conform to regula¬
tions centrally controlled. The regime of private property,
indeed, means that a man may do as he wills with his own
only to the point that the civii law permits him to will; and
though the ambit of that will is, in all conscience, vast enough,
the history -oijthe rights of property is most largely the record
of its circum scription.

It would not, indeed, be untrue to say that the historica l
argume ntmeans no more than that eachnraji, adequately
place d, is^the best judge of his own interest, and that the
society is most likely to prosper in which he finds room for the
expression of his interest. But this is to shift the debate to
the problem of ademiacv. and that, in its turn, raises the
whole issue of the rights which should inhere m property. At
np period havethose rightsjigsn generally absolute. Political
and religious philosophy is most largely the attempt to evolve
maxims of control which will at least minimise the dangers
which arise from a distinction between^ mine and thine. It
was the sense of those dangers which led Plato to reject the
notion of private property. A similar perception underlies


180 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the insistence in the New Testament and the Fathers of the
early Church upon the idea of Stewardship. That idea,
indeed, was never fully applied ; and its re-interpretation in
the course of mediaeval history left it but little more than an
emphasis upon responsibility which was never given the sub¬
stance of active control. For the Church compromised witl
the world. It accepted charity as the substitute for right
It assuaged symptoms instead of attacking causes. Th:
explanation, doubtless, is obvious enough. Granted its delicate
beginnings, a Church which sought to attack the economic
system of the time would have perished ignominiously ; and
by the time it had itself become a source of strength, it had
discovered enough persons eager to purchase salvation at the
expense of their possessions, to make it rooted in the im¬
plications of private property. The cential test is the persecu¬
tion of the Spiritual Franciscans. By that act the Church
made it obvious that, beyond charity, it had no message to
the disinherited.

The avenue to the modem attitude lay through Pyiita«wm.
The decay of corporate authority m the Roman Church, the
emphasis upon the internal life a man leads, made the problem
of his possessions relatively insignificant. Puritanism taught
men to rely upon themselves. It implied, especially in the
j perspective of religious persecution, a distrusj: of a ,ll re gulation
I made by the State. It provided a facile transition to an
attituclewhich could argue that the ownership of wealth)
was a sign of grace, and poverty an index to God's disfavour.
Puritanism, doubtless, had a keen sense of the d;mgers of
property. Its rigorous attack on wasteful expenditure, its
urgency, as with Richard Baxter, thai wealth be not used to
oppress the poor, are evidence that it was not uncritically
individualist. But individualist it could not help being by
its essential nature, and it tended to conceive of a State as a
body of men moved by self-interest to whom, in the absence
of barriers, success came as the reward of effort. Their views
met the new philosophy of politics of which Hobbes was the
most striking exponent. From him down to Adam Smith,
however various the institutional expression it received, self-^
interest became the key to social organisation. The object
of the State became the attainment of liberty in the sense of a


PROPERTY


181


clear path for the exertion of individual will. The common¬
wealth, said Locke, exists to promote civil interest, and " civi!
interest I call life, liberty, inviolability of Body, and the
possession of such outward things as Money, Lands, Houses,
Furniture, and the like.” 1 There is no sense_Jiere of the
individual, sha ring in the benefits of a mora l o rder made by
him in co-oper ation m th"TiTs felTows. The common good is
identified with the individual good, and whatever promotes
the latter promotes the former also. But individual good
depends upon each man for its achievement ; the State has
no function save to secureto the victors their spoils_of conquest.
This view was reinforced by the hedonistic psychology which
lay at the root of utilitarianism. The Industrial RevoTuTibn,
in brief, arrivecT aT a period when, predominantly, a simple
teleological optimism made the rights of property—and they
were broadly unlimited rights—the cornerstone of social
security.*

Protests against this doctrine there had, of course, been.
At the height of Puritan power Winstanley and the agrarian
communists had come to urge their belief in the iniquity of
private property. Mably and Morelly had, under the influence
of Rousseau's early views, insisted on the moral necessity of
a communistic scheme. But the gradations of society were
too firmly fixed for their argument to be taken seriously. It
needed the combined power of the revolution in industry and
the revolution in France to make the thesis of individualism
untenable. The one gave birth to economic socialism, the
other to a view of rights conceived in terms of personality.
Their conjuncture meant the erosion of any view of rights
which made property the foundation of the State. That is
the meaning of views like those of Saint Simon and Fourier in
France, of Hall and Thompson, of Bra)' and Owen in England.
Property became conceived as a product less of individual exer¬
tion than of the total forces in society. The collapse of feudalism
and the accession of the middle classes to power deprived the
governing classes of the sanctity they had seemed to possess.
For the French Revolution, perhaps only half-consciously,
added to the desire for liberty the demand for equality ; and

1 A iMler concerning 1 olcralxon (Works, ed. of 1727, '•ol. ti. p 239)

* Cf. Hammond, The Town Labourer, chap x


182 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

however equality be interpreted, it involves a revision of the
individualist theory of property. The preservation of the
existing order, as that was beatified in the work of the classical
economists, became impossible when to preserve it meant
to crown the existing inequalities. The stage began to be
cleared for novel conceptions

That, in truth, is the real meaning of the annus rnirabilis
of 1848. Marx and Engels, Proudhon and Louis Blanc, were,
in their various ways, demanding that organisation replace
- the anarchy of their time Organisation involved readjust¬
ment, and readjustment meant a recognition of rights. The
social order of Western Europe began slowly to adjust itself
to new claims. The State which had begun the nineteenth
century in the terms of laissez-faire began, as the twentieth
century' came into view, to search for a basis upon which it
could compromise with socialism. And by socialism was
meant the devotion ef the productivity of the State to the
fulfilment of the natural rights of men. So the taxation of
the modem State was budt upon the assumption that assess¬
ment must be graduated by ability to pay. Its franchise was
wellnigh universal It offered free education—if of a low
standard—to the people It began to insure against the
hazards of sickness and unemployment It made things like
the provision of houses and pensions in old age a matter of
corporate concern It is difficult to interpret these changes
except upon the view that the concept of property was under¬
going a change Men could still be rich, but the State was
admitting its obligation to mitigate the inequalities of social
opportunity.

That effort was proceeding when the war of 1914
threw all social systems into confusion What has every¬
where emeiged from its results is an immense. increase in
the operations of the State. To sustain the injured fabric
of society was an enterprise far vaster than in 19x4,
and far mote costly, it involved, as in the protection of
the householder against the landlord, great inroads upon
what had previously been regarded as the normal rights of
property. But the perspective of those operations was
above all set by the changed scale of social conceptions. Men
who had been asked to die for the State demanded also that


188


PROPERTY

they be able to live in it. Men who were told that they were
important in war insisted that they were significant in peace.
Private enterprise was challenged on the ground that it in¬
volved a preponderating share in the results of industry to
those who did not labour for their production. Private owner¬
ship was asked to explain what contribution is made relative
to the return it secured. Property as a ha sis of ri g hts-it-Was
argued, was obviously ,,jffl5&ti5iactQry. Fa)J..property
<RpeS^""upon"~^e sustenance .of society, and its rights ate
t herefore socia lly create d- But rights socially created are
r elative To social ne eds. These are the needs of individual
persons, and, in the modem State, the majority do not satisfy
their needs. The wider, moreover, the rights of property, the
less equal is the incidence of legislative benefit, and the less
close is the relation between property and service. Property
as a right to control things to the exclusion of other persons
raised in acute form the problems (i) of what things ought to
be left to individual control especially in such matters, like
electric power, as are vital to the life of the community ; and
(2) what amount of things a man can be permitted to control
without, by the power such control involves, injuring the
chance of equal access to the needs of citizenship. Beyond
all, there was the demand for a philosophic theory of property
which made the defence of private ownership morally possible.
The need was the more urgent because the rapid growth of
revolutionary communism had challenged at its root the whole
structure of existing civilisation. Russia in the twentieth
century was, it was immediately seen, likely to be as significant
as France in the nineteenth. As the latter had implied the
equalisation of political privilege, so the first foreshadowed
the equalisation of economic privilege. The central issue of
the generation was to discover a concept of property which
satisfied the moral sense of men.


II

Such a concept of property is co nceivable if we seek to
viej y man as. AJiUkiect of rights, l^fras. then the right to

fedAttal enables. .Mm

tg. ha. his first self. He can claim, that is, such a share of


184 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the national dividend as permits him at least to satisfy those
primary material wants, hunger, thirst, the demand for shelter,
which, when unsatisfied, prevent the realisation of personality.
The claim to such a share, the right to such property as that
share implies, is, I believe, most usefully regarded as an
individual and exclusive claim. It is not merely the right,
as in a Platonic State, to a seat at a communal board. If we
have learned anything from the evolution of institutions, it
is the lesson that an enforced communism of habits is always
dangerous. To share in a common life ought not to mean
'that the common life is built to a uniform measure. It does
not mean the eating of identical meals, the wearing of identical
clothes, the living in houses distinguishable from each other
,only by their position in the street. The life we lead must
leave room to us for choice or else it ceases to be life at all.
We must find ourselves; and we can find ourselves only by
decision between varied possibilities. Our claim to a minimum
property must be, therefore, a claim to choose, at that mini¬
mum, the things we desire to satisfy the claim.

Tha,t minim um claim is universal. It is the guarantee to
the individual that the pressure of social forces will not leave
him helpless and stranded. It is the assurance that he can
find a place within its ambit, and that his personality is sig¬
nificant at least in the degree which gives it the chance of
substance. But the right is relative to a duty. If I receive it
must be in order that I return. Society cannot maintain me
for the privilege of my existence. I must pay my way by
what I do. I must perform such functions as will produce
the amount required for ray maintenance. No man,^that is
to say, has a moral right to property except as a return for
functions performed. He has no right to live unless he pays
for his living. He Ji&s no right tojive because another has
earned what suffices for his™ maintenance. That" alone is
morally his which he gains by His*personal effort.

There is therefore moral legitimacy in the modem distinc¬
tion between owning and earning. Those whose property is the
res ult of oth er men's.effort ^.jarasItlTupoii society. "They
enjoy what they have not assisted to producer They are
given the means of avoiding a contribution to the total produc¬
tivity of society. They have legal rights ; but because those


PROPERTY


185


legal rights are not bom of their personal effort, they lack the
moral penumbra which entitle them to respect. It is possible
to admire the architect of a great fortune ; it is not possible
to admire those who live by his achievement. Society liter¬
ally cannot afford to pay tribute to the degree that inherited
wealth exacts it. Even if the owners of such wealth are
imbued, like Fox or Pitt or Shaftesbury, with a high sense of
social obligation, the virtues of a few do not compensate for
the social inertia of the many. Hereditary wealth involv es
two things : (i) There is a class freed from the legal obligation
to labour. (2) So freed, it is able to utilise its leisure in a way
that taxes the productive effort of the remaining members of
society. Almost always, as Veblen has shown, it will, in the
mass, misuse that leisure. That it may produce a Henry
Cavendish does not destroy the fact that society pays extrava¬
gantly for his production. It will, in general, be idle and
wasteful. It will devote itself to aimless pleasures. It will
make politics a pastime and religion an aesthetic sensation.
It may patronise art, but its patronage will destroy the soul of
the artist. It may cultivate letters, but the literature it
applauds will be deaf to the real needs of its time. A- society
which m aintains a class which lives by owning cam never
a dequately resp ect the claims of its humbler members. For
the former will do minate its institutions. They will have
the privileges which come from the possession of the spending-
power. They will set the standards of taste. They will provide
the employment for that legal class which, in any State, axe
almost necessarily dependent upon the rich. They will have
immediate access to the sources of political power. They
form the habits and ideals of the class which attains wealth
by its own effort. Their economic position involves a definite
social predominance. They are able, by their prestige, to set
the perspective of the State.

Anyone can verify this account by the study of contem¬
porary social structure. Our Parliament, for instance, is still
predominantly aristocratic in texture because a political
career involves difficulties for almost all who do not live by
owning. Education is still largely determined by the position
of one's parents ; to go to Eton and Christ Church is a kind of
family habit. Many of the best regiments in the army are


186 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

practically a private reserve for the sons of ancient families.
All of them show courage in the face of danger; but it is not
all of them who develop a grasp of military science. Even
the diplomatic service is a career access to which lies open
only with difficulty to those not bom within a fairly narrow
circle. They give to charity the perfume of their presence.
'Their bazaars and their bridge-parties, beatified by the
‘occasional presence of some member of the Royal House,
serve to remind them that they have a duty to the poor.
They maintain their interest in intelligence by a winter in
Luxor; they keep alive the national character by their
devotion to the fox and the partridge. They live in London
only six months of the year. When they leave for the " shires,”
or the warmth of the Riviera, London is empty, save for the
six million odd Londoners who work to keep them alive. And
a vast journalistic organisation is maintained to gratify the
populace with pictures of this incredible procession.

No one, I think, could seriously maintain that such a class
is of measurable utility' to the community, any more than the
French noblesse of the eighteenth century could be defended
because some few of their members were devoted to high ends.
They live lives which are indefensible in ethical terms. And
their social cost is the greater because their power to spend
makes society devote no small part of its effort to satisfying
their aimless pleasures. Nor does their cost stop there.
About them is the charm of tradition ; and those who have by
their own effort won a sufficient income are driven by the
force of imitation to seek a life similar in substance and aim.
The aristocracy recruits itself by alliance with the city. The
grocer of one generation is the peer of the next. The summit
of the pyramid is a plutocracy in the mass without function
and, in the mass again, with little or no sense of social obliga¬
tions. There have been, of course, families whose zeal for the
well-being of their tenants has been as honourable as it is rare.
But the character of society is built upon the rules and not
upon the exceptions. If all men are to have equal access to
the social heritage, one class cannot, in the nature of things,
be specially placed to secure a double share. That is what
occurs when a class is permitted to live by owning. It means
not only the denial for them of the need to contribute to


PROPERTY 18T

society, but also the insistence that society must contribute
to their need. Their position is an accident of parenthood;
and parenthood, however distinguished, is not entitled to levy
a permanent tax on social effort. We do not recognise an
obligation permanently to maintain the descendants of Milton ;
it is difficult to realise why, on any arguable principle, we should
be obliged permanently to maintain the descendants of Nell
Gwynn. The result of our system of property is, in this regard,
unrelated to any principle of justice. It cannot, therefore,
be part of any theory of property wluch seeks to win the moral
assent of men.

That is not, of course, to argue that a man is not entitled to
provide for his immediate descendants. Obviously enough,
no small part of his effort derives from a desire to win security
for his children. It seems, therefore, to follow that his children
should receive such training and such support as will enable
them to enter the battle of life equipped to endure it. But
that does not mean that they should receive such support as
enables them to avoid altogether the fact of battle. They,
like the average man, must earn their living by the sweat of
their brow. They must be given security. He must be able
to feel that his death before they are mature does not reduce
them to circumstances so narrow that their life is mean and
intolerable. That is, of course, the position of most men
who die before their children are adult. Its cruelty does not
entitle us to enlarge the numbers of those to whom it applies.
Inheritance is always justified where it means the provision
of an income for widowhood, on the one hand, and the educa
tion of children on the other. But the retention of propertj
beyond that penod cannot be justified m moral terms.

Nor, I imagine, would most object to property in those
intimate, personal things of which the value is, in the main,
a value of sentiment. A man’s books and pictures, the things
which by their possession bear the impress of his personality,
are living memorials too precious to dissipate ; it is only where
they are utilised to form a fund that they become subject to
State-scrutiny.

In this aspect, the j ustification of proper ty begins to
emerge. 11 is entitled tq£ xist_ wh£]^jljjesulu jronLi>£EaanaL
effort . It is rational when it is the outcome of function.


188


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


The property of a doctor, a sailor, an inventor, a judge, all
represent a definite return for definite service. Such property
is legitimately the embodiment of rights because it is accom¬
panied by the performance of duties. It comes from the fact
that its possessor has fulfilled a station in society. He has
endeavoured to pay his way. He has sought to return to
society the cost of his maintenance before the years of maturity.
He has not been parasitic upon the body politic. He has
1 sought to be a citizen in the sense of pooling his effort in the
i enrichment of the social whole. He represents a definite


addition to the productivity of those who live by what is
produced. He is not a mere tax upon the effort of others.

o f functio n is, of cp.Wg&J.Qp wide, a statement. ItJftajIxes
th e analysis of .property from two ancles. Property, so con-
ceiv&Cunplies, f ust. o f ~. a ll, a theory of rewa rd and, sgpfindly,
aJJbfi.Q O' of in dustrial organisation. It implies, that is to say,
a method whereby we can fix the limits of the rights of property
and a means of determining the kind of structure the utilisa¬
tion of property may involve. Is a man, for instance, to
obtain by effort that octopus-grasp over the economic life of
Germany which the late Herr Stinnes secured ? Does effort


mean effort in terms of exertion, of effort in terms of capacity ?
Can we discover means whereby to differentiate the price we
pay, say, for the effort of a bricklayer and the effort of a
great surgeon ? Can we distinguish between rights of property
as such, the possessions, that is to say, which, when translated
into money-terms, are available for investment, and the rights
of property as the expression of personality ? If I earn one
thousand pounds a year and live, as I think adequately on
seven hundred and fifty pounds, what rights attach to me as
the owner of two hundred and fifty pounds which I annually
invest ? Am I entitled to a definite and fixed return for the
use of a commodity of which I hire out the disposal ? Ought
my return to vary with the amount of risk I take in making
the type of investment on which I decide ? Am I entitled to
embark with my capital upon adventures which, like that of
the Mannesmann brothers in Morocco, may involve the des¬
tinies of a whole people which cannot hope for profit from my
gain ? Obviously, the rights of property do not admit of


PROPERTY


189


being fixed in simple terms. The statement of the problem
is by its nature complex ; and a reply which aimed at sim¬
plicity would be false to the issue it raised.

Ill

Practically speaking, theories of reward ..have divided
t hem selves into four main classes. There is the general
Communi st case lof eqaalitv of income. The argument on its
behalf is a much stronger argument than is generally admitted.
A man’s “ jpull ” upon society is very largely what his pur¬
chasing power is ; if, therefore, we are to equalise his access
to society with that of his neighbour, it is advisable to make
his income equal to his neighbour’s. Once, moreover, we
introduce distinctions, they are bound to rest upon an arbitrary
foundation. The difference between the income of a judge and
the income of a bricklayer is nothing more than a very rough-
and-ready estimate of the price at which the services of each
can be obtained. In fact, good judges are obtained at a
much lower salary in the United States than in Great Britain ;
and the salary of a successful bricklayer, is, proportionately,
much higher than in this country. Nor must we neglect the
eugenic argument which Mr. Bernard Shaw has adduced with
so much point. 1 Practically, as he insists, the main distinc¬
tions between classes are economic distinctions; and even
if the Duke can on occasion marry the factory girl, his sister
does not dream of marrying the factory “ hand.” If a royal
princess marries a commoner, it is always a well-endowed
commoner. Choice in marriage is, outside one’s class, very
largely determined by considerations of wealth. The English
peerage has even established a kind of commodity-price on the
American market. Equality of income would, as Mr. Shaw
points out, have the excellent result of making the whole
community inter-marriageable. There can be little doubt of
the benefit that would accrue therefrom to the quality of the
race. '

But equality of reward meets certain difficulties to which,
in our situation, there is at present no adequate reply. When
effort is demanded of all if we are to live at all amply, there

' The Case for Equably. Publications of the National Liberal Club, 1913.


190 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

'seems no justice i" ‘Tfl’ml reward for "ntgiinl effort Jgo|
does it seem just to jw .are unequal.

The miserly bachelor, the church-devoted spinster, ought not,
surely, to receive the same remuneration as the parents who
have five or six children to maintain. Nor can we neglect
the psychological argument that, granted the mental habits of
Western civilisation, equality of income could only be secured
by a revolution ; and, probably, one of the chief features of
that revolution would be the award of a special rate of pay to
the soldiery in order to persuade them to be loyal to the
government. It seems clear, moreover, in the experience of
Russia that at least in the early stages of a new social order
habits of differentiation must be given concessions. There
seems no reason to suppose that there is an atom of logic
about the present disparities. But, however gTeatly we
bridge them, we cannot as yet travel the whole road to equality.
The communist doctrine insists upon the vital truth that a
society which mainly judges men in the terms of their economic
possessions is morally unsound ; but, for a long time ahead,
the means to a better judgment must be found along different
paths.

Not less inadequate is the antithesis oL Jhecommunist
scheme which urges that remuneration should he fixed by the
higgling of the market. Supply and demand, we are told, are
aninSextcTifie social appreciation of the labour a man has
to sell. Their operation offers to his service a " natural"
reward. No other index has the same merit of obvious charity.
All this would be admirable if it were (i) in the least true
and (2) if it were morally adequate. But, in the first place,
before supply and demand can genuinely operate all counter¬
vailing factors must be withdrawn. The remuneration for
medical officers of health is not fixed at what will attract
competent medical men, but at the figure at which the British
Medical Association will allow competent medical men to be
attracted. The incomes paid in trustified industries are often
specially fixed not by the demand and supply of services
there, but by the special position a monopoly entails. A
judge's salary is largely a customary figure ; many men would
accept the position, as many do, at great financial loss for
the honour it implies. Supply and demand would only be a


PROPERTY


m


true index to income if there was an equal opportunity to
apply for the post involved. In fact, most posts involve a
kind of customary standard of living, and the incomes of the
given profession are probably a Gaussian curve about the
mean of that standard.

Nor, I have said, is the higgling of the market a morally
adequate test of worth) It leaves one-third of the average
industrial community on the verge of starvation. For them
it means poor health, undeveloped intelligence, miserable
homes, and work in which, broadly speaking, the majority
can find no source of human interest. 1 Because the deter¬
mination of wages has been left to the higgling of the market
we have had, by Trade Boards and Minimum Wage Legis¬
lation, to redress the balance due to the taking of an undue
advantage of weakness. The higgling of the market is the
apotheosis of inequality. It emphasises all the advantages
the employer of labour has in the fact that the average worker
cm u\ )t afford to wait. The competition involved is not a fair
competition because its essence is that freedom of contract
is absent. For freedom of contract, as I argued earlier, is
present only where there is equality of bargaining power. It
is of the heart of modem industrialism that equality of
bargaining power should be non-existent as between master
and man. There are, it is true, pivotal trade, m which the
relationship is, in the mass, more nearly equal. But this is
the exception and not the rule.

Nor can supply and demand in any way indicate a genuine
social value in the reward secured. Great fortunes are made
in advertising enterprise; but, broadly speaking, advertising
enterprise indicates the pathology of modem industrialism.
The art of salesmanship, if it is an art, represents, in the
mass, the ability to suggest that a commodity is what in truth
it is not, and, in the individual instance, the capacity to sell
a purchaser something that in fact he does not need. The
incomes made by skilful special pleaders in the days before
the reform of judicial procedure largely represented wealth
secured in an effort to defeat the ends of justice. Great
fortunes have been made in slum houses; but society has paid

1 See P. Sargant Florence, Economies of Fait gut and Unrest (1924), p. 374,
and Wallai, The Great Society, pp. 363 f.


192 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

over and over again a bill many times greater than those
fortunes in repairing the damage they wrought. The lady
who invented the “ Kewpie ” doll is said to have made a large
sum from her patent; but the social value of the source from
which her wealth was derived is, at the best, not immediately
obvious. The creator of a famous pill compounded soap and
water in fixed proportions ; but the social value of his mixture
was considerably less than the millions he amassed. The
theory that the price system fixes the “ value ” of service
rendered omits the fact that the " value " considered has
merely the connotation of effective demand. That value bears
no necessary relation to the values which are socially important.
If it did, our houses, the food we eat, the clothes we wear,
the schools (other than the public schools) we provide, would
be very different from what they now are. The present
distribution of rewards is an interesting index to the demands
that are in fact effective ; but we can only discover whether
each demand and, therefore, each reward ought to be effective
by a scrutiny of it. And, even then, we should have to
determine whether the demand supplied, even when desirable,
ought to give rise to the reward it involves. The merit of
the present system is that by making entire abstraction of
moral considerations it presents a facade of simplicity. But
no system can hope to endure which in its rtature makes
abstractions of those elements which give permanence to social
systems.

And, in fact, at least by implication, we condemn it our¬
selves. For there are ranges of service where we think reward
in terms of income morally inappropriate ; and we distinguish
with an interesting sharpness between industry and the pro¬
fessions. No man would have respected Pasteur if he had
demanded the market-price for his discoveries. The fame of
Sir Ronald Ross is not in small part due to unending travail
f in a cause where there was no hope of financial gain. We
l realise that the great discoverer, the great artist, the great
i statesman, can only be paid in moral com ; and we do not
even attempt the measure of their services in money-terms.
The whole ethos of a profession, as distinct from industry, is
J that it measures the value;pf-its effort by the serviceit renders
to the public. It has standards to preserve, of competence.


PROPERTY 1M

of method, of motive. It involves, at least at a certain level
the element of disinterestedness. A man can be expelled from
industry only by bankruptcy or the commission of crime;
but the professions have types of conduct they will not permit
even though the courts will not take cognisance of them.
The very essence of these things is that the well-being of
society demands therein the abrogation of the motives with
which a theory of reward in terms of supply and demand
would rest contented.

Nor is it, I think, unworthy of remark that the nations
which went to war in 1914 were compelled to limit the
operation of commercial motives. The very name of profiteer
connoted dishonour to those who made fortunes from the
misery of their country A minister of the Crown who
explained in defence of the business man that it was his
nature to sell in the dearest and buy in the cheapest market
was felt thereby to have lowered his reputation. 1 The idea
was widespread that the operations of trusts and combines
must be limited on behalf of the consumer. The ideas of
priority and price-fixing were significant admissions that the
higgling of the market, so far from being a measure of social
value, was like to destroy all social value. Those who gained
esteem were those whose services could be measured by their
contribution to the end of the State The atmosphere, of
course, was surrounded by the dramatic penumbra of war.
Yet there emerged from the conflict great numbers of men
who believed that such theses as these were not less applicable
to peace. The strength, for instance, behind the demand for
a capital levy (whatever may be its economic validity) came
most largely from the perception that a State which holds
the lives of its citizens at its disposal is entitled, in far higher
degree, to hold their property at its disposal also. We have
returned to the pre-war mood. Yet the exposure in those
feverish years of the assumptions of a commercial civilisation
are of high importance. What Mr. Tawney called the
acquisitive society revealed itself as unfounded in the moral
allegiance of men. It could win the acceptance of fear; it
could not win the loyalty of faith. But no society is likely
to endure in which men cannot believe with passionate con-

* Cf. Zimmern, Nationality and Government, p. 2S2 n.

13


194 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

viction. That is why we require a principle of remuneration,
and, therefore, an economic order, different from the one we
have inherited.

A ^j rri theory of reward is more attractive, and it has, at
least, foundations in moral principle. It rejects alike the
theory of equality, and the view that supply and demand
can regulate adequately. It demands that each 'Yintrihut**
to soci et y ac cording to his powers, axtAJbftJgffMdgd by society
according to his needs. The claim is an historic one, and it
has^attracted distinguished men. But it is its transparent
vice that it bears the appearance of a simplicity which, upon
examination, will be found unrelated to reality. Let us take
needs first. Obviously, we cannot take the idea of needs at
their face value. We could not proffer a clerk a reward which
enabled him to purchase the quartos of Shakespeare, however
urgently he demanded their possession. The only needs we
can recognise are the needs that are common to all men.
And, even here, there must be a maximum beyond which we
do not go. A clerk who decided to have thirteen children
would have greater needs than a clerk with a family of four ;
but response to those needs is an undiscriminating endowment
of stupidity. Needs can only mean average needs. We have
to assume some mean of citizenship and make our principle
of reward hinge upon that mean. We must therefore fix our
standard remuneration at a level which does not take
account of individual idiosyncrasy. Our effort can apply to
the general only ; the particular, beyond that effort, must look
to itself.

Nor is the notion of powers much more helpful. If it
means that each man must perform his function as best he
may, the statement is a truism which no one would deny.
Does it mean the duty to experiment with one’s powers,
until one finds the function which makes possible the
maximum return ? Does it mean the fixing of a minimum
product to which each man, in his particular sphere, will be
held i Are we to penalise those-who fall below that minimum ?
Are we to expect greater productivity from those whose powers
are obviously greater ? What is to be the test of one's p owers
in the incommensurable sphere of intellectual work ? If a
judge gives a decision as he hears the case, while another


PROPERTY


105


delays the courts by reserving judgment, are we to hold
that the latter does not act as his powers would 'warrant ?
What, in brief, is to be the' best of a' manY' 1 powers,
especially in mental work ? Are we to judge him by his own
standards, or some common standard ? Even, it may be
noted, in manual labour, the task of measurement is difficult
enough. The miner, for instance, may have a difficult place,
he may not be in good condition , the tubs for his coal may
not arrive as he wants them So, too, m a textile factory.
Light, temperature, humidity, penod of work, existence of
rest periods, proper methods of supplying the material, good
supervision of machinery, may make all the difference to a
worker's output He may be blamed for “ slacking,” when,
in fact, the blame rests on conditions over which he has no
control. Obviously the only sense m which a man’s powers
are genuinely measurable is when he affirms honestly that
he is doing his best But no social system will rest satisfied
with a "pureTy subjective test of this kind, and that the more
certainly when we know that the machine-technology of large-
scale industry fails to secure the interest of the worker. For
it is obvious that no man will work his best unless his heart
is given to the task that he performs ^

We are therefore driven back to a more complex view
Any principle of reward must satisfy the two cornplmcxQU-
ditions, that it enables the individual to reach out towards
his . best ta l f , while, simultaneously, it preserves and develops
the necessary functions of society We have somehow to
reconcile the interest of the individual with that of the
community We have therefore to meet the needs of citizens
in the degree of their importance, while we do not, in meeting
those needs, impair the general productive fabric We have
also, of course, to meet the demands of classes, children, old
people, disabled and defective persons, who cannot pay their
way. We have to make provision for the wastrel and the
criminal in such fashion as will, at the worst, prevent their
further degradation. Our basic condition must obviously be
that even,' need related to t he civi c minimum , every ne ed,
that is.~ wHTcn. wKen unsatisfiecfTprevents .the attainment of
e ffective citizensTu p7"must be satisfied before we deal with
needs .above d hatlcivie.minimum There is, therefore, as a


196 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

primary level in remuneration a point below which no person
can be permitted to fall who is capable of acting as a citizen.

But, secondl y, no p erson can be permitted toseeure
remunera tion except on the condition of performing work
recogn ised as useful. He earns wages as a return for personal
effort" Whatlie does must be labour that adds to the national
wealth. He can have no means of life at his disposal save on
the condition that he has a useful function to perform. Once
he performs work recognised as necessary he must be entitled
to a reward which gives him the means of civic completeness
It must keep him in good health. It must give him room
for the development of his faculties. It must enable him to
build a home and pay such family-costs as the community
does not provide. Such a reward is inherent in his quality
as a human being.

It is said, of course, that such an ideal is illusory Many
workers would simply not pay their wav at such increased
labour-costs, and at that rate there would be an increase i r
the number of the unemployed.' But the history of wages
in the nineteenth century has been the history of a very
substantial rise in real wages without any correlated rise in
unemployment The higher the wage, indeed, the greater is
the personal quality of the worker’s life. His demands grow
in width and depth, and the economic organisation of society
shifts to meet those new demands. Mr. Hobson has shown
that the inadequate and unequal distribution of purchasing
power is, indeed, one of the main causes of unemployment. 1
In general, an increase in the rate ol wages is attended by
more good than an increase in the rate either of profit or of
interest. And further, it is one of the valuable results of this
levelling up of the standards of consumption that it tends
to shift the emphasis of business enterprise over to those
aspects of organisation in which the great defects can be
mainly observed. No one can read evidence like the inquiries
into the coal industry, both in England and America, or the
railways of the United States, without seeing that the percentage
of preventable waste is enormous. The scientific study of

1 Se« A C. Pigon, Economics of Welfare ; III, XI-XVII, for * discussion
of this point

» J A. Hobson, The Economics of Unemployment


PROPERTY


197


fatigue alone is likely to result in greatly reduced costs. What
is called labour turnover is, again, an obvious source of
improvement. 1 There are vast possibilities of saving in the
marketing of products, of which recent experience in coal
is only an obvious example 1 There is the possibility that the
stabilisation of currency and credit contains the seed of great
hopes .3 We are not entitled, in short, to predicate the danger
of high wages until we have experimented adequately with
the reduction of cost in other directions. The standards of
reward, doubtless, will always be lower m a poor community
like Norway than in a rich community like the United States.
But, in general, a society which aims at preserving its
institutions will seek a level of reward at the highest rate
compatible with its industrial existence. And it will, if it is
wise, make the maintenance of that level the first charge upon
the productivity of the society.

I have spoken of a common civic minimum. But I do
not conceive that this civic minimum is the same for all
members of the community While there is an irreducible
minimum of human want which each citizen must be able
to satisfy, those wants are not identical in all. An agricultural
worker, a miner, a stevedore need, for example, a more costly
dietary than a clerk or an architect’s draughtsman. Th e
minimum we .sct ik.ior.^ea£h-occupation will clearly involve
d ifferences built upo n the CQsts that occupation involves.
An 3 here it is worth while to point out that difficult as
intellectual work is, it is at best dubious whether it involves
greater costs, training apart, than work mainly of a physical
kind. Certainly if effort is the test of pay, it is not improbable
that the present scale of wage-values will have to be almost
nearly mverted

But there here enters tfig second element in the fixing of
a just principle of .remuneration. It is one thing—and it is
a'gfeat thing—to pay to the worker a wage that covers the
cost of his effort. But WO ako pay . w agos ill-SUch A

fashipn that we attract Jiccsssail occupation

1 S. H Shchter, Tke Turnover of Factory Labour (1CU9)

> See the correspondence between the Ministry of Mines and the coal
distributing merchants Tke Itmts, April iq, 1914

J See E H. M Lloyd, (194.1), and J M Keynes, Monetary

Reform (1944)


198 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

a sufficiency o f talent to run them adequately. We need
enougETmmersTtut we need also enough judges and enough
doctors. Probably no judge works harder, even if he works
differently, than a miner in the sea-pits of Durham. If we
base our remuneration on effort alone, we should pay miner
and judge at equal rates Any deviation from this con¬
clusion must be justified with some care. The true method
of approach is, I think, to analyse the position from the
standpoint of the social result we require We must, I think,
admit that the value to society of a great judge or a great
doctor is greater than the value of a miner whose output
stirs the imagination The effort m ay be equal. For us,
then, the justification for any difference in reward must lie
in the probability that such difference will provide us with
the service we require in greater numbers than would be true
were equality of reward to obtain

Here, I submit, we must begin by insisting that far too
much emphasis has been laid on the importance of economic
reward. 1 The great artist, whatever his genre, pursues his
end for its own sake, independently of financial gam. Men
like Leonardo, Newton, Pasteur, Darwin, are not seeking
monetary wealth. The great soldier finds his reward not in
the income he receives, but in the public esteem that is the
measure of his repute The average high civil servant could
earn far more than his salary m the business world ; but the
consciousness that he has his hands on a great machine more
than compensates for a comparatively modest income. Even
with the average man, the desire for gam in itself is probably
far more rare than we are content to imagine. Those who
seem to pursue wealth for its own sake are, more frequently
in fact, seeking those standards which, in a commercial
civilisation, bring standing and p ower

Yet, also, it is beyond doubt true that wealth can bring
to life inducements which men of ability find attractive.
Every society contains men who will endure the difficulties
and irksomeness of a long training for the position and
contingent affluence which he at their end. Others there axe

* See Lord Haldane's evidence before the Coal Commission of 1919,
reprinted in The Problem of Nationalisation, for some striking testimony on
this point


PROPERTY


199


who will take the adventurer’s risk in the hope that some
bold tempting of fate may land them in the harbour of ease.
In cases such as these, payment by achievement as distinct
from payment by effort seems, therefore, to have a real place
in an imperfect world. In this aspect, we should then have
a reward for most men based upon their output, and so
calculated that the least skilled worker necessary to the
industry would be able to earn his civic minimum. When we
pass from manual work that is quantitatively measurable, we
come to different considerations We cannot, I think, really
establish any satisfactory criterion of comparison between the
work, say, of a Permanent Secretary of the Treasury and a
judge of the High Court. All we can do is to set our rewards
at the figure which gives us a full supply of the necessary
services. That figure would, upon considerations I discussed
earlier in this book, not involve anything like the present
disparities between rich and poor. A great lawyer, one
imagines, is not, save m an acquisitive society, only to be
purchased at seven or eight times the price of a great university
teacher. A nd it would, , upon the same considerations, be
u rgent so to organis e, aur-society that no person cap able of
t he highest eftmt was jexcluded from the chance to practise
i t by lack' uLtmuortumtv. So far as organisation permitted,
men would start equal in the race So far as legislation
could effect it, wealth, where it came, would be based upon
function alone There would be paid to all a reward that
enabled them to give of their best and to be, so far as they
knew, the best that they desired. Dif ferenc es mreward would
be.. _built either--upon . effort du rability. But the difference
would never permit the accumulation of reward so as to
benefit o ther, men. No one would be paid save for personal
achievement. No one would earn save by the contribution
he made to social good And since each aspect of social life
would lie open to hirn who would take advantage of it, we
should, at the least, abolish that hereditary poverty that is
the main feature of the present order.

Egmar ja may be m ade .here. The reward eac h
citizen earns must be his own tq do with as hewiTI Hemay
choose, as is so typical of America, to sacrifice the creature-
comforts of his home to the possession of a motor-car; or


ttx> A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

he may wish, as in the case of many Londoners, to endure
the discomfort of a long railway journey for the pleasure of
cultivating a gardes. The more a man is tempted to experi¬
ment with his own standards of consumption, the better it
is for society. The one thing we want to avoid are those
long rows of villas with identical wall-paper, identical books,
and identical standards of pleasure. Life is an art.which
we can know only by experience. And the experience must
he fully our own, shot through with the texture of ouf unique
personality, if we are to realise the things within us that make
us different from our fellows. If this be true, a society is
well advised which avoids controlling the standards of con¬
sumption which exist. If the worker chooses to buy a piano
upon which he cannot play, it is his business. If the business
man desires a house with endless bedrooms he can never
occupy, equally it is his business and his alone. The sphere
of social control lies in the realm of production. If it desires,
as it may desire, to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic
liquor, it is by the prevention of manufacture that it should
proceed. What it must seek to avoid is the creation of class-
standards in consumption. The prohibitions therein that it
enacts must be enforceable on all alike, or they are without
validity. Things like the mediaeval sumptuary laws are
inapplicable because they assume a society in which the
hypotheses of democracy’ do not apply. If we have abandoned
such effort in strict fact, we have not abandoned them com¬
pletely in actuad life. " To know one’s place ” in the standards
of consumption is still a demand tacitly applied to the weaker
classes of society. It is inapplicable because no member of
society has any place save that which he gams by the exercise
of his powers.

This view of reward, moreover, applies equally to a col-
Iq gtivist and a non-collectivist society. It is a general principle
of justice which arises from the fact that men live together,
without taking special acccunt of how they ought to organise
their common life. It assumes (i) t hat all alike are entitled
to jind th e means of full life, and that (2) beyond those means
differences must be required by the common good of society.
It attempts, that is to say, to found a theory of wages in the
common consent of men. It removes from all that haunting


PROPERTY


201


dread of insecurity and inadequacy which now poisons the
lives of most. It offers to some access to comforts which
are paid for by the greater value they contribute to society
in a realm where, admittedly, only the roughest estimate of
value can be made. Ideally, doubtless, men should give of
their best to their fellows for the sheer joy of giving. But,
ideally also, Nature would have fashioned a world from which
pain and danger were absent. We are not yet confronted by
those conditions. We can only win what we have by the
sweat of our brow. We can only maintain the scale of our
civilisation by a division of labour which, unless we are
careful, diminishes the moral stature of most. We must set
our ideals by the facts we discover. Other solutions will, in
the end, serve not to assist our progress but to betray our
hopes.


IV

A society might pay a just reward to its members and still
remain essentially unfree. Nothing is easier than to persuade
maOLto -exchange power for material comfort. The rights of
property must, therefore,, to bfi w.ell founded, involve s theory
ofjndustnal .organisation not less than a theory of reward.
It must be a theory which aims at the release of personality
in t the industrial sphere as release for it has been sought in
the sphere of politics. That does not mean the abrogation
of discipline. But it does mean that industry shall be informed
by a purpose relevant to the general well-being, and that the
issue of orders shall be informed by that purpose. Well-being
involves not merely the product itself, but also the methods
by which that product is attained.

Property in industry means capital to. be hired, and a
discussion of its rights is a discussion of the powers which
should belong to those who loan it on hire. Here, at the
outset, we are met by a limit involved by our view of remunera¬
tion. No man, it has been argued, is entitled to wealth he
has not earned. No man, therefore, will have capital to hire
that is not the result of his personal effort. Hereditary
business enterprise, in which the son takes over when the
father feels ripe for retirement, and that without a nice


202 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

scrutiny of competence, lias no relation to a concept of
justice.

ry, .in jact,. mus^e.made a profession. U-aeeds
te.be informed by a principle of _publi£_S£r.vice It must
not be merely a body of persons who are turning out goods
for profit. It must be a body of persons who perform certain
functions at some standard of competent performance even
while, in that performance, they protect their members from
undue competition from outside. They may be successful,
and success will possibly imply riches ; but their success, like
that of the good lawyer or the skilful doctor, must be built
upon an ability to enrich the public in enriching themselves.
That element of service is integral to the idea of a profession,
it is not yet integral to the idea of business enterprise. We
do not hold a boot-manufacturer to the use of such qualities
of leather as will make good boots We do not inquire if
a clothier has used shoddy material in the suits he sells. We
allow the establishment of rings and monopolies of which
the purpose is to cheat the public without regard to its need
But we do not allow the judge to debase the coinage of justice.
We exact from the medical man certain standards of pro¬
fessional conduct. Their criterion of right is not the financial
gain which may accrue, but the end their profession is to
serve. And we ask that they subordinate their personal
interest to the achievement of that end. .

Let us freely grant that our success is, at best, very’
relative. Let us grant, also, that the line between the worst
aspects of a profession and the best aspects of an industry'
cannot be easily drawn. Schoolmastering, for instance, is
a profession, but there are teachers who would degrade any
occupation. The law is a profession, and there are lawyers
whose conduct is a perpetual denial of their vocation. So,
also, there are business men whose ideal is to make their
profit only by service to the public. It yet remains in general
true that monetary gain is the object of an industry, while
it is only a partial object with the professional man. For,
with the latter, monetary gain is subordinate to rules con¬
ceived in terms of function, and the purpose of function is
social service.

IXJndustry Js„to be , professionalised,,. certain ebangws


PROPERTY 208

i mmediately become necessary. Broadly, these are divisible
into three large categorie s, (i) There must be an al teration
o f the character of the owner nf wealth intn a person to whom
a fixed dividend is paid for t he.j^.ofJbis,.3K£alth. He must
cease, that is, to control the business in which the property
he owns is invested. Exactly as the owner of government
stock is not given, as such, the advantage of a budget surplus,
and does not, as the owner of government stock, influence
the policy of the ministry in office, so, similarly, the owner
of industrial capital would be paid the market price, and no
more, for the service rendered by the loan of his capital.
He would not be, as he now generally is, the residuary legatee
of industry, profiting by the special ability of management,
or a rise in price, or the special privilege a monopoly can enforce.
(2) Th e re must .fee ao . alteration, in tha character of the control
exercised in indus try. Just as the rules of a profession are
made, subject to the will of society, by those engaged therein,
so must th£_cules^iitdystryj?e_ made by the woikingdoxce
of industr y. Those rules, doubtless, cannot be made m quite
the same way. Industry will, inevitably, remain more
hierarchical in structure than a profession, say, like the law.
But once the functionless owner of capital is removed, an
industry becomes an intelligible entity, and rules can be drawn
up for its governance upon the basis of the functions per¬
formed by each element therein. Wg„jcan. that is to say,
make the., relationship between a manager and a machine-
tender an intelligible one, because each has a function to
perform; but once the element of ownership is introduced
the possibility of harmony is absent. And, surely, there is no
more reason for offering industrial capital more than its fair
market-price than there is for offering a wage to iabpur that
is more than the industry can bear. We can only make
industrial relationships creative by making the exercise of
authority arise naturally out of function. If we strive, as
we now strive, to introduce an element deprived of exactly
that meaning which gives purpose to function, we are striving,
as it were, to persuade the French peasant of the Ancien
Riginie that a nobility which has privileges without duties
is really essential to his well-being and should receive the
major part of his produce. But the peasant, slow as he is,
soon ceases to believe us.


204


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Wg. must al so room than weitawedoim in

tfes^^tjor the ..social dement in the industiiaLaqaation.
That means, I take it, three th ings. It means, in thejust
place, t he soc ialised production of those elements in-- the
cog amon welfar e which are integral to the well-being. oi the
community. By socialisation I do not necessarily mean
nationalisation, though that is, of course, one of its forms.
I mean the production of certain essential commodities, of
which electric power is a fair example, by methods which do
not leave them at the disposal of private profit. The
technique may involve co-operative production, or con¬
sumer’s co-operation, or such a form of control as that
suggested by the Coal Commission of 1919 for the mining
industry. Whatever the method, the chief point in it is that
the profits therein earned will benefit the community and not
the private undertaker. It means, jfr* Qprmid. .plarp bjith
iq socialised industries and inindustries-retained under private
management the introduction of a constitution. There must
be standard hours and standard rates of pay. There must
be the replacement of autocratic managerial control (as in the
hiring and dismissal of employes) by methods of a more
democratic character. The introduction of changes in machine-
technology and piece-rates must be removed from the sphere
of arbitrary will to the sphere of representative government.
Promotion, the selection of a foreman, for instance, must be
built not upon the whim of a manager, but upon some approved
combination of competence, with the approval of those the
particular foreman is to control. It means, thirdly, tfej&Hgb-
out. the field.of industry insistence^ upon quSification ,.,acd
publicity. Exactly, that is to say, as ajoan. must offer proo fs
of competence before he is admitted to the bar or to medical
practice, before He can become the manager of a mine, or
the master of a ship, so must .he offer similar proofs before
he becomes head of a factory or a department store. We
must make an end of chance and nepotism in business enter¬
prise if it is to attain the dignity of a profession.

Nor is publicity less urgent. What we are gradually
learning in the present economic order is that secrecy in
matters like costs of production and rates of profit is a fatal
bar to a public spirit in industry. The claim of the business


PROPERTY


205

man to manage his own enterprise in his own way is a claim
to disregard new knowledge and public opinion. Exactly as
we are driven to demand of colliery companies and coal mer¬
chants, of cotton-sewing companies and building-rings, the
publication of their costs, so, if wg, jure ^ fe.. professionalise
industry , we mustjxave means of measuring the efficiency of
t hose who are practi tioners in it. That is not only necessary
for the public/ ft uTnecessary also for the workers whose
livelihood may be jeopardised by the futility of their employer.
It is necessary also to prevent those skilful manipulations by
which industrial enterprises are floated at values where the
bearing of a fair rate of profit is impossible in just terms.
The enforcement of that publicity, and the utilisation of its
results, will mean the construction of new industrial institu¬
tions. But only the scientific organisation of production, and
its judgment upon a scientific, basis, will enable us to make
industry answer the purpose of social life.

It should be noted that so to regard industry, from the
angle at which the rights of property cease to become rights
of control, involves a transformation that will be accomplished
in very various ways There are industries, of which the
building Hade is a notable example, in which the owner is
a manager as well as the proprietor of capital. To limit his
rights in that first capacity is not '-^possess him in the
second. He can, as the build, rs thunseives saw. in their
memorable report of 1919.' be utilised ir. the direction of his
industry as translormed just because t e has retainer’ the
capacity of a direct worker in it. That is not, bov/eve', the
position in other industries. There, a* m coal, for instance,
and iron and shipbuilding, organisation, particularly m recent
years, has taken a very ditierent form The categories of
owner and manager rarely fuse. The owner is a financial
figure not concerned with technical operations, but either
passively receiving a dividend, or arranging for the receipt
of a dividend for himself and other persons He is there for
profit and for no other purpose. He cannot help to manage
the operations of the industry because, like the average coal-
owner to-day, he has devolved those operations upon a cer-

1 Sec Tkt Industrial Council /or Ike Building Industry. Carton Foundation.
1919.


200 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

tificated manager and knows nothing about them. He cannot
share bis power with the workers, from operative to director,
in the industry because there is, in fact, nothing to share.
The others can combine to provide service. He is there not
to give but to receive. There cannot be joint control with
him because he is morally unrelated to the conduct of the
enterprise. All that he is entitled to ask for is the payment
of that interest that is his due. If his practical intervention
in the conduct of the enterprise is necessary to the provision
of the product, he is then, like the mine-manager, a technician
who can be absorbed in its transformation. If he is merely
a profit-maker, so long as he receives his profit, his presence
and control are, in point of fact, otiose.

Here, perhaps, it is worth while to point out that the
classical defence of the capitalist undertaker rests upon an
important confusion between thebry and practice. The pivot
of that defence was the fact that the division of labour becomes
anarchy unless, somewhere in the scale, there was a factor
which secured the integration of economic forces to some
particular ends. The world is a chaos of wants, and every
sort of enterprise is competing for the resources to satisfy
those wants. The function of the entrepreneur is to control
the distribution of those resources. He co-ordinates the
mechanism of production. He measures his response by the
delicate movements of market-demand. Without him, there
would be unutterable confusion, since the more highly
differentiated the society, the more urgent is his activity.
What he earns is therefore a necessary cost of production,
since it is implied in the nature of economic organisation.
To dismiss him as functionless is, therefore, it is argued, to
mistake altogether the world in which we live.

But even the most hardened defender of the present order
does not present this defence as more than a rough approxi¬
mation to the ideal. He admits that response is only made
adequate to wants when the conditions provide for adequate
response. In an ideal world of price-relations profit and social
value would be proportionate. In an ideal world all resources,
including labour, would be infinitely mobile. If they are not
so proportionate and so mobile, that is not his fault. He is
doing his best against difficult obstacles. To impede his


PROPERTY 207

operations is to prevent the performance of a task which must
be provided for in some way.

That is indubitable. The point of the criticism I have
here made is that if provided for as now industry must remain
the instrument of gain instead of service. For what is of the
essence of the present system is the fact of the unequal
position in the struggle to secure response to want. Mainly,
that unequal position is the result of the class-structure of
society. It is due to the fact that most people are not in
a position to make their wants a source of effective demand.
Where, therefore, rich and poor strive for satisfaction, the
superior economic power of the former compels the entre¬
preneur to adjust the system to the needs of the rich. The
price-system responds, therefore, not to true utilities, but to
the utilities represented by the power of money income. And
since each additional " dose ” of money income is a differential
advantage in securing satisfaction, the entrepreneur is not
supplying an economy conceived in terms of welfare, but an
economy conceived in terms of the power of classes to press
for response to their wants. And the inadequacy of this
system is intensified by its individualism. For the presence
of competition, and the secrecy which surrounds competition,
leads to constant miscalculation through the risks and doubts
of the market. Practically, the theses of this defence would
be valid only in a society without classes, in which the demands
of consumers were effectively equal. This is not the case.
And the result of inequality is to intensify the special power
of the class with property as against the class upon the margins
of subsistence. For the “ pull ” upon the economic system
by the former continually weights its effectiveness against
the poor. Property becomes the more secure because the more
its demands arc supplied the wider are the avenues of profit.
There is a growth of the investing class as distinct from the
owner of capital who is a manager as well. The centre of
industrial operations becomes financial. The object is simply
the maximum profit, since that is the purpose of financial
control. The entrepreneur then becomes more and more the
salaried official of a company. The notion of function dis¬
appears from the direction of industrial enterprise. That,
ultimately, is the real root of the disharmony between capital


208 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

and labour. The divorce between ownership and work directly
related to the purpose of a given industry means that there
is then no basis upon which adequate relations between capital
and labour admit of organisation. 1

Whereve r. th^efctfa,~func rionleia „pa 3 peity M i^_tfe 6 .£2 n -

tatyfeg.J.ACtor industrial production ^e aboUtion o f its
rights is the necessary path to justice. The abolition willbe
no easy matter, and there is no direct highroad to its
accomplishment. Those who have suggested action by the
proletariat to that end, a refusal, for instance, any longer to
maintain the system, forget that men must live, and that only
a peasantry growing its own food is in a position to continue
its abstention for any length of time. It might, of course,
come from political revolution which would destroy overnight
the rights of ownership as feudal rights were abolished at a
stroke by the States-General in 1789. I t would by flltilc-to
s uggest that politica l revo lutiga.i§,impossible. We can only
say that it is, at"best. a costly and dubious adv enture which
may end only in fixing the fetters of the present system more
firmly upon those who suffer by it; that it may even, by its
magnitude, destroy the whole fabric of civilisation. For the
weapons at the disposal of a modem jacquerie are more
destructive, above all, more permanently destructive than at
any previous time. We are only entitled to employ revolu¬
tionary instruments when methods of persuasion are challenged
by violence. F01 the resources of civilisation should only be
abandoned m the last resort.

The ai_tg caafjy£ ts aslaw tx process. but in all probability
a more fruitful one. It is to transform the structure of such
industries in having out . byjfigislaiiye enactment. the rights
qf ojjrftexs. They would then have the njhf l

but they would surrender aOc'e prbffls and control. These
would then pass, in part to the workers, from manual labourer
to research scientist, in the industry, in part, as is essential,
to the community. It is not necessary here to discuss how
those rights would, when transformed, be distributed. There


1 For an able defence of the opposite view see Mr H. D Henderson'«
Supply and Demand (1921) But Mr, Henderson fixes his attention upon
the ideal conditions, and hardly deals with the divergence from them «.
practice.


PROPERTY


209


is not, I think, any one form of industrial organisation suited
to all industries alike. Nor need we discuss here the order
in which such transformation should take place. A wise
community will proceed piecemeal and by stages, in order
that it may learn by experience. The outstanding points of
need are simple enough, however complex be their application.
We must, first, buy out the existing owners of property rights.
These must then be institutionalised into some system which
represents the needs of each particular industry. By these
means we can infuse the process of production with that sense
of responsibility it now lacks. We can make the community
as a whole a partner in that process. We can erect machinery
which not only leaves the workers free to produce, but also
permits the users of services to criticise and to have their
criticisms translated into the working of the process. These
things are impossible under the present system because its
subordination to the motive of financial gain does not leave
room for the ideal of service to express itself.

T hree furt her remarks may. he made. Extinction of rights
h Y thr cA compensation seems, to leave in full vigour

a class of junctiapless That is true; and in strict

logic it is unjustifiable. But the life of a community must
be adjusted to its experience and not to a strict logic. The
sudden extinction of these legal rights would, if unaccompanied
by compensation, probably result in an assault upon the
government making the attempt. Men will sooner, as
Machiavelli said, forgive the death of their relatives than^«
the confiscation of their property. Nothing is so likely to
poison the spirit of the body politic than the sudden dis¬
appointment of financial expectation. And, after all, the
community has its compensations. In the system here out¬
lined, payments to the existing owner would not pass to his
descendants; he would, at the most, be the recipient of an
annuity terminable at death. Nor, secondly, need it b e
supp osed that t he charg e s for such, extraction, are an unduly
heav y burden. If Great Britain had bought out its coal-
owners in 1913, it would have earned the purchase-price for
the mines of 1920.* No investment is ever lost that maintains

< And this apart from the advantages obtained by unification of
ownership.

14


210


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

good-will; and in the transference to a new system, the more
good-will we have, the greater is the augury of its success.


Yhe arguments usually laid down against the post office or
the telephone service are entirely inapplicable, for the simple
reason that the structure proposed is not built to that, or
any other, uniform pattern. What is proposed is the making
of a constitution for industries in which the autocracy built
upon rights of functionless ownership prevents the expression
of social purpose. Government control may be a necessary
stage through which industries must pass to a more flexible
form of operation. But, as will be seen later, the possibilities
of variety are larger than the opponents of collectivism are
prepared to imagine. Experiment is here as likely and as
legitimate as it is in the realm of political organisation. It
will, of course, make endless mistakes. It will, inevitably,
require a higher degree of efficiency and public spirit than
has been characteristic of the present order. But there is no
birth without pain ; and those who would confront the prospect
of a better life must not turn aside because there are dangers
on the road.

Above all, thirdly, it is important to remember .that .the
present system is breaking down. It has ceased to attract
the allegiance of the workers. They find no happiness in it.
They give to their effort neither their mind nor their energy.
Their inability to share in control makes them feel that the
conduct of industry is a thing in which they have no part.
Their sense is deep that the product is unjustly distributed
between themselves and their masters. They resent, as in
the coal industry, what they regard as the inefficiency with
which the management is conducted. None of the proposed
remedies—scientific management, a bonus-system on output,
co-partnership, profit-sharing—has anything but an infini¬
tesimal success. The roots of loyalty are gone. The system
has ceased to act as a source of moral possibility, and not the
most ingenious devices which tinker with its appearances can
re-create its inspiration. The profit-making motive has lost the
old magic which still glows in the pages of men like McCulloch
and Nassau Senior. The growth of education has completed


PROPERTY


211


the disillusion of experience. The modem worker is outraged
by the inhumanity and the hypocrisy of the existing order.
He does not believe in its professions. He notes its declining
success. He sees how the growth of trade-unionism has resulted
in an advance towards the inner fortress of the capitalist
citadel. He has become concerned with the oyerthrow of
foundatio ns

V

If this be t rue, the main problem of property is. a psycho¬
logical one. The old system has passed because the spread
of education made it impossible to utilise the motives which
were sufficient for its functioning a half-century ago. Largely
it was built upon fear, and systems built upon fear bear the
marks of impermanence upon their face. Pioneers lik&.Qw^ n
and Marx called what Mr.._Shaw has termed the " rpora l
unfr of capit alism in the heyday of it.s success; in the
passage of years there are few men conscious of themselves
to whom their lesson has not been brought home. Is it likely
that an order founded upon the principles here discussed will
be more adequate than its predecessor ? That depends, for
the most part, on the degree to which it can secure the happiness
of the average worker. It frankly abandons the profit-making -
motive as an incentive to the best work. It makes difficult,^
and, for all save a tiny fraction, even impossible, the accumu¬
lation of a large fortune. It was the operation of both those
incentives that made for the success of the capitalism of the
nineteenth century. That and a certain relentlessness were
the chief characteristics of its zenith. For there were few who
felt, .as William Morris did, “ ashamed when I have thought
of the contrast between my happy working hours and the
unpraised, unrewarded, monotonous drudgery which most men
are condemned to .” 1 Protests like those of Carlyle and
Ruskin, pictures like that in Disraeli’s Sybil, the unforgettable
bitterness of the working-class autobiographies in the hungry
'forties, did not avail to arrest what seemed the irresistible
tide of capitalist prosperity. Is a change so v ast as., that

1 Quoted in WiUtitm Morris, by Mr-. Townshend (1913), p. is.— {Fabian
Tract No. 167 )


212 A GHAMMAR OP POLITICS

here implied sim ply a ir aiik AC £ BPt a jw- . e ..ol^UBPossibiUst
idealism F~“

Broadly speaking, the a "fWCr d p p* n ds on fewcft con¬
siderations than it has been customary to call into account.
Much, I think, will result from the fact that a spurpfi, pf ppison
has been removed from the body economic. To make the
worker TeeTthat those who are paid must work that they
may be paid is already to make it plain that industry is not
the slave of unearned increment. The abolition of a parasitic
class cannot but be attended by good. It is more likely than
any single source of invention to secure that full-hearted
co-operation on the part of the rank and file which is the real
road to an increase in productivity. For, after all, the sense
of injustice acts as an inhibition fatal to the doing of one's
best. It corrodes both the mind and the heart. It secures
imitation that is the more deadly because it is so often
unconscious. Men not seldom begin io work badly from
anger, and continue to work badly because anger freezes into
indifference. The most fertile source of anger we car at least
avoid by the permeation of industry with a just and dis¬
cernible purpose.

But we.have.not merely to win the worker’s moral consent
We have also to secure his continuous interest. We cannot
do that in the way William Morris desired, by the surrender
of large-scale industry and its replacement by the individual
craftsman who is an artist vindicating his personality. But
there is still much that we can do. The ed ucati on of the
worker Will contribute a meaning to bis performance. In
knowing the life about him, he will cease to be transcended
by his machine. We can discover by research into the fatigue
of monotony ways of removing the mam causes which deaden
interest in work. We can, by t he jd acealialisaXion of the
factory-group find that number with which a man should work
from which there develops ease of intercourse.' That quality
is often seen in the ‘chapels’* of the printing trade; it is
the basis of the regimental platoon ; it is the reason why the
small common-room of a college at Oxford or Cambridge is
so much more successful as a stimulus to effort than the vast
faculty of a modem, especially an American, university.

1 Cf WalUut, The Gremt Society (1914). p. 354


PROPERTY


213


Team-work, in such a way, becomes real, and develops the
pride and self-sacrifice and initiative which are so obviously
lacking in the present order. What we call corporate per¬
s onality is bo m, and a man merges himself in its spirit as
the sailor Becomes intimate with the qualities of his ship.
By the creation in industry of self-government we shall build
institutions through which the worker can feel that he is
directly related to the centre of control. He will have the
means of that " freedom ” at hand which the Stoics under¬
stood so well—the provision of avenues through which internal
spontaneity may find expression and, where it seems fruitful,
response. Just as respect for law among the poor comes so
largely from the knowledge that even the humblest may have
his day in court, so will willingness to work come from the
knowledge that the worker may penetrate to the seat of power.
TTiat has been, also, one of the great sources of trade-union
authority: the knowledge that the vast organ at the centre
is instinct with his own will and his own purpose. He is
offered, further, a wage that permits of self-respect because
it is built on needs that have been measured in the terms of
his citizenship. Above all, perhaps, he will have a leisure
that his education, on the one hand, and the new atmosphere
of equality, upon the other, will translate, if he so will, into
a new dignity and a new creativeness. He has had few of
these things in the old order ; he has had none of them richly ;
yet all of them are intimately related to the things which
build his humanity. It does not seem excessive to have faith
that, as they come to function, they will make of industry
a branch of true citizenship.

It is not, as Mr>.Iawnev has said, 1 a change of hum an
nature that is .ieflttked .50 much as the emphasis of.eklRSPts
i n human nature that .are now ignored. Will this new
motivation appeal to the brain- worker in industry, as I have
argued that it is likely to appeal to the manual worker ? I
see no reason why that should jjpl be t he, case. Nothing is
involved in such a transformation as would be likely to degrade
his position. And, often enough, his position is degrading
.now. The clerk, the commercial traveller, the insurance
agent, are not only, in the mass, paid salaries which hardly,

1 The Sickness of an Acquisitive Society (1920), p 74


214


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

if at all, distinguish them from the skilled artisan, b ut the ir
li fe— 18 -A harass in g struggle to keep up pathetic appearances
on inadeq uate means. They are continually called upon Tor
tasks which an honourable or humane man would shrink from
performing; and they must, for their livelihood’s sake, obey
the crack of the whip. They see the ambitions they have
cherished realised by others, not seldom by uncritical favour
or simple nepotism. Because, as a rule, gentility has pre¬
vented them from organising, they have been unable, like
the mine-managers until these last days, to develop either
corporate feeling or adequate self-protection. ThtiyJia.veJaeen
jud ged, not by the values they can create, bpt_bX,thb prjufits
THey. ..can earn. They have been subordinates to their
employers, while they have been task-masters to their
subordinates. They have been, in the mass, a proletariat-in
all but na me. "

Their tendency is more and more to recognise their
common interest with the manual workers, and, as a result,
to make common cause with them ; and, as notably with the
engineering profession in America, they have begun to protest
against the waste and degradation of the present system.'
What is their probable position in a functional society?
They will exercise the power that is relevant to the function
they perform. They will exercise their special technique as
that is discovered to have purposive relationship to the end
in view. They would give orders, as now ; but their orders
would be born of principle. They would submit, as now, to
their superiors ; but their superiors would be men co-operating
with them in a common task and exercising authority by
virtue of rational qualification. They would improve their
positions by a performance related to a social value which
benefited the community of which they were a part, instead
of a pecuniary profit which is not necessarily related to any
save private good. They would not be paid vast incomes,
like the handful of rich brain-workers in modem industry,
but their remuneration would be built upon their ability and
their function, and they would enjoy security of tenure. And
they, like the manual worker, would have the means at their

* See the report of the Federated Engineering Societies, entitled Waste
tn Industry (1919).


PROPERTY 215

disposal to make their views heard where they desire them
to count and to prevail.

There is, I think, ample reason to believe that these
motives would be adequate to call from the brain-worker the
best of which he is capable. The prnfessionalisation _o f
industry is likel y to make an instinctive appeal to his sens e
of his craft. It has proved adequate for the army and navy,
adequate for teachers and doctors, adequate for the public
services in their varied forms. " The desire to distinguish
himself in the service of the State ” is, as Lord Haldane has
said , 1 “ as potent a motive ” with the brain-worker as the
desire to make a fortune. “ If he thinks he will be recog¬
nised,” Lord Haldane adds, ” because of his public spirit and
his devotion to his duty, that public spirit and devotion to
duty will make him do anything ; there is no sacrifice of
himself he will not make.” That will always be true of the
man who feels that he has important work to perform. There
will, doubtless, remain many who will work only for the
satisfaction of material appetite, as there will be many manual
workers to whose best side these motives will not appeal.
Any system of organisation is fortunate that secures half the
result it desires. But those who have seen the devotion and
energy of the best elementary teachers, and have realised
the difficulties against which they have been contending, will
have a sense of the possibilities involved in this experiment.
We cannot abolish selfishness or slackness in any society
merely by reorganising these institutions by which it is
dominated, but we can at least so reorganise them that
the minds of men are turned towards the qualities we need.
Wfi,„can offer the prospect of service to great ends in the
faith that the higher the ideal, the more lofty will be the
performance. Those who saw the armies on the battlefield
wdll believe that our faith is reasonable.

VI

No effort is more suspect in our time than the criticism of
the existing rights of property. It is wrong because it is
subversive. It is futile because it is Utopian. It is erroneous

f The Problem of Nationalisation (1921), p 20.


210 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

because it runs counter to the eternal laws of human nature.
But the existing rights of property represent, after all, but a
moment in historic time. They are not to-day what they were
yesterday, and to-morrow they will again be different. It
cannot be affirmed that, whatever the changes in social insti¬
tutions the rights of property are to remain permanently
inviolate. Property is & social fact, like aay-Qihe r t. and it is
the character of social facts to alter. It has assumed the most
vjmecTaspects, and it is capable of yet further changes. 1

Th e pr esent system is inadequate from whatever angle it is
regarded. It is psychologic al inadequate because, for most,
by appealing mainly to the emotion of fear, it inhibits the
exercise of those qualities which would enable them to live a
full life. Itjs.morally inadequate, in part because it confers
rights upon those who have done nothing to earn them, in
part because where such rights are related to effort, this in
its trim has no proportionate relevancy to social value. It
makes a part of the community parasitic upon the remainder ;
it deprives the rest of the opportunity to live ample lives. _It
i s econo mically inadequate because it fails so to distribute the
wealth it creates as to offer the necessary conditions of health
and security to those who live by its processes. I p thp result ,
it has los t the allegiance of the vast majority of the people
Some regard it with hate; the majority regard it with
indifference. It no longer infuses the State with that idea of
purpose through which alone a State can prosper.

There is nothing inherently wrong in the notion of private
prosperity. There is a sense in which it may be so held as
gemffheTy to express personality and tv contribute to its
enrichment. But, so to be held, it must be derived from
personal effort organised In such a way as to involve an
'addition to the common welfare. It must never be so large
in amount that its owner exercises power by reason of its
sheer magnitude ; it must never be so small that its possessor
cannot be himself at hisliest. The more equal its distribution,
the more likely is the contribution of the citizen to be judged
in terms of its social value, to become implicit with purpose as
the way to recognition. Regarded as the result of function,

■ It is interesting to compare the remarks on the idea ot evolution in
property m the famous Doctrine it Saint-Simon (1829), p 179.


PROPERTY W

it falls naturaHy into its prop er pla ce i n soc iety. It ceases to
dominate our minds. The excess of it no longer produces
idleness and waste; the failure to win a living wage will no
longer breed in men that sense of outlawry, as in some, or that
feverish envy, as with others. Men are no longer set over
against society, either snatching from it some chance oppor¬
tunity of advantage, or seeking to exploit it to some end which
their conscience tells them to be mean and dishonourable. It
does not exdnde variety, though it transfers the emphasis of
variety from material to spiritual things. It does not prevent
the necessary basis of unified action, since co-ordination for
function creates a plane where men can meet in common. It
does not weave the pattern of organisation on any uniform
scheme. There can exist every diversity of method, from a
bureaucratic treasury official to a masterless craftsman, whose
hand-woven fabrics some few persons may choose to wear.
will have, doubtless, a different scale of moral values from the
present order. So large a change cannot but alter ourjudg-
raent of good and bad. We sh all think more of the creative,
artist beca use there will be more people with the energy of
soul to appreciate him ; we shall think less, one imagines, of
the man who asks to be judged by the size of what he can
accumulate. I tmayeyec* in its early days, appear a materially
poorer society. For it will take time to train men to the
habitsbom of new principles, and some, refusing to be trained,
will doubtless withdraw from their effort the spirit that
invigorates it. It may become a society in which there will
be few wealthy men. Their disappearance will involve the
absence of that conspicuous display which has made so much
of our social life seem crude and tawdry, fi pt it will be a
s ociety o f deeper spiritual values, from which the worst tyranny,
that of man over man, will have been banished. For fellow¬
ship is possible where men are won to a common service, and
they can join together when that by which they live is bom
in justice.

Not* —On the effect of inheritance on the distribution of property ^er Mi
J. Wedgevrood'r# very interesting volume, Th* Economies of I it km t*»i t


CHAPTER SIX


NATIONALISM AND CIVILISATION
l

lF the modern world could settle its organisation in economic
terms only, the transition to an international order would not
be a matter ol overwhelming difficulty. The mechanisms ol
the credit system have already established an interdependence
sufficient to overleap all physical boundaries ; and modem
scientific development, especially in the means of communica¬
tion, is completing what economic discovery began. For
practical purposes, we have already a world-market, with its
corollary of a world-price, for the main essential commodifies ;
and it is possible to infer therefrom an organised system in
which each area would exchange the commodities it can
produce under circumstances of special advantage against
those similarly made by other areas. That was the order
visualised by the free traders of the early nineteenth century.
t Free Trade,” wrote Cobden in 1842,' “ by perfecting the
intercourse and securing the dependence of countries one upon
another must inevitably snatch the power from the govern¬
ments to plunge their people into wars.”

That has not, in fact, been the direction of events. The
nineteeenth century was, above all else, the epoch of nationalist
development; and the events of our own time have made it
clear that the end of its influence is not even remotely within
view. Modem nationalism is, broadly speaking, hardly older
than the first partition of Poland; and it differs from all
previous forms into which its ideology’ has been cast because it
seeks the organs of a sovereign State through which to express
itself. It has required^ therefore, the obvious indicia of
self-sufficiency. It has demanded for each nationality an

1 Morley, Life of Cobden (Evcrsley edition), i. 24 B.

218


NATIONALISM AND CIVILISATION 2lS

autonomous and independent government, the Italian will
not serve the Austrian, as the Bulgar will not serve the Turk.
It has sought frontiers that imply strategic .security , France/
must have"lhe Rhine as a barrier against German invasion.
It has revived and developed the theories of Colbertism, and
has sought, by means pf the tariff, to make each nation a
complete economic unit. And, having come to be, it has
insisted that growth is the concomitant _of_ life. Colonies,
protectorates, spheres of influence, hinterlands of legitimate
aspiration—all of these are the expression of that luxuriance
of spirit which implies that a nation is mature. It is not
insignificant that there is no powerful nation in modem Europe
which has not won or lost a colonial dominion In every case
that has involved either temporary or lasting tutelage for the
area concerned. Not seldom, also, the inhabitants of that
area have themselves, like America, sought release from the
swaddling-clothes of colonialism , and they have emerged, or
sought to emerge, into the full panoply of a national State.

The idea of nationality is not easy to define, for there, is no
measurable factor to which it can be traced. The fervid
nationalism of America has made it clear that race is of dubious
importance, and, indeed, none of the older European nations
can seriously lay claim to racial purity. Language is a factor
of unquestionable significance , yet Switzerland has been able
to transcend the difficulties presented by a variety of tongues.
Nor does political allegiance explain anything. The history
of the nineteenth century is very largely the history of changes
in allegiance effected in nationalist terms. The possession of
a homeland is of high value in making a nation conscious of its
separation. Yet, as the Jews bear witness, it may be rather
the aspiration towards recovery than possession itself that is
essential to the concept of nationhood.

Broadly speaking, in fact, the idea of nationality is, as
Renan insisted in a famous essay,’ essentially spiritual in
character. It implies the sense of a special unity whichlharks
off those who share in it from the rest of mankind. That unit
is the outcome of a common history, of victories won and
traditions created by a corporate effort. There grows up a

' Kenan, Quest ce qu unc nation ? in Dtscouts ct Conferences especially
pp. 306-7.


220 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

sense of kinship which binds men into oneness. They recog¬
nise their likenesses, and emphasise their difference from
other men. Their social heritage becomes distinctively their
own, as a man lends his own peculiar character to his house.
They com e to have an art, a literature, recognisably distinct
from that of other nations. So England only could, have
produced Shakespeare and Dickens ; so we admit that there
are qualities in Voltaire and Kant from which they typify the
nationalism of France and Germany

Nationalism as a quality making for this separateness is
^builded, doubtless, up on the basis of gregariousness. The
solidarity it implies must have had .high survival-value when
wandering nomads hunted for suitable feeding-grounds. The
groups with a strong herd-instinct triumphed in the struggle for
existence. They came to have territories they could call their
own. They fought against those who would invade them.
Victory intensified the value of their homeland, and gave
them traditions which reacted upon their descendants to
enhance the value of what had been dearly purchased. War,
Indeed, seems to have been the chief factor in budding the
modem nation. There are, of course, obscurities and to spare.
We cannot fully explain how the indigenous tribes of England
so mingled with the invaders from France as to form an English
nation, or why the English invader of Ireland should have been
so largely absorbed by those over whom his suzerainty was
extended. What emerges, and what for us is significant, is
t he fac t of nationality as urgently separatist in character. Jl
is not a simple economic phenomenon, though it may be
utilised for economic purposes. The break-up of Austria-
Hungary was economically an obvious waste ; but each of its
parts demanded autonomy as the expression of separateness.
Egypt, it is probable, will be the poorer for the disappearance
of British administrative ability ; but Egypt prefers autonomy
to profit. Canada would probably gain, on the economic side,
by incorporation with the United States; but she steadily
prefers the maintenance of her connection with Great Britain.
The disappearance of England from India will almost certainly,
if it comes within some near period, result in anarchy for a
time ; yet there are thousands of Indians to whom the idea of
an Indian-created anarchy is preferable to a British-created


221


NATIONALISM AND CIVILISATION

peace, patriotism, the love of one’s nation, may stray into
devious paths; hut, at bottom, it seems a genuinely instinctive
expression of kinship with a chosen group that is deliberately
exclusive in temper. And because it is exclusive, it seeks
autonomy, even if autonomy involves economic sacrifice.

It is at the point where nationalism invokes autonomy as
its right that the needs of civilisation begin to emerge. For to
demand autonomy in the modem world is, in effect, to demand
the whole panoply of the sovereign State. It means, to take
some vital examples, that, in its allotted area, the nation-State
will demand complete control of all the instruments of life. It
will not be answerable, save in the arbitrament of war, to
others outside itself. It will claim to settle its own frontiers,
its own tariffs, the privileges it will accord to such minorities
as dwell within its boundaries, the strangers it will admit, the
beliefs it will exclude, the form of government it desires Nor
must we fail to notice the way in which the solidarity, and
therefore the exclusiveness, of a nation may be consciously
fostered. That may be done by education. In America, very
notably, emphasis upon the national tradition has welded the
most diverse elements into a proudly self-conscious unity. It
may be done by the sense of external danger. The presence of
po wand alien nations upon the frontiers of France and
Germ 1 ly has been powerful in making each of those peoples
acutely aware of their difference from their neighbours. Jhe
press, of course, operates to a similar end. It feeds the herd'
instinct of each nation. It praises those who are supposed to
be the national allies, and belabours those who are supposed
to be hostile. And that sense of exclusiveness promotes a
loyalty which may often, like family affection, live its life
independent of right or truth. Nations, for example, may be
divided upon the issue of making war ; but once war has been
declared the instinct of the herd operates to banish dissent.
Those who continue to emphasise disagreement are certain to
be stigmatised as traitors ; even, as in the South African War,
when the nation-State is not seriously threatened, hostility to
the official policy will be commonly equated with incapacity
for the obligations of citizenship.

So regarded, nationalism is comparatively a new force in
history, for in its aspiration to Statehood it can hardly be


222 A GRAMMAR OB’ POLITICS

dated earlier than the first partition of Poland. The suppres¬
sion of a national State almost synchronised with the assertion
of national independence in America and national sovereignty
in France. Each of those ideas proved a kind of political
dynamite. At first, indeed, the forces of the French Revolu¬
tion seemed to imply rather a Euro pean than a_ national
movement; but the opposition of the reactionary forces of
Europe gave birth in the French to a consciousness of special
destiny, to which the strength of nationality gave peculiar
emphasis. It was victorious in the person of Napoleon ; but,
in its victory, the latter kindled the flames of nationalism in
the defeated forces. Thenceforth a new gospel was proclaimed.
It might, as m Italy, move forward m the name of democracy,
or, as in the subject-peoples of Turkey, colour its nationalism
in a religious garb. What was the result in every case was the
insistence that the dominion of one nation over another was
politically inexpedient and morally wrong. It became the
thesis”of the nineteenth century that States composed of
various nationalities were monstrous hybrids for which no
excuse could be offered ; hence, for example, the passionate
sympathy of Victorian England with the Italian crusade
against Austria It was implied in the democratic theory of
government, for it was difficult, as MiJjjjaid, to know ‘,'*«s'hat
any division of the human race should be free to do 'if not
to determine with which of the various collective bodies of
human beings they choose to associate themselves. ... It is
in general a necessary condition of free institutions that the
boundaries of governments should coincide in the main with
those of nationalities/' 1 Unity and independence were the
inevitable corollaries of this view ; and it could be inferred,
as thinkers so different as Hegel and Maj’.zin iir/erred thatjhe
nation-State was the ultimate unit in human organisation and,
accordingly, the .ultimate unit in human allegiance.

~T shall discuss below the moral di fficulties involved in this
vigw. But it is important first to discuss the two great counter
.tendencies of the period, which have united both to strengthen
and to dissolve the force of nationalism. Th e one is the fqrm
JaJteq by modern warfare, the oth er the inherent character of
the industrial order. The second is, in some sort, the parent

* Mill, RcprrsrntaUvc Government (1861), pp 296, 298.


NATIONALISM AND CIVILISATION 228

of the first, and it is convenient to discuss it as the main factor
in the complex synthesis at which we have amved.

That factor is the character of modern lndustjAahsn*- It
has created a world-market, and a**wor£dhmarket implies
foreign competition. The Englishman who manufactures
motor-cars must compete against the American engaged in a
similar effort; the Lancashire cotton-mill spins against India
and France, America, Germany and Japan No nation can
now consume all that it produces It is compelled to find
markets for its surplus goods , and, in any given trade, it is
worth while for a particular group of manufacturers tojgyiunise
the competition of their rivals in that trade Domestically,
the form taken by that minimisation is a protective tariff ,
abroad, it takes the form of colorusatipn, of concessions in
undeveloped countries, of favoured-nation clauses in com¬
mercial treaties, and the like Freedom of international
trade, in other words, becomes limited by the demands of
nationalism. It is found, in the classic phrase, that liade
follows the flag The power of the nation-State may be
exerted to obtain a market dominated by some special national
group That has been our history in India and Egypt, that
is, largely, the history of Franco-German complications m
Morocco The trade may take the form of investment . a
debtor-country may be forced to accept tutelage in the
interest of bondholders It may take the form of an exclusive
or semi-exclusive market. As power extends, nationalism
becomes transformed into imperialism The latter is most
generally an economic phenomenon The romantic penumbra,
of patriotism is exploited, as in the South African War, to
consolidate the interests of some special group The notion
that the material resources of a given area are a matter in
which the whole world has a concern disappears They
belong to that given area They may be used wisely or
wasted as the nation-State thinks ht To interfere is to
attack national prestige The problem then becomes one of
honour, and, unless compromise, as with the Bagdad Rail¬
way, is arranged, it is discovered that pioblems ot national
honour are non-justiciable In that event the only arbiter
is war

These conclusions, I am urging, arc irresistible so long as


*24 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the authority of the nation-State is held at the disposal of
commercial interests. The Jnstincts of the herd become
inevitably manipulated to serve the special needs of a few.
Ideals oT self-sufficiency, the special protection of an infant
industry, the privileged position of manufactures vital to the
national safety, are all involved in the contact between political
authority and commerce. The emigration of America is
regulated to serve the interests of business men who need
cheap labour; when the working-man organises, his voting
power is then satisfied by restriction upon its entrance.
English manufacturers of motor-cars obtain special duties
against the foreign manufacturer. Armament-firms are given
battleships to build as a subsidy for the maintenance of their
works. India demands a special protection that she may
develop industries which would not grow easily in the stem
Conditions of an open market. In the special conditions
produced by the war of 1914, this atmosphere has been greatly
intensified. For the discovery of the significance of the
blockade has meant that the necessaries of lif» involve a
ielf-subsisting people ; and, in the absence of other considera-
:ions, that involves the building of trade upon a basis calculated
0 maximise protection against the dangers of war.

Nor is this all. The character of modem warfare implies
urther difficulties for civilisation. Its destructiveness is so
freat that the nation-State must direct the organisation of its
■esources to safeguarding itself from the dangers involved in
war. It must build its frontiers so as to make attack as
lifficult as possible. It must, if it can, so distribute their
xmndaries as to have access to the commodities, especially
wheat and coal and iron, the supply of which is essential to
war. It must maintain armies beyond the expenditure
justified by its resources, and, to that extent, deliberately
impoverish itself in the interest of its security. But each of
its neighbours will do the same ; and there is engendered a
competition in the armament of power which acts so as to
jeopardise the maintenance of peace, to provoke an atmosphere
if nervous hostility, and to induce the smaller States into
illiance with powerful neighbours that they may win security
ay that multiplied strength. So organised, the distribution
if naticm-States resembles nothing so much as a powder-


NATIONALISM AND CIVILISATION 2*5

ma gazin e which, as in 1914, a single c hanc e spark rpay suffice
to provoke into conflagration.

Nor, T would add, Is there reason to suppose that the
control of natural resources by the State in the interests of
security would diminish the explosiveness of the atmosphere.
It is, I think, probable that a large measure of social control
over the basic raw materials will develop to prevent their
exploitation. That social control may even, as with Russia,
assume the form of a communist State. But so long as it
remains persistently nationalist in temper, and works through
the mechanisms of exclusive sovereignty, it will simply be
more powerful for the purpose it has in view.. Russian
communism was at least imperialist enough to overrun Georgia.
Socialist England would still need cotton and oil, and would
fight, if need be, for access to them. It may even be suggested
that such socialist States would be able with peculiar facility
to conduct their wars, since no one in them could claim that
they were waged for private interests. Socialism is only
international as such because capitalism is international. ^A
world of socialist States, independent of, and sovereign to,
each other, might easily become as mutually hostile as the
States of the present epoch.

A nationalism that implies the sovereign right of self-
determination is, therefore, a principle of which the conse¬
quences are far different from those envisaged by men like
Mazzini and Mill. It i nvolves the politics of prest ige; and
these, in their turn, involve a world so ordered that relation¬
ships between nations cannot become matters to be determined
by justice. It is not necessary to deny the reality, even the
validity, of national feeling to realise that it is built on emotions
which are, in the atmosphere of contemporary civilisation,
fraught with grave danger No one need doubt that it is good
to be an Englishmen ; but it is also necessary to inquire for
whom it is good and for what end. When the nationalism of
Englishmen, or of any other people, produces a State which
demands allegiance whatever the cause it professes, considera¬
tions are involved which go to the root of political philosophy.
A nat ion i s entitle d, to live. But because it cannot live to
itself alone, the question of how it is to live is not a question
it is entitled to determine alone. For, in the political order of

15


S26


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

which it is a part, moral purposes are realised to which national
interests, even, it may be, national existence, are secondary.
Patriotism in a citizen is not the blind following of his nation¬
state wherever it may lead ; and t he rights of a nation-State
do not consist in safeguarding its own interestsaTtHe expense
ofolfiers. That is a politics of power which denies the idea of
right in the relation between States , and it is elementary, as
Burke insisted in his indictment of Warren Hastings, that the
denial of right abroad means, sooner or later, the denial of
right at home. Men cannot discipline themselves in injustice
to strangers without, ultimately, denying the duty of justice
to their lyothers


II

The problem, then, is the equation ci nationalism, with
right. I do not mean bv “ right ” some mystic concept of
transcendental ethics I mean only that the interests sought
to be realised are measured m terms common to ill people
affected by the habit of living together l am arguing that
since my neighbour is the whole wot Id I must so conceive my
“ interest ’’ that n unpins th>' interest of those with whom I
have to live. It is the old truth that no man cmi live to him¬
self set in the new terms enforced by scientific discovery. It
means that howevei we may recognise the separateness of
those spiritual systems wc call nations theie is a " together¬
ness ” in their functioning which involves building the
institutions of " togetherness ” Tho.c institution' can be
built only upon the basis of joint decision upon matters of
common interest As soon, foi example, as what England
does directly affects Franc e the area of iiite r settmg activity
must give rise to a solution jointly planned by England and
France. And, obviously enough, once the problem is so
stated, the unit of reference cannot be confined to the two
illations Logically, t he .found,ition of an approach La .the"
[common problems of civilisation is eithei international or it
'is worthless.

For, ultimately, effective decisions cannot be made li they
myself unless I co-operate in making them. That
is not less true of the relationship of nation-States than it is


NATIONALISM AND CIVILISATION


227


true of individuals. I may be coerced into the performance
of functions I dislike ; but my service then becomes un-
creative because it is unfree. So, tog, with na tions. They
can work with another; they cannot be themselves at their
best if they'work; against each other. The power they exert
must be the power bom of activity with others, not the power
bom of coercion over others. They must convince their
neighbours that the relationship they have is one it is mutually
worth while to maintain. Each must gam from it the sense
of satisfied harmony which comes of service built upon self-
respect. For an order based upon compulsion can never
permanently maintain itself. That, at least, is th§ lesson of
Ireland and India, of Austm-Hungary, and the Germany
distorted by the Treaty of Versailles Orders issued and
relationships established must carry with them the assent of
the interests they affect They cannot, otherwise, grow into
validity.

That means the disappearance of the sovereign nation-
State. It means that no unit of civilisation can claim the
right to dictate to the world-order m which it finds to-day its
only meaning For no unit is any longer self-sufficient; over
a vasf 'area of functions the decisions if takes involve that
world-order in their incidence Such decisions involve what
Mr. Leonard Woolf has called “ cqs mopo litanjaw-making," if
they are to be sure of a fruitful application. This is not, of
course, an easy matter It involves (a) the_discoveryj>f the
functions that are universal in their incidence , ( b ) the building
of institutions suitable to the operation of those functions ;
(c) a method of suitable representation for the nation-States
which are to share in the government of such institutions.
The implication, in a word, of modem conditions is world-^
government The process, naturally enough, is immensely
more complicated than the government of a single State. The
spiritual tradition of co-operation has still to be created ; the
difficulty of language has to be overcome ; the application of
decisions has to be agreed upon in terms of a technique that is
still largely unexplored. The only source of comfort we
possess is the increasing recognition that modem warfare is
literally a jqjro of suicide, and that, as a consequence, the
choice before us is between co-operation and disaster. That


238


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

was the sense which, in 1919, led the makers of the Peace of
Versailles to strive for the mitigation of its inequities by the
acceptance of the League of Nations. The latter, indeed, is
the facade of a structure which has not yet been called into
being. But it has at least this great importance, that it con¬
stitutes an organ of reference which goes beyond the fiat of
a given State. It is, in fact, either nothing, or else a denial of
national sovereignty in world-affairs. It is upon the basis
of that denial that we have to build.

The discovery of functions that are universal in their
incidence is not a matter to be settled on a priori grounds.
Scientific discovery would make such an effort out of date even
before the ink in which the principles were written had grown
dry. What rather it is wise to attempt is a vision of the kind
of problem which has ceased to be merely national in character.
Certain obvious categories immediately suggest themselves :

(a) Problems of communication.

(i) Problems of territorial limits.

(c) Problems of racial or national minorities.

(d) Problems of public health.

(e) Problems of industry and commerce.

(f) Problems of international migration.

(g) Problems concerning the direct prevention of war.

In each of these categories, we have already not merely a
certain experience upon which to go, but also, with the
exception of the control of migration, certain institutions
which have already been tested by tneir actual operation.
What mainly emerges from that experience and that opera¬
tion ? Above all, I suggest two things. It is, first of all,
possible to administer and to legislate internationally. That
has been shown in things like International Maritime legis-
"j lation and such a complicated system as the International
Postal Union ; it is dear from the volume of achievement
which already stands to the credit of the International Labour
Office; it is clear from the very striking work of the Sugar
Commission which arose out of the Convention of 1902. In
these, and in innumerable similar instances, what we have
secured is the imposition of international standards upon


NATIONALISM AND CIVILISATION 229

national interests which, often enough, sought to evade or to
transcend those standards. It is clear, in the ^gsoad
that from the habit of international co-operation men of the
most alien and, often enough, antithetic experience, can pool
that experience to make a common solution. They,
learn, in a word, to think internationally. They do not cease
to be English or French or German ; but they learn to adjust
their nationalism to a richer perspective.

The second poin t of importa nce is the growing jinificationN
of law. We are compelled by theTacIs of civilisation to find
common rules of conduct which can be observed in Paris as
well as Tokio, in London as well as New York. We can seek
the universal establishment of a forty-eight hour week ; we
can see the "universal abolition of the use of white lead in paint.
We are driven, m a word, at least to a common minimum of
civilised life for all nation-States whose behaviour at all
seriously affects the world-order. What we must realise is the
need for driving, this process of unification much further than
it has so far gone. We must use it to distribute the raw
materials of industry We must use it for the settlement of
tariff-barriers. We must prevent, say, America making,
single-handed, the decision that the Philippines are unfit for
self-government; we must permit India to appeal beyond the
decision of Parliament to the common will of a world unified
into the League of Nations. Above all, we must prevent one
nation-State making war upon another by insisting that their
disputes are referable to, and must be decided by, an inter¬
national tribunal, and we must define as an aggressor to be
punished the State which refuses to submit its disputes to the
tribunal and to abide by the award that is issued. When we
realise the implications of this unifying process, we begin to
get a vision of the world at every point different from that
which sees it as a system of isolated and independent com¬
munities. We reject this latter system in part because it is
the root of conflict, and in part because its implications are out
of harmony with the facts to which our institutions now need
to be adjusted.

But can sujt|hleJnstitutions be discovered through which
this unifying process can be administered ? There seems no
reason to doubt that they can I shall discuss in detail later


280 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

in this book what seems an institutional pattern of which at
least the large outlines are reasonable What we need to
know is whether the characteristic organs of democratic
government—a legislature, an executive with a civil service,
and a judiciary—can be made flexible enough to apply to the
complicated structure of world-affairs Here, certainly, there
is room both for optimism and experiment It is clear that
we have reason to suppose that, as the work of the International
Labour Office makes manifest, a considerable body of agree¬
ment is attainable on the most difficult of problems It is
clear that blindly to follow the classical structure of
parliamentary government is to mistake altogether the nature
of the problem We cannot, at least m any practicable future,
visualise the Prime Minister of a world-State unfolding his
policy to a popularly elected Parliament at Geneva What
rather we have to envisage is continuous conference of govern¬
ments m which mechanisms exist for effective compromise on
the one hand, and for binding dissentients on the other 1 hat
does not mean the simple foimula of majority rule , but it
does, I tmnk, mean the abandonment of that principle of
unanimity upon which the existing strut ture of the League of
Nations is based Our situation calls lor government, and the
very notion of government involves the binding of a minority
to the acceptance of decisions made after free and full
discussion The major part of thost decisions will, in the
nature of the case, be nationally and not internationally,
administered The civil service of an international authority
will be a body of registration and iiiioim.ition rather than
a body applying solutions An international judiciary will
remit its decisions to national courts thiough vvmch they will
be made to work rather than maintain a polii e ion e to carry
them out The view to be taken at the mu i national legis¬
lature by the government of any btate vwL depend upon its
power to get that view accepted beforehand in a national
legislature If it fails in its emphasis, it may lose its authority
and be driven to resign but the will of the international
authority will be binding on its successor The distinction
drawn by Washington between influence and government is
as urgent in international as if is in domestic affairs

Nor is the problem ut n presentation on an international


NATIONALISM AND CIVILISATION 281

authority at all straightforward. At a ti me when the dogma
of State : sovereignty was.-at its apogee, i t seem ed log ical to
infer therefrom the notion of the equality of .States-, and,
consequently, to insist upon equal representation. But we
know from bitter experience that equality of States does not
produce workable solutions. We cannot make, say, Jugo¬
slavia the equal of the United States by giving it equal
membership of an international body. We cannot win results
that can be applied if, for example, the votes of the South
American republics are to outweigh those of the great powers.
Our problem is not the discovery of equal electoral districts as
in a democracy where personalities are, on a given plane, to
be equally weighed. What rather we have to do is to assure
to each State qualified for membership a voice that can speak
with freedom and to States like England, America, Russia,
that special authority which comes from their special incidence
upon world-affairs. The solution, I suggest, will be found in
making the legislature of the international authority accessible
equally to all States, while reserving permanent places upon
its executive to some only. The remainder may elect their
representatives to sit with the delegates of the great powers,
but they will be subject to the chances of elective fate. And
it will, one imagines, be necessary to make the executive body
a kind of upper chamber with a suspensive veto which can only
be overridden in peculiar circumstances Urgent as these
details are, they are still, it must be insisted, details. Once
the principle of unequal representation is admitted, it does not
become impossible to find a framework into which even the
intricate network of modern communities may be fitted. For
to insist on unequal representation is ultimately to abandon
the thesis of State-sovereignty , and it is fronuls. abandonment
that the chance of creative experiment emerges.

Ill

But alLJthis, it will be said, neglects the great fact of
patriotism, and the root of patriotism is expressed in the
defferimnation jo pr eserve national independence at all costs.
With those whcT3esire to maintain the status quo, patriotism is
made an instinct, and the attempt, accordingly, to infuse the


332 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

social order with rational purpose is made a priori superfluous.
The argument is, of course, important, but it is, at bottom,
much less formidable than it seems. For were it true in its
full rigour, it would make impossible any discussion of inter¬
national arrangements, and it would render absurdly illogical
the whole and vast structure of international agreement that
has so far emerged. Nor must it be forgotten that even the
instincts of men can be made the subjects of rational control.
Few now defend Calvin for his treatment of Servetus ; yet it
it hardly two hundred years since that action would have
commended itself to the majority of average men. No one
now defends man-traps and spring-guns; yet less than a
century has elapsed since they were defended in the House of
Commons almost as part of the eternal order of nature. We
do not know what we can do with human instincts until we
experiment with them ; and there is, as I shall show, ground
for the belief that patriotism can be sublimated into forms less
dangerous to social welfare.

Patriotism is built in part from the gregarious instinct of
man, and in part from the rational desire for self-government.
The structure I have urged as essential outrages neither of
these aspects. It does not propose that an Englishmen shall
cease to love or cherish his fellow-Englishman, to live with
them, to work with, even, it may be, to die for them. It does
not even ask him to surrender his belief in his effortless
superiority ax an Englishman over other nations. It agrees
that he should manage his own affairs It would leave to him
the unimpaired right to decide that he prefers a monarchy to
a republic, parliamentary government to the Soviet System,
the private ownership of the liquor traffic rather than pro¬
hibition. He could maintain, if he sc desired, the present
religious compromise in education without a single Frenchman
or American or Japanese having the right to criticise his
solution. He might continue to refuse State-recognition to
the arts. He might insist on the retention of a divorce law
which opens the floodgates of hypocrisy. Wherever the
incidence of his decision palpably lay in the sphere of internal
affairs it would leave his present position entirely unaffected.

But the right to manage his own affairs does not mean.the
right, to manage other people’s affairs. The developmental


NATIONALISM AND CIVILISATION 288

inte rnational law and con vention was due to the realisation
we cannot se parate the two ; that, because some of our
decisions affect other people, it is well that other people should
be consulted when they are being made. It did not insult
English patriotism in 1832, that the middle class should be
consulted in the choice of its governors. It was not even an
insult that the working-class should be finally admitted to
similar consultation in 1918. It was lhe4>erceptiqn_that what
touches all should be decided by all—an historic principle in
English government—which broke down the_ narrow confines
of theearlier system. Nor, though in a more meagre way, has
the history of international arrangements in the last century
been very different. The experiments that have been made
arose fro m th e realisation that "where “common interests are
affected there should be common organs of government.
That was the purpose, for example, of the Danube Commis¬
sion ; it has also, in a much vaster sphere, been the purpose,
even if but half-achieved, of the Imperial Conference. And
the solid result that has emerged from the working of these
arrangements is the knowledge that, granted good-will, they
can be extended into an efficient organisation of the world-
order which makes provision for necessary unities even while
it leaves room for the wise diversities of the human pattern of
association. It is a one in a many ; but the emphasis of that
oneness is not a denial of its indestructible pluralism. Nor is
this all. I t is a supreme virtue of international government
that it enables a trust emphasis to be placed on the well-being'
of the masses than is possible under the geographic limitations
of the modem State-system. Tfiat is implicit, for example,
in the conventions of the International Labour Office; they
force upon a backward State those standards of industrial
behaviour which are demanded by the public opinion of the
world. It brings out the true national interest against that
private interest masking as public welfare through the peculiar
incidence of power in a given geographical area. No one, for
instance, can seriously say that the protection of the Mann ea¬
rn ann brothers in Morocco was so vitally an interest of sixty
million Germans that a war with France over Morocco would
have been justified. Whether they were protected or no,
would have made no difference to any but a small number of


884 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

investors in the concessions they had obtained.
indeed, is_caUed “ national interest ” in these cases is rarely
oilier thap the protection of a band of financial adventurers
who are risking their capital under the protective armour of
the national Foreign Office. Skilful propaganda symbolises
them as “ England ” or “ France ” or " America ” ; but the
symbol is a tribute to the ignorance of the masses and not an
offering upon the altar of their need.

When, that is to say, we are told that international govern¬
ment, by attacking national prestige, breaks down upon the
rock of patriotism, we need, first of all, to know what national
prestige in the given instance involves. Englishmen in general
would hesitate to protect their prestige by war with Russia if
they learned that in fact their prestige meant the protection
of bondholders who had lent money to the Czanst despotism.
Americans who are eager to rearrange the government of
Mexico would have a different attitude to intervention if they
knew that what is called an “ intolerable insult to the United
States ” is, in fact, a refusal on the part of some Mexicans to
be the subjects of an American oil company. One can under¬
stand the emergence of a sense of prestige if, for example, all
Englishmen were refused access to American courts of justice
or if all Germans were refused the right, not denied to other
nationals, to travel in Italy. But, ia the majority of cases
to-day the patriotism that is called into being, however noble
—and it often is noble—is largely misplaced. What it protects
is, not the total interest of the geographical community, but
the power of a small group within that community to exploit
some undertaking in which they believe undue profit is to be
found. The youth of the nation pays the price; and the
youth of the nation is too precious to be made ‘he victim of so
sinister a misinierpretation.

I have argued that the emphatically territorial character
of the sovereign-nation State enables a small section of its
members to utilise its power for their own ends, even against
the interests of their fellow-citizens. Against such a danger
international government represents the most solid protection
rye have. But there is another aspect of importance to which
attention must be directed. The assumption of Statehood by
the nation obscures the urgent fact that the State is only one.


NATIONALISM AND CIVILISATION 283

however important, of the various groups into which society,
isdmded I argued earlier (i) that the State is, in daily
administration, the government and that the government may
lie at the disposal of a special interest, and ( 2 ) that to enforce
upon it organised consultation with other groups is essential
if the will realised is to represent a just compromise between
competing wills. We balance, in fact, the territorial supremacy
of government by making it work througli functional organs.
International government has advantages of a similar kind.
It enables us to make its will responsive not merely to the
political State, but also to group-interests which, if the political
State stood alone, might well receive inadequate recognition.

The advantage of this possibility has already been made
apparent m the operation of the International Labour Office.
The tripartite composition of national delegations—govern¬
ment, employers and workers—gives a flexibility to the
expression of group-interests that has been notably absent
from ordinary diplomatic lelations ; and it is further reinforced
by the possibility of substituting for the ordinary delegate from
any group persons of special competence upon some particular
problem But the system admits of further extension. It is
possible by sub-conferences of the national delegations to
express a united view at the Assembly of the Labour Office.
It is possible to transform the - delegations into permanent
commissions connected in an advisory capacity with the
national government of the day. We could create, through
the International Labour Office, permanent administrative
commissions on special functions to which might be confided
powers of the kind now possessed by such bodies as the Sugar
Union.

Nor, of course, are such possibilities limited to the area
covered by the International Labour Office. In the League of
Nations itself it is clear that questions like the migration of
peoples, the treatment of subject-races, the repression of the
traffic m noxious drugs, all lend themselves to similar treat¬
ment. There is, surely, nothing to be lost, and much to be
gained, by making the decisions of States based not merely
upon the widest practicable induction open to them, but also
an induction which is, a prion, assured of reasonable com¬
petence. All bodies which seek influence in the modem


286 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

world, the co-operators, the trade unionists, the chambers of
commerce, are driven to organise themselves internationally
in the search to make their influence felt. More and more
they are winning positions in which the State finds itself
compelled to take account of their power. What is here urged
is that to make that power direct instead of obscure is to
ensure that the world-order is built upon an experience com¬
pounded of all the interests that are seeking expression of their
purpose. It aSords an opportunity for integration of resources
instead of antagonism of resources. It provides channels of
connection for those interests which transcend the boundaries
ot a single State and are yet limited, by the technique of
geographical organisation, to adjustments which are wasteful
and unreal. I may add that these international solutions
rarely lend support to the plea that the interests of the national
State are sacrificed in their making. For, in the long run, the
only solutions that work are the solutions which mutually
benefit the parties making them. That means, inevitably,
compromise; and it means compromise beaten out by cor¬
porate discussion. We are unlikely to obtain such corporate
discussion, at least in a permanently effective way, unless we
have the institutions to compel it. And we cannot balance
the interests of the parties concerned unless, above the impact
of their power to enforce their will, considerations of right are
given the opportunity of expression.

All this, it may be said, does not touch the ultimate
question of national independence. For the international
authority thus created might will, not merely territorial changes
in some given State, but, possibly, the actual disappearance of
the State itself. In the old order, Austria-Hungary was able
to annex Bosnia and Herzegovina; what, in the new, is to
prevent the League of Nations deciding that they shall be
transferred against their will ? Why should not a new Russia
submit to membership of the League in return, for instance,
for the restoration of her authority over Finland and Latvia,
Lithuania and Esthonia ? There is a variety of ways in
which, it may be suggested, considerations of this kind can
easily be met. Exactly as in the American Constitution, no
State can be deprived of its equal suffrage in the Senate without
its own consent, so would it be possible to prevent an attack


NATIONALISM AND CIVILISATION 2*T

on territorial integrity by making the consent of the State
involved necessary to any proposal of change. To suppress
the will to independence of any State, moreover, is not a mere
matter of bargaining in the council chamber. It can only be
done by making the State freely assent to that suppression.
Just as the Treaty of Sevres involved the Treaty of Lausanne,
so the neglect of justified nationalism would bring with it its
own penalty. The statesmen who make the international
solutions of the next age are not less likely to realise that fact
than the statesmen of the last generation. They are being
driven by the logic of experience to depend more and more
upon the assent of the communities for which they legislate.
They have either to find organs through which that assent
may be made articulate or find their solutions wrecked by facts
they were unwilling to consider. The history of Italy and
Austria, of Alsace-Lorraine, of the Balkan Peninsula, is the
kind of evidence which makes it likely that an international
authority will be more careful to find genuinely corporate
solutions than was possible when the issue was left to the
arbitrament of force.

And, at least, the alternative is clear. Either national
States must learn to co-operate instead of to compete, or, it is
likely, the small national State will cease to possess effective
independence. Even the brief but feverish interval since the
Peace of Versailles has shown that the new States of Europe
are driven to become the satellites of the greater Powers in
their hurried search for avenues of survival. They are driven
to barter what truly constitutes their freedom for military
protection. Their armaments, their alliances, even the
internal substance of their economic life, become not the ex¬
pression of their own needs, but of the will of their superior
neighbour. If this process proceeds unchecked, we shall see
the world peopled, perhaps, by some half-dozen great empires
each of which, in seeking its safety, will destroy the whole
fabric of civilisation.

We cannot permit that process to go on if we have any
regard for the riches of our heritage. And we can only prevent
its development by the surrender of the fiction that, in the
life of society, there is no word beyond the will of the indi¬
vidual State. We have to find middle terms between com-


2S8 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

plete dependence and complete independence. Inquiry shows
clearly that the invention is a possible one. Canada and South
Africa have both found a full national life possible without the
pursuit of the mirage of State-sovereignty; their citizens can
assume a stature not less tall, a posture not less dignified, than
those of Poland or Roumania. Their ambitions can be as
fully satisfied in any sense in which the organisation of the
modem world makes national ambition justifiable. Nor must
we fail to realise the urgency of the issue. The day of the
Laodicean passed when scientific discovery made possible the
sTedTship'and the aeroplane. There are no longer lotus-fields
where men may linger careless of the life about them. The
world is one and indivisible in a sense so compelling that the
only question before us is the method by which we represent
its unity.

Two other remarks may perhaps be made The nation-
state will act towards other nation-States as it acts towards
its own citizens; external policy is always, in the end,
a reflection of, and an adjustment to, interna] poke) Where
there is slavery within a State, the wars of that State are wars
for the enslavement of its rivals. Whete there is bitter class-
conflict, the dominant class is always seeking to limit and to
' hinder the trade of dominant classes abroad. We seem, in the
play of world-forces, to become to others that which we have
been content to be to each other The Ulster which was blind
to the fact that behind the insurgency of nineteenth-century
Ireland there lay an urgent protest of the Jrtsh soul, adopted,
when remedy of that condition was at last attempted exactly
that contempt for law of which it had earlier complained.
Unless we can find the institutions which make possible the
abrogation of conflict in tine domestic life of the State, we shall
not find them in the sphere of international affairs.

For hate is of all qualities the most cancer-like to its
, possessor. It leads us to develop in ourselves the character
we condemn in others. Burke’s great warning that freedom
suppressed by Englishmen in India would lead them, sooner or
, later, to destroy English freedom, is a particular of which the
universal lies at the heart of our social life. That is why the
realisation of what is implied in democracy is the necessary
prelude to the achievement of an ordered civilisation. We


NATIONALISM AND CIVILISATION 289

cannot, of course, achieve it separately. State by State; for
each State has become so entangled in the world outside itself
that the two are aspects of a relation that is unified. But it
is dear that whatever makes for the betterment of relations
between citizens of the same State develops also the prospect
of friendship between dtizens of different communities. Ulti¬
mately, that is, the purity of that corporate soul we call a
nation is only maintained when the forces of the spirit are the
masters of its life. It is only debased when it lends itself to
other forms of power ; and debasement is always easier than
devation.

It may be said that the big battalions triumph, and that
a nation which neglects physical force is like a man who throws
away his sword in a battle. But this, after all, is to beg the
prior question of whether a battle was essential and whether
other means of arbitrament could not have been found. Might,
in the modem world, needs to be dothed with right if it is to
be sure that it will achieve permanence. The spiritual life of
Europe belongs not to Caesar and Napoleon, but to Christ;
the dvilisation ol the East has been more influenced by Buddha
than by Ghengis Khan or Akbar. It is that truth we have to
learn, if we are to survive. We overcome hate by love, and
evil by good; baseness begets only a progeny like to itsdf.
We must set our own houses in order if we are to realise the
vaster dream.

Nor are we, secondly, called upon to believe that the
prevention of conflict by international government deprives
life of its colour or its romance. The glamour of war is as
unreal as the bought affection of the prostitute , it exists only
in the inexperience of those who have not known its deadly
furies. For the few to whom there comes the occasion of
chivalrous exploit, there are the millions to whom it means
death and disease and maimed lives Its agonies do not touch,
in any realistic way, those who direct its operations; and for
the actual combatants, it is the organised and deliberate
destruction of all that makes humanity a precious and lovely
thing. Nor does the civilian population escape its impact.
Death by starvation, by poison-gas, by aeroplane steals on
some like a thief in the night; others are made moral lepers
by either the avoidance of duty or the clutching at illegitimate


240 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

gain. We must not, either, forget its mental legacies, fear and
hate, envy and revenge. For that which, above all, has
destroyed our belief in the tradition that war strengthens
men’s souls is the knowledge that in its modem form it
transforms peace into its own grim image.

That is not the least reason why no man can give an un¬
excepted allegiance to the nation-State. TfelLljTie loyalty
he owes is to the ideals he can build from his experience.
The true battle in which he is a soldier is the battle to make
those ideals ample and generous and compelling. At that
point there comes into view the true romance of modem
civilisation, the most genuinely co-operative effort in which
we can lose consciousness of self. It is the conquest of
knowledge that is the real source of our hopes, its conquest
and its extension to the common man. For the real root of
conflict is ignorance. It is the ill-informed mind and the
narrow mind which are the servants of national hate. It is
they which are exploited by the evil forces of an age. What
is wanted, if we are to break down the barriers between know¬
ledge and ignorance, is education. We can only surmount
our problems by enlisting the service of every citizen in that
task ; and we can only make men citizens by training their
minds to grasp the world about them When the masses can
understand they will have the courage to act upon theii under¬
standing. For intellect, as Carlyle said, is like light; from a
chaos it makes a world.


CHAPTER SEVEN


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL
I

The view of the State discussed in the previous chapters
involves a new attitude to the problem of authority. It
involves, of course, the exercise of power by persons; and it
admits that the number of persons legally entrusted with
power is likely to remain small. But its centre of interest is
less in the question of those who constitute the ultimate
source of legal reference in society than in the relations
established by them in order to make their decisions the jesult
of the largest empirical induction it is open to them to obtain.
It is emphatic that their power must be built from the
experience of all persons affected by its exercise. Their
authority is limited to the degree that it succeeds in integrating
that experience.

This argument involves a re-interpretation of the doctrine
of consent in politics. It involves, therefore, also a re¬
interpretation of the theory of representation upon which
we at present depend. The modem doctHne-oi-canseni. is
l argely a specious intellectualism. We do not choose our
governors in the sense of actively making certain persons
govern by our deliberate choice, We do not accept their
legislation in the sense of finding it expressive of what is one
with our own sense of our needs. Between us and our rulers
there lies a vast abyss which is filled by the devices that power
and its varied mechanisms bring into being. We are told that
public opinion wills this and desires the other But we have
no satisfying channels either for the gamering of public opinion
or for placing before it the materials upon which it may build
an edifice of demand which represent its wants. Consent

16 141


242 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

may in practice mean any of a score of things from blank
ignorance through dumb inertia to deliberate coercion. It
may mean, not the fusion of wills to achieve some purpose
warranted by the facts, but the overcoming of wills which
feel, sometimes actively, sometimes passively, that the thing
proposed is wrong or mistaken or inadequate. Or there may
be assent to a proposal which is, in fact, untrue because the
administration of the thing announced as realised renders
impossible the achievement of the idea which seeks trans¬
lation into the event.

Our doctrine of consent must therefore take account of
certain uncomfortable situations which surround the existing
system. We base our legislation on the expert interpretation
of our environment. But the interpretation even by the
expert is coloured by his own response to it, and the nature
of that response alters the environment by the fact that it has
been interpreted. No environment, in short, is ever a static
thing. We live in it and make it. It becomes ours by our
experience of it, and it becomes different because t is ours.
Our view of what the environment means is always intensely
individual. It cannot be felt by others as we iecl it. It does
not convey to them the impact it makes on ourselves. There
are no objective situations to be seized by a body of passionless
experts who can present objective conclusions to the legislator.
The solutions proposed make their way successfully only as
they represent an interpretation of experience sufficiently akin
to our own to be valid for us. That is why, for instance, the
making of law can never be safely confined to a single class in
the community. For its view of need is bound to be coloured
by its special interest, and because it has never been made to
integrate that interest with those of other classes, it will be
unable to realise, if not their existence, at least their validity.
That has been strikingly seen in the disputes in the coal-
industry in recent years. Where the miners have seen the
low standard of life to which they have been condemned, the
owners have been impressed by their low rate of profit. It is
seen, also, in the post-war relations of Germany and France.
Where the former has seen mainly the savage humiliations of
the period since 1918, France has been troubled in part by her
own humiliation in the period of war, in part by the need for


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 248

security against the anger to which German humiliation has
given rise. The outside r, who asks that each shall consider the
position of its neighbour^mistakes the nature of the problem.
Each can only see the problem of the other when they par¬
ticipate in making a solution. But their present relation does
not provide for the mutual creation of authority. So, too,
the miner and the mineowner can only have interests in
common by creating common interests. The interpretation
each makes of his experience must have equal validity in the
solution reached before consent to that solution is real. At
present, when the parties to the State-relation, even more, to
international affairs, demand justice, they mean in fact simply
justice for themselves. We can only move beyond that ex¬
clusiveness when all can protect their interests by partici¬
pating in~the process which secures them.

T hat is t he real case for self-government. It permits due
attention being given to the interest affected, by making the
consent to be secured the consent of those persons who alone
know what the interest effectively is. Authority therefore, is
a function of relations ; arjd j.Lderives its validity from_the
way in which those relations are organised. 11 is important,
moreover, that we should regard those relations as dynamic.
They are changed by working, and they, in turn, change by
their operation. The process is an interweaving one. The
impact of interests alters the character of interests. Solutions
become workable because they are able to garner the experience
of those who make them. Authority imposed from without
can never achieve that effect over a period. Its values are
personal to those who make the decisions. It fails eventually
to co-ordmate the experiences affected by its decisions. That
is why moreover, there is a point at which the administration
of decisions must be decentralised if it is to be creative. For
the incidence of their application weights differently for each
area involved the substance of the decision made. That
substance, indeed, actually becomes different as it meets the
environment that is influenced; and, in its turn, it directly
influences the environment it encounters. Few things are
more interesting on a municipal body than the way in which
membership of a committee persuades the elected councillor
who is adamant about expenditure on other matters to feel


344 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

that the subject he is concerned to administer is not receiving
adequate attention. Will that i s made by activity as-distinct
/'from consent that is inferrecf 7 rom reception is the_foundation
npon which authority must be based.

Authority, therefore, co-ordinates the experiences of men
into solutions that harmonise the needs they infer from those
1 experiences. I shall discuss later how those experiences are
encountered in social organisation. What, for the moment, I
am concerned to urge is that no authority is truly respected,
wins, that is, a consent of substance save in those terms. I do
not mean that, even in those terms, its co-ordination will be
final, for even when it is made the environment has begun
to change its character. Respe ct Jfoj; laty__cap never he
guaranteed_ali that we can do is"to. reduce the area oi-dis¬

respect it wiU encounter. We can do so by the degree to
which we build our decisions, not upon the fear we can inspire
^ or the habits of deference they meet, but by the range of
experience that they span. But because men interpret that
i experience differently, the possibility of conflict, ‘hough it can
ibe minimised, is never finally absent. We can be certain that
most orders will be obeyed. Yet history, we must also remem¬
ber, is quite largely the record of disobedience to orders which
have seemed to men a denial of what was most certain in their
experience.

I The clearest and most direct way to minimise conflict is
I to organise better information upon which to base decisions.
Not seldom our difficulties have arisen from the fact that the
parties to some given issue have not merely a different view of
the result of the conflict, but also a different view of what the
conflict is about. Here, the expert determination of facts is
a fundamental matter; and the expertise, to be acceptable,
must be drawn from a point outside the persons directly
involved in the struggle. Miners, for in-tance, will rarely
accept mineowners’ views of overhead charges; and mine-
owners usually deny with fierceness the miners’ statistics of
wage-rates. The expert from outside who investigates and
presents the available information is here the essential term
in the equation ; he determines, as no one else can adequately
determine, the material upon which judgment is to be delivered.
But he ought not to determine the judgment. That externa!


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 245

imposition of a view not made by the persons involved is
usually a compromise acceptable to neither side, or else a
settlement denounced as biased by the side to which it is
adverse. The expert oug ht always to provide the materials
for a finding, but never the finding itself. For the latter at
once becomes subjective in a way destructive of the character
that makes its basis acceptable. It loses its quality of
expertise. It becomes something to be impugned in order
that the decision may be rejected.

That was shrewdly pointed out by Sir William Harcourt
in a remark that goes to the root of the matter. “ The value,”
he said, 1 “ of political heads of departments is to tell the
officials what the public will not stand.” But so stated, the
thesis is incomplete. What is not less important is to know
from what sources the political head of a department derives
his view. A Chancellor of the Exchequer who merely con¬
sulted property-owners upon the incidence of taxation would
have but a poor clue to the mind of the public; a Viceroy who
questioned the wives of Anglo-Indians would hardly be well-
informed upon the state of native opinion. We have, therefore,
to go beyond the statesman and to organise the experience he
is seeking to interpret. We have to make known to him the
wills embodied in that experience. We have to construct
definite channels through which they can have access to him.
And not merely access. For in the process of building such
relationships we have, as nearly as we can, to weight those
wills equally that they may be estimated with fairness.

There are involved in this view certain li pnts t o the ng ht-
ness oj _authori ty as such which need careful exploration. It
is clear, ljrsLof all, t hat the ex perien ce of each.member of the
St ate, bo th by himself and in concert with others, must be
made capable of expression. It must have, not merely
awareness of itself, but the means of stating the things of
which it is aware. That involves . I think, the j5ystems-of
rights I discussed above; for, without them, the citizen has
not the means of adequate statement at his disposal. And it
would follow therefrom that no authority is legitimate which
does not recognise and operate those rights. What it is and
does derives its significance from them. To the degree that

1 A. G Gardiner, Sir WiUiam Harcourt, n 587


246


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


it denies them it is limiting not merely the body of knowledge
at its disposal, but also its capacity to satisfy the wants of
citizens. Limitation of that kind, even when originally un¬
conscious, becomes, again perhaps unconsciously, systematic.
For where men are silent because they have not been given the
means of speech, it is always ultimately assumed that they are
silent because they have nothing to say.

The pow e r to stafp fiaperifincaJmplifiS. .the..right to be
consulted about w ants. My experience is pointless unless it
leads me to demand satisfaction. And it must here again be
insisted that the wants required are a private system of
experience into which, at the best, others can only penetrate
in small part. The consultation of experience therefore means
the .right to participate in the" m'aEmg of decisions. For any
order that is iss ued witho ut my sharing in its building will be
an order that speaks for those who make it, and not for me.
Anyone who analyses, for instance, the history of the landed
system in this country will see that whatever experience it
summarises, the peasant is not a participant therein. The
law of sedition in India is, similarly, built upon the will of a
conquering race to preserve its dominion from the danger of
destructive criticism. It is so clear that power is limited by
the experience which exercises it that it hardly needs argument
to prove that its legitimacy is similaily limited to those who
have shared in that exercise. The foundation of democratic
government is therefore in the active sharing by citizens in. its
processes. The will of the State must be compounded of the
separate and varying consciousnesses that are affected by its
willing.

Here, of course, a complex problem emerges in the effort
to discover how much participation is necessary in order that
its results may be adequate. It is easy to make the idea of
consultation absurd by thinking of it in terms of our present
political structure and trying to visualise each statute and each
administrative order being scrutinised by a helpless and
muddled electorate. Participation certainly involves voting
on a variety of matters; I have already argued that the
people must periodically choose their governors. But the
reality of participation will, I think, be found on a different
plane from that of electoral machinery. To elect our officials


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL


247


and then to wait until we can cashier them will never give
substance to our citizenship. It j&jifli sq .much zip the .purely
political plane as in the field of economic and administrative
activity that p articipation is important. These can, as fields
of activity, be related back in their turn to the political process.
But what we need is inventiveness m the ^organisation of
functions, and, within ^h'ose functions, the attempt to avoid
making authority purely hierarchical in its categories. For
every separation of human beings, by exclusion, is a potential
source of conflict. Every body m which the source of power
is separated from the peisons influenced by the exercise of
pow'er tends to acquire a life of its own, a self-interest, therefore,
of its own, distinct from the purpose it seeks to fulfil. That
separateness, indeed, changes the purpose , for it interacts
with its environment to build a new atmosphere in which it
drifts towards a new orientation.

This raises the p roblem of th e wny.m.wiikii the individual v
is, in mod em social organisation, related to the State ; and,
in particular, it raises the question of what I should like to
call—the terms are not merely reiterative-—t he l egality of
law. Every citizen has, from the standpoint of politics, three
aspects of primary importance. There is, of .all t{ie man/
himself, an ultimately unassimilable human being, to whom
Isolation from the rest of his kind, the privacy which he will
die to protect, is at all costs important. A man's religion is
a typical section of this aspect, though it has not, of course,
been so typical save in very recent times. But in relation to
the rrtodern State each man is, m this depai tment or elsewhere,
ultimately an Athanasius. He will be broken by the world
rather than yield to the world. In the decisions the State
makes for these intimate aspects of a man's self it must leave
him room to move as he thinks fit ; there is nothing it can do
which will deflect his conscience without, by destroying it,
making the whole of his experience invalid for him. For that
experience, I suggest, makes law for him; and the decisions
of an external authority have no hold on his respect save as
they coincide with that experience in its results. There is,
S gcondiy , the man who is an gssQCiaUiie animal, who belongs
to this church, and thajt trade union, this international body
and that employers' association. All these are functions of


848


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

himself. They are corporate personalities through_which his
own personality is breaking into expression. Their decisions
carry weight with him, even when they trench upon that civic
aspect which is, as I argued above, most intimately the State's
own sphere. In the l ast aspect, the State is seeking to lay
' down the gen eral princ iples hy which the life of the societyas
a whole may b e,directed. It is building, not an ultimate
unity, but necessary unities^ of conduct; it isfunding minimal
adjustments in behaviour. Most largely, in the modem world,
it is seeking a harmony between the second and third aspects
here outlined.


Here is the head and centre of the problem of authority.
That problem, as I conceive it, is twofold in nature. It is the
problem (i) of making the solutions of the ultimately unifying
authority able to command the willing allegiance of citizens,
and (2) of discovering a process through which the likelihood
of its making that ability pre-eminent is maximised.

So to state the problem is, it must be admitted, to depart
from the classic path of political science. For it is the
assumption of the classic theory that the ultimately unifying
authority must be supreme just because it unifies. That was
why Hobbes, in his own vigorous phrase, refused to permit the
existence of associations in society on the ground that they
were " like worms in the entrails of a natural man ” ; 1 they
detracted from allegiance to the State and thus endangered the
acceptance of its decisions. So, too, with Rousseau, to whom
, corporations meant the interposition of a private will before
that general will upon which the well-being of the State
depended. So, too, it is argued that a strike in the public
services stands upon a different ground from a strike in private
employment. The Stale-is conceived as the ultimate law¬
-making body which gives their character to all other bodies
and institutions. From the State, if not their existence, at
least the rationale of their existence is derived. To deny its
law, even if it seems unjust, is to loosen the cement which
holds society together. It is not merely, we are told, to risk

' Leviathan, U. 29


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL


349


anarchy, but also, what is worse, it is to leave the settlement
^of social arrangements to a decision based on the might of the
conflicting parties concerned.' We must therefore postulate
the supremacy of the State’s will over all other wills in society.
Its authority then, I take it, has not merely a legal pre-eminence 1
but also amoral pre-eminence, as the fountain of social peace
For no purely legal order can be maintained without persuading
those who support it that they do so on moral grounds exclu¬
sively theirs. So stated, the first aspect of the problem of
authority permits of an a priori solution. Because the State
is the ultimately unifying organ, 1 must accept its orders
and give my allegiance to it against the demands of any other
body. The second aspect becomes then of merely minor
importance.

I do not myself consider that the problem is so simple as
this view would assume. For we are compelled, first of all,
to analyse the State-will as a function not less than a purpose.
We must infer, that is, the nature of the State, not from what
it announces itself to be, but from what it does to. the daily
substance of men’s lives. 1 have already argued that in
general the State is the government, that the decisions of thej
latter body are the decisions which get enforced. The problem
is then an inquiry into the authority of government which, in
its turn, becomes an inquiry not merely into what a govern¬
ment is, but also what, in the modem social equation, a
government is likely to be. I have suggested that the inference
must be drawn in the main from the property-system in the
given State, that this system will suggest the actual incidence
of power (whatever be its theoretic distribution! and that, in
general, the holders of power will divert its opportunities to
their own use. I argued that only the operation of certain
rights as the basis upon which authority rests can prevent
that perversion, and that the existing system apotheosises
inequality of power. I am driven, accordingly, t o two
conclusions. The claim of au thority upon myself is, firstly
l egitimate proport ionately to the mor al urgency of its appeal
and it is, secondly , i mport ant to make its decisions_as_cfosel>

* Mr W Y Elliott's The Pragmatic Revolt in Politics (1928) is an interest
ing attack on these views and a fairly complete guide to the relevant con
temporary literature


2S00 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

w oven from a nd into my own experience in order that its

,a maximum.

Law is, of cou r se, the ori gin of so ci al peace, and I do n ot
mean to deny for a moment the value of social peace. But I
am arguIng^tRaFT shall not feel it to be a condition inherently
superior to any other until I know what it implies ; and I
shall judge its implications by experience of their result ip
terms of my own life. 1 have to see, that is, what body^ of
experience its maintenance is protecting, and what other
experience is excluded from its protection Law wrlT, in
general, only appeal as legal to the citizen according as, it
seems to him genuinely, and not merely on a priori grounds,
the reflection of a moral order He will mean by that an order
in which the rights he recognises as valid find place and
sanction. Where they are absent he will feel entitled to rebel
against the demands of law. The exp erience of citizens, in
other words, i s the true maker of law W hat th ey .had true
to,ihat..experience wfll have authority for them. It is useless
to ask them to yield to decisions which come to then without
the reality they appreciate. They may yield to to.ce or to fear.
They may accept because they do not understand They
may feel that resistance, on son e given occasion, is not
worth the penalty contingently involved But they will not,
on any other conditions, give to the State the only allegiance
worth having, the obedience of a free and convinced under¬
standing

Admittedly this involves the theM>- that the exercise of
autho rity is surrounded by_ a penumbra oi anarchy. Is it
worth while to deny that truth ? Law foi men is not the
voice of an authority related permanently to some g ven organ,
but the voice of the authority they are piepared to accept.
That was what Ulster meant when it declared the Home Rule
Act unconstitutional. That, also, was the motive force
behind Passive Resistance to the Education Act of 1902.
That is why Churchmen refuse to accept as valid the decisions
of the Judicial Committee of the Pnvy Council. It explains
the resistance of South Wales miners to the Munitions Act of
1915 and of Communists to the whole social order under which
we live. Law, f or them, has the authority of its substance
and not the authority of the legal organ that is its source of


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 251

reference. There ar e , therefore, as many organs of authority
in society as there are bodies which command the^ assent of
men. I shall be with my Church and against the State, with
my trade union and against the State, if the impact of the
State upon my experience seems inadequate compared to the
impact of the Church or the trade union. It is my activity
which gives legality to the law.

Law, therefore, has to make its way to acceptance through
the channels of the mind. And it will convey a different
meaning to each mind it encounters because the experience of
each mind, the system, therefore, of its wants, are different.
The sanctions of authority are thus never ultimately single,"
because those wants, though general in character, are never
ultimately the same. We can therefore never guarantee
respect for law. We can never say, for instance, that because
the King in Parliament has spoken, therefore its will is bound
to prevail. Normally, of course, we have assurance that the
decision announced will be accepted. The real problems
occur at the margin and not at the centre of law-making.
But those margins are the urgent and controlling fact in any
political philosophy which seeks to be true to its total environ¬
ment. Legal right has no meaning for the individual save as
he himself makes it have meaning. It has no sanctions save
the authority he lends to it by articulating it with his own
experience. We are loyal to the demands of the State just to
the degree that the articulation accomplished results for us in
a satisfied activity.

I am not, it should be noted, denying the need of obedience.
Rather, I am arguing that it should be insisted that obedience
i s no t a relation between an active source of decision, and i
passive receiver, but. that, where it is to be creative, each ii
a' participant in the environment built by their relationship-
We have, fLour loyaity is to be at all genuine, to contribute to
the State, not a self that is an inert recipient of orders, but a
self which contributes to those orders and colours them with
its own personality. The State, that is to say, must make its
law valid, must discover what I have called the legality of law,
by compounding it lrom the experiences of its citizens. It can
only do so by associating them with the process of law-making.
For when we say that the State makes law, we tend to forget


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


S52


that the State must act through agents who are also men.
Their wants and purposes are built from their own experience
of life, and, naturally, are valid for themselves as they satisfy
the implications of that experience. But they are inadequate
for others save as they include others. They lack, save in
that way, the authority which makes their wants and pur¬
poses compelling because recognisable as our own. And that
recognition can only come when we know that their authority
is not merely made by us at some definite moment of origin,
but continues to be so made by being interwoven, at each
stage of the process of government with our own activities.
These represent the wants we know as we only can know them.
Authority, otherwise, has no profound roots in the soil of our
own existence.

Certain contemporary examples will perhaps make this
attitude clear. The most striking of all is the manner in which
the Treaty of Versailles was made. It is generally agreed that,
after the German Revolution of 1918, the desire for a reason¬
able peace in Germany was widespread Bui a reasonable
peace meant one in which the interests of the vanquished, not
iess than those of the victors, found a place In the Treaty
actually made, not only did the vanquished receive no con¬
sideration, but they were even prohibited from expressing the
view of what the Treaty meant to them. They were driven
into acceptance of the Treaty bv the fear of what might follow
if they repudiated it. The result is what might have been
expected. The average German does not feel that mainten¬
ance of the Treaty is an obligation of honour He docs not


find that his relationship to it is built out of any experience,V
that has validity for himself He accepts the Treaty to the^ 1
point that force, actual or contingent, prevent' his evasion of


it. But what, in fact, is continually in his mind is the remaking
of the Treaty. What, in fact, he is continually seeking is such
a body of readjustments as will create obligations he can


respect as reasonable. And no such adjustments will be found


save as he participates in the search for them The process of
making them must give him a creative part m their finding.
It may even, I think, be legitimately urged that the attitude
of those politicians to whom the Treaty is a sacred document
verbally inspired is largely derived from the recognition that


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 258

its authority is inadequate. They were searching not for a
solution, but for power over Germany. They were insisting
not on an instrument which should join into harmony
experiences previously antagonistic, but an instrument which
embodied their own experience. The lesson they, are being
taught is the simple one that while the instrument they have
forged has authority for themselves, it has no authority for
Germans. They attribute this, of course, to inherent
immorality in the nature of Germans; but it is, in fact, a
simple psychological consequence verifiable from the everyday
relationships of ordinary men

Hardly less striking has been the post-war relation between
Capital and Labour, especially in Great Britain. " Employers,"
a great capitalist told the House of Lords recently,' “ have
never been more anxious for the welfare of their workers than
they are to-day; and never has there been less response.”
But good-will is inadequate as a means of creating response
unless the objects to which it is directed are determined by
co-operation. There is no such co-operation between Capital
and Labour to-day, nor do there exist the institutions through
which it might flow. The industrial world is organised not
for peace but for conflict. Each party, as strategic advantage
presents itself, imposes terms upon the other. Neither has
real access to the other's mind. Neither has agreed upon
common objects of endeavour. T fie employer who demands
a larger output from his men has never set himself to discover
the terms upon which a larger output can be secured He has
never tried to realise that it is a complex function of many
variables. He is too often content to assume that if additional
output is followed by an addition to wages, the worker’s
concern about the matter is over. He has never seen that
what is important for the worker is not an aspect of his
behaviour, but his integrated behaviour. Additional output
raises the question not merely of increased wages, but of
proper piece-rates, of continuity and volume cf employment,
of fatigue in industry, of the relation, through fatigue, of
sickness to security, and so forth. None of these is a question
that can be settled by the employer alone. Each of them, if
it is to be settled in an adequate way, must be built upon the

* Lord Emmott in the House of Lords. July 7, *<524.


254 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

attachment of an equal weight to the worker’s experience with
that of the employer. At present the content of the phrase
“ welfare ” in Lord Emmott’s remark is utterly different for
each party. And the fatal flaw in the whole relationship is
that he assumes, as so many employers assume, that the lack
of response on the worker’s part is either a war-neurosis, or
else a slackness due to irresponsibility The fact, of course,
is that the war has mere!}’ sharpened the worker's sense that
he is not willing any longer to be ruled from without, even if
tb»* autocracy is a benevolent one. For the most benevolent
autocrat cannot penetrate an experience he does not share ;
its joys and its pains are equally unknown to him. What we
are witnessing m industry is the birth-pangs of a new order.
It may well be that conflict will stifle it before it emerges.
Certainly it cannot be quick with healthy life unless the
environment it is to encounter is reshaped to fit its wants.

And here a particular argument is of interest because it
illustrates, more vividly than any other, the approach to the
problem of authority I am seeking to emphasise. Men say
they can understand strikes in industries which do not seriously
affect the society as a whole. If the makers of perfume choose
to cease work, that is a matter of indilference ; society will not
die for lack of perfume. But on the railways or in the police
force a strike, it is urged, is a very different thing. For these
functions are clothed with a directly public purpose ; where
they cease to operate, a direct blow is aimed at the very heart
of social organisation. It is, therefore, so it is said, 1 impossible
to permit dislocation in enterprise of this kind. The State
owes it to society to see that there is continuity of service.
Either, then, it must make strikes in these functions definitely
illegal, or it must have the means at its disposal of operating
alternatively the dislocated service.

I do not deny the seriousness of dislocation in these
functions. But it follows from what I have urged above that
the legal prohibition of strikes will not add one jot or tittle to
the authority which seeks to prevent them. To say that the
purpose, of these functions is continuity of service and that,
therefore, a strike is a denial of their rationale, seems to me an

1 Cf. Leon Duguit, he Droit Social, Le Droit Individual ci L Etai (1908),
pp i 34 t


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 255

entirely useless approach to the problem. For the purpose of
a function is not a static form of words. The purpose is the
meaning of the function in the daily life of those who are
related to it. The way to prevent dislocation is not to pro¬
hibit it, but to enable those so related to participate in its
working. For their control is then an expression of their
experience. The discipline they adopt grows naturally out of
the needs they know. Men are not less likely to strike, say
on the railways, because strikes are illegal; that is only more
likely to exacerbate their temper when they have struck.
Nor, I suggest, does the provision of a temporary alternative
really help the problem. For either it drives towards a settle¬
ment which, like the Treaty of Versailles, fails to carry with
it a sense of obligation, or else, by using power on one side of
the conflict, it turns the issue away from a consideration of
the real facts involved to questions oi method in truth irrelevant
to them. The secret ol avoiding dislocation in industries of
this kind is to make the necessary institutions of agreement he
at their foundation instead of creating them spontaneously as
each temporary difference arises. For then the agreement is
cloaked in the authority derived from continuous knowledge ;
and that knowledge, in its turn, is a function of the total
experience available to us We can then evaluate the factors
of solution before the differences are precipitated. W r e can
examine before the request becomes a demand, and the demand
a threat. Above all, we can examine in common. In our
preSfent arrangements, what is emphasised is always the line of
partition instead of the territory of agreement ; and, granted
those arrangements, it is inevitable that it should be so.

I do not say that this method will prevent strikes ; I only
urge that it will minimise their number as no other method can
do. But a new problem here arises upon which something
must be said. So far I have mainly spoken of the individual
as though lie and the State weie the only factors in the social
process. Clearly, of course, the issue is more complex than
this; for the State, as I argued earlier, does not exhaust the
associative impulse in men. They build themselves groups as
the expression of felt needs which cannot be satisfied by
individual activity. The group is an attempt to advance
some interest in which its members leel an answer to the wants


256 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

of their experience. They are original functions of the environ¬
ment. They are an effort so to adjust it that the individual
can by its means feed impulses which, otherwise, are either
starved or inadequately nourished. T he group is real in t he
same s ense as The.State is real. It hasTtKat nT’t© say, an
Interest to promote, a function to serve. The State does not
Call it into being. It is not, outside the categories of law,
dependent upon the State. It glows in the whole environment
as a natural response to factors in that environment. It lives
and moves as its surrounding circumstances seem to warrant.

.'The group, we say, is^real. What is it real as ? Is it real
in the sense that Jones is real, or Smith, or Robinson, a
complete finite entity to be immediately and recognisably
differentiated from other complete and finite entities ? The
group is real, I suggest, as a relation or a process. It is a
binding together of its individual parts to certain modes of
behaviour deemed by them likely to promote the interests
with which they are concerned. In that sense it possesses
personality. It results in integrated behaviour It enables
its members to find channels o! satisfied activity which, other¬
wise, would be absent. It has life only through that behaviour.
It lives, not as a thing apart from its members, but m and
through what they do. It enables them to form habits which
satisfy, in greater or less degree, the needs their experience
seems to warrant. It moulds the background of their lives
and, simultaneously, serves as an instrument through which
they themselves contribute to the moulding. It gathers
together strands of conduct into a. unification of behaviour for
that area of experience it seeks to contiol. Us absence would
be felt by them as the deprivation of a linkage between them¬
selves and the outer world.

The variety of this group-life is almost bewildering in its
profusion. Political parties, churches, tiade unions, employers’
associations, friendly societies, goif-clubs, research bodies like
the Institute of France, dramatic societies, are only instances
of their place in social organisation. They do not, of course,
''exhaust the allegiance of the individual. He is a centre from
wKicE there radiate outward lines of contact with the groups
to which his experience calls hun. They determine, quite
largely, his choice of friends, of opportunities, of a career. They


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 257

drive roads through life along which, a little timidly and
dubiously, he makes his way to his goal. They represent,
Tor the vast majority, a necessary economy of effort. They
plan his activities and give him room in their planning for the
expression of his desire. They fail or succeed as they are
sensitive to his gropings for satisfaction, by the degree to which
they realise in him the energy which is seeking to find a meaning
that satisfies in the vast social forces before him. They seek
to give him mastery of the event, to enable him, in concert
with like-minded men, to control the environment to a destiny
he wants. They have, often enough, a special validity for
him because they are the channel of his deliberate preference.
They mould a tradition about which he feels urgently, where
he is recogmsably at home. They evoke, accordingly, a loyalty
which, not seldom, goes down to the very roots of his being.
They give him a feeling that he has found himself, a power of
self-recognition that is an invaluable factor in the achievement
of personal harmony What, without them, is a chaotic world,
becomes a world ordered by the opportunity to do something
he believes it worth while it do with others who share an
experience akin to his own.

To ur ge in this way that the group is necessary Jto the
individual is not necessarily to be blind to its possible defect s.
LikeTEe"nation-State, it tends.iPJSXdusiveaess as a means of
self-protection. It grows willing to sacrifice the tradition of
other bodies to its own tradition. It asks of its members a
surrender of their personality to its prevailing tone and
atmosphere. It asks him to be loud about its merits and
either complacent or silent about its defects. In the absence
of keen criticism from within, it will become rigid and arrogant,
unable to realise the possibility that it is not infallible, llwill
substitute for a healthy esprit de corps an idolatrous fanaticism
which destroys what there is of plasticity in its members.
It will persecute dissent and eulogise obedience with little
regard to the substance they contain. It will insist that its
partial good is good itself, and its glimpse of truth the whole
truth. It will be impatient, particularly at moments of conflict
with other groups, of a willingness in its members to consider
solutions alternative to its own. Its leaders, like the governors
of a State, will tend to develop purposes and interests different

17


SS8 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

from, often in antagonism to, the purposes and interests of
the general body of its members. " However faithfully,"
•ays Mr. Ode,* " the members of a committee may try to fulfil
their whole duty to their members, an element of committee
loyalty will almost inevitably enter into their actions." A
cabinet that is in fact alien in temper from its party will seek
to emphasise a non-existent unity with it. Its very sense of
disharmony will make it insist on mechanical obedience even
more than if it were satisfactory to its constituents. Absorp-
tion in any group tends to mean narrowness instead of breadth,
< jgdiiir^5istieaL3 .~^.^aatiCiitv. unquestioning acceptance instead
^jn^tm«dj3gtfiement.

Yet all this, after all, is only to say that groups are built
from human beings and that they act as the State in its own
turn acts. Everyone prefers the routine to the novelty
Everyone is more comfortable in obedience than in dispute.
Everyone desires that his particular solution be accepted as
universal truth. And with all groups save the State there is
one saving condition of basic importance. They are voluntary
bodies. They lack the instruments of ultimate coercion.
If I do not like my club, I can resign. If I disagree with my
Church, I can leave it. Even industrial bodies cannot coerce
their members beyond the point of insisting on what may be
termed mental conformity. The group, in other words, is
largely driven by the circumstances of its situation to respond
more vividly than the State responds to the wants of its
members. It is compelled to lean much more heavily upon
their conscious^ willingness to act together, must less upon the
inert and almost automatic hab it of i ndifferent acceptance,
lit is, if it is to be successful, much more dependent upon the
assent which arises from deliberate mental activity. It has
TO readjust itseli more continuously to new conditions. It
has to revise its dogmas, to allow a broader interpretation erf
purpose, than the State* Its penalty is more costly to itself,
and its failure to readjust entails a heavier penalty. For while
its members are linked with it because they place value upon
the interests it promotes, they do not all place the same value
upon those interests; and those interests have for them a
marginal utility which exists in the perspective of knowledge

* Social Theory, p. 120.


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 269

that loyalty may be transferred elsewhere. A Church of
England that is unduly subservient to the State loses members
to the Church of Rome; a Liberal Party which is vague
about its industrial policy finds an apparent drift among its
members to the forces of Labour. Even the proud boast of
semper eadctn does not persuade the Roman Catholic Church
to force upon its members an attempt to apply the Syllabus
of 1864 ; and the development of a specifically Catholic Social¬
ism is evidence that Popes are infallible rather as a matter of
courtesy than of administration. A Republican Party which
calls attention rather to its past than to its future finds that
its own members search for the symbols of rebellion against
it. Groups, in short, are forced in the end to the conviction
that what gives them life is what their members think about
them. No allegiance is permanent that does not prove itself
to them as it works. Their obligations become sterilised save
as they grow spontaneously from an experience that proves
their worth.

This has been put by Father Tyrrell in an admirable phrase.
" It is not their red robes," he said, 1 " but my own judgment
about them that gives the pack of cardinals any title to distinc-
' tion. Like Elizabeth, it has frocked them and can unfrock
them. It is they who are in peril, not we." The authority
of any groupTs based, in fact, upon the living and spontaneous
trust it can command. If it betrays or stultifies itself it ceases
to win the loyalty that is its life. Here, as elsewhere, it is
plain that the rea^field of social action is the individual human
miDd. Its experience forces it to judge, and all judgment,
ultimately is a choice. It is, of course, a choice with penalties.
The soldier who comes to believe in the moral error of coercion
has no alternative save to lay down his sword; but he will
suffer from his decision. The Churchman who comes to
doubt the validity of his faith has, equally, no alternative
save resignation. There comes a point in individual experience
when, again in Tyrrell's words, 1 one is driven on "to follow
the dominant influence of one’s life even if it should break the
heart of all the world.” That is the ultimate fact by which
all authority, voluntary or otherwise, is conditioned. Loyalty

1 Ltfe of George Tyrrell, by M D Pctre, ii 196

* Ifnd 11. 142.


260


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


as won from us, it cannot be imposed upon us. It mu9t grow
spontaneously out of our experience ; and the body which
peeks to retain it must be able continuously to adapt itself to
fan experience that is ever-changing It will never quite
^succeed. Men will never be content to be syllables in the mouth
of Allah. Their difference from their fellows will always
prevent their absorption. Our sense is that we experience
ourselves not in unity but in division. We are conscious of
se para teness from others, as well as an enfolding with others.
We prove that separateness to be real by the disharmonies of
which it makes us aware. We cannot act without the sense
that we are only partially with our fellows, and with them
partially only in parts which refuse reduction to an ultimate
unity. Our isolation, however uncomfortable, is ultimately so
inescapable and so immense that it makes us see the universe
not as an alphabet in which we are the letters, but as ariiscrete
seriesjjf symbols only part of which convey to us a meaning
we can accept.

If this be true, it follows that there is no necessary unity
in society. There are, at points within its structure, unities
of which the transcience varies in degree But these unities
are always external, and they unite at points only upon their
boundaries. They are means through which men realise them¬
selves, never ends in which they find themselves. We are
never, as human beings, wholly included m any relation.
About us is always an environment which separates us from
others, or, at the best, makes our union with them but a
partial one. For our minds, at least so far as social theory
is concerned, are finite minds. We know some things, but not
all things, and what we know we know differently from one
another We have to take the world of sense as we meet it,
its losses and gains, its struggles and its victories, and assume
that, as we meet it, it is a real world in space and time We
have to treat what seems to us evil as genuine and not merely
as an appearance capable otherwhere, of being harmonised
into good. The unity we encounter in the world of social fact
is never complete. For while we may all seek an end which
can be described as identical, the end is one only in the descrip¬
tion. The good life for me is not the same as the good life for
you. It has, of course, resemblances. In a well-ordered society


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 261

It has sufficient resemblance to make social peace effective.
But resemblance does not involve identity. The things we
want do not flow together with each other. What we meet
is pluralistic and not monistic. Theie is no plane on whith
the differences can somehow be coerced into unity.

If this be true, it follows that what there is of unity in our
relations is not a prion there O ur groups d o not grove together
into a vast monistic whole. We build them together as and
how we can. We find the means of connection by the discovery
of kindred purpose, of sameness in difference, of like origin.
The oneness we achieve is a contribution we ourselves make.
But we make it only in a partial way. I may co-operate with
X in industry while I try to deprive him of his religious rights.
I may be an earnest propagandist for the study of Czecho¬
slovak literature even while I wish to restore Czecho-Slovakia
to its old place in a re-made Austria-Hungary I may, that is
to say, relate myself to parts without, simultaneously, involving
wholes We are in, so to say, not a universe but a multiverse.
We recognise as valid the claims not of some final synthesised
unity, but of unities to which we feel ourselves sympathetic.
We respond to those claims But we do not feel them part of
some great system w Inch mo\ es by logical sequence from its pieces
to a whole Our relations are not like chords in a great sym¬
phony in which what is important is the ultimate impression
conveyed. Each jyece of our experience is real for us . and,
therefore, the attachments of each jnece guide our personalities
into a system of loyalties How that system maintains its
equilibrium, where, at any moment, the emphasisisto be thrown
is a matter that each of us must decide For that system is
ours and ours only Its impact is decisive for ourselves. Its
authority for us is the fact that it has grown within our own
conscience and our own mind, is, so to speak, ultimately a
part of each. To accept another system is to make our own
experience the slave of another. It is to yield my personality,
all that makes me most distinctively myself, to the desires of
another and to the will another bases upon those desires.
But there is never enough oneness of desire between me and
another to make a real solution of this kind. The co-operatiox
I discover myself to need is, m James' phrase,’ federal and not

* A Pluralistic Universe, p 3*1


S6S A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

imperial, in character. What I search for is not a centre of
active willing in which I myself am lost, but a centre to the
will of which I can myself contribute the thing that is distinc¬
tively myself.

If this be true, the implications, as I think, are of importance
for political philosophy. The centre of significance is no longer
the search for unity, but, rather, what that unity makes.
And what it makes must, if it is to win my allegiance, include
results I recognise as expressive of my need, results, even more,
that I realise I have helped to make. For my needs will go
unexpressed save as I make them articulate. I must build
myself into the decisions which bind my behaviour. For,
otherwise, the coherence that is effected is only accidentally
relevant not only for myself, but also for those groups through
which I seek self-expression. A unity achieved without my
contribution may adjust me to the new environment it creates,
but it will not be a creative adjustment. Once it is realised
that the structure made is intended to contain my activities,
it is obvious that I must put my own hand to its construction.
Tbe edifice, whatever it emerges as, will not be perfect. Some¬
thing of myself will be omitted in whatever synthesis is made.
But, clearly, that synthesis will seam to me less an evasion
or a betrayal if it is a process compounded in part from me
not less than from others. It is the difference between occu¬
pying one’s own house and living in a prison-cell. To the
former I can add myself. It becomes a thing through which
and in which I can add my peculiar grasp of life. In the latter
I inherit uniformities which I am powerless to alter. The
routine of form and activity is there for me to accept. No
increment of myself can colour or change it. It remains con¬
sistently external to my personality. It separates me from the
world instead of giving me a place in the world, It ensures
dislocation instead of promoting union.

The political inference is t I think, cl ear. The stru cture of
soda! organisation must b e iede ral if i t is to be adequate.
Its pattern involves, not myself and the State, my groups and
the State, but all these and their interrelationships. For
when I respond to the demands of the State, there grows up
between us a process which alters both response and demand.
That process is compounded not merely from my State-context,


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 308

but from the total environment in which I find myself. The
State which seeks my loyalty by seeking it is altering my
relation to Church and trade union, to all the multiplicity of
fellowships to which I belong. It has to validate that altera¬
tion. It has to prove to me that, the adjustment it asks me
to make adds to my satisfaction. It can do so only by the
demonstration that the change to be effected is not an impo¬
sition upon those fellowships but a growth from their experience.
It has to show that its demand represents a genuine reciprocal
increase of good. And good means good for me as well as
others; it must be a co-operative creation in which I feel
myself to share. It must be a good which elicits not merely
an apathetic acceptance on my part, but a response which
enables me to experiment with the growing realisation of my
best self. That realisation, above all, must be my own. For
it is when I am guided by self-knowledge to the sense of
what I may become that I begin most genuinely to enter
my inheritance.


Ill

This is at least the path to a solution of the two issues in
the problem of authority that I outlined earlier in this chapter.
It does not, as in the classic theory of politics, begin by postu¬
lating the necessary unity of society and continue by insistingi
on the supremacy of the State as the organ of that unity.
It admits that the varying factors in the equation of life
impel the admission of diversity. It agrees that unity is not
there, but has to be made, It does not demand a unity of
Procrustes, in which individual personality is abridged to fit
the formula of those who, at some given moment, dominate
the State. That is, of course, a unity; but it is the unity of
the cannibal and his victim. Rather it insists on unification
made through a process of so associating interests that each,
in the solution effected, finds sufficient concession to itself
to experiment with the result. It does not even argue that
the solution will succeed, or that it ought to be accepted because
it happens to be a solution. Right, as it recognises, is not a
static thing, but made and remade in the crucible of experience.
It follows therefore that, in its view, the claim of authority is


264 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

worth just as much as it proves itself to be worth as men in
their various relationships make trial of the result of its claim.
It admits the desirability of obedience, because it realises the
superiority' in general, of order over conflict. But it argues '
thaT obedience is only creative when it arises from a self-imposed
discipline. It sees the imperative element ip law as something
derived not from the persons proclaiming it as law, but from the
impact of its content upon the persons affected by the command.
'Orders as such are, therefore, morally neutral in this view, they
be Tie right or wrong as they work in the substance of men's
lives. And they are, it argues, the more likely to work as
what they contain in their administration is wrought from
and operated by the persons to whom the orders are issued.
For building upon the basis that all experience is finite, that
what I want and do is, ultimately, an induction limited by the
narrow field I know, it seeks to expand my experience until
it is shared with, and becomes a part-function of, the largest
available volume of knowledge.

At this point, clearly, it becomes a theory of representation.

It admits the necessity for co-ordination, though it urges that
all co-ordination achieved is at best a partial thing. But it
denies that simple view of the co-ordination effected by the
legislature of a State which underlies, for instance, John
Stuart Mill's Representative Government. “ The theory is,”
says Mr, Lippmann , 1 applying it to the American position,

“ that the best man of each district brings the best wisdom
of his constituents to a central place, and that all these
wisdoms combined are all the wisdom that Congress needs."
Obviously, nothing of the sort occurs. The wisdom of most
men is simply never made available to their representatives
in a central legislature. Those who choose are, often enough,
unable to say what that wisdom is ; those who are chosen are
not seldom unable to interpret, sometimes from self-interest,
sometimes from stupidity, the wisdom that does express itself.
The idea that my will and my experience are, hi some mystic
fashion, embodied in the will and experience of my representa¬
tive is contradicted by all the facts at our disposal. My will
cannot , as Rousseau saw, ever be represented at all, and my 1
experience is, for its intimate substance, essentially private

* Public Opinion, p. 288,


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 265

to myself. I can recognise, in any average legislative assembly,
men whose actions reveal a purpose sufficiently akin to my own
to enlist my support. I can infer from those actions interests
which go along with my interests, experiences which are relevant
to my experiences. The problem of representation is the
problem of enabling me to have contact with those men.

It should be realised that my contact will rarely be at all
direct and intimate. There is not time for more than partial
glimpses of one another in the shifting scene of politics. There
are too many people in the State, and too much to do in the
State, for the co-ordinations effected by a central legislature
to be more than ve ry rough fi rst approximations . The views
which find their e x prgSff d« THerewtl 1 be the powerful and the
clamant views. They will not mirror the total volume of
interests in society simply because that is, frankly, sheer
impossibility. The size of the modem State makes it necessary
for the people to surrender direct control of principles and direct
control of administration. They can, broadly, say yes or no
to large general solutions, they can be for free trade and against
child labour. But they must, in general, express their will
by choosing persons to say yes and no on their behalf. They
must recognise that the persons so chosen cannot be made
delegates in the sense either (a) of making all their views
known beforehand, or (b) submitting their proposed views
on new problems back to their constituents for scrutiny and
approval. The rush of business does not permit the leisurely
survey that method would involve. All the direct power the
average citizen can hope for is, first the opportunity periodically
to seek a change in the co-ordinating authority, and, in the
intervals, to use the groups of which he is a part to bring
pressure to bear upon that body.

It is the sense of the helplessness in which this seems to
leave him that has led many to suggest a different basis for the
task of co-ordination. Mr. Cole, for instance, sees society as
a mass of functions, and he would make the ultimate co-ordi¬
nating authority an indirect organ to which those functions
contribute representatives.* I have already rejected this
view. 1 It seems to me clear that the basis of choice in a

■ Social Theory, chap, viii; Guild Socialism Restated, chap, vii-viii.

* Chapter IX.


266


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


co-ordinating body must be personal, simply because the
individual is not merely a system of affiliations to. different
functions, nor do I believe that the general thesis of social life
permit statement in terms of some given functional view. The
case for the magnicompetent and directly elected body driving
a stream of tendency through affairs seems to me overwhelming.
It is true that I cannot be fully represented as a citizen, but it
is also true that I cannot be fully represented as an engineer
or a doctor or a carpenter. And the simplicity which makes
me choose as a person is too important to be discarded for a
view which makes the co-ordinating body much more remote
from me as a person than, say, the House of Commons now is.
The success of the latter in affording satisfaction does not depend
upon the rejection of its territorial basis. It is built rather
upon other and more complex factors.

These are, I think, broadly contained within three categories.
The character and ability of the members of the central legis¬
lature are important. The body which nominates them as
candidates, the conditions on which men are admitted as
candidates, obviously here count for much. The work of men
like Ostrogorski and Graham Wallas has thrown a vivid light
upon what may be termed the pathology of parliamentarism.
This, as I believe, is most largely due to the fact that our
civilisation is organised, not for service, but for acquisition.
It is dominated by the view that success means wealth, and
the general stream of tendency in society is, accordingly,
poisoned at its source. Here, once more, emerges the
importance of that system of rights already outlined. It
constitutes the second great factor in the building of an
adequate method of representation. It acts as a check upon
'what a co-ordinating body can do, it defines the limits within
which it can work. It means, for example, that there is outside
it an alert-minded, because educated electorate, and that the
power of property to sway its decisions is consciously limited.
It means that it cannot interfere with the expression of opinion.
It ensures, I think, the existence of parties the aims of which
are more realistic, the terms of conflict between which are less
likely to involve the defeat of the general purposes of the
State.

The third category is that of the information at the


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL

disposal of the co-ordinating authority. Its significant
think, can hardly be over-estimated. Anyone who reads
speeches in an average debate of Congress or the Hou»
Commons, and compares those speeches with the criticism, say,
of a physical theory by physicists, will be appalled at the
quality of the evidence upon which we rely for social derisions.
It is defective in three primary ways. It is inadequate, first,
in the range that it covers. Anyone, for example, who analyses
the housing problem in England will find that we have no
exact information upon any one of the constituent factors
upon which that problem depends. The coal industry, again,
is the only one whose organisation has been at all systematic¬
ally surveyed. The most elementary statistics are lacking
upon which successful educational policy depends. " Social
processes,” says Mr. Lippmann,* " are recorded spasmodically,
quite Often as accidents of administration. Though it (the
material) deals with the conscious life of his fellow-citizens,
it is all too often distressingly opaque, because the man who
is trying to generalise has practically no supervision of the
way his data are collected.'’ We need immensely to develop
the business of expert fact-findipg if we are to possess the body
of information out of which Sound conclusions can emerge,
and this, it should be added, is one of the mosku^gent ways in
which the opinion formed by the public^ pr^ss may be invested
with the atmosphere of myth. '

But the finding of facts is one-titing; their interpretation
is another. Facts have to be evaluated by those to whom their
import is directly relevant. What is here important is the
way in which the co-ordinating authority is linked to the body
of experiences it is seeking to serve. At present, that linkage
is largely a chaotic group of relationships, without even attempt
at system. The opinion that filters through, the emphasis,
accordingly, the co-ordinating body receives, is at every point
spasmodic and haphazard. The validity of co-ordination de¬
pends upon two things. It depends, first, upon the way in
which it is built from the experience it is seeking to co-ordinate,
and the way, secondly, that the solution it reaches is later
administered. I have already discussed these questions in
part, and I shall later indicate in detail the institutions they

> Public Opinion, p. 374.


268 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

seem to me to involve. Here it is enough to point out the
grounds upon which I am emphasising the importance of
this linkage, if representation is to be effective.

I am arguing that the only way to do things for people
is to make them do things for themselves, that men who stand
outside a situation can only be made responsible about it by
being driven to make their minds march along with those who
are inside. But they must not choose those whom they think
inside, as, for instance, modern governments choose trade
unionists who have long lost touch with the mind of labour
to " represent 11 labour on inquiries they initiate. Those so
chosen must be the nominated choices of the interests organised
for consultation. We need, in short, permanent and con¬
tinuous organs which are consulted before decisions are
reached. If legislation is introduced about the mines, we need
to know that the Minister of Mines has had to weigh the facts
and opinions of every interest directly involved in mining.
We need a system, to take an obvious example, which does for
public bills, and in a coherently systematic way, what is now
done for private bills m the House of Commons. We need,
that is, to interweave the relationship of the co-ordinating
authority to the group affected by it For we then make that
group share in the decision we reach We make it interpene¬
trate with that decision so as to ensure the infusion of its
experience into the will given effectiveness We prevent the
crystallisation of that will before it has sought the necessary
foundations upon which it is to be built. We mould the
purposes of each social function into a unity where they may
so recognise their purpose as to admit the rightness of that
unity. We maximise inventiveness by making our social de¬
cisions grow from the largest range we can hope to encompass.

I do not mean to imply that this method of making solutions
will enable us to avoid all disagreement. The interests in
society are too diverse to make it probable that men can
always pool their differences by conferring upon them. A
co-ordinating authority determined upon secular education
could not, obviously, persuade the representatives of the Roman
Catholic Church to accept its views. But I think it probable
that their joint search into their differences would find a
meeting-ground where each felt that its purpose found a just


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 269

realisation, and it is not unlikely that this will be true oi many
of the problems we now state in the form of mutually exclusiv.
alternatives. I think it possible that those who desire, and
those who oppose, the nationalisation of banks might by
conference reach a plan of organisation that would satisfy the
fears of bureaucracy on the one hand and the dread of irre¬
sponsible finance on the other. Problems will, of course, arise
in which the interests participating will feel that they have been
unjustly treated ; and they will fight rather than give way.
There will even be occasions in which that injustice is real,
and their pugnacity intelligible. But we can at least minimise
that danger.

But when the solution has been made, it has to be applied.
Here, I suggest, is the largest area of future inventiveness.
The less there is of complex detail in the decisions of a co¬
ordinating authority, the more of flexibility that enables
creative adjustment to the special case, the more are those
decisions likely to be fruitful. We have recognised something
of this In fhe principle of the gTant in aid. We have admitted
even more in the abrogation of Parliamentary Sovereignty
where the will of the Dominions is concerned. What we need
is to multiply the channels through which the general civic
standards may be translated at the circumference into locally
applied statutes. We need to let the cotton industry legislate
for itself within the ambit of the general level at which the
society broadly aims. We need to allow' it to grow organs
which can take initiative in detail on its behalf. War experience
has thrown much light on possibilities of this kind. The Cotton
Control Board, for example, was an instance where the solutions
made were effective because they were administered by those
who lived directly by the results ; and its success is the more
striking when the generally antithetic nature of the interests
to be organised is borne in mind.' The plain lesson of the
record of Works Committees during the war is that solutions
w'hich are the result of self-imposed authority operate far
better that those imposed from w.thout. 1 The power of the

' See H D Henderson, l he Cotton Control Board (19^); and, more
generally. E H M Lloyd. Experiments trt Ltr/am State Controls (1924)

» Cf. the Report of the Ministry of Labour on Works Committees (1919).
especially pp 32, 117.


270 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Shop-Steward Movement was largely derived from the fact
that their connection with the rank and hie looked outwards
from within instead of looking inwards from without . 1 They
were able to integrate their relationship with their constituents
in a way impossible to other persons. They spoke much more
nearly the mind of the workshop than others could hope to
do, because they were in and of it. Their demands met the
support they did because they grew recognisably out of a similar
experience. What we need is to plan our industrial organisa¬
tion as it relates to the State so that the voice which speaks
to the State may have a character as genuine and veracious.


IV

My point may perhaps be made by saying that since society
is essentially federal in nature, the body which seeks to impose
the necessary unities must be so built that the diversities have
a place therein. If it is true, as I have argued, that no associa¬
tion included the whole of myself, no association can legislate
successfully for the whole of myself. No body, therefore,
that builds directly from me cat. co-ordinate the various
relationships which radiate outwards from any individual save
as those relationships have an organised connection with it.
It is not, I think, practicable to make that body a function
of functions in the sense of building it from representatives
elected by the various associations in society. Such a body
would be unwieldy and remote. It would settle questions
that are not, in fact, germane to the spheres within which its
members had worked prior to their choice as members. An
engineering guild as such, for example, cannot have general
views upon foreign policy, it can have views only upon engi¬
neering and such decisions in foreign policy as affect engineers
as engineers. The case for the territorial State is the final
case that it moves beyond the partial glimpse to the
wholeness into which those partial glimpses must be fitted.
That “wholeness is never perfect, never even adequate. But
it is more likely, under conditions here outlined, to be effective
than in an ad hoc body made from categories that are ultimately

1 Cf. G. D. H. Cole, Workshop Organisation (1923), especially chape, iv, v, x, xi.


271


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL

not less artificial than the territorial entities upon which we
now depend, and it provides the one plane upon which men
may meet under the conditions of an equality which alone
gives validity to such ultimate solutions as we adopt.

But because society is federal, authority must be federal
also. That involves, I have argued, the making of decisions
out of the interests which will be effected by them, and, in
turn, their application by those interests. It means making
the mining industry a unit of administration in the same
sense as Lancashire. It means surrounding the Ministry of
Education with bodies entitled to speak on behalf of the
parties to the educational process, and entitled to be consulted
because they are entitled to speak. It means the abandonment
of the sovereign State in the sense which equates the latter
with society and gives it, thereby, the right to dictate to asso¬
ciations within society. Because it abandons the principle
of sovereignty, it abandons ~fEe" principle of hierarchy also.
It does not envisage the allegiance of man as a series of con¬
centric circles of which the great and all-embracing circle is
the State. It sees him as bound now here, now there, as his
experience seems to warrant in each problem that arises.
It insists that his ultimate allegiance is not to some collective
entity outside himself, but to the ideals his experience has
taught him in his conscience to accept. It makes decision his
business and his choice. It does so because, otherwise, human
values are largely lost, and we lose the sense of personal good
which is, in the end, the most precious of all. For our achieve¬
ments, to be real, must take place in the additions they make
to the happiness of individual men and women, if they are to
be lasting and substantial It is no use adding to the glory of
a Church save by securing the salvation of its members. It
is no use enriching a society unless the citizens of that society
share as individuals in the gain that is won.

It need not be denied that the organisation which here
emerges is immensely more complex than that which we have
inherited. The grounds of complexity lie in the facts. Our
civilisation is for the most part built upon the assumption
that power belongs to a few, and our institutions have been
constructed to make those few retain their power. Largely,
they are not democratic institutions, because they do not


272 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

attempt to take account of the mass of experience affected
by their working. Their philosophy, in so far as they have a
philosophy, is fringed about with theses derived from an
earlier stage of history when the common man could be dis-
Tegarded by its processes. We are seeking different ends.
By liberty we mean initiative for all men and not for some
men, by equality we mean that each personality shall win such
significance as it is entitled to, and not live as the servant of
other personalities. We cannot so widen the horizon of the
State purpose without great changes. We are living in a
world the processes of which are, in general, set by the
experience of the French Revolution. Its validity is largely
exhausted for ourselves, or, rather, its validity has been found
applicable to a much wider experience than it was, at its
apogee, able to survey. We have to make provision for that
extension.

The principle which underlies the organisation here
envisaged is simple, even if its application is intricate.
Postulating that ethical values are personal, and that each
individual is entitled to act as his instructed conscience
warrants him in acting, it finds the principle of social systems
in the idea of function. By function it means the purpose
aimed at by a body of men and women acting in concert.

It argues that a function has validity, needs, therefore,
recognition, because it grows naturally out of an experience
they have proved for themselves. It represents a want, the
response to which means happiness. It does not argue that '
all functions can be reconciled into a synthesis which embraces
them all. It admits that many are conflicting, sometimes
through ignorance, sometimes through genuine and permanent
incompatibility. It admits, also, the necessity of a scheme of
co-ordination that will enable the uniformities to be adminis¬
tered which are necessary because men live together in large
societies. But it insists that the co-ordination shall grow
from within, and not be imposed from without. It argues
that the experience of no group of men is ever wide enough
or true enough to make it possible for them to be entrusted,
in any other way, with final powers. It agrees that a coercive
authority is necessary, but it is distrustful of a coercive
authority. It is distrustful because the psychological penumbra


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL


273


which surrounds coercion deadens those who exert it to the
needs and wants of others It limits the experience which
enters into the decision made It is exercised for the advantage
of the few who possess its instruments, or have access to those
possessors It narrows the validity of wants by equating the
welfare of a few' with the happiness of the community

To attempt a creative co-ordination it t rats the authority
which co-ordinates a system of guarantees or limitations
that system, admittedly, is intricate It- fiamewoik is a
system of rights postulated as natural be'au-t tsperience has
shown them to be the m ccssarv tonmrons of a good life
A man, we argue, cannot In tu-> Ix'f stl! it he 1-, involved m
a perpetual stiuggle to c atwf;) the Dare ->t minimum of physical
appetites He must tl etc fore win bv hi^ effort a sufficient
wage, reasonable h >uis of labour ind Mich c> ndi'ions of
shelter as elevate Ins mind b<\ird w >-p <therwis<‘ sordid
But because hn> best stlf hvt^ tsstn'iallv m a spiritual world,
his rights stretch beyond mate ria 1 no t ssitv He .mist interpret
of and for himself what life seem- to him i< mean Hi- vkw
of it is his ow r n. and hi- isolauon from n s nll<>w% nnai s tint
no ont can express it on his bth t’f H< n u-' tin ret >rc have
freedom of speech that he in,»v mike rhar n< w >u ml and
freedom of association tint h> n,av join wi»h tnei- to give
substance to it He must ban lie iiclit ti s ar> in the
government of tne societv in which lit is involved 1 that cud,
hist of all, tin right to tdtiiamn is t-scmnl 1 < 1 without it
no man can formulate tin iu> ur.m„ trnboii.i l 11 Sis ivperienoe
of life He must also have tin light * > v. ,i * th bv whom
ht is to he governed, and as a toiollaiv tlnittu the right to
be chosen, if he can ,«.s a govtrne r b\ in- fellows Hu* self-
government i- not merely a mitrtr <>f -t tiling the charactet
of the political fabric Our livt- ate Ko much involved m
the mdustnal vocation bv which we live to admit of its nature
'being determined independently of our experience Iflftefewd
Beijioe.racyj.Sj therefore, the net essc-v complement of political
/democracy Self government in the one completes the process
of self-government in the other ft will, from its nature,
involve a different typejif organisation 1 he ascent m it to
power will be graded more stctplv m terms of technical
competence It will leave less room lor the popular virtues,

18


274 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

more opportunity for expertise. But the purpose to be served
by the rights maintained in each is in substance identical.

These rights, it must be added, do not maintain themselves.
It is the clear result of history that they cannot be maintained
in a society of which the chief motive is a love of monetary
gain. Unless there is approximate equality of property as
between its different members, their rights will in the mass
be merely relative to the property they possess. The chief
.social motive must, therefore, be service, and property must
be the result of service in personal terms. I must myself
serve ; I must not live by owning what arises from the service
of another. While this excludes, at any rate over any period
it is necessary to discuss, a rigorous communism, it certainly
involves a large transformation of the legal rights now annexed
to property. It assumes that the production of those goods
and services without which the society cannot live must be
directly organised by the society. It assumes that all other
production must be carried out in terms of standards created
and enforced as part of the minimum basis of civilised life.
Where it leaves private enterprise in control of some allotted
field,, it defines with some vigour the conditions within which
that private enterprise may work. For it insists that in all
productive effort the public is an unseen partner whose wishes
must be respected in the deed of partnership. It will not,
for instance, allow the private employer to hire or discharge
his workers as he pleases. It will not allow him to preserve
that secrecy in finance which now so perverts the character
of industry. Where capital is private, it argues that it has
no more right to determine industrial policy, or to be the
residuary legatee of industry, than the holders of the National
Debt can justly determine foreign policy, or absorb some
unwonted surplus in the Exchequer. It limits rigidly the rights
of inheritance on the ground that no man is entitled to evade
his contribution to the sum of social production. It believes
that such a transvaluation of values, so far from destroying
initiative and vigour, gives them opportunities of which, thus
far in history, they have been rarely able to take advantage.
It is confident that no other method gives the due weight to
personality to which by its peculiar qualities it shows itself
to be entitled.


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL


275


Such a view as this involves a somewhat different attitude
to liberty than that of the classical writers. It does not regard
freedom merely as absence of restraint. It agrees that once
men live together in the great society, there develop necessary
uniformities of conduct which limit the habits" possible of
expression. But it does not, either, find the meaning of
Jiberty In obedience to a rule laid down by a few in the interest
of an order which protects mainly those few. Liberty in the
social theory here urged means the exercise of initiative by
each man in the attempt to secure the fulfilment of his Best
self. It means the guarantee of avenues through which that
initiative may find its way to its appointed end. Obviously,
therefore, liberty is inseparable from equality, since the a priori
distinctions which announce differences of access restrict the
chance of liberty to a few fortunately situated persons
in the State. A society in. which men .are given an equal
opportunity of self-realisation is, also, a society in which there
is justice. For by justice we mean, as in the famous definition,
the rendering to each man of his own. It is such an ordering
of social arrangements as will give the maximum guarantee
available that the wants of each individual receive their due
recognition in the totality of wants supplied. It is not
suggested that such recognition is, or can be, perfect. The
magnitude of our scale of life makes certain the presence of
confusion and error. But at least we can advance beyond the
inherent possibilities of the existing system.

L Justice implies la w, but the view of law here outlined
volves an unconventional approach to its definition. Law
is, as Vinogradoff has said,* “a set of rules directing the
relation and conduct of their (the State’s) members.” The
important problem here is why the particular rules chosen
are adopted, and how they work in the life of the society.
Laws as such we discern to be morally neutral; they are
merely decisions which get accepted in the presence of social
forces. We reject, that is to say, the view of law which
regards it as just merely because of its source Of origin. We
even refuse to take as urgent in the estimate of its claim
the fact that it proceeds from good intent. For good intent
may be ignorant or mistaken. It may come from a view of

1 Historical Jurisprudence, >. 33.


276


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


the facts too narrow to hope for adequacy. It may be blind
to the extent of the forces it is its business to satisfy. For
the end of law is the satisfaction of human wants. That
means not the wants of a few, not the wants deemed right
by those applying the law, but the totality of wants encountered
by law. Law, therefore, to be justice, must be the expression
of relationsToumTacfequate in the experience of men.

Who. TFwTTl BP'^SFcTaTe 1 fo act as judges of that adequacy ?
There can, I think, be only one answer to that question. The
judges a re all of those who desire that their desires should be
fulfilled, the body of members, that is, in the given society
Law, theiefore, to be found adequate must be built upon an
induction from the widest possible experience it can know.
I t must attemp t, in Miss Follett's happy phrase, 1 " the reci¬
procal fitting of needs one to the other ” Once we begin that
process of reciprocal adjustment, we move from the earlier
sphere of contract to the sphere of status or relation The
movement of societies i^ then no longer one, as in Maine’s
view from status to contract but a movement from contract
to relation It is an endeavour to make rights and duties
flow from the functions involved It makes, for instance,
the liability ot an employer dependent, not upon the thing he
wills, but the will which experience deems to be involved in
the relations occupied nv an cm plover in the general social
fabih J In agency we interpret, not a contract of mandate,
but a system of rights and duties which arise in the relation
of principal and agent This is a n turn to the basis of feudalism
in distinction to the central notion of Roman law whuh seeks
to give effect to the wills of the actors in the particular incident
involved t What, of coulee, is important for us m this doctrine
of relation is the proportionate power of th* parties to it.
We have, that is to say, m judging law not merely to regard
the fact that interests are united, but also the way in which
they aie united For that way, in fact, determines the relation
leached. If one party is at an advantage over another, the
substance of law is affected in its favour That is clear, for

r Crcuttvr f xfertfhce p 264

' Cf iny Foundations of Sovereignty chap vjjj

i Cf Pound. 7he Spirit of the Common Law, especially lecture 1 \shere
this view is fully discussed


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL


277


instance, in the game laws; it is clear in the general foundations
of the law of master and servant. If law is to represent a
" reciprocal fitting of needs,” it cannot be right, as Acton
said, 1 that one party should have retained “ the making of
the laws, the management of the conditions, the keeping
of the peace, the administration of justice, the distribution of
taxes, the control of expenditure, in its own hands exclusively.”
Reciprocal fitting only takes place where there is equality of
power between the parties to the adjustment

If law, therefore, is to order human relationships .rightly,
it musFbeliuilt upon a right induction from human experience.
But no such experience can be rightly interpreted unless it
is systematically organised and systematically recorded. For
to co-ordinate the innumerable and often conflicting social
interests into a sufficient wholeness for the purpose of order is
the most subtle and delicate of all tasks. We may premise
that neither one man nor one class of men ran hope to be
sufficiently acquainted with their range and meaning, and
that even less than in the past because of the high specialisation
involved in the division of labour. 1 would even suggest that
no class is less fitted for this co-ordination than the industrial
class which, since the beginning of the nineteenth century,
has mainly performed it or controlled its performance. It
is composed of men whose genius has l>een specialised to the
acquisition of fortune under the intricate conditions of a
world-market. They tend, quite naturally, to look upon life
merely or mainly as a conflict for wealth under terms which
they only can fully understand because they have in fact
framed them. What they mean by those terms has been well
set out in the judgment of the court in Mogul Steamship
Co. v. McGregor. 1 What, in fact, it broadly implies is the
absence of a social context in the business relation. The
industrial class will sell their service as they can and for what
they can, and if public difficulty is involved in their activities,
that is no concern of theirs If legislation attempts restraint
upon those activities, there is no limit, as American experience
plainly shows, to the effort they will make either to annul
or evade it. Nothing in all this precludes the view that they

1 Letters to Alary Gladstone, pp 5

* 11892) A C 25


278


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

are admirable husbands and model parents, or that they act
as I have suggested on other than the highest ground. But
because they are involved in a narrow circle of special interest,
they are too limited in their view to grasp the multiform
relation of which law must be the expression. They are
unsuited, that is, to dominate the State. For their power to
equate their partial experience with the total social need
inevitably results, not in the making of effective adjustments,
but ir, the undue precipitation of conflict.

That is why, as I have argued, oply approximate equality
of pr ope rty will epable the individual to make his experience
duly felt. That is why, also, his experience, as it associates
itself with that of his fellows, needs organised relation to
the State if the law is to be suffused with justice. Forjasr
is not foundbut made. It is written out of the experience
brought home to those who have its ultimate definition in their
hands. They permeate it with the wants and desires which
make themselves felt in the total push of social action. It is
not the abstract outcome of judicial or legislative momentum.
Someone's urgtnrv has shaped it one way rather than another
way. Its life, as Ah. Justice Holmes has finely said, is in its
experience and not its logic, and its " inarticulate major
premise *’ has always been the will that has been powerful
enough to inform that life. In the feudal period those so
powerful were, mainly, the owners of land; in our own day
they are, mainly again, the holders of industrial capital. And
because their wills represent only a part of the needs struggling
for satisfaction, the law becomes biased against those whose
speech, as i aw is formulated, goes unheard. It loses authority
because they do not recognise it as implicit with the substance
also of their own desires. It fails to bind them to allegiance
because what it ordains benefits, not themselves, but others.
Only when it is based upon an induction to which each interest
fn the community has contributed does it truly co-ordinate,
by creating a genuine, because general, satisfaction.

I say, therefore, that all men have an equal right to share
in the making of law, and that only as our social arrangements
sake provision for that sharing will they win the loyalty of
utizens. Otherwise, the rules accepted as law will be derived,
lot from the co-ordinating authority we call the State, but


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 279

from that group whose rules seem to one or more citizens a
truer response to their needs. For the sharing is important
to the sanction needed by the process of making law. It
enables us to find the methods by which we can interweave
desires. It makes us in a position to grow our law out of the
needs we totally confront, instead of dominating those needs
by some special solution of which the substance is narrow and
partisan. It makes the concepts of jurisprudence grow out
of the facts of life, and thereby enables it the better to adjust
itself to the changes m itself those facts will bring. It enables
us to supplement the special perspective of the jurist by
bringing him into contact with experiences and ideals
from which his own environment is alien. 1 am arg uing ,
broadly, that law has no moral appeal m any other terms.
The legal order only .makes itself valid by being the expression
of the social order , and the social order means not one only,
but the whole of the myriad foices m our midst which axe
striving to fulfil their wants.

Here I may, perhaps, interpolate one remark. It is some¬
times said that while the legal order is, as a rule, morally
inferior to the ideals of a given period, it is always striving to
make up its lost ground The humanitarian temper, the
power of equity, the compelling force of new facts, drive, so
At is said, the legislature and the judge to adjust themselves
to the growth of new needs. There is a real truth m this.
We have Factory Acts at the height of the laissez-faire period ;
and the Lord Eldon who opposed every measure of social
amelioration in Parliament was a great reforming judge,
albeit but half-consciously, upon the Bench. 1 So, too, the
pressure of business need has mitigated the irresponsibility
of the State in the sphere of contract; and the Conseil d'Etat
has ceased to protect the French government from its own
blunders in those administrative courts which were held to
transcend the rule of law 1 But this is still inadequate. It
is, as a contmuous process, too accidental and haphazard to
make certain that the adjustments effected are as nearly
various as the needs encountered. Mr. Justice Holmes, for

* It was Eldon who, by his decision in Lloyd v Loartng 6, Vesey 773,
made possible the development of corporation law m the nineteenth century
Cf my Foundations of Sovereignty, chap iv

* Ibtd., chap, in, especially pp 130 ff


280 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

example, may be able to see that new ideas involve consti¬
tutional experiment, but the majority of his colleagues upon
the Supreme Court of the United States will remain limited
by an experience inherently alien from the new ideas. 1 The
London County Council may admit that it is a valuable experi¬
ment in education to make school-children witness performances
of Shakespeare's plays ; but the absence of that novelty from
the statutory definition of its powers will make the courts
limit the concept of education to the eaiher and more
formalistic view

That is why I have insisted on the systematic record
and organisation of experience The lo-oromating authority
may still be chosen by persons who are not differentiated
as they choose by the vocations into which tiu-y enter. That
absence of differentiation is, I think essential because it is
simple, and involves the territorial ha->s of government
But the groups we encounter m social and industrial life need
|to be fedeially related to the government if the decisions of
the latter body are to be wist T hat rowans, 1 have urged,
giving to those groups tile means of prior and organic influence
with government before it pronounces upon the problems of
co-ordination It means weighing 1 heir ipmion-, -eekmg their
criticisms, meeting their special need 1 It means, further,
allowing them responsibility in their own life, t V- responsibility
which comes from power over their mtunatf affairs It means
that Manchester can have a rnunu.pal theatre without
Parliamentary sanction It means, also, that (I use for the
moment, a neutral term' the governing b xlv of the mining
industry can force upon its constituents, i! it so desire, a
pension scheme for miners over and above thi national old-
age pension. It means bioadk speaking, less direct admin¬
istration by the State and a more flexible application of its
statutes in terms of the varying situations to which they
apply It conceives accordingly, of ‘•date statutes as minimum
solutions and leaves to the interests they affect, as these are
organised, the power and, not seldom, the duty of adding to
them. The result will be a more intricate world , but it will
be the better because its activities will have the chance of
creative adventure

1 Cf Frankfurter Th< CvmU'utianal Of'iuton\ of Mt Justice
Harvard l au Renew June 1916


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 281

\bove all, it may be suggested, it will make, and for the
time, the co-ordinating woik of th( State a matter of
principle It will not say, as now, that somehow order must
be preserved, and that the State is simplv the body to which
the keeping of order is entrusted For the keeping of order,
important as it is may subordinate to itself all that is worth
while in the pui poses of society and i State w hit h is informed
mainly or wholly by that desire will use its power to dwarf
the moral stature of its otizens 1 or it cannot be too often
insisted that power is poisonous to those who exercise it unless
their authority is checked always by urgent criticism, and, if
need be, in the end by resistance 1 hat power, granted the
weapons now at its disposal i> so \a,t th it it can easily, in
the effort after certainty destroy all that there is of individu¬
ality m men It tends unless uc ire vigilant to assume that
silence means contentment and that disturbance implies not
reseaich into the grievance that it indicates but punishment
for the excess its form has assumed It keeps men uninspired
and uniform inert and ignorant It tan asin pr< evolutionary
Russia, literally make i desert arid cal' it [xace So used,
power is the more disastrous be amt it merely postpones
the day ol reckoning If e abstnci fre rn it of a larger purpose
makes its organs the subjects of . <. mfli * for the spoils they
promise They arc then attacked from within and alike
their defenders and their opponents will seek the support of
those outside the ranks of affinity by appealing to them
in the name of principles until then forgotten Because the
minds of men au rts;>onsi\( t j noble desires, such appeal
will not be made m vain

I he State htn outlined is not 1 think so liable to these
defects It can dim that it petlomis a natural function
It is budt to dtlend the u\it minimum of rights without
winch, as 1 aigutd earlier, no man i an hope to be his best
self It has no exact boundarit s to the area it occupies, for
life cannot be contuneu within i utgorits of mathematical
precision It unmt even difine itself those boundaries at
any given moment of action in a priori turns That does not
mean that its lunction is am the less real for any given
purpose has to grow into, to make adjustments with othei
purposes, m order to fulfil its end The State protects the


*82 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

wholeness of men over and above those parts which express
themselves through groups more specific in character. It '
does not do so by being something over and above them. It.
co-ordinates with them by associating itself with them, by
becoming a means through which they reach a general medium
of expression. To that end, it seeks to embody the largest
induction open to it. It speaks, not for some, but for all. It
decides, not for a few, but for the whole. It includes experience
and does not exile experience. It is, for instance, legitimate
for the Roman Catholic Church to deny salvation to all outside
its membership: that is the condition of its being. But a
State must secure temporal salvation for all who own its
citizenship. It can do so only by counting as equal in worth
the personalities of its citizens. For it, on this plane, there
must be neither Jew nor Greek, neither bond nor free. It
must compound its notions of general well-being from the
total environment it encounters.

In such fashion the State might become a genuine search
for social integration. It might cease to be the organ of a
few because its will would become instinct with the desires of
the many. It would be responsive, not to the purposes of
those whose poorer makes their Demands immediately urgent,
but to all who have an individuality they would preserve and
enlarge. They would be able to make their desires articulate.
They would be able to feel that their desires were weighed,
not in terms of the economic pressure they represent, but the
social value they embody. Their experience of life, their
sense of the meaning it has for themselves, would be taken
into account. Such a State might be the true organ of a
community, the meeting-ground on which its varied purposes
found the means of a unity adequate for its general enrich¬
ment. It would not impose a uniform rule. It would
recognise that the material is too diverse to permit df such
simplicity. It could be taken as suffused with good faith in
a sense in which the State in our own day is void of such
virtue. 1 It will be less safe, doubtless, in the sense that its
(pronouncements of right will be more hardly won, and less

> That is why, X think, Mr. Elliott's view of the modem State as essen¬
tially an umpire in the social conflict is inadequate. It assumes the impar¬
tiality of its agents, op. eit.


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 181

'inertly accepted, than is now the case. But that is likely to
make it more careful in the making of its rules, at once more
scrupulous in building their foundations, and more elastic in
fitting them to the forces they seek to control.

But all this will hold only on two conditions. The State
that is to achieve an ambition so high must begin by
organising criticism of itself. It must posit fallibility as its
foundation. It must realise that what it does Is not right
because it has willed to do it, but right because it works.
And it can know that its will works justly only by the esti¬
mation of its results in the lives of those affected by them.
Such knowledge means two things. It means, first o f all, a
citizen-body alert to the errors of government. Its members
must be so disciplined in mind that they can appreciate the
synthesis made, can also directly contribute themselves to
its making. A State in which the art of politics is, in its
general terms, apprehended only by a few can never enrich
' the lives of the many. For it can never genuinely know the
wants of the many. It can only roughly imagine those
wants by assuming their identity with the wants of its own
directors. That identity is an unproven hypothesis, unproven
because, predominantly, it is untrue. And the degree of its
ignorance is the measure of the misinterpretation it will
make. Because, therefore, that knowledge is so precious to
it, the life-blood of the State is freedom of speech. To set
boundaries to the effort of the mind is always, at least ulti¬
mately, to frustrate that effort. To stigmatise inconvenient!
thought as sedition, or blasphemy, or evil is, sooner or later,
to stifle thought itself. Inconvenient thought rarely means
other than unconventional thought, and unconventional
thought is the parent of social discovery.

The seco nd condition is that we take increasing oppor¬
tunity.to improve tKJTquality of the information upon which
we act. Our decisions are not taken in a vacuum. What-
eveF~we do has its outcome in actions which may affect
myriads of human lives. The picture in a statesman’s head,
say, of the intentions of Japan, may be the little increment
which tips the beam towards peace or war. We have to
analyse our environment, to measure the results of that
environment. We have to transcend our self-centred ex peri-


284 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

ence, and the prejudices to which it gives rise, by externalising,
by making as objective as we can, the pictures of the world
about us We want, for instance, statistics of miners' wages,
not statistics of the mine-owners’ view of miners' wages, and
statistics of the miners’ view , all that we denve from these
are arguments to strengthen a decision we had already
decided to make without them Self interest can only be
persuaded from its subjectivity as it meets that audit by
record which reveals its patent selfhood We are deceived
by press and party, by Church and btate because we lack
the machinery of co-ordinated knowledge We do not know
the meaning of our activities because we do not in any senous
way attempt to record them Yet without that record the
conflicts of modern social life are but a blind groping in a
darkened room

I neither suggest nor believe that such a political system
as this is likely to resolve our doubts and difficulties in a
final way Life is a kinetic thing, and the solutions we make
only give nse to new problems We create desires by satisfy¬
ing desires. But I believe that such a State might hope, as
it has not now the right to hope, to get its decisions accepted
It might claim to ha\e gathered to itself a larger volume of
experience deeply felt and carefully measured than in any
previous time It would have left a larger room for individual
action and corporate action than the highly unified State of
which we are now seeing the slow erosion It would have
bound to itself that passionate loyaltv which comes to a
great leader when men find in his words the echo of the song
in their own hearts

Yet it will not alwavs get its decisions accepted Man is
I l&k'JUre’S.J£bd. and it is his habit to protest against the will
that seeks to bind his will Where there is refusal of consent,
we must not assume, whatever the character of government,
that such refusal is wrong Grievance never proceeds to
rebellion unless it is deeply grounded m a sense of wrong.
Grievance is never adequately met by suppression of its
symptoms Whatever the form and substance of the State,
the judgment upon its policy, the resolution of conflict where
it meets antagonism, remain a matter for the individual
mind It is there only that effective choices can be made


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 285

It is there only that allegiance arises from conviction
Athanasius is not reconciled by the issue of a command , he
makes his peace by finding that the legal order can be so
adjusted as to embody what he desires The possibility, in
every situation, that Athanasius mav be right can only be
overlooked when we prefei authority to truth, and the habit
of such preference is. ultimately, to prefer ourselves to
authority That is the certain highioad to anarchy For the
real destruction of a social order arises, not from the existence
of passionate dissent but from the determination to refuse to
dissent the opportunity of satisfaction , and that refusal is,
as a rule, ground for the suspicion that dissent has right upon
its side

Whatever has here been said of the internal relations of
a State holds also, with no less emphasis, of its external
context The, nalion-htatf is not the fina l unit, of, social
organisation Its power as a sovereign body represents a
phase only of historic experience and the pressure of world-
forces has already made its sovereignty obsolete for any
creative purpose The nation-State is entitled to autonomy
in alUconcerns of which the incidence is obviously local, but
immediately what it wants and does impinges upon the
interests of the larger world outside, its will is only one of
many factors which must go to the making of a decision.
It may choose its own Prime Minister , it is not entitled to
settle the scale of its armament It may dig its own coal;
but it is not entitled so to pick and choose in the marketing
of its coal that it deliberately prejudices the interests of other
nation-States The conditions, particularly economic, of
modern civilisation demand the habit of organised inter¬
national co-operation We can onlv secure that habit by
building institutions through which it may grow to its
appointed purpose Such institutions are incompatible with
the existence of States which assert their will independently
of the will of others The incompatibility is the greatei
because, too often, the range of experience upon which that
will is based is so narrow as in fact to traverse the needs
therein implied We can only remedy the danger that State
power suffers perversion m the sphere of international affairs
by making that State the subject of a control beyond itself.


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

We need not postulate, for that end, the obsolete fiction of
State equality. But we must at least assure to States, what¬
ever their size, that their claims are met in terms of right and
‘not in terms of force. War, therefore, must be outlawed;
and the whole effort of civilisation must be directed against
those States which trust to war as the instruments of their
purpose. ThaLiffipUes a federal organisation oi States, a will
built from the integrating ofmteresfim conference. It means,
doubtless, the subordination of the great State to ends out¬
side itself, and it will be difficult to win the surrender of their
prestige. Yet no other way lies open to us if we are to prevent
war on the one hand, and, on the other, to secure economic
justice between peoples.


V

To those for whom law is a simple command, legal by
virtue of the source from which it comes, it is not likely that
such complexities as these will be popular. We are urg in g
that law is. in truth, not the will of the State, fcut that from
which the will of the State derives whatever moral authority
it may jjossess. That is, admittedly, the abandonment of
simplicity. It assumes that the rationale of obedience is in
all the intricate facts of social organisation and in no one
group of facts. It denies at once the sovereignty of the
State, and that more subtle doctrine by which the State is at
once the master and the servant of law by willing to limit
itself to certain tested rules of conduct. It insists that what
is joapOTtant in law is not the fact of command but the end
at which that command aims and the way it achieves the
end. It sees society, not as a pyramid in which the State
sits crowned upon the summit, but as a system of co-operating
interests through which, and in which, the individual finds
his scheme of values. It argues that each individual scheme
so found gives to the law whatever of moral rightness it con¬
tains. Law, that is to say, is made valid by my experience
of it, and not by the fact that it is presented to me as law.
Such experience, indeed, is rarely separate in kind (though it
is always unique in degree) because it is shared with others
in the effort to make an impact upon society. It app ears


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 88T

as an intwert which seeks the objectivity of realisation. It
strives to'suffuse the law with its sense of need. It judges
the law by what it recognises therein of that sense as
satisfied. It therefore demands a system of social condi¬
tions in which the end capable of being achieved is both
worthy of achievement and relevant to itself. Therein appears
the importance of the idea of rights. For these make the
path of law a road which leads to the fulfilment of desire;
and those who seek fulfilment are entitled to consider their
needs equal in significance to the needs of others. I^aw then
em erges as the eval uation of the interests by the interweaving
of interests. It is a function of the whole social structure
and not of some given aspect of it. Its power is determined
by the degree to which it aids what that whole social structure
reports as its desires . 1

From the conception of law as the evaluation of interests
we reach the most fruitful view available of the place of the
individual in society. We can admit that some interests are
so personal to a man's self that they can gain f ulfilm ent only
in isolation. We can thereby avoid the falsity of that philo¬
sophy which sees each man as meaningless save as a part
of some social whole. We can admit, further, that interests
may be incompatible and that even where harmony is possible
the effort of adjustment is long and subtle. All the co-ordina¬
tion achieved represents some sacrifice; and it is important
to realise that ihe judgment of whether the sacrifice achieved
is worth its cost can be made by individuals alone.

Their judgment, doubtless, will be different because their
relations are never identical. The perspective is made through
the shifting kaleidoscope of innumerable personalities. The
rightness of that judgment will depend upon the care and
knowledge with which men seek to make an integration of
their wants with those of others. The judgment will never
be complete or perfect because it is part of a process rooted
in the past and stretching out towards an unknown horizon.
The synthesis each man achieves creates, of course, a system
of habits, and these, as they seek articulation with the habits
of others, are bound to cause stress and pain. It is necessary,

1 See this well put in the translator's introduction to Krabbe, The Modem
Idea of the State (192a), especially pp xlv f , and cf my paper on The State
and Law in Economica for Nov 1029


288 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

accordingly, to minimise the conflict which ensues as interests
jostle one another in the struggle for survival. No adjust¬
ment effected is ever worth while save as it is reported as
adequate by the largest number of minds influenced by its
results.

That adequacy, of course, does not mean something
merely personal or selfish. ]t. means that .whatever—the
individu al ju dges as of value ypcorded as ..valuable i» the
push.qf £X£Blts. Tt means That his sense of right is that alone
which validates for him the meaning of social organisation,
and that there is no other way of securing validation from
him. I deny, therefore, that submission is ever a moral
obligation unless, as an act, it carries with it the individual
conviction of rightness which makes it moral. No jus est
quod jusium est from a State will ever do more than compel
upon a plane outside the field of etlucs unless it carries with
it a satisfying moral appeal. We cannot be certain that it
will. We can only hope that decisions prepared for acceptance
will be scrutinised with responsibility and with a due regard
for what they totally imply.

Any other view has little relevance to the facts about us.
Any other view is seeking to invest coercive authority with
ethical content on grounds which analysis shows to be simply
the fact of the power to coerce. That power may hew its
way to success, but it does not, by the fact of victory, become
a moral agent. W e argue , rather, that_ our,j-Conduct
are justified only as wnarTKey‘'arc in WDrkmg..anduct'S our
allegiance to them. No such result can be known until those
affeCTOTTeport that they accept the rules precisely on that
ground. And those affected will not be m a position so to
report until they have the power to make themselves respected.
They can do so only when they win their due place in the
negotiations which precede decision. That place can be
assigned them if we conceive it as won, not by force, but by a
give and take in which the unequal pressure of interests is
mitigated by our knowledge of what, as property, for instance,
ensures disharmony. It does not mean that we must take
each man, as in the Benthamite view, to be the best judge of
/Ins own interests , but it does involve, I think, our willing¬
ness to recognise that each man’s sense of his own interests


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL 389

is a fact we may not disregard. We have, therefore, to allow
his personality full access to the organs which register our
ultimate decisions. We have to maximise the responsiveness
of those organs to the will he seeks to express. Our main
effort must be to discipline his mind to the expression of lus
wants and to make possible such an enrichment of that mind!
, that the satisfaction of those wants achieves a good something!
more than purely personal. We shall, of course, succeed but
partially, for it is difficult m the pressure and scale of modern
administration to have more than a partial glimpse of his
need. Obviously, therefore, the more firmly we can make
his sense of need available for us, the more likely are we to
make possible for him the full realisation of his powers. And
nothing else can justify the process of government.

Two o ther remarks may be made. It follows from what
has been saidTEaT meh are entitled to disobey a State which
ceases to secure their self-realisation. Rebellion, therefore, is,
as T. H. Green insisted, a contingent duty on the part of the
citizen. To many this has seemed a doctrine of anarchy,
and they have therefore sought to avoid its implications
either by arguing that I cannot realise myself save through
the State, or, as with Green himself, that I ought not to
resist unless at least a considerable body of persons share my
view and are willing to act with me. Neither of these views
is, I think, well founded. The only State to which I owe
allegiance is the State in which I discover moral adequacy ;\
and if a given State fails to satisfy that condition I must, to
be consistent with my own moral nature, attempt experiment.
It is, of course, true that I can only realise myself in the ideal
State; but we are not entitled to assume that any given
State is seeking to achieve the ideal save as it proves that
assumption by its use of power. Green’s view is a wiser
one ; but what he urges is rather the higher expediency than
a rigorous logic. Most action of this kind is inevitably
minority action. Most minority action will fail unless it
enlists upon its side at least the inertia of the multitude. Out
first duty is to be true to our conscience, and we are the more
likely t o press the State into die aepace-af right tBeinorr
we lulfil that duty. We may have to pay the penalty We
may find ourselves involved in an effort far vaster than we

19


280 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

intended to provoke. But unless we do that which it lies in
us to do, our citizenship is nullified just at the moment where
it becomes an urgent thing. We act, alway s, at o ur peril;
but the peril involved in obedience may m the end be greater
tHirTtKe penalty of rebellion.

It has been said, also, that the individual for whose best
self the State exists has little to contribute that we are
entitled to regard as significant. What he is and does leaves
little impress upon the record of mankind. To adjust the
temper of social effort to average men is to crown mediocrity
as king. Rather we must recognise that quality is the
possession of a few, and we must equate function with the
possession of that quality. For, otherwise, we deny differ¬
ences of value in activity, and, in particular, we fail to value
things not easily apprehended, like art and science, save as
they minister to measurable utilitarian advantage. To build
upon the rule of number is to sacrifice all that gives to the
best of life the peculiar virtue for which it searches. Wha t,
r ather we re q ui re is to limit the possession of power to the
f$w JVrfw are fit to exert it. These, by their inherent worth,
would act as the trustees of mankind.

Ever since Plato drew the first great pattern of an aris¬
tocracy that ideal has proved attractive. Yet, on examination,
its virtues are less self-evident than a cursory glance would
surmise. It is the record of all history that no class of men
can retain over a period sufficient moral integrity to direct the
lives of others. Sooner or later they pervert those lives to
their own ends. And even if, in a rapid survey, the majority
of men seem indistinguishable from their fellows, to them¬
selves the fact of distinction is of the first importance. They
cannot achieve happiness vicariously. They must know it
with their own minds and their own hearts. They must
themselves make their own lives, because it is ui the art of
creation that they can best hope to realise whatever there is
in them of fineness and nobility. Nor have we the means at
our disposal to measure the qualities we should wish to find
in those who rule us before they appear in the opportunity
we provide for their emergence. They confine themselves
to no given class or race. We recognise them as they prove
themselves: and by offering them the largest room for proof


AUTHORITY AS FEDERAL


291


we ensure their richest provision. So regarded, men may
strive to make themselves the masters of the event because
they have the chance to meet the challenge of life. The
world outside them may remain mysterious, but within them
is the call to penetrate the mystery. It is a call not less to
sacrifice than to fulfilment. Or, rather, it is a call to fulfil¬
ment through sacrifice. It is the demand that we treasure
things of the spirit; that we suffuse pedestrian habit with
creative purpose; that we quarrel not over the petty dif¬
ferences of possession, but over the great issues of the mind.
It will require all the imagination and thought at our dis¬
posal if we are to meet the challenge like free men. It is the
most difficult and arduous of adventures. Yet, as Spinoza
said( all things excellent are as difficult as they are rare. We
can reach thq^ summit in the end if we but seek the courage
to go forward


PART TWO


CHAPTER EIGHT

POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS
I

The modem State, for practical purposes, consists of a rela¬
tively small number of persons who issue and execute orders
which affect a larger number m whom they are themselves
included , and it is of the essence of its character that,
within its allotted territory, all citizens are legally bound by
those orders

What are the forms through which they should move to
their appointed end 5 Since the time of Aristotle, it has
been generally agreed that political power is divisible into
three broad categories There is, first, the legislative power.
It enacts the general rules of the society It lavs down the
principles by which the members of ihe society must set
their course There is, secondly, the executive power It
seeks to apply those rules to particular situations , where,
for instance, an Old Age Pension Law has been enacted, it
pays out the specified sum to those entitled to receive it
There is, thirdly, the judicial power This determines the
manner in which the work of the executive has been ful¬
filled. It sees to it that the exercise of executive authority'
conforms to the general rules laid down by the legislature , it
may, as in Ex parte O'Brien declare that the particular
order issued is, in fact, ultra urcs It settles also the relation¬
ship between private citizens, on the one hand, and between
citizens and the government upon the other, where these give
rise to problems which do not admit of solution by agreement
It may be admitted at the outset that these categories


* (Ji supra.


896 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

are of art and not of nature. It is perfectly possible to con¬
ceive of all these functions being performed by a single body,
/>r even in the name of a single person; and in the modern
democratic state the distinction between them cannot, in
fact, be consistently maintained. Legislatures often perform
executive acts, as when the Senate of the United States con¬
firms the nominations of the President. They perform
judicial duties also ; the House of Lords is a Court to pass
upon impeachments authorised by the House of Commons.
Executive bodies, especially in recent times, perform acts it is
difficult to distinguish from legislation, on the one hand, and
judicial functions on the other ; of which the provisional
orut" system in England, and the power of the Ministry of
Health in Arlidge v. Local Government Board ' are sufficient
examples. The judiciary, moreover, is constantly acting as
an executive. The English judges issue rules under the
/Judicature Acts. They act also as a legislature when they
give expression to that part of the law not formally enacted
by statute; * and it is a striking fact that the responsibility
of the French State has been largely created by the juris¬
prudence of the Conseil d'Etat.i There exist, moreover, in
every State powers like that of declaring war and making
treaties, of recognising governments already dt facto as it
' jure, of the veto of legislation by an executive authority,
which it is no easy matter to classify with any precision.
Little, indeed, is gained by the formal attempt—the effort,
for instance, to make the judicial power merely a species
of executive authority—to distinguish between the different
types of function here outlined. For rules formulated to
fgovem particular cases become, if they work satisfactorily,
i general rules, and general rules, in their turn, are made
obsolete bj the manner, or the result, of their application.

It may yet be fairly argued that, m every State, some
distinction between the three powers is essential to the main-
•* tenance of freedom. Since the work of Locke and Monte¬
squieu, we have come generally to admit the truth of

1 (igi 6) AC i2o.

1 Cf. J Holmes jn Jensen v Southern Pacific, 244 U S 205.

3 Cf. Dugnit, Les transformations du Drott Public, chap vii, and my
foundations of Sovereignty, chap. lii


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS


297


Madison’s remark that "the accumulation of all powers . .
in the same hands . . . may justly be pronounced the very
definition of tyranny." 1 Nor is the reason for this insistence
far to seek. Power that L> not in some fashion divided is
bound to be absolute ; and power being, by its very nature,
dangerous to those who exercise it, it needs to be limited
before it can be exercised with safety. This was put con¬
cisely by Hflonfegquieu in some famous sentences. “ When
the legislative and executive powers," he said,* " are united
in the same persons or body, there can be no liberty, because
apprehensions may arise lest the same monarch or senate
should enact tyrannical laws, to enforce them in a tyrannical
manner. . . . Were the power of judging joined with the
legislature, the life and liberty of the subject would be
exposed to arbitrary control, for the judge would then be the
legislator. Were it joined to the executive power, the judge
might behave with ail the violence of an oppressor.”

It is not, I think, possible so to define the area of each of
these three authorities that each remains independent and
supreme in its allotted territory. The separation of powers
does not mean the equal balance of powers. If it is, broadly
speaking, the business of the executive to carry out those
principles of general policy enacted by the legislature, it
must retain the confidence of the latter body ; and such
confidence implies the power to compel subordination of the
executive to its will. The legislature, that is to say, can
directly secure, as a matter of right, that the substance oi
executive acts is suffused with what it deems to be its pur¬
poses. So, too, though more indirectly, with the judiciary.
The legislature ought not to dictate to any judiciary the
nature of the results it should attain in a particular case ;
but it is entitled, within the limits hereafter discussed, to
provide by statute against the recurrence of a derision of
which it is in disagreement with the principles. So, also,
when a particular decision, as in the Free Church of Scotland
case,J is likely to result in injustice, a legislative compromise
is not an unfair solution^ o^Jthe problems raised. In general,

1 Federalist. No 46 (ed Ford', p 310

1 Esprit its Lois. Bk xi chap vi

J See the separate report by Orr


298 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

therefore, the powers both of executive and judiciary find
their limits in the declared will of the legislative organ.

The case is different in the relationship of executive and
judiciary. It is the business of the judge to be the task¬
master of the executive. He has to see that its interpretation
of its powers is never so elastic that it either arrogates novelty
to itself or bears unequally upon the body of citizens. To
such ends as these, it follows that every executive act should
be open to scrutiny in the courts; and the decision of the
judiciary should always be binding upon the executive unless
the legislature otherwise resolves. There should never be
the power in an executive body which enables it to escape
the scrutiny of men less tempted than itself to identify will
with authority. What Professor Dicey has called the rule
of law js, with all its implications, fundamental. It means
that the State must be put on an equality with all other
bodies, that it must answer for its acts ; it means, also, that
no mysterious prerogative should intervene to prevent the
attainment of justice. The power of the judiciary over the
executive is, therefore, if contingent, nevertheless essentia).
The one limitation of substance is that the courts cannot act
propriis motibus. There must be complaint before decision,
and the complaint must come from the citizen body. But
when the complaint is proved, the executive should have no
authority to transcend the judicial will. Remedy, if remedy
be required, is the business of the legislature

This separation of functions need not imply, though it
has been taken to imply, a complete separation of personnel.
Montesquieu's mistaken view of the relation between executive
and legislature in England, consecrated as it was by Black-
stone, led to the theory that no bridges ought to be built
between the organs which represent these various powers.
But, as D ueuit has pointed out, 1 the execution of any
order involves the assistance of all ultimate authorities in
the State ; and the attempt, as in the American Constitution,
rigidly to separate the three powers, has only meant the
building of an extra-constitutional relationship between them.
The use of the patronage, on the one hand, and the peculiar
structure of parties, on the other, has effected by means

1 La Separation des Pouvoirs, p. I


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS


so»

open to serious question a conjunction between executive
and legislature which needs, in any case, to be made. Much
the best method of obtaining it is to make the executive, as
in England and France, a committee of the legislature.
Thereby a variety of ends are served. The executive can
only stay in office so long as it retains the confidence of the
legislature. A flexibility in its policy is thus assured which
prevents that deadlock in action which occurs whenever the
American President is at odds with Congress, and that even
when his own party is in power. The presence of the
executive in the legislature enables it to explain its policy in
the one way that ensures adequate attention and organised
criticism. It is not attention and criticism in a vacuum. It
is attention from, and criticism by, those who are eager to
replace the executive if it proves unconvincing. It thus
makes for responsibility. It prevents a legislature which
has no direct interest in administration from drifting into
capricious statutes. It arrests that executive degeneration
which is bound to set in when the policy of a ministry is
not its own. It secures an essential co-ordination between
bodies whose creative interplay is the condition of effective
government.

Nor is that all. The executive as a committee of the
legislature has an opportunity to drive a stream of tendency
through affairs. That is an urgent task. The modern
legislature is, of necessity, too large to be left to direct itself;
either it loses its centre of equipoise in a mass of statutes
unrelated to the posture of affairs, or it gives rise to an interest
as against the executive which sets one striving against the
other in an effort to win credit from the electorate. The
value of an executive which forces the legislature either to
accept or to reject its measures is that the latter's efforts
are then canalised into something like an organised policy. v
The play of ideas is not prohibited, but it is limited to the
measures upon which men are prepared to risk their political
existence. The executive is not made to administer measures
it believes mistaken ; the policy adopted is one for which it
is prepared to make itself responsible. Or, alternatively, a
different executive comes into view.

This relationship, moreover, presents a simple means


800


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


whereby persons fitted to be members of an executive may
make known their ability. Certainly whatever may have
been the defects of the House of Commons, what has been
called its selective fnnctjgn has been amazingly well done.
It has proved character as well as talent. It has measured
the Tunterland between oratorical quality and administrative
insight with much shrewdness. I know of no alternative
method that in any degree approaches it. Certainly the
choice of men for high executive office, as during the war, on
the ground of great business capacity, or position in the
trade union world, was, generally, a sorry failure. The
average American President represents, at the best, a leap
in the dark; his average cabinet rarely represents anything
at aU. But the average member of an English cabinet has
been tried and tested over a long period in the public view.
He has the " feel " of his task long before he comes to that
task. He has spent his earlier career in contact with the
operations he is now to direct. To give the executive, by
this means, the initiative in law-making, and to build its
life upon the successful use of that initiative in the legislature,
is an elementary induction from historic experience.

Nothing in this implies the mastery of the legislature by
the executive. Under the system, indeed, there have devel¬
oped experiences so different as those of Ureat Britain and
France. What, rather, -is .involved is the co-ordination of
knowledge, so that each aspect of the governmental adventure
is used to enrich the other. The position of the judiciary
is different Its whole purpose is impartiality. It is deliber¬
ately set aside from the normal process of conflict out of
which law emerges. For its object is, above all, to protect
the body of citizens from executive encroachment. To make
it in any 3ense subordinate to the executive is to make
impossible the performance of the most urgent function
within its province. That is why most political systems
have set themselves to protect the independence of judges.
The federal judiciary in America, the bench in England, can
bnly be removed by a special and difficult procedure ; and it
is noteworthy that in the American S.ates, where election of
judges usually prevails, a much less high standard of com¬
petence prevails. It is, 1 think, clear that the proper per-


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 801

formance of the judicial function implies, first of all, that no
judge shall be removed except for physical reasons or for
corruption. The executive may dislike his pronouncements.
His decisions may be unpopular with the people. Unless he
is in a position to know that no penalty follows from doing
the right as he sees the right, he is bound to be the creature
of the passing phases of public opinion. It implies, secondly,
th e rule of law. That rule may be enforced through special
tribunals, where technical problems, as in the fixation of gas-
rates in America, are in issue; but there must be no organ
of the executive exempt from judicial inspection. And,
clearly, where the executive_Jtself exercises quasi-judicial
functions the judiciary should have such power of scrutiny as
toill enable it to see that the rules adopted by the executive
are such as are likely to lesult in justice. Executive discre¬
tion is an impossible rule unless it is conceived in terms of
judicial standards.

1 do not think, as has sometimes been suggested, that
judicial independence of the executive is attacked in the
prerogative of pardon which inheres in the executive.* There
are three clear reasons for its existence in practically its
present form. In the first place, judicial errors do occur.
They are, possibly, infrequent, but cases like the Bock case
make it imperative that, where they are detected, there
should be immediate means of remedy. There is, secondly,
the possibility of a wrong assessment of penalty. Judges
notoriously varyin The severity of punishment indicted; it
is necessary to have the means of balancing justice by mercy
in the necessary cases. There is, t hirdly , the fact that cases
pccur in which the penalty inflicted ought not to be ojxsra tive
for reasons made evident only after it has been assessed. The
power to review in cases like these is obviously essential. It
may be admitted that, under the first head, judicial pardon
would not raise immense difficulties. But judicial action
under the second and third would undoubtedly ieadto public
criticism, and that, in its turn, would bring the judiciary into
an atmosphere peculiarly unfavourable to its functionmg.
When the po w er •feroffthe other "hand, given to the executive,
public criticism has its definite place. The loctie of the

Dagoit, StfKrraixon dtt Pnwifj, p 99


802 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

power to pardon (or to mitigate) is simply a matter of con¬
venience of which the utility hardly needs discussion.

The method of appointing judges raises questions which I
shall "discuss in detail"later. Here I would urge only that
either popular election, as in America, or legislative election
as'm "Switzerland is neither of them adequate. Appoint¬
ment by the executive has, on the whole, produced the best
results. ' But it is, I think, urgent to prevent judicial office
being made the reward for political services. To that end
it is a matter of elementary wisdom to ordain that no
member of a legislature, or of the political executive, should
be eligible for judicial office. The English tradition, for
instance, of giving the law officers of the Crown the refusal
of such judicial vacancies as occur is a serious error. The
qualities which make a man fit for the judicial function are
not necessarily those which make a man a successful attorney-
general ; and it brings to the bench men accustomed to con¬
sider problems from the special angle of executive need,
instead of men accustomed to the jealous scrutiny of the
effort to satisfy that need. It follows, also, taat such a
fusion of executive and judiciary as is represented by the
office of Lord Chancellor is similarly mistaken. The more
complete the separation of the judiciary from politics the
better for its quality and independence. The reverse logically
follows. A man who serves in a judicial capacity ought not
to be eligible for political office. To make it possible, for
instance, lor a judge of the Supreme Court of the United
States to look forward to the Presidency is inevitably to
introduce elements into his decisions ol a peculiarly unde¬
sirable kind.

I have assumed, in this discussion, that while the judiciary
may control the acts of the executive, it ought not to control
legislative acts. This raises certain complex considerations
which need some further analysis. It is obvious that there
are two cases in which the work of a legislature is inevitably
subject to the scrutiny of the courts, (x) Where the Con¬
stitution is written and the powers of the legislature are
defined by it, the authority of the legislature is confined to
what the courts hold to be within the competence of its
powers. ( 2 ) In any federal State, even when the central


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 808

legislature is left unhampered by such restrictions as those
represented by the Fourteenth Amendment to the American
.Constitution, the question of the area of competence of the
different elements of the Federation, is also a judicial matter.

Outside of Great Britain, it has been usual in most States
to define with some exactitude the powers of a legislative
assembly and, as in the United States, to attach to the defini-
-tfon of those powers a system of limitations embodied in a
Bill nf J&ghts. We have had experience of a written constitu¬
tion in England under the Commonwealth; but no attempt
has been made since that time to differentiate between con¬
stitutional and ordinary legislation. As a result. Parliament
can, as a matter of strict law, abolish the Habeas Corpus Act
as easily as it changes the laws relating to the liquor traffic.
What prevents such an attempt is the tradition which gives
to statutes like Habeas Corpus a majesty of a peculiarly
impressive kind. Certainly the absence of this differentiation
makes for a flexibility that has enormous advantages in a
period of great social change. It means that new ideas can
make their way without being compelled to pass through
the complicated sieve devised to protect ideas deemed funda¬
mental by an earlier period. If England wishes to abolish
child labour, that change can be directly effected; but the
will of the American Congress is thwarted by the Supreme
Court. The English system clearly prevents the judiciary
from deciding upon the desirability of legislation the principles
of which were unknown, naturally enough, to the generation
by which the Constitution was made. And it is obvious that
the more the courts can be saved from passing upon such
/desirability, the more likely they are to retain the respect of
citizens.

For it must not be forgotten that much legislation held
unconstitutional by the Supreme Court is, in fact, so held
not upon principles of strict legal theory, but upon a view
'of what is reasonjjkJe. The substance of reasonableness
do45*nor3well in the clouds, but is built almost entirely upon
/he habits and contacts of those estimating it. A few men
may be detached enough to project themselves beyond the
special circle of their limited experience; most, certainly,
will be content to be imprisoned therein without any sense of


804 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

that captivity. Mr. Justice Braxfield had never a shadow of
doubt that the Scottish radicals woe criminal, not became
of overt acts logically construable as crime, but because men
in his own environment did not hold those opinions. Mr.
Justice Grantham tried election petitions in the simple belief
that a decision in favour of the Tory candidate fulfilled the
requirements of justice. * The remarks of American judges
in the political trials of the last" ten 'years have been more
'frequently like those of counsel determined to secure a con¬
viction than of men anxious to arrive at an impartial verdict
on the facts. To entrust the judge with the power to over¬
ride the will of the legislature is broadly to make him the
decisive factor in the State.

In that sense, a written constitution in which the legislature
is so vigorously controlled seems to me a great mistake. For
the constitution will always reflect the spirit of the time at
which it was made. The judge will, on the average, be better
acquainted with that spirit, more bound to the ideas it reflects,
than he will be with a later and more novel, ideology. His
views on the ftdvisibility, say, of economic legislation are no
more likely to be right than those of the legislature, and
there seems, therefore, no common sense in allowing his views
to prevail.

But, equally, there seems no good reason why a legislature
should be able to enforce its win on subjects of great magnitude
without control of some kind. There are notions so funda¬
mental that it is necessary in every State to give them
special protection. Freedom of speech ought not to be
interfered with as easily as the licensing laws. Ex host facto
laws and bills of attainder are, I think without exception,
vicious both in principle and resuit. Acts of indemnity
ought not to be available by the simple process of majority
rule. Martial law ought not, as in the Punjab rising of 1919 .
to be antedated in order to include cases in which, under
normal circumstances, it might be difficult to secure a prose¬
cution.3 Legislation which aims at the disfranchisement of a

1 Hansard, 4th ctenes, vol iCm p. 370 ; 5th serie*. vol 22 p 366

* Cf. the citations m Chaffee, Freedom of Speech, passim

3 In the cases of Kitchloo and Satya Pal of the evidence in O'Dwyer v.
Nmr, M my 1924.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS


806


special class or creed is an outrage upon the whole thesis of
citizenship. Powers such as these ought never to be within .
the compass of a legislature except under severe restrictions
as to their exercise.

So also, I would urge, in matters like the period in which
a legislature is to retain power, it ought not to be able to
prolong its own existence. It ought not to be able to pass
financial measures which provide the executive with funds
for more than a year at a time. It ought not to be able to
ally itself to a particular Church. It ought not, in a word,
to be able to alter the basic framework of the State except .
under special conditions, direct access to which is rendered
difficult.

This implies . 1 think, a written constitution. Ideas so ,
fundamental as these cannot be left to the hazards of a
chance majority in the legislature. The action of the Supreme
Court in cases concerned with freedom of speech has shown
that judicial review is not an adequate safeguard ; and the
ambit covered by the Defence of the Realm Act shows that a
powerful executive may so sweep a legislature off its feet, v ,
that fundamental liberties may become the creatures of
executive discr etion. We need to avoid the unlimited \
authority of Parliament, on the one hand, and the unique ;
inaccessibility of the American Constitution to amendment )
on the other. A written constitution which may be amended -
by a two-thirds majority of the legislature supplies an ade¬
quate via media. It secures the electorate against the danger
that its liberties may be invaded. It prevents the judiciary
from exercising more than a limited control over the political
sphere. It leaves room for the making of such necessary
changes as have a convinced public opinion on their side. It
may be added that an age which, like our own, has seen the
classic safeguards of representative government thwarted
on every side, needs to reinforce its conviction of their
urgency. It ought not, for instance, to be possible for a
revolution like that of Mussolini to express itself through
constitutional forms. Liberty is, in any case, a sufficiently
fragile thing for it to be wise to make its suppression less easy
than it has become in recent times. Men who are determined
to enforce change of this kind by violence will, doubtless,

20


«» A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

resort to it if no other means lies open. But it is, it may be
urged, better that their effort should be plainly revolutionary
•'‘than that they should be able to pervert the Constitution to
their purposes. Atheism, after all, should not be preached
from the pulpit of a cathedral.

The situation in a federal State is somewhat different.
There not only are the earlier problems in issue, but also
those special problems which relate to a somewhat more
rigorous distribution of competence than is the case in a
unitary State. I do not, indeed, believe that the problems
are qualitatively different; it is as urgent for Manchester
to control its special needs as it is for Alberta or Tenessee.
But the range of competence in a federal State is likely to be
wider than elsewhere, and special provision needs to be made
for it. Here, I think, the lesson of experience is tolerably
clear. A written constitution is the only method by which
the effective control of the powers allotted to the constituent
parts of a federation can be guaranteed to them; and the
judicial review of the exercise of those powers is the most
certain way of securing the maintenance of a reasonable
equilibrium. Certainly the Supreme Court of the United
States has been remarkably successful in holding the balance
i even between centrifugal and centripetal tendencies; and
decisions like McCray v. United States, 1 on the one hand, and
Noble Stale Bank v. Haskell,' 1 on the other, show how much
elasticity has been provided foi in the system.

But it is also obvious that no original distribution of
powers will ever be adequate over any long period While
it is possibly too broad a generalisation to urge, with Pro-
fe ssor Dicey, that federalism is always a stage on the road to
unity, it is certainly true that the interests of a developing
nation-State need the continual readjustment of the powers
allotted. This, it is clear, has been the experience of the
United States. Very notably, the control of labour legislation
by the States was much more suited to a pre-industrial epoch
than to one, like the present, in which uniform manufacturing
conditions are implied by large-scale industry. The same is
true of matters like company-law, like bills and notes, and,
in a very different sphere, like the rules for admission to

•195 us. 27 »J19U.S. J04.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS


807


such professions as the law and medicine. The uniformity
obtainable by negotiation between the different States is too
arduous a matter for any subject of urgency. The attempt
to secure it by indirect means, the use, to take the example
of child labour, of powers like the Commerce clause, is mis¬
taken because it perverts the instrumentalities provided by
the Constitution to illegitimate uses. What, once more,
emerges as essential is that amendment should be reasonably
accessible without being too easy of access.

The American method of amendment is, it should be said
at once, far to difficult to be satisfactory. It is built upon
the supposition that the areas represented by State-lines
are still genuine entities for the purpose of creative adminis¬
tration. That may have been true in 1787 ; it is no longer
true to-day. And to maintain the States as the effective
power in the amending process is, accordingly, to deprive
the central authority of the instrumental needs to fulfil its
ends. Nor is the Canadian technique of federal disallow¬
ance of provincial acts much more satisfactory. It raises,
in the first place, the very difficult problem of the grounds of
disallowance, which are, in each case, problems in policy
uniquely susceptible to partisan interpretation, and, secondly,
it is a merely negative power, where what is required is a
method of positive reorganisation. 1 The Australian system,
which provides for the elicitation of public opinion by a
referendum, 1 suffers from the fact that it is referring to an
undiscriminating and uninformed mass a problem which,
from its very nature, requires treatment by expert inquiry.
The way out, as I think, lies in allowing the central authority
to make the adjustment it requires on three conditions. It
must secure a two-thirds majority of the legislature for its
proposal; it must be able to pass it by that majority in two
successive sessions of the legislature; and, in the event of
the legislatures of two-thirds of the constituent States pre¬
senting a formal protest against the change, it must be able a
third time to secure the assent of a two-thirds vote of the
Central Legislature. The advantages of such a method of
amendment are clear. It makes the burden of change lie

1 Keith, Responsible Government in the Dominions, 725-49.

1 Moore, The Commonwealth of Australia, 597-606.


808 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

within the control of the body charged with the national
interest. It makes the period of change slow enough to
prevent any hasty or ill-conceived proposal finding its way
immediately to the statute-book, and by providing the con¬
stituent States with a means of protest, to which consequences
are attached, it offers them the assurance that their insistence
will be duly weighed. The method, it will be noted, does
not at any point impair the power of judicial review; it
would still be competent for the courts to hold either federal
or State legislation ultra vires. But a court-decision would
no longer be able, as it is able in the United States, to hinder
the passage of statutes which have behind them the con¬
sidered opinion of the central legislature.

I said above that the problem of the distribution of
powers in a federal State is only quantitatively different
from that in a unitary State. In most countries, local
government powers He completely within the control of the
central legislature. Outside of Germany, practically every
local authority in a unitary State has merely specified powers;
and it can on! v secure an increment of authority by per¬
suading the central legislature to pass a special act conferring
the power desired. This is as a system, unduly distrustful of
local experiment. It prevents the local body from exercising
initiative in regions where new ideas are not only valuable
in themselves, but add both to the responsibility and to the
attractiveness of local politics. If the borough of Fulham
desires to run a municipal laundry, I see no reason why
parliamentary permission should have to be invoked; if
Boston wishes to purchase its tram-lines, it should not need
to wait upon the will of the Massachusetts legislature. In
any distribution of powers in a unitary State, therefore, we
seem to need two categories of authority: we need (a) areas
to which, at a given standard, the local body must devote
its attention ; (b) areas the control of which is definitely
reserved to the central legislature. In the second, indeed,
the control may well be, on occasion, merely the control of
inspection, the actual administration, as in education in
England, being left to local bodies. But in the residuary
area, the larger the volume of initiative left to the local body,
the more fruitful is its performance likely to be. The central


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 809

legislature may still be left to wnend the technique of distri¬
bution between the central executive and the local bodies.
But it ought not, I urge, to be able easily to amend that
technique. The majority required for the change proposed
ought always to be larger than in the case of ordinary legisla¬
tion. For in every State, the more opportunity is given for
the needs of the community to be satisfied rather at the base
than at the apex of the social pyramid, the fuller and richer
will be the life of that community. Normally and broadly,
central control will be more efficient; but, normally and
broadly also, such control will never arouse the degree of
interest in the process of law-making that local initiative can
secure.

A word here is advisable upon the distribution of powers
in the aspect of devolu tion. It is increasingly assumed in
political discussion that we have need, not only of central
and local bodies, but also of intermediate bodies which will -
assume control over areas intermediate between, say, Great
Britain, on the one hand, and Liverpool on the other. The
case of Great Britain may be taken by way of illustration.
Parliament, it is said, is overwhelmed by the pressure of its
work because it is continually compelled to deal with ques¬
tions too narrow to be worthy of its scrutiny. Just as, apart
from local government, the United States has forty-nine
legislatures to cope with its problems, Australia seven, and
Canada eight, so should Great Britain have at least four, in
order that the Imperial legislature may be free to devote its
time to major issues only. The same would apply to France
in terms of one or other of the many regional schemes pro¬
liferated there in recent years. The Belgian problem, also,
could thereby be solved, since Flemings and Walloons would
then become autonomous in local concerns.

It may be admitted that the element of nationalism makes
the Belgian problem quite distinct from that of the normal
unitary State not keenly divided by bitter feeling between its
component parts. But devolution in the latter case has
nothing of its a priori simplicity when it is analysed in detail.
The analogy with a federal State is an unjustified one.
America, Australia and Canada are all rather continents
than countries; Germany presents quite special problems of


810 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

origin and composition ; Switzerland is too small a theatre
of events to present comparable issues. And, in any case,
the pressure on the normal federal legislature is not less than
that upon Parliament; what it gains in the limited area to
be discussed it loses in intensity within its allotted field.
The pressure is, in fact, the natural result of the transformation
of a negative State into a positive State. Anyone, moreover,
who studies the list of subjects it is proposed to devolve upon
local legislatures will be struck by their comparative unim¬
portance. 1 Education, prisons and public health apart, the
majority of them do not occupy a twentieth part of parlia¬
mentary time ; and of the latter, housing and national health
insurance raise financial questions of a magnitude that no
local legislature could solve without central control (and
therefore parliamentary review) of its decisions. Such a
division of powers, further, would involve at every point a
judicial review of legislation made by the subordinate legisla¬
tures, and thereby multiply largely the business of the courts.*
There will, further, be an immense increase ; n the size of
the civil service, since for the functions now centrally per¬
formed, at least a triplicate staff will be necessary. And this
is to omit minor questions like the multiplication of elections
in which, outside of Parliament, the stimulation of local
interest has become so difficult. Certainly that interest is
not increased by giving it new issues of mainly a technical
kind to disentangle.

It is, I think, a clear general truth in politics that to
secure an adequate legislature two things are necessary.
There must, first, be the power in the legislator* to solve
important questions, and, secondly, consideration must be
attached to the position of a private member. Both those
conditions are satisfied by the Parliament of the modem
State; neither, I think, can be satisfied in the local legis¬
latures suggested. For where, as I have argued, vital ques¬
tions like education and housing are involved, finance is
bound to transfer effective control back to the central legis-

1 Conference on Devolution (Cmd 692), 1920, Appendix III, pp 16-17.
See Henderson and Laski in Economic*, March 1923, and Chiao, Devolution
•ft Great Britain (1922).

* Even if the Murray MacDonald’s scheme (ibid , p 13) of reference to
the judicial committee is adopted, and he does not prevent recourse to the
courts of law by private persons


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS


811


lature; and popular interest in licensing and ecclesiastical
measures is not likely to invest the average member with the
prestige which comes from the power to handle great ques¬
tions. The mere multiplication of territorial centres of
authority has no contribution to offer to the type of problem
we are now seeking to solve. There are, of course, genuine
territorial questions; and the problem of area apart, the
twofold division into central and local seems fully adequate
to their needs. Where other issues arise, it will, I think, be
found that the considerations involved are different. We
need the central resolution of general principle, as now. But
the application of general principle is a matter, not of terri¬
torial, but of functional devolution. Our future lies in dis-'
covering how to relate genuine industrial units to a central
legislature in the same way that we relate territorial units.!
The distribution of power between those units and the
legislature does not raise issues seriously different from those
discussed earlier in this chapter. But it is better to postpone
discussion of this relationship until we have sought to build
our industrial institutions.


II

The legislature of a State is chosen by the citizen-body.
How is the choice to be made ? What are to be the relations
between the persons chosen and the electorate which chooses
them ? I argued earlier m this book that the modem demo¬
cratic State has no alternative to universal adult .suffrage.
It lies, as a State, at the disposal of each of its members to
enable him to realise the best in himself ; and he is entitled,
as a matter of logic, to the vote that he may thereby express
what his experience seems to warrant him expressing in the
pu sh of affai rs. I do not argue that universal suffrage has
any practical merits which render it inherently superior to
other systems. But, theory apart, n o tests of exclusion seem
available which assist the State to thefurtherance of its. .end.
Property as a basis for the franchise merely limits the interests
of the State to those of the owners of property. No technique
is known whereby an educational, qualification can be made
synonymous with political fitness. Exclusion on the ground


812 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

that a man has been in receipt of public relief is merely
to stigmatise economic misfortune as a crime. Exclusion
on the ground of conviction by the courts is intelligible if it
is confined to a small range of offences. But. even here, a
time-limit ought to operate; for obviously we do not want
to exclude men like Jean Valjean from exercising their full
part m civic life. Lunacy and mental defect are, of course,
different matters. In those cases exclusion is built on the
^simple ground that attainment of a best self is, in any sense
implicit with social meaning, impossible.

But an electorate must be organised to choose. A whole
adult population cannot from some vast list select those
whom it prefers. It is dear that a local relationship of some
kind must develop between the member of the legislature and
his constituents. What ought that relationship to be ?
Broadly, we have a choice between two systems. We may
either have equal electoral districts, each returning a single
member; or we may have some larger, equal unit area, each
returning a number of members upon the basis of proportional
re prese ntation .

what must be realised at the outset is that the member
of a legislature will only be returned as a member of some
party or group. The life of the democratic State is built
upon* the party-system, and it is important at the outset to
discuss the part played by party in the arrangement of affairs.
Briefly, that part may be best described by saying that parties
'arrange the issues upon which people are to vote. It is
obvious that in the confused welter of the modern State there
must be some selection of problems as more urgent than
others. It is necessary to select them as urgent and to present
solutions of them which may be acceptable to the citizen-
body. It is that task of selection the party undertakes. It
acts, in Mr^ Lfiffell’s phrase, as the. broket Qf ideas. From
the mass of opinions, sentiments, beliefs, by which the
electorate moves, it chooses out those it judges most likely
to meet with general acceptance. It organises persons to
advocate its own view of their meaning. It states that view
as the issue upon which the voter has to make up his mind.
Its power enables it to put forward for election candidates
who are willing to identify themselveS with its yiew. Since


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS


818


its opponents will do the same, the electorate, thereby, is
ehabled to vote as a mass, and decision th%t would other¬
wise be chaotic assumes some coherency and direction.

Biuch time has been spent in the effort to explain the
origin of pa rties. To some they are bom of the natural
Contrast between those who cling to the old and those who
embrace the new. To others, they arise from the pugnacious
instinct of men. It is, however, clear that no single explana¬
tion suffices. Therejs a conflict of wills in society, and that
conflict is decided by the decision of the intermediate mass
which is not firmly convinced of the truth of any general
cause. To attract its support it is necessary to advertise
one’s view. Parties are the natural method of effecting that
end.' Their form is largely dependent upon the conditions of
any given time. They may group themselves about religious
issues, as in the sixteenth-century France; they may group
themselves about economic issues, as in the England of our
own day. Naturally, they arouse the pugnacious instinct;
naturally, also, there will be a tendency for the radical solu¬
tion to attract the young. What, at least, is certain, is that
without parties there would be no means available to us of
enlisting the popular decision in such a way as to secure
solutions capable of being interpreted as politically satis¬
factory.

To say, of course, that parties are natural is not to say
that theyjarejfirfect. They suffer from all the evils of group
separatism which I discussed in an earlier chapter. They
distort the issues that they create. They produce divisions
in the electorate which very superficially represent the way in
which opinion is in fact distributed. They secure, at best,
an incomplete and compromising loyalty. They falsify the
perspective of the issues they create. They build about
persons allegiance which should go to ideas. They build
upon the unconscious and they force the judgment of men
into the service of their prejudices. Yet, when the last
criticism of party has been made, the services they render to
a democratic State are inestimable. They prevent popular
vagaries from driving their way to the statute-book. They
are the most' soEd obstade we have against, the danger of
Casagjgjp- Above all, they arable the electorate to choose


814 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

between alternatives which, even though at best an artificial
dichotomy, are the only satisfactory method of obtaining a
government. For, on practically every issue in the modem
State, the serried millions of voters cannot do more than
accept or reject the solutions offered. The stage is too vast
to permit of the nice shades of quantitative distinction
impressing themselves upon the public mind. It has rarely
the leisure, and seldom the information, to do more than
indicate the general tendency of its will. It is in the process
of law-making that the subtler adjustments must be effected.

If this is true, it follows that a political system is the more
satisfactory, the more it is able to express itself through the
antithesis of two great parties. Each may contain a certain
variety of opinion. Both may fail to attract in their ranks
much more than that active minority which is willing to
devote itself to political affairs. But the superiority of a
two-party system over a multiplicity of groups is above all
in this, that it is the only method by which the people can
at the electoral period directly choose its government. It
enables that government to drive its policy to the statute-
book. It makes known and intelligible the results of its
failure It brings an alternative government into immediate
being. The group-system always means that no government
can be formed until after the people has chosen the legislative
assembly. It means that the executive will represent, not a
-general body of opinion, but a patchwork of doctrines which
compromise their integrity for the sake of power. It means,

• also, short-lived administrations, since reshuffling of the
groups to overthrow the government is the most interesting
exercise in which the legislature can indulge. Short-lived
administrations always mean that no coherent policy can be
realised. While the group system probably reflects more
accurately the way in which the popular mind is actually
divided, it is fatal to government as a practical art. For the
essential need in administration is the absence of uncertainty.
An executive must be able to plan its way continuously to
an ordered scheme of policy. That involves a majority,
because it involves strong government. A legislature, other¬
wise, is so much the master of the executive that the latter
is unable to attempt great measures, and the time which


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 815

should be spent upon them is devoted to manoeuvring for
positions which are lost almost as soon as they are occupied.

So stated, any electoral system ought to satisfy four
general considerations. It ought to enable the legislative
assembly to embody the opinions of the majority and the
minority on the great issues of public interest. It need not,
indeed, if it is to be effective, it cannot, embody the total
drift of opinion with any effort after mathematical precision.
It must allow all groups of men to make themselves heard ;
but it is compelled to confine popular selection to predominant
groups in order to make the business of government coherent
and continuous. The areas, secondly, which return members
to the legislature, must be small enough to enable the candi¬
dates to be known in a genuine way, and, after election, to
be closely related to their constituents so that a personal
relation develops between them. There must, thirdly, be a
means between elections, of checking the result of a general
election by revealing the drift of opinion among the voters;
this, it may be added, is admirably secured in England and
America by the method of bv e-electi ons. This system,
fo urth ly, must be so organised that the voters are as directly
.related as possible to the government in power. They must
be able to feel that it is their choice and that it is as a govern¬
ment that it will come before them for scrutiny when the
term of legislative office expires. 1

On these grounds we reject the system of proportional
representation by which it is sought to obviate the defects
caused by the majority-principle. I cannot deal here in
detail with the arguments by which it is defended; here it
must be sufficient to point out the general grounds of rejection.
These are, it may be noted, mainly practical in character.
We should be compelled to substitute great multiple member
constituencies for the present areas. Thereby, we should
intensify, the complexity of choice, and increase the power of
the professional organiser in politics. We should destroy any
prospect of personal relations between the member and his
consti tuent s; he would become simply an item in a list,
voted for almost entirely on party-grounds. We should get

< See all tfau excellently put in Dr. H Finer'* pamphlet, Tkt Cast against
Proportsonol SiprstiaUstton (Fabian Society, 1924).


816 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

weak government, without that body of support which
enaBfcs W to operate a' great programme. We_ should
multiply the number of vagaries which from time to time,
like the supporters of the Tichbome claimant and Mr.
Bottwnley, obscure the clash of real .issues. We should be
unable to have bye-elections as a test of changes in opinion;
and we should encourage all dissidents within a party to
,«eek that independent structure which, ultimately, means
the group-gystem. Thereby we should transfer the place
whine governments are made from the country as a whole,
to t| y obscurer recesses of the legislative assembly. Not
teat, we should diminish the responsibility of the private
member by increasing his sense that, whatever his personal
effort, the party organisers who maintained the list of candi¬
dates would be able to ensure his return. Every such com¬
plication of electoral machinery is, I believe, bound to result
in a decline of civic interest in the political process

What compensation does the proportional system offer in
mitigation of these defects ? It will, it is alleged, result in
a better representation of national opinion than is now the
case. But, in fact, there are few shades of national opmion
which do not already find their expression in a legislative
assembly; and, at best, the variety is obtained at a sacrifice
that » very dubious. It is said, further, that the system
makes opportunities for independent persons that are now
largely Absent. I do not think there is any substance in
this view. For, in the large constituency the system involves,
yrhatjs important is no longer the individual candidate, but
the total impression produced by the list to which he belongs.
In that aspect, the more independent a candidate the less
chance the list will have of conveying a solid impression to
the electorate; and the tendency of the party organiser will
be to choose as candidates men who can be trusted not to
disturb the regular routine. Nor, I would urge, is there any
foundation for the view that in the single-member consti¬
tuency, the minority is unrepresented, while, in the propor¬
tional system, this danger is adequately met. “ The horizon
oi a minority,” as Dr. Finer well remarks, " is notTimited
by'tfie boundaries of a constjtqcncy.” Government is not
ctmedlm'by'presentiDg to a legislative assembly alternatives
which must be fully accepted or rejected. The process of


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 817

give-and-take which takes place there enables every minority
that is organised to give expression to its views, to exercise
its " pull" on the total pressure of which a given measure is
the result. Political decisions are not made by an arith¬
metical process of counting votes. More urgent is the weight¬
ing of influences that takes place in the law-making process.'
And minority-views may find adequate institutions therein
for the expression of their opinions and desires.

A word should be said upon one aspect of the system to
which too little attention is given. In a single-member
constituency, it is argued, I may find no candidate Ldesire
to support. But that may equally happen in a multiple-
member area, and whereas in the single-member constituency
I can give the full weight of my vote to the party I desire
to see in power, in the multiple-member area 1 can give only
a fraction of that weight, and the lower preferences I express
have no proportionate relation at all to the positive desire I
may feel. Something is to be said for the alternative vote
in the single-member constituency, where three parties, clearly
destined to permanence, exist. But, even there, there is no
real relation between the preferences expressed; and the
system may result in the choice of the pis aller rather than
of the man about whom a genuine intensity of opinion has
clustered. It involves the danger that the larger the number
of candidates who run on special issues, unrelated to the
main streams of electoral tendency, the greater the likelihood
first that the composition of the legislative assembly will, if
they are elected, be atomic, and ii they are defeated, that
they merely defeat the effort or their supporters to relate
themselves to the government of the day.

One final remark in this regard may be made. It is not
likely that the difficulties of the modem State are such as to
be at all seriously remediable by reforms of electoral machinery.
Mainly, those difficulties are moral m character. We shall
meet them rather by the elevation of the popular standard
of intelligence, and the reform of the economic system, than *
by making men choose in proportion, to the neatly-graded ;
volume of opinion. Proportional representation, where it
has been tried, has not noticeably improved the standards of
public life. In Belgium it has tended to eliminate inde-


118


4 GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

pendence In Switzerland, it has so multiplied the tiny
groups, that no coherent opinion has been able to emerge.
“JJhat alw ays im plies weak government, and weak govern¬
ment uKunatelv means inrsponsfok government. Minorities
can always be sure of reasonable representation in the State
so l ory as they are able, to make their views articulate and
organised to give them driving power. And, in general, the
two-party system produces a conflict sufficiently acute to
make both of them anxious for ideas likely to attract pop ular
support. The permeation of parties, rather than the creation
of gnptps, is, therefore, the path along which ideas should
nor mally move. There may, of course, come a time when it
is evident that assimilation is impossible and that the only
way to realisation is through the making of an independent
appeal to the voters. That happened, for example, with the
Labour Party in England in the years from 1906. But the
test of the adequacy of the labour Party will lie, as it lies
with all rebels, in its ability to create a new two-party
equilibrium.


Ill

A State divided into equal electoral districts, each returning
a single member to the legislative assembly, seems, therefore,
the general lesson of historic experience. What ought to be
the relation of the member to his constituents ? It is neces¬
sary, first, to dispose of one view which is fatal to the quality
of a legislature. No constituency ought to be limited in
jf^luace, as in the United States, to one of its own residents.
Nothing is so certain as to make for parochialism. Nothing
more tempts a member to lend himself to the service of
sinister interests than knowledge that defeat may mean the
end of his political career. It is, moreover, a serious waste
on another side. The ability at the command of a State
does not distribute itself with mathematical accuracy over
the electoral divisions. New York is more likely to have a
number of men capable of playing a distinguished part in
the Senate than Delaware or Nevada. A theory which
equates defeat with practically permanent exile does not
maximise the advantages of a community. It is all to the


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 810

good that Mr. Gladstone, defeated in Oxford, should find
refuge in South Lancashire, and Mr. Churchill move from
Manchester to Dundee. Any other view under-estimates so
seriously the importance of experienced leadership in politics
as to make it not unlikely that it is at bottom built upon the
credulous superstition that, all men being more or less equal
in ability, the composition of a legislature is not a very serious
matter. That is a mistake so profound that not the least
cause, for example, of the declining respect for the Congress
of the United States is its failure to contain the natural
leaders of the people. The wider the ambit of electoral
choice, the better the operation of political institutions is
likely to be.

It is sometimes suggested that a member of the legislative
assembly must be either a delegate or a representative, must
either vote as he is instructed, or use his best judgment upon
the issues he is called upon to decide. That is, in fact, a
wholly false antithesis. For no member can stateJus total
views; partly because there is not the time to do so, partly
because new issues are bound to arise. And upon those new
issues he cannot, item by item, consult his constituents in
such a fashion as to elicit from them their considered judg¬
ment. Any constituency is entitled to the fullest expression
it can get of a member’s general attitude. It is entitled to
know his views upon the questions of the day. Any elector
may reasonably ask him for an explanation of his political
actions. But a member is not the servant of a party in the v
majority in his constituency. He is elected to do the best he
can in the light of his intelligence and his conscience. Were he
merely a delegate, instructed by a local caucus, he would cease
to have either morals or personality. Clearly, he is not entitled
to get elected as a free trader and to vote at once for a pro¬
tective tariff. He is not entitled to get elected and then to
decide on a year's voyage round the world. He must be
decently consistent in opinion, and reasonably diligent in the
performance of his duty. No constituency is justified in
expecting more service than these imply, and a constituency
which trusts its member will, on the whole, find that he repays
it amply. Burke’s classical explanation 1 of the relationship

1 Spotck to tkt Electors of Brutol. Works (ad. of. iSxj), voj, iii. pp. n f


890 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

is as true to-day as when it was first spoken to the misguided
electorsol Bristol.

But, as I think, one further safeguard is needed. A
constituency that is dissatisfied with the member it has chosen
can always reject him at the next election. If, as in the
United States, only two years elapse between elections, a
mistaken choice is not likely to have serious consequences.
But, as I shall argue later, two years is too short a period
of office for a legislature; it cannot, in that time, hope to
translate a wide policy into statutes. A five year period
seems much more adequate to that end, and in five years
the electors may feel the desire to register some deliberate
dissatisfaction either with the member himself, or with the
Government he supports. They should, I think, have the
means at their disposal of making that view felt.

I think, therefore, that some form of the device known
as the recall would be a valuable addition to our electoral
machinery. It ought not, clearly, to be a weapon of easy
use. Were that to be the case, the member would at once
be transformed into a delegate living under tl.c shadow of a
particularly ugly sword of Damocles; and it would be more
than likely that the fall of the sword would be arranged by
the most undesirable elements in his constituency. But
proper safeguards can be had ; and they enable the electorate
to have some closer check, both upon the member and his
party, than the present system permits. Clearly no recall
ought to operate before a year has passed from the original
election of the member; nor, again, should it be called into
play within twelve months of the end of a legislature's term
of power. It would therefore be effective for the three years
in which a Parliament, for instance, is well under weigh and
is dealing with the measures by which it wiii be later judged.
Obviously, there should be no attempt at a recall unless
behind the demand for it is the opinion of at least half of
the electorate. They would then be entitled to petition for
a bye-election in the constituency, but a bye-election in which
the voters would decide whether or not they wished to retain
the services of their member. He ought not, I think, to be
recalled unless some such proportion as two-thirds of those
voting desired a change. In this limited form the recall


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS


321

would apply only to extreme cases ; and it would have the
great merit of calling the attention of the State as a whole
to the problem it involved. It would not affect the member
who was really performing his task, save where the party he
was supporting was deliberately running counter to the
general drift of opinion. In that aspect it would serve as a
valuable index to the probable fate the party would encounter
at the next general election The recall, so used, is not
evidence of a distrust in representative government, but a
means of warning the legislature that it needs to make itself
trusted.*

There is widespread belief that a valuable electoral
mechanism Is to be found in the referendum and the initia¬
tive. These correspond to a desire, negative and positive,
to secure a direct expression of public opinion on specific
issues as distinct from the general and broad view of policy
made in a renewal of legislative power. Both referendum
and initiative have now a considerable history, especially in
Switzerland and in the United States ; and there have even
been thinkers enthusiastic enough to find in them the cure
for the ills of democratic government. Their rise is probably
due to that growing distrust of legislatures which has been
one of the great political characteristics of the last half-
century. They possess, moreover, a certain superficial plausi¬
bility on their side. If the popular will is to prevail, it does
not seem unreasonable to build upon the logical basis of
allowing that will room for direct expression. Whenever,
therefore, a considerable body of electors either desires or
opposes some special change, they ought to be able to poll
the people in the attempt to secure sanction for their views.

Any discussion of these methods must build rather upon
experience of their working than upon first principles. It is
clear, first of all, that they have led to no widespread changes ;
on the contrary they are, as some of their most ardent advo¬
cates have noted, more likely to rally the conservative than!
the progressive forces of society. They rarely enlist much
popular interest , on the average, about half as many persons
vote in them as will vote for persons in a general election for

* For adverse comment on the recall see Lowell. Public Opinton And
Popular Government, p 147

21


ass A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

office. Mot seldom, indeed, the number of persons voting is
so small, that it is difficult, from the size of the mass abstaining,
to know whether there is any public opinion at all upon the
question decided. It does not seem that direct government
has made much difference, either for improvement or the
reverse, to the quality of the legislature. Many of the
measures submitted to popular decision bear upon their face
the marks of the unpractical enthusiast who has suffered
rebuff from the legislature. So far as the actual working of
direct government is concerned, there is no reason to suppose
that it has any special contribution to make to our problems.

The reasons, I suggest, are not in truth far to seek. The
number of specific questions susceptible of popular decision
by mass-voting is very small. For what is, as a rule, urgent
in the issues they raise is not the simple desirability of
affirmative or negative response, but the much more complex
question of the desirability of a particular solution stated in
all its complex statutory terms. It is not difficult to ask a
man whether he is in favour of a protective tariff or no; but
the submission of an itemised tariff for acceptance or rejection
does not elicit a true public opinion in any sense of the term.
A man may say that he favours Dominion Home Rule for
Ireland; but the forms in which his desire is embodied are
90 capable of variation that he may refuse to recognise the
particular form submitted as the adequate embodiment of his
desires. The difficulty, in fact, which direct government
involves is the final difficulty that it is by its nature far too
crude an instrument to find room for the trice distinctions
inherent in the art of government. You can amend and
alter in a legislative assembly you cannot amend and alter
when your legislative assembly consists of millions of members.
Moat legislation consists of a principle embodied in a mass of
administrative de tail. The principle may be comparatively
simple, but it is rarely capable of appraisal save in terms of
the clauses which give it substance. And those clauses will
almost always involve a technical knowledge which no
undifferentiated electorate can hope to possess

Nor is that the end. There is a large number of subjects
of the first importance upon which, in the nature of things,
an opinion can only be formed after long and arduous exam-


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 92S

illation The public may agree in principle to the national
control of the electricity supply; but it will not undertake
the research necessary to grasp the methods by which that
national control should be applied. The more satisfactory
legislation is to be, the more dependent it is upon its principle
in relation to its working technique; and that is inevitably
a matter for expert judgment. Two other considerations
arise. It will be found, in general, that where the movement
for direct government is most widespread, there also the
legislative assembly is most distrusted. But, in fact, the
remedy for an inadequate legislature never lies in the mere
multiplication of machinery. That problem is a moral issue,
where mechanical checks are out of place. It is dear,
secondly, that the primary assumption of direct government
is that administration is a simple matter, upon which each
member of the electorate can, fairly effortlessly, possess con¬
victions. Such a view will appear inadequate to anyooe
who reads the annual volume of statutes in any modern
State. And the number of those interested to vote

upon the technical issues which arise is never large enough
to justify the theoretic assumptions of direct g ov e rnm ent.
I do not, indeed, urge the argument that they are likely, when
applied, to destroy the sense al responsibility in a legislative
assembly; that would involve a far greater frequency of
reference to the people than is likely to be the case. But I
think that the adherents of direct government belong to
that curious group of enthusiasts who have a touching con¬
fidence that there exists somewhere a remedy for all political
ills which will prove a panacea in use. That is true only as
it assumes that the real panacea is the elevation of the moral
and intellectual standards of the electorate as a whole.

What, then, can the voters do in the intervals between
general elections ? We have rejected direct government, and
accepted the limited recall as a method that obviously can
be called into play only as a remedy of last resort. As indi¬
viduals, it must, I think, be admitted that they can do little.
The world now is too big and complex a world for the activity
of the average man to affect its work in any serious way. A
distinguished statesman, or an eminent thinker, can doubtless
arouse influential discussion; Lord Lansdowne's letter upon


394 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the war, Mr. Keynes’ Economic Consequences of the Peace,
were both of them, in their various ways, historic events.
But, for the mass, action that is to entail consequences means
organised action; and organised action means the develop¬
ment of relations to particular rather than to general func¬
tions. That, at least, with one exception. It is, I think,
possible to make the activity of political parties more
jesponsive to the will of their rank and file than is now the
case. No one can fail to be impressed by the contrast
between the way in which the Liberal and Conservative
parties in England respectively adopted Home Rule and
Tariff Reform, and the way in which the ideals of the British
Labour Party have been formulated. In the former, the
will of a leader was practically imposed upon his followers
without the latter being able to do much more than accept
his policy, or, like Mr. Goschen and Mr. Churchill, leave the
party. In the case of the latter, by a complex machinery of
advisory’ committees and conferences, there is a constant
how of ideas between leaders and rank and file which gives
every organised opinion an opportunity, if not to get adopted,
at least to struggle for adoption. The articulation is, of
course, imperfect ; and it is always suriounded by that
mysterious limitation which is due to the influence of per¬
sonality. But I do not think there is room for doubt that the
British Labour Party has found a method whereby parties
may be made much more responsive than in the past to the
will of their ordinary members.

Outside of party, the main sphere of the voter will lie in
Other directions. These are, one imagines, divisible into
three main groups There will, first, be a variety of propa¬
ganda associations connected with particular issues They
will press, as now, for the abolition of vivisection, the proper
treatment of aborigines in backward countries, the simplifi¬
cation of spelling, for all, in fact, of the innumerable purposes
a society like our own serves to create. There will, secondly,
be associations of men m their aspect of producers, engineers,
doctors, teachers, miners. These will concern themselves
with pressure on the legislative assembly for the remedies
which particularly concern the special problems of their pro¬
fession. But, as 1 shall show later, the main theatre of their


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 828

activity is less likely than now to be directly political, and
more likely to aim at influencing functional bodies concerned
with the government of then professions Their effort, that
is to say, will be concentrated m a narrower field than now;
and they will reach the legislative assembly rather through
intermediate functional institutions than through a direct
appeal. It is in the third group that we may, as I hope,
look to the largest growth of activity Exactly as groups of
producers associate to protect their special interests, so is it
possible, mulatto mutandis, for groups of consumers, locally,
and nationally, to associate for similar purposes Examples
will, perhaps, make this clear There is no reason m the
world why the users of the telephone should not, as in
France, 1 associate to watch over the operation of the service.
They could see that the latest inventions were properly
utilised They could insist upon proper inquiry into com¬
plaints. They could watch over the problem of costs They
could employ their own inspectors to test the efficiency of
the operating service They rould secure representation
upon the advisory telephone committee of the Post Office
where, as in England, the telephone was nationalised, or, as
m the case of a private telephone system, they could appoint
a consultative committee to act with the owning company m
the development of the service

So, too, with a function like that of National Health
Insurance At present, in England, the insurance com¬
mittees are the only guarantee the insured person has that
his interests are properly safeguarded , and it is rare indeed
that a complainant is in a position fully to present his case,
or to test the adequacy of its investigation But if we had
an association of insured persons with their own legal staff
and their own inspectors, the position would be very different.
Complaints could he investigated bv persons whose function
it was to protect the complainant They could assure a
higher standard of service by a proper sur\eillance of the
medical profession. They could see that no doctor undertook
the charge of more patients than he could properly look after.
They could act as counsel in the appeals before the Insurance

1 There is, I believe, an analogous association formed recently (1924) in
Great Britain


326 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Commissioners. They could see that insured persons had
all the benefits to which they were entitled. Or, in a very
different sphere, we may take the art service of the modem
State. At present, we govern the National Galleries and
Museums by trustees who are often eminent, but rarely distin¬
guished in the particular function the institutions seek to fulfil.
In England, we usually choose as trustees benevolent noblemen
who desire to be known as patrons of the arts; in America
it is the custom to select persons who may be expected to
endow the institution with new treasures. If, particularly
in the case of local galleries and museums, we had associations
of persons to whom the incidence of art in life is important,
we could prevent the gallery from becoming, as it so often
becomes, the mausoleum of official art. In part, the associa¬
tion could itself seek to purchase objects, in part it could
criticise what had been purchased, the arrangement of speci¬
mens, the uses to which the institution was put. It could
nominate its representatives on the governing body of the
institution. It could employ distinguished experts, especially,
one hopes, from abroad, to report upon the policy of the
institution. Should it ever happen that the democratic
State is persuaded to realise the importance of national and
municipal theatres, it would have an obvious further field of
usefulness. So, too, with universities. There is no reason
one can see why the alumni of Oxford and Cambridge and
Manchester should not be organised to serve them as the
alumni of American Universities are organised. Upon the
one fundamental condition that they did not attempt criticism
of the opinions taught, there are few aspects of university
life in which their aid and suggestion would not be helpful;
and here again the nomination of their representatives to
serve on the governing body of universities would supply a
valuable link with the world outside.

There are few services used by the public which are not
in some degree susceptible to organisation of this character.
Its advantages are threefold. It supplies a means of making
opinion flow through channels where it is most likely to prove
of service. It enables us to have an external check upon the
quality of eSort provided by the service involved. It ends
that hapless situation where the user of services is left to do


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 8*7

the best he can with commodities he is practically unable to
control. And, obviously, the general function of these results
is an opinion which directly affects the effort of political
parties and, through them, of the legislative assembly itself.
The latter, indeed, is influenced m two ways. It is influenced
from below as the associations make their views felt by the
political parties; it is influenced from above as they secure
organic connection with the executive. Nor is the latter an
impossible task. Already the modem administration sets
up consultative committees upon which sit the parties to
the work it performs. At the Ministry of Food, daring the
war period m England, the Consumers' Council rendered
valuable service m offering to the officials a body upon which
a proposed policy could be tried before being set into general
operation. 1 We need to umversahse that experiment for
every department of administration where it is likely to
prove creative For the more we can convince the body of
citizens of their direct interest in the process of politics, the
better is likely to be the result of political effort

On the assumption, however, that such organisation is
accompanied by a rise in the standards of pubhc education,
it is useless to envisage any widespread increase of interest
in political technique unless there is fairly intimate knowledge
of what it implies. We cannot make men interested in what
they lack the training to understand. At present, to the
vast majority of the electorate, the political process is & mass
of mysterious occurrences based on rules and ideas which they
feel, quite wrongly, to be remote from their daily lives. We
have to destroy that feeling. We can only destroy it by
making the process intelligible, and that can only come when
the educational period is long enough and its standards high
enough to make the citizenship of the average man a living
reality to him. That will not appear an impossible adventure
to anyone acquainted with the history of public education.
It will, of course, be difficult, for the last thing men desire
re to be persuaded into thought. But so persuaded, they
will find, like others who have already made the effort, the
fascination of thought. That is the true seed-ground of our
hopes.

1 Cf Beveridge, The Pubhc Service in War and Peace


888


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


IV

So elected, what is the legislative assembly to be like ?
It is almost a dogma of political science that it ought to con¬
sist of two chambers. Single-chamber government,’ it is
assumed, is the apotheosis of democratic rashness. We need
a brake on {he wheel. We need a mechanism that enables
us to delay the first, rough impulses of a body fresh from its
contact with-the electorate, and eager, in its mexpenence,
to t., brace every kind of novelty A second chamber provides
exactly this safeguard , and it is regarded a-, notewoithy that
practically' every State of importance in the modem world
has adopted the two-chamber system

It should yet be noted that the two-chamber system is
largely an historical accident. Bifurcation is, universally,
derived from the habits of the English constitution but
there were moments in English history when it seemed hkelv
that we should have at least three, and possibly four. Houses
of Parliament The problem of a second chamber is best
approached by considering the forais it may Wke We are
then in a better position to judge of the need for, and the
validity of, its revision The problem of the central legis¬
lative assembly m a federal State is, howe et a quite separate
one , and I propose to discuss it apart from the general issue

The second chamber may be elective, and chosen either at
the same time as the first, or at some intermediate period ,
and a chamber of this kind may either have the same powers
as the first, or inferior powers Any such constitution is,
I think, clearly unsatisfactory For equal powers make
eventually for deadlock, and a deadlock always involves an
unsatisfactory compromise of principle. To elect the chambers
simultaneously is merely to duplicate their membership, to
elect them at different times is, as American experience has
shown, to diminish at every point the efficiency of the
executive. Where the second chamber has inferior powers,
it can act only as a postponing or revising assembly, and I
shall show later that these functions rest upon quite untenable
assumptions.

In England, the second chamber is purely hereditary,
save for a small infusion of law peers On the thesis discussed


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 829

m the earlier part of this book, such a method has nothing
to be said for it. Clearly, it involves setting aside per¬
manently a small class in the State and giving to it a special
control over policy That is a denial of equal citizenship
and the basis of the State is its faculty for protecting the
equal interest of members in its results The history' of the
House of Lords is the history of an assembly that, quite
naturally given its constitutive principle, has set its face
firmly towards the past It has been somnolent under con¬
servative administrations, and active under liberal Save
by making its composition numerically ludicrous, it would
be impossible to find room m it for an adequate representa¬
tion of the Labour Partv And even though its powers be
limited by some such statute as the Parliament Act, its
members cannot be made to represent any but themselves^"

It is possible to have a purely nominated second chamber,
in which the original membership would be chosen by the
executive which replaced vacancies as they occurred Member¬
ship could either be for life, or for a given period, with or
without re-eligibility The field of choice might be
unrestricted, or it might be confined to men who have won
distinction in specified fields like industry, the professions,
and the public services But such a chamber, it is clear,
from the mere fact that it is nominated and not elected, would
lack the authority possessed by the popular chamber At
best, again, it could only either revise or postpone It would
tend, from the nature of things, to be a senate which would
mistake the experience it had encountered for all relevant
social experience One form of the nominated assembly is
the Canadian Senate, which hardly commands even its own
confidence And the Canadian Senate affords the warning
that an executive is likely to fill vacancies ui a nominated
second chamber with its own supporters With such a body,
it is not likely to oppose measures of first-class importance
If it does it either enfeebles the executive, or produces m
suitable circumstances a general election in possible defiance
of public opinion. It is difficult to see any solid value in a
body of this kind 1

1 I do not here discuss the complicated second chamber recommended
by Lord Bryce for this country It seems to me at once fantastic and to


880


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


A second chamber might also be indirectly elected, as
the French Senate now is, and as, before 1913 , was the Senate
of the United States. But, here again, if such a chamber
is, at the time of its election, hostile to the Government of
the day, it is destructive of the quality of the work, while if
it is favourable, it is probably superfluous. Experience,
moreover, has lamentably shown that of all methods of
maximising corruption, indirect election js the worst. That
was why the United States~amen3ed the constitution to
permit of popular election ; it was discovered that the earlier
method tended to make the average member the nominee of
some great business interest. If indirect election is built
not upon inferior legislatures, but as Mr. Graham Wallas
has suggested , 1 upon trades and professions, we encounter
the insoluble problem of how so to weight each trade and
profession relative to another as to have an adequately pro¬
portioned assembly. And, even then, there is the further
difficulty of seeing why a man elected, say, as a doctor to
represent doctors, should have any special virtue in the
opinions he expresses on problems of currency and banking.
If he does not possess that virtue, he is valueless to the
assembly; if he does, it is not by reason of his relation to his
profession that he possesses it.

Another method proposed is that in vogue in Norway
and recently advocated by Mr. Lees-Smith . 1 The second
chamber, in this view, would be a small body elected by the
first, and roughly proportionate to the composition of the
latter. The will of the party in power would thus be secure
of gaining effect; and since the tenure of the second chamber
would end with that of its constituting authority, there would
be no danger of a priori conflict. Its sole functions would be
to postpone and to revise; and its value would be found in
the fact that, while it could in this way check haste or error,
it would be powerless to destroy.

On the general issue, this much may be said, WTierever


lombine all the worst features of all existing second chambers. For a
iiscussion of its proposals see Mr H, B Lees-Smith’s Second Chambers in
Theory and Practice, pp. 216 I.

• The Great Society (1914), p. 288.

* Second Chambers «» Theory and Practice, pp 249 f.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 881

in a State the legislature has two houses, one or other will
always take the lead. One or other will therefore come to be
the centre of importance, and to that chamber political talent
will invariably gravitate. The second chamber will, as a
consequence, either live in a state of suspended animation or
else, to secure some degree of attention, it will oppose measures
for which it cannot hope to gain the credit. Rather than see
itself impotent, it will in Bentham's forcible phrase, " play
/Off the whole artillery of fallacies ” against the bills it
sought to pass. 1 It will waste time in useless debate ; and
it will, thereby, keep executive officials from other and more
urgent duties. Broadly speaking, any second chamber which
.'agrees with the first is superfluous; and, if it disagrees, it is
bouQd to be obnoxious. For the argument that there must
be delay against the rashness of a single, elected assembly
mistakes, or ignores, the conditions of modem politics./.
Legislation is not made ex nihilo; it does not suddenly, as
out of a clean sky, find its way to the statute-book. Almost
any measure that is enacted becomes law as the result of a
long process of discussion and analysis. The problem of
Home Rule for Ireland was debated for thirty years before
its essential passage ; the reform of the House of Lords has
been in the public mind for a generation. The minimum
wage, the abolition of the poor law, town-planning, the
nationalisation of the mines, all questions of this magnitude
are before the public for years before parties adopt them
with a view to legislation. Between the Education Act of
1902 and Mr. Fisher’s attempt to complete its structure
nearly sixteen years elapsed It took nearly twenty years to
accomplish the federation of Australia. What, I think,
would most strike the observer who consults the statistics 1
would be the length, and not the shortness, of time which
intervenes between the administration and the realisation
of ideas.

And, in any case, the kind of check provided by a second
chamber is not the most desirable form available. Necessary
delay is always secured by the slowness with which a great
organisation like a political party is persuaded to the accep-

1 Constitutional Code. Bk I, ch xvi

* Cf. the table in Systems of Government within the British Empire, p. li


an A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

tance of a novelty. Necessary revision is best effected by
the prior consultation by government of the interests touched
by the legislation proposed. Most criticism in a second
chamber will merely repeat the arguments already adduced
in the first. What it has to say will not. except by acci¬
dent, possess any special quality of expertise. It will tap no
sources of knowledge or opinion not already in contact with
the first. The true place for such an effort is in the advisory
bodies by which the executive departments are surrounded.
There, for instance, a minister of the interior can actually
frame his Shops Hours Act in consultation with shopkeepers,
assistants and consumers. He can learn, far better than in
debate, the probable result of his scheme. He can make the
necessary adjustments in the light of their special knowledge.
The revision of a chamber is either a pure matter of drafting,
in which case it is best transferred to an office like that of the
Parliamentary Council, or else it is a matter of substance,
in which case it can be made equally well in one chamber as
in two. The power, in fact, to postpone is a power to defeat
the changes regarded as necessary by the party chosen for
office by the electorate. That power ought to belong to
the electorate only, and at the period when it comes to assess
the use made by the party of its authority. The power to
revise is either largely verbal, in which case it does not need
so substantial an institution as the second chamber, or
important, in which case it ought to be a direct challenge to
the party in office made on the floor of the elected assembly.
I agree that the party in office will make mistakes, and that,
in particular, it will assume a desire on the pan of the
electorate for measures to which the latter is in reality
opposed. But a second chamber is no more likely than the
first to be correct in its judgment of the electoral will. The
necessary checks are always present in the inertia of the
imass, and the desire of a government to avoidTarge changes
which may be disastrous. Any other checks will, almost
inevitably, be a premium not upon improvement but upon
opposition in terms of vested interest.

And this is true even on the supposition that a satisfactory
second chamber can be found. 1 have already argued that
this in fact is unlikely. The Norwegian method is the most


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 888

satisfactory ; but it is, after all, but the pale ghost of an
effective assembly. (The hereditary second chamber is exclude'
by the first principles of the State-purpose. The elected
chamber, if made simultaneously with the first' is merely a
reiteration of it; if made at a different time is merely a
hindrance to adequate policy making. The nominated second
chamber suffers from the fact that if nominated on party-
principles it is, as in Canada, entirely noxious, and, if on the
principle of eminent service, it does not necessarily relate the
service it distinguishes to the political process. Loid Lister
was a great surgeon ; but that does not qualify him to con¬
tribute to a debate on social insurance. Lord Pirrie was a
great ship-builder ; but his opinions on African slavery are
not thereby significant. Every rich man on such a senate
would be merely a representative of the interests of prosperity ;
every great public servant is either, like the retired proconsul
from India or Egypt, vaccinated against the democratic
habit of thought, or, like the ex-Treasury officials nominated
to the House of Lords, valuable rather upon committees of
inquiry, than in debate upon bills. It is better, therefore,
to have directly single-chamber government, and to throw
the burden of control upon the electorate which chooses the
chamber, and the executive which directs its activifies.’

The problem m a Federal State is obviously somewhat
different in character. There we have the union of areas
different in size, and often enough, different also in interest,
which seek in their union some special protection against the
danger of being over-weighted by more populous neighbours.
In America and Australia the difficulty was met by equal
representation in the Senate of those States; in Germany it
is met by the Bundesrath. Yet it is worth while to remember
that, Germany apart (since the operation, there, of the
monarchical principle introduced considerations absent else¬
where), the effect of State equality has been largely overcome
by the operation of the party-system. Republicans in the
American Senate vote in much the same way as Republicans
in the House of Representatives; Liberals in the Australian
Senate remember their party as much as their State. Once,

1 On the whole question see the remarks of Mr J. JRamsay MacDonald,
Socialism and Government, vol. ii. pp. 50 f.


894 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

in fact, a federal State ccmes into being there grows up a
sense of nationalism which, facilitated by the growth of com¬
munications, tends to make largely obsolete the original
units of representations So, for instance, the interests of
Massachusetts are hardly distinguishable from the interests of
the States of the Atlantic Seaboard; the interests of Minne¬
sota are one with the interests of the Mid-North-West era
block of agricultural States. The unreality of State-boundaries
was strikingly seen in the way in which West Virginia was
carved out of its mother-State. The two Dakotas might
perfectly well be one ; and they might equally well be linked
with Nebraska and Minnesota. America and Australia, indeed,
are fortunate in that their federal problems do not possess a
racial as pqct i that is not the case with Canada, Germany
and ^Switzerland. The French-Canadian has genuine special
interests to safeguard, the South German is different from
the Prussian, the Swiss must conciliate special religious views.
Yet even where such diversities are in issue, I do not see a
second chamber is of much assistance

That is dearly sot the case in Canada. "Since the
organisation of the Commonwealth," writes Sir J. S. Willison, 1
“ the Senate has proceeded on the principle that to question
the expediency and justice of conservative legislation is
flagrant treason to British Institutions in North America."
The Australian Senate has already broken down from any
angle of constructive significance. The American Senate, at
any rate since the civil war, has been divided, not in terms of
States, but in terms of regional economic interests which
have equally divided the House of Representatives. 1 believe
myself that no safeguard necessary to the units of a federation
requires the protective armour of a second chamber. I suggest
that all the requisite protection can be seemed {«) by the
terms of the original distribution of powers embodied in the
constitution and ( b) by the right to judicial r evi ew possessed
by the coarts. Amendment of that distribution, if needed,
ronld be secured by demanding a-two-thirds majority for
its passage in the legislative assembly, and either the assent
jf a majority, or of two-thirds of the constituent States.

* Sir Wit/rid Lrutrier and Ike Liberal Party, i. 41a, quoted in Macdonald,
p.eU.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 885

These would then possess ample safeguards for their defence.
Their representatives in the legislative assembly would be
there to 'protect than with their votes. Their authority
could not be altered except by a specially constructed national
act. They would lose, doubtless, the right to equal repre¬
sentation in the Senate; but I have already argued that such
right is, as a result of the party-system, largely illusory.
Even complex racial issues, like the rights of French-Canadians,
admit of adequate protection by such means.

A quite different method of two-chamber government has
been outlined with great attractiveness by Mr. and Mrs.
WeJjb.* Broadly, they accept the case against a second
chamber in its present form. But they are so impressed by
the overwhelming burden of the modem legislative assembly
that they suggest a division of its business into two parts,
each of which is to possess a Parliament for its control.'
" What we shall call the Political Democracy,” they write,*!
" dealing with national defence, international relations, and
the administration of justice, needs to be set apart from
what we propose to call the Social Democracy, to which is
entrusted the national administration of the industries and
services by and through which the community lives. The
sphere of the one is Verwaltung, auioritd regalienne, police
power; that of the other is Wirtkschafi, gestion, housekeeping.
The Co-operative Commonwealth of To-morrow must accord¬
ingly have, not one national assembly only, but two, each
with its own sphere ; not, of course, without mutual relations,
to be hereafter discovered, hut co-equal and independent,
and neither of them first or last. We regard . . . two
co-ordinate national assemblies, one dealing with criminal
law and political dominion, and the other with economic
and social administration, not merely as the only effective
way of remedying the present congestion of parliamentary
business, but also as an essential condition of the progressive
substitution, with any approach to completeness of the com¬
munity for the private capitalist.”

In the scheme set forth by Mr. and Mrs. Webb, the

• A Constitution for tie Socialist Commonwealth of Great Britain, Part II.
chap, i, pp. lot fi.

> Op. cit., p. in.


886 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Political Parliament would be elected as now, and its pro¬
ceedings would be guided by an executive built upon the
model of the English cabinet. The'Social Parliament would
be similarly elected; but it would sit for a fixed term of
years with dissolution possible only under special circum¬
stances. It would do its work mainly through committees
presided over by chairmen, who would not accept, at least
necessarily, each other’s* views, and would be responsible
only for their own committees, the model, in fact, being the
structure of the London County Council. To the Social
Parliament, it is important to note, will be transferred all the
financial powers of the present House of Commons. Admit¬
tedly, the two bodies will find it impossible to live absolutely
separate lives. Some of the decisions of each will trench
on the other’s sphere. The Political Parliament, for instance,
will have to decide what expenditure it recommends for the
Subjects it controls, and to present the bill to the Social
Parliament. Mr. and Mrs. Webb seem to object to the
detailed scrutiny of the bill; they would have only acceptance
or rejection. Where disagreement developed, there would
be conference, and, if conference proved abortive, there
would be a joint session of the two Parliaments in which
the aggregate vote would settle the matter. This machinery
would also be used for alterations in the constitution. It may
also be necessary to have a joint annual session to deal with
finance, and a standing joint committee on hnance which will
prepare the estimates. When deadlock seems incapable of
resolution, either a referendum or a double dissolution might
provide the means of settlement. 1

The basic ideas involved in this scheme are, as it seems,
two in number. There is, first of all, the notion that only
the division of the business to be settled by government into
two parts can possibly prevent the legislative assembly from
being overwhelmed. There is, secondly, the belief that the
balance of power made by this creation of independent
assemblies makes for freedom. “ It would be open to the
Social Parliament," write Mr. and Mrs. Webb,* " to organise
the public services in whatever way was thought fit . . .
(but) it would not be within the power of the Social Parlia-

• Op cit , pp Mo-28. ‘Op cit, p ijq.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 887

ment, without obtaining the concurrence of the Political
Parliament . . . either to make the use of any pubhc service
legally compulsory under penalty, or to make it an offence
for the service to be supplied in any other way.” Similarly,
the Political Parliament ought not to embark upon a policy of
increased armaments, or international expansion, without the
concurrence of a Social Parliament, guarding the purse¬
strings of the State for the development of its own schemes *

The plan is, I think, much the most serious so far put
forward to deal with the problem of the legislative assembly
in the modern State But it is also, I suggest, despite its
great merits, an inherently unworkable plan It is, first of
all, an elementary induction from the experience of history
that the Parliament with the taxing-power must, sooner or
later, draw essential control to itself , and the Political Parlia¬
ment would, I believe, quite rapidly develop into a sub¬
ordinate assembly limited to a partial control over a narrow
field. Nor is the division of authority outlined by Mr. and
Mrs Webb a natural one Foreign policy canno t be sepa rated
from economic policy , a tariff-scheme, a State-purchase of
raw materials?"aTpart-guarantee of an international loan, all
involve areas equally withm the competence of either assembly.
You cannot ask a Social Parliament to pass measures raising
money for a department of foreign affairs and persuade it
not to criticise the conduct of foreign affairs, and that the
more when such conduct will have profoundly affected matters
withm its own sphere For the five years from 1918, the
Labour Party m the House of Commons protested that an
Anglo-Russian agreement was a partial specific for unemploy¬
ment ; in the plan under discussion, Anglo-Russian affairs
belong to one Parliament and unemployment to another.
The Political Parliament could not effectively discuss whether
refusal to take advantage of a national electricity supply
should be made a penal offence without, either avowedly or
by implication, discussing the desirability of a national
electricity supply As soon that is to say, as law-making is
seriously envisaged, any attempt at compartmentalising it is
purely verbal Further difficulties, moreover, are involved

■ Op at, pp 136 1 and especially the important note on parties in the
Socialist State on p 144.

22


888 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

If the Social Parliament rejected the Army Estimates of
the Political Parliament, it might be upheld in the Joint
Session, not by the vote of the Political members, but by
the addition of the minority among the latter to its own
majority. In that case, the Political Parliament would have
to resign ; not, be it noted, because its policy was unac¬
ceptable to those to whom it was responsible, but because it
was disliked by men who. could not criticise its details and
were not responsible for its application.

Nor is this all. The plan, as I believe, would mean joint
committees between the two Parliaments on every subject of
importance; and joint committees either imply the acceptance
of the report by the two legislations, in which case the joint
committees are the true repositories of power, or rejection,
in which case the legislatures will find it necessary to sit
almost continuously in joint session. But either case reveals
the serious defect that the policy ultimately carried would,
not be a policy at all, but a series of discrete statutes unin-^
formed by any general principles. You cannot actually have
a liberal policy in health and a reactionary policy in educa¬
tion at one and the same time. Yet that is the possibility
Mr. and Mrs. Webb imply. Nor do they tell us on what
issues the Social Parliament is to be elected. Who are to
be its leaders will not be known until after it is elected ; and,
by that fact popular control of its policy is largely denied.
If the two Parliaments are not elected simultaneously, their
moral complexion may be so different that, other difficulties
apart, each may frustrate the purposes of the other; and if
they are elected simultaneously, they will largely act as two
great wings of a single assembly which never has an
opportunity to co-or dina te State-policy. 1 do not, more¬
over, believe that merely because one Parliament controlled
public services, and the other the mechanisms of justice,
personal liberty would be rendered safer thereby. If
the postal employees, the miners and the railway workers
went on strike under national ownership, the mere fact that
they were responsible to the Social Parliament and not to
the Political would not make the latter less involved. It
would still have-to maintain law and order, and it would have
to maintain it under the very difficult circumstances of being


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS *89

unable to end the strike (which would be the business of the
Standing Committee of the Social Parliament) and unable
to refuse the assistance demanded by the Social Parliament.
Where, moreover, does the maintenance of law and order
end ? May it not, in the instance here taken, 1 involve running
the mails, and mines and railways, as all essential to public
order ? And, ; n that event, what becomes of the independent
powers nicely separated to secure personal liberty ?

The making of policy, therefore, seems to involve a single
assembly charged with the oversight of the whole field of
administration. I agree with Mr. and Mrs. Webb that it is
desirable to withdraw much of what is now the concern of
tnat assembly from the field of its competence. I agree,
also, that the maximisation ot liberty is of the highest
importance. But the introduction of rigid categories into
administration seems to me attended by the same difficulties
as we found to be implied in the doctrine of the separation
of powers Bridges have, in fact, to be built, and those who
guard those bridges remain masters of the field. The objects
in view can be obtained m a different way, and without the
complexities to which this scheme of dyarchy gives rise.
Liberty, assuredly, does not anse from the simple mechanical
device it would imply. Men have been sent to prison for
offences in America that are plainly m the area of the First
Amendment to the Constitution ; and the courts have refused
to question the action of the executive. The real remedy
for such outrages is rarely m the forms of constitutions ; it is
always, ultimately, resident in the spirit of the citizen-body
It may be added that the reason why the procedure of a
body like the London County Council is successful lies in
the fact of its limited competence. It is because the area it
must traverse is broadly known that it is able to manipulate
a committee-system as the operative agency of government.
That is not the case with a legislative assembly where the
area ot authority is broadlv undefined The limits of demar¬
cation must then be fixed by men who survey the boundaries
they set up from a broadly similar point of view. They
must be ab e to perform their task in such fashion as to be
responsible for each act they do as part of a broad stream of

1 It is Mr and Mrs Webb's own instance, op. tit., p. 14s.


840


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


tendency. They must want higher wages because they want
better education, better education because they want indus¬
trial self-government Mr. and Mrs. Webb give us no access
to this coherency. It could, indeed, be obtained under their
plan by the chairmen of committees meeting together with
the cabinet of the Political Parliament; but they would
then form a cabinet which would be effective only as it agreed
in general outlook, and was able to drive its agreements
through the two assemblies. But it is inherent in the plan
that there is no assurance of either. Policy would remain,
almost certainly, a patchwork of disconnected ideas. But
law-making, so conceived, is fatal to good administration,
and it is the first business of a legislative assembly to make
good administration possible.


V

The single-chamber and magnicompetent legislative as¬
sembly seems, therefore, best to answer the needs of the modern
State. Who ought to be capable of being chosen for its
members ? Limitation, if limitation there is to be, must be
so safeguarded that it excludes in general terms, and does
not weight the scales against any special class of citizens.
But there is no reason why we should allow men to be chosen
without regard to their experience of affairs. Absence of
limitation may give us a younger Pitt, but it gives us also a
large number of members who go to the legislative assembly
merely for the prestige which membership confers. A rich
man persuades a constituency to adopt his son as candidate
because he can afford to pay the expenses of election; a
retired merchant becomes a candidate to satisfy the social
conditions of an aspiring wife ; the wife of a member elevated
to the House of Lords succeeds him on a wave of sentiment
unrelated to the problem of her fitness. It is wiser, surely,
to exact a small qualification for membership in order that
those seeking election may offer proof of a genuine interest
in affairs. Nor is such a qualification difficult to find. If
members were, before their candidature was legal, required
to serve three years on a local body, they would gain that
" feel" of institutions so necessary to success. We should


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 341

then have some evidence of a real wish on their part to grasp
the nature of public business; and we should, I think, do not
a little to revivify local life by making it the necessary avenue
to a career in the national assembly. We should not, thereby,
exclude any serious person from a political career, and it
would not be difficult to devise alternative qualifications
(such as membership of the civil service) for those to whom
membership of a local body had been a priori impossible.

It is, I think, obvious that, once elected, there should be
no limit to the period of re-eligibility a member of the
legislative assembly should enjoy. A system which puts an
end to his period of service just when he is beginning to gain
experience deprives itself of not the least useful instrument
he possesses. For in a legislative assembly, few things
compensate for the absence of experience. Procedure is
inevitably technical; and any limit will merely end a man's
term when he is at the height of his utility. It is, moreover,
notorious that in assemblies like the American House of
Representatives, where what may be termed the legislative
turnover is enormous, much of the wastage of time, and not
a little of the lack of public esteem, are due to the fact that
they are. so to say, almost new assemblies at each epoch of
their renewed power. Much of the strength of a chamber
like the House of Commons has come from the fact that its
leading figures have, over long years, been distinguished
actors there. The thirty years’ membership of Edmund
Burke, the sixty years’ service of Mr. Gladstone, the forty
years’ of Mr. Disraeli, all meant an incomparable insight
into the technique of government. Even in the case of the
advent of a new party, like the British Labour Party, to
power, its leaders had been familiar with the centre of public
affairs for twenty years, And only upon the condition of
unlimited eligibility can a legislature properly fulfil its
selective function. It is not easy for a man to make his
mark there. The atmosphere of legislative debate is different
from any other atmosphere in the world. A few outstanding
persons like Bright may make an immediate reputation ;
but the majority will need time to impress themselves upon
the assembly, and through the assembly, to become known
to the public outside as persons to whom the leadership of
the State may be entrusted.


MS A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

The best period of power for a legislature seems to be
not less than four, nor more than five years. Not less than
four, because a smaller period has two grave defects; it
does not give the new member adequate familiarity with the
ways of the legislature, and it does not leave time for the
passage of an ample programme. Here, it may be suggested,
American experience is decisive. The fatality attendant on
the two-year term of office is that just when the congress¬
man is learning to grasp his work, he has to devote himself
to a re-election he is unlikely to secure; and an executive
which, in any case, is at a grave disadvantage has to begin
all over again the building of the relationships which secure
the realisation of its effort. A period longer than five years
is a mistake, above all, because, beyond it, the legislature
loses touch with the electorate. A party ought to know that
it is not so long protected from popular judgment as to be
able to assume that its mistakes will be forgotten. I do not
think that fixity of period is desirable. New issues constantly
arise upon which a refreshment of legislative authority is
desirable. A government which cannot command the con¬
fidence of a legislature may feel entitled to consider that a
general election will give it a new lease of power. When,
for instance, in 1909 the House of Lords threw out the Finance
Bill of that year, only a general election could have provided
Mr. Asquith with the authority necessary to carry through
$0 great a change in the balance of power in the two chambers;
and the same is true of the second general election of 1910
by which a mandate was secured fcr the Parliament Act of
1911. A legislature that is forced to live out its period of
office will always be distinguished by two undesirable features.
It will so assert its superiority over the executive as to make
the latter its tool; and it will pay the less regard to public
opinion from the knowledge that its own attitude has a
formidable constitutional protection.

The right of dissolution is an invaluable mechanism for
the prevention of those evils. But it is, of course, an exceed¬
ingly delicate instrument, about the uses of which there are
grave differences of opinion.* I believe myself that it is

' Cf. my Slat* of Partiss and tho Right of Dissolution (Fabian Society
■ 934) lor a /nil diacaaaton ol the whole question.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS MS

imperative to entrust the exercise of the right to the executive
of the day. The safeguards against its abuse are obvious
and powerful. No executive will have a causeless dissolution
for fear of losing office as a result. It will fear the offence it
may cause among its supporters. It will know that every
electorate resents the dislocation of private business caused
by a general election. It will realise that it is useless to trust
the hazards of the unknown unless it has some solid achieve¬
ment behind it likely to attract widespread popular approval.
Ur. Gladstone risked a causeless dissolution in 1874: the
result was one of the largest Conservative majorities in recent
times. Ur. Baldwin acted similarly in 1923 ; and the result
was the advent of the Labour Party to Office The right to
dissolve cannot be left to the legislature, not only because
few legislatures can be trusted to vote for their own extinction,
but also because, if the proposal to dissolve were defeated in
the assembly, it would, obviously, be equivalent to a demand
for a new executive. Nor is there any outside agency which
can be trusted, for to give such an agency the powers implied
in a dissolution is to make it the master both of the policy
and fate of the executive, a position only the electorate can
occupy. The absence of a power to dissolve is subversive of
all executive morale. It leads it to trim its sails to every
legislative wind. It throws it into the kind o f helpless posi¬
tion occupied by President Wilson on his return to America
after the signature of the Treaty of Versailles. The power of
dissolution is the recognition that, ultimately, the electorate
is the paramount authority in the State. And no executive
ought to occupy the seat of power unless its place is sanctioned
by that authority. A coherent representative system would
be impossible unless the right to dissolve was always the
prerogative of the government of the day.

It is the need of a coherent representative system which
gives us the clue both to the organisation of the legislative
assembly and to its relations with the executive power. One
word may perhaps be said upon the size of a legislature,
though it is, in general, a practical matter in which theoretical
considerations are out of place. No legislature should be so
small that its representatives cannot, from the size of their
constituencies, have genuine personal relations with the elec-


344 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

torate; no legislature should be so large that effective debate
is impossible for its members. A body of more than six
hundred members, like the House of Commons, obviously
means either such a limitation of debate that no argument
can be properly put, or the restriction of debate to a handful
of members, while the rest remain silent auditors. But it
has been the experience of every system that if the mass of
its members are compelled to silence, they will not long
remain auditors. They will come to give their votes. But
debate will be largely a matter carried on for the edification
of the electorate, and it will not normally be able to affect
the votes of those who decide. Broadly, I should argue that
no legislature ought ever to exceed five hundred members, if
it is to perform its function efficiently.

I have already defined the purpose of the legislature as
the duty of laying down the general rules. How is that
purpose to be fulfilled ? All methods to this end turn upon
the relationship of the legislature to the executive, and the
consequences which follow from that relationship. There
seem three possibilities, if modem experience is at all
adequate as the basis of a criterion. There may be: (i) A
complete absence of any organised relation as in the United
States. (2) There may be a fully organised relation, in
which, by various means, the legislature dominates the execu¬
tive, as in France. (3) There may be a fully organised rela¬
tion in which the executive directs the legislature, without
being able to dominate it with any pretence at completeness.

The American system maximises all the difficulties of
law-making. The legislature is organised upon no coherent
plan; there is no one to whom genuine initiative responsi¬
bility belongs for the passage of legislation. The application
of law is entrusted to other hands, with the result that its
members are largely legislating in a vacuum. The executive
has no reason to expect that ample consideration for its felt
needs which is essential to successful administration. It
cannot control finance, with the result that members are
continually able to devote expenditure to objects which are
either remote from, or unrelated to, the needs of the State.
Debate ceases to possess reality ; for it cannot affect the life
of the executive, and it does not, therefore, seriously influence


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 845

the temper of administration. So rigorous a separation,
moreover, means that the two organs may be dominated by
different parties, so that the activities of each may be, and
often have been, thwarted by the hostility of the other. The
chambers, moreover, cannot with any reality exercise selective
functions for the simple reason that prominence in them is
not seriously connected with the chance of high executive
office. The congressional system has the capital defect of
failing to dramatise political life. The result is that a deadly
inertia settles over its legislature. What it does fails to
illuminate the public mind. It does not produce important
criticism in the newspapers, because no results of pictorial
consequence follow from its working. It destroys the quality
of officials, because, from their position, they are unable to
influence the executive towards the adoption of a continuous
and constructive policy. The legislature is continually tempted
to interfere in the executive domain, in order thereby to
magnify its office ; and much of the latter’s time is wasted in
the futile effort to frustrate that criticism. The system, in
short, makes for the almost complete evasion of responsi¬
bility. There is no one body of men who must bear the blame
for failure. The executive can always insist that legislation
is outside its sphere of competence. The legislature knows
that, whatever its attitude, its tenure of office is fixed and
certain. The complication which results from the rule of
local residence is, of course, merely incidental to these diffi¬
culties J but it completes a failure to meet the conditions
under which legislative success is possible.

The French system has few of the defects inherent in
the American plan. Much, doubtless, of its inadequacy
arises from the multiplicity of groups of which the Chamber t
of Deputies is composed. This makes immediately for
uncertainty of governmental tenure. A ministry knows that,
however admirable its work, the chances are enormously
against its remaining in office for more than two years. The
day upon which it assumes power is certain to be the day
upon which its fall from power is organised. Nor is it given
effective leadership over the business of the assembly. Its
projects go into the commissions of the Chamber, exactly as
the propositions of any private member. They emerge as


846 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

fully changed; and even its financial measures are amended
out of all recognition with but little regard to the coherency
of their plan. The difficulties of the French system are
mainly two in number. No French ministry is ever likely
to have the time to carry out an ample programme; and
behind it there always exists the shadow-ministry of the
Commissions which derive their influence very largely from
the degree to which they are able to dominate the legal
ministry. The result makes the deputy a much more
important person than, for instance, the average member of
the House of Commons. But it makes him important only
by sacrificing to him any genuine responsibility on the part
of ministers, and any genuine coherence in legislation. Few
tests are simpler in this aspect than that of finance. Only
one French minister in the half-century of the Republic has
attempted seriously to deal with the incidence of taxation
and its results; for to do so brings into view the alternative
ministries which are proliferated over the legislative assembly.
One other consequence of this system deserves mention
though it is rarely brought into view. Because the ministry
only bean a partial responsibility for legislation, it does not
secure from the French civil service assistance either as loyal
or as valuable as that upon which an English minister can
count. The French civil servant knows how temporary will
be his master's rule, and he is tempted, especially in political
affairs, to develop a policy and connections of his own, both
in the Chamber of Deputies, and in the press, in order to
evade the control of the masters from whom he differ*.

The British system, as I shall show, is not free from
defects, but its superiority to its alternatives is incontestable.
It is built upon three great principles. It is assumed to be
the business of the executive to drive a stream of tendency
through affairs. It must present a programme to the legis¬
lature and stand by the acceptance of that programme ; if it
is rejected upon any serious point, it must either resign or
appeal to the electorate. It is, secondly, the final autiiority
in finance. No private member may either propose a
fin a nci a l measure or attempt the increase (he may attempt
the reduction) of estimates considered adequate by the
government of the day. As a consequence, th irdly , of these


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 847

two principles, the initiative of the private member has a
much narrower field of activity. He may, as in America
and France, present his bills in unlimited numbers; but he
knows beforehand that the time-table and the procedure of
the assembly are under the control of the government, and
that there is, broadly, no serious prospect of an important
measure finding its way to the statute-book unless it secures
the guardianship of the government. The merits of the
system are plain. In the first place, it not only provides for
a coherent legislative structure, but also that those who have
planned it shall, if they can secure its acceptance, put it into
operation. It makes responsibility, in the second place,
immediate, direct, and decisive. Everyone can see who is to
be blamed and praised. Everyone knows where measures
must originate. Everyone sees exaccly whom to punish.
And, in the third place, finance and legislation bear a definite
relationship to each other. No one can hope to promote his
special nostrum, or to benefit his own constituency. Log¬
rolling, such as that which takes place m the American
legislature, is obviated at the outset.

The plain virtues of this system must not, however, blind
us to its dements. It certainly gives the executive an oppor¬
tunity for tyranny. It can, if it so please, make the most
minor issue a question of confidence, and so proffer the
alternative either of a support that is not whole-hearted, or a
dissolution which will prove inconvenient. Thereby it un¬
doubtedly tends to make debate unreal , for so much depends
upon keeping disciplined the ranks of the party in power,
that members are not unlikely to oppose a policy in speech,
and support it in the division lobby from fear of the conse¬
quences of hostility m the latter place. The initiative of
the private member may, further, be so restricted by a strong
executive that he is reduced almost to nullity. He can
become a person only by revolting, and, by revolting, he may
place his opponents in power. The legislature may easily,
as a consequence, be reduced to what it was under the
administration of Mr. Lloyd George, an organ of registration
for decisions it is really powerless either to criticise or to
altar. It seems to retain, even m that event, the ability to
discharge its selective function ; but I believe that careful


848 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

analysis would show that, at a given point, paralysis of the
legislative assembly tends to make the executive look else¬
where for its personnel. 1

Even with these defects, I believe that the British system
provides the model upon which we can build the method of
relationship between legislature and executive. We shall
need to make the executive responsible for the general making
of policy. Its members, therefore, will have to be elected
members of the legislative assembly, and stand or fall by the
important measures they present. They must have complete
responsibility for finance, ■ save that, again, their methods
may be rejected. They must control, therefore, the time¬
table of the legislature ; and the power of the private member
to steer important legislation to the statute-book must be
largely non-existent. * In the plan they make of the expendi¬
ture of tun** they must always have adequate room for the
three great spheres in which the private member makes his
greatest contributions. There must always be full oppor¬
tunity to gain information from the executive by question
and answer ; and, obviously, there will be occasions upon
which a refusal to answer may properly be made a question
of confidence in the executive. There must be time, secondly,
for the ventilation of grievance. The opportunity to utter
complaint is one of the occasions where a legislature has a
special value ; and it may generally be said that it is the
more effective, the ampler the opportunity. There must,
thirdly, be such room for debate as gives to the opposition
in the assembly a real chance to make its views known upon
the problem under discussion. Granted the pressure of
business, it is obvious that a limit to discussion is essential;
and, certainly, an executive which cannot control the time¬
table of the legislature is bound to be a failure as an initiator
of policy.

But, in so simple a form, these principles will prove inade¬
quate unless they are supplemented in three ways. It is
essential, in the first place, to leave room for diversity of
opinion in the legislature upon the details of law- makin g
The individual member must be encouraged to persuade the
assembly that his suggestions are, in fact, improvements.

1 Cf my analysis in the Nation, October-December 1910.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 349

The ideas which prevail must not be wholly ministerial ideas.
That means the abrogation of the executive nght, now
exercised, for example, by the British cabinet, to make any
questions it chooses questions of confidence upon which turns
the existence of the government of the day. The absurdities
to which this leads are well known. Under the Balfour
administration of 1900 it actually led to a question of whether
pillar-boxes should be green being made a matter of confi¬
dence , and the unfortunate critic of the executive (who
was actually one of its supporters) found himself compelled
to deny his own colour-preferences No will is ever so com¬
pletely right as to deserve the power to attach to itself the
penalties contingently in solved m a vote of confidence.
There ought to be an independent authority m the legislative
assembly who can impartially settle whether amendments
proposed are in truth so fundamental as to require that they
be made hanging-matters In England, the Speaker could
perform that function in the same way as he certifies that a
bill is a money-bill, in order to preserve it from the control
of the House of Lords A power to act m this fashion would,

I believe, be an invaluable protection m a legislative assembly
not only to the Opposition, but also to those critics of the
executive who are anxious to support it in general, but wish
also to retain the right to be independent about the details
of public business I cannot here attempt a detailed account
of the grounds upon which an officer like the Speaker, who
is by definition removed from the normal heat of party con¬
flict. is essential to the proper functioning of a legislative
assembly But anyone who considers the history of the
Speakership in the American House of Representatives will,

I think, understand the grounds for the view here urged 1
It is necessary, m the second place, to bring the members
of the legislative assembly into some organic connection -
with the executive departments There might be set up a
senes of committees, each of which would deal with a single
department They would, as I conceive them, be a body of
some dozen members selected, not so much as representative
of parties, though parties would be represented upon them,
as of the specialised ability on particular questions which the

* Cf M P FoUett Tht Speaker of lit Hotue of Repreuntateati.


MO A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

legislature contains. They would work not as the makers of
policy, which is primarily, as I have argued, a ministerial
function, but in part as a consultative organ, and in part as a
means of bringing to the legislature a definitely competent
opinion upon the working of the administrative process.
They ought to have access to all papers save those of an
especially confidential kind. They should have the power to
initiate inquiries in the departments. They should be able
to summon public servants before them for the taking of
evidence upon particular questions. They should have regular
meetings with the minister at which his policy, and especially
his legislation, is freely discussed and explained. To them
should be submitted those ordinances which every executive
is compelled to issue out of its discretion and without imme¬
diate legislative sanction. Their function, I would emphasise,
would give them no specific duties to the legislature, unless it
was deemed desirable to make their approval necessary, as I
believe it could usefully be made necessary, before the issue
of what is called in England delegated legislation.* They
could, otherwise, report disagreement with the executive
only through the ordinary channels of debate. They would
have no power to prevent the introduction of legislation, and
no authority to dictate ministerial methods. Their business,
like that of the King of England, would be to advise, to
encourage, and to warn, with the addition that, in the process,
they would also learn.

The advantage of such a system seems to me great. In
the first place, it ensures a greater responsiveness on the
part of the executive to the opinions of the legislative body.
It enables the latter, without displaying overt hostility, to
press their views, to make suggestions, to glean knowledge.
It ensures the presence in debate of a body of men really
equipped to understand, whether in agreement or disagree¬
ment, ministerial policy. It provides the minister with a
testing-ground where he may learn the kind of view the
informed public is likely to take of his schemes. It pi events

1 Cf C T Carr, Delegated Legislation, and my paper on Adrmmstrotive Dis-
c return in Journal of Public Administration, April 1923 See also Parliamentary
Debates. 5th senes, vol 144, col 429, where some interesting statistics are given.
Mr W. A Robson's Justice and Administrative Law (192S) and Lord Hewmrt’s
The New Despotism (1929! bring out, m their very different ways, the urgency
of this need.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 851

him from becoming a dictator who, like a god in the machine,
makes pronouncement* to be received as oracular. Not
least in importance, it brings his official staff into contact
with the outside world and prevents the growth of that
habit, typical everywhere of a bureaucracy, of regarding the
legislative assembly as its natural foe. Impersonal institu¬
tions are always psychologically inadequate ; but when they
are transformed into agents of flesh and blood, a co-operative
understanding becomes possible. I believe, for example, that
such a legislative committee on foreign affairs is much the
surest way of maintaining a reasonable continuity in policy,
without the necessity of those sporadic outbursts of angry
publicity which do so much harm to international relationships.

To suggest the construction of such committees is to meet
at once with two great difficulties. Would a given committee
interfere with the functions of the minister ? The com¬
mittees of Congress and of the French Chambers interfere, as
is well known, to nauseation with the administration of the
departments. They try to replace the ministerial will by
their own. They waste endless time in investigation. They
limi t initiative and weaken responsibility But the root of
these difficulties lies, I think, in a fact from which the plan
here outlined is free. Both in the United States and France
the committees have a duty to the legislature Thor business
is frankly to expose the minister. They are set there as a
watch-dog upon him. They report systematically upon his
actions. They announce their concerted view of his measures.
The committees I have in view would have no such oppor¬
tunities. They would not report to the assembly, except in
the single case of delegated legislation, and then only in the
event of disagreement with the minister. Their proceedings
would be private. They could not introduce any bills of
which he disapproved. Antagonism, where it developed,
would have its sufficient safeguard in the fact that the
executive had a majority in the legislature. It is the division
between the two in America, and the group system m France,
which make the committees system so noxious in its results.

The real difficulties would depend upon the minister
himself. Where he is strong, and really understands the
process of administration, the committee would be invaluable


852 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

to him. He could use it not merely to consult, but also as a
pathway through which his policy might pass to enlightened
assent in the legislative assembly. He would use it to
inform himself of the public view of his policy. He would
gain from it suggestions and criticisms likely to be of high
value. And his officials, I think, would understand the
importance of training up in the legislative assembly a body
of members really informed on the functions of a minister.
That, it may be added, would improve enormously the
selective function the legislature performs, for the com¬
mittees would serve as the nucleus from which future ministers
might be drawn, and there would be absent from the making
of ministries much of that difficulty in the choice of office
which is now so apparent. With a weak minister, of course,
the position would be more difficult. His tendency, undoubt¬
edly, would be to shift the burden of responsibility upon his
committee, and that, in the nature of things, would tempt it
to using its functions. The remedy against that danger lies
largely in the quality of the public service If they can make
the tradition of their department creative, tae difficulty will
be at its minimum ; a man like Sir Robert Morant can always
do much to vaccinate a minister against the disease of
timidity. But even were it at its maximum, I still think
the experiment is vital In most matters of administration
the lay mind has a fund of common sense to contnbute which
is unrealised by the expert, absorbed m his daily routine
The mutual impact of minds so different would provide a
fund of inventiveness in the details of daily work, and
inventiveness in minor detail is tne quality by which the
official is saved from that dull routine which stifles him in
the red-tape of his own traditions And, lastly, it may be
noted that unless some such knowledge as these committees
would confer is open to the private member, there is no
way in which the legislature can criticise those who lead it
from the angle of assured competence. A legislature without
access to technical knowledge is always at the mercy of a
confident executive. Here, at least, there are the means of
mitigating that disparity >

> Cl my lecture in The Development of the Cunt Service, from which 1
have borrowed some sentences in these paragraphs.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 353

The third supplement to these general principles is more
revolutionary. All legislative debate involves at least two
stages. There is discussion, first, of general principle, and,
second, the dissection of that principle in detail, as it is pre¬
sented in the clauses of a measure. The mass of business
which confronts the modern legislature has made it necessary
to delegate the second stage, more and more, to committees
of the legislature, which report back their findings to the whole
assembly. But these committees largely nullify the value of
their work by modelling their organisation and procedure
upon that of the legislature as a whole. The methods
necessary for the discussion of principle, upon which the
life of the executive depends, are not the same as those suited
to the discussion of detail. In the latter case, the problems
raised are almost always technical, and, as a rule, the normal
party conflict is out of place I believe that, more and more,
the committee stage on all bills not of the first magnitude is
capable of great improvement. It is clear that there are
bills, of which the Treaty with the Irish Free State Act of
1922 is an example, in which amendment by the legislature,
save in the form of rejection, is impossible because the
executive is, so to say, committed to every comma of the
bill as it stands. But that is not true of all save a few
measures. The majority are susceptible of change, and the
executive itself amend them as they make their way to the
statute-book.

Once a bill is sent to a legislative committee of this kind,
I believe that the procedure upon it should be transformed
into a process akin to that of committees m British munici¬
palities. There, it will be remembered, the permanent
official is present at debate , he answers questions, makes
suggestions, explains difficulties, affords information. The
whole difference between a good and bad committee on a
municipal body is between a committee which really makes
use of its officials at its meeting, and one intent on demon¬
strating the inferiority of the paid servant to the elected
councillor. I believe that it would be a great step forward
if ministers were to take their permanent officials to the com¬
mittees of the legislature and give them a full opportunity
to be useful to members in the discussion. That would lead,

23


844 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

firstly, to the disappearance of much deliberate obstruction
It would give assurance that discussion of questions in their
nature wholly, or even mainly, technical were dealt with in a
technical way. It would remove the element of partisanship
which now tends to permeate problems where it is obviously
out of place. It would ensure also that the views of the
private member would receive more real consideration than
is now possible. For the tendency would be to transform
these committees into bodies much more like the Private
Bill Committee of the House of Commons, where a bill, how¬
ever objectionable in principle, is discussed in its details
simply with a view to making it an adequate measure. Obvi¬
ously, of course, the permanent official could only speak when
so permitted by the minister in charge of the bill under dis¬
cussion. But I think it would be discovered in the use of
this procedure that much business was in fact non-contentious
which is now assumed to be necessarily the fighting-ground of
parties. I think legislation thereby would be at once more
rapid and more effective. And the great deb? e would be all
the better for being limited to the type of occasion —the
analysis of principle—where alone it is likely to be fruitful.

One other problem in the relationship of executive and
legislature needs a word. It is always important to prevent
the executive from influencing the private member by way of
corruption. That influence may take the most diverse forms.
It may, as in America, result from a discreet share in the
bestowal of patronage; the friends and relatives of the
member may be given office, sometimes high judicial office,
in return for his vote. A most insidious form is when the
size of the political executive is so large that its members
have a direct influence upon the size of its majority, and a
direct interest, whatever its policy, in keeping it in power.
An average British administration to-day, for instance, has at
least some fifty members ; a French ministry has hardly less.
Clearly an upper limit to the size of a ministry is essential
when a fifth of the whole party in power may be in office.
For similar reasons, no public servants ought to be members
of the legislative assembly ; for the facilities for influencing
them corruptly are too large not to be exercised, and too
difficult not to be detected. Another form of influence lies in


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 885

the right of the executive to confer titles of honour. Man is
a vain creature, and the “ bit of ribbon .to stick, in ..his coat ”
casts a glamour over official ^opinion. Either definite legis
lation against the conference of titles on political grounds,
or a self-denying ordinance which makes them impossible of
access, would, I think, be of great value. And it should
always be illegal for any executive to give paid governmental
employment to any member of a legislative assembly.* A
list of exceptions could easily be made for the type of post
where legislative experience is of obvious assistance, a post,
for instance, like the governorship of a colony.

It goes without saying that the members of a legislative
assembly must enjoy the utmost freedom of debate. They can¬
not be bound by the limitations which are referable to a court of
law. For, obviously, if their statements and suggestions come
within the ambit of the law of libel and slander, much would
not be said in discussion that is essential to its value. Men
must be able then to hint their belief in corruption even when
the chain of proof is not legally ample. They must be able to
describe the proceedings of, for instance, a colonial governor
as tyrannical without having to face an action for damages.
Whether they should be so protected outside the legislative
assembly is a much more difficult matter to decide. Much of
the work of a member is done in letters to the press and
in public meeting. He may have views and ideas it is
important for him to express, and yet be unable to find occa¬
sion for giving them vent in the legislative assembly. He
ought not, clearly, to be given an open cheque to slander as
he will; but there is some case, to take an English example,
for protecting him from the consideration he is likely to
receive from a London jury in a political libel action. Certainly
it would be difficult for a man who felt strongly about the
policy of Governor Eyre to have stigmatised it in adequate
terms unless he were able to do so from a point of protected
vantage in the House of Commons.

• For aoiof useful remarks on this general question see Stdgwick, Elrmsnt*
of Politic *, pp. 462-3.


8« A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

VI

The executive in the modem State has, in general, three
aspects. It is, firstly, as I have already sought to show, a
committee of the party in power in the legislatiye assembly,
offering proposals to that assembly, and holding office upon
the condition of winning assent to those proposals. It is,
secondly, an administering body applying legislation. It has
to manage the vast body of officials who are necessary if the
work of administration is to be efficiently carried out. It is,
thirdly, in continuous relationship with the mass of citizens
through its function as administrator; and I argued earlier
in this book that the quality of its administration depends,
in large part, on the way in which those citizens are associated
with it in the tasks it performs.

Let us take each of these aspects separately. The executive
as a political body has three mam functions. It is concerned,
first, with the final choice of policy to be submitted for
acceptance to the legislative assembly. Its existence, as an
executive, will depend upon the fate of tha^ policy And,
since the legislature is generally, and at its most efficient,
divided into two parties, it is obvious that the executive is.
in this regard, broadly the leaders of the party in power.
Its business is to translate the declared will of the party into
terms of measures. It derives its knowledge of that will in
part from the announcements of the party itself, in part
from the reception of its policy from its supporters, in part,
above all, from all the complex pressure of opinion that it
meets as it moves upon its way. It decides policy ; and,
once the policy is accepted, it is its business to see to it that
the public services apply that policy, in spirit and in detail,
in the sense intended by the legislative assembly For it
will have to meet there criticism of the way in which policy
is carried out. It will be responsible for what is done. Error
will be its error , blame will be blame it has to shoulder The
policy, moreover, cannot be applied in detail from a single
centre It has to be delimited into its various aspects. The
man who is responsible for health cannot also be responsible
for naval and military defence. The man who deals with
foreign policy cannot also charge himself with supervising


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 857

the details of educational administration. The third function,
therefore, of the political executive is first to delimit and then
to co-ordinate the activities of the different departments of
State.

I shall call the political aspect of the e xecu tive the cabinet,
since this is the name it has come to possess in the majority
of modern States How shall it be chosen, of whom shall it
be composed, what shall be its size ? Though these may seem
questions of form, they go in fact to the very heart of
political theory. Shall, for instance, the formal head of the
State, as in America, be the chief member of the cabinet ?
Are his colleagues to be, as there, his subordinates, or are they
to be co-equal with him in a common task. Experience is,
I think, clear that every State needs an official head who is
not the active head of the cabinet. He may, as in France,
be the president of a republic, or, as in England, a constitutional
monarch, stripped of all save the ceremonial of power For
the American system is bound to have two results . (;) the
tenure of the chief executive is fixed , (2) the nature of his
power is such that his colleagues are bound to be subordinate
to him in legal as well as actual authority The method
both in England and in France enables the political parties
to choose their leader, to permit him to form a cabinet of
his colleagues, and, on their defeat as a cabinet, either to give
place to their opponents, or to appeal for renewal of power
to the electorate.

The leader of a party so chosen becomes Prime Minister.
It is, I think, axiomatic that he should be free to select his
colleagues, and that his party should not choose those who
are to serve with him The latter method is open to the
grave disadvantages that it destroys flexibility of choice, and
that it may well mean the triumph of availability rather
than merit. Any party will be a collocation of units of varying
views, and to leave it to choose the colleagues of the Prime
Minister will mean not the representation of those best fitted
to make a policy, but of members of each unit who must
do the best they can to formulate a unified policy. Such
unity is not difficult in opposition, where hostility to a common
foe is the law of life. But it is of the highest difficulty when
the fairly has a majority. And, in any case, to give to the


858 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Prime Minister legal freedom of choice does not mean that
he can pick and choose as he pleases. There will be, in every
party, a body of men whose standing in the legislative assembly
makes imperative the recognition of their claims. Mr. Glad¬
stone did not like Mr. Chamberlain, but he was compelled
to admit him to his cabinet. Lord Salisbury, doubtless,
would have been happy not to offer Lord Randolph Churchill
the leadership of the House of Commons, but in fact he had
no alternative. Where the Prime Minister is really free is in
the actual disposition of offices ; and here again he is largely
limited by the fact that he must induce his colleagues to
accept those for which he denominated them. The breakdown
of Lord John Russell's attempt to form a government in 1845
through the unwillingness of Grey and Palmerston to accept
the offices for which he destined them is evidence that the
limitation is real.* A further check on error would be obtained
if the legislative committees on departments I discussed above
were in operation. For their working would tend to allocate
members to such office as genuinely interested them. They
would act as a sorting-house in which could be separated
those members whose interest, like that of John Bright, is
in the broad principles of policy, and those who, like Sir James
Graham or Cardwell in England, like Gallatin and Roon in
other countries, have a positive talent for the specific details
of administration.

Outside these limits, the greater flexibility there is, the
better for the working of the system; and the concentration
of choice in the hands of the Prime Minister seems to be the
best guarantee of flexibility. But a cabinet so formed may
be of two kinds. It may either, as with the War Cabinet of
Mr. Lloyd George, be a body of lour or five persons who
concern themselves only with general policy, and leave its
application to subordinate ministers, or, as with the historic
cabinet of Great Britain and the continent, a larger body,
the majority of whom are concerned in the active adminis¬
tration of their departments.* I do not think there can be

• Trevelyan, Life and LetUrs of Lori Macaulay (Nelson edition), ii. 143.

* On the system of Mr. Lloyd George see the Report of the War Cabinal
for 1917 (Cd. 9005) and Lord Curcon's speech in the House of Lords on
June 19, 1918


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS


850


any serious question about the superiority of the latter method.
Policy cannot really be separated from administration; the
essence of measures lies always m their execution. Men who
seek to avoid detail will find either that their principles fail
because of the neglect of detail, or that, despite their avowed
concentration on principle, they are m fact spending their
time not merely on detail, but also upon the effort to settle
disputes between departments as to whom that detail belongs,
without the knowledge which comes from being immersed
in the technique of administration Since, moreover, the
departmental ministers will always be subordinate, there will
be a tendency on the part of the legislative assembly to
disregard them and to appeal beyond to the small policy¬
making cabinet That will make for a lack of coherence in
administration For the effort of the cabinet will then be
directed to placating the legislature at the expense of its
subordinate ministers The same will be true of the pressure
of outside interests and, sooner or later, those who are the
heads of administration in the executive will cease to play
a serious part m the disposition of affairs

The cabinet on the second model therefore seems preferable
It ought not, however, to be a large body It has to assume
collective responsibility for the whole ordering of policy and
administration It needs to develop a unity of outlook, to
be able to act quickly and effectively as problems arise for
its decision A body of some ten or twelve members seems
the most suitable for this purpose It is large enough to be
able to cover the general field of administration, and small
enough to develop a genuine corporate mind about the large
issues it confronts I do not mean that twelve posts exhaust
the area of subjects which require ministers for their adminis¬
tration, but that the division of the field of policy into at
most a dozen large categories, each presided over by a
minister, leaves room for the best results That is, I think,
borne out by several considerations of recent experience. A
smaller number does not enable the great departments to
be represented in the making of policy , a larger number
inevitably gives rise to a smaller cabinet within the cabinet
who will more and more tend to the arrogation of decision.
Or, alternatively, the larger number will mean such a volume


*«0 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

of cabinet business that the co-ordination of policy will be
neglected, and each minister will be left to a largely uncon¬
trolled mastery of his field.

What should be the relationship between the members
of such a cabinet ? With two exceptions, that is a matter
which belongs rather to the art than to the theory of politics.
It is plain that a certain primacy belongs to the Prime Minister.
He is both the leader of the party and the leader of the
legislative assembly. To him, more than to any other person,
belongs the responsibility for political strategy. He has to
drive the team, to persuade recalcitrant colleagues into
harmony, to state the issues to the electorate in their most
authoritative form. It will, I think, be found that the most
successful cabinets have always been those in which the
Prime Minister has been able to impose his will upon his
colleagues with an authority to which no other member can
pretend. For it must be remembered that in making decisions
a cabinet has rather to weigh opinions than to count them ;
responsibility in its problems does not adequately arise from
the simple taking of a vote- The more influence that attaches
to the Prime Minister's view, the easiei it will be to secure
unity of outlook. This does not, it must be emphasised,
mean that the Prime Minister should out-distance his col¬
leagues in the fashion of an American President. That leads
to a centralisation of authority which always means that
decisions are ignorantly taken ; it leads to flattery of the chief
by his subordinates; to a theory also of indispensability
which turns, ultimately, into a doctrine, applied, at least
internally, of presidential infallibility. The doctrine of indis¬
pensability is impossible for the simple reason that it is the
basis of a democratic system that no person is indispensable.

In the second place, a certain primacy belongs to the
Minister of Finance. For taxation lies, and is likely increasingly
to lie, at the heart of the modem State. The minister who
has the power to search the pockets of citizens is entrusted
with an authority of peculiar magnitude. With him, also,
belongs the control of the national debt, and, through his
influence over the banking and currency systems, a power over
commerce and industry, which are, from any angle, over¬
whelming. Inevitably this sphere involves a special attitude


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 861

to the expenditure of the State; for it must control that
expenditure at least to that debatable point where taxation
becomes confiscatory in character. It will, indeed, by its
relation to the spending-power of other departments involve
a certain supervision of their policy. How much supervision
it should involve depends upon factors with which I am not
here concerned. Certainly, the British system of treasury-
control has great advantages in that it saw to it that expenditure
proposed was not more than adequate for the end desired;
but I think most experts outside the British Treasury would
agree that it had great defects in compensation. Particularly
in the period of the positive state, upon which we have now
entered, it needs great courage and determination in a Minister
of Finance to resist the pressure of the spending departments.
But the principle of a single body of estimates criticised
collectively from the angle of what is practically a non¬
spending department is the key to sound finance; and it
obviously makes the minister in charge second only to the
Prime Minister himself.

Otherwise, all members of a cabinet are on an equal
footing ; and the distinctions which appear are the result,
not of theory and its needs, but of the interplay of unpre¬
dictable personality. A cabinet is likely to be the more
successful, the more its basic decisions result from a genuinely
corporate discussion. The less respect there is paid to the
notion that the minister in each department is omnipotent
the better it will be for the spirit of its work. For, otherwise,
it meets two dangers that have been strikingly manifest in
recent times. The one is that there is really no body of
persons effectively charged with the total survey of policy ;
and the other that what appears as the policy of the minister,
and respected as such, is, in fact, merely the policy of his
permanent officials. This latter distinction is important.
Every bureaucracy, however eager to be liberal, tends to give
undue reverence to its own methods and its own traditions;
and when it encounters novel suggestions, its habit is to
begin by emphasising their impossibility and continue by
insisting on their unwisdom. It needs a strong minister to
triumph over departmental conservatism ; and, outside
agencies apart (a point I shall discuss later), there must be


MS A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

means in the cabinet to insist that departmental conservatism
is never accepted as final. That will only occur when the
cabinet regards itself as free to intervene in the work of the
departments, and to insist upon the paramount character of
its decisions. It may be wrong ; it often will be wrong; but
policy is never co-ordinated unless it interprets its function
in this way. Otherwise it becomes merely a body whose
business is simply the arrangement of work for, and decisions
in, the legislative assembly; and, thereby, the half of its
value is lost.

I have already pointed out that the Prime Minister occupies
a special position of authority among his colleagues. Two
corollaries ot that position seem implied in the modem history
of the office. It is important that he should not be burdened
with departmental work. His business is to retain a fresh
and open mind upon the general problems of the government.
He has to act as the source of general emollience in the ministry.
He has to keep himself informed about the broad outline of
events in all departments of State. A Prime Minister who
endeavours to combine these functions with the pressure, for
instance, of an office like that of foreign affairs, is bound to
neglect one or other; and each is too important to make
neglect admissible. He must be the active leader of the
legislative assembly. His presence there has a twofold sig¬
nificance. It co-ordinates, in a way otherwise unattainable,
the work of his colleagues in the legislature. If his appearances
in the assembly are rare, there will always grow up a tendency
to regard him as a court of appeal from the rest of his cabinet.
He will become a President instead of a Prime Minister.
His absence, secondly, will have the disastrous effect of trans¬
ferring the centre of decision away from the legislative
assembly. The fact that he is not available there will make
him sought where he can be found. His office will become
a centre of pressure from powerful interests which gain access
to him. He will be tempted to make agreements with them,
and to present those agreements to the assembly as fatts
accompli s which they can only reject by compelling the
resignation of his government. An assembly so placed is
bound to decline swiftly in respect of citizens. Its debates
will become unreal, because they will be felt not to affect


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 368

the true source of decision. Policy will not be made in the
light of day; and an assembly lives by the policy it can
secure. This, it may be added, is another reason for the
superiority of the two-party system. For a Prime Minister
who presides over a coalition of groups which can always form
a new combination is always plagued by an instability that
is fatal to the integrity of his work, A policy of ideas becomes
a policy of manoeuvres; and the attention which should be
given to the large outlines of legislation becomes necessarily
devoted to the minor tactics by which the dissolution of the
coalition is prevented.

Obviously, this envisages a strong executive forcing a
coherent plan of legislation to the statute-book. It is necessary,
therefore, to inquire into two aspects of the problems raised
by a strong executive. What opportunity, first, is given to
the legislative assembly to make its own impact upon the
executive ? What place, secondly, have the various interests
of society in the structure here outlined ? The legislative
assembly, I think, has three clear safe guards within itself.
It can always dismiss the cabinet from office. Though the
power to dismiss will rarely be exercised, it always remains
as a contingent threat of high value. It cannot, secondly,
be forced to pass legislation which affects the constitutional
foundations of the State, except under special circumstances,
such as a two-thirds vote of the assembly, which are not
likely to exist unless there is a situation of grave need. It
could not, in the view here taken, be forced to abrogate the
Habeas Corpus Act, to pass such a measure as the Espionage
Act of the United States, or a bill giving the executive
authority to legislate by proclamation. It has, thirdly, its
legislative committee for each department which will give
it an ultimate knowledge of the details of administration.
It will thereby know, informally as well as formally, what
is in the ministerial mind. It will see what materials lead
him to the formation of his judgment. It will be able to
criticise and oppose in an atmosphere from which the threat
of resignation or dissolution is absent. Here it should be
insisted that no such system of committees can possibly be
adequate which does not provide for the examination of
estimates of expenditure by the departments. We do not


864 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

need the meticulous control now exercised by the French
Commissions, and the Congressional Committees. But we do
need to avoid the impasse in which the British House of
Commons now finds itself, of being able to criticise national
expenditure only after the money has been spent. Committees
on estimates, with the requisite staff of experts independent
of the executive, and with the right of examination of the
departments, are therefore essential, and no criticism so far
made of their necessity seems to me to have realised the
danger of their absence. 1 One further protection that the
legislature requires is the creation, within itself, of what is
called in America a legislative reference bureau. 2 Without
it, the private member is too often at a disadvantage in his
contests with the cabinet. He does not know the materials
he ought to use; he is not aware of experiments relevant
to his inquiries. The minister, amply piotected by the
panoply of his experts, evades the issue by a thrust of fact
that the proper organisation of the member’s interest would
always enable him to parry.

A very different relation to the executive exists in the
case of the citizen-body. Their problem is to make their
will known, in *such a way that not only are their needs
apparent, but also to demonstrate that the will declared has
a strong body of opinion behind it. At present, the citizen-
body brings its pressure to bear in a variety of ways. At the
electoral period, it awards office to a party with whose general
ideas it is, for the time, in sympathy. After the election,
the different associations pass resolutions, prepare petitions,
canvass the members of the legislature, take deputations to
ministers. Sometimes their pressure is strong enough to obtain
an inquiry into some special problem ; on occasion, as in the
Trades Disputes Act of 1906, they are powerful enoigh to
force the ex°cutive to act on their behalf. But, in general,
public opinion suffers from two grave difficulties. It is 1 arely
organised in a continuous relation with the government ; its

1 See the Ninth Report (H C 121 of 1918) of the Select Committee on
National Expenditure, especially the appendices of evidence I note that
its conclusions are in the main approved by the Report of the Machinery of
Government Committee (Cd 9230 of 1918), pp 14-15

* Cf. McCarthy in P. S Remsch, Readings in American State Government,
pp. 63 a.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 865

connections are not institutional, but spasmodic. It can only,
moreover, criticise what the government is doing in the light
of specific acts which, by being acts, already exist in an
atmosphere of prestige which make inquiry no easy matter.
The first difficulty 1 shall deal with later, since its solution
depends upon the executive as an administering and not as
a political body. The second, I suggest, can be met by a
simple expedient for which ample precedent exists in political
experience.

That expedient, I suggest, may take two forms. It may
either, in the case of public bills, involve what is called in
Massachusetts a “ public hearing,” 1 or, in the case of problems
where no bill has been introduced, of organising inquiry with
a view to securing definite opinion by its results. Let us take
the first form separately. When a bill has been sent to a
committee of the legislature, if that committee so decides,
it might take evidence, not upon the principle, but upon the
details of the measure, from members of the public, either
as individuals, or through organised associations. It might,
for instance, take evidence from landlords and tenants upon
the problems of rent restriction ; it might hear from employers
and workmen on the clauses of a Trade Boards Act; from
dentists and medical men on a bill to prevent untrained
persons practising dentistry. And the value of such
" hearings ” would, I think, be intensified by the presence
of permanent officials at that committee stage. The committee
would grow into what Mr, Lowell calls a semi-judicial attitude.
“ It comes to look on itself as sitting in judgment upon the
matters presented to it,” he writes, 1 " rather than as acting
on its own initiative; and this to an extent that is at times
surprising. In the best sense, the procedure is extremely
democratic, for it gives the whole people a chance to take part
in legislation at the formative state. But it is by no means
democratic in the false sense that the opinions of all men
are given equal importance.” The limitations of such evidence
to the details of measures follows from the fact that the
cabinet has made itself responsible for the principle. The

1 Cf. Lowell, Public Opinion and Popular Government, pp. 250 f„ for
some interesting details

* Op cit., p 25 i.


896 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

settlement of its wisdom is then a matter for the legislation
as a whole. But I see no reason why there should not be a
chance for special knowledge to be publicly available at the
discussion of details. Matters like the number of witnesses
to be heard, the method of their examination, and so forth,
are simply questions of detail; and it is suggestive that only
13 per cent of the “ hearings " in Massachusetts occupied more
than a single day.

The second form of this expedient may suitably take a
wider ambit. There is a great variety of problems upon
which either little quantitative knowledge exists, or which are
not deemed of a nature to involve government action for their
solution. Here it seems to me desirable to give wide limits
to the discretion of citizens. 1 have already argued that
while the cabinet should generally control the time-table of
the legislative assembly, some room should be left for the
initiative of private members. It is, for instance, under the
scope of that initiative that private members introduce bills
into the House of Commons; and it is through the wider
use of the private bill that a means may be found for the
relationship I am recommending. What I propose is that
when any member of the legislature introduces a bill, he may
have it sent to a select committee if one hundred (or some
other suitable figure) other members support such a reference.
That select committee would then examine the bill by public
hearings and report back its findings to the legislative
assembly The cabinet could then, as it pleased, help it or
not to the statute-book. In any case, there would be left
upon record a valuable body of evidence upon the subject
matter of the bill; and I have already argued that the increase
of knowledge upon public questions is a matter of the gravest
urgency. On occasion, doubtless, the findings of such a
committee would necessitate immediate executive action; a
revelation, for instance, such as that of the condition of the
chain makers at Cradley Heath some fifteen years ago, 1 ought
to compel the executive to make decisions In general,
probably, the result will be rather the formation of a general
public opinion which opens up an avenue through which,
later, government action may make its way. Such an inquiry,

1 Cl R. H Tawney, Minimum Rates tu Chain-making Industry


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS


867


for example, into the results of raising the school-leaving age
from fourteen to sixteen years, would be invaluable. And
the method proposed would avoid the danger of that type
of inquiry which, suddenly evolved to meet an unanticipated
crisis, conducts its work in an atmosphere of passion that is
fatal to scientific results.

Nor is it likely, as may be argued, that such a scheme
will make every association with a nostrum to propound seek
an inquiry of this kind into its validity. Nothing now prevents
a member introducing any bill he pleases ; and the fact that
a fifth of the legislature have to pledge themselves to the
need for inquiry is a safeguard against unnecessary multi¬
plication. For the members themselves will act as the judges
of the evidence; and the time at their disposal is always
sufficiently limited to make it sure that they will not search
after every will-o’-the-wisp that flits before them. I do not
think it likely that bills would be promoted to restrict salmon
and sturgeon fishing in certain rivers ; or to require headlights
of certain power on locomotives ; or to make special provision
for the insurance of goats ; or to standardise the amount of
alcohol permitted in intoxicating liquors—all of which have
been the subjects of the referendum or initiative in America
and Switzerland—but if we could, by this means, inquire
into the relation of birth control to maternity welfare, or
the desirability of abolishing the rule of unanimity in jury-
cases, or the unification of social insurance, we should make
far easier than it now is the path of social improvement. And
We should enable every citizen with special experience to have \
means of direct contact with the legislative assembly. We l
have the right to assume that such experience will, by that
contact, ultimately bear fruitful results.

I have laid much stress here on legislative processes. That
is because the truth emphasised by Sir Henry Maine in regard
to judicial work holds also of the legislative process. Social
progress is secreted in the interstices of legislative procedure.
It is in its flexibility, on the one hand, and its accessibility,
on the other, that a legislative assembly is most likely to
discover the means of its success. It ought not to be separated
from the executive, because, in that event, the latter is deprived
of the power to become genuinely creative. It ought not to i


868 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

be dominated by the latter because, where that occurs, the
private member ceases to be anything but a unit in a division
list. It needs the power effectively to criticise and amend
the measures of the government because there is no assurance
of infallibility in the latter’s work. It needs to associate the
general public with its effort, partly because there is therein
a fund of common sense and experience which ought not to
go unused, partly because its organisation is a sphere where
the initiative of the private member has a special place, above
all because such organisation provides one of the surest means
available both for the education of public opinion and the
emphasis of public need. Here, as elsewhere, much obviously
depends upon the standard of intelligence in the electorate;
but that standard is in a reciprocal relation to the institutions
I have outlined. They will not. Of themselves, asstire the
realisation of the purpose the State seeks to embody, but
they are likely to make more possible than now the fulfilment
of that purpose.


VII

When policy has been formulated by 'the cabinet, and
accepted by the legislature, it needs to be applied. Here
emerges the second great function of the executive, that .of
co-ordinating and controlling the administration of the State.
Its first great problem is the principle upon which the flow
of business is to be distributed between departments. There
is, of course, no rigid system of categories into which all
business may naturally be placed. But I believe that the
broad choice by which any executive is confronted is between
distribution by persons and distribution by services. We
might have a ministry which dealt with children, one for
unemployed persons, one for the aged, one for military and
naval pensioners, and so forth, each seeking to supply all the
varied needs of the class with which it dealt. Alternatively,
we might have, as now, a ministry of defence, a ministry of
education, a ministry of health, and so on. The defect of
the former is, I think, clear. It seeks to provide for each
class of persons a variety of services, always specialised in
nature, which will be duplicated in every other department.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 869

It is better that a Ministry of Education should deal directly
with the educational needs of all persons, from the nursery
onwards We then get a fairly specific field of activity which
deals with the general needs of the community for each
department of the executive. The principle has the great
advantages, first, that it enables the members of a department
to concentrate their efforts upon a particular subject instead
of scattering them over an area too wide to permit of a general
level of high quality ; and secondly, it enables a better use to
be made of specialised knowledge by making it visible upon
a plane where its varied aspects have organised relation to
one another. 1

The case, therefore, for departmental organisation by
services is plain. But that does not mean that such services
can, or will, exist in water-tight compartments The Ministry
of Education may have to concern itself with problems of
health in school-children, which it will find directly in relation
to conditions of housing and parental wages. It will have to
take account of those relations, and connection with other
departments will obviously become essential. Each will find
that it possesses primary and secondary interests, and that
it needs to develop means within itself to deal with them in
all their formidable complexity. Each will find on its borders
problems which involve co-operation with other departments
if they are to be adequately solved. And there will, again
and again, be the difficulty of deciding (obviously a cabinet
question) whether some particular function belongs to one
department or another Is, for instance, a naval air service
to be controlled by a ministry of naval affairs or a ministry
of air defence ? Much argument has been expended to
justify both methods. What I am alone here concerned to
insist is that the dubiety is typical of the material we encounter,
and to draw therefrom the inference that matters of common
interest can be dealt with adequately only by co-operation
between the departments involved.

Let us suppose, however, that our departments are defined.
Two problems then immediately arise. How is each to be
organised and who is to staff it ? In the matter of organisation

* See this worked out in detail ra the Mauhtnery of Govtrnmciti Report,
pp. 8 f.


24


870 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

there are, I think, five clear principles which need to be
observed. There must, in the first place, always be a minister
responsible to the legislative assembly for the work of a
department. He must bear the burden of its errors, and,
presumably, win the credit for the virtues it can claim.
Any other system—the attempt, for instance, to deal with a
specific service by means of a board—dissipates responsibility
to vanishing point. The legislative assembly must always be
able to point to a particular individual and demand from him
a justification of departmental policy. It may, of course,
through him, be compelled to strike at the cabinet itself;
but it is essential, at some given point in departmental struc¬
ture, to trace decisions to a person who is not corporate, but
individual

There must, secondly, be special provision in each depart¬
ment for adequate financial supervision. That implies, I
think, an officer second only in importance to the permanent
head of the department who must be responsible (a) for all
payments made by the department, and ( b) for annotating in
terms of cost all the proposals which emanate from it.
Obviously he will have special relations with the Ministry
of Finance, since it will be his business to explain to its
representatives the estimates of the department. Obviously,
also, he must supervise the work he performs in such a way
that the services of his department may be immediately com¬
pared with analogous services in other departments. He must
be able to show why the cost per bed in a naval hospital under
his charge is higher than a similai bed in an army hospital,
and he must make it possible for the Ministry ol Finance to
know and explain, for instance, the differing expense of dental
services in schools and in the army and navy. Wherever
there is an attempt to keep the size of a departmental staff
at the minimum, the last place for contraction m personnel
is in the financial section; for here, ultimately, is the true
watchdog of the taxpayer.

Every ministry, thirdly, must possess a committee of
members of the legislative assembly with whom it is in
organised relationship. I have already dealt with the nature
and functions of these committees. Here it may further be
pointed out that, as we come clearly to see the nature of


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 871

administration, these committees will grow in their possible
significance.

It is important, fourthly, to make definite arrangement
for inter-departmental co-operation. Obviously such co¬
operation takes many different forms. There is need, for
instance, for the development of continuous consultation
between departments like the Board of Trade and the
Ministry of Labour for the resolution of their joint problems.
In part those problems are specific, as where a proposed
bill concerns the interests of each, and in part, also, they are
general, as where the heads of each department may explore
some common issue which touches them both. No one, I
think, can survey the methods used by the governments of
modem States without the sense that far too little effort is
made to pool experience in an organised way. There are,
indeed, mechanisms to this end, like the Committee of Imperial
Defence in England. But it ought to be a regular habit
for the officials of the Department of Overseas Trade to meet
the officials of the Foreign Office Members of the public
services must learn to live together and to think together if
their expertise is to be more than a routine. The same thing,
of course, is true intra-departmentally as well In this aspect,
one British ministry * has deliberately reorganised itself in
order to utilise on a single plane the wide competence that
is at its disposal. And even while one need not minimise
the value of the doubtless considerable informal discussion
that takes place, it is better to know that discussion of this
kind has become habitual in administration, and that a
definite place has been found for it, than to suppose that men
will realise its urgency from the simple facts of experience.

Not less vital than any of these is the importance of making
special provision for research and inquiry. One of the great
weaknesses in the modern governmental system is the small
loom we leave for services of this kind A government needs
to think ahead. It needs to work at the problems of peace
in the same way as a general staff works at the problems of
war. It must plan out the lines of possible policy, collect
the facts needed to develop those lines m all their relationships,
seek to weigh them duly as they seem to have significance.

• The Board of Trade Cl Cd 8912 of 1918,


872 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Little of this work can be taken in their stride by officials
already burdened with administrative duties, any more than
a general officer in the held can be charged with securing
the munitions that he needs. The more, indeed, we leave
free the heads of departments to think out the correlation
of policy, the higher will be its policy. But we require, also,
in each department a group of officials whose main business
is research into its problems; and beyond those special
investigations of departmental incidence we need a mechanism,
always in vivid touch with the departments themselves, for
correlating special researches and undertaking inquiries of
which the significance is wider than the making of immediate
policy would involve. Such a need is implicitly recognised,
both in England and the United States, by the existence of
committees like that of the Privy Council on Medical Research
and of such bodies as the Geological Survey at Washington.
But they everywhere lack co-ordination; and they have not,
so far, developed that relationship to departmental work
which would enable, say, the Board of Trade to call upon the
Committee for Medical Research to investigate the health
conditions of seamen’s quarters in ocean liners; or the Com¬
mittee on Scientific and Industrial Research to apply its
powers to the problem of the degree to which the exposure
to heat of stokers may be diminished. Nothing can ever
compensate for the absence in a State (a) of systematic and
organised research, and (6) the accumulation of material likely
to bear on social processes.

What would such arrangements involve f There are, I
think, three general ways in which research of importance
may be carried on under governmental authority. There may
be direct inquiry by departments themselves. Much work
of this kind is already undertaken. Each department of the
modem State has broadly come to realise that it must have
available for its work the body of recorded knowledge upon
the matters with which it deals. It must be able, also, to
collect at short notice the materials which will enable it to
answer the persistent inquiries of members of the legislative
assembly upon questions within its competence. It must be
able, again, though in a limited way, to undertake inquiries
into subjects directly affecting its work. An admirable example


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 378

of the latter type of work is the volumes of special inquiries
of the Board of Education in England.

A second type of research is not less important. There
may be inquiries not directly carried on by any one depart¬
ment, though supervised by it in conjunction with others.
Thus, for instance, the Home Office in England may co-operate
with the Mine Rescue Apparatus Committee of the Depart¬
ment of Research under the Privy Council m the attempt to
develop safety in mines The Ministry of Agriculture could
co-operate with the Food Investigation Board * The dif¬
ference between the first and second types of xesearch lies
not merely in the different personnel by "'whom it is made,
but also in the fact that, in the second case, those who make
the report have no responsibility for its application. Their
work is done when their conclusions are presented. They do
not assist in pressing for their utilisation, nor do they share
in administering their results. They act simply and solely
as a fact-finding body. How should such research be
organised ? It needs, I suggest, a body akin in structure to
the Committee for Imperial Defence for its direction. To it
would be entrusted (i) the co-ordination of research, (2) the
development of relations with non-governmental and foreign
bodies engaged in work analogous to its own, (3) the com¬
munication of its results and knowledge to the- departments
mainly affected by them. It would, clearly, work largely
through advisory committees of experts, both official and
non-official. It would cultivate the closest relations possible
with the universities and independent research bodies which,
like the universities, have a slightly scientific character. It
should, I think, be directly undei the control of the Prime
Minister, in otu.er both to emphasise the importance of its
work, and to secure that its most urgent discoveries are properly
represented in the highest quarter. Such a method of organisa¬
tion has the special advantage of making the Prune Minister
responsible to the legislative assembly for the efficient conduct
of investigation.

The third type of research is that which, while stimulated

1 Cf Report oj the Miuhmerv oj (jo\erum,ni (Ohmnttrr p 1Since this,
was written the Committee on Civil Research largely planned, 1 believe, by
the late Lord Haldane .has come into lieing on almost exactly the model here
outlined (1910)


874 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

into activity by such a body as the Committee outlined above,
would be carried out independently of it. There is a great
deal of work for which complete independence in investigation
is desirable, especially in the social sciences. A government
department may announce conclusions on forestry or meteor¬
ology without the suspicion of bias being attached to its results.
But when we pass to problems in which the personal factor
is large, there is much to be said for confining the part of
government to assistance in the collection of material, or
provision of facilities (including financial facilities) for the
independent investigation of problems of which the urgency
is obvious. One or two examples will, perhaps, make this
clear. There are problems, the most suitable unit of organisa¬
tion in trade unions, for instance, in which an independent
group with full access to the materials would probably do
better work than a government department; much the same
is true of such questions as the dilution of skilled labour, and
the conservation of coal. The more we can persuade bodies
like the universities consciously to devote themselves to work
of this kind, checking or corroborating, if need be, the work
of officials, the better will be the quality of information at
our disposal. We rest satisfied a little easily with a govern¬
ment report as the last word upon its problem. Of its
integrity as a body of findings there is rarely, at least in
England, much room for question. But exactly as the
physicist and the biologist will repeat, almost to exhaustion,
the experiments of their confreres, so do we need the repetition
of social analyses. Once the government has reasons ’
assurance that the work is undertaken in a scientific spirit,
it ought to give all the assistance in its power, without regard
to the probable result of the inquiry. In no other way can
we obtain the representation of all the varying points of view
entitled to their say. At present, the tendency of a govern¬
ment, where it seeks outside expert aid, is to restrict the
possession of expertise to those who can be relied upon for
eminently “ safe ” conclusions. Yet even in a government
department the ferment of a brilliant radical would not be
without its advantages. The British Treasury, for instance,
may be right in its steadfast adherence to the mystic truth
of the gold standard; but it would be comforting to know


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 875

that it had a research branch in which doubts of that truth
could be officially pursued.

It is essential, further, to hring the public into organised
relations with the executive as an administrative body. Here,
as I believe, is the largest field for experiment that we
possess; here, also, governments show themselves perhaps
more conservative than in any other area of activity. Their
attitude possesses a certain regalian atmosphere of secrecy,
which belongs rather to the temper of bureaucracy, than to
the democratic state. The theses we lay down are simple
enough. The making of policy, we assume, is the more suc¬
cessful, the larger the number of affected interests consulted
in its construction. The business of government is to draw
upon their experience, not as itself it interprets that experience,
but as the interests themselves give expression to it. The
administration of policy, in the second place, ought to involve
the association with it of all bodies directly influenced by its
results, and it should, wherever possible, be decentralised in
order to leave room for the largest flexibility in application.

Let us consider, first, the kind of satisfaction afforded to
these theses by a modem government, and take the case of
England as an example. We have a number of ministries
which possess statutory advisory committees, of which the
Board of Education and the Scottish Education Department
are the most notable examples. We have other committees
which are not statutory, but exist at the discretion of the
minister concerned, like the business men’s committee of the
Post Office, and, during the war, the Consumers’ Council of
the Ministry of Food. We have also certain types of specialised
committee, of which good instances are the Adult Education
Committee at the Board of Education, and the Prison
Education Committee at the Home Office. Now what is
notable about these committees is that the minister has
exclusive discretion over their personnel, and exclusive dis¬
cretion over the subject-matter he will submit to them. They
are active or passive as he pleases. They have no rights, and
their duties are limited to the subjects he thinks it worth
while to consult them about. Clearly, it is proper that he
should, as he is, be free to accept or reject their advice
as he pleases; otherwise his ministerial responsibility to the


876 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

legislative assembly would be seriously unpaired. But the
outstanding fact about the committees is their wraith-like
character. They are merely concessions to a sense that they
are the means of securing public confidence in the work of
the department; but there is no evidence that they are in
any way substantial.

Secondly, we have ministries in which the administration
has a decentralised character. That is true, on the one side,
of ministries like the Board of Education which works through
the ordinary agencies of local government; of the Ministry
of Pensions, on the other, which builds itself upon a hier¬
archical system of local advisory tribunals with large powers ;
the ultimate authority being reserved to the ministry itself.
But, in general, the striking fact about administration is the
power of the central government at Whitehall. The effort
is constantly after uniformity of procedure, not less than
uniformity of principle. That has not, indeed, gone so far
as the amazing centralisation of France which results, as
Lamennais said, in apoplexy at the centre, and anaemia at
the extremities. But it has gone sufficiently far to have
evoked interesting and important protest, 1 and it has thereby
evinced the natural tendency of all authontv to accrete power
to itself, with but little regard to the results of the accretion.

Of the value of advisory bodies there is now no room for
doubt. " We think,” reported Lord Haldane’s Committee
on the Machinery of Government,’ ' that the more they are
regarded as an integral part of the normal organisation of
a department, the more will ministers be enabled to command
the confidence of Parliament and the public in their adminis¬
tration of the services which seem likely in an increasing
degree to affect the lives of large sections of the community.”
“ Committees,” writes Sir Arthur Salter,3 “ are an invaluable
instrument for breaking administrative measures on to the
back of the public. Modem government often involves action
affecting the interests, and requiring the goodwill, either of
large sections of the community, or of the community as a

* Reports oj commsswns cm Industrial Unrest (1917). Bulletin 137 of the
U S. Bureau of Labour, p 49

» Report, p w

1 The Development of the Civil Sennet, p 220.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 377

whole. The action cartnot be made acceptable without
detailed explanation of this necessity, for which mere announce¬
ments in the press are insufficient In such cases the prior
explanation and the assent of committees of representative
men who, if convinced, will carry the assent of the several
sections of the communitv who look to them as leaders, will
be ot the greatest possible value " “ The committees,” says
Sir Andrew Ogilvie of the advisory committee of business
men on public telephones, 1 “ did most excellent work
in the provinces , . (They) took a sensible and business¬
like view of the matters that came before them A certain
competitive feeling between the different public bodies con¬
cerned made them select good representatives Groundless
complaints were discouraged They were satisfied that the
management was intelligent and considerate, and the feeling
of mistrust which the British public entertain towards all
State officials was largely overcome ”

What should be the functions of such committees, and
how should they be composed 5 Let me first emphasise the
functions they ought not to fulfil They are to advise about
administration , but they are neither to direct nor to control
it. That is in part because the notion of ministerial respon¬
sibility to the legislative assembly must be left unimpaired,
m part because, as I believe, the root of all effective adminis¬
tration is the devolution of responsibility upon an individual.
They are not, secondly, to prepare policy They may offer
suggestions when it has been prepared, or even indicate
subjects which require attention , but the definition of measures
is essentially a matter for the minister and his subordinates.
They cannot, thirdly, commit outside bodies to agreement.
They are not bodies of delegates in the sense of carrying a
mandate for any particular plans; they are called, not for
their authority, but for their counsel They must never,
fourthly, have access to information about the proposed
purchase of materials by the government in its capacity as
trader ; anyone who considers, for instance, the functions of
the Treasury in England m such matters as the purchase of
foreign exchange, and the issue of Treasury Bills, will realise
that secrecy of operations m such matters is essential. Nor

■ lind , p 108,


878 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

ought they in general, I think, to be consulted about negotia¬
tions between a government and a foreign power; publicity
here seems in place rather in relation to the ratification of
results accomplished than of intervention in a delicate process
where premature disclosure may be fatal. Above all, they
should, as committees, be confidential in character, and
without power to disclose collective resolutions to the public
at large. But the minister, of course, ought to have the
right tc authorise the publication of such decisions if he, and
the committee, thought publication desirable.

These are elementary limitations. Before we can discuss
what such committees can do, it is important to establish
the nature of their composition. It must, I think, be first
of all postulated that advisory committees which cover the
whole field of departmental competence are generally a mistake.
What is wanted is the power to be consulted on the points
which affect special interests; and the opinion of a business
man, say upon technical problems of engineering, is not worth
a great deal. Even in an area like that covered by the Board
of Education, what we require is rather special, than general,
knowledge ; we need the experience of teachers in secondary
schools, in universities, in elementary schools, rather than to
take a number of people eminent in education and to place
before them all the various issues with which the ministry
is concerned. In the building of such committees, two points
are of importance. The committee, m the first place, must
be small; otherwise it will inevitably become a small con¬
ference in which there will be speeches, but not discussion.
It must, in the second place, be representative. Those who
attend there must be persons who command the confidence
of the interests which are affected by the work of the par¬
ticular department. Generally a committee of not more than
twenty members seems the right size for such a body. It
ought to be composed of two parts ; (a) a majority chosen
by representative associations in the different interests, such
as industries, affected by administration; (b) a minority
chosen by the minister to represent the public and special
bodies sufficiently, though indirectly, concerned to need the
protection of representation. Thus, for example, on a Com¬
mittee of the Board of Education to deal with the elementary


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 879

schools, there would be representatives of such bodies as the
National Union of Teachers, the Assistant Mistresses'
Association, of the bodies which represent teachers in secondary
schools, and so forth. A committee of the Home Office to
deal with legislation about factories would comprise repre¬
sentatives of the trade unions, of the National Union of
Manufacturers, together with specialists in the physiology of
industrial fatigue and m industrial law A committee of the
Board of Trade on patents would include representatives of
the Institute of Patentees lawyers specially expert m patent
law, and, one may suggest, nominees of such bodies as the
Royal Society and the Institute of Electrical Engineers. A
committee of the Ministry of Health on the administration
of grants-m-aid would comprise representatives of popular
bodies like the County Councils’ Association, of professional
bodies like the Institute of Municipal Treasurers, and the
National Association of Local Government Officers, and con¬
sumers' bodies such as Ratepayers' Associations. Obviously,
it is impossible for me here to draw up either a list of the
necessary committees or of the bodies which should be repre¬
sented on them In any case, such lists would be obsolete
before they were made What, above all, I am concerned
to urge, are the two principles of special competence, on the
one hand, and of nominated representation on the other.

I urge the first because, exactly as I earlier rejected the
idea of a vocational body on the ground that a given
vocation has no necessary relevance to general problems, so,
similarly, I believe that the general committee would have
little relevance. It is essential, if these committees are to
function as creative institutions, that they should deal with
an area that is a matter of vital interest to their members,
and about which the opinion of those members cannot be
weighed lightly even by the most sturdy bureaucrat. Wherever
problems arose which interested more than one committee
it would be a simple matter to submit it to both and, if
necessary, to have a joint meeting of them for its consideration.
I urge the principle of nominated representation upon two
grounds I believe, first, that a member nominated by a
minister never feels himself so free as one who is there as
of right. The former is inhibited by complex emotions it


880 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

is better to minimise at the outset; and, secondly, ministerial
choice makes the problem of reappointment and removal
difficult. I envisage nominated representation as being for
a period of three yeajfs, renewal of nomination being within
the absolute discretion of the appointing body. The minister
ought not to be able to prevent an unpleasant choice. He
needs a committee to scrutinise, not merely to approve his
policy. The members should, preferably, be elected by the
councils of their nominating bodies, miners by the executive
of the Miners' Federation, teachers by the council of the
National Union of Teachers, and so forth. They should also
be paid for their services sufficiently to compensate for lost
time, but not enough to make their election sought after on
grounds of income. The value, I think, of such method of
choice lies in the facts that (i) it makes it easy for the
nominating body to express its views to its representative,
and (a) that it provides for a continuous interest in his work
on the part of the constituency he represents.

What should be the functions of these committees ? This
is, it must be admitted, a delicate problem; for, just as in
the case of the legislative committees discussed above, much
will turn upon the personality of eacn minister and his chief
officials. A strong minister, as I think, will know how to use
the committees with which he deals as an invaluable repository
of suggestion and opinion ; a weak minister will be tempted
either to evade them through timidity, or to accept their
views as the embodiment of public opinion without the effort,
where he disagrees, to strike out a strong line of his own and
risk the consequences. But I do not believe that the danger
is any greater than that which surrounds the relationship
of a weak minister to his permanent officials. And, in this
latter case, the value of the committee lies in its being an
additional check upon the limitations of a bureaucracy which
too easily, in any event, evades the categories of public opinion.

The large functions of these committees would be four
in number. The committee would be entitled to prior
consultation on all proposed bills. When a department
contemplated a new statute it would submit it to the com¬
mittee (of course, in confidence) for criticism. There would
be conferences between the minister and his permanent


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 881

official*, ob the one aide, and the committee on the other.
The bill would be explained; its clauses would be criticised
in the light of the committee's experience and knowledge;
while the minister would be free either to reject, or to accept,
the suggestions he received. There will, of course, be
emergency legislation upon which there is no time for the
committee to be properly consulted. Here, it would be
possible, upon the introduction of the bill, for the minister
to be made statutorily responsible for convening the com¬
mittee on a request from two-thirds (or some such proportion)
of its members; and, in that eyent, the suggestions they choose
to make might go to the appropriate legislative committee
for introduction as amendments in the committee stage of
the bill in the legislative assembly. What, at any rate, would
be secured would be that on all matured and fundamental
plans the interests involved were able fully to state their
attitude before the enacting legislation had become a matter
of prestige with the ministry which introduced it.

The committees, secondly, would be consulted upon
general administrative policy. Here, once more, the matters
for its discussion would clearly depend a good deal upon the
minister. If he chose to act without consultation, nothing
could prevent him from doing so. But I think most of the
difficulties in this regard could be obviated by making it
possible for each member to suggest matters for discussion,
and entitling him, in the event of ministerial objection, to
an explanation of the hostile attitude. Instances of general
administrative policy may be taken from various fields. If
the Minister of Education, for instance, chose to raise, under
statutory powers, the school-leaving age to sixteen, he would
consult with the appropriate committee of his department;
and, clearly, it would be his duty to acquaint the Minister of
Labour with his proposal, and obtain from the advisory
committees of the latter department an expression of opinion
upon his policy from the peculiar angle of their special
interests. If the Minister of Labour proposed to establish
a trade board in a sweated industry, he would act similarly.
If the Minister of the Colonies proposed to make elementary
education compulsory for natives, he would consult his
advisory committee on native affairs, in which, in all likelihood.


882 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

tbere would be a special sub-committee on the problems of
native education. So, too, with housing. The Ministry of
Health could present its difficulties to committees of builders,
of the building trade unions, of architects, and of medical
men. There is, I think, no aspect of policy in which a minister
has to make decisions in which he could fail, by a careful
use of his committees, to obtain illumination upon his needs.

The committees, thirdly, would be empowered to make
suggestions. Here, indeed, is one of the sources of their work
in which, by careful exploration, there seems the prospect of
high utility. Their suggestions ought to cover the widest
possible area. They ought to indicate the need for inquiry
to the intelligence branch of the ministry. Where their
suggestion covers a field outside the total competence of the
department, it ought to be referred to the Government
Committee on Research with a recommendation from the
minister, the committee being always free to act upon its
own views. There are few people who would be chosen for
service upon these committees who would not be able to put
forward ideas it would be well worth while to explore.
Anyone who has talked with a group of miners about their
work will have realised how wide is their field of suggestion,
over every side of the mining industry, which now goes unused.
The same is true of the best teachers. It is, I think, one of
the few ways open to us to correct the dangers of professional
conservatism. A committee of a Ministry of Justice, for
example, upon which the lay mind as well as the legal mind
found place, could indicate a score of places in the law where
the need for revision and experiment is essential. Legal
protection for the poor in civil, no less than criminal, cases, 1
the administration of prisons, the treatment of debtors, the
relation between the press and justice in sensational crime,
are only a few of the many problems to which such a com¬
mittee would inevitably draw attention. At present we
investigate them not because they are obviously there but
because, at some special moment, an ugly instance compels
immediate inquiry. It was known in England for years that

* Cf. R. Hcber Smith, Justice and the Poor (New York, J919), is a mine
of information on this question; the nearest English equivalent I know is
Judge Parry's The Law and the Poor.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 888

our law of lunacy was In grave need of revision. The official
inquiry merely whitewashed the actual administration; and
it was only the dramatic nature of Harnett v. Adam and Bond 1
which drove the Government to appoint a Royal Commission.
We can. if we choose to utilise our experience, be forehanded
about these matters. But we shall only be forehanded by
creating the institutions to compel forehandedness.

The fourth use to which these committees could be put
turns upon a more technical matter which I shall examine
below. It is well known that the growing area of state-
activity has transformed the major part of legislation from
detailed and exhaustive statutes into skeleton acts the details
of which are, in various ways, filled in by the departments
concerned. This delegated legislation has now grown to
dimensions so immense that it easily out-distances the amount
of law-making directly due to the legislative assembly. It is,
I think, mcieasingly necessary to protect the public against
bureaucratic abuse of these powers. That is a negative
function It is, also, a policy of wisdom to have at hand
consultative bodies of competence which can express their
views upon the employment ot delegated authority. In each
case these committees are an instrument which seems
naturally designed for these ends. What, generally, I suggest
is that no department shall issue orders under its delegated
powers without having first consulted the appropriate con¬
sultative committee ; and that in the event of objection from
the latter the order shall not be issued without the specific
approval of the legislative assembly.

So tar, I have been concerned with these committees in
their central aspect, as they bear upon administration at its
ultimate source of direction. But there is no reason to con¬
fine an instrument of this kind to Whitehal' and Washington,
to Parts and Berlin Every State passes a multitude of
statutes upon which local comment and suggestion would be
invaluable at the centres of their application. I have already
quoted Sir Andrew Ogilvie’s praise of the work done in
England before the war by local committees on the telephone
service. Similar testimony exists on a variety of other

1 Though T believe a departmental committee had previously sat On
the whole problem set M Lomax, Experiences of an Asylum Doctor


#84 4 GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

matters, especially in the organisation of food rationing in
England during the war. What I suggest is a large extension
of these committees, not by nomination at ’the discretion of
the minister, but, as in the case of the central bodies, by
nomination from representative bodies concerned. Thus, for
example, there would be in each local education authority
a committee of teachers, parents, medical men, and so on,
charged with the business of reporting directly upon educa¬
tional administration. They would point out that the local
authority was tending to engage too many uncertificated
teachers ; that the schools were not being adequately repaired ;
that there was an insufficient relation between the schools and
the public library service. The minister, in his turn, would
bring their reports before the local education authority; and
there would, as 1 think, grow up from this network of relation¬
ships a genuine interest on the spot in the quality of service
supplied.

So, similarly, with measures iike the Factor}' Acts. Every¬
one knows that no State has a sufficient service of inspection
to be able to prevent whole evasion of their provisions. There
should, I suggest, be a system of regional committees which
would supervise the administration of factory law- They
ought to be competent to receive complaints, and, if need be,
report them to the local judiciary for the purpose of prose¬
cution. Similarly, agricultural committees could deal with
problems like the taxation of a minimum wage in the given
area, with rural credits, with the promotion of agricultural
co-operation, with conditions of tenancy, and so on. The
committees ought always to deal with an area large enough
to permit it to undertake genuine administrative functions.

I shall give reasons in a later chapter why much of the petty
jurisdiction now performed under statute by subordinate
magistrates could more usefully be performed by tribunals
constituted from committees of this kind ; they might inflict
fines for the evasion of Factory Acts, Trade Boards Acts
and the like. We ought to have local advisory bodies on
railway service, on electricity supply, on, in fact, every
function where the incidence of administration on persons
gives birth to experience which involves suggestiveness. These
bodies should always be articulated to the central executive.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 886

They should be provided with the official assistance necessary
to make them effective. They should have the means and
place of regular meeting. They should have the opportunity
to publish their comment and suggestion. They will, I think,
do much to prevent the atmosphere of administration from
degenerating into the issue of orders, on the one hand, and
their indifferent acceptance on the other. They will provide
means for utilising the services of men who now avoid public
life, either because they are unwilling to undergo the process
of election, or because their interest is not in the general
complex of governmental functions, but in a single aspect
of that complex. They popularise the administrative process
by widening the area of persons able to scrutinise its substance
from an angle of competence. They provide for a constant
interchange of opinion and ideas between the centre and the
circumference of government. They leave untouched that
need in government for simple and intelligible institutions
which I discussed earlier in this book. They prevent authority
from degenerating into anarchy by the indefinite division of
power. They prevent it from becoming autocratic by sub¬
jecting it, at each stage, to the pressure of an opinion that
is generally informed, on the one hand, and specially com¬
petent on the other They bring the organised interests of
men, their churches, their trade unions and the rest mto a
definite relation with the central government. They make it
possible for the activities of that government to bear through¬
out the impress of external opinion. They make it live in
a constant stream of criticism ana inquiry. Not least, they
will provide, increasingly, for a growing decentralisation of
function. Local officials will find themselves, in their struggles
with the central executive, backed by a body of support
which ministers will find it difficult to neglect.

What, broadly, these bodies will do is to interpret the law.
“ The meaning of a statute," writes Professor Cohen, 1 " con¬
sists m the system of social consequences to which it leads,
or of the solution to all the possible social questions that can
arise under it These solutions or systems of consequences

• The Process of judicial Legislation, in 48 American Law Fevieui (1914).
pp. 161. 183 The italics are Professor Cohens I should like here to
emphasise the debt 1 owe to this brilliant paper.

25


•M A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

cannot be determined solely from the words used, but require
a knowledge of the social conditions to which the law is to
be applied as well as of the circumstances which lead to its
enactment. . . . The meaning of a statute, then, is a judicial
creation in the light of social demands. It decides not so
much what the legislature actually intended, nor what the
words of a statute ordinarily mean, but what the public, taking
all the circumstances of the case into account, should act on.”
The committees here suggested will explain what are the
consequences of a statute. They will build up, consciously,
and in the light of experience, a code of tradition which will
make a vital impact upon the meaning of law. Its commands
will be shot through with the knowledge of those who feel
its results. They will be embedded in an experience made
articulate through institutions seeking deliberately to give it
expression. These bodies will, as I have explained, be
advisory ; but I do not suppose that it will be easy to neglect
their advice. For what they will counsel will bear upon its
face the impact of a knowledge to which no others can
pretend. They will interpret law, and therefore they will
make the law. For they will bring into the light of day the
true consequences of law, as those are felt by the men who
suffer them. They will determine, therefore, the way in which
it is applied. They will indicate, accordingly, necessary change
and necessary amendment. They will give each interest in
the community organic connection, as an interest with the
State. They will infuse its purpose with their own purposes.
They will supplement its partial and inadequate glimpse -of
the total volume of social experience by giving it direct access
to the knowledge, emotions, ideas, of which they are the
depositories. They cannot paralyse administration by shatter'
ing power into fragments; but they can assist adminis¬
tration by building the bridges necessary to its passage to
the purpose at which it aims. They preserve the primacy
of that civic sphere which, as I have urged, gives the State its
special place in society; but they emphasise, by organising
the power of dissent, the places where that primacy is inade¬
quately understood or deliberately unrealised. They are at
once a warning and encouragement to the executive, and an
assistance to the legislature. A warning and encouragement


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 887

to the one because they indicate openly the limits within
which it may work; and to the other an assistance because
they give it the body of facts out of which there can grow
both the criticism and the enactments that are its functions.

One other word should be said in this connection. I have
urged, both in the case of central and of local committees,
that their sphere is rather, to use Hamilton’s distinction,
influence than government They will rather communicate
opinion than actually either administer or legislate. It may
be added, first, that the boundary between these categories
is one of convenience rather than reality ; and, secondly, that
it will probably be found in experience that they both, but
especially the local committees, will be growingly charged
with duties under statutes of minor administration and
inspection. They will, I believe, inevitably accrete to them¬
selves a rule-making power. Over and above certain minima
laid down at the centre and enforced by it, they will add
new demands upon the area they survey as their instructed
judgment deems warranted. They will become, m short,
centres of power administering it in the light of a direct
experience not otherwise available. They will suffuse that
administration with the needs that can never be expressed
in uniform terms. They will give to government a flexible
morphology which has been so far lacking because it has
usually meant, as in America before the Federal Constitution,
and France before 1789, the absence of the necessary powers
of co-ordination. It will have the great merit of shifting the
area of the subject administered to meet its special wants.
It will revivify that notion of citizenship as the capacity not
less to rule than to be ruled, which is the great gift of the
city-State to our own times.


VIII

I have spoken of administration as the process of applying
the law enacted by the legislature. But that is, in fact, to
give an incomplete account of its scope and significance.
For administration, the world over, involves far more thaw
the scrutiny of statutes for the knowledge of the regulations
under which the citizen body lives. Sometimes a government


888 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

department is entrusted with wide powers. Sometimes these
derive from such a prerogative source as the King in Council,
or the ordinance-making authority of the President of France.
Sometimes they are conferred upon such statutory bodies as
the General Medical Council. What is always typical of the
modern State is that, over and above the general law-making
authority, there will be found a number of subordinate
authorities with the power to bind citizens as though they were
making statutes.

This position is tbe inevitable result of the growing pressure
of business in the modem legislature. Parliament in England,
the Reichstag in Germany, the Chambers m France, have
simply not the time to compile statutes so minutely detailed
as to meet every possible situation which may arise. They
have not the time, and they have not trie competence. For
not only is the modem legislative assembly, from its mere
size, inapt to the construction of technical details, but also
it is impossible to predict the type of problem which will arise
under any statute; and many problems will occur which
cannot be brought under any foreseen legislative solution.
In all such cases it is necessary* to entrust powers to the
executive, sometimes, though not always, defining to which
department of the executive the power is entrusted. The
British Post Office will tell the inhabitant of London how
much he is to pay for a letter to Mauntius. The Ministry
of Labour will tell anyone who proposes to set up a business
whether the type of manufacture in which he proposes to
engage is governed, and how it is governed, bv the Trade
Boards Act of 1909. The Foreign Office wi'- tch him whether
the city of Hong-Kong, to which he proposes to emigrate,
has had the dozen acts applied there which, by the Foreign
Judicature Act of 1890, may be applied by Order-in-Council
to any foreign territory where the King has jurisdiction. He
will learn of court fees not from the Judicature Acts, but
from the Rules of the Supreme Court. He will know what
he is to do if onion-smut breaks out on his farm in Essex
from regulations made by the Board of Agriculture. He will
not find a list of official poisons in any statute, but in regula¬
tions issued by, and changeable at the instance of, the Home
Office and the Pharmaceutical Society. If he has a son at


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 880

a secondary school whom he would like, if a scholarship is
available, to send to Oxford, he must consult the regulations
of the Board of Education about scholarships from secondary
schools to universities. If he wishes to earn his living by
setting up a civil aviation line from London to Amsterdam,
he will find that the regulations are not in the Air Navigation
Act of 1920, but the many Orders in Council issued thereunder.
If he wishes to know the price of a summons for non-payment
of debt, he will find it not under the Metropolitan Police Act,
as in 1839, but in tables prepared and issued by the Home
Office. The situation in which he finds himself may perhaps
best be put by saying that the King in Parliament will, on
the average, pass some eighty statutes each year, while the
number of orders and rules mad 2 by the executive will be
about thirty times as many.

The result is not merely seen in this virtual creation of
many law-making bodies. It is seen also in the limits which
develop upon the jurisdiction of the courts. Administrative
bodies not only find themselves compelled to undertake
judicial duties, but also to perform them in such a way that
the courts are excluded from scrutiny of their operations.
It has been decided by the highest English tribunal that
when a government department assumes quasi-judicial
functions the absence of express enactment in the enabling
statute means that the department is free to embark upon
what procedure seems best to it; nor will the courts inquire
whether such procedure results, or could result, in justice.'
It has been decided by the highest American tribunal that
the decisions of the Secretary of Labour in all immigration
cases are final,' so that, for instance, a Japanese bom in
America could be excluded from the United States on his
return from a visit to Canada on the fiat of an executive
department no longer amenable to the rule of law. It has
J»een held there, also, that the findings of an expert com¬
mission are final, and will not be discussed again by the
courts.3 The ordinance power of the French President is,

1 Arltdge v Local Government Board (1915), AC. 120.

* U.S v. Ju Toy. 198 U S 253

3 Baltimore <£ Ohio R K Co v Pitcairn Coal Co, 215 U.S. 481 ; J.C.C.
v. Union Pacific R R. Co , 222 U S 541


880 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

similarly, beyond judicial scrutiny. The Insurance Com¬
missioners in England are also, in many ways, beyond the
power of the courts. Obviously, a development of this kind
needs ample safeguards unless it is to result in a grave invasion
of public liberty. That is overwhelmingly apparent when it
is remembered that in England, the classic home of the rule
of law, a single regulation of the Defence of the Realm Act
was held to have nullified a fundamental statute like Habeas
Corpus. 1

Much, indeed, of this development is perfectly intelligible.
Where, for example, great problems like those involved in
government insurance are concerned, there is undoubtedly a
great convenience in leaving their interpretation to the officials
who are solving them as a part of their daily routine. They
have gained in its application an expertise to which no purely
judicial body can pretend; and their opinion has a weight
which no community can dare to neglect. The business of
the State, in fact, is so much like private business that, as
Professor Dicey has emphasised, its officials need “ that
freedom of action necessarily possessed by every private
person in the management of his own personal concerns.”*
So much is tolerably clear. But historic experience suggests
that the relation of executive justice derived from a rule¬
working power to the slow infiltration of a bureaucratic regime
is dangerously close. The safeguards against abuse of those
powers is, therefore, at least as urgent as the need for powers
themselves. Where do the remedies lie ?

Let us take the problems in their logical order. We need
(a) securities against the making of intolerable or unnecessary
rules, and ( b) adequate protection against undue invasion of
the judicial prerogative. The first great need, clearly, is that
all delegation of power should be revocable. It may prove
to work badly. It may be shown, though good in itself, to
have been entrusted to a body which is unsuited to administer
it. It may need the addition of special limiting clauses to
its exercise. Delegation should, therefore, always be revocable
by the legislative assembly. The limits of powers conferred

■ R. v. Holliday (1917), A.C 226. But note the dissenting opinion of
Lord Shaw.

• 31 Law Quarterly Review (1915), p. 150.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS Ml

should always be laid down with strictness, and there should
never be authority to exclude the courts from judicial definition
of that limit. The reason for this second restriction has been
stated admirably by Lord Shaw. “ The form,” he says of
the English system, 1 " in modern times of using the Privy
Council as the executive channel for statutory power is
measured, and must be measured strictly, by the ambit of
the legislative pronouncement. That channel itself ... is
simply the government of the day. ... In so far as the
mandate has been exceeded, there lurks the element of a
transition to arbitrary government and therein of grave
constitutional and public danger. The increasing crush of
legislative efforts, and the convenience to the executive of a
refuge in the device of Orders in Council would increase that
danger tenfold were the judiciary to approach any action
of the government in a spirit of compliance rather than of
independent scrutiny. That way also would lie public unrest
and public peril.” In the third place, the department making
rules should always consult particular interests affected by
the use of its powers before they are issued. Here, as I think,
is the place where the advisory committees discussed above
would have high value. No department should have the
power to issue rules until they have been presented to the
appropriate committees for criticism. If they are ratified
there, they should then go through their normal forms of
publicity and announcement. If the committee rejects them,
they should immediately be communicated to the legislative
assembly with the announcement that objection has been
taken to them ; and, in that event, they should not legally
come into operation until they have been definitely confirmed
by resolution of the legislative assembly. The advantage of
this safeguard is that it assures a proper scrutiny of orders
by those who are likely to experience their results. It prevents
a body of officials from imposing their will upon the community
without other sanction than their own necessarily limited
experience. There should, fourthly, always be adequate
arrangements to ensure full publicity for the orders issued.
Though, in theory, all citizens of the modem State know all
its laws, there is, in practice, a certain visible hiatus in their

• R. v. Haiti day, iii sxpra, at p. 287.


89* A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

knowledge; and it would, I think, be wise to make the
departments explain their proposals for publication to the
advisory committees. Not all London shopkeepers, for
instance, make a habit of reading the London Gazette; and
their taste for professional literature should be reached so far
as possible.

We move to a somewhat different range of problems when
we are concerned, not with government departments, but with
local and special bodies with the power to make rules. Man¬
chester can make bye-laws ; so can the colleges of Oxford and
Cambridge, and the Southern Railway. How can we safe¬
guard ourselves against abuse by them of their opportunities ?
For, unquestionably, they will do queer things: a local
authority in England has actually prohibited " lounging ” on
Sunday afternoons, and German municipalities have pro¬
hibited boys from playing football in the streets. The
difficulty here is to prevent stupid legislation, while, at the
same time, there is no undue restriction upon the power of
the local body to exercise a full initiative. If Oxford
University, for instance, legislates against compulsory Greek,
there ought not to be anywhere in existence an overriding
power ; yet few will disagree that such power ought not to
extend so far as to allow Cambridge University the right to
exclude women from membership. At present, we have, as
a rule, two forms of safeguard. The legal character of any
bye-law may be tested in the courts, and new bye-laws must
be submitted, like those of the railway companies in England
to the Ministry of Transport, to some specified government
department which may refuse to ratify them. Of the former
type of control, there can be no question ; it is inherent in
the degree of validity we have sought to establish for the
doctrine of the separation of powers. The second type is,
I think, more questionable. In the case of a commercial body
like a railway company, it matters less than in the case of
a body which, like a municipal corporation, derives much of
its authority from the will of the electorate. In either case,
control by officials means the interposition of a departmental
will over the will of persons to whom the powers used do in
fact belong, and whose initiative, therefore, ought not to lie
directly within the discretion of a bureaucracy. The safe-


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 898

guards, I suggest, should be of two kinds. In the case of
a commercial body, the disallowance of a rule ought only to
be made after the proposed disallowance has been communi¬
cated to the legislative committee of the department; it
would then be open to any of the latter to raise the question
in the legislature. In the case of bodies like municipal
corporations, or the universities, disallowance ought never to
be exercised save in one of two ways : (i) if the disallowance
is on the legal ground that the proposed rule is ultra vires,
it ought to take the form only of a warning which the public
body is authorised to test in the courts ; (2) if the disallowance
is on the ground that the substance of the proposed rule is
undesirable, the department ought directly to report its views
to the legislative assembly, leaving the latter body to annul
it, if it thinks fit. For if a municipality does think fit to
prohibit Sunday " lounging,” it is better, I believe, to allow
its attitude to be dealt with by the local electorate than to
impair its initiative from a platform of superior wisdom. It
is surely better that local bodies should have ideas, even if,
on occasion, they seem to assume a bizarre form.

The judicial aspect of the problem can, I believe, be met
in two ways. 1 have already suggested that the findings of
an expert commission have a validity to which no judicial
examination can pretend ; the decision, for instance, of the
New York Public Service Commission that a gas company
ought to provide gas service for a given district is almost
inevitably more right than a decision pronounced by the
courts in a similar case. And I do not think it is necessary
to disturb such findings. What is essential is that we should
have assurance that the methods utilised in reaching such
decisions are judicially satisfactory ; that, for instance, there
is full time for the preparation of a case, proper rules of
evidence, and so forth. Every such decision, therefore, ought
t to be open for scrutiny by the courts, not on the ground of
its substance, but on the view that t is wanting in this regard.
This, it may be noted, is the attitude taken by the Supreme
Court of the United States. " This court,” said Clarke, J.,*
" will . . . enter upon such an examination of the record as
may be necessary to determine whether the federal con-
‘ New York, etc., v. McCall, 38 Sup. Ct Rep 122, 124


894 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

stitutional right has been denied, . . . whether there was such
a want of hearing, or such arbitrary or capricious action on
the part of the Commission as to violate the due process
clause of the constitution.” It is exactly such an assurance
that the substance of due process has been observed that we
require. It does not, I think, mean stereotyping any special
procedure as the only proper method ; administrative law,
by its nature, demands elasticity. But it does mean that a
judge, on examining the record of the case, can satisfy himself
that the parties to it have had a full and fair hearing.

This first method is comparatively simple and involves
no striking departure from customary effort; indeed, in Anglo-
Saxon countries, it might rather be represented as a return
to the normal standards of procedure. The second, however,
involves quite definite novelty; not, indeed, in parts, but in
its breadth of application. What, broadly, I suggest is that
the State should be sued for its torts exactly as a private
person is sued, that, whenever its officials act ultra vires, the
public exchequer should be mulcted in damages by the courts
exactly as though the offender were John Jones. What is
here urged is, after all, the not unreasonable thesis that
service in the central functions of government does not release
men. from their human fallibility. Public enterprise is not
less liable to error than private ; and its responsibility should,
on that account, be none the less strictly enforced. Nor do
we sufficiently realise the danger of excluding Ihe State from
the categories of legal responsibility. It begins as a legal
exclusion, but, sooner or later, that legal category will pass
over into the moral sphere. The fact of achievement will
become more important than the method by which attainment
is reached. Once an end is set up as ir. itself great enough
to set its exponents beyond the reach of law, the real safe¬
guards of liberty are overthrown. Irresponsibility becomes
equated with the dubious explanation of public policy, and
that, in history, is always the first step to the morally
obnoxious ground of raison d'etat. The release of the State
from the trammels of law means in practice the release of its
officials from the obligations to which other men are usefully
subject. That release breeds the worst evils of bureaucracy.
It makes those so released impatient of criticism and resentful


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS SOS

of inquiry. The controlling factors of good conduct are thereby
loosed; and we discover that men who, in private life, are
gentle and tender and kindly, become in their State-aspect
different beings. But the inference therefrom is not that we
should judge that aspect differently. Rather it implies that
we must the more sternly apply the standards of normal
justice.

For let us look briefly at the results of the alternative.
The British Admiralty may infringe a patent granted to a
private citizen by the Board of Trade ; 1 though such an
infringement by another private person would at once involve
damages. The van of the Postmaster-General may run over
Miss Bainbridge, but the irresponsibility of the State deprives
her of any right to compensation except from the humble
wages of the driver. 1 The government may dismiss an official
whom it has induced to give up his business by engaging him
for a definite term of years, and no action will lie against it .3
Miss Mighell can obtain no financial balm for breach of promise
if the man she believed to be plain Albert Baker turns out
to be Sultan of Johore.4 Nor is the situation in America
different. Not only are the constituent States exempt from
suit without their own consent, but the federal government
occupies a similar position .5 In France, a category of State-
responsibility has, after much hesitation, been evolved. But
it remains broadly true m all jurisdictions that if officials
choose to cloak themselves in the garb of State-sovereignty,
they are, as officials, beyond the reach of the courts. Yet,
illogically enough, that is not true of municipal bodies and
their servants, 6 even though they are as much a part of the
State as the central government; and, when we decline from
local bodies to such quasi-public bodies as the trustees of a
dock, liability for error and wrong is just as widespread as
if a private person were concerned .7

* Feather v. Regina, 6 B & S. 237

* Bainbridge v Postmaster-General (190OI. 1 K B 178.

5 Dunn v. Regina (1896). 1 Q B C A 116

* Mtgkell v Sultan of fohore (1894), 1 Q B. 149

5 U.S. v Lee, 106 U.S. 196, where at p. 206, it is admitted that the
exemption trom suit rests on no " solid foundation of principle."

4 Cf. R. D Maguire, Slate Liability for Tort, 30 Harvard Late Review, p 20.

1 Mersey Docks v Gibbs. 11 H.C LC 680.


806 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

What is the ground upon which this doctrine rests ?
Practically, its whole foundation is the doctrine that the
State as the maker of law is beyond the reach of those who
receive the law from its hands. The State can do no wrong
because it is a sovereign State, and the plain mark C)f
sovereignty is that it cannot be made to answer for its acts.
In England the State has, for historic reasons, been personified
into the Crown; but what has been said of its position by a
strong court would hold of authoritative acts elsewhere.
*' The maxim that the King can do no wrong," insisted the
court, 1 ” applies to personal as well as political wrongs, and
not only to wrongs done personally by the sovereign (if such
a thing could be supposed possible), but to injuries done
to one subject by another by authority of the sovereign.
For from this maxim that the King can do no wrong it follows
as a necessary consequence that the King cannot allow wrong
to be done ; for to authorise a wrong to be done is to do a
wrong; and as the wrongful act done becomes in law the
act of those who authorise it to be done, it follows that the
petition of right which complains of a tortious or wrongful
act done by the Crown or by servants of the Crown discloses
no right to redress, for as in law no such wrong can be done,
no such right can arise.” The subject, that is to say, is left
helpless before the State, though it should be noted that in
matters of contract the exigencies of a business civilisation
have driven the State to admit responsibility.

The simple remedy is to permit the State to be sued in
the same way as a private person. That will probably involve
the incorporation of government departments in order that
the source of liability may be made clear. Officials will not
then be able to screen themselves behind the majestic cloak
of a non-existent entity without even the ordinary charms
of legal fiction. The judges will be able to protect the ordinary
citizen from wrong, from whatever quarter that wrong may
have proceeded. A single illustration will suffice to make
clear the consequence of this doctrine. Where, for instance,
a man has been wrongly convicted of crime and imprisoned,
he will be able to sue the State for damages for wrongful
imprisonment. That, as I think, is obvious justice ; and the

■ Feather v. Regina, 6 B. & S. 257.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 897

rarity of the occurrence makes it more desirable to throw
its results into striking relief. Nor, it may be added, is this
doctrine contrary to the development of recent events. The
line of evolution in France and Germany is towards a fast-
increasing recognition of responsibility ; and it is notable that
in England a Royal Commission which sought to allay the
fears of civil servants in India translated its remedy into the
form of a claim against the Secretary of State for the fulfilment
of a contract which was to be enforceable in a court of law.'
It follows, indeed, from the idea of a positive State that the
duty of responsibility should be accepted. For no State can
permit its officials to dig deep into the lives of men and seek,
simultaneously, to evade payment for their blunders.*

IX

From all that has here been said, it follows that every
State is enormously dependent upon the quality of its public
officials. Administration is of its essence ; and it is inevitable
that those who actually carry out the application of law should
hold its virtues in their keeping. How should such officials
be chosen ? Ought they to be a permanent body, which the
political executive cannot, broadly speaking, change ? Or
ought they, as in Andrew Jackson’s conception, to hold their
office at the will of the administration, in order that the latter
may be assured of their sympathy and co operation ?

There seems now no reasonable ground for doubt that
the less control the political executive possesses over the
appointment of permanent officials, the better it is for
the State. It is not only that insecurity of tenure depletes
the ranks of the public service of experience that is essential
to its effic'ent conduct ; that men of ability and character will
not be tempted into work where there is no guarantee of a
continuous livelihood; and that the absence of a constant
tradition will always tempt the political executive to twist
the law it applies to its own advantage. It is clear from the
experience of every modem State that the power to control

1 See Repoit of the I ee Commission on the Public Services in India (1024).

1 On the whole subject cf the paper on the Responsibility of the State tn
England, in my Foundations of Sovereignty and Mr t Borchards State
Liability for tort in the > ale Law journal foi 1920-7 The report of the
Hewart Committee in 1024 is, at least a programme for Great Britain


MS A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

appointment to the public service makes certain, where it is
possessed by the political executive, an ample corruption of
public life. The exclusion of the British Foreign Office from
open competition made it for long, in John Bright’s phrase,
the " out-door relief department of the English aristocracy.”
The spoils system in America results in periodic crises in which
there are revelations of dishonesty perhaps even greater than
the most debased commercialism would show. The power of
the French Minister over entrance to his departmental service
results in constant scandals, of which the dismissal of a great
historian from a lifelong post at the archives to make room
for an ignorant political nominee is only a striking example.'
Unless the public service is, as a body of officials, beyond the
reach of the executive, it is inevitable that the mind of the
minister should be devoted not to the problems of his office,
but to the need of rewarding his followers ; and the assassina¬
tion of President Garfield is only the climax of what that need
will involve. There will grow up in every State a race of men
who live by giving service to one or other of the parties in the
State in return for a brief period as an official, a career for
which they have neither training nor competence. And it
is further clear that they will use the posts they fill not for the
performance of their duties, but for lining their own pockets
at the public expense. Anyone who studies in detail the
history of this system as reflected in the administration of
President Harding in America will realise the implications it
makes possible.*

The public service of a State must, therefore, live under the
segis of two definite rules. It must be appointed by persons
other than those in the cabinet, or its subordinate political
posts; and it must be appointed under rules which reduce
to a minimum the chance of personal favouritism. There is,
I think, no question but that the principle of open competition
alone satisfies these rules. That means, for all except such
purely technical posts as, for example, that of a veterinary
surgeon in a department of agriculture, that admission to the
service is on the sole basis of being able to satisfy suitable

* On this general problem cl. my Authority t* Ik* Modern State, chap. v.

> Cf. The New Republic, 1923-4, pastim, for details of the oil scandal,
the war hospitals' scandal and their ramifications.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 390

tests for the type of appointment vacant. Experience seems
to show that those tests are the more satisfactory the more
they are adapted to the selection of good, general intelligence
than to an attempt to measure, say, suitability to a particular
post like that of an assistant m the department of foreign
affairs. The habits of a special function not involving the
kind of special competence required by medicine or mathe¬
matics can always be obtained m the actual manipulation
of the material. Entrance, therefore, to the public service
should normally be at the age when, in a similar position in
ordinary life, a young man or woman expects to earn a living.
And they should be chosen by a commission the members of
whom can only be removed under circumstances similar to
those of a judge What powers the executive should possess
will, therefore, begin only after the official has been appointed
to his department. Selection is, a prion, entirely outside
its competence.

But here certain important considerations emerge Every
public service may be roughly divided into two great categories.
There will be a large number of persons whose work mainly
consists in purely manipulative functions They copy letters,
fill out forms, enter items m accounts There will be a much
smaller number who are engaged in genuinely creative work,
who think out policy, undertake investigations, make decisions.
The majority of this latter class will be persons who by educa¬
tion have been trained for this type of effoit and the cost of
such training will, in the contemporary State, on the whole
confine the sources from which they are drawn to the middle
and upper classes of the community It is well known, for
instance, that, until quite recently, the administrative class of
the British civil service was drawn almost entirely from Oxford
and Cambridge , and the average working-man cannot hojie,
even if he has a really able son, to send him there. Broadly
speaking, therefore, unless the educ ational system of a State is
democratic enough to correct this kind of limitation, the
effective public service will be confined to the comfortable
classes of the community That means two things First, the
experience upon which its members will draw is not representa¬
tive of the community as a whole, and even the new facts
they encounter will be envisaged in terms of that special


400 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

experience. Secondly, the advice they will offer to the
political executive will be fairly narrow in range, unless
they contain among them, what is, in any case, rare, men
of great imaginative insight. How are we to correct
deficiencies of this kind ?

To some extent, clearly, the problem is one of time: the
more rapidly we recognise that right to an adequate training
I discussed earlier in this book, the wider will be the provenance
from which the administrator is drawn, the more representa¬
tive, therefore, of the different aspects of social life. But,
predominantly, I believe that the corrective is most largely
to be supplied by the system of advisory committees discussed
above. For there the official will be compelled to measure
his knowledge and experience against a much wider range of
variety than is now the case. He will less and less draw his
conclusions from the readin g of reports, the arguments he can
think of in an office; he will more and more tend to build
them out of personal contact with business men, trade unionists,
doctors, school teachers. He will be far less protected than
he now is by the armour of an office routine into which he can
always withdraw from external contacts. He will have to
meet a more direct and personal criticism, informed as his own
views can rarely be informed, by what William James happily
termed the “ pungent sense of effective reality.” It is one
thing to construct a dietary for a dock labourer in the cool
seclusion of a department; it is quite another thing, and it is a
liberal education, to defend that dietary before a committee
where he may be examined by dock-labourers . 1 The official
may be, as Sir William Beveridge has urged, bound, Uke the
Franciscan, to '* the triple vow of poverty, anonymity, and
obedience,” 3 but he must not forget that the influence and
value of the brotherhood came from the fact that it mingled
with the world, and particularly with the disinherited of the
world. I believe that he will learn much, also, as he seeks to
adjust himself to the arrival of new classes to the leadership
of the State. For these will bring with them new views and
new experience, and in the attempt to serve their wants he

v

1 Evidence before Lord Shaw's Commission on Transport Labour, vol. i
pp. 185 f.

* The Development of the C toil Service, pp 231, 244


401


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS

will gain new insights of Ms own. That has rarely beat his
fortune in the past. Anyone, for example, who looks at a list
of British cabinet ministers in the century before 1914 will
be impressed, I think, by the fairly uniform experience they
represent. Eton and Oxford, the law and the ownership of
land, great family and great business enterprise, find uniform
place there, whatever the party in power.' Much the same
was true, until 1906, of the House of Commons. Mutatis
mutandis, the hypothesis admits of illustration from France
and Germany, and if there has been a greater variety in
American institutions it has not, for a number of reasons
inherent in their character, affected the experience of officials.
But the tradition has been broken, and we are clearly upon the
threshold of experiment. The public services will need, in
this background, the mechanisms through which the temper
that welcomes innovation is in every possible way encouraged.

Something also can be done in another way. No one who
studies the literature of politics can fail to be impressed at
the dearth of studies which aim at the deliberate improvement
of public administration. " The civil service,” writes Sir
William Beveridge,* ‘‘ is a profession, and I should like it to
become and realise itself as a learned profession.” That in¬
volves, I think, a good deal more experiment with the tech¬
nique of public administration than has, so far, been found
suitable. It means, in part, collective thinking about the
problems of administration, the attempt, ever more wide, to
relate them to the largest volume of available experience;
but it means, also, the effort to make thought on the work
of the official a scientific discipline which can be taught and
explored. We must, that is to say, be able to formulate the
rules of public administration as a system of working hypotheses
constantly modified by an experience conscious of itself. To
that end, I believe, two things are necessary. We must, first
of all, associate the official with the government of his pro¬
fession. We must make his thought about the standards
under which he works articulate and organised in the same

' Cf my Personnel of the British Cabinet (Fabian Society 1Q28)

1 The Development of the Civil Service, p. 242 The word learned " is
italicised by Sir William Beveridge


26


408 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

way as those standards are articulate and organised in the
law and medicine. We must, also, allow the official, under
suitable circumstances, to write and publish about govern¬
mental oiganisation. Obviously, we cannot allow, say a
treasury clerk, to criticise the budget of his department, but
there is no adequate reason why he should not indicate what
he considers desirable changes in the structure of treasury
organisation. Sir Ian Hamilton 1 has recently pointed out
the stupidity of that censorship in England which prevents
the army officer from making his technical criticism of the
War Office public until his retirement has made it obsolete.
Scientific public administration cannot be developed by leaving
its formulation either to unconscious tradition or to the formu¬
lation of principles by even the wisest of outsiders. It can
come only when the speculations of experts upon their prob¬
lems are checked by the criticism of the public. It is unhealthy
for any body of men to be in a position where they are sheltered
from organised analysis. Yet we seem, under modem govern¬
ments, to take the most special pains to prevent such analysis
being made. Administrative methods are so largely a body of
secret and unexplored habits that criticism of them must
inevitably be, in some degree, ignorant. That is bad for
the public official because his detection and exposure of the
criticism tends to make him a little complacent of those habits.
He stands by them because he knows them, and instead of
being encouraged to initiate, he develops the habit of infalli¬
bility. That is a dangerous frame of mind, especially in a
world, like our world, where the need of change is so wide
and instant. We must develop a habit of breaking habits in
the official if we are to use him to full advantage.

There are, I think, three important expedients of which
we shall have to make increasing use if that full advantage is
to be realised. The first, and not the least important, is the
idea of a sabbatical year for public officials. For what he
needs, above all, is freshness of mind, the ability to make new
contacts and to assimilate new experience. To be immersed
year after year in an office where, inevitably, problems come to
him very largely as issues on paper, is fatal to that freshness
in all save a few remarkable men. Change of work and scene

• The Soul ani Body oj an Army, pp. zi f.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 408

is fundamental to him. He must be able to free his mind
from the embarrassment of detail, to put his travellers’ pack,
so to say, on the mountain peak from which the vast panorama
of life unfolds itself as a whole, and not in the compartments
that are his daily round. One aspect of this is particularly
urgent. The man who is to write despatches to Canada from
Whitehall must see Canada ; he cannot really know the mind
with which he has to deal from an annual visitation in London
with Canadian officials and public men. The man who is to
take charge of problems concerning the League of Nations
needs to be seconded for a year to service in Geneva. He will
the better serve the State by an intimate sense of the inter¬
national mind at work there than by trying to guess its meaning
from exchange of correspondence and an occasional visit to
the Assembly of the League. The official who is to advise the
Minister of Agriculture on the marketing of farm products
will much more creatively grasp his function if his knowledge
of other methods has been gained by direct observation instead
of from the reading of reports embodying the observation of
others. All this, of course, has an especially urgent emphasis
when we move from the problems of civilised States to those
involved in the guardianship of more primitive peoples. But
I shall deal with this latter system in a later chapter.

There should, secondly, be a much more organic connection
than there is now between the public service and the universi¬
ties. Its value lies in two directions. The university is,
first of all, the place where the problems of administration
can be considered, probably more effectively than elsewhere,
upon the plane of political science. They are freed there
from the harassing penumbra of their immediate psychological
environment. They can be rationalised into their abstract
form in a way that is impossible in the market-place, on the
one hand, and the department itself upon the other. They
can be given their adequate historical background. And,
secondly, I believe that the university has much to contribute
to the training of officials. For it can set the issues they have
to solve in a perspective richer than is possible in the depart¬
ment troubled by the intervention of immediacy. It can
remove from their consideration the prejudices due to persons
and special interests. That is, to some extent, already clear


404 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

from the experience we have. Bodies like the Institute of
Public Administration in England, the Institute of Govern¬
ment Research in America, the Ecole des Sciences Politiques
in France, have provided a meeting-ground between the official
mind and the academic mind, from which there has emerged,
in even a brief space of time, work of considerable value; and
a great Secretary of War has borne striking testimony to the
value of university instruction, even in the period of practical
work, for public officials. 1

In the third place, I believe that it is profoundly important
to shorten the average period of official life. One of the great
dangers to a public service lies in the permanence that is its
characteristic ; for this tends to make at least the upper layer
of officials a caste whose habits are, from the inevitable rigidity
due to long experience, hardened against the intrusion of
novelty. This can, as I have argued, be largely counteracted
by such devices as advisory committees and a sabbatical year.
But the dangers still remain («) that some men will be retained
in the service far too long, either because they are too old, or
because they are obviously unsuited to its special atmosphere;
and (6) that men come to work of creative responsibility at
too late a stage in life, when their mental faculties have
acquired a certain hardness, and their habits have made than
eager rather for the routine than from the departure from the
routine. The latter danger, it may be added, is intensified
by the doctrine of ministerial responsibility and the loyalty
it will engender from the official to his political chief. For
since the latter must bear the burden of all mistakes, the
official is tempted to choose the decision which will occasion
the least controversy. He seeks correctness. He shrinks
from sowing intellectual wild oats, with the result that at the
height of his career he has rarely intellectual wild oats to sow.
A skilful minister can, doubtless, remedy this passion for the
orthodox by insisting on experiment and defending bis depart¬
ment even when it has obviously blundered; but not all
ministers are skilful.

The minister apart, we can, I think, do much to obviate
these difficulties in three ways. We can, first of all, make it

• See the evidence of Lord Haldane before the Royal Commission on the
Coal Industry. 1919, reprinted in the Problem of Nahonaltwiton, p it


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 408

much easier than it now is for a man to leave the service who
finds, after eight or ten years, that he is either unsuited to or
dissatisfied by it. Instead of fixing his pension rights at the
end of his career, we can build up a proportional system of
accruing rights which will enable him to risk a new career
without financial sacrifice. We can, secondly, develop the
habit of special appointments to a small number of technical
posts, so that the department it constantly invigorated by new
blood, free from its traditions, and with experience largely
gained in a very different world. We must not, of course,
so organise such posts that they become merely a reservoir
of ministerial patronage; appointment ought always to be,
at the least, a matter in which the Minister selects from a
short list of names provided by the Public Service Commission,
and chosen by the latter from whoever, granted the requisite
qualifications, chooses to apply. But if, for instance, a govern¬
ment sets up a system of labour exchanges, and has at hand
a man who has specialised in the knowledge of their function
and working, it ought to be able, if it thinks fit, to secure his
services. If it has a department of animal husbandry, it
ought not to be compelled to recruit its head necessarily from
the promotion of subordinates. The safeguard is that the
minister should be made to satisfy the body normally filling
vacancies in the public service; and a distinction, quite
clearly, must be made between general administration and
the administration of specialised subjects. But within those
safeguards the principle, I think, is clear.

In the third place, we need to lower the age-limit for retire¬
ment. It is, perhaps, dangerous here to be too specific;
but I should suggest that except in the quite special case of
of an extraordinary man, no person ought to stay in the
public service, especially in a responsible position, after the
age of fifty-five. He will then, it must be remembered, have
been normally engaged on administrative work for over thirty
years. If he is young, when originally appointed to a premier
position, he blocks the way for younger men ; if he is near to
the retiring age, the chances are that his appointment is a
tribute rather to his seniority than to his quality. It is urgent
in any public service to develop the notion of giving men
dearly responsible work before, at the least, the age of thirty-


406 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

five. For, otherwise, they grow rapidly into the habit of
looking to a superior for orders. They are lost and helpless
when time gives them the duty of making important decisions.
They have grown mature not in creative thought for themselves,
but in providing the material for other people’s thought.
Some, of course, like Austin Dobson, may evade this danger
by making the true centre of their lives outside the department ;■
a man may be in reality a great golfer masking his powers in
the guise of an official. But such exceptions will be rare;
and if we desire the type of public servant to whom his work
appeals so as to evoke all the qualities of mind and heart at
his command, we cannot too early offer him functions he can
fulfil with complete satisfaction to his self-respect. Either
there must be a sense of creativeness once the technical aptitude
has been acquired, or there will be a failure to secure the best
results from the sources we nse. 1

A kindred problem which needs discussion is the relation
of the lower grades of the public service to the adminis¬
trative class. How are we to ensure that the former
are given adequate opportunity to prove their fitness for
more responsible work ? There is, I think, little doubt
that it has so far been too much the assumption of modem
governments that the minor official is permanently destined
to be a hewer of wood and drawer of water to his superiors;
and little or no effort has been made either to discover or to
evoke what talent he possesses. The tendency is, indeed, to
give the ranks and classes of a public service a somewhat
rigidly hierarchical character; with the result that it often
reproduces for the subordinate officials many of the problems,
both financially and intellectually, of the modern proletariat,
The problem, indeed, is a complex one. The officials who
determine promotion naturally make their contacts for the
most part with the officials who expect p'omotion; and the
latter are already in the administrative class. And this
situation is further intensified by the narrowness of the sources
from which that administrative class is taken. It consists,
as I have already pointed out, quite largely of people of the
same social class and the habits of that class; and it is neither

1 On all this. Sir William Beveridge's The Public Service tn War and
Peace is a mine of informative comment; see especially pp. 39-47.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 407

difficult nor unnatural for them to assume that their habits
are essential to the proper performance of the public business.
That is not in fact more likely to be true than the assumption
that only an hereditary aristocracy is fitted to govern, or that
only well-boni people can fulfil the functions of the diplomatic
service. In a body of men who, in the non-administrative
classes of the English civil service are, the Post Office and the
Defence Services apart, nearly two hundred thousand in
number, it would be remarkable indeed if there were not a
body of men who would amply repay the conference of an
opportunity to do work of first-class magnitude. How are
we to organise their discovery ?

As in every large-scale enterprise, it is unlikely that any
system will do more than very partially fulfil its purposes;
and it is certainly undesirable to adopt any such mechanical
device of allotting some percentage of vacancies to the lower
grades. Nor ought we to be impressed by seniority ; that is,
most emphatically, to mistake antiquity for experience. The
qualities we want to discover are energy and originality of
mind, the power to manage men, the ability to handle large
subjects, rather than the mere knowledge of departmental
routine. A variety of expedients suggest themselves. Some¬
thing can undoubtedly be done by the zealous insight of higher
officials. If they are genuinely anxious to discover talent,
they will ^nd that talent lies there to be discovered. But I
am not inclined unduly to trust to the experience of a large
degree of this kind of discrimination in officials who have heavy
work to get done, and are naturally more anxious to get it
done than to be interested in the question of who has done it.
More help, I think, can be obtained by the careful organisation,
especially for the younger members of the lower classes of
officials, of opportunities for further education. Those who
take advantage of those opportunities at once discriminate
themselves as persons of energy and initiative; and if they
give proof in the use of them of talent, channels for their
advancement should be open. A man, for instance, who
takes a high university degree while in the public service
ought to be entitled to credit for his achievement; and this
might reasonably take the form, either of being seconded on
probation for more responsible work, with permanence if he


408 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

is a success, or of permission to attempt entrance into the
administrative class some years later than is normally the
case. So, also, the publication of a competent book on
problems of governmental interest ought always to lead
to investigation by the department. A man who can do an
inquiry as able as the investigation into the results of boy
labour at the Liverpool Docks ought obviously never again
to be left to perform any routine work; his competence for
skilled research is immediately beyond question.' A man in
government service who publishes, say, a competent book on
public health administration ought to be selected for promotion
in the same way as a young university lecturer who analyses
the problems of his subject. Much, also, may be accomplished
as self-government within the public services becomes a
realised ideal. A second-division representative on a Whitley
Council, for instance, ought to be able, by proof given of his
capacity there, to ensure himself a period of probation on
administrative work. And the plea that the department is
fully staffed ought never to be a hindrance to his opportunity.
For it is not the nature of any government department to
fed itself fully staffed unless it wishes to do so.

I cannot here proceed to multiply indefinitely such types
of possibility at our command. But one further suggestion
needs to be explored because it seems to involve opportunities
of which a skilled administrator might make goyl use. I
have already urged the importance of the departmental
conference in the making of policy. Inevitably, that will,
almost entirely, be a conference of the chief officials. But I see
no reason why we should not develop the idea of conferences
of minor officials on departmental problems, of which the
presidency was entrusted to the heads of departments who
would go there, not merely to cultivate good relations with
their staff, but also find out the range of their minds when at
ease, in a fashion open to them rarely in the hours of public
business. Foreigners have often been bewildered by the habit
of the political week-end in England ; but that wise invention
was based on the profound truth that men come to know
each other better when they are away from the convention of
full-dress uniform. The decency of English political life, not

1 Boy Labour at the Liverpool Docks, 1919 (Mini* try of Lobov).


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 40»

a little, also, of its creativeness, is built on the fact that men
who face one another over the benches of the House of Com¬
mons have enough social intimacy to join their minds in making
a common solution of difficult problems before the breaking-
point is reached. What I suggest is, so to say, the administra¬
tive week-end, in which the permanent secretary deliberately
sets out to feel the minds of men whom he will, otherwise,
hardly know save as persons who put papers upon his table.
Just as the minister best learns to know his officials by dining
with them, and smoking with them, so the official best learns
to know his minor subordinates by seeing them outside the
routine of office-hours. And unless he is capable, to that
point of breaking the hierarchy in which he is involved, he
will never be able fully to elicit the qualities he might secure.

I do not discuss here the question of the official in a
nationalised industry; that is a problem in economic institu¬
tions which is treated in a later chapter. But it is of high
importance to insist with emphasis that w'hat is said here of
the central departments applies also, in all its implications,
to the public service in local government institutions as well.
First of all. because they are, not less than the central depart¬
ment, the public service ; and they require standards not less
high, devotion not less exacting, than work in Whitehall or
Washington or Paris. Every great municipality, therefore,
needs its civil service commission not less than the central
government. In England we have such a body in London
and Manchester ; in America it exists, though with but partial
efficiency, in New York. But it is in Germany, above all,
that the importance of a high standard in the service of local
government has been most closely taken to heart. There is,
undoubtedly, too much of the spirit of bureaucracy in their
routine; many of them complain themselves of the needless
formalities through which they have to work their way. But
the standard of their work is better than elsewhere because
the conditions of entrance to the service are much more
rigorously controlled, and far more free from partisan nomina¬
tion, as in the United States, and favouritism, as in Great
Britain.

It is, of course, clear that any local service is subject to
the limitation that, except for its higher appointments, where


410 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the necessary qualifications are usually fixed by the central
government, the personnel of the service must largely be drawn
from the locality itself. But that ought not to mean that
local residents can be taken into municipal employment merely
because they happen to be local residents. At the minimum
an educational test ought to be applied; certainly no entrance
ought ever to be possible for persons who are not eligible for
admission to a university. Here, once more, Germany has
much to teach the rest of modem States. Her schools of local
government, as at Dusseldorf and Cologne before 1914, as at
Eisenach and Nerchau even since that time, are notable achieve¬
ments. At Eisenach a communal official can, in a two years’
course, study problems like those of local finance and taxation,
education, town planning and poor relief; instruction for
which the hapless official elsewhere would, I think, be genuinely
grateful. There is no reason available why, as in Berlin, the
continuation schools of other States should not provide training
to young people who wished to enter the service of local govern¬
ment, or why the authorities should not ask the schools to
nominate probationers who shall, say at the end of a three-
year period in which general education is combined with
practical work, be engaged permanently if their work is satis¬
factory It will be difficult, on any other plan, to get officials
of the requisite quality ; and it will be impossible properly to
carry out the policy of a central government, which leans much,
inevitably, upon local co-operation, unless local officials can
grasp the aims and methods of the central power. Otherwise,
there develop that friction and jealousy which prevent a proper
combination of their joint endeavours; and the result is
either an excessive centralisation or an inertia at the seat of
central authority about local problems which is fatal to their
adequate solution.


X

In strict theory, there is no reason why all the necessary
functions of government should not be carried on by a single
body. It could maintain its local officials, who would report
directly to it, and apply the necessary solutions in accordance
with its directions. In a real sense, indeed, this is not an


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 411

inadequate description of local government in France. There
at least, few outside the pettiest details fail to come within
the province of the Prefect, himself an appointed official
delegated by, and reporting to, the Minister of the Interior;
and it is fair to say that all serious changes in local government
policy originate from, and are sanctioned by, officials in Paris.
Occasionally, indeed, an outstanding person may be able to
make innovations, as in the famous administration of M.
Herriot at Lyons. But, in genera], a vivid local life in France
is not lived in political terms „ and it seems to be felt that the
existing centralisation is necessary to preserve an adequately
uniform system. Not, indeed, that protest against its results
has been lacking. The literature of French regionalism is in a
high degree the literature of revolt against a decay enforced by
Paris upon the provinces , and it is there urged that unless the
resumption of active powers by local authorities is made
possible, the central authority will not merely stifle all local
initiative, but destroy also that well-spring of local knowledge
and local interest without which it cannot possibly exercise
its functions . 1

The case, indeed, for a strong system of local government
in any State is clear almost beyond the needs of discussion.
We cannot realise the full benefit of democratic government
unless we begin by the admission that all problems are not
central problems, and that the results of problems not central
in their incidence require decision at the place, and by the
persons, where and by whom the incidence is most deeply felt.
Among the inhabitants of some given area, that is to say,
there is a consciousness of common purposes and common
needs by which they are differentiated from the inhabitants
of other areas. I am, as a citizen of London, deeply interested
in the water-supply and public libraries of London, I share
that interest with six million fairly similar citizens. But
neither I nor the six million would feel at all deeply involved
if we heard that the water-supply of Manchester was unduly
expensive, or that the citizens of Sussex could not get the
latest books. Neighbourhood, in other words, makes us
automatically aware of interests which impinge upon us
more directly than upon others. We find that those interests

■ Cl. Charles Brun, Le Rfgionalisme


412 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

differ in quantity and character from the interests of other
neighbourhoods. We find that by common counsel we can
seek to give those interests a quality of satisfaction which
contents us more than we should be contented if that
quality of satisfaction were contributed by others from with¬
out For administration from without lacks the vitalising
ability to be responsive to local opinion. It is bound, in the
nature of things, to miss shades and expressions of thought
and sentiment the perception of which are in a real degree
urgent to the success of administration. And such government
is bound, almost inevitably, to aim, not at variety, but at
uniformity. It will seek to meet, not the special wants of
Liverpool, but those wants which are similar to wants just met
in Hereford or Leicester. It cannot grasp, in other words, the
genius of place. Because, further, it is government from
without, it fails to evoke either interest or responsibility from
tbe neighbourhood it controls. It may well evoke indignation ;
but it does not succeed in eliciting the creative support of
citizens. Its solutions may be well meant in conception,
and efficient in application. But they fail to arouse in the
neighbourhood a desire actively to participate in the realisation
of their best result.

There are, moreover, other reasons why strong local govern¬
ment is an advantage. If a service is exclusively applied to
the benefit of a particular district, it is obviously only fair
that the inhabitants of the district should pay for it; and to
raise from them the funds for payment means the certainty
that they will demand control of the service, and the probability
that they will manage it efficiently in order to keep their bill
of costs as low as possible. Clearly, further, we cannot make
an average man realise his citizenship in any creative way if
his only relation to government is obtained by voting once
every four or five years in a national election. Its relevance
to him must be brought more directly home, otherwise his
interest in the political process will wane to vanishing process ;
and it is elementary that the more inert the citizen-body, the
more likely is there to be corruption and sinister privilege in
the State. A man who realises that his street is badly paved
because a body of persons directly under his view and influence
are inefficient begins to haye a sense of the network of interest


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 413

in which he is involved. Local government, in other words
is educative in perhaps a higher degree, at least contingently,
than any other part of government And it must be remem¬
bered that there is no other way of bringing the mass of citizens
into intimate contact with the persons responsible for decisions.
It is dear that any great degree of centralisation must mean,
and can only mean, a bureaucratic system No legislative
assembly in the world will be able, however greedy of power,
to make decisions upon more than the largest outlines of local-
problems. The application of their details will be left to
the departments. Appointed officials will therefore dominate
them, and they will never be genuinely accessible to public
opinion. For complaint against them can only be investigated
in general terms , and it will only produce a revised decision,
again in general terms, which the same officials wifi proceed
again to apply, with, doubtless, the same results

There are, of course, dangers in the conference of powers
upon local territorial groups Uniformity is usually cheaper,
because it is almost always easier to make a single solution
and apply it wholesale than to make a variety of solutions
and have them applied piecemeal. It involves, also, some
sacrifice of the greater knowledge and greater capacity that
are almost bound to be at the command of a central, compared
with a local, authority. Localism, also, lends itself a little
easily to the sinister influence of powerful persons or bodies
within a given neighbourhood ; the record of American cities,
and even of American States, is a plain lesson m this regard.
Nor must we omit the results of the truism that the conference
of power is in fact the conference of power You may not be
able to persuade a local body adequately to utilise its powers.
A backward corporation may resist every stimulus except the
passion for reducing the cost of its services to itself. It may
refuse, for example, to take advantage, like some English
counties, of the Public Libraries Act; it may remain, like
Georgia in the United States, adamant against the abolition
of child labour. Everyone knows the difficulties we encounter
in persuading a rural community adequately to endow the
education of its children. Jt must be admitted that m many
respects the creation of a local government system is the
offering of hostages to fortune. For a backward community


414 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

may be hostile to every species of improvement, and it is
rarely indeed that its forced conversion to novelty is at all
satisfactory. It neglects, as a rule, that care for the gradual
education of opinion which, ultimately, seems to lie at the base
of all genuine freedom, and to be more important than any
given statute, however urgent it may seem to the advocates of
its enforcement.

No problem in local government is more difficult than
the delimitation of the areas of local government. Every
principle that has been recommended seems, almost inevit¬
ably, at some point to betray us. Scientific discovery makes
obsolete the boundaries of historic tradition; the needs of
things like drainage and water-supply overpass the urgency
of tradition. Geographical considerations are rarely of any
final importance; for a bridge can span a river, and a tunnel
may make a mountain governmentally irrelevant. The idea
of transport zones was suggestive in the days when the
means of communication hardly differentiated our civilisation
from that of the Romans ; but with the advent of the railway
and the aeroplane transport zones may well make Brighton a
suburb of London and New Haven merely an outlying district
of New York. The most convenient practical means lies, I
think, in the indication given by density of population. The
inhabitants of the modem city, for instance, need more special
provision for services like water, lighting, and drainage than
the dwellers in a rural area. For that reason, convenience
indicates the city as a fairly natural unit of local government.
But the lines of its boundaries are inevitably arbitrary, since,
to take an obvious case, a tramway system will often link a
city with its surrounding country districts. Nor is this all.
It is clear that a service like the provision of electric power
requires for economy a much larger area of distribution
than a service like paving, and the combination of areas
suited to their particular functions into an adequate unit
of government is a matter of grave difficulty. All, I think,
that we can say is that each area, whether urban or rural,
needs to be planned as a complex of functions, and that
the method of administration must always leave room for
co-operation between areas in the resolution of their joint
interests.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 415

Area, that is to say, must correspond to function, while,
at the same time, we provide the opportunity for maint aining
the special interest of each group of neighbours in the needs
and possibilities of their special environment. That clearly
involves two things. It means, first of all, that the persons
responsible for the general principles upon which the different
local circumstances are administered must be elected by the
body of citizens and not appointed ; and it means, secondly,
that those so elected must oversee the general complex of
services which relate to each local area. That will enable the
same body of men to sit on bodies which deal with any given
function by which their electorate is served. They will pro¬
bably, for instance, completely control such services as paving
and cleaning the streets, or providing public baths, where the
area of provision can be small and yet efficient and economical ;
they will, probably, only partly control such services as lighting,
university education, and provision of facilities for recreation
and town-planning where the function needs to be organised
over an area which transcends the principle of neighbourhood.
But the interest of the elector in the person chosen will be
protected by the fact that his nominee will sit on whatever
body deals with the subject involved , and he will, accordingly,
have the means directly at his disposal for the expression of
his opinion. Cities could then be divided into electoral districts
of a size small enough to permit adequate contact between the
elector and his representative, and yet not so small as to make
the governing municipal body too large for the efficient conduct
of business. In rural districts it would, m this view, be
necessary to combine smaller villages into units similar in
character, though necessarily smaller in population, than
the urban electoral districts, which would, m combination,
provide an area large enough to cope with the problems to
which, in the aspect of local government, rural life gives rise.
The representative of each electoral district thus determined
would automatically sit as member for that district upon the
body governing any function of local import He might be,
for instance, a member of the city council of Manchester
for all the services m which Manchester is a natm al and normal
unit of government; and a member of a council for say, the
north of England in relation to its electncity supply.


416 A GRAMMAR QF POLITICS

What is involved in such a scheme ? Firstly, I think,
elected service in local government will become, exactly like
service in the modern representative assembly, full-time and
paid work. For any member who desires seriously to grasp
the issues which come before him for judgment, many of them
technical and all of them intricate, cannot adequately do so
if he is merely to deal with them in the intervals of his business.
They require a fresh mind and a full mind. If we maintain
the principle of unpaid work, we shall always find that member¬
ship of these local bodies will be predominantly representative
of the richer classes in the community; and the standards of
their performance will accordingly be set, not by the needs of
the area, but by the desire of those classes to make local
government as cheap as possible. They will provide excellent
drainage but inadequate education, good roads but poor
libraries. They will not grasp the psychological issues by
which, for instance, the mind of the poor is moved. Anyone
who watches the endeavour of the average English Board of
Poor Law Guardians to understand the hatred of the poor for
indoor relief will see why it is only final and abject destitution
which is willing to take refuge there. And local government
based on the unpaid member has, the world over, somehow
seemed to accrete to itself a variety of persons—small contrac¬
tors, publicans, shopkeepers and the like—whose disinterested
zeal for the public welfare has been less apparent in the quality
of work done than in their pronouncement of intention. Even
in England, the home of the unpaid representative, we have
seen the need for remunerating the mayor of many boroughs ;
and we have begun to pay expenses incurred in the perform¬
ance of their duties by members of committees on Insurance
and War Pensions. To refuse to extend the principle is to
narrow dangerously the services of membership; and it is
bound to be merely temporary as the class so largely excluded
makes its way to power.

The elected member, secondly, will have what may be
called magnicompetence; he will oversee the administration
of a general range of functions rather than be chosen, generally
speaking, to attend to a special subject. The case for magni¬
competence against specialism is, I think, a clear one. Func¬
tions dovetail into one another. Education and health,


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 417

transport and housing, cannot, without the danger of Lilli¬
putian administration, be viewed separately. The system of
ad hoc bodies has been constantly tried, especially in English
experience, and it has always ultimately broken down. It
prevents any total view of local finance ; the elector cannot be
expected to construct for himself a systematic view of the
budget in which he is involved. It multiplies elections to the
point of nauseation; and that is a position which, as American
experience shows, always leads to indifference on the part of
the elector. He knows that Jones is generally competent,
but he cannot seriously measure competence in relation to
burial boards, libraries, highways, schools. And such a
system seems to lead always to candidatures which seek to
represent not a general concern for the quality of administra¬
tion, but a special interest in some aspect of it. The school-
board system in London, for instance, led to the selection not
so much of members interested in education, as in members
interested in preserving Church schools or Roman Catholic
schools, in keeping scripture teaching in the curriculum or
keeping it out of it. And when the school hoard grew into
concern with larger interests, it found at once that the field
involved was outside its sphere of competence. The suggestion
that this difficulty can be met by joint meetings of ad hoc bodies
is open to precisely the same objections as the scheme for two
Parliaments outlined by Mr. and Mrs. Webb. For either,
say in the case of commissions dealing with health and educa¬
tion, there will be a permanent joint committee, in which real
power will lie, or the two commissions will, on ail large matters
of principle, function as a single unit.

The persons chosen to sit upon these magnicompetent
bodies should, thirdly, be directly and not indirectly elected.
This principle is as much a matter of solid experience as of
abstract theory. The only way in which we can secure any¬
thing approaching a continuous democratic control of policy¬
making bodies is by preserving direct contact between the
elector and his representative ; for, otherwise, an inevitable
remoteness supervenes, and public interest in the making of
policy declines through that remoteness. The result, that is
to say, is a diminution in the educative value of a representative
system. People are less likely to be informed of the signifi-

27


418 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

cance of what is being done because their access to its achieve¬
ment is not straightforward. They miss the simplicity of
being able immediately to affix responsibility for what they
dislike. There are, moreover, two further dangers in an
indirectly elected body. Almost inevitably it seems to tend
to bureaucracy. Because it is not checked by public opinion,
it fails to appreciate the importance of public opinion. Because
it is removed from public control, it tends to be impatient of
public control. It is, further, clear that an indirect system
vill exaggerate all the weaknesses of majority-rule. It will
reflect not the total opinion of the bodies from which it is
chosen, but merely the dominant opinion; and where, as so
often in America and Canada, that dominant opinion has a
special religious complexion, the making of policy is distorted
in a peculiarly vicious way. It is, finally, much more difficult
in this system to secure adequate publicity for the proceedings
of the body. We hear much of the work of borough and
county councils in England ; we hear little of their joint com¬
mittees for managing schools. And even when such manage¬
ment is efficient, that is because the policy of management
lies outside the committee , nor is the gain, if there is a
gain, in efficiency superior to the loss involved in a full public
interest in what is being done.

It is obvious that the central government must retain a
power generally to control the work of local authorities. How
far is that power to extend ? It is clear, first of all, that there
are many subjects in which at least a uniform standard of
minimum attainment must be enforced. In education, in
health, in housing, whatever the local will, it is impossible
for the State to allow their standards to fall below a level
consistent with the fulfilment of the rights of citizens. Such
standards, therefore, require to be defined by the legislative
assembly ; and though their administration may be organised
in concert with local bodies, the power to inspect, and, if
need be, to control, cannot be surrendered to them. It is
clear, also, that changes in social need involve continuous altera¬
tion both in the sources from which power is exercised and the
area over which powers extend ; and it is necessary to make
the legislative assembly the ultimate reserve authority for the
enactment of necessary changes. There are, thirdly, certain


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 419

subjects over which local bodies ought not to exercise any
control at all. They ought not, of course, to be able to mitigate
the purposes of State legislation, save in so far as there is pro*
vision deliberately made for it. They should not be permitted
to make regulations upon subjects like railways and the postal
service, which are dearly central in character. Their powers
of taxation ought, I think, to be defined with some rigidity,
though the experience of France and Germany in the possibili¬
ties of local taxation ought to make us a little careful in the
boundaries we erect for this power. It is, moreover, always
advisable to reserve what may be termed a right of entry for
report and inspection to the central government, even where
the full control of some given subject is local in character. For,
dearly, the central government cannot abandon the general
duty of investigation. It will always be able to survey experi¬
ence, to compare methods, to suggest experiments, from an
ampler view than the vast majority of local bodies. It will,
as a rule, be more discriminating and less partisan in its
interpretation of the results it encounters. I do not think
there is need, as in England, of a special ministry charged
with the specific duty of supervising local government; it is
better that the control of each function should reside in the
department to which it naturally belongs. For there is an
inevitable temptation to such a ministry with general powers
to extend the amplitude of its jurisdiction. It will make
itself a tutor over subjects in reality beyond its control. It
will be worried over departures from the uniformity which
makes its task an easy one. It will be dubious about experi¬
ments it has not itself initiated. The less we have of such
central interference, above a general minimum level of com¬
petence, the better it is likely to be for the quality of local
effort.

This, I believe, involves the transference of much greater
powers to local bodies than it has been customary to give
them in Anglo-Saxon countries. There it has been the rule
that no power can be exercised for which there does not exist
a specific warranty in statute. Every local experiment, there¬
fore, outside the range of statutes has always involved a fresh
application to the legislature. Such application is not only
slow of result, but it is also exceedingly expensive; an average


420 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

act of Parliament cost the city of Leeds, in the years from 1897
to 1913 , nearly seven thousand pounds. In the five years
from T901, the twenty-eight London boroughs spent over
seventy thousand pounds on legislation; and in the three
years from 1903, the London County Council itself spent, in
promoting and opposing bills, more than one hundred thousand
pounds. Legislation, clearly, is an expensive amusement;
and it would hardly have been possible for a device more
deterrent of innovation to have been invented. If Leeds, for
instance, is to spend seven thousand pounds in discovering
whether it may have a municipal theatre, the probability is
that it will not have a theatre at all.

It seems to me, therefore, the better theory to build the
relationship between local and central government on the
model of the relation between the States and Washington in
the American union. There the reserved powers belong to
the Federal authorities, and the residuary powers are within
the ambit of State-control. So, in similar fashion, powers not
specifically forbidden to a local authority might be exercised
by them. It would, I think, be easy to devise quite adequate
safeguards against abuse of these powers. There might be a
provision for a local referendum ; the citizens of Manchester,
for instance, might prevent the building of a municipal theatre
by plebiscite. AU schemes might well assume the character
of provisional orders which have to be submitted to the legis¬
lative assembly, and become inoperative if the latter, by
resolution, indicates its disapproval of the scheme proposed;
and it might well be made the duty of the appropriate depart¬
ment to accompany the laying of the provisional order upon
the table of the legislature by a memorandum in which the
proposal, especially on its financial side, is critically explained.
Such sanction, it may be added, ought not to be required where
legislation already permits the use of powers. If Manchester,
for instance, decided to raise the school-leaving age to sixteen,
what would seem to be required is congratulation rather than
permission. And, within the limits of discretion, it ought to
be possible for such experiment to be accompanied by financial
novelties. A locality ought to be permitted, if its inhabitants
agree, to ruse a special rate in aid of an object it desires, and
to attempt, for instance, to pay for some special purpose by


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 421

such an expedient as the taxation of local ground values. The
value also of legislation like the Communal Taxation Law of
1893 in Konigsburg, which permits special contributions to be
levied on the owners of property who enjoy economic advan¬
tages owing to the execution of such public works as street-
widening, slum clearance, and the provision of parks and open
spaces, seems to be beyond discussion.

The notion that residual powers might, within the limits
indicated, belong to local authorities is by no means a leap in
the dark. It has been for the last fifty years the secret of
the success which has attended municipal effort in Germany.
Persons accustomed only to the limits of the Anglo-Saxon
system would be amazed at the extent of local powers in
Germany. “ The urban commune," says a decision of the
Supreme Administrative Court of Prussia, 1 “ using its own
resources, may claim as falling within its powers everything
that promotes the welfare of the whole community, and the
material interests and intellectual progress of the individual
citizens. It may, of its own will, establish any institutions
and arrangements for the common welfare which serve this
purpose. It has a general right to promote the moral and
economic interests of its citizens, and to use the resources
available for the purpose. But it is always—and this is the
boundary beyond which its acts are ultra vires—subject to the
limitation that itself and its organs must restrict themselves to
the care of local interests." It is under these powers that
German towns have, without recourse to any legislative
authority, set up their theatres, built their tramways, embarked
upon municipal trading, established school medical services,
and the provision of meals for school children; have promoted
music, the drama, learning, dispensaries for the tubercular,
municipal savings banks, house building, the guardianship of
illegitimate children, bureaus of legal advice, and unemploy¬
ment and fire insurance. " The German town of to-day,"
says a well-known authority upon them, 1 " is the standard-
bearer in intellectual, economic, and social progress."

. 1 Lteemon of September 21, 1886; and see the comment thereon of
H Kappelmann, Vrrfassung uni I'frwaltungsorgantsalioti der Stadte, vot. I
P 35

1 Most, Die Deuticke Stadt uni iA re Verwaltung, yo) 1 p 51


4tt A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

The special value of this system lies in three directions.
It provides the means for important experiment in social
matters, while restricting the necessary area of the experiment,
and, therefore, what danger may be inherent in its failure.
It contains, therefore, the great advantage that is offered by a
federal system of encouraging local initiative and, at the same
time, minimising the cost of that initiative to the community
as a whole. It lessens, secondly, the pressure of local affairs
upon the central legislative assembly. I myself believe that
practically all the advantages claimed for the system of de¬
volving authority upon subordinate Parliaments can be more
easily attained by this method; and its greater institutional
simplicity is a further recommendation. It is, further, a
means not otherwise available of stimulating local pride in
civic achievement, and, inferentially, of associating local
effort with the task of government in a much more creative
fashion than is now possible. For many to whom gas and
water politics are permanently unattractive will be drawn
into interest in municipal functions once their contingent area
is dependent so largely upon the local will. When it is possible,
for example, to make the drama a natural branch of local
activity, it will be found that there exists in each area a
largely untapped source of public energy waiting to be used ;
and the energy which begins by confining itself to the drama
will quickly find that the proper use of a local theatre sends
it into the schools, and from the schools to the homes of the
people.

So far I have discussed the problem of local government
predominantly from the angle of the central departments of
the State. But it is, I think, clear that such a structure as
that here outlined offers room for large possibilities from two
angles. An attempt can be made to relate its organs to the
consumer, regarded as a citizen, on the one hand, and to the
producer, regarded as a technical expert, upon the other.
There is no reason why every activity of a local council should
not be surrounded by its advisory committee. Upon it there
would sit, sis upon a national body, representatives of the
different interests involved. An education committee of this
kind, for example, would naturally include representatives of
teachers, of parents, and of former students of the schools.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 423

For one day it will be realised as obvious that the English or
American elementary school has as much need, and as distinct
a title, to its old students' associations as Eton or Girton:
and the members of them will be as anxious to create and
preserve a tradition as the alumni of more narrow foundations.
So also, I imagine, the modem school will find it more and
more useful to group the parents with whom it has to deal into
some kind of organisation, and to elicit their support and
encouragement in developing itself. The interaction of the
teacher's mind with that of the parent cannot but result in
a deeper perception on the latter's part of what an educational
system might imply; and those who represent these bodies
on an advisory committee on local educational policy will do
much to strengthen the energy and stir the ambition of their
elected representatives. So also an advisory committee to
the Health Committee of the Council, upon which there sit
doctors and dentists, nurses and sanitary inspectors, welfare
workers and architects, will easily develop functions of genuine
importance if it lends itself to the task of watching step by
step the policy of the governing body. They would be em¬
powered to make suggestions to the elected council, to initiate
inquiries, to issue announcements on the larger issues of local
importance. A municipal body which understood its function
would never fail to associate with, for instance, its library
work, the local associations of teachers; and, if it happened
to be a university town, to ask the university for assistance in
its work. Nor ought it ever to neglect the importance of
advice from the local press. To secure proper publicity for
its activities is a really urgent function. Public apathy is in
a large degree the result of public ignorance, and the proper
use of the press is one of the straightest roads to the remedy.

What would be the form of government to be utilised by ~
these elected representatives ? There are here several quite
distinct problems. No small part of local government is quite
definitely expert administration in which general opinion is
only valid upon large outlines of policy, on the one hand, and
finance upon the other. It is this consideration which has
made the German municipal system so largely government by
experts, and relegated the elected representative to little more
than an advisory person of special importance. The ideal


424 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

has been to make it certain that every branch of local adminis¬
tration is in the hands of men who are definitely specialists,
and can take the necessary steps to secure efficiency without
waiting upon the consent of the elected council, or the pressure
of public opinion. Practically, their relationship to the
elected council is not unlike the relationship of the British
Government to Parliament. The latter may criticise, demand
explanation, and, in the last resort, reject; but it is essentially
th. business of the cabinet to tell their superiors what to do,
and how they ought to do it. The Anglo-American system,
on the other hand, has retained omnipotence in policy for the
elected amateur; and the expert official has been like the
King in the English constitution, a person who may advise
and encourage and warn, but cannot pass beyond counsel
into the self-determined exercise of power. The American
system of commission government, in which a small elected
body, usually ot some half-dozen persons, devote their whole
time to oversight of the expert administrator seems to be a
compromise between the English and the German methods. 1

On the whole, and granted a right relation between the
elected representative and the expert, I think it probable that
the classic model of Anglo-American has the largest advantage
on its side. It ensures a direct and continuous relation between
government and public opinion. It brings a constantly fresh
mind to the problems of administration. It breaks the rigidity
of outlook to which the professional mind is too often prone.
It prevents the assumption, not uncommon with the expert,
that he possesses a technical competence about which amateur
opinion is simply irrelevant. And most of the dangers implicit
in control by the untrained amateur can, I think, be obviated
by proper use of the expert and by the fact that as service on
local government bodies becomes more and more a full-time,
paid service, there will be greater opportunity for the dis¬
appearance of the amateur who remains incompetent. Largely,
of course, the relationship between the elected member and the
expert is not susceptible of definition ; it is a habit of mind, a
tradition, which can be recognised when seen, but eiudes the

* Fcr government by commission, cf Professor W B. Munro's excellent
Government of American Cities end bis Principles and Methods of Municipal
Administration.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 425

printed word. We know that it is not the relation between
Mr. Nupkins and his clerk; and it is not the relation of over¬
whelming dominance which, on occasion, has been the charac¬
teristic of an English town-clerk near the age of retirement.
But anyone who has seen an English municipal body at work
will have realised that the whole difference between efficient
and inefficient administration lies in the creative use of officials
by elected persons.

We can, fairly easily, organise room for this creativeness
in the structure here envisaged. Local administration is
largely government by committee ; there, above all. is found
the centre where policy is finally determined. We can, I
think, transform the composition of these committees so as to
ensure that expert opinion carries its full weight. Each
committee should be compelled to co-opt to membership
representatives of the vocations allied to their work. The
latter could not, of course, vote; but they would speak, and
they would see to it that the officials were allowed a full oppor¬
tunity to develop their plans. We should then have teachers
on the education committee ; doctors and dentists and nurses
on the health committee; architects, surveyors, building
operatives on the housing committee; accountants on the
finance committee; representatives of the local Trades
Council and the Chamber of Commerce on the establishment
committee; these would, I think, bend the energies of the
council to the proper appreciation of technical competence.
They would also provide a link between the elected body
and its advisory committees of great value, for they would
be able to trace, as the public cannot now trace, the real
responsibility for lack of constructive thought in administra¬
tion. An official, so bulwarked, who could not get adequate
consideration for his ideas would either be a genius so far ahead
of his time as to invite misapprehension, or a man not competent
for his task. For it is not the least part of the expert’s function
to be able to make plain the importance of his conclusions.
It is no part of his duty to play the Cassandra in local govern¬
ment.

With the relationship between employers and employed in
local government I shall deal later, since that is an economic,
rather than a political, matter. Here it is sufficient to say


426 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

that there most be room for much greater voca tion al self*
determination than now exists, and that, as urged earlier in
this chapter, all the considerations which govern the problems
of appointment in the service of the central government apply
with not less force to local government also. A different but
an urgent issue is the sphere of trading enterprise by these
local bodies. The lines of demarcation are, I suggest, fixed
by two considerations. There are types of industry, of which
railways and electricity supply are obvious examples, the
•cope of which is national in character; and much is lost, and
nothing gained, by attempting a multiplex provision of what
needs unified supply. There are types of industry, secondly,
like milk-supply, bread, the distribution of coal, which can
better be undertaken by consumers' co-operation; and in
that form present the important advantage that the quality of
service offered is then open to independent scrutiny, for instance,
by the health inspectors of a municipal body. In bp tween
the two there is a great range of service where local provision
has obvious advantage. Tramways, for instance, gas and
housing, the provision of medical service both of a remedial
and preventive character, are all examples of service in which
the local body has shown itself able to excel. I do not see,
either, why municipal bodies should rujt co-operate to produce
many of the commodities they now jointly use on a vast scale,
either securing them by direct manufacture or through such
agencies as the Co-operative Wholesale Society in England.
It is the peculiar value of this form of enterprise that it permits,
if properly organised, either the elimination of profit, or, as in
the case of many municipal tramway systems, the devotion of
profit to public purposes. The degree to which development
of this kind can be carried is obviously great, but it depends
very largely on making the initiative of local bodies a real and
living thing. There must not fall across their path the sus¬
picions shadow of a government department, distrustful of
its endeavours. Once they are free to exploit the genius of
their neighbourhood, there is no reason not to expect such a
flowering of local patriotism as marked, for instance, the
Italian cities of the Middle Ages or the Hansa towns.

For the main difficulty, heretofore, in local government is
that it has been rare to attempt the evocation of a community


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 427

spirit It has meant a little, but not too much, to be a citizen
of some city; but the power has not been there to make
citizenship creative, and the general mass has not been related
to the process of government. Its art gallery has been a
matter for its curator and his committee; it has not been a
matter for every citizen possessed of a love of art. Its infant
death-rate has been a matter for the medical officer of health ;
he has not been allowed effectively to appeal to a civic con¬
science, alert and armed. We must strive to create a local
pride in achievement and a local sense of shame in failure. It
must matter, for instance, to the resident of a rich borough
like Kensington that its infant mortality rate is higher than
that of a poor borough like Poplar. It must be brought home
to the citizens, say, of Liverpool that their neighbour, Man¬
chester, has a municipal repertory theatre, while their council
remains content with the normal supply of commercial dramatic
art. We need to set local authorities striving against each
other in ceaseless rivalry, to produce in men that urgent local
patriotism which Mr. Chesterton depicted in the Napoleon of
N oUig z-JlilL That, I think, can be achieved if the local
authorities are free to think out great policies and to apply
them in freedom. And it will not be unimportant to the
standards of central politics that we are able thus to revivify
the quality of local life.

Such emulation, it should be added, means an immense
growth in two aspects of government of which we are only
beginning to perceive the significance. We shall need, if
emulation is to be creative, a great increase in the volume of
investigation in local affairs, and we shall need, also, a great
increase in co-operation and the pooling of knowledge between
local authorities. The first aspect is one in which the central
government could be of immense assistance. Its power of
investigation is always greater than that of any local body,
and its right of inspection gives it access to material not
otherwise likely to be accessible. If we could know annually
in each measurable department of the national life the com¬
parative achievement of each local authority, we should go far
towards stimulating competition in achievement and in pro¬
viding ourselves with an index to what should be the standard
of minimum service exacted from local bodies by the State.


438 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

We could compare library systems and the degree to which
their use was organised; the number of children in each area
who passed from primary to secondary schools and from
secondary schools to the university; we could see what service
was made available for the sick in Durham and compare it
with the kindred service in Winchester; we could measure
the reduction in cost to the consumer of tramway services in
Cincinnati and Clev elan d ; we could get reports upon the local
museums of Boston and Glasgow. What Mr. and Mrs. Webb
have called “the impartial qualitative assessment of each town
as a whole ” * seems to me a really urgent task if its govern¬
ance is to approach adequacy.

We need, secondly, the co-operation of local authorities.
There is a number of directions in which such co-operation
can usefully develop. Not only can the local authorities
jointly undertake certain obvious services for themselves, of
which insurance against fire is the most obvious, but they can
also—sometimes by direct co-operative production, sometimes
by centralised purchase of goods on a larger scale than is
open to a single authority—largely reduce to themselves and
their constituencies the cost of the services they provide.
They could co-operate to provide, region by region, a common
rate in support of the universities. They could jointly under¬
take the provision of far more complete vital statistics than
are now available in any existing State. They could form the
habit of holding conferences—sometimes of elected persons,
sometimes of officials—for the discussion of specific and
common problems, and see to it that the conclusions reached
were emphasised in the proper quarters. They could unite to
secure the proper town-planning of a region and the proper
provision of services, like tramways, which now suffer so
seriously from "dead-ends ” through the artificiality of boun¬
daries. It is to be hoped that they will grow into the habit of
interchanging their chief officials for limited periods to prevent
their methods from becoming stereotyped and rigid. They
might unite to provide a costings service, in which each item
of municipal expenditure will be carefully compared through-

1 A Constitution for the Socialist Commonwealth of Great Britain, p. 240.
My obligation to this brilliant chapter will be dear from the degree to which
1 have adopted Mr, and Mrs Webb’s conclusions on local government.


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 429

oat the State. It is clear, as Mr. and Mrs. Webb point oat,
that there are many ways of developing the advantages of a
centralisation without its dangers, of which the self-imposed
standard is not the least beneficial. The wider the field of
such co-operation, it may be added, the better the service
they are likely to obtain from their officials; for nothing so
contributes to pride in work as the knowledge of possible
alternative achievement. Ultimately, moreover, there is no
reason why such mutuality should not become international,
and the common basis of experience from which ideas are
drawn admits the general knowledge of civilisation as a whole.
Certainly there is no habit we need so urgently to acquire
as the recognition that the parish needs to build its methods on
the ideas of the world. So far such effort has been rare,
though the systematic endeavour of Japan and the bureaus
of municipal research in America are evidence that its import¬
ance is being realised increasingly. Certainly there is no field
of social activity in which the deliberate co-ordination of
knowledge is more likely to bear fruitful results.

XI

Such a scheme of political institutions represents, of course,
only a small part of the area in which the activity of the State
will necessarily go deep; it represents, however, that part in
which its influence is most likely to be direct. Its advantages,
as 1 see them, are, above all, that while it maintains as simple
the organs of legal registration, it provides for the admission
that law affects only a small part of social life; and it therefore
surrounds each organ of legal competence with bodies entitled
to advise and so made that their advice is fully weighed. Those
bodies are so constituted that they bring into the ambit of
State decision the views and ideas of all the various interests
affected by its results. The underlying theory, that is to say,
upon which the scheme is built is a recognition that the sources
of decision are multiple, and that therefore the result enacted in
statute should be a function of the many variables which
enter into its making. It gives the voluntary body, therefore,
a definite position in the making of law ; and it thereby ensures
that its experience and its desires shall be counted by those


480 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

who have the ultimate decision in their hands. It does not
assume for that ultimate decision any quality superior to its
substance. It admits that it will make mistakes; it agrees
that, on occasion, it will commit deliberate wrong. But it
argues that the checks and balances with which it is here
surrounded reduce the likelihood of error and minimise the
possibility of wrong. It is, as I think, a prescription of value
against serious disorder in society; but it is not, and it does
not pretend to be, a final prescription. The only way to make
the State a subject of passionate loyalty is to make it deserve
passionate loyalty, and the degree of its desert will depend
upon what it achieves for the happiness of ordinary men and
women. Here, at the least, those ordinary men and women
are given the opportunity to make fully known that upon
which they believe their happiness to depend. It will be
open to the State to deny their will, but it will be the nature
of this system to make that denial a much more difficult,
sometimes even a more perilous, adventure than it is to-day.
As a system, also, it strives at every angle of its compass to
make its working a mechanism of education to those who
encounter it. For it is built on the conviction that the Greek
notion of citizenship—the capacity to rule and be ruled in
turn—contains a truth the importance of which we are in danger
of forgetting. We cannot go back to the simplicity of the
dty-State, but there is no reason why we should not profit
by their wisdom.

It seeks also, as a scheme of institutions, to concentrate
attention less on the problems of power than on the problems
of administration. It is its argument that much more time
has been spent than is necessary upon what may be termed the
abstract metaphysics of politics. For so long as we deal with
the concept of an intangible State, so long we shall miss the
central fact that what is truly important is the relationships
of those who act as its agents. It is the things they do and
fail to do, the process in which their actions are embodied, that
constitute the reality of political discussion. The sovereign
State of philosophic theory never existed except in the imagina¬
tion of philosophers. The true State of everyday life is, I have
here argued, a body of men issuing orders, and what must be
considered is the range of subjects to which their orders should


POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 481

icier, and the methods by which abuse of power must be
adequately prevented. I have not urged that prevention is
always possible—men who are determined on the commission
of wrong will always find the safeguards of justice frail enough
for the ends they have in view—but I have urged that they
may be more firmly welded m the heart of the communal life
than they now are, and, consequently, that their neglect may
be made more dangerous than it has been m the past.

Much of the theory here defended has turned upon a
denial that the rulers of society, as such, are entitled to any
special prestige That has been the reason, for instance, on
the insistence that their agents are, at every point, subject to
the rule of law. That is why, also, it has been made a matter
of grave difficulty for the legislative assembly of the State to
invade such basic rights as freedom of speech. I have not
denied that the government of a State ought to be the just
guardian of general social interests, but I have bmlt my
hypotheses upon the view that the performance of this function
cannot, without careful examination of its results, be admitted
as m any way adequate. That is why, again, the mere enact¬
ment of law does not seem to me impressive What is
important is its substance , and the quality of that substance
will depend upon the degree to which the makers of law are
compelled to take account of the varied, and often opposite,
social interests which dispute for the mastery of the State.

One last word may fitly be said. There will be many to
whom the idea of organised consultation seems a pale ghost
alongside more complex arrangements for the division of legal
power into a multiplicity of unrelated groups Of this criticism
two things are, I thmk, fair comment The separate func¬
tioning of groups always involves some system of interlocking
relationships at the boundaries of their function , and the
harmony thereby attained seems to me both more artificial
and less responsible than that attainable by the method here
outlined , and, secondly, organised consultation seems to me
a weapon of which the quality and strength depend entirely
upon the spirit and the intelligence of the citizen-body In a
society divided, like our own, into rich and poor, where,
because of that division, the avenues of intelligence are largely
under the control of a small class of wealthy persons, it is not


432 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

possible to realise the fall implications of the system, because
those full implications are fatal to a society divided into rich
and poor. But in a society built upon principles of justice
such organised consultation would, as I think, be as powerful a
safeguard as we require for the protection of the rights men
possess in virtue of their humanity. Public opinion will then
be the organised utterance of the community’s instructed
conscience; and they who seek to prevent its purposes or to
frustrate its desires will lack the chief weapons they have at
their disposal. A society, in fact, in which there are freedom
and equality has already divided power. Its difficulty is the
long road it has to travel before freedom and equality may be
attained.


CHAPTER NINE


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS
I

From the standpoint of politics, the problems of industry have
two aspects of importance. There is, first of all, the problem
of safeguarding, throughout its operations, what I have called
the natural rights of men. An industrial system must satisfy
the principles of justice; it must give to the worker a secure
and adequate livelihood, reasonable conditions of work, and a
full opportunity to share in the making of the conditions upon
which his happiness in work will depend. He must not feel
that his life is at the hazard of another man’s will. He must be
able, by his effort, to purchase for himself the means to self-
realisation, so far, at least, as these are dependent upon material
factors. The authority which presides over his destiny must
be an authority that is explicable in terms of moral principle.
Obviously enough, none of these conditions is fulfilled under
the present system. It involves, as a system, the abstraction
of labour-power from the labourer, so that the price paid for
the former is only partially determined by the needs of the
latter. That price, moreover, is paid only when there is need
of the particular kind of labour which the worker is able to do ;
if his employment does not involve the making of profit, he
is not entitled, whatever his needs, to the engagement of his
services. Nor has he, in return for his labour, any effective
share in the organisation of production, even when he is
employed. The broad characteristic of modem industry is
the almost absolute separation of management from labour.
The area of consultation is narrowed down to the conditions
attaching to the price to be paid for labour and the physical
conditions of its employment. The worker has no right to
express his ideas upon methods of production. He has no

28 «


484 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

organised opportunity for suggestion. Even when he has
demands to make, or grievances to put forward, their formula¬
tion usually involves a test of power in which the thing of
import is not the moral quality of the demand or the grievance,
but the strategic condition of the parties to the industrial
relation. Nor, finally, has the worker any claim upon the
product of his work. Once his price has been paid he is
insignificant in relation to it. He is, in a full sense, that
animate tool which to Aristotle was the essence of the slave.

Nothing of all this is qualitatively altered by the fact that
exceptions to it can be shown. There are employers who
make it a custom always to pay adequate wages; who give
to their workers a full share in the determination of labour
conditions ; who have invented machinery for the co-operative
investigation of demand and grievance; who regard the
welfare of their employes as a matter of urgent moral import¬
ance to themselves. There are many employers of whom
this would be true, some of whom it would even be an inade¬
quate account; but any survey of industry as a whole would
make their numbers irrelevant to the general character of
the industrial relation It is significant that every great
advance in industrial welfare has had to be fought for as
though it represented an attack on the yery citadel of industrial
prosperity; and that every attack, always supported by the
emphatic argument that it represents the experience of men
peculiarly fitted to estimate the future, has within a short time
of being made disappointed the prophecies of its protagonists.
It is significant, also, that the moral relations of industrial
enterprise are avowedly distinct from those of private life.
Every investigation made reveals corruption and waste as
its necessary and inevitable accompaniments. It should be
added that this is not less true of the worker than of the
employer. The latter is not less tempted, by the conditions
under which he lives, to evade the right. He fails to give his
best work, he does not realise himself, simply because the
system does not permit its emergence and its restoration.
The Mr. Bounderbys of the modem Coketown mean perfectly
well, but in the circumstances of their environment their
intentions are a priori frustrated.

From this angle the interest of the State in an industrial


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 485

system is the protection of the producer, whatever his position
in the industrial hierarchy. It is called to his protection
because he is a citizen, and cannot, upon the plane of civic
life, function as a citizen unless certain qualities are inherent in
the process of production. But the State is bound also to the
protection of the consumer. He lives because certain services
are available to him. He needs continuous access to certain
commodities without which life is impossible. These are
urgencies which cannot, in the nature of things, be withheld.
He needs also other commodities, the absence of which does
not, indeed, destroy life, but may well destroy that which
gives to life the flavour of beauty and comfort. Finally, and
at a further distance from the interest of the State, there are
commodities the need for and want of which is in no sense
universal, but which supply a genuine quality to a portion of
mankind. In such an analysis it is, I think, plain that the
interest of the State in the first group of wants is immediate,
direct, and comprehensive. It must ensure such a supply
of them as will serve the total need of the community. It
must see to it that their quality is adequate; the maxim
caveat emptor cannot apply in regard to primary qualities in a
civilisation so complex as our own. The failure to secure these
services being fatal, it is obvious that the State cannot risk
their production by private enterprise. Nor can it risk even
their distribution save under such safeguards as will ensure
that no section of its citizens is deprived of access to them.
The second group of wants does not involve such vigorous
supervision by the State. It is desirable that they should be
satisfied ; it is not fundamental that they should be satisfied.
The interest, consequently, of the State in their production
is an interest in the results of production, on the one hand, and
in the effect of the methods of production on the producer, on
the other. With the third group of wants—the production of
cosmetics, for example—the interest of the State in the fact of
production is negligible; where alone it is concerned is to
protect the producer in such enterprise in order that the
process in which he is involved shall accept the standards
essential to the quality of citizenship.

It follows from this analysis that the government of industry
can generally be resolved into three large categories. There


486 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

are industries urgently affected by a public character which
are monopolistic in their nature. Their operation is essential
to the welfare of the community. They have to be operated
for use and not for profit. There must be the maximum of
continuity in the service they afford. There must be stringent
public regulation, not only of the conditions of production,
but also of the selling price of the commodity produced ; and
it may even be necessary to maintain the production of such
commodities when there is little prospect—as in research, for
instance—of a measurable economic return. In this first
category the only possible method of government is the
nationalisation of the service involved. By nationalisation
I do not mean a specific form, such as that taken in modern
States by the Post Office. There is room, and to spare, for
experiment in the method of government in nationalised
industry. The one consideration it excludes is the notion of
private profit. In the second category, we are given the
production of urgent commodities which are not naturally
monopolistic, in which, indeed, as in agriculture, there may
be clearly a large place for the individual producer, but in
which, also, the interest of the State is paramount; and,
secondly, commodities which are definitely desirable, but not
necessarily urgent, in the former sense. Here, I believe', the
forms of government admit of a much larger range of variation.
But in the first group of this category—as, for instance, in the
supply of milk and bread—the less room there is for private
profit the better; and I shall argue that these services, as they
mainly affect the householder, are the natural and proper
sphere of the consumer’s co-operative movement. The
second group of this character may be organised privately,
whether like the modem company, or by such a producer’s
guild as those which seem likely to revive under modem
pressure for the democratisation of industrial control. They
will be characterised by a considerable degree of government
intervention, under forms, and through standards, I shall
discuss later. There will, thirdly, be the category in which the
commodities produced are not invested with a public character.
Here, as I think, the forms of industrial government may be as
various as human ingenuity can suggest. Ail that the State
will exact is conformity with certain standards, in wages, in


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 437

hours of labour and the like, and in the erection of institutions to
ensure that the will of labour has a full opportunity to impress
itself on the making of those standards. But in the third
category, the problem of the amount of profit will not directly
concern the State. If a firm, for instance, invents a toy so
appealing as to enlist the universal allegiance of children, the
State will not seek to limit the profits of its manufacture;
or if it publishes a book which has an immense sale, it will
regard the publisher as entitled, once the interests of its writer
are safeguarded, to what he can make from his enterprise.

1 do not, therefore, envisage anything like the disappearance
of private enterprise. Its province, indeed, will be smaller
than is now the case. It will, wherever it operates, be subject
to a much more rigorous control than in the past; and,
especially in the basic industries, initiative will have to display
itself under different forms than it assumes under the present
system. But I do not assume that any special formulae,
whether State socialism, guild socialism, or syndicalism, repre¬
sent a universal truth applicable to all industry under all
conditions. I believe that there will still be a place for
industrial adventure, but I do not expect that place to be
within the area upon which public welfare depends. I believe,
further, that many occupations, especially on the distributive
side of industry, will have no natural place in the system.
Advertising, for instance, and the middlemen of trade who
neither manufacture nor consume, can, as I shall seek to show,
be largely eliminated in their present form by a less wasteful
organisation of the channel between producer and consumer.
But I am not envisaging a world in which the enormous
economic disparities of the present system have any place.
Men will still be able to make fortunes ; but, especially in the
period of transition, they will be subject to heavy taxation
upon income, and still heavier duties upon their estates at
death. For it must be emphasised that to establish a system
of rights involves expenditure by the State; and, particularly
in the epoch of change, the wealth devoted to that purpose
must largely be derived from the taxation cf wealthy men.
That is one of the unavoidable privileges of the rich. It will,
I do not doubt, be deeply resented at the outset. Changes in
the habits of society are always deeply resented by those


488 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

whom they affect, But as men grow into the new conditions,
I believe that the result will be increasingly to transfer social
significance from wealth to service ; and men will prefer to be
known for what they do rather than for what they possess. In¬
deed, as I argued earlier, I think it probable that such a society
will, in the result, be totally richer than at present, even though
its appearance does not show the great peaks of fortune now
possible. For because it is generally informed by justice,
because, generally, it reflects the desires of those associated
with its effort, it is more likely to secure from all save a few
an effort more commensurate with their powers than the
present order can win from them. It will be able to draw upon
a larger area of inventiveness. It will have fewer disastrous
casualties than now. It will have a higher standard of honour
than a society built, like ours, upon the motive of profit¬
making. It will have found the means to make men share
not less in the gain than in the toil of living.

II

Any discussion of the process of nationalisation must begin
by insisting upon three things. It is not, first of all, a question
of catastrophic nationalisation. So far as we can see, the pro¬
cess will be a piecemeal one, the character of which will change
as it leams by experience. Nor, secondly, need it be assumed
that each nationalised industry needs an identical form of
government; it needs a constitutional form of government
in which certain principles and elements will, in different
guises, always be found, Nor, thirdly, is it possible for
me, even if I had the knowledge, to draw up a catalogue of
the industries which may naturally be grouped under each
of the three categories outlined above. There could not, in
any case, be agreement upon such a list. I think myself,
for example, that the service of banking ought definitely to
be a nationalised service ; but powerful reasons can be adduced
for leaving it a private industry, under some substantial, but
still not final, public control. There are industries, like the
mining and oil industry, in which the case for nationalisation
seems to me clear beyond discussion. There are others, like
shipping, in which the predominant part seems to me an


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 489

obvious case for a nationalised service, but in which, also,
there is no reason why auxiliary aspects, a steamer-service,
for instance, between Margate and Ramsgate, should not be
either private or municipal in character. It is not, indeed,
improbable that many nationalised industries will continue to
be surrounded by a residuum of private enterprise, sometimes
for the purpose of making special commodities, sometimes for
the purpose of export, sometimes to make articles the demand
for which is not large enough to justify the devotion of national
factories to their production. Nor will the list of nationalised
industries ever remain permanent over a long period. Inven¬
tion and discovery will always imply additions to, and sub¬
tractions from, the list. We have, therefore, to concern
ourselves with leading principles rather than with details, to
set out the foundations rather than to build the superstructure.

It is essential, in any national plan of industry, that the
ownership of the means of production should be vested in
the State. That is necessary for two reasons. It emphasises
where the ultimate incidence of control must rest. It enables
us to insist that the producers in the industry are not entitled
to regard it as existing solely for their benefit; they cannot,
therefore, claim such a level of prices as will give them a wage
disproportionate either to need or to the result of effort. It
emphasises, also, that the surplus value created by the industry,
over and above cost of production and the distribution of the
product to the ultimate consigner, belongs to the community
as a whole. We reject, that is to say, any purely syndicalist
plan of industrial organisation. It is not less objectionable in
principle than any other plan of private ownership. There is
no reason to suppose that the ownership of the American
mines by the United Mine Workers of America would be more
careful of the public interest in coal than has been the case
under their ownership by corporations like the present interests.-
The fact is that all exclusive control of this kind is morally
vicious. It confers a title to special privilege which is cor¬
rupting in its essence, even if its possessors believe that they
will devote it to the noblest ends. That has been the case
with churches, and even with bodies within churches, like the
Franciscans, who have started out from the principle that
private possessions are morally dangerous. It has been seen.


440 A GRAMMAR OP POLITICS

in the case of the working-class, both in the treatment often
accorded to trade-union officials by their constituents, and
in the inability of the Co-operative Movement to adopt a
satisfactory policy towards its employes. A statement like
that of Mr. Cole, that " the control of actual production . . .
is the business of the producer, and not of the consumer,"*
altogether omits consideration of the intricate relationship
between the aspects of the productive process. It is only by
making ownership from the outset a matter in which the
community has the ultimate power that we can build adequate
relations beyond.

But while the community, through the State, must own
the instruments of production, the producers are entitled to
participate in management. What does such participation
imply ? Clearly, it must include a share in the making of the
conditions under which the members of the given vocation,
whether they be lawyers or miners, chemists or carpenters,
exercise their function. They must assist in settling their
pay and their hours of work, the sanitation of their factories,
the character of the particular job they do, the men with whom
and, to no small degree, under whom, they are to work. They
must be free, in a word, to make their vocation an effective
function in the same way as the doctor and the lawyer. There
can, I think, be no doubt that the standard of these professions
is in no small degree built upon the autonomy of the members
of the craft. They accept a discipline to live under because it
it self-imposed. It is creative because it is derived from their
own experience of what will make them conscious of a great
tradition which they must not only preserve, but also develop.
Their code of honour is bom of self-determination. There
must similarly be room in factory and office for a kindred
freedom. And this self-determination is not a generalised
right of a few workers chosen to represent an indifferentiated
mass of their fellows. It is a right for each class and grade of
workers who feel themselves as distinct from one another as
the dentist from the doctor. Their control will be worthless
unless it is specialised control. There will be the need to
protect themselves against the invasion of their special sphere.
There will be the demand that their peculiar technique secures

1 Self-Government i n Industry (rd, of 1919), p. 151,


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 441

its apposite qualification before anyone can be permitted to
practise it. This specialism, moreover, is essential the more
technical the work becomes; for then the worker is a member
of a small group to whom protection that is general will become
purely illusory in character. Nor do I believe, as Professor
Graham Wallas ' has argued, that these safeguards merely
intensify professional conservation. There is a sense in
which professional conservation is the best safeguard we have
of the tradition of experience; and, broadly speaking, it is
only in vocational self-determination that a particular group
of workers can grow conscious of themselves. I believe that
consciousness is more truly the root from which freedom
grows than we are inclined to admit.

Participation, further, must mean the right to be consulted
in the making of policy for the industry. But, here, certain
differentials are important. The making of policy is not daily
administration. The former is the long plan, the general
direction of events over a period. Here, assuredly, the workers
in a given industry have a right to be heard, to explain their
point of view, to emphasise doubts, and, at the margin, to
resist decision. But they cannot make the poli cy ; that is a
matter which must rest with those who speak in the name oft
the community. Thus, for instance, it would not be for the'
miners to say how much coal should be produced in a given
year. They might urge on the deciding body that the number
of tons was too large for the number of hewers in the pits, or
too small to produce a wage-fund consistent with an adequate
standard of life. But though they would thus share in the
decision made, its making depends upon considerations of
which their interests are only part. Administration is a
different matter. Once a policy has been decided upon, its
application is a matter of technique where each grade involved
in the technique has the right to help. But help must be
proportionate to qualification. The hewer of coal cannot
settle problems which belong to the mining engineer simply
because he lacks the knowledge to do so. He ought to be
able to make representations, whether of grievance or sugges¬
tion. But as soon as administration passes beyond the
technique of a given grade of worker, whatever the advisory
< Our Social Heritage, chap, vi.


442 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

capacity in which he may attend to settlement, he cannot
expect to control it. That would be as absurd as to allow
the patient to control the doctor in the choice of the medicine
he requires.

The classical method in a nationalised industry has been
a system like that of the British Post Office in which a minister
responsible to Parliament is supposed to make the policy
which directs its operations. It is clear that such a simple
method is altogether inadequate to our needs. In the first
place, the system does not permit any real knowledge of the
work of the Post Office. An annual examination of estimates,
an occasional question, and, quite rarely, a special debate,
makes the supposed control of Parliament very largely a
myth; and the assumption that the methods of the Post
Office are a matter of cabinet policy is irrelevant to the proper
character of industrial enterprise. The doctrine, moreover, of
ministerial responsibility cannot work in a realm such as
this. It is resented by the government of the day ; it is
disliked by the official, who realises the ignorant character
of most of the criticisms he has to meet; it is a source of
irritation to the private member who finds that his inquiries
are met by the skilful evasion of their substance. The
nationalised industries we are discussing will inevitably be
the subject of discussion in the legislative assembly. But
their relation to the government of the day will, I think, have
to assume a different form.

I have already argued that the distribution of government
business should be by functions and not by persons. One of
those functions is the control over the production of com¬
modities in its varying forms. The more unified the nature of
that control, in its large outlines, the better is the national
policy likely to be. We ought not to have a separate minister
of mines, of agriculture, of the postal service. We need a
angle minister of production co-ordinating the policies of a
number of subordinate ministers, and presenting, for the
cabinet, a co-ordinated body of ideas to the legislative
assembly. These subordinate ministers will not, in the case
of a nationalised industry, be directly responsible for its
operation. They will communicate to those who administer it
the general ideas upon which the legislative assembly insists.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 448

They will receive from those administrators their report upon
the methods they propose to use in giving those ideas practical
application; that will lead, on his part, to criticism, sugges¬
tion, and, on occasion, to definite objection. They will be
supported, as I pointed out earlier, by a legislative committee
each of which will enable them to advise the legislature upon
problems connected with the industry. They will, in a word,
exercise, not administration, but control; and the latter will
be derived from the policy sanctioned by the legislative
assembly itself. Their knowledge of the way in which the
stream of tendency they direct through affairs flows to its
appointed end they will derive from a body of experts in
their departments who will spend their time in providing
them with statistics of cost and output, with audits of accounts,
with the result of inspections, and with, perhaps above all,
the record of research into new possibilities which they can
bring to the notice of the service of administration. Their
part will have been played in satisfying the legislative assembly
that the policy it has sanctioned has been put into operation.
They will not be responsible if, for instance, a local chamber
of commerce is dissatisfied with its telephone service, or an
angry clergyman dislikes the extra stop on a train from London
to Eastbourne. Those will be recognised as technical problems
about which the ideas of the administrative personnel are
the real factor in government.

Two questions arise here of the first importance. Does
such control offer an adequate guarantee that the interests of
the State will be safeguarded in the administration of the
service ? I see no reason why this should not be the case.
There is preserved in all its fulness the ultimate power of
the legislative assembly to make the policy of the industry
It will be able to control the principles which underlie its
direction far more fully than is now possible. It will be
able to criticise the operation of those principles from a basis
of much fuller knowledge than is now available, say, to the
average member of Congress or the House of Commons. It
will have its group of members in touch with every item of
importance in the working of the assembly. It will learn from
the advisory committees the impact that working on the
persons affected by it. The publicity secured by the minister’s


444 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

department will throw a flood of light on the te chn ica l effi¬
ciency of its operation. The system here outlined surely
adds to, rather than subtracts from, the safeguards of national
ownership.

The second question is more complex in character. If
final control, as here suggested, is placed outside the
nationalised industry, can the self-government of the producer
therein, the democratic nature of the process in which he is
involved, be made effective ? It must be said at once that if
by self-government in industry is meant the total and absolute
control of all operations and the policy upon which those
operations depends by the producers, it is impossible, in any
real way. We can allow a postal guild to tell the State what
ought to be charged for the delivery of letters; we cannot
allow it finally to determine the price of delivery. We can
give it the opportunity to make its case an overwhelming one;
but an external view is essential to the protection of others
interested in the delivery of letters. We can allow miners to
develop what they consider adequate tests for entrance to a
mining guild ; but we must retain for the State the right to
revise those tests. In the vast majority of cases, I believe
that the administration of a nationalised industry will be
almost entirely left, in every question of practical importance,
to those engaged in working it. But the safeguard must
always exist that the producers do not seek to exploit the
community for their own interest. The criteria which Mr. Cole
regards* as sufficient proof that a society will never be
exploited by the guild do not seem to me in any way adequate.
The guild, he thinks, is prevented from exploitation because
it is charged a " substitute for economic rent ” in return for
the use of the instruments of production. But, obviously,
that substitute must be fixed in terms of the cost of production,
and those costs may be charged with a wages bill, for example,
for which there is no justification. Such a doubt Mr. Cole
thinks a betrayal of faith is human nature; to which I think
the simple answer is that we have been betrayed by human
nature so often that it is elementary wisdom to safeguard
ourselves against it. To urge, as he urges, that the taxation of
guilds will solve the matter because the competent authority

* Self-Government in Industry, p. 337.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 445

will fix the burden in terms of the productivity of the industry,
and that since productivity depends on price, “ the heaviest
burdens will be laid on the broadest backs,” is to omit the
fact that those " broadest backs ” will dominate the competent
authority. Nor do I believe we can secure the necessary
mechanisms of industrial change, and the necessary degree of
industrial audit, unless control remains outside. Freedom in
industry seems to me to mean the chance to make one's per¬
sonality creative in the vocation pursued; and it will appear
later that there is a full opportunity for that creativeness in
the administrative institutions of a nationalised industry.

Let me turn, then, to the institutions of administration.
At the apex of each national industry will be a governing
board in which there will be vested the full power to carry
out the policy approved by the legislative assembly. What
will be its constitution and functions ? It should, like the
cabinet, be essentially a small body ; any committee charged
with executive duties cannot be large if it is in any real degree
to be efficient. It will need to represent three different types
of interest in the industry. There will be members who
represent the side of management, in which the technical
side is included; others, again, will represent the different
vocations, both manual and clerical; others, finally, will
represent the public, and especially those industries which
are allied to the service concerned. How the membership
is to be chosen is not a matter upon which anything final
can be said; much, obviously, will depend upon the character
of the industry and the variety of the vocations of which it is
composed. But certain principles, I think, are clear. The
representatives of the vocations should always be chosen by
the vocations themselves. That does not necessarily mean
election at large, by all the members of the vocation; per¬
sonally, I think it probable that their choice, either by the
executive committee of the vocation or by an ad hoc delegate
meeting, will give better results than those available from an
indiscriminate mass vote in which it is difficult for tho merits
of the candidates to be nicely judged. The members who
represent management should be elected by the managers and
technicians jointly; and it will be advisable to ensure that
each group shall be able to have their own members on the


448 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

board. The representatives of the public should be nominated
by the subordinate minister in charge of the department
under which the industry is grouped ; but he should, I think,
submit his proposed list to the legislative committee of his
department for endorsement, and there should always be
included in his list one representative nominated by the con¬
sumers’ Co-operative Movement. The members should be
appointed for a term of years, and they should be re-eligible
without limit. The board needs to embody the maximum it
can secure ; it is not a method of training apprentices. The
members should, of course, be paid for their services, and they
should meet as often as their business requires.

The functions of the Governing Board define themselves,
at least in principle, with some simplicity. It is charged
with carrying out the general policy of the legislative assembly.
It must interpret its meaning in large outline, and think out
the implications it contains. It will co-ordinate the work of
the districts into which it will be necessary to divide the
industry as a whole. It will act, therefore, as an advisory
body to those districts, consider their problems, criticise their
operations, remit to them suggestions, ask them to carry out
experiments either sectionally or upon a national scale.
Clearly, also, it must be charged with three essential functions
if an adequate unification of its work is to be achieved. It
must maintain the control of the statistical side of the
industry, its estimates, its accountancy, its audit. That is
urgent, both for the purpose of proper estimates of cost, of,
therefore, the fixation of price, and for the making of decisions
upon such financial problems as the maintenance of an ade¬
quate reserve, the raising of new capital and so forth. It is
by the Governing Board that relations with other industries will
be determined ; not, indeed, the details of those relationships,
but such systematic principles as will secure a jiist uniformity
of treatment. It must, secondly, maintain a district service
of inspection. Where, for instance, there is a fall in total
output it must be able to have its independent explanation
of the fall. Where the industrial relations of management
and men are bad, it must have an independent survey of the
conditions which surround that badness. It must, thirdly,
maintain an independent research organisation communicating


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 447

to the district novelties in method, the results of foreign
experiment, the possibilities of new machinery and so forth.
Its meetings, clearly, will not be public; but its account
ought to be accessible in the same way as the national accounts
and its proceedings published in the large outline of their
results. It ought annually, at least, and, possibly, more
often, to summon conferences of the District Boards, of which
the powers will be outlined below, and of the vocational
bodies in the industry; there, criticisms, recommendations,
ideas, should be freely exchanged, and the meeting should
bear something of the relationship to the industry that the
annual conference of the trade unions in England bears to
the movement as a whole. It does not, that is to say, control,
but it gives the directing force of the movement a sense of
the wider influences at work there. It should be the duty,
also, of the Governing Board to report annually to the minister
in charge of the department concerned with its work.

Two other aspects of the work are also important. It will
have, clearly, certain powers of appointment. It will select,
as will be seen in detail later, the public representatives of
the District Boards; and it will need to appoint its own
staff. For the latter purpose it must maintain an establish¬
ment section whose business it will be to see that no person
is appointed to any post who does not possess the requisite
qualifications. These will be, clearly, largely vocational in
character; and that is, in itself, some safeguard against
favouritism in its various forms. But it is, I think, important
to prevent even the Governing Board making the establish¬
ment section the creature of its own will; and, to that end,
I suggest that the members of the section, some five or seven
in number, shall be chosen by the vocations in the industry
as permanent nominees and shall be dismissable only by
action of the minister in charge of the department. They
would then be as independent in tenure and character as
the members of such a body as the Civil Service Commission
in England. To them, also, ought to be submitted not merely
the national appointments, but also such local positions as
the managership of a factory or a mine. They can, in each
case, only require proof of qualification: but the power to


448 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

require such proof is essential to the proper working of the
industry.

The Governing Board, secondly, must obviously have
powers in relation to strikes or lock-outs. It ought, I believe,
to be made a local condition in such a relationship as a
national industry implies, that no national stoppage should
take place until the Governing Board has sought the means of
settlement. District stoppages are, in the first instance, a
district matter; but the Governing Board ought to have the
rignt to demand an immediate report of the issues in dispute,
to explain to the District Board the principles of settlement
it proposes, and, if it is dissatisfied with the handling of the
case by the District Board, to be able to revoke it into its
own hands. In all such disputes it is essential that there
should be maintained uniform rates of wages, and uniform
hours of labour throughout the industry; and the Governing
Board must admit no settlement that violates this principle.
There is no case for admitting variation on any other ground
than the character of the work done or the amount of output
over a minimum which admits of a full wage for the purposes
of citizenship.

The Governing Board will act rather as a co-ordinating
factor in administration than as itself the directly admin¬
istering factor. For a centralised service in which complete
uniformity prevailed would leave no room for flexibility, or
for the display of initiative outside the Governing Body.
The inevitable result of such a policy would be bureaucracy
at its worst. The mine and the factory would be hampered
by a network of regulations which would make it difficult
for them to meet the special conditions they are bound to
confront. Each industry, therefore, must be divided into
regions of which the number will depend upon the character
of the industry and the principles upon which it is organised.
The coal industry, for instance, is in England divided into six
Districts by the Mines Department, and in the scheme devised
for its governance by Mr. Justice Sankey it was divided into
fourteen. Each Of these Regional or District Boards should
be composed of representatives of each of the interests which
find place in the Governing Body. The representatives of
management and the vocations would be similarly elected;


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 449

those of the public being appointed by the Governing Body.
The persons chosen to represent the pubbc would include a
district representative of the Co-operative Movement

The functions of the Regional Boards will be similar in
character, though narrower in the area with which they deal,
to those of the Governing Body They will be responsible for
the administration of the industry in their district They
will apply on the spot the national policy with the flexibility
demanded by the special district conditions they confront.
Over two problems, basic wages and basic hours of labour,
they ought not, I think, to exercise control , these are
essentially national matters because they require from their
nature, uniformity of principle There is no reason why a
miner in Northumberland should work longer hours than a
miner m Yorkshire , nor can rational grounds be alleged why
he should be paid less for the same basic effort The Regional
Board, also, will appoint the managers of the different mines
or factories in their areas In each case, their choice should
be surrounded by two safeguards They should, I think,
select only after opportunity has been given for all qualified
men to compete for the appointment , and they should be
compelled to report their choice to the Establishment Section
of the Governing Body 1 he latter ought not to be able to
refuse the nomination made, except upon the ground of
inadequate qualification , it is I think, of the first importance
that each Regional Board should be fully responsible for
problems of personnel within its area It should act as the
primary authority m all industrial disputes within its area ,
with the two limitations that the Governing Body should have
the right to revoke a dispute mto its own jurisdiction, and
that the woikers should be able to appeal thereto from its
decision Under it, also there would he departments to deal
with the purchase of materials and the marketing of the
product in the gi\en area, linked ob\iousl>, to each mine
or factory by the necessary channels For it is clear that
centralised purchase of materials is an obvious economy,
and organised marketing is the only wav in which we can
eliminate the host of middlemen who, without performing
any genuine service that is indispensable, now infest the
ranks of industry The more direct the highroad from pro-

29


MO A G RAMMAR OF POLITICS

ducer to consumer, the more efficient is their relationship
likely to be.

Below the Regional Boards will be the individual mines
and factories of the industry. Two things in the constitu¬
tion of each are, I think, quite clear. The factory or mine
must at the source be under the control of a manager who
is directly responsible for its working; and his relationship
with his workers there must be arranged through the medium
of a Works Committee. There is no substitute possible for the
individual responsibility which control by a person represents
in each unit of production. There must be a single mind
planning the application of decisions and responsible for
their result. Committees are much more effective either in
vetoing action it is proposed to take, or in outlining a policy,
than in actually attempting operation. The mainspring of
the latter is an actual person free to plan his way to the end
he is instructed to reach. He may be surrounded with restric¬
tions, those are the material to which the effort of his hand
is subdued. But it is quite certain that the individual
factory will be a failure unless the responsibility for its
management is single and personal.

But this does not mean that the manager should be an
autocrat, free to hew his way as he pleases to his appointed
goal. The average worker is much more intimately affected
by his policy than he is likely to be by the decisions either
of the Governing Body or the Regional Board. His freedom
at his work is undoubtedly increased by the sense that he
ultimately contributes, through his representatives, to the
making of policy. But what mainly touches him and influ¬
ences his sense of happiness in life depends most largely upon
the circumstances of his daily life. It is the order of the
foreman, the decision of the works manager that he
most intimately; and it is to this end urgent that he should
participate in, and vitally help to make, those oiders and
those decisions. Clearly the character of such Works Com¬
mittees cannot be uniform. Anyone who looks at the already
existixig variety of structure will realise that uniformity is
neither attainable nor desirable . 1 There will be cases in

1 Cf. for details in Great Britain the Report on Works CommtUets of the
Ministry of Labour, and, for America, the similar report published by the


461


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS

which a mixed committee of management and workers is
desirable. There will be others in which the representation is
confined to the workers alone. There will be others, again, in
which the committee will more suitably represent a special
grade of workers than a heterogeneous collection of them.
Some factories will be so large as to need all three types;
others, again, will probably be small enough to need a single
form only. The one essential limitation of power to which
they will be submitted is that they will not be able to alter
the principles of national or regional agreements made with
the Governing Body or the Regional Board respectively ; that
must always be a matter for the vocational associations as
a whole, though suitable adaptations of principle to local
conditions may be made with the assent of all concerned.

The functions of the Works Committees would lie mainly in
two directions. They would discuss with the management
the day-to-day grievances which inevitably arise in all
administration— cases of unfair treatment, of unusually heavy
work, of inadequate routing of work throughout the factory;
the delays, for instance, from which miners suffer through
the failure to supply sufficient tubs' for coal; and they would
contribute suggestions to the management for the improvement
or organisation in the factory. Anyone who studies the
functions now performed by existing Works Committees will
gain at least a general notion of the place they will come to
occupy in the industrial structure. And it is worth while to
set these out in some detail, because a realisation of their
scope will provide a means of measuring the extent to which
the worker’s life will be planned by a process of which he is
largely the creator. I add that they must always have, as a
matter of constitutional right, the power of access to the
manager; that service upon them must count as working
time; and that where their functions are of large enough
volume they should have their paid officials. We cannot,
beyond this, define with any precision their actual relationship
with the management. But two things may be said. The
more freely the manager seeks to avail himself of their services,

Bureau of Industrial Research in New York For Germany, see the Report
of the International Labour Office of January 1921 on Works Councils m
Gtrmany.


459 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

to consult them, to try and grasp the point of view they urge,
the more likely is he to stimulate the quality of effort we
require in industry. Much, of course, will depend upon
managerial temperament; there are some men to whom
consultation is the most difficult of all habits. But such men
are fitted rather to be experts in some special sphere than to
seek to drive a team of men. We cannot have autocracy,
and where it is sought, an appeal to the Regional Board ought
always to be in order

In this background, I suggest, that our experience already
indicates that the problems dealt with by Works Committees
will comprise at least the following range of subjects. 1
(x) Works rules. (2) Distribution of hours of work ; time¬
keeping; breaks in working hours. (3) Payment of wages.
(4) Settlement of grievances. (5) Holiday arrangements.
(6) Physical welfare in mine and factory; such problems,
for instance, as baths at the pit-head, safety appliances,
heating and sanitation. (7) Factory and mine discipline.
(8) Training of apprentices. (9) Education in the factory—
the provision of a technical library, organisation of lectures
and so forth, (xo) Reception of suggestions for improvement
in method and organisation of work; facilitation of tests
for such suggestions, (xi) Organisation of social side of
factory life, e.g. sports, dramatic group, etc. (12) Investi¬
gation of factors, e g. housing conditions, inadequate provision
of schools, which may affect the proper working of the factory.
I do not, of course, pretend that this list is adequate, much
less complete; but it at least serves to indicate how much of
the worker's life can be ruled by institutions in which he has
a share

Nor can it be doubted that these Works Committees are
a powerful creative force. There is a large body of evidence
in proof of their value. They have secured better time¬
keeping. They have aided in the maintenance of a greater
volume of output. They have prevented the wastage of material
in manufacture. They have prevented the violation of safety
rules. There are cases where petty theft has almost entirely
disappeared through the action of such a committee. There

1 Cl, Report on the Establishment and Progress of Joint Industrial Council,
H.M. Stationery Office, 1923, pp 70-1,


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 458

are others where their investigation into the machinery used
has brought about substantial technical improvements. There
are others, again, where the committee has maintained output
while securing a decrease in the number of hours worked
weekly by the staff. Another committee had a chart of
output placed on each machine m order that the workers
might see for themselves the variations in their efficiency.
" It has been found,” says a report of the British Government, 1
" not only that they serve as an effective substitute in the
individual establishment for the no longer direct relations
between employers and work-people, but that they provide
also, in many cases, a means of meeting the demand of work¬
people for an msight into the economic conditions of the
industry, and of the particular establishment with which they
are connected Difficult as in many cases such questions are.
Works Committees at least ensure the confidence between
employers and work-people without which discussion of the
problem involved is impossible ”

It should be emphasised that these Works Committees are
the root of freedom in the factory The individual worker
is himself helpless before the size of modem organisation.
He can only make himself felt by the evolution of institutions
through which his will has a full opportunity of expression.
In committees such as these there is, I think, a reasonable
guarantee that this will be the case They will work on the
spot. They will be composed of men who know each other in
the intimacy of kindred effort They will be elective , and
the period of office can, without senous difficulty, be made
much shorter than m the case either of the Governing Body
or the Regional Board They will have real value for the
latter institutions, since it will be generally true that a
manager who is in continual difficulty with his Works Com¬
mittees is at some important point unfit for his post That
is why it is important to give the committee not merely
functions of the range indicated, but also the right to protest
against the manager to the Regional Board There cannot,
I think, be the nght to carry a proposal against him in the
factoiy itself, simply because he is the person responsible
for its operation, and he cannot responsibly apply a policy

■ Ibid p 83


454 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

built from below with which he is in disagreement. Nor do
I believe that this right of protest will impair discipline in
the factory, for it is general experience that discussion on
the plane of comradeship and equality almost always leads
to a satisfactory compromise. The occasion for protest will
be rare; and, were it absent, acute disagreement would have
no alternative save unconditional surrender or a strike. It
is, I think, a mistake to create alternatives of this character.
They are bound to lead to that psychological malaise so evident
in European industrial conditions since 1918 and so fatal to
the proper working of the industrial machine. The right of
protest secures a determination from a disinterested body
upon which both management and men find their place ; and
I believe that in all save a few instances the determination of
that body will be accepted without difficulty. Where, indeed,
it meets with refusal it will probably reflect a problem so large
as to need decision in principle by the legislative assembly.

There remains the problem of the recruitment of staff,
and of the methods of appointment and dismissal, of discipline,
indeed, in general, in the nationalised industry Here, the
basic principles have the merit of simplicity, even if it is
impossible to determine the varied forms they will assume.
It is clear that vacancies must be filled by advertisement ;
and that the persons selected to fill them must be qualified
for the post, as the vocation to which they belong determines
qualification. There can be no question of a right to a
position, in the way, for instance, in which the son of a present-
day employer enters his father’s business as a matter of
course. We shall need in each factory and pit, or in such a
grouping of them as is found most satisfactory, an appoint¬
ments section working in dose connection with the manage¬
ment. It will be connected with the local schools and colleges
in an organic way, and people will enter it at the age of work
through such means. Where it is not the apprentice, but
adult m anual labour, that is required, the appointments section
will furnish particulars of. its vacancies to the local branch of
the vocational organisation which will act as the employment
exchange for the area. In the case of clerical labour, the
experience of the modem civil service suggests that, at the
base, competitive examination is much the best method of


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 455

recruitment. Once we pass from first appointments to pro¬
motion and selection lor technical posts, other and more
complex considerations arise.

All minor posts in each factory are, broadly, of lour kinds,
(i) There is the position of foremen. They should, I suggest,
be appointed by the manager after consultation with the
Works Committee. ( 2 ) There are positions like those of
managerial assistants where the work involved is not technical
in nature, but involves general planning and oversight. They
should be chosen by a special selection committee, presided
over by the manager, with representatives on it of the manage¬
ment side, and the Works Committee. This selection committee
should, preferably, be a standing committee of the factory,
for experience suggests that the judging of men is a quality
which can be acquired by experience. (3) There are,
thirdly, positions of a technical nature like that of an
accountant or a chemist. These should, I think , be similarly
appointed to the second group, save that the selection
committee should in these cases be fortified by the addition
of a member of the technical vocation involved. ( 4 ) The
final class is that of manager. I have already suggested that
he should be appointed by the Regional Beard. The latter
can make all inquiries it needs to satisfy itself that its selection
is likely to be approved in the factory concerned, but the
chief problem is that of capacity. Mr. Cole’s suggestion 1
that he should be chosen by the Works Committee in a factory
is, I think, open to all the usual objections that such self-
election involves. It maximises intrigue, and it fails to do
justice to ability. Anyone who studies the results of the
system as it worked in the old self-governing workshop, or,
erven more, in the colleges of Oxford and Cambridge, will not
be inclined to trust to its working. It is a simple illustration
to compare the record of Masters of Trinity College, Cam¬
bridge, who are appointed by the Crown, with those of any
other Cambridge collage, co see the advantage of external
device. There can be ample consultation, but the final power
ought to scrutinise the problem from the angle of the
industry as a whole.

' Self-Government in Industry, p. 217 But all Mr Cole's suggestions in
this matter seem to me to show less than his usual insight


4M A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

All this, of course, is simply an indication of technique.
What, generally, it seeks to avoid is the placing of the power
to make appointment in the hands of those from amongst
whom the choice must be made. There can be, and there
ought to be, the most ample consultation of them, and, other
things being equal, no views ought to weigh more than theirs.
But there is, in our experience, little reason to doubt that the
absence of an external appointing authority either leads to
availability in the American sense, or to seniority, as the
criterion of fitness; and neither is adequate for industrial
lunctions. I do not suppose that any technique adopted will
precisely resemble that here outlined; but the principle upon
which it rests is, I am fairly certain, at the heart of successful
enterprise.

Promotion is a different matter. Everyone who works has,
I think, a right to the satisfaction of two expectations. He
has a right to have his period of service count, up to a certain
point; and he has the right to be considered for promotion.
In academic work, it is not unusual for each year of service,
after a period of probation, to be recognised by a small incre¬
ment of pay, the total of these increments not being greater
than the salary affixed to the grade next above that to which
the recipient belongs. The same principle characterises the
public service of the modem State. It is, of course, dependent
cm satisfactory work. It is, I think, the simplest system
of recognition there is, and its general adoption is m accordance
with justice. It enables us to reward the man who works
hard, even while his capacity does not justify us in giving him
more responsible function. For where capacity must above
all count is in the promotion of men. The method I would
suggest is twofold. In the case of all subordinate appointments,
the Works Committee might nominate a candidate to the
committee of selection. In most cases, their choice will be
unexceptionable and, with the consent of the latter, he should
be promoted to the vacant post. But beyond this level,
promotion should follow the path now usual, for example,
m the nigher posts of the municipal service. The committee
of selection would fill it from within if it was convinced of
the suitability of some person in the factory itself; but if
it was doubtful of his fitness, or if it thought definitely that


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 457

it could do better outside, it would throw open the post to
competition and leave the man on the spot to be weighed
against those who chose to apply. That is, I suggest, an
important guarantee against what may be called industrial
inbreeding. It will weight the scale somewhat in favour of
the known candidate, but not sufficiently to risk his choice
merely on the ground that he is known. So, similarly, the
average permanent secretary to a British department of
State will be chosen from inside; but instances do not fail
to occur when it is considered advisable to transfer an official
from another department, r\/'

The problem of discipline in a nationalised factory seems
to me likely to be much simpler than it is under the present
system. Most of the present difficulties are inherent in the
autocracy of the system. Men can be appointed by the employer
without regard to the will of those they control, and they are,
similarly, subject to dismissal. The strategic dispositions of
the parties to industry, the fear of unemployment, the desire
to stand in well with the management, tend only too often
to make the foreman a bully and each problem of discipline
a matter of prestige which may engage, as in the famous
Knox Strike of 1912, on the North-Eastern Railway in
England, 1 all the forces of combat on either side. Much of
all this is removed in a nationalised industry on the one hand
by the removal of the profit-motive, and on the other by the
existence of the Works Committee, which will enable most
problems to be confronted long before the difficulties of
prestige are involved. But friction will, of course, occur; and
the best way to deal with its incidents has been shown to
be a Board of Discipline in which management and men
equally participate under the chairmanship of an impartial
person, preferably drawn from outside the industry. In each
case there can then be a formal hearing, with evidence
from witnesses and a punishment which, in the majority of
cases, seems to be accepted as representing substantial justice.
It is overwhelmingly important that the whole process of
industrial administration should avoid the existing habit of
condemning men, almost always without even a hearing,

• On the Knox Strike, G. D. H Cole and R. P Amot, Trade Unionism
mmd tk* Railways, p 33,


*58 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

to penalties as serious as dismissal. Often enough the offence
does not merit more than a warning, and the absenoe of
such instant severity, or the sense that it has been visited
upon the offender only after deliberation which his fellows
share is vital to the sense of dignity modem industrial methods
too often fail to recognise in the worker . 1

So far, I have not discussed the methods by which the rates
of pay, the number of hours to be worked, the period of
apprenticeship to be served, in each vocation, are settled for
a national industry. That is because I do not believe that
any of the institutions so far proposed are likely to be adequate
to this end. For no industry will include all the members
of any given vocation ; the mining industry will have doctors
and engineers, clerks and accountants, chemists and lawyers
as part of its normal staff. There will be grades within each
vocation, and their varying numbers will mean a very different
bargaining power in such matters if they were left to their
own devices; for on the Governing Body, and even cm the
Regional Board, the less numerous workers are not likely to
be represented. Similar work, moreover, must be performed
under similar conditions, no matter what be the industry in
which it is performed. It seems clear, therefore, that, the
basic pay of the worker in his capacity as citizen apart, the
conditions of each vocation must be settled by the trade
union of that vocation by mutual discussion with the Governing
Body of the industry. Over and above the minimum, the rates
of pay conceded will obviously depend upon the productivity
of the industry concerned. There will, I imagine, be provision
made for increase of pay where there is increase of effort;
and special considerations will attach to work of a particularly
dangerous kind. I add that I do not believe that the settle¬
ment of these issues will be free from difficulty; nor do I
doubt that, on occasion, such difficulty may lead to a strike.
It is, however, probable that certainly the extent and largely
the bitterness of these disputes will be mitigated by the
important fact that a refusal to increase pay on the part of
the Governing Body will not mean an increase in profit for

1 On the working of such Discipline Boards see Coke and Amot, op. cti.,
chaps, vii and ix The court-martial system in the army in time of peace
is an approach to a similar' idea.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 459

the shareholder who contributes nothing to the well-being
of the industry, or the financier who is concerned, not with
its service, but merely the return it can make. The Govern¬
ing Body, also, will have to decide the amount to be set
annuall y apart to cover such fixed charges as depredation,
and replacement, of plant. Prices will, as nearly as possible,
be fixed so as to cover cost of production ; and where there is
a reduction in cost below what is produced by sale, there
should be a special return to management and labour as the
reward for their effidency. There must, of course, be a limit
to this reward, and when, in any year, the surplus realised
passes a certain percentage of affixed revenue, it ought to
go to the reduction of price, so that the public as a whole
participates in the accruing benefit.

I have already discussed, in another connection, the part
that may be played in the constant stimulus to improved
service by the creation of advisory committees of those by
whom the service is utilised. In the consumers’ Co-operative
Movement, for example, such methods as the District Meeting
undoubtedly do much to prevent the purchaser from falling
into an apathetic dullness about things which vitally concern
him. There are, I think, great possibilities in bodies of this
kind. There are few users of motor-cars who cannot contri¬
bute ideas to their manufacture. The telephone, the postal
service, the railway, are all immediately susceptible to institu¬
tions of this kind. Obviously enough, there are services so
technical in nature that it is impossible to organise a serious
consumers’ opinion about them; but in the building of
ships, for example, I do not think we can doubt that the
Seamen’s Union could contribute an experience of great
importance; and the engine-driver and fireman might well
be asked for their views upon the construction of locomotives.
There is everything to gain by the multiplication, in every
department of industrial life, of voluntary advisory bodies
which give results of their experience to the particular trade
they use. They may even come, like the SocidU des Abonnds
au Telephone in Paris, to erfiploy their own experts to check
the work, and stimulate the inventiveness, of those by whom
they are served. Such advisory bodies point also, especially
where the nationalised industry produces commodities of


*00 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

universal use, to the need for research associations, in which,
outside the official categories, ideas may be exchanged and
developed. Bodies like the Institute of Naval Architects,
like the Teachers’ Guild, are rather remarkable for their
rarity than for their frequency, though in Germany they
seem to have attained a much greater importance than else¬
where. 1 We have, indeed, vast bodies like the Chambers of
Commerce in England and the National Association of Manu¬
facturers in America ; but these seem to have developed into
trade-protecting societies concerned with little else than the
prevention of any growth of government enterprise. What we
need is bodies which, by unofficial research and inquiry, will
deliberately seek to improve the standards of service in the
different trades.

Partly, one hopes, these might develop as definite branches
of the vocational bodies. There is room and to spare in the
trade-union movement for independent investigation of this
kind. No reason exists, for instance, why the Miners’
Federation of Great Britain should not independently study
the problem of safety in mines, the more particularly when
it is remembered that on certain phases—the fighting of “ gob "
fires, for example—their members have a vast and unequalled
body of experience upon which to draw. Similarly, one
would like to see suggestions for the improvement of the legal
profession from solicitors’ and barristers' clerks, a body of
men with more practical knowledge, and less recognition, than
any kindred group in the vocational world. A federation
might, in addition to the improvement of their status, throw
a flood of light upon the administration of the law. It is,
of course, important to prevent critical inquiry of this kind
from being regarded as a breach of discipline ; we cannot
permit such an attempt, unfortunately an unsuccessful one,
as that of the Postal and Telegraph Clerks’ Association in
England to study the working of the postal cheque system in
Europe to be hindered by the Post Office on the ground that
it implied a criticism of the apathy of official methods.

< Cl. H. Finer, Repruentatne Government and a Parltamtnl of Industry,
p. 54, and especially the survey anted in note 4 on that page. Mr. and Mrs.
Webb undertook a survey of professional associations in the New Statesman
for October 2, 1915, and April 21-28, 1917; but the situation has much
changed since then.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 401

Medical men and engineers have shown in a notable way
what can be done by organised research of this kind. There
is no reason why their achievement should not be copied by
the rest of the vocational world. The greater the stream
of criticism and suggestion that flows through the working of
each nationalised industry, the richer will be the results it
can obtain.

And it is here, as I think, that we find the answer to the
problem of authority in the world of industry. A system such
as that which I have outlined has the merit of transferring
the questions which arise to what may be termed the plane of
measurable discussion. Orders will be issued in terms of a
need that is always verifiable. Demands will be judged in an
atmosphere of co-operation. The will of each person engaged
on industrial work will find a channel through which it car
seek to realise itself. There is initiative where initiative is
required ; but that initiative will operate always in an environ¬
ment of general consent. The producer will be safeguarded
by the fact that he makes the essential conditions of his
effort; the consumer is protected, first, by the ultimate control
of policy by the legislative assembly, and, secondly, by the
advisory committees through which his wants will be made
directly known to the leaders of the given industry. We
marshal, that is to say, the searchlight of all informed opinion
upon the function each industry seeks to fulfil. We cease to
enshroud its operations, as now, in a secrecy that withholds
at every point the essential facts which make judgment upon
its efficiency impossible. We shall be able to test all cases
of supposed inefficiency by the reports of experts who have
no other duty than the impartial discovery of those facts.
We offer to the humblest worker in the lowest grade of any
mine or factory the opportunity to co-operate with its manage¬
ment in the improvement of its operations. We permit
every substantial grievance he feels to be judged, not by an
authority alien from his interests, but by an authority he
shares in making. We need not deny the complexity of the
means by which these ends are achieved. A service which
aims at supplying the wants of States of the modem size
cannot, in the nature of things, avoid complexity. We do not
avoid it now ; and it is, to-day, more dangerous because it is


462 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

autocratic and secretive. Admittedly, the worker in the new
era, as in the old, will find the need imperative to submit his
will to the will of others. But he will be able to formulate
his will; he will secure consideration for his wants, and if
he fails to win regard, it is by the facts that he will have been
defeated. That situation, I believe, may with justice be
defined as the status of a freeman. For by it he is made the
servant, not of other men, but of the logic inherent in social
organisation. He, in fact, helps to make that logic, and bis
service is thus a function which he masters as he fulfils it.

Ill

I have already pointed out that nationalised industries,
in the form above discussed, will occupy a part only of the
industrial field. Mainly they will be confined to services like
those of mining, railways, shipping, where an element of
natural monopoly enters into the service offered. A second
great area in the industrial field belongs, as I think naturally,
to the province of consumers co-operation. I am not here
concerned with those forms of consumers’ co-operation which,
like the gas supply of a municipality, are essentially compul¬
sory in character. There, so to say, the nature of the service
requires oneness and indivisibility. The consumer is offered
no alternative; he has a standard product which be can ofily
have from one authority and in a single form. I am con¬
cerned with the place and prospects in the democratic State
of the form of consumers’ co-operation of which the founda¬
tions were laid by Robert Owen and the model created by
the famous Rochdale store in 1844. That movement now
includes within its ambit not less than one-third of all the
families of Great Britain ; and both on the continent of Europe
and in America it has shown that it represents a permanent
form of industrial enterprise.*

Practically speaking, the character of the Co-operative

1 On the movement as a whole see Sidney and Beatrice Webb, TAe Con¬
sumer s’ Co-operative Movement, Percy Redfern, The History of the C W.S ;
L. S. Woolf, Co-operation and ike Future of Industry . For the statistics of the
movement the People's Year Book, published by the Co-operative Union, and
the Annual Report of the International Co-operative Alliance should be consulted
See also L, S. Gordon and C. O'Brien, Co-operahon tn Many Lands,


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 468

Movement may be described by saying that it is a democratic
movement for the production of any article required by its
members, the method of production and distribution elimin¬
ating the idea of profit. The range of the commodities it
produces is very striking. It has its own banks, and its own
insurance service; it runs its own farms and its own tea-
gardens ; it manufactures its own boots and shoes: it bakes
its own bread; it sells milk and meat and furniture. Broadly,
it has concentrated its operations on what may be called the
general wants, and largely the standardised wants, of the
householder. It has, of course, quite definite limitations.
It does not seem to have appealed either to the comfortable
classes, on the one hand, or to the very poor, upon the other.
It has been essentially a movement of the solid working class,
and its productions have the quality that influence would
lead us to expect. A man could furnish his house from the
co-operative store, but he would not satisfy the taste of a
skilful interior decorator. He could clothe himself in garments
of co-operative manufacture, but he would appear rather
serviceably than attractively clad, and if his wife bought at
the co-operative store the whole range of her wardrobe, she
would not, unless she was an exceptional person, acquire that
note of distinction in dress which appears to be an unchanging
object of human desire. There is, moreover, a considerable
area of service in which direct co-operative production would
not pay, because the demand from the membership of the
movement is not large enough, or consistent enough, to justify
direct manufacturing. It appears, moreover, fairly clear that
the technique of consumers' co-operation is not generally
applicable to agriculture. It might succeed where what is
required, as in the production of wheat, is essentially large-
scale operations; but where a peasantry makes the personal
element in landholding fundamental, consumers’ co-operation
does not seem suitable. 1 The argument, so often made, that
the co-operator cannot engage in the export trade, has been,
I think, clearly contradicted by the experience of recent years ;
and as the movement becomes universal in character, the
difficulty of the problem of profit can, I think, be automatically
solved. For either goods can be exchanged against goods,

1 Woolf, op. cti., pp. 104-5.


464 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

as in the relationship of the German and Danish movements,
or the profit made can be devoted to such communal pur¬
poses as education.

What, I think, emerges from any systematic analysis of
consumers' co-operation is, broadly speaking, that it is emi¬
nently suited to cany on that body of industrial operations
requisite for the supply of household needs, without differen¬
tiation of class in the community. For the problem of
quality in the Co-operative Movement is simply a question
of demand. It can supply the needs of Whitechapel not less
than those of Mayfair. Granted a fair approximation to
economic equality, the divisions of taste and standards which
now divide the various classes of society will be absent. The
community will meet upon a level of kindred want, and its
absorption into the Co-operative Movement will transform
the latter into an agency able to meet the wants it encounters.
I do not, of course, suppose that in each department of house¬
hold need consumers' co-operation will be the sole source of
supply. There is no reason why the independent craftsman
should not survive to supply peculiar wants. In dress, in
articles of household decoration, in design, in the arts, I
assume the likelihood that men and women will earn their
living by ministering to the taste of a small number of clients,
and that in such a realm there will be a sphere for the small
guild of producers who will market productions which are
above, or different from, the fairly standardised commodities
in which consumers’ co-operation will seek to specialise.
Normally, for example, I shall have my house decorated on
some fairly simple plan thought out in the proper department
of the local co-operative branch ; but if I desire in a room,
or a garden, features of uniqueness, I shall go to a group of
craftsmen such as those whom William Morris gathered about
him.

The relation of the Co-operative Movement to the central
State and local authority admit, I think, of fairly simple defini¬
tion. An industry like mining seems to me essentially fitted
for such a scheme of nationalisation as I outlined in the pre¬
vious section; the co-operative store then becomes, at least
in the sphere of domestic consumption, the natural distributing
agency. It will thus enable us to cut out at a stroke the vast


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 465

horde of middlemen who at present increase price by their
intervention between producer and consumer ; and the absence
of profit in its own operations is a further fact in its favour.
It is not necessary, I think, to assume any sharp-cut cleavage
between co-operative production and production by the State.
The one may be the purchaser of the other's commodities,
where the State is the predominant producer, and it will
then distribute them as its members demand. It may well
itself attempt manufacture ; and there will be some advantage
in this rivalry of two forms of production from which alike
the motive of profit-making is absent. It is, indeed, clear
that there are subjects of production unsuited to the move¬
ment, which must be left to operation by the State ; and the
case for the national ownership of coal and oil seems to me
final in view of the State interest in their conservation being
paramount over the wishes of a constituency whose interest,
like that of a body of members in the Co-operative Movement,
is in immediate consumption. On the other hand, I think the
controversy between those who desire a co-operative milk
supply, as against those to whom municipalisation is the ideal,
should be resolved, as a general rule, in favour of the former.
The latter can then preserve the all-important function of
safeguarding quality by constant inspection and control. It
becomes an independent and impartial authority testing the
level of service in the interests of consumers. The fact that
the municipality distributes free milk in large quantities is
easily met by arrangements with the co-operative agencies.
The same is true, mutatis mutandis, of other services like coal.

What, then, will be the institutions by which the Co-opera¬
tive Movement is governed, and, particularly, by what means
will it ensure its members a full opportunity to control in
a continuous way its operations, while, at the same time,
there is an adequate self-government for its employes ?
Save in scale and detail, the basic institutions of the move¬
ment seem to me fully adequate to its need. Each district
will have, as now, its local system of stores each governed
by a district executive elected by the membership of the
district. It will be necessary to make that executive a
full-time body, choosing its own chairman ; and its members
will, for the first time in the history of the movement, have

JO


466 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

to be fully remunerated for their services. There will be,
moreover, & special accounting staff at each branch with,
as I hope, independent powers to report the result of their
findings directly to the members as a whole. The branch
executive will be small; but 1 think that one-third of its
membership should always be composed of representatives of
the branch employes. This is, of course, a matter upon which
there have been grave differences of opinion in the Co-operative
Movement; 1 but if there is to be genuine democracy in the
movement, the orders issued must be subject not less to the
scrutiny of those who receive them than of those for whose
benefit they are intended. Membership of the executive
committee ought to imply continuous re-eligibility; and the
present safeguard against error or corruption, that a member
may be recalled by a two-thirds vote of a special general
meeting of the members, is well worth retention. There
should always be, as in many branches there already is, a
labour advisory committee, empowered on behalf of the
employes to discuss the problems of labour with the manage¬
ment in similar fashion to that of a factory in a nationalised
industry. There should, of course, be retained the quarterly
meeting of the branch ; and its activities should be increased
and intensified by a system of advisory committees on which,
it may be suggested, women ought to find a consistently
larger place. Much, also, could be done to maintain the
interest of the member in the work of tbe society by adopting
the useful German expedient of the group-agent.* Those
co-operative societies are bound to be the most successful
which aim most carefully in making their store not merely a
magazine of retail articles, but the embodiment of a great
social philosophy of which the spirit is the more active in
the degree that the average member is alive to its problems.

There are, indeed, many questions in which the advisory
committees and the general meeting might be asked to share.
The former might well report on the quarterly progress of
the branch to its members ; it might organise social activities ;

1 See, for instance, the Report of the General Co-operative Survey Committee

p 194 (19*9)

* Cf Sidney Webb, The Constitutional Problem < of a Co-operative Soettfy
(Fabian Tract No 202), pp 16-17,


ECONOMIC I NSTITU TIONS 467

it might attempt inquiry, through the group agents, into
sources not fully explored ; it might investigate the activities
of other societies with a view to the improvement of its own
service; they might receive complaint from the members
about inadequate supply of, or defective quality in, commodi¬
ties. The success of the experiment made by the Leeds
Co-operative Society, which embodies many of these ideas, is
a decisive proof of both its need and its value. The members
of the advisory committees should, of course, be elected by
the members of the branch year by year, and, beyond the
repayment of their expenses, their services should be voluntary.
No one who knows the Co-operative Movement at all inti¬
mately can, 1 think, doubt that a little effort will secure
invaluable knowledge from this service. And when, again as
in Leeds, these branches meet together each quarter to survey
the problems of the whole area, we have at once an invaluable
mechanism of general discussion. There is an experiment
of great interest in the selection by these voluntary advisers
of an unofficial executive of their own to act, so to say, as
their cabinet. It provides a means of forcing upon the
executive of the society problems they might either be
indifferent to. or neglect, and it provides, not less significantly,
an invaluable training-ground from which the future direction
of the society may be chosen. The meetings, in short, of
these advisory committees can perform for the Co-operative
Movement the service performed for the cabinet in the
selective function of the legislative assembly.

What the branch meeting can do will, I think, depend most
largely on the zeal of the branch committee and the group
agents. To the degree that they are able to make the mass
of the members conscious of the fact that the movement is
what they make it. and that to make it effective they must
offer the criticism and suggestion indicated by their experience,
it will be a full expression of what they conceive themselves
to need. Here also, as I believe, is the field in which the body
called the Co-operative Union can be most valuable. So far,
it has remained much too much a congress passing pious
resolutions, much too little a body seeking to instil a coherent
body of principle into every nook and cranny of its immense
constituency. It must realise that educational effort is at


468


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the centre of co-operative effort; and, as a collateral problem,
that merely because a man is an ardent co-operator he is not
necessarily the person best fitted to make the union’s literary
appeal effective. Here, it is certainly impressive that much
the most fruitful work should have been done by the women's
organisation; though even the Co-operative Guild has not
5 per cent, of the members in its ranks. Upon the work of
these educational bodies will depend the amount of interest
that can be created in the rank and file of membership ; and
it may be added that much of its quality will depend not so
much on consciously direct propaganda as on the way in
which it uses its potentially immense powers to raise the
general level of citizenship.

On the local side, the problems of a co-operative society
are comparatively simple in principle. So long as they
create the institutions necessary, as in a nationalised service,
to guarantee adequate self-government to their employes, so
long as they create a directorate well paid enough to attract
the ability their functions need; so long, finally, as they check
their efficiency by expert audit, on the one hand, and popular
control on the other, the field of their activities is almost as
wide as they may choose. It is on the federal side of their
relationships that they raise, as might be expected, more
complex problems. As is well known, practically all the retail
societies are linked together in a great Wholesale Society by a
federal constitution. It is from the Wholesale that the local
societies buy the goods they are to retail to their members;
and the profits gained by the Wholesale are returned to its
constituent members as a dividend on purchase exactly as
in a local society. The government of the Wholesale is similar.
Each local society has one vote as a society, and additional
votes in terms of a certain unit amount of purchases. The
societies elect the directors, thirty-two in number, of the
Wholesale, and the latter present their policy before a
quarterly delegate meeting of the local societies. The latter
being the ultimate authority, they can clearly control the
productive methods of the Wholesale at every important
point in their operation.

As a trading corporation, the general efficiency of the
Wholesale compares favourably, I believe, with that of any


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 499

private enterprise in the world. But the problems it has to
solve for itself are of a different nature from those connected
with the mere increase of its volume of business. That, at
least ultimately, is a matter in which the constituent societies
have the real control of its future. Rather, the issues it has
to learn to confront are connected with (i) the organisation,
within itself, of a democratic relationship with its employes;
(2) a much more co-ordinated effort to foresee the growth of
new needs ; and (3) a much better system of internal criticism
and suggestion than it now possesses. Let me try to deal
separately with each of these issues. First: it is, I think,
dear that whatever holds for the employes in a nationalised
industry holds also for the employes of the Wholesale. They
are therefore entitled to membership, elected from within their
own ranks, of the Board of Directors. As in the Governing
Body of a nationalised industry, these should represent the
interests of the vocations, on the one hand, and the manage¬
ment on the other; together they should choose at least
one-third, and possibly one-half, of the Board. There is no
other way in which their interests in so vast an organisation
can be properly safeguarded. The constituent societies will
still be paramount; but they will meet on equal terms those
who, in the experience of the Co-operative Movement, have
clearly been regarded as its step-children. To this representa¬
tion other structures must be added. The Works Committee
at each factory, the Discipline Board for the employe who
has offended the rules, must exist in the co-operative world
not less fully than elsewhere. Appointments are a different
problem in structure, though not in principle. I see no reason
why the local co-operative society should not, through the
schools, have its organised relation with the boy or girl who
wishes to enter its service, and organise a systematic plan
of entrance with the requisite trade unions. On the side of
clerical labour, they should recruit in the first instance by
competitive examination ; with the restriction, if they so
desire, that only the children of co-operators in good standing
shall be eligible. Minor promotions should be made, factory
by factory, with the assent, either of the general Works Com¬
mittee or the special body which may deal with a special
department. Major promotions should be a matter for the


470 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Board ; but there should always be (<) advertisement of the
post, ( b i) proof of special qualifications where that is desired,
and (c) consultation of those over whom the person promoted
will exercise authority. If this is done, the interest of the staff
in appointments will be properly safeguarded by the presence
of its staff representatives on the Board of Directors. It is
perhaps relevant here to remark that the Wholesale will have
to free itself, at any rate over the next few generations, from
its limited view of adequate financial reward in the highest
posts, if it is to attract the ability it needs. It will always,
undoubtedly, be able to get better men for a lower rate of
pay than private industry, at any rate upon its Board of
Directors; but that is less true of its technical and managerial
appointments. It must learn the danger, and guard against
it, of staff in-breeding. It ought, to use a concrete illustration,
to be as natural for the Co-operative Bank to want the services
of an economist like Mr. Keynes for its directorate as it is for
a profit-making bank to seek the sendees of retired statesmen.
And, mutatis mutandis, that holds for every aspect of its
activities. It must draw its personnel, especially at the top,
from the whole range of the industrial field.

It needs, secondly, I have said, much more co-ordinated
effort to plan the response to the growth of new needs. That
is particularly evident on the side of publicity. The weakness
of the Wholesale has lain in its failure to utilise competent
and disciplined minds in the production of its propaganda
literature and the advertisement of its commodities. Its
literature must be of a quality as high as the service of its
ideals seems to warrant. So far, the tendency has been in all
of its,educational activities to subordinate them to the develop¬
ment of trading. But no one can study the Co-operative
Movement without seeing that these educational activities
are the real key to the development of trading. New needs
can be answered adequately only as the body of members are
aware of their presence, and that awareness will come only
as the co-operator is trained to think out continuously their
significance and to press them, in organised fashion, upon the
directors of the Wholesale. That implies a staff for the
purpose of education and propaganda, not recruited merely
by election, but built as a body of experts for no other purpose.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 471

It would, indeed, be an admirable thing if two of the directors
were specifically appointed to this end; and they might
oversee the literary activities of the movement. These will
not be satisfactory until they are read, not as a matter of
duty by the co-operator, but as a matter of interest by the
outsider, much as he compelled, by their sheer quality, to
read the technical publications of Mr. George Russell. That
will have the important effect of disturbing the complacency
of co-operators by bringing to bear upon them a steady fire of
criticism and comment from those outside the main-stream of
the movement. They must get into the habit of employing
the expert from outside to explain and survey their efforts.
They impinge much more upon the unconverted through a
study by Mr. and Mrs. Webb than by a hundred pamphlets
by their own zealous members. But this service must be
organised to be successful; and it is the only way of building
a highroad through what are at present desert places.

They need, thirdly, I have suggested, much better mech¬
anisms of internal criticism. That is the more important as
the area of the movement widens, and absorbs, as it ought to
absorb, the private trader in household commodities. To
that end, the Wholesale needs to develop a much bigger
relationship to the local societies than it now occupies. Just
as I have argued that the Central Government of the modem
State must help the local authorities by inspection, by
criticism, by suggestion, so must the Wholesale assist its
constituent members. It has at its command immeasurably
more information to establish a disinterested comparison of
their working in every department of their effort. It must
show not merely the growth of their trading, the amount of
their balance, the number of their members ; it must compare
society with society over a period of years in every item of
work. It must set up what is called in the United States an
industrial audit in which the merit and defect of every method
in use is analysed and revealed. It goes without saying that
such audits would be made by men who had no authority to
apply the lessons they taught; they would be communicated
to the society and used by the society for its own improve¬
ment. They would be published as a means of stimulating
each society to surpass the achievement of its fellows. I


473


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

am not suggesting any impairment of the federalism of the
Co-operative Movement; the independence of the local society
in its own concerns is a feature to be touched only at one’s
peril. I am rather suggesting that the Wholesale is in a
position which cannot be otherwise occupied to survey and
make known the implications of co-operative effort; and,
therefore, that as it makes them known, so will there be the
knowledge, and so only, by which progress is possible. That
would mean the establishment in the Wholesale of a department
of research from which there would issue reports on every
aspect of the movement. It would report all new advances
and new methods. It would explain what was being done
abroad. It would offer to Leeds an itemised study of its
work in terms of a similar study of Glasgow or Woolwich.
It would be there for every local society to seek assistance
.from as it desired. “ Every group of men,” writes Mr. Webb,*

. “ can be incited to strive voluntarily to excel othe r groups of
men in any undertaking whatsoever, if only there are com¬
monly accepted and widely published tests ol success.”
Certainly it is only by their establishment that the Co-opera¬
tive Movement can hope to make itself commensurate with
the general body of citizens.

It is, I think, obvious in such an analysis, that it is difficult
to set limits to the part consumers’ co-operation may play
in the State of the future. It is worth while to insist again
on the importance of the two vital facts that it provides a
mechanism for (a) the abolition of the profit-making motive
over a vast area, and (6) that it cheapens the whole cost of
production by the abolition of the chain of middlemen who
now intervene between producer and consumer in the dis¬
tributive process. Nor must we neglect the fact that it is
a direct and democratic method of enabling the objects of
production to be determined by the consumers themselves in
a manner that obviates no small part of the wastage inherent
in the present system. A simple illustration will serve to
make this clear. Let us take the manufacture of cups and
saucers. In private enterprise the sole question which deter¬
mines their production is the question of whether they can

* The Need far Federal Reorganisation in the Co-operative Movement
(Fabian Tract No. 203), p. 25.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 478

be made at a profit. Tbe public does not know that there is
a scheme for their production ; it learns of it only by a vast
system of advertisement the cost of which becomes a part of
the price it eventually pays. Demand is not ascertainable
except by experiment, and the history of business enterprise
is the proof that this experiment is both costly and wasteful.
The consumer may buy the cups and saucers ; but he knows
nothing about them except what the manufacturer may
choose to tell him, and the price he pays has no necessary
relation to the cost of production. Nor is the position, I
suggest, much better if we substitute a producers' guild in
the place of the private manufacturer. Here, again, there is
no volume of ascertained demand; there is no indication of
consumers’ desires; there is no ■ direct relation between
producer and consumer. Under the system of consumers’
co-operation all these difficulties are eliminated. When the
Wholesale decides to manufacture, it is upon the basis of an
ascertained demand. It does not have to search for its
market, and it hears directly and in detail of the way in
which its commodity satisfies the public which has asked for
it. The ideal of production for use seems to me more largely
capable of fulfilment within the ambit of the Co-operative
Movement than in any other system of industrial organisation.

There remain two questions upon which a word is necessary.
If, it may be said, the boundaries of the Co-operative Move¬
ment are so ample, why may not consumers’ co-operation
be the ideal form of production for industry as a whole ?
Why is it necessary to cumbeT social theory with the study
of alternative forms ? The answer, I think, lies in the fact
that consumers’ co-operation is successful just because it is
restricted to the production and control of commodities upon
which the judgment of the general body of consumers is as
good a judgment as we can have. It is ministering, not to
a body of expert needs, as in the manufacture, for instance,
of tools and machinery, but to a body of general needs. It
has an obvious constituency immediately capable of con¬
centration upon the processes directly interesting them. That
is, I suggest, less obvious immediately we pass from articles
of general to articles of special consumption. There the
constituency is of a different nature I do not see why those


474 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

who utilise, for instance, particular types of machinery should
govern those who make the machinery on their behalf. They
are not interested in anything but the finished machine,
and its relation in price and quality and volume of supply,
to their needs. The producer ought, therefore broadly to
control the process which supervenes between demand, on
the one side, and the completion of the finished product on
the other. Nor, in practice, do I think such trades as engineer¬
ing will offer, under the form of consumers' co-operation, the
most efficient unit of production. In theory, undoubtedly,
Mr. Woolf is right in his contention 1 that it is as easy to
envisage the co-operative control of the railways as to think
of them in terms of nationalisation; in practice I believe that
all the advantages offered by co-operation can be secured
by advisory committees of consumers, and that a nationalised
form will offer greater scope to the producer from every angle.
Nor, secondly, is there any gain in making the forms of
industrial organisation correspond to any one type. There
is a positive advantage in variety, because of the experiment
it permits; and inadequacy can always be controlled by its
transformation to another form under the segis of the
legislative assembly.

That raises the question of the relationship of the
Co-operative Movement to the State What powers will
the latter possess over the movement in its expanded form ?
Clearly enough, the Co-operative Movement must satisfy all
the requirements of that civic minimum of rights I have urged
it is the peculiar province of the State to enforce Whatever
rates of pay it offers, it must at least offer the rate required
as minimal by the State. It must, also, submit to control
in the details of manufacture. If it is discovered, for instance,
that boric acid is an undesirable form of preservative, and
its use is forbidden by legislation, the co-operative dairy
must submit to State inspection in the same way as any
other enterprise. Its factories must conform to State require¬
ments of sanitation and safety. It ought to possess, in the
future, something of the relation to a Ministry of Production
which it now occupies to the Board of Trade; and there
would, I suggest, be real advantage in the annual analysis

‘ L. S. Woolf, Socialism and Co-operation, chap, iv, especially p. ioj.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS


475


and criticism of its work by the appropriate authorities in
the Ministry of Research. If it supplied milk to the City of
Manchester of which the quality was deemed defective,
it would have to submit to inspection; and its refusal to
accept competent findings, and to alter its methods in con¬
formity therewith, would, I think, necessarily involve penal¬
ties. Here, of course, lies one of the supreme advantages of
the co-operative system; for a complaint by the Medical
Officer of Manchester to its citizens would also be a complaint
to its co-operators, and the latter would immediately have
the means of remedy in tneir hands. But, outside these
necessary limitations, the non-official character of the Co¬
operative Movement is one of its greatest gains. It means
greater responsiveness to expressed need, greater flexibility,
and a greater power of control in the ordinary man and
woman. It is for these an additional and important lesson
in the art of government, where what they do reacts directly
upon the quality of their own lives. Anyone who has seen
the work of the Women’s Co-operative Guild will know the
hopefulness of this aspect of the co-operative effort. It makes
creative citizenship as few other factors in the community.
The more it is encouraged, the greater will be its accomplish¬
ment.


IV

The forms of private enterprise are so various that it is
impossible within the compass of this book to do more than
indicate the basic principles of its control. They follow, as
I think, upon the earlier discussion of the rights inherent in
men as citizens, upon the one hand, and the nature of property
in its relation to those rights upon the other. But anyone
who reflects for a moment upon the range of differences between
the one-man motor repair shop on a country road, the guild
of peasant weavers producing their hand-woven fabrics for a
small number of customers, the great co-partnership enter¬
prise like the Zeiss works at Jena, cotton mills upon the scale
of Horrockses at Preston, will realise that each form is a matter
for the separate application of general principles, and that
the application will vary as the nature of the industry varies.
In some, it is probable, individual production will be per-


476 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

mifrted; but the product will be marketed by co-operative
methods, as in Danish agriculture, or brought collectively
through the State, or the Co-operative Wholesale Society,
as in the case of the purchase by the British Government
of the Australian wool-crop during the war. In other trades,
as in jewellery, for instance, it is possible that it will be found
most advantageous to have State ownership of gold and silver
mines, and of more specialised products like precious stones,
while their manufacture and sale as finished products are
most largely left to private hands. In other hands, again, as
in building, there is, I believe, great room for the small guild
of producers who will work either for the private householder
or the municipality much as those who built the cathedral
and the dwelling-house of the Middle Ages were accustomed
to do. There will be industries also in which the State will
hardly concern itself at any stage, as, for example, the manu¬
facture and sale of cosmetics. What alone I can here attempt,
in the presence of such complexity, is an indication of general
theory; and I can only emphasise my full admission that
the changes suggested are not likely to take place in the precise
form I suggest, or even with precisely the same ends in view.

Generally speaking, State regulation of private industry
will have three genera] interests to protect. It needs, in the
first place, to safeguard the welfare of the producer in industry.
It must secure to him an adequate return for his labour
and such minimum conditions of effort as assure to him the
full opportunity to exercise his functions as a citizen; in a
word, to be himself at his best. It must prevent his degenera¬
tion into that animate tool which is to-day the position occupied
by innumerable workers in every branch of industrial activity.
It must assure them the same consideration for their person¬
ality as human beings that is, in the scheme here outlined,
offered to the worker in the industries operated by itself. It
must prevent that domination of management and technique
by the speculative financier which has in recent years—to
take two famous examples—done so much to impair the
prosperity and destroy the service of the cotton industry in
Lancas h ire and the railroads in the United States. It must,
secondly, protect the consumer against extortionate prices,
on the one hand, and defective quality of product upon the


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 477

other. Anyone who reads, for instance, the history of the
trust in American industry will have lit tie difficulty in admitting
that its rigorous control is not merely urgent in the con¬
sumers’ behalf, but even in the protection of political freedom
itself; the president of a great American corporation has
frankly admitted that he himself, and every business man
similarly placed, attempts the deliberate domination of parties
in their own interest by corrupt methods. 1 " Franchises to
the use of streets and highways,” says a distinguished
American publicist, 1 " the grant of rights of way, concessions
of charter privileges, legislative sanctions to corporate under¬
takings, lucrative usufructs of various species of public
wealth, real estate development in connection with municipal
improvements, etc., are fields of investment for many millions
of private capital, an obvious policy with whose representatives
is to confederate their interests with political influence.”
We have seen the results of such a " confederation of interest ”
in the history of President Harding's administration. Nor
is the power of the trust confined to the United States.
English combines, like the Imperial Tobacco Company and
the Coats Sewing Cotton Trust, literally hold the consumer
in their grip ; and the range of their activities is only partially
explored by government research.3 The cartellisation of the
German industry is probably the most scientific in the world ;
and our own generation has seen the activity of a single man
thwart the foreign policy of the government, settle the hours
of labour of thousands of workers, dictate the price of coal
and steel products to the body of consumers, and then, as
a final wrench to the screw, bend their minds to his support
by owning the newspapers they must read.

The State, thirdly, must protect the investing public.
That will, it may be added, be a wider duty under the scheme
here outlined than it is at the present time. Under the
modern company laws, any body of men may secure capital
from its owners, with no sufficient guarantee either of a
genuine service to be rendered or of a possible return on the

1 Senate Report No 606, 53rd Congress, 2nd Season.

• Testimony of the President of the American Sugar Refining Company,
especially at pp. 351-2. quoted by H j. Ford, The Rite and the Growth elf
American Politics, p 318

S Report of the Committee on Trusts (1919), p. 3.


478 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

investment. The company may be dishonest in its operation,
or inefficient, without the public being able at any point to
have knowledge. Its proceedings are wrapped in secrecy
throughout. Its balance-sheet is, often enough, unintelligible
except to a skilful accountant; and even he can only tell its
true meaning by comparison with the actual physical assets
it is supposed to represent. Modem financial manipulation,
moreover, has reduced both management and technique to
mere creatures of a body of directors who, like the boards
of an American railroad, may know nothing at all of the
actual operations of industry. Increase of capitalisation may
be determined upon without any regard to the welfare of
the investor. Output may be limited in accordance with
arrangements of which he is kept completely ignorant.
Ownership and control are almost wholly divorced; and,
generally speaking, management and control are divorced
also So long as the investor receives his due return, he
is supposed to be content; and if that due return fails, either
he confronts liquidation of the company, in whi h case he is
helpless, or else he must be content to trust those already
unsuccessful in the hope of a return to prosperity. The
resultant wastage of capital under the system is enormous ; 1
and the system, of course, has no means at its disposal of
securing the loyalty of those who labour under it. For their
interest ceases when their wages have been paid, and its
prosperity does not affect them ; nor, m past times, does it
assume that it has any responsibility for their well-being.
Under it, they are chattels to be purchased or thrown aside
according to the prospect of profitable employment

Practically speaking, the plans here laid down must confine
themselves to the corporate aspect of business enterprise. In
the one-man business, or the small partnership, considerations
arise which can hardly be met by any general scheme, and,
in any case, the company practically covers the larger part of
the industrial field. We assume, therefore, a body of persons
who desire to form a company under such rules as may
constitute company law in the given State. What principles
ought to underlie that law ? Each company will consist,

■ See the estimates of Lord Russell of Killowen. quoted in Webb, Otcay
of Capitalist Civilisation, p 67


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 479

basically, of investors, management and labour, since the
Board of Directors will represent, in part at least, the first of
these classes. The process, I suggest, through which a
company will pass in its working life will be built upon
two general principles. To the investor there will be issued
capital stock of a par value equivalent to his investment; and
the total issue will be secured by an exclusive title to the
property of the company. It follows, therefore, that as
additions are made to the plant, or as capital is paid out,
the original investment will be of less value than the actual
physical assets of the company; and the security to the
investor will be, accordingly, strengthened. Such stock,
will, of course, be assignable in the ordinary way, and it will
cany with it voting rights. But it is, I think, important to
surround such voting rights with two safeguards. Voting,
first, should always be in person and not by proxy. The
investor, that is to say, must be more than a person blindly
confiding his powers to directors of whom he knows little or
nothing. His responsibility must be called into being by the
sense that the ultimate responsibility is emphatically his own.
And, secondly, upon the admirable example of the Co-operative
Movement, whatever his holding, he should exercise only one
vote. The control, therefore, of the general meeting of the
company will be governed by persons and not by amounts of
stock. This would, I think, transform the general meeting of
the company from a formality into & genuine legislative
assembly ; it would end the autocracy of the directorate.
The shares would carry with them a limited and preferred
rate of dividend like the preference share in the ordinary
company.

But there is a class of investors who search only, as in
trustee securities, for an assured and unchanging return.
They do not desire to share in industrial risk ; they are un¬
interested in a part responsibility for management. Ideally,
they would invest in State or municipal bonds ; but we may
assume that, with some greater risk, they desire a propor¬
tionately higher return. To them would be issued debentures,
equal in par value to their investment and charged with a
fixed rate of -interest, necessarily lower than that of the first
class of shares , that fixed rate would be the primary liability


*80 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

ol the company, to be satisfied, apart from the earnings of
labour and management, before the claims of any other
investors. They would have no voting power in the company.
As their interest was met, their concern m it would cease ; and
they could be active only if the company failed to meet its
obligations to them.

When the operating costs of the company have been met,
the holder of stock will have the first claim upon the remaining
p,et revenue. He will be paid, that is, the preferred rate
of dividend, his 5 or 6 or 7 per cent allocated at the
formation of the company as its basic dividend The
remaining surplus will be divided into three equal parts ; one
will be devoted to the investors, one to labour and management,
and one to the public. Each will thereby possess a definite
claim on the results of efficient operation The public surplus
should, I suggest, be divided also into two parts. The one
would be definite State revenue, of the nature, clearly, of the
modem corpoiation tax , the other would be devoted to the
improvement of the company, whether by the extension of
its plant, the retirement of debentures, or the development of
new enterprise as is best thought fit by the company directorate
and the government department t oncemed.

But it is not enough to secure to labour and management
a share in the surplus earnings of which they are most essen¬
tially the creators. It is necessary, also, to associate them
with the direction of the industry. To that end, on any
company’s Board of Directors, one-half of the seats should be
reserved for the elected representatives of management and
labour, in equal proportion. They should have equal power
with the representatives of invested capital. Thereby we
assure not only the proper protection of their interest in the
company, an interest, it may be rdded, far more real than that
of the investor, but also we have a safeguard against the
manipulation of the company by the financial side of its
direction. We get a means of appealing to the investor
against such methods of reorganisation as have been, for
example, so largely responsible for unemployment m the
cotton industry since 1920. 1 Here also, it may be pointed
out, the association of investors’ voting power with persons

1 Set The Times of August 25, 1924, for comment on this situation


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 481

instead of amount of investment is another protection against
manipulation.

But it is necessary, also, to prevent the possibility that the
power of the company may be used, as has been the habit of
corporate enterprise in the past, to the detriment of the public
interest. That makes the public regulation of the industry
essential. Every company, therefore, must be compelled to
keep its accounts in a prescribed manner; it must be made,
year by year, to set apart for maintenance and depreciation
such a proportion of its annual gross revenue as is deemed
necessary to conserve the integrity of the original investment
in it. It should be required annually to submit to the central
government a report upon its working, together with a full
balance-sheet which displays both its total assets and its total
liabilities and does not serve as a screen for secret reserves.
If its net surplus is, after payment of interest on the invested
capital, beyond a certain amount, power should be had, either
to utilise that surplus for public purposes, or to enforce a lower
rate of price to the consumer, as the circumstances of the
industry as a whole may seem to warrant. The government,
moreover, must retain at all times the right, so to say, to
inspect the company, to audit its accounts and to measure its
efficiency ; and on the appeal of the representatives of labour
and management on the board of the company it ought to
have the power to initiate a thorough inquiry into its working.

In such a perspective, the life-history of a company would
be, in the nature of things, a public adventure. Its profits
would be known ; its costs would be published ; its wages and
salaries could be scrutinised as though they were the wages
and salaries of a minister and his officials ; its efficiency would
be measurable by any person who took the pains to grasp
the processes by which it lived. We cannot, I would urge,
sufficiently emphasise the importance of such publicity. We
know, better than ever before, to what passions and suspicions
the ignorance and secretiveness of business relations give rise.
We cannot have either clear thought about them, or harmony
of feeling in them, unless we disperse that miasma. We
cannot ask for co-operation between capital and labour when
the indispensable facts about the process of production are
deliberately concealed from view. Anyone who analyses the

31


485 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

modem industrial dispute will see at a glance that often its
inception and always its acerbity are due to the ignorance on
either side of the fundamental conditions in the industry. We
can never secure a genuine public opinion about the issues of
business, because the facts upon which such a public opinion
can be formed are never offered to us. We hear of sweating,
on the one side, and ca' canny on the other. We are told that
a group of employers is profiteering, or that a body of workers
is abusing a privileged industrial position. These character¬
isations are, at present, largely without meaning because they
are not definitely measurable. They hearten either side for
the conflict, but they do not assist, they rather prevent, the
victory of justice.

But if we insisted that each company must reveal its true
assets and its real profits, if we had a cost analysis of each
industrial process, much of this ignorance would disappear. A
charge of profiteering could immediately be referred to the
facts. The exact situation could be presented impartially as
though it were the chemical analysis of a dye or the report of
an engineer on the load a bridge may safely bear. I do not
say that the general public would grasp the precise import of
all the results; but their expert sifting would imply general con¬
clusions explicable to the public, and we should be able, as we
are now rarely able, to use the impact of opinion as a safeguard
of industrial abuse We should also, I believe, improve the
general level of business efficiency, in part by the disappearance
of feebler economic units, in part by the improvement in them
which knowledge would bring. We should discover, probably,
that there are few industries to-day in which the existing unit
represents the most efficient unit of production ; and we could
press for the necessary reorganisation. Nor does that imply,
in the system here outlined, danger to the consumer ; for it is
the virtue of such publicity as is here assumed that it makes
possible, almost by its mere existence, efficient public control
It is the only way, moreover to meet properly the various
incentives which fuse together in the industrial process, to
apportion to each its due place in the structure of the whole.
It is the only way by which the State can be enabled to play
its proper part in the national economy. For as it then acts
the meaning of its act will be measurably known. If it


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS ■*««

secures, for Instance, a settlement in an industrial dispute, it
will be able at once to set out the precise meaning of its solu¬
tion ; if it decides upon a change in the basic hours of labour,
it can at once measure the effects of its action upon produc¬
tivity. Publicity, in a word, is the necessary condition of
science ; and until there is the organised knowledge such
publicity affords, there cannot be satisfactory conditions in
industry.

It is perhaps worth while to summarise briefly the advan¬
tages inherent in this method of organising private enterprise
before we discuss the governmental institutions it involves.
It secures, first of all, effective co-operation in each industry.
It gives to worker, to management, and to finance a full share
in the direction of the enterprise. It protects the owner of
capita] not only by maximising the integrity of his investment,
but also by assuring to him safeguards against financial
manipulation of his due rights by other owners. It protects
the interest of labour and of management by giving them their
place in the direction of the industry, and assuring them their
due share of the reward of increased efficiency. It no longer
regards capital as the natural residuary legatee of profit. It
offers to it a fixed return upon its investment ; but it insists
that any return beyond that limit must be duly divided
between all the parties to the industrial relation. It protects
the consumer, first by providing for the proper public over¬
sight of the industry, and second by returning to him, in the
shape either of reduced prices or of a contribution to State
revenue, surpluses beyond a fair rate of profit. It prevents
thereby the undue curtailment of purchasing power, in itself
a cause of unemployment by the restriction of production it
entails. It is. of course, based frankly upon the assumption
of a much more even distribution of wealth than now exists.
I have already explained the grounds for that need. It
involves the picture of an investing public drawn from a much
wider area than at present. It ought also, I think, to involve
a much more organic relation than now between the investor
and the working of his capital. The smaller the class we have
who live by owning, the better it will be for the quality of life
we have in the community. The device here adopted of the
personal and equal vote among shareholders will, it is urged.


484 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

contribute to that end. It will prevent the individual enter¬
prise from being dominated by the large owners of capital, a
domination, it may be added, that is particularly dangerous in
the case of the press. There is full room in it for initiative,
and a return to the special effort which initiative involves.
But it is avowedly, a system built upon the principle that the
controlling factor in industry must be the will of the community
and the standards imposed by that will; and it is mainly
concerned with finding due place for them, on the one hand,
and, on the other, of offering to the incentive of the normal
business man a fair field for his activity.

It is perhaps advisable to meet at once one criticism which
will be made of these principles before I proceed to discuss
the way in which they may be related to the part played by
the State in their operation. They are, it will be said, the
apotheosis of officialism. Yet we know that the official is
hostile to the introduction of new methods, vhile private
enterprise is continually awake and alert to the prospects of
experiment. Unless we leave unlimited room for the great
business man, who is by temperament as individual and as
little capable of control as the great artist, the community will
lose the great advantage of his services. But is such a
criticism true ? Is it, indeed, even a fair description of the
system under which we now live ? No one, I think, can
seriously pretend that the average investor in modem business
enterprise takes the slightest interest in the working of the
concern from which he draws his profit. He is not searching
for new methods. He does not keep himself abreast of
technical discoveries and seek to force their use upon the
management. He rarely attempts criticism of the company’s
operations except when he is deprived of his expected dividend ;
and the case is rare for him to attempt opposition to any
person nominated as a director of the company. As a definite
factor, indeed, he is practically obsolete ; and his position has
hardly changed since Adam Smith wrote that " the greater
part of tire proprietors seldom pretend to understand anything
of the business of the company, . . . they give themselves no
trouble about it, but receive contentedly each half-yearly or
yearly dividend as the directors think proper to make to them.”'

> Wtalik of Nation* (Everyman’* Edition), il, 1*9.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 485

Nor Is the position very different in the directorate of those
industries where the economic unit is of any considerable size.
No one pretends that the miscellaneous collection of men who
govern our railways have in general any real knowledge of
their problems, or that they contribute any real improvements
to their operation. The same is true, perhaps in an even
greater degree, of the directors of mines. It is, as is well
known, a habit of the English company to attract the investor
by advertising upon his prospectus the presence of a stray peer
upon its Governing Board; and their value, and the part
actually played by them has been revealed in more than one
instance in proceedings before the courts. 1 The ignorance,
indeed, of boards of directors has been revealed wherever
careful inquiry has been made into business conditions. It
was shown strikingly, for example, in the report of the Coal
Conservation Commission on the supply of electric power. 1 It
was revealed in the inquiry into the iron and steel industry by
the Industrial Fatigue Research Board. " It seems probable,’’
says the latter.l " that if all the iron and steel works in this
country adopted the most efficient methods, they could, on
an average, improve their output by something between 50
and 100 per cent.” Similar criticisms could be multiplied
indefinitely. Practically every report of the Interstate Com¬
merce Commission of the United States is an implied
condemnation of American railway methods. Sometimes the
defect revealed is the lack of cars, sometimes insufficient
tracks; in other cases the freight cars are inadequate, in others,
again, the terminal facilities.* The whole import of the
conservation movement in America is a similar criticism of the
wastefulness and inefficiency of those by whom industry is
controlled.

When we move to responsible management, the situation,
though on a different plane, is not immensely different. The
three great qualities upon which the largest aspect of business
success depends, the willingness to use the results of science,
the desire to stimulate the careful measurement of their own
methods, the quick sense of the importance of psychological

1 At in the cate o( G. L Bevtn and hit companies.

* Cmd. 8880, p. 3.

» Fifth Report of the Industrial Fatigue Research Board, p. 95.

• See, for instance, its report for 1916.


486 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

factors in industry—none of these is conspicuously general
Nor it there any general evidence of the training necessary for
the management of modem business enterprise—knowledge of
economics, of finance, of psychology. “ The very notion of
the need of such training,” writes Mr. J. A. Hobson, 1 “ appears
to almost all of them a ridiculous pandering to an intellect-
ualism which unfits men for a real business life.” They are
content with what they call practical experience. But
practical experience is always acting upon assumptions
awareness of which is essential; and the easy maxims of
tradition with which the business man contents himself seem
to act rather as barriers to initiative than as a stimulus to its
development. Men who live, like Mr. Sinclair Lewis’ Babbit,
in the atmosphere of Main Street, are not likely to be injured
by the injection into their world of scientific habit instead of
rules of thumb. Lack of initiative is largely the outcome of
provincialism, and nothing is so likely to destroy provincialism
as the introduction into business of standards of qualification
and measurement of processes.

The case, I think, of the really great business adventurer—
men like Lord Rhondda in England and Mr. J. J. Hill in
America—is quite different. But an analysis of their careers
will, as a rule, reveal that the thing they seek is not a response
to the incentive of profit, but a response to the incentive of
power. They are eager to feel that they have their hands on
a big machine. They are anxious to satisfy the creative
impulse. They have the big conceptions, the restless tempera¬
ment, the unwearying experimentalism, of the great scientist
and the great explorer. Of them two things may be said.
There is ample room for their talent in the nationalised
industry. Their brains can find there an outlet of which the
scope is infinitely bigger than private enterprise can offer, in
which, also, they can satisfy the motive which, as Lord Haldane
pointed out to the British Coal Commission, " is equally potent
with the best class of men, namely the desire to distinguish
himself in the service of the State.” 1 It is, indeed, dangerous
to allow full play to minds such as these except under such

1 See his admirable Incentives m the New Industrial Order, especially
chap. iv.

* The Problem of Nationalisation, p. 17.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 487

safeguards as I have discussed. There are few societies able
to afford the services of men like Mr. Rockefeller or
■ Mr. Carnegie ; the price we have to pay for them is too high.
That, 1 believe, has been dearly shown in the case of a man
like Stinnes in Germany. We cannot hand over whole
populations to satisfy the Moloch-like lust for power in these
men. And if they refuse, as I think will rarely be the case,
the devotion of their talents to public industry, there is still
left for them the sphere of private enterprise. Only, it is left-
on the condition that they cannot use what is vital to social
life—food, credit, transportation, coal—as their playthings. If
the prize they want is not the power of doing a big job, with
public esteem as the chief reward, but the prize of monetary
reward, they must make it in fields where they do not impinge
upon sodal security. And, even there, they must make it
only under the safeguards which protect the rights of every
other citizen. Profit made by the methods revealed to the
Industrial Commission of the United States is made at a price
we must refuse to pay.' If that means that the modern
Napoleon will not enter industry, it follows that we must do
without his talents.

Finally, in this regard, it is worth while to point out that
much of the criticism directed against government control,
even against government methods, cannot be rightly estimated
unless it is seen in its proper perspective. Two things here
may be noted. The criticism usually starts from the assump¬
tion that laissez-faire is the ideal condition, and that each
departure from it is an assault upon liberty. But what
Matthew Arnold called " doing as one likes ” is exactly the
reason why government control became necessary. Factory
Acts, Trade Boards, and the like were all the logical outcome
of laissez-faire ; it is because without them the community
would have found a civic life impossible to the vast majority
of its citizens. The notion, secondly, that government
methods are destructive of initiative is largely a mythology
built upon the fact that business men are accustomed to take
rapid decisions without reference to other wills, that they rely
upon personal influence, and that faith in their judgment is,
in their own world, one of the chief causes of their success.

1 Ftnal Report (1916), passim


488


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

But all these qualities arc essentially the roots of that industrial
autocracy which is, as I have argued, without moral justifi¬
cation. It assumes that there is virtue in placing the will of
the many in subordination to the will of the few, without it
being incumbent upon those few to offer rational ground for
their actions. Nor, I may add, is the supposed inferiority of
government methods so patent as the business man tends to
assume. I quote the testimony of one who is, in general,
hostile to the State as trader. " I do not myself find,” says
Sir Lawrence Weaver, 1 " the methods of correspondence, of
filing, and other elements of government routine at all difficult
or irksome, and I think on the whole its methods of handling
business are far more efficient than many of the much-vairnted
business systems.” It is, of course, obvious that a business
man would find the duty of keeping records, and the necessity
of explaining his policy, a strange and irritating adventure.
He lives upon an almost intuitive sense which he can rarely
hope to translate into words. He issues orders which he
expects to have obeyed without protest. But it is precisely
because he has sought neither to keep the record of what
policy involves, nor to make his orders a function of common
counsel, that we have to move to a new basis of industrial
organisation.


V

How, then, is the State-relation to private'industry to
express itself in institutions ? Let us first note the purposes
that such relation must have in view. It aims, on the side of
production, in securing the worker in industry, whether he be
a manager at one end of the scale or a machine-tender at the
other, that civic minimum of rights essential to him as a
human being. It aims, on the side of consumption, at pro¬
tecting the ordinary citizen in his purchase of necessary
commodities, so far as organisation can secure him protection.
It seeks, therefore, three things: (a) continuity of supply;
(b) reasonable price ; (c) the safeguard of quality. Nothing
in all this, it may be noted, implies the admission of any
revolutionary principles into the structure of industry. The

* Development of the Ctvtl Servtee, p 73,


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 489

idea of unregulated competition does not exist outside of
economic theory ; even the maxim Caveat emptor holds only
within the margins of statutes like the Pure Food Acts.
Regulation, indeed, has become the rule rather than the
exception ; and an economist who would paint a portrait of
the industrial process must deal rather with the friction by
which his hypotheses are frustrated than with the hypotheses
themselves. Laissez-faire as a systematic principle ended with
the outbreak of war in 1914; and the effort it implied has
become impossible of achievement in the background of the
great society. The problem, in fact, is not whether govern¬
ment intervention is desirable. The truth is that government
intervention is essential, and the problem is simply of methods
whereby it can bear its maximum fruit. For to leave to the
unfettered play of economic forces the supply of those needs
by the satisfaction of which we live is to maintain a society
empty of all moral principles ; and such a society more surely
moves to disaster than at any period in history.

I can attempt here only the bare outline of what, as I
think, the government regulation of private industry will
imply. We are not, I may add, without experience of its
meaning, particularly of its meaning in relation to a specific
purpose. Anyone who studies the record of war-control of
industry in the period from 1914 to 1918, will be amazed at
the mass of material we possess upon the necessary mechanisms
of regulation. It may in general be argued that this material
is divisible into five great categories. We know much, firstly,
about the stabilisation of prices, of profits and of wages. We
are beginning to realise that the trade-cycle is not, like a comet,
a vast natural force shot into earthly phenomena from without,
and therefore beyond human control. We can attempt, bit by
bit, the estimate of supply and demand, on one side, and the
stabilisation of currency on the other, so as to repair the evils
of gross fluctuation. We can, secondly, control the issue of
capital. We can establish priorities according to degree of
social importance. We can, not less urgently, check the
export of capital, particularly where it searches for undesirable
channels. We can attempt, thirdly, the centralised control
and distribution of raw materials; the purchase, on govern¬
ment account, of the wool-supply of Australia, of raanila


49G A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

hemp, of Russian flax, were experiments which were the more
hopeful and the more significant, the more closely they are
scrutinised. We can control each industry, fourthly, by means
of councils representative of the industries concerned, which
can be entrusted, as I shall explain, with quite large functions
of self-government. We can, finally, in the realm of food and
essential raw materials, greatly reduce costs by an efficient
system of zonal distribution.

At the centre of any such control will clearly lie the
Ministry of Production. Its officials will be charged, above
all, with maintenance of two basic services • they will keep a
census of production for each industry, and a costings depart¬
ment. These will be united under what may be termed an
economic general staff whose function it will be to co-ordinate
the multifarious activities which arise from government
control. I do not conceive that it will be necessary for them,
in any really organised trade, directly to undertake the work
of actual administration They will, one may hope, rather
co-operate with business men than dnve them , though their
control of price in the interest of the consumer will involve,
clearly, that they be entrusted, subject to the ultimate control
of the legislative assembly, with regulating prices But they
will be able, through the statistical information at their
command, to even out the fluctuations of supply and demand
into something like an even adjustment, and, through their
knowledge of the cost of production, to establish the nature of
a fair price. They will attempt, where it seems advisable, to
buy directly at the source, and thus minimise speculation and
the chaos of the middleman. They will attempt, especially in
food supplies, the standardisation of quality. They will act,
in times of scarcity, as the natural organ for the control of
demand. They will, if experience indicates anything,
definitely encourage production by the policy of buying over
a period of years at a stable price, instead of leaving
innumerable dealers, as in agriculture, to make innumerable
separate bargains with innumerable producers.

I do not, of course, suggest that a single formula applies to
the whole intricate mechanism of business. Even, for example,
in a fairly straightforward matter like centralised purchase
of raw materials great variety of methods is possible. The


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 481

government might itself import the total needs of the com¬
munity and sell the stock to the manufacturers; in the
woollen trade, for instance, it was found advisable in England
to replace the machinery of private trade completely. Or the
government might act through private agents who would be
paid a fixed commission on their work, as in the case of the
purchase of Russian flax. Or, again, the trade itself might be
organised as a single purchasing agency, subject only to a
general control audit by the government. The decentralisa¬
tion possible under this last method, the wider scope, therefore,
that it permits seems to offer, on the whole, the possibilities
of maximum advantage. Whatever the form, it is, I think,
clear that centralised marketing of staple commodities is the
only way both to assure stability of supply, on the one hand,
and to minimise the cost of distribution, on the other. In
general, it is obvious that each trade will require its own
special methods, and that they will be the better the more
they are self-evolved.

What, broadly, seems to be required in all industries of
importance that are to remain private in character is the
creation in each industry of an association of manufacturers
similar in character to a trust. There are, indeed, few indus¬
tries of any size to-day in which combination on a large scale
has not taken place; 1 but their object has, of course, been
unconcerned with public advantage. And precisely as the
interests of owners become fully organised, so, also, must the
interests of workers by hand and by brain. We can obtain
from the parties to any form of industry a council for its
government which would consist of four parties. There is the
interest of owners ; there is the vocational interest; there is
the interest of direct users of the products of the industry;
there is the interest, finally, of government as the body con¬
cerned with the general public well-being. Each of the
parties would be equally represented on the council. It would
be necessary to make membership of the associations repre¬
senting both ownership and vocations compulsory upon all
companies engaged in trading ; and the council would possess
the power to issue orders which, upon approval by the Ministry
of Production, and subject to the control of the legislative
' Cl. Riport of Uu CommitU* on Truitt, Cd. 9236 of 1919, p. a.


4M A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

assembly, would be binding upon the industry as a whole. I
think, further, that each council should possess a judicial
department with the right to inflict penalties for the evasion
of its orders; such penalties, of course, being subject to the
ordinary right of approval of the courts. It is an experiment
of great importance to attempt, as in the legal and medical
professions, to make responsibility for what may be called the
morale of industry, a matter in which those engaged therein
have an interest that is not only direct, but also explicit.

What would be the functions of such a council ? Here,
once more, it must be emphasised that we have to deal in
general terms. It is natural that they should vary from
industry to industry, and no single council, probably, will
reproduce all the features here indicated, or any of them in
quite the same way. Nothing can be identical where the
material itself is different, and a different body of persons
manipulate that material. But, subject to such limitations,
the following scheme is, I think, a fair outline of the juris-*
diction it would exercise. It would discuss and issue orders
upon (i) the wages, working conditions, and hours of labour,
in the industry as a whole ; ( 2 ) the stabilisation of employment
and production ; ( 3 ) the creation of machinery for the settle¬
ment of disputes. It would, obviously, be a great advantage
if each council possessed a permanent court of conciliation to
which all disputes could, where necessary, be referred; ( 4 ) the
collection of information upon all matters pertaining to the
industry. This would include (a) statistics of cost, ( 6 ) statistics
of output (c) methods of manufacture, (rf) research into all
matters. All such information would be published; and it
would, of course, be of first importance in the establishment
of prices. ( 5 ) Facilities for the consideration of inventions in
machinery and method, with the provision of safeguards for
their devisers. ( 6 ) Investigation of special problems in the
industry and, particularly, the study of foreign methods.
The results of such investigations would, again, be published
to aQ the members of the industry. ( 7 ) Research into the
health conditions of the industry, particularly with a view to
reducing the use of noxious materials, e.g. white lead in p ain t.
( 8 ) Supervision of apprenticeship in the industry in conjunction
with the vocational bodies concerned. ( 9 ) Organisation of


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 408

education ol a technical nature after the period of apprentice¬
ship, again in conjunction with the proper vocational bodies,
(xo) The provision of necessary publicity for the industry,
this to include an annual report to the Ministry oi Produc¬
tion upon the work of the council, (n) To serve as the link
between the industry and the government. ( 12 ) To co¬
operate, where necessary, with the councils of other industries
on matters of joint interest. 1

What I am proposing is, practically, a parliament for each
industry, with the power to lay down binding conditions upon
each of its members. But before I discuss the personnel and
officials to which such a parliament gives rise, it will be useful
to emphasise generally the characters of the powers it will
exercise. There is involved, firstly, the idea of publicity in
the industry. The output, the costs of manufacture, the
gross and net profits of each member-firm in the industry will
be a public matter. It is, indeed, largely upon such publicity
that the Ministry of Production will base the scale of prices to
which it gives assent. And, in order that such publicity may
be effective, it is dear that the Ministry certainly, and possibly,
the audit and costings department, must possess such powers
as appertained to the Food Controller in England during the
war, under Regulation 2 G. That regulation involved three
things. It meant, first, theright to exact information considered
necessary, whether of manufacture, purchase, sale, distribution
and such like; it meant, second, the power of access to the
books of the firm for the purpose of verification ; and it meant,
thirdly, that refusal of such information or access should be
treated as a summary offence. Clearly, also, such publidty
involves also standard forms of book-keeping and the rest. It
is only upon the basis of such knowledge that legislation in
regard to the industry can partake of a sdentific character.

There is involved, secondly, the idea of standardisation.
That has two aspects. It will mean, on the one side, common
rates of wages’, of hours of labour, of physical conditions in the
industry; and, on the other, a relatively common technique
in manufacture and, not seldom, in distribution. This is, of

* It will be obvious how much this analysis o>( functions owes to " the
model form ” issued by the Ministry of Labour in England. See their repost
on Joint Industrial Councils, 1913, pp. 204-5.


4M A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

coarse, the general history of combination. It involves, as a
rule, an increasing tendency to common purchase of material,
as, for instance, in the great soap combine of Great Britain.

It involves, increasingly, the standardisation of all processes
where the article produced is made by repetition of manufac¬
ture; the work, in this aspect, of such a body as the Engineering
Standards’ Association, is a model of what I am trying to urge.
It involves, also increasingly, a growing specialisation within
the trade, companies tending more and more to devote them¬
selves to one or two types of work, and becoming more and
more expert in its development. It permits also such obvious
and important economies as centralised distribution and
collective advertising, and, if the system of district councils,
to be outlined presently, be adequately worked, it permits
also of great economies in the cost of transport. We can
eliminate such waste as experienced by the Ministry of Food
when it found that milk going from South Wales tc London
used to cross milk going from Gloucester to South Wales. 1 It
will tend to transfer competition from price to quality, with a
public guarantee*: that each commodity made represents a
standard and identifiable specification. There is involved,
also, the fact that the whole body of new knowledge is placed
at the disposal of the industry. The temptation to suppress
inventions will be obviated by the public character the industry
has acquired.

Such a form of organisation as is here outlined offers, I
suggest, the maximum safeguards obtainable from any industry
left in private hands. The procedure of each firm is controlled
in such fashion that it has to share all additional profit with
the public beyond a certain level. Its prices are controlled
from without. What have been termed the " circumstancial
safeguards " against the evils of trustification » are increased
in value by the fact that the ultimate control of the industry
does not lie in the hands of its owners, or even of the workers,
whether by hand and brain, in combination with those owners.
The government retains the power to fix price and the right of
entry. It can check at any point failure in quality or output.
The industry is made to function as a whole, and it acquires,

■ E. H. H. Lloyd, Erpmmrnts in SUUt Control, p. 381.

* Report o/’Committu on Trusts, p. 23.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 465

through its council, a common mind and a common conscience.
The device, moreover, of a fixed price is a mechanism of great
value in the enforcement of industrial efficiency upon the more
backward firms. For while it operates to leave a margin of
greater profit to the best, that profit, as I have already shown,
wall be shared in by the State and the consumer ; and the less
efficient are definitely and, I think, necessarily driven out much
more rapidly than is now the case. The modern spectacle of
the small and incompetent manufacturer who lives year by
year on the edge of financial abyss and seeks to keep alive by
economy on wages and the quality of his product is not an
attractive one. It is to him, as a rule, that there gravitate the
individual labourer who undercuts the general wages standard,
the clerk who is beyond his best, the untrained who know
nothing of the hours of labour or the proper physical conditions
which should attach to their work. The modern trust either
crushes him bit by bit, or pensions him off. At any rate, the
more rapid the process of elimination the better it is for the
health of the industry

The national council m each industry need not, and in
general will not, be the sole authority in its sphere. In most
industries, it will be found essential to supplement its work by
the creation of district councils which, mutatis mutandis, will
perform similar functions for the area they cover. For,
obviously, there are certain local differentia which cannot be
adjusted from a single centre. Problems like variation in the
wage rate to meet special conditions of rent, problems of over¬
time, peculiar conditions of a local market are much better
adjusted within the area where they occur than by reference
to a central body the majority of whose members will be
unacquainted with the problems involved. Quite dearly, no
district council can attempt national solutions; quite dearly,
also, its major results, if they are of a far-reaching character,
ought to be confirmed by the central council before they
become operative. In general, too, it would be unwise for
these district councils to undertake research. That is essen¬
tially a matter for the industry as a whole, and for com¬
munication to the industry as a whole; for a district to
obtain results is to raise the question, which ought never to be
raised, of the area of their availability. Nor is it, I think.


496 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

necessary to make the composition of a district council quite
so complex as that of the central body. The representatives
of the government may well be reduced to a liaison officer ;
and the representatives of allied industries will, in all
probability, need to be present only where problems arise of
special interest to themselves. But the judicial work of the
district council should, I think, be a fundamental feature of
its activity. It will not be difficult so to separate the area of
large and small problems as to make the petty fine one inflicted
at the source, while the graver offence is judged by the industry
as a whole.

The district council, moreover, can, 1 think, be made of
great use in another way. I assume, as a matter of course,
that there will be reproduced in the structure of private
industry the same system of works committee that I have
already outlined in nationalised and co-operative industry.
And there must be, I suggest, a kindred power in the works
committee of a private factory to appeal, in suitable cases,
beyond its management to the district council for redress.
Cases, for example, like the evasion of national agreements,
like the refusal to reinstate in case of wrongful dismissal,
things which are, and will remain, the groundwork of strikes,
are a territory in which the intervention of an authority
representative of the industry can be greatly valuable. We
need to build up the tradition of an industrial ethic evolved by
the men who actually operate the industry from their own
experience of it. We cannot, I believe, make their solutions
legally binding in many of these cases. But we can use them
in two valuable ways. They are, first of all, authoritative
publicity. They enable the body of citizens to know what is
felt about - some definite grievance by those best qualified to
judge it. We can, secondly, use it as expert evidence in such
legal proceedings as may follow from action by an industrial
district council. It follows, therefore, that it must have the
right to compel the attendance of witnesses, in its inquiries,
and to take evidence upon oath ; and it must develop a pro¬
cedure which will be accepted by the courts as judicially valid
in the same way as they now accept, for instance, the findings
of Public Service Commissions in the United States. Under
the conditions to which, in the plan here outlined, private


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 497

industry will be subjected, we can, 1 believe, look forward to
the development of an industrial jurisprudence as valid for its
special sphere as the jurisprudence of the courts themselves.
And it will be a jurisprudence the more valuable in that it will
represent, not the experience of a single party to the process,
but of the total experience within the industry. Little by
little, also, there are many minor aspects of law enforcement
which these district councils might well take over, of which
obvious examples are violations of the Factory Acts, of hours
of labour laws, and of such statutes as those concerned with
pure food and the prevention of traffic in noxious drugs.

What would be the size and composition of these councils ?
They need to be large enough to admit a genuinely full repre¬
sentation of the interests concerned, and, at the same time, to
be small enough to permit a fairly complete and intimate
discussion of the details of policy within each industry.
Some such figure as a hundred members is, I suggest, a reason¬
able size. The representative associations of employers and
workers would be the obvious electoral units of two of the
four parties concerned; the representatives of the govern¬
ment would be appointed by the Ministry of Production ; and
those of allied industries by their representative bodies in turn'.
I do not pretend to know how often they should meet. Clearly,
however, they will need at least four general meetings a year;
and details, as opposed to the large outlines of policy, would be
worked out in committees much upon the lines of a municipal
body in England. They will need provision, of course, to
enable a special meeting to be called at any time, where urgent
problems arise. They would vote in the usual way, .save
that, where they recommend the passage of an order binding
upon the whole industry, there should be a two-thirds or
similar majority in its favour. They should have the power to
mend their own constitution by a similar vote. They should
have direct and continuous access to the government depart¬
ments dealing with their work, a connection, it may be noted,
that will be facilitated by the presence on them of government
representatives. They would be, also, the normal vehicle of
communication between the industry and the government.
The latter would, of course, consult it, as in duty bound, upon
all matters of legislative policy. It would go to it for negotia-

32


4M A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

tion and discussion in such matters as the fixation of prices,
the settlement of national minima of wages and hours of
labour, the attitude to be adopted by the State to proposed
international conventions in industrial matters. In none of
these things could it, or should it, tie the hands of the govern¬
ment ; that is a matter where the control of the legislative
assembly is fundamental. But, from the very character of
its composition, its opinion will carry weight; and the higher
the ethical and technical standard it sets itself, the greater the
authority that will attach to its decision.

Each council will need a permanent staff; and it is a
matter of some interest to work out the type of staff it will
probably evolve. Here we may note the difference between
the conception which underlies the present scheme, and that
which seems inherent in the structure of the Whitley Councils.
Those who built the latter seemed to imagine that with a
secretary and a clerical staff the council would be able
without difficulty to perform its functions. 1 That is not, I
think, likely to be the case ; though if is perhaps the inevitable
result of a theory built upon the co-operation of capital and
labour on the present basis of industrial relationships. I have
already argued that this is generally impossible, and that the
more powerful the organisation of labour in a given industry,
the less likely such co-operation is. For the greater the degree
of labour organisation, the more widespread will be the
perception of the absence of moral principle in the structure
of industry ; and it is only as that condition is remedied that
co-operation will become creatively possible.

There will be, I suggest, at least six general departments
attached to the permanent secretariat of the council. There
will be, of necessity, an audit department engaged in formu¬
lating the necessary inquiries into the financial side of the
industry. There will be, secondly, a costings department upon
which will fall the important burden of providin g the material
whereby the council can make its recommendations upon
price-fixing to the Ministry of Production. There will be,
thirdly, a research department, which will, I believe, become
of growing importance, especially in the heavy industries;
and already, indeed, the better firms, both in Englan d and

■ Report on tie Progress oj Joint Industrial Councils (1913), p. 306.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 499

America, have come to see the importance of making proper
provision for scientific investigations. Such a department ought
not, of course, to confine itself to the purely technical side of
the industry; its psychological problems, its methods of sale, its
organisation in the factory, are not less important. Nor should
it neglect the special problem of industrial disease. Miners'
nystagmus, plombosis, Sheffield grinders’ disease—it is incum¬
bent upon the trades where maladies such as these mean a
special mortality-rate to bestir themselves for their prevention.
There will also be a legal department charged in part with the
task of drafting, in part with the quasi-judicial work which, as
I have argued, could well be made a function of the councils.
Probably, also, there will develop a department to deal with
education m the industry, and such general problems of its
welfare as insurance and superannuation. I do not myself
think that the problem of the workers’ leisure is in any way
a concern of these bodies, or of the district councils For in
an industrial society dominated, as our own must be, by a
machine-technology, the less the life of the working-day is
projected beyond its boundaries, the better it will be for the
average citizen. He must find his own means to make that
leisure fruitful , and the key to its utilisation must be sought,
originally m the schools, and, later, m the general civic life
about him.

If such a pattern of organisation is at all correct, it is clear
that we are envisaging the growth of an industrial civil service
the opportunities and, ultimately, the powers of which will
not be less important than those of the government depart¬
ments. They, we have seen, must be removed, if they are to
function adequately, from the atmosphere of patronage. The
same is true of this industrial civil service It will be not less
necessary to devise qualifications for its officers than for judges
in the courts, or doctors in the operating-rooms. They will
need a quite special training for many of their functions ;
their lawyers, for instance, will not be the genial young men
who have ambled delicately through dinners at an English
Inn of Court. Exactly as we require a diploma of public
health from the doctor who seeks a post as a medical officer,
so, I suggest, we shall require a special competence in industrial
law for admission to the legal department of a council. There


500 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

will be, one imagines, in such a body a small establishment
committee which will select its officials in terms of qualifies
tkm. And exactly as in law and medicine, we are developing
special training for special work, so also shall we need such
training for business enterprise. It is more than time that the
study of business enterprise became, as it is slowly becoming,
a subject for university study. It is more and more evident
that the problems of business, like marketing, like costing and
the like, are all of them subjects in which an academic habit of
mind has much of value to contribute. Work like that of the
Harvard Business School or the School of Rural Economy at
Oxford is laying the foundations of a revolution in the
discipline and habits of business life.

I have written of private industry as though the limited
liability company would be the normal unit in its operations.
That is not, of course, necessarily the case. There is likely to
be -a future of importance for at least two other forms of
organisation. In industries where, as in building, a large
fixed capital is relatively unimportant, there is, I think, a
great future for the guild idea. I see no reason why inde¬
pendent bodies of craftsmen should not provide houses in the
same way as the ordinary master builder of the present time.
The problem for them is almost entirely a problem of credit, on
the one hand, and of discipline on the other. Each of these
is, in its turn, largely a matter of experience and tradition.
They will need to devise with great care the technique of their
government. They will have to subject themselves to the
general rule of their industry in the same way as a private
company. They will have to make their way by the proof of
quality inherent in their work, and their ability to produce
something different from the machine-made article. But the
governing body of such a guild cannot, of course, be the
workers themselves. That would be to repeat again the tragic
and fatal history of the self-governing workshop. 1 The
control must lie in a committee representative of the vocational
bodies concerned; and the men working on a particular job
will be related to that committee exactly as though they were
in, say, a nationalised industry. Much, of course, of the

1 Ci. B. Jones, Co-operative Production, and C. E. Raven, Christian
Socialism, chaps, vi and x.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS SOI

future of such guilds depends upon the ability of the rank and
file to submit to conditions of organisation probably even more
stringent than those required in private business. That can
be without question where there is a proper appreciation of the
importance of management in industrial success. And the
problem of the provision of credit is, I believe, likely to be
solved if such efforts as the trade-union banks, now multiplying
rapidly in the United States, prove successful. The history,
for example, of the part played by labour in the reorganisation
of the Philadelphia Rapid Transit Company is highly significant
in this regard . 1 If labour can develop superior productive
efficiency, and prove able to finance it, the extension of its
democratic control is likely to be a permanent factor in the
making of a new industrial order.

There is, I think, a place of importance also for what has
come to be called the collective contract. There is no reason
why the workers in a particular factory should not take over
from the employers the total performance of a given body of
work. They could negotiate with them for the partial or
complete production of certain definite commodities at a fixed
price. They could then themselves arrange for the hi ting and
firing of labour, the appointment of foreman, the determination
of the hours of labour. Arrangements could easily be made
for the period over which the work was to be completed, the
rates of pay upon which the price was to be fixed, the penalties
to be involved in non-performance. In industries like cotton
and engineering, where it is the custom for groups of workers
to perform collectively an allotted range of functions, there is
ample room for what may perhaps be termed controlled
democracy in the workshop. The employer would supply
material and specifications ; he would fix the time within
which he expected the contract to be fulfilled ; he would
bargain for the price ; but he would, on the one hand, be
relieved of responsibility for the myriad difficulties of workshop
discipline, from the irritation that -comes from doubt whether
the working force is doing its job, from the resentment which
so often develops when a foreman is unpopular. The workers,
on the other hand, would have a sense of freedom and responsi-

1 But their future must be regarded as in the highest degree experimental
and dubious. Co-operative banking, which might perform a similar function,
is a different matter


MS A G RAMMAR OF POLITICS

bility fa their effort. Time lost, poor work, bad discipline,
would fall upon their shoulders. A mistaken appointment
would be their error, and not his. The problem of engagement
and dismissal would not lead to the perpetual challenge which
now seems inherent in the industrial relation. " The funda¬
mental significance of this plan of action,” writes Mr. Cole,*
“ lies in the fact that it is directed, not to the admission of the
workers to the conjoint exercise of a common control with the
employer, but to the transference of certain functions
completely from the employer to the workers.” Such a
collective contract is an alternative and limited form of the
guild production I have just discussed. It must, of course,
satisfy in rates of wages and hours of labour the normal
standards of the industry ; and it will involve subjection of
the wage-rate to the normal cost of production fixed by the
council of the industry upon the basis of the price of its product
as defined by the Ministry of Production. Clearly, therefore,
it builds greatly upon the efficiency of the workers to whom
the contract is entrusted. But where they know one another,
and have what may be called a body of corporate habits, it is,
I believe, an invaluable method of procedure. For it combines
the mechanical routine with the intellectual effort. It gives
the worker a real say in the disposal of his labour. It is
experimental and elastic. It could be applied to a single
stage of manufacture, and extended or contracted as it proved
successful. It might be used on the rveting of steel plates
on a ship, on the sale of some portion of a company's output
in an allotted territory, on the spinning or weaving of certain
types of cotton goods. Nothing is of greater industrial im¬
portance than the building of habits in the workers such as
the collective contract makes possible. For it ends, where it
is properly utilised, their position as tenders of a machine. It
makes them the authors of a process instead of the servants of
a routine. It is built upon a trust in their ability to think and
plan. It regards them as more than the blind tools of forces
they can neither understand nor control.

Such a system of institutions fulfils, I think, the purpose I
outlined earlier of industrial organisation. It leaves room,
and to spare, for the industrial magnate who searches not
• Chaos and Order in Industry, p. 156. The italics are Mr. Cole's


508


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS

merely for power but also for fortune It gives the individual
worker & full opportunity to make his experience felt in the
working of the process of which he is a part. He is no longer
simply a commodity to be used or tossed aside as the market
demands. His vocation is protected alike by its compulsory
recognition and by the places allotted to him in the governance
of his industry ; and he can himself look forward to a place on
the body charged with that governance. We do not abolish the
profit due to efficiency, but we compel it to build itself on
the attainment of standards, and we prevent capital from
functioning, as in the past, as the residuary legatee of industry
Nor do we leave the consumer, as now, at the mercy of power¬
ful combinations. He is protected at once by the share in the
industrial government that is played by his representatives,
and by the power of the Ministry of Production to fix prices.
I do not, of course, deny that in such a scheme as this the
business man can no longer conduct his business in his own
way. He will pay standard rates of wages. He will be
subject to rigorous control in the conditions of his factory.
His profits will be limited to a reasonable rate ; and where he
makes more than that rate, he will return a due share of it both
to his workers and to the public. Nor will he be able, as now,
to surround himself with the fantastic barrage of secrecy that
he protests is essential to his work. He will have to depend
much less on personal influence, much more on the efficiency of
his organisation and the quality of his business. He will be
scrutinised in the large outlines of his work by men who are
charged with the duty of enforcing the public interest in his
effort. The region within which his own unrestricted will may
operate is professedly narrowed and rigorously defined.

He has, it may be remarked, compensations of importance
in return. His business is made the servant of moral principle;
and there are thereby enlisted in his service instincts and
emotions he could not otherwise hope to call into play. Where
he has been compelled to rely upon fear, he is able to depend
on co-operation. Where his working force has tended to be
slack and incompetent, it is given incentives, in no other way
accessible, to effort and efficiency. He can secure, if he so
pleases, all that there is of inventiveness and energy in labour.
He has the assurance that if he is defeated by his rivals, their


SO* A GRAMMAR OP POLITICS

victory will be due not to competition, or undercutting, but
to the superior quality of their effort. He will have at his
disposal an organisation, in the research department of the
council, which will keep him in touch with all the facts of his
industry. If his costs are unduly high, he can have them
investigated; if his commodities do not, say, retain their
previous market abroad, he will learn just what is attractive
in the product of his competitors, I do not claim that he will
be free from strikes; a strikeless industry is not, I believe,
attainable in an imperfect world. But he is far less likely to
meet industrial dislocation than under the present system.
He will not encounter the suspicions by which he is surrounded
to-day, belief in hidden reserves, conviction that he is profiteer¬
ing, faith in a vast market he does not in fact control. If he
is met by a demand for increased wages, the justice of the
demand will be susceptible to exact quantitative measurement.
If he requires an increase in the hours of labour, he will be able
to show with precision its relation to output, thereby, to
profit. Industry, in the phrase of Mr. Justice Brandeis, will
have been transformed into a profession ; and its relation to
the public will be one of service by the very law of its being.
The economic difference between employer and worker will not
be as vast as it is to-day ; but, where it exists, it will be
referable to causes analysable and intelligible.

There is, moreover, one other aspect of this new synthesis
which deserves a word. It is, of course, a frankly collectivist
system. It attempts a wholesale planning of the methods
wnereby the purpose of industry is achieved. Is it likely, in
a regime which, confessedly, implies much greater equality
than now, that adequate provision can be made for new
capital when the rewards of risk are on a smaller scale ? We
are here in the realm of prophecy, and gambling in the realm
of economic futures is a dangerous, if agreeable, adventure.
But it is permissible to point out certain contemporary facts
from which important inferences may be drawn. Production
in war-time, in the first place, taught us two great lessons. It
showed that a fuller and more scientific use of the available
factors of production could lead to a greatly increased volume
of output, and that the chief cause of that increase lay in the
new incentives injected into industry bv the universal will to


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 505

victory. It showed, secondly, that this increased volume of
output was accompanied by a greatly increased demand
for commodities as a result of the change m the dis¬
tribution of income. From that experience, I think, two
inductions may be drawn. If we could keep the industrial
system working in terms of war-time incentive, if, that is,
organisation could assure the full and continuous employ¬
ment of capital and labour, and, second, if we could draw the
necessary saving from a wider area, even if we did not, as
now, draw largely upon the mechanical accumulations of a
small numbei of rich persons, we could in publicly owned
industries partly provide for new capital by the automatic
accumulation of reserves, and in industry as a whole from the
fact that a comfortable income for the body of workers would
implant habits of saving not possible under existing conditions 1
Men cannot save when their income is hardly adequate to the
burden of life, even more, where it is rarely secure But once
a regular minimum is -established which makes possible a
standard of fair comfort, the cost of saving is not too great to
make immediate consumption moie attractive And it may
oe added that the larger the field of safe investment offered,
the greater will be the incentive to save A higher level of
consumption will mean an increased demand for articles of
general comfort, and this institution will act, almost auto¬
matically, to replace what Mr Hobson calls " an irregular
unreliable, and insufficient demand for luxuries on the part of
the nch ” into channels that assure continuity. And. as I
shall show later, the development of social insurance will offer
possibilities in this regard of which the present methods are
unable to take advantage

One last remark may be made It need not be denied that
there are two groups of thinkers to whom such plans as these
are finally unpalatable On the one hand, to those who
conceive of the reorganisation of society m rigorously com¬
munistic terms, they will appear timid and conservative,
They lack the logic of inevitable catastrophe. They do not
envisage either the rapid or the complete disappearance of the
capitalist system in its present phase , rather they imply the

1 See on all this the excellent remarks of Mr J A Hobson. /ncm/iwi
*n th* New Industrial Order, pp 50 f


506 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

development of a new society within the shell of the old. They
are even bold enough to envisage the disappearance of that
class-war which now lies at the root of social structure, for
they conceive it possible to harmonise the interests of those
who are parties to the industrial relation. The answer to such
a criticism is, I believe, a final one. Revolutions do not
achieve the direct end at which they aim ; and the weapons
of which they are driven to make use destroy by their character
the prospects they have in view. An English social revolution,
for instance, could, even if it were successful, be achieved at a
cost few will be prepared to pay; and that cost would, as I
think, prevent the consummation of the ideals at which the
revolution aimed. It is probable, moreover, that an English
social revolution must, to be successful, be a phase in a general
European revolutionary movement; for the experience of
Russia makes it obvious that a communist State cannot
maintain the rigour of its outline in the midst of capitalist
States. The conditions of a successful revolution, in other
words, seem to me so improbable of fulfilment that the adven¬
ture could only be justified, first, as a weapon of last resort,
and second, when the chances of victory were very great.
For the failure of an economic revolution would, under modem
circumstances, entail penalties more fatal than at any previous
time.'

Yet I do not believe that such communist pessimism is
either half so unjustified or so disastrous as the naive faith
that laissez-faire is still the major solution of the problems
before us. The history of industry all over the world has been
the record of the necessary abandonment of Imssez-faire for
reasons that have, at every point, been overwhelming. The
hours of labour a man may work, the level of wages he may
receive, the materials to be used in the commodities he makes,
the conditions of sanitation and safety in the factory or mine
where he has to labour, it has been found necessary unceasingly
to control these if we are to have even the prospect of decent
living for the majority of the people. Countless investigations
have shown what is meant by their absence. Pictures like

1 On th© problem of revolution in genera! sec L. Trotsky, T he Defence
of Terrorism. B Russell, Practice and Theory of Bolshevism, Part II. chaps.
ii, vi, vii, and my Communism (192;), passim


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 50 ?

that drawn by Engels of England in the ’forties, like Charles
Booth’s magistral survey of Victorian London, like Rowntree's
description of York in the first years of the twentieth century,
above all the relentless and accurate analysis of capitalism at
its apogee of Karl Marx , 1 are of all of them explanations of why
laissez-faire involved as its inevitable consequence the attempt
by the State to enforce standards of minimum welfare upon
industry Statesmen, therefore, who can still proclaim, like
Sir Robert Home,* that " State interference with industry was
never an advantage,” are either completely ignorant of the
course of industrial history, or else prepared to face with
equanimity the maintenance of the present system.

For this latter view it is difficult to see any tenable grounds.
The working-classes of the world have no longer any faith
in capitalism. They give to it no service they can avoid. It
involves industrial dislocation as the law of its being. It
implies a distribution of property at no point referable to
moral principle. It means waste and corruption and in*
efficiency. Nor, historically, can it avoid the difficulty that
political power has now been conferred upon those who least
share in the benefits it secures; there is not, I think, any
evidence or men coming to the possession of political power
without trying, as a consequence, to control economic power
also. They may, of course, be resisted. But the result of
such resistance on any large scale will inevitably be revolution,
and there will then be precipitated exactly the situation pre¬
dicted in the communist analysis. I do not say the revolution
will be successful. I do however, urge that even its defeat
will destroy the prosperity of capitalism, on the one hand, and
imply such an iron dictatorship of the capitalist, on the other,
as to usher in a period of guerilla warfare almost certain to
ruin the prospects of civilisation. It is to the avoidance of
such a dilemma that the view here urged is directed. It is an
attempt to make possible the triumph of reason in a vital
department of human affairs. Frankly, it demands from the
economic rulers of society a sacrifice greater than they have

1 Engels, Condition of Ike IV or king Classes ix England tn 1844: Charles
Booth. London Q S Rowntree, Poverty ; Karl Marx, Capital, vol. i.
especially chaps, x, xv. xxv.

* London Times. September 8. 1024.


508


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

ever been called upon to make. Frankly, also, it admits that
their refusal of such sacrifice involves unthinkable disaster.
We have reached a moment when institutional change is
bound to be rapid, in either a backward, or a forward, direc¬
tion. The one, as I think, implies the end of coherent
civilisation; the other offers, at the least, the prospect of an
ordered society built upon justice. That is why men who
oppose the drift towards change will seem like those whom
Burke described when he wrote of men who persisting in
if’ opposing that mighty current, will appear rather to resist
{the decrees of Providence itself than the mere designs of men.”

VI

I have argued here that vocational bodies will have a
place of primary importance in the new State. What will be
the character of vocational bodies ? How are the lines of
demarcation to be drawn ? What will be their purposes ?
Of what nature will be their powers ? This must, I think, be
said at the outset that the position they will occupy differs
qualitatively from the position occupied by the trade union
in the modem State. For the purpose of the latter is, above
all, a fighting purpose. It is built upon the notion of class-
consciousness. It involves breaking down the separation of
vocations and fighting, where possible, along the most extended
front. That is why, in the contemporary situation, industrial
unionism is superior to craft unionism, why amalgamation is
better than federation. That is why, as Mr. and Mrs. Webb
have pointed out,' “ what is desirable for the battle with
capitalism, whether fought on the industrial or on the political
Add, may well be ‘ the one big Union, so organised and so
directed that the whole of the manual working dass, and the
whole of the allied brain-workers may move as one with one
will, and for one purpose. The more homogeneous and the
| more highly disciplined the force, the quicker and more
complete may well be the victory."

| I am concerned with a different position. It is with a
sotiety into which the idea of equality has already been
injected that we must deal. It is upon the assumption that we

• Constitution jot a Socialist Commonwealth, p. 176.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 009

have moved through the class struggle to a free common¬
wealth that we must build our vocational structure. What,
in such a society, is a vocation ? It may, I think, be defined
as a permanent and continuous association of persons who are
separated from others by the possession of a special competence
secured by a definite training. Where we have such a body
of persons, they will always insist, so far as they can, on the
practice of their craft under conditions that they determine
for themselves. They will feel themselves members of what
the mediaeval world finely called a "mystery” alien from
other “ mysteries.” They will desire to settle how they are to
work, the standards of their performance, the ethics of their
profession, the admission to their ranks. They come to
develop, like the modem nation-State, a body of traditions
peculiarly their own, a corporate personality that feels itself
violated when it is ruled by others who do not share in those
traditions. The characteristic of a vocation is that it operates
within a given function where it is, relatively speaking, expert,
and that it has no collective view outside the ambit of that
given function. It is concerned to protect its differences from
other vocations, not its identity with them. The vocation of
a doctor has no interests in common with that of a lawyer;
that of an engineer has nothing in common with the vocation
of a typist. The tie which binds the members of a vocation
together, the thing which gives them their common outlook,
is not their general function of producers, but their special
function as producers of a limited and fairly definite service.

It seems, therefore, to follow that the type of vocational
organisation with which we have to deal is built, not upon the
general range of a given industry, but upon the categories of
function within that industry. In a nationalised railway
service, for instance, the State would be concerned, not with a
single trade union of railwaymen, but with a variety of craft-
bodies, of engine-drivers, firemen, platelayers, porters and the
like, combined, it may be, for the defence of common interests,
but essentially recognising inherently different purposes in
their function. The porter of the Examination Schools at
Oxford is a necessary part of the university staff, but he has
no proper place in a body concerned with the interests of
university teachers. A hospital cannot do without its doctors;


«10 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

but* they are out of place in a body seeking to protect the
interests of nurses. I do not doubt the need of common
organisation for common interests; but it seems to me that
the essence of vocational self-government lies in the emphasis
laid upon distinctions and not upon identities. It is, of
course, impossible to say a priori when a vocation becomes so
distinct from an existing body as to need separate protection
of this kind ; or, conversely, when two vocations have become
so genuinely merged as to be in fact performing a single
function. New bodies grow up, like accountants and
secretaries, who, a half-century ago, had no recognisable
technique of their own , older separations, like that between
the solicitor and the barrister, or between the physician and
the surgeon, break down in the light of changing conditions.

What is, I think, certain is that the making of demarca¬
tions can never be entrusted to the body itself It ought to
share, and share largely, in the decision , but its interest in
self-protection is too great to make it possible for complete
self-determination ever to be its prerogative Nor, further,
can it solely decide the conditions of entrance to the vocation.
Anyone who considers, for example, the way in which doctors
and lawyers resisted the admission of women to their pro¬
fessions will realise why it is essential to retain an ultimate
nght of external control An analysis, moreover, of the
conditions of entrance to the profession of solicitor in England
will make it clear to any disinterested observer that the
regulations have been so framed as to assure, as far as possible,
the hereditary character of the vocation There is every¬
thing, I think, to be said for making a period of qualification
and a proof of competence a necessary condition of entrance
to the vocation; with, of course, the corollary of a proper
register of qualified persons, whether in the vocation of a
domestic servant, or of a doctor, or of an engineer But if the
profession is left with a free hand to settle the conditions of
entrance, it will always seek to protect existing practitioners,
sometimes by limitation of numbers, sometimes by the require¬
ment of unnecessarily high standards of qualification, and so
forth. There begins, then, to emerge, 1 suggest, a twofold
conception at this point. The recognition of new vocations is
a matter to be settled by the government and (a) those in the


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS *11

allied vocations, (b) those seeking recognition for what they
claim to be a new vocation, (c) relevant subject bodies like, for
example, the Royal Society or the Engineering Standards
Committee, whose opinion is entitled to weight. The deter¬
mination of the conditions of entrance to the vocation would,
in similar fashion, be determined by a body equally composed
of (a) those already practising the particular vocation, (6) those
who would teach persons who would desire to enter it,
and (c) representatives of adlied vocations. It would be
possible, also, in many cases to associate with such a body
representatives who would put the point of view of those who,
later, would be the employers of the entrant to the vocation.
Often enough, the presence of the latter would be a valuable
protection against that professional conservatism which
insists upon uniqueness where none in fact exists.

Qualification, of course, does not imply the guarantee of
employment; there are said to be lawyers and doctors who
do not pay their way. But it is, I think, clear that under
the scheme here outlined we shall have the means at our
disposal of establishing much more closely an adequate
relation between size in the profession and its annual recruit¬
ment than is now the case. A model from which such a
relation may develop is offered by the practice of the Civil
Service Commission in Great Britain. There, year by year,
the number of vacancies to be filled by examination is notified;
and it is possible, by that means, to limit fairly effectively
the number of applicants for positions. If such a practice
became general, and if there were established under each
education authority a committee of teachers and parents who
worked in conjunction with appropriate bodies in the dif¬
ferent services, it would be possible to know within reasonable
margins the number of posts likely to be filled. That need
not, of course, operate to limit the number of those who
desire to qualify in a particular profession, even when they
either cannot, or choose not to, practise in it. The more we
can encourage the habit of alternative qualification the better
it will be for the standards of our democracy. That is not
only because there are many posts which need a dual quali¬
fication ; it is also because it is, particularly in a civilisation
dominated by machine-technology, important to have people


#12 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

who can be shifted from one special form of laboui to another;
for the study of the physiology of industry makes increasingly
evident the importance of change in work. Not the least
of our present difficulties lies in the fact that once a man has
adppted a particular profession, he is condemned to practise
it for life, save in the most exceptional cases. The growing
interest in adult education, moreover, makes it increasingly
possible that after the period of compulsory training is over,
we may be able to persuade larger numbers (we must dwell
here only m the realm of persuasion) to fit themselves for
a wider sphere of work than seemed possible or attractive
to them at the period of their entrance into industrial or
professional life. That is important not only from the stand¬
point of a man’s usefulness to himself, but, industrially, in
relation to the problem of unemployment, and, intellectually,
from his value as a citizen. The ampler we can make bis experi¬
ence, the greater the contribution he will make to social effc t.

How will each vocation be governed ? Here, obviously,
I can only indicate some leading prirciples ; details are a matter
in which discussion would need to take account of the thousand
varying problems the pattern of vocational structure affords.
But certain things are clear. The vocation will be governed
by an executive council elected by its members. It will need
therein, as with the Miners' Federation of Great Britain, to
take account of regional interests, not less than of the general
number of members. It will choose such permanent officers
as it requires, remembering, one hopes, that administration
is a specialised art, in which continuous opportunity of practice,
as opposed to constant change, is of the first importance.
Beyond its executive council, it will have need of local bodies ;
and it will be a matter of the first importance to select proper
units of local organisation. It is, for instance, clear in the
majority of occupations that the true local unit is not the place
where the member resides, but the place in which the vocation
is actually practised. Much of the efficiency of vocational
life depends upon the opportunity to consult, as in the Miners’
Lodge, the men who are actually working together. 1 The

1 On this see the conclusive argument of Mr J. T Murphy in his paper
Tht Unit of Organisation, published in the fifth number of the Re-organisation
of Industry Series by Ruskm College.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 51*

difficulty, sometimes urged, of finding a suitable time for
meeting can, with a little inventiveness, always be overcome.
Two engineers who live at Clapham have less interest in
common, or, perhaps less effective means of articulating their
experience, than two engineers who work in the same factory
in Clapham, but live respectively in Poplar and Battersea.
They meet on a plane uniquely devised to bring out what
is common in their experience. It is error of a serious kind
to lose the opportunity to use it. I think, further, that
experience points to the vesting of certain powers in the
executive council that are now, especially in the trade-union
movement, relegated to the rank and file. The council, for
instance, should always choose the officials of the vocation;
no large body of men can appreciate the technical qualities
which go to the making, say, of an efficient secretary. So,
also, the council should choose the representatives of the
vocation who are to sit upon such bodies as the governing
body of a nationalised industry. Anyone who studies the
statistics of trade-union voting * will realise how small is the
interest of the rank and file in such questions ; how little, also,
is such interest related to genuinely competent appreciation.
It is clear, on the other hand, that where the questions to be
decided relate definitely to the personal experience of members,
as in the number of hours it is proposed to work, or the
necessity of a strike, it is desirable that the decision shall be
based on the votes of the total membership. It is, further,
important that there should develop in the vocational world
bodies which correspond to the quarterly meeting of the
consumers' Co-operative Movement. For, often enough, the
grave danger exists that the official at a central or regional
headquarters will lose touch with the rank and file. He needs
to know, not only what individual members are thinking, as
he makes contact with such members, but what emerges as
points of grievance and suggestion when discussion is corporate
and organised. And it is through such institutions of con¬
tinuous consultation that there will develop the proper type
of voluntary body within a given vocation. Medical men,
for instance, who are impressed by the importance of birth-
control could then form a society which would use the
1 As giveu. for instance, by Mr. Murphy in the essay just referred to on
P iy

as


114 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

quarterly meeting to impress their views upon the profession
as a whole; and where it was desired to represent the medical
profession upon a public inquiry into that question, that
society would form a national unit to choose a doctor to
express its point of view.

One fact of importance should, however, be noted here.
I have assumed that it will be obligatory on all members
of the vocation to join the association concerned with its
governance. That association, nevertheless, cannot, under
the assumptions I have made, be the ultimate governing body
in the industry any more than, for instance, the Miners'
Federation or the British Medical Association is the ultimate
governing body in each respective vocation. The rules, the
observance of which are binding upon the members of an
association in the sense of involving a legal penalty—expulsion
from the vocation, for instance—must, I think, be framed, not
by the association itself, but by the association in con¬
junction with an external authority who, in the instance
taken, would be the Minister of Justice. Wherever, that is
to say, the rules of the association involve by their nature
deprivation of the right to practise the craft, the power of the
association should never be final. It should always be a power
of which the substance should be approved by the State,
though its enforcement is best left to the vocation itself.
Exactly as the General Medical Council and the. Bar Council
have the right to strike practitioners from their rolls, but are
limited as to the causes for such expulsion, so, 1 suggest, eaoh
vocation should be limited. Nor do I see any reason why
it should not be open to private persons to delate to such
bodies for alleged unprofessional conduct meriting expulsion.
The larger the degree of self-government we can develop in
this direction, the better it will be for the esprit ic corps of
a vocation. Responsibility is more certainly bom from powers
of this kind than in any other way; and I believe that, as a
general rule, the average professional court will be a better
medium of justice than a body of lawyers to whom the
professional ethic of the given vocation has to be explained
as a thing of strangeness. Appeal to the ordinary courts
must, of course, be preserved in order to see (a) that a proper
procedure has been followed, and Ifi) that the action taken is


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 515

not ultra vires, but if these conditions are met, the power of
the vocation could usefully be left as final.

We begin now to see the purposes at which a vocational
body should aim, and the powers it requires to fulfil those
purposes. It is the vocational body, whether in the region,
or in the nation-State as a whole, that will choose those who
are to represent it in governing bodies in industries, in advisory
committees of government department and the like. They
will go there frankly to protect the interests of their vocation,
to bargain about its hours of labour, its rates of pay and the
general conditions upon which its effort depends. They will
not, of course, be plenipotentiaries, but ambassadors; in the
last resort it is the vocation itself which must determine
whether it will accept the terms offered to it. The right
to accept involves, also, the right to reject, and there will
clearly be cases, even in a nationalised industry, in which men
will withhold their labour rather than submit to the con¬
ditions offered. I do not think the right to strike can be
denied to any vocation. In a State such as we have been
here considering, it will, I believe, be a rare thing for a strike
to occur. But if a body of men believes with any intensity
that to continue work under the conditions proposed is
impossible, they will, as I have already argued, strike, whatever
be their legal situation. The real safeguard against such a
position lies in two directions. It is secured, first of all, by
making the conditions of the vocation materially and
spiritually adequate. When men know that the economic
order is permeated by just principles, the will to strike is largely
absent; and it is secured, secondly, by the conference of a
large degree of self-government upon the vocation. That is,
I may perhaps point out, the value of the Whitley system
in the British civil service. Its present weakness lies in two
directions also. It is a mistake to make civil servants act
as the employers’ side in a Whitley Council; that function
is much better entrusted to the legislative committee of the
department. It is a mistake, also, not to allow the councils
to deal with such matters as promotion. It would be wise,
further, to relate the work of the Civil Service Commission
to the vocational bodies in the public services. The standards
of entrance, the method of testing efficiency, the relation of


516 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

gr&des one to another, are all of them questions upon which
the views and experience of those bodies is of the first impor¬
tance. One would like to be certain that they are utilised.

The vocation, further, must take up, as a matter naturally
within its scope, the study and advancement of its own
technique. Partly, of course, that is a matter in which, as
in medicine and the law, there will always exist within the
vocation voluntary associations working at the problems of
the craft. But that is not adequate to its needs. It is
always urgent that there should be recognised officially by
the vocation itself the need of organised improvement in the
standards of the profession. One would like to see the miners
employing their own medical men, their engineers, their
lawyers. The teaching profession might well maintain in
every country a great institution like Teachers’ College in
New York to act as a definite centre for the making of new
knowledge in educational technique and its communication
to the profession as a whole. The medical profession might
well set out to discover men like Banting and Lister, and set
them to solve the difficulties of medicine and surgery. The
actuary, the engine-driver, the boilermaker can all add to
the quality of their effoit by making it part of their business
deliberately to search for the means of improvement. That
is important not only as an item in professional self-respect;
it is important also because discoveries so made become the
common possession of the vocation, and not simply a source
of profit. And it enables us to avoid the difficulty met, for
instance, in what is called scientific management when an
efficiency engineer like Mr. F. W. Taylor seeks to impose a
routine upon a body of workers to whom he does not belong.
Improvement made from within, as made by co-operation
with the vocation itself, has a quality of responsibility in no
other way obtainable. And it is, particularly in routine-
work, an immense factor in giving to the vocation an avenue
to self-importance. If, for example, the fatigue of say shop-
assistants was studied under the aegis of shop-assistants them¬
selves, the conclusions arrived at would have the quite special
value of immediately electing a volume of support that would
not attach, for instance, to an inquiry by a government
department or an employers’ association. If miners would


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 517

study scientifically the problem of safety in mines, I believe
that the reduction of accidents in mining would be much
more rapid than in the past. If, even, the Miners' Federation
of Great Britain or the United Mine Workers' of America were
to survey the equipment of coal-mines in order to determine
its adequacy, the change they could produce would be
enormous. For such an effort wins for its support a driving
force obtainable because its translation into effective terms
involves the dignity of the profession as a whole.

The vocation, further, must develop its professional
standards. What, exactly, does that imply ? Professional
standards may be defined as rules intended to prevent the
victory of self-interest over service in the working of the
vocation. It is to that end, for instance, that doctors and
lawyers in England are forbidden to advertise. It is for that
reason that a solicitor’s bill of costs is subject to the scrutiny
of the courts. No doctor is supposed to take a commission
from another doctor to whom he introduces a client; though
business men think nothing of asking, for instance, a com¬
mission from a stockbroker to whom they have introduced
a friend who desires to float his business as a limited company.
Nor may a professional man use the knowledge he obtains
in the practice of his vocation to the detriment of his client.
I do not doubt or deny that many vocations now carry the
code intended to embody such safeguards to a point where,
in reality, they involve grave dangers. It is, for example,
probable that medical etiquette often prevents the criticism
of a method of treatment where the purpose is, quite rightly,
to prevent the criticisms of a fellow-practitioner. It is
practically certain that the ethic of lawyers as a profession
is much the largest obstacle in the way of reasonable law
reform. Nevertheless, I believe that the creation of standards
of conduct which the profession can enforce upon the members
is essential to its function, and if, as suggested, research is
recognised as inherent in that risk, the charge that professional
interest will oppose originality can quite largely be broken
down. We cannot allow the British Medical Association to
prevent the wider use of midwives, district nurses and health
visitors upon the ground that " any salaried hierarchy of the
professionals is inconsistent with the personal dignity and


518 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

individual freedom of the practitioners, that the creation of
any specialism whatever inevitably d im i n is h es by so much
the sphere of the general practitioner.” 1 But the fact of
danger is rather a ground for having the ultimate control
outside the profession than a ground for assuring to it the
power to determine its own standards. And when the last
word ba« been said against the professional habits of doctors,
it remains, I think, true that their standards of conduct still
easily outdistance those of any other vocation we know. The
power to revise is not a power to interfere day by day. One
would like, nevertheless, to see the habit grow up of a small
commission to inquire, every decade or so, into the professional
habits of a vocation. It would be a commission, not of
experts, but of public-minded and disinterested men who
would take evidence upon the working of the professional
code, and try to invent ways for its improvement. It would
prevent much of the rigidity against which so much complaint
is now made. It would check the habit of repeating customs
in parrot-fashion as though they represented eternal truth.
It would enable the interested outsider to offer suggestions
to the craft in an atmosphere likely to ensure a more fitting
reception than they now receive. Granted, for example, that
a bonesetter ought to be a qualified practitioner, it would be
a comfort to the general public to know that qualified
practitioners were efficient bonesetters. At present, indubit¬
ably, criticism is received with impatience unless it comes
from sources within the profession. Such a commission could
voice authoritatively the critirisms often felt without, but
which lack the means to reach their proper goal.

Finally, it is, I think, important that the vocation should
grow into the habit of voicing deliberately the sense it has
of national need. To some extent, this has already been
provided for by the system of advisory committees I have
already outlined. But these, in any case, cannot speak for
the vocation as a whole, and much of their work will necessarily
be done under conditions of official secrecy. It is important
to break down that monopolisation of access to the ministerial
maul which any body of permanent officials naturally seeks,

1 See Wallat, Our Social Htrilaft, p. 130, where the quotation ii given
in fell with a character!*tic comment.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 519

for its own conveniences, to possess. It would be a great
step forward if the General Medical Council were able to speak
for the profession on the minimum policy required to decrease
infant mortality; or the Teachers' Registration Council to
have a united policy on the number of cubic feet per child
in a school necessary as a minimum to educational efficiency ;
or the council of a united legal profession to speak with vigour
on the question of prison reform. Such a function would
have the further merit of persuading the practitioner in each
vocation to follow out the public implications of his experience.
And, obviously, the State has a right to that experience,
though it too rarely receives it. No one knows so much
about the desirability of birth-control as the medical pro¬
fession ; but we probably know less of the views of the medical
profession upon that question than we do of almost any other
group in the community. No one knows as much about the
desirability of a public defender as the legal profession; but
our ignorance of its views is similar to our ignorance of the
views of the medical profession upon birth-control. This is
a sphere, it may well be, in which the quarterly meetings of
vocations in different regions would have a special value-
It would be possible there to collect the professional opinion
of the locality; and a little ingenuity upon the method of
eliciting opinion, and the majority necessary to enable a view
to be presented as the prevailing view, is not very difficult.
Otherwise, we are left to accept policies which may well
represent the apogee of unwisdom Take, for example, the
question of vaccination. What is the predominant medical
opinion upon the conscientious exemption clause ? Many in
England to-day believe that the medical profession is fairly
divided upon the subject; and few will either study or under¬
stand the quite final statistics of Doctor MacDonnell. 1 But
if the doctors spoke in a general way, we could avoid the
laxity which now surrounds the law. Nothing is so integral
to the proper fulfilment of professional purpose as the pre¬
vention of the wastage of its experience. We can hardly
attempt too quickly the use of means to prevent the con¬
tinuance of the present chaos in this regard.

• Bitmuinka, vol. i. p 375, and vol u p 135.


530 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

VII

At the basis of any reconstruction of economic institutions
must lie the conception of social insurance. Exactly as an
individual seeks to safeguard his dependents against the
consequences of death by life assurance, so must society
protect itself against the avoidable risks of modem life by
insurance against them. A non-insured class is always a
burden upon society ; an insured class is not merely a burden,
but the wise administration of insurance is actually a definite
gain in benefit to the society as a whole. For every scheme
of insurance that is built upon the contributory principle is
in fact built upon saving; and proper actuarial methods
might make such savings a source not merely of individual
security, but also of social prosperity.

I do not need to point out that in matters like health
and unemployment the principle of social insurance has already
been accepted in the two chief countries of Western Europe;
and no one seriously proposes to abandon what is, quite
frankly, the main security we have against revolution. But
the substance of social insurance need not be limited to that
narrow field. There is no reason in the world why every
citizen should not, as a matter of course, be safeguarded
against disablement from accident or disease, from old age
(even when non-contributory pensions operate at sixty-five),
against unemployment; and there would, equally, be States
endowment, on the same principle, of the widow and the
orphan, of maternity, and of the education of children
through at least that period we distinguish as secondary
education.

Here we are in the realm of what may be termed compulsory
social insurance. Each type of benefit is one that the State
must directly undertake as a matter of elementary precaution.
Such insurance should be compulsory, not only because the
financial burden on the State becomes, otherwise, too heavy,
but also because, properly administered, it inculcates the habit
of thrift, and the sense in the citizen of a common interest with
other citizens. I add that it is essential to the adequate
working of these forms of social insurance that they should be


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 521

unified into a nationalised industry.* There is no room in
what is quite obviously a natural monopoly for the private
company competing against other private companies. That
way lies a wastefulness of which the price is unnecessarily
paid by the insured person. The investigation of the working
of private industrial assurance shows that, in England, only
48 per cent, of the premiums collected are returned to the
insured, and that the profits are excessively high.* So many
policies lapse, moreover, that the animal loss to the holders
reaches an enormous sum. The expenses of administration,
the payment of directors, commissions to agents, the cost
of collecting premiums, the expense of advertising, the
enormous and unnecessary multiplication of offices—all these
represent a waste that can at once be eliminated by State
management.

That does not, of course, mean centralised management.
There is no reason why, while the general control of finance
is directed from a single office, there should not be a large
measure of local autonomy in administration. I think myself
that, once the idea of a national minimum of insurance is
accepted, the most simple form of its administration would
be its transference to the ordinary units of local government.
That would have the great merit of enabling the local authority
to experiment with schemes beyond the national minimum,
and thereby to develop initiative in an urgent department
of social welfare. It would permit the co-ordination of
insurance policy with the health measures, the housing effort
of, for instance, a municipal council; if the claims for sickness
benefit in Manchester were unduly high, it would then be
possible to ask questions of the medical officer of health.
I assume, of course, the abolition of the right to contract
out of the insurance minimum on the part of any area or
vocation. The whole point of such a scheme as this is that
it should be universal, and removed from the sphere of private
profit-making. It is, I think, also dear that no local authority
ought to be permitted to embark upon experiments in insurance

■ Cl. Sir W. Beveridge. Insvrcmc » for All, pat rim. His figures are based
on the existing English scheme, but then is no reason why they should not
be largely increased upon the basis ol increased premiums.

» Cl, the Holman Gregory Report, 193a, Cond. 816, and Sir W. B e v eridge's
remarks, op. cil., p. to.


522 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

without the approval of the central authority. The actuarial
and investment risks in matters of this kind must be safe¬
guarded by the maximum of knowledge.

The sphere of compulsory insurance is one, I submit, in
which the profit-making motive is out of place. It is the
protection of the community against inevitable social loss,
and the corollary of such protection is the maximum pos¬
sible return to the insured person within the area that it
covers. Beyond that sphere, as experience may define its
boundaries, the problem is a different one. Protection against
fire, or burglary, or accidents inflicted by a motor-car, the
desire to secure to one’s idren the certainty of the highest
form of educational training, are all of them methods of
insurance which are rightly left to the will of the individual
citizen. He may feel that the chance of his house being
robbed is so small that it is not worth paying against the risk.
He may decide that if his son is capable of benefiting by a
university education, the normal means of access thereto are
adequate. Yet in all the normal forms of private insurance
which remain after the needs of the State have been met,
the case for making it a government monopoly is, I think,
a final one. At every point in its administration economy of
charges would be effected; and there would, as a result, be
the means of increasing the return to the insured person.
The experience of the United States in insuring the lives of
its soldiers is evidence of the ease and efficiency with which
a nationalised system could be administered. I see no reason
why the State should not make reasonable profits out of the
Post Office; and it could apply those profits to whatever
purpose was deemed most wise at the given moment in each
year when the Minister of Finance introduced his programme.
Nationalised insurance, moreover, would place at the disposal
of the government a great reserve for investment which it
could use with great effectiveness in industrial development.
There is no reason, either, to expect laxity of service or
inadequate experiment with new forms. Such a department
could be surrounded with bodies of organised critics in pre¬
cisely the same way as any other industry. Insured persons
could utilise every method they now adopt for their own
protection, and they would enjoy the disappearance of


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 528

enormous charges for services which such a unification would
immediately make superfluous.

It is not, I think, possible to exaggerate the importance
to the community of an adequate system of social insurance.
Whatever the character of the State, whether it retain its
present form, or whether it become practically communist,
it will need to secure itself against the inevitable costs of life.
There will always be sick persons; old age is an inescapable
burden ; not even the wisest social scheme can prevent the
maladjustments which will occur through a bad harvest in
Russia for a poor monsoon in India. Every parent with
children to educate will find the cost of that education a
growing burden upon themselves. It is, therefore, the obvious
part of wisdom to meet these problems with the least possible
cost to the community as a whole. Nor can we offer
immunity to any from the obligations they entail. State
insurance then becomes as obvious as a State post office, or
a State police force. And the higher the minimum of the
service is set, the richer, in the end, the community will be.
We shall not need the vast relief-services of the nlodem State,
its poor-law system, for instance, once we are able to put
the problems which make the poor law necessary upon the
footing of insurance. We shall not compel the hospital to
rely upon the casual donation, to face, as it continually faces,
the danger of inadequate equipment, or impossibility of
experiment, when it has the right to call upon the medical
insurance fund for the services that it offers ; whfen, also, the
citizen can go to the hospital as of right, in the knowledge
that the charge of his treatment is borne by the insurance
he has paid. We can, in brief, immensely multiply the
certainties of life by this means ; and we can do it in such
a way that the individual citizen is himself the means of their
manufacture. The last twenty-five years have made the
principle an elementary one in the life of the State. Our
business is so to enlarge the sphere of its operation that we
may realise the full implications of its promise


524


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


VIII

I have throughout this book insisted on the importance
of equality in the political relationships of any community.
I have argued, further, that in the concept of equality in
politics the key will be found to lie in the property-system
of any given State. The manner in which property is dis¬
tributed will always, in a system so largely individualist as
our own, determine also the distribution of economic power.
And it is inevitable that economic power should, in its turn,
chiefly determine the distribution of political power also. For
those who can decide not only what is to be produced but,
also, the manner of its production clearly command the
working lives of other men. Their decisions, doubtless, will
be quite largely influenced by considerations in which
economic motives have only a partial place. They will make
concessions to the demands of humanitarianism, as in the
Factory Acts. They will yield, as in the establishment of the
checkweighman in a colliery, to the power of combination
among the workers. But, at the base, the political system
will practically reflect their interests to the degree that they
are united in their consciousness of them. And in an age,
like our own, of vast concentration of industrial capital it
is unlikely that such consciousness will be lacking. Unless,
therefore, the power of property is to dominate the rights
of personality in a community, it is necessary to limit the
opportunities of which it may seek to take advantage.

In part, at least, we have already provided for such
limitation in the plan of industrial organisation here outlined.
For in a nationalised industry, by definition, private profit
making is excluded, and though there will doubtless be among
its members those to whom, relatively speaking, a large salary
will be paid, their power will arise not from the salary they
receive, but from the service they perform ; and it will be
inherent in the method of performance that the possibility
of autocratic control is removed from them. So, also, in that
sphere of industry which I have argued .is the natural sphere
of consumers’ co-operation. Here, again, the accumulation of
property by the medium of profit is, a priori, ruled out of our
discussion. The special expert may be well paid ; but he will


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 524

not be able to tax industry in the enormous way now
characteristic of the captains of trade.

"When private industry is concerned, it is not unlikely that
some men will make large fortunes. Short of confiscation,
I see no way in which, for instance, a man with the talents
of Mr. Bernard Shaw can be prevented from earning a large
fortune. Where industry is concerned, I believe myself that
the methods of control here urged permit such fortunes to be
earned with justice. The consumer and the producer alike
are thereby enabled to share in the results of enterprise
returning more than that share to which capital is entitled
by the price it can command in the market. Where men
choose to save, and to profit by the results of postponed
consumption, I see no reason why they should not be permitted
to do so ; on the condition always that the investment of their
savings does not carry with it a power of exclusive industrial
control. Where the income so obtained is unduly large, it
is not difficult to correct its dangers by means of a graduated
income-tax ; and I believe that it will be possible in such a
community as we here are envisaging to lighten the burden
of taxation upon small incomes by its transference to the
swollen revenues so characteristic, in our own time, of the
millionaire class in the United States.

The real problems, I believe, lie in two directions. There
is, in the first place, the question of the terms upon which
industries now in private hands are to be transferred to public
or quasi-public ownership ; and there is, secondly, the question
of inheritance. It is best to deal with the second question
first, since the results reached in its analysis will be found, I
think, quite largely to determine the other question. I have
already argued that the only principle upon which the possession
of private property can be justified is the performance of
function. I own because I serve ; 1 cannot own because
someone else has served. And, ideally at least, what I own
ought to have measurable relevance to what I do. A writer,
for instance, of great poetry ought to be able to secure for
himself that solitude without which great poetry cannot be
written ; for though Robert Burns might sing in the peace
of exacting rural labour, it is not probable that he could have
sung in the crowded misery of a Glasgow slum. A Prime


086 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Minister cannot adequately perform his work except under
conditions which necessitate a somewhat larger income than
would suffice for the comfortable maintenance of a policeman.
I do not argue that the highroad to measurable relevance is
either direct or easy ; but, ultimately at least, it is a road we
must seek to discover.

If, then, I can own only because I have served, it follows
that there cannot exist an exclusive right of bequest. That
will, accordingly, be limited in two ways. There will be
limit ation upon the amount of property I can bestow, and
there will be limitation upon the persons entitled to receive
it. The limitation of amount may, also, be regarded from
two points of view. There will, firstly, be an absolute limita¬
tion upon a total fortune; the State will assume the position
of universal heir to all estates over a certain sum. There will,
secondly, be a limitation upon the amount of property any
single person can receive as an inheritance.

Such a view is, of course, met by those who defend the
existing order with the argument that it attacks the rights
of property. The answer to that argument has been well
put by John Stuart Mill. “ The idea of property,” he wrote, 1
“is not some one thing identical throughout history and
incapable of alteration ... at any given time it is a brief
expression denoting the rights over things conferred by the
law or custom ox some given society at that time ; but neither
on this point, nor on any other, has the law and custom of
a given time and place, a claim to be stereotyped for ever.
A proposed reform in laws or customs is not necessarily
objectionable because its adoption would imply, not the
adaptation of all human affairs to the existing idea of
property, but the adaptation of the existing idea of pro¬
perty. to the growth and improvement of human affairs.”
Certainly no other method of approach to the problem has
the right even to pretend to be scientific. Our views of the
right to inheritance or bequest are utterly different from what
they were even a generation ago. They change with time

’ Quoted from Mill's posthumous essays on Socialism in the FortmgMIy
Rtvitm for 1879 by Sir W. J. Ashley in note K to his edition of Mill's Pnnci-
ftu of Political Economy, p. 989. For Mill's own earlier views on inheritance
ef. <K 4 ., pp. an ft.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 5*7

and place. They are not the outcome of any considered
philosophic principle ; and they have been continually adjusted
to the pressure of new wants and new ideas.

Broadly speaking, we may consider inheritance, under the
limitations noted above, from three special angles. There is
(a) inheritance to a wife and children ; there is (£>) inheritance
to collateral relatives or friends ; there is (c) the special prob¬
lem of the charitable bequest. Inheritance to a wife and
children, obviously, has two distinct sides. The children may
be immature or adult; the wife may, and, in the modern
world increasingly will, be earning her own living. Let us take
as the simplest instance, the case where the wife has been
dependent upon her husband and the children are all in the
early years of school. If property is to be related to function,
to what are they entitled ? The wife, I suggest, ought to
receive by inheritance an income adequate to maintain that
system of established habits which she has pursued in the life¬
time of her husband, the average standard of living, broadly
speaking, to which she was accustomed in the last ten yean
of his life. We then enable her to avoid the break with the
past which continuous expectation so often, and so naturally,
makes painful and difficult. But she is entitled to it only
in her own lifetime, or until remarriage. With her own death,
her interest in it ceases, and it should revert to the State as
the universal residuary legatee. Its purpose is then fulfilled,
and can have no moral right to bestow what she has not
earned. In the event of remarriage, equity suggests that
she is entitled to such a share of that income as will, with
the earnings of her second husband, bring their joint income
up to the standard she enjoyed before remarriage; with, of
course, the corollary that if the income of her second husband
is larger than her income as a widow, the latter should revert
to the State.

What is the position of the children in such an instance
as I have assumed ? Clearly, they are entitled to such main¬
tenance during the period of immaturity as will give them the
best education by which they can profit. They ought to be
able to enter the battle of life without in any degree suffering
from the premature death of their father. But they cannot,
1 think, be regarded as having such a title in his estate as will


538 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

permit them, when the period of youth is over, to live by
owning. They have no right to what, for them, would be the
enjoyment of unearned increment. No children have the right
to demand from their parents that they be left in circumstance
which preclude them from exertion ; for that is, in fact, a
demand that they be left parasitic upon society. Society, may
of course, agree that, in the period of maturity, they enjoy
some small income which, while never sufficient to preclude
the necessity of work, is yet the means of increased comfort;
and I think myself that this is the method by which we shall
transform the present mode of inheritance into one more
capable of moral defence. But they will enjoy it only as
income and not as capital. Upon their death, it will lapse
again to the State. Their provision for their own children
must be a matter for their own exertions They ought not
to be permitted to provide unless they have made the
effort to provide We cannot regard an estate as a
permanent organism to which living people are functionless
appendages.

What again, of inheritance where, on the death of the
father, the children are already of mature age 5 They are
then either earning their own livelihood, m which case they
are receiving what society adjudges them to be worth, or
parasitic upon their father, as in the case oi an unmarried
daughter who serves as an ornament in the paiental home.

In the first case, I suggest, equity is amplv served by such
an addition to income as will repiesent a modicum of increased v
comfort, without ever being large enough to permit the children
to live by owning In the second, it is ground either, where
possible, for such an income as will, over a period, train the
daughter to maintain herselt, or, where that is impossible,
offer her reasonable comfort in hei own lifetime The case
for this view is the simple one put concisely by Mill in the
remark that " it is really no grievance to any man that for
the means of marrying and of supporting a family he has to
depend on his own exertions ” 1

I assume these principles to be just whatever the testa¬
mentary disposition of the father I assume, that if he dies
intestate the children have an equal right to that share in his

' Principles of Political Economy (td Ashlej) p 2*5


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 530

fortune herein implied; that, if he makes a will, he cannot
unreasonably exclude either wife or children from participating
in its benefits, if the latter are below legal age, though he may
so exclude them if they are already dependent upon their own
exertions. I admit, of course, that, short of revolution, it is
unlikely that we shall attempt their practical application at
a single stroke. More probably, we shall pass through a series
of progressive stages in the diminution of inheritance. We
shall increase the Death Duties and Inheritance Taxes. We
shall permit estates up to, say, five hundred pounds, to be left
undivided, and we shall compel the division of larger states
until, for instance, the proportion of a millionaire's estate
heritable by a single person may be only i per cent. I
speak only of direct inheritance by a wife or children; and
I am seeking to prevent the situation that has been well
described by Professor Clay. “ When a millionaire dies,” he
writes, 1 " his place is taken by another millionaire ; the object
of this type of proposal is to secure the dispersal of each
generation's accumulation at the end of the generation, to
enforce a continual redistribution of property, and to sub¬
stitute a large number of small fortunes, for a small number
of large fortunes. The rate of change would be set by the
scale adopted, and the steepness of the scale would depend
on the strength of society’s desire for equality.”

With collateral inheritance the problem is a different one.
A man may be presumed to have a direct and immediate
. interest in the economic welfare of his children , there is no
special reason to suppose that he has similar feelings, beyond
a general sense of good-will, about his cousins or nephews.
In the case, therefore, where there are no children at death,
and the man dies intestate, there is no ground that I can see
for allowing the estate to pass to indirect heirs It is not to
be assumed that the fortune was accumulated on their behalf ;
evidence that this was the case ought always to be the con¬
clusive evidence built upon the production of a will. There
is no right on the part of collaterals to expect to inherit;
except, indeed, in the case of entailed estates, such inheritance
is, in most cases, probably a surprise. On general principles,
therefore, I suggest that intestacy should, where the dead man

■ Property and Inheritance, p 29.

34


MO A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

his left no children, leave the State free to take the estate
to itself. It will be easy to make special provision for family
heirlooms and the like ; indeed, contingently upon their not
being sold, I see no reason why they should nor pass free of
legacy duty. What is mainly involved is the prevention of
the endowment by accident of persons whose protection
cannot, by the fact of intestacy, be assumed to have been
the purpose by which the deceased was moved.

The case, is, I think, slightly different where a will is
actually made. Here the motive of a legacy may be entirely
admirable. A man may desire to recognise service from a
friend, or to recompense the devotion of a relative. In
general, the principle upon which such cases should be decided
is, it may be suggested, twofold. In the case of simple gifts
which do not involve a serious addition to income, which do
not, that is to say, permit the legatee to live by owning, equity
is not outraged by leaving them untouched. They even have
a real value, quite apart from the sentiment they embody;
a teacher, for instance, who receives a legacy of two hundred
pounds may well find that the travel upon which she decides
to spend it makes all the difference to her life. In such cases
as this, interference by the State does not appear to be
necessary; for gifts of this kind do not involve a power
seriously to affect the life of the community. Nor, mutatis
mutandis, is there serious ground for interference where a
man endows a sister or niece who has shared his house with
him over a period of years. Here it is entirely reasonable
that he should recognise the devotion of such service by leaving
them a moderate income the capital of which shall pass to
the State upon her decease. But immediately large sums are
in question, the case for limitation is a final one, especially
when, as in Anglo-Saxon communities, it is not seldom the
case, the bequest is accompanied by limiting conditions which
seriously impair the legatee’s freedom of action. Bequests,
for instance, contingent upon marriage within a certain time,
cr upon the condition that the legatee does not change his
religion, ought always to be regarded as illegal on grounds
of public policy; for such a binding of the will of one who
lives to the purpose of one who is dead is a mental slavery
of a peculiarly obnoxious kind. In general, then, I urge that


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS Ml

all bequests, either to friends or collateral relatives, should
be void of such limiting conditions as I have noted, and should
never be of such amount as will make it unnecessary for the
legatee to live by his own exertions.

Much more complex questions are raised by what are
termed charitable bequests. To leave property for public uses
is, in general principle, a meritorious act; it is a good instance
of that quality called by Aristotle munificence. 1 But an
examination of the problem makes it appear less simple.
It is, for example, unjust that a man should found a place
of education and dictate in perpetuity what doctrines should
be taught there. It is, as Mill pointed out, 1 “ impossible
that anyone should know what doctrines will be fit to be
taught after he has been dead for centuries.'’ Clearly each
generation has its own ideas ; and while there is good reason
why a man who endows, for instance, a Roman Catholic
college in his own lifetime should not see it turned while he
lives into a Jewish seminary, there is no reason why, after
a suitable period, he should be able to control its developments.
The right, therefore, of each endowed institution to alter its
purpose, say once in fifty years, is, I think, clear; and if
protection were needed against wanton preversion, as in the
classic case of Serjeant’s Inn,3 it could easily be found by
requiring reference to a body like the Charity Commissioners
in England. There is, indeed, good ground for making it
proper for such a body to receive applications for the alter¬
native use of a bequest, or the waiving of any conditions
attached to it, immediately it has been paid over. The
testator, for instance, who founded a school of economics in
a great American university on condition that the virtues of
a protective tariff were taught there, will be felt by most to
have gone beyond the bounds of reasonableness. Experience
has shown that few institutions are strong enough to avoid
the desire to please their rich friends; American education
has notably suffered by its sacrifice of academic freedom to
the search for endowments It is only by insisting that

* Politics, li. <i, 1 263a 1 Principles of Political Economy (ed Ashley), aS

* The Times, April to, J90.1

* Cl. Upton Sinclair, The Goose-step, and the earlier warning of Mr J. A.
Hobson, The Cnsu of Liberalism, pp. 218 1 . See also my article ltesearch,
Foundations, and the Universities, m The Dangers of Obedience, and Other
Essays (1930).


582 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the power to endow shall at no point involve even the power
to make use of endowment specific and permanent that we
shall avoid not merely being ruled by the dead, but also the
effort to please the living at the expense of conviction.

But to permit bequests to be generally applied in this
fashion without some power of social control would be
disastrous. There is no limit to the eccentricity of testators.
The good lady who, three-quarters of a century ago, left the
whole of her considerable fortune to propagate the sacred
writings of Joanna Southcote only illustrates the imagination
of which a testator may be capable. I think, therefore, that
in all cases it should be necessary to establish that the purpose
endowed is rational and not contrary to a public policy inter¬
preted in a liberal way, and that in all cases where the bequest
amounts to a considerable sum, those endowed should be
required to submit schemes for its use to the body charged
with the supervision of charitable bequests, ^or, otherwise,
there will always be the danger, first, that the bequest will,
like the endowment of much English education, be quite
wantonly perverted,* and. secondly, that the money will be
frittered away upon objects that cannot be expected to secure
a reasonable return upon the outlay. The present habit, for
instance, of American millionaires of establishing by bequest
large general funds held absolutely at the discretion of a small
number of trustees confers upon the latter an immense power
and prestige of which the consequences might easily be sinister.
Society is entitled to protect itself against possibilities of this
kind. For either such funds are controlled by voluntary
trustees, in which case their supervision is almost inevitably
inadequate, or they are controlled by a permanent staff to
which there then accrues a power of interference which has
often, in modem experience, reached dangerous dimensions.
It is a power analogous to that of a proprietor of a great
newspaper. It makes them able, unless there are counter¬
vailing conditions, to control the actions, and the ideas, of
those who grow to rely upon them for assistance.

It is said that such safeguards as are here suggested will
diminish the incentive to enterprise, and that society will

■ Cf H. T. Wilkins and J, A. Fallows, English Educational Endowments,
passim.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 588

suffer from such diminution. That the motive to effort in
many is the desire to benefit thei children I do not deny ;
but it is a motive traversed by the social interest of safe¬
guarding the community against the growth of a class that
is not required to exert itself to live. I believe myself that,
outside a man’s children, the desire to endow others is not
a motive of real importance ; and of the former it still remains
true, as Mill remarked, 1 that " in a majority of instances the
good, not only of society, but of the individuals, would be
better consulted by the bequeathing to them a moderate rather
than a large provision.” Every child, as he said, has a
claim to a successful start in life, but it is socially disastrous
to render him independent of his own effort. Indeed, it may
in general be argued that, apart from the parental impulse
to safeguard one’s children, the real purpose of monetary
accumulation is power ; and I have already argued that such
power is, by its very nature, illegitimate, since it can so rarely
be referred to moral principle. And, surely, that would be
inevitably a better and a richer society in which no one could
assume that the means of life were at his disposal unless he
earned them. We should, thereby, avoid what poisons so
much of our effort to-day : the conspicuous waste of a few,
with the feverish exertion of many to emulate and copy that
conspicuous waste. To make the irrational luxury of a few the
source of social prestige is to multiply in society every avenue
of meaningless waste that it can exploit. We must set our
canons of conduct by other standards.

If this analysis be justified, we have a method of approach
to the problem of what should be the mechanisms to be used
in transforming a private into a public industry. Broadly
speaking, there are three avenues of transformation. It is
possible to confiscate, as in revolutionary Russia. It is possible
to compensate by purchasing the industry at a valuation, and
giving to the former owners either money or bonds in return.
It is possible, finally, to attempt partial compensation by taking
over the industry and paying to the owners a limited sum
either in the shape of a capital sum or of annuities. I shall
argue that the third of these methods is probably the best
at our disposal.


• Op. at., p, 224


584 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Confiscation, of course, makes a dramatic appeal to those
who are impatient of the present system. TTiey see the
injustices upon which it has been built. They cannot discover
any defence for those injustices ; and they realise that attempts
at defence—those made, for instance, by the owners of mining
royalties before the British Coal Commission in 1919 1 —are too
absurd to stand analysis. They point out that the United
States of America, in which private property is more firmly
entrenched than anywhere else in the world, suppressed the
liquor industry without a penny of compensation. They
insist that most landowners, for instance, in Great Britain,
have acquired their possessions without service of any obvious
kind. They do not think that the State can afford to assume
the burden which full compensation would involve. But the
answer to this view is, I think, a final answer. The first
result of so drastic a step as confiscation is the evolution of
ill-will. That ill-will has two consequences, as in Russia, of
a disastrous character. It leads to sabotage by the directive
ranks of an industry at a time when we can least afford it;
and, if it is confiscation on any large scale, it leads to an
attempt, which may be a successful attempt, at fascism. It
is, I think, a practical truth of the first importance that it
is always wise for statesmen to avoid the disappointment of
established expectations so long as they can be abridged to
reasonable dimensions. The community may pay a higher
price in money; but the gain in the good-will that accrues
is always, I think, more than compensation for that price.
And the amelioration of the transaction for many who would
otherwise find the task of adjustment hard is no light boon.
A case like that of prohibition in America is not really in point,
since there the industry was not continued but suppressed.
And, in any case, there is the precedent on the other side
of the payment to West Indian slave-owners in 1833. Morally,
doubtless, it would be most difficult to justify that payment;
but on the ground of a wise expediency it is difficult to
question it. I do not deny that in many cases the logical
ground for confiscation is irrefutable; but it is, I think, an
instance where to follow the strict path of logic is to fall into

* M mules of Evidence Evidence of the Duke of Northumberland, Lord
Dynevor, the Earl of Durham.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 585

grave error. For in politics the best means always the best
possible ; and prudence in the measurement of possibilities
is the first virtue in a statesman.

Compensation, on the other hand, is a relative item. No
community could afford to give a body of owners the price
they would demand for their possessions. That is clear for
two reasons. In the first place, to arrive at a true valuation
of most industries has become an almost impossible research.
They do not represent a genuine value. Many of them,
notably, for instance, the railways, have been built most waste-
fully ; 1 most of them are founded upon a basis of capitalisation
which represents no genuine assets of any kind. The Lan¬
cashire cotton mills, for example, changed hands in the boom
of 1919 at fantastic prices ; and their valuation, to be in any
way sane, would at least have to go back to 1913, and in many
cases farther. That artificial element, moreover, known as
good-will, is, as the history of liquor licences bears witness,
a morass from which a community will make its way out only
after the gravest difficulties. In most industries, national
purchase on any terms acceptable to the owners would saddle
the State with a burden of debt which would either mean low
wages to the producer or high prices to the consumer. And,
secondly, it would have the further danger of offering to the
owner property rights which would perpetuate rather than
diminish the existing differences between classes. Just as
the owners of the national debt are the most solidly entrenched
of all proprietors to-day, so the owners of bonds upon national
industries would be similarly entrenched. The thing for which
we are concerned is to obviate a situation where a class
of owners can remain parasitic upon the community. The
ordinary formula of compensation are powerless to help us
in this regard.

We are left, therefore, with the third of our three avenues
of transformation. That would consist, as I have already
briefly suggested, in the payment of annuities to the actual
holder of property rights in the given industry during his
lifetime ; with, of course, the corollary that those rights would
pass absolutely to the State at his death. The owner of
mineral royalties in coal, for instance, would continue to receive

1 L. C. Money, Tht Triumph of Na H o n a htuti on, pp. 10-13.


586 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

year by year what he was accustomed to receive in, say, a five-
year period before the transformation was accepted, but on
his death no further royalties would be paid. Similarly with
the owners of railway shares, or shipping shares, or bank
shares. We should then have the assurance that within a
measurable period the maintenance of functioniess ownership
would cease to be a charge upon any nationalised industry.
We should disappoint no reasonable expectations. We would
even make special provision for hard cases, like those of the
widow and the orphan. We could offer the alternative of a
lump sum in compensation to those who preferred it, though
in this case it would, I think, be necessary to pay a lower
rate of compensation than was represented by the annuity
system. The great point, as I see it, of this method is that
it enables us at once to meet established expectations, and at
the same time to see a definite period within which there will
be no class that lives only by reason of idle ownership. If
it be said that cases will occur in which the sudden death
of a proprietor will practically make the extinction of his
ownership amount to confiscation, the answer is, I think,
that provision would easily be made for making the minimum
term of the annuity at least ten years, though the limitation
would be important that the death before that period of the
proprietor could create rights for his children only. The
community can rarely afford not to be generous in its dealings
with property. It cannot, indeed, afford to mortgage the
prospects of prosperity to existing owners at any given time ;
but it need not seek to make the transition more difficult for
them than the total economic interests of the community
seem to require.

There is one argument usually urged against views such
as I have here advocated upon which a word is necessary.
If, it is said, men are prevented from leaving their property
to their children after death, the only result will be that they
will divide it in their own lifetime; and, thereby, the whole
purpose of this scheme will be vitiated at the outset. I believe
myself that the effects of donationes inter vivos can easily be
exaggerated. If the gift is small— a donation, for instance,
of a few hundred pounds—it hardly becomes relevant to the
problem we are discussing. If it is large, it will normally


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 5«7

be discovered and so reached by means of income-tax. It
is likely that such taxes will, where unearned income is con¬
cerned, be larger in the future than in the past, and the benefits
of such gifts will, accordingly, be lessened. They may also,
moreover, be met by an extension of the present law of
inheritance in England whereby donationes inter vivos are
taxable as part of the testator's estate, if they are made
within three years of his death. It would be possible, further,
for all inherited wealth to be placed under the control of
official trustees, in which case the testator would be able
to divert out of income only. Nor is that all. Anyone who
studies day by day the habits of wealthy men, as their wills
reveal those habits, will realise that they do not, in general,
desire to distribute their possessions in their lifetime. Their
acquisitive faculty is satisfied only by the contemplation of
their riches. To distribute them before death is to diminish
their power, and the vanity which is met by the exercise of
that power. That is notable, for example, in the case of
charitable bequests. Men endow institutions after their death
rather than during their lifetime, even if such endowment
involves the taxation of the benefit the institution will receive.
These habits will probably always govern those in whom the
instinct to accumulate is strong. Where, finally, an attempt
is made to evade the law by a contract of sale which is in
fact fictitious, the courts have already—for instance, under
the bankruptcy laws, and, in America, in the famous case of
In re Gould —shown themselves willing to go behind the
fictitious contact to the real substance it seeks to conceal. 1

IX

So far I have discussed economic institutions as though
each nation-State was a self-contained unit, independent of
world conditions. That is not, of course, the case. It has
become finally clear that international relations are the
governing factor to which all economic change must ultimately
be referred. Russia cannot exist as a communist State when
she is surrounded by capitalist communities. England cannot

1 Cf. Dai too. The hufueliiy of Incomes, pp. 315 1., for a dio c —to o of thi*
qtmttoe.


599 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

be prosperous except upon the condition that the countries
to which she is accustomed to export are prosperous also.
We are learning, moreover, that it is increasingly urgent to
establish international standards in certain spheres of economic
life. The English cotton industry cannot survive against
Indian and Japanese competitors if the wage-standards of
the latter are infinitely below those which obtain in Lanca¬
shire. The American worker in the steel industry of Pittsburg
cannot maintain his wage-standard unimpaired if cheap
labour from Poland and Ruthenia is to swamp his market.
The English miner is bound to be unemployed if his time-unit
of labour, upon which the setting cost of coal will depend,
is a seven-hour day, compared with a ten-hour day in German
mines. And wage-standards in general are bound to mean
little unless there exist (a) a general assurance of a continuous
and adequate food-supply for the world and (b) international
control of those basic raw materials upon which the industrial
life of any community depends. We need, also, the main¬
tenance of free and equal access to the means of communica¬
tion. For it is obvious that if Great Britain, for instance,
were able to impose discriminatory tolls upon foreign vessels
using the Suez Canal, or America upon foreign vessels using
the Panama route, equitable commercial relations would be
impossible. Clearly, further, the colonies of the world, and
especially the colonies mainly peopled by subject races, must
offer equal commercial privileges to all communities. For,
as Sir Arthur Salter has said, " a large proportion of the
world's wars have obviously resulted from the abuse of the
power of government in order to secure an undue commercial
economic profit by means of the political force and the military
force which it commands." 1

I shall deal in a subsequent chapter, though necessarily
in the most tentative way, with the institutions implied in
these hypotheses. Here it will be sufficient to point out the
broad considerations they involve. They mean that our
conception of the nature and functions of a League of Nations
must be at least as much economic as purely political. They
mean, further, that such a body as the International Labour
Office must grow into an organ of effective government, setting

* Allied Skipping Control, p. 268.


ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS 589

minimum standards of labour all over the world, and limiting,
by insistence upon those standards, the power of national
governments to be the final arbiter of their level of economic
civilisation. I do not think they necessarily imply a single
body, an executive or a legislature, seeking to deal with such
vast problems. Almost inevitably, as I shall seek to show,
each function will need its separate organ of authority and
control. We shall need a commission to deal with oil, a
commission to deal with coal, a commission to deal with the
wheat supply, and so on. Behind these conceptions there
obviously lie two general conceptions of the first importance.
We shall have to ration our resources in the interest of
international conservation, exactly as, during the war, the
allies were compelled to ration the use of essential commodities.
We shall, further, have to utilise the principle of priority.
First things first is an obvious necessity in international
economics. We cannot allow petrol to be used for pleasure-
cars if there is a lack of petrol for ocean-going cargo ships.
We shall have to develop, as the basis of social organisation,
a statistical service which will provide the fullest possible
knowledge of the production, the stocks, and the consumption
of each commodity of which the use has international signifi¬
cance. Admittedly, there is no region of life in which progress
is likely to be so slow as here; but, also, there is no region
in which the fact of progress will produce more assured
results.


X

Half a century has passed since Matthew Arnold warned
the English people to choose equality and abjure greed. 1
The warning has a universal significance. No nation can hope
to survive, no civilisation has ever survived, ip which there
is a permanent division of its people into rich and poor.
That has been finally impossible since the invention of printing
made access to knowledge universal, and the invention of
mechanical transport made a unified economic system inevit¬
able. We live under a system of which the moral assumptions
are rejected by the majority of those affected by them. It
• Mixed Essays, p. 49.


540 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

is unable to retain their loyalty or their affection. It arouses
in many a desire for its active overthrow which, given their
possession of political power, must lead either to concessions
or to revolution. The latter, as I have argued, is probably
incompatible with the maintenance of civilised life; for, if it
is attempted on any large scale, its destructiveness will reduce
the standard of living for vast populations to the level of the
Indian ryot. But if we are to avoid revolution, the con¬
cessions must be large enough to assure a world-order in
which the average man is assured of the opportunity to realise
his best self. That means, as Arnold said, equality; and
equality means, undoubtedly, great sacrifice on the part of
those who now enjoy the gain of living while bearing very
partially the cost of that gain. The system of institutions
here outlined is, in the economic sphere, an effort to depict
what those concessions will involve. They do not meet the
time-problem involved. Probably they will be most effective
as they grow gradually into acceptance; for new habits need
a period in which to realise their fruition. But it is important
to remember that the time-problem is not determined solely
by the classes in the possession of power. They are required
by the conditions of our age to offer proof that within the
categories of the existing order great improvements are possible.
They have to prove their good-will to the disinherited. Only
as that proof is rapid and substantial shall we be able to
maintain the best prospects of the human race.


CHAPTER TEN


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS
I

“ The importance of the judiciary in political construction,"
Henry Sidgwick has written, 1 “ is rather profound than
prominent. ^On the one hand, in popular discussion of forms
and changes of Government, the judicial organ often drops
out of sight; on the other hand, in determining a nation’s
rank in political civilisation, no test is more decisive than
the degree in which justice, as defined by the law, is actually
realised in its judicial administration, both as between one
private citizen and another, and as between private citizens
and members of the government.Certainly no man can
oVeriesBmate the importance of the mechanisms of justice.
There have been few greater avenues to freedom than that
beaten out by the writ of Habeas Corpus. There have been
few guarantees of equity more solid than that clause in the
Act of Settlement 1 which declares that the judges of England
shall hold office quam dtu se bene gesserint. What seem, on
the surface, insignificant procedural changes—as when a man
becomes entitled before trial to a copy of the indictment
upon which he is charged, or is able in the witness-box, to
testify upon his own behalf, or may appeal from the verdict
of a jury and the sentence of a judge to a body of legal
experts beyond them—these, for all their forbiddingly tech¬
nical character, are more nearly related to freedom than the
splendid sentences in which Rousseau depicts the conditions
of its attainment. Obviously, therefore, the men who are
to make justice in the courts., the way in which they are to
perform their function, the methods by which they are to

• Elements of Politics, p. 481.

■ 12 and 13 W. Ill, c. 2. in.

MI


548 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

be chosen, the terms upon which they shall hold power, these,
and their related problems, lie at the heart of political
philosophy. When we know how a nation-State dispenses
justice, we know with some exactness the moral character to
which it can pretend.

I have already argued that the independence of the
judiciary from the executive is essential to freedom. In that
tense, the doctrine of the separation of powers enshrines a
permanent truth. For it is obvious that if the executive
could shape judicial decision in accordance with its own
desires, it would be the unlimited master of the State. The
interpretation of the law must, therefore, be entrusted always
to a body of persons whose will cannot be bound by the will
of the executive. They must be able to call the executive
to account. They must be able to resolve disputes between
private citizens in such fashion as to make their decision an
equitable precedent for cases of a similar kind. They are
seeking, as judges, to evolve from the competing social
interests which appear before them a solution which maximises
the public advantage. They are making from a given and
particular instance a universal rule by which the conduct of
other men will be shaped and determined. It is clear that
the more independent their position, the more likely they will
be to realise the purpose of their institution.

What is the general nature of the proceedings which take
place in a court of law ? Its business is the resolution.of a
complaint. A states that he has been wronged by B, whether
A is a public or a private person. It is necessary, first, to
investigate the facts. Did B truly wrong A ? Does what B
has done truly constitute a wrong ? If it does, what is the
penalty for the wrong committed ? Certain difficulties in
this process must be borne ih mind. The court finds the law,
but in finding it the court also makes it. No statute has
ever been drawn that has covered or can cover the infinite
variety of acts of which human ingenuity is capable. Some
will be covered by a statute, as when a man forges banknotes
and meets the penalty involved. Others may be included
by what the court will deem the intent of the legislature, as
when the court holds that a particular statute was intended
to cover a class of cases not hitherto included within its ambit.


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS MS

Others, again, will be settled by the judge evolving a principle
to meet them from what he deems the implications of social
experience. Others, once more, will be settled by reference
to a judicial precedent which was, in its day, an induction
from what an earlier judge believed to be the lesson of an
earlier experience, his view being, for sufficient or insufficient
reasons, held to control the actual case in dispute. Each case
may be a species of a larger genus ; but th? observer will note
always its uniqueness, and that effort is required to bring
it within the ambit of the factors by which decision is ccm-
trolled.

The fact of that effort is of the first importance. The
judge who makes it moves one way, rather than another way.
What are the sources of information by which his motion
is decided ? Certainly, they are larger than most will be con¬
cerned to admit. Statute and precedent are relatively simple;
but when, for instance, the Supreme Court of the United
States held that a New York statute prohibiting night work
m bakeries was unconstitutional under the Fourteenth Amend¬
ment whatever moved their effort, it was neither statute nor
precedent. 1 So, also, when the House of Lords handed down
the Osborne judgment, 1 the moving cause of their decision
lay outside the simpler sources of law; what the majority
of them said, a body of trade unionists trained in the law
would not have said. When, again, the Conseil d'Etai, in the
Pluchard case,3 held that the French State was responsible
for the negligence of its agents, it was making new law, outside
of statute and of precedent. Whereby was it so moved ?
There are judges whose sentences in sexual cases are notoriously
light, there are others who, in similar cases, inflict punishment
of the utmost rigour. There are benches of magistrates in
England where conviction for violation of the Factory Acts
is pumshtd severely ; there are others where the penalty
inflicted is almost always nominal. What have we to take
into account in our effort to grasp the working of the judicial
mind?


■ 198 u s. 43.

> Ste the verbatim report published by the National Union of Railwaymen
111 1910.

3 Vt »i \pra.


544 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

The only possible answer, I think, is that the judge will
decide, where he is not, as in the cases I have noted, obviously
bound down by statute and precedent, by his conception
of what ought to be the law; and that conception will be
determined by what William James called his sense of the
" total push and pressure of the cosmos." To that test all
fesufiPKefore him are ultimately brought. " We may try,"
writes a distinguished American judge,’ “ to see things as'
objectively as we please. None the less, we can never see
them with any eyes except our own.’! That is the answer
to Mr. Justice Holmes’ plea that law and morals live their
lives upon different planes. For as soon as the judge is free
to make law, the guide he follows, the test he applies, is the
experience of life that he knows. No one can read the summing
up of Braxfield in the trial of Muir for high treason without
seeing that his interpretation of life was the simple one that
all political reformers are a priori guilty of high treason. 1
The decision of the House of Lords in the Taff Vale Case i
was an obvious decision from men who had no experience
of the conditions under which tracie unions must work. The
majority of the Supreme Court in Coppage v. Kansas * had
never been driven to learn why the open shop is the controlling
factor in low standards of labour. Law, therefore, is always
made in terms of what life has meant to those who make the
law. Nor is that conclusion invalidated by the fact that
great judges, like Mr. Justice Holmes, are able in rare instances
to transcend the limitations of experience and see the issue
in a wider perspective.

Obviously, therefore, of law as made by the courts this
must first be said, that it can never be a final source of State-
decision. It represents only what its makers represent. It
is limited by the narrow experience the average judge will
possess, the certainty, in the field especially of industrial
relations, that he will find it usually difficult, and often
impossible, to grasp a point of view usually alien from what
he himself has known. The larger, therefore, the field in which


1 B N Caidozo, The Nature oj the Judicial Procete, p, 13

* Ret v hfrnr, S.T util *37-382.

J Taff Vale Ry. Co v. A S R S {1901), A.C. 426.

* 236 V S 27


545


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS

the legislative assembly can lay down rules of general guidance,
the more will the courts be able to respond to the popular
sense of justice. And no legislative assembly ought ever to
be hampered by so complex a constitutional procedure as that
which makes the Supreme Court of the United States the
effective master of social change. Nothing is more likely to
engender disrespect for law than the perception that experi¬
ments which have behind them a vast body of experience,
and have proved acceptable to a legislative assembly, can be
prohibited by a court on purely technical grounds which will
almost always be found to conceal a dislike for the substance
of the experiment prohibited. No constitution ever enacts
a static philosophy; and those responsible for its judicial
interpretation must always be careful lest they mistake their
private prejudice for eternal truth.

A position of this kind gives, of course, special importance
to two aspects of the judiciary. It makes the method of
choosing judges one to be analysed with special care, and
it makes the mechanism for the discovery of necessary legal
change one that cannot be discrete and casual, but organised
and continuous in character. I take first, the question of
judicial appointment Practically, we have a choice between
two methods—election and nomination. The former is, the
federal judiciary apart, the typical method in the United
States , the latter is the English system, practically all judicial
appointments being under the control of the Lord Chancellor.
In France, Italy and Germany all judges are appointed by
nomination ; but in Switzerland the fourteen members of the
Federal Court are elected by the legislative assembly. This
method is followed by two American States; in six, the
governor of the State recommends, and either the Council or
the Senate coftfirms In the remaining States, popular
election for a term of years which may, as in New York, be
as many as seventeen, is the rule

Of all methods of appointment, that of election by the
people at large is without exception the worst. For either
the candidate is chosen for purely political reasons, which is
the last ground upon which he should be made a judge, or
those who vote for him are not in a position to weigh the
qualities upon which his choice ought to depend. An electorate

35


546 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

which had to choose, say, between Eldon and Erskine for
judicial position would almost certainly choose the latter;
and, almost certainly also. Lord Eldon had most of the
equipment of a great judge, and Erskine none. Most of the
great judges in recent English history, men like Blackburn,
Bowen, Watson, Macnaghten, were entirely unknown to the
public outside. The latter judges legal eminence largely by
its political relations, on the one hand, and its position in
the causes calibres of crime upon the other. Candidates for
judicial office cannot possibly put before an electorate either
a programme, on the one hand, or a personal plea, on the
other, which can have the slightest relevance to their future
conduct. American experience, moreover, is, I think, clear,
that the method of election hinders the independence of the
judges, and, in general, attracts an inferior type of lawyer
to the bench. That is particularly the case when the period
of election is for only a short term of years. The position
may perhaps best be put by saying that if the election is for
life, probably the wrong type of man will be chosen, while
if it is for a short term, the judge's conduct in office will be
determined, at least partly, by considerations which should
never be in his mind. The desire to court popularity is a
temptation few will be able to resist when their re-election
is dependent on their popularity. And, in America, it is
notable that the highest tradition in judicial affairs among the
States belongs to Massachusetts, where appointment is by
nomination; while, in general, the federal judges, who are
nominated by the President with the consent of the Senate,
enjoy far greater esteem among the public than the judges
of State courts. The judicial office, in brief, requires a
technique competence for which is not a matter upon which
public judgment is of much value. And dependence upon
public judgment introduces elements into the decision which
are better absent.

Election by the legislature is less open to objection ; but
it is still, I think, an undesirable form of appointment. For,
once more, if the choice is to be made on grounds of legal
fitness, the average member of a legislature has no special
qualifications for judging, and he is therefore likely to be
swayed by political considerations irrelevant to the problem.


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS 547

It is notable, for instance, that Republican Presidents of the
United States have usually submitted Republican names to
the Senate; and the one case, in recent years, where the
Senate has stoutly fought appointment was a case in which
the lawyer nominated had rendered distinguished service to
organised labour . 1 The Swiss system of legislative election,
on the other hand, has undoubtedly worked well; though
it has been assisted therein, first, by the comparatively small
sire of the legislature, and secondly, by the fact that political
appointments are virtually excluded from consideration by
statute. The inability, moreover, of the court to declare
federal legislation unconstitutional operates to diminish the
likelihood that there will be deep antagonism to any candidate
of real legal eminence. The temper of Swiss politics, indeed,
makes legislative intervention in the judicial sphere much less
noxious than it would be elsewhere.

For consider what would occur in the House of Commons,
for instance, if the members were entitled to elect the
judiciary’. Obviously, there would have to be a small com¬
mittee to sift the nominations made, and to report thereon
to the House. If the report of the committee were accepted,
and its nomination adopted as a matter of course, it would
be possible, on one condition, to hope for reasonable results.
That condition is that no member of the House itself should
be eligible for appointment. But such a condition imme¬
diately excludes men of great eminence from the field of
selection; and it practically compels a lawyer to choose
between a legal and a political career in a most unfair way.
If, on the other hand, the House rejected the report, the
position would be an intolerable one. \ sensitive person
might well shrink from the ordeal involved. And even with
the committee, the opportunities of wire-pulling, the attempt
to gain illegitimate influence, the use of political prestige,
would do much to lower the quality of appointment. And
in any period of acute partisan temper, it would be difficult
to suppress the tendency to make the judicial office the reward
of party loyalty.

We are therefore thrown back upon nomination as the

' The case of Mr Justice Brandeis See the extraordinary volume of
evidence before the Senate Judiciary Committee on his nomination in 1916.


548 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

best available method of choice. But simple nomination, as
in England by the Lord Chancellor, is not, I think, an adequate
system. It leaves the door too wide open for measurement
of fitness in terms of political eminence rather than judicial
quality. It is notorious that Lord Halsbury used his power
of nomination to elevate members of his own party, whenever
possible. The position of the Lord Chancellor as a party
leader makes him peculiarly liable to the pressure of men
who feel that a place on the bench is a fair reward for party
service ; and there have been notorious cases in which a Lord
Chancellor has not been strong enough to resist that pressure.
It is, then, necessary to surround the power of nomination
with safeguards. I do not myself think that a legislative
committee is a satisfactory channel for that end. In America,
it has always proved a means of reserving appointments to
the party in office ; and, even if the English judicial tradition
is different, more satisfactory ways lie open to us. It would
be possible, for instance, to make appointments on the
recommendation of the Minister of Justice, with the consent
of a standing committee of the judges, which would represent
all sides of their work. They, after all, know the bar as few
others can know it. They are not likely to be moved by
political prestige. They are in the best possible position to
assess the probable fitness of the men likely to prove successful
on the bench. They would represent the best guarantee we
could have that appointments were made only with the needs
of the office in view.

I speak here, of first appointments. The question of
promotion raises further problems. In most judicial systems,
it is necessary to have a graded series of courts, ending in a
supreme tribunal of which the decisions can only be reversed
by the legislature. In England, appointments to these
superior posts are technically made by the Prime Minister,
though the Lord Chancellor is usually the effective source of
choice ; 1 in America they are made by the President with the
concurrence of the Senate. No one can study the history of
appointments to these higher posts, especially in the United
States, without the sense that there is too little relation
between them and membership of the inferior courts. A man

1 Report of the Machinery of Government Committee. p t>6. On the character
ot judicial appointment in England see my paper in the Michigan Law Review
for 1916-7, where a statistical analysis of the last hundred years is given.


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS M9

who accepts a federal district judgeship in America practically
excludes himself from the Supreme Court, and, in England,
men distinguished in politics who decide upon a judicial career,
usually go straight to such a position as the Mastership of the
Rolls, or the House of Lords. To gain a reputation in America
for a liberalising attitude in economic matters, is for a judge
to rule himself out when promotion is in question. That
has not been the case in England, but it is notable that the
office of Chief Justice has, for almost half a century, been
the reward of political service. Yet it is, I believe, not less
important in the judiciary than elsewhere that the man whose
services in a lower court are really distinguished should have
a reasonable assurance of promotion in recognition of them.
We do not want, of course, promotion on the ground of
seniority; but we do not want an able judge to feel that
he will not be passed over for some clever political hack who
has known how to press his claims at the right time. I suggest,
therefore, that when a vacancy occurs in a superior court
(as in the Court of Appeal or the House of Lords in England)
the committee of the judges should present to the responsible
minister (whom I have here called the Minister of Justice)
a list of, say, three names from the judges of the lower court
from whom he shall select one for promotion. The danger
that a political protege will be too rapidly advanced can easily
be met by requiring that no judge shall be advanced who has
not already served for five years in his present position; and
the danger of merely promoting senior judges could be met
by the proviso that no judge who is less than five years from
the age of retirement shall be recommended for promotion.

Once appointed, a judge should obviously hold office during
good behaviour; otherwise he cannot acquire that habit of
independence inherent in his position. Good behaviour is
sufficiently defined by the classic method of requiring a vote
of the legislative assembly for his removal, and since we are
visualising single-chamber government, such a vote, to be
effective, should be supported by two-thirds of the members
who take part in the division. That type of stringency is
important, for a case in which high feeling is aroused in the
public, or where the judge, with the best intentions, makes
some observation which creates deep party resentment, might


550 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

easily, in the absence of proper safeguards, either actually
involve his removal or so damage his prestige as to make his
continuance on the bench a matter of difficulty. There should,
further, be a retiring age which might reasonably be fixed at
seventy years. There are, of course, judges who, even at
eighty, are capable of doing magnificent work. But, in
general, after seventy, the average judge is less and less able
to meet demands, particularly those of a new era, made upon
him. “ Judges, ’ Mr. justice Holmes has written, 1 “ com¬
monly are elder'y men, and are mere likely to hate at sight
any analysis to which they are not accustomed, and which
disturbs repose of mind, than to fall in love with novelties.”
That perception j- important because, as I have already
argued, it is the judge’ 1 ' expedience of life that determines
his attitude to tr.e problems of law Most people s philosophy,
both in its conscious assumptions and its much more significant
unconscious prejudices, is fairly fixed at forty; and thirty
years later the average judge will belong to a generation of
which the general outlook is very different from his own.
Nor is that all A judge, I imagine, 1-., vn the first five years
of his service, burly convinced that most of Ins opinions are
wrong in critical cases, in the -e>__md five years he will be
equally convinced that they are light, and afterwards he will
bear himself with »crtp'\ wb-'her thev be right cr wrong.
When that serenity become- .ur^ial, it is time for him to
retire.


II

That the judicial function requires removal from the
sphere of exec i*:\ ralluencc I pointed out in an earlier
chapter. But t..„t removal needs to be discussed in the light
of certain mechanisms and problems which are integral to its
understanding What, essentially, is here in issue is the
problem of making the executive subordinate to the judiciary
in all points which concern the interpretation of the law,
where the judgment of the executive is questioned by a private
citizen. I have already dealt partly with this question. I
have argued that the State must be liable for the acts of its

1 Collected Papers, j> 2$o


551


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS

agents as an ordinary citizen is liable. I have argued, also,
that even where, for purposes of convenience, judicial powers
are conferred upon a department, the methods it utilises, the
procedure it employs, shall be open to scrutiny by the courts,
with the power to upset a decision which, in their view, has
not been reached by adequate inquiry; the latter having
reference, not to the finding of facts, but to the mode of
investigating them. Unless this type of judicial supremacy
is maintained, the executive will always have an overwhelming
advantage against the private citizen ; and the latter will be
unable to invoke his rights against those who shelter them¬
selves beneath the cloak of official acts. 1

But there are certain other safeguards that are important.
It follows, I think, from the method of judicial appointment
here urged, that no member of a government in office should
be appointed to a judicial position. Such appointment
diminishes, I think, the chance that he can bring a really
judicial mind to the range of legal questions in which the
interests of the executive are involved. A man, for instance,
who as Attorney-General, was responsible for such a statute
as the Restoration of Ireland Act of 1920 1 is quite definitely
not a suitable person to decide cases like Ex parte O'Brien ;
for there surrounds his mind a penumbra fatal to genuinely
disinterested opinion. I would even go further and urge that
persons who have acted as legal officers of the executive power
ought to be disqualified from judicial office for a period of
seven years. A man, for example, who, as Attorney-General
of the United States, is responsible for the incredible prosecu¬
tions under the Espionage Act, cannot really recover in a short
period that judicial frame of mind which will enable him to
decide them reasonably upon the bend The converse is, I
think, also true. Once a man has attained judicial tank, he
ought to be ineligible for political office. If candidates for
the Presidency of the United States can be selected from the
Supreme Court, a prize so glittering will not fail to sway
the minds of some judges at least who sit there ; and their
decisions will follow the path to their ambition. If an English
judge may hope to be Lord Chancellor, he can hardly avoid,

’ Cf. my Foundations of Sovereignty , chap 111

1 10 and u G«o. V. c. 31.


559 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

in all cases where the authority of the executive is in question,
remembering that ministration to its comfort will not be
unlikely to bear its fruit. A judge may do his utmost to
embody the pure spirit of reason; but that is not less cause
for us, on our side, doing what we can to aid him in the
process. A self-denying ordinance of this kind is here an
assistance we may not neglect.

It follows from this that executive and judiciary must, so
far as possible, abstain from mutual criticism of each other's
work. There will, undoubtedly, be occasions when this is
impossible ; cases inevitably arise in which criticism is implied
in the task of judgment. But two instances may be selected
to illustrate what I mean. In O'Dwyer v. Nair it became
necessary to review the riot at Amritsar in 1919.' In his
summing-up to the jury, Mr. Justice McCardie, speaking, as
he said, " with full deliberation,” expressed the opinion that
General Dyer, who had suppressed the outbreak, was unjustly
condemned by the government for the part he had played.
That was a view which, however important, was not strictly
relevant to the case; and since the government had refused
the evidence upon which General Dyer, rightly or wrongly,
was condemned, he was not in possession of all the facts when
he uttered his criticism of the executive. No one can doubt
that he acted from the highest motives ; but no one, I think,
can doubt also that a judge ought not to advise a jury, and
through the jury the public at large, upon highly controversial
questions of a non-legal character upon which the jury itself
has to make no finding.* His actions led to vehement dis¬
cussion in the House of Commons, and a motion was actually
tabled for his removal from the bench. Most people will feel
that the remedy proposed was unduly drastic, since the fault
was, at the worst, an error of judgment made in all sincerity ;
but most people, also, will feel that such errors are bound to
result in the effects to which Mr. Justice McCardie's action
gave rise unless the judge is almost over-careful not to speak
on any issue which does not fall directly and obviously within

1 See the daily reports in the London Times, May i-June 6, 1914.

1 For Mr. Justice McCardie's summing-up see The Times, June 6, 1934;
for criticism in Parliament, see Parliamentary Debates, June 9. 1924 ; on the
trial generally, see the London Nation, June 13, 1924.


55*


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS

his province, So, also, when, in United States v. O’Hara, a
member of the Socialist Party was on trial, it was a mis ta ken
conception of the judge's function for the court to say that
the Socialist Party, if it held the defendant's views, had " no
place on the American soil either in times of war or times of
peace.” 1 That is a direct incitement to the executive,
especially in a period of inflamed opinion, to use the courts
generally, and one judge in particular, to silence opinion which
it happens to find inconvenient.

Conversely, it is important for the judge that he should
not be hampered in the performance of his duties by attack
on the part of the executive power. Much of this danger is
obviated by making his position secure against wanton dis¬
missal ; no judge, either in England or America, has been
dismissed for two centuries and more in the manner of Sir
Edward Coke. J But an Attorney-General of the United States
has complained that the construction placed by certain courts
on a clause in the Espionage Act of 1917 was so narrow
that " most of the teeth which we tried to put in were taken
out ”—a remark that is little less than the assertion that some
judges destroyed the effectiveness of urgent legislation; and
the criticism was the more lamentable in that it was easy to
discover to what judges he was referring. Even more remark¬
able was the attack of Daniel Webster, when Secretary of
State, upon the opinion of the court (now generally held to
be mistaken) in The People v. McLeod. 3 He denounced it,
writes a distinguished lawyer, " probably in stronger terms
than have been used in modem times by any responsible
officer in regard to any judicial decision.” 4 The denunciation
was quite unnecessary; and the way in which the judge is
hampered by an attack of that kind is too obvious to need
comment.

A range of questions is relevant in this connection where
the judicial function essentially consists in critical inquiiy
into government acts. Cases occur in which, for a variety of
reasons, endeavour is made to control the situation by execu-

• Nelles, Esptonagt Act Casts, p. 47.

• Holdsworth, Hist, of English Law, voi. v. p. 440.

» 1841. N.Y. Hill, 377.

• W. H. Moore, Act of Stott in English Lam, p. 44.


554 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

tive fiat, to the exclusion of judiciary inquiry. In some of
those cases, as, for instance, whether a given State is at war
with another State, it is obvious that the opinion of the
executive authority must be final. 1 The same is broadly true
where problems arise in relation to the recognition of a de facto
government, though here it is probable that, in the future,
recognition will be dependent upon the act of an international
authority rather than of a temporary executive, since the
problems involved, say in Mexico, where one set of powers
do not recognise a government recognised by other powers
gives rise to impossible situations. I have already discussed
the problem of tortious acts committed in the name of the
State. Anyone who remembers the purely historical reasons
which govern the absence of liability will recognise the need
here for change. The impossibility of the present position
can best be illustrated by saying that while in England an
action for trespass lies against the servants of the Crown, an
action for ejectment will not lie, 1 though ejectment is the clear
purpose of an action for trespass.

The real nature of the problems involved, however, appears
in the relation of the courts to a situation of martial law. No
one can doubt that there is a point in the suppression of
disorder where it becomes a matter of duty on the part of the
executive to take all necessary means for its suppression, and
those means will involve the use of military force and the
punitive measures such a force will adopt to secure the end for
which it is used. How far ought the fact of martial law to
operate so as to exclude the courts from inquiry into the
offence alleged, and punishment where it is proved ? With the
technical nature of martial law I am not here concerned. The
problems, from the standpoint of general political theory, with
which the judicial authority is concerned are two in number.
How far, firstly, can the courts allow their jurisdiction to be
ousted on the ground of military necessity ? Hew far,
secondly, can tne court accept as a defence to an action the
plea that the action taken was done in the course of his duty
by a person acting as a martial law official ?

The answer to the first question can, I conceive, only be

1 Cf. Tie Pelican. I. Edwards, Adm. Reports, App. D.

1 Cawthorn v. Campbell (1790), 1 Anitr. 205.


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS 555

given in a general way. It is that so far as is humanly
practicable it is the business of the judge to insist that no
jurisdiction shall supersede his jurisdiction, that so long as
his court can effectively function, no other courts can be
permitted to function. For unless there is the utmost rigour
in the maintenance of this view, it is certain, on the experience
of history that there will be excesses in the administration of
martial law, The temper I am urging as essential was, of
course, nobly demonstrated by Chief Justice Fitzgibbon in the
Case oj Wolje Tone . 1 * 3 Unless it is established that a military
tribunal can punish, unless the civil courts literally cannot
sit, abuses of authority are inevitable. We have ample
experience of such abuses. Anyone who reads the evidence
in, for example, Ex parte M ilhgan* or R. v. Nelson and Brand 3
will be able to realise the way in which, as counsel for the
petitioner put it in the Milligan case, " the executive depart¬
ment of government . . . becomes absolute master of our
liberties and lives.” « I do not doubt that in the suppression,
for instance, of rebellion it is necessary to punish both
instantly and severely. But I think all the evidence goes to
show the necessity of certain restrictions on the executive
power, in a period of disorder, if the paramountcy of civil
justice is to be maintained, (i) All trials under martial law,
except for trivial offences, should be carried out by civil
officials nominated by the judges for this purpose from a
standing panel of banisters. (2) These tribunals should not
have the power to inflict sentences of more than one year’s
imprisonment. (3) All trials for serious offences, involving
a longer sentence than one year, should be held in the ordinary
civil courts, and the accused should have the right to counsel.
At these trials the ordinary procedure of criminal justice
should obtain. (4) No person, when arrested under martial
law, should be detained for more than twenty-four hours
without a charge being formulated against him ; nor should
he be detained for longer than one week without being brought
to trial. Where the circumstances necessitate a remand, the

1 Ut supra.

1 (1866) 4 Wall 2

3 See separate reports by Cockbum.

« Loc. cit . p. 22


586 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

accused should be entitled to such treatment as will afford
him full facilities to prepare his defence. (5) Every martial-
law officer who proposes to create a new offence should be
compelled to secure the assent to his proposal of two of the
civil officials acting in the judicial capacity described above.
In the event of their objection, his proposal should not become
operative until the central government has confirmed it.

These may seem drastic proposals ; but their justification
will be apparent to anyone who considers the alternative to
them. I take as an example a series of occurrences in the
suppression of disorder in the Punjab during April and May
of 1919.* Two men were arrested in Amritsar prior to the
declaration of martial law and deported to an extreme part of
the province ; on the declaration of martial law, they were
brought back to Lahore, which was in the martial-law area,
and tried and sentenced by a special martial-law tribunal. 1
A number of pleaders were arrested at Gudaspur, laken, under
revolting conditions, to Lahore, and confined there in the
common jail for a period lasting up to a month. They were
then released, without any charges having been preferred
against them ; on the evidence, indeed, it seems difficult to
know of what they could have been charged. In the trial,
again, of Harkishan Lai and others, for treason and waging
war against the King-Emperor at Lahore, the accused were not
allowed to have a lawyer of their own choosing ; a full record
of the case was not taken ; and the notes taken by counsel for
the defence had to be surrendered by him to the court at the
end of each day, Under such conditions it is difficult to see
how any adequate defence was possible. A punitive detach¬
ment, under a Colonel Jacob, flogged a man who refused,
seemingly with some truculence, to say who had destroyed
some telegraph wires; it later appeared that the man, as he
had asserted, had in fact no knowledge of who had destroyed
them. In Lahore—to take a final instance—the military officer
in command prohibited more than a few persons to congregate
in the streets ; a group did so congregate, and its chief members

< I am not, it mu 3 t be noted, discussing whether inarm! law was or was
not necessary at this time and place. My criticism is limited to a series of
occurrences which are the inevitable result of military administration
unchecked by full judicial control,

* The case of Kitchlew and Satya Pal


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS


557


were flogged. On investigation, it tamed out that the group
was a wedding-party whose purpose was as innocent as that
of any persons engaged in a similar function. 1 I do not, of
course, suggest that there is anything especially cruel or
remarkable in these instances. Whether the instance selected
is repression in Ireland, in Bavaria, in Hungary or Russia,
what always emerges is that once the operation of justice is
transferred from the ordinary courts and handed over to the
executive, excesses of this kind are bound to occur. It is,
therefore, urgent so to organise the power of the courts that
only with the disappearance of the power to govern do they
abdicate from their functions and their procedure.

The second problem arises in relation to pleas of defence
against actions brought against officials for their conduct in a
period of martial law. Here, at least, we have, under the
common law, one invaluable safeguard. ■ It is established that
no act is justified that cannot be proved to have been necessary
to the maintenance of order. " It is the emergency that
creates the right," says an American court,’ “ and the
emergency must be shown to exist before the taking can be
justified.” No executive officer, that is to say, can urge in
defence of his action that he thought it necessary ; he must
prove to the satisfaction of the court that not he only, but an
average jury, can be made to agree with his judgment. It
will, I think, be admitted that no other satisfactory criterion
is available. Granted all that can be said of the difficulties of
judging in cold blood responsibilities that have to be taken in
hot blood, those difficulties constitute ground for mitigation
of penalty, if the judgment goes against the defendant, and
not ground for exonerating him from conviction. The
position is not dissimilar from that of a man who commits
murder under grave provocation; the murder then becomes
intelligible, but it is none the less murder. The provocation
is ground for a mitigation of penalty ; it is not a ground for
acquittal. In every case, therefore, the business of the judge
is to measure with scrupulous care the relation between the


■ These cases, and many others, will be found in the evidence Riven
before the Hunter Commission in 1919. and are supplemented in the evidence
given in the case of O’Dwyer v. Ntir in the spring of 1934
» Mitchell v. Harmony, «3 Howard, 115, 134.


658 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

act done and the situation it was considered by the doer
important to resolve. And that doer is not entitled to escape
the control of the courts because he is acting in a special
executive position.

This, of course, raises the question of Acts of Indemnity.
In the modem State, the occurrence of disturbance has,
practically invariably, been followed by legislation exonerating
those concerned in its suppression from any responsibilities
they might otherwise have incurred. Nor is that true merely
of disturbance ; for the arrest in and deportation from England
of persons suspected of complicity with crime in Ireland was
also followed by an Act of Indemnity. 1 The broad result of
such a process is to prevent all judicial inquiry into acts which
might, conceivably, have serious consequences for their per¬
petrators. It is to leave those who believe themselves to have
suffered unjustly from such acts dependent upon the charity
of the executive power. It enables the executive fairly
effectively to protect itself from any ample inquiry into its
conduct such as might follow from a series of cases in which
that conduct was found to be unjustified by the circumstances
it was intended to meet. All cases where martial law is
applied are cases where judicial inquiry is peculiarly necessary;
and Acts of Indemnity almost always make judicial inquiry
difficult and unsatisfactory. If, then, at a point in the
relationships between executive and judiciary the work of
the latter is to be properly performed, the ordinary Act of
Indemnity seems to me a most improper form of procedure.
It should always be open, in such cases, for the citizen who
believes himself to be wronged to prove his right to remedy
in the oourts within a suitable time. There is, I think, ground
for insisting that such wrongs shall be proved within a short
period after they are said to have occurred, that the writ, for
instance, shall be sought within not more than one month ;
an Act of Indemnity might then be reasonable. But an
executive which can always be sure of legislative protection
< will be careless of judicial scrutiny because it knows that it
has the means of evading judicial scrutiny ; and that evasion

' T& deportations were declared illegal in Ex parte O'Brien (1913),
■ 2 K.P. 61; the Act of Indemnity is 13 and 14 George V, c. 12. See the
debates in Parliament (fifth series), vol. 164. pp. 839, 1662 f., 1703 ff.


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS 550

will influence its agents at the circumference even more than
at the centre. All Acts of Indemnity, therefore, ought to
require a special majority for their passage by the standing
orders of the legislative assembly ; and that majority ought to
be at least two thirds of its membership.

Ill

Every legal system involves, in its working, an unpro¬
fessional element, of which the jury is the most notable
example. The right, indeed, to tried by jury has been, at one
period or another, the object of most political systems as a
safeguard against the bias of a judiciary often at the mercy of
the executive power. The jury was then at least a partial
guarantee that the opinion of a fairly disinterested body of
persons was taken into account. Anyone who reads, for
example, the records of the treason trials of 1794 1 can see
that without the presence of the jury the results of those
cases would have been built simply on the equation of liberal
opinion with high treason. Anyone, further, who studies the
habits of the English judges in criminal cases half a century
ago will realise that, whatever the presumptions of English
justice, the judge did in fact assume that the persons charged
were probably guilty; and the jury served the invaluable
purpose of being a means of appeal from the fixed prejudices
on the bench. On the other hand, of course, the jury system
has grave disadvantages. It will tend, in all cases where
political opinion is involved, simply to reflect the prev ailing
current of opinion about it. Juries in the Southern States of
America, for Trist&nce; are notably prejudiced when cases
involving a negro are concerned ; and an average London jury
looks upon a libel very differently when the defendant is a
conservative magnate from its views when he is a radical
trade unionist. In ail cases that are not definitely criminal
cases, the average juryman lives in a world of which the
standards of opinion are rarely investigated by him. He lives
by the views of his neighbour, and he applies those views,
outside that field controlled by the judge, to facts upon which

1 A good summary of them is in P. A. Brown, Tht French Revolution and
English History.


MO A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

he has to pass. To read, for instance, the charge of Cockbum,
C. J., to the grand jury in R. v. Nelson and Brand * would make
it impossible to understand why no true bill was found except
upon the assumption that most Englishmen felt, like Carlyle,
that whatever put down the Jamaica rebellion was good,
irrespective of the manner of doing it.

Nevertheless, I believe that the jury system is an important
safeguard in all criminal cases, and in such civil trials as involve
a personal, as distinct from an impersonal interest; a libel,
for instance, as distinct from a breach of contract. It is
important that jury service, like the franchise, should involve
no property qualification ; if it is to be an average mind, that
is the only way to make it genuinely average. It is important,
also, that the juror should be adequately remunerated. Any¬
one who has sat on a jury for any length of time will have
realised that, after a period, what concerns the jurymen is
neither the evidence nor the result of the case, but the very
different question of when they will be able to return to their
usual routine. That results in the introduction of curiously
irrelevant matters into their mind. They become prejudiced
in favour of the counsel who is brief, without much regard to
the importance of what he is saying. Their minds wander
from the matter in hand to reflection upon whether the judge
will begin early or late after the week-end adjournment.
Difficulties of this kind have suggested to some the need for a
standing panel of jurors who shall find a career in that service.
But the whole point of the system would be lost by such a
method. For what we require in these cases is not a specially
trained opinion, but the opinion of the man in the street; and
that is, on the whole, not ineffectively reached under the
present regime, so long as the right to appeal from its decisions,
especially in criminal cases, is retained. 1

The position is, however, different where the problem
concerned in a case is hardly personal, but, broadly speaking,

' tec hnica l in character. It may be a matter of trade practice
in a matter 61 contract, of trade union customs, of violation of
a trade-mark, of the law of agency, and so forth. In technical

■ Vl suftrm.

* I do not, of course, mean (hat the prosecution should have a right of
appeal in criminal cases.


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS Ml

issues of this kind a jury, I suggest, is out of place unless it is
a special kind constructed to suit the problem in dispute.
The simplest way, I think, to meet this need is to have a
standing panel of jurors from representative associations who
will serve when necessary. That has the additional value of
enabling the opinion of the expert witness to be tested by men
who are able to assess from genuine knowledge the value of the
testimony he offers. It offers to the judge the assurance that
his view will be examined by a body of men to whom the
import of his words will matter seriously. Each of these is a
benefit of no small kind.

The unprofessional element in the judicial process has also
a notable body of representatives in unpaid justices of the
peace whose record, especially in England, has been a note¬
worthy one, if the range of their functions is borne in mind.
I believe myself quite definitely that it is a final mistake to
entrust a general jurisdiction to persons of whom no experience
in the law is required. There are several elements in the
problem which require discussion. The ground of appoint¬
ment is, in the first place, unsatisfactory. Almost always,
that ground is political. The office becomes what Mr. H. G.
Wells has aptly termed a " knighthood of the underlings.”
It is used to recognise inferior political service of which the
quality is not sufficient for greater recompense. It becomes
a minor note like the Order of the British Empire; and an
important Member of Parliament will secure it for his useful
henchman much in the way that the dead fox is given to the
hounds after the day's run. That is, surely, an inadequate
way of filling an important judicial office. But, in the second
place, the methods of fulfilling the function leave much to be
desired. If the case involves a point of law, the ignorance of
the magistrates leaves their court clerk the master of the
decision. If the case is a matter of discretion, the compelling
motives are what is supplied by the experience of a man whose
actual knowledge of his work is limited, as a rule, to a fort¬
night’s sitting in the year. The results are of a serious nature.
There are magistrates who cannot be restrained from express¬
ing their views on every conceivable subject. There are others
who are unnecessarily severe in-some cases, and unnecessarily
lax in others. A study of the variations of sentence in

36


562 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

particular offences would reveal the hazards to which a
prisoner is exposed when he is judged by the unpaid, -s
against the paid, magistrate. 1 do not doubt that much
invaluable service is performed by a small section of the
justices of the peace. But the average justice has neither
the knowledge nor the training for the position that he fills.
He is the man in the street on the bench instead of on the jury.
And when he is a country justice dealing, for instance, with a
poacher, he does not possess the frame of mind or the
experience to enable him to do justice. It is, therefore, a
matter of importance in any judicial system to confer powers
of general jurisdiction only upon persons of trained competence
in the law.

The matter is different where special problems are con¬
cerned. There are certain infractions of the law, on the one
hand, and civil cases, on the other, where I believe that the
conference of original jurisdiction, the right of appeal being
always reserved, would bring with it great good. There are
cases in which a given trade has a special interest in the result;
as, for instance, food shops in the legislation intended to
protect the public against the sale of bad food. There are
cases, again, like those which come under the Factory Acts,
in which it is desirable to develop a general sense of responsi¬
bility to the acts among employers of labour. In such cases,
I believe, the constitution of regional tribunals composed of
persons nominated by representative institutions would be a
useful means of offering to those most directly affected by the
law a means of applying it. The dange r of partial adminis¬
tration could always be met by a right of appeal. If, for
instance, we had the scale of wages made by a trade board
enforced by a court composed of representatives of the board,
we should develop a proper sense in the given industry of the
importance of such legislation. There would grow up a
genuine esprit de corps in the industry, the desire to compare
favourably with other industries ir the infrequency of court
cases. The same is true in the case of the use of prohibited
materials. And, under such a system as I have described in
the previous chapter, it would be possible, I think, to develop
within each Industrial Council a legal tribunal which would
deal with infractions of the law as they affected the standing of


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS 588

the given industry. There is no reason why we should not
evolve a moral discipline in the industrial field comparable to
the standards of professional conduct in medicine or the law.
A man then who persistently evaded the Pure Food Acts
might be expelled from the trade, or a company dissolved, for
the preservation of its standards of honour in the same way as
a doctor is struck off the medical register. Decentralised
jurisdiction of this kind, so long as it is confined to certain
special offences, and is carried out by tribunals which grow
out of the proper authority involved, have little of the amateur
character which belongs to the unpaid judges of the present
time. And it has the merit of making the industry itself a
genuine unit for other purposes. It could then advise the
Ministry of Justice upon the administration of law, as it is
thereby affected, in a way that is bound to improve its quality.
We have already found great value in the powers of arbitration
which belong to chambers of commerce. That is because the
jurisdiction there exercised is confined to problems the
chambers are peculiarly fitted to solve ; and the extension of
such powers is bound to result in benefit.

A third and, at present, unutilised aspect of the unpro¬
fessional element in the judicial function relates to the problem
of crime and its punishment. In most States, to-day, the law
simply fixes the upper limit of sentence, and leaves its actual
nature to the unfettered discretion of the judge. Any revision
of the sentence then becomes a matter for the executive power.
When the judge makes his decision he has before him a report
from the police upon what is known of the prisoner, and such
evidence as may have been produced in the case itself. That
is, I think, an inadequate method of procedure. In the first
place, there are types of offence the penalty for which was
settled long before any real knowledge of their nature was
possible, of which sexual offences are the best example. In
cases of this kind, no judge ought to be able to sentence until
he has considered competent medical opinion upon the case.
It ought to be as natural for a medical assessor to be consulted
in such cases as it is for a naval assessor to be consulted in
admiralty cases. 1 It ought, secondly, to be possible to devote
much more attention to the use to which the sentence ought
1 Cf Graham Wallas, Our Social Heritage, p. 192.


664 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

to be put than oow occurs. A judge who sentences a burglar
to seven years’ penal servitude is, as most modem research
goes to show, sentencing him to a prison discipline which is
almost certain to send him back to burglary on his release.
It seems to me dear, on all the evidence, that we need to
assist the judge by providing him not merely with the police
record of die defendant, but with all that can be discovered
of his mental and social history by a trained body of investi¬
gators. We should then be in a position to offer the judge
material upon which he could act in the light of a much more
real knowledge than he now possesses. And I believe that the
system in which the judge's interest in a prisoner ends with
his conviction is a mistake. If means were devised to assodate
the judge with the administration of prisons, he would have
what, as a rule, he now lacks, a much more intimate realisation
of his responsibilities. There is, indeed, good reason for making
such an association the means of obtaining year by year a
commentary upon the character of prison administration. If
the State were divided into regions, and a judge of the High
Court made responsible for the inspection of each district,
with the duty of visitation and report, we should end much
of the ignorance which now surrounds the whole character of
our prison system ; and we should have the means of utilising
a body of expert suggestion as the avenue to continuous
reform. At present it is a notable fact the world over that all
penal reforms of a serious character originate outside prison
officials ; and they are rarely adopted without a long struggle.
To acquaint the judge with the effect of his decisions is to call
into being a lever of great value in a region where it is urgently
required. 1


IV

Equality in justice is a primary condition of attaining
justice; yet no one could even pretend to believe that it is
obtained under the present system. That is true not only of

■ On thi* whole question see especially R Saleilles, The Individualisation
of Punishment ; Stephen Hobhoiue and A Fenner Broclcway, The Prison
System ; Sidney and Beatrice Webl, English Prisons under Local Government;
T. Mott Osborne, Society and Prisons ; James Devon, The Criminal and
the Community.


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS MS

criminal, but in civil cases also. The modem State maintains
a vast organisation for the prosecution of alleged offenders;
there is no such organisation to ensure their adequate defence.
There is one law for the rich and another for the poor whenever
the preparation of a defence is an item of importance in the
, case. Nor is that all. In the personal relations of life, as in
divorce, for instance, lack of means generally implies lack of
access to the courts. Often, also, in civil cases the inability
of a poor person to employ a counsel, still more to employ
really skilful counsel, is a fatal bar to their obtaining justice.
Another region of inequality is notable. If a poor person
steals, conviction follows rapidly ; if a rich person steals, she ■
is usually bound over on the plea of nervous trouble. If a i
taxi-driver is proved to have been drunk in charge of a car, he
pays the penalty; but it is notorious that magistrates do not
like to convict the rich young man in a similar position, since
he will usually appeal and often get his case reversed on appeal.
What is disorderly conduct in resisting the police in White¬
chapel is not seldom regarded as an ebullience of high spirits \
in Mayfair. If directors of a company in high social position
pay no attention to the affairs of the company, they are not
held responsible when it is compulsorily liquidated; but if a
petty official is confused in his accounts, charges of embezzle¬
ment are difficult to avoid. Clearly, we need to remedy such
a state of affairs.

In part, of course, we cannot remedy it by legislation,
since, in part, the temper which is responsible for the position
will change only as the social atmosphere changes. A magis¬
trate who sees guilt in a poor thief, but nervous disease in a
rich one, will continue to make the distinction until differences
of economic status are negligible; a judge who does not believe
that distinguished directors of public companies ought to be
responsible for a negligence they are paid to prevent, will only
find them responsible when there is a genuine relation between
income and service. Wherever, in this aspect, differences in
the administration of law are dependent, not upon the law
itself, but upon the social results of the inequality of wealth,
only a movement towards the equality of wealth can obliterate
those differences. The situation here is only a particular of
a much more generic problem. Things seem wicked in the


see A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

poor which are not wicked in the rich ; the rulers of civilisation
were horrified when Bolsheviks murdered aristocrats, but they
were not horrified when aristocrats murdered Bolsheviks.
The atmosphere I am seeking to describe was perhaps best
shown in the Franks murder trial in Chicago when it seemed
to be assumed by the public opinion of America that the sons
of millionaires would not, despite their guilt, be sentenced to
death by the courts, 1 The temper, in fact, which permits the
English peer a special trial by the House of Lords will only
disappear with the abolition of the privileges typified by the
House of Lords.

Yet all this is no reason why we should not seek to deal
with that aspect of the problem which admits of direct remedy.
Two aspects are here involved. In the case of crime, exactly
as we have a Director of Public Prosecutions, as in England,
a District Attorney, as in the United States, so do we need a
Director of Defences whose business it will be to see that no
prisoner, accused of a serious charge, 1 shall be tried without a
proper defence being prepared. Where it is possible to make
a reasonable charge for bis services, there is no ground for their
being given free ; but where the defendant is too poor to pay,
the costs ought to be regarded as part of the normal expenses
of justice. It is only by such means that the average prisoner
can be assured that his case will be properly presented to the
court. The judge, doubtless, will do everything he can to
present the full bearing of the evidence to the jury ; but there
are matters of investigation, production of witnesses, and so
forth, that depend very largely now upon the prisoner's
financial position. In a great murder trial, I am told, it is
customary for a newspaper to bear part of the cost in return
for a sensational article from the prisoner. That is obviously
an indefensible method of procedure. It panders to the
lowest taste of the human mind. It tends to make the
criminal into something of a hero. It adds a glamour to
crime instead of showing it for the mean and sordid thing it
usually is. If the institution of a public defender resulted
only in the suppression of this traffic, it would be largely

1 See an article entitled " The Franks Case " in Netv Republic, September

19 * 4 -

3 By which I mean an oBenco lor which the penalty is six months or more


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS 567

justified. But its main justification is that it will put the
prisoner upon an equality with the State which prosecutes
him.

A Public Defence Office is essentially centralised by its
nature; in the case of civil justice, what is wanted is a
mechanism for assisting poor persons on the spot with com¬
petent legal advice. The need for such a mechanism is already
largely recognised in theory ; and, in practice, the poor man's
lawyer is usually part of the welfare agencies of the modern
city. 1 But voluntary agencies cannot even pretend to cover
the ground. Not only do they lack the means to cover the
whole range of law, but they are rarely able to do more than
give the applicant advice, without pursuing that advice into
the courts ; and, not seldom, they depend upon the young
and inexperienced lawyer for the advice they can offer. In
Germany, indeed, the system exists upon a much vaster scale ;
and the no bureaus of legal advice supported in part by the
municipalities dealt in 1912 with over a quarter of a million
cases. 1

But something much wider is needed. We need a public
office of legal advice attached to every court in the State.
The office should be attached to the local authority which is
served by the court, and should be staffed by officials appointed
by the local authority, since experience serves to show that a
large number of its cases will be concerned with problems
which arise out of questions within the competence of the
local authority. It should, broadly, have three divisions :
(1) a division of advice ; (2) a division of mediation; and
(3) a division for the preparation of cases for the courts. Any
danger of it becoming bureaucratic and formal could be
obviated by providing it with an advisory council of lawyers
whose business it would be to watch over, and report upon its
working. It would also, I think, tend to raise its status in
the estimation of the Bar if appointment to legal positions
that were not positions on the High Court, or quasi¬
political in nature, like that of the Attorney-General, were
made dependent upon a period of service in such an

1 Cf R H. Smith, Justice and the Poor, for a wealth of information upon
this whol* subject

‘ Ct W H Dawson, Municipal Ltjc and Government in Germany, p. 308.


568 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

office. Certainly a borough stipendiary, for example, who had
watched at first hand work such as I shall outline could sot
fail to be a more valuable public servant as a consequence.

I take separately each of the divisions I have suggested in
this office. Advice and information should be given on all
questions relating to public and private law with two excep¬
tions. No advice should be given where the applicant had
already consulted a lawyer ; nor should it be available where
the suspicion arises that the applicant is seeking advice in
order to evade the law. It is not the business, for instance, of
such an office to assist in the evasion of income-tax or to
arrange a collusive divorce. But an applicant who desired
information or counsel upon such matters as those of the
Insurance Act, or Workmen's Compensation, or the law of
landlord and tenant, ought to receive it. A man who had
received a summons could be advised upon the position
involved. A creditor who could not obtain repayment of a
small loan, a debtor in the hands of an extortionate money¬
lender, a person who had suffered damage from the negligence
of a motor-driver, could come to such an office in the same way
as the rich man goes to his private lawyer.

In the second {dace, the office would have a division of
mediation. Year by year there come into the courts hundreds
of cases which a little tact and ingenuity could preserve from
judicial settlement. There are cases of slander and libel;
there are cases where husband and wife have quarrelled and
resort is had to judicial separation; there are cases where
breach of promise is alleged to have occurred; and cases
where some sudden quarrel between a debtor and creditor
makes the latter go to court in a burst of ili-temper. I need
not suggest the great range of questions which will occur to
anyone who studies at all carefully the working of the average
police court on an average day. If such an office as this were
given the power to attempt private settlements a good deal of
unnecessary suffering could be avoided. It would be neces¬
sary, I think, to give the office the power to summon parties to
a private hearing; and where mediation was accepted, and the
solution agreed to by both parties, it would be necessary to
make the result a bar to future action. On these conditions, if
the environment of the office had something of the dignity v*l a


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS 569

court of law, and if, secondly, the officials appointed had the
infinite patience of a good London magistrate, there is no
doubt that we could add enormously to the sum of human
happiness.

There would, thirdly, be a division concerned with actual
cases in the courts. Here the office would do all that a
lawyer is accustomed to do, but would do it at a fee that was
within the means of the applicant. It would, I think, have to
work upon the basis that, where the applicant had in legal
fact no case at all, it would not minister to mere litigiousness.
There is a section of the poor, as there is a section of the rich,
to whom the opportunity of legal proceedings is a method of
response to the combined impulses of vanity and pugnacity.
We may admit that the determined litigant has not seldom
been the guardian of public liberty, but that is not a reason
for providing him with a public office for his assistance. In
general, the officials must satisfy themselves that the applicant
has a real claim to be met or a real defence to urge. They
must, of course, make real inquiries, and where the applicant
feels that he has not been fairly treated by them, he should
have the right of complaint to the advisory council of the
office. I do not, of course, deny that an institution of this
kind will deprive the lawyers of much business which would
otherwise fall to them. But it has certain merits of great
importance once it establishes itself in public confidence. It
is likely to end the regime of that class of lawyers who now
live on the misfortunes of the poor. It will do much, also,
to humanise justice. The poor litigant who is defended by a
public authority will not receive the cavalier treatment not
seldom meted out to him to-day. And in humanising the law
it will strengthen the law by increasing the respect in which it
is held in the hearts of the people.

Such a system, I would urge, has value also in that it oilers
a medium, of which lawyers may avail themselves, to serve the
public. We have at the present time a small number of men
who devote themselves to such service; and there must be
many a poor litigant in Boston to whom the legal-aid bureau
of the Harvard Law School has stood as the embodiment of
justice.' It would, I think, be possible, by co-operation
CL Smith, op. at.


S70 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

between the lawyers of each district to arrange for a panel
of voluntary service in such an office as would result in a
greatly diminished expenditure upon its functions. In general,
it may be, it would be difficult for the average barrister to give
up his day to acting as counsel in a court case. But the
conditions of modem economic life will make much of the
work of these offices evening work , it is when the working
man comes home in the even mg that he will resort there in
his need. I see no reason why the lawyers should not arrange
that, night by night, they supply a panel of helpers who will
advise and mediate. Such a plan has manifest advantages for
themselves; it would be for the young lawyer what resident
hospital work is to the young surgeon To the older lawyer,
doubtless, it would present less attraction But both sides of
the legal profession have to remember that they are a pro¬
fession ; and I have argued in this book that it is the main
characteristic of a profession not to be motivated merely by
considerations of profit. And an analogous experience
suggests that, even for the expert practitioner there are rich
rewards in such an effort Certainly every university teacher
who has served in the movement of adult education would
agree that the enthusiasm and devotion he can inspire is out
of all proportion to the time and trouble he is called upon to
expend. He learns there far more than he can ever hope to
teach.

The same would, I believe, be true of the lawyer,
particularly on the advocate's side of the profession. He
would leam a good deal about human nature of which he is
now ignorant. It would be an advantage to him to adjust
his mind to an atmosphere in which he was seeking human
solutions and not legal solutions. He would see the raw facts
of law, not as points in a case, but as problems to be adjusted
to the wants of human beings. He would need less legal
insight into the law than moral insight into the law I believe
myself that an experience of this kind would do much to
increase the value of the lawyer in his ordinary work. He
would multiply his chances of becoming what the best type of
family solicitor has been—a trusted friend of those whom he
professionally advises. His own view of the law would
broaden. He would be more likely to grasp what is meant


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS £71

by saying that justice is the end of law. He would see justice,
in fact, simply as a method of response to human desire, away
from the formalism in which, in certain aspects, it has to
clothe itself. There might develop from such an effort what
may be termed a preventive justice which would bear the
same relation to the justice of the courts as preventive
medicine to hospital treatment And, as I shall point out
later, the experience he might gain from such effort has
a value of high importance in relation to the reform of
the law

There is one other aspect of equality in law which demands
a word of comment That is the problem involved for the
poor in the infliction either of prison sentences, or of heavy
fines, and the rather special problem coated by the costs of
law proceedings as distinct from the cost of lawyers. The
family of a wealthy man is not seriously disturbed by these
things, for the poor they may make all the difference between
sufficiency and want It seems clear, therefore, that in all
save really serious offences the business of the magistrate is
to use his discretion against a prison sentence He must,
therefore, relate the payment of fines to the wages of the
defendant fined , for there are few cases in which such a
penalty is not rather a punishment inflicted upon the family
than a punishment inflicted upon the individual Indeed,
there is ground for the argument that all fines of a pound and
upwards should be paid in instalments, rather than in a lump
sum, when the means of the defendant are small; and the
relief would be greater if a system like that of the family-wage
advocated by Miss Rathbone 1 operated to protect his wife
and children Because, m fact, guilt is personal, we should do
all we can to narrow the number of those injured by its conse¬
quences So, also, I suggest, much is to be said for enabling
the judge, in appropriate cases, to remit court fees where the
defendant or plaintiff ought not to have been brought to
court, and, where possible, means could be devised to sur¬
charge those responsible for unnecessary and unjustified
litigation A similar problem is raised by the cases m which
poor debtors are imprisoned Here, certainly, unless failure
to pay arises, as in maintenance cases, out of deliberate effort

* Eleanor Rathbone, The Disinherited Family


m A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

to evade responsibility, the penalty inflicted has consequences
which go far beyond the nature of the offence.

I do not, of course, urge that such methods as these will do
more than mitigate the grosser evils of legal inequality. Wider
problems exist, especially in such branches of the law as
Employers' Liability and Workmen’s Compensation. The
remedies the law here offers are obviously grossly inadequate
compared to the miseries involved. But no merely adminis¬
trative mechanisms will meet such cases. Their cure depends
upon legislative effort, especially in the direction of social
insurance. All that we can do within the categories of the
existing system is to ensure three things. We can make
certain of an adequate defence for all accused persons, whether
rich or poor. We can offer legal advice of the highest quality
to all, regardless of their means. We can see to it that no one
with a grievance to be remedied, or a good answer to a com¬
plaint, is without the opportunity to prosecute his grievance
or to make his answer. In doing these things v.e could also,
as I have urged, develop a preventive jurisprudence which
would solve by prudence what is now too often answered
unnecessarily in terms of law. I believe that changes such as
these are of high importance. For, in the end, systems of
justice are measured by the degree to which they respond to
the wants and needs of humble men.


V

It is almost an inevitable characteristic of the legal mind
that it should tend to conservatism. It is largely engaged in
the study of precedent. What it can do is most often set by
the statutes of a preceding generation. Its chief exponents
are, as a rule, men already well past middle age who come to
positions of authority just when new wants they have not
known are coming to be expressed. Lawyers, in fact, are more
definitely the servants of tradition than any other class in the
community; for the demonstration that novelty is desirable
is, with them, more difficult, because more impalpable, than
with any other aspect of social life. The great changes in
medicine, as with aseptic treatment, in industry, as with the
development of mechanical transport, in education, as with the


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS 57*

Workers’ Educational Association, can, all of than, be proved
rapidly by experiment, and the weapons to overcome the
habitual conservatism of the average man lie, accordingly,
ready to hand. That is much less the case in the law; and
yet for law to lag behind the needs of its generation has con¬
sequences of profound seriousness. We need, therefore, to
devise means whereby the study of necessary legal change
can be made definite and continuous, in order that the
adaptation of the processes of law to changing wants in such
generation may be as rapid as possible.

This conclusion will not, I think, appear doubtful to anyone
who studies, for instance, the history of the legal profession in
England. It is not insignificant that every great period of
social change in England has been accompanied by a temper
of antagonism to lawyers. The hatred of the peasants in 1381
was chiefly directed against the attorneys whom they regarded
as the makers of their chains ; Jack Cade’s first desire was to
hang all the lawyers; and not the least notable mood of the
Puritan rebellion was the demand for a complete reform of the
law. It is not insignificant, also, that it was forty years
before the common sense of Bentham attracted to his service
that little band of zealots who changed the character of English
social history in the nineteenth century ; and it is remarkable
that, amongst them, only two lawyers, Romilly and Brougham,
were prominent in any consistent way. Lawyers have con¬
tributed little or nothing to the amelioration of penal systems.
They have been consistently reactionary about the education
of their own profession; and even when, as in the case of
Lord Westbury,' urgent effort has been made for improvement,
it has languished after a brief enthusiasm. Anyone who reads
the record of the effort of Fitzjames Stephen to secure proper
attention to the problems of codification will realise how
accidental is the possibility of improvement.’ English lawyers
have made great contributions to legal history; they have
written, in particular branches of the law, text-books of high
value. But, since Austin, if Austin is to be accounted a great
jurists they have done little or nothing for the science of

< See his speech in Hansard, March J, 1854.

1 Leslie Stephen, Life of Fitijames Stephen, pp 351 f.

s On which see the remark of Professor Maitland in Fisher, F. W. Maitland,
P 117.


574 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

law; and until law becomes a matter of genuine and wide¬
spread scientific investigation, its continuous improvement is
unlikely to be secured.

I do not, of course, argue that the English situation is
lamentable when other countries are brought into comparison.
The administration of law in England, and especially of the
criminal law, is probably better than in any other civilised
community ; and in France, where legal science has reached a
high degree of excellence, the Code Napoleon still hangs like a
millstone round the neck of a generation for which it has
largely ceased to have validity. 1 But in Germany it will be
obvious to anyone who studies, for instance, the history of the
adoption of the great Civil Code, deliberate and creative legal
reform has been made possible by the devotion to legal science
which exists there ; and a survey of American effort in legal
science would, I think, suggest the likelihood that the successor
of Bentham will be bora in the Western Hemisphere, so far, at
least, as the future of the common law is concerned.

There are, generally, five conditions precedent to the
possibility of an attempt at the continuous improvement of
the law. In part, it is a matter of the way in which lawyers
are trained. If their education as lawyers is a genuine human
and philosophic discipline, it is much more likely to engender
the temper which adopts a sceptical attitude to legal principles
than if it is merely the absorption of that minimum of informa¬
tion considered sufficient for admission to practice. In part,
secondly, it is a matter of the way in which the legal profession
is organised. If it is made a definite purpose of the associa¬
tions within the profession to attempt improvement, if it has,
that is to say, subject associations attempting the advance of
legal knowledge, like the Institute of Mechanical Engineers, or
the Royal Society of Medicine, there will at least be within it
a meeting-ground for those lawyers conscious of defect in the
law, and public-spirited enough to search for its remedy. In
part, thirdly, there is need, within the national Ministry of
Justice, of a permanent commission of lawyers whose business
it is to research into the means of legal improvement, in part
by the investigation of complaint, in part by absorbing the
lessons of international experience, in part also, by th<

> Cf, G. Moran, La Ri voile rfes fails contra It Code.


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS 575

development in the profession through their stimulus of
deliberate inventiveness about the law Not less important,
fourthly, is the proper consideration of lay experience of the
law ; especially where, as with doctors and business men,
there quite obviously exists a great reservoir of creativeness
which largely goes unused Certainly, to take an obvious
example, if I desired to know the real effect of the Workmen’s
Compensation Act it is from doctors and trade union officials
rather than from lawyers that I should seek to learn it Of
great importance, finally, is the utilisation of judicial experience
in the amendment of the law For the most part, all that we
have now are occasional dicta, as m Lord Russell of Killowen’s
praise of juries, or the special knowledge that is contributed to
a recondite inquiry as that which resulted in England in the
amendment of the law of real property

Let us take each of these points separately The method
by which lawyers are trained is, I have argued, at the root of
the attitude they will take in their profession to legal reform
Legal education, that is to say, must be more than the acquisi¬
tion of a merely practical technique It must seek to convey
an interest in the law as a science, the sense of it as a vital
tract in human experience which is continually charted more
adequately for those who use its paths Legal education,
therefore, must be not less a genera] intellectual discipline
than a reception of information It must wrestle with prob¬
lems as well as offer statements It must not assume that
the judicial decisions which are its substance are nght because
they are judicial decisions It must be so organised as to
induce the critical temper in the student I should myself
argue that, if this be true, the study of law is m its nature
a subject to be taught by the methods, and m the atmosphere,
of a university, and that, preferably, it should be regarded as
more suitably embraced as a specialised and higher training,
in the same way, for example, as legal study' in Harvard Uni¬
versity, where, as Maitland pointed out 1 the true inheritors
of the great traditions of Padua and Bologna are to be found.

What does this involve 5 It is, I think, simplest for my
purpose to consider as an example the typical English
barrister and to suggest the changes which are, in this view,
Entlisk Law and the Renaissance, p 3;


57ft


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

important. It is, broadly speaking, a training which does not
have in view a philosophic gTasp of its subject. Its aim is to
enable the aspirant to the profession to pass a certain number
of relatively simple examinations which do not call so much
for an insight into law as a science, and the relations of law to
the neighbouring subjects which determine its character, as
they demand the memorising of a number of cases, and the
ability to apply to similar cases rules that can be forgotten
once the examination is over. The barrister’s training,
indeed, is nothing like so serious an intellectual effort as that
of the solicitor. He has the future of the law in his hands.
Yet he rarely knows anything of the history of the law, and
even more rarely of its basis in jurisprudence. There are, of
course, some who gain such insight in the universities. But
it is, I think, significant that the Inns of Court have not
taken the teaching of law very seriously, and not less
interesting that men like Maitland—perhaps the greatest
legal genius in England since Bentham—were never able to
gather about them disciples eager to carry on their work. In
general, moreover, the teaching of English law, especially in
the Inns themselves, is the teaching of dogma rather than of
inquiry. There is no real effort to stimulate curiosity about
the law. It is, for the average lawyer, simply a system of
doctrines made by the courts and to be learned as the courts
shape the system. I do not, of course, deny that the method
produces lawyers of great learning and distinction. But I do
deny that it produces a race of lawyers who are concerned to
reshape the law to fit the needs of a changing environment.

Here, I believe, a great example has been set by the
tradition and methods of the great continental law schools, on
the one hand, and the great American law schools on the other.
They train successful lawyers. But the method by which
they are trained has results different from those in England.
In America, for example, the student learns from the outset
what Mr. Wells has happily termed a scepticism of the instru¬
ment. He learns that legal cases are legal problems, and that
the judicial answer to the problem is to be proved as much as
any other answer. His teachers are usually engaged, as in the
great law school of Harvard University, in remaking the
foundations of the law. I mention only the dead; but I


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS 577

know of no teaching tradition among English lawyers to
compare with the great teaching tradition of Langdell, Ames,
and Gray.' And any great teaching tradition, as Maitland
showed in England by his work on trusts and corporations,*
inevitably becomes a great reforming tradition. The students
of such men go out not merely to practise, but also to improve.
They become missionaries for new ideas. They attempt
experiment. No one who studies the history of recent
law, for example, can fail to see the influence of men like
Saleilles and Duguit in France, of Gierke and Kohler in
Germany. With them, consciously, law has been an expres¬
sion of life, adapted to meet the changing needs of life.

I argue, therefore, that a conscious effort to make legal
training an insistence upon the possibility of experiment
would, upon experience already in our possession, attune the
mind of lawyers to the implicit needs of their subject. But a
training in positive law alone is, I believe, inadequate. The
study of jurisprudence is integral to the intellectual discipline
I am advocating because without a knowledge of jurispru¬
dence, especially in its comparative aspect, no lawyer, however
practically eminent, can really measure the meaning of the
assumptions upon which his subject rests. Jurisprudence is
the eye of the law. It gives the law its insight into the environ¬
ment of which it is the expression. It relates the law to the
spirit of the time, and the richer the jurisprudence of a given
system in a given age, the nearer will be the law of that system
to the needs of its time. The poverty of English jurisprudence
since Austin is the measure of the inadequacy of our law to
meet the swift changes of our social situation. We should not
have had reactionary decisions like those in the Free Church
of Scotland case, or the Osborne case, if our lawyers had been
trained to watch the juristic significance of the judgments
they make.

Nor is that all. Because law is a part of life it must enter
into relations with those parts of life by which it is largely
determined. No man, for instance, can adequately study law
unless he has an intimate acquaintance with political economy.

‘ The present divorce between the schools of political economy

1 Cf the Centennial History of the Harvard Law School.

2 See the papers on legal personality in vol m. of his Collected Paprrs,

37


878


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

and law," writes Mr. Justice Holmes, 1 " seems to me evidence
of bow much progress in philosophic study still remains to be
made." No one, certainly, can study the decisions of the
Supreme Court of the United States in the last twenty-five
years without the sense that they are in general a patient
attempt to apply the apriorism of the 'sixties to a situation
that period could not, in the nature of things, contemplate.
To study the judgments of that court in such cases as Lochner
v. New York, 1 and Adair v. United States ,3 as Coppage v.
Kansas < and Hammer v. Dagenhart, 5 is to realise that to the
degree that lawyers are left to obtain their economic ideas
from business men, they will be ignorant of the general results
of an economic science which continuously enlarges the
boundaries of its knowledge. That is not true merely of the
United States, where the power of judicial review makes
political economy particularly important. English judges
who had been trained to grasp the meaning of trade union
organisation, who had been taught to realise, for instance,
that in the issues of Osborne v. Amalgamated Society of Railway
Servants * Mr. and Mrs. Webb’s History of Trade Unionism
was as important as any number of cases in the law of
unincorporated associations, would not have gone so wildly
astray. Contract, tort, property, all these are legal categories
which are inexplicable in any save their economic context.
Nor is constitutional law intelligible except as the expression
of an economic system of which it is designed to serve as a
rampart. It was Maitland who pointed out that Magna
Carta is a feudal document; and the rights it conveys are
meaningless without reference to the good syndicalists who
extracted them from their unwilling suzerain.

Nut less urgent than the training of lawyers, as a condition
of law reforms, is the organisation of lawyers. At present
they are well organised for the protection of their interests.
They control the conditions of entrance to their profession.
They determine almost completely their own standards of
professional ethic. No other body of workers possesses quite
so completely the indicia of self-government; and their
natural aptitude for a political career gives them an over-


1 Collected Papers, p. 195.
« VI supra.


1 VI supra.

S 247 U.S. 251.


J 208 U.S. 161.
* Ut sUpra.


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS S7»

whelming position in the legislative assembly. Yet it cannot
be said that lawyers have shown any special desire to balance
these advantages by a measure of service to the community
which would justify them. In England, a few small societies,
like the Society for Comparative Legislation, manage to secure
the interest of a few ; in America and the major Dominions,
bodies like the Bar Associations meet annually for a brief
period to eat and drink and hear solemn orations on the great
traditions of the law. But there is no organised effort, place
by place and month by month, to study the problems of law
and to suggest the means of their solution.

It would. I think, be possible to take a great step to this
end if each unit of legal organisation were not merely a trade
union but also a research association. If the Bar, say, of
Manchester, recognised its obligations not merely to con¬
viviality, but also to progress, it ought not to be difficult to
produce from the accumulated experience of Manchester
lawyers ideas for legal change. They would have then-
published transactions. They would seek to answer, not
merely general legal problems, but also the special legal
problems of their own city. A single instance may suffice to
illustrate my meaning. A few years ago, the city of Cleveland
was shocked by the discovery of a grave judicial scandal
which threw into high relief the bad administration of justice
there. A committee was formed to investigate the whole
position of criminal law and its administration in Cleveland.
Two distinguished lawyers from Harvard were employed to
analyse in detail the existing situation, and to make suggestions
for its improvement. They produced a masterly report, 1 but
what was even more important than their report was- the
formation of a permanent body, partly of lawyers, partly of
interested laymen, to watch over and report upon the adminis¬
tration of the law in the future. There is no reason that I can
see why such bodies should not be formed elsewhere. Probably,
indeed, they are best confined, so far as they are general and
permanent, to the legal profession only, meeting similar bodies
m other professions for the exchange of mutual knowledge and
suggestion. But no one can read the history of what has been
done in Cleveland without the sense that it opens immense

1 Criminal Justice in Cleveland.


580 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

possibilities in any effort to make legal reformation a habit of
the legal mind. For the mere publication of judicial statistics
does not give us more than the bare anatomy of legal adminis¬
tration ; and to confine research to a few lawyers who, for one
reason or another, do not enjoy an ample practice is to leave
unused experience of precious import.

But voluntary investigation of this kind, valuable though
it is, is not sufficient. It is necessary not merely that
conclusions should be arrived at, but, also, that they should
be sure of adequate consideration by the executive power.
To that end, I believe, there should be in the Ministry of
Justice a small but permanent Commission of which the
purpose would be the study of law reform. It would have, as
I see it, three types of function. It would amass information,
both domestic and foreign, upon all the problems of legal
doctrine and legal administration. It would investigate, from
time to time, and by the creation of such agencies as it deemed
proper, particular branches of the law It would receive from
every relevant source criticism, inquiry, suggestion, upon the
working of the law. It would hear, for instance, from the
bodies organising legal aid for the poor that the law in relation
to bastardy cases seemed, in their experience, to need amend¬
ment ; and it would organise inquiry into the possibilities of
change. It would discover that a penal reform had been
attempted with success abroad, and it would send out a
representative to discover the value of the new method and
the degree to which it was applicable to its own situation. It
would endeavour to collect the results of all that might indicate
avenues of improvement and to bring them to the attention of
the Minister of Justice. Gradually, as I believe, it would make
possible the possession by the latter of quite wide rule-making
powers which, subject to the ultimate approval of the legis¬
lative assembly, would make possible many more legal changes,
and much more widespread legal experiments. We cannot, of
course, develop an instrument such as this if the legal offices
of the executive remain what they are in the majority of
States a combination of judge, advocate, and, so to say, con¬
sulting legal physician. But their transformation into a
genuine Ministry of Justice would give, for the first time, the
occasion for significant innovation.


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS 581

We need, further, to utilise much more creatively than we
now do the knowledge and experience of the judiciary. Here,
indeed, we must proceed with caution ; for our effort must
never involve such a connection between the judiciary and the
executive as will break that independence in the former which,

I have urged, lies at the root of civilised justice. But it would
be possible, and would not, in this respect, be harmful to
require from the judges an annual report upon the working of
the courts. They could indicate there at least reforms that
the lesson of their work has taught them to be desirable. They
would say, for instance, that no judge sits in the English
Divorce Court without the sense that what he is compelled to
do there is an insult to his self-respect. They could point out
how often the procedure of appeals protracts litigation to a
point that is intolerable. They could suggest their sense that
the punishment inflicted in certain classes of crime, as of
sexual violence, for instance, are not genuinely relevant to the
offence they are intended to meet. I do not think their
report should be anything more than a published document
But it would offer important suggestions to the Ministry of
Justice which the latter could then proceed to explore.

For the results of its exploration, of course, the judges
would not be responsible. Their part would be done when
they had indicated needs their experience had encountered.
We get something of this indication now, as when a judge
makes a remark obiter, or in a speech expresses his sense of the
answer to some general problem. So, for example, Mr. Justice
Holmes has told us that he does not see any harm in abolish¬
ing the power of the American Supreme Court to declare
congressional legislation unconstitutional, though we do not
know the views of his eight colleagues. 1 So, also, the Chief
Justice of England has commented upon the method of
appointment to the judicial bench. 1 But the difficulty of such
methods lies in their occasional character ; they do not relate
an experience, however deeply felt, to the channel of action
through which it ought to flow. It is only by organising
judicial experience into coherent and continuous suggestion
that we can best utilise the wisdom it embodies.

• Collected Papers, p 296

* Speech to the Hardwicke Society. London Times, November i. 1924.


582


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


VI

One final problem remains. There is quasi-judicial power
in certain executive officials which, quite apart from the area
of administrative law. raises questions of importance. The
judiciary makes law by giving its judgment upon issues sub¬
mitted to it by private persons or by the executive. How is
submission by the executive to be organised ? In all States
theie is a Minister of Justice, or an authority equivalent to that
office, who acts as the legal adviser to the government of the
day and, on the criminal side, organises the prosecution of
offenders. What should be the limit and character of his
powers ?

Broadly speaking, the real problem involved is that which
occurs on the side of prosecution, especially in relation to
political offences Every government has a power to decide
not to prosecute or, piosecution having been commenced, to
decide upon its discontinuance Is that power political, or
judicial, in its nature ? Ought it to be, m the latter case,
exercised by a politician who, like the Minister of Justice, is
by the character of his office necessarily in continuous contact
with the government of the day ? Can he, in the light of such
contact, possibly separate the judicial from the political
aspect of his duty ? Is it, then, preferable to entrust the
power to undertake, or to discontinue prosecutions, to a
permanent official safeguarded, for example, as the Controller
and Auditor-General is safeguarded m Great Britain ?

The political solution is, 1 think, alone possible for the
simple reason that there are types of offences, sedition, for
example, and blasphemy, the decisions about which can be
settled only upon expediency and not upon principle A
permanent Prosecutor-General could not distinguish between,
say, sedition as practised by Lord birkenhcad and Lord
Carson, and sedition as practised by an unimportant group of
revolutionary Communists He could not proceed in the
second case without proceeding m the first, and to proceed in
the first might have involved consequences which no govern¬
ment was prepared to face. To entrust such a power,
therefore, to a permanent official is, at the margin, to give
him power of life and death over the executive. It is surely


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS


688


obvious that such a power can only be exercised by a minister
responsible to the legislative assembly. It is clear that the
basis upon which he must, if he is wise, proceed is that of
general policy ; and this necessarily involves consultation
with his colleagues wherever the issue raised appears to involve
considerations of gravity. It may be wise to prosecute to
prevent a feared disturbance from gathering volume. It may
be unwise to prosecute because political convictions make
martyrdoms, and causes prosper by the martyrs they create
These are all of them problems for executive consideration, for
they depend upon a nice balance of consequences the nature
of which affects at every point the life of government. If a
Communist is prosecuted for sedition, the government will
inevitably be challenged by those who doubt the Wisdom of
such effort, and if the government agrees with the challenge,
its only remedy is either a pardon, which stultifies the prosecu¬
tion, or else Some underground communication to a permanent
official the judicial nature of whose function is thereby invaded
from the angle of politics And it is inevitable that the mind
of the official should, m such an atmosphere be biased by the
opinion he encounters. It is therefore better that all such
cases should be frankly admitted to be within the scope of the
executive power. Foi then the cabinet is definitely responsible
for what occurs, and we do not surround the problem with a
miasma of obscurity and prejudice We obviate the very
real difficulty that, in undertaking such prosecutions, the
mind of a permanent official may be seriously affected by his
own opinions.

I do not, of course, deny the difficulties inherent in this
view. It may lead to the inception or withdrawal of prosecu¬
tions from motives which have in view something other than
the mere fulfilment of the law Pressure may be brought to
assure the escape of influential persons from punishment, and
that for offences which cannot possibly be regarded as political.
But the answer to that danger is a twofold one. Pressure
will be brought in any case, whoever may be the person charged
with the duty of prosecution , and by making questions
connected therewith questions of ministerial responsibility, we
at least assure that they are amenable to the will of the legis¬
lative assembly. And, secondly, we bring the political aspect


584 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

of prosecution into the light of day. It is inconceivable, for
example, that the Liberal Government of 1913-14 should not
have discussed the desirability of prosecuting Lord Carson and
his friends for tampering with the loyalty of the army. In the
method here proposed, the decision taken is clearly traceable
to a definite source. The responsibility for it is a plain one,
and the government of the day is called upon to justify the
action that it takes.

What is to occur when action is taken to initiate a
prosecution which it is subsequently decided to abandon ?
Here again the cases of importance are nearly always political
in character. No one would have objected to the abandon¬
ment of the case against Adolf Beck on the ground that careful
research in the police archives has established (as it would have
established) the fact of mistaken identity. But what of a case
like that in which the prosecution of Mr. J. R. Campbell was
abandoned ? Certain formula should, I think, be observed.
(1) There should be no communication with the judge or
magistrate except the formal announcement of a proposed
abandonment. (2) There should be an official announcement
of the grounds upon which the abandonment has been made.
(3) It should be understood that abandonment, especially in
political cases, involves the responsibility of the government
of the day. (4) The judge or magistrate should not be en¬
titled to refuse withdrawal ; for, otherwise, he becomes at
once prosecutor and, at least in the first instance, judge, in
the given case. (5) All such cases should be officially notified
to the legislative assembly, and to the advisory legislative
committee of the Ministry of Justice. We then have, I think,
ample safeguards against the abuse of this power. We have
definite responsibility on the part of the government. We
have certain publicity, and an authoritative pronouncement
of the grounds upon which the government takes its stand.
Where error or injustice has been committed we have the
means of challenge in the one place where it is fitting that such
challenge should be made. Such an atmosphere, I suggest, is
infinitely preferable to the half-lights of the present regime. 1

No one, of course, denies the vital importance of keeping

1 On all this see debate on the Campbell case in the House of Commons,
Parliamentary Debates, fifth series, vol 177, No 128, October 8. 1924, pp 381 ff.


THE JUDICIAL PROCESS 585

the administration of law as free as possible from political
influence. But that is not the same thing as saying that, in
England, for example, the Attorney-General " in forming his
opinion on matters of prosecution, is entirely free from any
political influences whatsoever." 1 Whenever the case is, in
its nature, political, political influence is inevitable. For the
whole business of such prosecutions is expediency, and no
government, immediately expediency affects matters of policy,
can submit to the dictation of its Attorney-General. If that
is not the case, Acts of Indemnity are clearly unjustified,
since all such acts are a plain interference with the course of
law on precisely the ground of expediency. They take away
from wronged persons rights possessed by the latter in the
ordinary course of justice because the executive deems their
abolition desirable. The only way to enable the adminis¬
tration of justice to be free from " any political influence
whatsoever ” is to place the whole process of prosecution in
the hands of a permanent official who is not answerable to the
government of the day. I have already discussed that view.
It is, I have argued, impossible of application once it is realised
that the function involved raises questions of policy. For the
only place where the latter can be ultimately decided is upon
the floor of the legislative assembly. A permanent official who
prosecuted a political figure under a statute of Edward III *
directed against robbers from over the sea would obviously
give rise to debates in Parliament, and if Parliament thought
his action impolitic it would obviously censure his action.
But immediately that occurred, a function supposedly judicial
in character would clearly be merged into one of which the
emphatic political incidence was beyond all question. The
effect of such an incidence would be fatal to any non-political
official. He would hesitate to act in the next similar case.
He would judge it not by its merits but by its consequences
in difficulty to himself. He would have no real protection
against that difficulty, since no ministerial cloak could be
thrown about his acts. His position would be an intolerable
one. He would be attacked without adequate power of

• Cf. the remark* of Sir R Horne in the debate cited in the note above,
pp 581-2.

* The case of Mr George I.ansbnry in 1913.


586 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

defence, and it would be necessary rapidly to abandon the
fiction that his office was judicial in character. For
immediately he began to explain himself, it would be found
that he was acting upon grounds of policy, and he would be
revealed as a branch of the executive whose relation to it was
inadequately organised The punty of judicial administration
is not to be found in Sir Robert Horne’s theory. For its
result would merely conceal the consultation which must take
place, the suggestions that are inevitable in any system, from
the public view. And no one will be persuaded that their
concealment is proof that they have disappeared when the
most elementary analysis reveals their urgent importance


CHAPTER ELEVEN


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION
I

I argued in an earlier chapter of this book that the scale
of modem civilisation has made the national and sovereign
State an institutional expedient of which the political unwisdom
and moral danger are both manifest. We are committed to
international experiment by the facts about us. We have been
driven to recognise the economic interdependence of States.
We have come to see that outside purely domestic concerns
settlement in terms of common rules is the only method
likely to make possible satisfactory international arrange¬
ments. The experience of what world-conflict has involved
seems to have convinced the best of this generation that the
effective outlawry of war is the only reasonable alternative
to suicide. We have realised, moreover, that politics includes
economics, and that the consequences of a world-market are
the settlement in common of those matters of common concern
which arise from the fact of a world-market. Since, that is
to say, matters like the supply of raw materials, or tariffs,
or emigration, affect the world as a whole, no State can be
a law unto itself in laying down the rules which obtain in
relation to them. International control of some kind and
degree is postulated wherever a given State-function directly
impinges upon the common life of States.

It was, of course, this perception which led to the inclusion,
in the Peace of Versailles, of the Covenant of the League of
Nations. I have not here to deal with the grave defects of
that instrument in its original form. I do not need to argue
—since conviction upon the point is general—that the
effectiveness of the League depends very largely upon the
degree of its inclusiveness; that, consequently, the absence

•87


588 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

of States like Russia and America is fatal to the proper
fulfilment of its purposes. Nor need I dwell upon the purely
technical issue of whether the League is juristically a super¬
state or merely an association of sovereign nations. I believe
myself that it is inevitably destined to become the former
and that this character will become increasingly obvious as
its functioning becomes more adequate. For it has, in fact,
the power to bind its members ; and there are already spheres
of activity within its ambit of authority in which evasion
of the obligations it creates are, if not theoretically impossible,
at least sufficiently diffi ult to be impossible in practice.
But the notion that State-sovereignty in international affairs
is in truth obsolete still troubles a generation inflamed by
the fever of national prejudice ; and it is both wiser, and
more fruitful, to approach the problems of international
organisation from a different angle.

That angle is the discussion of the functions it has to
perform and the organs necessary to the performance of
those functions. By the analysis of their nature we are
much more likely to grasp the character of that which recon¬
ciles nationalism with civilisation than if we commit ourselves
to the dissection of purely abstract ideas. Broadly speaking,
matters of common concern in modem civilisation can be
divided into three general categories. There are political
problems, there are economic problems, there are social
problems. I do not, of course, suggest either that these
categories are exhaustive, or that they do not often enough
shade off into one another. But, as a rule, the great majority
of the questions we have to solve fall fairly reasonably within
one or another of them. I shall try to list the main subjects
which fall within each, and to say something about their
significance as matters of common concern. One general
observation may, however, be made. There are many
problems of which the incidence concerns mainly two or
three States, in which the general international interest is
both small and remote ; of which a good instance is the work
of the International Commission which controls the traffic of
the Danube. The solution of such problems can always be
confided to the parties predominantly concerned upon two
conditions: it must be reached in a public manner, and its


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION


588


substance and the administration of that substance must be
approved by, and open to the Inspection of, the general inter¬
national authority. The League of Nations, that is to say,
is not likely to become a State in the normal sense of the word.
It will concern itself less with direct ad minis tration than
with propounding, or accepting, solutions which will be
administered by others. It will, therefore, be a source of
principle rather than an agent of action; though it will, as
I shall show later, have to be regarded as the ultimate reserve
force in society from which, in the last resort, definite action
originates.


II

I take first of all the political functions of the League of
Nations; and we may first discuss those among its political
functions of which the international significance is unquestion¬
able. It is clear (i) that all treaties must be registered with
the League, whatever their extent and nature. This is
necessary, not only because of their possible effect upon other
States, which, by the fact of registration, are able to raise
the question of their substance before the League, but also
because secrecy in international arrangements is fatal to the
atmosphere of peace. There are, moreover, certain types of
treaty which are, a priori, obnoxious, which must, therefore,
be rendered invalid by the action of the League. Treaties,
for instance, in which one State binds itself to joint military
action with another, as France practically bound herself to
joint military action with Russia before 1914 , are indefensible.
I do not, of course, argue that to make registration compulsory
will ensure that secret arrangements are obviated. But if
only publicly registered and internationally approved treaties
are sanctioned by the League, the revelation of arrangements
which their makers had attempted to conceal is likely to
make those arrangements less effective than they would
otherwise be. Had the precise terms of the Anglo-French
entente of 1904 been revealed when they were made, it would
have been much more difficult to secure the atmosphere of
war in 1914 . Secrecy breeds suspicion, and suspicion is the
nurse of fear. The result of compelling publicity is to throw


580 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the onus of a grave offence upon powers which, even in the
existing atmosphere, do not like to brave the hostile opinion
of the world. And such publicity makes possible the neces¬
sary provision that no treaty should be regarded as valid
until within three months from its publication by the League.
For we then have a period in which States affected by the
new arrangements may protest against them if they are
adversely affected. That is, I think, a legitimate matter for
appeal to the Council of the League.

(2) Boundaries .—The authority of the League should
always be invoked in fixing boundaries. Where the States
concerned are in agreement upon the line to be drawn, the
League may be no more than a source of approval. Where
the problem, as with Poland and Germany, is a debatable
one, the authority of the League is the only source of a
reasonably impartial solution. It is, moreover, through the
League only that there can adequately be worked out that
system of neutral zones through which we may hope to avoid
the difficulties which arise from considerations of strategy.
Take, for example, a definitely German territory like the
Rhineland. It is unquestionably a source of danger to French
security through the opportunities it offers for invasion. If
it could be neutralised in a military sense, neither the political
nor the economic interests of Germany need suffer. But such
demilitarisation can only be effected through the agency of
an impartial authority. And, as a rule, the making of
boundaries, as in the Balkans, involves the weighing of social
and national considerations which art interpreted differently
according to the State which makes the interpretation. The
League of Nations is the best assurance we have that the
changes effected will be reasonable. The assurance, indeed,
is not complete ; for the plebiscite in Silesia was flagrantly
violated by the solution of the League itself. In general, it
is probable, the League must make for itself a self-denying
ordinance that all boundaries which seek to settle problems
of racial affinity must go by majority-rule, and the actual
voting must be carried out with safeguards of secrecy as
complete as those of an English general election.

(3) Disarmament. —Ideally, the solution of the disarma¬
ment question is a position where no State possesses more


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 591

armed forces than are necessary for the problems of internal
police ; as a matter of practice, that solution is Utopian at
the present time. But our experience of national competition
in the scale of armaments has already taught us some obvious
lessons. It has shown that preparation against war is no
safeguard against war; that, on the contrary, preparation is
the inevitable prelude to war. The history of Anglo-German
naval rivalry is in this regard final. And it is clear that
unless there is some agreed and proportionate method of
defence, under the auspices of the League, observance of
which is a condition of continued membership, there is no
proper protection against the atmosphere of suspicion which
arises out of the uncontrolled power to arm. What principles,
then, of control may be said to emerge from our recent
experience ? They are, I suggest, five in number, (i) No
State should be permitted to maintain a conscript army. The
training of the adult population to arms is tantamount to
an invitation to the powerful State to use its forces for the
extension of its influence. It is clear that the relation between
the numbers of French and German citizens was, in the
atmosphere of conscription, one of the contributory causes in
the war of 1914. The maintenance of a purely professional
army operates to demilitarise the habits of the general
population. It follows, of course, that such unpaid troops
as the British Territorial Army should likewise be prohibited,
(a) The manufacture of armaments, whether naval or military
in nature, should be confined to governments. Anyone at all
intimately acquainted with the history of the armaments
" ring ” before 1914 » will have realised the disastrous results
of allowing private enterprise to live by the belligerent habits
they can induce in governments; and it is clear, even after
the war, that the new States created by the Peace of Versailles
are dragged by the inherent vices of the system into a kindred
atmosphere. The manufacture of munitions in Austria was
forbidden by the Treaty of Trianon ; but there seems no
doubt that armaments have been made there for the use of
the now independent succession-States. (3) It is necessary,
further, to prohibit the manufacture of certain types of

1 Cf. H. N Brailsford The War of Steel and Gold, chap 11, pp. 88 f The
revelations of Mr Shearer's activities at Geneva in 1917 illustrate the per¬
manent character of this evil Sec the London Times for October 1929


592 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

armament, of which an obvious illustration is poison gas.
There is, doubtless, an irony almost as savage as that of
Swift in the notion of civilising warfare. But no one who has
seen the effects, say, of poison gas, or of the bombardment
of unfortified towns, especially from the air, can doubt that
they release barbarisms fatal to the elementary decencies of
human nature. And the greater the advance of science, the
more disastrous are the consequences of such usage. The
matter has become serious enough to affect the whole future
of the human race ; for if this inventiveness is unchecked,
and the chemist, for example, has a period of thirty years
in which to perfect his discoveries, the effects of war will be
to reduce civilisation to a shambles in which decency will
have become a legend. (4) There must be agreed scales of
armament between States on the basis partly of population,
and, partly, of the volume and area of trade to be defended.
Such a rationing of permissible armament does not, of course,
seriously diminish the possibility of war ; at the best it merely
decreases the cost of war in time of peace. But it has the
very great value of making the scale of defence public ; and
the result of that publicity is to lower the dangerous suspicions
out of which and upon which the atmosphere of war emerges.
It releases public funds, moreover, for pacific purposes; and
that is a consequence which, particularly in the sphere of
education, has contingently unlimited importance. (5) It is
vital that no naval or military bases snould be built with¬
out the specific approval of the League. It is clear that
such efforts as the fortification of Heligoland by Germany
or of Singapore by Great Britain, raise questions of far more
than merely domestic significance. Had Lord Salisbury
foreseen the future of Heligoland, he would never have
exchanged it for Zanzibar; and a fortified Singapore is
inevitably regarded by Japan as a menace to her safety.
If States with outlying possessions are to proliferate forti¬
fications over the world, it is obvious that their neighbours
will be compelled to retort in kind, and we shall be threatened
with a new form of competition in armaments not less
menacing than those of the past. If there is a good case for
a naval dock at Singapore, Great Britain ought to be able
to make out that case before an independent tribunal. To


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 598

leave her with the final power to decide is to violate, ab mttto,
every principle of international organisation

Once it is conceded that disarmament is a matter for the
League, the method of securing the observance of these
principles becomes important. Clearly, no ordinary executive
could expect to cope with the problems to which they give
rise. They involve the existence of a standing body of experts
who shall report from time to time to the League upon their
application. To report, they must have the right to inspect,
and to inspect, they must have the right of entry The
League, therefore, must have beneath its executive body a
Disarmament Commission charged with the supervision of
these functions. It will, of course, be a commission of inquiry
and not of action , it will do only what it is authorised to do
by its superiors And such a functional body within the
League serves as a type of administrative authority which
will doubtless have to be created for not a few purposes It
will act as an eye for the League It will render its observa¬
tions independent of the material supplied to it by the States
which might, conceivably, be interested m evading their
obligations I do not imply that such a Commission will
prevent evasion, any more than the criminal law prevents
murders from being committed But at least it will serve
as a safeguard against them 1

(4) Treatment of Minorities, racial and religious —Not the
least urgent problem raised in an acute form in the nine¬
teenth century, and accentuated bv the provisions of the
Peace of Versailles, is that which is raised by the fact that
no geographical boundaries, however drawn, can possibly
give territorial autonomy to each group of persons claiming
distinctive characteristics , nor, on economic grounds, would
such separation be desirable It is, accordingly, important
that minorities should be guaranteed in the possession of
those rights without which, as I have sought to show above,
a creative life is impossible They are not attained merely
by the insertion of a Bill of Rights in a constitution In
Poland and Roumania, in Hungary and Jugo-Slavia, equality
before the law has neither existed nor has effort been made

1 This is of course provided for by Article TX of the Covenant of the

League


38


594 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

to ensure its existence. The only way in which it can be
made real is to offer to these minorities the protection of the
League. What rights that protection should safeguard varies,
naturally, from State to State. In some countries, it involves
linguistic protection; Germans do not desire to be coerced
mto speaking Czech or Polish. In others it is religious pro¬
tection which is important; Roumanian Jews do not wish to
be excluded from universities because their faith is different
from that of the general population What seems necessary,
in general, is the establishment of a minority's right to protest
to the League against its treatment, with a consequent duty
on the part of the League to investigate complaints which
seem substantial. Such an investigation ought to involve
recommendations after hearings, and it should be an obliga¬
tion inherent in membership of the League that any State to
which such recommendations have to be sent undertakes to
carry them out in principle and in detail

Can the League enforce its recommendations upon an
unwilling State ? To the point of making war to that end,
obviously such enforcement is likely to be, for some time,
impossible. But it could, I think, insist that any State which
failed to carry them out as a matter of deliberate policy could
be subjected to economic boycott It could be prevented from
raising loans abroad ; its securities could be removed from
the lists quoted in the Bourses of foreign powers ; and in
extremely bad cases it might be prohibited from trade with
those powers. Suspension from membership of the League
is also a penalty of a useful kind ; for that would be an
announcement that the recalcitrant power had defied the
public opinion of the world.

It is a question of much interest as to when the treatment
of subject-minorities moves over from being a domestic issue
to being one of which the League must take account Suppose,
for example, that Egypt or India apjjealed to the League,
as Ireland appealed to the Peace Conference in 1919 Suppose
that the Philippines, or Haiti, or San Domingo asked the
League for assistance against what, rightly or wrongly, they
believed to be maltreatment by the United States. What,
in instances such as these, is the duty of the League ? A
prior question must here be asked. What is to be taken as


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 3»5

an appeal from Egypt or Ireland or India ? Obviously some
discontented minority association has not the right to be
heard; its business is, as it best may, to become a majority
in the community it seeks to represent. An official appeal
must, I think, be taken to mean an appeal from a majority
of members representing the minority concerned in the elected
assembly of the given State. If they complain of oppression,
it should, I think, be the duty of the League to investigate
their alleged grievances. The only case against that view
is that which rests upon prestige. England did not, in 1919,
like the idea of its relations with Ireland being investigated
by foreigners; the United States wants independence to
come to the Philippines at a time of her own choosing. But
a case built only upon prestige is, I think, one that is im¬
possible to maintain. No people, as Sir Henry Campbell-
Bannerman said, is ever good enough to govern another
people; and if the latter's elected representatives combine
to protest against their suzerainty there is at least a prima
facie case for investigation.

In such cases it should, I suggest, be the function of the
League to make independent inquiry. Clearly, all such
investigations must be ad hoc investigations ; and they must
take the form of general recommendations which are not
binding in character. No League of Nations which ordered
England to withdraw from India or Japan to surrender
Korea could hope to enforce its views ; the most it can attempt
is the publication of conclusions and suggestions. And if
that work is effectively done, it will be difficult for any govern¬
ment to resist the accretion of public opinion about such a
report. It will, moreover, serve another important purpose.
Half the difficulties which face the modem world come from
our ignorance of foreign affairs ; and much of what knowledge
we believe ourselves to possess is in fact a system of inductions
from tendencious reports. Englishmen naturally believe that
India is well governed because they govern it themselves;
Indians, equally naturally, believe that their exclusion from
supreme control is a cause of misgovemance. Only genuinely
independent inquiry can awaken either to the other's point
of view. But it is important that the inquiry should be
genuinely independent. It is no use sending a Roman


596 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Catholic to inquire into Hungary’s treatment of its minorities
or an Anglo-Indian civilian to report upon the future of the
Philippines. Bias and error we shall doubtless always have ;
but the League must take pains to see that they are at their
minimum.

( 5 ) The Treatment of Backward Peoples .—Closely connected
with the problem of minorities is that of subject races. Here,
the League has already acknowledged a measure of responsi¬
bility by insistence upon the mandate system for colonies and
territories which, as a result of the war of 1914 , have been
handed over to the victors in that conflict. By Article XXII
of the Covenant of the League certain principles of govern¬
ment have been laid down. These territories are divided into
three general groups. In the first, of which Iraq and Palestine
are examples, the community is recognised as “ having
reached a stage of development where their existence as
independent nations can be provisionally recognised,” but
they must receive the advice and assistance of the Mandatory
Power in matters of administration. The latter, broadly
speaking, may regard them as a temporary protectorate. In
the second group, the territory becomes what is, in the
British Empire, a Crown Colony without representative
institutions. The Mandatory Power guarantees religious
freedom. It agrees to enforce the prohibition of slavery and
the slave trade, of the liquor traffic and the sale of arms,
and to protect the interest of the natives in all transactions
about land. It agrees not to establish fortifications, or naval
and military bases; and to train the natives in arms no
further than is necessary for police and defence. Freedom of
trade is also secured. Togoland and the Cameroons are
examples of this type of mandate. The third class is of
territories which, either because of their small size, like Nauru,
or their thin population, like South-West Africa, are integrally
absorbed into the territory of the Mandatory Power, and become
subject to such laws as it chooses to make. In all three
classes the Mandatory Power must make an annual report
on its work to the League ; and the latter has established a
Permanent Mandates Commission of nine members, five of
whom belong to non-mandatory, and four to mandatory States,
to watch in detail over the operation of the system. None


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 597

of these members, moreover, who sit for the Mandatory
States, must be in the employ of the governments concerned.

No one can deny that these principles represent, in
general, a great advance upon methods so far suggested for
the government of native races. Anyone who compares
them, for example, with the principles actually involved in
the penetration of the African continent 1 will realise that the
possibility of a new atmosphere has been created. But, it
may be suggested, there is still a great gulf fixed between the
principles adumbrated and the measures taken to ensure
their application. The annual report is made by the Manda¬
tory Power ; the State to be scrutinised, that is to say, reports
from time to time that its conduct has been good; and the
attitude of South Africa over the Bondelwarts rebellion will
make most independent observers a little dubious whether
such reports are the best way to the goal in view. There are,
in fact, two quite obvious ways in which they can be supple¬
mented. There should, in the first place, be accredited to
each mandated territory of the League a commissioner who
will act as its ambassador upon the spot. He should belong
always to a different State from that of the Mandatory Power.
It should be his business to keep watch upon its work, and
independently to report upon it to the League. All regulations
made by the Mandatory Power should be referred to him for
approval, and, in the event of his disagreement, they should
be confirmed or denied by the Permanent Mandates Commis¬
sion. Where trouble occurs, as in the Bondelwarts rebellion,
it should be his function to make an independent judicial
inquiry and to report directly to the League as early as
possible after the outbreak. He should himself always speak
the most usual language of the territory, and have an inde¬
pendent staff speaking the languages of the different peoples
Thereby the League would possess an independent and con¬
tinuous check upon the work of the Mandatory Powers;
its discussion of their work would not be based mainly, as
now, upon what the latter had chosen to tell them. It could
really investigate trouble ; whereas, at present, if it chose
to make investigation, most of the relevant evidence would
already have perished. Dead natives do not differ from other

1 Cf L. S. Woolf, Empire and Commerce in Africa , Norman Leys, Kenya


998 A GRAMMAR OP POLITICS

men in being able to tell no tales. It may be added that
then is no reason why the mandate system should not be
CTtpnHcH to all territories in which the native races pre¬
dominate. Every reason for League control of Togoland is
a reason for League control of Kenya; and there is already
provision in the Covenant whereby this extension might
without difficulty be made. 1

Such a system of inspection, I believe, is of the first
importance; but it will not by itself guarantee adequacy.
Not less important is the quality of the personnel engaged
in the administration of mandates. The League cannot,
of course, control appointments to the colonial service of
a Mandatory Power; but it can, if necessary, and after
appropriate investigation, demand disciplinary measures,
including dismissal from the service, of persons so appointed.
It can, further, insist that no person shall be appointed to
the service without an adequate training in ethnology and
anthropology, and ability to speak the language of the territory
he is to administer. It is the dear lesson of research that
ability to understand native customs is essential to wise
administration in these matters ; and only a genius can hope
to learn them by rule of thumb on the spot.* It is important,
further, to see that no white settlers engaged in commerce
should possess judicial powers. They are there for profit,
and it is obvious from the history of commerce in such
territories that the trader cannot be trusted to do justice
to the native. Nor, so far as possible, should forced labour
be permitted ; certainly the native should never be hired out
over a period in which specific performance is enforced to
private persons. The matter is different where public works,
like the making of roads, are concerned. But the general
rule that labour employed should be normal wage-labour is
a principle of great importance.

(6) Aggression, Wars and Disputes. —The value of the
League of Nations depends clearly upon its power to prevent

• Article XXIII, Clause (6), . , . the Members ol the League .

undertake to secure just treatment ol the native inhabitants ol territories
under their control."

• Cf. the remarks ol W. H. R. Rivers in Tks Depopulation of Melanesia,
and the remark*, passim, of Sir F. Lugard in his great work, The Dual Menials
in Tropical Africa.


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 599

war. Let us examine the provisions already made in the
Covenant for the peaceful settlement of disputes. Each
member, in the first place, guarantees both the territory and
the existing independence of all other members of the League
against external aggression; and it is the function of the
Council of the League to advise upon the methods of fulfilling
this obligation. 1 War, or the threat of war, is, secondly, a
matter of concern to the League, whether its members are
affected or not; and when such emergency arises, the Council
of the League is to be summoned forthwith. Every member
of the League has “ the friendly right ’’ to bring to the atten¬
tion either of the Assembly or the Council circumstances
tending to disturb international peace.* In the event of
dispute between members of the League, they agree, if the
dispute seems suitable to arbitration or judicial settlement,
to submit the problem to such settlement if the ordinary
diplomatic channels fail; and they agree not to resort to war
until three months after the award under such a settlement
has been made, the period of that award being six months, at
a maximum from the submission of the dispute to the Council.*
The members of the league agree to carry out the terms of
an award in good faith, and failure involves action against
the recalcitrant member by the Council.* For the purpose of
such arbitration a permanent International Court of Justice
has been created. 5

But, obviously, the root of the matter lies in disputes
which members of the League are not prepared to submit
to arbitration. In that event, the members agree to submit
the matter to the Council, and submission is effected by one
of the parties to the dispute giving notice thereof to the
Secretary-General of the League. Preparations are then
made for full inquiry, and the Council seeks the means of
settlement. If it fails, it makes, either unanimously or by
a majority, a report of conclusions and recommedations;
and dissenting members are entitled to publish a minority
report. If the report of the Council is unanimous, and one
party to the dispute agrees with it, the members of the League

1 Article X of the Covenant, * Article XI of the Covenant.

3 Article XII of the Covenant. « Article XIII of the Covenant.

$ Ibid., Article XIV.


600 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

pledge themselves not to make war upon that party. If no
unanimous report is issued, the parties remain free to take
individual action. The Council does not act when the subject
of a dispute is found to be of a domestic and not of an inter¬
national nature ; and it may, if it think fit, refer the dispute
to the Assembly of the League which then acts in the place,
and with the powers of the Council, so long as the member-
States on the Council and a majority of the Assembly concur
in the report. In all such decisions, of course, the parties
concerned in the dispute do not take a voting part. 1

So much is already League-law, binding upon its members ;
and, before we discuss the method of its enforcement, it is
perhaps well to see how far it takes us. The Covenant
provides machinery for the settlement of disputes which do
not raise the difficult problems of prestige; particularly, it
makes permanently justiciable problems which arise out of
treaties or international law. It compels settlement in non-
justiciable disputes where the Council is unanimous, but it
still leaves open the door to wax where there is disagreement
on the Council. No one, I think, can deny that work of some
significance has already been done under these provisions.
Certainly the issues between Finland and Sweden over the
Aaland Islands, and between Jugo-Slavia and Albania, over
the northern frontier of the latter States, were settled
promptly and fairly by these means. That, however, which
arose between Greece and Italy in the summer of 1923, and
resulted in the bombardment by Italy of Corfu, is evidence
that the utilisation of these provisions is no easy matter.
Sanctions apart, it is clear that they need supplement,
especially in the direction of a definition of what disputes are
justiciable, and how an aggressor in the case of conflict is to
be defined. The provisions, moreover, do not bind non-
members of the League, and the position of two of these
powers, America and Russia, may be decisive in the future
of civilisation. 1

Let me take these points separately. It is, I think, urgent
in the interests of peace that it be emphasised in the regula¬
tions of the League that there is no such thing as a dispute

1 Article XV of the Covenant.


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 601

not capable of settlement either by an international court
of justice or by arbitration. For immediately a nation¬
state assumes that a given issue touches its honour, and it
cannot, therefore, submit itself to an international jurisdiction,
it is, in fact, adopting the same mental attitude as the pro¬
tagonist m a private duel. Austrian “ honour ” was not
vindicated in 1914 by making war upon Servia; Italian
“ honour ” was not vindicated in 1923 by bombarding Corfu.
In each case real issues were evaded by being enveloped in
a miasma of prestige which prevented their exploration in
terms of the facts they involved. The conception that a
nation-State which either commits wrong, or believes itself
to be wrong, can make its own law, represents a faith as
outworn as, and infinitely more dangerous than, the creed
which assumed that an insulted aristocrat of the eighteenth
century' could only vindicate himself by blood. “ The national
honour,” as Mr Veblen has well said, 1 " moves in the realm
of magic, and touches the frontiers of religion " For no one
seriously believes that an outraged corporate personality is
made whole again by any of the ways mvolved in the code
of diplomatic procedure The common man does not, as a
rule, even know that it has been outraged until his patriotism
is appealed to by methods which frequently lose sight of the
facts which are said to constitute outrage. And if honour,
being dissatisfied in terms of punctilio, then proceeds to wax,
the common man may pay the penalty in terms which go
far beyond any price commensurate with the original sin.

I believe, therefore, that it is necessary to define the
jurisdiction of the League over disputes much more broadly
than is now the case. (1) It must not only have jurisdiction,
as now, over disputes susceptible of legal decision, or by
agreed arbitration, or by settlement in terms of unanimous
decision by the Council of the League. It must assume
(2) that all disputes are within its competence and that any
decision reached by even a bare majority must be accepted
by the parties to the dispute because such a decision, even
when regarded as unfair by either or both, is, in the light
of historic experience, preferable to decision by war. The
latter type of decision is either no decision at all, or, at best,

• Veblen. The Nature of Peace, p 29


002 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

merely involves the welfare of a small group in the victorious
nation-State to the detriment of the vast majority of its
citizens. The universal jurisdiction of the League is, therefore
elementary. The problem then becomes one of organising the
administration of its powers, rather than of inquiring into
those powers themselves.

One point of importance may here be noted. If, it is
argued, compulsory settlement is to be the rule, two vast
areas of dispute immediately come into view, (i) There are
problems connected with the Treaty of Versailles the present
settlement of which is bound to be a temporary one. The
present constitution of the League, especially by canonising,
in Article X, the present frontiers of nation-States stereotypes
obvious injustice; and many nation-States, rather than
submit to justice, will defy the League and risk war. (2) There
are also problems, like the admission of Japanese to Australia,
or of Indians to Kenya, which may be settled on paper by
arbitration; but the white races, in either case, will fight,
whatever the risk, against a settlement imposed from without
that is contrary to their own view. Neither of these views
is, I think, a tenable one. No one who reads the Treaty of
Versailles can doubt that it is instinct, at many points, with
grave injustice. But no one also, as I think, can deny that
those injustices are susceptible of remedy in such a system
as is here outlined, and that, alternatively, the making of
war is not in the least likely to remedy them. There are
injustices in relation to the boundaries of States. These can,
it may be suggested, be met in a variety of ways. If the
difficulties involved are economic in nature, as when a
State becomes landlocked by the revision of boundaries, it is
possible to arrange for utilisation, on agreed terms, of the
nearest available seaport. If the difficulties are strategic
in character, the way out lies through the building of neutral
zones. If they relate to the treatment of a national or
religious minority, the principles already urged above become
germane. It will, of course, become essential eventually to
amend Article X by permitting of its revision upon agreed
principles; as it stands, it represents the passion of a war-time
period. But, as those passions die away, there is room for
its amendment within the confines of the Covenant of the


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 60 S

League; and such a method is clearly preferable to the use
of a force which cannot, in its employment, be possibly con¬
fined to any precise or limited objective

Nor, I believe, do the problems of which the admission
of Japanese to Australia is an example offer final difficulties.
The issue is not, of course, a simple one Ultimately, it is
inevitable, I think, that problems of international migration
should come within the ambit of the League But it is obvious
that to decide such problems m principle is a very different
matter from deciding upon their administrative technique.
Australians, clearly, cannot claim to exclude Japanese alto¬
gether, without agreeing to their own exclusion from Japan
That is, probably, an impossible position in view of the
economic relationships involved But, m admitting Japanese,
Australia might well be regarded as entitled to settle (i) the
annual number of immigrants she is prepared to receive;
(2) the conditions they shall observe after entrance into
Australian territory, (3) their possible segregation to specific
belts of territory The ideal of a " white Australia" is a
perfectly intelligible one and no League of Nations which
strove to be realistic could fail to demand of those who
proposed to emigrate the observance of those conditions upon
which the standard of a “ white Australia" depends. But
the converse is also the case , and white people who emigrate,
say, to the hinterlands of Africa cannot demand that the
mandatory powers use their authority to safeguard the type
of civilisation to which they are accustomed against conditions
to which it is unrelated

If, then, all disputes are to be within the province of the
League, how is aggression involving League action to be
defined ? There are, I think, three categories of acts which
make possible the naming of an aggressor (1) A power which
refuses to accept the jurisdiction of the League is an aggressor.

(2) A power which, having accepted jurisdiction, refuses
to accept a settlement made by the League is an aggressor.

(3) A power which, under (1) or (2) uses the intervals before
I eague action to prepare itself for war by increasing its
armaments or its effectives becomes thereby an aggressor In
all these cases the League must exercise against States which
put themselves in any of these categories all the authority at
its command.


604 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

A general question here arises with which it is necessary
to deal before the methods of enforcing League authority are
discussed. The question has two sides. There is. the issue,
first, of dealing with non-members of the League. For some
period, at any rate, America will not join the League. What
will occur if die becomes involved with Japan in a crisis which
seems likely to result in war ? The answer is, I think, plain.
America, like any other power, must be offered arbitration
by the League. Her refusal to accept such arbitration must
be recognised as not less definitively an act of aggression than
if it were made by England or France or Italy. For the
consequences of an American-Japanese war cannot be limited
to the original combatants ; and the State which fights must
be made relentlessly aware that it fights at its peril. If it is
argued that Canada or Australia would, in such a conflict,
refuse to accept the orders of the League, would, indeed,
possibly fight on the side of America, the only possible answer
is that if this should occur, as it might well occur, it would,
of course, destroy the League. Upon the consequences of that
destruction I do not need to dilate. But it is, I think, obvious
that with the breakdown of the League there would be an
end to international experiment. We should then revert to
the pre-1914 situation, which is, as we have learned, the
inevitable source of war.

The other aspect of the general question is the possibility
that member-States may refuse to accept either the jurisdiction
or the recommendations of the League, in defiance of their
plain obligations. I do not deny such a possibility; it is
inherent in all that has here been urged about the general
nature of legal obligation. All that can be said to the contrary
is this: The degree of allegiance the League commands will
depend (a) upon the confidence it commands by the work it
does and (6) by the sanctions at its disposal. The League,
clearly, if it can prove its good-will to its members, is, to the
degree of its success, unlikely to forfeit its authority; and if
it can make the position of a recalcitrant member impossible,
the motive of fear may prove adequate. But there is, frankly,
no guarantee in either position. Anyone, whether in the
State or in the League of Nations, who is determined to resist
authority whatever the consequences will naturally resist it;


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 605

no law is immune from the wilful lawbreaker. All, accord¬
ingly. we can do is to minimise by organisation the chance
that such infractions will occur.

If, then, such be the jurisdiction of the League, we have
to inquire into the powers that it needs to carry out its func¬
tions. The existing sanctions are defined in Article XVI of the
Covenant of the League. These, broadly speaking, are three
in number, (i) Any nation-State which resorts to war under
the conditions outlined above is penalised by the severance
of all economic relations with members of the League, and
all other intercourse of a financial, commercial or personal
kind. (2) The Council is to recommend what effective naval,
military or air force the members of the League are severally
to contribute for the protection of the Covenant. (3) Passage
through its territory is to be afforded by all members of the
League to any State co-operating with the League under (2).
A subordinate sanction is the power of the League by a
unanimous vote of the Council to expel from membership
any State which has violated the Covenant.

In principle, at least, these sanctions are powerful enough
to satisfy anyone of their theoretical effectiveness. In part,
clearly, the machinery 0 f sanctions must always be left vague ;
it would be ridiculous to call into being the same scale of
attack against a recalcitrant Great Britain as against a
recalcitrant Albania. But, assuming the nature of such
sanctions, the question of whether they can be called into
being is obviously a question of the first importance.
Obviously, in the nrst place, the military obligations of
each power concerned must be defined. The League must
know what forces—naval, military, aerial—it can count upon
in applying sanctions. It must, obviously also, publish
these facts, in order that members of the League may realise
the striking force of the League But would the States so
obliged fulfil their obligations ? Here, of course, we dwell in
the realm of conjecture. If they did not, obviously the League
would come to an end amid derision. If it is necessary to
apply force, and it found that it could not depend upon its
members, it would be useless. Yet that failure is unlikely, for
the reason that the League, in deciding upon military sanctions,
is, after all, the States which have to supply the means of


<00 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

sanction; and they will not cover themselves with ridicule.
They may default; but if the problem involved is serious
enough to necessitate the use of armed force, their default
seems unlikely.

The use of economic sanctions is in another, and less
difficult, atmosphere. This is probably the most effective
weapon at the disposal of the League ; for in the midst of
an economic world-order it is improbable that any State can
afford to pay the penalty such sanctions would involve. Its
credit-structure would be ruined. It would be shut out from
all sources of export. It would not be able to import neces¬
sary food commodities and raw materials. Italy, for example,
would lack coal, copper, and iron ; and, all else apart, without
these the conduct of war is impossible. Experience of the
blockade in the years from 1914 has taught most European
nations that the power to control the flow of goods and services
is a fundamental power. It is a weapon which c m be brought
into play without great effort, and it is rapid in its results.
Save in the case of self-sufficient States like Russia and
America, it is doubtful whether any member of the League
could long withstand its rigorous application. Its silent
character, moreover, the fact that it does not involve the
contingent expenditure of life on the part of the States
co-operating in its use, makes it likely that this will be the
most general type of sanction applied by the League in cases
of importance. Nor do I think it is a sanction in which States
will refuse to co-operate, 1


III

Under Articles XXIII to XXV of the Covenant of the
League of Nations certain matters of general social welfare
are placed under its supervision. They possess, I believe, an
importance which far surpasses the attention they have com¬
manded in popular interest. For, in part, they constitute a
body of functions in relation to which the League already
encountered either existing international agreements, on the
one hand, or a body of fairly coherent international opinion
on the other; and they represent a field of activity success in
which is likely to result in the transference of faith in inter-

1 Cf D Mitrany The P»ohUnt of International Sanctions (192b)


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 607

national organisation to the more striking functions of the
League. As at presort defined, and omitting matters already
discussed above, these social functions may be divided into six
general groups. The League (x) is to secure and maintain fair
and humane conditions of labour for men, women and children
both in the territories of League members and of those with
whom these have dealings, and to create appropriate inter¬
national institutions for the purpose. (2) It is to supervise
and execute agreements relating to the traffic in women and
children, and such noxious drugs as opium. (3) It is to secure
and maintain (a) freedom of communication and transit, and
(b) equitable commercial treatment for the members of the
League. (4) Where disease has an international incidence, the
League is to take steps for its control and prevention. (5) It is,
by consent, to extend its supervision to existing international
bureaus, such as the Institute of Agriculture at Rome, and,
where such supervision is not exercised, it is to assist in
whatever way is thought desirable by the Council; and all
future international organisations are to be placed under its
direction. (6) It is to promote and assist Red Cross Organ¬
isations which aim at “ the improvement of health, the pre¬
vention of disease, and the mitigation of suffering throughout
the world.”

This is, clearly, an ambitious programme ; but, with some
hesitation, as in the case of Russia, not unconnected with
the partisan atmosphere of war, the League may fairly be
said to have genuinely attempted to give it concrete substance.
I shall deal below with the economic activities of the League.
But it is useful here to note the type of effort which illustrates
this branch of international function. Much has been done
to repatriate prisoners of war, and, analogously, to relieve
refugees from Russia and the Near East. Something has been
achieved in mitigating the horrors of the White Slave Traffic
and of the deportation of women and children to Turkey and
Asia Minor. Conferences have met in tne effort to control
the traffic in opium and cocaine ; and though what has here
been revealed is perhaps rather the degree of homage paid
by commercial hypocrisy to the international conscience,
there are greater signs of good-will in the matter than at
any previous time. A real effort, further, has been made


608 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

to check the spread of typhus in Eastern Europe, and it is
likely that only the League could have been effective fas this
regard. The financial reconstructions of Austria and Hungary
are very definite achievements. Less, perhaps, has been
accomplished for the maintenance of the common intellectual
life of European civilisation, though instances of assistance
in a small way are not lacking. In sum total, I think, it is
fair to say that a real start in beneficent organisation has
been made. The problem is the intensification of effort father
than the realisation of its importance.

What direction should that intensification take ? Certain
obvious possibilities suggest themselves. There are needed,
in the first place, under the aegis of the League, permanent
Commissions, parallel to the existing Commissions on Mandates
and on Intellectual Co-operation, of which the importance
would, over a period, be very great, (i) There is needed a
Commission on Educational Work in Backward Countries.
This applies not merely to mandated territories, where special
technical problems are involved, but also to areas like the
Balkans, where education is still at an unreasonably primitive
level. We need to develop a common minimum of educational
effort among all members of the League if the full impact
of its work is to be made plain to the common people. We
have to organise interchange of teachers and pupils among
different States if our educational systems are to transcend
their present provincialism. We have to be able to offer
advice to States which realise their lack of adequate staff
and methods, and, where possible, to provide access to a
supply of teachers. There is, of course, some cultural inter¬
change now; but its organisation is directed rather to the
enhancement of specific national influence than to building
a medium of international advantage. (2) There is needed,
secondly, a Permanent Medical Commission dealing primarily
with the organisation of medical work in backward areas,
with sub-commissions under its control actually doing medical
work in these areas. The wink now done on a small scale
by such bodies as the Yale Medical College in China needs to
be co-ordinated with the deliberate end of relating it in a
coherent way to world needs. Such a commission could
cultivate relations with foundations like that of Mr. Rocke-


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 608

feller in New York. It could advise and report upon current
medical organisation. It could organise expert inquiries into
particular medical problems. It could bring to the knowledge
of medical men in Jugo-Slavia the importance, for instance,
of recent American work on the prevention of rickets among
children. 1 A series of carefully prepared bulletins on medical
progress in different branches would be of the highest value in
regions which, at present, are for practical purposes entirely
ignorant of the advances which have been made. (3) There
is needed, thirdly, an International Commission on Official
Statistics. I have already urged the great importance of
quantitative knowledge upon social questions; and such
knowledge is the more valuable, the wider the area of com¬
parison upon which it is built. At present that area is narrow
because it is practically impossible to compare the statistics
of one country with those of another, through differences in
form and method. We can compare the infantile death-rate
of English and American cities, but we cannot compare, in
any realistic way, the wage-rates in similar industries. We
need, therefore, an international body charged with two
functions : (a) The adoption of increasingly uniform methods

in the collection and presentation of statistics, and ( b ) the
preparation of reports upon the results of comparing State
with State upon this basis. This does not require any large
organisation. It involves a small permanent staff at Geneva,
and the association therewith of government officials and
other experts in an organised and continuous way. Such an
effort, it may be added, is really urgent if we are to tackle
in a hopeful way the problems of economic co-operation by
which the world is confronted. (4) There is needed, fourthly,
an International Commission on Law. Such a body would,
of course, sit under the ultimate control of the International
Court of Justice. It would seek to effect three things.
(a) It would assist in the codification of international law,
both public and private. ( b) It would attempt to develop
uniformity in branches of the law, as, for example, that of
bills and notes, or the incorporation of public companies, where
incorporation is obviously desirable, (c) It would act as an
advisory body on questions of law where, though the para-
1 See J B S Haldane in tbe Nation for November 7, 19:4.

39


«» A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

mountcy of the individual State must be preserved, it is
desirable to have an expression of expert international opinion.
Examples of this type of question are legislation relating to
•liens; to the legal position of women who marry foreigners;
to the position of political offenders who have fled from the
State, where their offence was committed, and so forth.
Such a commission, once more, does not need any formidable
panoply of organisation. It requires a small permanent staff,
together with the power to initiate sub-commissions of special
inquiry. And, in general, it would be advisable that these
sub-commissions should be composed not only of government
representatives, but also of persons delegated thereto by
legal organisations for their special competence in particular
problems.


IV

Obviously, no international organisation would be effective
which failed to take account of economic questions. I argued
in an earlier chapter that the relation of nationalism to
industrialism is now so complex and so interwoven that the
problems raised by the one can only be solved by meeting
the problems specifically raised by the other. That has been,
at least in part, recognised by the labour section in the Treaty
of Versailles, and by the creation, under the Covenant of the
League of Nations, of the International Labour Office. Indeed,
it does not need discussion to demonstrate that a tariff may
be not less a cause of economic conflict than a frontier; and
in modern diplomacy the objects of discussion tend more and
more to be concerned with economic questions. Anglo-
Russian relations, for instance, are poisoned by the problem
of the debts incurred by Russia before the Revolution of 1917.
The boundary of Mesopotamia is connected, as is the status
of Mexico, with its oil-wells. The relation of the Great Powers
to China is set by its immense and unused natural resources.
The prospects of Italy in a world-system are built upon her
access to a supply ot electric power ; and the absence from her
territories of a coal-deposit makes the problem of fuel for
industrial purposes one of immense political significance for


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 611

her. So, also, with the large issues of foreign investment
and of a mercantile marine It is clear that an ability to
invest abroad may bring one State under the political dominion
of another, as Egypt became a protectorate of Great Britain
It is clear also that if the mercantile marine of one nation¬
state has lower freight-costs than that of another, by reason,
for instance, of differential advantages such as America could
grant by her control of the Panama Canal, grave international
complications might result. It is clear, finally, that only with
reasonably uniform labour conditions can industrial com¬
petition approximate to fairness. The price of English coal
is bound, broadly speaking, to be higher than that of German
coal, if the standard-day of the English miner is seven hours
and that of the German miner eight; even more, for similar
goods, the English cotton-operative cannot maintain his market
if his price is to meet that, for instance paid by the millowners
of Bombay and Osaka.

I take, of course, only a few instances amid the great
variety that exist. They lmpiv. I think, that the League
must undertake far wider economic control than is provided
for under its existing organisation. I can only attempt here
the broadest kind of indication of the economic categones
over which, as I believe, the influence of the League should
become paramount I do not argue that it is likely to become
paramount in any short space of time No nation-State is
likely to part with so\ereignty ovei its economic concerns
until, m the area of political affairs, the competence and
good-will of the League has been proved beyond a doubt
It is, indeed, possible that m some of these categones the power
of the League will develop less into thoroughgoing control than
into the authority to make recommendations, or to find con¬
clusions, which the good-will of individual States is left to
translate mto substance. But a brief discussion of one or two
categories of this kind will serve the purpose of at least indi¬
cating the region mto which the League must make its way

I, International Investment —I do not need to dwell in
any detail over the power of international investment English
dealings with South Africa and Egypt, American dealings
with Haiti, with San Domingo and with Mexico, French
dealings with Russia, are merely instances of a traffic of which


612


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


the consequences have been incalculable. 1 What, I think,
emerges from any consideration of their meaning is the need
of a twofold system of control, (i) Where the loan involved
is made to a State, its terms should be approved by the
League, whether it is made by the investors of a single State
or on some apportioned system of contribution, as in the
loan made to Germany under the Dawes scheme in the
autumn of 1924. {2) The method of repayment should never
include a power which may threaten the political independence
of a State, as the independence of Egypt was destroyed under
the British occupation. (3) It should never carry with it the
grant of economic concessions to the citizens of any special
State; there develops, otherwise, the type of problem which
is illustrated by the history of concessions in Morocco and
Persia. (4) Where the money loaned is to be spent outside
the debtor-State, as in the purchase, for instance, of rolling-
stock for a railway, the purchase should be made by the
decision of the debtor-State in concert with an ad hoc advisory
committee appointed by the League. (5) No State should
be entitled to act on behalf of any investors who have par¬
ticipated in a loan without the sanction of the League.
(6) No State should permit its citizens to invest in any loan
to a State which is not a member of the League fully per¬
forming its functions as a member, and, in especial, the
obligations involved in the conventions of the International
Labour Office.

But loans to a State, even when so safeguarded, do not
exhaust the problems of international investment. It is
important, also, to organise methods of supervising the
operations of business men abroad, especially in backward
territories. Anyone who reads the history of the Congo, or
of Putumayo, will realise without difficulty why such super¬
vision is required. But these are only the last terms in a
series the consequences of which demand at every point
scrutiny. The grounds of this control have been succinctly
stated by Mr. Brailsford. " If a m an or a company wishes
la trade or lend money abroad under cover of our flag" he


1 C f. Mr. H N. Bradford's Wat of Steel and Cold , chaps 11, m and vnt,
lor a full discussion of these matters.


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 61S

writes, 1 "it is obvious that if we intend m any degree to
protect or recognise his business, it must be open to investiga¬
tion, and it must conform to such rules as the present standards
of international morality may lay down ” Mr Brailsford was
writing in 1914, when a League of Nations did not seem
practical, the requirement in our own day must be conformity,
not to a State-made basis of obligation, but to one arrived
at under the aegis of the League It would, I think, involve
some such system of conditions as the following: (1) Each
State should keep a register of undertakings engaged in
business abroad The register should be divided into enter¬
prises receiving recognition and those to which, for reasons
set out below, recognition was refused ; the cost of registration
being met by am annual fee like that now charged for the
registration of companies (2) The register should be revised
annually, and should be open to inspection by the public.
A copy of it, brought up to date, should be kept at the head¬
quarters of the League (3) Recognition should be refused
to any person or company which (a) does not observe the
labour conditions established by the International Labour
Office, (b) the obligations, especially under the Mandates,
established by the League of Nations , ( c ) which attempts to
trade with countries m which slavery persists; (d) which
attempts either financial or military intervention in a State
which is either engaged in civil or foreign war (4) Where
a company asks for recognition and it is refused, an appeal
should be permissible to the courts (5) Where appeal against
a recognition already made is lodged with the League of
Nations, it should be competent for the International Court
of Justice to hear the appeal, the costs, on failure, to be borne
by the appellant If the appeal is successful, the State in
which the company is registered should pay the costs. (6) No
company to which recognition has been refused should have
the right (a) to have its securities quoted on the stock
exchanges of any member of the League, (6) the right to sue
in any court of law, except for the purpose of appealing against
any refusal of recognition , (c) the right to the services of any
embassy or consulate of any member of the League; (tf) the
right of entry into any mandated territories. An infraction
• Op. cil , p 141


614 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

of this latter rule should be punished by the imprisonment
or heavy fine of the agent attempting entry.

It is not pretended here that such a system as this is
exhaustive, for, clearly, experience will suggest a variety of
other expedients. But at least a register of this kind would
put grave difficulties in the way of the undesirable trader
who, like Don Pacifico, or the Mannesmann brothers, is really
exploiting the national prestige for his own personal benefit.
It would not, I think, in any way hinder legitimate trading.
Practically every firm which does business with the normal
civilised State would be recognised as a matter of course;
those excluded would be firms dealing, for the most part, with
backward areas upon conditions which seemed inequitable.
To deprive the latter of commercial status in international
affairs is to recognise the reputability of recognised firms; and
that is to introduce a much-needed element of ethics into
business enterprise. I do not, of course, deny that, upon
occasion, the possible gams from unauthorised adventure will
be high enough to persuade men to the risk ; and some of
them, at least, will be able to evade the safeguards here
suggested. But at least we shall discourage hereby the majority
of adventurers of this type; and the advantage of so doing
will, I think, appear unquestionable to anyone who surveys
impartially the history of foreign investment.

2. Tariffs .—For reasons into which I cannot here enter,
a tariff for revenue only, as opposed to tariffs which attempt
to protect the domestic industries of a given State, seems to
me a clear path to international peace.' But it is fairly clear
that, outside Great Britain and Holland, the majority of the
members of the League are likely, over a long period, to
remain fully persuaded that what may briefly be described as
economic Colbertism is to their advantage. The business of
the League, therefore, reduces itself to the function of pre¬
venting a tariff being used as a method of economic discrimina¬
tion against its members, or of using a tariff as a means of
penalising those of its members who do not observe the
economic obligations which arise under the Covenant. The
League, therefore, should aim at equality of treatment for all

1 The best general statement against tariffs tnat 1 know will be found
in Professor E. Cannan's Wialtk (1914), chap, xiv


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION


615


its members under any tariff adopted by one of them; it should
prohibit those " most-favoured nation ” clauses in commercial
systems which operate to the disadvantage of other States.
Inferentially, therefore, it should, I think, prevent the granting
of preferences by the Dominions to Great Britain, and vice
versa. For these operate to erect a closed economic system
between the States concerned ; and that has, historically, a
pernicious effect on international relations.

3. Other Economic Functions .—But a temporary inability to
deal with tariffs beyond this point does not, I think, debar the
League from considering ways and means of dealing with two
other matters of grave economic importance. There are countries
in which the standard of life, whether measured in wages, hours
of labour, or factory conditions, are so low that its commodities
can be purchased at a cost far below that of other countries
where better standards obtain. Factory labour in India, for
example, has still to learn the meaning, in any vigorous way,
of trade unions ; and, while its standard of wages is intolerable,
its hours of labour are reminiscent of the conditions in England
before the Ten Hours Act of 1844.* What is to be done in
cases where the products of such labour undersell that produced
under equitable conditions ? There should, I suggest, be a
power inherent in the Council of the League, upon recom¬
mendation from the International Labour-Office, to demand
from such a State the creation, within a specified time, of a
system analogous to the Trade-Board system in Great Britain,
but with powers extended to cover the whole range of indus¬
trial conditions. These Trade Boards should apply standards
agreed upon as adequate by the International Labour Office,
and certified to be such by the latter within twelve months
of their establishment. If the Council is informed that the
required improvement has not been effected, it should be
empowered to demand from member-States an embargo upon
the imports from the recalcitrant power. Such a policy, I
believe, follows logically from the pledge in the Covenant to
secure and maintain fair and humane conditions of labour.*

The second problem is much more far-reaching in imme-

■ The reader should compare Engels' Condition of the Working Class in
England in 1844 with Mias Gladys Broughton's Labour in Indian Industry.

* Article XXIII (a) of the Covenant of the league


616 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

diate, though not, I believe, in ultimate character. It is
conceited with the utilisation of raw materials in mandated
territories or unexploited areas. There is no “reason why,
unless we regard profit-making as a final reason, we should
allow the wastage of natural resources in such areas as has
taken place in civilised countries. In all such cases exploita¬
tion should take place only upon conditions approved by the
League; and the working of those conditions should, from
time to time, be inspected by the League in order to make
certain that the conditions are observed. If, for example, oil
is discovered in large quantities in Mesopotamia, the technical
circumstances of its production ought not to be determined
by the company which secures the concession, but by an
ad hoc commission of the League, assisted by independent
expert testimony. If gold is discovered in Tropical Africa,
its production ought to be organised in similar fashion. There
is every reason why the League should, in this sense, come to
regard itself as a trustee for the future ; and to the degree
that it insists upon such trusteeship it will remove a source
of grave friction in international relations.

This problem of the control of natural resources in unor¬
ganised areas raises, of course, the much more complicated
question of their control in normal States. Here, at the least,
we have some small, but important, experience, to go upon.
We learned in the years of war that it was possible (a) to
organise service in terms of need, and (6) to establish inter¬
national 1 mechanisms for the determination of that need.
No one can have read Sir Arthur Salter's history of the control
of allied shipping or the record of the British Government
in the purchase in bulk of necessary raw materials, without
the sense that such methods look towards a system in which
there is a permanent replacement of the middleman by a
combination of States purchasing, through the League, the
stock of raw materials over a series of years, at an agreed
price, and distributing the stock on a principle of prior need.*
The investigation, at least, of such a possibility appears
important for two reasons. It makes possible, in the first

1 To be accurate, inter-allied

* Cf. J. A. Salter, Allied Shipping Control ; and E. M. H. I.toyd, Experi-
ments >» State Control.


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 617

place, the maintenance of a stable world price-level for essential
commodities; and it brings, secondly, into the field of possi¬
bility, the removal of unnecessary and expensive competition
in the commodity so controlled.

Before I attempt to explore the implications of this
principle, it is worth while to note that certain indirect steps
to this end of an interesting kind are already in existence.
When, in 1904, Mr. Lubin founded the International Institute
of Agriculture, one of the purposes he had in mind was the
reduction of speculative dealings in the food supplies of the
world, and he proposed international organisation against rings
and monopolies which acted to that end. Here, as elsewhere,
international business has been in advance of international
government. Bodies like the White Sea and Baltic Con¬
ference, like the International Rail Syndicate, like the
Continental Commercial Union in the Glass Industry, have
for years conducted their operations on the basis of an agreed
sales area, an agreed output, and an agreed price. 1 Their
object, of course, was the maximum of profit with the minimum
of risk. There does not seem to be any a priori reason why
the governments of States should not utilise the machinery
of the League in suitable regions to assist their peoples to a
full supply of necessary commodities at a reasonable price.

The method, indeed, by which such operations are effected
is not likely to be of any uniform pattern, nor is it likely
to be entrusted to an ad hoc body with plenary powers, like
the Reparations Commission. It is much more likely to be a
senes of consultative bodies, appointed through, and reporting
to, the League, but working through the executive of each
member of the League. The latter will, as Sir Arthur Salter
has pointed out 1 be influenced by and co-ordinated in their
operations by these bodies ; but they will be jointly moved
less by direct control than by reciprocal influence. It may
be, for example, that the English Government will purchase
that proportion of the world’s wheat supply needed by its
people separately from France ; but it will purchase it in the
light of a full knowledge of what France is doing and a sense

1 Cf L S Woolf. lulrriatioH'i! Gnvnnmrnt, 'hap. vi,‘for a wealth of
material upon this, subject.

1 Op. cit , p i5-j.


618 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

of the impact upon France of its separate action. So, also,
Italy may contract with Great Britain for the purchase of
coal; and the settlement of that purchase will be made by
a body which realises its influence upon the policy of the
Smith American Republics. Thereby is established the vital
principle of international organisation that governments should
deliberately and continuously negotiate upon the joint settle¬
ment of large economic issues.

Certain inferential principles which here emerge may be
noted in passing, since their results bear upon a later stage
of the argument. It is possible, I have urged, for governments
to co-operate in settling large economic questions. That
settlement will probably be best effected, not by an executive
body, but by the co-ordinated consultation of those in the
separate States who are responsible for the political action
involved. In general, it is best that such consultation should
take place, not, as in the older diplomacy, through the medium
of Foreign Offices, but through direct connection between the
specialised department. The British Board of Trade should
deal directly with the French Ministry of Commerce ; the
Italian Minister of Agriculture should concert measures with
the German Minister of Agriculture. Direct connection entails
permanent institutions of contact. It is not enough to have
occasional meetings of heads of departments. The responsible
permanent personnel must learn to know each other inti¬
mately, fo feel out each other's minds, to gather from these
continuous relations the ability to apply a sense of international
need to the work of their own States. That involves, as Sir
Arthur Salter has rightly insisted, 1 the growth between officials
of a confidence great enough to enable them " to discuss
policy frankly in its earlier stages, and before it has been
formed and formulated in their respective countries." For
thereby, we avoid the danger of implicating in discussion the
prestige of an administration; we prevent it from having to
give way in the public view. We get the basis of a common
decision reached before governments have committed them¬
selves to one view or another. No officials, of course, can,
or should, commit their respective countries; but when the
margins of agreement are known, it becomes a far easier
■ Op. ctt., p. 35S.


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 619

matter to settle the powers to be conferred upon officials who
make the solutions in terms of principles of which the limits
are fairly well defined. Meetings of governments then become
official occasions sanctioning plans of which the outlines are
already organised. And the plans so made may become
instinct with a spirit of internationalism simply by the way
in which officials, through their personal contact, have learned
to realise and weigh other points of view.

I emphasise the importance of contact outside the Foreign
Offices of State. 1 believe it is of real urgency in building up
such a method of international administration to multiply
the sources of contact between States. The more we can
localise action, the more it can be dealt with in terms, not of
prestige, but of technique, the greater is the opportunity for
the growth of technique. The normal channels of diplomacy
centralise issues in a way of which the consequences may come
to possess, far more significance than is warranted. A problem
of oil in Downing Street may easily loom larger than it looms
in Whitehall. Technique keeps the trivial in its right per¬
spective. If a Foreign Office is brought in to grapple with
a dispute about railways, almost inevitably a hinterland of
discussion beyond railways begins to pervade the atmosphere.
And to keep discussion technical has the great additional
advantage of keeping it undramatic. It cannot easily be made
a journalistic sensation. It cannot be surrounded with that
miasma of report and scandal which have poisoned so many
international conferences in the last few years. It makes the
notion of a triumph much less accessible when, a priori, the
nature of the triumph is not intelligible enough to be news.
Anyone who has studied the working of things like the London
Conference of 1924 will have realised that their best work
was done when two or three men gathered together in a quiet
room, not to bargain with each other, but to find solutions
satisfactory to them both ; and it is not difficult to understand
why a habit of gathering together over a long period of time
should build bridges of mutual confidence over which success
may be reached.

4. Migration.—Certain special problems occur in relation
to the movement of peoples of which the consequences may
be momentous. In part, the issue is illustrated by the colour-


630 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

bar upon immigration into certain States of which I have
already spoken. But, in part, also it involves discussing what
is to be the general protection offered to the emigrant who
leaves his native State, the organisation, for his advantage,
of the full knowledge of what he will encounter ; and it involves
the prevention of such movement as that of the Chinese
immigrants to South Africa except upon terms that are
adequate in a general way. The sooner the League turns its
attention to these issues, the better it will be for the League.
It needs to set up, under the aegis of the Council, a permanent
Commission on migration with very definite functions, (i) It
should have the power to prevent emigration from backward
or mandated areas unless the wages and conditions of labour
offered are the same as those obtaining for similar work in
the country to which the emigrants are going. (2) It should
organise the inspection of vessels carrying emigrants and
insist upon the maintenance of a minimum standard of
accommodation. (3) It should be given the right to inspect

(a) the work of emigrant bureaus in different countries, and

(b) the power to license them to perform that work ; the
licence being withdrawn in the event of abuse. (4) It should
be given the right to inspect the accommodation for emigrants
at ports of landing, and to make suggestions for their improve¬
ment to the proper authority; failure to improve being
followed by publicity about the facts involved. (5) It should
receive at the beginning of each year a statement of the total
number of immigrants each State is prepared to absorb, the
occupations in which there is room, the conditions upon which
such occupations can be followed; and it should, through
sub-cotnmissions in each State, publish the information
available. Each emigration bureau should be compelled to
give this information to each person who proposes to emigrate.
(6) It should, by agreement with members of the League,
work in concert with the consular authorities in different
States and act as a clearing-house to check the numbers of
emigrants so that no more set out upon their voyage than
are likely to be received. It is difficult not to believe that
there is here a region of activity in which the League can do
incalculable good. The powers I have suggested do not reach
a long way; but, wisely used, they may become the nucleus


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 691

of wider authority from which there may one day emerge that
attempt at an organised distribution of population in terms
of area upon which ultimately much may come to depend.

5. Labour Conditions .—Under the Treaty of Versailles
there has already been set up an International Labour Office,
the general purpose of which is to maintain and improve the
standard of life of the working-classes throughout the world.
I shall discuss later in this chapter the methods adopted by
that office and the institutions through which it does its work.
Here it is sufficient to note why it is necessary for the League
to undertake functions of this kind. I have already pointed
out that there is a world-market, and that the pressure of
competition tends to produce a common level of industrial
conditions in that market. But, obviously, it is of the first
importance to determine what that level ought to be. In the
long run, depressed wages in Germany mean depressed wages
in England ; long hours in Japanese cotton-mills mean long
hours in Lancashire cotton-mills. Italy will not supply proper
accommodation for its seamen, if French sailors live under
bad conditions. A world-market, in fact, ultimately implies
that the conditions of the State where the lowest cost of
production prevails will determine the conditions of production
in other States. It is, therefore, urgent to obtain a minimum
standard throughout the world below which no State may
permit its workers to fall. This involves a common minimum
of sanitary conditions, of hours of labour, of wage-rates. It
means a. universal prohibition of child labour, a universal
enforcement of a weekly rest in industry. It means that
when certain materials, like white phosphorus, are discovered
to be- dangerous, they may not be used anywhere in industrial
processes. It means that such safeguards of the working-
classes, as the right to associate for the joint sale of their
labour and for collective bargaining about the conditions of
their labour must be assured to them. I take only obvious
examples ; in the first three sessions of the Annual Conference
of the International Labour Office, seventeen conventions were
passed. 1 It may be said in general that no more valuable
work has been accomplished by the League than that for

■ Cf. E. B. Behrens, The International Labour Office, Appendix VII, for a
full list of these up to April 1924.


m A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

which the International Labour Office has been responsible.
It has quite definitely, in the five difficul years since its origin,
marked an epoch in the history of the working-class.

A word must be said about the character of international
legislation upon these issues. There are certain areas of
activity upon which the International Labour Office is bound
to commit its members to a definite policy, and to no other
policy than its minimal substance. But that policy will
inevitably be minimal in character. It cannot legislate
directly in the sense of itself administering its laws. It must
seek their enforcement through the legislatures and public
services of its member-States. It can, indeed, as it does,
adopt not only binding conventions, but also recommenda¬
tions, that particular conditions are desirable, even when the
time has not yet arrived for their universal enforcement; and
such recommendations will be valuable for the stimulus they
provide to public opinion in the member-States to press for
their realisation. Yet it must be understood that the problem
of international labour legislation raises issues at once delicate
and complex. We can impress upon a State a minimum
below which its standards must not fall. We have to take
care, first, that minimum standards do not become maximum
standards, and that, secondly, enough account is taken of the
great variety of conditions to make the legislation proposed
capable of effective administration.

The latter problem is at least partly met by making the
parties to the contract of legislation not merely the repre¬
sentatives of governments, and partly by making it possible,
as in the Seamen’s Conference at Genoa in 1920, to have
special expert assemblies to deal with issues of a peculiarly
complex kind. The first expedient is an invaluable one. It
not only makes possible the expression of industrial opinion
from the most divergent angles, and that in an authoritative
way; but it also, in particular, makes possible the expression
of emphatic dissent from the official view of government.
It is invaluible, for instance, when the Japanese government
delegate paints an idyllic picture of labour conditions in Japan,
to have his interpretation promptly denied by the repre¬
sentative of the Japanese workers.' Much, further, is gained

■ Behrens, op eit., p 121.


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 628

by encouraging, through international contact, the sense tha t
these problems are common world-problems, and that only
genuinely corporate action can resolve them. If the Con¬
ference were puiely governmental in character, it would be
much less authoritative. But when an official, say a Minister
of Labour, argues that some given legislation is impossible
in his own State, the possibility that his argument will be
overthrown by a workers’ delegate from his own State not
merely adds piquancy to the debate, but also genuinely leads
to care in the formulation of objections to that legislation.
I shall, indeed, argue later that this procedure could be very
usefully adapted to the Assembly of the League itself.

6 . It is, finally, of urgent importance within the League
that every type of economic inquiry be undertaken. Legis¬
lative action, the world over, is built upon knowledge; and it
is amazing how little knowledge we have about the issues
with which we have to deal. Problems of currency, of invest¬
ment, of the effect of tariffs, of productivity, of labour con¬
ditions—upon all of these what little information we possess
is surrounded by an ocean of ignorance. The League has
already shown in a variety of spheres its capacity for this
type of work. Not only can it survey conditions, it can
invite the expert to make a special report; it can summon
a special commission to discuss the meaning of knowledge in
its possession. The Treaty of Versailles 1 made it one of the
two main purposes of the International Labour Office to
" collect and distribute information on all subjects relating
to international conditions of industrial life and labour."
There is no reason why that power should not be extended
to every aspect of economic life. Wherever its incidence or
substance affects international relationships, there is a fitting
subject for investigation by the League. And such research
ha the additional value that it is much more likely, from
the source of its origin, to be exhaustive and impartial than
research taken under the auspices of separate States. Its
facts are, from that character, more likely to be antiseptic
in character. Few people would regard without suspicion an
inquiry into the working of the Silesian coal-mines by a Pole
or a German ; but few people would be disinclined to believe

■ In Article 396


634


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


a report made thereon by an independent commission of the
League upon which neither Pole nor German had served. I
do not argue that the mere finding of facts is itself a guarantee
of wisdom. But I do argue that wisdom is impossible without
an expert fact-finding agency, and that the League is by its
nature the best fact-finding agency at its disposal. The more
widely it is used to that end, the wiser will be the foundations
of international policy.


V

Such an outline of the functions of international organisa¬
tion at least serves to indicate the necessary organs of action.
Clearly the League of Nations has need of four definite insti¬
tutions. It requires a legislature or assembly to formulate
the general principles of international policy : it needs an
executive or council to direct a stream of tendency into the
legislature and to act as a maker of solutions in the intervals
of legislative action; it needs a permanent civil service, or
secretariat, charged with the preparation of business and the
conduct of necessary inquiries; it needs, finally, a judiciary
to interpret the legal implications of its activities.

But to use, in this fashion, the terminology of democratic
government does not imply that these institutions will be
analogous to the internal institutions of the modem State.
Two considerations rule out that possibility. The League,
in the first place, is an association of nation-States which are
politically unequal while they are juridically equal; their
representatives are, therefore, necessarily the representatives
of governments. However each State may decide to choose
its delegates, they cannot act, like a member of the House
of Commons, as their instructed judgment deems best war¬
ranted ; they must act upon the orders given to them by those
from whom their authority is derived. The actions of the
League, in the second place, cannot follow from the normal
process of majority-rule. In most of what it does, its business
is to win the consent of each nation-State to policy; and the
attempt to bind these to acceptance of policy by the mere
counting of votes would be fatal to the existence of the League.
It constitutes much more a channel of continuous consultation


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 625

than a law-making body enforcing rules upon an opposition.
It rather weights opinions than counts them. It is not a
super-State in any administrative sense of the word. Much
more, it is a permanent congress of ambassadors who seek
the means of equitable compromise where disagreement
occurs. It is a recognition that common problems involve
organs of common decision, and that common decision is best
reached as statesmen seek to pool their minds in an effort to
find solutions. Upon occasion, doubtless, the League will have
to insist upon the acceptance of its views by those who dissent
from their substance. But, in general, its effort must, from
the nature of the interests it comprises, seek a path alien in
nature from the division-lobby of a legislative assembly. Where
its problems admit of a direct “ yes” or “ no,” it will, in the
main, require at least an approach to unanimous agreement;
and, in other regions, most of its issues will involve solutions
of a quantitative kind. It may, for instance, absolutely
prohibit child labour among its member-States; but in fixing
rules of wages for international labour it will not attempt,
because it cannot attain, legislative simplicity of a qualitita-
tive kind.

I may make one other remark before I attempt to deal
separately with these institutions. The solutions made by
the organs of the League must be regarded, I think, as law
in the full sense of that term. They are, that is to say,
decisions which will be binding upon the parties. But, clearly,
they are not binding in the sense that a decision, say, of a
police-magistrate is binding upon a defendant whom he
imprisons. There will not be, in general, a court which can
move to the execution of decisions. That does not. I believe,
deprive its decisions of legal competence. It means only that
their execution is effected through a different process than
that which obtains for the internal life of a State. We may
grant that Italy, for instance, may refuse to accept the findings
of the Permanent Court of International Justice upon some
issue to which she is a party. We may grant, further, that
the process of bringing her to acceptance is much more intricate
than any we have previously known. It is yet clear that
League decisions must, in the last resort, be enforceable, and
that there is, of necessity, arrayed behind them the corporate

40


6M A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

power of its members. To say that such corporate power
cannot be called into action does not mean ultimately more
than to say that certain Acts of Parliament cannot be enforced.
Law, whether national or international, is built upon the
presumption of good-will. It has to assume that what it does
will be accepted by those whom it affects. Marginal cases
of refusal will, of course, occur; and the secret of successful
law-making is so to shape its substance as to reduce those
cases to a minimum . That problem, admittedly, is much
more intricate in the relations of States than in the relations
within some given State ; the interests touched are wider, the
sanctions to which appeal is in the last resort made are more
complex and more remote. But the intricacy still involves
quantitative and not qualitative difference. The root of what
is being done is the same. Wrong is being punished, disputes
are being settled, standards are being created. We are finding
in the one, as in the other, behaviour patterns that make possible
the life of civilisation. In the one, therefore, as in the other,
we give to those behaviour patterns the name of law. They
are norms of conduct established by the analysis of experience.

i. The Assembly .—The League must have an organ in
which each member-State is entitled to its say. The Assembly,
therefore, consists of delegates from each State who are to
be not more than three in number, and to exercise between
them a single vote. Upon the floor of the Assembly, as a
consequence, all member-States are equal; and its competence
as a body extends to every subject within the power of the
League itself. It is to meet at stated intervals which, in
practice, has come to mean an annual session, and at such
other times as may be required. All questions before it must
be settled unanimously, except those concerned with the
admission of new members of the League, which require a
two-thirds majority ; those which concern the election of
non-permanent members of the Council, which require also
a two-thirds majority; and those which concern questions of
procedure, which require a simple majority only. The
Assembly, with the Council, elects the judges of the Permanent
Council of International Justice; it amends the Covenant,
where amendment is deemed necessary; it considers disputes
referred to it by the Council, or by the parties concerned; it


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION M7

adopts the annual budget of the League, and apportions
expenses among the member-States; and it considers both
the annual report of the League's work and the measures
taken to execute its decisions. Any member-State may with¬
draw from the League upon giving two years' notice, provided
that at the time of withdrawal it has fulfilled all its obligations
under the Covenant, and it ceases to be a member either by
breaking its undertaking or by rejecting a duly passed amend¬
ment to the Covenant . 1

Most of these powers and forms are implied in the logic
of what the League is by its original nature. But certain
grave problems arise, both of form and substance, which must
be discussed in some detail. What States, in the first place,
ought to be admitted to membership ? The only conceivable
answer, I think, is that every State must be admitted which
is willing to accept the obligations thereby incurred ; and this
must apply not less to States like Russia whose philosophy
of government differs so widely from that of most members,
than to States like Mexico which finds difficulty in achieving
a settled government of any kind. For an objection to the
first on the ground of its character is, ultimately, an objection
also to the membership of States like Spain and Italy, where
governments not built upon popular consent also hold power ;
and objections to Mexico would apply also to some of the
South American States where stability is often more apparent
than real. The admission of Mexico, indeed, possesses a quite
special importance, since its entrance into the League is an
assurance of protection to it against the danger, possibly
remote but still existent, of American aggression. Nor is the
permission of withdrawal a difficulty. The period of notice
is, firstly, a period of warning ; and a State which seeks to
play a lone hand is always hampered by the fact that action
against one member of the League is action against all. It
will never, in other words, pay any State to withdraw from
the League unless events prove that the League itself cannot
be made a reality.

These are, broadly, simple matters. Much more difficult
are the rules which demand unanimity on all save a small
number of relatively unimportant questions. It is elementary
1 Covenant, Articles I, III, V, XV. XIX.


«98 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

in the history of States that a demand for unanimous consent
is fatal to effective government; the liberum veto in Poland,
for example, was not the least cause of its decay. Even a
requirement like the two-thirds rule of the American Senate
has, on occasion, been fatal to decisive action at points where
decisive action was sorely wanted. But there are, it may be
suggested, two important considerations which mitigate the
force of this apparent weakness, (i) From the nature of its
membership, the Assembly can only be effective on grave
questions by convincing its constituent States, and no con¬
viction will be genuine which does not arise from consent freely
given. The State must be made to feel that its own will
finds place in the decisions made, if it is to accept them as
moral obligations. (2) There is, secondly, a way in which
action may be taken by the Assembly which binds the members
of the League without ultimate unanimity being required.
The Protocol for the Pacific Settlement of International
Disputes , 1 for instance, had, as a draft before ratification, to
be passed unanimously, but, assuming the success of the
Disarmament Conference that it calls for, it becomes binding
on members of the League when a majority only of the
permanent members of the Council and ten other member
States have ratified it.* Under these circumstances, for
instance. Great Britain might dissent from the Protocol and
yet be compelled to accept its obligations. Clearly, therefore,
the rule of unanimity is less onerous than it appears.

The constitution of the Assembly has been vehemently
criticised on the ground that it is undemocratic in character.
Only governments, it is said, are there represented; and it
is suggested that the personnel of a State-delegation should
be elected by the legislative assembly, or some similar body
which can protect it from being the creature of a temporary
administration. But the answer to such criticism is, I think,
a. final one. There is nothing to prevent any State from
making its own arrangements about the character of its
representatives; and South Africa has already selected as
one of its delegates the citizen of another State. And, in
the second place, since the government of the day is responsible

> Pawed unanimously at the Fifth Assembly on October 2. 1924 .

> Article 21 of the Protocol.


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 620

for the making of foreign policy in a State, it is inevitable
that it should decide by whom its commitments should be
made. It could not continue to act as a government if one
policy were to be presented to its own legislature and another,
possibly quite different, to the Assembly at Geneva. Yet there
is, I believe, this much of reality in the criticism. One of the
consequences of the League is to make continuity in foreign
policy important; and that can only be achieved by making
its substance largely an agreed matter between the government
of the day and the opposition. That can, it may be suggested,
be achieved by making one of the members of each State-
delegation a member of the opposition nominated by the latter
for that post. The working of the International Labour Office
has shown the great value of a kindred procedure. It affords
a valuable opportunity of ventilating points of difference before
the body most likely to be affected by them. It will tend
to take foreign affairs out of the held of normal partisanship,
since any final divergence of view in a national delegation
will deprive the State in which it occurs of much of its
authority. And where it does exist, it is of high utility that
it should be declared before the bar of international opinion,
and not screened from view by the facade of governmental
unity. It is, of course, evident that, in all such cases, the
voting power must be exercised by the government repre¬
sentative.

The members of the Assembly have, almost uniformly,
been statesmen, and not officials, and it is clear, I think, that
this must necessarily be the case. In all matters of high
policy the statesman can criticise and argue, where it is, in
public, difficult for the official to do more than announce.
The statesman, further, has a power to commit which reaches
beyond what can be confided to an official; the latter cannot
speak beyond his precise terms of reference, and debate would
be stifled if a delegate had to wait upon telegram or telephone
for additional instructions. But it is a matter of some
importance to decide by what political personages a State
should be represented. I think myself that on occasions of
really vital importance the Prime Minister himself should be
the head of his delegation ; and on normal occasions his place
should be taken by the Foreign Secretary. Obviously, where


880 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the business of the Assembly is largely routine business, it
ought not to occupy the time of the former. But when great
matters are on hand, the greater the authority lent to the
Assembly by the character of its personnel, the better will be
the quality of its work. Alternatively, the Foreign Secretary
should be in his place ; for to attach a separate department
in the national governments to the work of the League is
to suggest a difference between that work and normal foreign
policy. That is, in fact, not the case. Normal foreign policy
has to become League policy ; and it will only come to be
so if both permanent officials and Foreign Ministers come by
experience of the League to permeate their daily work with
the spirit of the Assembly. Separation of personnel, is, in
this regard, dangerously liable to become separation of
function; and even in the brief history of the League the
absence of the Foreign Minister of a State from Geneva has
tended to make his policy different both in texture and
approach from that of the member-minister of the Assembly.
There is even something to be said for making the permanent
head of the Foreign Office the third member of the delegation
for this purpose. For, ultimately, his impact upon policy is
so much deeper and more continuous than that of his tem¬
porary chief, that lack of personal contact with the Assembly
may easily, especially in its formative years, mean the develop¬
ment of half-conscious antagonism to it.

Any Assembly, of course, is bound to be different from
what its formal constitution makes it; it lives, not by its
inaugurating clauses, but from the habits engendered by its
experience. It is, it may be suggested, already legitimate
to hazard certain inferences about the nature of the Assembly
of the League. It is able to overcome the barrier made by
differences of languages. It can genuinely debate proposals,
and genuinely ventilate grievance. It can draw to itself a
public opinion capable of transcending parochial loyalties.
It provides an invaluable sounding-board for the better
impulses of mankind. It offers the opportunity for great
personalities, whether they come from the large State or
from the small State, to win attention for views which would
otherwise go unheard amid the pressure of events; for it
makes those views events by the circumstances of their


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 681

utterance. It enables the small State to meet the larger power
upen the footing of equal discussion. It permits the reference
of problems to bodies more likely than any other to be free
from immediate interest or inherited prejudice. It adds to the
stature of justice by persuading reasonable men that those
who evade its authority are afraid of the judgment of reason.
An observer who scrutinised the record of the Assembly would,
doubtless, find room for serious blame. But he would, I think
above all, conclude that, if it had no other value, it would be
invaluable because it is a brake upon the power of the great
State. It forces it into the public view, and compels it to
submit to analysis and criticism. These, in the end, are the
real remedies against the dangers that confront us. For the
States, at long last, which fail are those that, defying than,
have sought to be a law unto themselves.

a. The Council .—To dissect the Council of the League is
inevitably a more difficult task than to analyse the Assembly;
for the structure of the Council is admittedly mcomplete, and
it cannot pretend to finality until Russia, Germany and the
United States are represented there.

But, if we assume their ultimate representation, a simple
but essential principle lies at the basis of the Council. It is
naturally divisible into a permanent part, composed of repre¬
sentatives of the Greater Powers and a temporary part com¬
posed of representatives of the Lesser. That is, I think, an
inevitable division. The world must be taken as it is, and
decisions made, say, for Great Britain by Chile and Belgium
would not possess effective validity. The balance of advantage
lies in recognising the significance of the great State, while
refusing to it ultimate power upon the Council. This is done
by making the number of States permanently represented less
by two than the number of temporary members. 1 The com¬
petence of the Council, like that of the Assembly, is limited
only by the range of the Covenant itself; and, as with the
Assembly also, its decisions, except upon questions of pro¬
cedure, and one or two other, but minor, matters, must be
unanimous. The rule of unanimity is, on the whole, less of

• At present the numbers are tour and six respectively . if Russia, Germany
and the United States were to join, the Council would, { assume be increased
by the addition of three other lesser States


«M A GRAMMAR OP POLITICS

a stumbling-block than might appear. For, in the first place,
it is undoubtedly a safeguard against the very real danger of
coalitions within the Council, and, on the assumption proved
by the experience of the British Empire, unanimity seems
attainable so long as there exists a will to agree. The Council
is bound to meet annually; though, in point of fact, it has
met at least six times each year since the foundation of the
League. Its special authority in disputes is notable, (i) If
contending States do not agree either to arbitration or judicial
settlement, they must submit their dispute to the Council.
If the latter cannot effect an agreement, it may, either by
a unanimous or a majority vote, publish a report of the facts,
with recommendations ; if the report is unanimous, apart from
the parties concerned, and one of these carries out the recom¬
mendations, the other cannot make war upon it. If unanimity
is not attained, war may be embarked upon after three months
from the publication of the Coundl’s decision. If one party
claims that the dispute is domestic in nature, and the Council
agrees, its jurisdiction ceases; it cannot, therefore, interfere
in the internal affairs of a .State. It may also, either of its
own motion or at the request of one of the parties, refer a
dispute to the Assembly, in which case, the latter assumes the
same powers of settlement as the Council itself. Where such
reference is made, the member-States on the Council must be
unanimous, and a majority of the delegates of other States
must concur in the report and recommendations. New
member-States may be invited to temporary membership for
the settlement of disputes with a member-State. If the
invitation is accepted, the normal procedure applies; if it is
refused, and war breaks out, the whole League becomes
involved. 1

Obviously, the Council is the real pivot of the League.
It is the real source of executive decision. It is the primary
factor in the settlement of disputes. Upon its activity depends
the creativeness of the Assembly as a whole. How far is its
structure satisfactory for the purposes it has in view ? Let
us note, first of all, some deficiencies. The rule of unanimity
is, I have urged, necessary in the major work of the Council;
it is not, it may be suggested, necessary also in its minor

■ Covenant of the League, Article* IV, XU, XIII, XV, XVI, XVII


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 688

work. Unanimity ought not to be necessary for undertaking
those social activities—the suppression of the traffic in harmful
drugs, for example—in which, as I have already argued, there
lies the opportunity of much fruitful work. In these instances,
the obligation to accept a two-thirds majority ought to be
regarded as sufficient. Nor, secondly, ought the Council itself to
consider whether a dispute is or is not domestic ; for if England
regards, for example, conflict in Egypt as a domestic matter,
the view of France is likely to be coloured by her own special
position in Morocco. It is better, therefore, that such questions
should be referred to the Permanent Court, and that the
Council should act upon its decision. Non-members of the
League, thirdly, should have the right to appeal to the Council
for arbitration even when their dispute is with a State which
is also not a member; for if, to take an obvious example, the
United States were to make war upon Mexico, the annexation
of the latter would so profoundly alter the position of the
South American Republics as to make their interest in the
decision one that needs all the emphasis the combined authority
of the League can give. 1

Certain other questions of importance present themselves.
By whom shall States be represented at meetings of the
Council ? So far as possible, for reasons I have already
explained in dealing with the Assembly, it is important that
the delegates should be the Foreign Secretary of each State.
There are, of course, necessary exceptions to this rule; distance,
for instance, makes the presence of the Japanese Foreign
Minister at present impossible. But representation, either
by ambassadors or subordinate ministers, is not, in general,
satisfactory. Their instructions are necessarily less flexible.
They do not enable the minister to learn the meaning of
international relations by direct contact with their substance.
They tend to become separated from that common mind
which grows from continuity of intercourse at meetings of the
Council; and it is, in general, a bad thing for any government
to have its international policy in different hands from those
which conduct its foreign affairs. Certainly it has been

1 By Article XVII the League may invite non-members to submit to its
authority, I am anxious tlvat the invitation may be made merely upon
request from one of the parties to the dispute,


684 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

possible to recognise in the Foreign Office of Great Britain
difference of outlook from that which prevailed in the depart¬
ment presided over by Lord Cecil, a difference not less important
m method of approach than in the object desired.

More complex is the question of publicity. Here, it is
obvious, the considerations which apply to the Assembly are
out of place. Publicity is the life of the Assembly; in the
Council, publicity before decision may not seldom, especially
in the settlement of a dispute, do more harm than good. But
it is also important that the Council should not degenerate
into a body debating behind dosed doors, and uttering ex
cathedra pronouncements which it does not condescend to
explain. It is, therefore, important that all decisions arrived
at should be published with an offidal explanation of the
results achieved ; for, as M. Branting has said, 1 " reasons are
quite the best way by which the decisions of the Council can
be defended from criticism." It is, I think, further dear that
tiie Council conld well hear in public (z) all statements by
parties to a dispute; (2) all questions submitted to it about
the conduct of Mandatory Powers; (3) all questions which
relate to the activities of the League under Artide XXIII.
No one who heard Lord Balfour’s denunciation of General
Zeligowski at the Fourteenth Meeting of the Council can doubt
the salutary effect of publicity; and it is a general rule that
secrecy should be resorted to only when negotiations of a
delicate nature, as the financial reconstruction of Austria, are
under discussion.

A matter of great importance is the relation of the Council
to the Assembly. Here it is necessary at the outset to put on
one side the tempting analogies of parliamentary government.
The Council is a cabinet, but it is also a legislature; and .in its
combined nature it corresponds to no previously existing institu¬
tion. It dominates the Assembly, since the latter cannot act
without it; yet, in certain fields, it is amenable to the control
of the Assembly. A report upon its work is annually sub¬
mitted by the Secretary-General of the League; and its
discussion by the Assembly corresponds to the discussion
of the Annual Estimates by the House of Commons. But dis¬
cussion in the Assembly, while it may influence the Coundl,

1 Proceedings of the Second Assembly, September 1921.


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 6S5

need not do so; the latter may stand by its decisions, and,
if it does so, it will not fall upon account of them. It is,
therefore, clear that the Assembly is, at every point, a body
inferior, both in power and authority, to the Council, and.
apart from its normal meetings, its extraordinary sessions
depend, for practical purposes, either upon the will of the
Council or upon reference to it of a dispute by one of the
parties concerned. Generally, therefore, some nine members
of the League are settling the essence of world-policy in its
name.

Is this an adequate relationship ? We have to remember
the conditions under which the League must work. A body
so diverse as the Assembly, so subject, also, to the difficulties
of distance, cannot be summoned often in the nature of things.
Its members must, as a rule, be given reasonable notice of
matters to be discussed if their judgment is to be arrived at
after mature consideration Inevitably, therefore, the Council
is bound to be the root of decision in interim periods ; and its
power needs to be elastic in character if it is to meet with
success the problems that will anse It must have, m short,
what in England is called a prerogative power ; and the limits
of that power can be settled, as occasion serves, by the
Assembly. But it would in general be impossible to allow,
for instance, disputes once settled to be reopened by the
Assembly. If it was known that such revision was possible,
every party to a dispute which felt itself aggrieved by the
decision would appeal to the Assembly for a rehearing Stare
dectsis is an inevitable principle of the situation we confront.
The Assembly is bound, therefore, to be a means of criticism
rather than a means of control. The differences of jurisdiction
inhere in the character of the problem It is, moreover, to
be remembered that the situation will gradually be modified
by two factors of experience The Council will accumulate
precedents, and these will gradually, even if half-consciously,
limit its power of innovation; and, as the work of the Per¬
manent Court proceeds, a volume of legal derisions will be
collected within which the Council will have to act. But it
is important that the Covenant of the League should bind the
Council to accept the determination of the Court upon questions
of law. For unless that is done, the decisions of the Court


686 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

will be no mote than expressions of opinion, weighty perhaps,
but entitled to be rejected if they are inconvenient. That
will deprive the Court of what is essential to its authority,
since it will transform it into a body of legal advisers, instead
of a body of judges. To make the Council bound by law is,
one may urge, the surest way to make its findings instinct
with justice.

One other power over the Council, I suggest, the Assembly
might reasonably exercise. Even if we grant that in major
matters decisions of the Council must be regarded as choses
jugdes, that character need not extend to matters which, though
important in themselves, are relatively of minor significance.
The Council, for instance, has dealt with the problems of
transit, health, registration of treaties, the liquor traffic in
Africa, none of which is likely to lead to serious differences of
opinion. Decisions on questions of this character might, it
may be suggested, be subject to revision by ihe Assembly.
They will come before it year by year in the annual-report
of the Secretary-General; and it would be a useful addition
to the powers of the Assembly if it was given authority, by
a two-thirds vote, to revise the decision of the Council. A
case in point is the question of famine-relief in Russia which
was rejected through the opposition of the Great Powers,
despite the eloquent advocacy of the smaller States. To
override the former in such cases will not seldom be to
replace the political or economic considerations of a great
State by the humanitarian considerations of a smaller. We
cannot expect Great Britain to surrender India at the behest
of Holland; but it would be good for her soul, or for that of
Japan, to surrender, even at grave economic loss, a traffic like
that of opium, say, at the demand of Norway or Denmark.
Anyone who looks over the range of functions comprised in
Article XXIII of the Covenant will not find it diffic ult to
believe that for these, at least, the Assembly might well
retain supremacy. How far beyond such matters its com¬
petence as a revising body should extend will depend, quite
clearly, on the success of the League in building habits of
international co-operation. Partially, at least, the problem
is one of prestige; and it is only as habits of co-operation
grow that prestige will give way to justice.


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 687

Anyone who examines the record of the Council since its
origin will. I think, be driven to two conclusions. It has been,
for the first five years of its history, still greatly permeated
by the legacy of the war-spirit. In obedience to that spirit,
as in problems like the Saar Valley and Silesia, it has been
guilty of grave errors ; in obedience, also, to that spirit, it has
failed to take account of questions like the invasion of the
Ruhr Valley by France, which cried aloud for its intervention.
It has, secondly, shown a serious lack of courage in dealing
with the great issues upon which its influence must be built.
It was successful in small things, like the settlement of the
Aaland Islands difficulty, 1 and the frontier of Albania;»it was
not successful in greater things like the Graeco-Italian dispute
of 1923, the Franco-German issue in the Ruhr, the Anglo-
Egyptian dispute of 1924. This last difficulty, it may be
urged, showed all the weaknesses of the Council in their
clearest perspective. For a penumbra of uncertainty sur¬
rounded both the international status of Egypt and her part
in the governance of the Sudan; both of these were questions
which required at once legal and impartial handling, yet both
of them were questions England settled by herself, without
reference to the League. Egypt, moreover, was not a member
of the League; and her appeal to it, though made with
unanimity by the legislative assembly, was not concurred in
by an executive which had hardly assumed office at the time
when the appeal was made; yet the Secretariat of the League
did not accept the appeal as official, on the ground that it did not
emanate from a “ government ” in the technical and adminis¬
trative sense of that term. The League, in other words,
allowed great issues to be decided without intervention upon
the most narrowly legal grounds. The misfortune of that
action lies in the fact that it was submission by the League
to the will of a great State, when the party affected was a
small State, and at a time when the great State was acting
in the name of its prestige. But it is exactly to prevent action
in the name of prestige that the Council of the league has been
given its authority to intervene. Refusals like that in the
Anglo-Egyptian case, silence, as in the case of the Ruhr,
weakness, as in the case of Greece and Italy, do not encourage

1 Geneva, June 1921. 1 Paris, November 16, 1921.


•88 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

a belief in the bona-fidcs of the Council. It is necessary,
Mr. Ramsay MacDonald has said, " to empty our minds of
thoSe revolutionary, futile ideas that one nation by its strength
of will and determination, can simply ride roughshod over the
rest of the world.” 1 But our minds will be emptied of such
ideas only as the Council firmly decides upon intervention
whenever such aggression is attempted. Granted, as we
may grant, that such a policy may break the League, it
is also not less likely to make it; and until the Council
attains the authority such intervention implies, the Great
Powers will look to it, not as an arbitrator, but as a contingent
convenience.

3. The Secretariat.-— By Article VI of the Covenant the
administrative staff of the League comprises a Secretary-
General and such assistance as he may require. The first
Secretary-General was appointed by the Peace Conference at
Versailles in 1919; his successor will be appointed by the
Council with the approval of a majority in the Assembly.
His duties, roughly, fall into ten large categories. (1) He acts
as recorder of the decisions of the Council and the Assembly.

(2) He co-ordinates the general work of the League Secretariat.

(3) He prepares an annual report upon the work of the Council
for presentation to the Assembly. (4) On the request of any
member of the League, he summons, under Article XI of the
Covenant, a meeting of the Council to deal with any emergency
situation which foreshadows conflict. (5) He receives, under
Article XV, notice of submission by a party to any dispute,
and makes the necessary arrangements for its investigation
and discussion. (6) He receives and, on registration, pub¬
lishes, all treaties made by any member of the League.*
(7) He informs members of the League when amendments
to the Covenant have taken effect.3 (8) He arranges for
carrying out the decisions of the League through the offices
of the permanent Secretariate (9) With the approval of the
Council, he appoints members of the Secretariat and its staff .5
(10) He prepares the agenda for all bodies meeting under the
auspices of the League.

* Speech at Port Talbot, in Tkt Tttrus, November 29, 1924

* Article XVIII. J Article XXVI. « Article II s Article V.


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 689

It is obviously difficult to over-estimate the significance of
the Secretariat. 1 Its functions are both large and complex ;
it oils the wheels of the League machinery ; and not a little
of the adequacy of the League depends upon the competence
of its work. But it tunctions, also, within certain well-defined
limits. It is an international civil service, and, as such, it
comprises citizens of every member-State within the League.
It has not, therefore, a single tradition of expertise upon which
to build; it has to mould its routine out of cosmopolitan
habits which are not seldom at variance with one another.
While, moreover, it is an administrative body, it does not
itself execute; it can only organise the process of execution
which must be carried out by the members of the League
individually. It cannot embark upon such effort as it
thinks fit. Its work is limited, firstly, by the budget granted
to it by the Assembly, and, secondly, by the degree to which
meinber-States effectively co-operate with it in its work. Yet,
even with these limitations, it is bound to play a growing
part in the League; and much of what it does will involve
a skill in negotiation and a delicacy in statement probably
greater than the civil service of an individual State has so
far known.

How is this Secretariat to perform its duties ? I shall not
discuss here the purely technical problem of its internal
organisation; rather I shall seek to discover what methods
are involved in its work, and the significance of those methods.
The outstanding fact in the function is clearly the business
of inquiry. In almost every avenue of social and political
life, the Secretariat of the League is collecting information
upon which the decisions of the League will eventually be
based. How is that to be done ? There will be problems,
firstly, which it must itself directly answer. There will be
others where what is required is less direct investigation than
the co-ordination of existing knowledge. There will be others,
again, where what is required is investigation by a body of
outside experts organised ad hoc for their analysis. There
will be others, once more, where what is needed is less any of
these than the presentation of recommendations by a body
of experts to be acted upon or not as the League thinks fit.

> it comprise* at the present time (19*4) some three hundred persons.


640 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

It is only necessary to outline the implications ol such
a function to realise that it needs to be organised by men of
the highest ability. The Secretariat of the League, clearly,
cannot be composed of men who were just not quite good
enough to reach the highest posts in the civil service of their
respective States. It follows that the League must build its
Secretariat upon foundations which attract the ablest men of
each member-State into its ranks. Its pay, its security of
tenure, its condition of work, must be not less adequate than
those of the best national civil service in the League. It must,
of course, find room for every member-State citizens in its
ranks; but, at the top, it must regard competence as more
important than nationality. It is clear, further, that much
of the success of the Secretariat in this regard will depend
upon its connections with research bodies, the world over, and
with individual experts in the fields with which it is concerned.
Partly, ol course, it can obtain such connection by means
of the Permanent Advisory Commissions of which I spoke
earlier in this chapter ; partly, also, it can, as the International
Labour Office does, establish correspondents all over the world
who keep the Secretariat in touch with developments of
importance to it; partly, also, by special conferences, like
the Brussels Finance Conference, it can create an avenue
through which expert opinion will be directed towards it.

I do not myself believe that these methods will prove
adequate by themselves. If the League is to be effective, it
must have an observer in each State with the powers and
privileges of an ambassador in that State. He must be a
centre of knowledge, and a liaison between the national life,
on the one hand, and Geneva upon the other. He must be
able to organise for the League inquiries on the spot. He
must have the authority to insist, for instance, that some
convention of the International Labour Office is not being
observed. He must serve as the medium of negotiation
between the State to which he is accredited and the League
itself. He must, so to say, represent the visible existence of
the League among its members. Nor need we belittle the
ceremonial importance of such observers. To collect about
themselves men and women in each State upon the basis of
an interest in internationalism would be a service of high


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 641

importance. Such observers, of course, would never be
citizens of the country to which they were sent. They would,
like the ordinary ambassador, be seconded from Geneva to
such work; and on their return there they would bring to
its activities a knowledge and a freshness of high importance
to their quality. They would prevent the League, again and
again, from acting on biased information or seeking assistance
from mistaken sources. Their confidential reports would
greatly aid in enabling the Secretariat to make the results of
inquiry of maximum advantage to the League.

But the Secretariat has not merely to investigate. It is
charged also, as 1 have noted, with the task of negotiation.
Part of this duty is what may be termed statutory in nature,
as when the Secretary-General summons a meeting of the
Council on the occasion of a dispute; part of it is routine
work undertaken in the fulfilment of League decisions. In
both types, it may be remarked, observers such as I have
spoken of could play a part of high value. Certain other
considerations, moreover, emerge. It is clear, firstly, that the
Covenant of the League cannot cover all the emergencies that
will arise; it visualised, for instance, appeal to the League
by a member against a non-member, but it did not visualise
an appeal by a non-member against a member of the League.
Yet no difficulty ought ever to escape the notice of the League
merely upon technical grounds. In these cases of emergency,
therefore, apart from summons of the Council at the request
of a member, it ought to be the duty of the Secretary-General,
with the approval of the President of the Council, to summon
the latter body when any appeal, though not legally sub¬
stantial, seems to him from its character one it would be unwise
to neglect. There is not, I think, any undue risk in the
conference of these powers. It would still be open to the
Council, on its meeting, to decide that no action should be
taken ; and a decision by the Secretary-General not to summon
the Council would provide the Assembly with a possible lever
for debate in its next meeting. Gradually, in fact, there would
accumulate a body of precedents which would guide the
Secretary-General in his decision; and the existence of such
a reserve power, in independent hands, would protect the
League from itself. For there is always a danger that the

41


642 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Council will leave a dispute untouched, not because it is
outside the scope of its authority, but because each member-
State is anxious not to wound the susceptibilities of others.
We must guard against any punctilio of that kind.

Another consideration of importance emerges. While the
authority of the League will, of course, depend upon the
relationship it is able to establish with the Foreign Offices of
member-States, it will have not only to win what may be
called an external confidence from them, it must be able,
also, to persuade them to look at their own problems from
the angle of their impact on world-relations as a whole. I
do not need to emphasise the difficulty of that effort. What,
as I think, it clearly involves is developing the Secretariat of
the League as a place to which the officials of member-States
may be seconded for temporary service as part of their normal
duties. If we could be certain, for instance, that no man
served as a permanent head of a Foreign Office unless he had
spent two years in the service of the League, we could also,
I suggest, be certain that he would look upon the assumptions
of national policy from a larger and more creative point of
view. He would have learned much from the international
outlook which continuous residence at Geneva unconsciously
enforces. He would learn to trust the League by helping to
work it; he would cease to regard it as simply one more
instrument with which he has to negotiate. He would come
to know in the intimacy of continuous colleagueship men who
do not accept the assumptions which, in London or Paris or
Tokio, go without question. He would learn how national
policy appears, not as it affects the interests of his own State
merely, but as it affects the total interest of the League.
Such service, in fact, would be a liberal education in that
cosmopolitan outlook which the needs of humanity have made
so essential. For until the international mind is rooted in
the civil services of member-States not less than in Geneva
itself, it will be difficult to make the League grow into the con¬
sciousness of diplomacy as a thing inherent in its nature and
not alien to it.

Upon one problem it is worth while to say a special word.
The Secretariat of the League is drawn from different States,
and there are some who deny that an official who is, say, an


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 648

Englishman or a Frenchman, who comes to Geneva only alter
he has reached the age of manhood, can divest himself of
national bias. If by this is meant that a League official who
is an Englishman will tend to look at League questions through
English spectacles, it is, I think, completely untrue. For
where an issue is dealt with by the League, especially if it
be critical in its nature, there is no simple " English view ’’
to be a priori laid down. No one can say, for example, that
Lord Morley of Blackburn ceased to take an English point
of view because he opposed the Boer War; no one, I believe,
would now argue that it is un-American to favour the entrance
of the United States into the League. It is not a priori more
difficult for a League -official to be impartial than it is for an
English civil servant to be neutral between the contending
parties it is his duty to serve. The latter is not a passionless
expert who merely does what he is told. He has, often
enough, strong political views in a marked degree hostile to
those of the minister he is serving. But he is able, by the
compelling force of the tradition of which he is a part, to put
his own opinions on one side. He is told the goal in view
and he seeks, with uncompromising loyalty, the direct highroad
to that goal. It is, of course, true that the tradition of such
loyalty is not so strong in some countries as it is in Great
Britain, and that national prejudice may be a deeper passion
than party prejudice. Yet even when all this is remembered,
I do not think it militates against the probability that an
official of the League can remain a good Frenchman and, at
the same time, learn to regard its problems from an angle
where French interests are not unduly weighed. And the fact
that his views are being subject to the unconscious pressure
of opinions formed from other traditions is, on any rational
hypothesis, bound to round the edges of bias in a marked
degree. The first Secretary-General of the League has been
an Englishman; but a scrutiny of what he has done, in
particular of his annual reports to the Assembly, does not
suggest that the record would have been different, above all
that the decisions would have been different, had he been a
Frenchman or a Swede.

One final remark about the Secretariat may be made.
Among its functions, as I have noted, is the preparation of


644 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

agenda lor the meetings of the Assembly. Such agenda
contain three groups of items. There are matters decided
upon by the Assembly at a previous meeting ; there are matters
introduced by the Council; and there are matters introduced
on the initiative of a member-State. The Secretariat circulates
to the delegates all documents relative to the work of the
Assembly. Here, it may be suggested, there is a realm in
which the initiative of the Secretariat may be of quite primary
importance. There are two kinds of initiative in relation to
the agenda of the Assembly about which the work of the
Secretariat may well be decisive, (i) It may indicate to
delegates subjects that it believes are worthy of consideration
by the member-States, together with the grounds upon which
their consideration is proposed. By so doing it will secure
either actual discussion at the Assembly or an international
publicity which will ultimately lead to discussion. Such sug¬
gestions will have the further importance that, while they may
not be ripe for immediate resolution by the League, their
indication as important may prevent them from passing
unnoticed in the pressure ol affairs. (2) The Secretariat might
also, in sending relevant documents to the delegates, inquire
further if other information is desired upon the subjects to
which they refer. It ought, m fact, to play the part that the
legislative Reference Bureau of Wisconsin was able to play
at the height of its prestige 1 Few things are more necessary
in the working of the Assembly than the assurance that its
delegates have at their command all the information necessary
to the making of adequate decisions, and it is, also, of
importance that there should be available for the Assembly
not merely governmental facts, but the expression of views
opposed to government opinion. This suggests the possibility
of organising within the Assembly a procedure for the reception
of petitions akin to that of the Parliament of the modem State.
The reception of those could be notified to members when the
agenda for an Assembly is sent out ; and States interested
in one or more of them could then either ask the Secretariat
for information upon them or, if they thought fit, raise the
questions to which they give rise in the Assembly itself.

■ See an article by Mr, C McCarthy in P. S. Reinscb, Headings on A meru-an
State Governntevt, pp 63-73.


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 645

That would, I believe, supplement in a valuable way a pro¬
cedure which, otherwise, compels minority-movements in a
State to be unheard by the body dealing with world-opinion.
By such means, minorities could at least make their views
accessible to members of the League; and we should have
some safeguard against the natural tendency of governments
to insist that their view has the overwhelming support of those
over whom they rule.

4. The International Court of Justice.—Ho League of
Nations could pretend to completeness of structure which
lacked a permanent judicial organ. " The League,” writes
Sir Frederick Pollock, 1 “ has to rebuild and extend the law
of nations, and a rule-making, or even a legislative, authority
will not suffice for this. Formal definition and enactment
must be kept alive by constructive interpretation, to the end
of producing a continuous tradition of doctrine, a ' jurispru¬
dence ’ in the French sense of that word. Isolated decisions
of different and independent authorities, however respectable,
will never make such a doctrine.” But it is not merely for
this important reason that a Permanent International Court
is essential. Where the problems involved are judicial in
nature, it is important that the body giving judgment should
be independent of the governments of member-States. Every
reason, in fact, which makes for the independence of the
judiciary in municipal causes, makes, with even added force,
for its independence in international causes. Settlement of
judicial matters by either a body of statesmen or by judges
nominated ad hoc by governments can never have either
the freedom or impartiality of a court independent of transitory
situations. What is required is, as Sir Frederick Pollock has
aptly pointed out, a body which, like the Judicial Committee
of the Privy Council in the British Empire, exercises its
authority by consent, before which member-States of the
empire can be summoned, but which is yet independent in
constitution of executive purpose or desire.

The Permanent Court of International Justice was created

1 The League of Nations (2nd edition), p. 2j2. I have here to record my
greet obligations to this invaluable book. On the Court, the best technical
description is Mr A. Fochiri’s. The Permanent Court (1926).


046 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

under Article XIV of the Covenart. It is competent to hear
and decide any international dispute which the parties therein
concerned agree to submit to it; and it may give an advisory
opinion upon any question referred to it by the Council or
the Assembly. The judges of the Court are appointed by a
somewhat complicated process. There is, in the first place,
limited nomination by the judicial members of The Hague
Tribunal formed into national groups, or by similar groups
from States not represented there, certain legal qualifications
being required for nomination. From the list so formed,
fifteen judges, of whom four are deputy-judges, are chosen
by the concurrent votes of the Council and the Assembly,
an absolute majority in both being required for election. 1
The judges are elected for nine years, and no State may have
more than one of its citizens upon the Court; though any
State which is a litigant is entitled, for the p’irposes of its
case, to a seat thereon. The Court sits at The Hague ; and it
is required to hold at least one session annually. To secure
continuity of jurisdiction, it is also provided that its President
and Registrar, with their staffs, must reside at The Hague,
just as the High Court organises the presence of a judge in
London during vacations.

The competence of the Court has not been settled in an
entirely satisfactory wa>. Under Article XIV of the Covenant
it can only deal with disputes referred to it by both parties,
though it is clear (i) that the Council will refer to it for opinions
upon legal questions which arise out of disputes, and
(2) members of the League may, at their option, recognise
the jurisdiction of the Court as compulsory by signing a clause
to this effect.* In general, then, the Court seems likely to
deal with five types of question: (1) It will interpret treaties;
(2) it will settle questions of international law; (3) it will
determine, subject to the limitations noted above, the repara¬
tion to be made where there has been a breach of international
obligations; (4) it will determine the existence of any


1 If, after a third ballot, there arc still vacancies, a much nioie elaborate
mechanism of choice comes into play This has not yet been necessary.
For details cf Fachiri, op at

* 'I he chief states signed this Optional Clause, sometimes with minor
reservations, at the Assembly of 1929


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION «47

situation which, if it does exist, constitutes a breach of such
an obligation ; (5) it will advise the League upon any question
referred to it by the Council or the Assembly, though its advice
is not binding unless it is endorsed by the body concerned.
A typical case under (5) was the question referred to it in
1922 of whether the workers’ delegate from Holland to the
Third Conference of the International Labour Office had been
appointed in conformity with the provisions laid down in
Article III of the Labour Covenant of the League, which lays
it down that the non-government delegates must be chosen
from the most representative industrial organisations. 1 Finally
it may be noted that the law to be applied by the Court is
built out of four sources. (1) The rules recognised in inter¬
national conventions made by contesting States; (2) inter¬
national custom so general as to be accepted as law; (3) such
general principles of law as are recognised by the civilised
world, and (4) judicial decisions and the doctrines of recognised
publicists as guides to the making of legal rules.

The main comment upon the Court that an observer would
be tempted to make is, I think, that it has been unduly
restricted in its competence by the powers conferred on the
Council and the Assembly. If it is to be genuinely and
continually authoritative, it needs to be certain that its
advisory opinions will be treated as binding; otherwise,
inevitably, its members will be tempted to find what is likely
to prove acceptable lest it suffer by the rejection. It should,
secondly, be given a compulsory right to adjudicate all
questions which give rise to a dispute as to whether the matter
involved is or is not domestic in nature. For to leave to the
Council matters of this kind is to make the States giving the
decision concern themselves less with the facts involved than
with the effect of a precedent made upon their own situation.
It should, thirdly, be the normal method of settling disputes,
and the signing of what is now an optional clause of acceptance
should clearly be obligatory on all members of the League;
otherwise the tendency will unquestionably be to make the

' Cl. Behrens, op. eit., pp. 124-5. The International Court is also, under
clauses 415-20, and 423 of the Treaty of Versailles, the source of appeal for
Complaints aboni the fulfilment of matters relating to the organisation of
labour.


64 8 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

Court the source of judgment for small States, while the
Council remains the body to which the larger States refer.
That will, it may be suggested, very seriously diminish the
prestige of the Court. It is only the knowledge that Great
Britain not less tnan Brazil is answerable to the tribunal that
will make its activity a settled part of the habits of mankind.

It should be noted, further, that the jurisdiction of the
Court is, apart from the interpretation of the Labour clauses
of the Treaty of Versailles, original only; and it is obvious
that, in general, this must remain the case. But there are,
I believe, several directions in which the Court could provide
material of grea* value for municipal jurisdictions. Under
Article III of the Covenant it would, as Sir F. Pollock has
suggested, 1 be empowered by the Council with the task of
consolidating international law, and revising its substance
from time to time in the light of experience. No one would
suggest that this is a simple task, or one to he performed
in any brief space of time. But its successful achievement
would not only be an immense international service, but it
would confer great credit upon the Court; and it would give
desirable uniformity to much that at present is divergent in
substance and application. There is, moreover, a range of
questions where the conference upon it of appellate juris¬
diction could hardly fail to do good. It is, for example, the
law that if a foreign sovereign claims property as the public
property of his State, his declaration cannot be investigated
and is exempt from the consequence of jurisdiction. 1 There
seems no good reason why, if such a declaration is challenged,
the facts should not be determined in the ordinary way by
the Permanent Court, and that the more since the present
doctrine is only, as I pointed out earlier, a regrettable result
of the classic doctrine of sovereignty. So, also, in cases of
the detention of an immigrant alien in alleged violation of a
treaty, the national decision might well be appealed from to
the Permanent Court .3 So, again, if, under municipal law,
alien property is destroyed outside the municipal jurisdiction,
an appeal ought to lie even from the highest tribunal of a State

' Op. ctl , p 173.

* The Parliament Beige {1880), 5 P D 197

1 A.s in the Chinese Exclusion Case, 130 U S 581,


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION Sift

f n grounds of justice ; > for the property destroyed might have
easily been lawfully used under the laws of the plaintiff’s
State. What generally emerges, I think, from cases of this
kind is that where act of State, in one of its various forms,
is urged as a bar to jurisdiction, a plaintiff should be able
to cite the State concerned from the Municipal Court into the
Permanent Court. Only in that way can the individual be
protected from the irresponsibility of sovereign powers.

What, in fact, I am here pleading for is that the rules of
international law should be made universally binding through
the power to have them definitely interpreted by a recognised
tribunal. It is only in that way that we shall escape from
the tradition started by Hobbes of regarding the law of nations
as merely the law of nature disguised. 1 Obviously we should
have to limit with some stringency the occasions of appeal;
obviously, also, we should have to make the decisions of the
International Court binding upon all Municipal Courts and
enforceable by their authority. There is good reason for this
plea. The famous epigram that international law is not law
at all has had a serious effect historically, both upon its
prestige and its range of influence. Because it has had no
domicile of permanent pronouncement, its practical effect
has been weakened because it seemed to lack the certainty
and the sanctions of municipal law. It is, I think, possible
for the International Court to do for law in general what the
Praetor’s Edict did for Roman jurisprudence in its golden
age. But, to that end, it will be necessary to admit that the
supreme tribunal of a national State cannot have the last
word if the decision it makes involves the clash of principles
derived from more than a single source of law. There is no
reason to suppose that such uniformity as would be involved
would destroy the elasticity of the present regime, since most
ultimate jurisdictions already depart with difficulty from their
own precedents. And there is, it may be urged, great value
in making it possible to prevent the denial of justice by
allowing the plea of sovereignty to bar process. If sovereigns,
personal or corporate, are different from other beings, personal

■ Zuron v. Denman (1848). 2 EX 167; and compare Carr v. Front
Timts &■ Co. (1902), A.C 176

* Leviathan, Part II, chap xxx


690 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

or corporate, the best way to deal with them is to constitute
a special court to deal with them. By so doing we can end
the notion that conduct by or in the name of government is
clothed with a special sanctity. If the International Court
did no more than contribute to that end, it would have achieved
results of the highest importance.

One further question remains. I have already spoken of
the need, under the League, of a Permanent Commission of
Law ; and it is clear that such a body must work in the closest
relationship with the International Court. The latter would,
dearly, be the best possible body for the appointment of its
members. It would be the vehide for transmitting the finding
of the Commission to the League itself. It could use it as
its own organ of inquiry into problems where investigation
is, in its opinion, desirable. The Court, in fact, may be
visualised not merely as a body recording findings as cases
come before it for decision, but also, at least equally, as a
body concerned to stimulate the general development of the
law. In this respect it has a great weapon in its hands.
Legal inquiry, properly undertaken, is one of the great sources
of future progress. And it may be suggested that there is a
number of kindred organisations which might well be shep¬
herded under the wing of the International Court. A good
example of this is the International Prisons Conference. One
of the more regrettable features of criminal administration is
the small part played in its improvement by judges. If the
International Court would organise such a conference, and
bring its findings, and their bearings, to the attention of national
judiciaries, it would possibly do good, and, at least, could
do no' harm. It might, further, inaugurate international
conferences of judges for the discussion of matters where the
interchange of opinion—as, for instance, the protection of
judicial independence — has great importance. There is,
briefly, a great field for the International Court not merely
as a judicial organ, but as an institution concerned to make
law the response to need. And the more urgently it works
to that end, the more likely it is to assist the League towards
the increasing fulfilment of its purpose.

5. The International Labour Office. —I have already sug¬
gested that the League, if it is to be successful, must increasingly


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 661

undertake economic functions. That aspect of its activity is
provided for, in part by the Economic Section of the Secretariat,
in part also, and most importantly, by the International Labour
office The latter consists of two parts: it has a General
Conference of representatives of its member-States, and a
permanent organisation at Geneva. Membership of the office
is not confined to members of the League, though all members
of the latter are also members of the former; but under the
provisions of the Labour Office, States like Russia and America
could accept the obligations of membership without being, at
the same time, committed to the larger obligations of the
League. Under these terms, Germany was for some years a
member of the Labour Office, though not in the League itself.

The International Labour Office will, if the Draft Amend¬
ment of 1922 is, as seems likely, ratified, 2 governed by a body
composed of thirty-two persons. Of these sixteen represent
governments ; eight of them are nominated by States of chief
industrial importance^ and eight by the government delegates,
excluding those from States so nominated, of the remaining
members. It is provided, also, that six of these sixteen
members shall come from non-European States. Of the
remaining sixteen persons, eight, representing the employers,
and eight, representing the workers, are elected by the delegates
of these classes at the Conference, it being, again, provided
that two of each come from non-European States. The
Governing Body holds office for three years ; it fixes its own
time of meeting and procedure, and it may be especially
summoned when any twelve or more of its members so desire.
Vacancies and substitutes are provided for by its own vote,
subject to its methods being accepted by the Conference.
It receives annually from each member of the office a report
upon what the member has done in the fulfilment of its obliga¬
tions as a member ; and it has the right to prescribe the form
in which the report shall be made. It receives complaints

» Part XIII of the Treaty of Versailles deals with the principles of its
organisation ; its standing orders were adopted at the Washington Confer¬
ence on November 3, 1922 They are conveniently reprinted as Appendix
V and VI of Mr E Behrens' International Labour Office.

* Cf Behrens, op ext, 184 n.

S The question of what States arc “ of chief industrial importance " is
to be settled by the Council of the League.


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

from industrial associations about the non-fulfilment by
members of their obligations, and it communicates such com¬
plaints to the State concerned; if the answer is deemed
unsatisfactory, it has the right to publish complaint and reply.
It can also receive a complaint on similar lines from one
member about another, and, if it thinks fit, can appoint a
co mmiss ion of inquiry into the complaint; 1 and each member
is pledged to offer all facilities to the Commission. The latter
body then reports, and makes recommendations for dealing
with the complaint; if these are not accepted, the case is
referred to the Permanent Court, which has then the duty of
•* affirming, varying, or reversing the findings " of the Com¬
mission, and suggesting appropriate economic methods of
carrying out its recommendations. Any member may then
apply these methods to the defaulting State. The Governing
Body directs also the general activities, and controls the
finances of the Labour Office, the executive management being
confided to a Director.

The Director is responsible for the general management of
the Office, and the appointment of its staff, which, by statute,
must include women. The functions of the Office fall broadly
into three large categories, (i) It collects and distributes
information upon all aspects of international economic life,
it examines particularly questions to be brought before the
Conference, it conducts inquiries into problems within the
range of its interests and publishes the results ; (2) it prepares
the agenda for meetings of the Conference; (3) it receives
complaints upon the non-fulfilment of obligations by members.
For the purpose of its work, the Office is divided into three
divisions. The Diplomatic Division carries on correspondence
with governments, and prepares the groundwork of the Con¬
ferences ; the Intelligence and Liaison Division undertakes
the collection and distribution of information; the Research
Division is in charge of general scientific investigation. Con¬
nected with the last section are the Advisory Commissions of
which there are two types: (1) Consultative Commissions, of
which the International Maritime Commission of 1920 is an
example. These are composed of equal representation of the

' For the construction of the Commission see Article 412 of the Treaty
of Versailles.


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 658

interests concerned, and they make recommendations to the
Governing Body within the terms of reference decided upon
by the latter. (2) Technical Commissions, like that on the
problem of care and employment of disabled soldiers and
sailors, upon which sit only experts chosen by, and responsible
to, the Director of the Office. 1 There are also correspondence
offices in various countries, and special representatives in
others. These serve to keep the Office at Geneva in touch
with events through knowledge on the spot. Conversely,
many of the members of the office have appointed attaches
to it, so that contact is maintained from the centre to the
circumference also. The staff, it should be added, consists
of the most diverse nationalities, 1 it is recruited, where
possible, by a combination of examination and selection,
except in the case of the higher posts ; and it seems to
have been extraordinarily successful in overcoming the diffi¬
culties of language.

The Conference is, of course, the apex and crown of the
work of the Office. It meets at least once each year. Each
member-State sends four delegates, who are nominated by
its government, two of them representing the government
itself, one representing the workers, and one the employers;
and it is stipulated of each of the two last that they shall be
representative of the most important organisations in their
respective States. 3 Each delegate is entitled to be accompanied
by two advisers for each item on the agenda of the Conference,
though advisers may not vote; it is thus possible for any
particular problem to be treated by an expert from one of
the three angles involved. The Conference has a President,
and three Vice-Presidents, who must be of different nationali¬
ties and belong to the three classes of the Conference. The
President, who neither debates nor votes, organises the working
of the Conference and enforces its standing orders. Any
delegate can move resolutions, providing that at least two
days' notice of his intention is given ; but proposals relating

' On the Commissions see Mr. Behrens' very interesting account, op at.,
chap vii.

1 In 1913 it had twenty-eight different nationalities among its members.

J In the event of objection being taken to any nomination the Conference
as a whole is. by decision of the Permanent Court, competent to decide on
eligibility.


654 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

to •expenditure are first referred to the Governing Body which
examines and reports upon its financial implications to the
Conference. Voting is normally by show of hands, and no
vote is valid unless it totals one-half the delegates present.
Methods also exist for the enforcement of the closure, and for
the introduction of emergency resolutions. The order of
proceedings in the Conference is determined by a Committee
of Selection composed of twenty-four members; twelve of
these represent governments, and six each employers and
workers respectively, no State having more than one member.
These are chosen by the groups of delegates in the respective
categories. There is a committee on credentials of delegates;
a committee, which need not consist of delegates, on drafting,
to which is entrusted the drawing up of recommendations or
conventions out of the decisions of the Conference; and the
groups into which delegates are classified choose, with the
Selection Committee, such other committees as are necessary
for the work of the Conference. All the committees have
a chairman, and the minority, if there is one, has the right to
present and explain its dissent in a separate report. All the
secretarial work of the Conference is performed by the staff
of the Labour Office.

The decisions of the Conference take two forms ; they may
be either draft conventions or recommendations, and either,
to be accepted, must be adopted by a two-thirds majority of
those voting at the Conference. A convention is so drafted
that it may practically be written into the legislation of each
member-State without important alterations. It has all the
details of substance and exception of a normal English statute.
Conventions, when ratified, must be accepted in their complete
form, and remain in force for at least ten years. But though
every State is bound to submit draft conventions to its
appropriate legislative tribunal, it is not bound to ratify
them, its sovereign power, thereby, remaining unimpaired.
Recommendations differ from conventions in being mainly
statements of general principle which States are advised to
adopt as best they can: but their ratification may be either
partial or complete, and there is no period within which
they cannot be repealed. They also must be submitted within
a year, at most eighteen months, to the appropriate ratifying


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 655

authority in each State, just as in the case of a draft con¬
vention. It is, however, notable that no method seems to
exist of compelling the submission of Conference decisions to
these authorities ; and it is notable that the Draft Convention
for a forty-eight hour week, probably the most important
single decision of the Conference, has not yet been presented
for ratification, by any member-States which are permanent
members of the Council of the League. 1

Such a bare outline of anatomy does much less than
justice to what is not merely an important, but, so far, by all
odds the most successful, part of the machinery of the League
of Nations. Any discussion of it involves two related groups
of questions. We have to inquire, in the first place, into the
significance of what the Labour Office has actually done; and
we have to examine, in the second place, into the value of the
powers at its disposal for the end it has in view. Its actual
achievement is divisible into two parts. There is, first of all,
the legislation, as it may not unfitly be termed,,of its Con¬
ferences ; and there is, secondly, the vast body of information
and research it has, often for the first time, made available.
Its legislation covers a wide field, though one may note that,
whereas its first three Conferences were prolific in Draft
Conventions, at the fourth and fifth only recommendations
were adopted. It has legislated upon such subjects as the
hours of labour, the employment of children, the right of
association for agricultural workers, the use of white lead,
a weekly rest in industry, night work for women, the medical
examination of young persons at sea; in the first three
Conferences, apart from recommendations, seventeen draft
conventions were adopted. Of these, Esthonia, among mem¬
bers, has the place of honour, since its legislature has ratified
fifteen of them ; Great Britain has ratified eleven ; Japan,
seven ; Italy, five; and France, one; some of the smaller
States, like Finland, Holland and Sweden, have also pro¬
portionately good records in ratification. Certain of the
members—Chile, for example, and Germany, Italy, and Holland
—have also introduced various measures involving ratifica-

1 Though Belgium claims—on what grounds I do not know— to have applied
the substance of this Convention without formal ratification See the table
in Behrens, op ci<, Appendix VII


656 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

tion. What, in hard, material fact, is the value of these
draft conventions ? They serve, broadly speaking, three large
general purposes. They are, in the first place, an announce¬
ment of the irreducible minimum standard of industrial life,
as that standard is acceptable to the common consciousness
of modem States. They are, secondly, a very real weapon in
the hands of the labour movement in each State concerned;
for they constitute an index to policy which has real value
for the purpose of securing social advance. They are, thirdly,
a means of forcing upon backward States standards of legisla¬
tion which are essential to the welfare of the poorer classes
throughout the world.

As at present organised, however, there are obvious lacunae
in the mechanism of draft conventions. The duty of submis¬
sion for ratification ought to be peremptory ; and the govern¬
ment of each State ought, on failure to submit, to be called
upon to give a satisfactory explanation to the Governing Body
of the Labour Office. But, also, when ratification has been
completed, we need a process of inspection far more complete
than now exists. There is, of course, a machinery for the
formulation of complaints against States which have failed
to cany out covenants they have ratified ; but that is, clearly,
machinery of the last instance, and it omits provision for the
more subtle form of evasion. It would be a great advantage
if, year by year, both the government, on the one hand, and
representative industrial associations, on the other, were asked
annually to report to the Labour Office on the operation of
such conventions as were supposed to be working; and the
Labour Office itself should, every three or five years, inspect
the administrative methods used to enforce their operation.
It should, further, be realised that many of them, if they
are to be satisfactory, depend entirely upon the presence in
each State of strong trade unions; and in Japan and Hungary,
for example, the law itself, or the administration of the law,
practically prohibits the very existence of trade unions. The
sooner, moreover, ratification is made to follow upon the
adoption by the Conference of a convention, the more likely
are they to be treated seriously by those who support them.
The wide divergence between adoption arid ratification sug¬
gests that, so far, States have not been inclined to view con-


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 657

ventions as much more than urgent recommendations. And
since that purpose is already served by the recommendation
itself, the greater obligation of the convention needs to be
thrown into more striking relief.

Another point in relation to the Conference is important.
At present the Government of each State not only has twice
the number of non-official delegates, but it also, though in
agreement with representative organisations, nominates the
latter as well. That is probably unexceptionable in cases
where, like England and Germany, the labour organisation
is powerful enough to secure that its view of who represents
it is fairly certain to prevail; but that will not always, as the
difficulty with Holland has shown, be the case. It is probably,
therefore, more satisfactory to allow industrial associations,
whether-of employers or of workers, directly to appoint their
own representatives. Otherwise, there is a real danger,
especially in those States where trade unions are weak, that
the government will be tempted to choose worker-delegates
whose vote it can rely on for its own purposes. The difficulty
in relation to employer-representatives is a different one. The
need of the Conference is, undoubtedly, for the attendance of
men actually engaged in industry rather than the permanent
officials of business organisations. " The latter,” says Mr.
Behrens, 1 " are apt to endeavour to get quick party “ scores ”
which will gain the recognition of superiors, rather than take
the longer and more statesmanlike point of view.” Of govern¬
ment delegates this, above all, should be said, that, so far as
th£ problem of distance permits, they should always be the
Minister of Labour and his chief official adviser. There is
literally no other way of bringing home the significance of the
Conference to the government of the day in each State. By
that means, above, all, the proper bndges of contact can be
built, and an international official responsibility can be created
without which draft conventions are not likely to be effective.

Much the most interesting type of work performed by the
Labour Office is in the direction of research. Here, certainly,
the basis upon which its effort has been built represents a
diplomatic departure of the first importance. For its principle
is the right to communicate directly with the persons of parties
1 Op at, p 118
42


008 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

interested in its problems without going through the channels
of government offices in the various States. That represents
a recognition that the information upon which its conclusions
will be based are not likely to be adequate if they are built
solely upon the knowledge that official sources are prepared
to supply. There are, consequently, many problems upon
which the information collected by the Labour Office is the
only real source of adequate judgment; and its headquarters
are bound, increasingly, to become the most important centre
in the world for any industrial research which seeks for a
broad basis in its inductions. The fact, moreover, that its
publications are the product of minds of the most diverse
types has the advantage of making them largely free from
the danger that any special emphasis is accorded to a par¬
ticular national view. The important question here arises
of what research the Labour Office is to undertake. " There
is always a danger,” says the Director in his Report,* " of
the protagonists of certain opinions and certain causes making
the International Labour Office an instrument for the col¬
lection and compiling of statistics to support their interest
and to help them in attaining their particular ends.” That
is undoubtedly the case; and it involves, I think, organising
with some care the organs entitled to demand that researches
should be undertaken, where these are of a special kind. One
can easily conceive, for instance, that comparative statistics
of output in a given trade might be used to promote longer
hours, or dilution of skilled labour, unless there are careful
safeguards.

In general, I think, the methods adopted might be upon
the following lines: (r) All investigation must be undertaken
that is asked for by the Conference ; (2) all investigation
must be undertaken that is asked for by the Governing Body;
(3) all investigation must be undertaken that is demanded
by a majority of one of the three groups in the Conference,
subject to the approval, by a majority, of the Governing
Body. Other investigations, where they are of a minor kind,
will clearly depend upon the Director’s views. If they are
important, and objection to them is taken, the Director should
submit them to the Governing Body with his own recom-

' Report of the Director to the Third Conference (1921). p 236


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION M»

emulations as to action. It is, I suggest, clear that the bulk
of the normal work of the Office must be what may be termed
continuous in character, like the Annual Reports, in Great
Britain, of the Chief Inspector of Factories; and that investi¬
gations of magnitude should be undertaken in response to
specific demand. The more, of course, such large-scale in¬
quiries permit of transformation in annual reports upon their
substance, the better it will be for the work of the Office.
So far as possible, moreover, it must be less a conclusion-making
body than a fact-finding body ; for its influence and reputation
will depend almost entirely on the confidence it can inspire.
In general, it is for the Conference to make conclusions, and for
the Office to supply the material out of which they can be made.
Or, alternatively, conclusions should be reached by the advi¬
sory Commissions of experts of which I have already spoken.

But it is of the first importance that the Office should take
no narrow view of the boundaries of its research. Labour is
not an abstract entity which can be divorced from the total
social environment in which it is placed. The Office deals,
for instance, with vocational education ; but it cannot usefully
collect facts upon that subject without also explaining their
relevance to education as a whole. It cannot explain the
nature and functions of works councils without, simultaneously,
discussing also their impact upon trade-union organisation.
America, for instance, is the home of the “ company union,"
with, often enough, institutions for discussion of considerable
magnitude; but a discussion of their incidence would be
worthless which did not also take account of the degree to
which they are deliberately intended, as in the ironworks
of Colorado, to act as a barrier against the development of
industrial unionism of the normal form. So also, if in a
wider sphere, with unemployment. The Office could not,
to-day, usefully investigate its causes without examining the
relationship of currency methods to its incidence. This
implies, of course, a close co-operation with the Economic
Section of the League itself; but, beyond such co-operation,
it implies a duty also on the part of the Labour Office to follow
out the ramifications of its problems into whatever direction
the facts may lead them.

One final remark may be made. An organisation with


660 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

over fifty members, speaking the most varied and dissimilar
tongues, is obviously concerned very greatly with the question
of how to make its work known in an effective ana enduring
way. In part, of course, that is accomplished by the trans¬
lation into the languages of member-States of the more
important publications of the Office ; in part, also, it is
attempted by making the Director and his chief colleagues
representatives on mission in an effort, by speech and inter¬
view, to explain the functions and achievement of the Office ;
in part, again, it is effected by the publicity in the press for
the work of the League, especially of its conferences. All this,
no doubt, is to the good. But it may be suggested that,
even collectively, these methods are not finally adequate. It
is above all important that the Conferences of the Office should
be held not merely in Geneva, but, occasionally, in every
region where it deserves to have influence. In Japan, in South
America, in the Balkans, it is more likely to make its way
by showing itself as a living thing than by all the publications
it can ever issue ; in particular, I believe, it is much more
important that it should meet in States where Labour con¬
ditions are bad than, as in Geneva or Washington, where they
are in the van of development. Much, further, could be done,
by organising, on the same basis as the full Conference itself,
special regional conferences where local difficulties could be
discussed, and resolutions, perhaps, passed in the shape of
recommendations to the Conference proper. And it is vital
to the Labour Office that its main regular publications should
be available in every language in which they are likely to be
read. That may mean, of course, the publication of special
journals rather than the translation of existing ones; the
problem is one of adapting means to ends. Certainly it is
urgent that not the Office only, but the League also, should
acquire the habit of thinking of language, not as a barrier to
impede, but as one to transcend. There is every reason for
limiting the languages of official use; there is no ground for
limiting the languages of possible utility. The Labour Office
is not likely to meet, for a long time, with difficulties of a
grave kind in the more advanced industrial countries. That
is all the more reason for making itself influential in those
regions where its influence is more greatly needed.


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION eel
VI

International government as far-reaching as that here
outlined is, of course, a new experiment in the history of the
world. Men have for centuries sought the means of peace
without a desert as the condition of peace; those whose names
bear an honourable place in that tradition—Postel. Penn, the
AbW Saint-Pierre—have seemed even to our own generation
to belong to the category of Utopian thinkers. Yet, after all,
the Utopia of one century is the reality of its successor ; and
if the hypotheses we have here laid down are dismissed as
Utopian, that does not mean that they are unnecessary or
impractical. For we are so often the prisoners of our old
traditions that we do not recognise our presence in a new
world.

Every claim, of a certainty, that has been made against
the principles of international government can be shown
to be false as it has been applied. The national interest
of the States concerned has not suffered diminution; their
administrative independence has remained secure. The love
of men for their kith and kin can be not less real in its
atmosphere than it was in the days of Napoleon. The right
of a State to retain a monarchy or to become a republic has
not altered. The decisions in which it has become involved
are made by itself not less than by others, as it is affected
by those decisions ; and those which concern itself alone are,
not less than before, matters about which it retains a full
autonomy. We have learned, indeed, that through inter¬
national organisation we can transcend the narrow limits of
geographical boundaries. We can unify interests which, like
those of the wage-earners of the world, were hampered and
frustrated by frontiers. We have learned, also, that whenever
protests are made against international government in the
name of national prestige those who make the protests, as
England in the case of Egypt, have always something to conceal.
We have realised, in brief, that the territory between States
which seemed to the last generation a permanently uncharted
hinterland is, in fact, not less susceptible of organised govern¬
ment than that which has already been mapped and surveyed.

But two great problems remain to trouble the lawyer and


G 62 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

the sceptic. The lawyer can understand sovereignty. He can
grasp the concept of a State wrapped in the majestic garments
of irresponsibility, declaring its own will, and being subject
to no other will save its own. This mysterious realm of
obligations, half-legal, half-moral, in which the State may
obey itself, but is yet constrained to reliance upon others,
has nothing of the simplicity in which juristic concepts have
moved since the beginning of the seventeenth century.
Sovereignty in international law gave him definite sources of
reference. He knew by whom the State was bound. What
Hegel called the " indgsUipg unity ” of things was reduced
thereby to measurable proportions. The State which was
the guardian of the world, but not itself a factor in an
organised moral world, 1 had behind all the sanction of
traditions of which he was the guardian and interpreter. To
move from these concrete and hard realities to an international
society where the State was but a One in a Many without
definition being conferred upon its manyness was to leave the
brightness of day for a twilight world where all things were
vague and obscure.

Yet, after all, it is the facts which compel this movement.
The sovereignty of States is seen to be a fiction as soon as
they attempt the exertion of their sovereignty. Their wills
meet with one another ; they cannot cut a clear and direct
route to their goal. Their wills meet, because their rela¬
tions grow ever more intimate, and the institutions of the
sovereign State fail to express the moral wants of those
intimate relations. We have therefore required institutions
to embody the sitUichkeii which arises from their interaction.
We find them in building a vehicle of spiritual unities and
giving to its decisions the power to bind the separate wills
related to them. We discover, in short, that the sovereignty
of the State is a power only to fulfil certain purposes and
obligations ; and with the emergence of the great society those
purposes and obligations are, in their largest outline, capable
of definition only by an organ in which the single State has
influence but not ultimate power. The lawyer is witnessing,
in fact, the transformation of the sovereign State into a unity
of local importance in a vaster community of which it is a

* BoMnqort, Philosophical Theory of the State, pp. 314-5.


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 068

part. That vaster community will, as it grows into the
common consciousness of men, take to itself the power and
authority that it needs to fulfil its end. It will, of course,
move slowly and obscurely in its beginnings; and the lawyer
who is troubled by this transaction will do well to remember
that the modem State did not spring full-bom from the
Reformation. Men did not at once take Bodin for gospel;
and, when they did, they discovered that his was a gospel
which remained true only by not being applied. That has
been the history also of States in their international context.
But because there is danger that, as with France under
Napoleon, or Germany under the Hohenzollem, States may
seek to give substance to their sovereignty, what we have
done is to arm against them the moral consciousness of an
organised world. But the lawyer finds moral consciousness
inadequate as a source of legal reference.

For he argues with Hobbes that “ covenants without the
sword are but words, and of no strength to secure a man at
all." But the sword is in the Covenant; only the method of
organising its use is different from in the past. At this point
the sceptic intervenes. The thing, he argues, cannot be done.
Englishmen will not, in the last resort, fight at the bidding of
Frenchmen and Germans, of Serbians and Italians. They will
be masters in their own house; and if their own house is the
world, then they will be masters of that world. For to rely
upon other States for justice is to rely upon broken reeds.
Their interests are not the same as English interests; their
wants are not English wants. Human nature does not possess
the ingredients from which may be hammered out the solutions
of right reason. The world is on the side of the big battalions,
and to write fine words on paper is not to win victories.

The poison of Machiavelli is in our blood; and certainly
he who read the record of history would be entitled to his
pessimism. " Most successfu l men,' * wrote Lord Acton. 1
" deprecate whatlsif "Henry ~T aylor callsmu ctT weak sen-
siBBiljrof cohscienceTpancfne quotes tEeTamous remark of
Lord Grey that the intercourse of nations cannot be strictly
regulated by the rules of morality. If by this is meant that
men will often enough care so passionately for the end they

■ History of Fnedom, p. *19,


664 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

seek as to be negligent about the means by which they attain
it, no one, I suppose, will deny its truth. But for all men
there exists what Tocqueville called a patrie inlelUctutUe,
and the history of mankind is the history-oFtheir allegiance
to it. The purpose served by States is the purpose served
by the fragmentary communities of the Middle Ages ; they
serve, by the barriers they create, to secure self-government
against the absorptiveness of power. But exactly as those
communities could be embraced, without moral loss, in a
larger system, so, it may be urged, can the States of our own
time yield to the pressure of needs greater than, and beyond,
themselves. Either they must abandon their right, or we
must surrender the scale on which we seek to live. For that
scale involves, by the inherent logic of its nature, the pursuit
of purposes to which private interests must be sacrificed; or,
rather, its purpose is such that only by its realisation can
private interests themselves be realised. If there is any
lesson in the results of history, it is above all the lesson that
we cannot attain ends in carelessness of means ; for the means
enter into the end and transform it. To make private success
the goal is impossible to any State which seeks survival in
a world of States. For reckless pursuit of that undefined
chimera is, in the end, fatal to existence. It destroyed
Louis XIV; it destroyed Napoleon ; it destroyed Germany.
It destroyed them because they exalted private interest over
public well-being. They saw good only in terms of their own
desires; and that blindness has, in the end, brought with it
its own penalty.

We need not deny that evil is real, and that the pain men
have suffered is something for which there can be no com¬
pensation. We need not, either, insist that there is an
unfolding purpose in the world which, whatever we do, will
realise itself. What there is of purpose in the world, what
soul of goodness also, is there by the deliberate effort of men.
That, after all, is the groundwork of hope. Amid passion and
differences, amid, also, the passion of differences, we are able
dimly and yet securely to discern interests of mankind that
make them one and indivisible. For the interests of men are
less and less set by the geographical frontiers of the nation¬
state. Social organisation has transcended those limited


INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION 6«5

boundaries. The working-classes of the world are beginning
to see that a quarrel between the rulers of Serbia and Austria
is not their quarrel; the scientists of the world know that the
increase of their wisdom is a matter of international co-opera¬
tion ; the consumer realises that he is a world-citizen whether
he likes it or not. States as the ultimate units of mankind
cannot express those group-consciousnesses in any real or
enduring way. They can, doubtless, exploit the instinct of
man to love his own herd and delude him into a belief that
obedience to their orders is identical with right conduct.
But a term is being set to that power of exploitation by
experience.

We are being driven, in fact, to see the position of the
nation-State in new proportions, as one only in the varied
groupings of mankind. We can see developing beneath the
older structure new organs expressive of needs thus far only
half-conscious of themselves, but increasingly anxious for a
larger development. They can attain their maturity only as
the nation-State combines with others in an order at once
more integrated and more various than we have thus far
known. But combination means the sacrifice of primacy and
its replacement by co-operation. Co-operation means prin¬
ciple, and principle in its turn means standards. We are
evolving instruments which greatly add to our power of
avoiding the delusions through which, in the past, we marched
to war. Humble men are being led by education to dream
of a life in which they realise beauty and the joy of living.
An East that was once unchanging has become conscious of
newer and larger destinies. In Africa we ourselves are seeking
to avoid the bitter wrongs of earlier experiments with the
simpler peoples. It is too early to say that we shall succeed ;
it is even too early to claim that we ought to succeed. But,
at the least, there is in the world a growing impatience at the
exploitation of man by man. There is a fuller sense, more
widespread and more deeply felt, that the inheritance of the
world is not the possession of a few, and that for the others
life is merely an endless toil. We have discovered the sig¬
nificance of equality ; and its demands upon us are not likely
to be less than the demands we have known in the name of
freedom.


006 A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS

The sovereignty of the State, then, is in process of div
appearance in international affairs because it has served its
purpose there. It no longer enfolds and absorbs the allegiance
of the individual; his loyalties are as diverse as his experience
of life. As he grows into the consciousness of the world, so
does he reduce that world to the service of his personality.
He is coming to see that the categories utilised by the State
when it sought freedom from religious bondage are no longer
valid. What he requires is not the concepts of imperialism,
but the concepts of federalism. What he has come to see ts
the futility of independence in a world which is interdependent.
There are concerns where he will allow intervention from none.
There are matters where with those about him of his own
kindred he claims the right to self-determination. Beyond,
there are the greater issues which he sees are the common
concern of mankind. It is the paradox of self-government
that, to be free, he must share with others in making the rules
of fellowship among men. But life has taught us in the
sternest fashion that without those rules there will be no
fellowship, and without fellowship there will be no freedom.
Either we have to make a world by deliberate plan, or we
court disaster. It is a grim alternative. It makes men feel
how near their feet lie to the abyss. But it is also an alternative
that may prove the pathway to their salvation.


INDEX


Acton (Lord) Antithesis between
liberty and equality, 152 , on
inequality and law, 277 , quoted
663

Administrative Tribunals, must
be judicially controlled, 301 ,
nature of their powers, 389
methods of controlling, 390 f
Anarchy, conditions of avoiding
100 , a consequence of rcvolu
tion 506

Aristocracy, weakness of 290
Aristotle, on master and slave 42,
149. on munificence, 130
Arnold (Matthew), quoted, 539
Associations, as natural as the
State, 60 , cannot have a final
trill, 67, relation to organised
consultation, 133 , profusion of
236 , defects of, 257 , merits of
258 , their part in influencing
legislature, 324 . relation to the
executive, 373 . their part in
making the law, 385 , and local
government, 425 , and national¬
ised industries. 459 , and private
industries, 497 . in a State built
on equality, 508 f , recognition
of new vocational. 510 , govern¬
ment of vocational, 512 , research
as function of vocational 516 ,
and jury-system in technical
cases, 561

Austin (John), his theory of sover¬
eignty, 49 f

AuthoritYj place of consent in, 241 ,
relation to self-government. 243 ,
and the expert, 244 f , and
experience, 243 , and the indi¬
vidual, 247 ; and power of the
State, 249, and law, 230 f ,
hoar made valid, 231 , and
conscience, 259, never com¬
pletely unified. 261 , as an
expression of facta, 267 , legiti¬
mised by co-operation, 268 ,
a* co-ordination of functions,

8*T


273 , and rights, 274, and
grievances, 284 , in international
aflairs, 285 , how made moral,
288 , rebellion against as contin¬
gent duty, 289 , in industry 461

Backward Peoples, protection of,
59 *

Behrens (E B ), quoted, 621 n ; 657

Bsnthaii (Jeremy), excessive sim¬
plicity of 15 , theory of social
good, 24 , on second chambers,
331

Beveridge (Sir W), on advisory
committees. 327 , on civil ser¬
vice, 401 , on social insurance.
320 n

Bodix (Jbax). on sovereignty. 46

Bradley (F H ), quoted, 95

Bkailsford (H N ), quoted, 391 n ,
612 n

Brandeis (L D ), quoted. 122 n.

Branting (H ). quoted, 634

Bright (John), against limitation of
hours of labour, 71

Burke (Edmund), on place of
property in State, 88 , on sup¬
pression 0/ freedom, 238, on
duties of memher of Parliament,


Cecil (Lord Hugh), on justification
of property, 178

Civil Service, importance of, 397 ,
appointment to, 398 1 , methods
of improving, 402 f ; official life
in should he shorter, 404 ; rela¬
tion of higher to lower officials in,
406 ; need for growth of indus¬
trial, 499 , and League of Nations,
638

Clarke (Mr. Justice), on control of
executive discretion, 393

Clay (Henry), on effects of inherit¬
ance, 329

Cobden (Richard), on effects of
free trade, 218


668 A GRAMMAR

Cohen (M. R), en interpretation of
law, 3 8 S

Colbertism, revival of, 119
Cole (G. D. H ), on process of law,
73 ; on the recall, 82 , on disper
sion of authority, 1381.. on
committee-loyalty, 238 , on rights
of producer, 440 , on powers of
guild, 444 , on choice of manager
m industry, 455 , collective con¬
tract in, 501

Constitution, relation to rights,
103; flexible or right, 137.
degree to which it should be
written, 305 , amendment of, 307
Consultation, importance of, 80 f ,
and rights, 133 ; makes authority
creative, 268

Decentralisation, confers sense of
responsibility. 61 . essential to
rights. 131 ; makes authority
creative, 27 1 ; distribution of
powers under, 309 ; and federal¬
ism, 310, avoids danger of,
bureaucracy, 413 ; dangers of,
413 ; makes experiment possible.
422 f.

Defender (Public), need of in
criminal cases, 566
Democracy, in what sense final, 17 ,
regards its members as equally
entitled to happiness, 157
Dicey (A V ), on sovereignty, 52
Ducuir (L£on), quoted. 234 208 301

Education, a condition of the
responsible State, 78 , right of
citizen to, 114 , and liberty, 146 ,
and equality. 154

Elliott (W. G), quoted, 249 a,
282 n

Emmott (Lord), on relations be¬
tween capital and labour, 253
Eouauty, and liberty, 152 , meaning
of. 153 f ; and opportunity. 154 ,
its necessary institutions, 157 ,
its economic aspect, 158 ; and
wealth, 161 ; and industrial
authority, 163 ; in international
relations. 165 , of reward, 189 ,
before the law, 364 f
Executive, its ordinance power
104 , must be separate from
judiciary, 129 , functions of, 295

356 ; has judicial functions, 296 ,
and legislature, 299 , in America,

357 ; methods of choosing, 357 ,
how composed, 358; internal
relations of 360 , head of should


OF POLITICS

be m legislative assembly, 362 .
relations to citizens. 364 ; and
public hearings, 365 f . as admin¬
istrator, 368 , should be organised
by functions, 369 , departmental
co-operation in, 371 , andresearch
372 f ■ and advisory committees,
375 f , advisory committees of,
should be specialised, 379 , their
functions, 380 f , rule-making
jiowcrs of, 388 ; control of its
rule-making powers. 391 , must
be liable for its torts, 393 . place
of civil service in, 397 , and
political prosecutions, 582 f , in
League of Nations, 631

Finer (Herman), on proportional
representation, 315 . on voca¬
tional bodies in Germany, 460 »
Fitzcibbon (Chief Justice), his
action in Wolfe Tone’s Case, 535
Follett (M P), on co-operation of
purposes, 276

France, legislative committees in,
345 . local government in, 411
Frankfurter (Felix), quoted, 280
Freedom (see Liberty)

Germany, Economic Council in, 82
and Peace of Versailles, 252 ,
high standard of local officials
in, 409 , creativeness of its local
government, 420; method of
appointing judges in, 545
Goethe (Wolfgang von), quoted.
43

Government, arises from the facLs
of human nature. 17 ; its claim to
embody a social will, 20 , built
upon moral obligation, 57 . needs
to consult all interests. 80 , can
no longer be direct, 117 , in daily
fact is the State, 131 , any
increase in power of. contin¬
gently dangerous, 170, inter¬
national character of, 387 f.

Gray, (J C ), quoted, 56
Green (T H ), on citizenship, 39 ;
on rebellion, 289

Guild Socialism, certain difficulties
in, 82 , powers of guilds in, 444

Haldane (Viscount), on motives to
effort, 215, 486 , on value of
advisory bodies, 376
Hamilton (Alexander), quoted, 140
Hamilton (Sir Ian), quoted, 402
Harcourt (Sis W ), on relation of
ministers and officials 243


INDEX


660


Hegel (G W F ), his theory over-
simple, 13, on the nation-State,
122

Higgling or Market, an inadequate
test oi remuneration, 191

Hobbes (Thomas), on allegiance
248 , on law of nations, 649 , on
covenants, 663

Hobson (J A ), quoted, 196, 486, 503

Holmes (Mr Justice), on nature of
law, 278 , attitude to experi¬
ments. 280 , on law and morals,
344 , on judges, 330 , on impor¬
tance of economics to lawyers,
377 on abolition of judicia 1 veto
on congressional legislation, 381

Horne (Sir R), on advantages of
laitut-fatre 307, on political
prosecutions, 585

Indemnity (Acts or), ought to
involve two-thirds majority in
legislature, 338-9

Industry, effects on the citizen, 76
constitutionalism in, 79, as a
profession, 202, publicity in
204 , rights must be safeguarded
ln - 433 . place of the State in
435 . categories of. 436 . private
enterprise in. not likely to dis¬
appear, 437 , nationalisation in,
437 f , management of national¬
ised, its meaning. 440 legislative
assembly and nationalised. 443 .
institutions of nationalised, 445 ,
governing board of nationalised,
443 f , regional boards in
nationalised, 449, works com¬
mittees in nationalised. 450 f .re¬
cruitment of staff in nationalised,
434 f , promotion and discipline
in nationalised. 436 f , advisory
committees in nationalised, 439
authority m nationalised, 461 ,
sphere of consumers' co-oj>eration
in, 462 f., relation of consumers’
co-operation to State, 464 , insti¬
tutions of consumers’ co-opera¬
tion. 466 , needs of co-operative
movement in, 470. State
regulation of private, 476 f .
form of corporate effort in pri¬
vate, 478 f . place of worker in
private, 480 , publicity in private
enterprise, 481 , ignorance and
waste in private, 483 . laisun¬
fair* impossible in, 48)1, 306,
results of war-experience in, 489,
need for industrial councils in
private, 491 , functions of these


councils, 492 f , powers and
composition of, 497 , research in
pnvate, 498 . place of guild in.
300 , collective contract in, 501 ,
place of vocational bodies in,
308 f , transference of private
to State, 325 , and international
government, 611, 630

Insurance, importance of 320,
should be nationalised, 321 .
proper subjects of, 522

Internationalism, implied in na¬
tionalism, 228, functions in¬
volved in, 229 as a system of
institutions, 230 , as a protection
for the masses, 233 , and safe¬
guards for natural rights, 236,
arguments against, 239, econo¬
mic institutions of, 337 f

James (William), on instinct of
constructiveness, 23, on neces¬
sary pluralism, 261 , quoted.
400. 344

Jesuits, influence on. theory of
sovereignty, 47

Judiciary importance of indepen¬
dence in, 83 : must be separate
from executive, 129 , function of
293 - legislates and administers,
297 . must control administrative
tribunals, 301 , should not con¬
trol legislature. 302-4 , place of,
in the State, 540 . motives of
decisions by, 543 . method of
appointment 545 i , promotion
of members of, 349, tenure of
office in. 549, how to separate
from executive, 551 . should not
criticise executive, 332 , should
usually be immune from execu¬
tive attack 333 , and martial
law, 334 , the unpaid magistrate
In, 361 , and industrial courts,
362 , and medical assessors in
criminal cases 363 , and prisons.
364 , and law reform, 381 ; in
League of Nations, 643

Juries, merits and weaknesses of,
339 , need for technical juries in
technical cases, 361

Law, importance of, 230 , nature of,
273, adequacy of, 276- clam
influence in, 277; hfe of, is
experience, 278; element of
command in, never final, 286;
an evaluation of interests, 287

Lawyers, and the poor, 370 ; con¬
servatism of, 372 , training of


670


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


57J ; importance of economics to,
377; purposes for which they
should be organised, 378 , and
law reform, 380

Lees-Smith, (H B.), advocates Nor¬
wegian second chamber, 330

Leo ax Advice, (Bureaux or), need
for,' 567 , functions of, 368 ; staff
of, 570

Legislative Assembly, should be
territorial and not vocational, 84 ,
limits to power of, 139 , functions
of, 293 , has certain executive
and judicial functions, 296, re¬
lation with executive, 299 , how
chosen. 311 ; parties and, 313 ,
value of two-party systemin, 314 ,
proportional representation and,
315 , duty of member in. 319 ,
and the recall, 320 , and refer¬
endum and initiative, 321 f , and
the constituencies. 324 , should
consist of a single chamber, 3 28 f ,
Mr and Mrs Webb's two Parlia¬
ments, 333 f. , qualification of
rqembcrs for, 340 members of
should be re-ebgible, 341 , Prime
Minister should have right to
dissolve, 342 , proper sue oi.
343 ; relation ol to executive in
America, 344, in France, 345 .
in England. 346 , place of ad¬
visory committees in 349 , their
value and difficulties, 350-2 ,
initiative of private members in
353 , safeguards against corrup¬
tion in, 354; and League of
Nations, 626

Liberty, born of government. 18 ,
as tutelage to a real self, 30 , as
emphasis of individuality, 34 ,
depends on habit of civic pi otest
85, of speech, u8f , limits of
free speech, 121 , in wartime,
123 f , and judicial protection
128 , meamng of, 142, and
restraint. 143, as opportunity,
144 , private liberty, 146, in
politics 147, economic, 148 ,
and special privilege, 149 , and
equality, 152 , may imply dis¬
obedience, 171

Libpmann, (Walter), quoted, 264.
267

Local Government, makes respon¬
sibility widespread, 60; reason
for its existence, 411 , advantages
of, 412, weaknesses of, 413,
areas in. 4T4 , needs paid service.
416; should be based on direct


election, 417; power of central
government over, 418; needs
wider powers than now, 419,
value of experiment in, 42a,
associations and, 425 , need for
civic spirit in, 427 , need for
scientific assessment of its work,
428

Locke (John), on separation of
powers, 104 , on property, 181
Lowell (A L ), on Public Hearings
in Massachusetts, 365

McCardie (Mr Justice), action in
O'Dwyer case, 552

Macaulay (Lord), on means of
political safety, 101
MacDonald (J R ), quoted, 638
Machiavelli (N ), quoted 209
Madison (James), quoted, 162, 297
Maine (Sir Henry), on Austin, 51
Maitiand (F W ), work of, 576
Marshall (Thomas), theory of sove¬
reignty, 46

Martial ' Law judicial control of.
554 f

Marx (Karl), on weakness of State
divided into rich and poor, 13
on early capitalism, 507
Mill (J 5 ), on test for franchise,

115, on liberty 144, on nation¬
ality 222 , on inheritance, 526 i ,
on charitable bequests 531
Minorities and League of Nations,
593

Montesquieu (C S), on nature of
law, 55 , on separation of powers,
104 , quoted, 297

Morris ^William). on happiness in
work 211

Nationalism, significance of in nine¬
teenth century, 219 , meamng of.
220 f , and autonomy, 221 , and
industrialism 223 , and modern
warfare, 225 f , relation to right.
226, implies internationalism,
228 ; and patriotism, 231 , not
entitled to unexcepted allegiance,
240 , makes us see State in new
perspective, 665

Nations (League or), political func¬
tions of, 589-606 , and treaties,
589, and boundaries, 59 ° . and
disarmament, 591 , and minor¬
ities, 593. enforcement of its
views, 594 f . 600. 603, 625 , and
backward peoples, } 9 b; and
disputes, 59S ; and social welfare,
606 needs an educational com-


INDEX


071


mission, 60S, needs a medical
commission and one on statistics,
609, economic functions of, 610 f ;
should control international in¬
vestment, 611 , relation of, to
tariffs, 614, and labour standards,
613, 621 , and natural resources
■n unorganised areas, 616 . and
migration, 619, and economic
inquiries, 623, 637 , institutions
of, 624 f , assembly of, 626,
admission to, 626 , character of
State-representation in assembly
629, council of, 631 , members
of, 633 , council of, and assembly,
634 , council of, and Egypt, 637 ,
secretariat of 638 f . aud inter
national court 643 , powers of
its court 649 , and labour office,
6301. , labour decisions of, 634

News importance of a pure supply
of 86, honest, a condition of
liberty, 147

Obedience, grounds of, 21 , not
morally necessary in every case,
33 limits of, 250

Ogilvie (Si* Andrew), on value of
advisory bodies. 377

Pericles, on liberty, 152

Pollock (Sir F ), quoted, 110 643
648

Pound (Roscoe), on idea of relation
in law 276 n

Powers (Separation or), does not
mean equal balance of, 297

Propketv. validity of. 87 as a
right, 130, as a means of self
preservation 173, not built on
principle, 174 , habits of present
system of, 175 attempts to
justify, 177 influence of Pun
tanism on theory of 1S0 pro¬
tests against, 181 its influence
on State 184 f , justification of
as functional 187 , as theory
of reward 189 f and industrial
organisation 201 as return to
entrepreneur 206 and confis
cation 208 , and compensation if
rights of are extinguished, 209
effects of just system of, 212
and inheritance, 326 f and charit¬
able bequests, 331 , confiscation
of a mistake 533

Punjab, disturbances of 1919 m. 336

Renan (E ), on nationality, 219

Rights, inherent in citizenship 39


functional in character, 40, or¬
ganisation oi, 38 f , nature at,

89 f , not merely will of State,

90 , as natural and historical. 91 ,
utility as test of, 92 , correlative
with functions, 94, identical at
minimum. 95, relation to cen¬
tralisation, 101 , and written con¬
stitution, 103, condition pre
cedent of law, 105, right to
work, 107 f , right to leisure, in ,
right to industrial self-govern¬
ment, ii2 f , right to education,-
114, right to political power.
U5f , right to free speech, n8f ,
right to associate. 122, and
equality before the law. 128,
right to property, 130 , are never
static, 263

Rousseau (J J ), influence on theory
of State, 30 , on sovereignty, 46 .
on tendency of governments to
deteriorate, 71

Royer-Collard (P P ), quoted, 64

Salter (Sir Arthur), on value of
advisory bodies, 376, on causes
of war, 338 , on contact of public
officials, 618

Science, importance of. in modern
civilisation, 19

Shaw (G Bernard), on equality of
income, 189 , on work of Marx

an

Shaw (Lord), on control of executive
discretion 391

Sidowick (Henry) on importance
of judiciary, 340

Smith (Adam), on habits of share¬
holders. 484

Socialism, as protest against rights
of property. 181

Society, difference from the State,
26 , is federal in nature, 39

Sovereignty, chapter u. passtm ,
legal aspect of, 30 f , in a rigid
constitution 53 , political nature
of 55 f , incompatible with in¬
terests of humanity, 64, and
nationalism 227, protects the
few against the many, 234 , not
necessary to a full national life,
238, sense in which it must be
abandoned, 271, and League of
Nations, 662 f

Spinqia (Benedict) quoted, 291

State its claim to control, 21
sources of allegiance to, 22,
puroose of, 25 different from
society 27 will of 29, »t


072


A GRAMMAR OF POLITICS


. representing best self, 30 f. ; an
administrative concept, 35; has
no special moral claims, 37 ;
power of, limited by rights, 41 ;
sovereignty of, chapter li, patnm ;
bora with Reformation, 43;
changes in its history, 47 f ,
place of law in, 3} ; influence of
voluntary bodies on, 59 ; as a
moral entity, 61; and general
will, 68 ; its function in society,
70 ; relation to functional bodies,
73 f., how made responsible, 74 ,
and process of consumption, 77 ,
interests it must consult, 80 ,
value of territorial, 86 , must be
built on equality 87 ; place of
rights in, 90 f ; duty of individual
to, 196, its prescriptions never
final, 99, as communittu com-
mmiiatxm, 103; must control
industrial power, 109; cannot
exclude class from franchise, 117,
right to sell-protection. 113 ; and
written constitution, 135 , and
liberty, 144 ; bias of action in,
151 ; and equality, 153 f , and
present system of property, 176 ,
and nationalism, sir , cannot be
unified. 261, increasing com¬
plexity of. 271 ; as co-oidinator,
281 ; must organise criticism of
itself, 283 ; difficulties not only
those of machinery. 317 ; should
he liable for its torts, 395 , pro¬
blems are problems not of power
hut administration, 430
Strikes. in public services, 154, 449 ,
futility of laws against, 315


Tawney (R. H.), quoted. 193, 231
Thomas (Albert), on inquiries In
Internstional Labour Office, 638
Thoueac (H. D), no duty to dis¬
obey, 171

Trade Unionism, need.for compul¬
sory membership of, 79
Tyrrell (George), on allegiance, 239

United State*, problem ol sove¬
reignty in, 49 ; legislative com¬
mittees in, 344; executive of.
337 ; Public Hearings system in
Massachusetts, 365 ; executive
discretion in, 393 ; spoils system
in. 398; election of judges in,
545

Veblen (Tborstein), on conspicuous
waste, 23

Vinogradovs (Sir P.), on nature of
law. 273

Vocations, set under Associations

Wallas (Graham), quoted. 169. 441
Weaver (Sir Lawrence), on civil
service method. 488
Webb (S. and B). their Theory of
Parliament. 335 f ; quoted, 428,
472, 508

Webster (Daniel), hit attack on
judicial decision, 533
Wells (H G ), on justices of the
peace, 561 , On importance of
scepticism. 576

Windham (W 1 , opposed extension of
educational facilities, 71
V/oolv (Leonard), quoted. 127, 474,
617
