William Law, The Spirit of Prayer (1749)
==========================================================================
Law's treatise on prayer as the essence of religion — influential on the mystics and the Oxford Movement. Essential English mysticism. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web


at |http : //books . google . com/


/^<^^3.35


Harvard College
Library


FROM THE BEQUEST OF

JOHN HARVEY TREAT

OF LAWRENCE, MASS.
GLASS OF 1862


V


SPIRIT OF PRAYER,


OR9


THE SOUL RISING OUT OP THE VANITY OP TIME,


INTO THE


RICHES OF ETERNITY.


PART I.


BY WILLIAM LAW, M. ^.


oyc/


PROvmEsrCE :

J^mN ItflLLER, PRIlfTSR.

1823.


Ar — %

APR 25 1B88


tA<U^.


CHAPTER I-

Treating of some mailers prqHiratorjf to the S^rit
of Prayer.

The greattet part of mankind, nay of Chris-
tians, may be s«dd to be asleep; and that par-
ticular way of life, which takes up each man's
mind, thoughts, and affections, may very well
be called his particular dream. This degree
of vanity is equally, visible in every form and
order of life. The learned and the ignor-
ant, the rich and the poor, are all in the same
state of slumber ; only passing away a short
life in a different kind of dream. But why so ?
It is because a man has an eternity within him,
is bom into this world, not for the sake of liv-
ing here, not for any thing this world can give
him, but only to have time and place^ to be-
come either an eternal partaker of a divine
life with God, or to have an hellish eternity
amongst fallen angels : And therefore, every
man who has not his eye, his heart, and his
bands, continually governed by this twofold
eternity, may be justly said to be fast asleep,
to have no awakened sensibility of himself
And a life devoted to the interests, and enjoy-
ments of this world, spent and wasted in the
slavery of earthly desires, may be truly called
a dream? as having all the shortness, vanity.


and delusion of a dream; only^ with this great
difference, that when a dream is over, nothing
is lost but fictions and fancies ; but when the
dream of life is ended only by death, all that
eternity has lost, for which we were brought
into being. JNow there is no misery in this
world, nothing that makes either the life or
death of man to be full of calamity, but this
blindness and insensibility of his stat^, into
which he so willingly, nay, obstinately plung^
himself. Every thing that has the nature of
evil and distress in it, takes its rise from hence.
Do but suppose a man to know himself; that he
comes into this world on no other errand, but to
rise out of the vanity of time into the riches of
eternity ; do but suppose him to govern his in-
ward thoughts and outward actions by this
view of himself, and then to him every day has
lost all its evil ; prosperity and adversity have
no difference, because he receives and uses
them both in the same spirit ; life and death
are equally welcome, because equally parts of
his way to eternity. Foe poor and miserable
as this life is, we have all of us free access to
all that is great, and good, and happy ; and
carry within ourselves a key to all tbe trea*-
sures that heaven has to bestow upon us. — ^We
starve in the midst of plenty, groan under in-
firmities, with the remedy in our own hands ;
live and die, without knowing and feeling any
thing of the one^ only good^ whilst we have it in


«ur power to f^DOW and enjoy it in as great a
reality, as we know and feel the power of this
world over us; For heaven is as near to our
souls^ as this world is to our bodies ; and we
are created, we are redeemed, to have our
conversation in it. God, the only good of all
intelligent natures, is not an absent or distant
God, but is more present in and to our souls,
than our own bodies ; and we are strangers to
heaven, and without God in the world, tor this
only reason, because we are void of that spirit
of prayer, which alone can, and never fails to
unite us with the one^ only ^ood^ and to open
heaven and the kingdom ot God within us. A
root set in the finest soil, in the best climate^
and blessed with all that sun, and air, and rain
can do for it, is not in so sure a way of its
growth to perfection, as every man may be,
whose spirit aspires after all that, which God
is ready and infinitely desirous to give him.
For the sun meets not the springing bud thai;
stretches towards him, with half £at certainty,
as God, the source of all good, communicates
himself to the soul thai longs to partake of him.
We are*all of us by birth the offspring of
God, more nearly related to him, than we are to
one anotiier ; ibr in him we tive^ asiJd move^ €md hsiw
our being. The first man that was brought forth
from God, had the breath and spirit of Father^
jSbn, and Holy Ghosi^ breathed into him, and so
he became a living souL Thus was our first

J# 'A-


father born of God, descended from him, and
stood in paradise in the image and likeness of
God. He was the image and likenei^s of God,
not with any regard to his^ outward shape or
form, for no shape has any likeness to God ;
but he was in the ima^e and likeness of God,
because the holy trinity had breathed their
own nature and spirit into him. And as the
deity, Father^ /Son, and Holy Spirit^ are always
in heaven, and make heaven to be every where;
so this -spirit, breathed by them into man,
brought heaven into man along with it ; and so
man was in heaven, as well as on earth, that is,
in paradise, which signifies an heavenly state,
or birth of life.

Adam had all that divine nature, both as to
an heavenly spirit and heavenly body^ which the
angels have : But as he was brought forth to
be a lord, and a ruler of a new world, created
out of the chaos, or ruins of the kingdom of fal-
len angels, so it was necessary, that he should
also have the nature of this new created world
in himself, both as to its spirit and materiality.
Hence it was, that he had a body taken from
this new created earth, not such dead earth as
we now make bricks of, but the blessed earth of
paradise, that had the powers of heaven in it,
out of which the tree ofUfe itself could grow.
Into the nostrils of this outward body, was the
breath or spirit of this world breathed; and
in this spirit and body of this worlds did


the inward celestial spirit and body of Adam
dwell: It was the medium or means through
which he was to have commerce with this
world, become visible to its creatures, and
rule over it ^nd them. Thus stood our first
father ; an angel both as to body and spirit (as
he will be again after the resurrection) yet
dwelJing in a body and spirit taken from this
new created world ; which however was as in-
feriour to him^ as subject to him, as the earth
and all its creatures were. It was no more
alive in him, no more brought forth its nature
within him, than satan and the serpent were
alive in him at his first creation. And herein
lay the ground of Adam's ignorance of good
and evil ; it was because his outward body,
and the outward world, {\n which alone was
good and evil) could not discover their own na-
ture^ or open their own life within him, but
were kept unactive by the power and life of
the celestial man within it. And this was
man's first and great trial ; a trial, not imposed
upon him by the mere will of God, or by way
of experiment ; but a trial necessarily implied
in the nature, of his state : He was created
an angel, both^as to body and spirit; and this
angel stood in an outward body, of the nature
of the outward world ; and therefore, by the
nature of this state, he had his trial, ov power
of choosing, whether he would Bviie ^ an angel,
using cmly his outward body as a meand of


opening the wonders of the outward world to
the glorj of hi« creator 5 or whether he would
turn his desire to the opening of the bestial
life of the outward world in himself, for the
tsake oiknomng the goqd cmd evil that was in it
The fact is. certain, th^t he lusted after the
knowledge of this good, and evil, and made use
of the means to ipbtain it. No sooner had he
got this knowledge, hy the opening the bestial
life and sensibility within him, but in that
day, nay, in that instant, he died; that is,
his heavenly spirit, with its heavenly body,
were both extinguished in him; but his soul,
an immortal fire that could not die, became
a poor slave in a prison of bestial flesh and
blood. See here the nature and necessity
of our . redemption ; ^t is to redeem the first
angelick nature that departed from Adam ;
it is to make that heavenly spirit and body
which Adam lost, to be alive again in all the
human nature ; and this is called regeneration :
See also the true reason why only the $on^ or
eternal word of God, could be our redeemer ;
it is because he alone, by whom all things
were at first made, could be able to bring to
life again that celestial spirit and body which
had departed from Adam : Se^ also why our
blessed redeemer said, except a man be bom
again^ of waier and the spirit^ he amnot enter into
the kin^m ofhemm. He must be bora agaia


9

of the spirit^ because Adam's first heavenly
spirit was lost ; he must be born again of water,
because that heavenly body which Adam lost,
was formed out of the heavenly materiality,
which is called water. Thus in the revelation
of St. John, the heavenly materiality, out of
which the bodies of tbe angels, and also of
Adam, were formed, is called a glassy sea, as
being the nearest and truest representation of
it that can be made to our minds. The neces-
sity of our regaining our first heavenly body,
is the necessity of our eating the body and
blood of Christ. The necessity of having
again our first heavenly spirit, is declared, by
the necessity of our being baptised by the holy
ghost Our faU is nothing else, but the falling
of our soul from this celestial body and spirit,
into a bestial body and spirit of this world*
Our rising out of our fallen state, or redemption,
is nothing else but the regaining our first an**
gelick spirit and body, which in scripture is
called our inward, or new man, created again in
Christ Jesus. See here, lastly, the true ground
of all the .mortifications of flesh and blood, re-
quired in the gospel ; it is because this bestial
life of this outward world should not have been
opened in man; it is his separation from God,
and death to the kingdom of heaven ; and
therefore, all its workings, appetites, and desires,
are to be restmined and kept under, that the


10

first heavenly life, to which Adam died, may
have room to rise up in us.

But to return. That Adam was thus an an-
gel at his first creation, dwelling in an outward
body and outward world, incapable of receiv-
ing any impressions fi*om them, and able to
rule them at his pleasure ; th^t all outward na-
ture was a state of life below him, in subjection
tcf him ; that neither sun, nor stars, nor fire,
nor water, nor earth, nor stones, could act upon
him, or hurt him, is undeniably plain fron^
hence ; becausehis first and great sin, which
cost him his angelical life, and took from him
his crown of glory, consisted in this, that he
lusted to know, and took the means of knowing,
what good and evil is in the bestial life of this
world : For this plainly demonstrates, that be-
fore his sin, whilst he stood in the first state of
his creation, that he was an angel in nature^ and
power, that neither his own outward body, nor
any part of outward nature, had any power in
him or upon him ; for had his own outward
body, or any element of outward nature, had
any power to act upon him, to make any im-
pressions, OP raise any sensations in him, he
tould not have been ignorant of good and evil
in this world. Therefore, seeing that his eat-
ing of the forbidden tree, was that alone which
opened this knowledge in him, it is a demon-
stration, that in his first state he was in this
world as an angel, that was put into the pos-


II

session of it only to rale as a superiow beio^
over it; that he was to have no share of its life
and nature, no feeling of good or evil from it;
but to act in it as an heavenly artist, that had
power and skill to opifn the wonders of God
\n every power of outward nature. An angel,
we read, used at a certain time to come down
into 2Lpo&l at Jerusalem^ the water stirred by the
angel gave ibrth its virtues, but the angel felt
no impressions oi weighty fit <?oi/ from the water.
This is an image of Adam's first freedom from^
and power over all outward nature. He could,
wherever he went, do as this ai^el did, make
every element and elementary thing, discover
all the riches of God, that were hidd^en in it,
without feeling any impressions of any kind
from it. This was to have been the work both
of Adam and his oiFspring, to make all the cre-
ation shew forth the glory of God, to spread
paradise over all the earth, till the time came,
that all the good in this world was to be called
back to its first state, and all the evil in every
part, left to be possessed by the devil and his
angels. But since he fell from his first state
into an animal of this world, his work is changed^
and he must now labour with sweat to iiu the
cursed earth, both §ofr Itimself and the beasts
tcipon it

Let us now consider some ptain and impor-
tant truths that follow from what hojs been sai4
above.


12

FirsU It is plain that the sin and fall of Adam
did not consist in this, viz. that he had only
committed a single dot of disobedience^ and so
might have been just as he was before, if God
had pleased to overlook this single act of dis-
obedience, and not to have brought a curse
upon him and his posterity for it. — ^Nothing of
this is the truth of the matter, either on the part
of God, or on the part of man.

Secondly^ It is plain also, that the command
of God, not to lust after, and eat of the forbid-
den tree, was not an arbitrary command of God,
given at pleasure, or as a mere trial of man's
obedience; but was a most kind and loving
information gwen by the G©d of love to his new
born offspring, concerning the state he was in,
with regard to the outward world ; Warning
him to withdraw all desire of entering into a
sensibility of its good and evil ; because such
sensibility could not be had, without his imme-
diate dying to that divine and heavenly life,
which he then enjoyed. Eat not^ says the God
6f love, of the tree oj knowledge of good af\d evily
for in the day thou cfitest thereof ^ thou wilt surely
die.

As if it had been said ; *' I have brought thee
into this paradise, with such a ns^ture as the
angels have in heaven. By the order and dig-^
nity of thy creation, every thing that lives and
moves in this world, is made subject to thee,
as to their ruler* I hare made thee in thy out*


13

ward body of this world, to be for a time a lit-
tle lower than the angels, till thou hast brought
forth a numerous offspring, fit for that kingdom
which they have lost. The world around thee,
and the life which is newly awakened in it, is
much lower than thou art ; of a nature quite
inferiour to thine, it is a gross, corruptible
state of things, that cannot stand long before
me ; but must for awhile bear the marks of
those creatures, which first made evil to be
known in the creation. The angels, that first
inhabited this region where thou art to bring
forth a new order of beings, were great and
powerful spirits, highly endowed with the
riches and powers of their creator. Whilst
they stood (as the order of creation requires)
in meekness and resignation, under their crea*
tor, nothing was impossible to them ; there was
no end of their glorious powers throughout
their whole kingdom. Perpetual scenes of
light, and glory, and beauty, were rising and
changing through all the heighth and depth of
their glassy sea, merely at their will and plea-*
sure. But finding what wonders of light and
glory they could perpetually bring forth.; bow
all the powers of eternity, treasured up in their
glassy sea, unfolded themBelves, and broke forth
m ravishing forms of wonder and delight,
merely in obedience to their call; they began
to admire and even adore themselves, and to
fancy, tit^t there was some in/imt^ of power hid*
2


14

den in themselves ; which they supposed was
kept under and suppressed, by that meekness,
and subjection to God, under which they acted.
Fired and intoxicated with this proud imagin-
ation, they boldly resolved, with all their eter-
nal energy and strength, to take their kingdom,
with all its glories to themselves ; by etenial^'
abjuring all meekness and submission to God.
No sooner did their eternal, potent desires,
fly in this direction of a revolt from God,
but in the swiftness of a thought, heaven was
lost ; and they found themselves dark spirits,
stripped of all their light and glory. Instead
of rising up above God,' (as tney hoped) by
breaking off from him, there was no end of
their eternal sinking into new depths of slavery,
under their own self-tormenting natures. As a
wheel going down a mountain, that has no bot-
tom, must continually keep on its turning, so,
" are they whirled down by the impetuosity of
their own wrong-turned wills, in a continual
descent from the fountain of all glory, into the
bottomless depths of their own dark, &ery,
working powers. In no hell, but what their
own natural strength had awsJ^ened ; bound in
no chains, but their own unbending, hardened
spirits ; made such, by their renouncing, with
all their eternal strength, all meekness, and
subjection to Gpd. In that moment, the beau-
tiful materiality of their kingdom, their ghssi^
^ea in which they dwelt, was, by the wrathful


15

rebellious workings of these apostate spirits,
broke all into pieces ; arid became a black
lake, a horrible chaos of fire and wrath, thicks
ness and darkness, a heigfath and depth of the
confused, divided, fighting properties of nature.
My creating/af stopped the workings of these
rebellious spirits, by dividing the ruins of their
wasted kingdom, into an earth, a sun, stars,
and separiated elements. Had not this revolt
of angels btou^ht forth that disordered ckaos^
no such materiality as this outward world is
made of, had ever been known. Gross com-
pacted earth, stones, rocks, wrathful fire here,
dead water there, fighting elements, with all their
gross vegetables and animals, are things not
known in eternity, and will only be seen in time, ^
till the great designs are finished, for which
thou art brought forth in paradise. And then,
as afire awakened by the rebel creature, be-
gan all the disorders of nature, and turned that
glassy sea into a chaos, so a lastfire^ kindled at
my word, shall thoroughly purge the floor of
thisworld. In those punfyingflames, the sun,the
stars, the air, the earth and water, shall part with
all their droBS, deadness, and division, and all
become again that first, heavenly materiality,
a glassy sea oi everlasting light and glory, ill
which thou and thy offspring shall sing hallelu-
. jahs to all eternity. Look not thererore, thou
child of paradise, thou son of eternity, look
not with a longing eye after any thing in this


]6

outward world. There are tlie remains of the
fallen angels in it ; thou hast nothing to do in
jt, but as aTuler over it. It stands before thee
as a mystery big with wonders; and thou,
whilst an angel in paradise, hast power to open
and display them all. It stands not in thy
sphere of existence ; it is, as it were, but a pic-
ture, and transitory 6gure of things ; for all that
is not eternal, is but as an image in a glass,
that seems to have a reality^ which it hath not.
The life which springs up in this figure of a
world, in such an infinite variety of kinds and
degrees, is but as a shadow ; it is a life of such
days and years, as in eternity have no distinc-
tion from a moment. It is a life of such ani-
mals and insects, as are without any divine
sense, capacity, or feeling. Their natures
have nothing in them, but what I commanded
this new modelled ckaos^ this order of stars and
fighting elements, to bring forth.

Now Adam, observe, 1 will open to thee a
great mystery. The heavenly materiality of
the angels^ kingdom before their revolt, was a ,
ghssjf sea^ a mirrour of beauteous forms, figures,
virtues, powers, colours and sounds, which
were perpetually springing up, appearing and
changing in an infinite variety, to the manifest*
ation of the wonders of the divine nature, and
to the joy of all the angelical kingdom. This
heavenly materiality had its fruits and vegeta-
bles, much more real than any that grow in
2 ^


17

time, but as different from the grosanesa of the
fruits of this world, as the heavenly body of an
angel is different from the body of the grossest
beast upon earth. In this angelical kingdom^
the one element (which is now in four parts)
was then a fruitful mother of wonders, contin-
ually bringing forth new Jbrms and figures of
life ; not animals, beasts, or insects, but hewi-
iifulj^^ures^ and ideal forms of the endless di-
visibihty, and degrees of life, which only broke
forth as delightful wonders of the depth of the
riches of the divine nature, and to tune the voices
of angels with songs of praise to the infinite
source of life. And hence, O Adam, is that end-
less infinite variety both of the animal and vege-
table Jife in this perishable world. For no fruits
or vegetables could have sprung up in the di-
vided elements, but because they are the di-
vided parts of that one heavenly m&tjerialityf
or glassy sea^ in which angelical fruits had form-
erly grown forth. No animal life could have
arose from stars, air, and wnter^ but because
they are all of them the gross remains of that
one element, in which the ^fitire* and images of
life had once risen up in such an infinite varie-
ty of degrees and kinds. Hence it wa§, that
when my creating /a/ spoke to these neV i^^g-
ed stars, and elements, and bid life a^wake.n in
them all according to its kind, they all obeyed
my word, and every property of nature strove
to bring forth, after the hind and manner as it
2*


.-A


It

had done in tbe region of eternity. This, my
son, is the source and original of all that infi-
nite variety, and degrees of life, both of anh-
mals and yegetables, in this world. It is he-
cause all outward nature, being fallen from
heaven, must yet, as well as it can, do and
work, as it had done in heaven..

In hea^ven, all births and growths, all figures
and ispiiritusil forms of life, though infinite in
variety, are yet all of a heavenly kind ; and
only so many manifestations of the goodness,
wisdom, beauty and riches of the divine na-
ture. But in this new modelled chaos^ where
the disorders that were raised by Lucifer are
not v^hoUy removed, but evil and good mu»t
island in i^^rife, till the last purifying fire, her<^
every kind and degree of life, like the world
from whence it springs, is a mixture of good
and evil in its birth.

Therefore, my son, be content with thy an-
gelical nature, be content, as an angel in par-
adise, to eat ang^' food, and to rule over this
mixed, imperfe *Ci^nd perishing world, without
partaking of i'^ corruptible, impure, and per-
ishing nature. iLiUst not to know how the ani-
inals feel the evil and good which this life af-
fbi^ them ; for if thou couldst feel what they
feel; thou must be as they are; thoQ canst not
have their smnbiUty^ unless thou hacrt their na-
ture. Thou canst tfot at once be an angel and
«i eafthly aoimaL if the bestial life i» raised


19

«p in thee, the same instant tiie heavenly birth
of thy nature must die in thee. Therefore,
*upn away thy lust and imagination from a
tree, that can only help thee to the knowledge
of such good and evil, as belongs only to the
Bnimals of this outward world ; for nothing but
the bestial nature can receive good or evil
from the stars and elements: They have no
power, but over that life which proceeds from
them. Eat therefore only the food of para-
dise; be content with angels^ bread; forjf
thou eatest of this tree, it will unavoidably
awaken and open the bestial life within thee ;
and in that moment, all that is heavenly must
<Jic, ^nd cease to have any power in thee. And
thou must fall into a slavery for life, under the
divided, fighting powers of stars and el^nents.
Stripped of thy angelical garment, that hid thy
outward body under its glory, thou wilt be-
come more naked than any beast upon earth,
be forced to seek from beasts a covering, to
hide thee from the sight of thine own eyes.
A shameful, fearful^ sickly, wanting, suflfering,
and distressed heir of the same speedy death
in the dust of the earth, as the poor beasts,
whom thou wilt thus have made to be thy
brethren.**

This paraphrase Heave to the reflection of
the reader ; and proceed to shew.

Thirdly^ That the misery^ distress and wdut
<^nditioD, which Ad§m by his transgression


20

brought upon himself, and all his posterity,
was not the effect of any severe vindictive wrath
in God, calling for justice to his offended sov-
ereignty, and inflicting pains and punishments
suitable to the greatness of his just indignation,
and anger at the disobedient creature.

If Aiieim, contrary to the will of God, and for
the sake of some new-fancied knowledge, had
broke both his own legs, and put out both his
eyes, could it with any show of truth and rea-
son have been said, that God in the severity of
his wrath at so heinous an offence, had punish-
ed Adam %vith lameness Siud blindness? And if it
be further supposed, that God, seeing Adam
lying in this lame and blind condition came
and j^poke kindly to him, informing him' of a
secret oflove^ which he had in heaven, which he
promised to send him immediately by his high-
est messenger of love ; assuring him, that by
the use of this heavenly secret oi divine power^
his legs and eyes should, in some coui^e of
time, be infaUibly restored to him, even in a
better state than they were in at the first ; must
it not be still more unreasonable and absurd,
to charge any thing of this lameness and btind-
ness upon a wrath in God kindled against Adam?
Nay, is it not clear, in the highest degree, that
in all this matter, Adam fiad nothing from God,
but the overflowings of mere love and good-
ness; and that he had no lameness and blind-


2K

ness, but from his own voluntary acts upon him*
self.

This is a simple but clear representatioh,
of the case, how matters stood betwixt God
and our first father, when hy his own act and
deed, he extinguished that divine life, in which
God had created him. Adam had no more hurt,
no more evil done to him, at his fall, than the
very nature of bis oum acHon broi^bt along
with it upon himself He lusted to have the
sensibility of that good and evil which the beasts
of this world have. He Was told, that it could
not be had without the loss of his heavenly life ;
because such loss was as neeesssarily implied
in the nature of the thing itself, as blindness is
implied in the extinction of eyes. However,
he ventured to make the trial, and chose to
eat of that which could and did op^ti this sen*
sibility of earthly good and evil in him. No
sooner was this sensibility opened in him, but
he found it to be a subjection and slavery to all
outward nature, to heat an^ cold, to pams and
sickness, horrour of mind, disturbed passions,
misery, and fears of death. Which is in'otb^r
words only saying, that he found it to be an
extinction of that divine, angelical nature,
which till then, had kept him inisensible, and
incapable of any hurtful impressions, from any
or all the powers of this world. Therefore,
to charge his miserable state, as a punish*
ment inflicted upon him by the severe wrath of


22

an incensed God, is the same absurdity, af^
in the former supposed lameness and blind-
ness. Because the whole nature of all that
miserable change, both as to body and souU
which then came upon him, was neither more
nor less than what was necessarilv implied in
that which he chose to do himself. And therefore
had nothing of the nature of a punishment inflic-
ted from without; but was only that which his
own action had done in and to himself: Just as
the man that puts out his own eyes, has only
that darkness and blindness, which his own ac-
tion has brought forth in himself

From this short, yet plain and true account
of this matter, we are at once delivered from
a load of difficulties that hare been raised
about theya//of man, and original sin. It has
been a great question, how the goodness of
Godi, could punish so small and single zxi act of
disobedience m Adam, with so great a punish-
ment. Here the sovereignty of God hath been
appealed to, and hath set the matter right ; and
from this sovereignty, thus asserted, came forth
the systems of absolute election^ aad absolute
reprobation. But for our comfort it appears,
that the question here put, concerns neither
God nor man, that it relates not ^t all to the
matter and has no existence, but in the brains
of those that formed it. For the action in
which Adam^s sin consisted, was such an act,
as in itself implied all thai miserable change ihdX


23

came upon him ; and so was not a smatt^ or m«
gie act o( disobedience^ nor had the least punish-
ment, of any kind, inflicted by God upon it.
All that God did on this transgression, was
mere love, compassion, and relief administer-
ed to it. All the sovereignty that God here
shevi'ed, was a sovereignty of love to the fal-
len creature. So that all the volumes on this
question may be laid aside, as quite beside the
point. Another, and the greatest question of
all, and which divines of all sorts have been
ever solving, and yet never have solved, is
this ; How it can consist with the goodness of Godj
to impute the sin of Adam to all his posterity ? But
here, to our comfort again, it may be said, that
this question is equally a vain fiction with the
other, and has nothing to do with the proceed-
ure of God towards mankind. For there is
no imputation of the sin of Adam to his posterity,
and so no foundation for a dispute upon it.
How absurd would it be to say, that God im-
putes the nature, or the body and soul of
Adam to his posterity ? for have they not the
nature of Adam by a natural birth from him,
and not by imputation from God? Now this is
all the sin that Adam's posterity have from
him, they have only their flesh and blood, their
body and soul from him, by a birth from him,
and not imputed to them from God.. Instead
therefore of the former question, which is quite
beside the matter, it should have been asked ,


24

thus, how it was consistent with the goodness
of God, thai Mam could rtot generate children ojT
a nature and kind quitelsuperiour to himself? '^is
is the only question that can be asked with re-
lation to God, and yet it is a question whose
absurdity confutes itself. For the only rea-
son why sin is found in all the sons of Adara,
is this, it is because Adam of earthly flesh and
blood, cannot bring forth a holy angel out of
himself, but must beget children of the same
nature and condition with himself. And there-
fore here again it may be truly said, that all
the laborious volumes on God's imputing Ad-
am's sin to his posterity, ought to be consider-
ed as waste paper.
♦ But farther, as it is thus evident from the na-
ture of Adam's transgression, that all his mis-
ery came from the nature of his own action,
and that nothing was inflicted upon him, from
a wrath or anger, in God at him, so is it still
much more so, from a consideration of the di-
vine nature. For it is a glorious and joyful
truth, (however suppressed in various systems
of divinity) that from eternity to eternity, no
spark of wrath ever was, or ever will be in
the holy triune God. If a wrath of God was
any where, it must be every where, if it burn-
ed once, it must bum to ^11 eternity. For
everything that is in God himself, is bound-
less, incapable of any increase or diminution,
without beginning aiid without end. It is as
good sense, as consistent with the divine na-


25

tare, to say, that God, moved by a wrath in and
Jrom himself, began the creation, as that a
wrath in God ever punished any part of it*
Nature and creature is the only source from
whence, and the seat in which, wrath, pain,
and vexation cap dwell. Nor can they ever
break forth either in nature^ or ereaturcy but
so far as either. this, or that, has lost its state
in God. This is as certain, as that storms and
tempests, thunder and lightnings have no ei^is-
tence in heaven. God, considered in himself,
is as infinitely separate from all possil^lity oif
doing hurt or willing pain to any creature,, as
he is from a possibility of suffering pain or
hurt from the hand of man. And this, for this
plain reason, because he is in himself, in bit
holy trinity, nothing else but the boundless
abyss of all that is good, and sweet and ami-
able ; and therefore stands in the utmost con-^
trariety to every thing, that is not a blessing;
in an eternal impossibility of willing and in-^
tending a moment's pain or hurt to any crea"*
ture. For from this unbounded source of good-
ness and perfection, nothing but infinite streams
of blessing are perpetually flowing forth upon
all nature and creature, in a more incessant
plenty, than rays of light stream from the sun^
And as the sun has but one nature, and can
give forth nothing but the blessings of light ;
so the holy triune God has but one nature and
intent towards ail the creation, which is, to
pour forth the riches and aweetaess of his di«
3


26

vine perfections, upon every thing that is ca-
pable of them, and according to its capacity
to receive them.

The goodness of God breaking forth into a
desire to comrmmicate good^ was the cause and
the beginning of the creation. Hence it fol-
lows, that to ail eternity, God can have no
thought^ or intent towards the creature, but to
communicaie good ; because he made the crea-
ture for this sole end, to receive good. The
first motive towards the creature is unchange-
able ; it takes its rise from God's desire to comr
municate good^ and it is in an eternal impossibi*
lity, that any thing can ever come from God> as
his wUl and purpose towards the creature, but
that same hve and ^oc&ie*^, which first crea-
ted it, he must always m//that to it, which he
iGiUed at the creation of it. This is the ami-
able nature of God, he is the goodj the un--
changeable, overflowing fountain of good, that
sends forth nothing but good to all eternity.
He is the bv^ itself, the unmixed, uomeasurable
love, doing nothing but from love, giving no*
thing but gifts of love, to every thing that he
has made ; requiring nothing of all his crea-
tures, but the spirit and fruits of that love^
which brought them into being. Oh !, how
sweet is this contemplation of the heighth and
depth of the riches of divine love ! llVith what
attraction must it draw every thoughtful man,
to return love for love to this overflowing foun-
tain of boundless goodness.'^ What charms


27

has that religion, which discovers to ue our ex-
istence in, relation to, and dependence upon
thiB ocean of divine love! View every part of
our redemption, from Adam^s first sin, to the
resurrection of the dead, and you will find no-
thing but successive mysteries of that first love,
which created angels and men. All the myste^-
ries of the gospel, are only so many inarks and
proofs of God's desiring to make his love tri-
umph, in the removal of sin and disorder fi*om
jdl nature and creature.

But to return, and consider farther the na-
ture of Adam's fall, we have seen that it con-
sisted of no arbitrary pimishment m&icted on him
by a wrath raised m God, but was only such a
state of misery, as his own action necessarily
brought ufk)h him. Let us now see what hap-
pened to his soul^ a little more distinctly, and
and how it differed from what it was before his
fall, in its heavenly state.

The angels that kept their state, and those
that fell from it, were at first of one and the
same nature ; the angels that fell, did nOt lose
all their nature, for then they must have fallen
into no/Atng- ; they only lost the heavenly and
divine part of it, and therefore there is some-
thing still remaining in them, that is also in the
holy angels, and which is common to both of
them. rJow this, which they did not lose, be-
cause it cannot be lost, is a certain root of lift,,
or fi-rownc? of their existence, which when once
in being, cannot be broken, and in which the


28

unceaeing etemitj or immortaHtj of their na-
ture consists, a r(H>t or first ground of life,
equally capable of a beayenfy birth, or of a
birth aad growth into hell. Now that there is
this root of life in angela, and that it is some-
thing quite distinct from their heaTenly nature^
is very plain from hence, that the devils have
lost their hmvenly^ and yet have kept their ttef^
,nal and immortal nature, therefore that in which
their eternity, and immortality consists, must
be something entirely distinct from their hea-
venly nature, and must be also the same with
that^ in which the eternity and immortality of
the holy angels consists. For the fallen angels
have no other eternal root in them, but that
which they had before their fall, and which
they brought from heaven ; and therefore th(d
whi^h is and must be eternal and undying in
its nature, is the same eternal root of life,
which is in the angels that kept thi^ir state.
And consequently, the only difference betwixt
an angel and a devil, is this, that in the angel
its eternal root of life generates a birth of the
light and holy spirit of God in it ; and in a deviL,
this eternal r6ot of life ha$ lost this birth^ and
the powder of bringing it Torth aj^ain. Now
here is to be truly seen the real diflerence be-
twixt the soul of Adam before, and after his fall.
Before his fall, it had the nature of an angel
of God, in which the divine birth of the light
and holy spirit of God sprung up, but when
contrary to the will, and command of God, a


29

bestial life was awakened in him, the heaven-
ly life was necessarily extinguished. The
^oal, therefore, having lost that heavenly birth
which made it like an angel of God, had nothing
remaining in it, but that eternal and immortal
root of life, which is the very essence of a fall-
en angel. But here we must observe a great
and happy difference, befwixt the soul of Adam,
though dead to all that was heavenly, and the
soul \)f a devil. The angels that extinguished
the birth of heaven in themselves, fell directly
into the horrible depths of their own strong
self4ormehtirig nature, or their own hell^ and that
for these two reasons.

Firsts Because there was no where else for
them to fell into, but into this tormenting sen-
sibility of their own fiery, wrathful darkened
nature.

Seconditfy Because their revolt from God, was
an attempt, and intent to be higher and great-
er by awakening, and trusting to their own
^Mturat powers^ than they had hitherto been by
submission to God. They would have a great-
ness that sprung only itom them$dve$^ and
therefore they found iliat which they sought,
they found themselves left to all the greatness
that was in themselves, and that was their h^
viz. a fiery strength of a self-tormenting nature,
because separate from the one source of light
and love, of peace and joy.

But Adam, though his soul was as entirely
dead to heaven, as the souls of the devils were,
3*


30

yet fell not into their heli, for these two rea-
sons. *

Firsi, Because his angelical man dwelt in a
body taken from this outward world, ^vhich
body did not die at hisjtransgressjoii, therefore
his soul that had lost its heavenly tight, did not
fall directly into the devil's hell, but it fell into
a body of earthly flesh and blood, which being
capable of the enjoyments and satisfactions of
this life, could, whilst it lasted, keep the soul
insensible of its own fallen state^ and hellish
ii:ondition«

Secondly^ Because Adam not aspiring to be
€^ve or without God by his own proud strength,
but only lusting to enter into a sensibility of the

food and evil of the bestial life of this world ;
Fe found only that whiqh he nought, and fell in-
to no oth^ state or misery, than that bestial life,
which his own actions and desires had opened
in him. And therefore, this outward world
stood him in great stead, it prevented his im-
mediate falling into the state of fallen angels.

But then, as there was nothing that kept him
out of the hell of fallen angels, but his body of
earthly flesh and blood, and as this was now
as moTtul in him, as it was in the beasts, and
lay at the mercy of a thousand ai^cidents, that
could ev,ery moment take it fromhim^so he
was in his fallen state, standing as it were on
the brink of hell, liahle every moment to be
f uahed into it.


31

See here the deep ground and ahsolute neces-
sity of that nevr birth of the word^ son^ and «piV-
e^ of God which the scripture speaks so much
of. It is because our soul, as fallen, is quite
dead to, and separate from the kingdom of
heaiiDen, by having lost the light and spirit of
Ggd^ its6lf; and therefore is, and must be
ineapable of entering into heaven, till by this
xk^m birth, the soul gels again ita first heavenly
nature.

If them hast nothing of this birth when thy
body dies, then thou bast only that root of lim
in thee, which the devils have, thou art as far
from heaven^ and as incapable of it, as they
are ; thy nature is their nature, and therefore
their habitation mast be thine. For nothing
can possibly hinder thy union with fallen an-
gels, when thou diest, but a birth of that in thy
soul, which the follen angels have lost.

How pitiable therefore, or rather how hurt-
ful is that learnings . which uses all its art of
words, to aCvoid and lose the true sense of our
Saviour's doctrine concerning the new birth,
which is necessary to fallen man; by holding,
that the passagesf assertii^ the new birth, are
only iSL figurative^ strong form of words concern-
ing something that is not reaUy a birth, or growth
of a new nature, but may, according to the
best rules oi criticism^ signify either onventrance^
into the society of christians, by the rite of bap-
timn, or such a new relation, as a scholar may
have with his master, who by <:ottformity io


32


^ terms of union, or by copying his ways, and
manners, may, by a figure of speech^ be said to
be born again of him.

Now let it liere be observed, that no passage
of scripture is to be called, or esteemed as .a
figurative expression, but where the /tVero/ mean-
ing cannot be allowed, as implying something
that is either bad in itself ^ ov impessibh orimonr
sistent with some plain, and undeniable doc-
trines of scripture. Now that this is not the
case here, is very evident. For who will pre-
sumeto say, that for the soul of fallen man to
be bom again ^f the son, or liglit, und holy
spirit of God, is in the literalsense of the words,
a thing bad in itself^ or impossibh or ineonsistent
with any plain and undeniable doctrines of
acripture ? The criticks therefore, who, in this
matter, leave the literal meaning of the words,
and have recourse to a figurative sense, are-
without excuse, and have nothing they can
urge as a reason for so doing, but their own skill
in words. But it may be further added, as a
just charge against these criticks, that their fix-
ing these passages to a figurative meaning, is
not only without any ground, or reason for so
doing, but is also a bad meaning, impossible to
be true, and utterly inconsistent with the most
plain and fundamental doctrines of scripture.
Now thatthis is the case here, may in part be
seen by the following instance.

Let it be supposed, that an human body had
lost the%A/, and oiVof Ibis world, and wa§


33

in a state of death, because both these were
quite extingpiebed in it. Mudt it not be said,
that this human bod? cannot 8ee» or enter
again into the life of this ii^orld, unlees the
light and air of this world get again a new birth
in it ? Is there here any dccasion, oif any room
to form a doubt) how these words are to be
understood, or any possibility to mistake the
noeaning of them ? What a philosopher would he
be, who ibr fear of beii^ called an enthusiast^
should here deny the Uterai meaning of a new
birth of ti^ht and air^ and think himself suffic-
iently justified in flying from it, because in his
great reading, he had seen the words, births
light and mV, sometimes, and upon some occa*-
sions, o^ed only in h figurative seme ?

Now this is exactly, and to a tittle the case
of the soul, as fallen^ and lying in the same
state of death to the kingdom of God^ till anci^
birA of the light, and spirit of God be again
brought forth in it. And therefore the necessity
of understanding these words in their literal
meaning, the absurdity of flying to a figurative
sense of the new birth, and the impossibiHty of
that being the true one, is equally plain^ and
certain in both these cases.

Now that the soul, as fallen, is in this r^l
$ttite of death, is a doctrine not only plain from
the whole tenour of scripture, but affirmed in
all systems of divinity. For all hold, and teach,
that man unredeemed^ must at the death of bis
body, hare fallen into ^ state of misery, like


34

that of the fallen angels. But how can this be
true, unless it be true, that the life of heaven
was extinguished in the soul ? And that man
had really lost that light, and Sj^irit of God,
which alone can make any being capable of
living in heaven. All therefore that I have
here, 8UkI elsewhere said, concerning the death
of the soul by its fall, and its -wanting a real
new birth of the son, and holy spirit of God
in it, in order to its salvation, cannot be deni-
ed, but by giving up this great, fundamental
doctrine, namely, that man in hisJaUen states and
mvtedeemed,i must have been eternaUy lost. For it
cannot be true, that the fall of man unredeem-
ed, would have kept him for ever out of heav-
en, but because his fall had absolutely put an
end to the life of heaven in his soul.

On the other hand, it cannot be true^that
Jesus Christ is his redeemer, and does deliver
liim from his fallen state, unless it be true, that
iFesus Christ helps him to a new birth of thai
light and spirit of God, which was extinguished
by his fall. For nothing could possibly be the
redemption, or recovery of man, but regenera-
tion alone. His misery was his having lost
the life and light of heaven from his soul, and
theretbre nothing in all the universe of nature,
but a new birth of that which he had lost
could be his deliverance from his falleu'state.
And therefore if angels after angels had
come down from heaven to assure him, that
God had no anger at him, he would still have


, 35

heexi ilk the BSime helpless slate; nay, had tl|€y
told him, that God had pity. and compassion to-
wards him, he had yet been unhelped; because
in the nature of the thing, nothing could make
so much as a beginning of his deliverance, but
that which made a beginning of a new birth in
him, and nothing could fully effect his recove-
ry, but which perfectly finished the new birth
of all that heavenly life which he had lost.

The gospel tells us of a certain man, that
fell among thieves, who stripped him, and
wouiHled l>im, and left him half dead ; that
first a Priest^ then a Levite coming that way,
both of them avoided the poor man, by passing
on the other side*

Here it is pJain, that this Priest and Levite
left the poor man in the sQme helpless state in
which they found him. Let it now be suppos-
ed, that instead of going on the Qther side of
the road, they had come up to him, and pour-
ed ailsLiid wine into his wounds, only in afigur-
ative sense of the words, that is, that they nad
spoke such words to him, words so softy so oily,
and reviving, that in a just/g«r6 of speech, they
might be called, a pouring of wine and oil into
his wounds. Now bad they done this, mustit
not still be said, that the poor man's wounds
and nakedness were still l^ft in the first helpless
&tate? And all for this plain reason, because
the poor man was naked and wounded, not in
1^ figurative sense of the words, but really and
trufy^ and therefore opuld have no help, or ben-


36

efit, but from real oil and wine really poured
into his wounds. And for the same plain rea-
son, the fallen soul really de'did to the kingdom
of heaven, can have no help but by a new birth
of the light and spirit of heaten, realty brought
forth again in il. When Adam lay inlii^ death
wounds to the kingdom of God, had the high-
est order of archrongels or seraphims come by
that way, they could only have done as the""
Priest and Levite did, go on the other side;
or if they had come up to him, and done all
they could for him, it could only have been
such a good or relief io him, as by a figure of
speech might be so called.

For as Adam had extinguished the light and
spirit of God in himself, so no one could be the
good Samaritan to him, or pour that wine and
oil into his wounds, which they wanted, but he
who was the author^ and source of light and life
to every being that lives in heaven.

One would wonder how any persons, that be-
lieve tlie great mystery of our redemption, who
adore the depths of the divine goodness, in that
the Son of God, the second person in the trinity,
became a man himself, in order to make it pos-
sible for man by a birth from him, to enter again
into the kingdom of God, should yet seek toy
and contend for, not a real, but a figurative
sense of a new birth in Jesus Christ. Is there
any thing more inconsistent than this.^ Or can
any thing strike more directly at the heart kA
the whole nature of pur redemption? Go4 be-


37

came man, took upon him a birth from the fall-
en nature. But why was this done ? Or wherein
lies the adorable depth of this mystery ? How
does all this manifest the infinity of the divine
love towards man ? It is because nothing less
than this mysterious incarnation (which aston-
ishes angels) could open a way^ or begin a
possibility^ for fallen man to be born again from
above, and made again a /?ar/a^^r of tne divine
nature. It was because man was become so
dead to the kingdom of heaven, that there was
no help for him through all nature. No pow-
ers, no abilities of the highest order of crea-
tures, could kindle the least spark of life in
him, or help him to the least glimpse of that
heavenly light which he had lost. Now when
all nature and creature stood round about
Adam as unable to help him, as he was to help
himself, and all of them unable to help him, for
this reason^ because thai which he had lost, was
the life and light of heaven ; how glorious, how
adorable is that mystery, which enables us to
say, that when man lay thus incapable of any
relief from all the powers ^wA. possibilities of na-
ture, that then the Son, the word of God enter-
ed by a birth into this fallen nature, that by
this mysterious incarnation, all the fallen na-
ture might be born again of him according to
the spirit^ in the same reality^ as they were bom
of Adam according to the flesh? Look at this
mystery in this true light, in this plain sense of
scripture, and then you must be forced to fall
• 4-


38

down before it, in adoration of it. For all that
is great and astonishing in the goodness of God,
all that is glorious and happjr with regard to
man, is manifestly contained m it.

But tell me, I pray, what becomes of all this,
what is there left in any part of this mystery, if
this new birth^ for the sake of which God became
man, is not really a new birth in the thing itself,
is not, as the scrijjture affirms, a real birth of
the Son and spirit of God in the soul, but
something or other, this or that which the crii-
icks say, may be called a new birth, by a cer-
tain figure of speech ? Is not this to give up all
our redemption at once, and a turning all the
mysteries of our salvation into mere empty, un-
meaning terms of speech ? He that should de-
ny the reality of the resurrection, upon pre-
tence, that by the rules of criticism, it need
not signify a real coming out of a state of natu-
ral death, might have more to say for himself
both from reason and scripture, than he that
denies the reality of the new birth in Christ
Jesus. For this new birth is not a pm% but
the whole of our salvation. Every thing in re-
ligion from the beginning to the end of time, is
only for the sake of it. Nothing does us any
good, but either as it helps forward our re-
generation? or as it is a true fruit, or effect
of it.

All the glad tidings of the gospel, all the
benefits of our Saviour, however variously ex-
pressed in scripture, all centre in this one


39

pointy that he is become our lights our life,
our resurrection,- our holiness and salvation ;
that we are in hiin new creatures, created again
unto righteousness, born again of him, Irom
above, of the spirit of God. Every thing in
the gospel, is for the sake of this new<;reature,
this new man in Christ Jesus, and nothing is
regarded without it. What excuse, therefore,
cam be made for that learning, which, robbing
us of the true fruits of the tree of life, leave us
nothing to feed upon, but the dry dust of
words ?

lam the vine^ ye ate ike branches. Here Christ,
our second Adam, uses this similitude to teach
us, that the new birth that we are to have from
him is real^ in the most strict and literal sense
of the words, and that there is the same near*
ness of relation, betwixt him and his true disci-
ples, that there is bretwixt the vine and its
branches, that he does all that in us, and for
us, which the vine does to its branches. Now
the life of the vine must be really derived into
the branches, they cannot be branches, till the
birth of the vine is brought forth in them. '
And therefore as sure as the birth of the vine
must be brought forth in the branches, so sure
is it, that we must be born again of our second
Adam. And that unless the life of the holy
Jesus be in us by a birth from him, we are as
^eadto him, aYid the kingdom of God, as the
branch is dead to the vine, from which it is
broken off


40

Again our blessed Saviour saith, withaui tne
e can do noihmg. The question is, when, or
ow a man maj' be said to be loithoui Christ ?
Consider again the vine and its branches ; a
branch can then only be said to be without its
vine, wh^en the vegetable life of the vine is no
longer init> This is the only sense^in which
we can be said to be without Christ : when he
is no longer in us, as a principle of a heavenly
life, we are then without him, and so can do no-
things that is, nothing that is good or holy. A
Christ not in us^ is the same thing as a Christ
not ours. If we are only so far with Christ, as
to own and receive the history of his birth,
person and character, if this is all that we have
of him, we are as much without him, as much
left to ourselves, as little helped by him, as
those evil spirits which cried out, we Icnow thee^
who thou art^ the Iwly one of God. For those evil
spirits, and all the fallen angels, are totally
without Christ, have no benefit from him, for
this one and only reSsoh, because Christ is not
tn them; nothing of the Son of God h generated
or bom in them. Therefore every son of Adam,
that has not something of the Son of God gener-
afed^ or born within him, is as much without
Christ, as destitute of all help from him, as
those evil spirits who could only make an out-
ward confession of him.

It is the language of scripture, that Christ
in us is our hope of glory; that Christ formed
in us, living, growing, and raising his own life


41

iinA spirit in ud, is our only stalvation. And
indeed all this is plain from the nature of the
thing, for since the serpent^ «n, death and hell^
are all essentially tvilfun us, the very growth of
our nature, must not our redemption be equal-
ly tnwardy?in inward essential dectth to this state
of our souls, and an inward growth of a con-
trary life within us ? If Adam was only an out*'
ward person^ if his whole nature, was not our na-
ture, born in us, and derived from him into us^
it would be nonsense to say, that his fall is our
fall. So in like manner, if Christ, our second
Adam, was only an outward person, if he en-
tered not as deq>hf into our, nature as the first
Adam does, if we hifive not as reaBy from hitii a
new inward, spiritual man, as we have outward
flesh and blood from Adam, what ground could
there be to say, that our righteousness is from
him, as our sin is from Adam ?

Let no one here think to charge me with
Tdisregard to the holy Jesus, who was bom of
the virgin Mary, or with setting up an inward
isaviour in opposition to that outward Christ,
whose history is recorded in the gospeL No :
ft is with the utmost fullness of faitn and as-
surance, that I ascribe all our redemption ta
that blessed and mysterious person, tliat was
then born of the Virgin Mary, and will assert
no inward redemption but what wholly pro-
ceeds from, and is effected by that life-giving
Redeemer, who died on the cross for our re-

demptioD.

4#


42

Was I ta say, that a plant, or vegetable must
have the sun withdn it, must have the life, light
and virtues of the sun iqcorporated in it, that
it has no benefit from the sun, till the sun is
thus inwardly forming, generating, quickening
and raising up a life of the sun's virtues in ih
would this be setting up an inward sun in op-
position to the outward one ? Could any thing
be more ridiculous than such a charge ? For
this is not all that is here said of an inward sun
in the vegetable, so much said of a power and
virtue derived from the sun in the firmament ?
So in like manner, all that is said of an inward
Christ, inwardly formed, and generated in the
root of the soul, is only so much said of an in-
wardlife^ brought forth by the power and ej^ca^
of that blessed Christ, that was born of the
Virgin Mary.


CHAPTER II.

Discovering the true way of turning to God^ and of
finding me Kingdom of Heaven^ the riches of
eternity in our souk.

Thou hast seen, dear reader, the nature, and
necessity of regeneration^ be persuaded there*
fore fully to believe, and firmly to settle in thy
mind this most certain tt*uth, that all oar salva-
tion consists in the manifestation of the nature^
Hfcj and spirit ^of Jesus Christ in our inward new
man. This alone is christian redemption, this
alone delivers from the guilt and power of
sin, this alone redeems, renews, and regains
the first life of God in the soul of man. Every
thing besides this, is self is fiction^ is propriety^
is own will^ and however coloured, is only thy
old man with all his deeds. Enter therefore with
all thy heart into this truth, let thy eye be al-
ways upon it, do every thing in view of it, try
every thing by the truth of it, love nothing but
for the sake of it. Wherever thou ^oest, what-
ever thou dost at home, or abroad, in the field,
or at church, do all in a desire of union with
Christ, in imitation of his tempers and inclina-
tions, and look upon all as nothing, but that
which exercises, and increases the spirit and
life of Christ in thy souL From morning tp
ftight keep J wu» in thy heart, long for nothing,


44

desire nothing, hope for nothing but to have
all that is within thee, changed into the spirit
and temper of the holy Jesus. Let this be thy
Christianity^ thy church and thy religion. For this
new birth in Christ thus firmly believed, and
continually desired, will do every thing that
thou waritest to have done in thee, it will dry
up all the springs of vice, stop all the work-
ings of evil in thy nature, it will bring all that
is good into thce^ it will open all the gospel
within thee, and thou wilt know what it is to
be taught of God. This longing desire of thy
heart to be one with Christ will soon pat a
stop to all the vanity of thy life,- and nothing
will be admitted to enter into thy heart, or pro-
ceed from it, but what comes from God and
returns to God; thou wilt soon be, as it were
tied and bound in the chains of all holy affec-
tions and desires, thy mouth will have a watch
set upon it, thy ears would willingly hear no-
thing that does not tend to God, nor thy eyes
be open, but to see, and find occasions of do-
ing good. In a word, when this faith has got
both thy head and thy heart, it will then be
with thee, as it was with the merchant who
found a pearl of great price, it will make thee
gladly to sell aa that thou hastj and buy it. For all
that had seized and possessed the heatt of any
man, whatever the merchant of this world had
got together, whether dT riches, poiv^r, hor^
our, leamii^ff <^r reputatii^n^ losed ati its valu^^
is counts iHit «s dui^> M wiliingly pl^rted


45

^ith, as soon as this glorious pearl, the new
birth in Christ Jesus, is discovered and found
hy him. This, therefore, may serve as a touch^
stone^ whereby every one may try the truth of
his state; if the old man is still a merchant
within thee, trading in all sorts of worldly hon*
our, power, or learning, if the wisdoDd of thie
world is not foolishness to thee, if earthly inter-
ests, and sensual pleasures are still the desire
of thy heart, and only covered under a /brmof
godliness, a cloak of creeds, observances and in-
stitutions of religion, thou mayest be assured,
that thevearl of great price is not yet found b^
thee. For where Christ is born, or his spirit
rises up in the soul, there all self is denied, and
obliged to tiirn out; there all carnal wisdom,
arts of advancement, with every pride andglo'*^
ry of this life, are as so many heathen idols all
willingly renounced, and the man is not only
content, but rejoices to say, that his kingdom is
7iot of this world.

But thou wilt perhaps say, how shall this
great work, the birth of Christ be effected in
me ? It might rather be said, since Christ has
an infinite power, and also an infinite desire to
save mankind, how can any one miss of this
salvation, but through his oum unwillingness to
be saved by him ? Consider, how was it, that
the lame and blind^ the lunatick and /eper, the
publican and sinnerf found Christ to J)e their sa-
viour, and to do all that for them, which they
wanted to be done to them ? It was because


4«

they had a reed desire of having that^ which they
asked for, and therefore in true faith anA prayer
applied to Christ, that his spirit and power
might ent^r into them, and heal that which
they wanted, and desired to be healed in
them. Every one of these said in faith and de^
sire^ Lord^ if thou wiU^ thou canst make me whole.
And the answer was always this, according to thy
Jmthj so be it done unto thee. This is Christ's an-
swer «(w, and ihus it is done to every one of
us at this day, as our faith is^ so is it done unto us.
And here lies the whole reason of our falling
ishort of the salvation of Christ, it is because we
bnre no toiU to it

But you will say, do not all christians desire
to have Christ to be thcfir saviour ? Yes. But
^ere as the deceit ; all would have Christ to be
Iheir saviour in the next worlds and to help
them into heaven when they die, by his power,
and merits with God. But this is not willing
Christ to be thy saviour ; for his salvation, if
it is had, must be had in this world, if he saves
thee, it must be done in this life, by changing
and altering aS that is within thee^ by helping
thee to a new. heart, as he helped the blind to
see, the lame to walk, and the dumb to speak.
For to have salvation from Christ, is nothing
else but to be made like unto him ; it is to
have his humility and meekness, his mortifica-
tion and self-denial, his renunciation of the spir-
it, wisdom, and honours of this world, his love
of God, his desire of doing God^s will, and


47

seeking only his honour. To have these tem«

Eers formed and begotten in thy heart, is to
ave salvation from Christ ; but if thou wiUest
not to have these tempers brought forth in thee,,
if thy faith and desire does not seek, and cry to
Christ for them in the same reality^ as the lame
asked to walk, and the blind to see, then thou
must be said to be unwilling to have Christ to
"be thy saviour.

Again, consider, how was it, that the carnal
Jew^ the deep-read Scribe, the learned Rabbi,
the religious Pharisee, not only did not receive,
but crucified their saviour ? It was because
they toiUed, and de^firedno such saviour as he was
no such inward salvation as he offered to them.
They desired no change of their own nature,
no inward destruction of their own natural
tempers, no deliverance from the love of them-
selves, and the enjoyments of their passions ;
they liked their state, the gratifications of their
old man, their long robes, their broad philacteries,
and greetings in the markets. They wanted
not to have ihehr pride and self-love dethroned,
their covetousne38, and sensuality to be sub-
dued by a new nature from heaven derived
into them. Their only desire, was the success
of Judaism, to have an outward saviour, a ttmpo"
ro/ prince, that should establish their law and
ceremonies over all the earth. And therefore
they crucified their dear redeemer, and would
have none of his salvation, because it all con-
sisted in a change of their nature, in a new birth


48

from above, and a kingdom of heaven to be
opened within them by the spirit of God.

Oh Christendom, look not only at the okl
Jews^ but see thyself in this glass. For at this
day, (oh sad truth to be told !) at this day, a
Christ wiihin us, an inward saviour raising a
birth of his own nature, life, and spirit within
us, is rejected as gross enthusiasm^ the learned
Rabbis take counsel against it. The propaga-
tion p( popery^ the prooagatioft oi protestantism^
the success of some particular church, is the
salvation which priests and people are chiefly
concerned about.

But to return : It is mani|p^t, that no one
can fail of the benefit of Christ's salvation, but
through an unwillingness to have it, and from the
same spirit and tempers which made the Jews
unwilling to receive it. But if thou wouldst
still farther know, how this great work, the
birth of Christ, is to be effected in thee, then
let this joyful truth be told thee, that this great
work is already begun in every one of us. For
this holy Jesus, that is to be formed in thee, that
is to be the saviour and new life of thy soul,
that is to raise thee out of the darkness of death
into the light pf life, and give thee power to
become a son of God, is already within thee,
living, stirring, calling, knocking at the door of
thy heart, and wantmg nothing but thy own
faith w:id good wilLf to have as real a birth and
form in thee, as he had in the Virgin Mary.
For the eternal Word, or Son of God, did not


49

then first begin to be the saviour of the world,
when he was born in Bethkhe^n ofJudea; but
that Word which became man in the Virgin
Mary^ did from the beginning of the world, en-
ter as a word of life, a seed of salvation, into the
first father of mankind, was inspoken into him,
as an ingrafted word, under the name and char«
acter of a bruiser of (he serpenfs head. Hence
it is, that Christ said to his disciples, the king'^
domofGod is within you; that is, the divine
nature is within you, given unto your first fa-
ther, into the light of his life, and from him risf
ing up in the life of every son of Adam. Hence
also the holy Jesus is said to be the lighi^ which
Ughteth every man that cometh into 4he world. N ot
as he was born at Bethkhem^ not as he had an
human form upon earth, in these respects he
could not be said ta have been the light of eve-
ry man that cometh into the world. But a9
he was that Eternal Wordy by which all things
were created, which was the /i/c and light of ail
things, and which had as a second creator en-
tered again into fallen man, as a bruiser of the
serpent, in this respect it was truly said of our
Lord, when on earth, that hs was that light which
'^hteth every man^ that cometh into the world. For
he was really and truly all this, as he was the
Immanuely the God with us^ given unto Adam,
and in him to all his offspring. See here the
beginning and glorious extent of the catholick
churcji of Christ, it takes in all the world. It is
God's unlimited, universal mercy to all man«


50

kind ; and every human ereature, as sure as
he is born of Adam, has a birth of the bruiser
of the serpent within him, and so is infallibly in
covenant with God through Jesus Christ.
Hence also it is, that the hoi v Jesus is appoint-
ed to be judge of all the world, it is because all
mankind, all nations and languages have in
him, and through him been put into covenant
with God, and made capable of resisting the
evil of their fallen nature.

When our blessed Lord conversed with the
woman at Jacob's well, he said unto her, if
thou knewest the gift of God^ and toho it is that
thlketh with thee^ thou wouldest have asked of him^
and he would have given thee living tvater. How
happy (may any one well say) was this woman
of Samaria to stand so near this gijl oJ'God^ from
whom she might have had living water, had she
but vouchsafed to have asked tor it ! But dear
christian, this happiness is thine ; for this holy
Jesus, the gift ofGod^ first given into Adam, and
in him to all that are descended from him, is
the gift of God to thee, as sure as thou art born
of Adam; nay, hast thou never yet owned
him, art thou wandered from him, as far as the

Erodigal son from his father's house ? Yet is
e still with thee, he is the gift of God to ttiee,
and if thou wilt turn to him^ and ask of him, he
has living water for thee.

Poor smner! consider the treasure thou hast
within thee, the Saviour of the world, the eter-
nal Word of God lies hid in thee, as a spark


51

pf the divine nature, which is to overcome 6in»
and death, and hell within thee, and generate
the Jife of heaven again in thy souL Turn to
thy heart, and thy heart will find its Saviour,
its God within itself. Thou seest, hearest and
feelest nothing of God, because thou seekest
for him abroad with thy outward eyes, thou
seekest for him in books, in controversies, in
the church, and outward exercises, but there
thou wilt not find him, till thou hAsi first found
him in thy heart. Seek for him in thy heart
and thou wilt never seek in vain, for there he
dwelleth, there is the seat of his light and holy
spiirit.

For this turning to the light and spirit of
God within thee, is thy only true turning unto
God, there is norther waj^ of finding him, but
in that place where he dwelleth in thee. For
though God be every where present, yet he id
only present to thee in the deepest, and most
central part of thy souL Thy natural senses
cannot possess God, or unite thee to him, nay
thy inward feculties of understandings wiU^ ana
memory^ can only reach after God, but cannot
be the place of his habitation in thee. But
there is a root^ or dq^th in thee, from whence
all these faculties come forth, as lines from a
centre, or as branches from the body of the
tree. This depth is called the centre^ the/ww/,
or bottom of the soul. This depth is the iwiVy,
the eternity^ I had almo&t said the infinity of thy
^ul, for it is so infinite, that nothing can satis-


52

iy it, or give it any rest, but the infinity of God.
In this depth of the soul, the holy trinity
brought forth its own living image in the first
created man, bearinginhimself a living repre-
sentation of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
this was his dwelling in God^nd God in him.
This was the kingdom of God within him, and
made paradise without him. But the day that
Adam did eat of the forbidden earthly tree, in
that day he absolutely died to this kingdom
of God within him. This depth, or centre of his
soul having lost its God, was shut up in death,
and darkness, and became a prisoner in an
earthly animal, that only excelled its brethren,
the beasts, in an upright form, and serpentine
subtlety. Thus ended the fall of man. But
from that moment that the God of mercy in-
spoke into Adam the bruiser of the serpent,
from that moment all the riches and treasures
of the divine nature came again into man, as a
seed of salvation sown into the centre of the soul,
and only lieth hidden there in every man till
he desires to rise from his fallen state, anji to
be born again from above.

Awake then, thou that sleepeth, and Christ,
who from all eternity hath been espoused to
thy soul, shall give thee light. Begin to search
ftnd dig in thine own field for this pearl of eter-
nity, that lieth hidden in it ; it cannot cost thee
too touch, nor canst thou buy it dear, for it is
ai/, and when thou bast found it, thou will know
that all which thou hast sold or given away


53

for it, is as mere a nothing, as a bubble upon
the water.

But if thou turnest from this heavenly pearl,
or tramplest it under thy feet, for the sake of
l)eing rich, or great, either in church or state,
if death finds thee in this success^ thou canst
not then say, that though the pearl is lost, yet
something has been gained instead of it. For
in that parting moment, the ifungs and the
sounds of this world, will be exactly alike; to
have had an esiate^ or only to have heard of it,
to have lived at Lambeth twenty years, or only
to have twenty times passed by the palace, wili
be the same good^ or the same nothing to thee.

But I will now show a little more distinctly,
what this pearl of eternity is. FirsU It is the light
and spirit of God withm thee, which has hith-
erto done thee but little good, because all the
desire of thy heart has been after the light and
spirit of this world. Thy reason and senses^
tliy heart and passions, have turnedfall then*
atiention to the poor concerns of this life, and
therefore thou art a stranger to this principle
of heaven, this riches of eternity within tljpe.
For as God is not, cannot be truly found by any
worshippers, but those who worship him ia
spirit and in truth, so this light and spirit,
though always within us, k not, cannot be
found, felt, or enjoyed, but by those whose
whole spirit is turned to it.

When man first came into l»eing, and stood
before God as hit own iniiige woA tiken^Ev/


54

iliis light and spirit of God was as natural io
him, as truly the light of his nature, as the light
and air of this world is natural to the creatures
that have their birth in it. But when man,
not content with the food of eternity, did eat of
the earthly tree, this light and spirit of heaven
was no more na/wro/ to him, no more rose up as
a birth of his nature, but instead thereof he
was left solely to the light and spirit of this
world. And this is that deaths which God told
Adam he should surely die^ in the day that he
should eat of the forbidden tree.

But the goodness of God would not leave
man in this condition; a redemption . from it
ivas immediately granted, and the bruiser'of
the serpent brought the light and spirit of
heaven once more into the human nature.
Not as it was in its first state, when man was
in paradise, but as a treasure hidden in the cen-
tre of our souls, which should discover, and
open itself by degrees, in such proportion, as
the faith and desires of our hearts were turned
to it This light and spirit of God thus freely
restored again to the soul, and lying in it as a
secret source of heaven, is called graceTfree grace^
or ihe supernatural gift, or power of God m the
sQul, because it was something, that the natu-
jral powers of the soul could no more obtain.
Hence it is, that in the greatest truth, and high-
est reality, every stiring of the soul, every /cw-
dency of the heart towards God and goodness,
isjpW/y and mcmwrily aseribed to the Holy


oa


Spirit, or the grace of God. It is because iliii^
fir%t seed of life, which is sown into the soul, as
the gift or grace of God to fallen man, is itself
the light and spirit of God, and therefore, eve-
ry stirring or opening of this seed of life, every
awakened thought or desire that arises from it,
^ must be called the moving or the quickening
of the spirit of God ; and therefore that new
man which arises from it, must of all necessity
be said to be solely the work and operation of God.
Hence, also, we have an easy and plain de-
claration of the true meaning, solid sense, and
certain truth of all those scriptures, which
speak of the inspiration of God, the operation
of the Holy Spirit, the power of the divine,
light, as the sole and necessary agents in the,
renewal and sanctification of our souls, and al-
so as being things common to all men. It is be-
cause this seed of life, or bruiser of the serpent
is common to all men, and has in all men a de-
gree of life, which is in itself so much of the in-
spiration, or life of God, the spirit of God, the
light, of God, which is in every soul, and is its
power of becoming born again of God. Hence
also it is, that all men are exhorted not to quench
or resist^ or grieve the spirit, that is, this seed of
the spirit andHght of God that is in aU men, as
the only source of good. Ag^n^^ flesh ksteth
against the spirit^ and the spirit against the flesh,
!By tha flesh and its lustings, are meant the
mere human fia^tir^, or the natural man^ as he is
by the&U; by the sj^irit is meaiit the bruiser


56

of the serpent, diat seed of the light and spirit
of God, which lieth as a treasure hid in the soul,
in order to bring forth the life that was lost in
Adam. Now as the flesh hath its life, its lust-
ings, whence all sorts of evil are truly said to
be inspired, quickened and stirred up in u»; so
the spirit being a living principle within us, has
its inspiration, its breathing, its moving, its
quickening, from which alone the divine life,
or the angel that di^in Adam can be born in
us* y

When this seed of the spirit, common to all
men, is not resisted, grieved and quenched, but
its inspirations and motions suffered to grow
and increase in us, to unite with God, and get
power over all the lusts of the flesh, then we
are born again, the nature, spirit and tempers
of Jesus Christ are opened in our souls, the
kingdom of God is come, and is found within us*
On the other iiand, when the flesh, or the no/u-
ro/ mem hath resisted and quenched this spirit
or seed of life within us ; then the works ol the
flesh, adultery, fornication, murders, lying, ha-
tred, envy, wrath, pride, foolishness, worldly
wisdom, carnal prudence, false religion, hypo-
critical holiness,* and serpentine subtlety, have
set up their kingdx)m within us.

See here in short the state a^ man as redeem-
ed. He has a spark of the light and spirit of
God, as a supernatural g^ of God given into
the birth of his soul, to bring forth by degrees
a nm» birth of that life, w^ich was lost in para-


6?

dise. This holy spark of the divine nature
within him, has a natural, strong and almost
infinite tendency, or reaching after that eter-
nal light and spirit of God, from whence it
eame forth. It came forth from God, it came
fmi of God, it partakeih of the divine nature,
and therefore it is always in a state of tenden*
cy and return to God. And all this is called
the breathings the moving, the quickening of the
Holy Spirit within us, which are so many op-
erations of this spark of life tending towards
God. On the other hand, the deity as consid-
ered in itself, and tvithout the soul of man, has
an infinite, unchangeabk tendency of love, and
desire towardis th^ soul of man, to unite and
comfttunicate its own riches and glories to it,
just as the spirit of the adr tvithout man^ unites,
and communicates its riches and virtues to the
spirit of the air, that is within man. This love
or desire of God towards the soul of man is so
great, that he gave his only begotten son, the
brightness of ^ his glory, to take human nature
upon him, in its fallen state ;^ that by this mys*
terious upipn of God and man, all the enemies,
of the soul of man, might be overcome, and
every human creature might haye a power of
being bom again according td that image of
God, in which he was first created. The gospel
is the history of this love of God to man. In-
wardly he has a seed of the divine life M^en into
the birth of his soul, a se^d that has all ^e
riches of eternity in it, and is always wanting


58

to come to the birth in hitn, and be alive in
God. Outwardly he has Jesus Christ, who as
a sun of righteousaess, is always^ casting forth
his enlivening beams on this inward seed^ to kin-
dle and call it forth to the birth, doing that to
this seed of heaven in man, which the sun in
the firmament is always doing to the vegetable
seeds in the earth.

Consider this matter in the following simili*
tqde. A grain of wheat has the air and ligfu
of this world inclosed, or incorporated in "it:
This is the mystery of its life, this is its power
of growing, by this it has a strong continual
tendency of uniting again with that ocean of
light and air, from whence it came forth, and
so it helps to kindle its own vegetable life;

On the Qther hand, that great oeean^ of li^ht
and air, having its own offspring hidden in the
heart of the grain, has a perpetual strong ten-
dency to unite, and communicate, with it again*
From this desire of union on both sides^ the veg-
etable life arises, and all the virtues and pow-
ers contained in it.

But here let it be well observed,, that this
desire on both sides cannot have its effect, till
the h%isk and gross part of the grain falls into a
state of corruption an.d death, till this begins,
the myi^tery of life hidden in it, cannot come
forth. The application here may be left to the
reader.^ shall only observe, that we may
heJe -see the true ground, and absolute neces*
sity of that dying to ourselves, and to the world,


59

to which our blessed Lord so constantly calls
all his followers. An universal self-denial, a
perpetual mortification of the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is
not a thing imposed upon us by the mere will
of God, is not required as r punishment^ is not
an invention of dull and monkish spirits, but has
its ground and reason in the nature of the thing,
and is as absolutely necessary to make way for
the new birth, as 'the death of the husk^ and
gross part of the grain, is necessary to make
way for its vegetable life. .

JBut secondly^ this pearl of eternity is the wis--
dirni and love of God within thee, in this pearl
of thy serpent bruiser, all the holy nature, spir-
it, tempers and inclinations of Christ lie as in
a seed in the centre of thy soul, and divine
wisdom and heavenly love, will grow up in
thee, if thou givest but true attention to God
present in thy soul. On the other, there is hid-
defn also in the depth of thy nature, the root or
possibility of all the hellish nature, spirit and
tempers of the fallen angels. For heaven and
hell have each of them iheir foundation within
us, they come not into us u'om without^ but
spring up in us, according as our wiU and heart
is turned either to the light of God, or the
kingdom of darkness. But when this life,
which is in the midst of these two eternities, i«
at an end, either an angel, or a devililvill be
found to have a birth in us.


60

Thou needest not therefore run here, or
there, saying, where is Christ f Thou needest not
say^ who shaU ascend into heaven^ that t>, to bring
down Christ from above ? or who shall descend
into the deep to bring up Christ from the dead ?
for behold the Word, which is the wisdom of
God, is in thy heart, it is there as a bruiser of
tby serpent, as a light unto thy feet and lan-
tern unto thy paths. It is there as an holt/ oil,
to soften and overcome the wrathful fiery pro-
perties of thy nature, and change them into the
humble meekness oflight and love. It is there
as a speaking word of God in thy soul ; and as
soon as thou art ready to hear, this eternal
speaking word will speak wisdom and love in
thy inward parts, and bring forth the birth of
Christ, with all his holy nature, spirit and tem-
pers within thee. Hence it was, (that is, from
this principle of heaven, or Christ in the soul)
hence I say it was, that so many eminent spir-
its, partakers of a divine life, have appeared in
so many parts of the heathen world. Glorious
names, sotis of wisdom, that shone, as lights
hung out by God, in the midst of idolatrous
darkness. These wer6 the apx>stle6 of a Christ
within, tho-t were awakened and commissioned
by the inward bruiser of tbe «erpent, to call
mankind frpm the blind pursuits of flesh and
blood, to know themselve^, the dignity of their
nature,|^he immortality of their souls, and the
necessity of virtue to ;9.yoid eternal shame and
misery. These apostles, tljiough they had not


61

the law^ or tvrittm gospel to urge upon their
hearers, yet having turned to God, they found,
and preached the gospel, that was written in
their hearts. Hence one of them could say
this divine truth, viz : that such onljf are priests
and prophets^ who liave God in themselves. Hence
also it is, that in the christian church, there
hath been in all ages, amongst the most illiter-
ate, both men and women, who have attained
to a deep understanding of the mysteries of the
wisdom and love of God in Christ Jesus. And
what wonder? Since it is not art or science,
or skill in grammar or logick, but the opening
of the divine life in the soul, that can give true
understanding of the things of God. This life
of God in the soul, whicn for its smallness at
first, and capacity for great growth^ is by our
Lord compared to a grain of mustard seed,
may be, and too generally is suppressed, and
kept under, either by worldly cares, or pleas-
ures, by vain learning, sensuality, or ambition.
And all this while, whatever church, or profes-
sion any man is of, he is a mere natural man,
unregenerate^ unenlightened by the spirit of God,
because this seed of heaven is choaked, and
not suffered to grow up in him. And therefore
his religion is no more from heaven, than his fin€
breedings his cares have no more goodness in
them, than his j5&(wwr«,9, his love is worth no
more than his hatrad^ his zeal for this, or ^gainst
that form of religion, has only the nature of
any otherworldly contention in it. And thus
6


62

it is, and must be with every mere natural man,
whatever appearances he inay put on, he
may, if he pleases, know himself to be the
slav€, and machine of his own corrupt tempers
and inclinations; to be enlightened, inspired,^
quickened and animated by self-love, self-es^
teem, and self-seeking, which is the only life,
and spirit of the mere natural man, whether he
be heathen^ Jew^ or christian.

On the other hand« wherever this seed of
heaven is suffered to take root, to get life and
breath in the soul, whether it be in man, or
woman, yeung or old, there this new born in-
ward man is iustly said to be inspired^ enlighten^
ed and moveci hy the spirit of God, because his
whole birth and life is a birth from above, of
the light and spirit of God, and therefore all
that is in him, hath the nature, spirit and teni-
per^ of heaven in it. As this regenerate life
grows up in any man, so there grows up a true
and real knowledge of the whole mystery of
godliness in himself. AH that the gospel teaches
of sin and grace, of life and death, of heaven
and hell, of the new and old man, of the light
and spirit of God, are things not got by hearsay^
but inwardly knpwn, felt and experienced in the
growth of his own new born life.' He has then
an unction from above, which teacheth him all
things, a spirit that knotvethwhat it ought to pray
for^ a spirit that prays without ceasing^ that is
risen with Christ from the dead, and has all
its conversation in heaven, a spirit that hath


63

I

groans and siglis thai cannot be uttered^ that travail-
eth aad groaneth with the whole creation, to
be delivered from vanity, and have its glorious
liberty in that God, from whom it came forth.
Again, thirdly^ this pearl of eternity, is the
churchy or ^emp/eof God within thee^ the conse-
crated place of divine worship, where alone,
thou canst worship God in spirit^ and in truth.
In spirit^ because thy spirit is that alone in thee,
which can unite, and cleave unto God, and re-
ceive the workings of his divine spirit upon
thee, /n /rti/fc, because this adoration in spirit,
is that truth a.nd reality^ of which all outward
forms and rites^ though instituted by God, are
only the figure for a time, but this worship is
eternal. Accustom thyself to the holy service
of this inward temple. In the midst of it, is
the fountain of living water, of which thou
mayst drink, and live for ever. There the mys-
teries of thy redeiiiiption are celebrated, or
rather opened in life and power. There the
supper of the lamb is kept ; the bread that came
down from heaven^ that giveth life to the worlds is
thy true nourishment : all is done, and knowir
in real experience, in a living sensibility of the
work of God on the soul. There the birth, the
life, the sufferings, the death, the resurrection
and ascension of Christ, are not merely remem-
bered, but inwardly found, and enjoyed as the
real states of thy soul, which has followed
Christ in the regeneration. When once thou
^rt well grounded in this inward worship^ thou


64

wilt have learnt to live unto God above tinie, and
place. For every day will be Sunday to thee,
and wherever thou goest, thou wilt have a
priest^ a churchy and an altar along with thee.
For when God has all that he should have of
thy heart, when renouncing the will, judgment,
tempers and inclinations of thy old many ihoix
art wholly given up to the obedience of the
light and spirit of God within thee, to will only
in his will, to love only in his love, to be tvise
only in his wisdom, then it is,, that every thing
thou dost, is as a song of praise, and the com-
mon business of thy life is a conforming to
God's will on earth, as angels do in heaven.

Fourthly, and lastly, this pearl oi eternity is the
peace and ^p^ of God witjiin thee, but can only
be found by the manifestation of the life and
power of Jesus Christ in thy soul. But Christ
cannot be thy power and thy life, till in obe-
dience to his call, thou deniest thyself, takest up thy
daily crass, andfoUowest himin the regeneration.
This is peremptory, it admits of no reserve, or
evasion, it is the one way to Christ and eternal
life. But be where thou wilt, either Aer«, or at
Rome, or Geneva, i(selfi& undenied, if thou livest
to thine own wiU, to the pleasures of thy natural
lust and appe titles, senses and passions, and in
conformity to the vain customs, and spirit of
Ais worid, thou art dead whilst thou livest, the
seed of the woman is crucified within thee,
Christ can profit thee nothing, thou art a stran-
ger to all that is holy and heavenly within thee.


65

and utterly incapable of finding the peace and
yoyof God in thy soul. And thus thou art jjoor,
ar)d bltnd^ and naked^ and empkj^ and livest a
miserable life in the vanity of time ; whilst all
the riches of eternity, the light and spirit, the
wiadom and love, the peace and joy of God are
within thee. And thus it will always be with
thee, there is no remedy, go where thou wilt,
do what thou wilt, all is shut up, there is no
open door of salvation, no awakening out of the
sleep of sin, no deliverance from- the power of
thy corrupt nature, no overcoming of ihe world,
no revelation of Jesus Christ, no joy of the new
birth from above, till dying to thyself and the
^orld, thou tumest to,the light and spirit, and
power of God in thy soul. All is fruitless, and
insignificant, all the means of thy redemption
are at a stand, all outward forms are but a dead
formality, till this fountain of living water is
found within thee.

But thou wilt perhaps say, how shall I dis-
coveri^this riches of eternity, this light, and
spirit, '^d wisdom, and peace of God, treasur-
ed up within me? Thy fir&i thought of re-
pentance, or desire of turning to God, is thy first
discovery of this light and spirit of God within
thee, ft is the voice and language of the toord
of God within thee, though thou knowest it not
It is the bruiser lof thy serpent's head, thy dear
Immanuet^ who is beginning to preach within
thee, that same which he first preached in pub-
lick, saying, rqmU for th% kingdom of heaven is


66

at hand. When therefore but the Bmallest in-
stinct or desire of thj heart calleth thee towards
God, and a newness of life, give it time and
leave to speak ; and take care thou refuse
not him that speaketh. For it is not an angel
Scorn heaven that speaketh to thee, but it 15 the
eternal spefdcing worrf of God in thy heart, that
word which at first created ihee^ is thus be-
ginning to create thee ns^ond time unto right-
eousnefifs, that a new man may be formed again
in thee in theimage and likeness of God. But
above all \hings, beware of taking this desire of
repentance, to be the effect of thy own natural
sense and reason, for in so doing thou loosest the
key of Sill the. heavenly treasure that is in thee,
thoM shuttest the door against God, turnest
away from him, and thy repentance (if thou
hast any) will be only a vain, unprofitable work
of thy own hands, that will do thee no more
l^ood, than a well that is without water. But
if thou takest this awakened desire of- turning to
God, to be, as in truth it is, the coming of
Ohrist in thy soul, the working, redeemingpower
of the light and spirit of the holy Jesus within
thee, if thou dost revereoee and adhere to it,
as such, this Jaith wiU same thee^ will make thee
whole; and by thus believing in Christ, though
thou wert dead, yet shalt thou live.

Now afi depen^eth upon thy right submis*
sionand obedience to this speaking of God in
thy soul. Stop therefore atl selectivity, hsten
n^t to J&e ^uggcstioni of thy own reaaon, run


67

not on in thy own will, but be retired, silent,
passive, and humbly attentive to this new risen
light within thee. Open thy heart, thy eyes,
and ears to all its impressions. Let it enlight-
en, teach, frighten, torment, judge, and con-
demn thee, as it pleaseth, turn not away from
it, hear all it saith, seek for no relief out of it,
consult not with flesh and blood, but with a
heart full of faith and resignation to God, pray
only this prayer, that God's kingdom may come,
' and his will be done in thy soul. Stand faith-
fully in this state of preparation, thiis given up
to the spirit of God, and then the work of thy
repentance will be wrought in God, and thou
wilt soon find, that he that is in thee, is much
greater than all that are against thee.

But that thou mayest do all tliis the better,
and be more firmly assured, that this resigna-
tion io^ and dependance upon the working of
God's spirit within thee, is right and sound, I
«ball lay before thee two great, and infallible^
and fundamental truths, which will be as a rock
for thy faith to stand upon.

First, that through all the whole nature of
things, nothing can do, or 6e a real good to thy
soul, but the operation of God upon it. Seeondku
that all the dispeneations of God to mankind,
from the fall of Adam to the preaching of the
gospel, were only for this one end^ to fit, pre-
pare, and dispose the soul for tbe operation of
the spirit of God upon it. These two great
truths well and deeply apprehended, put the


68

soul hi its right state, in a continual depend-
ence upon God, in a readiness to receive ali
good from him, and will be a continual source
of light in thy mind. They will keep thee safe
from all errours, and false zeal in things, and
forms of religion, from a sectarian spirit, from
bigotry, and superstition ; they will teach thee
the true difference between the means and
end of religion, and the regard thou showest
to the shelly will be only so far, as the kernel is
to be found in it.

Man by his fall, had broke ofT from his true
centre^ his proper place in God, and therefore
the life, and operation of God was no more in
him. He was fallen from- a life in God, into a
\\{eo( selfi into an animal life of self-love, seli-
esteem, and self-seeking in the poor perishing
enjoyments of this world. This was the natural
state of man by the fall. He was an apostate
from God, and his natural life was all idolatry,
where selfwsiS the great idol, that was worship-
ped instead of God. See here the whole truth
in short All sin, death, damnation, and hell,
is nothing else but this kingdom of self, or the
various operations of self-love, self-esteem, and
self-seeking, which separate the soul from God,
and end in eternal death and hell.

On the other hand, all that is grace^ redemp-
tion^ salvation^ sanctification^ spiritual life, and the
new birth, is hpthing else but so much of the
life, and opers^on of God found again in the
flouL, It is man boine back again into his cen-


69

ire^ or place in God, from whence he had broke
ofE The beginning again of the life of God in
the soul, was then first madei when the mercy
of God inspoke into Adam diseed of the divine
life, which should bruise the head of the ser-
pent, which had wrought itself into the human
nature. Here the kingdom of God was again
lYithin us., though only as a seed^ yet small as it
was, it was jet a degree of the divine life, which
if righly cultivated, would overcome all the
evil that was in us, and make of every fallen
man, a new bom son of God.

All the sacrifices, and institutions of the an«
cient patriarchs, the Urn of Moses, with all its
types, and rites, and ceremonies, had this only
end; they were the methods of divine wisdom
for a time, to keep the hearts of men from the
wanderings of idolatry, in a state of holy expec*
tation upon God, they were to keep the first
seed of life in a state of growth, and make way
for the farther operation of God upon the soul ;
or, as the apostle speaks, to be as a schoolmaS'-
ter unto Christ. That is, till the birth, the
death, the resurrection and ascension of Christ,
should conquer death, and hell, open a new
dispensation of God, and baptize mankind
afresh with the Holy Ghost, and fire of heaven.
Then, that is, on the day of pentecost^ a newdis^
pensation of God came forth; which on God's
part, was the operation of the holy spirit in
gifts and graces upon the whole church. And
on man's part, it was the adoration of God in


70

spirit and in truth. Thus all that was done l>y
God, from the bruiser of the serpent given to
Adam, to Christ's sitting down on the right
hand of God, was all for this end, to remove
all that stood between God and man, and to
make way for the immediate^ and continual op-
eration of Goc( upon the soul. And that man,
baptized with the holy spirit, and born again
from above, should absolutely renounce self^
and wholly give up his soul to the operation of
God's spirit, to know, to love, to will, to pray,
to worship, to preach, to exhort, to use all the
faculties of his mind, and all the outward things
of this world, a^ enlightened, inspired, moved
and guided by the Holy Ghost Who by this
last dispensation of God, was given to be a
comforter, a teacher, and guide to the church,
who should abide with it for even

This is Christianity, a spiritual society, not
because it has no worldly concerns, but be-
cause all its members, as such, are born of the
spirit, kept alive, animated and governed by
the spirit of God. It is constantly called by
our Lord the kingdom of God, or heaven, be-
cause all its ministry and service^ all that is done
in it, is done in obedience and subjection to
thai spirit^ by which angels live, and are gov-
erned in heaven. Hence our blessed Lord
tauffht his disciples to pray, that this kingdom
mignt come, that so God's will might be done
on earth as it is in heaven, which could not be,
hni by that same spirit, by which it is done in


71

heaven. The short is this: the kingdom of
self, is the fall of man, or the great apostacj
from the life of God in the soul, and everyone
wherever he be, that liveth unto self\ is still un-
der the fall and great apostacy from God. The
kingdom of Christ, is the spirit, and power of
God, dwelling and manifesting itself in the
birth of a new inward man ; and no one is a
member of this kingdom, but so far as a true
birth of the spirit is brought forth in him.
These two kingdoms take in all mankind, he
that is not of one, is certainly in the other; dy-
ing to one is living to the other.

Hence we may gather these following truths :
First, here is shown the true ground and reason
of what wa^ said above, namely, that when the
ca// of God to repentance first ariseth in thy soul,
thou art to be retired, silent, passive, and humbly
attentive to this new risen light within theOi
by wholly stopping, or disregarding the work-
ings of thy own will, reason and judgment. It
is because all these are false counsellors, the
sworn servants, bribed slaves of thy fallen na-
ture, they are all born and bred in the kingdom
of self; and therefore if a new kingdom is to
be set up in thee, if the operation of God is to
have its effect in thee, all these natural powers
of self, are to be silenced and suppressed, till
they have learned obedience and subjection to
the spirit^ of God. Now this is not requiring
thee to become a /oo/, or to give up thy claim to
sense and reason, but it is the shortest way to


72

have thy sense and reason delivered from fol-
ly, and thy whole rational nature strengthened,
enlightened, and guided by that light, which is
wisdom itself.

A child that obediently denies his own will,
and own reason^ to be, guided by the will and
reason of a truly wise. and understanding tutor,
cannot be said to make himself a fool, and
give up the benefit of his rational nature, but to
have taken the shortest way to have his own
will and reason made truly a blessing to hioi.

Secondly^ Hence is to be seen the true ground
and necessity of that universal mortification
and self-denial with regard to all our senses,
appetites, tempers, passions and judgmeiits.
It is because all our whole nature, as fallen
from the life of God, is in a state of contrariety
to the order and end of our creation, a contin-
ual source of disorderly appetites, corrupt
tempers, and false judgments. And therefore
every motion of it is to be mortified, changed
and purified from its natural state^ before we can
enter into, the kingdom of God. Thus when
our Lord Bd\\hy except a man hateth his father and ^
mother^yeaj and his own life^ he cannot be my disr
ciple;. it is because our best tempers are yet
carnal^ and full of the imperfections of our fallen
nature. The doctrine is just and good : not
as if /a/Acr and mo^Aer were to be hated; but
that love^ which an unregenerate person or wa-
turalmanyhdAh towards them, is to be hated ;
as being a blind self-kve^ full of all the weakness


73

and partiality with which fallen man loves, hon-
ours, esteems and cleaves to himself. This
lovje, bom from corrupt flesh and blood, and
poUuted with self, is to be hated and parted with,
that we may love them with a love born of
God, with such a love, and on such a motive, as
Christ hath loved us. And then the disciple
of Christ far exceeds all others in the love of
parents. Again^ our oim life is to be hated;
and the reason is plain, it is because there is
nothing lovely in it. It is a legion of evil, a
monstrous birth of the serpent^ "the worlds and
the^e^A, it is an apostactf from the life and pow*
er of God in the soul; a life that is death to
heaven, that is pure unmixed idolatry, that
lives wholly to self, and not to God, and there-
fore a// this own life is to be absolutely hated,
all this self is to be denied and mortified, if the
nature, spirit, tempers and inclinations of
Christ are to be brought to life in us. For it
is as impossible to live to both these lives at
once, as for ^ body to move two contrary ways
at the same time. And therefore all these mor-
tifications and self-denials have an absolute
necessity in the nature of the thing itself.

Thus when our Lord further saith, unless a
man forsake all thai he hath he cannot be my disci-
plci The reason is plain, and the necessity ab-
solute; it is because oiZ that the-hatural man
hath, is in the possession oiselflove^ and there-
fore this possession is to be absolutely forsaken,
and parted with. All that he hath, is to be
7


74

!>ttt into other hamls, to be given to divine
Qve, or this natural man cannot be changed in-
to a disciple of Christ. For self-love in all that
it fuUkt is earthly, sensual and devilish, and
therefore must have all taken away from it ;
and then to the natural man all is lost, he hath
nothing left, all is laid down at the feet of Je-
sus. And then all things are common, as soon
as self-love has lost the possession of them*
And then the disciple df Christ, though having
nothings yet possesseth all things all that the natu-
fol man hath/orsoArcw, is restored to the disciple
of Christ an kmdred.fold. For self-lpve, the
greatest of all thieves, being now cast out, and
all that he had stolen and hidden, thus taken
from him, and put into the hands of divine love,
every mite becometh a large treasure, and
mammon openeth the door into everlasting
habitations^ This was' the spirit of the first
draught of a christian church af Jei'usalem, a
church made truly aflter the pattern of heaven,
where the love that reigns in heaven reigned in
it, wh^re divine love broke down all the selfish
fences, the locks and bolts of m^, mine^ my otvn^
kc. and laid all things common to the members
of this new kingdom of God on earth.

Now though imany years did not pass after
the age of the apostles, before s^tan and self

Sot footing in the church, and set up merchan-
ize in the house of God ; yet this one heart and
one spirit^ which then fiirst appeared in tfie Je-
rusalem church, is that one heart and q^irii of


75

Jivine love^ to which all are cailed, that would
be true disciples of Chri«>t. And though the
practice of it is lost as to the church in gene-
ral, yet it ouglit not to have been lost; and
therefore every christian ought to raake it his
great care, and prayer, to have it restored in
himself. And thei), though bom in the dregs
of time, or living in Babylon, he will be as truly
a naeinber of the first heavenly church at Jeru-
salem, as if be had lived in it, in the days ol'
the a{>ostleB. This spirit of lov€, born of that
celestial fire, with which Christ baptizes his
true disciples, is alone that spirit, which wcan
enter into heaven, and thereiore is that spirit
which is to be born in us, whilst we are on earth.
For no qne can enter into heaven, till he is
made heavenly, till the spirit of heaven is en-
tered into hifi).. And therefore all that our
Lord bath said of denying and dying to self,
and ofhi^ parting with all th)%t he hath, are
practices absolutely necessaiy from the nature
of the thing.

Because aUturntng to self, is sofartumingfrom
God,.and8omiiebaBwebave of self-Iove,so much
we have of a hellish, earthij we^ht, that must
be taken off, or there can be no ascension into
heaven. But thou wilt perhsipssay, if aU self-
hve^ is to be renounced, then all love of our
neighbour is renounced along with it, because
the comandment is, only to love our neighbour as
ourselves. The answer here is easy, and yet no
quarter |;iren to seif-loye^ There is but one


76

onl^ love in heaven, and yet the angels of God
love one finother in the same manner as thej
Jove themHelvcS* The matter is thus: the one
siupreme, unchangeable rule of lovfe^ which is a
taw to all intelligent beings of all worlds, and
will be a law to all eternity, is this, viz. thai
God Cf/ana is to be loved for himself^ apd all other
beings only in him andjbr him. Whatever intel-
ligent crtature lives not under this rule of love,
is so far fallen from the order of his^ireatioq, and
is, till he returns to this eternal law of love, an
apostate from God, and incapable of the kingdom
of4>eaven.

Now if God alone is to be loved for himself,
then no creature is to be loved for iV^e^/ and
so all self-love in every creature is absolutely
condemned.

And if all created beings are only to be lov-
ed in and for Gdd, then my neighbour is to be
loved, as I love myself, and I am only to love
myselfi as I love my neighbour, or any otherv
created being, that is, only la. and for God.
And thus the conimand of loving our neigh-
bour as ourselves, stands firm, and yet all self-
love is plucked up by the roots. But what is
loving any creature, only m and /or God ? It is
when we love it only, as it hGoiTswork^ image
and delight^ when we love it merely as it is
God^s, and belongs to bim, this is loving it in
God, and when all that we wish, intend or do
to it, is done from a love of God, for the honadr
of God^ and in xonforojity to the will of God,


77

tJiis is loving iljor God. This is the one hve
thai is, and must be the spirit of all creatures,
that live united to God, Now this is no spec-
ulative refinement or fine spun fiction of the
ferain, but the simple truths a first law of nature, '
^nd a necessary band of union between God
and the creature. The creature is not in God,
is a stranger to him, has lo&t the life of God in
. itself whenever its love does not thus begin
and end in God,

The loss of this love, was the fall of man, a«
it opened in him a kingdom of self, in which
satan, the world, and the flesh, could all of
them bring forth their own works. If thjere-
fore man is to rise from his fall, and return to
his life in God, there is an absolute necefisitjr
that sdf^ with all his brood of gross affection^,
be deposed, that his first love, in and for which
he was created, may be born again in him.
Christ came into the world to save sinners^ to
destroy the works of the deviL Now ^&elf is
not only the seat and habitation, but the very
life of sin. The works of the JAe^W are all
wrought in self, it is his peculiar icovkho^e^ and
therefore Christ is not come as a saviour from
sin, asa destroyer of the work€ of the devil in
any of us, but so far as self is beaten down, and
overcome in us- If it is literally true, what our
Lord said thcaUs kingdom was not ^f this woridi,
.&en it is a truth of the same i^ertainty, that no
tme iA a member of tMs kingddm, but be ttiat
HI the literal sense ^df the woras, rten<2iinciB0 th<^
. 7* "


T8

spirit of this world. Christians might as well
part with half the articles of their creed, or
but half believe them, as to really refuse, or
but by halves enter into these self-denials.

For all that is i»the creed, is only to bring
forth this dying and death to all, and every
part of the old man, that the life and spirit of
Christ may be formed in us.

Our redemption is this new birth ; if this is
not done, or doing in us, we are still unredcfem-
ed. And though the Saviour of the world is
coEoe, he is not come in us, he is not received
,Vy ;ps, is a stranger to us, is not ours, if his life
is;ilpt within us. His life is not, cannot be
yif^m us, but so far as the spirit of the world,
*seU^love, self-esteem and self-seeking are re-
nounced, and driven out of us.

Thirdly^ hence we may also learn the true
nature and worth of all self-denials and mortijl-
cations. As to their nature, considered in them-
selves, they have nothing of goodness or holi-
ness, nor^are any real parts of our sanctification,
they are not the true/ooc? or nourishment of the
divine life in our sotils, they have no quickening,
sanetijfying power in them, their only worth con-
sists in this, that they remove the impediments
of holiness, break down ihat which stands be-
tween God and us, and make way for the guick^
ening^ sanct^ying spirit of God to operate on
our souls. Which operation of God is the one
only thing that can raise the divine life in the
«om, or £elp it to the smallest degree of t^dX


79

^holiness, or spirituial life. As in our creation,
we had only that degree of a divine life, whicli
the power of God derived into Qs ; as then all
that we had, and were, was the sole operation of
God in the creation of us, so in our redemption,
or regaining that first perfection, which we have
lost, allmust be again the operation of God, et?-
cry rfegree of the divine life restored in us, be it
ever so small, must and can foe nothing else
but so much of the life and operation of God
found again in the soul. All the activity of
man in the works of self-denial, has no good in
itself, but is only to open an entrance, for the
one only good, the light of God, to operate up-
on us.

Hence also w^ may learn the reason, why
many people not only lose the benefit, but are
even the worse for all their mortifications. It is
because they mistake the whole nature and
worth of them. They practice them for their
own sakts^ as things good in themselves, they
think them to be red parts of holiness, and so
rest in them, and look no farther^ but grow full of
self-esteem, and self-admiration for their own
progress in them. This makes them self suffi-
cient, morose, severe judges of all those that
fall short of their mortifications*

And thus ihtiiself'denials do only that for
them, which indvlgences do for other people,
they withstand and hinder the operation of uod
upon their souls, and instead of being r^a% self-


80

denials, they strengthen and keep up the king-
dom oiself.

There is no avoiding this fatal errour, but by
deeply entering into this great truth, that all
our own activity and working has no good in
it, can do no good to us, but as it leads and
turns us in the best manner to the light and
spirit ofGod, which alone brings life and salva-
tion into the soul. Siretchfarth thy hand, said
our Lord to the man, that had a withered hand ;
he did s6, and it mas immediately made whole as
the other.

Now had this man any ground for pride, or a
high opinion of himselff for the share he had in
the restoring of his hand ? Yet just such is our
share in the raising up of the spiritual life with-
in us, AH that we can do by our own activity^
is only like this man's stretching out his hand ;
the rest is the work of Christ, the only giver oif
life to the withered band, or the dead souL
Wb "tran only then do living works, when we
are so far born again, as to be able to say with
the apostl^, yet not I but Christ that Kveth in me.
liut to return, and further shew how the soul
that feels the call of God to repentance, is to
behave under it, that this stirring of the divine
power in the soul, may have its full effect, and
bring forth the birth of the new man in Christ
Jesus. We are to consider it (as in truth it is)
as the seed of the divine nature within us, that
•can only srow^by its own strength and mim with
God. It IS a divine life, and therefore can


8]

Pfcow from nothing but divine power. When
the Virgin Mary conceived the birth of the ho-
ly J^$us, alt that she did towards it herself, was
only this single act of faith and resignation to
God ; behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto
me according to thy word. This is all tiiat we
can do towards the conception of that new man
that is to be borfe in ourselves. Now this truth
is^easily c<>nsented t0, and a man thinks he be-
lieves it, because lie consents to it, or rather,
does not deny it. But this is not enough, it is
to be apprehended in a deep, full, and practi-
cal assurance, in such a manner as a man knows
and believes that he did not create the stars, or
cause hfe to rise up in himself. And then it is
a belief, th^ puts the seul into a right state,
that makes room for the operation of God upon
it; His light then enters with full power into
the soul, and his holy spirit moves and directs
all that is done in it, and so man lives again in
God as a new creature. For this truth thus
firmly believed, will have these two most ex-
cellent effects : first, it will keep the soul fixed,
and continually turned towards Gpd, in faith,

))rayer, desire, confidence, and resignation to
nm, for all that it wants to have done in it, and
to it ; which will be a continual source of all
divine virtues and graces. The soul thus turn-
ed to God, must be always receiving from him.
It stands at the true door of all divine com-
munications, and the light of God as freely en^
ters into it, as the light of the sun enters into the


82

air. Secondhf^ it will fii and ground the soul in
a true and lasting self-denial. For by thus
knowing and owning our own nothingness and
inability, that we have no other capacity for
good, but that of receiving it from God alone^
ifelfis wholly denied, its kingdom is destroyed ;
no room is left for spiritual pride and self-es«
teem ; we are saved from a pharasaical holi-
ness, from wrong opinions of our own works
and good deeds, and from a multitude of er-
rours, the most dangerous to our souls, all which
arise from the something that we take ourselves
to be either i^ nature or gracfe. But when we
once apprehend but in some good degree, the
cttoS God, and the «o/Am^nrm of ourselves, we
have got a truth, whose usefulness and benefit
no wordB can express. It brings a kind of in-
iallibility into the soul, in which it dwells ; all
that is vain, and false, and deceitful, is forced
to vanish and fly before it. When our religion
is founded on this rock, it has the firmness of a
rock, and its height reaches unto heaven. The
world, the flesh and the devil can do no hurt
to it ; aU enemies are known, and all disarmed
by this great truth, dwelling in our souls. It is
the knoweldge of the «// of God, 4hat makes
cherubims^ 9l\)Sl seraphims to be flames of divine
love. For where this cH of God is truly known
and felt in any creature, there its whole breath
and spirit is a fire of love, nothing but a pure,
disinterested love can rise up in it, or come
from it, a love that begins and ends in God,


«3

And where this love is born in anj creature,
there a seraphick life is bom along with it. For
this pare love introduces the creature into the
all of God, all that is in God, is opened in the
creature, it is united with God, and hath the
life of God manifested in it.

There is but one salvation for all mankind,
and that is the Ufe of God in the soul. God
has but one design or intent towards all man-
kind, and that is to introduce or generate ht$
own life, light and spirit in them, that all may
be as so many images, temples, and habitations
of the holy trinity. This is God's good will to
all ckristims^ Jews^ and heathens. They are all
equoMig the desire of his heart, his light continu-
ally waits for an entrance into all of them, his
wisdom crieth^ she putteth forth her voice^ not here,
or there, but every where, in all the streets of
all the parts'of the world.

Now there is but one possible waj^ for man to
attain this salvation, or life of God in the soul.
There is not one for the Jew^ another for a
christian^ and a third for the heathen^vio; GoA is
one, human nature is one, salvation is one, and
the way to it is one ; and that is, the desire of the
soul turned to God. When this desu^e is alive and
breaks forth in any creature under heaven, then
the tost sheep is found, and the shepherd hath it
upon his shoulders. Through this desire the
poor/>roc&Va/ ^on lea veth his hmks zxA swine^
and hasteth to his father, tis because pf/^t^ cK?-
sjr«, that the father seeth the son, while jret


84 ,

tjwt off^ that he runs out to meet him^ falletU on
his neck, and kisseth hinoi. See here how plain-
ly we are taught, that no sooner is this desire
arisen^ and in motion towards God, than the cp:
eration of God's spirit answers to it, cherishes
and welcomes its first beginnings^ signified hy
the father^s seeing and having compassion on
his son, whilst yet a/ar oJ\ that is in th^ first be-
ginnings of his desire. Thus does this desire do
all,'it brings the soul to God, and God into, the
soul, it unites with God, it co-operates with
God, and is one Hfe with God. ^Suppose tbis
desire not to be alive, not in motion either in a
Jew or a christian^ and then all the sacrifices,
the service, the worship either of the latv or the
gospel^ are but dead works, that brinjg no life in-
to the soul, nor beget any union between God
audit. Suppose this desire to be awakened,
■find fixed Upon God, though in souls that n^ver
fieard either of the law or gospel, and then the
divine life, or opei'ation of God enters into them,
and the new birth in Christ is formed in those
that never heard of his name. And these are
they that shall come from the easi^ and from the west
and sit down with Abraham^ and Isaac in the king-
ddm of God.

6 my God, just and good, how great is thy
love and mercy to mankind, that heaven is thus
every where open, and Christ thus the common
saviour to all that turn the desire of their hearts
to thee ! Oh sweet power of the bruiser of the
serpent, born in every son of pian, that stirs and


85

works in ^very man, and gives every man
a power, and desire, to find bis happiness in
God ! O holy Jesus, heavenly lighi^ that U^hteth
every man that conuBthinio the worO^ that redeem-
eth every soul that followeth thy light, which
is always within him ! O holy trinity, immense
ocean of divine love, in which all mankind live
and move, and have their J[>eing ! None are
separated from thee, none live out of thy love,
but all are embraced in the arms of thy mercy,
all are partakers of thy divine life, the opera*
tion of thy holy spirit, as soon as their heart is
turned fo thee ! Oh plain, and easy, and sim-
ple Way of salvation, wanting no subtleties of
art or science, , no borrowed learning, no re-
finements of reason, but all done by the simple
natural motion of every heart, that truly longs
after God. For no sooner is the finite desire
of the creature in motion towards God, but the
infinite desire of God is united withiit, co-ope^^
rates with it. And in this united desire of God,
and the creature, is the salvation, and life of
the soul brought forth- For the soul is shut
out of God, and imprisoned in its own dark
workings of flesh and blopd, merely and solely
because it desires to live to the vanity of this
world. This desire is its darkness, its death,
its imprisonment, and separation from Goii -r u
When therefore ihe first spark of a desire at
ter God arises in thy soul, cherish it with all
thy care, give allthv heart into it, it is nothing
less than a touch of the divine loadstone^ that (3
8


86

te draw thee out of the vanity of time, into the
riches of eternity. Get up therefore and fol*
low it as gladly, as the ivise mm of the east fol*
lowed the star from heaven that appeared to
them. It will do for thee, as the star did for
them,, it will lead thee to the birth of Jesus not
in a stable at Bethkhem in Judea^ but to the birth
of Jesus in the dark centre of thine own fallen
soul.

I shall conclude this /r^t* oar; with the words
of the heavenly illuminated, and blessed Jacob
Behmen.

" It is much to be lamented, that we are so
blindly led, and the truth withheld from us
through imaginary conceptions ; for if the rfi-
vine power in the inward ground of the soul, was
manifest, and working with its lustre in us, then
IS the whole triune God present in the /j/cand
lie^e^ofthesoul; and the heaven wherein God
d welleth, is opened in the soul, and there^ in the
soul, is the ^ce, where the Father begetteth
his Son, ana where the Holy Ghost proceedeth
from the Father and the Son.

" Christ saith, / ara the tight of the worlds he
thatfoUeweth ^e\ walketk not in darkness. He di-
rects us only to himself. He is the morning
star^ and is generated and riseth in us, and shi-
neth m the darkness of our nature. O how
great a triumph is there in the soul, when he
ariseth init, then a man knows, as he never
knewbefore, that he is a stranger in a foreign
land.'*


THB


SECOND PART


•f vu


SPIRIT OF PRAYER*


OB,


THE SOUL RISING OUT OT TEE VANITY OF TIME,


INTO THE


RICHES OF ETERNITY.


JMtINO nVMKAL SJALOOUBS BKTWBIN ACADIMlCUf, ItTBTICOa, <
ILVS: AT WHICH BUMANUS WAS fUMMMtlT,


BY yniUAM LAW, M. A,


PROVIDENCE:
JLOUK JflLLER, PRIWTEH.
IB23.


THE FIRST DIALOGUE

betwbeh
Academem^ Rustims^tind TTieophilus.

AT WJMCH HUMANUS WAS PIOESENT.

Acad. Well met, honest Rusticus, 1 can
liow tell you with much pleasure, that we shall
soon see a second part of the spirit of prayer. And
as soon as I get it, I will come, ^nd read it to
you.

jRust. I have often told you Academicus, that
I wondered at your eagerness and impatience
to see more of this maltet. As to my part, I
have no such thirst within me^ and should make
no complaint if it never came mi^

Acad. My friend Rusticus, yon^ can^t read,
and that is the reason, that you are not in mj
«tate of impatience to see another book.

Rust. Indeed Academicus, you quite mistake
the matter. The first part of the Spirit tfPi^yer
you read to me more than three .or four times,
and that ip the reason, why I am in do jstate of
eagerness after ^a sepond part. I h?kve fotpid in
the first part, aH that 1 need ,to know .ef God, of
Christ, of myself, of heaven., of hell, of sin, of
grace, of dea|b, and* of jsalvatipn. That all
Ihese things have their ,&€m^, their £^, and.((heir


90

working in my own heart. That God is always
in me, that Christ is always within me, that he
is the inward light and Ufe of my soul, a bread
from heaven, ot which 1 may always eat, a wa^
ter of eternal Ufe springing up in my soul, of
which I may always drii^. O my friend, these
truths have opened a new life in my soul, I am
brought home to myself, the veil is taken oflf
from my heart, I have found my God, I know
that his dwelling place, his kingdom is within
me. What need we then call out for books
written only with pen and ink, when such a
book as this, so full of wonders, is once opened
in our own hearts ? My eyes, my ears, my
thoughts are all turned inwards, because all
that 6od, and Christ, and grace are doin^ for
me, all that the devil, the world and the flesn are
working against me^ are only to be known and
found there. What heed then of so much news
from abroad, since all that concerns either life
or decdh are all transacting, and all at work
within me ?

How could I be said to have felt these great
trighs, to be sensible of these riches of eternity
treasured up in my soul, to know what a great
^ood the divine nature is in me, and to me, if
instead of turning all the desire, and delight of
my heart towards them^I only felt a longing
and desire to read more concerning the Spirit
of Prayer. No, Academicus, anomer, and a
better nre is kindled within me ; my heart is in
motion, and ail that is within me tends towards


91

God ; and I find thai nothing concerns me more
than to keep my heart from wandering after
any thing else. I now know to what it is that I
am daily to die^ and to what it is that I am dai-
ly to live, and therefore look upon every daj
as lost, that dees not help forward both this
death, and this life in me. I have not yet done
half, what the first part of the Spirit of Prayer
directs me to do, and therefore have but little
occasion to call out for a second.

Theo^ Indeed Academicus, I must own thai
honest Kusticus, as you called him, has spoken
well. Your education has so accustomed you
to the pleasureofreading a variety of books, that
you hardly propose any other end in reading,
than the entertainment of your mind, thus the
Spirit of Prayer has only awakened in you a de-
sire to see another part upon the same subject.
This fault is very common to others, as well as
scholars, and even to those who only delight in
reading good books.

Philo for this twenty years has been collect-
ing and reading all the spiritual books he can
hear of. He reads them, as the criticks read
commentators and lexicons, to be nice and ex-
act in telling you the^/vfe, spirits, and intent of this
or that spiritual writer, how one is more accu-
rate in this, and the other in that. Philo will
ride you forty miles in winter to have a conver-
sation ^out spiritual books, or to see a collec-
tion larger than his own. Philo is amazed at
tUiedeadness and insensibility of the christian


92

world, that they are such strangers jto the in-
ward life and spiritual^nature of the christian
salyation, he wonders how thej can be so zeal-
ous for the outward letter and form of ordinan*-
ces, and so averse to that spiritual life, that they
all point at, as the one thing needful But Phi-
lo never thinks how wonderful it is, that a man
who knows regeneration to be the whole^ should
yet content himself with the love of books upon
the new birth, instead of being born again him-
self. For all that is changed in Philo, is his
taste for books. He is no more dead to the
world, no more delivered from himself, is as
tearful of adversity, as fond of prosperity, as
easily provoked, and pleased with trifles, as
much governed by his own will, tempers, and
passions, as unwijling td deny his appetites, or
enter into war with himself, as lie was twenty
years ago. Yet all is well with Philo, he has no
-iBUSpicion of hirasi^lf, he dates the newness of his
life'and fulness of his light, from the time, that
he discovered th e pearl of eternity in spiritual
authors/.

All this, Academicus, is said on your account,
that you may not lose the benefit of this spark
^f the divine fife that is kindled in your soul^
but may conform yourself suitably 6) so |;reat
a gift of God.

It demands at present an eagerness of anoth-
er kind, than that of much reading even upon
<he most spiritual matters.

Jlcad. I thank you, Theophilus, for your good
will towards me, but did not imagine my eager


93

ness after such books to be so ^reat and dan-
gerous a mistake. And if I Aotrt yet entirely
give into what you say, it is because a friend of
yours, has told ue, (and as I thought by way of
direction) that he has been a diligent reader of
all the spiritual authors, from the apostolical
Dionysius down to the illuminated Guion, and
<^lebrated Fenelon ofCambray ; and therefore
it would never have come into my head, to sus-
pect it to be a fault, or dangerous to follow his
example.

Tluoph. I have said nothing, my friend, with
a design of hindering your acquaintance with
all the truly spiritual writers. 1 would rather
in a right way help joa ta a^ truieJiOwaacy with
them. For they are friends of God, entrusted
with his secrets, and partakers of the divine na-
ture. And he that converses rightly with
them, has a happiness, that can hardly be over
valued.

My intention is only to abate for a time, a
spirit of eagerness after much reading, which in
your state has more of nature than grace in it,
which seeks delight in a variety of new notions,
and rather gratifies curiosity, than reforms the
heart

Suppose you had seen an angel from heaveUi
who had discovered to you a glimpse of its own
internal brightness, and of that glorious union
in which it lived with God, opening more of its
self to the inward sight of your mind, than vou
could either forget or relate. Suppose it had


94

told j^ou witli a piercing word, and living im-
pression, that all its own angelick, and heaven-
ly brightness was hid in yourself, concealed from
you under a bestial covering of flesh and blood ;
that this flesh and blood was become the mas-
ter of it, would not suffer it to breathe, or stir,
or come to life in you. Suppose it had told you
that all your life had been spent in helping this
flesh and blood to more and more power over
you, to hinder you from knowing and feeling this
divine life within you. Suppose it had told you,
that to this day you had lived in the grossest
setf^tdohtry^ loving, serving, honouring and ador-
ing yourself, instead of loving, serving, and
adoring God with all your heart, and soul and
spirit. That all your intentions, projects, cares,
pleasures, and indulgences had been only so
much labour to bring you to the grave in a total
ignorance of that great work, for which alone
you was born into the world.

Suppose it had told you, that all this blind-
ness and insensibility of your state, was all ob-
stinately, and wilfully brought upon yourself,
l)ecause you bad boldly slighted and resisted
allthedaily inward, and outward calls of God
to your soul, all the teachings, doings, and suf-
ferings of a son of God to redeem you. Sup-
pose it left you with this Jarewell^ O man, awake,
thy work is great, thy time is short, i am thy
last trumpet ; the g^av^ calls for thy flesh and
blood, thy soul must enter into a new lodging.
To be born again is to be i\n angel. Not to be
born again, is to become a devil.


95

Tell me now, Academicus, what would jon
expect from a man, who had been thus awaken-
ed, and pierqed by the voice of an angel ?
Could you think he had any sense left, if he was
not cast into the deepest depth of humility, self
dejection, and self-abhorrehce ? Casting him-
self, with a broken heart at the feet of the di-
vine mercy, desiring nothing but that from that
time, every moment of his Kfe might be given un-
to God, in the most perfect denial of every tem-
per, will and inclination, that nourished the
corruptiQU of his nature. Wishing and praying
from the bottom of his heart,. that God would
lead him into, and through every thing inward-
ly and outwardly, that might destroy the evil
workings of his nature, apd awaken all that was
holy and heavenly within him, that the seed of
eternity, the spark of life, that he had so long
quenched and sniothered underearthly rubbish
might breathe, and come to life in him.

Or would you think he was enough affected
with this an^ick visit, if all that it had awak-
ened in him, Was only a longing and eager de-
sire to hear the same, or ianother angel talk
again.

Jlcad. Oh Theophilus, you have said enough.
For all that is within me consents to the truth
and justness of what you have said. I now feel
iq the strongest manner, that I have been rath-
er amused, than edified by what I have read.

Theoph. A spiritual book, Academicus, is a
call to a^ real and total a death to the life of


96 \

corrupt nature, as that which Adam died in par-
adise, was to the life of heaven. He indeed
died at once totally to the divine life in^ which
he was created, but as our body of earth is to
last, to the end of our lives, so the end of our
earthly life, every step we take, every inch of
our road is to be made up of denial, and dying
to ourselves. Because all our redemption con-
sists in our regaining that first life of heaven in
the soul, to which Adam died in paradise.
And therefore the one single work of redemption
is the one single work of regeneration, ortherais- •
ing up of a life, and spirit and tempers, and in-
clinations contrary to that life and spirit which
we derive from our earthly fallen parents. To
think therefore of any thing, but the continual,
total denial of our earthly nature, is to overlook
the very one thing on which all depends. And
to hope for any thing, to trust or pray for any
thing but the U/e of God, or a birth of heaven
in our souls, is as useless to us, as placing our
hope and trust in a graven image. Thus saith
the Christ of God, the one pattern, and author
of our salvation, ifamf man will be my disciple^
let him deny hdmseffl hate his own Ufe^ take tp his
daily cross andJhUow me. And again unless a man
be born again from above, of water and the
spirit, he cannot see or enter into the kingdom
of God. ,

Now Is your time, Academicus, to enter
deeply into this great truth. You are just come
out 01 the slumber of life, and begin to see with


97

new eyes the nature of your salvation. You
are charmed with the discovery of a kingdom
of heaven hidden within you, and long to be
entertained more and more, with the nature,
progress, and perfection of the new birth, or
the opening of the kingdom of God in your souls.
But'my friend, stop a little. It is indeed-great
joy, ihdiiihe pearl oj great price is found, but
take notice, that it is not yours, you can have
no possession of it, till as the merchant did, you
sell all that you liave^ and buy it. Now self is all
that you have, it is your sole possession, you
have no goods of youroi^w, nothing is yours but
this self. The riches of^c^are your own riches^
hutall this self is to. he parted with, before the
pearl is yours. Think of a lower price, or be
unwilling to give thus much for it, plead in your
excuse, that you keep the commandments, ajid
then you are that very rich young man in me
gospel, who went away sorrowAil from our
Lord, when he had said, if thou toilt be perfect^
that is, if thou wilt obtain the pearl, sell all that
thou hast and give to the poor, tliat is, die to
all Xhy possession of self and then thou hast giv-
en all that thou hast to the poor, all that thou
hast is devoted and used for the love of God
and thy neighbour. This selling all, Academ-
icus, is the measure of your dymg to self all
of it is to be given up, it is nn apostate nature,
a stolen life, brought forth in rebellion against
God, it is a continual departure from him. Ft
corrupts every thing it touches, it defiles every
9 .


98

thing it receives, it turns all the gifts, and bles-
sings! of God into covetousness, partiality,
pride, hatred, and envy. All these tempers are
born, and bred, and nourished in self, they have
no other place to live in, no possibility of ex-
istence, but in that creature whrch is fallen
from a life in God, into a life in self.

Acad^ Pray, sir, tell me more plainly, what
this self is, since so much depends upon it.

Theoph, It is hell, it is the devil, it is dark-
ness, pain and disquiet. It is the one only en-
emy of Christ,' the great anti-christ. It is the
scarlet whore, the fiery dragon, the old serpent,
the devouring beast, that is mentioned in the
revelation of St. John.

Acad, You rather terrify than instruct me by
this description.

Theoph. It is indeed a very frightful matter,
it contains every thing that man has to dread
and hate, to resist and avoid. Yet be a3sured my
friend, that careless and merry as the world is,
every man that is born into it, has all these en-
emies to overcome within himself. And every
man, till he is in the way of regeneration, is
more or less governed by them. No hell in
any remote place, no devil that is separate
from you, no darkness or pain that is not with-
in you, no antichrist either at Rome or Eng-
land, no furious beast, no fiery dragon, without
or apart from you, <ian do you any hurt. It is
your own hell, your own devil, your own beast,
your own antichrist, your own dragon that


99

lives in your own heart's blood, that alone can
hurt you.

Die to this self, to this inward nature^ and
then all outward enemies are overcome. Live
to this self, and then when this life is out^ all
that is within you, and all that is without you,
will be nothing else but a mere seeing and
feeling this hell, serpent, beast, and fiery
dragon.

Seehere, Academicus^the twofold nature of
every man. He has within him a redeeming
power, the meekness of the heavenly life, called
the Lam6 of God. This seed is surrounded or
encompassed with the beast of fleshy lusts, the
serpent of guile and subtilty, and the dragon of
fiery wrath. This is the great trial, pr strife
of human life, whether a man will live to the
lust of the beasts the guile oi the serpent j the pride
and wrath of the fiery dragon^ or give himself
up to the meekness, the patience, the sv/eet-
ness, the simplicity, the humility of the Lamb
of God.

This is the whole of the matter between God
and the creature. On one side fire arid wrath,
awakened first by the rebellious angels ; and
on the other side, the meekness of the Lamb
of God, the patience of divine love coming
down from heaven, to stop and overcome the
fire and wrath that is broken out in nature and
cre:ature. Your father Adam has introduced
you into the fire and wrath of the fallen angels,
into a world from t^^hence paradise is departed.


100

Your iie&h and, blood is kihdled in that sin,
which first brought forth a murdering Cain.
But dear soul, be of good comfort, for the meek-^
ness^ the lovey the hearty the Lamb of God, is be-
come man, has set himself in the birth of thy
own life, that in him, and with him, and by a
birth from him, heaven and paradise, may be
again opened both within thee, and without
thee : not for a time, but to all eternity.

Once more, Academicus. Every man in this
^vov\d^Um(\s essentially m heaven, and in hell,
both as to that w^hich is within him, and that
which is without him. For man and the world
are both in the ^ame fallen state* The curse m
the earth is that sam6 thing in outward nature,
that the loss of the divine life was to the soul
of Adam. The whole world in all its nature is
nothing else but a real mixture of heaven, and
hell. The sun and the water of this world, is
that which keeps under, and overcomes the
darkness, wrath and fire of hell, and carries on
the vegetable and animal life that is in it. The
light of the sun blesses all the workings of the
elements, and the cool softening essence of the
water keSps under the fire, and wrath of na-
ture. In all animal creatures the birth o^ light
in their own life, and the water of their own
blood, both produced by the light of the sun,
and the water of outward nature, brings forth
an order of earthly creatures, that can enjoy
the good th^t is in this world, in spite of the
wrath of hell, and the malice of devils.


101

But man has more than all this, for being at
first created an angel, and intended by the mer-
cy of God to be an angel again, has the light of
heaven, and the water of eternal life, both giv-
en to Adam in that seed of the woman^ which wa^
to Bruise the head of the serpent, that is to
overcome the curse, the fife, and wrath, orhell
that was awakened in the fallen soul. So that
man has not only in common with the other an-
imals, the light and water of outward nature to
quench the wrath of his own life in this mixed
world, but he has the meekness, the light, the
love, the humility of the holy Jesus, as a seed
of life born in his soul, to bring forth that first
image of God, in which Adam was created.

This, my friend, is the true ground of all true
religion, it means nothing, it intends nothing,
but to overcome that earthly life, ivhich over-
came Adam in the fall, that made him a pris-
oner of hell, and a slave to the corrupt work-
ings of earthly flesh and blood. And therefore
you may see,and know witha mathematical cer-
tainty, that the one thing necessary for every
fallen soul, is to die to all the life, that we have
from this world, that the life of heaven may be
again born in him. The life of this world, is
the life of the beast, the scarlet whore, the old^cr-
j»cn/, and the fiery, dragon.

Hence it is that sin rides in triumph over

church and state, and from the court to the

cottage, gil is overrun with sensuality, guile,

falseness, pride, wrath, envy, selfishness, and
9#


102

every form of corruption* Every one swims
avray in this torrent, but he who hears and
attends to the voice of the Son of God
within him, calling him to die to this life, to take
up his cross, and follow him.

Much learbed pains has been often taken to
prove, Rome, or Constantinople, to be the seat
of the beast, the antichrist, the scarlet whore,
&c. Bat alas, they are not at such a distance
from us, they are the properties of fallen hu-
man nature, and are all of them alive in our
oWn selves, till we are dead or dying to all the
spirit, and tempers of this world. They are
every where, in every soul, where the heavenly
nature, and spirit of the holy Jesus is not. But
when the human soul turns from itself, and
turns to God, dies to itself, and lives to God in
the spirit, tempers, and inclinations of the ho-
ly Jesus, loving, pitying, suffering and praying
for all its enemies, and overcoming all evil with
good, as this Christ of God did; then, but not
till then, are these monsters separate from it.
For covetuousness, and sensuality of all kinds,
are the very devouring beasts religion governed
by a worldly, trading spirit, and grati^ing the
partial interests of flesh and blood, is nothing
else but the scarlet whore^ guile and craft, and
cunning are the very essence, of the old serpent ;
self-interest and self-exaltation are the whole
nature of anftVftm/. Pride, persecution, wrath,
hatred and envy, are the very essence of the
fiery dragon.


103

This, Academicus, is the fallen human na-
ture, and this is the old man, which is alive in
every one^ though in various manners, till he is
born again from above. To think therefore of
any thing in religion, or to pretend to real holi-
ness, ^without totally dying to this old marij is
building castles in the air, and can bring forth
nothing, but satan in the form of an angel of
light. Would you know, Academicus, whence
it is, that so malny false spirits have appeared
in the world, who have deceived themselves,
and others, with false fire, and false light, laying
claim to inspirations, illuminations, and open-
ings of the divine life, pretending to do won-
ders under extraordinary calls from God ? It
is this, they have turned to God, without turn-
ing from themselves, would be alive in God ^ be-
fore they were dead to their own nature, a
thing as impossible in itself, as for a grain qf
wheat to be alive before it dies.

ISow religion in the hands of self, or corrupt
nature^ serves only to discover vices of a wor-
ser kind, than in nature left to itself. Hence
are all the disorderly passions of religious men,
which burn in a worser flame^ than passions
only employed about worldly matters. Pride,
self-exaltation, hatred and persecution undef
a cloak of religious zeal, will sanctify actions,
which nature, left to itself, would be ashamed
to own.

You may now see, Academicus, with what
§reat reason 1 have called you, at your first


104

setting out, to this great poiiii, the total dying
toseltasthe only ibundution of a solid piety.
All the fine things you henr or read of an in-
ward and spiritual life in God, all your expec-
tations oftlie light and holy spirit of God, will
become a false food to your soul, till you only
seek for them through death to self.

Observe, sir, the difference, which clothes
make in those, who have it in their power to
dress as they please ; some are all for shew,
colours, and glitter, others are quite fantastical
and affected in their dress; some have a grave
and solemn habit, others are auite simple and

!)lain fn the whole manner/ Now all this dif-
ierence of dress is only anoutv^^ard difference,
that covers the same poor carcase, and leaves
it full of all its oT^n infirmities* Now all the
truthsof the gospel, when only embraced and
possessed by the old ma/i, make only such su-
perficial difference, as is made by clothes. —
Some put on a solemn, formal, prudent outside
carriage, others appear in all the glitter, and
shew of religious colouring, and spiritual attain-
ments ; but under all this outside difference,
there lies the poor fellen soul, imprisoned, tin-
helped, in its own fallen state. And thus it
mast be, it is not possible to be otherwise till
the spiritual life begins at the true root, grows
out of deatK and is born in a broken heart, a
heart broken off from all its own natural life.
Then self-hatred self-*Gontempt, and self-deni-
al is as suitable to this new born spirit, as self'


105

love, self-6steem> and self-seeking is to the unv
regenerate man. Let me, therefore, my friend,
conjure you, not to look forward, or cast about
for spiritual advancement, till you have rightly
taken this first step in the spiritual life. All
your future progress depends lipon il. For this
depth of religion goes no deeper than the depth
of your malady. For sin has its root \n the bot-
tom of your soul, it comes to life with your
flesh and blood, and breathes in the breath of
your natural life, and therefore till you die to
nature, you live to sin, and whilst this root of
sin is*alive in you, all the virtues you put on, are
onlylike fine painted fruit hung upon a bad tree.

Mead. Indeed, Theophilus, you have made
the difference between true and false religion
as plain to me, as the difference between light
and darkness. But all that you have said, at
the same time is as new to me, as if I had lived
in a land where religion , had never been nam-
ed. But, pray sir, tell me, how I am to take
ihXsJirst step., which you so much insist upon.

Theoph You are to turn wholly from your-
self, and to give up yourself wholly unto God,
in this or the like twofold form of words or
thoughts.

"Oh my God, with all the strength of my
soul, assisted by thy grace, I desire and resolve
to resist and deny all my own will, earthly tem-
pers, selfish views, and inclinations ; every
thing that the spirit of this world, and the van-
ity of fallen nature prorhpts me to. I give my*
self up whelly and solely unto thee, to be ^1


106

thine, to have and do, and be, inwardly and out-
wardly, according to t^y good pleasure. I de-.
sire to live for no other ends, with no other de-
signs, but to accomplish the work which thou
requirest of me„ an hunible, obedient, faithful,
thankful instrument in thy hands, to be used
as thou pleasest.''

You are not to content yourself; my friend,
with now^ and then, or even many times making
this oblation of yourself to God. It naust be
the daily, the hourly exercise of your mind, tiU
it is wrought into your very nature, and becomes
an essential state and habit of your mind, till
you feel yourself as habitually turned from all
your own will, selfish ends, and earthly desires,
as you are from stealing and murder; till the
whole turn and bent of your spirit points as
constantly to God, as the needle touched with
the loadstone does to the north. This, sir, is
your first, and necessary step in the spiritual
life, this is the key to^H'the treasures ofheav-
en, this unlocks the sealed book of your soul,
and makes room for the light and spirit of God
to arise up in it. Without this, the spiritual
life is but spiritual talk^ and only assists nature
to be pleased with a holiness that it has not.

The necessity of this first step, and the folly
of pretending to succeed without it, is thus rep-
resented by our blessed Lord. Whai man in-
Jending to build a housfi.

All our ability, and preparation to sucrcrfl
in this great affair, lies in this first step. Yon


107

may perhaps think this an hard saying. But
don't go away sorrowful^ like the youtjg manin
the gospel, because he had great possessions.
For my friend, you little think what a deliver-
ance you will have from all hardships, and
what a flow of happiness is found even in this
life, as soon as the soul is thus dead to self^ freed
from its own passions and wholly given up to
God ; of which I shall speak to you by and by.
I have told you the price of the new birth. 1
shall now leave you to consider, whether you
will be so wise a oierchant, as to give up all
the wealth of the old man for this heavenly
pearl. I don't expect your answer now, but
will stay for it till to-morrow.

But, pray gentlemen, who is this Humanus, 1
don't remember to have seen him before ? he
seems not willing to speak, yet is often biting
his lips at what is said.

Rmt. This Humanus, sir, is my neighbour,
but so ignorant of the nature of the gospel, that
he is often trying to persuade me into a disbe-
lief of it. I say ignorant, (though he is a learn-
ed man) because 1 am well assured, that no
man ever did, or can oppose the gospel, but
through a total ignorance of what it is in itself*
For the gospel, when rightly understood, is ir-
resistable, it brings more good news to the hu-
man nature, than sight to the blind, limbs to the
lame, health to the sick, or liberty to the con-
demned slave. But this neighbour of mine has
never yet b^en insight of the truth, as it is in


108

the gospel, he knows nothing of the grotincl a
and reason of it, but what he has picked up
out of books, that have been written against it,
and for it. He often makes use of one maxinfi
of the gospel, to overthrow it, and wonders that
so plain and honest a man as 1 am, will not sub-
mit to it. He says, if it be a truth as the gos-
pel saith, that the tree must be. known by itsjrmt^
and that a good tree cannot bring forth corrupt
fruity we need only look at the lives of chris-
tians, the craft of priests, the wars, contentions,
hatreds, sects, parties, heresies, divisions, out-
rages and persecutions which Christianity has
brought forth, we need only look at this, to have
all our senses and reason {(ssure us, that the
gospel must be a bad tree.

But this is enough concerning the man. He
comes with me at his own earnest desire, which
has lately seized him, and upon his own strict
promise, not to interrupt our conversation, but
to be a silent hearer, till it is all over. And
therefore if you please, sir, I beg our conver-
sation may for a while turn upon the chiefpoint
asserted in the spirit of prayer, for two reasons,
first that Academieus may see what reasons I
had for saying, that book had given xAe a suffi-
cient instruction ; and also that Humanus hear-
ing these great points, may hear the whole
ground and nature, the necessity and blessedr
ness of the christian redemption, set forth in
such a degree of light, and truth, and amiable-
ness, as he had no notion of before.


109

TheopL Your neighbour is welcome, ^nd t
pray God to give him an heart attentive to
those truths, which have made so good an im-
pression upon you* The first point that you
desire us to speak to, is conceri^ing the origin-
al of this temporal world. How God was mo-
ved to cteate it, upon the fall of a Whole host,
or kingdom of angels, who by their revolt from
God, lost the divine li^ht, and awakened in
themselves, and the region in which they dvi^elt,
the dark, wrathful fire of hell. For hell is
nothing else, but nature departed, or excluded
from the beams of divine light. The materiaU^
iy of their kingdom was spiritual^ and the light
that glanced through it, thiat filled its transpar-
ency with an infinity of glorious wonders, was
the son of God, the brightness of the FatherV
glory. The spirit that animated the inward
life of these glorious angels, and that moved
with its sweet breath, through all this* ^m$%f
sea^ opening and changing new scenes in the
mirror of divine wisdom, was the holif spirit of
God, that eternally proceeds from the father
and the son. Thus did these celestial spirit^
live, move, and have their being in God. A^
was heaven, and they were all as so many crea-
ted Gods, eternally sinking down and rising
up into newlieights, and depths of the riches
of the divine nature. With this degree of glo-
ry and happiness, was the whole extent of the
place of this world filled, before the angels
fell. And to this degree of happiness and heav-
10


110

enly glory, will the whole place of this world
be again raised, when the love of God shall,
have finished the great work of the redemp-.
tioa of mankind. . Heaven again, and angels
again, raised out of the misery of time, to sing
eternal praises to the holy trinity, and to, the
lamb, that has overcome sin, and death, smd
hell, aod turned all tlie wrath, and misery, and
darkness of this world, into a heaven, never
more to be changed. Oh Rusticus, what sen-
timents dp these things raise in you ?

RusL Indeed, sir, they almost make me to
forget that 1 am in the body. You have set me
upon a mountain, from which^ whether I look
backwards,, or forwards, or downwards, all is
equally surprising; backwards, a breachmade
in heaven, the first opening of hell and dark-
ness, and a new creation out of the ruins of the
fallen angels ; forwards, time and all temporal
nature rising again into its first eternity ; down-
wards a globe of earth, the seat of war between
heaven and hell, where men are born to par-
take of the dreadful strife, and have only the
little span of life, either to overcome with God,
or be overcome by the devil to all eternity.
Qhsir, what great things are these ? ^I wish
that ajl the . world, as well as my neighbaur
Humanus, were forced to be silent hearers of
them. But, pray sir, go on.

Theoph. When God saw the dnrknessitkatwas
upon thejhce ef the deepy and the whole angeUck
habitetkm hecoiae a chaos of confiiaioB^^ the


Ill

spirit of God moved upon the face of ike water s^
tnat is, the spirit of God began to operate again
in this outward darkness, that covered this
once transparent glassy sea ; for from a glassy
sea, it was become a deep covered with dark-
ness, which was soon to take another nature ;
to have its fire and wrath converted into sun
and stars, its dross and darkness into a globe
of earth, its mobility and moisture into air and
water, when the spirit of God began to move
and operate in it. But before this chads had
entered into this new order, God said, let there
be lights and tliere was light. This light, my
friend, was not the present light of this world,
which now governs the night and day; for the
sun, the' moon and stars were not created till
the fourth day. But the light which God then
spake forth, was a degree of heaven, that w^s
commanded to glance into the darkened deep,
which penetrated through all the depth of the
chaos,' and intermixed itself through^ •'^'/
part; not turning the whob i^**^^"^^%f^" ^^
light, but only byjl«-quiclj:ening virtue fitting,
disposing, and preparing every part, to take
that change, which every following day of the
creation was to bring forth, in and out of this
darkened deep. For darkness is deathf and
Kght is life. This wns the nature and work of
thisit first light, which God called forth on the
fir?t da^; it was God's baptizing the dead
chaos ^viththe spiritof life, that it might be ca-
pable of a resurrection into anew creation.


113

See here the uniformity of the divine proce-
Uure, with regard both to fallen nature and
creature. When the creature (man) was fal-
len, his redemption was begun byGod'S speak-
ing a ^cc/.of light, called the seed of the wo-
man into the birth of his life. This alone could
qualiiy him for the new creation in Christ Je-
sus. When nature was fallen, its restoration
was begun in the same manner, light was com-
manded to enter into it, or rather to rise up
in it, this was its power or possibility of coming
out of its fallen state.

Marrel not, Rusticus^ that I calf this first
Jight of the first day a degree of heaven. For
light is natural, essential, and inseparable from
heaven, it belongs only to heaven, and where-
ever else it is, it is only there as a gift from
heaven. And therefore so much as there is of
light in this world, so much there is of heaven
in it. Darkness is natural, essential, and in-

, irable frpm hell, and can be no where else,
put wher^ h^\\ Qan in some degree open and
discover itself. And wherever, and in what de-
gree darkness can shew itself, there, and in the
same degree is the nature of hell known and
felt. This world is made up of light and dark-
ness,, not only as it consists of day and night,
but because every earthly thing is itself a mix-
ture of light and darkness. The darkness is
the evil, and the light is the good that is in ev-
ery thing. If the darkness was predominant in
vegietables, they would all be rank poison^ if in


113

^Biiiiinals, they would be all as so many wrathful,
venomoas serpents of hell. If the. light did
quite sappress thedarkness in vegetables, they
would be like the fruits which were to • have
been man's food in paradise*

JRmt These things, Theophilus, strike a most
^^mazing light into all the mysteries both of na-
ture and grace. But they do not more enlight-
en, than they ediiythe mind. They ax^e; all
reforming truths, they have the. nature of alter-
atives, they purg^ the heart of all its dross,
they force it to drop all its pretensions to
earthly things, as the poor deceitful baits of
fallen nature, and to long for nothing, but *to
have that first heaven and life in God, tor which
angels and men were at first created. But I
want to shew to my friend Humanus, as it were
in one view, that chain of truths, which follows
from what you have said, but 1 had rather you
would do it.

Theoph. Agreed. And I will set them inoi^
der thus. 1st, that the place of this world is
the very place or region, which belonged to
Lucifer and his angels. 2dly, that every thing
that we see in this world, all its elements, the
stars, the firmament, &c. are nothing else but
the invisible things of the fallen world, made
visible in the new, and lower state of ejiistence.
3dly, that before the rebellion of the angek,
there wad nothing but God, and heavei) and
I^avenly beings. Light and love, and joy and
glory^ ^ith all the litcnden tbereoi; were the
• 10*


/


114

only things seen and felt by the angels. Dark-
ness and fire with every quality thereof were
absolutely unknown to the angels, they had
no more suspicion of them, than of the possi-
bility of sickness, pains, heat and cold. All they
aimed at, was at being higher in the glories and
powers and light of that heaven in which they
lived. But their turning to their own strength
to effect this, was their whole.turningfrom God
and a falling into nature without God, which
was the first discovery of darkness, wrath, and
fire, and pain^and torment. 4thly, hence h ap-
pears that €krkness is the ground of the sub-
stance, or materiality of nature, /re is its life,
and tight is its glorious transmutation into the
kingdom of heaven, and spirit is the opener of
all its wonders. All that can be conceived, is
either God, or nature, or creature ; God is the
holy trinity without, or before nature, but na-
ture is the manifestation of the holy trinity in a
triune life of fir e^ light smd spirit,

5thly, Here we see the pUin and true ori-
ginal of all evil, without any perplexity or im-
putation upon God. That evil is nothing else
but the wrath, and fire and darkness of nature
broken off* from God. That the punishment,
the pain, or the hell of sin, is nodesignedly pre*
pared, or abltrary penalty inflicted by God, but
the natural and necessary state of the creature,
that leaves, or turns from God. 6tbly, that the
will of the creature is the only opener of al)
evil, or gopd in the crettture, the wiU piandfi


115

between God and nature, and must in all its
VForkings unite either with God, or nature, the
will totally resigned, and given up to God, is
one spirit with God, and God dwelieth in it, the
will turned from God, is taken prisoner iq the
M^ratb, fire and darkness of nature.

7thly, Here we see, how and why a creature
can lose, and die to all its happiness, and per-
lection, and from a beauteous angel, become a
deformed devil. It is because nature has no
beauty, happiness, or perfection, but solely
from the manifestation^ or birth of the holy trini-
ty in it. God manifested in nature, is the only
blessing, happiness, and perfection of nature.
Therefore the creature, that in the w^orking of
its will is turned fiom God, must have as great a
change brought forth in it, as that of heaven in-
to helly forced to live, but to have no other life
but that of its own gnawing worm, left to it-
self.

8thly, Hence we see the deep ground, and
absolute necessity of the christian redemption,
by a birth from above, of the light and spirit of
God, demonstrated in the most absolute de-
gree of certainty. It is because all nature is
m itself nothing, but a hungry^ wrathful fre of
life, a tormenting darkness, unless the light and
spirit of God kindle it into a kingdom of heav-
en. And therefore the f^dlen som can have no
possible reliefs or redemption, it must be to all
eternity an kungry, dark^ fi^^^ tormenting spirit
of life, Bnlees the light, or son, and spirit of God
be born again in it»


116

Hence also it follows, that iti all the possibil-
itj of things, there is and can be but one hap-
piness, and one misery. The one misery, is
nature and creature left to itself, the one hap-
piness; is the life, the light and spirit of God
manifested in nature and creature. This is the
true meaning of those words of our Lord, therfi
ty but one that is gqodr^ and that is God,

9thly, Henee it is also seen, that there is
and can be but one true religion for the fallen
soul, and that is, the dying to self^ to nature and
treature^ and a turning with all the «i?///,the desire
and delight of the soul to God. Sacrifices^ obla-
tions, prayers, rites and ceremonies, without
this, are but as sounding brass, and tink-
ling cymbals. Nay, zeal and constancy, and
warmth, and fervour in the performance of
thes^e religious practices is not the matter ; for
nature and self-love can do all this. But these
religious practices are then only parts of true
religion, when they mean nothing, seek noth-
ing, but to keep up a continual dying to self,
and all worldly things, and turn all the will, de-
sire and delight of the soul to God alone.
Lastly^ there is and can be only one salvation
for the fallen soul, and that is heaven opened
^gain in the soul, by the birth .of such a life,
light and spirit, as is born in angels. For Ad-
-am was created to possess that heaven from
which the angels fell ; but nothing can enter
into heaven, but the angelick life, which is born
<d heaven. The los& of this angelick lile^ was


JI7

the fall of Adam or that death which be died^
on the day he did eat of the earthly fruit,
therefore the regeneration, or new birth of his
first angelick life, is the one only salvation of
the fallen soul. Ask not therefore, whether
we are saved by faith, or by works, for we are
saved by neither of them. Faith and works
are at first only preparatory to the new births
afterwards they are the true genuine fruits and
effects of it. But the new birth, a life from
heaven, the new creature, called Christ in us, is
the one only salvation of the fallen soul. No^
thing can enter into heaven, but this life which
is born of, and comes from heaven.

Rust. I thank you, Theophilus^ for setting
these awakening truths in so stronj^ a light.
And I think it is not possible, for my friend Ha-
manus, to be unafTected with them.

.They must needs open in him, a new way of
thinking about religion, and shew him the deep
and solid ground of the absolute necessity of
the christian redemption, and incline him to he
a willing hearer of that which follows.

Theoph. I hope it will be so, Rusticus, and
what I would here, and through every point,
we speak of, observe to you, friend Huma-
nus, is this, that the christian religion is the one
on/y true religion ofnaturje, deeply and necessa-
ily founded in the natwe of things, that its doc-
trines are not founded in an arbitrary appoint-
ment of God, but have their natural 4Jtndne$^^
mry reason, why they cannot be otherwise, %s


118

has here b^en shewn in the one great pgint of
regeneration, which is the whole of man's sal-
vation, and the one only thing intended by all
revelation from the fall of man to the end of
the world. Now the true ground of the one
true religion of nature, cannot be known or
seen into, but by going back to the beginning
bf things, and shewing how they came into
their presetit state. VV^ must find out why and
how religion came to be necessary, and on
what its necessity is founded. Now tbis can-
not be done, unless we find out what sin, and
evilf and deaths and darkness are in themselves,
and how they came into nature, and creature.
For this alone can shew us, what religion is
true^ is natural^ is necessary^ and alone sufficient
to remove all evil, sin and disorder out of the
creation. For this reason, we began with the
grounds and reasons of the creation of this
world, shewing how it came to be as it is. But
this could not be done, but by going so far
back as the fall of angels. For it was their
revolting from God, that brought wraih, and
fire^ artd thickness^ And darkness^ and death into
nature and creature, and so gave occasion to
this new creation, to its being in such a s^tate,
and of such a nature as it is.

For who does not see, that this first dead-
ness, thickness, wrath, fire and darkness, caus-
ed by the angels* sirt, are the very materials out
of whi^h this world is made ? For are not the
fire, the air, the water, the earth, the rocks,


and stones of this world, the rage of heat and
cold, the succession of dky and night, the
wrath of storms and tempests, an undeniable
and daily proof of all this? Now when we thqs
see what sin, and eviU and death,! and dark>^
ness is in nature,, aiwl how they came into it,
then we seeyalso, how and what they are, and
how they came into the creature, because the
creature has its form, its being in and out of
nature. They came into nature, or rose up in
it, by nature's being broke off from God, and
so losing the light and spirit of God, which
made it to be a kingdom of heaven ; we see al-
so that when this disordered nature was. to be
taken out of its fallen estate by a new creation,
that to do this, the spirit of God moved^ or en-
tered again into the darkness of the waters,
and the light of God was called into it. A
plain proof, that the malady of nature, was no-
thing else but its hss of the light, and the spirit
of God working in it. Thisuhews us also, that
the fallen creature is to be restored, or put in-
to a way of recovery in one and the same way as
fallen nature, viz. by the spirit and light of Uod
entering intb it again, and bringing forth a new
birth or creation in Christ Jesua^ Just as the
spirit and light entering into the chaos, creat-
ed or turned the angels' ruinc^d kingdom into a
paradise oh earth.: God help him, who can
see no light or truth here. Your friend Hu-
mamis lays claim to a. religion of nature, and
reason, I join with hua with all my heart. No^


120

other religion can be right, but that which has
its foundation in nature. For the God of na-
ture can require nothing of his creatures, but
what the state of their nature calls them to.
Nature is his great law, that speaks his whole
will both in heaven, and en earth, and to obey
nature, is to obey the God of nature, to please
him, and live to him in the highest perfec-"
tion. God indeed has many after laws, but it
is after his creatures have fallen from nature,
and l&st it« perfection. But all these after
Jaws have no other end, or intention, but to re-
t>air nature, and bring men back to their first
natural state of perfection. What say you now,
Academicus, to all these matters ?

Acad. You sir, and Rusticus, both of you
know, how these matters have affected me, ev-
er since I read the book called the appeal lo all
that doubly &c. From that time, I have stood
upon new ground, I have seen things in such
a newness of light, and reality, as makes me
take my former knowledge for a dream. A
dream I may justly say, since all my labour
was taken up in searching into a seventeea
hundred years history of doctrines, disputes^
decrees, heresies, schisms, and sects, wherever
to be found in Europe, Asia and Africa. From
this goodly heap of stuff crowded into my mind,
I have been settling matters betwixt all the
present christian divisions both at home and
abroad, according to the best roles of criti-
cism. Having little or no other idea of a re*


121

ligioua man, than that of a stiflT maintainer of
certain points against all those that oppose
them. And in this respect, I believe I may say,
that 1 only swam away in the common torrent.

And in this laborious dream, 1 had in all like-
lihood ended my days, had not that book, and
some others of the like kind, shewn me, that
religion lay nearer home, was not to be dug
out of disputes, but lay hid in myself, like a seed,
which for want of its proper nourishment, could
not come to the birth. But however, though
matters stand thus with myself, and I seem to
be entered into a regirin of light ; yet I must
not forget to tell you, what some of my learned
friends object to all this. They say, that in
those books there are many things asserted,
which have not the phtn letter of scripture to
support them, and that therefore men of sober
learning are tiiautious of giving into opinions,
not strictly grounded on the plain letter of
scripture, however fine and plausible they may
seem to be.

Theoph. Is there not some reason, Acade-
mrcus, to take this objection of your learned
friends to be a mere pretence ? For what is
more fully grounded upon the plain letter of
scripture, than the doctrines of a real regen-
eration, a new birth of the ward^ the <Son, and
holy Spirit of God, really brought forth in the
slDul ? And yet this plain letter of scripture, itp^
on the most important of all points, the very
life and essence and whole nature of our re-
11


122

dem'ption, is not only over looked^ hut jiypexAj
opposed bj the generality of men of sober learn-
ing. But this point has not only the plain let-
ter of scripture for it, but what the letter as-
serts, is absolutely required by the whole spirit
and tenor of the new testament. All the epis-
tles of the apostles proceed upon the suppose
ed certaility of this one great point.

A son of God united with, and born in our na-
ture, that his nature may have a birth in us, a
holy spirit breathing in the birth and life of our
souls, quickening the dead life of fallen Adam,
is the letter and spirit of the apostles' writings,
grounded upon the plain letter of our Lord's
own words, that unless we are born again from
above, of the Son, word, water and Spirit of
God, we cannot enter or §ee the kingdom of
Heaven.

Again, \p it not the plain letter of scripture
that Adam died the day that he did eat of the
earthly tree ? Have we not the most solemn
aiSseveration of God for the truth of this ? Was
not the change which Adam found in himselii a
demonstration Qf the truth of this fact ? Instead
of the image and likeness of God in which he
was created, the beauty of paradise, he was
stript of all his glory, confounded at the shame-
ful deformity of his own body, afraid of being
seen, and unable to see himself uncovered ;
delivered up a slave to the rage of all the stars
and elements of this world, not knowing which
way to look, or what to do in a world, wher^


123

he was dead to all that he formerly felt, and
alive only to a new and dreadful feeling of
heat, and cold, shame and fear, and horrible
remorse of mind, at his sad entrance in a world
whence paradise, and God, and his own glory
was departed. Death enough surely !

Death in its highest reality, much greater in
its change, than when an animal of earthly
flesh and blood is only changed into a cold
lifeleas carcase.

A death that in all nature has none like it,
none equal to it, none of the same nature with
it, but that which the angels died, when from
angels of God, they became living devils, ser-
pentine, hideous forms, and slaves to darkness.
Say that the angels lost no life, that they did
not die a real death, because they are yet
alive in the horrors of darkness, and then you
may say with the same truth, that Adam did
not die when he lost God, and paradise, and
the first glory q( his creation, because he af-
terwards lived, and breathed in a world, which
was outwardly in all its parts full of the same
curse, that was within himself. 'But farther,
not only the plain letter of the text, and the
change of state, which Adam found in himself,
demonstrated a real death to his former state,
but the whole tenor of scripture absolutely re-
quires it. All the system of our redemption
proceeds upon it. For tell me, I pray, what
need of a redemption, if Adam had notlost his
first state of hfe ? What need of the deity to


124

enter again into the human nature, not onlj as
tcting, but taking a birth in it, and from it,
what need of all this mysterious method, to
bring the life from above again into man, if the
life i'rom above had n«t been lost. Say that
Adam did not die, and then tell me, what sense
or reason there is in saying, that the Son of
God became man, and died on the cr 069 to r^*
9tore to him the life that he had lost ? It is true
indeed that Adam in his de*ath to the divine
life, was left in the {possession of an earthly
life. And the reason is plain, why he was so.
For bis great sin consisted in bis desire, and
longing to enter into the life of this world, to
know its good and evil, as the animals of this
world do ; it was l^B choosing to have a lik of
this world after this new manner, and his enter-
ing upon the means of attaining it, that was his
death to the divine life. And therefore it is
no wonder, that after his death to heaven and
paradise, be found himself still alive, as an
earthly animal. For the desire of this earthly
life was his ^reat sin, and the possession of
^his earthly life w$ls the proper punishments
aftd misery that belonged to his sin ; and there-
fore it is no wonder, that thai life, which was
(he ^oper punishment, and real discovery of
the h*uit6 of his sin should subsist, after his sin
had put an end to the life of paradise and Go^
in blip. But wonderful is it to a great degree,
that any man should imagine, that Adam did
not die on the day of biB sin, because he had


125

as good a life left in him, as the beasts of the
field have.

For is this the life, or is the death that such
animals die, the life and death with which our
redemption is concerned? Are not all the
scriptures full of a life, and death of a much
higher kind and nature ? And do not the scrip-
tures make man the perpetual subject to whom
this higher life and death belongs? What
ground or reason therefore can there be to
think of the death of an animal of this world,
w^hen we read of the death that Adam was as-
suredly to die the day of his sin ? For does not
all that befel him on the day of his sin, shew
that he lost a much greater life, suffered a
more dreadful change than that of giving up
the breath of this world. For in the day of
his sin, this angel of paradise, this Lord of the
new creation fell from the throne of his glory
(like Lucifer from heaven) into the state of a
poor darkened, naked, distressed animal of
gross flesh and blood, unable to begir the odious
sight of thsit which his new opened eyes forced
liim to see ; inwardly and outwardly feeling the
curse awakened in himself, and all the crea-
tion, and reduced to have only the faith of thg
devils, to believe and tremble. Proof enough
surely^ that Adam was dead to the life and
light, and spirit of God^ and that with this
death, all that was divine and heavenly in his
soul, his body, his eyes, his mind and thoughts
was quite at an end. Now this life to whietv
11*


126

Adam then died, is that life which all his pos-
terity are in want of, and cannot come out of
that state of that death into which he fell, but
bj having this first life of heaven born again in
them. Now is there any reason to say, that
mankind in their natural state are not dead t^
that first life in which Adam was created, be-
cause they are alive to this world ? Yet this is
as well, as to say that Adam did not die a real
death, because he had afterwards an earthly
life in him. How comes our Lord to say, that
unless ye eat the flesh and drink the bhod of the Son
of man^ ye have no life in you? Did he mean ye
have no earthly life in you ? How comes the
apostle to say he that hath the Son of God has
life, but he that hath not the Son of God, hath
not life ? Does he mean the life of this world ?
No. But both Christ and his apostles assert
this great truth, that all mankind are ih the
state of Adam's first death, till they are iiiade
alive again by a birth of the Son, and Holy
Spirit of God brought forth in them. • So plain
is it, both from the express letter, and spirit of
scripture, that Adam died a real death to the
Kingclom of God in the day of his sin. Take
away this death, and all the scheme <^ our re^
demption has no ground left to stand upon.

Judge now, Academicus, who leaves the let-
ter of scripture, your learned friends, or the
author of the appeat. They leave it, they op-
]>ose it in tbat^ which is the very life of ebris«
tiauity,


127

For \vithout the reality of a new birth, foun-
ded on the certainty of a real death in the fall
of Adam, the christian scheme is but a skele-
lon of empty words, a detail of strange mys-
teries between God and man, that do nothings
and have nothing to do.

On the other hand, look now at the things
set forth in the appeal, concerning the fall of
aiigels, the nature and effects of their revolt,
and the creation of this world as deduced
therefrom. They neither leave nor oppose any
letter or doctrine of scripture. They add no-
thii^ to religion, but the full proof of all its
articles; they intend nothing but to open the
original ground^ and true reason of the christian
redemption, and the absolute necessity of its
being such, as the gospel declares. Now the
idter of scripture does not do this in open
words, it sets not forth the v)hy^ and how^ things
are, either in nature and grace, it teaches not
the ground^ or philosophy of the christiai) faith,
it contents itself with bare facts^ and doctrines^
-and calls for simpAe faith and obedience. No
wonder therefore, that when the natural and
necessary ground of the ehristian redemption is
opened^ that the letter of scripture is not step by
step appealed to, for every thing that is said.
And yet mariy things may be sufficiently groun-
ded on scripture, that are not so expressed in
the letter* The Sadducees denied that there
was any resurrection at all^ and this they did^
because they could not find it in the express let-^
A^ of the &ye books of Moses. Ana yet it


128

seecttB, that the resurrection was plainly and
^/ro/i^/y taught there. ^For thus saith our Lord —
That the dead shall rise again, Moses shewed
at the bush, when he said, the Lord is the God of
Abraham, Isaac, ^t. For he is not the God of
the dead^ but of tlie living.* This shews us that
a thing may be fully and sufficiently proved
from scripture, which is not plainly expressed
in the letter. And thus stands the matter with
regard to those great, and edifying truths set
forth in the appeal. They are trm/ scriptural^
they have their ground and authority from scrip- ,
ture, though not so open and express in the
letter, as matters of faith, and necessary doc-
trine are. For is not the fall of angels a scrip-
ture truth ? Is not the desolation, which tlieir
fall brought into nature, and the very place of
this world, a scripture truth ? What else can
be meant by darkness^ upon the face of the deep ?
What darkness, or what deep, but in the placfe
of this world } What darkness, or state of the
deep, but such an one, as God, was about to
raise out of its disordered state } And does
not the letter of scripture shew, that out x)f
thi$ darkness and waters^ and state of the deep^
the. spirit and light of God entering into them,
brought forth the earth, the stars, the sun and
all the elements into a form of a new world }
To ask for a particular text of scripture,
saying in so many express words, that the place
of this world, is the very place and extent of

JLukeix,37, 38.


12«

the kingdom of the fallen angels, is qnite ri-
diculous, and without the least ground iii rea*
son, as is enough shewn in the appetH. For
does not our Lord expressly c^U the devil a
prince of this world ? But how could this name
belong to him^ but because he is here in \m
own first region, and territories, and has stiU
8ome power, till all the evil, that he had raised
in h, shall be entirely separated from it. For
was not this world raised out of the materials
of the fallen angels' kingdom, and was not the
wrath, and fire and darkness of their fall, still
in some degree remaining io every part of this
world, they could have no more power in it,
than they have in heaven, they must be atl
entirely incapable of seeing or entering into it,
as they are of seeing, or entering into the
kingdom of heaven. For they have nothing
but evil in their nature, they can touch noth-
ing, move nothmg, see nothing, feel nothing,
taste nothing, aCTin nothing but that very evil,
darkness, fire, Atid wrath, and disorder which
they first awakened, and kindled both in them*
selves and their kingdom. And therefore it is
a truth of the utmost certainty, that they can
be no where, but where there is something of
that evil still subsisting, which they brought
forth. And this may pass for demonstration,
(if there be any such thing) that the scriptures
themselves demonstrate the place of this world
to be the very place ?nd r€fi:ion in which the
angels fell, j^nd they still are here, because


130 .

their kinsfdotn is not wholly delivered from all
the evil they had raised in it, but is to stand
for a time, only in a state of recovery; where
they themselves mu^t see, in spite of all the
rage and malice of their fiery darts, that tlie
mystery of a Lamb of God born upon earth,
wiir raise creatures of flesh and blood, amidst
the rains off their spoiled kingdom, to be a
host of angels in heaven restored ; and them-
selves plunged into a hell, that is cut off' from
every thing, but their own wrath, fire and
darkness. And all this, Academicus, to make
it known through all the regions of eternity,
that »recfe can degrade the highest angels into
devils, and humility raise fallen flesh and blood
to the thrones of angels. This, this is the
great end of God's raising a new creation, out
of the fallen kingdom of angels, for this end
it stands in its state of war, a war betwixt the
fire and pride of fallen angek. and the meek-
iiess and humility of the Eamb of God ; it
stands its thousands of years ift this strife, that
the last trumpet may sound this great truth
through all heights and depths of eternity.
That evil can have no beginnings but from pride^
^nor any end^ but from humility.

Oh Academicus, what a blindness there is
in the world ! What a stir is there amongst
mankind about religion^ and yet almost all seefn
to be afraid of thdt^ in which alone is salvation.

Poor mortals ! What is the one wish and de-
sire of your hearts? What is it that you call


131

happiness^ and matter of rejoicing ? Is it not
when every thing about you, helps you to^stand
upon higher ground^ gives full, nourishment to
self esteem^ and gratifies every pride of life ?
And yet life itself, is the bss of every thing,
unless />nrfe be overcome. Oh stop a while in
contemplation of this great truth, it is a truth
as unchangeable as God, it is written, aiid
spoken through all nature; heaven and earth,
fallen angels, and redeemed men, all bear
witness to it. The truth is this. Pride must
die in ^ow, or nothing of heaven can live in you..
Under the banner of this truth, give up your-
selves to the meek and humble spirit of the
holy Jesus, the overcomer of all fire and pride
and wrath. This is the one way, the one truth,
and the one life. There is no other open door
into the sheep-fold of God. Every thing else
is the working of the devil in ihe fallen: nature
of man. Humility must sow the seed, or there
can be no reaping in heaven. Look not at
pride only as an unbecoming temper, not at
humility only as £i decent virtue, for the one is
death, and the other is life, the one is all hell,
and the other is aU heaven.

So much as you have of pride, so much you
have of the faflen angel alive in you ; so much
a? you have of true humility, so much you have
of the Lamb of God within you. Could you
see with your eyes, what every stiring of pride
does to your soul, you would beg of every
thing you meet, to tear the viper from you,


Ids

though with the loss of an hand, or an eye.
Could you.see what a sweet, divine, transform-
ing power there is in humility, what a heaven-
ly water of life it gives to the fiery breath of
your soul, how it expels the poison of your
feUen nature, ahd makes room for the spirit of
God to live in you, you would rather wish to
be the foot-stool of all the world, than to want
the smallest degree of it. Excuse, Academi-
cus, this little digression, if it be such ; for the
subject we were upon, forced me into it.

Acad. Indeed, sir, the lesson you have here
given, is the same, that the whole nature of
the fall of angels, and the whole nature of the
redemption of man, daily reads to every crea-
ture ; and he who alone can redeem the world,
has plainly shewn us, wherein the life and
spirit of our redemption must consist, when
he saith, learn of wc, for I am meek and lowly of
heart. Now if this lesson is unlearnt, we n^ust
be said to have left our master, as those dis'
cipte» did, ^ho went back^ and walked no more
with him*. But if you please, Theophilus, we
will now break off till tne afternoon.

Theoph. Give me leave first, Academicus^
but just to mention one point more, to shew
to you still farther how unreasonably your
friends object to the appeei; the want oi the
jrfain letter of scripture. Now let it be sup-
posed) that the accoimt of the fall of angels,
>■ ■

* John ▼!.'


133

ihe creaCion, &c, given in the appeal has not

scripture enough Take then the contrary

opinion, which is that of your friend's* vir. that
all world, and all things are created out of no^
thing.

Shew me now, Academicus, I do not say a
text, but the least hint of scripture, that by all
the art of commenting, can so much as be
drawn to look that way. It is a fiction^ big
with the grossest absurdities, and contrary to
every thing that we know, either from reason
or scripture^ concerning^ the rise, and birth
and nature of things, that have begun to be.
Adam was not created out of nothing, for the
letter of Moses tells us in the plainest words,
out of what he was created or formed, both as
to his inward, and his outward nature. He
tells us also as expressly out of what^ Eve, the
next creature, was created. But from th«
time' of Adadn and Eve, the creation of every
human creature, is a birth out of its parents,
body and soul, or whole nature. And to shew
us how all things^ or worlds^ as well as all liv-
ing creatures, are not created out of nothing,
St* Paul appeals to this very account, that
Moses gives of the woman's being formed out
of the man, but all things (says he) are out of
GodJ^ Here this fiction of a creation out of
nothing', is by the plain and open letter of scrip-
ture absolutely removed from the whole system

* 1 Cor. xi. 12.

12


134

of created thiftgs, or things which begin tobe ;
for St. Paul's doctrine is, that all things come
in\o being out of God, in the same reality, as
the woman was formed or created out of maj»«
So again, there is to us but one God^ out of whom,
are all things ^^ for so you know the Greek
should be translated, not of, but out of God,
not of, but out of the man. The fittion therefore,
which I speak of, is not only without, but ex-
pressly contrary to the plain letter of scripture.
For every thing that we see, every creature
that has life, is by the Scripture account a
birth from something else. And here, sir, you
are to take notice of a maxim that is not denia*
ble, that the reason why any thing proceeds
from a birth, is the reason why efvery thing must
do so. For a birth would not be in nature, but
because birth is the only procedure of nature.
Nature itself is a birth vrom God, ih^ first ma--
nifestation of the hidden, inconceivable God,
and is so far from being out of nothing, that it
is the manifestation of all that in God, which
was before nnmanifest. As nature is the first
birth, or manifestation of God, or discovery
of the divjne powers; so all creatures are the
manifestation of the Powers of nature, brought
into a variety of births, by the will of God
out 0^ nature. The first creatures that are the'
nearest to the deity, are ottt of the hi^hert*
powers of nature, by the will of God, willing

* 1 C»r. viii. 6.


135

that Aature should be manifested in (he rise
and birth of creatures out of it. Nature <^i*
reeled, and governed by the ^visdom of God,
goes on in the birth of one thing out of another^
The spiritual materiality of heaven brings forth
the bodies, or heavenly fiesh and blood of an-
gels^ as the materiality of this world brings
forth the birth of gross flesh and blood. The
spiritual materiality of heaven, so far as the
extent of the kingdom of fallen angels reached
has hy varioi^ changes, occasioned by their
fall, gone through a variety of births^ or crea-
tionsj till some of it came down to the thick*
ness of a«V, and water^ and the hardness of
earlh and stones. - But when things have stood
in this^ state, their appointed time, the last
purifying fire kindled by God, will take away
all thickness^ hardmsSy and darkness^ and bring
all the divided things-, and elements of this
world back again^ to be that first glassy: sea^
or heavenly materiality, in which the throne of
God is set, as was seen by St. John in the re-
velation ^ade.to him.

But the fiction of the creation out of nothings
is not only contrary to the letter and spirit of
the scripture account of the rise, and birth of
thingSj but is in itself full of the grossest ab-
surdities, and horrid consequences. It s^a-
mtes every thing from God, it leaves no relation
between God and the creature, nor any possi-
bility for any power^ virtue^ quality^ or perf'ection
q{ God to be in the creature. For if it is


136

created out of nothings it cannot have somethitig-
of^^God in it. But I here stop. For as you
know, we have agreed, if God permit, to have
hereafter one day's entire conversation, on the
nature aiid end of the writings of Jacob
Bebmen, and the Hght use and manner of
reading them, and all that, as preparatory to
a more correct EngHsh edition of his works,
from the original Germak language ; so this and
some other points shall be adjourned to that
time. In the afternoon, we will proceed only
on such matters, as may farther set the chris-
tian redemption in its true and proper light
before your friend Humanus.

jicad. I am very glad, Theophilus, that I
have mentioned these objections to you, though
they were of no weight witli-me; since you
have thereby had an occasion of giving so full
an answer to them. The matter stands now in
this plain and ea«y point of light.

In the appeal we havo a system of uniform
truths, concerning the fall of angels, their
Spoiled and darkened kingdom, and the crea-
tion of this world as raisea out of it. We have
the creation and fall of man, his regeneration,
and the manner of it, all opened, and explain-
ed according to the letter ana tenour of scripture,
from their deepest ground in such a manner,
as to give light and clearness into all the arti-
cles of the christian faith, to expel all difficul-
ties and absurdities, that had crept into if; and
the whole scheme of onr redemption proved


137

to be absolutely necessary both from scripture,
and all that is seen, and known in nature and
creature.

On the other hand, the opinion which is and
must be received, if the account in the appeal
is rejected, appears to be a fiction^ that has
no sense, no reason, no fact, no appearance
in nature, nor one single letter of scripture
to support it. But standi^ in the utmost con-,
trariety to all that the scripture saith of the
creation of every thing. And is in itself
full of the grossest absurdities, raising dark-
ness and difficulties in all parts of religion^
that can never be removed from it. For a
4:reation that has nothing of God in it, can ex-
plain nothing that relates to God. For a crea-
tion out of nothing, has no better sense in it,
than a creation into nothing. My friends, for
this time, adieu.

aU«E END OP THE FIRST DklAJLOGUE.

42*


THE

SECOND DIALOGUE,

Theoph. Let us now speak of Adam in his
first perfection, created by God to be a lord,
and ruler of this new created world, to peo-
ple it with an host of angelick men, till time
bad finished its course, and all things fitted to
be restored to that state, from which they were
fallen by the revolt of angels.

For the restoration of all things to their first
glorious state, bj making the good to overcooie
the«vil, was the end whict God proposed bj
the state and m^anner of this new creation.

Adam was the chosen instrument of God, to
conduct this whole afTair, to keep up this new
made world in the state, in which God had
created it, not to till the earthy which we now
plough, but to keep that^ which is now called
(be curse in the earth, covered^ hid^ and over^
come by that paradise in which he was created.
For tbi^ end, he was created in a twofold na-
ture, of the powers of heaven, and the pow-
ers of this world. Inwardly, he had the ce-
lestial body aad soul of an angel, and he had
this angelick nature united to a life and body
taken from the stars, and elements, of this out-
ward world. As paradise overcame, and con-
cealed ad the wrayt|i pf the stars and ekmentd,


139

and by that evil^ which is called the cune^
from being known, or felt; so Adam's angelick,
heavenly nature, which was the paradise of
God within him, kept him quite ignorant of
the proprieties of that earthly nature that wa^
under it ; he knew and saw, and felt nothing
in himself, but a birth of paradise, that is, a
life, light, and spirit, of heaven* For he had
no difference from an angel in heaven, but that
this world was joined to him, and put under
his feet. And this was done, because he was
created by God to be the restoring anf^eU to do
all that in this outward world which God
would have to be done in it, before it could
be restored to its first state. And therefore he
must have the nature of all this world in him,
because he was to act in it, and upon it, as
its restoring angeU and yet with such distinction
from it, with such power upon it, and over it,
as the light has upon, and over darkness.
Does not now the whole spirit of the scrip-
tures consent to this account of Adam's^iirst
perfection } Do not all the chief points of our
redemption demand this iperfection in Adam
unfaUm ? H6w else could YABfall bring on the
necessity of the gospel redemption of a* new
birth from above, of the word and holy spirit
of God ? For had he not had this perfection
of nature, at first, his redemptlbn could not
have consisted in this revival of this birth and

Erfection in him. For had he been something
IS than the loss of an angelick and heavenly


140

life, that had happened to him hy his fall, ha<l
it been only some evil^ that related to a life of
this world, nothing else but some remedy from
this world, could have been his redemption.
But since it is the corner stone of the gospel,
that nothing less than the eternal wordj which
was man's creator, could be his redeemer, and
that by a new birth from above, it is a demon*
stration, that he was at first created an angel,
born from above, and such a partaker of the
divine life, as the angiels are, and tliat his fall
was a real death or extinction of his angelick
life.

But the letter of Moses is express fbi* this
first perfection of Adam. God said, let us make
man in our own image^ cvfler our likeness. How
different is this from the creation of the ani-
mals of this world ? What can you think, or
say higher of an angel ? Or what perfection
can any angel have, but that of being in the
image and after the likeness of God ? But now
what an absurdity would it be, to hold, that
Adam was created in the image and likeness
of God, and yet had not in him, so much as
4he image, and likeness of an angel ? Again,
was not paradise lost, was not evil and the
curse awakened in all the elements, as soon as
Adam fell? And does not this prove beyond
all contradictlbn, that Adam was created by
God, as I said above, to be the restoring angel^
to have power over iall the outward world* to
keep all it» evil from being known, or MU tiU


141

the fall of angels from heaven, liad been re-

f haired by a race of angelick men born on earth.
5ut how could he do, and be all this for which
he was created by God, how could he keep up
the life of heaven and paradise in himself, and
this new world, unless the life of heaven had
been his own life ? Or how coald he be the
father of an offspring, that were to have no
evil, nor so much as the knowledge of what
was good, and evil, in this world ? Could any
thing but a heavenly man bring forth a hea-
venly offspring ? Or could he be said to have
the life of this world opened in him in his
creation, who was to bring forth a race of be-
ings, insensible of the good and evil in this
world? For every thing that ha§ the life of
this world opened in it, is under an absolute
necessity of knowing, and feeling its good, and
evil.

Secondly^ That Adam when he first entered
into the world, had the nature and perfection
of an angel, is further plain from Moses, who
tells us, that he was made at first both male
and female in one person, and that Eve, or the
female part of him, was afterwards taken out
of him. Now this union of the nmie and fe-
male in him, was the purity^ or virgin perfection
of his life, and is the very perfection of the
angelick nature. This we are assured of from
our Lord himself, who in answer to the ques-
tion of the Sadducees, said unto them, ye do
err^ not knotting the scripfvres and the power of


142

God^for in the resurrection they neither marry^ nor
are given in marriage^ bui are as the angels in
heaven* Or as in Bt. Luke, for tbey are equal
to the angels of God. Here we have a twofold
proof oftbe angelick perfectioH of Adam. (I.)
Because wq are told, that the state in which
he was created, neither male nor female, but
with both natures in his one person, is the
very nature, and perfection of the angels of
God in heaven. (2.) Because every one who
shall have a part in this resurrection, shall
then have this angelick perfection again, to be
«o more ixiale, or female, or a part of the hu-
xx^oitj, but suefa perfect, complete, undivid-
ed, creatures, as the angets of God are. But
now, this perfection coukt not belong to the
humanitj after the resurrection, but because
it belon^^d to the first man before his foil.
For nothing will be restored, but that which
waB first lost, nothing rise again, but that which
should not have died, nor any thing be united,
but that which should not have been parted.
The short is this. Man is at last to have a na-
ture equal to that of the angels. This equali-
ty consists in this; th^ as they have, so the
humanity will have both male and female na-
ture in one person.

By the humanity was thus created at first,
male and female in one person, therefore the
humanity had bX first a nature, and -perfection

* Matt, xxii. 29. 30.


143

eqoal to that of theangels^ Thus is the letter
of Moses much more plain for the angelick
perfection of Adam In his creation, than it is
for the resurrection of the dead; and yet we
hare our Lord's word for it, that Moses suffi-
ciently proved the resurrection of the dead.—
AVhat say you, Academicus, to this matter ?

Acad. I will here just mention what my good

old tutor says; the author of the appeal^ says

he founds all his scheme of regeneration or re-

^ demption on a supposed threefold Ufe^ in which

Adam was created. His sole proof of this

threefold life is taken from this text of Moses.

God breathed into man the breath of lives ^ and man

become a living souL From this phrase, the

breath oflives^ the appeal without any authority

from the text, observes thosy here ^the highest^

and most divine original is not darkhj^ but openly^

absolutely^ and in the strongest form of expression

ascribed to the sotiU ^c. a vain assertion, says my

tutor, for the breath of life or lives is used by

Moses only as a phrase for animal life. This

is plainly seen,^ Gen. vii, ver. 1!1, and all flesh

die d aU in whose nostrils was the breath of

Kves.

Behold, says he, the very phrase, which the
a^ppeal takes to be so full a proof of the high
dignity, an<i threefold life oi God in the soul,
here made use of to denote the life of every
kind of animal — and therefore, says be, if this
phrase proves the soul of Adam to be a mirror of


144

the holy Triniii/^ it proves the same of every •
breath in the nostrils of every creature.

Theoph. To make short work, Academicus,
with your tutor's confutation, as he thinks, of
the capital doctrine of the iqypeal,^ I shall only
quote the whole period, as it stands in the ap-
peal. - *^ God breathed into him the breath of lives
(spiraculum vitarum) and man became a liv-
ing soul. Here,' says the appeal^ the notion of a
soul created otU of nothings is in the plainest,
strongest manner rejected by the first written
word of God, and no Jew or Christian can have
the least excuse for falling into such an errour :
here the highest and most divine original is not
darkly, but openly, absolutely ascribed to the
soul. It came forth as a breath of life, or lives
out of, and from the mouth of God, and there*-
fore did not come out of the toomb of nothings
but is what it is, and has what it has in itself,
from^ and out of the first and highest of all be-
ings."* Here Academtcus, behold the false-
ness, and weakness of your tutor's observation
— the appeal^ you plainly see, proves only from
the text of Moses, the high original of the soul,
and only for this reason, because it is the breath
o/*God, breathed into man. The appeal m^kes
no use of the expression, the breach of lives^
takes no notice of it, deduces nothing from it,
but solelif considers the act of God, as breathing
the spirit of the soul from himself; and frem

'* Appeal, p. 2.


Mo

4his act of God, *he high birth ancV dignity of
the soul isjftost justly afErraetl. And the ap*
pealxs^ke^ this observation solely to prove, that
,^ie soul is not created out of nothing. This is
tii^one, sole, open, and declared intent of the
appeal \n M this paragraph. But your tutor,
overlooking all this, though nothing else is
there, makes the author of the apj[>e€r/ to affirm
the threefold life of God in the soul, merely
from the phrase oHho breath of UvegyVfh^^ there
is not one single word about it. For the qp-
peal not only has not the least hint in this place
of any such matter to be proved from the breath
of Uves^ but through the whole book there isr
not the smallest regard paid to this expression,
nor any argument ever deduced from it. How
gtrange is all this in your good old tutor I

The matter is plainly this, the author of the
appeal looks wholly to the action of God, breath-
ing his own spirit into Adam, and from this
breathing, he justly affirms the divine nature of
the soul, all his argument is deduced from
thence. Now if your tutor, or any one else
could shew, that God breathed his own spirit in^
to every animal, and with this intent, that it
might come forth in his own image apd like*
ness, then Ihe distinction, and high birth of the
soul, pleaded for by the aj^ind^ would indeed
be lost. But till theof tfie e^ppeai^ must, and
therefore will for ever standE unconfuted in its
assertion of the dignity, and divine birth of the
soul

13


146

Again, behold Academicus, a still farther
weakness chargeable upon your tutor. You
have seen, that his reasoning upon the breath
of lives^ is meddhng ivith something that the
cgop^a/ meddles not with, makes no account of,
but your tutor has conjured it up for his own
use, and yet see what a poor use he makes of
it. He affirms that Moses uses only the breath
of Uves^ as a phrase for animal life. How does
he prove this? Why truly, from this reason,
because Moses uses the same phrase when he
speaks of the lives of all animals.

Now does not every Englishman knaw, that
we make use of the same^owr tetters of the al-
phabet, when we say the «/c of a man, the life
of a beast, and the life of a plant? That we
use the same^vc letters when we say the death
of a man, the death of a beast, and the death
of a plant ? But will it thence follow, that the
life and death of men, smd beasts, and plants
are of the same nature and degree, and have
the same good and evil in them ? Yet this is
full as well, as to opnclude that the breath of
life in man, and the breath of life in animals, is
of the same nature^ and degree^ has the same
'goodness and excellency in it, because the same
words made up of the same letters, express
them both. Your tutor tjiei^efore, Academicqs,
aad not the author of Itie appeal^ is the person
that reasons weakly from the phrase of the
breath ofHves. For that author never so much
as offers to argue from it. His proof of the


117

threefold life of God in (he soul, so far as it is
deduced, from the text of Moses, lies wholly
in this, that it is the breath and spirit of the
triune God breathed forth from this triune dei-
ty into man. This sure, is no small proof of
its having the triune nature of God in it. And
this threefold life of the soul, thus plainly de-
-ducible from the letter of Moses, is shewpi to
be absolutely certain/rom every chief doctrine
and institution, nay from the wfwle ncUure of our
redemption ; and all the gospel is shewn to set
itB seal to this great truth, the threefold Ufe of
God in the soul. Nay every thing io nature,
fire, and light, and air, every thing that we
know of angels, of devils, of the animal life
of this world, is in the plainest and strongest
manner from.^ the bediming to the end of the
appeat^*Wi^d,e so many proofs of the threefold
life of thp triune God in the soul. Thus says
the appeal^ no omnipotence can make you a par-
taker of the life of this outward tcortd^ toithout
having the life of this outward world born in your
pivn creatur^ly being ; the fire and light and air of
this world must have their birth in your own
creaturely being, or you cannot possibly live
in, or h^ve a life from outward stature. And
therefijcp, no omnipotence can make you a
parlSt^. of that beatifick life, or presence pf
the n^jty trinity, unless that life stands in the
same triune state within you, as it does with*-
out you."* Again, search to eternity, says the


148

* appeal^ whj no devil, or beast can possilily
outer into Leaven, and there can only this one
r^a^on be assigned for it, because neither of
them have the triune ho\y life of God in them.*
But enough of this mistake of your good old
tutor. Rusticus will, 1 am afraid, cliide you,
for being the occasion of this long digression
from the point we were speakiog to,

RusL Truly sir, I do not know what to make
of these great scholars, they seem to have more
love for the shadow of an objection, than for
the most substantial truths. I think I here see
great reason, why our Saviour chose poor il-
literate fishermen to be hrs apostles, ot. Paul
was the only man, that had some learning, and
he was a persecutor of Christ, till such time^
as God made m it were scales to fall from his
eyes— and then he became a powerful Apostle*
But let lis return to your account of the first
created perfection of aian, and tho degree of
his falling from it. It is one of the best doc-
trines that I ev(*r heard in my life. It not only
stirs up every thing that is good, and makes
me hate every tbmg that is evil in me, but it
gives 80 good a isense, so sound a meaning to
every mystery of the gospel, that it makes
every thing our Saviour has done fot^\te, and
every thing he requires of us, to b^^^^^
necessary, and beneficial to us. But^iB^pbse
now, our fall not tp be a change of nature» not

* Appeal p. tfX


149

n death to our first life, but only a singly $in, qr
mistake in the first man, nhat a difiiculty ifi
there in supposing so great a scdbenie of re-
demption to set riglit a sinigle mistiakq in one
single creature ? Again, m' hat could map baye
to do with angels, and heaven, if he had n^t
at his creation had the nature of heaven and
angels in him ? But pray sir, begin again, ju^t
where you left off.'

Theop. 1 was indeed, Rusticps, at that time
just going to say, that Adam had lost much of
his first perfection before his Eve %vas taken
out of him, which was done to prevent worse
effects of his fall, and to prepare a^meana for
his recovery, whe» his fall should become to-
tal, as it afterwards was, upon the eating of
the earthly tree of good and evil

// is not good that man should be akme^ saitli the
scripture ; this shews, that Adam had altered
his first state, had brought some beginning of
evil into it, and had made that not to be good,
which God saw to be good, when he created
bim. And therefore as a lesser evil, and to
prevent a greater, God divided the first per*
' feet human nature into two parts, into a male
anil a female creature ; and this, ^s you shall
see by and by, was a wonderful hlstance of
th^ love and care of God towards this hew
bumamty. It was at fir3t, the total humanity m
'.one creature, jWhp shofddiajlbatjstatl^iof'per*
fection Eave brought forth Jiis.owfrii^eaeBS'aat
of himself, in such purity of love? and such
13*


150

divine power^ as he himself was brought forth
hj God ; the manner of his own birth frorai
God, was the manner that his own offspring
should have had a birth ^om him, all done hy
the pure power of a divine love, Man stood
tto longer in the perfection of his first state, as
a birth of divine love, than whilst he loved
himself onfy as God loved him, as in the image^
and (ifier the likeness of God. This purity of
love, and delight in the image of God, would
have carried on the birth of the humanity, in
the same manner, and by the san)e divine
power, as the first man was brought forth. For
it was only a continuation of the same gene-
rating iove, that gave birth to the first mr.n.
Bat Adam tt>rned away his love from the di*
vine image, which he should only have loved,
and desired to propagate out of himself. He
gaaed upon this outward world, and let in an
adulterate love into his heart, which desired
to know th^ life that wag in this world. This
impure desire brought the nature of this world
into hifa. His first love, and divine power
• had no strength left in it, it was no longer a
power of bringing forth a divine birth from
Aimself. His first vircinity was lost by an
adulterate love which nad turned its desire
into this world. This state of inalnhty^ is that
which is called his fallii)^ into a deep sleep.
And in this sleep, God divided this overcome
huammtj into a male and female.


151

The first step therefore towards the redemp-
tioii, or recovery of man beginning to fall, was
the taking his Eve out of him, that so he might
have a second trial in paradise, in which if he
iailed, anotl>er effectual Redeemer might arise
out of the seed of the woman. Oh my friends,
what a wonderful procedure is there to be
seen in the divine providence, turning all evil^^
-as soon as it appears, into a further display,
and opening of new wonders of the wisdom,
and love of God, Look back to the first evil,
which the fall of apgels brought forth. The
darkness, wrath and tire of fallen nature^ was
immediately taken from them, and turned into
a new creation; wh^rd those apostate angels
were to see all the evil that they had raised in
their kingdom, turned against them, and made
the ground of a new race of beings, which
were to possess those thrones which they had
lost. Look now at Adam brought into the
world iasuch an angelick nature, as he, and
all his redeemed sons will have, after the •re-
surrection ; an angel at first, and an angel at
last, with time, and misery, and sin, and death,
and hell, all of them felt, and all overcprae,
betwixt the two glorious extremes. When this
first human angel, through a false^ impure
love, lost the divine power of generating his
own likeness out of himself, God took part of
liis nftture from bim^ that so the eye of his de-
tire, which was turned to the life of this world,
might be directed to that part of his nature,


152

which was taken from him% AncI/ this fe the
reason of my s^j^hig before^ that this. ^ was
chosen as a lesser evil^ and to avoid a greater;
for it was a lesser degree of falling from fife
first perfection, to love the female part of his
own divided nature, than to turn his love to-
wards that, which was so much lower than his
own nature. And thus, at thai tinie^ Eve was
a help^ that was truly and properly meet for hiua,
since he had lost his first power of being him-
self the parent of an angelick offspring, and
stood with a longing eye, looking towards the
life of this world.

But the most glorious effect of this division
into male and female is yet to come. For
when Adam and Eve had joined in the eating
of the tree of good and evil, and so were to-
tally fallen from God, and paradise, into the
misery and slavery of the bestial life of this
world. When this greatest of all evils had
thus happened to these two divided parts of
the humanity, when a.JJ^the angel was lost, and
nothing but a shameful frighted animal q/ thii^
world, was to be seen in this divided male and
female; then in, and by, and through this di«
vision, did God open, and establish the glori-
eus scheme of an univer^l redemption to these
fellen creatures, and all their offsprings by the
mysterious seed of the woman.

Had Adam stood in his first state of p^rfec*
tion as a birth of divine love, ^d loving onl^
the divide iiq^e a^d jyiK^^i^ in himsi^tt, this


153

fove would have been itself the fruitful parent
of an holy ofispring ; no Eve had been taken
out of him, nor any male, or female ever
known in human nature. All his posterity bad
been in hrim secured^ and the earthly tree of
good and evil had never been seen in paradise.
But though he lost his first generating power
of divine love, and stood as a barren tree ;
yet seeing God's purpose of raising an offspring
from Adam, to possess the thrones of fallen
angels must go on and succeed, therefore that
Adam might yet have an offspring, God took
from him, that which is called the female part*
of his nature, that by this means both a pos-
terity, and a Saviour might proceed from him.
For through this division of man, God would
in a wonderful manner do that^ which Adam
should have done, before he was divided.

For out of this female part, and after the
iall, God would raise, without the help of
Adam, that same glorious angelick man, which
Adam should have brought forth before, and
without his Eve, which glorious man is there-
fore called the second Adam. 1. As having
in his humanity that very perfection, which
the first Adam had in his creation. 2. Because
he was to do all that for mankind by a birth
of redemption from him, which they should
have had by a birth from Adam, had he kept
liis first state of perfection. What say you,
Academicits, to all this ?


154

Acad. Truly sir, there seems to be so much
light, and truth, and scripture for all this ac*
count that you have given of these matters, aa
must even ibrce one to consent to it. But 4heu
all our systems of divinity, to which learned
men are chained, are quite silient of these mat*
ters. I never before heard of this gradual faU
of Adam, nor this angelick state of his hrst
creation, and power of bringing forth his own
offspring, and therefore can hardly believe it
so strongly, as I wpuld^ and^s the truth seems
to demand of me.

RusL Pray sir, let me speak to Academicus^
he seems to^ be so hampered with learning,
that I can hardly be sorry, thatl am not a great
scholar.

Can any thiqg be more punctually related
in scripture, than the gradual fall of Adam ?
.Do you not see, that he was created first with
both natures in Jiim? Is it not expressly told ,
you, that Eve was npt, taken out of him, till
such time as it was not good for him to be as he
then «^a^, and yet God saw that was good,
when he created him. Is it not plain therefore^
that he bad fallen «.om the goodness of his
first creation, and therefore his fall was not at
bnce, nor total till his eating of the earthly
tree. Again, as 1,0 his being an angel at bis
first creation, fo,ecause of Ijoth natures in him ;
is it not sufficiently plain from his being to be
an angel of the same nature at last, in t^ie re-
surrection? For this is an axiom that cannot


155

be shaken, that nothing can rise higher^ than i(s
first created naiiire ; 3,nd therefore an angei at
last, must have been an angel at first. Do you
think it possible for an ox in tract of time to
be changed into a rational philosopher ? Yet
this is as possibief as for a man that has only
by his creation the life of this world in him, to
be changed into an angel of heaven. The life
of this world can reach no farther than this
M'orld, no omnipotence of God can carry it
farther, and therefore if man is lo be an angei
at the last, and have th^ life of heaven in him,
he must of all necessity in his creation, have
been created an angel, and had his life kindled
from heaven* Because no creature can possi-
bly have any other life, or higher degree of
life, than that whfch his creation brought forth
in him.

Theoph. M&vvel not, Academicus, at that
which has been said of the first power of Adam,
to generate in a divine manner an holy off-
spring, by the power of that divine love which
gave birth to himself; for he was born of that
love for no other end, than to multiply births
of it, and whilst his love continued to be one
with that love, which brought him into being,
nothing was impossible to it. For love is the
great cr^^ting fiat that brought forth every
thing, that is distinct from God, and is the
only working principle that Btirs, and efTects
every thing that is done in nature and creature.
Love is the principle of generation from the


i:j6

highest to the lowest of creatures* it is the
first beginning of every seed of life; every
thing has its form from it; every thing that is
born, is born in the likeness, and with a fruit-
fulness of that same love that generateth and
beareth it, and this is its own seed of love
within itself, and is its power of fructifying in
its kind.

Love is the holy, heavenly, magick power of
the deity, the first fifit of God, and all angels,
and eternal beings are the first births of it.
The deity delights in beholding the ideal ima-
ges which rise up and appear in the mirror of
his own eternal wisdom. This delight becomes
a loving desire to have living creatures in the
form of these ideas, aiid this loving desire is
the ggnerating, heavenl/ parent out of which,
angels and all eternal beings are born. Every
birth in nature is a consequence of this first
prolifick love of the deity, and generates from
that which began the first birth* Hence it is,
that through all the scale of beings, from the
top to the bottom of nature, love is the one
principle of generation of every life, and every
thing generate* from the same principle, and
by the same power by which itself was gene-
rated. Marvel not therefore, my friend, that
Adam standing in the power of hi^jfirst birth,
should have a divine power of bnnging forth
his owu likeness. Bat I must now tell you,
that the greatest proof orthis glorious truth is
yet to CQcae. For I will shew you, that all the


157

gospel bears witness to that heavenly birth
which we should have had from Adam alone.
This birth from Adam is still the one purpose
of God, and must be the one way of all those
that are to rise with Christ, to an equality with ,
the angels of God. All must be children of
Adam, for all that are born of man and woman,
must lay aside this polluted birth, and be born
again of a second Adam, in that same perfec-
tion of an holy angelick nature, which they
should have had from the first Adam before his
Eve was separated from him. For it is an un-
deniable truth of the gospel, that we are called
to a new birth, different in its whole nature,
from th^t which we have from man and wo-
man, or there is no salvation; and therefore it
is certain from the gospel, that the birth which
we have from Adam, divided into male and fe-
male, is not the birth that we should have had,
because it is the one reason, why we are un-
der a necessity of being born again of a birth
from a second Adam, who is to generate us
again in that purity, and divine power, in and
by which we should have been born of the
first angelick Adam.

A divine love in the first pure and holy
Adam, united with the love of God, willing
him to be the father of a holy offspring, was
to have given birth to a race of creatures from
him. But Adam^ fulfilled not this purpose of
God, he awakened in himself a false love, and
«o all his offspring were forced to be bora of
14


158

man and woman, and thereby to have such
impure flesh and blood as cannot enter into
the kingdom of heaven* Is not this proof
enough that this birth is r\bt the first birth that
we should have had? Will any one say, how
could Adam have such a power to bring forth
a birth in such a spirihial way, and so contrary
to the present state of nature ? The whole na-
ture of the gospel is a full answer to this ques-
tion. For are we not all to be bom again in
the same spiritual way, and are we not nierely
by a spiritual power, to have a birth of hea-
venly flesh and blood? The strangeness of
such a power in the first Adam, is only just so
strange, and hard to be believed, as the same
power in the second Adam ; and who is called
the second Adam for no other reason, but be-
cause he stands in Xhe plwe of the first, and is
to do ihat^ which the first should have done.
And therefore our having from him a new
heavenly flesh and blood raised in us by a
spiritual power ^ superiour to the common way
of birth in this world, is the strongest of proofs,
that we should have been born of Adam in the
same spiritual power, and so contrary to the
birth of animals into this world. For all that
we^ have from the second Adam, is a proof that
we should have had the same from Adam the
first. A divine love in Adam the first, was to
have brought Jbrth an holy offspring. A di-
vine fm^ now takes its place, in the second
birth, and ia to generate a mew birth from the


159

second Adam, is lo eat his flesh and drink his
blood, by the same divine power, by which
we should hare had a birth of the angelick
flesh and blood of our first parent. Thu«i
Academicus, is this birth from Adam ahne no
whim, or . fiction, or fine spun notion, but
the very birth that the gospel absolutely re-
quires, as the substance of our redemption.
There is no room to deny it, without denying
the whole nature of our redemption. On the
other hand, the birth that we have from Adam
divided into tM.k aj)d ftmak^ is through all
scripture declared to be the birth of meWv,
of shame, of pollution, of sinful flesh and blood ;
and is only a ground and reason, why we must
be born again, of other flesh and blood before
we can enter into ^he the kingdom of heaven?
This truth therefore, that we was to' have had
a heavenly birtb from Adam, depends not up*
on this or that particular text of scripture, but
is affirmed by tfee whole nature of our redemp*
tion, and tlie whole spirit of scripture, repre-
senting our birth from this world as shameful
as that of the wild ass's colt, and calling for
a new birth from above, as absolutely neces-
sary, if man is to have a place amongst the
angels of God. Aiid therefore it may be af-
firmed, that so sure as it is from scripture, that
Chi-ist is become our second Adam, to help us
to such a birth, so sure is it frdm scripture,
that we should have had the same birth from
^ur first parent, who if not fallen, could have


160

wanted no redeemer of his offspring, and there-
fore must hare brought forth that same birtk^
which we have from Christ, but could not have
from the birth of mat) and woman. I must
now only just mention to you a passage much
to the matter in hand, taken from the second
epistle of St. CHemens a bishop of Rome, who
lived in the very time of the apostles. He^re-
lates, that Christ being asked, when his king-
dom should come, gave this answer. Whm
two things shall become one^ and that which is out-
ward^ be as that which is inward^ the mak mth
thejemxxh^ and neither man nor woman* There
wants no comment here, I shall only observe,
that the meaning of the words, when thai which
is outward shaU 6e, as that which is inward^ seems
plainly to be this, when the outward life or
birth is come to be as the inward, angelick
life is, then the birth will be one, the male and
female in one, and then the kingdom of God
is come. These words were in the next cen-
tury quoted by Clemens of Alexandria, though
with some alteration. The same author also
relates another answer given by our Lord to
much the satne question, put by Salome, where
our Lord's answer was thus. fVhen ye shall
have put out or away the garment of shame^ and
ignominy^ and when two shall become one, the mjak
.and the female united, and neither m^m nor woman.
The garment of shame and ignominy, is plain-
ly that cloathing of flesh and blood, at the sight
of which both Adam and Eve were ashamed.


161

Jcad. I am fully satisfied, Tbeophitus, with
the account you bav^ given of the first perfec-
tion and divine state ot our first parent. And
I think nothing can be plainer, than that we
were to have been born of him to the same
heavenly birth, which we now are to receive
from Christ, our second Adam. But I must
still say, that 1 am afraid, your critical adver-
earies, will here find some pretence, to charge
you with a tendency at least to that heresy^
which held marriage to be unlawful, since you
here hold, that it came in by Adam^s falling
from his first perf^etion*

Theopk. I own, my friend, that th^re is no
kno>ying when one is safe from men of that
stamp. But as lor me, my eye is only upon
truth, and wherever that leads, there I IqIIow,
they, if they please, may persecute it with
objections^ Here is not tne least pt'etence for
the charge yod speak o£ For here is no more
tondemr>ation bi marriage, as unlawful, thaa
there is a condemnation of God, for keeping
op the state and life of this world. The con*-
tiociation of the world, though fallen, is agio*
rious proof and instance ^ the goodness of
God, that so a race of new hwri an|elB may*
be brought forth in it Happy ther^re is it,
that we have sucb a world as this to be beri>
into, since we are only born, to be bora again
td> the life of heaven. Now marriage has the-
nature of this fallen world, but it is God^» ap»
pomted means of raising the seed of Adam to^


162

its full number* Honourable therefore is mar*
riage in our fallen state, and.bappy is it, for
man to derive his life from it, as it helps him to
a power of being eternallj a son of God.

PiTor does this original of marriage cast the
smallest reflection upon the' sex^ as if thej
brought all^ or any impurity into the human
nature. No, by no means. The impurity lies
in the division^ and that jyhich caused ii^ and not
in either of the divided parts. And the female
part has this distinction, thoush not to boast of,
yet to take comfort in, that the Saviour of the
world is called the seed of the woman^ and bad
his birth only from the female part of our divid-
ed nature. But Rusticus, I see, wants to speak.

Rust Indeed, Sir, I do. But it is only to ob-
serve to you, what a system of solid, harmoni-
ous and great truths are here opened to our
view, by this consideration of the first angelick
state 01 Adam, and his falling from it into an
earthly animal life of this world. Created at
first an human angel, with a host of angels in
his loins, and then falling from this state, with
this particular circumstance, that he had not
only undone himself, but had also involved an
innocent, and an almost numberless posterity
in the same misery, who now must all be bom
of him in his fallen condition. Thus looking
at this creation of so noble and high a creature,
and his fall, as introducing so extensive a train
of misery, how worthy of God, how becoming
a love, and wisdom that are infinite, does all


163

the stupendous mystery of our redemption ap-
pear ? It was to restore an angel, big with an
angelick offBpring, an angel that God had cre-
ated to carry on the great work of this new
creation, to bring time with all its conquests
back into eternity, an angel in whom, and with
whom, were fallen an innocent, numberless
posterity, that had not yet began to breathe.

What a sense, and reasonableness does this
state of things give to all those passages^ of
scripture, which bring a God incarnate from
heaven, to remedy this sad scene of misery that
was opened on earth! What less than God,
could awaken again the dead angelick life ? —
What less than God's entering into the human
birth itself, and becoming one of it, and with it,
could generate again the life of God in every
human birth ? The scripture saith, God so loved

the worl d God spared not hds'only son • —

Christ laid4own his life for tis^ Src. How glori-
ous a sen^e is there m all these sayings, when
it is considered, that all this was done, for so
high and divine a creature, created by God for
such great ends, and full of a posterity, that
was to have filled a heaven restored ? In this
light, every part of our redemption gives a glo-
ry, a wisdom, and goodness to God, which far
surpasses every other view, we can possibly
take of them. Whereas if you lessen this an-

gelick dignity of the first man, if you suppose
is fall to be less, than that of falling with all
his posterity, from an angelick life, into the


164

earthly, animal life of thi§ world, slaves to nin
and misery; all the fabrick of our redemption
is foil of such wonders, as. can only be woiMlerw
ed at. Thus, if you consider this world, and
man its highest inhabitant made out of nothing
and with only the breath of this earthly life
breathed into his nostrils ; what is thereto call
for this great redemption from heaven ?

Again, if you consider the fail of man only
as s^ single act of disobedienee to a positive, ar-
bitraiy command of God, this is to make all the
consequences of his fall unexplicable. For
had the first sin been only a dngleact of disobe-
dience, it had been more worthy of pardons^
than any other sin, merely because it was the
first, and by a creature that had as yet no ex-
perience. But to make the first single act of
disobedience not only unpardonable^ but the
cause of such a curse and Variety of misery en-
tailed upon all his posterity from the beginning
to the end of time ; and to sqppose that so
much wrath was raised in God, at this single
act of disobedience, that nothing could make
an atonement for it, but the stupendous mystery
of the birth, sufferings, and death of the Son
of God, is yet farther impossible to be account-
ed for. Id this case, ib» sujqposed wrath and
goodness of God are equally UDexplicable.'--*
And from hence alone have »prung^ up the de-
testable doctrines about the guilt and imputa^
fion of the first sin, and the several sorta of
partial, absolote dteetians ai»2 rc^probations of


165

some to eternal happiness, and others to be
fire-brands of hell to all eternity. . Detestable
may they well be called, since if Lucifer could
truly say, that God from all eternity determin-
ed, and created him to be that wicked, hellish
creature that he is, he might then add, not un-
to him, bot unto his Creator, must all his wick-
edness be ascribed. How innocent, how tol-
erable is the errour of transubstantiation, when
compared with, this absolute election, and rep-
robation ? It indeed cannot be reconciled to
our senses and reason, but then it leaves God,
and heaven, possessed of all that is holy and
good ; but this reprobation-doctrine not only
overlooks all sense and reason, but confounds
heaven and hell, takes all goodness from the
Deity, and leaves us nothing to detest in the
sinner, but God's eternal irresistible contriv-
ance to make him to be such.

But now, when we take this matter of the
creation, and fall of man, as truth, and fact, and
scripture plainly represent it, every thing that
can awaken in ourselves, a love and desire to
be like unto God, is to be found in it. Whilst
man stood in his first perfection, unturned from
God, this world was under his feet, paradise
was the element in which he lived ; the 25pm/
of God was his life, the Son of God was his
light, he was in the world, as much above it,
and with as full distinction fi*om it, as uncapa-
ble of being hurt by it, as ari angel, that only
comes with a divine commission into it. The


166

whole world was a gift, put into hie hands, the
etandiug or fall of it^ was left to him; as his will
and mind should work^ so should either para*
dise, or a cursed earth oi^ercome. God, by
by this new creation, had so altered the wrath-
ful state of Lucifer's fallen kingdom, that the
evil that had been raised in it, was hid and
overcorro by the good. It was thus created^
and put into this new state for this sole end,
that an human angel might keep paradise alive,
and bring forth a paradistical host of angels, in
the very place^ where the fallen angels had
biought forth their evil But all these great
things depended upon Adam's conforming to
the designs of God, and living in this world in
inch a state, as God had created him in. He
could not conform to the designs of God any
other way, than by the recdliide of his wiU^ wil-
ling that which God willed both in the crea-
tion of him; and the world.

Whilst his will stood thus inclined, the new
creation was preserved, himself was an angel,
and the world a paradise. No evil would have
been known either in plant, or fruit, or animaj,
nor could have been known but by the declining
wilt and desire of man calling itfortb. His first
longing look toward the knowledge of the life
of this world, was tke first loosing of the reins
of e^l.-- — -It began to have life, and a power
of stirring, as. soon as he cast his destr6 into it
Hence from his desire, turned to the knowledge
of the good and evil in this world, the curse in


1G7

the earth got a power of giving forth an m/trcc,
whose fruit was the key to the knowledge of
good and evil, a tree which could not have
grown, had he willed nothing, but that which
God willed in the creation of him.

He was not the creator of this bad tree, no
more than he was the creator of the good trees
that grew in paradise. But as the reclitude of
lijs will kept up the heavenly powers of para-
dise in the earth; so the declension of his go6d
will, opened a passage for the evil that was hid
in the earth, to bring forth a tree in its own
likeness. The earth had a natural power of
bringing forth a tree of its own nature, and
paradise was that heavenly power which hin-
dered it from bringing forth such productions:
But when the keeper of paradise turned a wish
from God, and paradise, after a bad 'knowl-
edge ; then paradise lost some of its power, and
the curse in the earth could giye forth a bad
tree. But see now the goodness and compas-
sion of God towards this mistaken creature;
for no sooner ha<l Adam by the abuse of his
power and freedom, given occasion to the birth
of this evil tree, but the God of love informs
him of the dreadful nature of it, commands him
not to eat of it, assuring him that death was hid
in it, that death to his angelick life would be
found in the day that he should eat of it A
plain proof, if any thing can be plain, that this
tree came not from God, was not according to
hi^ wilt, and purpose, but from a power in the


168

earth, which could not shew itself, till the
strong will and desire of Adam desired to taste
something, that was not paradistical. . But
pray Theophilus, do you now speak again.

Theoph. The short of the matter then, my
friend, is this. Neither Adam, nor ^ny other
creature has at its crealion^ or entrance into life,
any arbitrary trial imposed upon it by God. —
The no/wra/ state of every intelligent creature,
it is one only trial, and it cannot sui, but by de-
parting from that nature, or falling from that
state in which it was created. Adam was cre-
ated an human angel in paradise, and he had
no other trial but this, whether he would live in

))aradise, as an angel of God, insensible of the
ife, or the good and evil of this earthly world.
This was the tree of life, and the tree of death,
that must stand before him, and the necessity
of his choosing either the one or the other, was
a necessity founded in his own happy nature.
The true account therefore of the fall of Ad-
am, is a ^rarfwo/ declension, or tendency of his
will from the life of paradise into the life of
this world, till he was at last wholly fallen into
it, and swallowed up by it. The first begins
ning of his lust towards this world, was the first
beginning of his fall or departure from the life
of heaven, and paradise ; and his eating of the
earthly tree was his last and finishing step of
his entrance into and under the full power of
this world. This was the true nature of his
fall On the other hand, all that we see on the


169

part ofGoJ, is ^gradualhelpy administered by
God to this falling creatcire, suitable to every
degree of his falling, till at last, .fn the fulness .
of his fall, an universal redeemer of liira and
liis posterity, was given by a second Adam, to
regenerate again the whole seed of Ada^fi the
first.^ ' \" • . • '

Thus the first degree of his lust towards this
world, had some stop put to it, by the taking
Ills Eve out of him, that, so, his desire into the
life of this world, might be in sorae measur,©^
lessened. When his. lust into this Horld still
went on, and gave occasion to the birth of the
evil tree, a suitable remedy was here given by
God; for God laid' a prohibition upon if^ and '
declared the d^ath that must be received from
it. When he was further so overcome by his
lusting desire, as to eat of the tree that had the
nature of this world in it, and so lost his first
life, and angelick clothing, then God, even then
all goodness, and mercy to him, only told him.
of the airse and misery that was opened in na- '
ture ; that himself ana posterity must be sweat-"^
ing, labouring animals in a fallen world, tilf '
their sickly, shameful, naked new-gotteh bod-
ies, mixed and mouldered in the corruption of
that earth, whose fruits they had chosen to
know, instead of those of paradise. ♦

Now all this i^ nothing of a penalty wrathfnlly

•inflicted by JGod, but was the fiatural state oi

Adam, as soon as his own lust had led him out

of a heavenly paradise, into the earthly life of

15


170

this world. God brings no misery upon him^
but only shews the misery that he bad opened
in himself, by not keeping to the state in which
he was created/ And no sooner had God in-
formed this miserable pair of the state, they
had brought upon themselves, but in that mo-
menVhis eternal love begins a covenant of re-
demption that was to begin in them, and in and
through them extended itself to all their pos-
terity. A beginning of a new birth, called the
^^d of (he woman^ was like the first breath of
life^ breathed or inspokcn again into the light of
their life, which as an Immanuel^ or God with
them^ should be born in all their posterity, and
fee their power of becoming ^gain such sons of
God, as should fulfil the first designs of the cre-
ation of Adam, and fill heaven again with that
host of angels, which it had lost. Thus from
the creation of Adam, through all the degrees
of his fall, to the mystery of his redemption,
every thing tells you, that God is love. Nay
ttie very possibility of his having so great a fall,
gives great glory to the goodness, and love of
GTod tovyards him. He was created an angel,
and therefore had the highest perfection of an
angel^ which is a/mcfom of willing. 2dly, he
w;as created to be the restoring angel of this
new creation. Now these two things, which
were nis highest glory, and greatest marks of
the divine favour, wer6 the only possibility of his
falling. Ha4 he not an angejick freedomof
Willv lie could not have had a false Avillj had


171

lie not had all power givpn unto him, over this
world, he could not have.faljen^mtp'it; it was
this divine, anid high poWei: 9ver it, t^iat open-
ed a wiay for his entrance, or falling into it.-r-
Thus, Academicus, from this view of man, we
come to the utmost certainty of a threefold na-
ture, or life in h'lm. 1. He is the son oX a feiUen
angel. 2. He is the son of male anil female of
this bestial wodd. 3. He is a son of the Lamb
of God, and has a birth of heaven again in his
soul. Hence we see also, thstt all we have to
fear, to hate, and renounce, all that we have to
love, to desire and praj for, is all within our-
Sjelves. No man can be mis^raible but by fall-
ing a sacrifice, to his own inw?ird passion^, and
tempers; nor any one happy, but by overcom-
ing himself. How ridiculous would a ma,n
seem to you, who should torment himself be-
cause the land in America was not well tilled?
Now every thing that is not within you, tlhat
has not its birth, and growth in your own life, is
at the same distance from you, is ias foreign* to
your own happiness, or misery, as an American
story. Your life is all that you have, and noth-
ing is a part of it, or makes any alteration in it,
but the good or evil, that is the workings of
your own life. Hence you may see why our
Saviour, who though he had all wisdom, and
came to be the light of the world, is yet so
short in his instructions, and gives so small a
number of doctrines to marikind, whilst, every
moral teacher writes volumes upon every sin-


172

gle virtue. It is because he Viiew, what they
knew not, that dur whole malady lies in this,
that the. mtl of onr mind^ the lust of our life is
tume^ ihtotfiis world. And that uothidg can
relieve us^ 6r ^et us right, but the turning the
will of our tnind, arid trie desire of our hearts
to G6d,dHd that heaven which we had lost. —
And hence it is, that he calls us to nothing, but
^ total (fecial of ourselves, and the life of this
world, and to a faith in him, as the worker of a
new birth and life in us. Did we but receive
his short instructions with true faith and sim-
plicity of heart, as the truth of God, we should
hot want any one to comment, or enlarge upon
them. A traveller that has taken ^ wrong
road, does not want an orator to discourse to
him, on the nature of roads, but to be told, in
short, which is his' tight way. Now^this is our
case, it was not a number of things that brought
about our fall, Adam only took up a wrong tvilif
that brought him and us into our present state,
or road of life; and therefore our Saviour uses
not a number of instructions, to set us right, he
pnly tells us to renounce the false will^ which
brought Adam into the life oi this world, and
to take up that will, which should have kept
him in a paradise. Observe now, my friend, the
great benefit that we have from the foregoing
account of man's original perfection, and the
nature of his fall. It opens the true ground of
our religion and the absolute necessity of it ;
it, forces us to know that our whole natural life


1^3

isa mistaicen road, and thatChVfetis .albhepup
true guide out of it; ft teaches us every rea-
son for renouncing ourselves, and loving the
whole nature of our redemption, as the great-
est joy anci desire ^of our hearts. \ We are not
only compelled, as it w^re to hunger after it, to
run with eagerness into its arms, but are also
delivered from all mistakes about it, from all
the difficulties, and perplexities, which divided
sects, and churches have brought into it For
from this view of things, we.see, not uncertain-
Ij, biit with the ftillest assurance that our will
and our heart is all, that nothing else either
finds, or loses God, and that all our. religion, is
only the religion of the heart. We see with
open eyes, that as a spirit of longing after the
life of this world, made Adam, and us to te the
poor pilgrims on earth, that we are, so the <spir-
it of prayer or the longing desire of the hes^rt af-
ter Christ, and God, and heaven, breaks £^11 bur
bonds asunder, casts all our cords Trbm us, and
raises us out of the miseries of ti^e into the
riches of eternity. r'Thus seein^j^and koowm^
our first, and our present state, efery thing cajils
us tb prayer; and^e desire of our. heart Ije^
comes ;the spirit of pj^yer. Anid when the spir-
it of prayeir is born in iig, then jp|ra^er is^ no
Ipiiger considered^ as only , the fctusjp^§^ o|thiS|
or that hour, but is jthe continual pan^i^$ 9r
breathihg of the ^eai-t after Groil. Its petitions
arie rioi picked out oif'm devotion, it

loves it^ otehlahguage, it speaks most when it
15*


174

says least. If ypM ask what its ^ords are, they
kre sptrit^lhey ^ve /jjTe, they are /oi;c,.that unite
with G()(i ., . .

Jcad. 1 apprehend. Sir, tliat what you here
say of the spirii of prayer, will be taken by
some people for a censure upon hours^aindjbrms
of prayer. Though 1 know you have no such
meaning. _

RusL Pray let me speak again to Acaderai-
cus, his learning seems to be always upon the
watch, to find out some excuse for not receiv-
ing the whole truth. Does joot Theophilus here
speak of the 5/?mV of prayer as a state pf the
heart, which is become the governing principle
of thie soul'? life ? And if it is a liynig state of
the heart, must it not have its life in itself, inde-
pendent of every outward time, and occasion ?
And yet must it not at the same time, be that
alone" which disposes, and fits the heart to re-
joice, and delight in hours, and times, and oc-
casions of prayer? Suppose he had said, that
honesty fe an inward living principle of the heart,
a rectitude of the mind, that has all its life and
strength tt;//^(^tself. Could this be thought to
censure all tiipes and occasions of performing
outward acts of honesty? Now the 5pm/ of
prayer ditters frpm all outward acts and forms
of prayer^ just as the honesty of the hearty or a
living re^'titud^ of mihd differs from outward,
' aiidpccasionialafe^ of honesty. And yet should
a mat) overlook, or disrcfgard times and occa-
sions of outwarcl a<it6 of honesty, on pretence


175

that true honesty was an inward living princi-
ple of the heart, who would niot see» that such
a one, bad as little of the inward spirit, as the
outward acts of honesty ? St. John saith, //*ewy
^n hath Ms worhPs goods^ and seeth his brother
haih needy and shutUih tip his bowels of compasmn
to him^ hpw dwelkth the love of God in him ? Just •
so, and with the ^anje truth it may be saidvJf a
man overlooketh, neglecteth, or refus^th times
and hours of prayer, Aour dwelleih the spirit of
prayer in him ? And yet its own life and spirit
IS vastly sjiperiour to, independent on,and§tays
for no particular hours, or forms of words. And
in this^ense it is truly said, that it has its own
language, that it wants not to pick words out
of manuels of devotion, but is always speaking
forthy spirit, and life, and love towards God. —
But pray Theophilus, do you go on, as you in-
tended.

TheopK I shall only add, before we pass on to
another point, that from what has been said of
the first state, and fall of man, it plainly follows,
that the sin of all sins,ortheAc/'e^^ of all heresies,
is a worldly spirit. We are apt to consider this
temper only as an infirmity, or pardonable iail-
qre, but it is indeed the great apostasy from God
and the divine life. It is not a single sin, but
the whole nature of all sin, that leaves no pos-
sibility of coming out of our fallen state, till it
be totally renounced with all the strength of
our hearts. Every sin,, be it of what kind it
^yj, ii^^ oply a braiich|Qf the worldly spirit, that


176

lives in us. There is but one thai is goody saith
oar Lord, and tkcU is God. In the featiie strict-
ness of expression it must be said, there is but
one life^ that is good, and that is the life of God,
arid heaven. Depart in the least degree from
the goodness of God, and you depart into evil,
because nothing is good but his goodness.

Choose any life, but the life of God, and hieav-
en, and' you choose death; for death is notbing
else but the loss of the life ofGod. The crea-
tures of this world have but one Ufe^SinA that is
the life of this world : This is their one life^ and
one good. Eternal beings have but one life^ and
■ one goody and that is the life of God. The spirit
of the soul is in itself nothing else but a spirit
breathed forth from the life of God, and for this
only end, that the life of God, the nature of
God, the working of God, the tempers. of God,
might be manifested in it. God could not cre-
ate man to have a will of his own, and a life of
his own, diifTerent from the life and will that is
in himself; this is more impossible, than for a
good tree to bring forth corrupt fruit. God can
only delight in his own life, his own goodness,
and his own perfections, and therefore cannot
love or delight, or dwell in any creatures, but
where his own goodness, and perfections, are
to l^ found. Like can only unite with like,
heaven with heaven, and hell with hell, and
therefore the life of God must be the life of th^
soul, if the soul is to unite with God. Hence it
is, that ail tiie religion Of faUeh mati, airth^


177

methods of otir redemption have only this one
end, to take from us that strange and earihljf life,
we have gotten by the fall, and to^ kindle again
the life of God, and heaven in pur souls^ * Not
to deliver us from that gross and sordid vice
called coveteousness^ which heathens c$n con-
demn, butto take the whole 5/?mV of this vrorld
entirely from us, and that for this necessary
reason, because all thai is in the worlds the lust of
ihejlesh^ the lust of the eyeSy and the pride oflife^ is
not of the Father^ that as, not that life, or spirit
of liie which we had from God by our creation,
but is of this worlds is brought into us by our fall
from God into the life of this world. And there-
fore a worldly spirit is not to be considered as
a singly sin, or as something that may consist
with some real degrees of christian goodness,
but as a state of real death to the kingdom, and
life of God in our souls. Management, pru-
dence, or an artful trimming betwixt God and
mammon are here all in vain, it is not only the
grossness of an outward, visible, worldly be-
haviour, but the spirit^ the prudtnce^ the subtlety^
the wisdom of ihh world, that is our separation
from the life of God.

Hold this therefore, Academicus, as a cer-
tain truth, that the herest/ of all heresies is. a
worldhj spirit It is the whole nature, and mis-
ery of our fall, it keeps up the death of our
souls, and so long as it lasts, make? it impossi-
ble for us to be born again from above. It is
the greatest blindness, and darkwss of oui* jx^


178

ture, and keeps us in the grossest ignorance
both 6f heaven and hell. For though they are
both of them within us, yet we feel neither the
one nor the other, so long as the spirit of this
wotld reigns in us. Light and truth, and the
gospel, so far as they concern eternity, are all
empty sounds to the worldly spirit. His own
good, and his own evil goi'^ern all his hopes,
and fears, and therefore he can have no relig-
ion, or be farther concerned in it, than so far as
it can be made servicable to the life of this
world. Publicans and harlots are all born of the
spirit of this world, but its highest births are
the scribes^ the pharisees and hypocrites^ who turn
godliness into gain, and serve God for the sake
of mammon ; these live and move and have
their being in and from the spirit of this world.
Of all things therefore, my friend, detest the spir-
itof this world, or there is no help,you must live
and die an utter stranger to all that is divine and
heavenly. You will go out of the world in the
same poverty and death to the divine life,in which
you entered into it. For a worldly, earthly
spirit can know nothing of God, can know noth-
ing, feel nothing, taste nothing, delight in noth-
ing, but with earthly senses and after an earth-
ly manner. The natural man^ sailh the apostle,
receiveth not the things of the spirit of God^they are
foolishness unto him. He cannot know them^ be^
cause they are spiritually discerned^ that is, they
can only be discerned by that spirit^ which he
bath not. Now the true ground and reason of


179

this, and the absolute impossibility for the nat-
ural man, how polite» and learoed, and acute
soever he be, is this, it is because all rea/ knowl-
edge, is life^ or a living sensibility of the thing
that is known. There ts no light in the mind,
but what is the light of life ; so far as our life
reaches, so far we understand, and feel^ and
know, and no farther. All after this, is only
the play of our imagination, amusing itself with
the dead pictures of its own ideas. Now this
is all, that the natural man, who hath not the
life of God in him, can possibly do with the
things of God. He can only contemplate them
as things /omgw to himself as so many dead
ideas^ that he receives from books, or hearsay,
and so can learnedly dispute, and quarrel about
them, and laugh at those as enthusiasts, who
have a* living sensibility of them. He is only
the worse for his hearsay dead ideas of divine
truths, they become a bad nourishment of all
his natural tempers : he is proud of his ability
to discourse about them, and loses all humility,
all love of God and man, through a vain and
haughty contention for them. His zeal for re-
ligion is envy and wrath, his orthodoxy is pride
and obstinacy, his love of the truth is hatred
and ill-will to those, who dare to dissent from
him. This is the constant effect of the relig-
ion of the natural man, who is under the dor
minion of the spirit of this world. He cannot
know more of religion, nor mieike a better use
of his knowledge, Uian this comes to : and all


180

for this plain reason, because he stands at the
same distance from a living sensibility of the
truth, as the man that is born blind does from
a living sensibility of light. Light must first
be the birth of his own life, before he can enter
into a real knowledge of it. Yet so ignorant is
the natural man with all his learned acuteness
that he does ndt so much as know, that there
is, and must be this great difference between
real knowledge, and dead ideas of things, and
that a man cannot know any thing any further
than as his own life opens the knowledge of it
in himself

The measure of our life, is the measure of
our knowledge, and as the spirit of our life
worketh, so the spirit of our understanding
conceiveth. If our will worketh with .God,
though our natural capacity be ever so mean
and narrow, we get a real knowledge of God,
and heavenly truths^ for every thing must feel
that, in which it lives.

But if our will worketh with satan, and the
spirit of this world, let our parts be ever so
bright, our imaginations ever so soaring, yet all
our living knowledge, or real sensibility can
go no higner, or deeper, than the mysteries of
iniquity, and the lusts of flesh and blood. For
where our life is, there, and there only is our
understanding, and that for this plain reason,
because as life is the beginning of all sensibili-
ty, ho it is, and must be the bounds of it ; and
no sensibility can go any further than the life


1«1

goes, or have arry other manner of knowledge,

than as the manner of its life is. If you ask

what life is, or what is to be understood by it ?

It is in itself nothing else but a toorktng wiUj and

no life could be either good, or evil, but for

this reason, because it is a working will: every

life from the highest angel to the lowest animal

consists in a working will, and therefore as the

Will worketh, as that is with which it uniteth,

so hath every creature its degree^ and kind, and

numner of life; and consequently as the will

of its life worketh, so it hath its degree^ and kind,

and manner of conceiving, and understainding,

of liking and disliking. For nothing feels, or

tastes, or understands, or likes or dislikes, but

the life that is in^us. The spirit that leads our

life, is the spirit that forms our understanding.

The mind is our eye, and all the faculties of

the mind see every thing according to the state

the mind is in. If selfoh pride is the spirit df

our life, every thing is only seen, and felt, and

known through this glass* Every thing is dark,

senseless, and absurd to the .proud man, but .

that which brings food to this spirit. He un^

dorstands nothing, he feels nothing, he tastes

nothing, bat as his ]pride is made .sensible of

it; or capable of being affected with it. His

working will, which is the life of his soul, liv-

eth and worketh only in the element of pride,

and therefore what suits hia pride, is his only

good, and what contradicts his pridei) is all the

evil that he can feel, or knavir. His , wit, his

16


..^


182

parts, his leafnif >g, his advancement^ his friends,
his admirers, his successes, hk conquests, all
these are the on/y God and heaven, that he has
any living sensibility of. He indeed, can talk
of a scripture God, a scripture Christ, and
heaven, but these are only the ornamental fur-
niture of his brain, whilst pride is the God of
his heart We are told, that God resisteih the
proud^ and giveth grace to thehumbk. This is not
to be understood as if God by ^x\ arbitrary will^
only chose to deal thus with the proud and
humble man. Oh no. The true ground is
this, the resistance is on the part of man. Pride
resisteth God, it rejecteth him, it turneth from
him, and chooseth to worship and adore some*
thing else instead of him. Whereas humility
leaveth all for God, falls down before him and
opens all the doors of the heart, for his en-
trance into it. This is the only sense, in
which God resisteth the proud, and giveth
grace to the humble* And thus it is in the
true ground, and reason of every good and
evil that rises up in us; we have neithergood
nor evil, but as ii is the natural effectof the work*
ings of our own will either with or against God^
and G^d only interposei^ with his threateiif
ings, and instructions, to direct us to the right
use of our willsy that we may not blindly wnrk
ourselves into death; instead of life. £at take
now another instance like that abready men<f
tioned. Look at a man whose working will is
tinder the j^wer c^woli^r He sees^ and hean,


183

and feels, and understands, and talks wholly
from the light and sense of wrath. All his fac-
ulties are only so many faculties of wrath, and
he knows of no sense or reason, but that which
his enlightened wrath discovers to him. I have
appealed, Academicus, to these instances, on-
ly to illustrate, and conQrm that great truth,
-which I before asserted, namely, that the worh^
ing of our wiU, or the state of our life governs
the state of our mind, and forms the degree and
^nann^r of our understanding and knowledge.
And that as the Jire of our life burns, so is the
Ught of our life kindled. And all this only to
shew you the utter impossibility of knowing God,
and divine troths till your life is divine, and
wholly dead to the life, and spirit of this world;
Since our light and knowledge can be no bet-
ter, or higher, than the state of our life and
heart is. Tell me now, do you feel the truth
of all this? 1 say feel, because no truth is pos-
sessed, till you have a feelidgy and living sen-
sibility of it.

^cad. Oh Sir, you have touched every string
of my heart, and 1 now^ wish with the psalmist,
that 1 had the wings of a dove, that I might flee
away^ and be at ireat, flee away from the spirit
of this world, to be at rest in. the sweet tran-
quillity of a life, born again of God. You know,
Sir, that in the morning you told me of a certain
first ^ep^ that of all necessity must be the Aeg-m-
mVig- of a spiritual life, you gave me till to-mor-
row, to speak my mind, and resolution about it.


184

But YOU have now extorted my answer from
me, 1 cannot &taj a moment longer. With all
the strength that 1 have, I turn from everj thing,
that is not God, and his holy will ; with all the
desire, delight-and longing of my heart, I give
up myself wholly to the life, light, and holy
spirit' of God;. Pleased ^with nothing in this
world, but as it gives time, and place, and oc-/
casions of doing, and being that^ which my
Heavenly Father would have me to do, and be.
Seeking for no happiness from this earthly falt^
en life, but that of overcoming all its spirit, and
tempers. ' But I believe, Theophilus, that you
had something farther to say.

Theoph. Indeed, Academicus, there is hardly
any knowing, when one has said enough of the
evil effects of a worldly spirit. It is the canker
that eateth up all the fruits of our other good
tempers, it leaves no degree of goodness in
them, but transforms all that we are, and do,
into its own earthly nature, l^he philosophers
of old, began all their virtue in a total renun-
ciation of the spirit of this world. They saw
with the eyes of heaven, that darkness was not
more contrary to light, than the wisdom of this
world was contrary to the spirit of virtue;
therefore they allowed of no progress in virtue,
but so far as a man had overcome himself, and
the spirit of this world.

This gave a divine solidity to all their in-
structions, and proved them to be masters of
true wisdom. But the doctrine of the cross of


185

Christ, the last, the highest, the most finishing
stroke given to the spirit of this world, that
speaks qnore in one word^ than all the philoso-
phy of roItimifloUs writers, is yet professed by
those, who are in more friendship with the
world, than tvas allowed to the disciples of Py-
thagoras, Socrates, Plato, or JSpictetus.

Niay, if those ancient sages were to startup
amongst- qs. with* their diririe wisdom, they
woula bid feir to be treated by the sons of the
gospel, if not by someffath(^rs of the church, as
dreaming errthusi&sts.

But Academicus, this is a standing truth, the
world can only love its own, and wisdom can
only be justified of her children. The heaven-
born Epictetus told one of his scholars, that
then he might first look upon himself as having
made some itue proficiency in virtue, when the
world took him for h fool; an oracle like that,
which said, \he wisdom of this world is Jholiskncss
wkh Gqd., ■-

If you Was to 9sk me, what is the apostacy
of these last times, or whence is all the degen-
eracy df the present christian churth, 1 should
placfe it All in ^l worldly spirit. If here you see
open wickedness, t^iere only forms of godliness,
if here superficial holiness, political piety, craf^
ty prudende, there haughty sanctity, partial
ae^cl, enyiotisdrfttodbxy, if almost every where
you feee a Jewish 'blindness, and hardness of
heart, and the church trading w^ifh the gospel,
ai visibly, as the old Jews bought and sold
16*


186

beasts in their temple, all this is only so mvLUjr
forms; and proper fruits of the worldly spirit.
This is the great net^ with which the devil be-
comes a fisher of men ; add be assured of this,
my friend, that every son of man is iji this ne/,
till throngh, and by the spirit joi Christ, he
breaks out of it.

I say the wirit of Christ, for nothing else can
deliver him from it. Trust now to any kind, or
form of religious observances, to any number
of the most pl^sible -virtues, to any kinds of
learning,or efforts of human prudence, and then
I will tell you what your case will be, you will
overcome one. temper of the world, on^ and
merely by cleaving to another. For nothing
leaves the worlds nothing renounces it, nothing
can possibly overcome it, but singly and solely
the spirit of Christ,/ Hence it is, that many
learned men with all the rich furniture of their
brain, live and die slaves to. the spirit of t.his
-world, and can only differ from gross worjd-
lings, as the scribes and pharisees differ from
publicans and sinners, it is because the spirit
of Christ is not the one only thing, ths^t i« the de-
sire of their hearts, aind therefore their leai'ning
onlv works in and with the spirit of this world,
and becomes itself no small part of* the vanity
of vanities. Would you farther know, Academ-
icus, the evil nature and effects of a worldly
vspirit, you need only look at the blessed pow-
er and effects of the 5ptnV o/'/?ray^r, for the one
goes downwards with thesame^strengtfj, as the


187

olher goes upwards;, the one betroths, and
wedsjou, to an earthljf^ nature, with the eam^
certainty, as the other espouses, and unites you
to Christ and God, and heaven. The spirit of
prayer^ is a pressing forth of the soul out of thisi
earthly life, it is a stretching with all its desire
after the life of God, it is a leaving, as far as it
caiv, all its dwn spirit^ to reqeive a spirit from
•above, to be ofteiife, one love, ope spirit with
tjhrist in-God. This .pray er which is an eriip^
tying itself of all its owq lusts, and natural tein^
pers, and an openiqg itself for the light and love
of God to enter into it, is the prayer in the name
bf Christ, to which nothing is denied. For the
love which God bears to the soul, liis eternal,
never ceasing desire to enter into it, to dwell
in it, and open the birth of his holy word, and
spirit in it, stays no longer than till the door of
the, heart opens for him. For nothing doe^, or
can keep God out ^f the soul, or hinder his ho-
ly union with it, but the desire of the heart turn-
ed from him. And the reason of it is this, it is
because the life of the soul is in itself nothing
^Ise but a working will^ and therefore wherever
the will worketh, or goeth, there and thef j? on-
ly the soul liveth, whether it be in Cpd^ror^the
creature.

Wbaleyer it desireth, that is the fudx^i its

fire^ {^nd^ps its fuel is, so is the flame of its life.

.A willgiv^p up to earthly. goods, is as grass

^ith Nebuchadne^ar, and has one life with

ite beasts of. the^:%^ Foj: earthly desires


188

keep up the same life irr a man, and an ox. —
For the one 6nly reason, why the ailimals of
this world have no sense, or knowledge of God,
13 this, it is becahse they cannot form any oth-
er than earthly desires, and so can only have
an earthly life. When therefore a man wholly
turneth his working will to qarthly^ desires, he
dies to the excellency t)f his natural state, and
may be said only to liy^ andmqVe^* and hav^
his being in the life of this World, as the beasts
have,^ — Earthly food, &c. 6hly desired!, and used
for the support of the earthly body, is suitable
to man's present condition, and the order of
nature ; but when the 'desire, the delight, arid
' longing of the soul, is set upon earthly tbingsy
then the hutaanity is degraded, is fallen from
God; and the life of the soul is made as (earth-
ly and bestial, as the life of the body: For the
creature can be neither higher, nor lower,
neither better nor worse, than as the M''ill work-
eth. For you are to observe, that the will hath
a divine and magick powefr, what it desireth,
thatit tafceth, and of that it eateth and Itveth.-—
Wherever, and in whsitever the working will
choo^feth to dwell ond delight ^th^t beidometh. the
souFs/ooiJ, its cokditidn; its b'ody^ its clothings anA
habitation. For all these are the. true and cer-
tain effects, and jpowers of the wqrking; will. ,.
Nothing doth, or can go With ' a ma^ iritp
heaven, nothing followetfi him ihtb hdtt, htit ttiiV
in which the will' dyvelt, with whiqh it was'fedf,
nourished, and cfothed; in ihis life. AiiA ihik


189

is to be noted well, that death can make no al-
teration of this state of the will, it only takes
offthte outward, worldly covering of flesh and
blood, and forces the soul to see, and feel, and
know what a life, what a state, jrborf, body^ and
hahifation^ its own working w|ll. has brought
forth for it. Oh Academicus stop a while, and,
let your hearing be turned into feeling. Tell
me is there any thing in life, that deserves a
thought but how to keep this working of our will
in aright state, and. to get that purity of hearty
which alone can see, and know and find, and
possess God ? Is there any thing so frightful, as
this worldly spirit, which turns the soul from
God, makes it a house of darkness, and feeds it
with the food of time, at the expense of all the
riches of eternity ?

On the other hand, what can be so desirable
a good as the spirit of prayer^ which empties the
soul of all its own evil, separates death and
darkness from it, leaves self^ time^ andfMl^ worlds
and becomes one life, one light, one loi/p, one
spirit with Christ, and God, and heaven. :

Think, my friends, of these things, with some**
thing mbre than thoughts, let your hungry soulsi
eat of the nourishment of them, as a bread of
heaven; and desire only to live, that with all
the working of your wills, and Xhe whoh spirit
of your minds, you may live and die united to
God. And thus, let this conversation end^ till
God gives us another meeting. . ^

. / TjaJE ENP' OF THB.aECOiNP PULOGVR^.


TBiRD DIALOGUE.

Rust. I BAVii brought again with me, gentle-
men, my silent friend Humanus, and upon the
^ame condition of being silent stiH. But though
his silence is the same, yet he i^ quite altered.
For this twenty years I have known him to be
of an even, cheerful temper, full of good nature,
and even quite calm and dispassionate in his
attacks upon Christianity ; never provoked by
what was said either against his infidelity, or
in defence of the gospel. He used to boast of
his being* free from those sour passions, and re-
sentments which, he said, were so easy to be
seen in many, or most defenders of the gospel
meekness. But now he is morose, peevish, and
fall of chagrin, Jind seems to be as uneasy with
himisel^gfS with every body else ; whatever he
says, iflf rash, satirical, and wi'athful. I tell him,
but he will not own it, that his case is this. The
truth has loujehed him, but it is only so far as
to be hi& tbrmenior: Ut 4s only as welcon>e to
hini,;a« a /Azj^tbat has taken from him all his
riches, goods and armour, wlier^iti he trusted.
The cfiristianity he usedtd oppose h vanished,
and therefore dll th^ weapons h^ had against it,
ar^ dropt out of his hands. It rtbiv 'appears to
stand upon another ground,:^ to have a deeper
bottom and better nature, than Vi^hat henmag-


191

inedv and therefore he, and his Bcl%Bm$ of infi-^
deliiy are quite disconcerted.. But though hl»
arguments have thus lost all their strenglh,.yet
his heart i& left in the state it was^ it stands in
the same opposition to Christianity^ as it did
before-, and yet without any ideas^ of his brain
to support it. And this is the true ground of
his present uneasy, peevish state ofnptind. He
has nothing now to subsist upon, but the. reso-
lute hardness of his heart, his pride^ and ^stinacv.
These he cannot give up by the force of his
reason, his heart cannot bear th^ thoughts of
such a sacrifice, and yet he feels and knows
that he has no strength* left, but in. a settled
hardness, pride and obstinacy tp continue as

he is. rThese, I own, are severe and; hard

words,,but hard as they are, 1 Qni jsure Huma*
nus knows, that they proceed from the softness,
and affection of my heart toward him, from a
compassionate zeal toshewhim.where his mal-
ady lies, and the necessity, of ^verpo/qi^g him-
self befi)re he can have the .blessing oC light;
and truth, a^d^peace*, Thpttgh it is^^ with some
celqctance^ yet 1 ha^e chpi^rt thusttp nx^ak^ij^j
neighbour knpwm both to hitii^eFlf, an4 rt4;> yqii,
that you way speak of su^yh m^ttersi ^^ Baay^
giv« the best reUef to the stiite he. is in. , .

TAet^A. Jndeed Husticus,! muqh approve' of
theapint, you have.her-e shewn, v«(ith regajrd to^
fotir friend, and hopfi he will take ip good parti
all ibife you jhftvfe :mid*^ As for; ip? I fio^^r^^o
liitt i^ith the. utmci^ tepd^tq^p ^f afiectipQu,^ I


192

feel tod Gotttpassionate the trying state of his
hearty and have only this orie wish, that I could
pour theheavenlj water of meekness, and the
oil of divine love into it. Let us force him to
know, that we are the messengers of divine love
to him, that we seek not ourselves, nor our own
victory, but to n()ake him victorious over his
own evil, and become possessed of a new life
in God. His trial is the greatest and hardest
that belongs to human nature. And yet it is
absolutely necessary to be undergone.

Nature must become a torment and burthen
to itself before it can willingly give itself up to
that death, through which alone it can pass in-
to life. There is no true and real conversion^
whether it be from infidelity, or any other life
of sin, till a man comes to know and feel, that
nothing less than hh whole nature is to be part-
ed with, and yet finds in himself no possibilittf of
doing it. This is the inability, that can bring
us at last to say with the apostle when I am weak
thtn lam strong. This is the distress, that stands
near to the gate of life, this is the despair, hy
which we lose all our own life, t6 find a new
one in God. Tor here, in this place it is, that
faith ^xaA hope^ and true seeking to. God, and
Christ are born. But till all is despair in oar-^
selves, till all is lost, that we had any trust in,
as ourotyn, till then, faith and hope, and turn^
irig to God in prayer, are drily things learnt, and ^
practised by mk and meiffeorf, but they arenbt
born in us, are not UviHg qualities of the new


193

birth ; tilL we have done feeling any trust, or
confidence in ourselves. Happy therefore is it
for your friend Humanus, that he is come thus
far, that every thing is taken from him, on which
he trustedy and found content in himself. In
this state^ one sigh, or hok, or the least /tirnen^
of Jbis heart to <jod for help, would be the be-
ginning of hjis salvation. ^ Let us therefore try ^
to improve this happy moment to him, not so
much by arguments of reason, as by the arrows
of that divine love, which overflows all nature,
and creature.

ForHumanus, though hitherto without Christ
is still within the reach of divine love ; he be-
longs to God, God created him for himself, to
be an habitation of his own life, light and holy
spirit, and God has brought him and us togeth-
er, that the lost sheep may be found, and
brought back to its heavenly shepherd.

Oh, Humanus, love is my bait^you must be
caught by it, it will put its hook into your heart,
and force you to know, that of all strong things,
nothing is so strong, so irresistible as divine
love. ,

It brought forth all the creation, it kindles
all the life of heaven, it is the song of all the an-
gels of God. It has redeemed all the world, it
seeks for every sinner upon earth, it embraces
all the enemies of God, and from the beginning
to the end of time, the one work of providence,
is the one work of love.
17


194 ^

Moses and the prophets, Christ and his apos-
tles were all of them messengers of divine love^
They came to kindle a fire on earthy and
that fire was the love which burns in heaven.
Ask what God is ? His name is love, he is good^
the perfection, the peace, the joy, the glory and
blessing of every life. Ask what Christ is ? He
is the universal remedy of all evil broke forth
in nature and creature, he is the destruction of
misery, sin, darkness, death, and helL He is
the resurrection and life of all fallen natures-
He is the unwearied compassion, the long-suf-
fering pity, the never-ceasing mercifulness of
God to every want, and infirmity of human na-
tdfe.

He is the breathing forth of the heart, life,
ahd spirit of God into all the dead race of Ad-
am, fte is the seeker, the finder, the restorer
of all that was lost, and dead to the life of God.
He is the love, that from Cain to the end of
time, prays for all its murderers, the love that
willingly suffers and dies among thieves that
thieves may have a life with him in paradise.
The love that visits publicans, harlots, and sin-
ners, that wants, and seeks to forgive, where
most is to be forgiven.

Oh, my friends, let us surround ahd encom-
pass Humaniis, with these flamcis of love, till he
cannot make his escape from them, but must
become a willing victim to their power. For
the universal God is universal love, all is love,
but that which is hellish and edrthly. AU re-


195

ligiori is the spirit of love, all its gifts and graces
are the gifts and graces of love, it has no breath,
no life, but the life of love- Nothing exalts,
nothing purifies, but the fire of love, nothing
changes death into life, eartj^ into heaven, men
ipio angels, but love alone; hove breathes th^^
^>i/ of Gpd, its words and works c^re the impi-
raiipn olGod. Itspeaketh not of itself^ but the
W0rd^^he eternal word of God speaketh in it;
for a|l that love speaketh, that God speaketh^
ppcapae love is God. Love is heaven revealed
iijl the sQuI^ it is light, and truth, it is infallible,
it has np errours, for all errours are the want of
love. Love has no more of pride, than ligh^
ha? of darkness, it stands and bears all its fruity
from a depth, ami root of humility. Love is of
po sect, oi^ party, it neither makes", npr admits of
any houpds, you may as easily enclose the hghit,
or shut up the air of the world into one place,
i^,eDnfi]id>ljove to & g«ct or party. It lly^ m the
Mbir&i^^beLmniversaliiy^ the impartiality of heaven/
UrWHei^es un one^ holy, catholick God, the God
of all&jpifitsvit unites and joins with the catho-
lick spirit of the one God, who unites with all
that is good, and ismeek,patient5 well-wishing,
and loiig^uffering over all the evil thai is in na-
ture and creature. Love, like the spirit of God,
rideth upon the wings of the wind, and is in
omion, and communion with all the saints that
are in heaven and on earth. L^ove is quite pure,
it hath no by-ends, it seeks not its own, it has
but ou^wiily and that iji, to give itself into every


1»6

thing, and overcome all evil with good. Last-
ly, love is the ChristofGod, it Cometh down
from heaven, it regenerateth the soul from
above, it blotteth out alt transgressions, it tafc-
eth from death its sting, from the devil his

Eower, and from the serpent his poison. It
ealeth all the infirmities of our earthly birth, it
gives eyes to the blind, ears to the de^f, and
makes the dumb to speak; it cleanses the le-
pers, and casts out devils, and puts man inplara*
dise before he dies. It liveth wholly to the will
of him, of whom it is born, its meat and drink is,
to do the will of God. It is the resurrection
and life of every divine virtue, a fruitful mother
of true humility, boundless benevolence, un-
wearied patience, and bowels of compassion.
This, Rustfcus, is the Christ, the salvation, the
religion of divine love, the true church of God,
where the life of God is found, and lived,' and (o
which your friend Humanus is calleAiby os.-*^
We direct him to nothing but the^ inwkr4)*fe.
of Christ, to the working of the holy srpittkiof
God, which alone can deliver him from ihe
evil that is in his own nature, and give? him a
power to become a son. of God. / : u !

Bu^i. My neighbour has infinite reason to
thank you for this lovely draught you have
given of the spirit of religion ; he cannot av^id
being affected with it. But pray let us now
hear, how we are to enter into this religion of
divine love? or rather what God has done to in-


197

troduce m into it, and makeiis partakers again
of his divine nature.

Theoph. The first work, or beginning of this
redeeming love of God, is in that Imnmrmelj cm*
God with us, given to the first Adam, as the seed
of the nvoman^ which in him, and all his posteri^
tj, should bruise the head, and overcome the
life of the serpent in our fallen nature. This is
love indeedy because it is universal, and reach*
es everr branch of the human tree, from the
first to the last. man that grows from it. Miser-
ably as mankind are divided, and all at war
with one another, every one appropriating God
to themselves, yet ihey all have but one God,
who is the spirit of all, the life of all, and i\m
lover of all. Men may divide Ihemsefares, to
have God to themselves, they mav hate and per-
secute one another for God's sake ; but this i«
a blessed truth, that neither the hater, nor the
hated cap be divided from the one, holy, 4;a^o-
lick.God, who with an unalterable meekness^
i»weetness, patience, and goodwill towards all^
waits for all, calls them all, redeems tli^m all»
and comprehends all i|i the outstretched atm«
of his catholidklove. Adk not therefore how
vf^ shall enter into this relidod of love^ and sal<»
nation, for it is ttselfentered into bs^ it has taken
pi^session of us, firom the bef^niflg. It iir Im^
mwmd\n&(reTf htunan soul, itfies wa> traasui^
^f heaven, and etemity in us; if caoRi^ be di-
vided fijom us by the power cftiiMi, we oimnot
iMe itourseirefi, itwilt nevsr iufjg ioi^ aor JS^
17*


198

•ake us, till with our last breath we die in the
refusal of it This is the open gate of our re-
demption, we hare itot far to go to find it. It is
every man's own treasure, it is a root of heav-
en, a seed of God, sown mto our souls by the
word of God, and like a small grain of mustard
seed, has a power of growing to be a tree of
life. Here, my friend, you should once for all,
mark and observe, where and wfiat the true na-
ture of religion is, for here it is plainly shewn
^ou, that \i% place \& within, its work and effect
is toithdn^ its glory, its life, its perfection is all
within ; it is merely and solely the^ raising a
new life, new love, and a new birth in the in-
ward spirit of our hearts. Religion Twhich is
solely to restore man to his first and right state
in God) had its beginning, and first power from
the seed of the tcoman^ the treader on the ser-
pent's head, and therefore all its progress from
its beginning to its last finished work, is and
can be nothing else, but the growing power and
victory of the seed of the woman^ over all the evil
brought by -the serpent into human nature. —
For the seed of the woman is the spirit, and
power, and life of God, given, or breathed
again into man^ to be the raiser and redeemer
of that first life^ which he had lost This was
the spiniue^nBiw^ of religion in its first begins
ning, and this alone is its whok nature to the
end of time; it is nothing else, but the power,
andlife asd &pirit ofGod, as Father^ iSon, and
Holy Spirit^ w^xking^ creating^ and reviving life


199

in the fallen soul, and driving all its evil out of
it. This is the true rock, on which the church
of Christ is built, this is the one churchy out of
which there is no salvation, and against which
the gates of hell can never prevail.

Here therefore we are come to this firm con-
clusion, that let religion have ever so manj
shapes^ forms J or reforrrmiions^ it is no true divine
service, no sproper worship of God, has no good
in it, can do no good to man, can remove no
evil out of him, taise no divine life in him, but
so far as it serves, worships, conforms, and gives
itself up to this operation of the holy triune
God, as living and dwelling in the soul. Keep
jclose to this idei^ of religion, as an inward, spir-
itual life in the soul, observe all its works with-
in you, the death and life that are found there ;
seek for no good, no comfort, but in the inward
awakening of all that is holy and heavenly in
your heart, and then so much as you have of
this inward religion, so much you have of a
real salvation. For salvation is only a victory
over nature, so far as you resist and renounce
your own vain, selfish, and earthly nature, so
far as you overcome all your own natural tem-
pers of the old man, so far God enters into you,
lives, and operates in you; he is in you the
light, life, and the spirit of your soul, and you
are in him that new creature, that worships
him in spirit and in truth* For divine worship,
or service is, and can be only performed, by
being like minded with Christ, nothing worships


200

God, but tl)« spirit of Christ his beloved Son,
in whom he is well pleased. This is as true,
as that no man hath knoum the Father^ but the Son^
and he to whom the Son reveaieth him. Look now
at any thing bb religion, or divine service, but
a strict, unerring conformity to the life, and
spirit of Christ, and then though every day was
full of burnt offerings, and sacrifices, yet you
would be only like those religionists, who drew
near to God with their lips^ but their hearts were far
from him.

For the heart is always far from God, unless
the spirit of Christ be alive in it. But no one
has the living spirit of Christ, but he who in all
his conversation walketh, as he walked* Con-
sider th^se words of the apostle, my little ch^-
dreuj ofwfwmJtravel in births till Christ beform^
/^dinyw. This is the sum total of all, and if
this is wanting all is wanting. Again, says he, he
is not a Jew^ which is one outwardly. Circumds^
ion is nothings and uncirctmunsian is nothings but the
new creature is aU. Nay see how much farther
he carries this point, in the following words,
though I speak with the tongues of men am angek,
though I have the gift of prophecy^ though I have aU
faiths so that 1 could remove mountains^ &<:.and have
not charity (that is, have notthe spirit of Christ)
it profited me nothing. For by charity here, the
apostle means neither more nor less, but strict*
iy tbat same things which in other places, he
calls the new creature^ Christ formed in ua, and
oar being led by the spirit of Cbri&t* Accord-


201

ing to the apostle, nothing availeth but the new
creaiurcj nothing availeth but the spirit of ch^ri^
ty here described ; therefore this charitj, and
the new creature, are only two different expres-
sions of one and the same thing, viz. the birth
and Jbrmation of Christ in us. .Thus saith he^
if any man have not the spirit of Christ : Hei$
none of his^ nay thotigh he could say of himself
(as our Lord sayamany will) have I not proph-
esied in the name of Christ, cast out devils, and
done many wonderful works, yet such a one,
not being fee/ by the spirit of Christy is that very
man, whose high state, the apostle makes to be
a mere nothing, because he bath not that spirit
of charity, which is the spirit of Christ. Again^
there is no condemnation to those, who are in Christ
Jesus, therefore to be in Christ Jesus, is to
have that spirit of charity, which i@ the spirit,
and life, and goodfiess of all virtues. Now nere
yxm are to observe, that the apostle no more
tejects alt ofOward religion, when 'be says cir-
cumcisi&n is nothing^ than^he rejects prophesying
smd Jmih^ and alms-giving, when he says they
propt nothing ; he oiuyteacheB this solid truih^
that the kingdom of Gedisivithin us, and that
it all consists in the state of our hearty and that
there&i^ all outward observances, all the most
BpeeioQS virtues, profit nothing, are of no value,
unless the hidden man of the heart, the new
creature, led by the spirit of Christ b^ the doer
of them.


202

Thus, says he, th^ who are led by the spirit of
God are the sons of God. And therefore oone
else, be they who, or where, or what they will,
clergy, or laity, none are, or can be sons of God,
but they who give up themselves entirely to the
leading and guidance of the spirit of God, de-
siring to be moved, inspired and governed
solely by it

Again, top are of the cirmmcision^ who worship
God in the spirit ; and to shew that this is npt a
vain pretencie, he says in another place, the
mannestation ofthe spirit is given fo every man t0
proj^t withal. Therefore no profit from any thing
else, all preaching and hearing is vain, and aU
preachers and hearers stand chargeable with
the vanity of their religious performances, who
think of preaching, or hearing profitabbf, any
other way, or by any other power, tnan m and

^ " ] * •• '""^ *• ■•--'V''^'^ ^nil working
by taeholy spimoi uroa awenui^ w..^ ,. ^

in tbem» Thus again, > if the^rit of him^ nko
raised Jesus from the dead^ d/meU in t/(mi he aUo shot
quicke» your mortei bodies by his spirit^ whiA
dweUeth m you. In vain therefore is life exp^t-^
«d, either for body or soul, but by the holy
Spirit dwelling in them. Again, through hint we
both have o/ceess by one spirit to the Father j there-
fore this one spirit i« the only way to God, and
salvation. Thus does all scripture brii^ us to
this conclusion, that all religipn is but a dead
worky unless it be the work of the spirit of God,
and that sacraments, prayers, singing, preach-
ing, hearing, are only so many ways of being


203

fervent in the spirit, and of giving up ourselves
more and more to the inward working, enlight-
ening, quickening, sanctiiying spirit of uod
within us ; and all for this end, that the/aZ/may
be taken frooi us, that death may be swallowed
up in victory, and a true, real, Christ-like na-
ture formed in us, by the same spirit, by which
it was formed in the holy Virgin Mary. Now
for the true ground and absolute necessity of
thus turning wholly and solely to the spirit of
God, you aeed only know this plain truth;
namely, that the spirit of God, the spirit of sa-
tan, or the spirit of this world, are and must be,
the one or the other of them, the con^t'ntia/ lead-
er, guide, and inspirer of every thing that lives
in nature. There is no going out frpm some
one of these ; the moment you cease to be mov-
ed, quickened, and inspired by God, you are
infallibly moving and directed by the spirit of
satan, or the world, or by both of them. And
the reason is, because the soul of man is a spir^
it and a /j/e, that in its whole being is nothing,
else but a birth both of God and nature^ and
therefore every moment of its life must live in
some union and conjunction either with the
spirit of God governing nature, or with the spir-
it of nature fallen from God, and working in it-
self. As creatures therefore, we are under an
absolute necessity of being under the motion^
guidance, and inspiration of some spirit that is
more and greater than our own. All that is put
in our own power, is only the choice of our lead^


204

er, but led and moved we must be, and by that
spirit to which we give up ourselves, whether
it be, to the spirit of God, or the spirit of fallen
nature. To seek therefore to be always under
the inspiration and guidance of God's holy spir-
it, and to act by an immediate power from it, is
not proud enthusiasm, but as sober and humble
a thought, as suitable to our state, as to think
of renouncing the t^orld, and the devil. For
they nevef are, or can be renounced by us, but
so far as the spirit of God is living, breathing,
and moving in us. And thatfor this plain rea-
son, because nothing is contrary to the spirit of
satan and the world, nothing works, or can work
contrary to it, but the spirit of heaven.

Hence our Lord said, he thai is not with me is
against niB^ and lie that gathereth not with me, scat^
tereth ; plainly deqlanng, that not to be with
him and led by his spirit, is to be led by the
spirit of satan and the world. Ask now, what
hell is ? It is nature destitute of the light and
spirit of God, and full only of its own darkness,
nothing else can make it to be hell. Ask what
heaven is ? It is nature quickened, enlightened,
blessed, and glorified by the light and spirit of
God dwelhng in it. What possibility therefore
can there be, of our dividing from bell, or part-
ing with all that is hellish in us, but bjr having
the life, light, and spirit of God livmg, and
working in us. And here again, my friends,
you may see in the greatest clearness, why noth-
ing is available, nothing is salvation, but the


205

every thing else but this birth, and life of the
spirit, is only the spirit of satan, or the spirit
of this world. Have you any thing to object
to these things ?

Acad. Truly sir, ail objections are over with
me ; you have taken from me every difficulty,
or perplexity that I had, either about religion,
or the providence of God. 1 can now look
back into the first origin of things with satisfac-
tion, I have seen how the world and man began
to be, in a way highly worthy of the divine wis*
dom, and how they both came into their present
condition, and how they both are to rise out of
it, and return back to their first state in a glo-
rious eternity. It now appears to me with the
utmost clearness, that to look for salvatiop in
any thing else, but the h'ght of God within us,
the spirit of God working in us^ the birth of
Christ really brought forth in us^ is to be as car-
nally minded, as ignorant of God, and man, and
salvation, as the Jews were when their hearts
were wholly set upon the glory of their temph'^
service and a temporal saviour to defend it, by a
temporal power. For every thing but the ligllt
and spirit of God bringing forth a birth of
Christ in the soul, every thing else, be it what
it4irill, has and can have no more of salvation
in it, than a temporal, fighting saviour. For
what is said of the impossibility of the blood
of bulls and of goats to take away sins, must with
the same truth be said of all other outward,

18


20B

creaturely things, they are all at the same dis-
tance from being the salvation of the soul, and
in the same degree of inability to take away
sins, as the blood of bulls, and goats.

And all this for this plain reason, because the
soul is a spirit breathed forth from God himself,
which therefore cannot be blessed but by hav-
ing the life of God in it, and nothing can bring
the life of God into it, but only the light and
spirit of God. Upon this ground I stand in the
utmost certainty, looking wholly to the light
and spirit of God for an inward redemption
from all the inward evil that is in my fallen na-
ture. All that I now want to know is this, what
I am to do, to procure this continual operatiqn
of the spirit of God within me. For I seem to
myself, not to know this enough ; and I am also
afraid of certain delusions, which 1 have heard
many have fallen into, under pretences of being
led by the spirit of God. Pray therefore, The-
ophilus, give me some instructions on this head.

Rust, r ray gentlemen, let an unlearned man
speak a word here. Suppose, Academicus, you
had a longing, earnest desire to be governed by
a spirit of plainness and sincerity m your whole
conversation. Would this put you upoft asking
for art^ and ruks^ and methodic or consulting some
learned man, or book, to direct you, and keep
you from delusion ? Would you not know and
feel in yourself, that your own earnest desire,
and love of sincerity and plainness, and your
own inward aversion to every thing that was


207

contrary to it, must be the one only possible
way of attaining it, and that you must have it in
that degree, as you loved and liked to act by it ?
Now there is no more of art^ or any secret re-
quired to bring, and keep you under the direc-
tion of the spirit of God, than under the spirit
of plainness, and sincerity. The longing earn-
est desire of the heart, brings you into the safe
possession of the one, as it does of the other.
For it has been enough proved, that the spirit
of prayer forms the spirit of our lives, and oyery
man lives as the spirit of prayer leads him.
Nay every prayer for the holy spirit, is the spi-
rit itself praying in you. For nothing can turn
to God, desire to be united to him, and govern-
ed by him, but the spirit of God. The impos-
sibility of praying for the spirit of God in vain,
is thus, shewn by our blessed Lord, if ye being
evil know how to give good gifts unto your ckHdreUf
how much more shaU your heavenly father^ give the
holy spirit^ to those thai ask for iit. But I here
stop.

Acad. I do not know bow to understand what
Rnsticus has said. For do not all good chris-
tians daily pray for the spirit of God, yet how
few are led by it } Pray Theophilus, do yoa
speak here.

Theoph. People may be daily at the service
of the church, and read long prayers at home,
in which are many petitions for the holy spirit^
and yet live and die, led and governe^ltby the
spirit of the woxld. Because aU these players,


208


V:


whether we bear them rekd by others^-op read
them ourselves, may be done in compliance
only to duties, rules, and iorms of religion, as
things we are taught not to neglect, but being
only done thus, they are not the true^ real
working of the spirit of the heart, nor make
any resJ alteration in it But you are to ob^
serve, that Rusticus spoke of the spirif ofpratf'*
cr, which is the heart's own prayer, and which
has all the strength of the heart in it. And
this is the prayer, that must be affirmed to be aA
ways effectual, it never returns empty, it eats
an^ drinks that, after which it hungereth, and
thirsteth, and nothing can possibly hinder it
from having that, which it prays for. This we
are assured of from these words of truth itself;
blessed are they that hunger and thirst afler right'
eousness^for they shall befiSed. But this blessed*
ness could not belong to hungering, if the truly
hungry and thirsty could ever be sent empty
away. Every spirit necessarily reaps that which
it soweth, it cannot possibly be otherwise, it is
the unalterable procedure erf nature. Spirit is
4he first power of nature, eyery thiqg proceeds
roni itjis born of it, yields to it, and is governed
by it. If the spirit soweth to the flesh, itreap-
etb that corruption which belongs to the flesh,
if it soweth to the spirit, it reapeth the fruijts of
the spirit, which are eternal life. The spirit of
prayer therefore is the opener of all that is good
within us, and the receiver of all that is good
without us, it unites with God, is one power


209

with him, it worfcswith him, and drives all that
is not God, out of the souL The soul is no
longer a slave to its natural impurity, and cor-
ruption, no longer imprisoned in its own death
and darkness, but till the fire from heaven^ the
spirit of prayer is kindled in it.

Then begins the resurrection and the life,
and all that which died in Adam, comes to life
in Christ. Ask not therefore, Academicus,
what you are to do, to obtain the spirit of God,
to live in it, and be led by it ; for your power
of having it, and your measure of receiving it,
are just according to that faith, and earnest-
ness with which you desire to be led by it.
For the hungry spirit of prayer, is that faith to
which all thmgs are possible, to which all na-
ture, though as high as mountains, and as stiff
as oaks, must yield and obey. It heals all
diseases, breaks the bands of death, and calls
the. dead out of their graves. Look at the
small seeds of plants, shut up in their own dead
husks, and covered with thick earth, and see
how they grow. What do they do? They
hunger and thirst after the light, and air of this
world. Their hunger eats that, which thej
hunger after, and this is their vegetation, u
the plant ceases to hunger, it withers and dies^
though surrounded with the ws and light of
this world.

This is the true nature of the spiritual life,
k is as truly a vegetation^ as that of plants, and
tu)thii% bwt its oum hm^er can help it to the

■I n.v;
Jo-


210

true food of its life. If this hunger of the soul
ceasetb, it withers and dies, though in the midst
of divine plenty. Our Lord, to shew us, that
the new birth is really a state of spiritual veg-
etation, compares it to a small grain of mus-
tard-seed, from whence a great plant arises*
Now, every seed has a life in itself, or else it
could not grow. What is this life ? It is noth^
ing else but a hunger in the seed after the air
and light of this world, which hunger being
met and fed by the light and air of nature,
changes the seed into a living plant. Thus it
is with the seed of heaven in the soul, it has a
life in itself, or else no life could arise from it.
What is this life ? It is nothing else but a kun-
get after God, and heaven, which no sooner
stirs, or is suffered to stir, but it is met, embra-
ced, and quickened by the light, and spirit
of God, and heaven, and so a new man in
Christ, is- formed from, the seed of heaven, as a
new plant from a seed in the earth. Let us
guppose now, that the seed of a plant,* had
seme and reason^ and that instead of continual-
ly hungering after, and drawing in, the virtue
of the light, and air of our outward nature; it
should amuse and content its hunger with r ^o-
aorUng about the nature of hunger, and the
different powers and virtues of light and air,
must^oet^Bucfa a seed of all necessity wither
away^ without ever becoming a living plant ?
Now this is no false similitude of the seed of
life in man; man has a power of drawing all


211

the virtue of heaven into himself, because the
seed of heaven is the gift of God in his soul,
which wants the light and spirit of God to
bring it to the birth, just as the seed of the
plant wants the light and air of this world ; it
cannot possibly grow up in God, but bj taking
in lights life and spirit from heaven, as the crea-
ture$of time take in the light, and life, aiid spirit
of this world. If therefore the soul instead of
hungering after heaven, instead of eating the
flesh and blood of the Christ of God, contents,
and amuses this seed of life with ideas, and no-
tions, and sounds, must not such a soul of neces-
sity witherand die, without ever becoming a liv-
ing creature of heaven ? Wonder not therefore,
Academicus, that aU the work of our salvation,
and regeneration, is by the scripture wholh/ con-
fined to the operation of the light and spirit of
God liping^ and working in us. It is for the
same reason, and on the same necessity, that
the life and growth of the creatures of this
world, must be wholly ascribed to the powers
of this world living, and working in them. Nor
does all this in the least degree, make a man a
machine^ or without any power with regard to
his salvation. He must grow up in God, as the
plants grow in this world, from a power that is
not his own, as they grow from the powers of
outward nature. But he differs entirely horn '
the plants in this^ that an uncontrolabie will,
which is his own, ma»t be the leader and be-


212

ginner of his growth either in God, or: nature:
it is strictly true, that all man^s salvation de«
pendeth upon himself, and it is as strictly tru^,
that all the work of his salvation is sokly the
work of God in his souL All his salvation de-
pendeth upon himself, because his wiUrspiritj
has its power of motion in itself. As a will^ it
can only receive that which it willeth, every
thing else is absolutely shut out of it. For it
is the unalterable nature of the will, that it can-
not possibly receive any thing into it, but that
which it willeth, its willing, is its only power
of receiving, and therefore there can be no
possible entrance for God, or heaven into the
soul, till the will-spirit of the soul desireth it,
and thus all man's salvation dependetb upon
himself. On the other hand, nothing can cre-
ate, effect, or bring forth a birth, or growth of
the divine life in the soul, but that light and
spirit of God, which brings forth the divine life
in heaven, and all heavenly beings. And thus
the toork of our salvation is wholly and solely
the work of the li^ht, and ^irit of God, dwell-
ing and operating in us. Thus, Academicus,
you see that God is all ; that nothings but his
life and working power in us, can 1^ our sal-
vation, and yet that nothing but the spirit of
prayer^ can make it possible for us to have it, or
be capable of it. And therefore neither you,
nor any other human soul can be without the
operation of the light aad spirit of God m it,


fil3

but because its will-spirit or ks spirit of prayer^
is turned towards sdmething else, for we are
always in union with that, with which our wil^
is united. Again, look, Academicus, at thfe
light and air of this world, y6u see with what
a freedom of commimication they overflow, en^
rich and enliven every thing, they enter every
where, if not hindered by something, that with-
stands their entrance. This may represent to
you, the ever overflowing free communication
of the light, and spirit of God to every humarl
fiouL They are every where, we are encom-
passed with them, our souls are as near to them^
as our bodies are to the light and air of this
world, nothing shuts, them out of us, but the
will and desire of our souls, turned from them,
and praying for something else. I say praying
for something else,* for you tire to notice this,
as a certain truth, that every man^s life is a
contimtal state of prayer, he is no moment free
from it, nor can possibly be so. For all our
natural tempers, be they what they will, ambi-
tion, covetousness, selfishness, worldly-minded-
ness, pride^ envy, hatred, malice, or any other
lust whatever, are all of them iri reality onlv
so many difierent kinds, and fopms of a spirit
of prayer, which is as inseparable from the
heart, as^ weight is from the body. For every
natural temper is nothing else, but a manifesta-
tion of the desire, and prayer of the heart, and
shews us how it work^, and wills. And as the
heart worketh and wiUeth, such, and no other


214

is its prayer. All else is only form, and fiction,
and empty beating of the air. If therefore the
working desire of the heart is not habitually
turned towards God, if this is not our spirit of
prayer, we are necessarily in a state of prayer
towards something else, that carries us from
God, and brings all kind of evil into us. For
this is the necessity of our nature, pray we
must, as sure as our heart is alive, and there-
fore when the state of our heart is not a spirit
of prayer to God, we pray without ceasing to
some or other part of the creation. The man
whose heart habitually tends towards the rich-
es, honours, powers, or pleasures of this life, is
in a continual state of prayer towards all these
things. His spirit stands always benjpowavds
them, they have his hope, his lovc^f^s iaith,
and are the many gods that he worships, and
though when he is upon his knees, and uses
forms of prayer, he directs them to the God of
heiaven, yet these are in reality the god of his
heart, and in a sad sense of the words, he re-
ally worships them in spirit, and in truth. —
Hence you may see, Academicus, how it comes
to pass, that there is so much praying, and yet
so little of true piety amongst us. The bells
are daily calling us to church, our chsets abound
with manuak of devotion, yet how little fruit f
It is all for this reason, because our prayers
are not our own^ they are not the abundance of
our own heart, are not/owWand feli within us,
as we feel our own Uung^r and thirst, but are


215

only so tiMiny borrowed forms of speech, which
we use at certain times and occasions. And
therefore it is no wonder that little good comes
of it. What benefit could it have been to the
pharisee if with a heart inwardly full of its
own pride, and seM-exaltation, he had outward-
ly hung down his head, smote upon his breast,
and borrowed the publican's word8,Gorf 6c merci*
Julio me a sinner? What greater good can be ex-
pected from our praying in the words of David,
or singing his Psalms seven times a day, if our
heart hath no more of the spirit of David in it,
than the heart of the pharisee had of the spir-
it of the humble publican ?

.^cad. Oh Theophilus, truth and reason for-
ces me to consent to what you say, and yet I
am afraid of following you. For you here seem
to condemn forms of prayer in publick, and
manuals of devotion in private. What will be-
come of religion, if these are set aside, or dis-
regarded ?

Theoph. Dear Academicus, abate your fright.
Cain you think, that 1 am against your praying
in the words of David, or breathing his spirit
in your prayers, or that 1 would censure your
singing his Psalms seven times a day ? Remem-
ber how very lately I put into your hands, the
book called, a serious call to a devout Ufe^ &c. and
then think how unlikely it is, that 1 should be
against times, and methods of devotion. At
three several times, we are told, pur Lord pray-
ed, repeating the same form ofwords^ and there-
fore a set form of words ai^ not only consis-


-. 216

tent ^itb, but may be highly suitable to the most
divine spirit of prayer. If your own heart for
days, and weeks, was unable to alter, or break
off from inwardly thinkiDg; and saying, hallowed
he thy name^ thy kingdom come^thy will be done* If
at other times for weeks and months,. it stood
always inwardly in another form of prayer, un-
able to vary, or depart from saying, come lord
Jesus, come quickly, with all thy holy nature^
spirit, and tempers into my soul, that I may be
born again of thee, a new creature, I should
be so far from censuring such a formaUiy of
prayer, that I should say, blessed and haj>py
are they, whose hearts are tied to such a form
of words. It is not therefore, sir, a set form of
words, that is spoken against, but a heartless
form, a form that has no relation to, or corres-
pondence with the state of. the heart that uses
it. All that I have said, i^ only to teach you
the true nature of prayer, that it is only the
work of the heart, and that the heart onijf
prays in reality (whatever its words are) for
that which it habitually wills, likes, loves, and
longs to have. It is not therefore the using the
words of David, or any other saint in your
prayers, that is censured, but the using them
without that state of heart, which first spake
them forth ; and the trusting to them, because
they are a good form, though in our hearts we
have nothing that is like them. It would be
good to say incessantly with holy David, my
heart is atkirst for God^-r-^^s the heart destrdh the


.217

maier-brooks^ so longeth my soul after ihee^ O God,
But there is no goodness in saying daily these
words, if no such thirst is felt, or desired in the
heart. And my friend, you may easily know,
that dead forms of religion, and numbers oftre-
peated prayers keep men content with their
state of devotion, because they make use of such
holy prayers, though their hearts from morn-
ing to nighty are in a state quite contrary to
Ihem, and join no farther in them than in liking
to use them at certain times.

Acad. I acquiesce, Theophilus, in the truth
of what you have said, and plainly see the ne^
cessity of condemning what you have condemn-
4^d, which is not the form, but tlie heartless iotm.
But still, I have a scruple upon me, I shall be
almost afraid of going to church, where there
are so many good prayers offered up to God,
as suspecting they may not be the prayers or
language of my own heart, and so become only
a lip4abour^ or what is worse, an hypocrisy be-
fore Gpd. /

Theoph. I do not, Academicus, dislike yoxir
scruple at all, for you do wfell to be afraid of
saying any thing of yourself, or to God in. your
prayers, which your heart does not truly say. -
It is also good for you to think that many of
the prayers of the church may go faster, and
higher, than your heart can in truth go along
with them. For this will pqt you upon a right
care over yourself, and so to live, that as a
true son of your mother the church, your heart
19


218

may be able to speak her language, conform
to her service, and find the delight of your
soul in the spirit of her prayers. But Ibis
will only then come to pass, when the spirit of
prwyer is the spirit of your heart; then every
good word, whether in a form, or out of a form,
whether heard, or read, or thought, will be as
suitable to your heart, as gratifying to it, as
food is^ the hungry, and drink to the thirsty
soul. But till the spirit of the heart is thus re-
Aewed,'till it is emptied of all earthly desires,
and stands in an habitual hunger and thirst af-
ter God (which is the true spirit of prayer,) till
then, all our forms of prayer will be more or
less, but too much like lessons that are given to
scholars, and we shaU mostly say them, only be-
cause we dare not neglect them, But be not
discouraged, Academicus, take the following
advice, and then yon may go to church with-
out any danger ol a mere lip-labour, or hypoc-
risy, although there should a hymn, or a psalm,
or a prayer, whose language is higher than that
of your own heart. Do this. Go to the church,
as the publican weiit into the temple ; stand in-
wardl'fm the spirit of your mind, in that form,
which he outwardly expressed, when he cast
down his eyes, smote upon Jiis breast, and
could only say, God be merciful to me a sin-
ner ! Stand unchangeably (at least in your de-
sire) in this form and state of heart; it will
sanctify every petition ttiat comes out of your
mouth; and wlien any thing is read, or sung,


219

or prayed, that is more exalted and fervent
than your heart is, ii'you make this an occasion
of a farther sinking down in the spirit' oi* the
publican, you will then be helped, end highly
blessed by those prayers and prbises^, which
seem only to fit and belong to a better heart
than yours.

This, my friend, is a secret of secrets, it
will help you to reap, where you fcave not
sown, and be a continual source of grace in
yoursouL This will not only help you to re-
ceive cQod from those prayers, whieh seem too
good for the state of your heart, but will help
you to find good from every thing else. For
every thing that inwardly stirs in you, or out-
wardly happens to you, becomes a real good to
you^ if it either finds, or excites' in you (his
humble form of mind* For nothing is in vain,
or without profit to th^ humble soul, like tiie
bee it takes its honey even from bitter herbs, it
stands always in a state of divkie growth, and
every thing that falls upon: it is like ^ dew of
heaven to it. Shut up yourself, theilefore, in
this/br/n of humility, all good is inclosed in it,
it is a water of heaven^that turns the fire'of the
fallen soul into the meekness of the divine life,
and creates that oil, out of which the love to
God, and man, gets its flame. Be inclosed
therefore always in it, let it be as a garment
wherewith you are alfVays cover^, (ind the
girdle with which jou are gu*t; breathe noth-
ing hiii in jtnd from its spirit, see nothing but


220

with its eyes, h^r nothing but with its eaFS«
and then, whether you are in the church, or
out of the church, hearing the praises of God,
or receiving wrongs from men and the world
all will be edification, and every thing will help
forward your growth in the life of God.

Acud. Indeed, Theopbilui^) this answer to
my dcruple is quite good, V not only like, but
I love it much; it gives as well an unction to
my heart, as a light to my mind. All my desire
now is, to live no longer to the world, to my<-
self, my own natural tempers, and passions,
but wholly to the will of the blessed and ador-
able God, moved and guided by his holy
spirit.

Theoph; This resolution, Academicus, only
shews that you are just come to yourself, for eve-
ry thing short of this earnest desire to live whol-
ly unto God, may be called a most dreadful in^
fatuation, or madness, an insensibility that can«-
not be described. For what else is our life,
but a trial for the greatest evil or good, that
an eternity can give us ? What can be so dread-
ful, as to die possessed of a wicked immor-
al nature^ or to go out of this world with tem-
pers that mnst keep us for ever burning in our
own fire aiul brimstone? What has God not
done to prevent this? His redeeming love be-
gan with our fall, and kindles itself as a spark
of heaven in every faR^n soul. It calls every
man to salvation, and eve^y man is forced to
tiear, though he will not obey its voice. God


221

has so love<J the world, that his only sort hung
and expired bleeding on the cross, not to atone
his own wrath against us, but to extinguish our
own hell within us^ to pour his heavenly love into
us, to she^ us that meekness, suffering, and dy-
ing to our own fallen nature is the one^ only possi-
ble way fcr fallen man to be alive again in God .
Are we yet sons of pride, and led away with
vanity? Dolhe powers of darkness rule ovef*
us, do impure and evil spirits possess and drive
on our lives ? Has sin lost all it« power of
frighting us, is remorse of conscience no fon*-
ger felt? Are' falsehood, guile, deb^lfcheryi
prbfaneness, perjury, bribery, corruption, and
adultery^ no longer seeking to hide themselves
in corners, but openly enteriBfg all our high
places, giving battle to ervery virtue, hiid lay-
ing claim to the government of the world ?
Are we thus near being swallowed up by a
deluge of vice and impiety, all this is not come
upon us, because God has left us too* much
without help frotn hieaven, or too much expos^
ed us to the powers of hell, but it is because
we have rejected and despised the whole mys- :
^ry-of our salvation, and trampled underfoot -
the precious blood of Christ* whixjh alone hasi
that ptnnipotence, that can either bring heav-
en into us, or drive hell out of usi Oh Britain^
Britain, think that the Son of 'Gbd saith unto
thee, as tie said, O Jermtdem^ Jeiitmlem^ hotv of^
ten would 1 have gathered thfjf cUW^ ai aheh gath* ■
ereth her chickens ui^fhier u^iHgSy'emd ye w&tdd
19*


222

7iot! Behold your house is bft unto you desolai(k
And now let me say, wliat ailetb thee, O Brit-
i^h earth, that thou quakest, and the founda-
tions of thy churches that they totter? Just
thqt same ailetb tliee, as ailed Judah^s earth,
when the divine Saviour of the world dying on
the cross,, was revikd, scorned and mojcked^ by
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, then the earth
quakdd, the rocks rent, and the sun refused to
give its light. Nature again declares for God,
the earth, and the elements can no longer bear
our sins, Jerusalem's doom for Jerusalem's sin,
may well be feared by us. O ye miserable
pens dipt in satanV ink, that dare to publish
the folly of believing in Jesus Christ, where will
you hidejoar guilty heads', whea nature dis-
solved shall shew you the rainbow, on which
the crucified Saviour shall sit in judgment, and
* every wqrk ^receive its reward? O tremble!
Ye apostate sons^ that come out of the schools
ofChrhst, to fight Lucifer's battles, and do that
for him, which neither he, nor his legions can
do for themselves. Their inward pride^ spite,
wrath, malice and rage against God, and Christ,
and human nature, baye no petfs but yours, no
apostles but you. They must be forced to
work in the dark, to steal privately into im-
j^ure hearts, could they not beguile you into a
fond belijttf, ths^t you are loyersof truth, friends
of reason, detectors .of fraud, great geniuses,
and i^oral phijipkjippheirs, merely and solely be-
}cause ye bUsph^me Christ, and the gospel of


God. Poor deluded soqls^ rescued from hell,
by the blood of Christ, called by God to pos-
sess the thrones of fallen angels, permitted
to live only by the mercy of God, that ye may
be born again from above, my heart bleeds for
you, think, I beseech you, in time, what mer-
cies ye are trampling under your feet. Say not
that reason and your intellectual faculties stand
in your \¥ay, that these are the besi g^is ihsA
God has given you, and that these swet you
not to come to Christ. For all this is as vain a
pretence, and as gross a mistake, as if ye were
to. say, that you had nothing but yoxxv feet to car-
ry you to heaven. For your heart is the best
arid greatest g-j/? of God to you, it is the high-
est,, greatest, strongest, and nohXe^i power oi
your nature, it forms your whole life, be it what
it will ; all evil and all good comes from it,
your heart alone has the key of life, and death,
it does all that it will ; reason is but its play-
things and whether in time or eternity, can on-
ly be a Tfure beholder of the wonders of happi-
ness, or forms of miserj^, which the right, or
wrong working of the heart \^ entered into.

I will here give you an infallible touchstone^
that will try all to the truth. It is this. Re-
tire from the world and &11 conversation only
for one months neither write, nor read,nor debate
any thing in private with yourself, stop all the
former working of yoiir heart, and mind, and
with all the strength of your heart, stand all


2U

itis m'onth as continually as you can, in thi^
foiio\ving form bf prayer to God. . Offer it fre-
quently on your knees, but whether sitting,
standings or walking, be always inwardly-
longing, and eairnestly praying this one prayer
to God, " That of bis great goodness, he wouH
make known to yoti, and take from your heart,
every kind, and form, smd degree of pride,
whether it be from evil spirit^, or your own eor-
rupt nature, and that he would awaken in you
the deepest depth and ifru/Aof all that humility
which can make you capable of his light and
holy spirit." Reject every thought, but that .of
wishing and praying in this manner from the
bottom of your heart, with such truth and earn-
estness, as people in torment wish 'and pray
to be delivered from it. Now if ye dar^ riot^
if your hearts will not, cannot give themselves
up in this manner to the spirit of prayer, tbea
the touchstone has done its work, and ye may
be as fully assured, both what your infidelity
is, and from what it proceeds, as ye can be of
the plainest truth in nature. This will shew
you, how vainly ytu appeal to your reason and
speculation, as thfe cause of your infidelity,
that it is full as false, and absurd, as if thieves
and orfw/Z^rcr^ should say, that their theft and
adultery was entirely owing to their bodily
eyes, which shewed them extern^ objects, and
not to any thing that was wrong or bad in their
hearts. On the other hand, if je can and will
give yourselves up in truth and sincerity to this


225*

spirit of prayer, 1 will venture to afBrin, that if
ye had twiee as many evil spirits in you, as
Mary Magdalene bad, they will all be cast out
of you, and ye will be forced with her, to weep
with tears of love, at the feet of the holy Je-
sus.

But here, my friends, I stop, that we may re-
turn to the matter we had in hand.

RnsL You have m£tde no digression, The-
ophJIus, from our main point, which was to re-
commend Christianity to poor Humanus. He
must,! am. sure, have felt the death-blows that
you have here given to the infidel scheme.—
Their idol of reason, which is the vain god, that
they worship in vain, is here like i/agon fallen
to the ground, never to rise up again. Huma-
nus is caught by your bait of love, and I dare
say he wants only to have this conversation
ended, that he may try himself to the truth, by
this divine touch-stone which you have put into
his hands.

jlcad. Give me leave, gentlemen, to add on^
word to this matter. Theophilus has here
fairly pulled reason out of its usurped throne,
and shewn it to be a powerless, idle toy, when
compai^ed to the royal strength of the heart,
which is the kingly power that has all the gov^
ernment of life in its hands. But if Humanus,
or any one else would see reason (uMy maintain-
ed in all its^tt^^ rights^ and yet entirely disarm-
ed of all its pretences to a religion 'of its own,
and the trutli of the gbspel fully prcrved to ev-


226

erj man, learned, or unlearned, from the
known stale of his own heart; if he would see
all thi$ eiet forth in th« Btrongefs^, clearest light,
be Deed only read about an hundred pages of a
book''^ published about twelve years ago, to
which no answer has, nor it may be, ever will
be given by any natron of reason, and infideli-
ty. And if part of that book (as 1 have often
wished) beginning at page 161, to 275, was
printed by itself, and known and read in
every part of^^he kingdom, all christians, though
no scholars, would have learning enough both
to see the deep, true and comfortable founda-
tion of their gospel faith, and the^niserable fol-
ly and Ignorance of those, who would set up a
religion of humaR reason instead of it. But now,
Theophilus, I b^gwe rnay return to that very
point concerning prayer, where we left off 1
think my heart is entirely d#voted to God, and
that! desire nothing but to live in such a state
of prayer as may best keep me under the guid-
ance and direction of the holy spirit Assist
me therefore, my dear friend, in this important
matter, give me the fullest directions, that you
can, and if you have any wanwa/ of devotion
that you prefer, or any method that you would
put me in, pray let me know if.

Rust. I beg leave to speak a word to Aca-
demicas. I am gladj sir, to see this fire of heav-

* A demonstration of the grpss and fundamental errours of a late boolt
called, A plain acctkint of ific nature, 4'C. of Che sacrcmunt of Ute Lord's
!$upjier.


227

en thus far kindled ioryour soul, but winder
that you should want to know how you are to
keep up its flame, which is like wanting to
know, how you are to love and desire that,
which you love and desire. Does a blind, or-
sick, or lame man, want- to know, how he shall
wish and desire sight, health, and limbs, or
would he be at a loss, till some form of words
taught him hoW to iong for them? Now yoii
can have no desife or prayer, for any grace, or
help from God, till you in some degree as sure-
ly feel the want of them, and desire the good
of them, as the sick man feels the .want, and-
desires the good of health. But when this is
your case, you want no more to be told ho.w
to pray, than the thirsty man wants to be told
what he shall ask fot. Have you not fully con-
sented to this truths that the h^art only can
pray, an^ that it prays for nothing but that^
which it loves^ wilh and wishes to have ? But can
love, or desire want art or method to teach it
to be that which it is ? If from the bottom of
you-r heart you have^a sincere, warm love for
your most valuable friend, would you want to
buy a book to tell you what sentiments you
feel in your heart towards this friend^ what
comfort, what joy, what gratitude, what
trust, what honour, what confidence, what
faith, are all alive and stirring in your
hearts towards him ? Ask not therefore, Aca-
demicus, for a book of prayers, but ask your
heart what is within it, what it fedfejf how it


2S8 •

stirs, what it wants, wli^t it would tiavc alter-
ed, what it desires, and then, instead of calling
upon Theophilus for assistance, stand in the
same form of petition to God. * r

. For this turning to God according to the in-
ward /ee/ws:, want and motion of your own heart,
u\ love, and trust, in faith of having from him,
all that you want and wish to have, this turning
thus unto Gdd, whether it be with, or without
words, is the best form of prayer in the world.
Now no man can be ignorant of the state of
his own heart, or a stranger to those tempers
that are alive and stirin^in him, and therefore,
no man can want a form of prayer ; for what
should be the form of his prayer, but that
which the condition and state of his heart de-,
mands ? If you know of rto trouble, feel no bur-
den, i^^ant nothing tp be altered, or removed,
nothing to be increased or strengthend in you,
hovv can you pray for any thing of this kind ?
But if your heart knows its own plague,, feels
its inward evil, knows what it wants to have
removed, will you not let your distress > form
the manner of your prayer? Or will you pray
in a form of words, that have no more agree-
ment with your state, than if a man walking
above ground, should beg every man he me^
to pull him out^f a deep pit* For prayers not
formed according to the real state of your
heart, are but like a prayer to be pulled out of
a deep well, when you are not in it. Hence
you may see, how unreasonable it is, tp xnake


- 22»

a mystery of prayier^ or an art that needs so
much instruction, since every map is, and only
can be directed by his o^m'^inwmd state, and
condition, when, and how, and what he is to
pray for, as every man's outwaxd state shews
him what he outwardly wants. And yet it
should seem, as if a prayer-boofc was highly
necessary, and ought to be the performance of
great learning and abilities, since only our
learned^ men, and scholars make our^ prayer
books.

jicad* I did not imagine, Rusticus, that you
would have so openly declared against manu->
als of devotion, since yoii cannot but know,
that not only the most learned, but the most
pious jdoctors of the church, consider them as
necessary helps to devotion.

jRm5/. If you, Academicus, was obliged to go
a long journey oT\J(wt^ and yet through a weak-
ness- in your legs could not set one foot before
another, you would do well to get th^ best
travelling crutches that you could.

But if with sound and good legs, you would
not stir one step, till you had got crutches to hop
with; surely k man might shew you. the folly
of not walking with your ov^ii legs, without be-
ing thought a declared enemy to crutches, or
the makers of them. Now a manual is not so
good a help as crutches, and yet you see
crutches are only proper, when our legs can--
not do their office. It is, Isay, not so good a
help as. crutches, because that which you do
20


230

with the crutches, is that very same thing that
you should have done with your legs, you teal-
ly travel ; but When the heart cannot take one
step in praye^i and you therefore read your
manual, you do not do that very same thing,
which your heart should have done, that is,
teally pray. A fine manual therefore, is not to
be considered as a means of praying, or as
something that puts you in a state ot prayer,
as crutches help you to travel, but its chief use
as a book of prayers to a dead, and hardened
heart, that has no prayer of its own, re to shew
it, what k state and spirit of prayer it wants,
an4 at what a sad distance it is from feeling all
that variety of humble, penitent, grateful, fer-
vent, resigned, loving sentiments, which are
described in the manual, that so being touch-
ed with a view of its own miserable state, it
may begin its own prayer to God for help.
But 1 have done. Theophilus may now answer
your earnest request.

Theoph. Your earnest desire, Academicus,
to live in the spirit of prayer, and be truly
governed by it, is a most excellent desire ; for
to be a man of prayer is that which the apostle
ineans by living in the spirit^ and having our con-
versation in heaven. It is to have done, not on-
ly with the confessed vicei3, but with the allow-
ed follies, and- vanities of this World. To tell
such a soul of the innoceney of levity, that it ^
need not run away from idle discourse, vain *
gaiety, add trifling mirth, as being the harmless


231

relief of our heavy natures, is like telling the
flame that it need not always be ascending up-
wards. But here you are to observe, that this
spirit of prayer is not to be taught you by a
book, or brought into you by any art from
vi^ithout, but must be ai> inward birth, that must
arise from your own fire and iighi within you*
as the air rises from the fire and light of this
world. For the spirit of every bemg, be it
what, or where it will, or be its spirit of what
kind it wiit, is only the breath or spirit that
proceeds from its own fire and light. In vege-
tative, sensitive, and intellectual creatures^ it
is all in the same manner, spirit is the third
farm of its life, and is the birth that proceeds
from the other two\ and is the manifestation of
ibetr liature and qualities. For such as the
fire and light are, such and no other, neither
higher or lower, neither better nor worse 19
the ipifit, that proceeds from them. Now the
reason why all, and every life does, and must
stand in this form, ie wholly and solely from
hence, because the deity, the one source and
fountain of all life, is a irium God, whose third
JormiB^ and is called the spirit of Qod, pro-
ceeding from the father and son.

The painful sense and feeling of what you
are, kindled into a working state of sensibility
by the light of God within you, is the /ire and
light from whence your spirit of prayer pro-
ceeds. In its first kindling nothing is found, or
fek, but p^r), wrat}^ aq^ 4^rkness, as it is to be


232

seen in the first kindling of everj heat or fire.
And therefore, its first prayer is nothing else
but a sense of penitence, self-condemnation,
confession and humility. It feels nothingbut
its own misery^ and so is all humility. This
prayer of humility is met by the divine love,
the mercifulness of God embraces it, and then
its prayer is changed injLo hymns, aqd songs,
and thanksgivings.. When this state of fer-
vour has done its work^ has melted away all
earthly passions and affections, and left no in-
clination in the soul, but to delight in God
alone, then its prayer changes again. It is
now come so near to God, has found such un-
ion with him, that it does not so much pray as
live in God. Its prayer is not the work of any
particular action, is not the work of aiiy partic-
ular faculty, not confined to times, or words,
or place, but is the work of his whole being,
which continually stands in fullness of faith, in
purity of love, in absolute resignation, to do,
and be, what, and how his beloved pleaseth.
This is the last state of the spirit of prayer, and
is its highest union with God in this life. Each
of these foregoing states has its time, its varie-
ty of workings, its trials, temptations, and pu-
rifications, which can only be known by expe-
rience in the passage through them. The one
only and infallible way to go safely through all
the difficulties, trials, temptations, dryness, or
opposition of our own evil tempers, is this. It
is to expect nothing from ourselves, to trust to


233

nothing in ourselves, but in every thing, expect,
and depend upon God for relief. Keep fast
hold of this thready and ttien let your way be
what it yriU, darkness, temptation, or the re-
bellion of nature, you will be led through
all, to an union with God. For nothing hurt«
us in any «tate, but aft expectation of some-
thing in it, and from it, which we should only
expect from God. We are looking for our
own virtue, our own piety, our own goodness,
and so live on, and on in our own poverty and
weakness; today pleased and comforted with
ihje seeming strength and firmness of our own
pious tempers, and fancying ourselves to be
somewhat^ to-morrow fallen into our own mirt^
we are dejected, but not humbled, we grieve,
but it is only the grief of pride, at the peeing
our perfecticm fiotlo be such as we vainly im-
agine^* And thus it will be, till the whole
turn of our mind^ is so changed^ that we as
fully see, and know our inabmty to have any
goodness of <>ur own, as to have a life of our
own.

For since nothing is or can be good in us,
but the life of God manifested in us, how caft
this be had bqt from God ilone .^ Wbeti we
«re happily brought to this conviction, &ea
we have done with all thought of being our
own builders, the whole spirit of our fiiind
is become a tttere fcdih^ and hopt^ and trust in *
tbe Bole operatitm of Ood's dpirit, looking no
mot^ to eiiiy otbi^r power to be formed m
Christ new creatures, than we look to anr
20*


234

other pow^r.for the resurrection of our bodi^
at, the last day. Hence mzj be see;n that the
trials of every state are its greatest bless-
ings they do that for us, which we most of all
want to have dope, they force us to know our
own nothingness and the all of God.

People who have' long dwelt in the fervours
of devotion in a high sensibility of divine aflfec-
tions, . practising every virtue with a kind of
greediness, are frightened, when coldness seizes
upon them, when their hymns give jio trans-
port, and their hearts instead of flaming with
the love of every virtue, seem ready to be over-
come by every vice. But here, keep fast hold
of the thread 1 mentioned before, and all is
welL^ For this coldness is the divine oflspring
or genuine birthof the former fervour, it comes
from it as a good fruit, and brings^ the soul
nearer to God, than the fervour did. The fer-
vour was good, and did a good work in the
soul, it overcame the earthly nature, and made
the soul delight in God and spiritual things;
but its delight was too much an own deUgfU^ ^
fapcied selt-holiness, and otfcasiotxed rest and
^atiisfaction in seli^ which if it had continued
uninterrupted, undiscovered, an earthly self
Jbad only been changed iqto a spiritual selil
Therefore, I called this coldness, or loss of fer-
vour, its divine, offsprings because it brings a
divine effect, or more fruitful progress in the
divine life. For this coldness overcome^, and
delivers us from spiritual selfi as fervour over-


235

came the earthly nature. It does the work
tbat fervour did, but jn a higher degree, be-
cause it gives up more, sacrifices more, and
brings forth more resignation to God than fer-
vour did, and therefore it is more in God, and
receives more from him. The devout soul,
therefore, is always safe in every state, if it
makes every thing an occasion either of rising
up, or falling down into the handd of God, and
exercising iaith, and trust, and resignation to
him. Fervour is good, and ought to be loved,
but tribulation, distress, and coldiiess, are bet-
ter, because they give means and power of ex-
ercising a higher fejth, a porer love, and more
perfect resignation to God, which are the best
state of the soul. And therelbre, the pious
soul that eyes only God, that means nothing
but being his alone, can have no stop put to its
progress ; light and darkness equally assist
him, in the light he looks up to God, in the
darkness he lays hold onOod, and so they both
do him the same good.

This little sketch, Academicusi, of the na-
ture, and progress of the spirit of prayer, may
shew you, that a mannialiQ not so great a mat-
ter as you imagined.

The best instruction, that I can ^ive you, as
helpful, or preparatory to the spirit of prayer,
is already fully given, where we hfive set forth
the original perfection, the miserable fall, and
the glorious redemption of man» It is the
true knowledge of these great things that can


236

tlo all for ycm, which human itistruction can dd^
These things must fill you with a dislike of
your present state, drive all earthly desires out
of your soul, and create an earnest longing aftet^
your first perfection. For prayer cannot bd
taught you by giving you a book of prayers, _
but by awakening in you a true sense aiid
knowledge of what ypu are, and what you
should be, that so you may see, and know, and
feel what things you want, and are to pray for.
For a man does not, cannot pray for any thin^
because a fine petition lor it is put into his
hands, but because his own condition is a ree^
$on and mcHive for his asking for it And there-
fore it is, that the spirit of prayer in the first
part, began with a full discovery, and proof of
these high and important matters, at the sight
of. which, the world, and all that is in it, shrinks
into nothing, and every thing past, present,
and to come awakens in our tearts a continual
prayer, and long^ing desire after Gody Christ,
and eternity. -

Jlcad. I perceive, then, Theophilus, that you
direct me entirely to my own prayer in my pri-
vate devotions, and not tp the use of any book.
But surely you do iiot take this to be right in
general, that the common people who are un-
learned, and mostly of low understandings,
should kneel down in private without any tor-
rowed CotA of prayer, saying qidy what com<^l
then into their own heads.


237

Theoph. It would be very wrong, Academi-
cus, to condemn a manual, as such, or to tell
any people learned, or unlearned, that they
outfit not to make any use of it. This would
be quite rash and silly. But it cannot be
wrong, or hurtful to any body^ to shew, that
prayer i^ the natural language of the hearty
and as such, does not want any form, or bor-
rowed words^. Now all that has been said of
manuals of prayers, only amounts to thus much;
that they are not necessary, nor the most natu-
ral, and excellent way of praying. If they hap-
pen to be necessary to any person, or to be
his most excellent way, it is because the natu-
ral, real "prayer of his heart is already engaged,
loving, wishing, and longing after the things of
this life, which makes him so insensible offais
spiritual wants, so blind and dead as to the
things of God, that he cannot pray for^them^
but so far as the \|fords of other people arc
put into his mouth. If a man is blind and
knows it not, he may be told to piray for sight ;
if he is sick and knows nothing of it, he n)ay
be^toid to pray for health ; so if the soul is in
this stat^ with regard to its spiritul wants, a
manual may be of good use to it, not so much
by helping it to pray,: as by shewing it at
what a miserable distance it is from those
tempers, which belong to prayer.

But when a man has had so much bene-
fit from the gospel, as to know bis own mis-
ery, his want of a redeemer, who he is, and


. 23ft ^

how he is to be found, there every thing
seems to be done, both to awaken and di-
rect his prayer, and to make it a true praying
in and by the spirit. For when the heart really
paaits^ and longs after God, its prayer is a prajr*
mgV as looved and animated by the spirit t>f
God, it is the breath or inspiration. of God stir-
ing, moving, and opening itself in the heart.
For though the earthly nature, or old rnm can
oblige, or accustom himself to take heavenly
words at certain times into his nu)uth; yet
this is a certain truth, that nothing ever did, pr
€an have the least desire or tendency to as-
cend to heaven, but that which came down
from heaven, and therefore, nothing in the
heart can pray, aspire and long after God, but
the spirit of God moving and stirin^ in it Ev^
ery bpeath, therefore, of the true spirit of pray-
er, can be nothing else but the breath of the
spirit of Godi, breathing, inspiring, and moving
tb^ heart in alV its variety oi notions and Bffec*
tions towards God, And therefore, every time
a good. desire stirs in the heart, a good prayer

foea out of it, that reaches God, as being the
ruit and work of his holy spirit. When any
man feeling his corruption, and^ the power d*
gin in bis soul, looka up to God with true earn-
estness of faith and desire to be delivered from
it, whether with words, or without words, how
can he pray better? What need of any change
of thoughts, or words, or any variety of ex-
pressions, when the one faith and desire of his


239

heart made known to God, and continued in,
is nat only all, but the most perfect prayer he
Tjan make. Again, suppose the soul in anoth-
er state, feeling with joy its offered redeemer,
and opening its heart for the full reception of
him, if it stands in this sDatte of wishing and
longing for the birth of Christ, bow can its pray-
er be in a higher degree of request? or if it
breaks out frequently in these words, corne^
Lord Jesus^ come quickly with all thy holy nature^
spirit^^and tempers into my soul^ is there any occa-
sion to enlarge, or alter these words into-an-
other form of expression ? Can he do better, or
pray more, than by continually standing from
time totimein this state of wishing to have Christ
formed in him* Nay, is it not more likely,
that his heart should be more divided and dis-
sipated by a numerous change of expressionas
than by keeping united to one expression that
sets forth all that he wants ? ' for it is the reali-
ty, the steadiness, and continuity of the desire,
that is the goodness of prayer, and its qualifi-
cations to recie ve all that it wants. Our Lord
said to one that came to him, what wilt thou
that I should do unto thee ? He answered, Lorrf,
thadnmy receive my si^ht. And he received it.
Another said, Lora, if thsm tcilt^ thoti canst make
m^ clean. And he was cleansed. Tell me what
learnings or fine parts are required to make
such prayers as tt^ese, and yet what wonders
of relief are^recorded in scripture, as given to
such short prayers as these .'^ Or tell me, what


240

blessing of prayer, or faith, or love, may not now
be obtained in the same way, and with as few
words, as then was done ? Every man there-
fore, that has any feeling of the weight of
his sin, or any tru^ desire to be delivered from
it by Christ, has learning and capacity enough
to make his owji prayer. Fqv praying is not
speaking forth eloquently, but simply the true
desire of the heart, and the heart simple and
plain in good dfesires, is in the truest state of
preparation for all the gifts and graces of God.
And this 1 must tell you, that the most simple
souls that have accustomed themselves to
speak their own desires and wants to God, in
such short, but true breathings of their hearts
to him, will soon know more of prayer, and the
mysteries thereof^ than any pet'sons who have
only their knowledge from learning, and learn-
ed books. .

jlcad. You seem to me, Theophilus, to have
much truth in what you say, and yet to be in a
way by yourself. I cannot take you to be with
those who place all in many and long forms,
and now I take you to be even more against
those who make much account of what they
call a gifted mm^ and make th^t to be the true
gift of prayer when any one is able to pray
extempore^ or with his own words for an hour or
two at a time.

Theqpk. I have shewn you, Academictfs, that

Eraye/ is purely the desire of the heart, that it
as not the nature of praying, but so far as it is


241

the true language of the heart. I have shewn
you the great benefit, that all people must re-
ceive from this true pra3^er of the heart. And
to remove all pretence of want of ability in the
lowest sort of people, to pray from their own
hearts, 1 have shewn, that the most simple
short petitions, when truly spoken by the
heart, have all the perfection that prayer can
have.

But mark, sir, why, or when I ascribe this perfection ^
it. It is when the h^art stands continually in this state of
wishing to have that, which is expressed in so few words.
It is then, that I said, there was no occasion to enlq^rge or
alter the words into another, or longer form, because the
reality, the steadiness, and the continuity of the desire is the.
goodness, and perfjBction of the prayer. Now, sir, let us
suppose two men, the one is frequently an hour, or two, or
a whole night on his knees in silent prayer^ in high acts of
love, and faith, and resignation to God, not outwardly spok-
en by his mouth ; the other is as long a time pouring lorth
the devotion of his heart in a variety of fervent expressions.
May not both these me^ justly appeal to me, not only as
not condemning, but as asserting the goodness of their
length and manner of prayer, since I make a short simple
petition to be only then a good prayer, wheij it proceeds
from a steady ^ continued desire of the heart ? It is not there-
fore silence^ or a simple petition, or a great variety of out-
ward .expressions, ihsA^ alters the nature of prayer, or makes
it to be good, or better, but only and solely the reality^ stead-
iness, and contimiiy of the desire, and the^fore, whether a
' Hoan offer this desire to God in the silent longing of the
hearty or in simple short petitions, or in a great variety of
words, is of no consequence, but all of them equally good,
when the true and right state of the heart is with them.

Thus you see, Academicus, that I am so far from being
as you said, in a way by myself^ that I am with every man in
every way, whose heart stands right towards God. But if
21


242

>'6u would know, what 1 would call a true and great gift of
prayer, and.wlwt I most of all wish for to myself, it is a
aood luart that stands continually inclined to God.

Acad. I am not sorty Theophiliis, that I have made so
unreasonable an observation upon what you sajd, smce rt
has occasioned you to ^ve so good, and just an answer to
it But yet this silent prayfer jion speak' of, is _what I nev-
er read, nor heard any thing of before, and it seeme to me
but like a ceasing to pray, and jet you seem to hke it m
turn, as well as any other way of praymg.

Tkeoph. All that I have saidof prayer, Academicus, has
been only to this end, to shew you, itsti^e and real nature,
whence i't is to arise, where it is to be found, and how you
are to begin, and become a true proficient m it. « there-
fore yon was at present to look no farther, than how to
put yourself in a state of beginning t« practise a prayerpro-
ceedingfrom your own heart, and continuing m it, leaving
all that you are farther to know of prayer, to be known in
its own lime bv experience, which alone can open any true
knowledge in you; this would be much better for you^
than to be asking before hand about -such things, as arc not
• -your immediate concern. ,. . , , , '

Besin to be a man of prayer, m this easy, simple and nat-
ural LnHer,that has beeii set before you, iffld when you
are faithful to this method, you will *»»«« °««*^«;? °*^,^'„';-
struction in the art of prayer., lour own h^rt thus turned
to God Will want no one to tell it, when it should be siMpU
in its petitions, or various in its expressions, Or wostrate it-
self in «<ence before God. B«t this hastiness of knowing
things, before tfiey become our concern, or b^oag to us, is
veTc^nion. Thus a man that has b»t just entered ui,on
The reformation of his life, sballwanttoread or hear a
discourse upon perfection, whethertt be absolutely attama-
bfe^r not AnU siiall be more eagw after wltat he can
Wir of this matter, though at such a distaiice from himself,
tS of such things as concerti the next step that he is to

'^i:: SSt hSerfready rightly take.t^. Jrst st.p
intone Sritual life, you have devoted yourself absolutely


243

to God, to life wholly to hw will, under the Hght atid guid-
ance of his holy spiritj intending seeking nothing in this
world, but such a passage tlirough it, as may JLend to the
glory of God, and the recovery of your own fallen soul.—
Y^VLtnext step is this, it is a looking to the continuance of
this first resolution, and donation pf yourself to (rod, to see
that it be kept alive, that .every thing you do, may be ani^
faated and directed by it, and all the occtirrenices ofeverfr
day, from morning to night be received by you, as becomes
ja spirit that is devoted to God. Now this second st<ep can-
not be taken, hut purely hy. prayer, nothing else has the
least power hej^e but prayer ; I do not inean you must "fre*
tjuently read, or say a number of prayers, (thoi^h this in
i^ turn, raajr be goo^, imd u«eful to you) but the prayer I
me<ui, and which you must practise,, if you would take this
second step in the «pirit»a^ life, is prayer of the lieart, or
prayer of ^y our own, proceeding from the state of your
beart, and its own tendency tP God. Of all thingathere-
iore, take this prsiy^esr of the heatit, consider it as yourinfal-
libie^ide to h^Vrea, turn from ev«ry thit^ that is an bin-
4eraace of it, that que^nches, or abates its fervour, love and
Hk^ nothing but that which is suitable to it, and let every
day begin, go on and end in the spirit oiiL Consider your-
self as always wrong, as having gone aside, and lost your
right path, when any d^ight, desire, ^r trouble is suffered
to live in you, titat cannot be made a part of this prayer of
the heart to God. For nothing so infallibly ahiews us the
true state of our -heart, us that which gives us either delight
or trouble ; for as our delight and trouble is, so is the state
of pur heart : if therefore, you are carried away witb any
trouble, or delight) that has not an immediate relation to
your progress to the divjne life, you may be assured your
heart is mi m its right state of prayer to God. Look at a
man who is devoted to soBie onf'thtngy or has some one
great worldly matter at heart, he stands turned from every
thing that has not some relation to if, he has no joy or trou-
ble but what arises from it, he has no eyes, nor ears but to
see or hear something about it* AH else is a trifle, but that
which some way or ot ber concerns this great matter. You


244

ueed not tell him of any rulep, or methods to keep it in bis
thoughts it goes with him into all places, and companies, it
has his first thoughts in the morning, and every day is gooti ^
or bad, a? this great matter seems to succeed or not. This
may shew you how easily, how naturally, how consfemtly
our hearC will carry on its own st^te of prayer, as soon as
God is its great object, or it is wholly given up to him as its
one great good. This may also shew you, that the heart
cannot enter into a state of the spirit of prayer to God, till
that which I called the first step in the spiritual life is taken ^
which is the taking God for its all, or its giving itself up
wholly to God. But when this foundation is laid, the seed
of prayer is sown, an4 the heart is in a continual ^tate of
tendency to God, having no other delight, or trouble in
things of any kind, but as they help or hinder its imion
with God. Therefore, Academicus, the way to be a matt
of prayer, and be governed by its spint, is not to get a book ^^
foil of jfray^rs, but the best help you can have from a book
is to read one full of such truths, instructions, and awaken*
ing informations, as force you to see, and know who and
what and where you are, that God is your all, and that all is
a misery but a heart, and life devoted to him. This is the
best outward prayer book you can have, as it will turn you to
an inw:ard book, and spirit of prayer in your heart, which is a
continual longing desire of the heart after God, bis divine
life, and holy spirit. When for the sake of this inward
prayer, you retire at any time of the day, never begin till
you know and feel, why and wherefore you are going to
pray, and let this why and wherefore form and direct every
thing that comes from you, whether it be in tl^ught or
word. ' As you cannot but know- your own state, so it must
bejhe easiest thing in the world to look up to God with
such desires as suit the state you are in, and praying in
this manner, whether it be in one, or more, or no worda,^

?fOur j>rayer will be always sincere, and good and high-
y benetiftial to you. Thus praying, you can never pray
in vain, but one month in the practice of it, will do you more
good, make a greater change in your soul, than twenty
years of prayer only by books, and forms of other peopled
: making.


243

No vice c^ Wbour in yoti, no infirmity take any root,
no g&odr desire can languish, when once ybur heart is in.
this method of prayer, never beginning to pray, till you •
first see how matters stand with you, asking your heart what
it wantS| laid having nothing in your prayer^, but what the
knowfi state of your heart puts you updn demanding^ sayings
or offering unto God. A quarter of pn hour of this prayer
brings yoa out of your clo«ei a new man, your heart feels
the good of it, and every return of such a prayer, gives new
itfe, and growth to all your virtues with more certainty,
than the dew refreshes the herbs of the fieldi Whereas,
overlooking this true prayer of your own heart, and only at
. certain times taking a prayer that you find in a book, you
liave nothing to wonder at, 'if you are every day praying,
and yetxvery day sinking farther and farther under all your
infirmities. For your heart is your life, and your life can
only be altered by that which is the real working of your
heart.- And if your prayer is only a form of words made
by the skill of other people, such a prayer can no more
change you into a good man, than an actor upon the stage,
%vho speaks kingly language, is thereby made to be a king.
Whereas, one thought, or word, or look towards God,pro-
ceectingfrom your own heart, can never be without its pro-
per fruit, orfail of doing a real gobd to your soul. Again,
another great and infallible benefit of this kind of prayer, is
this, it rs the only way to be delivered from the deceitful-
Dcss of our own hearts«

Our hearts deceive us, because we leave them to them-
selves, are absent from them, taken up in outward things^
in outwaird rules and forms of living and praying. But this
kind of praying, which takes ail its thoughts and words only
from the state of our hearts, makes it impossible for us to be
strangers to ourselves. The strength eft* every sin, the
jpower of ev€ffy evil temper, the most secret working of our
Yiearts, the weaki«s« of any, or all our vhrtues, is with a
noonday clearness forced to be seen, bs soon as the heart
is made oyr pray ex-book, iand we pray for nothing, but ac-
cordhig*to what we read, and fin(]l there,
-21*


246

Acad. Ofa Theophilus, you have shewn me, that it is^ al-
most as easy, ami natural a thiug to pray, as to breathe ; and
. that the best prayer in the world, is that whkh the heart
can thus easily send forth from itself, untaught by any things
bu{ its own sense of God, and itself. And yet I am almost
afraid of loving this kind of prayer too much. I am not free
from suspicions about it, I apprehend it to be that very
praying by the. spirit,^ or as moved by the spirit or from a
light rxithin^ which is condemned, as quakerism, .

Theoph. There is but one good prayer, that you can pos-
sibly make, and that is a prayer in and/ro77», or as the spir-
it of God moves you in it, or to it. This, this alone is a dir
vine prayer, no other prayer has, or can possibly' have any
communion with God. Take the n^attcr tlms, Man is a
threefold being, he has three natures, he partakes of the
divincy the elementary, and the diabolical nature. Had he
not these three natures in a certaiadegree in him, he could
have 1^0 communion with God, he could not enjoy the ele-
ments, nor could the evil spirits have the least power of ac- *
cess to him.

Now the astral y elementary nature cannot have a longing
after the pure deity, it cannot hunger and thirst after the di-
vine im^e, nor desire to be perfect, as God is perfect ; this
is as impossible, as for the beasts of the field to long to be
angds. Therefore flesh and blood in us can no more make
a cZ*mae prayer, than in any other animal of this world.

*The diabdical nature in us, can do nothing but that,
whiqh the devils do. It can only rise up in its own pride,
envy, and seif-exaltation,^and omy hate all' the goodness
that is either in heaven^ or on earth. And therefore it is
a truth of the greatest certainty, that no man ever did, or
can sead up a divine and heavenly prayer to God, or isach.
a prayer as caa reach God, but in and by the Spirit of God
in him. Our astral^ elemeniary man, and Ofu^ proud^ sub-
tle, serpentine nature <?aa read or say a prayer full of good
words and wishes, as easily as satan could use scripture
language in the temptation of Christ ; but nothing can wish
Xo be like God, or to unite with his goodne$s and holiness,
but that spirit ia us, wliicb psurtok^s 9fiiis divine nature.^


Therefore to ridicule praying by the spitit, Or as. moved
by the spirit, is ridiculing the one only prayer that is divine,
or can do us ahy divine good; and to reject and op-
pose it, as a vain conceit, is to quench, anid suppress all
that is holy, heavenly, and divine within us* For if this
holy spirit does not live and move in us, and bring forth all
the praying alfectians. of our souls, we may as well think of
reaching heaven with our hands as with our prayers.

Acad, I know not, Theophiliis, how to deny any thing
that you have here said, yet this account seems to make no
distinction beiv^een'owr own good spirit, and the holy spirit
of God. I took the inspirations, and graces of the b©ly
spirit, to be something that camfe into us from without^ anrf
to be as distinct from our own good spirit, as God is dis-
tinct from the creature.

Theoph, The holy spirit 6f God is as becessary to oar di-
vine life, or the life of grace, as the aiVof this world is ne^
cessary to our animal life ; and is as distinct from us, and
as much without us; aS the air of this world is distinct from,
abd 'without the creatures, that live in it. And yet our own
good spirit, is the very spirit of God moving, a^d stirring in
us. No animal can unite with, or breathe the air of this
worldy till it has first the air of Ibis world brought forth as
the iru^ birth o{ iUov/n life in its itself ;' this is its only ca-
paci^ to live in the spirit of this world ; and the breath,
or spirit that thus arises in its own life, is the very same
breath, that is in outward nature in which it lives. It is
.strictly thus, with the spirit of God in our souls, it must
first have a birth a?tW» «s, arising from the lift of our
souls, and as such is our only capacity to have life, and live
in the spirit of God himsielf, and is the very breath of the
spirit of God, who is yet as distinct from us, as the breath
of our animal life, that arises ff om our t^wn fire, is distinct
from the air of the world in which, it lives._ And thus,
Academicus, our own good spirit, is the very spirit of yihe
deity, aiid yet not God, but the spirit of God breathed or
kindled into a^reatur^ly form ; and Uiis good spirit, divine
.» in its ort^in, and divine in its nature ^ is that alone in us,
that can reach Qod, unite with him^ co-operate with him,
be moved, and blessed by him, as our earthly spirit is> by

the outward spirit of U^s, «kmefit$try world.


248

• Acad. Indeed, TbeOphiJws, yoa huve in few words sd
gone to the bottom of tliis matter, that nothing is ief^ either
for apj farther doubt, or inquiry about it. Mj own ^ood
spirit IS the breath of God in me, and so related to God, as
the breath of my animal life is related to the oer or spirit
of this outward world. It is from God, hag the nature, the
€temity^ the spiritucdiiy of God, as the breath of my flesii
and blood has the grossness, the earthly ^ transitory nature
of the spirit of tbis world. And as all my communiGation
with this world prises from the breath of this world, kin-
dled in m^ own life y so all my possibility of communication
with God, arises solely from the breath of his holy spirit
brought fort^i in tbe' life of my soul ; and I can only live in
God by his spirit having a birth in me, as I can only Uve in
this world by having its spirit born in me. This plain truth
sets all the scripture doctrine conceniing the nc<:c«%,jE?ow-
er, siTii\ope*(itiofi of the holy spirit in the greatest alid most
edifying degree of clearness. Thus what can be a more
plain, sober, and palpable truth, tlian wlien the apostle
saith, they only areihe sons of God ts^o ar^ led by the spirit,
of God. It is only like saying, that those creatures only be-
long to this woild, who live in an^by its spirit. 1 shall '
here Sir, only add, that my gospel faith standi now upon a
most solid, asid comfo^rtabfe foMndation, my iieart is all de-
light, and devotion to God when 1 consider, first/ that Ghrfet
my redeemer is the first setd of tlie zvoman^ or pomer of
saliHition inspvken into fallen Adam, the Lnmanwel, 'the God
'mthin €V^ry man, ^e light that lighteth every man, that com-
fXh into Ae world. Secondly, that the. holy spirit of God,
tl>e breath of eternity, hath also its ned of life ki my soulu;
for where the wordj)r$on ofOod is, there is t%e spirit of
Gi»din the same s((£te; if one is only a seed of life, a spai^
of heaven, the other is so also, and these twoi tlius consid-
ered, are the glorious peart of eternity hidden in every
man's soul, and so often spoken of before. And thus we
anderstand, bow the whole of o»r redemption (abcorjSng
to the plain language -of scriptare) is inwardly and otawaird-
ly, solely the work ef tlie light and spirit of <9fod, a kingdon
of God both t»iihin a^ mithovi as, and to which we ^o not,

<&x^x Jive, b.!it SO f«r 8S w iff« tfi?pir«4, iBQTed, fiad W


249

by the spirit of God* Earnestly therefore to pray, hum-
bly to hope, and faithfully to expect to be continually in-
spiced, ainl animated Ijy the holy spirit of God, has no more
of vanity y fanaticism ^^ox enthusiastick wildness in it, thaft to
hope,and pray to act in every thing from, and by a good
spirit. For as sure as the lip of truth hath told us, that
there is but one thai is good, so sure is it, that not a spark
of goodness, not a breath of piety can be in a|>y creature,
either in heaven, or on earth, but % that divine spirit,
which is the &r€a^^ of Gad, breathed froi^ himself into the
creature. The mattferis not about appearances of good-
ness, fortes of virtue, rules of religion, or a prudential piety,
suited to time, and place and character, all these are degrees
of goodness that our old man can as easily trade in, as in any
other matters of this world. But so tbuch as we have of a
heavenly and divine goodhess, or of a goodness that belongs
to heaven, ante! has the nature of heaven in it, so much we
must have of a (fiWne inspiration in 'us. For as nothing
cai^fall to the eardi, but because ft has the nature of the
earth in it ; so it is a truth of the utmost certainty, that no-
thing can ascend towards heaven, or have the least power to
onite with it, but that very spirit which came' down from '
heayen, and has the natiire of hejtren in it This truth
therefore, that the kingdom of Ged is withia us, that its
light Is solely the Iamb of God^ its spirit s6lely the spirit
of God, stands tipou a rock, against' which all attempts are
in vaitt. All that I now farther desire to know, is only thisi
how I may keep >free from alf delusions in this matter, and
not take my own natural abifittes, tempers and passions, or
the suggestions of evil spirits, to be working of the spirit of
God^in me. Fray, Sir, tetl me^ how I shall safely know,
wheik and how &r I am led, and governed by the spirit of
God ?

Theoph, Yon may know this, Acadi^icus, just as you
kuAw, when you are goirerned by the spirit of wrath, envy,
guile, craft or coveteousness. Every maft knows this of
himself as easily, and as certainly, as he knows when he is
hungry, pleased, or displeased. Now it is the same thing
with regard to the spirit of God, the knowledge of it is as
perceptible in yourself, and liable to nomore delusion. F^m?


2sa

the si)irit of God 'u more ^istiogaisliable from sll ^ther
spirits and tern pers, than of your natural affectioas^or tem-
pers are from erne anollier as I %viU here plainly shew
^ou.

"God is unwearied /7aftenc€, sl meekness that canuot be
provoked^ he is an ev^er ^udiimg mercifulness:^ be is ud-
mut&d S^odnesSi impartial^ umyer^ iove^ his delig^it U ia
the coramuoicatioB of lumself, hi6 own happiBeaa, to every
thii^ accordiog ^ i|s capacity. He does everj thing thei^
is good, righteous aad Lovely, ftp its own sake, because it
is good, righteous^ aad lonely. He is the good from wluch
nothing hut good cometh, aod resisteth all ^e^il only with
goodness." This Sir, is the nature and spirit of God, and
lie re you Jba¥e your Mi/ix2/i^ proof, whether you^^ure movr
ed and led by the spirit of God. Here is a proof that imv-
^r can fsiil yOu« is always «t haad^ ood is liable to no mis-
take^ or ^delusion. If it be 4he earnest desii^^ and Joining
^your heart, to be merciful as <he is merciiUh, io be full of
bis uMBeariedp^ihnc^y to dwell in his tmattershle me^aitss ;
if yon Iqng to be liko him in ntUT^ersaly inpartisi love, if
yo« desire to commuiocate «uefy good to every creot^ire^
that you aire abk ; if you iove s»d practice every ihing that
fis good« rigHteouSf and !oVe1y, for its o%*^ sake t>ecause it is
good, Hgfaieoas and lovely, and resist no evil, ibirt with good-
ness ; then you have the utmost certainty y that the soirit of
God liveth^ dwelleCh, andgovemeth in yo^. Now aA lliese
tempers are as knowabie to every matt,, as jbis ownlove
l^d hatred, and thereforo no man can he deceived s^ Xo ^e
possession of Uiem» but Jie that chooses to decerv^ liimsf IH
Now if you want any of these i^m^er^yi^ X\ke -whole bent of
your heart and mi&d is not set ^pon them^ aU pretences to
an immediate inspiration, «and i:cntinu€d i)f>erfttiQa o^ th«
spirit of God, in our soul, are vain and groundless. For
the spirit of God i^ ihai:; which I ha«re here dorscriBed, and
where his spirit dwells, and governs, there all these tem-
pers are brought forth or springing up, as the certain fi-uits
of it. What room , therefore, Academicu^, for so much un -
certainty, or fear of delusion in this matter ? Keep hut
within the bounds here set you, call nothing a proofs of the
spirit or work of God in your soul, but l/w?^ temper^^ and


251

the works which tWy produce, aui then, bat not till then,
3'ou may safely and infallibly say with St. John, herebjf ^e .
know that he ahidethin W5, hythe spirit which he hath given vs,
Acad. Irideed, Theophilns, you have given me a short,
but very full and satisfactory answer to my question. I
now perceive that as a spiritual- man, or one devoted to the
spirit of €rod^ I am not to look after any extraordinary, any-
new openings, ilkiminations, visions, or voices inward, or
ontward from God, ^proofs of the spirit of God dwelling
and working in me ; but that all my proof, and security of
being governed by the spirit of God, is-to be grounded on
other matters. That the boundless humiUtj, and resigna-
tion of the hol^y Jesus^ the unwearied patience, the Bnal-
terable meekness, the in^artird universal love of God, man-
ifested id my soul, are its only proofs, that God is in me of
a truth. Thus far all is right and good.

But yet, sir, surely it must be said with truth, that the
spirit of God often disco vers-itself, and operates in good
souls in very extraordinary vvays, in uncomn>on illumi^ia-
tions, and openings of divine light and knowledge, in the
revelation of mysteries, in strong impulses, and sallies of a
wonderful zeal, full of the highest gifts and graces of God.
■ And that these have frequently been God's gracious meth-
ods of awakening 9 sinful world.

Theoph, What yon say, Academicus, is very true, and
almost every age of the church is a sufficient proof of it. —
By the goodness of God, the church has always had i!s ex-
traortfinaTy persons highly gifted from above, made burning
and shining fights, and carried into as uncommon ways^ of
life, by the same spirit, and for the same ends, as John the
Baptist was, and as different from common christians, as he
wasfron»the cdmmon Jews. But my friend, these extraor
dinary operations of God^s hoty spirit, and the wonders- of
his gifts and graces shewing themselves at certain times,
anrJ'upon certain persons through all the ages of the church,
are not matters of common instruction) they belong not ta
our subject, it i^ould be J^oranceand vanity in me to pre-
tend to let you inta the secret of themj it would be the
time thing ia-you to think yourself ready for it.


232

Would you Vnofxt the sublime, the exaked» the angelick
^ la the christiao life, see what the ^on of God satth, thou
skcdt ' love the Lord iky God with <dl thy hearty with all thy
$%uL^ with cUl thy mind, and with all thy Btrtngth; ^and iky
neighbour as thyself. On these two, saith he, hang all the
taw and the prophets. And without these two things, no
good light ever can arise, or eoter into jjour soul. * Take
all the sciences, shine in all the accomplishments of the let-
tered world, they will only lead you from one vain passion
to another ; every thing you send out from within you, is
selfish, vain and bad, every thing you see, or receive from
without, will be received with a bad spirit, till these two
heavenly tempers have overcome the aatural perverseness
of fallen nature. Till then, nothing /7iir6 can proceed from
within, nor any thing be received in purity from without.

Think youself therefore unfit, incapable of judging right-
ly, or acting virtuously, till these two tempers have the
government of your heart. Then every truth will meet
you, no hurtful errour can giet entrance into your heart ;
, you will neither deceive, nor be deceived, but will have
better knowledge of all divine matters than all the human
1 earning in the world can help jro\t to..

Would you know Tvhat it is to love God with all your
heart, and soul, &c. you need only look back to that which,
has been said of the nature and spirit of God. • For when
with all your heart and soul you love, and long to have that
nature^ and spirit^ to be wholly united to it, possessed and
governed by it, then you love God with all your heart and
soul, &c. And then you are first capable of loving yourself,
and your neighbour rightly. Foi:^'bo much as you have of
the divine nature and spirit in you, just so much power have
you of loving yourself, and your peighbour aright 4 that js,.
of loving only and equally that in yourself, and your neigh-
bour, which the Deity only and equally loves both in you,
and him. But it is time to part, when we have only told
our silent friend Humanus, that if we live to meet again, we
shall with all our hearts receive him as a speaker amongst
us. And 80> gentlemen, once more, adieu.

F/JV75.


THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK IS NOT
RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON OR
BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED
BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE
NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THE
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES.
