The Plumed Serpent (D. H. Lawrence, 1926)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1926 Martin Secker edition (https://archive.org/details/bwb_KR-439-328)
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

t 

n | 
6/- 

e 

Pp 

er 

ds 
vice 

lume 

Plum: 
H. Lawy. 

e 

The 
D. 

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 

. https://archive.org/details/owb_KR-439- 

PENGUIN BOOKS 

ee eee ee ~~ a — 
+s THE PLUMED SERPENT 1 | = 

“= 

- in 1885, the fourth child of a miner. At 13 he won a 
_ scholarship to Nottingham High School, which he left 
_ for a job with a firm of surgical goods manufacturers at 
a wage of thirteen shillings a week. He soon abandoned 
this to become a pupil-teacher at Eastwood. 
_ While -attending Nottingham University for his 
_ teacher’s certificate, he began his first novel, The White 
Peacock, which was published by Heinemann in 1911. 
_.. From that time onwards, with the exception of a short 
_ period as a schoolmaster in Croydon, he lived entirely 
_ by his writing. For two years he travelled in Germany 
> and Ttaly, and, returning to England, was married in 
y 1914 to Frieda von Richthofen. In ‘T1919, the 
_ Lawrences left England, and travelled first in Europe 
i: = then in Australia and America.) 
They settled for a while in New Mexico, but came 
 @hally to Europe in 1929. In that year Lawrence 
me seriously ill, and “hé ‘died of tuberculosis on 

_ 2 March 1930. | ‘ 

ee “David Herbert Lawrence was born at Eastwood, Notts, >) DP. 

PENGUIN BOOKS 
IN ASSOCIATION WITH 

WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD 

Penguin Books Ltd, ROMS eat eee : 
ee To Books Pty Ltd, , Ringwood, Victoria, A 

fe shojo pai 

First published 19262 k= 
_ Published in Penguin Books 1950 
Reprinted 1955, 1961, 1966 
Made and printed in Great Britain 
by Richard Clay (The Chaucer Press), Ltd, 
Bungay, Suffolk 
Set in Monotype Garamond 

"4 This book is sold subject to the condition 
i that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, — 
ae be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated 
without the publisher's prior consent in any form of 
a. “ binding or cover other than that in which itis 

oe published and without a similar condition 
including this condition being imposed : 
on the subsequent purchaser — ba i 

Sol aaa oa ee 

CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION by Richard Aldington 

BEGINNINGS OF A BULL-FIGHT 

TEA-PARTY IN TLACOLULA 
FORTIETH BIRTHDAY 

TO STAY OR NOT TO STAY 

THE LAKE 

THE MOVE DOWN THE LAKE 

THE PLAZA 

NIGHT IN THE HOUSE 

CASA DE LAS CUENTAS 

DON RAMON AND DONA CARLOTA 

LORDS OF THE DAY AND NIGHT 

THE FIRST WATERS 

THE FIRST RAIN / 

JBOME TO SAYULA 

THE WRITTEN HYMNS OF 
QUETZALCOATL 

CIPRIANO AND KATE 

FOURTH HYMN AND THE BISHOP . 

AUTO DA FE 

THE ATTACK ON JAMILTEPEC 

MARRIAGE BY QUETZALCOATL 

THE OPENING OF THE CHURCH 

THE LIVING HUITZILOPOCHTLI 

HUITZILOPOCHTLI’S NIGHT 

MALINTZI : 

TERESA 

KATE IS A WIFE 

HERE! 

v4 
II 
- 
54 

79 
88 

106 
120 
142 
149 
165 
180 
£93 

202 

219 

es) 
242 
259 
280 
301 
ax9 
347 
368 
388 
401 
410 
55 
442 

INTRODUCTION 

BY RICHARD ALDINGTON 

THE PLUMED SERPENT is a curious and original novel, 
ks 

with no affinities — unless perhaps very distantly with Rolfe’s 
Hadrian VII; and it is quite certain that that book had no in- 

to a position of power which he never had the faintest chance 
of attaining in fact on this earth. In Rolfe’s case it was nothing 
less than the Papacy — modest fellow! Lawrence, after playing 
at Red Indians and cowboys at Taos, New Mexico, less ambi- 
usly imagines himself transformed into the leader (perhaps 
two leaders) of a Mexican pronunciamiento. 

_ This, how€ver, was rather banal and otdinary, for in those 
$, were there ot more Mexican generals than soldiers? And 
wrtence by this time had already seén through the swindle of 
h ‘political revolutions? which promise an ‘epoch of abun- 
dance for all’ and bring only misery and deprivation, which 
certainly know how to make rich men poor, but distinctly fail 
to make poor men rich. No! Lawrence could not and would 
t infagine himself leading yet another demonstration of the 

He asked himself, quite seriously, what would really meet 
the needs of these Mexican Indians who had in actual fact te- 
volted after centuries against the rule of the degenerate des- 
cendants of the Conquistadores? Now Lawrence, whatever 
other people might think of him, considered himself ‘terribly 
religious.’ The religious beliefs of men, in his view, were far 
1ore important than the balance of trade, cost-of-living in- 
es, and the like ‘jargon’ of what he considered economic 
charlatanism. 

Now, by the time Lawrence came to write the latter part of 
tis book (there was a gap of nearly eighteen months between _ 
wo writings of this book — June 1923 to October 1924) he 
learned a good deal about the Indians and Mexicans of 

ales 

‘have in Mexico, how he became so caught-up in his own v 

8 INTRODUCTION 

New Mexico and old Mexico. He had rightly or wrongly com 
to the conclusion that it was quite useless to preach to them t 
religion of Jesus, of love and compassion and so forth. 
four centuries they still failed to grasp its first elements. ia 
Mexico, for instance, the old rites of blood-sacrifice still con 
tinued inde the colour of Christianity in the self- flagellati 1 
practices of the so-called Penitentes. And in old Mexico he dis- 
covered that the Virgin Goddess was believed to bring for 
not the Saviour of the world, but an awful obsidian knife su 
as was used to cut the heart from the living victim as an offe 
ing to the Mexican Sun-god. 

Lawrence, who cheougli all his transformations andeete : 
lings’ with himself remained as English as a wet Sunday i 
Hull, was considerably rattled by all this — and, incidenta 
the reader of The Plumed Serpent. can see for himself he 
the Englishman Lawrence constantly recoils in dissen 
horror from the very things he is supposed to be prea 
But one English trait he had not got — he never tried to 
suade himself that what he saw was other than it really wz 
he said to himself: Very well, these people need religion, 
the religion they need — the only religion: they can understan 
in fact —is the ancient religion of their forefathers, and ni 
alien religion which four centuries of effort have failed 
pose on them. 

It is a very plausible line of argument, especially f for 0 
who, like Lawrence, never thought of Religion as the Abeak 
an unchanging objective Truth nothing can alter, but as an 
pression of Man’s psychological needs. And so his Mi 
general, who is a projection of himself, sets about reca 
these long-banished gods of the ancient Aztecs—ITZPAPALOT 
and HUITZILOPOCHTLI and QUETZALCOATL— conceptions 
of the divinity as weird and repellent to us of the ancient wor rld 
as their unpronounceable names. How Lawrenceimagined ney 
could be invoked, what effect he thought the revival wou 

incantations that he began to plume himself on bei 
“natural aristocrat’ and even a new avatar of the Snake-Bi 
god, may be read at length from Chapter XI onwards. _ 

The opening of the book is on a totally different level 
ideas, though most skilfully adapted as the entrance upon | 

INTRODUCTION 9 

ain action. The first chapters are largely autobiographical, re- 
lating with almost prosaic literalness Lawrence’s experiences 
at id feelings and adventures when he first visited Mexico City, 
inder the guidance of the American poet, Witter Bynner. 
True, this is one of the novels where Lawrence himself does 

v Sirrly Fricda Lawrence, whose experiences are his experiences, 

al ind who shows a most disconcerting ability to jump out of her 
a skin into his, with all his prejudices, phobias, and whims 
in quite furious action. Nor is it necessary to demonstrate 
w both Don Ramén and Don Cipriano waver and become 
tessions of one ot more of Lawrence’s innumerable selves. 

valle aria and dysegsery, which ore course woke up the tubercles 
lungs, arid as he lay helpless thére came a great thunder- 
followed by an earthquake ... Frieda Lawrence had a 
rible journey getting the almost dying man back to the 
ited States, and he never returned to Mexico and its 
TZALCOATL. 

SIEAPTER= = 

Beginnings of a Bull-fight 

was s the Sunday after Easter, and the last bull-fight of the 
on in Mexico City. Four special bulls had been brought 
t from Spain for the occasion, since Spanish bulls are more 
‘than Mexican. Perhaps it is the altitude, perhaps just the 
iit of the western Continent which is to blame for the lack 
ep’, as Owen put it, in the native animal. 

though Owen, who was a great socialist, disapproved of 
oull-fights, “We have never seen one. We shall have to go,’ he 

Oh yes, I think we must see it,’ said Kate. 

id it’s owr last chance,’ said Owen. 

ay he rushedsto the place where they sold tickets, to book 
and Kate went with him. As she’came into the street, her 
art sank. It was as if some little person inside her were sulk- 
and resisting. Neither she nor Owen spoke much Spanish, 
ere was a fluster at the ticket place, and an unpleasant indivi- 
-came forward to talk American for them. 

t w4s obvious they ought to buy tickets for the ‘Shade.’ 
it they wanted to economize, and Owen said he preferred to 
ong the crowd, therefore, against the resistance of the 
* man and the onlookers, they bought reserved seats in 
‘Sun.’ 

‘he show was on Sunday afternoon. All the tram-cars and 
the frightful little Ford omnibuses called camions were labelled 
Torero, and were surging away towards oe Kate felt 

‘Tm not vety keen on going,’ she said to Owen. 
ay oe but ae not? I don’t believe in them on principle, but 

wen was an Ametican, ‘Kate was Irish. ‘Never having seen 
meant ‘having to go.’ But it was American logic rather 
sh, and Kate only let herself be overcome. 

a II 

12 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Villiers of course was keen. But then he too was Ametican, — 
and he too had never seen one, and being younger, more = ® 

anybody he had to go. 

They got into a Ford taxi‘and went. The busted car ee: 
away down the wide dismal street of asphalt and stone and. 
Sunday dreariness. Stone buildings in Mexico have a peculiar 
hard, dry dreariness. 

The taxi drew up in a side street under the big iron scaffoldes 
ing of the stadium. In the gutters, rather lousy men were sling 

pulque and sweets, cakes, fruit, and greasy food. Crazy motor- 

Be 4 

5 

cats rushed up and hobbled away. Little soldiers in washed-out _ 
cotton uniforms, pinky drab, hung around an entrance. Above ~ 
all loomed the network iron frame of the huge; ugly stadium. — 

Kate felt she was going to prison. But Owen excitedly 
sutged to the entrance that corresponded to his ticket. In the 

depths of him, he too didn’t want to go. But he was a born 
American, and if anything was on show, he had to see it. Sarees. vs 

was ‘Life.’ ; 
The man who took the tickets at the entrance, sudderily.-as 
they were passing in, stood in front of Owen, put both his 

hands on Owen’s chest, and pawed down the front of Owen’s” 

body. Owen started, bridled, transfixed for a moment. The 
fellow stood aside. Kate remained petrified. 

Then Owen jerked into a smiling composure as the man — 

waved them on. ‘Feeling for fire-arms!’ he said, rolling his 
eyes with pleased excitement at Kate. 

But she had not got over the shock of horror, foauiny the 
fellow might paw her. 

They emerged out of a tunnel in the hollow of the concrete- 
and-iron amphitheatre. A real gutter-lout came to look at their 

counterslips, to see which seats they had booked. He jerked his — 

head downwards, and slouched off. Now Kate knew she was 
in a trap — a big concrete beetle trap. 

They dropped down the concrete steps till they were only 
three tiers from the bottom. That was their row. They were to 
sit on the concrete, with a loop of thick iron between each 
numbered seat. This was a reserved place i in the ‘Sun.’ 

. 

Kate sat gingerly between her two iron loops, and looked: : 

vaguely around. ss 
‘T think it’s thrilling!’ she said. { 

BEGINNINGS OF A BULL-FIGHT 13 

Like most modern people, she had a will-to-happiness. 

& ‘Isn’ tit thrilling?” cried Owen, whose will-to-happiness was 
almost a mania. ‘Don’t you think so, Bud?’ 

¥ “Why, yes, I think it may be,’ said Villiers, non-committal. 
But then Villiers was young, he was only over twenty, while 
Owen was over forty. The younger generation calculates its 
. ippiness’ in a more business-like fashion. Villiets was out 
er a thrill, but he wasn’t going to say he’d got one till he’d 
it. Kate and Owen — Kate was also nearly forty — must en- 
thuse a thrill, out of a sort of politeness to the great Show-man, 
Providence. 

“Look here!’ said Owen. ‘Supposing we try to protect our 
tremity on this concrete —’ and thoughtfully he folded his 
in-coat and laid it along the concrete ledge so that both he 
and Kate could sit on it. 

_ They sat and gazed around. They wete early. Patches of 
ple mottled the concrete slope opposite, like eruptions. 
ring jugt below was vacant, neatly sanded; and above the 

» on the encircling concrete, great advertisements for hats, 
th a picture ofa city-man’s straw hat, and advertisements for 
spectaclés, with pale of spectacles supinely folded, glared and 
shouted. 

_ ‘Where is the ‘‘Shade”’ then?’ said Owen, twisting his neck. 
\t the top of the amphitheatre, near the sky, were concrete 
xey This was the ‘Shade’, where anybody who was anything 

Oh but,’ said Kate, ‘I don’t want to be perched right up 

there, so far away.’ 

Shy no!’ said Owen. ‘We’re much better where we ate, . 

in out “Sun”’, which isn’t going to shine a great deal after all.’ 
_ The sky was cloudy, preparing for the rainy season. 

pt It was nearly three o’clock in the afternoon, and the crowd 
was filling in, but still only occupied patches of the bare con- 

“crete. The lower tiers were reserved, so the bulk of the people 

at in the mid-way levels, and gentry like our trio were more or 

solated. 

But the audience was already a mob, mostly of fattish town 

nin ‘sees tight suits and little straw hats, and a mixing-in 

14 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

had brought their women, in sky-blue chiffon with brown chile 
fon hats and faces powdered to look like white marshmallows. 
Some wete families with two or three children. = 
The fun began. The game was to snatch the hard straw hat tg 
off some fellow’s head, and send it skimming away down the 
slope of humanity, where some smart bounder down below 3 
would catch it and send it skimming across in another direc- 2 
tion. There were shouts of jeering pleasure from the mass, 
which rose almost to a yell as seven straw hats were skimming, © 
meteot-like, at one moment across the slope of people. — 
“Look at that!’ said Owen. ‘Isn’t that fun!’ “ 
‘No,’ said Kate, her little a/ser ego speaking out for once, in — 
spite of her will-to-happiness. “No, I don’t like it. I really hate : 
common people.’ ; ee 
As a socialist, Owen disapproved, and as a happy man, he — 
was disconcerted. Because his own real self, as far as he had anys 

hea Dsise ‘e 

left, hated common rowdiness just as much as Kate did. * 
‘It’s awfully smart though!’ he said, trying to laugh in sym- — 
pathy with the mob. ‘There now, see that!’ ats 

‘Yes, it’s quite smart, but I’m glad it’s not my hat,’ said 
Villiers. 

‘Oh, it’s all in the game,’ said Owen oe oe 

But he was uneasy. “He was wearing a big straw hat of spiny 
make, conspicuous in the comparative isolation of the lower 
tiers. After a lot of fidgeting, he took off this hat and put it on ‘ 
his knees. But unfortunately he had a very definitely bald spot — 
on a sunburnt head. ; 

Behind, above, sat a dense patch of people in the unreserved : 
section. Already they were throwing things. Bum! came an — 
orange, aimed at Owen’s bald spot, “and hitting him on the — ‘ 
shoulder. He glared round rather ineffectually through his big” 
shell spectacles. fi 

‘I'd keep my hat on if I were you,’ said the cold voice of | 
Villiers. . 

‘Yes, I think perhaps it’s wiser,’ said Owen, with aaa 
nonchalance, putting on his hat again. 

Whereupon a banana skin rattled on Villiers’ tidy and lady- 
like little panama. He glared round coldly, like a bird that 
would stab with its beak if it got the chance, but which would 
fly away at the first real menace. 

BEGINNINGS OF A BULL-FIGHT 15 

How I detest them!” said Kate. 

diversion was created by the entrance, opposite, of the 
nilitary bands, with their silver and brass instruments undet 
ei arms. There were three sets. ies chief band climbed and 

uthorities. These musicians wore dark grey uniforms 
ed with rose colour, and made Kate feel almost re- - 
ited, as if it were Italy and not Mexico City. A silver band 
yale buff uniforms sat opposite our party, high up across the 
low distance, and still a third ‘musica’ threaded away to the 
on the remote scattered hillside of the amphitheatre. The 
2 papers had said that the President would attend. But the 

ection. Only a little distance above Kate’s row was a mass 
f peo ee #s it were impending; a very uncomfortable sensa- 

barids, due to strike up at three, still sat there in josey 
on, sounding not a note. 
misical La musica!’ shouted the mob, with the voice of 

heir Seroteins: and they bade won them all. The bands 
e their bands, present for their amusement. : 

But the bands were military bands, and it was the ateay 
whic Michhad wonall the revolutions. So the revolutions were their 
volutions, and they were present for their own glory alone. 
Niisica pagada toca mal tono. 

pasmodically, the insolent yelling of the mob rose and sub- 
ded. La misica! La musical The shout became brutal and vio- 
ent. Kate always remembered it. La musica! The band pea- 

facings struck up: crisp, martial, smart. 
hat’s s fine!” aa Owen. ‘But that’ ’s really good! And it’s 

/ 

f 

Ee 

ie Hoi, 

16 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

The music was smart, but it was brief. The band seemed 
scarcely to have started, when the piece was over. The musi- 
cians took their instruments from their mouths with a gesture 
of dismissal. They played just to say they’d played, makings it 
as short as possible. 

Musica pagada toca mal tono. 

There was a ragged interval, then the silver band piped uP: 
And at last it was half-past three, or more. = 
Whereupon, at some given signal, the masses in the middle, 
unreserved seats suddenly burst and rushed down on to the 
lowest, reserved seats. It was a crash like a burst reservoir, and 
the populace in black Sunday suits poured down round and 
about our astonished, frightened trio. And in two minutes it 
was over. Without any pushing or shoving. Everybody care- 
ful, as far as possible, not to touch anybody else. You don’t 
elbow your neighbour if he’s got a pistol on his hip and a 
knife at his belly. So all the seats in the lower tiers filled in one 

rush, like the flowing of water. 

Kate now sat among the crowd. But her seat, fortunately, 
was above one of the track-ways that went round the arena, so 
at least she would not have anybody sitting between her knees. 

Men went uneasily back and forth along this gangway past 
the feet, wanting to get in next their friends, but never ventur- 
ing to ask. Three seats away, on the same row, sat a Polish bol- 
shevist fellow who had met Owen. He leaned over and asked 
the Mexican next to Owen if he might change Sas with him. 
‘No,’ said the Mexican. ‘I'll sit in my own seat.’ 

‘Muy bien, Senor, muy bien!” said the Pole. 

The show did not begin, and men like lost mongtels sti! 
prowled back and forth on the track that was next step pee 
from Kate’s feet. They began to take advantage of the ledge on 
which rested the feet of our party, to squat there. 

Down sat a heavy fellow, plumb between Owen’s knees. 

‘T hope they won’t sit on my feet,’ said Kate anxiously. 

“We won’t let them,’ said Villiers, with bird-like decision. 
‘Why don’t you shove him off, Owen? Shove him off?’ 

And Villiers glared at the Mexican fellow ensconced be- 
tween Owen’s legs. Owen flushed, and laughed uncomfort- 
ably. He was not good at shoving people off. The Mexican 

-began to look round at the three angry white people. 

: 
: 
m4 

} BEGINNINGS OF A BULL-FIGHT 17 
or; he t 3 . E 5 ‘ > 
another moment, another fat Mexican in a black suit 

ut Villiers was too quick for him. He aiickly brought 
eet together under the man’s sinking posterior, so the i in- 
ridual subsided Son eeie on to a pair of boots, and at 

> Villiers was saying in good American. “This place is 
my feet! Get off! You get off!’ 
nd he continued, quietly but very emphatically, to push 
fexican’s shoulder, to remove him. 
e Mexican half raised himself, and looked round murder- 
y at Villiers. Physical violence was being offered, and the 
only retort was death. But the young American’s face was so 
ld and abstract, only the eyes showing a primitive, bird-like 
, that the Mexican was nonplussed. And Kate’s eyes were 
ng with Irish contempt. 
e fellow struggled with his Mexican city-bred ecate 
mplex. He muttered an explanation in Spanish that he was 
ly sitting there for a moment, till he could join his friends — 
g & hand towards a lower tier. Villiers did not under- 
a word, but he reitérated: 
on’t cate what it is. This place is for my feet, and you 
n’t sit there.’ 
home of liberty! Oh, land of the free! Which of these 
1en was to win in the struggle for conflicting liberty? 
ne fat fellow free to sit between Villiers’ feet, or was Vil- 
ree to keep his foot-space? ° 
ete are all sorts of inferiority complex, and the city Mext- 
has a vety strong sott, that makes him all the more aggres- 
once it is roused. Therefore the intruder lowered his pos- 
ot with a heavy, sudden bounce on Villiers’ feet, and Vil- 
rs, out of very distaste, had had to extricate his feet from. 
a compression. The young man’s face went white at the 
rils, and his eyes took on that bright abstract look of pure 
tatic anger. He pushed the fat shoulders more decisively, 

Se be shoved, Obiesacs - 

18 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

” ‘Insolence!’ said Kate loudly. ‘Insolence!’ 
She glared at the fat back in the shoddily-fitting black coat, 
which Tooked as if a woman dressmaker had made it, with 
loathing. How could any man’s coat-collar look so home- 
made, so en famille! | 

Villiers remained with a fixed, abstract look on his thin face, 
rather like a death’s head. All his American will was summoned 
up, the bald eagle of the north bristling in every feather. The 
fellow should not sit there. — But how to remove him? % 

The young man sat tense with will to annihilate his beetle- 
like intruder, and Kate used all her Irish malice to help him.” 

‘Don’t you wonder who was his tailor?’ she asked, with a 
flicker in her voice. : 

Villiers looked at the femalish black coat of bie Mexican, 
and made an arch grimace at Kate. | 

‘I should say he hadn’t one. Perhaps did it himself’. =~ 

‘Very likely!’ Kate laughed venomously. £35 

It was too much. The man got up and betook himself, rather 
diminished, to another spot. ; 

“Triumph!? said Kate. ‘Can’t you do the same, Owen?’ 

Owen laughed uncomfortably, glancing down at the man 
between his knees as he might glance at a dog with rabies, 
when it had its back to him. ; 

‘Apparently not yet, unfortunately,” he said, with some con- 
straint, turning his nose away again from the Mexican, — 
was using him as a sort of chair- back. 

There * was an exclamation. Two horsemen in gay Saleh 
and bearing long staffs had suddenly ridden into the ring. They 
went round the arena, then took up their posts, sentry-wise, On 
either side the tunnel entrance through which they had come 
in. ag 

In matched a little column of four toreadors wearing tight 
uniforms plastered with silver embroidery. They divided, and 
marched smartly in opposite directions, two and two, around 
the ring, till they came to the place facing the section of the 
Authorities, where they made their salute. ; 

So this was a bull-fight! Kate already felt a chill of disgust. 

In the seats of the Authorities were very few people, and 
certainly no sparkling ladies in high tortoise-shell combs and 
- Jace mantillas. A few common-looking people, bourgeois with 

BEGINNINGS OF A BULL-FIGHT Ze 

‘not much taste, and a couple of officers in uniform. The Prest- 
dent had not come. 
' There was no glamour, no charm. A few commonplace 
sople in an expanse of concrete were the elect, and below, 
ur grotesque and effeminate-looking fellows in tight, ornate . 
clothes were the hetoes. With their rather fat posteriors and 
‘their squiffs of pigtails and their clean-shaven faces, they looked 
like eunuchs, or women in tight pants, these precious toreadors. 
_ The last of Kate’s illusions concerning bull-fights came 
down with a flop. These were the darlings of the mob! These 
were the gallant toreadors! Gallant? Just about as gallant as 
assistants in a butcher’s shop. Lady-killers? Ugh! 
_ There was an Ah! of satisfaction from the mob. Into the 
ing suddenly rushed a smallish, dun-coloured bull with long 
flourishing horns. He ran out, blindly, as if from the dark, 
Ra obably thinking that now he was free. Then he stopped 
short, seeing he was not free, but surrounded in an unknown 
ry. He wag utterly at a loss. 
_A toreador came forward and switched out a pink cloak like 
an not far froff the bull’s nose. -The bull gave a playful little 
nce, fleat and pretty, and charged mildly on the cloak. The 
sreador switched the cloak over the animal’s head, and the 
little bull trotted on round the ring, looking for a way to 
- Out. 
Seeing the wooden barrier around,the arena; finding he was 
able to look over it, he thought he might as well take the leap. 
over he went into the corridor or passage-way which 
3 led the ring, and in which stood the setvants of the arena. 
Just as nimbly, these servants vaulted over the barrier into 
the arena, that was now bull-less. 
_ The bull in the gangway trotted inquiringly round till he 
ame to an opening on to the arena again. So back he trotted 
into the ring. 
_ And back into the gangway vaulted the servants, where they 
Bcd again to look on. 
_ The bull trotted waveringly and somewhat irritated. The 
adors waved their cloaks at him, and he swerved on. Till 

si THE PLUMED SERPENT 

horse on which sat the other picador. 

The bull trotted suspiciously up to the motionless horse 
bearing the rider with the long pole; a lean old horse that ; 
would never move till Doomsday, unless someone shoved it. S 

O shades of Don Quixote! Oh four Spanish horsemen of the i 
Apocalypse! This was surely one of them. 2 

The picador pulled his feeble horse round slowly, to face ches 
bull, and slowly he leaned forward and shoved his lance-point | 
ee the bull’s shoulder. The bull, as if the horse were a great _ 
wasp that had stung him deep, suddenly lowered his headina - 
jerk of surprise and lifted his horns straight up into the horse’s_ 
abdomen. And without more ado, over went horse and rider, _ 
like a tottering monument upset. = 

The rider scrambled from under the horse and went running _ 
away with his lance. The old horse, in complete dazed amaze-~ 
ment, struggled to rise, as if overcome with dumb incompre-_ 
hension. And the bull, witha ted place on his shoulder welling | 
a trickle of dark blood, stood looking around in equally pa ? 
less amazement. 2 

But the wound was hurting. He saw the queer sight of the 
horse half reared from the ground, trying to get to its feet. And 
he smelled blood and bowels: 

So rather vaguely, as if not quite knowing what he ought to 
do, the bull once more lowered his head and pushed his sharp, 
flourishing horns in the horse’s belly, working them up and 
down inside there with a sort of vague satisfaction. 

Kate had never been taken so completely by surprise in all 
her life. She had still cherished some idea of a gallant show. 
And before she knew where she was, she was watching a bull 
whose shouldets trickled blood goring his horns up and down 
inside the belly of a prostrate and feebly plunging old horse. 

The shock almost overpowered her. She had come for a 
gallant show. This she had paid to see. Human cowardice and 
beastliness, a smell of blood, a nauseous whiff of. bursten 
bowels! She turned her face away. 

When she looked again, it was to see the horse feebly and 
dazedly walking out of the ring, with a great ball of its own 
entrails hanging out of its abdomen and swinging reddish 
against its own legs as it automatically moved. 

ee eee 

BEGINNINGS OF A BULL- FIGHT = 

nd once more, the shock of amazement almost made her 
‘consciousness, She heard the confused small applause of 
sement from the mob. And that Pole, to whom Owen had 
duced her, leaned over and said to her, in horrible 

new Miss Leslie, you are seeing Life! Now you will have 
cthing to write about, in your letters to England.’ 

e looked at his unwholesome face in complete repulsion, 
Pristsed Owen would not introduce her to such sordid 
individuals. 

She looked at Owen. His noée had a sharp look, like a little 

ambles with all his eyes, knowing it is forbidden. 
illiers, the younger generation, looked intense and ab- 
ct, getting the sensation. He would not even feel sick. He 
just getting the thrill of it, without emotion, coldly and 
tifically, but very intent. 
nd Katg felt a real pang of hatred against this Americanism 
8 is coldly god unscrupulously sensational. 
_ *‘Why.doesn’t the horse move?,Why doesn’t it run away 
f rom thé bull?’ she asked in repelled amazement, of Owen. 

= O wen cleared his throat. 

_ *Didn’t you see? It was blindfolded,’ he said. © 
But can’t it swe// the bull?’ she asked. 
parently not. — They bring the old wrecks here to finish 
off. — I know it’s awful, but it’s part of the game.’ 

y mean, anyhow! She felt utterly humiliated, Srudhed by a 
nse of human indecency, cowardice of two-legged humanity. 
“brave” show she felt nothing but reeking cowardice. 
reeding and her natural pride were outraged. 

he ring servants had cleaned away the mess and spread 
> sand. The toreadors were playing with the bull, unfurling 
- foolish cloaks at arm’s length. And the animal, with the | 
sore running on his shoulder, foolishly capered and ran 
1 one tag to the other, here and there. 

or the first time, a bull seemed to her a fool. She had always 
raid of bulls, fear tempered with reverence of the great 

22 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

pidly he ran at the rag, each time, and the toreadors skipped - 
like fat- hipped girls showing off. Probably it needed skill and 
coutage, but it /ooked silly. 4 

Blindly and foolishly the bull ran ducking its horns cache 
time at the rag, just because the rag fluttered. 

“Run at the : men, idiot!’ said Kate aloud, in her owcrwikote om ; 
impatience. ‘Run at the men, not at the cloaks.’ : 

‘They never do, isn’t it curious!’ replied Villiers, with cool — 
scientific interest. “They say no toreador will face a cow, be- 
cause a cow always goes for /im instead of the cloak. If a bull — 
did that there’d be no bull-fights. Imagine it!” 

She was bored now. The nimbleness and the skipping tricks _ 
of the toreadors bored her. Even when one of the banderilleros- 
reared himself on tiptoe, his plump posterior much in evidence, 
and from his erectness pushed tw» razor-sharp darts with frills” 
at the top into the bull’s shoulder, neatly and smartly, Kate felt 
no admiration. One of the darts fell out, anyway, and the bull 
ran on with the other swinging and waggling in another bleed-_ 
ing place. 

The bull now wanted to get away, really. He leaped the fence 
again, quickly, into the attendants’ gangway. The attendants 
vaulted over into the arena. The bull trotted in the corridor, 
then nicely leaped back. The attendants vaulted once more into” 
the corridor. The bull trotted round the arena, ignoring the 
toreadors, and leaped once more into the gangway. Over 
vaulted the attendants. i 

Kate was beginning to be amused, now that the na 
men were skipping for safety. 

The bull was in the ring again, running from cloak to doalel 
foolishly. A banderillero was getting ready with two mote 
darts. But at first another picador put nobly forward on his 
blindfolded old horse. The bull ignored this little lot too, and 
trotted away again, as if all the time looking for something, 
excitedly looking for something. He stood still and excitedly 
pawed the ground, as if he wanted something. A toreador ad- 
vanced and swung a cloak. Up pranced the bull, tail in air, and. 
with a prancing bound charged — upon the rag, of course. The 
toreador skipped round with a ladylike skip, then tripped to 
another point. Very pretty! 

The bull, in the course of his trotting and prancing and 

BEGINNINGS OF A BULL-FIGHT 23 

ring, had once more come neat the bold picador. The bold 
picador shoved forward his ancient steed, leaned forwards, and 
pushed the point of his lance in the bull’s shoulder. The bull 
looked up, irritated and arrested. What the devil! 

a saw the horse and rider. The horse stood with that feeble 
jumentality of a milk horse, patient as if between the shafts, 
ting while his master delivered the milk. How strange it 
ist have been to him when the bull, giving a little bound like 
dog, ducked its head and dived its horns upwards into his 
elly, rolling him over with his rider as one might push over a 

The bull looked with irritable wonder at the incomprehen- 
ble medley of horse and rider kicking on the ground a few 
away from him. He drew near to investigate. The rider 
umbled out and bolted. And the toreadors, running up with 
t cloaks, drew off the bull. He went caracoling round, 
rging at more silk-lined rags. 
Meanwhile an attendant had got the horse on its feet again, 
was leading jt totteringly into the gangway and round to 
exit, under t e Authorities. The horse crawled slowly. The 
we ‘running from pink cloak to red cloak, rag to rag, and 
ver catching anything, was getting excited, impatient of the 
g game. He jumped once more into the gangway and started 
aning, ‘alas, on towards where the wounded horse was still 
limpimg its way to the exit. 
ate knew what was coming. Before she could look away, 
‘bull had charged on the limping horse from behind, the at- 
dants had fled, the horse was up-ended absurdly, one of the 
’s horns between his hind legs and deep in his inside. Down 
went the horse, collapsing in front, but his rear was still 
ee up, with the bull’s horn working vigorously ™p and 

cries of pleased amusement among the crowd. 

‘his pretty event took place on Kate’s side of the ring, and 
far from where she sat, below her. Most of the people were 
ir feet craning to look down over the edge to watch the 
nelusion of this delightful spectacle. 

‘Kate knew if she saw any more she would go into hysterics. 

24 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

She looked swiftly at Owen, who looked like a oud bey 
spellbound. é 
‘I’m going!’ she said, rising. : 
‘Going!’ he cried, in wonder and dismay, his flushed fies 
and his bald flushed forehead a picture, looking up at her. 
But she had already turned, and was hurrying away towards 3 
the mouth of the exit-tunnel. 4 
Owen came running after her, flustered, and sane in all” 
directions. ; 
‘Really going!’ he said in chagrin, as she came to the high» 
vaulted exit-tunnel. 3 
‘I must. I’ve got to get out,’ she cried. “Don’t youcome.” 
‘Really!’ he echoed, torn all ways. a 
The scene was creating a very hostile attitude in the dae 
ence. To leave the bull-fight is a national insult. 

‘Don’t come! Really! I shall take a tram-car,’ she aids 
hurriedly. = 

‘Really! Do you think you'll be all right? ; 

‘Perfectly. You stay. Good-bye! I can’t smell any more cof 
this stink.’ 

He turned like Orpheus looking back into hell, and waver- 
ing made towards his seat again. 

It-was not so easy, because many people were now on their 
feet and crowding to the exit vault. The rain which had sput- 
tered a few drops suddenly fell in a downward splash. ro 
were crowding to shelter; but Owen, unheeding, fought his 
way back to his seat, and sat in his rain-coat with the rain pour- 
ing on his bald head. He was as nearly in hysterics as Kate. 
But he was convinced that this was life. He was seeing LIFE, © 
and what can an American do more! 

‘They might just as well sit and enjoy somebody else’s- 
diarrhoea’ was the thought that passed through Kate’s dis- 
tracted but still Irish mind. 

There she was in the great concrete archway under the 
stadium, with the lousy press of the audience crowding in after 
her. Facing outwards, she saw the straight downpour of the 
rain, and a little beyond, the great wooden gates that opened 
to the free street. Oh to be out, to be out of this, to be free! 

But it was pouring tropical rain. The little shoddy soldiers 
were pressing back under the brick gateway, for shelter. And 

S : BEGINNINGS OF A BULL-FIGHT 25 
* 

_the gates were almost shut. Perhaps they would not let her out. 
: 5 h horror! 

She stood hovering in front of the straight downpour. She 
would have dashed out, but for the restraining thought of 
what she would look like when her thin gauze dress was plas- 
tered to her body by drenching rain. On the brink she hovered. 
Behind her, from the inner end of the stadium tunnel, the 
people were surging in in waves. She stood horrified and alone, 
looking always out to freedom. The crowd was ina state of ex- 
citement, cut off in its sport, on tenterhooks lest it should miss 
anything. Thank goodness the bulk stayed near the inner end 
_ of the vault. She hovered near the outer end, ready to bolt at 
any moment. 

The rain crashed steadily down. 

__ She waited on the outer verge, as far from the people as pos- 
5 sible Her face had that drawn, blank look of a woman near 

% up > and the horg of the bull goring slowly and dd thythmically in 
- its vitals. The forse so utterly passive and grotesque. And all 
its bow€ls slipping on to the ground. 

But a new terror was the throng inside the tunnel entrance. 
_ The big arched place was filling up, but still the crowd did not 

_ kindly brought his little boys to the show, and stood in fat, 
sloppy, paternal benevolence above them. They were pale 
mites, the elder about ten years old, highly dressed up in Sun- 
ay clothes. And badly they needed protecting from that pater- 
al benevolence, for they were oppressed, peaked, and a bit 
wan from the horrors. To those children at least bull-fights did 
ot come natural, but would be an acquired taste. There were 
other children, however, and fat mammas in black satin that 
was greasy and grey at the edges with an overflow of face- 
owder. These fat mammas had a pleased, excited look in their 
eyes, almost sexual, and very distasteful in contrast to their soft 
_ passive bodies. 

a 3 ae shivered a little in her thin frock, for the ponderous 

26 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

rain had a touch of ice. She stared through the curtain of water 
at the big rickety gates of the enclosuresurrounding the ampht- — 
theatre, at the midget soldiers cowering in their shoddy, pink 
white cotton uniforms, and at the glimpse of the squalid street ; 
outside, now running with ditty brown streams. The vendors _ 
had all taken refuge, in dirty-white clusters, in the pulque 
shops, one of which was sinisterly named: A Ver que Sale. 

She was afraid more of the repulsiveness than of anything. — 
She had been in many cities of the world, but Mexico had an 7 
underlying ugliness, a sort of squalid evil, which made Naples _ 
seem debonair in comparison. She was afraid, she dreaded the — 
thought that anything might really touch her in this town, and 
give her the contagion of itscrawling sort of evil. But she knew 
that the one thing she must do was to keep her head. a3 

A little officer in uniform, wearing a big, pale-blue cape, — 
made his way through the crowd. He was short, dark, and had 
a little black beard like an imperial. He came through the © 
people from the inner entrance, and cleared his way witha — 
quiet, silent unobtrusiveness, yet with the peculiar heavy In- 
dian momentum. Even touching the crowd delicately with his’ 
gloved hand, and murmuring almost inaudibly the Com per- 
miso! formula, he seemed to be keeping himself miles away — 
from contact. He was brave too: because there was just the 
chance some lout might shoot him because of his uniform. 
The people knew him too. Kate could tell that by the flicker of 
a jeering, self-conscious smile that passed across many faces, 
and the exclamation: ‘General Viedma! Don Cipriano!’ 

He came towards Kate, saluting and bowing with a brittle 
shyness. 

‘Iam General Viedma. Did you wish to leave? Let me get 
you an automobile,’ he said, in very English English, that — 
sounded strange from his dark face, and a little stiff on his soft 
tongue. 

His eyes were dark, quick, with the glassy darkness that shes 
found so wearying. But they were tilted up with a curious 
slant, under arched black brows. It gave him an odd look of 
detachment, as if he looked at life with raised brows. His man- 
ner was supetficially assured, underneath perhaps hallsaveaes : 
shy and farouche, and deprecating. 

“Thank you so much,’ she said. 

a] 

petee Wey NRE 

BEGINNINGS OF A BULL-FIGHT 27 

He called to a soldier in the gateway. 
‘T will send you in the automobile of my friend,’ he said. 
“Tt will be better than a taxi. You don’t like the bull-fight ?’ 
“No! Horrible!’ said Kate. ‘But do get me a yellow taxi. 
That is quite safe.’ 
“Well, the man has gone for the automobile. You are Eng- 
cape yes?” 
‘Trish,’ said Kate. 
“Ah Irish! !? he replied, with the flicker of a smile. 
“You speak English awfully well,’ she said. 
_ “Yes! I was educated there. I was in England seven years.’ 
“Were you! My name is Mrs Leslie.’ 
_ ‘Ah Leslie! I knew James Leslie in Oxford. He was killed in 
the war.’ 
“Yes. That was my husband’s brother.’ 
as really!’ 
~ “How small the world is!’ said Kate. 
Eves indged!’ said the General. 
There was a pause. 
_ ‘And the gerftlemen who are with you, they are —?’ 
_ ‘Ametican,’ said Kate. 
‘Ah Americans! Ah yes!’ 
_ “The older one is my cousin - Owen Rhys.’ 
- “Owen Rhys! Ah yes! I think I saw in the newspaper you 
_were,here in town - visiting Mexico.’ 
_ He spoke in a peculiar quiet voice, rather suppressed, and 
his quick eyes glanced at her, and at his surroundings, like 
_ those of a man perpetually suspecting an ambush. But his face 

_ had a certain silent hostility, under his kindness. He was saving 
_ his nation’s reputation. 

_ “They did put in a not very complimentary 1 note,’ said Kate. 
g think they don’t like it that we stay in the Hotel San Remo. 
It is too poor and foreign. But we are none of us rich, and we 

‘like it better than those other places.’ 
4 - ©The Hotel San Remo? Where is that?’ 
"In the Avenida del Peru. Won’t you come and see us there, 
and meet my cousin and Mr Thompson?’ 
F _ “Thank you! Thank you! I hardly ever go out. But I will 
4 call if I may, and then perhaps you will all come to see me at 
_ the house of my friend, Sefior Ramon Carrasco.’ 

a 
id 
a 

. 

28 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

“We should like to,’ said Kate. 
‘Very well. And shall I call, then?’ 
She told him a time, and added: 
‘You mustn’t be surprised at the hotel. It zs small, ace 
nearly all Italians. But we tried some of the big ones, and there 
is such a feeling of lowness about them, awful! I can’t fet 

the feeling of prostitution. And then the cheap insolence of the 
servants. No, my little San Remo may be rough, but it’s kindly | 
and human, and it’s not rotten. It is like Italy as I always knew ‘ 
it, decent, and with a bit of human generosity. I do = 
Mexico Citys is evil, underneath.’ 

‘Well,’ he said, ‘the hotels are bad. It is unfortunate, but the | 
foreigners seem to make the Mexicans worse than they are 
naturally. And Mexico, or something in it, certainly makes the - ; 
foreigners worse than they are at home.’ 

He spoke with a certain bitterness. 

‘Perhaps we should all stay away,’ she said. 

“Perhaps!” he said, lifting his shoulders a little. “But I don’t _ 
think so.’ 

He relapsed into a slightly blank silence. Peculiar how Hibs 
feelings flushed over him, anger, diffidence, wistfulness, assur-_ 
ance, and an anger again, all in little flushes, and sone 
naive. 

“It doesn’t rain so much,’ said Kate. ‘When will the car 
come?’ 

‘It is here now. It has been waiting some time,’ he replied. 

“Then I'll go,’ she said. 

‘Well,’ he replied, looking at the sky. ‘It is still raining, and 
your dress,is very thin. You must take my cloak.’ 

‘Oh!’ she said, shrinking, ‘it is only two yards.’ 

“Tt is still raining fairly fast. Better either wait, or let me lend © 
you my cloak.’ 

He swung out of his cloak with a quick little movement, | 
and held it up to her. Almost without realizing, she turned her 
shoulders to him and he put the cape on her. She caught it 
round her, and ran out to the gate, as if escaping. He followed, 
with a light yet military stride. The soldiers saluted rather 
slovenly, and he responded briefly. 

A not vety new Fiat stood at the gate, with a chauffeur in a — 
short red-and-black check coat. The chauffeur opened the 

Oe 

ot ee emery wer. 

TEA-PARTY IN TLACOLULA 29 

door. Kate slipped off the cloak as she got in, and handed it 
back. He stood with it over his arm. 

“Good-bye!” she said. ‘Thank you eyer so much. And we 
shall see you on Tuesday. Do put yout cape on.’ 

“On Tuesday, yes. Hotel San Remo. Calle de Peru,’ he 
ded to the chauffeur. Then turning again to Kate: ‘The 

born’s, where I can sit ina corner and drink tea to comfort me.’ 
_ “To comfort you after the bull-fight?’ he said, with another 
ck smile. “To Sanborn’s, Gonzalez.’ 
He saluted and bowed and closed the door. The car started. 
ate sat back, breathing relief. Relief to get away from that 
y place. Relief even to get away from that nice man. He 
; awfully nice. But he mage her feel she wanted to get away 
m him too. There was that heavy, black Mexican fatality 
bout him, that put a burden on her. His quietness, and his 
assurance, almost aeptnsnive ; and at the same time, a 

nick, naive? childish smile. Those black eyes, like black 
Ss that you couldn’t look into, and which were so watch- 

1 and of watmth! Perhaps! 

he felt again, as she felt before, that Mexico lay in her des- 
ost as a doom. Something so heavy, so oppressive, like 

a. of some huge serpent that seemed as if it could hardly 

é itself. 

¢ was glad to get to her corner in the tea-house, to feel 

elf in the cosmopolitan world once more, to drink her tea 
eat strawberry shortcake and try to forget. 

CHARTER R IT 

Tea-party in Tlacolula 

N came back to the hotel at about half-past six, tired, ex- 
, a little guilty, and a good deal distressed at having let 
go alone. And now the whole thing was over, rather 

30 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘Oh, how did you get on?’ he cried, the moment he saw 
her, afraid almost like a boy of his own sin of omission. 4 

‘I got on perfectly. Went to Sanborn’s for tea, and had | 
strawberry shortcake — so good!’ : 

‘Oh, good for you!’ he laughed in relief. “Then you weren’t — 
foo much overcome! I’m so glad. I had such awful qualms after j 
Pd Jet you go. Imagined all the things that are supposed to 
happen in Mexico - chauffeur driving away with you into — 
some horrible remote region, and robbing you and all that—but — 
then I Anew really you’d be all right. Oh, the time I had - — 
the rain! — and the people throwing things at my bald patch - — 
and those horses — wasn’t that horrible? — I wonder P’m still — 
alive.’ And he laughed with tired excitement, putting his hand ~ 
ovet his stomach and rolling his eyes. ; 

‘Aren’t you drenched?’ she said. 

“Drenched!’ he replied. “Or at least I was. I’ve dried off 
quite a lot. My rain-coat is no good —I don’t know why I don’t 
buy another. Oh, but what a time! The rain streaming on my — 
bald head, and the crowd behind throwing oranges at it. Then — 
simply gored in my inside about letting you go alone. Yet it was — 
the only bull-fight I shall ever see. I came then before it was 
over. Bud wouldn’t come. I suppose he’s still there.’ 

“Was it as awful as the beginning?’ she asked. 

‘No! No! It wasn’t. The first was worst — that horse-4 
shambles. Oh, they killed two more horses. And five bulls! Yes, — 
a regular butchery. But some of it was very neat work; those — 
toreadors did some very pretty feats. One stood on ~ cloak 
while a bull charged him.’ : 

‘I think,’ interrupted Kate, ‘if I knew that some af those — 
toreadors were going to be tossed by the bull, I’'d go to see 
another bull-fight. Ugh, how I detest them! The longer I live | 
the more loathsome the human species becomes to me. How | 
much nicer the bulls are!’ 

“Oh, quite!’ said Owen vaguely. ‘Exactly. But still there 
was some vety skilful work, very pretty. Really very plucky.’ 

“Yah!” snarled Kate. ‘Plucky! They with all their knives 
and their spears and cloaks and darts — and they know just how 
a bull will behave. It’s just a performance of human beings tor- - 
turing animals, with those common fellows showing off, how 
smart they are at hurting a bull. Dirty little boys maiming flies 

TEA-PARTY IN TLACOLULA 31 

— ‘that? s what they are. Only grown-up, they are bastards, not 

, boys. Oh, I wish I could be a bull, just for ae minutes. Bas- 

~ tard, that’s what I call it!’ 

Well!’ laughed Owen uneasily, ‘it is rather.’ 

ae Call that manliness!’ cried Kate. ‘Then thank God a mil- 
_ lion times that ’ma woman, and know poltroonery and dirty- 

_ mindedness when I see it.’ 

- Again Owen laughed uncomfortably. 

“Go upstairs and change’ she said. ‘ You’ll die.’ 

“I think Id better. I feel I might die any minute, as a matter 

of fact. Well, till dinner then. Pll tap at your door in half an 

pe 

___ Kate sat trying to sew, but her hand trembled. She could not 

_ get the bull-ring out of her mind, and something eas damaged 

_ in her inside. 

__» She straightened herself, and sighed. She was really very 
_ angry, too, with Owen. He was naturally so sensitive, and so 

kind. But be had the insidious modern disease of tolerance. He 

_tpust tolerate everything, even a thing that revolted him. He 

would call it Fife! He would féel,he had /ived this afternoon. 

_ Greedy’even for the most sordid sensations. 

‘Whereas she felt as if'she had eaten something which was 

- giving her ptomaine poisoning. If that was life! 

. Ah men, men! They all had this soft rottenness of the soul, 

a sttange perversity which made even the squalid, repulsive 

things seem part of /fe to them. Life! And what is life? A louse 

_ lying on its back and kicking? Ugh! 

_ . At about seven o’clock Villiers came tapping. He looked 

wan, peaked, but like a bird that had successfully pecked a 

“Oh it was GREAT!’ he said, lounging on one hip. 
a GREAT! They killed seven BULLS.’ 

‘No calves, unfortunately,’ said Kate, suddenly furious again. 
__ He paused to consider the point, then laughed. Her anger 
was another slight sensational amusement to him. 

. ‘No, no calves,’ he said. ‘The calves have come home to be 
tened. But several more horses after you’d gone.’ 

¥ “J don’t want to hear,’ she said coldly. 

He laughed, feeling rather heroic. After all, one must be able 
~ to look on blood and bursten bowels calmly: even with a cer- 

lt tes 
Pee 
ee 

32 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

tain thrill. The young hero! But there were dark rings round 
his eyes, like a debauch. 

‘Oh but!’ he began, making a rather coy face. “Don’t you 
want to hear what I did after! I went to the hotel of the chief — 
toreador, and saw him lying on his bed all dressed up, smoking _ 
a fat cigar. Rather like a male Venus who is never undressed. 
So funny!’ 

‘Who took you there?’ she said. 

‘That Pole, you remember? - and a Spaniard who talked 
English. The toreador was great, lying on his bed in all his get- 
up, except his shoes, and quite a crowd of men going over it 
all again — wawawawawa! — you never heard sucharow!” 

‘Aren’t you wet?’ said Kate. 

‘No, not at all. I’m perfectly dry. You see I had my coat. 
Only my head, of course. My poor hair was all streaked down - 
my face like streaks of dye.’ He wiped his thin hair across his” 
head with rather self-conscious humour. ‘ Hasn’t Owen come _ 
in?’ he asked. 

‘Yes, he’s changing.’ ; 

‘Well Pll go up. I suppose‘it’s nearly supper time. Oh yeas. 7 
it’s after!’ At which discovery he brightened as if he’d received 

a gift. 

‘Oh by the way, how did you get on? Rather mean of us to 
Jet you go all alone like that,” he said, as he hung poised in Pes 
open doorway. 

‘Not at all,’ she said. ‘You wanted to stay. And I can look 
after myself, at my time of life.’ 

“We-ell!’ he said, with an American drawl. ‘Maybe you 
can!’ Then he gave a little laugh. ‘But you shou/d have seen all 
those men rehearsing in that bedroom, throwing their arms 
about, and the toreador lying on the bed like Venus with a fat — 
cigar, listening to her lovers.’ 

‘I’m glad I didn’ t,’ said Kate. 

Villiers disappeared with a wicked little laugh. 

And as she sat her hands trembled with outrage and passion. 
A-moral! Howcould one be a-moral, or non-moral, when one’s. 
soul was revolted! How could one be like these Americans, 
picking over the garbage of sensations, and gobbling it up like “s 
carrion birds! At the moment, both Owen and Villiers —— ; 
to her like carrion birds, repulsive. 

ee ee nn eee ee i SE OR ETE : 

TEA-PARTY IN TLACOLULA 33 

She felt, moreover, that they both hated her first because 
_ she was a woman. It was all right so long as she fell in with 
them in every way. But the moment she stood out against 
_them in the least, they hated her mechanically for the very fact 
_ that she was a woman. They hated her womanness. 
_ And in this Mexico, with its great under-drift of squalor 

and heavy reptile-like evil, it was hard for her to bear up. 

__ She was really fond of Owen. But how could she respect 
_ him? So empty, and waiting for circumstance to fill him up. 
_ Swept with an American despair of having lived in vain, or of 
_ not having rea/ly lived. Having missed something. Which fear- 
_ ful misgiving would make him rush like mechanical steel fil- 
_ ings to a magnet, towards any crowd in the street. And then 
all his poetry and philosophy gone with the cigarette-end he 
_ threw away, he would stand craning his neck in one more fran- 
tic effort to see — just to see. Whatever it was, he must see it. 
Or he might miss something. And then, after he’d seen an old 
_ ragged woman run over by a motor-car and bleeding on the 
floor, he’d come back to Kate pale at the gills, sick, bewildered, 
daunted, and yt, yes, glad he’d seen it. It was Life! 
“Welt, said Kate, ‘I always thank God I’m not Argus. Two 
_ eyes ate often two too many for me, in all the horrors. I don’t 
_ feed myself on street-accidents.’ 
__ At dinner they tried to talk of pleasanter things than bull- 
_ fights. Villiers was neat and tidy and very nicely mannered, but 
she knew he was keeping a little mocking laugh up his sleeve, 
_ because she could not stomach the afternoon’s garbage. He 
_ himself had black rings under his eyes, but that was because he 
had ‘lived.’ ; 
The climax came with the dessert. In walked the Pole and 
_ that Spaniard who spoke American. The Pole was unhealthy 
and unclean-looking. She heard him saying to Owen, who of 
~ course had risen with automatic cordiality: 
‘We thought we’d come here to dinner. Well, how are 
Ee you?’ 
+ Kate’s skin was already goose-flesh. But the next instant she 
heard that dingy voice, that spoke so many languages dingily, 
 assailing her with familiarity: 
: ‘Ah, Miss Leslie, you missed the best part of it. You missed 
all the fun! Oh, I say ~’ 

i 

34 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Rage flew into her heart and fire into her eyes. She got up 
suddenly from her chair, and faced the fellow behind her. 

‘Thank you!’ she said. ‘I don’t want to hear. I don’t want — 
you to speak to me. I don’t»want to know you.’ 

She looked at him once, then turned her back, sat dowa 
again, and took a pitahaya from the fruit plate. 

The fellow went green, and stood a moment speechless. 

‘Oh, all right!’ he said’ mechanically, turning away to the b 

Spaniard who spoke American. 

‘Well — see you later!’ said Owen rather ee and he 
went back to his seat at Kate’s table. 

The two strange fellows sat at another table. Kate ate hers : 
cactus fruit in silence, and waited for her coffee. By this time 
she was not so angry, she was quite calm. And even Villiers 
hid his joy in a new sensation under a manner of er 
quiet composure. 

When coffee came she looked at the two men at the other 
table, and at the two men at her own table. 

‘I’ve had enough of canai/l/e, of any sort,’ she said. ead 

‘Oh, I understand, perfectly,’ said Owen. si 

After dinner, she went to her room, And through the night 
she could not sleep, but lay listening to the noises of Mexico i 
City, then to the silence and the strange, grisly fear that so often — 3 
creeps out on to the darkness of a Mexican night. Away inside — 
her, she loathed Mexico City. She even feared it. In the day- 
time it had a certain spell — but at night, the underneath 4 
ness and evil came forth. : 

In the morning Owen also announced that he had not slept 
at all. : 

“Oh, I never slept so well since I was in Mexico,’ said Vil- — 

liers, with a triumphant look of a bird that has just pecked a — 
good morsel from the garbage-heap. 

‘Look at the frail aesthetic youth!’ said Owen, i in a hollow 
voice. 

‘His frailty and his aestheticism are both bad signs, to aoe 
said Kate ominously. 

“And the youth. Surely that’s another!’ said Owen, with a 
dead laugh. we 

But Villiers ck gave a little snort of cold, pleased amuse-— 
ment, 

TEA-PARTY IN TLACOLULA 35 

_ Someone was calling Miss Leslie on the telephone, said the 
‘Mexican chambermaid. It was the only person Kate knew in 
the capital — or in the Distrito Federal — a Mrs Norris, widow 
of an English ambassador of thirty years ago. She had a big, 
‘ponderous old house out in the village of Tlacolula. 
“Yes! Yes! This is Mrs Norris. How are you? That’s right, 
hat’s right. Now, Mrs Leslie, won’t you come out to tea this 
afternoon and see the garden? I wish you would. Two friends 
ate coming in to see me, two Mexicans: Don Ramon Carrasco 
and General Viedma. They are both charming men, and Don 
Ramén is a great scholar. I assure you, they are both entirely 
the exception among Mexicans. Oh, but e#firely the exception! 
So now, my dear Mrs Leslie, won’t you come with your cousin? 
I wish you would.’ 
_ Kate remembered the little General; he was a good deal 
smaller than herself. She remembered his erect, alert little 
figure, something birdlike, and the face with eyes slanting 
nder arched eyebrows, and the little black tuft of an imperial 
n the chin: a face with a peculiar Chinese suggestion, without 
being Chinese irfthe least, really. An odd, detached, yet cocky 
le maw, a true little Indian, speaking Oxford English in a 
rapid, low, musical voice; with extraordinarily gentle intona- 
mn. Yet those black, inhuman eyes! 
Till this minute she had not really been able to recall him to 
‘self, to get any sharp impression. Now she had it. He was 
Indian pure and simple. And in Mexico, she knew, there 
were more generals than soldiers. There had been three 
generals in the Pullman coming down from El Paso, two, 
more or less educated, in the ‘drawing-room’, and the third, a 
real peasant Indian, travelling with a frizzy half-white woman 
who looked as if she had fallen into a flour-sack, her face was 
so deep in powder, and her frizzy hair and her brown silk dress 
so douched with the white dust of it. Neither this ‘General’ 
nor this woman had ever been in a Pullman before. But the 
General was sharper than the woman. He was a tall wiry fel- 
low with a reddened pock-marked face and sharp little black 
es. He followed Owen to the smoking-room, and watched 
th sharp eyes, to see how everything was done. And soon he 
new. And he would wipe his wash-bow] dry as neatly as any- 
body. There was something of a real man about him. But the 

36 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

poor, half-white woman, when she wanted the ladies’ toilet, — 
got lost in the passage and wailed aloud: I don’t know where to — 
go! No sé adonde! No sé adonde! — until the General sent the Pull- 
man boy to direct her. : a, 

But it had annoyed Kate to see this General and this woman | 
eating chicken and asparagus and jelly in the Pullman, paying — 
fifteen pesos for a rather poor dinner, when for a peso-and-a- : 
half apiece they could have eaten a better meal, and real Mexi- 
can, at the meal-stop station. And all the poor, barefoot people 
clamouring on the platform, while the ‘General’, who was a ; 
man of their own sort, nobly swallowed his asparagus on the 
other side of the window-pane. 

But this is how they save the people, in Mexico and else- 
where. Some tough individual scrambles up out of the squalor — 
and proceeds to save himself. Who pays for the asparagus and i 
jelly and face-powder, nobody asks, because everybody knows. 

And so much for Mexican generals: as a rule, a class to be 
strictly avoided. jt 

Kate was aware of all this. She wasn’t much interested in 
any sort of Mexican in office. There is so much in the world 
that one wants to avoid, as one wants to avoid the lice that 
creep on the unwashed crowd. 4 

Being rather late, Owen and Kate bumped out to Tlacolula | 
in a Ford taxi. It was a long way, a long way through the pecu- | 
liar squalid endings of the town, then along the straight road 
between trees, into the valley. The sun of April was brilliant, 
there were piles“of cloud about the sky, where the volcanoes 
would be. The valley stretched away to its sombre, atmos- 
pheric hills, in a flat dry bed, parched except where there was 
some crop being irrigated. The soil seemed strange, dry, black- — 
ish, artificially wetted, and old. The trees rose high, and hung — 
bate boughs, or withered shade. The buildings were either new — 
and alien, like the Country Club, ot cracked and dilapidated, 
with all the plaster falling off. The falling of thick plaster from 
‘cracked buildings — one could almost hear it! 

Yellow tram-cats rushed at express speed away down the 
fenced-in car-lines, rushing round towards Xochimilco or 
Tlalpam. The asphalt road ran outside these lines, and on the ~ 
asphalt rushed incredibly dilapidated Ford omnibuses, crowded 
with blank dark natives in dirty cotton clothes and big straw 

TEA-PARTY IN TLACOLULA 37 

ats. At the far edge of the road, on the dust-tracks under the 

es, little donkeys under huge loads loitered towards the city, 
i ‘iven by men with blackened faces and bare, blackened legs. 
-Three-fold went the traffic; the roar of the tram-trains, the 
clatter of the automobiles, the straggle of asses and of outside- 
seeming individuals. 

- Occasional flowers would splash out in eae? from a ruin 

of falling plaster. Occasional women with strong, dark-brown 
arms would be washing rags in a drain. An occasional horse- 
man would ride across to the herd of motionless black-and- 
white cattle on the field. Occasional maize-fields were already 
coming green. And the pillars that mark the water conduits 
assed one by one. 
_ They went through the tree-filled plaza of Tlacolula, where 
atives were squatting on the ground, selling fruits or sweets, 
then down a road between high walls. They pulled up at last 
it big gate-doors, beyond which was a heavy pink-and-yellow 
= and beyond the house, high, dark cypress trees. 

In the road two motor-cars were already standing. That 

eant other visf€ors. Owen knocked on the studded fortress 

doors: there was an imbecile barking of dogs. At last a little 
footman with a little black moustache opened silently. . 
_ The square, inner patio, dark, with sun lying on the heavy 
arches of one side, had pots of red and white flowers, but was 
ponderous, as if dead for centuries. A certain dead, heavy 
strength and beauty seemed there, unable to pass away, un- 
able to liberate itself and decompose. There was a stone basin 
of clear but motionless water, and the heavy reddish-and-yel- 
‘low arches went round the courtyard with warrior-like fatality, 
their bases in dark shadow. Dead, massive house of the Con- 
Pe aiceadotcs. with a glimpse of tall-grown garden beyond, and 
further Aztec cypresses rising to strange dark heights. And 
dead silence, like the black, porous, absorptive lava rock. Save 
heal the tram-cars battered past outside the solid wall. 

Kate went up the jet-like stone staircase, through the leather 
Bass: Mrs Norris came forward on the terrace of the upper 
patio to receive her guests. 

‘I’m so glad, my dear, that you came. I should have rung 
you up before, but I’ve had such trouble with my heart. And 
the doctor wanting to send me down to a lower altitude! I said 

38 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

to him, I’ve no patience! If you’re going to cure me, cure me at 
an altitude of seven thousand feet or else-admit your incom-__ 
petence at once. Ridiculous, this rushing up and down frot 
one altitude to another. I’ve lived at this height all these years. 
I simply refuse to be bundled down to Cuernavaca or some 
_ other place where I don’t want to go. Well, my dear, et how 
ate you?’ . 

Mrs Norris was an elderly woman, rather like a conquista-_ 
dor herself in her black silk dress and her little black shoulder- 
shawl of fine cashmere, with a short silk fringe, and her orna- _ 
ments of black enamel. Her face had gone slightly grey, her 
nose was sharp and dusky, and her voice hammered almost like 
metal, a slow, distinct, peculiar hard music of its own. She was. 
an archaeologist, and she had studied the Aztec remains so — 
long, that now some of the black-grey look of the lava rock, 
and some of the experience of the Aztec idols, with sharp nos 
and slightly prominent eyes and an expression of tomb-like 
mockery, had passed into her face. A lonely daughter of cul- 
ture, with a strong mind and a dense will, she had browsed all 
her life on the hard stones of archaeological remains, and at the — 
same time she had retained a strong sense of humanity, and a 
slightly fantastic humorous vision of her fellow men. > 

From the first instant, Kate respected her for her isolation 

‘and her dauntlessness. The world is made up of a mass of 
people and a few individuals. Mrs Norris was one of the few 
individuals. True, she played her social game all the time. 
But she was an odd number; and all alone, she could give the 
evén numbers a bad time. 

‘But come in. Do come in!’ she said, after keeping her two 
guests out on the terrace that was lined with black idols and 
dusty native baskets and shields and arrows and tapa, like a 
museum. 

In the dark sitting-room that opened on to the terrace were © 
visitors: an old man in a black morning coat and white hair 
and beard, and a woman in black crépe-de-chine, with the in- 
evitable hat of her sort upon her grey hair: a stiff satin turned — 
up on three sides and with black ospreys underneath. She had — 
the baby face and the faded blue _ and the middle-west 
accent inevitable. 

_ ‘Judge and Mrs Burlap.’ 

TEA-PARTY IN TLACOLULA 39 

‘The third visitor was a youngish man, very correct and not 
quite sute. He was “Major Law, American military attaché at 

_ The three people eyed the newcomers with cautious ‘suspi- 
ag They might be shady. Poe are ee so many shady 

- “Been long! i in Mexico?’ snapped the Judge; the police en- 
y liry had begun. 
* “No!” said Owen, resonantly, his gorge rising. ‘About two 
< > 
“You are an American?’ 

_*T,’ said Owen, ‘am American. Mrs Leslie is English — or 
rather Irish.’ : 
_ “Been in the club yet?’ 
ENo, said,Owen, “I haven’ t. American clubs aren’t much in 

uction.’ ‘ 
“Who? Garfield sagpei The fps: started as if he had 

- ‘T should rather like t. to go to Russia myself,’ said-Owen. “It 
probably the most interesting country in the world to-day.’ 
“But weren’t you telling me,’ put in Mrs Norris, in her clear, 
etal-musical voice, ‘that you loved China so much, Mr 
ays?” ms 
‘J did like China very much,’ said Owen. 
- ‘And I’m sure you made some wonderful collections. Tell 
me now, what was your particular fancy?’ 
Eeshins, after all,’ said Owen, ‘it was jade.’ 
‘Ah jade! Yes! Jade! Jade fs beautiful! Those wonderful 
little fairy-lands they carve in jade!’ 
3 ‘And the stone itself! It was the delicate stone. that fascinated 
me,’ said Owen. ‘The wonderful quality of it!’ 
- *Ah wonderful, wonderful! Tell me now, dear Mrs Leslie, 
oe you have been doing since I saw you? ; 
‘We went to a bull-fight, and hated it,’ said Kate. ‘At least I 
did We sat in the Sun, near the ring, ahd it was all horrible.’ 

ae 
atin 

ican 

a eae 

40 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

a 

‘Horrible, I am sure. I never went to a bull-fight in Mexico. 
Only in Spain, where there is wonderful colour. Did you ever 
try a bull-fight, Major?’ “a 

“Yes, I have been several times.’ 

“You have! Then you know all about it. And how are ei 
liking Mexico, Mrs Leslie?’ - 

‘Not much,’ said Kate. ‘It strikes me as evil.’ et 

“It does! It does!’ said Mrs Norris. ‘Ah, if you had known — 
it before! Mexico before the revolution! It was different then. 
What is the latést news, Major?’ 

‘About the same,’ said the Major. ‘There is a rumour that 
the new President will be turned down by the army, a few days 
before he comes into office. But you never know.’ = | 

‘I think it would be a great shame not to let him have a try,” | 
put in Owen hotly. “He seems a sincere man, and just because | 
he is honestly a Labour man, they want to shut him out.” 

‘Ah, my dear Mr Rhys, they a// talk so nobly beforehand. 
If only their deeds followed their words, Mexico would be | 
heaven on earth.’ <> 

‘Instead of hell on earth,’ snapped the Judge. " 

A young man and his wife, also Americans, were introduced 
as Mr and Mrs Henry. The young man was fresh and lively. 
“We were talking about the new President,’ said Mrs. — 
Norris. p= 
‘Well, why not!’ said Mr Henty breezily. ‘I’m just back 
from Orizaba. And do you know what they’ve got pasted e 
on the walls? — Hosanna! Hosanna! Hosanna! Viva el Jesus Cris. : 
de“ Mexico, Socrates Tomas Montes!’ 
“Why, did you ever hear of such a thing!’ said Mrs. Norris. 

“Hosanna! Hosanna! Hosanna! To the new Labour Presa 
I think it’s rich,’ said Henry. 

The Judge stamped his stick on the ground ina speechless 4 
access of irritability. : 

“They pasted on my luggage,’ said the Major, ‘when I came 
through Vera Cruz: La degenerada media clasa, Serd regenerada, 4 
por mi, Montes. 'The degenerate middle class shall be regener- 
ated by me, Montes.’ 4 

Poot Montes!’ said Kate. “He seems to have got his work — 
cut out.’ . 

“He has indeed!” said Mrs Norris. ‘Poor man, I wish he 

TEA-PARTY IN TLACOLULA 41 

might come in peacefully and put a strong hand on the coun- 
tt -y. But there’s not much hope, I’m afraid.’ 

There was a silence, during which Kate felt that bitter hope- 
ness that comes over people who know Mexico well. A 
bitter barren hopelessness. 

“aa Siow can a man who comes in on a Labour vote, even a 
doctored one, put a strong hand on a country!’ snapped the 
_ Judge. ‘Why he came in on the very cry of Down with rhe strong 
3 hand!” And again the old man stamped his stick in an access of 
.. irritability. 

This was another characteristic of the old residents of the 
ty: A state of intense, though often suppressed irritation, an 
irritation amounting almost to rabies. 

“Oh, but mayn’t it be possible that he will change his views 
little on coming into power?’ said Mrs Norris. ‘So many 
Pre sidents have done so.’ 

oot ‘I should say very probable, if ever he gets into power,’ said 
yo ng Hegry. “He'll have all his work cut out saving Socrates 
Tomas, he won’t have much time left for saving Mexico.’ 
 *He’s a darfferous fellow, and will turn out a scoundrel,’ 
id the Judge. 

“Myself,” said Owen, “as far as I have followed him, I believe 
is sincere, and I admire him.’ 

“I thought it was so nice,’ said Kate, ‘that they received him 
New York with loud music by the Street Sweepers’ Band. 
> Street Sweepers’ Band they sent to receive him from the 
! ? 

‘You see,’ said the Major, ‘no doubt the Labour people 
emselves wished to send that particular band.’ 

‘But to be President Elect, and to be received by the Street 
weepers’ Band!’ said Kate. ‘No, I can’t believe it!’ 

“Oh, it actually was so,’ said the Major. ‘But that is pietsier 
ailing Labour, surely.’ r 

‘The latest rumour,’ said Henry, ‘is that the army will go 
ver en bloc to General Angulo about the twenty-third, a week 
before the inauguration.’ 

‘But how is it possible?’ said Kate, ‘when Montes is so 
popular?’ 

‘Montes popular!’ they all cried at once. ‘Why!’ snapped 
Judge, ‘he’s the most unpopular man in Mexico.’ 

42 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘Not with the Labour Party!’ said Owen, almost at bay. si 

‘The Labour Party!’ the Judge fairly spat like a cat. ‘There _ 
is no such thing. What is the Labour Party in Mexico? A 
bunch of isolated factory hands here and there, mostly in the © 
State of Vera Cruz. The Labour Party! They’ve done what 
they could already. We know them.’ 

“That’s true,’ said Henry. ‘The Labourites have tried every 
little game possible. When I was in Orizaba they marched to _ 
the Hotel Francia to shoot all the gringoes and the Gachu- ~ 
pines. The hotel manager had pluck enough to harangue them, 
and they went off to the next hotel. When the man came ou 
there to talk to them, they shot him before he got a word out. 
It’s funny, really! If you have to go to the Town Hall, and 
you’re dressed in decent clothes, they let you sit on a hard 
bench for hours. But if a street-sweeper comes in, or a fellow 
in dirty cotton drawers, it is Buenos dias! Senor! Pase Usted! 
Ouiere Usted algo? — while you sit there waiting their pleasure. 
Oh, it’s quite funny.’ eee 

The Judge trembled with irritation like an access of gout. 
The party sat in gloomy silence, that sense of doom and des- 
pair overcoming them as it seems to overcome all people who O 
talk seriously about Mexico. Even Owen was silent. He too © 
had come through Vera Cruz, and had had his fright; the por- 
ters had charged him twenty pesos to carry his trunk from the 
ship to the train. Twenty pesos is ten dollars, for ten minutes” 
wotk. And when Owen had seen the man in front of him — 
arrested and actually sent to jail, a Mexican jail at that, for re- 
fusing to pay the charge, ‘the legal charge’, he himself had 
stumped up without a word. 

‘I walked into the National Museum the other day,’ said ee 
Major quietly. ‘Just into that room on the patio where the 
stones are. It was rather a cold morning, with a Norte blowing. 
I’d been there about ten minutes when somebody suddenly . 
poked me on the shoulder. I turned round, and it was a lout in 
tight boots. You spik English? I said yes! Then he motioned me 
to take my hat off: I’'d got to take my hat off. What for? said I, 
and I turned away and went on looking at their idols and 
things: ugliest set of stuff in the world, I believe. Then “ 
came the fellow with the attendant — the attendant of course 
wearing his cap. They began gabbling that this was the Na-— 

gk * 

TEA-PARTY IN TLACOLULA 43 

tional Museum, and I must take off my hat to their national 
monuments. Imagine it: those dirty stones! I laughed at them 
_ and jammed my hat on tighter and walked out. They are really 
¥ only monkeys when it comes to nationalism.’ 
‘Exactly!’ cried Henry. ‘When they forget all about the 
_ Patria and Mexico and all that stuff, they’re as nice a people as 
you'd find. But as soon as they get national, they’re just mon- 
keys. A man up from Mixcoatl told me a nice story. Mixcoatl 
is a capital way in the South, and they’ve got a sort of Labour 
bureau there. Well, the Indians come in from the hills, as wild 
as rabbits. And they get them into that bureau, and the Labo- 
-_fistas, the agitator fellows, say to them: Now, Sefores, have you 
anything to report from your native village? Haven’ t you anything for 
which you would like redress? Then of course the Indians start 
_ complaining about one another, and the Secretary says: Wait a 
minute, gentlemen! Let me ring up the Governor and reporr this. So he 
_ goes to the telephone and starts ringing: ringing: Ab! Is that 
ed Palace? Is the Governor in? Tell him Senor Fulano wants to speak 
him! The Indians sit gaping with open mouths. To them it’s 
a miracle. Ab ¥1s that you, Governor! Good morning! How are you? 
Can I have your attention for a moment? Many thanks! Well I’ve got 
some gentlemen here down-from Apaxtle, in the hills: José Garcia, 
- Jestis Querido, etc. — and they wish to report so-and-so. Yes! Yes! 
That's it! Yes! What? You will see that justice is done and the thing 
is mgde right? Ah senor, many thanks! In the name of these gentlemen 
ied the hills, from the village of Apaxtle, many thanks. 
. *There sit the Indians staring as if heaven had opened and 
abi Virgin of Guadalupe was standing tiptoe on their chins. 
And what do you expect? The telephone is a dummy. It isn’t 
connected with anywhere. Isn’t that rich? But it’s Mexico.’ 
2 The moment’s fatal pause followed this funny story. 

*Oh but!’ said Kate, ‘it’s wicked! It zs wicked. I’m sure the 
: Indians would be all right, if they were left alone.’ 
BS ‘Well,’ said Mrs Norris, ‘Mexico isn’t like any other place 
in the world.’ 
_ But she spoke with fear and despair in her voice. 

‘They seem to want to betray everything,’ said Kate. “They 
seem to Jove criminals and ghastly things. They seem to want 
_ the ugly things. They seem to want the ugly things to come up 

to the top. All the foulness that lies at the bottom, they want to 

 - 

44 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

stir up to the top. They seem to enjoy it. To enjoy making — 
everything fouler. Isn’t it curious!’ 
“It is curious,’ said Mrs Norris. P 
“But that’s what it is,’ said the Judge. “They want toturnthe 
country into one big crime. They don’t like anything else. 
They don’t like honesty and decency and cleanliness. They_ 
want to foster lies and crime. What they call liberty here is just _ 
freedom to commit crime. That’s what Labour means, that’s 
what they all mean. Free crime, nothing else.’ 
‘I wonder all the foreigners don’t go away, said Kate. 
“They have their occupations here,’ snapped the Judge. 
‘And the good people ave all going away. They have nearly | Ff 
all gone, those that have anything left to go to,’ said Mrs 
Norris. ‘Some of us, who have our property here, and who — 
have made our lives here, and who know the country, we stay — 
out of a kind of tenacity. But we know it’s hopeless. The more 
it changes, the worse it is. Ah, here is Don Raménand Don ~ 
Cipriano. So pleased to see you. Let me introduce you.’ i 
Don Ramon Carrasco was a tall, big, handsome man who ~ 
gave the effect of bigness. He was middle aged, with a large 
black moustache and large, rather haughty eyes under straight 
brows. The General was in civilian clothes, looking very small _ 
beside the other man, and very smartly built, almost cocky. -_ 
‘Come,’ said Mrs Norris. ‘Let us go actoss and have tea” 
The Major excused himself, and took his departure. . 
Mrs Norris gathered her little shawl round her howe 
and led through a sombre antechamber to a little terrace, 
where creepers and flowers bloomed thick on the low walls. _ 
There was a bell-flower, red and velvety, like blood that is dry- 
ing: and clusters of white roses: and tufts of bougainvillea, — 
papery magenta colour. 
‘How lovely it is here!’ said Kate. ‘Having the great dare 
trees beyond.’ 
But she stood in a kind of dread. 
“Yes it 7s beautiful,’ said Mrs Norris, with the gratification — 
of a possessor. ‘I have such a time trying to keep these apart.” 
And going across in her little black shawl, she pushed the 
bougainvillea away from the rust-scarlet bell-flowers, reOkn ee 
the little white roses to make them intervene. 
‘I think the two reds together interesting,’ said Owen. 

° 
os 
> 
q 

TEA-PARTY IN TLACOLULA 45 

“Do you really!’ said Mrs Norris, automatically, paying no 
_ heed to such a remark. 
The sky was blue overhead, but on the lower horizon was a 

“No, not at this season. But look, through the trees there, 
ou see Ajusco!’ 

Kate looked at the sombre-seeming mountain, between the 
; Bide dark trees. 
On the low stone parapet were Aztec things, obsidian 
_ knives, grimacing squatting idols in black lava, and a queer 
_thickish stone stick, or baton. Owen was balancing the latter: 
_ it felt murderous even to touch. 
_ Kate turned to the General, who was near her, his face ex- 
_ pressionless, yet alert. 
“Aztec things oppress me, > she said. 
‘They age oppressive,” he answered, in his beautiful cultured 
glish, that was nevertheless a tiny bit like a parrot talking. 
_ ‘There is 6 hope in them,’ she said. 
- *Peshaps the Aztecs never asked for hope,’ he said, some- 
hat automatically. ; 
_ “Surely it is hope that keeps one going?’ she said. 

2 enor: maybe. But not the Aztec, nor the Indian to-day.’ 

__ He spoke like a man who has something in reserve, who is 
only half attending to what he hears, and even to his own 
swer. 
‘What do they have, if they don’t have hope?’ she said. 
“They have some other strength, perhaps,’ he said evasively. 
- ‘TI would like to give them hope,’ she said. “If they had hope, 
they wouldn’ t be so sad, and they would be cleaner, and not 
have vermin.’ 
_ “That of course would be good,’ he said, with a little smile. 

‘No,’ she said. ‘They oppress me, like a weight on my heart. 
eS make me irritable, and I want to go away.’ 
‘From Mexico?’ 

Yes. I feel I want to go away from it and never, never see it 
3 again. It is so oppressive and gruesome.’ 

= " 

foe a 

46 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘Try it a little longer,’ he said. ‘Perhaps you will feel dif- 
ferently. But perhaps not, ” he ended vaguely, driftingly. 

She could feel in him a sort of yearning towards her. As if 
a sott of appeal came to her from him, from his physical heart 
in his breast. As if the very heart gave out dark rays of seeking © 
and yearning. She glimpsed this now for the first time, quite 
apart from the talking, and it made her shy. 

‘And does everything in Mexico oppress you?’ he added, 

almost shyly, but with a touch of mockery, looking at her with 

a troubled naive face that had its age heavy and resistant be- 
neath the surface. 

‘Almost everything!’ she said. ‘It a/ways makes my heart 
sink. Like the eyes of the men in the big hats — I call them the 
peons. Their eyes have no middle to them. Those big hand- 
some men, under their big hats, they aren’t really there. They 
have no centre, no real J. Their middle is a raging black hee 
like the middle of a maelstrom.’ 

She looked with her troubled grey eyes into the black, slant- 
ing, watchful, calculating eyes of the small man opposite her. 

He had a pained expression, puzzled, like a child. And at the 

same time something obstinate and mature, a demonish matur- 
ity, opposing her in an animal way. 

“You mean we aren’t real people, we have nothing of our 
own, except killing and death,’ he said, quite matter of fact. 

‘I don’t know,’ she said, startled by his interpretation. ‘I 
only say how it makes me feel.’ 

“You are very clever, Mrs Leslie,’ came Don Ram6on’s quiet, 
but heavy teasing voice behind her. “It is quite true. Whenever 
a Mexican cries Viva! he ends up with Muera! When he says 
Viva! he really means Death for Somebody or Other! I think of all 
the Mexican revolutions, and I see a skeleton walking ahead of 

a great number of people, waving a black banner with Viva Ja — 

Muerte! written in large white letters. Long live Death! Not Viva 
Cristo Rey! but Viva Muerte Rey! Vamos! Viva!’ 

Kate looked round. Don Ramon was flashing his knowing 
brown Spanish eyes, and a little sardonic smile lurked under 
his moustache. Instantly Kate and he, Europeans in essence, 
understood one another. He was waving his arm to the last 
Viva! 

‘But,’ said Kate, ‘I don’t want to say Viva la Muerte!” 

a a ee eS a sitveniaisdatiliesil 

~~ 

TEA-PARTY IN TLACOLULA 47 

‘But when you ate-real Mexican —’ he said, teasing. 
_‘T never could be,’ she said hotly, and he laughed. 
“Pm afraid Viva la Muerte! hits the nail on the head,’ said 
Mrs Norris, rather stonily. “But won’t you come to tea! Do!’ 
She led the way in her black little shawl and neat grey hair, 
_ going ahead like a Conquistador herself, and turning to look 
_ with her Aztec eyes through her pince-nez, to see if the others 
were coming. 
__ “We are following,’ said Don Reny6si in Spanish, teasing 
_ her. Stately in his black suit, he walked behind her on the nar- 
_ row terrace, and Kate followed, with the small, strutting Don 
q a also in a-black suit, lingering oddly near her. 
~ “DoT call you General ot Don Cipriano?’ she asked, turning 
= rc him. 
_. An amused little smile quickly lit his face, though his eyes 
a ail not smile. They looked at her with a black, shatp look. 
“As you wish,’ he said. ‘You know General is a term of dis- 
= in Mexico. Shall we say Don Cipriano?’ 
_. ‘Yes, [like that much the best,’ she said. 
5 And he seethed pleased. wp! 
_ It was a round tea-table, with shiny silver tea-service, and 
silver kettle with a little flame, and pink and white oleanders. 
The little neat young footman carried the tea-cups, in white 
cotton gloves. Mrs Norris poured tea and cut cakes with a 
heayy hand. 
~ Don Ramon sat.on her right hand, the Judge on her left. 
‘Kate was between the Judge and Mr Henry. Everybody except 
Don Ramon and the Judge was a little nervous. Mrs Norris al- 
ways put her visitors uncomfortably at their ease, as if they 
‘werté captives and she the chieftainess who had captured them. 
he rather enjoyed it, heavily, archaeologically queening at the 
head of the table. But it was evident that Don Ramén, by far 
the most impressive person present, liked her. Cipriano, on the 
other hand, remained mute and disciplined, perfectly familiar 
_ with the tea-table routine, superficially quite at ease, but under- 
~ neath remote and unconnected. He glanced from time to time 
at Kate. 
She was a beautiful woman, in her own unconventional way, 
and with a certain richness. She was going to be forty next 
, _ week. Used to all kinds of society, she watched people as one 
a 

tea 

fee? Eee 

= 
= 
q 

48 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

reads the pages of a novel, with a certain disinterested amuse- 
ment. She was never /# any society: too Irish, too wise. 

‘But of course nobody lives without hope,’ Mrs Norris was — 
saying banteringly to Don Ramon. ‘If it’s only the hope of a 
real, to buy a litre of pulque.’ 

‘Ah, Mrs Norris!’ he replied in his quiet, yet curiously deep 
voice, like a violoncello: ‘If pulque is the highest happiness!’ 

‘Then we ate fortunate, because a tostén will buy patadiee 
she said. J 

‘It is a bon mot, Senora mia,’ said Don Ramon, laughing and 
drinking his tea. 

‘Now won’t you try these little native cakes with sesame 
seeds on them!’ said Mrs Norris to the table at large. “My cook 
makes them, and her national feeling i is flattered when anybody 
likes them. Mrs Leslie, do take one.’ 

‘I will,’ said Kate. “Does one say Open Sesame!’ 

“If one wishes,’ said Mrs Norris. 

“Won’t you have one?’ said Kate, handing the plate to 
Judge Burlap. 

‘Don’t want any,’ he snapped, turning his face avery as if Rez 
had been offered a plate of Mexicans, and leaving Kate with bee 
dish suspended. i 

Mrs Norris quickly but definitely took the plate, saying: 

“Judge Burlap is afraid of Sesame Seed, he prefers the cave 
shut.’ And she handed the dish quietly to Cipriano, who was 
watching the old man’s bad manners with black, snake-like 
eyes. 

‘Did you see that article by Willis Rice Hope, in the Exce/- 
sior?’ suddenly snarled the Judge, to his hostess. 

“I did. I thought it very sensible.’ * of] 

“The only sensible thing that’s been said about these Aaa . 
rian Laws. Sensible! I should think so. Why Rice Hope came — 
to me, and I put him up to a few things. But his article says _ 
everything, doesn’t miss an item of importance.’ 

‘Quite!’ said Mrs Norris, with rather stony attention. ‘If — 
only saying would alter things, Judge Burlap.’ 

“Saying the wrong thing has done all the mischief!’ snapped ? 
the Judge. ‘Fellows like Garfield Spence coming down here © 
and talking a lot of criminal talk. Why the town’s full of Social- — 
ists and Sinvergienzas from New York.’ 

My 

as 

ss 

TEA-PARTY IN TLACOLULA 49 

“Miss Norris adjusted her pince-nez. 
‘Fortunately,’ she said, ‘they don’t come out to Tlacolula, so 
we needn't think about them. Mrs Henry, let me give you some 
- mote tea.’ 
“Do you read Spanish?’ the Judge spat out, at Owen. Owen, 
in his big shell spectacles, was evidently a red rag to his irrit- 
able fellow-countryman. 
- “No!” said Owen, round as a cannon-shot. 
Mrs Norris once more adjusted her eye-glasses. 
’ “It’s such a relief to hear someone who is altogether inno- 
cent of Spanish, and altogether unashamed,’ she said. .‘My 
father had us all speaking four languages by the time we were 
twelve, and we have none of us ever quite recovered. Mystock- 
ings were all dyed blue for me before I put my hair up. By the 
way! How have you been for walking, Judge? You heard of 
the time I had with my ankle?’ 
 *Of course we heard!’ cried Mrs Burlap, seeing dey, land at 
_ last. ‘V’ve been trying so hard to get out to seeyyou, to ask about 
‘it, We wete so grieved about it.’ 
**What happefied?’ said Kate. _ 
4 ‘Why! foolishly slipped on a piece of orange peel in town — 
just at the corner of San Juan de Latran and Madero. And I fell 
; tight down. And of course, the first thing I did when I got up 
_ was to push the piece of orange peel into the gutter. And would 
_ you believe it, that lot of Mex ~’ she caught herself up—‘that lot 
_ of fellows standing there at the corner laughed heartily at me, 
- _ when they saw me doing it. They thought it an excellent joke.’ 
| “Of course they would,’ said the Judge. ‘They were waiting 
_ for the next person to come along and fall.’ Me 
_ ‘Did nobody help you?’ asked Kate. 
_- *Oh no! If anyone has an accident in this country, you must 
- never, never help. If you touch them even, you may be arrested _ 
_ for causing the accident.’ 
‘That’s the law!’ said the Judge. ‘If you touch them before 
_ the police arrive, you are arrested for complicity. Let them lie 
_ and bleed, is the motto.’ 
‘Ts that true?’ said Kate to Don Ramon. 
‘Fairly true,’ he replied. ‘Yes, it is true you must not touch 
the one who is hurt.’ 
_ ‘How disgusting!’ said Kate. 

a 

a 
~ 

50 THE PLUMED SERPENT. 
“Disgusting! ’ cried the Judge. ‘A great dealis disgusti ig in 

my life on a banana skin; lay in a darkened room fot days, b 
tween life and death, and lame for life from it.’ 9 
‘How awful!’ said Kate. ‘What did you- do i you | 
fell?’ at 

‘What did I do? Just smashed my hip.” ~ A 

It had truly been a terrible accident, and the man had s suf- 
fered bitterly. 

‘You can hardly blame Mexico for a banana skin,’ ‘said 
Owen, elated. ‘I fell on one in Lexington Avenue; but fortu- 
nately I only bruised myself on a soft spot.’ 

‘That wasn’t your head, was it?’ said Mrs ; Henry. 
‘No,’ laughed Owen. ‘The otherextreme.’ ae 
‘We’ve got to add banana skins to the list of public men- 

aces,’ said young Henry. ‘I’m an American, and I may any day 
turn bolshevist, to save my pesos, so I can repeat what I heafd 
a man saying yesterday. He said there are onlytwo great diseases 
in the world to-day — Bolshevism and eee and 
Americanism is the worse of the two, because Bolshevism only 
smashes your house or your business or your skull, ‘but. 
Americanism smashes your soul.’ Be fe 
“Who was he?’ snarled the Judge. 
“I forget,’ said Henty, wickedly. a4 
“One wonders,’ said Mrs Norris slowly, “what he ne by 
Americanism.’ 
‘He didn’t define it,’ said Henry. ‘Cult of the dollar, I cup 
pose.’ 
‘Well,’ said Mrs Norris. ‘The cult of the dollar, in my ex- 
perience, is far more intense in the countries that haven’ t gor 

the dollar, than in the United States.’ : 
Kate felt that the table was like a steel disc to which they 
were all, as victims, magnetized and bound. wee 

“Where és your garden, Mrs Norris?’ she asked. 
They trooped out, gasping with relief, to the terrace. The 
Judge hobbled behind, and Kate had to linger ane 
to keep him company. -¢ 
They were on the little terrace. tae 
‘Isn’t this strange stuff!’ said Kate, picking up one of the e 
Aztec stone knives on the parapet. ‘Is it a sort of jade?” ~~ | 

_ ‘Jade!’ snarled the Judge. ‘Jade’s green, not black. That’s 

? 

q TEA-PARTY IN TLACOLULA ji 
4 
~y 
¥ 

_ “Jade can be black,’ said Kate. ‘I’ve got a lovely little black 
_ tortoise of jade from China.’ 
“You can’t have. Jade’s bright green.’ 
“But there’s white jade too. I know there is.’ 
The Judge was silent from exasperation for a few moments, 
Bs he snapped: 

‘Jade’s bright green.’ 

Owen, who had the ears of a lynx, had heard. 

“What’s that?’ he said. 

“Surely there’s more than green jade!’ said Kate. 

“What!” cried Owen. ‘More! Why there’s every imaginable 
‘tint — white, rose, lavender — 

“And black?’ said Kate. 

“Black? Oh yes, quite common. Why you should.see my 
BE iection. The most beautiful range of colour! Only green jade! 
| Ha-ha-ha!’ — and he laughed a rather stage laugh. 
= They had come to:the stairs, which were old stone, waxed 
3 afid polished in*Some way till they were a glittering black. 

‘lll catch hold of your arm down here,’ said the Judge to 
_ young Henry. ‘This staircase is a death-trap.’ 
Mrs Norris heard without comment. She only tilted her 
_ pince-nez on her sharp nose. 
/ In the archway downstairs, Don Ramon and the General 
took their leave. The rest trailed on into the garden. 

Evening was falling. The garden was drawn up tall, under 
the huge dark trees on the one side, and the tall, reddish-and- 
yellow house on the other. It was like being at the bottom of 
some dusky, flowering garden down in Hades. Hibiscus hung _ 
scarlet from the bushes, putting out yellow bristling tongues. 
- Some roses were scattering scentless petals on the twilight, 
and lonely-looking carnations hung on weak stalks. From a 

huge dense bush the mysterious white bells of the datura were 
suspended, large and silent, like the very ghosts of sound. And 
- the datura scent was moving thick and noiseless from the tree, 
into the little alleys. 
Mrs Burlap had hitched herself on to Kate, and from het 
silly, social baby-face was emitting searching questions. 
‘What hotel are you staying at?’ 

ll cat ae 

PV 

52 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Kate told her. 

‘IT don’t know it. Where is it?’ 

‘In the Avenida del Peru. You wouldn’t know it, it isa litle : 
Italian hotel.’ Sa 

‘Are you staying long? >” 

‘We aren’t certain.’ 

‘Is Mr Rhys on a newspaper?”? % 

“No, he’s a poet.’ ; 

‘Does he make a living by poetry?’ 

“No, he doesn’t try to.’ 

It was the sort of secret service investigation one is sub- 
mitted to, in the capital of shady people, particularly shady 
foreigners. 

Mrs Norris was lingering by a Henearers arch of little white 
flowers. : 

Already a firefly was sparking. It was already night. =) 

‘Well, good-bye, Mrs Norris! Won't you come and lunch 
with us? I don’t mean come out to our house. Only let me 
know, and lunch with me anywhere_you like, in town.’ 7 

‘Thank you, my dear! Thank you so much! Well! Pll see!’ 

Mrs Norris was almost regal, stonily, Aztec-regal. ee 

At last they had all made their adieus, and the great doors 
were shut behind them. 

‘How did you come out?’ Mrs Burlap asked, impertinent. 

‘In an old Ford taxi — but where is it?’ said Kate, peerin 
into the dark. It should have been under the fresno trees opp: 
site, but it wasn’t. 

“What a curious thing!’ said Owen, and he disappeared i int 
the night. : 

‘Which way do you go?’ said Mrs Burlap. > 

“To the Zocalo,’ said Kate. 

“We have to take a tram, the opposite way,’ said the ee 
faced, withered woman from the Middle-West. 

The Judge was hobbling along the pavement like a cat ail 
hot bricks, to the corner. Across the road stood a group of 
natives in big hats and white calico clothes, all a little the worse 
for the pulque they had drunk. Nearer, on this side of the road, 
stood another little gang, of workmen io town clothes. 

“There you have them,’ said the Judge, flourishing his stick 
with utter vindictiveness. “There’s the two lots of em.’ \ 

TEA-PARTY IN TLACOLULA 53 

_ ‘What two lots?’ said Kate, surprised. 

“Those peon fellows and those obreros, all drunk, the lot of 

them. The lot of them!” And in a spasm of pure, frustrated 

2 ‘hate, he turned his back on her. 

_ _ At the same time they saw the lights of a tram-car rushing 

_ dragon-like up the dark road, between the high wall and the 

_ huge trees. 

 ‘Here’s our car!’ said the Judge, beginning to scramble ex- 

_ citedly with his stick. 

_ “You go the other way,’ flung the baby-faced, faded woman 

in the three-cornered satin hat, also beginning to fluster as if 

she were going to swim off the pavement. 

The couple clambered avidly into the brightly-lighted car, 

first class; hobbling up. The natives crowded into the second 
class. © 

Away whizzed the ¢ren. The Burlap couple had not even said 
_ good night. They were terrified lest they might have to know 

somebody whom they might not want to,/know; whom it’ 

might not Jay to know. 

You comm@h-place little woman!” said Kate aloud, look- 

ing after the retreating tram-car. “You awful ill-bred little 

4 

_ She was a bit afraid of the natives, not quite sober, who were 

waiting for the car in the opposite direction. But stronger than 

her fear was a certain sympathy with these dark-faced silent 

men in their big straw hats and naive little cotton blouses. 

Anyhow they had blood in their veins: they were columns of 

dark blood. 

_ Whereas the other bloodless, acidulous couple from the 

‘“Middle-West, with their nasty whiteness ...! 

She thought of the little tale the natives tell. When the Lord 
‘was making the first men, He made them of clay and put them 
into the oven to bake. They came out black. They’re baked too 
much! said the Lord. So He made another batch, and put them 
in. They came out white. They’re baked too little! He said. So He 
had a third try. These came out a good warm brown. They’re 
just right! said the Lord. 

a _ The couple from the Middle-West, that withered baby-face 
- ‘aa that limping Judge, they weren’t baked. They were hardly 
: gee at all. 

aa 

2 
Fe 
E 
i 
PA 
> 

i 

i 

A 

. 
le 

54 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Kate looked at the dark faces under the arc-lamp. They 
frightened her. They were a sort of menace to her. But she felt 
they were at least baked hot and to a certain satisfactory 
colour. 

The taxi came lurching up, with Owen eee his head out 
and opening the door. 

‘IT found the man in a pulqueria,’ he said. ‘But I don’t think § 
he’s quite drunk. Will you risk driving back with him?’ 

‘The pulqueria was called La Flor de un Dia — the Flower of a ; 
Day,’ said Owen, with an apprehensive laugh. 

Kate hesitated, looking at her man. i 

“We may as well,’ she said. : 

Away gallivanted the Ford, full speed to Hell. 

‘Do tell him not so fast,’ said Kate. 

‘I don’t know how,’ said Owen. 

He shouted in good English: 

‘Hey! chauffeur! Not so fast! Don’t drive so fast.’ 

‘No presto. Troppo presto. Va troppo presto!’ said Kate. 

The man looked at them with black, dilated eyes of fathom- 
less incomprehension. Then he put his foot on the accelerator. — 

‘He’s only going faster!’ laughed Owen nervously. 

‘Ah! Let him alone!’ said Kate, with utter weariness. i9 

The fellow drove like a devil incarnate, as if he had the devil — 
in his body. But also, he drove with the devil’s own nonchalant ~ 
skill. There was nothing to do but let him rip. 

“Wasn’t that a ghastly tea-party!’ said Owen. 

“Ghastly!’ said Kate. 

2 

en ne a re 

ev il FP a ey 

ee eo Pe 

CHAPTER III ; ; 

Fortieth Birthday 

Kars woke up one morning, aged forty. She did not hide the © 
fact from herself, but she kept it dark from the others. : 
It was a blow, really. To be forty! One had to cross a divid- 

ing line. On this side there was youth and spontaneity and 
“happiness. ’ On the other side something different: reserve, res- 
ponsibility, a certain standing back from ‘fun.’ 

ak i’ 

Ee 

Ne eee, ET 
‘ 1 f 

ee etn Ee ee a ee 

FORTIETH BIRTHDAY 55 

_ She was.a widow, and a lonely woman now. Having married 

young, her two children were grown up. The boy.was twenty- 

one, and her daughter nineteen. They stayed chiefly with their 

” father, from whom she had been divorced ten years before, in 
- order to marry James Joachim Leslie. Now Leslie was Baa: 

and all that half of life was over. 

She climbed up to the flat roofs of the hotel: It was a brilliant 
morning, and for once, under the blue sky of the distance, 
Popocatepet! stood aloof, a heavy giant presence under 
heaven, with a cape of snow. And rolling a long dark roll of 
smoke like a serpent. 

Ixtaccihuatl, the White Woman, glittered and seemed near, 
but the other mountain, Popocatepetl, stood farther back, and | 
in shadow, a pure cone of atmospheric shadow, with glinting 
flashes of snow. There they were, the two monsters, watching 
gigantically and terribly over their lofty, bloody cradle of men, 

the Valley of Mexico. Alien, ponderous, the white-hung moun- 

tains seemed to emit a deep purring sound, too deep for the ear 

_ to hear, afd yet audible on the blood, a sound of dread. There 

was no Soaring or uplift or exaltation, as there is in the snowy 
mounwins of Europe. Rather a ponderous, white-shouldered 

_ weight, pressing terribly on the earth, and murmuring like two 
watchful lions. 

_ Superficially, Mexico might be all right: with its suburbs of 
villas, its central fine streets, its thousands of motor-cars, its 
tennis, and its bridge-parties. The sun shone brilliantly every 
day, and big bright flowers stood out from the trees. It was a 

~ holiday. 

Until you were alone with it. And then the undertone was 
like the low, angry, snarling purring of some jaguar spotted 
with night. There was a ponderous, down-pressing weight up- 

on the spirit: the great folds of the dragon of the Aztecs, the 

dragon of the Toltecs winding around one and weighing down 
the soul. And on the bright sunshine was a dark steam of an 
angry, impotent blood, and the flowers seemed to have their 
roots in spilt blood. The spirit of place was cruel, down-drag- 
ging, destructive. 

Kate could so well understand the Mexitan who had said to 
her: El grito mexicano es siempre el grito del odio - The Mexi- 
cant shout is always a shout of hate. The famous revolutions, 

a 

56 THE PLUMED SERPENT is. 
as Don Ramon said, began with Viva! but ended always with - 

Muera! Death to this, death to the other; it was all death! — 

death! death! as insistent as the Aztec sacrifices. Something for ; 
evet gruesome and macabre, 

Why had she come to this high plateau of death? As a wo- 
man, she suffered even more than men suffer: and in the end, 
practically all men go under. Once, Mexico had had an elabo- — 
rate ritual of death. Now it has death, ragged, squalid, —— - 
without even the passion of its own mystery. 

She sat on a parapet of the old roof. The street beyond was 
like a black abyss, but around her was the rough glare of un- 
even flat roofs, with loose telephone wires trailing across, and 
the sudden, deep, dark wells of the patios, showing flowers 
blooming in shade. ' 

Just behind was a huge old church, its barrel roof humping | 
up like some crouching animal, and its domes, like bubbles in- 
flated, glittering with yellow tiles, and blue and white tiles, — 
against the intense blue heaven. Quiet native women in long 
skirts were moving on the roofs, hanging out washing or 
spreading it on the stones. Chickens perched here and there. 
An occasional bird soared huge overhead, trailing a shadow. - 
And not far away stood the brownish tower-stumps of the — 
Cathedral, the profound old bell trembling huge and deep, so 
soft as to be almost inaudible, upon the air. . 

It ought to have been all gay, a/legro; allegretto, in that sparkle 
of bright air and old roof surfaces. But no! There was the dark 
undertone, the black, serpent-like fatality all the time. 

It was no good Kate’s wondering why she had come. Over 
in England, in Ireland, in Europe, she had heard the consumma- 
tum est of her own spirit. It was finished, in a kind of death 
agony. But still’this heavy continent of dark-souled death was 
more than she could bear. : 

She was forty: the first half of her life was over. The bright 
page with its flowers and its love and its stations of the Cross — 
ended witha grave. Now she must turn over, and the page was - 
black, black and empty. 

The first half of her life had been written on the brig 
smooth vellum of hope, with initial letters all gorgeous upon 
a field of gold. But the glamour had gone from station to 
station of the Cross, and the last illumination was the tomb. 

ee bible 

a ea) ae 

ie 

FORTIETH BIRTHDAY 57 

. Now the bright page was turned, and the dark page lay’ - 

before her. How could one write on a page so profoundly 
black? 

She went down, having promised to go and see the frescoes 
in the university and schools. Owen and Villiers and a young 
Mexican were waiting for her. They set off through the busy 
streets of the town, where automobiles and the little omnibuses 
called camiones run wild, and where the natives in white cotton 
clothes and sandals and big hats linger like heavy ghosts in the 
street, among the bourgeoisie, the young ladies in pale pink 
crépe de chine and high heels, the men in little shoes and 
American straw hats. A continual bustle in the glitter of sun- 
shine. 

Crossing the great shadeless p/aza in front of the Cathedral, 
where the tram-cars gather as in a corral, and slide away down 
their various streets, Kate lingered again to look at the things 
spread for sale on the pavement: the little toys, the painted 
gourd-shells, brilliant in a kind of lacquer, the novedades from 

_ Germany? the fruits, the fowers. And the natives squatting 

With their wasé¢s, large- -limbed, silent, handsome men looking 
up with their black, centreless eyed, speaking so softly, and lift- 

ing with small sensitive brown hands the little toys they had so 
catefully made and painted. A strange gentle appeal and wist- 
fulness, strange male voices, so deep, yet so quiet and gentle. 
Or the women, the small quick women in their blue rebozos, 
looking up quickly with dark eyes, and speaking in their quick, 
coaxing voices. The man just setting out his oranges, wiping 
them with a cloth so carefully, almost tenderly, and piling 
them in bright tiny pyramids, all neat and exquisite. A certain 
sensitive tenderness of the heavy blood, a certain chirping 
charm of the bird-like women, so still and tefider with a bud- 
like femininity. And at the same time, the dirty clothes, and the 

-. unwashed skin, the lice, and the peculiar hollow glint of the 

black eyes, at once so fearsome and so appealing. 
Kate knew the Italian fruit vendors, vigorously polishing 
their oranges on their coat-sleeves. Such a contrast, the big, 

handsome Indian, sitting so soft and as it were lonely by the 

kerb, softly, lingeringly polishing his yellow oranges toa clean 

gleam, and lingeringly, delicately arranging the little piles, the 

pytamids for two or three cents each. 

58 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Queer work, for a big, handsome, male-looking man. But — 
they seem to prefer these childish jobs. ; 

The University was a Spanish building that had been done 
up spick and span, and giyen over to the young artists to- 
decorate. Since the revolutions, nowhere had authority and 
tradition been so finally overthrown as in the Mexican fields of 
science and art. Science and art are the sport of the young. Go | 
ahead, my boys! 

The boys had gone ahead. But even then, the one artist of — 
distinction was no longer a boy, and he had served a long ap- 
prenticeship in Europe. 

Kate had seen the reproductions of some of Ribera’s fres- 
coes. Now she went round the patios of the University, looking ~ 
at the originals. They were interesting: the man knew his craft. _ 

But the impulse was the impulse of the artist’s hate..In the — 
many frescoes of the Indians there was sympathy with the In- 
dian, but always from the ideal, social point of view. Never the — 
spontaneous answer of the blood. These flat Indians were sym- 
bols in the great script of modern socialism, they were figures — 
of the pathos of the victims of modern industry and capitalism. 
That was all they: were used for: symbols in the weary script of 
socialism and anarchy. 

Kate thought of the man polishing his oranges half-an-hour 
before: his peculiar beauty, a certain richness of physical being, 
a ponderous power of blood within him, and a helplessness, a 
profound unbelief that was fatal and demonish. And all the 
liberty, all the progress, all the socialism in the world would 
not help him. Nay, it would only help further to destroy him. 

On the corridors of the University, young misses in bobbed 
hair and boys’ jumpers were going around, their chins pushed 
forward with the characteristic, deliberate youth-and-eagerness 
of our day. Very much aware of their own youth and eager- _ 
ness. And very American. Young professors wete passing in. — 
soft amiability, young and apparently harmless. 

The artists were at work on the frescoes, and Kate and Owen 
were introduced to them. But they were men — or boys — whose 
vety pigments seemed to exist only to épater le bourgeois. And — 
Kate was weary of épatisme, just as much as of the bourgeoisie. 
She wasn’t interested in éparant le bourgeois. The épateurs were as 
boring as the bourgeois, two halves of one dreariness. < 

FORTIETH BIRTHDAY 59 

The little party passed on to the old Jesuit convent, now 
_ used as a secondary school. Here were mote frescoes. 
_ But they were by another man. And they were caricatures so 
crude and so ugly that Kate was merely repelled. They were 
meant to be shocking, but perhaps the very deliberateness pre- 
vents them from being so shocking as they might be. But they 
- were ugly and vulgar. Strident caricatures of the Capitalist and 
__ the Church, and of the Rich Woman, and of Mammon painted 
_ life-size and as violently as possible, round the patios of the 
_ grey old building, where the young people are educated. To 
_ anyone with the spark of human balance, the things are a mis- 
_ demeanour. 
“Oh, but how wonderful!’ cried Owen. 
His susceptibilities were shocked, therefore, as at the 
- bull-fight, he was rather pleased. He thought it was novel 
and stimulating to decorate your public buildings in this 
- wa 
E The young Mexican who was accompanying the party was 
2 professér i in the University too: a rather short, soft young 
; Yellow of twefity-seven or eight, who wrote the inevitable 
; 
q 
3 

a 
: 
; 
. 
7 

poetry of sentiment, had been in’ the Government, even as a 
member of the House of Deputies, and was longing to go to 
New York. There was something fresh and soft, petulant about 
him. Kate liked him. He could laugh with real hot young 
amusement, and he was no fool. 
ntil it came to these maniacal ideas of socialism, politics, 
and La Patria. Then he was as mechanical as a mousetrap. Very 
tedious. 
Oh no!’ said Kate in front of the caricatures. ‘They ate too 
ugly. ‘They defeat their own ends.” 
: ‘But they are meant to be-ugly,’ said young Garcia. ‘They 
- must be ugly, no? Because capitalism is ugly, and Mammon is 
- .ugly, and the priest holding his hand to get the money from 
B...the poot Indians is ugly. No?’ He laughed rather unpleasantly. 
‘But,’ said Kate, ‘these caricatures are too intentional. They 
_ ate like vulgar abuse, not art at all.’ 

‘Isn’t that true?’ said Garcia, pointing to a hideous picture 
of a fat female ina tight short dress, with hips and breasts as 
protuberances, walking over the faces of the poor. 

‘That i is how they are, no?’ 

60 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘Who is like that?’ said Kate. ‘It bores me. One must keep 

a certain balance.’ 

‘Not in Mexico!’ said the young Mexican pnietialys his 
plump cheeks flushing. ‘In Mexico you can’t keep a balance, 
because things are so bad. In other countries, yes, perhaps you 
can remain balanced, because things are not so bad as they are 
here. But here they ate so very bad, you can’t be human. You 
have to be Mexican. You have to be more Mexican than hu- 

“man, no? You can’t do no other. You have to hate the capital- 
ist, you have to, in Mexico, or nobody can live. We can’t live. 
Nobody can live. If you are Mexican you can’t be human, it is 
impossible. You have to be a socialist Mexican, or you have to 
be a capitalist Mexican, and you hate. What else is there to be 
done? We hate the capitalist because he ruins the coe and 
the people.. We ust hate him.’ 

‘But after all,’ said Kate, ‘what about the twelve million 
poor — mostly Indians - whom Montes talks about? You can’t 
make them all rich, whatever you do. And they don’t undet- 

stand the very words, capital and socialism. They are Mexico, | 

really, and nobody ever looks at them, except to make a casus 
belli of them. Humanly, they never exist for you.’ 

‘Humanly they can’t exist, they are too ignorant!’ cried Gar- 
cia. ‘But when we can kill all the capitalists, then— 

“You'll find somebody killing you,’ said Kate. ‘No, I don’t 
like it. You aren’t Mexico. You aren’t even Mexican, really. 
You are just half Spaniards full of European ideas,and youcate 
for asserting your own ideas and nothing else. You have no 
real bowels of compassion. You ate no good.’ 

The young man listened with*round eyes, going rather yel-. 

low in the face. At the end he lifted his shoulders and spread 
his hands in a pseudo-Mediterranean gesture. 

“Well! It may be!’ he said, with a certain jeering flippaney.. 

‘Perhaps you know everything. Maybe! Foreigners, they usu- 
ally know everything about Mexico.’ And he ended on a little 
cackling laugh. 

‘I know what I fee/,’ said Kate. ‘And now I want a taxi, and 
I want to go home. I don’t want to see any more stupid, ugly 
pictures.’ 

Off she drove bral to the hotel, once more in a towering 
rage. She was amazed at herself. Usually she was so good- 

» ALJ ee erm ties 

_ tempered and easy. But something about this country irritated 
her and put her into such a violent anger, she felt she would 
die. Burning, furious rage. 

And perhaps, she thought to herself, the white and half- 
white Mexicans suffered some peculiar reaction in their blood 
which made them that they too were almost always in a state 
of suppressed irritation and anger, for which they must find a 
vent. They must spend their lives in a complicated game of 
frustration, frustration of life in its ebbing and flowing. 

Perhaps something came out of the earth, the dragon of the 
eatth, some effluence, some vibration which militated against 

' the very composition of the blood and nerves in human beings. 

_ Perhaps it came from the volcanoes. Or perhaps even from the 
-Silent, serpent-like dark resistance of those masses of pondet- 
ous natives whose blood was principally the old, heavy, resist- 
ant Indian blood. 

-Who knows? But something there was, and something very 
potent. Kate lay on her bed and brooded on, her own organic 
rage. Theré was nothing to be done! 

* But young Garcia was really nice. He called in the afternoon 
and sent up his card. Kate, feeling sote, received him un- 
willingly. y 

‘I came,’ he said, with a little stiff dignity, like an ambassa- 
dor on a mission, ‘to tell you that I, too, don’t like those cari- 
catutes. I, too, don’t like them. I don’ t like the young people, 
boys” and girls, no? — to be seeing them all the time. I, too, 
don’t like. But I think, also, that here in Mexico we can’t help 

_it. People are very bad, very greedy, no? — they only want to 
get money here, and they don’t care. So we must hate them. 
Yes, we must. But I, too, I don’t like it.’ 

He held his hat in his two hands, and twisted his shoulders 
in a conflict of feelings. 

Kate suddenly laughed, and he laughed too, with a certain 
pain and confusion in his laughter. 

‘That’s awfully nice of you to come and say so,’ she said, _ 
warming to him. 

“No, not nice,’ he said, frowning. ‘But I don’t know what to 

do. Perhaps you think I am — different - I am not the thing that 
Iam. And I don’t want it.’ 

He flushed and was- uncomfortable. There was a curious 

FORTIETH BIRTHDAY 61 

62 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

naive sincerity about him, since he was being sincere. If he add 
chosen to play a game of sophistication, he could have played 
it better. But with Kate he wanted to be sincere. 

‘I know, really,’ laughed Kate, ‘you feel a good deal like i4 
do about it. I know you only pretend to be fierce and hard’ 

‘No!’ he said, suddenly making solemn, flashing eyes. ‘I do 
also feel fierce. I do hate these men who take, only take every- 
thing from Mexico — money, and all — everything!’ He spread his 
hands with finality. ‘I hate them because I must, no? But also, 
Iam sorry -l am sorry I have to hate so much. Yes, I think I 
am sorry. I think so.’ 

He knitted his brows rather tense. And over his plump, ; 
young, fresh face was a frown of resentment and hatred, quite ; 
sincere too. = 

Kate could see he wasn’t really sorry. Only the two moods, 
of natural, soft, sensuous flow, and of heavy resentment and — 
hate, alternated inside him like shadow and shine on a cloudy 
day, in swift, unavoidable succession. What was nice about 
him was-his simplicity, in spite of the complication of his feel- 
ings, and the fact that his resentments were not personal, but — 
beyond persons, even beyond himself. 

She went out with him to tea, and while she was out, Bisa 
Ramon called and left cards with the corners turned down, and © 
an invitation to dinner for her and Owen. There seemed an 
almost old-fashioned correctness in those cards. 

Looking over the newspaper, she came on an odd little i item. 
She could read Spanish without much difficulty. The trouble 
lay in talking it, when Italian got in her way and caused a con- 
tinual stumble. She looked on the English page of the Excelsior — 
ot the Universal for the news—if there was any. Then she looked | 
through the Spanish pages for bits of interest. 

This little item was among the Spanish information, and was 
headed: The Gods of Antiquity Return to Mexico. 

“There was a ferment in the village of Sayula, Jalisco, on the Lake of 
Sayula, owing to an incident of more or less comic nature, yesterday morn- 
ing towards mid-day. The women who inhabit the shores of the lake are | 
to be seen each day soon after sunrise descending to the water’s edge with 
large bundles. They kneel on the rocks and stones, and in little groups, like 
water-fowl, they wash their dirty linen in the soft water of the lake, paus- 
ing at times as an old canoa sails by with large single sail. The scene is little — 
changed since the days of Montezuma, when the natives of the lake wor- 

BAe eee eee mn hee 

at 
* 

fa 

. 

ra 

FORTIETH BIRTHDAY 63 

shipped the spirit of the waters, and threw in little images and idols of 
baked clay, which the lake sometimes returns to the descendants of the 
dead idolators, to keep them in mind of practices not yet altogether for- 

gotten. 

“As the hot sun rises in the sky, the women spread their washing on the 
sand and pebbles of the shore, and retire to the shade of the willow trees 
that grow so gracefully and retain their verdant hue through the dryest 
season of the year. While thus reposing after their labours, these humble 
and superstitious women were astonished to see a man of great stature rise 
naked from the lake and wade towards the shore. His face, they said, was 
dark and bearded, but his body shone like gold. 

“As if unaware of any watchful eyes, he advanced calmly and majestic- 
ally towards the shore. There he stood a moment, and selecting with his 
eye a pair of the loose cotton pants worn by the peasants in the fields, that 
was spread whitening in the sun, he stooped and proceeded to cover his 

nakedness with the said garment. 

“The woman who thus saw her husband’s apparel robbed beneath her 
eye, rose, calling to the man and summoning the other‘women. Where- 
upon the stranger turned his dark face upon them, and said in a quiet 

- voice: “ Why are you crying? Be quiet! It will be given back to you. Your 

gods are ready to return to you. Quetzalcoatl and Tlaloc, the old gods, are 
minded to come back to you. Be quiet, don’t let them find you crying and 
complaining. I have come from out of the lake to tell you the gods are 

_ @oming back to Mexico, they are ready to return to their own home.” 

“Little'comforted by this speech, the woman who had lost her washing 
was ovefcome and said no more. The stranger then appropriated a cotton 
blouse, which he donned, atid disappeared. 

“After a while, the simple women gathered courage to return to their 
humble dwellings. The story thus reached the ears of the police, who at 

- once set out to search for the thief. 

‘The story, however, is not yet concluded. The husband of the poor 
woman of the lake-shore, returning from his labours in the field, ap- 

_ proached the gates of the village towards sunset, thinking, no doubt, of 
‘nothing but repose and the evening meal. A man in a black serape stepped 

towards him, from the shadows of a broken wall, and asked: Are you 
- afraid to come with me? The labourer, a man of spirit, promptly replied; 

No, sefior! He therefore followed the unknown man through the broken 

r wall and through the bushes of a deserted garden. In a dark room, or 

cellar, a small light was burning, revealing a great basin of gold, into which 

__ four little men, smaller than children, were pouring sweet-scented water. 

The astounded peasant was now told to wash and put on clean clothes, to 
be ready for the return of the gods. He was seated in the golden basin and 
washed with sweet-smelling soap, while the dwarfs poured water over 
him. This, they said, zs the bath of Quetzalcoatl. The bath of fire is yet to come. 

a They gave him clean clothing of pure white cotton, and a new hat with 

star embroidery, and sandals with straps of white leather. But beside this, 
a new blanket, white with bats of blue and black, and flowers like stars at 

the centre, and two pieces of silver money. Go, he was told. And when they 

64 THE PLUMED SERPENT a 

ask you, where did you get your blanket? answer that Quetzalcoatl is young again. — 
The poor fellow went home in sore fear, lest the police should arrest him _ 
for possessing stolen goods. 4 

“The village is full of excitement, and Don Ramon Carrasco, our emi- — 
nent historian and archaeologist, whose hacienda lies in the vicinity, has — 
announced his intention of proceeding as soon as possible to the spot to — 
examine the origin of this new legend. Meanwhile, the police are watching 
attentively the development of affairs, without taking any steps for the _ 
moment. Indeed, these little fantasies create a pleasant diversion in the 
regular order of banditry, murder, and outrage, which it is usually our — 
duty to report.’ i 

Kate wondered what was at the back of this: if anything - 
more than a story. Yet, strangely, a different light than the 
common: light seemed to gleam out of the words of even this 
newspaper paragraph. 

She wanted to go to Sayula. She wanted to see the big lake 
where the gods had once lived, and whence they were due to 
emerge. Amid all the bitterness that Mexico produced in her 
spirit, there was still a strange beam of wonder and mystery, 
almost like hope. A strange darkly-iridescent beam of wonder, 
of magic. 

The name Quetzalcoatl, too, fascinated her. She had read 
bits about the god. Quetzal is the name of a bird that lives high 
up in the mists of tropical mountains, and has very beautiful 
tail-feathers, precious to the Aztecs. Coatl is a serpent. Quetzal- 
coatl is the Plumed Serpent, so hideous in the fanged, feather- 
ed, writhing stone of the National Museum. 

But Quetzalcoatl was, she vaguely remembered, a sort of 
fair-faced bearded god; the wind, the breath of life, the eyes 
that see and are unseen, like the stars by day. The eyes that 
watch behind the wind, as the stars beyond the blue of day. 
And Quetzalcoatl must depart from Mexico to merge again in- 
to the deep bath of life. He was old. He had gone eastwards, — 
perhaps into the sea, perhaps he had sailed into heaven, like a — 
meteor returning, from the top of the Volcano of Orizaba: gone 
back as a peacock streaming into the night, or as a bird of 
Paradise, its tail gleaming like the wake of a meteor. Quetzal- 
coatl! Who knows what he meant to the dead Aztecs, and to 
the older Indians, who knew him before the Aztecs raised their 
deity to heights of horror and vindictiveness ? 

All a confusion of contradictory gleams of meaning, Quet- 
zalcoatl. But why not? Her Irish spirit was weary to death of 

ee se ae ee ee 

—* 

ea 

ele On. eee @ ree 

’ 

: 
ry: 
: 

FORTIETH BIRTHDAY 65 
definite meanings, and aGod of onefixed purport. Gods should 
be iridescent, like the rainbow in the storm. Man creates a God 
in his own image, and the gods grow old along with the men 

_ that made them. But storms sway in heaven, and the god-stuff 

_ sways high and angry over our heads. Gods die with men who 
_ have conceived them. But the god-stuff roars eternally, like the 

sea, with too vast a sound to be heard. Like the sea in storm, 
that beats against the rocks of living, stiffened men, slowly to 

_ destroy them. Or like the sea of the glimmeting, ethereal plasm 
of the world, that bathes the feet and the knees of men as earth- 

sap bathes the roots of trees. Ye must be born again. Even the 

gods must be born again. We must be born again. 

In her vague, woman’s way, Kate knew this. She had lived 
her life. She had had her lovers, her two husbands. She had her 

- children. 

Joachim Leslie, her dead husband, she had loved as much as 

~ a woman can love a man: that is, to the bounds of human love. 
‘Then she had realized that human love has its limits, that there 

_ isa beyond. And Joachim dead, willy nilly her spirit had passed 

- the bounds. Shewas no longer in love with love. She no longer 

yearnedfor the love of a man, or the love even of her children. 
Joachim had gone into eternity in death, and she had crossed 
with him into a certain eternity in life. There, the yearning for 
companionship and sympathy and human love had left het. 
Something infinitely intangible but infinitely blessed took its 

_ place: a peace that passes understanding. 

At the same time, a wild and angry battle raged between her 
and the thing that Owex called life: such as the bull-fight, the 
tea-party, the enjoyments; like the arts in their modern aspect 
of hate effusion. The powerful, degenerate thing called life, 

- wrapping one or other of its tentacles round her. 

And then, when she could escape into her true loneliness, 
the influx of peace and soft, flower-like potency which was be- 
yond understanding. It disappeared even if you thought about 
it, so delicate, so fine. And yet, the only reality. 

Ye must be born again. Out of the fight with the octopus of 
life, the dragon of degenerate or of incomplete existence, one 
must win this soft bloom of being, that is damaged bya touch. 

No, she no longer wanted love, excitement, and something 

to fill her life. She was forty, and in the rare, lingering dawn of 

66 THE PLUMED SERPENT 4 

maturity, the flower of her soul was opening. Above all things, — 
she must presérve herself from worldly contacts. Only she 
wanted the silence of other unfolded souls around her, like a_ 
perfume. The presence of that which is forever unsaid. 

. 

4 

And in the horror and climax of death-rattles, which is : 

Mexico, she thought she could see it in the black eyes of the ~ 
Indians. She felt that Don Ramon and Don Cipriano both had ~ 
heard the soundless call, across all the hideous choking. 

Perhaps this had brought her to Mexico: away from Eng- 
land and her mother, away from her children, away fromevery- _ 

body. To be alone with the unfolding flower of her own soul, 
in the delicate, chiming silence that is at the midst of things. 

The thing called ‘Life’ is just a mistake we have made in 
out own minds. Why persist in the mistake any further? 

Owen was the mistake itself: so was Villiers: so was that 
Mexico City.. 

She wanted to get out, to disentangle herself again. 

They had promised to go out to dinner to the house of Don 
Ramon. His wife was away in the United States with her two 
boys, one of whom had been ill, not seriously, at his school in 
California. But Don Ramén’s aunt would be hostess. 

The house was out at Tlalpam. It was May, the weather was 
hot, the tains were not yet started. The shower at the bull- 
fight had been a sort of accident. 

‘I wonder,’ said Owen, ‘whether I ought to put ona dinnes- 
coat. Really, I feel humiliated to the earth every time I put on 
evening dress.’ 

“Then don’t do it!’ said Kate, who was impatient of Owen’s 
kicking at these very little social pricks, and swallowing the 
whole porcupine. 

. 
t 
5 

ee wy ee 

til distil i ee 

She herself came down in a simple gown with a black velvet - 

top and a loose skirt of delicate brocaded chiffon, of a glimmer- 
ing green and yellow and black. She also wore a long string of 
jade and crystal. 

It was a gift she had, of looking like an Ossianic goddess, a 
certain feminine strength and softness glowing in the very 
material of her dress. But she was never ‘smart.’ 

‘Why you’re dressed up to the eyes!’ cried Owen in chagrin, 
pulling at his soft collar. ‘Bare shoulders notwithstanding!’ 

They went out tothe distant suburb in the tram-car, swift in 

= 

_ the night, with big clear stars overhead, dropping and hanging 
with a certain gleam of menace. In Tlalpam there was a heavy 
scent of nightflowers, a feeling of ponderous darkness, with a 
few sparks of intermittent fireflies. And always the heavy call- 
ing of nightflower scents. To Kate, there seemed-a faint whiff 
of blood in all tropical-scented flowers: of blood or sweat. 

It was a hot night. They banged on the iron doors of the en- 
trance, dogs barked, and a ozo opened to them, warily, closing 
fast again the moment they had entered the dark garden of trees. 

Don Ramén was in white, a white dinnet-jacket: Don Cip- 
riano the same. But there were other guests, young Gatcia, an- 
other pale young man called Mirabal, and an elderly man in a 
black cravat, named Toussaint. The only other woman was’ 

- Dofia Isabel, aunt to Don Ramon. She wore a black dress with 

a high collar of black lace, and some strings of pearls, and 
seemed shy, frightened, absent as a nun before all these men. 
But to Kate she was very kind, caressive, speaking English in 
a plaintive faded voice. This dinner was a sort of ordeal and 
ritual combined, to the cloistered, elderly soul. 

"But it was sé6n evident that she was trembling with fearful 
joy. Sheadored Ramén with an uncritical, nun-like adoration. 
It was obvious she hardly heard the things that were said. 
Words skimmed the surface of her consciousness without ever 

_ penetrating. Underneath; she was trembling in nun-like aware- 
ness of so many men, and in almost sacred excitement at facing 
Ee amic as hostess. 

The house was a fairly large villa, quietly and Beh fur- 

_nished, with natural taste. 

‘Do you always live here?’ said Kate to Ss Ramon. 

“Never at your hacienda?’ 

‘How do you know I have a hacienda?’ he asked. 

‘I saw it in a newspaper — near Sayula.’ 

‘Ah!’ he said, laughing at her with his eyes. ‘You saw about 
the returning of the Gods of Antiquity.’ 

‘Yes,’ she said. ‘on’t you think it is interesting?’ 

‘I think so,’ he said. 

~ ‘T love the word Quetzalcoatl.’ - 

‘The word!’ he repeated. 

His eyes laughed at her teasingly all the time. 

‘What do you think, Mrs Leslie,’ cried the pale-faced young 

FORTIETH BIRTHDAY 67 

68 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Mirabal, in curiously resonant English, with a French accent. — 
‘Don’t you think it would be wonderful if the gods came back ; 
to Mexico? our own gods?’ He sat in intense expectation, his — 
blue eyes fixed on Kate’s face, his soup-spoon suspended. ~~~ 

Kate’s face was baffled with incomprehension. “a 

‘Not those Aztec horrors!’ she said. 

‘The Aztec horrors! The Aztec horrors! Well, perhaps they 7 
were not so horrible after all. But if they were, it was because — 
the Aztecs were all tied up. They were in a cul de sac, so they 
saw nothing but death. Don’t you think so?’ 

‘I don’t know enough!’ said Kate. 

‘Nobody knows any more. But if you like the word Quetzal- 
coatl, don’t you think it would be wonderful if he came back 
again? Ah, the names of the gods! Don’t you think the names 
ate like seeds, so full of magic, of the unexplored magic? Huit- 
zilopochtli! — how wonderful! And Tlaloc! Ah! I love them! 
I say them over and over, like they say Mani padma Om! in 
Tibet. I believe in the fertility of sound. I*y papa/ot] — the Ob- 
sidian Butterfly! Itzpapalotl! But say it, and you will see it 
does good to your soul. Itzpapalotl! Tezcatlipoca! They were 
old when the Spaniards came, they:needed the bath of life — 
again. But now, re-bathed in youth, how wonderful they must 
be! Think of Jehovah! Jehovah! Think of Jesus Christ! How thin 
and poor they sound! Or Jes#s Cristo! They are dead names, 
all the life withered out of them. Ah, it is time now for Jesus 
to go back to. the place of the death of the gods, and take the 
long bath of being made young again. He is an old-old young 
god, don’t you think?’ He looked long at Kate, then dived for 
his soup. 

Kate widened her eyes in amazement at this torrent from the 
young Mirabal. Then she laughed. 

‘I think it’s a bit overwhelming!’ she said, non-committal. 

‘Ah! Yes! Exactly! Exactly! But how good to be over- 
whelmed! How splendid if something will overwhelm me! 
Ah, Iam so glad!’ 

The last word came with a clapping French resonance, and 
the young man dived for his soup again. He was lean and pale, 
but burning: with an intense, crazy energy. 

“You see,’ said young Garcia, raising his full, bright dark 
eyes to Kate, half aggressive and half bashful: ‘we must do 

oe 

FORTIETH BIRTHDAY 69 

_ something for Mexico. If we don’t, it will go under, no? You 
_ say you don’t like socialism. I don’t think I do either. But if 
_ there is nothing else but socialism, we ‘will have socialism. If 
_ there is nothing better. But perhaps there is.’ 
. “Why should Mexico go under?’ said Kate. ‘There are lots 
of children everywhere.’ 
“Yes, But the last census of Porfirio Diaz gave seventeen 
_ million people in Mexico, and the census of last year gave only 
_ thirteen millions. Maybe the count was not quite right. But 
_ you count four million people fewer, in twenty years, then in 
_ sixty years there will be no Mexicans: only foreigners, who 
“don’t die.’ 
| “Oh, but figures always lie!’ said Kate. ‘Statistics are always 
; misleading.’ 
__ ‘Maybe two and two don’t make four,’ said Garcia. ‘I don’t 
know if they do. But I know, if you take two away from two, 
it leaves none.’ 
‘Do you think Mexico might die out?’ she said to on 
~ Ramon. 
4 * ‘Why!’ he #€plied. ‘It might, Die out and become Ameri- 
 -canized.’ 
‘I quite see the danger of Ameticanization,’ said Owen. 
_ *That would be ghastly. Almost better die-out.’ 
- Owen was so American, he invariably said these things. 
| ‘But!’ said Kate. ‘The Mexicans look so strong!’ 
; hey ate strong to carry heavy loads,’ said Don Ramon. 
‘But they die.easily. They eat all the wrong things, they drink 
_ the wrong things, and they don’t mind dying. They have many 
children, and they like their children very much. But when the 
child dies, the parents say: Ah, he will be an angelito! So they 
cheer up and feel as if they had been given a present. Some- 
- times I think they enjoy it when their children die. Sometimes 
I think they would like to transfer Mexico en bloc into Paradise, 
ot whatever lies behind the walls of death. It would be better 
there!’ 
There was a silence. 
‘But how sad you are!’ said Kate, afraid. 
Dofia Isabel was giving hurried orders to the mansetvant. 
‘Whoever knows Mexico below the surface, is sad!’ said 
Julio Toussaint, rather sententiously, over his black cravat. 

Jo THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘Well,’ said Owen, ‘it seems to me, on the contrary, a gay 
country. A country of gay, irresponsible children. Or rather, 
they would be gay, if they were properly treated. If they had 
comfortable homes, and a.sense of real freedom. If they felt 
that they could control their lives and their own country. But 
being in the grip of outsiders, as they have been for hundreds 
of years, life of course seems hardly worth while to them. 
Naturally, they don’t care if they live or die. They don’t feel _ 
frees 

‘Free for what?’ asked-Toussaint. | 

“To make Mexico their own. Not to be so poor and at the | 
mercy of outsiders.’ E 

‘They are at the mercy of something worse than outsiders,’ 
said Toussaint. ‘Let me tell you. They are at the mercy of their 
own natures. It is this way. Fifty per cent of the people in 
Mexico are pure Indian: more or less. Of the rest, a small pro- 
portion are foreigners or Spaniard. You have then the mass — 
which is on top, of mixed blood, Indian and Spaniard mixed, 
chiefly. These are the Mexicans, those with the mixed blood. 
Now, you take us at this table. Don Cipriano is pure Indian. 
Don Ramon is almost pure Spaniard, but most probably he 
has the blood of Tlaxcalan Indians in his veins as well. Sefior 
Mirabal is mixed French and Spanish. Sefior Garcia most prob- 
ably has a mixture of Indian blood with Spanish. I myself have © 
French, Spanish, Austrian, and Indian blood. Very well! Now 
you mix blood of the same race, and it may be all right. Euro- 
peans are all Aryan stock, the race is the same. But when you 
mix European and American Indian, you mix different blood 
races, and you produce the half-breed. Now, the half-breed is a 
calamity. For why? He is neither one thing nor another, he is 
divided against himself. His blood of one race tells him one 
thing, his blood of another race tells him another. He is an un- 
fortunate, a calamity to himself. And it is hopeless. 

‘And this is Mexico. The Mexicans of mixed blood are hope- 
less. Well then! There are only two things to be done. All the 
foreigners and the Mexicans clear out and leave the country to 
the Indians, the pure-blooded Indians. But already you have a 
difficulty. How can you distinguish the pure-blooded Indian, 
after so many generations? Or else the half-breed or mixed-_ 
blood Mexicans who are all the time on top shall continue to 

eee ee 

FORTIETH BIRTHDAY 71 

destroy the country till the Americans from the United States 

flood in. We are as California and New Mexico now are, 
swamped under the dead white sea. 

“But let me tell you something further. I hope we are not 
Puritans. I hope I may say that it depends on the moment of 

- coition. At the moment of coition, either the spirit of the father 

fuses with the spirit of the mother, to create a new being with 
a soul, or else nothing fuses but the germ of procreation. 

“Now consider. How have these Mexicans of mixed blood 
been begotten, for centuries? In what spirit? What was the 
moment of coition like? Answer me that, and you have told 
me the reason for this Mexico which makes us despair and 
which will go on making everybody despair, till it destroys it- 
self. In what spirit have the Spanish and other foreign fathers 
gotten children of the Indian women? What sort of spirit was 
it? What sort of coition? And then, what sort of race do you 
expect?” 

‘But what sort of a spirit is there between white men and 
white women!” said Kate. 

” «At least,’ replied the didactic Toussaint, ‘the blood is homo- 
geneous, so that consciousness automatically unrolls in con- 
tinuity.’ # 

‘T hate its untolling i in automatic continuity,’ said Kate. 

“Perhaps! But it makes life possible. Without developing 
contjnuity in consciousness, you have chaos. And this comes 
of mixed blood.’ 

‘And then,’ said Kate, ‘surely the Indian men are fond of 
their women! The men seem manly, and the women seem very 
lovable and womanly.’ 

‘It is possible that the Indian ibaa are eit! -blooded, and 

there is the continuity of blood. But the Indian conscioustiess 

is swamped under the stagnant water of the white man’s Dead 
Sea consciousness. Take a man like Benito Juarez, a pure In- 
dian. He floods his old consciousness with the new white 

ideas, and there springs up a whole forest of verbiage, new 

laws, new constitutions and all the rest. But it is a sudden weed. 
It grows like a weed on the surface, saps the strength of the 
Indian soil underneath, and helps the process of ruin. No, 
madam! There is no hope for Mexico short of a mitacle.’ 
‘Ah!’ cried Mirabal, flourishing his wine-glass. “Isn’t that 

fe ; THE PLUMED SERPENT : | 

wonderful, when only the miracle will save us! When we must 
produce the miracle? We! We! We must make the miracle!’ 
He hit his own breast emphatically. ‘Ah, I think that is mar-_ 
vellous!’ And he returned to his turkey in black sauce. 

‘Look at the Mexicans!’ Toussaint flared on. “They don’t — 
care about anything. They eat food so hot with chili, it burns | 
holes in their insides. And it has no nourishment. They live in 
houses that a dog would be ashamed of, and they lie and shiver 
with cold. But they don’t do anything. They could make, easily, 
easily, a bed of maize leaves or similar leaves. But they don’t _ 
do it. They don’t do anything. They roll up in a thin serape | 
and lie on a thin mat on the bare ground, whether it is wet or | 
dry. And Mexican nights are cold. But they lie down like dogs, 
anyhow, as if they lay down to die. I say dogs! But you will | 
see the dogs looking for a dry sheltered place. The Mexicans, — 
no! Anywhere, nothing, nothing! And it is terrible. It is ter- _ 
rible! As if they wanted to punish themselves for being alive!’ — 

‘But then, why do they have so many children?’ said Kate. 

‘Why do they? The same, because they don’t care. They 
don’t care. They don’t cate about money, they don’t care about 
making anything, they don’t cate about nothing, nothing, 
nothing. Only they get an excitement out of women, as they 
do out of chili. They like to feel the red pepper burning holes 
in their insides, and they like to feel the other thing, the sex, 
burning holes in them too. But after the moment, they don’t — 
cate. They don’t care a bit. 

“And that is bad. I tell you, excuse me, but all, everything, 
depends on the moment of coition, At that moment many 
things can come to a crisis: all a man’s hope, his honour, his 
faith, his trust, his belief in life and creation and God, all these 
things can come to a crisis in the moment of coition. And these 
things will be handed on in continuity to the child. Believe me, 
Tama crank on this idea, but it is true. It is certainly absolutely 
true.’ 

‘T believe it is true,’ said Kate, rather coldly. 

‘Ah! you do! Well then! Look at Mexico! The only conscious 
people are half-breeds, people of mixed blood, begotten in 
greed and selfish brutality. ’ 

“Some people believe in the mixed blood,’ said Kate. 

‘Ah! They do, do they? Who?’ 

— 

g FORTIETH BIRTHDAY 73 

ef 

e 

“Some of your serious-minded men. They say the half-breed 

is better than the Indian.’ 

s 

“Better! Well! The Indian has his hopelessness. The mo- 
ment of coition is his moment of supreme hopelessness, when 

he throws himself down the pit of despair.’ 

The Austrian, European blood, which fans into fire of con- 
scious understanding, died down again, leaving what was 
Mexican in Julio Toussaint sunk in irredeemable gloom. 

“Tt is true,’ said Mirabal, out of the gloom. ‘The Mexicans 

_ who have any feeling always prostitute themselves, one way or 

another, and so they can never do anything. And the Indians 

_ can never do anything either, because they haven’t got hope in 

anything. But it is always darkest before the dawn..We must 
make the miracle come. The miracle is superior even to the 
moment of coition.’ 

It seemed, however, as if he said it by an effort of will. 

The dinner was ending in silence. During the whirl of talk, 
ot of passionate declaration, the servants had carried round the 
food and wine. Dofia Isabel, completely oblivious of the things 
that wete being’ said, watched and directed the servants with 
nervousanxiety and excitement, hef hands with their old jewel- 
lery trembling with agitation. Don Ramon had kept his eye on 
his guests’ material comfort, at the same time listening, as it 
were, from the back of his head. His big brown eyes wete in- 
scrutable, his face impassive. But when he had anything to say, 
it was always with a light laugh and a teasing accent. And yet 

- his eyes brooded and smouldered with an incomprehensible, 

unyielding fire. 
Kate felt she was in the presence of men. Here were men 

- face to face not with death and self-sacrifice, but, with the life- 

issue. She felt, for the first time in her life, a pang almost like 
fear, of men who wete passing beyond what she knew, beyond 
her depth. 

Cipriano, his rather short but intensely black, curved eye- 
lashes lowering over his dark eyes, watched his plate, only 
sometimes looking up with a black, brilliant glance, either at 
whomsoever was speaking, or at Don Ramon, or at Kate. His 
face was changeless and intensely serious, serious almost with 
a touch of childisbness. But the curious blackness of his eye- 
lashes lifted so strangely, with such intense unconscious male- 

74 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

ness from his eyes, the movement of his hand was so odd, 
quick, light as he ate, so easily a movement of shooting, or of 
flashing a knife into the body of some advetsary, and his dark- 
coloured lips were so helplessly savage, as he ate or briefly 
- spoke, that her heart stood still. There was something unde- 
veloped and intense in him, the intensity and the crudity of the - 
semi-savage. She could well understand the potency of the 
snake upon the: Aztec and Maya imagination. Something 
smooth, undeveloped, yet vital in this man suggested the 
heavy-ebbing blood of reptiles in his veins. That was what it 
was, the heavy-ebbing blood of powerful reptiles, the dragon 
of Mexico. 

So that unconsciously she shrank when his black, big, glit-— 
tering eyes turned on her for a moment. They were not, like | 
Don Ramén’s, dark eyes. They were black, as black as jewels — 
into which one could not look without a sensation of fear. And 
her fascination was tinged with fear. She felt somewhat as the 
bird feels when the snake is watching it. 

She wondered almost that Don Ramon was not afraid. Be- 
cause she had noticed that usually, when an Indian looked to 
a white man, both men stood back from actual contact, from 
actual meeting of each other’s eyes. They left a wide space of 
neutral territory between them. But Cipriano looked at Ramén 
with a curious intimacy, glittering, steady, warrior-like, and at 
the same time betraying an almost menacing trust in the other 
man. 

Kate realized that Ramon had a good deal to stand-up to. 
But he kept a little, foiling laugh on his face, and lowered his 
beautiful head with the black hair touched with grey, as if he 
would put a veil before his countenance. 

‘Do you think one can make this miracle come?’ she asked 
of him. 

‘The miracle is always there,’ he said, ‘for the man who can 
pass his hand through to it, to take it.’ 

They finished dinner, and went to sit out on the veranda, . 
looking into the garden where the light from the house fell un- 
cannily on the blossoming trees and the dark tufts of Yucca 
and the strange great writhing trunks of the Laurel de India. 

Cipriano. had sat down next to her, smoking a cigarette. 

“It is a strange darkness, the Mexican darkness!’ she said. 

3 
. FORTIETH BIRTHDAY ; 75 

“Do you like it?’ he asked. 

‘I don’t know yet,’ she said. ‘Do you?’ 

“Yes. Very much, I think I like best the time when the day 

_is falling and the night coming on like something else. Then, 

one feels more free, don’t you think? Like the flowers that 

_ send out their scent at night, but in the daytime they look at 

the sun and don’t have any smell.’ 

“Perhaps the night here scares me,’ she laughed. 

“Yes. But why not? The smell of the flowers at night may 
make one feel afraid, but it is a good fear. One likes it, don’t 
you think?’ 

‘Lam afraid of fear,’ she said. 

He laughed shortly. 

“You speak such English English,’ she said. ‘Nearly all the 

_Mexicans who speak Hnglish speak American English. Even 

Don Ramon does, rather.’ 
“Yes. Don Ramon graduated in Columbia University. But I 

. was sent to » England, to school in London, and then to Ox- 

ford.’ 
“Who sent you?’ 

‘My god-father. He was an Englishman: Bishop Severn, 
Bishop of Oaxaca. You have heard of him?’ 

‘No,’ said Kate. 

‘He was a very well-known man. He died only about ten 
years ago. He was very rich, too, before the revolution. He 
had a big hacienda in Oaxaca, with a very fine library. But they 
took it away from him in the revolution, and they sold the 

things, ot broke them. They didn’t know the value of them, of 

course.’ 

‘And did he adopt you?’ 

“Yes! In a way. My father was one of the overseers on the 
hacienda. When I was a little boy I came running to my father, 
when the Bishop was there, with something in my hands — so!’ 
— and he made a cup of his hand. ‘I don’t remember. This is 
what they tell me. I was a small child — three or four years of 
age — somewhere there. What I had in my hands was a yellow 
scotpion, one of the small ones, very poisonous, no?’ 

And he lifted the cup of his small, slender, dark hands, as if 
to show Kate the creature. 

‘Well, the Bishop was talking to my father, and he saw what 

76 | THE PLUMED SERPENT 

I had got before my father did. So he told me at once, to put 
the scorpion in his hat — the Bishop’s hat, no? Of course I did 
’ what he told me, and I put the scorpion in his hat, and it did 
not bite me. If it had stung me I should have died, of course. 
But I didn’t know, so I suppose the a/acran was not interested. 
The Bishop was a very good man, very kind. He liked my 
father, so he became my god-father. Then he always took an 
interest in me, and he sent me to school, and then to England. 
He hoped I should be a priest. He always said that the one 
hope for Mexico was if she had really fine native priests.’ He 
ended rather wistfully. | 

‘And didn’t you want to become a priest?’ said Kate. 

‘No!’ he said sadly. ‘No!’ . 

‘Not at all?’ she asked. 

‘No! When I was in England it was different from Mexico. 
Even God was different, and the Blessed Mary. They were 
changed so much, I felt I didn’t know them any more. Then I 
came to understand better, and when I understood I didn’t be- 
lieve any more. I used to think it was the images of Jesus, and 
the Virgin, and the Saints, that were doing everything in the 
world. And the world seemed to me so strange, no? I couldn’t 
see that it was bad, because it was all so very strange and mys- 
terious, when,I was a child, in Mexico. Only in England I 
learned about the laws of life, and some science. And then when 
I knew why the sun rose and set, and how the world really was, 
I felt quite different.’ ; 

‘Was your god-father disappointed?’ . 

“A little, perhaps. But he asked me if I would rather be a sad 
dier, so I said I would. Then when the revolution came, and 1 
was twenty-two years old, I had to come back to Mexico.’ 

‘Did you like your god-father ?’ 

“Yes, very much. But the revolution carried everything 
away. I felt 1 must do what my god-father wished. But I could 
see that Mexico was not the Mexico he believed in.*It was dif- 
ferent. He was too English, and too good to understand. In 
the revolutions I tried to help the man I believed was the best 
man. So you see, I have always been half a priest and half a 
soldier.’ 

“You never married?’ 

“No. I couldn’t marry, because I always felt my god-father 

FORTIETH BIRTHDAY 77 

was there, and I felt I had promised him to be a priest — all 

those things, you know. When he died he told me to follow 

my own conscience, and to remember that Mexico and all the 
Indians were in the hands of God, and he made me promise 
never to take sides against God. He was an old man when he 
died, seventy-five.’ 

Kate could see the spell of the old Bishop’s strong, rather 
grandiose personality upon the impressionable Indian. She 
could see the curious recoil into chastity, perhaps character- 

istic of the savage. And at the same time she felt the intense 
masculine yearning, coupled with a certain male ferocity, in 
the man’s breast. 

“Your husband was James Joachim Leslie, the famous Irish 
‘leader ?? he asked her: and added: ‘You had no children?’ 

“No. I wanted_Joachim’s children so much, but I didn’t 
have any. But I have a boy and a girl from my first marriage. 
My first husband was a lawyer, and I was divorced from him 

-for Joachim.’ 

‘Did youfike him — that first one?’ 

"Yes. I liked Mim. But I never. felt anything very deep for 
him. I married him when I was young, and he was a good deal 

older than I. I was fondvof hit, in a way. But I had never 
realized that one could be more than fond of a man, till I knew 
Joachim. I thought that was all one could ever expect to feel — 

that you just liked a man, and that he was in love with you. It- 
took me years to understand that a woman can’t love a man — 
at least a woman like I am can’t — if he is only the sort of good, 
decent citizen. With Joachim I came to realize that a woman 
like me can only love a man who is fighting to change the world, 
to make it freer, more alive. Men like my first husband, who 
are good and trustworthy and who work to keep the world 
going on well in the same state they found it in, they let you 
down horribly, somewhere. You feel so terribly sold. Every- 
thing is just a sell: it becomes so small. A woman who isn’t 
quite ordinary herself can only love a man who is fighting for 
something beyond the ordinary life.’ 

‘And your husband fought for Ireland.’ 

“Yes — for Ireland, and for something he never quite realized. 
He ruined his health. And when he was dying, he said to me: 
Kate, perhaps I’ve let you down. Perhaps I -haven’t really helped 

Ege 
Rr A 7 

78 THE PLUMED SERPENT +t 

Ireland. But I couldn’ t help myself. I feel as if I'd brought you to the 
doors of life, and was leaving you there. Kate, don’t be disappointed in 
life because of me. 1 didn’t really get anywhere. I haven’t really got any- 
where. I feel as if I'd made a mistake. But perhaps when I’m dead I 
shall be able to do more for you than I have done while I was alive. Say 
you'll never feel disappointed!” 

There was a pause. The memory of the dead man was com- 
ing over her again, and all her grief. 

‘And I don’t feel disappointed,’ she went on, her voice be- 
ginning to shake. ‘But I loved him. And it was bitter, that he 
had to die, feeling he hadn’t — hadn’t.’ 

She put her hands before her face, and the bitter tears came 
through her fingers. 

Cipriano sat motionless as a statue. But from his breast came 
that dark surging passion of tenderness the Indians are cap- 
able of. Perhaps it would pass, leaving him indifferent and 
fatalistic again. But at any rate for the moment he sat in a dark, 
fiery cloud of passionate male tenderness. He looked at her - 
soft, wet white hands over her face, and at the one big emerald 
on her finger, in a sort of wonder. The wonder, the mystery, 
the magic that used to flood over him as a boy and a youth, 
when he kneeled before the babyish figure of the Santa Maria 
de la Soledad, flooded him again. He was in the presence of the 
goddess, white-handed, mysterious, gleaming with a moon- 
like power and the intense potency of grief. 

Then Kate hastily took her hands from her face and with 
head ducked looked for her handkerchief. Of course she hadn’t 
got one. Cipriano lent her his, nicely folded. She took it with- — 
out a wotd, and rubbed her face and blew her nose. , 

‘I want to go and look at the flowers,’ she said in a strangled © 
voice. 

And she dashed into the garden with his handkerchief in her 
hand. He stood up and drew aside his chair, to let her pass, 
then stood a:moment looking at the garden, before he sat 
down again and lighted a cigarette. 

CHAPTER IV 

To guna or Not to Stay 

ienss had to return to the United States, and he asked Kate 

whether she wanted to stay on in Mexico. 

This put her into a quandary. It was not an easy country for 

a woman to be alone in. And she had been beating her wings 
in an effort to get away. She felt like a bird round whose body 

a snake has coiled itself. Mexico was the snake. 

. The curious influence of the country, pulling one down, 

_ pulling one down. She had heard an old American, who had 
been forty years in the Republic, saying to Owen: ‘No man 
_ who hasn’t a strong moral backbone should try to settle in 

_ Mexico. If he does, he’ll go to pieces, morally and physically, 
as I’ve seen hundreds of young Americans do.’ 

To pull one down. It was what the country wanted to do all " 
the time, ith a slow, reptilian insistence, to pull one down. 
To prevent the spirit from see hns: To take away the free, 
ny sense of liberty. 

“There is no such thing as ltberty,’ she heard the quiet, deep, 
echt voice of Don Ramon repeating. ‘There is no such 
thing as liberty. The greatest liberators are usually slaves of an 
idea. The freest people are slaves to convention and public 
opitfion, and more still, slaves to the industrial machine. There 
is no such thing as liberty. You only change one sort of domi- 
nation for another. All we can do is to choose our master.’ 

‘But surely that 7s liberty — for the mass of people.’ 

“They don’t choose. They are tricked into a new form of 
servility, no more. They go from bad to worse.’ 

“You yourself — aren’t you free?’ she asked. 

_ ‘I?’ he laughed. ‘I spent a long time trying to pretend. I 
thought I could have my own way. Till I realized that having 
_my own way meant only running about smelling all the things 
in the street, like a dog that will pick up something. Of myself, 
I have no way. No man has any way in himself, Every man 
who goes along a way is led by one of three things: by an appe-. 
tite—and I class ambition among appetites; or by an idea; or by 
an inspiration.’ 

80 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘I used to think my husband was inspired about Ireland,’ — 
said Kate doubtfully. 
‘And now?’ 

‘Yes! Perhaps he put his wine in old, rotten bottles that — 
wouldn’t hold it. No! - Liberty i is a rotten old wine-skin. It © 
won’t hold one’s wine of inspiration or passion any more,’ she — 
said. 
‘And Mexico!’ be said. ‘Mexico is another Ireland. Ah no, 
no man can be his own master. If I must serve, I will not serve © 
an idea, which cracks and leaks like an old wine-skin. I will — 
serve the God that gives me my manhood. There is no liberty — 
for a:man, apart from the God of his manhood. Free Mexico is 
a bully, and the old, colonial, ecclesiastical Mexico was another 
sott of bully. When man has nothing but his w7// to assert — ~ 
even his good-will — it is always bullying. Bolshevism is one 
sort of bullying, capitalism another: and liberty is a change = 4 
chains.’ 

“Then what’s to be done?’ said Kate. ‘Just nothing?’ 

And with her own will, she wanted nothing to be done. Let 
the skies fall! 

“One is driven, at last, back to the far distance, to look for 
God,’ said Ramon uneasily. 

‘T rather hate this search-for-God business, and clignuaae 
said Kate. 

‘I know!’ he said, with a laugh. “I’ve suffered from would- 
be-cocksure religion myself.’ i 

‘And you can’t really “find God”! she said. ‘It’s a sort of — 
sentimentalism, and creeping back into old, hollow shells.’ 

‘No!’ he said slowly. “I can’t find God, in the old sense. I 
know it’s a sentimentalism if I pretend to. But I am nauseated 
with humanity and the human will: even with my own will. 

I have realized that my wi//, no matter how intelligent I am, is 
only another nuisance on the face of the earth, once I start . 
exerting it. And other people’s wz//s are even worse.’ 

‘Oh! isn’t human life horrible!’ she cried. ‘Every human 
being exerting his will all the time — over other people, and 
overt himself, and nearly always self-righteous!’ 

Ramén made a grimace of repulsion. 

“To me,” he said, ‘that is just the weariness of life! For a 
time, it can be amusing: exerting your own will, and resisting 

a 

ra TOSS TAY OR NOTIEO {SLAY 8x 

all the other people’s wills, that they try to put over you. But 
_ at a certain point a nausea sets in at the very middle of me: my 
soul is nauseated. My soul is nauseated, and there is nothing but 
death ahead, unless I find something else.’ 
Kate listened in silence. She knew the road he had gone, but 
_ She herself had not yet come to the end of it. As yet she was 
still strong in the pride of her own — her very own will. 
“Oh, people are repulsive!’ she cried. 
“My own will becomes even mote repulsive at last,’ he said. 
_ “My own will, merely as my own will, is even more distasteful 
to me than other people’s wills. From being the god in my own 
machine, I must either abdicate, or die of disgust — self-disgust, 
at that.’ 
“How amusing!’ she cried. 
“It is rather funny,’ he said sardonically. 
‘And then?’ she asked, looking at him with a certain male- 
volent challenge. 
He looked back at her slowly, with an ironical light in his 
eyes. ? | 
**Then!’ he repeated. ‘Then! — I ask, what else is there in the 
world, besides human will, human Appetite? because ideas and 
ideals are only instruments of human will and appetite.’ 
‘Not entirely,’ said Kate. “They may be disinterested.’ 
‘May they? If the appetite zsn’¢ interested, the will is.’ 
“Why not?’ she mocked. ‘We can’t be mere detached blocks.’ 
‘If nauseates me — I look for something else.’ 
‘And what do you find?’ 
“My own manhood!’ — 
“What does that mean?’ she cried, jeering. 
‘If you looked, and found your own womanhood, you 
would know.’ 
‘But I fave my own womanhood!’ she cried. 
‘And then — when you find your own manhood — your 
womanhood,’ he went on, smiling faintly at her — ‘then you 
_ know it is not your own, to do as you like with. You don’t 
have it of your own will. It comes from — from the middle — 
from the God. Beyond me, at the middle, is the God. And the 
God gives me my manhood, then leaves me to it. I have noth- 
ing ‘but my manhood. The God gives it me, and leaves me to 
do further.’ 

82 THE PLUMED SERPENT ' 

Kate would not hear any more. She broke off into banalitices} 

The immediate question, for her, was whether she would 
stay in Mexico or not. She was not really concerned with Don 
Ram6n’s soul — ot even her own. She was concerned with her 
immediate future. Should she stay in Mexico? Mexico meant 
the dark-faced men in cotton clothes, big hats: the peasants, - 
peons, pelados, Indians, call them what you will. The mere 
natives. . 

Those pale-faced Mexicans of the Capital, politicians, artists, 
professionals, and business people, they did not interest her. 
Neither did the bacendados and the ranch-owners, in their tight — 
trousets and weak, soft sensuality, pale victims of their own | 
emotional undiscipline. Mexico still meant the mass of silent — 
peons, to her. And she thought of them again, these silent, — 
stif-backed men, driving their strings of asses along the coun- 
try roads, in the dust of Mexico’s infinite dryness, past broken 
walls, broken houses, broken Aaciendas, along the endless deso- 
lation left by the revolutions ; past the vast stretches of maguey, 
the huge cactus, or aloe, with its gigantic rosette of upstarting, ; 
pointed leaves, that in its iron rows covers miles and miles of © 
ground in the Valley of Mexico, cultivated for the making of © 
that bad-smelling drink, pulque. The Mediterranean has the 
dark grape, old Europe has malted beer, and China has opium 
from the white poppy. But out of the Mexican soil a bunch of 
black-tarnished swords bursts up, and a great unfolded bud of 
the once-flowering monster begins to thrust at the sky. They © 
cut the great phallic bud and crush out the sperm-like juice for | 
the pulque. Agua miel! Pulque! 

But better pulque than the fiery white brandy distilled from — 
the maguey: mescal, tequila: ot in the low lands, the hateful 
sugar-cane brandy, aguardiente. 

And the Mexican burns out his stomach with those beastly 
fire-waters and cauterizes the hurt with red-hot chili. Swallow- 
ing one hell-fire to put out another. 

Tall fields of wheat and maize. Taller, more brilliant fields of 
bright-green sugar-cane. And threading in white cotton 
clothes, with dark, half-visible face, the eternal peon of Mexi- 
co, his great white calico drawers flopping round his ankles as 
he walks, or rolled up over his dark, handsome legs. 

The wild, sombre, erect men of the north! The too-often 

= TO STAY OR NOT TO STAY 83 

_ degenerate men of Mexico Valley, their heads through the 
middle of their ponchos! The big men in Tlascala, selling ice- 

cream or huge half-sweetened buns and fancy bread! The 

— quick little Indians, quick as spiders, down in Oaxaca! The 
queer-looking half-Chinese natives towards Vera Cruz! The 
dark faces and the big black eyes on the coast of Sinaloa! 
The handsome men of Jalisco, with a scarlet blanket folded on 
one shoulder! — 
They were of many tribes and many languages, and far more 
alien to oneanother than Frenchmen, English,and Germansare. 
Mexico! It is not really even the beginnings of a nation: hence 
the rabid assertion of nationalism in the few. And it is nota race. 

Yet it is a people. There is some Indian quality which per- 
vades the whole. Whether it is men in blue overalls and a 

_ slouch, in Mexico City, or men with handsome legs in skin- 
tight trousers, or the floppy, white, cotton-clad labourers in 
the fields, there is something mysteriously in common. The 
erect, prancing walk, stepping out from the base of the spine 
with lifted Knees and short steps. The jaunty balancing of the 
huge hats. The shrown-back shoulders with a folded serape like 
a royal mantle. And most of them handsome, with dark, warm- 
bronze skin so smooth and living, their proudly-held heads, 

_whose black hair gleams like wild, rich feathers. Their big, 
bright black eyes that look at you wonderingly, and have no 
centre to them. Their sudden, charming smile, when you smile 
first. But the eyes unchanged. - 

Yes, and she had to remember, too, a fair proportion of 
smaller, sometimes insignificant-looking men, some of them 
scaly with dirt, who looked at you with a cold, mud-like anta- 
gonism as they stepped cattishly past. Poisonous, thin, stiff 
little men, cold and unliving like scorpions, and as dangerous. 

_ And then the truly terrible faces of some creatures in the 
city, slightly swollen with the poison of equé/a, and with black, 
dimnied, swivel eyes swinging in pure evil. Never had she seen 
such faces of pure brutish evil, cold and insect-like, as in 
Mexico City. 

The country gave her a strange feeling of hopelessness and 
of dauntlessness. Unbroken, eternally resistant, it was a people 
that lived without hope, and without care. Gay even, and 

laughing with indifferent carelessness. ity sib 

84 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

They were something like her own Irish, but gone toa fnuch 

greater length. And also, they did what the self-conscious and 
pretentious Irish rarely do, they touched her bowels with a 
strange fire of compassion. 

At the same time, she feared them. They would pull her 

down, pull her down, to the dark depths of nothingness. 

It was the same with the women. In their full long skirts and 
bare feet, and with the big dark-blue scarf or shawl called a 
reboxo over their womanly small heads and tight round their 
shoulders, they were images of wild submissiveness, the primi- 
tive womanliness of the world, that is so touching and so 
alien. Many women kneeling in a dim church, all hooded in 
their dark-blue rebozos, the pallor of their skirts on the floor, 
theit heads and shoulders wrapped dark and tight, as they 
swayed with devotion of fear and ecstasy! A churchful of dark- 
wrapped women sunk there in wild, humble supplication of 

dread and of bliss filled Kate with tenderness and revulsion. 

They crouched like people not quite created. 

Their soft, untidy black hair, which they scratched for lice; — 

the round-eyed baby joggling like a pumpkin in the shawl 
slung over the woman’s shoulder, the never-washed feet and 
ankles, again somewhat reptilian under the long, flounced, 
soiled cotton skirt; and then, once more, the dark eyes of half- 
created women, soft, appealing, yet with a queer void inso- 
lence! Something lurking, where the womanly centre should 

have been; lurking snake-like. Fear! The fear of not being able — 

to find full creation. And the inevitable mistrust and lurking 
insolence, insolent against a higher creation, the same thing 
that is in the striking of a snake. 

Kate, as a woman, feared the women more than the men. 
The women were little and insidious, the men were bigger and 
more reckless. But in the eyes of each, the uncreated centre, 
where the evil and the insolence lurked. ; 

And sometimes she wondered whether America really was 
the great death-continent, the great No/ to the European and 
Asiatic, and even African Yes! Was it really the great melting- 
pot, where men from the creative continents were smelted back 
again, not to a new creation, but down into the homogeneity 
of death? Was it the great continent of the undoing, and all its 
peoples the agents of the mystic destruction! Plucking, pluck- 

= 
| TO STAY OR NOT TO STAY 85 

ing at the created soul in a man, till at last it plucked out the 

growing germ, and left him a creature of mechanism and auto- 

matic reaction, with only one inspiration, the desire to pluck 
the quick out of every living spontaneous creature. 

Was that the clue to America? she sometimes wondered. 
Was it the great death-continent, the continent that destroyed 
again what the other continents had built up? The continent 
whose spirit of place fought purely to pick the eyes out of the 
face of God? Was that America? 

And all the people who went there, Europeans, Negroes, 
Japanese, Chinese, all the colours and the races, were they the 
spent people, in whom the God impulse had collapsed, so they 
crossed to the great continent of the negation, where the 
human will declares itself ‘free’, to pull down the soul of the 
world? Was it so? And did this account for the great drift to 
the New World, the drift of spent souls passing over to the side 
of Godless democracy, energetic negation? The negation 
which is the life-breath of materialism. And would the great 
negative pufl of the Americans at last break the heart of the 
world? wo q 

- This thought would come to her; time and again. 

She herself, what had she come to America for? 

Because the flow of her life had broken, and she knew she 
could not re-start it in Europe. 

These handsome natives! Was it because they were death- 
worshippers, Moloch-worshippers, that they were so uncowed 
and handsome? Their pure acknowledgment of death and their 
undaunted admission of nothingness kept so erect and careless. 

White men had had a soul, and lost it. The pivot of fire had 
been quenched in them, and their lives had started to spin in - 
the reversed direction, widdershins. That reversed look which 
is in the eyes of so many white people, the look of nullity, and 
life wheeling in the reversed direction. Widdershins. 

But the dark-faced natives, with their strange soft flame of 
life wheeling upon a dark void: were they centreless and wid- 
dershins too, as so many white men now are? 

__ The strange, soft flame of courage in the black Mexican eyes. 
But still it was not knit to a centre, that centre which is the soul 
of a man in a man. 

And all the efforts of white men to bring the soul of the datk 

86 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

men of Mexico into final clinched being has resulted in noth-_ 4 
ing but the collapse of the white man. Against the soft, dark 

flow of the Indian the white man at last collapses; with his God 
and his energy he collapses. In attempting to convert the dark 

man to the white man’s way of life, the white man has fallen ~ 
helplessly down the hole he wanted to fill up. Seeking to save © 
another man’s soul, the white man lost his own, and collapsed © 

upon himself. 
Mexico! The great, precipitous, dry, savage country, with a 
handsome church in every landscape, rising as it were out of 

nothing. A revolution-broken landscape, with lingering, tall, © 

handsome churches whose domes are like inflations that are 
going to burst, and whose pinnacles and towers are like the 

trembling pagodas of an unreal race. Gorgeous churches wait- _ 
ing, above the huts and straw hovels of the natives, like ghosts — 

to be dismissed. 

And noble ruined Aaciendas, with ruined avenues approach- 
ing their broken splendour. 

And the cities of Mexico, great and small, that the Spaniards 
conjured up out of nothing. Stones live and die with the spirit 

of the builders. And the spirit of Spaniards in Mexico dies, and — 

the very stones in the building die. The natives drift into the 

centre of the p/azas again, and in unspeakable empty weariness — 

the Spanish buildings stand around, in a sort of dry exhaus- 
tion. 

The conquered race! Cortés came with his iron heel and his 
iron will, a conqueror. But a conquered race, unless grafted 
with a new inspiration, slowly sucks the blood of the con- 

aer*g -* 

querors, in the silence of a strange night and the heaviness of a 

hopeless will. So that now, the race of the conquerors in Mexi- 
co is soft and boneless, children crying in helpless hopeless- 
ness. 

Was it the dark negation of the continent? 

Kate could not look at the stones of the National Museum 
in Mexico without depression and dread. Snakes coiled like 
excrement, snakes fanged and feathered beyond all dreams of 
dread. And that was all. 

The ponderous pyramids of San Juan Teotihuacan, the 
House of Quetzalcoatl wreathed with the snake of all snakes, 
his huge fangs white and pure to-day as in the lost centuries 

7 
Ge eis 
& cet te 

* TO STAY OR NOT TO STAY 87 

_ when his makers were alive. He has not died. He is not so dead 
as the Spanish churches, this all-enwreathing dragon of the 
horror of Mexico. 

Cholula, with its church where the altar was! And the same 
ponderousness, the same unspeakable sense of weight and 
downward pressure of the blunt pyramid. Down-sinking pres- 
sure and depression. And the great market-place with its lin- 

- geting dread and fascination. 

Mitla under its hills, in the parched valley where a wind 
blows the dust and the dead souls of the vanished race in ter- 
rible gusts. The catved courts of Mitla, with a hard, sharp- 
angled, intricate fascination, but the fascination of fear and re- 
pellence. Hard, four-square, sharp-edged, cutting, zig-zageing 
Mitla, like continual blows of a stone axe. Without gentleness 
or grace or charm. Oh America, with your unspeakable hard 
lack of charm, what then is your final meaning? Is it forever 
the knife of sacrifice, as you put out your tongue at the world? 

Charmless America! With your hard, vindictive beauty, are 

_ you waiting forever to smite death? Is the world your ever- 
lasting victim? © 

So logg as it will let itself be victimized. 

But yet! But yet! The gentle voices of the natives. The voicé 
of the boys, like birds twittering among the trees of the plaza 

~ of Tehuacan! The soft touch, the gentleness. Was it the dark- 
fingered quietness of death, and the music of the presence of 

death in their voices? 

She thought again of what Don Ramon had said to her. 

‘They pull you down! Mexico pulls you down, the people 
pull you down like a great weight! But it may be they pull you 
down as the earth’s pull of gravitation does, that you can 
balance on your feet. Maybe they draw you down 4s the earth 
draws down the roots of a tree, so that it may be clinched deep 
in soil. Men are still part of the Tree of Life, and the roots go 
down to the centre of the earth. Loose leaves, and aeroplanes, 
blow away on the wind, in what they call asain But the 
Tree of Life has fixed, deep, gripping roots. 

‘It may be you need to be drawn down, down, till you send 
roots into the deep places again. Then you can send up the sap 

and the leaves back tg the sky, later. 

‘And to me, the men in Mexico are like trees, forests that the 

. 

i o ae 

88 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

white men felled in their coming. But the roots of the trees are 

deep and alive and forever sending up new shoots. 

‘And each new shoot that comes up overthrows a Spanish 
church or an American factory. And soon the dark forest will 
tise again, and shake the Spanish buildings from the face of 
America. 

‘All that matters to me are the roots that reach down beyond 
all destruction. The roots and the life are there. What else it 
needs is the word, for the forest to begin to rise again. And 
some man among men must speak the word.’ 

The strange doom-like sound of the man’s words! But in ~ 

spite of the sense of doom on her heart, she would not go 
away yet. She would stay longer in Mexico. 

CHAPTER V 

The Lake 

lake. If she liked it there, and could find a house, she could 

OweENn left, Villiers stayed on a few days to escort Kate to the © 

stay by herself. She knew sufficient people in Mexico and in | 

Guadalajara to prevent her from being lonely. But she still 
shrank from travelling alone in this country. 
She wanted to leave the city. The new President had come 

« 

in quietly enough, but there was an ugly feeling of uppishness — 
in the lower classes, the bottom dog clambering mangily to the © 

top. Kate was no snob. Man or woman, she cared nothing 
about the social class. But meanness, sordidness she hated. She 
hated bottom dogs. They all were mangy, they all were full of 
envy and malice, many had the rabies. Ah no, let us defend 
ourselves from the bottom dog, with its mean grow] and its 
yellow teeth. : 

She had tea with Cipriano before leaving. 

“How do you get along with the Government?’ she asked. 

‘I stand for the law and the constitution,’ he said. ‘They 
know I don’t want anything to do with cuartelazos or revolu- 
tions. Don Ramén is my chief.’ 

“In what way?’ 

we eee 
j 0 

‘Later, you will see.’ 

He had a secret, important to himself, on rwhich he was sit- 
ting tight. But he looked at her with shining eyes, as much as 
to say that soon she would shate the secret, and then he would 
be much happier. 

He watched her curiously, from under his wary black lashes. 
She was one of the rather plump Irishwomen, with soft brown 
hair and hazel eyes, and a beautiful, rather distant repose. Her 
great charm was her soft repose, and her gentle, unconscious 
inaccessibility. She was taller and bigger than Cipriano: he was 
almost boyishly small. But he was all energy, and his eyebrows 
tilted black and with a barbarian conceit, above his full, almost 
insolent black eyes. 

He watched her continually, with a kind of fascination: the 
same spell that the absurd little figures of the doll Madonna 
had cast over him as a boy. She was the mystery, and he the 

_adorer, under the semi-ecstatic spell of the mystery. But once 
he rose from his knees, he rose in the same strutting conceit of 
himself as Before he knelt: with all his adoration in his pocket 
again. But he hael a good deal of magnetic power. His educa- 
tion had not diminished it. His education lay like a film of 
white oil on the black lake of his barbarian consciousness. For 
this reason, the things he said were hardly interesting at all. 
Only what he was. He made the air around him seem darker, 
but richer and fuller. Sometimes his presence was extraordin- 
atily ‘grateful, like a healing of the blood. And sometimes he 
was an intolerable weight on her. She gasped to get away from 
him. 

“You think a great deal of Don Ramén?’ she said to him. 

“Yes,” he said, his black eyes watching her. ‘He is a very fine 
man.” 

How trivial the words sounded! That was another boring 
thing about him: his English seemed so trivial. He wasn’t really 
expressing himself. He was only flipping at the white oil that 
lay on his surface. 

‘You like him better than the Bishop, your god-father?’ 

He lifted his shoulders in a twisted, embarrassed shrug. 

‘The same!’ he said. ‘I like him the same.’ 

Then he looked away into the distance, with a certain hau- 
teur and insolence. 

THE LAKE 89 

ca | 
+ 
go THE PLUMED SERPENT H 

‘Very different,.no?’ he said. ‘But in some ways, the same. 
He knows better what is Mexico. He knows better what Iam. 
Bishop Severn did not know the real Mexico: how could he, 
he was a sincere Catholic! But Don Ramon knows the real 

* Mexico, no?’ 

‘And what is the real Mexico?’ she asked. 

‘Well — you must ask Don Ramon. I can’t explain.’ 

She asked Cipriano about going to the lake. 

‘Yes!’ he said. ‘You can go! You will like it. Go first to 
Orilla, no? — you take a ticket on the railway to Ixtlahuacan. 
And in Orilla is an hotel with a German manager. Then from. 
Orilla you can go in a motot-boat, in a few hours, to Sayula. 
And there you will find a house to live in.’ 

He wanted her to do this, she could tell. 

‘How far is Don Ramon’s hacienda from Sayula?’ she asked. 

‘Near! About an hour ina boat. He is there now. And at the 
beginning of the month I am going with my division to Gua- 
dalajara: now there is a new Governor. So I shall be quite near 
too.’ 

‘That will be nice,’ she said. 

“You think so?’ he asked quickly. 

‘Yes,’ she said, on her guard, looking at him slowly. ‘I 
should be sorry to lose touch with Don Ramon and you.’ 

He had a little tension on his brow, haughty, unwilling, con- 
ceited, and at the same time, yearning and desirous. 

“You like Don Ramon very much?’ he said. ‘You want to 
know him more?’ 

There was a peculiar anxiety in his voice. 

“Yes,’ she said. ‘One knows so few people in the world 
nowadays, that one can respect — and fear a little. 1am a little 
afraid of Don Ramon: and I have the grea/es¢ respect for him — 
She ended on a hot note of sincerity. 

“It is good!’ he said. “It is very good. You may respect him 
more than any other man in the world.’ 

“Perhaps that is true,’ she said, turning her eyes slowly to his. 

“Yes! Yes!’ he cried impatiently. ‘It is true. You will find 
out later. And Ramon likes you. He told me to ask you to 
come to the lake. When you come to Sayula, when you are 
coming, write to him, and no doubt he can tell you about a 
house, and all those things.’ 

= tt Ll ben, ~ 

. THE LAKE 91 

‘Shall I?’ she said, hesitant. 

“Yes. Yes! of course, we say what we mean.’ 

Curious little man, with his odd, inflammable hauteur and 
conceit, something burning inside him, that gave him no 
peace. He had an almost childish faith in the other man. And’ 
yet she was not sure that he did not, in some cornet of his soul, 
resent Ramon somewhat. 

Kate set off by the night train for the west, with Villiers. The 
one Pullman coach was full: people going to Guadalajara and 
Colima and the coast. There were three military officers, rather 
shy in their new uniforms, and rather swaggering at the same 
time, making eyes at the empty air, as if they felt they weree . 
conspicuous, and sitting quickly in their seats, as if to obliter- 
ate themselves. There wete two country farmers or ranchers, 
in tight trousers and cartwheel hats stitched with silver. One 
was a tall man with a big moustache, the other was a smaller, 
grey man. But they both had the handsome, alive legs of the 
Mexicans, and the rather quenched faces. There was a widow 
buried in cfape, accompanied by avriada, a maid. The rest were 
tOwnsmen, Me#icans on business, at once shy and fussy, un- 
obtrusive and self-important. = 

The Pullman was clean and‘neat, with its hot green-plush 
seats. But, full of people, it seemed empty compared with a 
Pullman in the United States. Everybody was very quiet, very 
soft and guarded. The farmers folded their beautiful serapes 
and faid them catefully on the seats, sitting as if their section 
wete a lonely little place. The officers folded their cloaks and 
arranged dozens of little parcels, little cardboard hatboxes and 
heterogeneous bundles, under the seats and on the seats. The 
business men had the oddest luggage, canvas hold-alls em- 
broidered in wool, with long, touching mottoes. 

And in all the crowd a sense of guardedness and softness 
and self-effacement: a curious soft sensibilité, touched with fear. 
It was already a somewhat conspicuous thing to travel in the 
Pullman; you had to be on your guard. 

The evening for once was grey: the rainy season really ap- 
proaching. A sudden wind whirled dust and a few spots of 
rain. The train drew out of the formless, dry, dust-smitten 
areas fringing the city, and wound mildly on for a few min- 
utes, only to stop in the main street of Tacubaya, the suburb- 

“| 
92 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

village. In the grey approach of evening the train halted : 
heavily in the street, and Kate looked out at the men who 
stood in groups, with their hats tilted against the wind and 
their blankets folded over their shoulders and up to their eyes, 
against the dust, motionless, standing like sombre ghosts, only — 
a glint of eyes showing between the dark serape and the big 
hat-brim; while donkey-drivers in a dust-cloud ran frantically, 
with uplifted arms like demons, uttering short, sharp cries to 
prevent their donkeys from poking in between the coaches of 
the train. Silent dogs trotted in-and-out under the train, wo- 
-men, their faces wrapped in their blue rebozos, came. to offer 

tortillas folded in a cloth to keep them warm, or pulque in an 
earthenware mug, or pieces of chicken smothered in red, thick, 
oily sauce; or oranges or bananas or pitahayas, anything. And 
when few people bought, because of the dust, the women put 
their wares under their arm, under the blue rebozo, and covered 
their faces and motionless watched the train. 

It was about six o’clock. The earth was utterly dry and stale. 
Somebody was kindling charcoal in front of a house. Men 
were hurrying down the wind, balancing their great hats curi- 
ously. Horsemen on quick, fine little horses, guns slung be- 
hind, trotted up to the train, lingered, then trotted quickly ~ 
away again into nowhere. 

Still the train stood in the street. Kate and Villiers got down. 
They watched the sparks blowing from the charcoal which a 
little girl was kindling in the street, to cook sortillas. 

The train had a second-class coach and a first-class. The 
second class was jam-full of peasants, Indians, piled in like 
chickens with their bundles and baskets and bottles, endless 
things. One woman had a fine peacock under her arm. She put 
it down and in vain tried to suppress it beneath her volumin- 
ous skirts. It refused to be suppressed. She took it up and bal- 
anced it on her knee and looked round again over the medley 
of jars, baskets, pumpkins, melons, guns, bundles, and human 
beings. 

In the front was a steel car with a guard of little scrubby sol- 
diers in their dirty cotton uniforms. Some soldiers were 
mounted on top of the train with their guns: the look-out. 

And the whole train, seething with life, was curiously still, 
subdued. Perhaps it is the perpetual sense of danger which 

. 

makes the people so hushed, without clamour or stridency. 
And with an odd, hushed politeness among them. A sort of 
demon-world. 

At last the train moved on. If it had waited forever, no one 
would have been deeply surprised. For what might not be 
ahead ? Rebels, bandits, bridges blown up - anything. 

However, quietly, stealthily, the train moved out and along 
the great weary valley. The circling mountains, so relentless, 
were invisible save near at hand. In a few broken adobe huts a 
bit of fire sparked red. The adobe was grey-black, of the lava 
dust, depressing. Into the distance the fields spread dty, with 
here and there patches of green irrigation. There was a broken 
hacienda with columns that supported nothing. Darkness was 
coming, dust still blew in the shadow; the valley seemed en- 
compassed in a dry, stale, weary gloom. 

Then there came a heavy shower. The train was passing a 
pulque hacienda. The rows of the giant maguey stretched brist- 
ling their iron-black barbs in the gloom. 

All at ofice, the lights came on® the Pullman attendant came 
swiftly lowerime the blinds, so that the brilliance of the win- 
dows should attract no bullets frofi the dark outside: 

There was a poor little meal at exorbitant prices, and when 
this was cleared away, the attendant came with a clash to make 
the beds, pulling down the upper berths. It was only eight 
o’clock, and the passengers looked up in resentment. But no 
good. The pug-faced Mexican in charge, and his smallpox- 
pitted assistant, insolently came in between the seats, inserted 
the key overhead, and brought down the berth with a crash. 
And the Mexican passengers humbly crawled away to the 

_ smoking-room or the toilet, like whipped dogs. 

At half-past eight everybody was silently and with intense 
discretion going to bed. None of the collar-stud-snapping 
bustle and ‘homely’ familiarity of the United States. Like sub-_ 

_dued animals they all crept in behind their green serge 
curtains. 

Kate hated a Pullman, the discreet indiscretion, the horrible 
nearness of other people, like so many larvae in so many sec- 
tions, behind the green serge curtains. Above all, the horrible 
intimacy of the noise of going to bed. She hated to undress, 
struggling in the oven of her berth, with her elbow butting in- 

THE LAKE 93 

“raed 

. 

94 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

to the stomach of the attendant who was buttoning up the 
green curtain outside. 

And yet, once she was in bed and could put out her light and 
raise the window-blind, she had to admit it was better than a 
wagon-lit in Europe: and perhaps the best that can be done for 
people who must travel through the night in trains. 

There was a rather cold wind, after the rain, up there on that 
high plateau. The moon had risen, the sky was clear. Rocks, 
and tall organ cactus, and more miles of maguey. Then the 
train stopped at.a dark little station on the rim of the slope, 
where men swathed in dark serapes held dusky, ruddy lanterns 
that lit up no faces at all, only dark gaps. Why did the train 
stay so long? Was something wrong? 

At last they were going again. Under the moon she saw be- 
yond her a long downslope of rocks and cactus, and in the dis- 
tance below, the lights of a town. She lay in her berth watching 
the train wind slowly down the wild, rugged slope. Then she 
dozed. 

To wake at a station that*looked like a quiet inferno, with 
dark faces coming near the windows, glittering eyes in the 
half-light, women in their reboxyos running along the train bal- 
ancing dishes of meat, ‘amales, tortillas on one hand, black- 
faced men with fruit and sweets, and all calling in a subdued, 
intense, hushed hubbub. Strange and glaring, she saw eyes at 
the dark screen of the Pullman, sudden hands thrusting up 
something to sell. In fear, Kate dropped her window. The wire 
screen was not enough. 

The platform below the Pullman was all dark. But at the 
back of the train she could see the glare of the first-class win- 
dows, on the dark station. And a man sak sweet-meats — 
Cajetas! Cajetas! La de Celaya! 

She was safe inside the Pullman, with nics to do but to 
listen to an occasional cough behind the green curtains, and to 
feel the faint bristling apprehension of all the Mexicans in 
their dark berths. The dark Pullman was full of a subdued ap- 
ptehension, fear lest there might be some attack on the 
train. 

She went to sleep and woke at a bright station: probably 
Queretaro. The green trees looked theatrical in the electric 
light. Opa/es! she heard the men calling softly. If Owen had 

ae THE LAKE 95 

been there he would have got up in his pyjamas to buy opals. 
The call would have been too strong. 

She slept fitfully, in the shaken saloon, vaguely aware of 
stations and the deep night of the open country. Then she 
started from a complete sleep. The train was dead still, no 
sound. Thena tremendous jerking as the Pullman was shunted. 
It must be Irapuato, where they branched to the west. 

“She would arrive at Ixtlahuacan soon after six in the morn- 

_ ing. The man woke her at daybreak, before the sun had risen. 
Dry country with mesquite bushes, in the dawn: then green 
wheat alternating with ripe wheat. And men already in the 
pale, ripened wheat reaping with sickles, cutting short little 
handfuls from the short straw. A bright sky, with a bluish 

_ shadow on earth. Parched slopes with ragged maize stubble. 
Then a forlorn Aacienda and a man on horseback, in a blanket, 
driving a silent flock of cows, sheep, bulls, goats, lambs, rip- 
pling a bit ghostly in the dawn, from under a tottering arch- 
way. A long canal beside the railway, a long canal paved with 
bright green leaves from which poked the mauve heads of the 
lirio, the wates*hyacinth. The sun was lifting up, red. In a 
moment it was the full, dazzling gold of a Mexican morning, 

Kate was dressed and ready, sitting facing Villiers, when 
they came to Ixtlahuacan. The man carried out her bags. The 
train drifted in to a desert of a station. They got down. It was 
a new day. 

In the powerful light of morning, under a turquoise-blue 
sky, she gazed at the helpless-looking station, railway lines, 
some standing trucks, and a.remote lifelessness. A boy seized 
their bags and ran across the lines to the station yard, which 
was paved with cobblestones, but overgrown with weeds. At 
one side stood an old tram-car with two mules, like a relic. 
One or two men, swathed up to the eyes in scarlet blankets, 
were crossing on silent white legs. 

‘ Adonde?’ said the boy. 

But Kate went to see her big luggage taken out. It was all 
there. 

‘Orilla Hotel,’ said Kate. 

The boy said they must go in the tram-car, so in the tram- 
cat they went. The driver whipped his mules, they rolled in the 
still, heavy morning light away down an uneven cobbled road 

96 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

with holes in it, between walls with falling mortar and low, 
black adobe houses, in the peculiar vacuous depression of a help- 
less little Mexican town, towards the plaza. The strange empti-. 
ness, everything empty of life! 

Occasional men on horseback clattered suddenly by, occa- 
sional big men in scarlet serapes went noiselessly on their own 
way, under the big hats. A boy on a high mule was delivering 
milk from ted globe-shaped jars slung on either side his 
mount. The’ street was stony, uneven, vacuous, sterile. The 
stones seemed dead, the town seemed made of dead stone. The 
human life came with a slow, sterile unwillingness, in spite of 
the low-hung power of the sun. 

At length they were in the playa, where brilliant trees 
flowered in a blaze of pure scarlet, and some in pure lavender, 
around the basins of milk-looking water. Milky-dim the water 
bubbled up in the basins, and women, bleary with sleep, un- 
combed, came from under the dilapidated arches of the por- 
tales, and across the broken pavement, to fill their water-jars. 

The tram stopped and they got down. The boy got down 
with the bags, and told them they must go to the river to take 
a boat. 

They followed obediently down the smashed pavements, 
where every moment you might twist your ankle or break 
your leg. Everywhere the same weary indifference and broken- 
ness, a sense of dirt and of helplessness, squalor of far-gone in- 
difference, under the perfect morning sky, in the pure sun- 
shine and the pure Mexican air. The sense of life ebbing away, 
leaving dry ruin. 

They came to the edge of the town, to a dusty, humped 
bridge, a broken wall, a pale-brown stream flowing full. Below 
the bridge a cluster of men. 

Each one wanted her to hire his boat. She demanded a 
motor-boat: the boat from the hotel. They said there wasn’t 
one. She didn’t believe it. Then a dark-faced fellow with his 
black hair down his forehead, and a certain intensity in his eyes, 
said: Yes, yes; the hotel had a boat, but it was broken. She 
must take a row-boat. In an hout.and a half he would row her 
there. 

“How long?’ said Kate. 

‘An hour and a half.’ 

Woes id 
ae 
J 

THE LAKE 97 

‘And I am so. hungty!’ cried Kate. ‘How much do you 
charge?’ 

“Two pesos.’ He held up two fingers. 

Kate said yes, and he ran down to his boat. Then she no- 
ticed he was a cripple with inturned feet. But how quick and 
strong! 

She climbed with Villiers down the broken bank to the 
river, and in a moment they wete in the boat. Pale green wil- 
low-trees fringed from the earthen banks to the fuller-flowing, 
pale-brown water. The river was not very wide, between deep 
banks. They slipped under the bridge, and past a funny high 
barge with rows of seats. The boatman said it went up the 
tiver to Jocotlan: and he waved his hand to show the direc- 
tion. They were slipping down-stream, ee a lonely banks 
of willow-trees. 

The crippled boatman was pulling hard, with great strength 
and energy. When she spoke to him in her bad Spanish and he 
found it hard to understand, he knitted his brow a little, 
anxiously. And when she laughed he smiled at her with such a 
beautiful -gentlefféss, sensitive, wistful, quick, She felt he was — 
naturally¢ honest and truthful, and generous. There was a 
beauty in these men, a wistful beauty and a great physical 
strength. Why had she felt so bitterly about the country? 

Morning was still young on the pale buff river, between the 
silent earthen banks. There was a blue dimness in the lower 
air, and black water-fow] ran swiftly, unconcernedly back and 
forth from the river’s edge, on the dry, baked banks that were 
treeless now, and wider. They had entered a wide river, from 
the natrow one. The blueness and moistness of the dissolved 
night seemed to linger under the scattered pepper-trees of the 
far shore. 

The boatman rowed short and hard upon the flimsy, soft, 
sperm-like water, only pausing at moments swiftly to smear 
the sweat from his face with an old rag he kept on the bench 
beside him. The sweat ran from his bronze-brown skin like 
water, and the black hair on his high-domed, Indian head 
smoked with wetness. 

‘There is no hurry,’ said Kate, smiling to him. 

“What does the Sefiorita say?’ 

‘There is no hurry,’ she repeated. 

oul 

iy 

aS - ‘ se 
* mB ¢ 
98 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

He paused, smiling, breathing deeply, and explained that 
now he was rowing against stream. This wider river flowed 
out of the lake, full and heavy. See! even as he rested a mo- 
ment, the boat began to turn and drift! He quickly took his 
oats. 

The boat moved slowly, in the hush of departed night, upon 
the soft, full-flowing buff water, that carried little tufts of float- 
ing water-hyacinth. Some willow-trees stood near the edge, 
and some pepper-trees of most delicate green foliage. Beyond 
the trees and the level of the shores, big hills rose up to high, 
blunt points, baked incredibly dry, like biscuit. The blue sky 
settled against them nakedly; they were leafless and lifeless save 
for the iron-green shafts of the organ cactus, that glistened 
blackly, yet atmospherically, in the ochreous aridity. This was 
Mexico again, stark-dry and luminous with powerful light, 
cruel and unreal. ; 

On a flat near the river a peon, perched on the rump of his” 
ass, was slowly driving five luxurious cows towards the water 
to drink. The big black-and-white animals stepped in a dream- 
pace past the pepper-trees to the bank, like moving pieces of 
light-and-shade: the dun cows trailed after, in the incredible 
silence and brilliance of the morning. 

Earth, air, water were all silent with new light, the last blue 
of night dissolving like a breath. No sound, even no life. The 
great light was stronger than life itself. Only, up in the blue, 
some turkey-buzzards were wheeling with dirty-edged wings, 
as everywhere in Mexico. 

‘Don’t hurry!’ Kate said again to'the boatman, who was 
again mopping his face, while his black hair ran sweat. ‘We 
can go slowly.’ 

The man smiled deprecatingly. 

‘If the Sefiorita will sit in the back,’ he said. 

Kate did not understand his request at first. He had rowed 
in towards a bend in the right bank, to be out of the current. 
On the left bank Kate had noticed some men bathing: men 
whose wet skins flashed with the beautiful brown-rose colour 
and glitter of the naked natives, and one stout man with the 
curious creamy-biscuit skin of the city Mexicans. Low against 
the water across-stream she watched the glitter of naked men, 
half-immersed in the river. 

eee 

THE LAKE 99 

She rose to step back into the stern of the boat, where Vil- 
liers was. As she did so, she saw a dark head and the flashing 
tuddy shoulders of a man swimming towards the boat. She 
wavered — and as she was sitting down, the man stood up in 
the water and was wading near, the water washing at the loose 
little cloth he had round his loins. He was smooth and wet and 
of a lovely colour, with the rich smooth-muscled physique of 
the Indians. He was coming towards the boat, pushing back 
his hair from his forehead. 

The boatman watched him, transfixed, without surprise, a 
little subtle half-smile, perhaps of mockery, round his nose. As 
if he had expected it! 

“Where are you going?’ asked the man in the water, the 
brown river running softly at his strong thighs. 

The boatman waited a moment for his patrons to answer, 
then, seeing they were silent, replied in a low, unwilling tone: 

*Orilla.’ 

The man ja the water took hold of the stern of the boat, as 
the boatmafi softly touched the water with the oars to keep her 
stfaight, and hesthtew back his longish black hair with a cer- 
tain effrentery. 

“Do you know whom the lake belongs to?’ he asked, with 
the same effrontery. ~ 

“What do you say?’ asked Kate, haughtily. 

“If you know whom the lake belongs to?’ the young man in 
the water repeated. 

“To whom?’ said Kate, flustered. 

“To the old gods of Mexico,’ the stranger said. ‘You have to 
make a tribute to Quetzalcoatl if you go on the lake.’ 

The strange calm effrontery of it! But truly Mexican. 

‘How?’ said Kate. 

“You can give me something,’ he said. 

‘But why should I give something to you, if it is a tribute to 
Quetzalcoatl?’ she stammered. 

‘Iam Quetzalcoatl’s man, I,’ he replied, with calm eilvointibieg: 

‘And if I don’t give you anything ?? she said. 

He lifted his shoulders and spread his free hand, staggering 
a little; losing his footing in the water as he did so. 

‘If you wish to make an enemy of the lake —’ he said, coolly, 
as he recovered his balance. 

Be . ‘ i 

100 THE PLUMED SERPENT 4 

And then for the first time he looked straight at her. And as 
he did so, the demonish effrontery died down again, and the 
peculiar American tension slackened and left him. 2 

He gave a slight wave of dismissal with his free hand, and 
pushed the boat gently forward. 

‘But it doesn’t matter,’ he said, with a slight insolent jerk 
of his head sideways, and a faint, insolent smile. ‘We will wait 
till the Morning Star rises.’ ; 

The boatman softly but powerfully pulled the oars. The man 
in the water stood with the sun on his powerful chest, looking 
after the boat in half-seeing abstraction. His eyes had taken’ 
again the peculiar gleaming far-awayness, suspended between 
the realities, which, Kate suddenly realized, was the central 
look in the native eyes. The boatman, rowing away, was glan- 
cing back at the man who stood in the water, and his face, too, | 
had the abstracted, transfigured look of a man perfectly sus-_ 
pended between the world’s two strenuous wings of energy. A 
look of extraordinary, arresting beauty, the silent, vulnerable 
centre of all life’s quivering, like the nucleus gleaming in tran-— 
quil suspense, within a cell. 

“What does he mean,’ said Kate, “by ““We will wait till the 
Morning Star rises”??? 

The man smiled slowly. 

‘It is a name,’ he said. 

And he seemed to know no more. But the symbolism had 
evidently the power to soothe and sustain him. 

“Why did he come and speak to us?’ asked Kate. 

“He is one of those of the god Quetzalcoatl, Sefiorita.’ 

“And you? are you one too?” 

“Who knows!’ said the man, putting his head on one side. 
Then he added: ‘I think so. We are many.’ 

He watched Kate’s face with that gleaming, intense semi- 
abstraction, a gleam that hung unwavering in his black eyes, 
and which suddenly reminded Kate of the morning star, or the 
evening star, hanging perfect between night and the sun. 

“You have the morning star in your eyes,’ she said to the man. 

He flashed her a smile of extraordinary beauty. 

“The Sefiorita understands,’ he said. é 

His face changed again to a dark-brown mask, like semi- 
transparent stone, and he rowed with all his might. Ahead, the 

—— 

tivet was widening, the banks were growing lower, down to 
the water’s level, like shoals planted with willow-trees and with 
teeds. Above the willow-trees a square white sail was standing, 
as if erected on the land. 
_ “Ts the lake so near?’ said Kate. 

_ The man hastily mopped his running wet face. 

“Yes, Sefiorita! The sailing-boats are waiting for the wind, 
to come into the river. We will pass by the canal.’ 

He indicated with a backward movement of the head a nar- 
row, twisting passage of water between deep reeds. It made 
Kate think of the little river Anapo: the same mystery un- 
broken. The boatman, with creases half of sadness and half of 
exaltation in his bronze, still face, was pulling with all his 
might. Water-fowl went swimming into the reeds, or rose on 
wing and wheeled into the blue air. Some willow-trees hung a 
dripping, vivid green, in the stark dry country. The stream was 
natrow and winding. With a nonchalant motion, first of the 
‘tight then of the left hand, Villiers was guiding the boatman, 
to keep him from running aground in the winding, narrow 

water-way. o 

And this put Villiers at his ease, to have something practical 
and slightly mechanical todo and to assert. He was striking the 
American note once more, of mechanical dominance. 

All the other business had left him incomprehending, and 
aie? ie asked Kate, she had pretended not to hear him. She 
sensed a certain delicate, tender mystery in the river, in the 
naked man in the water, in the boatman, and she could not 
bear to have it subjected to the tough American flippancy. She 
was weaty to death of American automatism and American 
flippant toughness. It gave her a feeling of nausea. 

‘Quite a well-built fellow, that one who laid hold of the boat. 
What did he want, anyway?’ Villiers insisted. 

, Nothing!’ said Kate. 

* They were slipping out past the clay-coloured, loose stony 
edges of the land, through a surge of ripples, into the wide 
white light of the lake, A breeze was coming from the east, out 
of the upright morning, and the surface of the shallow, flimsy, 
dun-coloured water was-in motion. Shoal-water rustled near at 
hand. Out to the open, large, square white sails were stepping 
gingerly forward, and beyond the buff-coloured, pale desert of 

THE LAKE IOI 

“7 

water rose fat-away blue, sharp hills of the other side, many 
miles away, pute pale blue with distance, yet sharp-edged and 
clear in form. 

‘Now,’ said the boatman, smiling to Kate, ‘it is easier. Now 
we ate out of the current.’ 

He pulled rhythmically through the frail-rippling, sperm- 
like water, with a sense of peace. And for the first time Kate 
felt she had met the mystery of the natives, the strange and 
mysterious gentleness between a scylla and a charybdis of vio- 
dence; the small poised, perfect body of the bird that waves 
wings of thunder and wings of fire and night in its flight. But 
centtal between the flash of day and the black of night, be- 
tween the flash of lightning and the break of thunder, the still, 
soft body of the bird poised and soaring, forever. The mystery 
of the evening-star brilliant in silence and distance between the 
downward-surging plunge of the sun and the vast, hollow 
seething of inpouring night. The magnificence of the watchful 
motning-star, that watches between the night and the day, the - 
gleaming clue to the two opposites. | 

This kind of frail, pure sympathy, she felt at the moment 
between herself and the boatman, between herself and the man 
who had spoken from the water. And she was not going to 
have it broken by Villiers’ American jokes. 

Thete was a sound of breaking water. The boatman drew 
away, and pointed across to whete a canoa, a native sailing-boat, 
was lying at an angle. She had run aground in a wind, and now 
must wait till another wind would carry her off the submerged 
bank again. Another boat was coming down the breeze, steer-_ 
ing cautiously among the shoals, for the river outlet. She was 
piled high with pefates, the native leaf mats, above her hol- 
lowed black sides. And bare-legged men with loose white 
drawers rolled up, and brown chests showing, were running 
with poles as the shallows heaved up again, pushing her off, 
and balancing their huge hats with small, bird-like shakes of 
the head. 

Beyond the boats, seawatds, were rocks outcropping and 
strange birds like pelicans standing in silhouette, motionless. 

They had been crossing a bay of the lake-shore, and were 
nearing the hotel. It stood on a parched dry bank above the 
pale-brown water, a long, low building amid a tendet green of 

102 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

—o, ee 
. 

bananas and pepper-trees. Everywhere the shores rose up pale 
and cruelly dry, dry to cruelty, and on the little hills the dark 
statues of the organ cactus poised in nothingness. 

There was a broken-down landing-place, and a boat-house 
in the distance, and someone in white flannel trousers was 
standing on the broken masonry. Upon the filmy water ducks 
and black water-fowl bobbed like corks. The bottom was 
stony. The boatman suddenly backed the boat, and pulled 
round. He pushed up his sleeve and hung over the bows, 
reaching into the water. With a quick motiom he grabbed some- 
thing, and scrambled into the boat again. He was holding in 

“the pale-skinned hollow of his palm a little earthenware pot, 
crusted by the lake deposit. 

“What is it?’ she said. 

‘Ollita of the gods,’ he said. ‘Of the old dead gods. Take 
it, Seftorita.’ 

“You must let me pay for it,’ she said. 

“No, Sefiorita. It is yours,’ said the man, with that sensitive, 
masculine sincerity which comes sometimes so quickly from a 
native. ite hin ° 

It waya little, rough round pot’ with protuberances. 

‘Look!’ said the man,/reaching again for the little pot. He 
turned it upside-down, and she saw cut-in eyes and the stick- 
ing-out ears of an animal’s head. 

“A cat!” she exclaimed. ‘It is a cat.’ 

“Or a coyote!’ 

“A coyote!’ 

‘Let’s look!’ said Villiers. ‘Why, how awfully interesting! 
Do you think it’s old?’ 

“It is old?’ Kate asked. 

“The time of the old gods,’ said the boatman. Then with a 
sudden smile: ‘The dead gods don’t eat much rice, they only 
want little casseroles while they are bone under the water.’ 
And he looked her in the eyes. 

‘While they are bone?’ she repeated. And she realized he 
meant the skeletons of gods that cannot die. 

They were at the landing-stage; or rather, at the heap of col- 
lapsed masonry which had once been a landing-stage. The 
boatman got out and held the boat steady while Kate and Vil- 
liers landed. Then he scrambled up with the bags. 

THE LAKE 103 

104 THE PLUMED SERPENT | 

. The man in white trousers, and a wozo appeared. It was the 
hotel manager. Kate paid the boatman. 

‘ Adiés, Sefiorita!’ he said with a smile. ‘May you go with 
Quetzalcoatl.’ 

‘Yes!’ she cried. “Good- -bye!’ 

They went up the slope between the tattered bananas, whose ~ 
ragged leaves were making a hushed, distant patter in the 
breeze. The green fruit curved out its bristly-soft bunch, the 
putple flower-bud depending stiffly. 

The German manager came to talk to them: a young man of 
about forty, with his blue eyes going opaque and stony behind 
his spectacles, though the centres were keen. Evidently a Ger- 
man who had been many years out in Mexico — out in the 
lonely places. The rather stiff look, the slight look of fear in the. 
soul — not physical fear — and the look of defeat, characteristic — 
of the European who has long been subjected to the unbroken _ 
spirit of place! But the defeat was in the soul, not the will. 

He showed Kate to her room in the unfinished quarter, and 
ordered her breakfast. The hotel consisted of an old low ranch- 
house with a veramda — and this was the dining-room, lounge, 
kitchen, and office. Then there was a two-storey new wing, 
with a smart bathroom between each two bedrooms, and al- 
most up-to-date fittings: very incongruous. 

But the new wing was unfinished — had been unfinished for 
a dozen yeats and more, the work abandoned when Porfirio 
Diaz fled. Now it would probably never be finished. { 

And this is Mexico. Whatever pretentiousness and modern 
improvements it may have, outside the capital, they are either — 
smashed or raw and unfinished, with rusty bones of iron gir- 
dets sticking out. 

Kate washed her hands and went down to breakfast. Before 
the long veranda of the old ranch-house the green pepper- 
trees dropped like green light, and small cardinal birds with 
scarlet bodies and blazing impertinent heads like poppy-buds 
flashed among the pinkish pepper-heads, closing their brown 
wings upon the audacity of their glowing redness. A train of 
geese passed in the glaring sun, automatic, towards the eternal 
tremble of pale, earth-coloured water beyond the stones. 

It was a place with a strange atmosphere: stony, hard, 
broken, with round cruel hills and the many-fluted bunches of 

Bete en 

r 

THE LAKE 105 

the organ-cactus behind the old house, and an ancient road 
trailing past, deep in ancient dust. A touch of mystery and 
ctuelty, the stoniness of fear, a lingering, cruel sacredness. 

Kate loitered hungrily, and was glad when the Mexican in 
shirt-sleeves and patched trousers, another lingering remnant 
of Don Porfirio’s day, brought her her eggs and coffee. 

He was muted as everything about the place seemed muted, 
even the very stones and the water. Only those poppies on 
wing, the cardinal birds, gave a sense of liveliness: and they 
were uncanny. 

So swiftly one’s moods changed! In the boat she had 
glimpsed the superb rich stillness of the morning-star, the 
poignant intermediate flashing its quiet between the energies 
of the cosmos. She had seen it in the black eyes of the natives, 
in the sunrise of the man’s rich, still body, Indian-warm. 

And now again already the silence was of vacuity, arrest, 
and cruelty: the uncanny empty unbearableness of many Mexi- 
can mornings. Already she was uneasy, suffering from the 
malaise which tortures one inwardly in that country of cac- 
tuses. o . 

She went up to her room, pausing at the corridor window 
to look out at the savage little hills that stood at the back of the 
hotel in desiccated heaps, with the dark-green bulks of organ- 
cactus sticking up mechanically and sinister, sombre in all the 
glare, Grey ground-squirrels like rats slithered ceaselessly 
around. Sinister, strangely dark and sinister, in the great glare 
of the sun! 

-She went to her room to be alone. Below her window, in the 
bricks and fallen rubble of unfinished masonry, a huge white 
turkey-cock, dim-white, strutted with his brown hens. And 
sometimes he stretched out his pink wattles and gave vent to 
fierce, powerful turkey-yelps, like some strong dog yelping; 
ot else he ruffled all his feathers like a great, soiled white peony, 
and chuffed, hissing here and there, raging the metal of his 
plumage. 

Below him, the eternal tremble of pale-earth, unreal waters, 
far beyond which rose the stiff resistance of mountains losing 
their pristine blue. Distinct, frail distances far off on the dry air, 
dim-seeing, yet sharp and edged with menace. 

Kate took her bath in the filmy water that was hardly like 

< SR. Sra 
106 THE PLUMED SERPENT | 

water at all. Then she went and sat on the collapsed masonry, — 
in the shade of the boat-house below. Small white ducks bob- 
bed about on the shallow water below her, or dived, raising 
clouds of submarine dust. A canoe came paddling i in; a lean 
fellow with sinewy brown legs. He answered Kate’s nod with 
the aloof promptness of an Indian, made fast his canoe inside — 
the boat-house, and was gone, stepping silent and barefoot 
over the bright green water-stones, and leaving a shaciens cold — 
as flint, on the air behind him. _ 

No sound on the morning save a faint touching of water, 
and the occasional powerful yelping of the turkey-cock. 
Silence, an aboriginal, empty silence, as of life w7thheld. The 
vacuity of a Mexican morning. Resounding sometimes to the 
turkey-cock. 

And the great, lymphatic expanse of water, like a sea, trem- 
bling, trembling, trembling to a far distance, to the mountains | 
of substantial nothingess. : 

Near at hand, a ragged shifting of banana-trees, bare hills 
with immobile cactus, and to the left, an hacienda with peon’s 
square mud boxes of houses. An occasional ranchero in skin- 
tight trousers and big hat rode trotting through the dust ona + 
small horse, or peons on the rump of their asses, in floppy 
white cotton, going like ghosts. 

Always something ghostly. The morning passing all of a 
piece, empty, vacuous. All sound withheld, all life withheld, 
everything holding back. The land so dry as to have a quality of 
invisibility, the water earth-filmy, hardly water at all. The lym- ~ 
phatic milk of fishes, somebody said. 

CHAPTER VI 

The Move Down the Lake 

In Porfirio Diaz’ day, the lake-side began to be the Riviera of 
Mexico, and Orilla was to be the Nice, or at least the Mentone 
of the country. But revolutions started erupting again, and in 
1911 Don Porfirio fled to Paris with, it is said, thirty million 
gold pesos in his pocket: a peso being half a dollar, nearly half-a- 

oo 7 
2 THE MOVE DOWN THE LAKE 107 

crown. But we need not believe all that is said, especially by a ° 
man’s enemies, 

During the subsequent revolutions, Orilla, which had begun 
to be a winter paradise for the Americans, lapsed back into 
barbarism and broken brickwork. In 1921 a feeble new statt 
had been made. 

The place belonged to a German-Mexican family, hb also 
owned the adjacent hacienda. They acquired the property from 
the American Hotel Company, who had undertaken to develop 
the lake-shore, and who had gone bankrupt during the various 
revolutions. 

The German-Mexican owners were not popular with the 
natives. An angel from heaven would not have been popular, 
these years, if he had been known as the owner of property. 
However, in 1921 the hotel was very modestly opened again, 
with an American manager. 

Towards the end of the year, José, son of the German- 
Mexican owner, came to stay with his wife and children in the 
hotel, in the new wing. José was a bit of a fool, as most fo- 
reigners are, aft€r the first generation in Mexico. Having busi- 
ness tovsettle, he went into. Guadalajara to the bank and re- 
turned with a thousand gold pesos ina bag, keeping the matter, 
as he thought, a dead secret. 

Everyone had just gone to bed, on a brilliant moonlight 
night in winter, when two men appeared in the yard calling for 
José: they had to speak to him. José, suspecting nothing, left 
his wife and two children, and went down. In a moment he 
called for the American manager. The manager, thinking it 
was some bargaining to be done, also came down. As he came 
out of the door, two men seized him by the arms, and said: 
“Don’t make a noise!” 

‘What’s amiss?’ said Bell, who had built up Orilla, and had 
been twenty years on the lake. 

Then he noticed that two other men had hold of José. 
‘Come,’ they said. 

There were five Mexicans — Indians, or half-Indians — and 
the two captives. They went, the captives in slippers and shirt- 
sleeves, to the little office away at the end of the other part of 
the hotel, which had been the old ranch-house. 

‘What do you want?’ asked Bell. 

108 \ THE PLUMED SERPENT 

“Give us the money,’ said the bandits. 

‘Oh, all right,’ said the American. There were a few pesos 
only in the safe. He opened, showed them, and they es the 
money. 

“Now give us the rest, * they said. 

“There is no more, > said the manager, in all sincerity; for 
José had not confessed to the thousand pesos. 

The five peons then began to search the poor little office. 
They found a pile of red blankets - which they appropriated — 
and a few bottles of red wine — which they drank. 

‘Now,’ they said, ‘give us the money. 

‘I can’t give you what there isn’t to give,’ said the manager. 

‘Good!’ they said, and pulled out the hideous machetes, the 
heavy knives of the Mexicans. 

José, intimidated, produced the suit-case with the thousand 
pesos. The money was wrapped up in the corner of a blanket. — 

‘Now, come with us,’ said the bandits. 

“Where to?’ asked the manager, beginning at last to be scared. 

‘Only out onto the hill, where we will leave you, so that you 
cannot telephone to Ixtlahuacan before we have time to get 
away,’ said the Indians. 

Outside, in the bright moon, the air was chill. The American 
shivered, in his trousers and shirt and a pair of bedroom 
slippers. 

‘Let me take a coat,’ he said. 

“Take a blanket,’ said the tall Indian. 

He took a blanket, and with two men holding his arms, he 
followed José, who was likewise held captive, out of the little 
gate, across the dust of the road, and up the steep little round 
hill on which the organ cactus thrust up their sinister clumps, 
like bunches of cruel fingers, in the moonlight. The hill was 
stony and steep, the going slow. José, a fat young man of 
twenty-eight, protested in the feeble manner of the well-to-do 
Mexicans. 

At last they came to the top of the hill. Three men took José 
apart, leaving Bell alone near a cactus clump. The moon shone 
in a perfect Mexican heaven. Below, the big lake glimmered 
faintly, stretching its length towards the west: The ait was so 
clear, the mountains across, thirty miles away, stood sharp and 
still in the moonlight. And not a sound not a motion any- 

THE MOVE DOWN THE LAKE 109 

where! At the foot of the hill was the Aacienda, with the peons 
asleep in their huts. But what help was there in them? 

José and the three men had gone behind a cactus-tree that 
stuck up straight like a great black bundle of poles, poised on 
one central foot, and cast a sharp, iron shadow. The American 
could hear the voices, talking low and rapidly, but could not 
distinguish the words. His two guards drew away from him a 
little, to hear what the othets were saying, behind the cactus. 

And the American, who knew the ground he stood on and 
the sky that hung over him, felt again the black vibration of 
death in the air, the black thrill of the death-lust. Unmistakable 
he felt it seething in the air, as any man may feel it, in Mexico. 
And the strange aboriginal fiendishness, awake now in the five 
bandits, communicated itself to his blood. 

Loosening his blanket, he listened tensely in the-moonlight. 
And came the thud! thud! thud! of a machete striking with lust 
in a human body, then the strange voice of José: “Perdoneme! — 
Forgive me!’ the murdered man cried as he fell. 

The Amefican waited for no mote. Dropping his blanket, he 
jumped for thes€actus cover, and stooping, took the down- 
slope like a rabbit. The pistol- -shots f tang out after him, but the 
Mexicans don’t as a tule take good aim. His bedroom slippers 
flew off, and barefoot, the man, thin and light, sped down over 
the stones and the cactus, down to the hotel. 

When he got down, he found everyone in the hotel awake 
and shouting. 

‘They are killing José!’ he said, and he rushed to the tele- 
phone, expecting every moment the five bandits would be on 
him. 

The telephone was in the old ranch-building, in the dining- 
toom. There was no answer — no answer — no answer. In her 
little bedroom over the kitchen, the cook-woman, the traitress, 
was yelling. Across in the new wing, a little distance away, 
José’s Mexican wife was screaming. One of the servant boys 
appeared. 

“Try and get the police i in Ixtlahuacan,’ said the Ametican, 
and he ran to the new wing, to get his gun and to barricade the 
doors. His daughter, a motherless girl, was ctying with José’s 
wife. 

There was no answer on the telephone. At dawn, the cook, 

op 
oe 
af a> 
f 

IIo THE PLUMED SERPENT : , 

who said the bandits would not hurt a woman, went across to 
the hacienda to fetch the peons. And when the sun rose, a man 
was sent for the police. 

They found the body of José, pierced with fourteen holes. 
The American was carried to Ixtlahuacan, and kept in bed, 
having cactus spines dug out of his feet by two native women. 

The bandits fled across the marshes. Months later, they were 
identified by the stolen blankets, away in Michoacan; and, pur-_ 
sued, one of them betrayed the others. 

After this, the hotel was closed again, and had been re- 
opened only three months when Kate arrived. 

But Villiers came with another story. Last year the peons 
had murdered the manager of one of the estates across the lake. 
They had stripped him and left him naked on his back, with 
his sexual organs cut off and put into his mouth, his nose slit 
and pinned back, the two halves, to his cheeks, with long cac- 
tus spines. 

“Tell me no more!’ said Kate. 

She felt there was doom written on the very sky, doom and 
horror. 

She wrote to Don Ramon in Sayula, saying she wanted to go 
back to Europe. True, she herself had seen no horrors, apart 
from the bull-fight. And she had had some exquisite moments, 
as coming to this hotel in the boat. The natives had a certain’ 
mystery and beauty, to her. But she could not bear the unease, 
and the latest sense of horror. 

True, the peons were poor. They used to work for twenty 
cents, American, a day; and now the standard price was fifty 
cents, of one peso. But then in the old days they received their 
wage all the year round. Now, only at harvest time or sowing 
time. No work, no pay. And in the long dry season, it was 
mostly no work. 

“Still, said the German manager of the hotel, a man who 
had run a rubber plantation in Tabasco, a sugar plantation in 
the state of Vera Cruz, and an hacienda growing wheat, maize, 
oranges, in Jalisco: ‘still, it isn’t a question of money with the 
peons. It doesn’t start with the peons. It starts in Mexico City, 
with a lot of malcontents who want to put their spoke in the 
wheel, and who lay hold of pious catchwords, to catch the 
poor. There’s no more in it than that. Then the agitators go 

ie te 

: 

tound and infect the peons. It is nothing but a sort of infecti- 
ous disease, like syphilis, all this revolution and socialism.’ 

“But why does no one oppose it,’ said Kate. ‘Why don’t the 
hacendados put up a fight, instead of caving in and running 
away?” 

‘The Mexican hacendado|? Thé man’s German eyes gave out 
a spark. “The Mexican gentleman is such a brave man, that while 
the soldier is violating his wife on the bed, he is hiding under 
the bed and holding his breath so they shan’t find him. He’s as 
brave as that.’ 

Kate looked away uncomfortably. 

“They all want the United States to intervene. They hate the 
Americans; but they want the United States to intervene, to 
save them their money and their property. That’s how brave 
they are! They hate the Americans personally, but they love 
them because they can look after money and property. So they 
want the United States to annex Mexico, the beloved patria; 
leaving the marvellous green and white and red flag, and the 
eagle with the snake in its claws, for the sake of appearances 
and onour! Theyéte simply bottled full of honour; of that sort.’ 

Always the same violence of bitterness, Kate thought to 
herself. And she was so weary of it. How, how weary she was 
of politics, of the very words ‘Labour’ and ‘Socialism!’ and all 
that sort! It suffocated her. 

“Have you heard of the men of Quetzalcoatl?’ asked Kate. 

‘Quetzalcoatl!’ exclaimed the manager, giving a little click 
of the final ‘1’, in a peculiar native fashion. ‘That’s another 
try-on of the Bolshevists. They thought socialism needed a 
god, so they’re going to fish him out of this lake. He’ll do for 
another pious catchword in another revolution.’ 

The man went away, unable to stand any mote. 

‘Oh dear!’ thought Kate. ‘It really is hard to bear.’ 

But she wanted to hear more of Quetzalcoatl. 

‘Did you know,’ she said to the man later, showing him the 
little pot, ‘that they find those things in the lake?’ 

*They’re common enough!” he said. ‘They used to throw 
them in, in the idolatrous days. May still do so, for what I 
know. Then get them out again to sell to tourists.’ 

‘They call them o//itas of Quetzalcoatl.’ 

‘That’s a new invention.’ 

THE MOVE DOWN THE LAKE III 

Tee eee 
Bees ii) sore > ‘, x4 

112 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘Why, do you think?’ 

‘They’re trying to start a new thing, that’s all. They’ve got 
this society on the lake here, of the Men of Quetzalcoatl, and 
they go round singing songs. It’s another dodge for national- 
socialism, that’s all.’ : 

“What do they do, the Men of Quetzalcoatl?’ 

‘I can’t see they do anything, except talk and get excited 
over theit own importance.’ 

‘But what’s the idea?’ 

‘I couldn’t say. Don’t suppose they have any. But if they 
have, they won’t let on to you. You’re a gtingo — or a gringita, 
at the best. And this is for pure Mexicans. For /os sefiores, the 
workmen, and /os caballeros, the peons. Every peon is a caballero 
nowadays, and every workman is a sefor. So I suppose they’re 
going to get themselves a special god, to put the final feather 
in their caps.’ 

‘Where did it start, the Quetzalcoatl thing?’ 

‘Down in Sayula. They say Don Ramon Carrasco is at the 
back of it. Maybe he wants to be the next President — or maybe 
he’s aiming higher, and wants to be the first Mexican Pharaoh.’ 

Ah, how tired it made Kate feel; the hopelessness, the ugli- 
ness, the cynicism, the emptiness. She felt she could cry aloud; 
for the unknown gods to put the magic back into her life, and 
to save her from the dry-rot of the world’s sterility. 

She thought again of going back to Europe. But what was 
the good? She knew it! It was all.politics or jazzing or slushy 
mysticism or sordid spiritualism. And the magic had gone. 
The younger generation, so smart and interesting, but so with- 
out any mystery, any background. The younger the genera- 
tion, the flatter and more jazzy, more and more devoid of 
wonder. 

No, she could not go back to Europe. 

And no! She refused to take the hotel managet’s estimate of 
Quetzalcoatl. How should a hotel manager judge? — even if he 
was not really an hotel manager, but a ranch-overseer. She had 
see Ramon Carrasco, and Cipriano. And they were men. They 
wanted something beyond. She would believe in them. Any- 
thing, anything rather than this sterility of nothingness which 
was the world, and into which het life was drifting. 

She would send Villiers away, too. He was nice, she liked 

THE MOVE DOWN THE LAKE 113 

him. But he, too, was widdershins, unwinding the sensations 
of disintegration and anti-life. No, she must send him away. 
She must, she must free herself from these mechanical connec- 
tions. 

Every one of them, like Villiers, was like a cog-wheel in 
contact with which all one’s workings were reversed. Every- 
thing he said, everything he did, reversed her real life-flow, 
made her go against the sun. 

And she did not want to go against the sun. After all, in 
spite of the horrors latent in Mexico, when you got these dark- 
faced people away from wrong contacts like agitators and 
socialism, they made one feel that life was vast, if fearsome, 
and death was fathomless. 

Horrors might burst out of them. But something must 
burst out, sometimes, if men are not machines. 

No! no! no! no! no! she cried to her own soul. Let me still be- 
lieve in some human contact. Let it not be all cut off for me! 

But she made up her mind to be alone, and to cut herself off 
from all the*mechanical widdershin contacts. Villiers must go 
batk to his United States. She would be alone in her own 
milien. Net to be touched by any, ahy of the mechanical cog- 
wheel people. To be left alone; not to be touched. To hide, 
and be hidden, and never really be spoken to. 

Yet, at the same time, with her blood flowing softly sunwise, 
to let the sunwise sympathy of unknown people steal in to her. 
To shut doots of iron against the mechanical world. But to let 
the sunwise world steal across to her, and add its motion to 
her, the motion of the stress of life, with the big sun and the 
stats like a tree holding out its leaves. 

She wanted an old Spanish house, with its innet patio of 
flowers and water. Turned inwards, to the few flowers walled 
in by shadow. To turn one’s back on the cog-wheel world. 
Not to look out any more on to that horrible machine of the 
world. To look at one’s own quiet little fountain and one’s own 
little orange-trees, with only heaven above. 

So, having soothed her heart, she wrote Don Ramon again, 
that she was coming to Sayula to look for a house. She sent 
Villiers away. And the next day she set off with a man-servant, 
in the old motor-boat of the hotel, down to the village of 
Sayula. ; 

II4 THE PLUMED SERPENT : $ 

It was thirty-five miles to travel, down the long lake. But the 
moment she set off, she felt at peace. A tall, dark-faced fellow 
sat in the stern of the boat, steering and attending to the 
motor. She sat on cushions in the middle. And the young man- 
servant perched in the prow. 

They started before sunrise, when the lake was bathed in 
motionless light. Odd tufts of water-hyacinth were travelling 
on the soft spermy water, holding up a green leaf like a little 
sail of a boat, and nodding a delicate, mauve-blue flower. 

Give me the mystery and let the world live again for me! Kate cried 
to her own soul. And deliver me from man’s automatism. 

The sun rose, and a whiteness of light played on the tops of 
the mountains. The boat hugged the north shore, turning the 
ptomontory on which the villas had started so jauntily, twenty 
yeats ago, but now were lapsing back to wilderness. All was» 
still and motionless in the light. Sometimes on the little bare 
patches high up on the dry hills were white specks; birds? No, 
men in their white cotton, peons hoeing. They were so tiny 

and so distinct, they looked like white birds settled. 

’ Round the bend were the hot springs, the church, the in- 
accessible village of the pure Indians, who spoke no Spanish. 
There were some green trees, under the precipitous, dry 
mountain-side. 

So on and on, the motor-boat chugging incessantly, the man 
in the bows coiled up like a serpent, watching; the fish-milk 
water gleaming and throwing off a dense light, so that the 
mountains away across were fused out. And Kate, under the 
awning, went into a kind of sleep. 

. They were passing the island, with its ruins of fortress and 
prison. It was all rock and dryness, with great broken walls 
and the shell of a church among its hurtful stones and its dry 
grey herbage. For a long time the Indians had defended it 
against the Spaniards. Then the Spaniards used the island as a 
fortress against the Indians. Later, as a penal settlement. And 
now the place was a ruin, repellent, full of scorpions, and 
otherwise empty of life. Only one or two fishermen lived in the 
tiny cove facing the mainland, and a flock of goats, specks of 
life creeping among the rocks. And an unhappy fellow put 
there by the Government to register the weather. 

No, Kate did not want to land. The place looked too sinis- 

Za if 

THE MOVE DOWN THE LAKE 115 
ter. She took food from the basket, and ate a little lunch, and 
dozed. 

In this country she was afraid. But it was her soul more than 

her body that knew fear. She had realized, for the first time, 
with finality and fatality, what was the illusion she laboured 
under. She had thought that each individual had a complete 
self, a complete soul, an accomplished I. And now she realized 
as plainly as if she had turned into a new being, that this was 
not so. Men and women had incomplete selves, made up of 
bits assembled together loosely and somewhat haphazard. Man 
was‘not created ready-made. Men to-day were half-made, and 
women were half-made. Creatures that existed and functioned 
with certain regularity, but which ran off into a hopeless jumble 
of inconsequence. 
+ Half-made, like insects that can run fast and be so busy and 
suddenly grow wings, but which are only winged grubs after 
all. A world full of half-made creatures on two legs, eating food 
and degrading the one mystery left to them, sex. Spinning a 
great lot of &ords, burying themselves inside the cocoons of 
wotds and ideass¢hat they spin round themselves, and inside 
the cocogns, mostly perishing inert 4nd overwhelmed. 

Half-made creatures, rarely more than half-responsible and 
half-accountable, acting in terrible swarms, like locusts. 

Awful thought! And with a collective insect-like will, to 
avoid the responsibility of achieving any more perfected being 
or idefitity. The queer, rabid hate of being urged on into purer 
self. The morbid fanaticism of the non-integrate. 

In the great seething light of the lake, with the terrible blue- 
ribbed mountains of Mexieo beyond, she seemed swallowed by 
some gtisly skeleton, in the cage of his death-anatomy. She was 
afraid, mystically, of the man crouching there in the bows with 
his smooth thighs and supple loins like a snake, and his black 
eyes watching. A half-being, with a will to disintegration and 
death: And the tall man behind her at the tiller, he had the 
curious smoke-grey phosphorus eyes under black lashes some- 
times met among the Indians. Handsome, he was, and quiet 
and seemingly self-contained. But with that peculiar devilish 
half-smile lurking under his face, the half-jeering look of a patt- 
thing, which knows its power to destroy the purer thing. 

And yet, Kate told herself, both these men were manly fel- 

116 THE PLUMED SERPENT ; 

lows. They would not molest her, unless she communicated 
the thought to them, and by a certain cowardliness, prompted 
them. Their souls were nascent, there was no fixed evil in 
them, they could sway both ways. 

So in her soul she cried aloud to the greater mystery, the 
higher power that hovered in the interstices of the hot air, rich 
and potent. It was as if she could lift her hands and clutch the 
silent, stormless potency that roved everywhere, waiting. 
‘Come then!’ she said, drawing a long slow breath, and ad- 
dressing the silent life-breath which hung unrevealed in the 
atmosphere, waiting. 

And as the boat ran on, and her fingers rustled in ‘the warm 
water of the lake, she felt the fulness descend into her once 
more, the peace, and the power. The fulfilment filling her soul 
like the fulness of ripe grapes. And she thought to herself: 
‘Ah, how wrong I have been, not to turn sooner to the other 
presence, not to take the life-breath sooner! How wrong to 
be afraid of these two men.’ 

She did what she had been half-afraid to do before; she 
offered them the oranges and sandwiches still in the basket. 
And each of the men looked at her, the smoke-grey eyes looked 
her in the eyes, and the black eyes looked her in the eyes. And 
the man with the smoke-grey eyes, who was cunninger than 
the other man, but also prouder, said to her with his eyes: We 
are living! I know your sex, and you know mine. The mystery we are 
glad not to meddle with. You leave me my natural honour, and I thank 
you for the grace. 

In his look, so quick and proud, and in his quiet Mucha 
gracias! she heard the touch of mate recognition, a man glad 
to retain his honour, and to feel the communion of grace. Per- 
haps it was the Spanish word Gracias! But in her soul she was 
thinking of the communion of grace. 
~ With the black-eyed man it was the same. He was humbler. 
But as he peeled his orange and dropped the yellow peel on the 
water, she could see the stillness, the humility, and the pathos 
of grace in him; something very beautiful and truly male, and 
very hard to find in a civilized white man. It was not of the 
spirit. It was of the dark, strong, unbroken blood, the flower- 
ing of the soul. 

Then she thought to herself: After all, it is good to be hete. 

is 
‘= 

THE MOVE DOWN THE LAKE Les bf 

Tt is very good to be in this boat on this lake with these two 
silent, semi-barbarous men. They can receive the gift of grace, 
and we can share it like a communion, they and I. I am very 
glad to be here. It is so much better than love: the love I knew 
with Joachim. This is the fulness of the vine. 

“Sayula!’ said the man in the bows, pointing ahead. 

She saw, away off, a place where there were green trees, 
where the shore was flat, and a biggish building stood out. 

“What is the building?’ she asked. 

“The railway station.’ 

She was suitably impressed, for it was a new-looking, im- 
posing structure. 

A little steamer was smoking, lying off from a wooden jetty 
in the loneliness, and black, laden boats were poling out to 
her, and merging back to shore. The vessel gave a hoot, and 
slowly yet busily set off on the bosom of the water, heading in 
a slanting line across the lake, to which the tiny high white 
twin-towers pi Tuliapan showed above the water-line, tiny 
and far-off, dn the other side. 

They had passed the jetty, and agendns the shoal where the 
willows grew, she could see Sayula/ white fluted twin-towers 
of the church, obelisk shaped above the pepper-trees; beyond, 
a mound of a hill standing alone, dotted with dry bushes, dis- 
tinct and Japanese-looking; beyond this, the corrugated, blue- 
ribbed, flat-flanked mountains of Mexico. 

It looked peaceful, delicate, almost Japanese. As she drew ° 
nearer she saw the beach with the washing spread on the sand; 
the fleecy green willow-trees and pepper-trees, and the villas in 
foliage and flowers, hangiag magenta curtains of bougainvillea, 
red dots of hibiscus, pink abundance of tall oleander trees; 
occasional palm-trees sticking out: 

The boat was steering round a stone jetty, on which, in 
black letters, was painted an advertisement for motor-car 
tyres. There were a few seats, some deep fleecy trees growing 
out of the sand, a booth for selling drinks, a little promenade, 
and white boats on a sandy beach. A few women sitting under 
parasols, a few bathers in the water, and trees in front of the 
few villas deep in green or blazing scarlet blossoms. 

‘This is very good,’ thought Kate. ‘It is not too savage, and 
not over-civilized. It isn’t broken, but it is rather out of repair. 

AA ao z 
Ee, ee = th “ uf : ~ 

118 THE PLUMED SERPENT t 

It is in contact with the world, but the world has got a very 
weak grip on it.’ 

She went to the hotel, as;Don Ramon had advised her. 

‘Do you come from Orilla? You are Mrs Leslie? Don 
Ramon Carrasco sent us a letter about you.’ 

There was a house. Kate paid her boatmen and shook hands 
with them. She was sorry to be cut off from them again. And 
they looked at her with a touch of regret as they left. She said 
to herself: 

‘There is something rich and alive in these people. They 
want to be able to breathe the Great Breath. They are like child- 
ren, helpless. And then they’re like demons. But somewhere, 
I believe, they want the breath of life and the communion of 
the brave, more than anything.’ 

She was surprised at herself, suddenly using this language. 
But her weariness and her sense of devastation had been so 
complete, that the Other Breath in the air, and the bluish dark 
power in the earth had become, almost suddenly, more real to 
her than so-called reality. Concrete, jarring, exasperating real- 
ity had melted away, and a soft world of poteney stood in its 
place, the velvety dark flux from the earth, the delicate yet 
supreme life-breath in the inner air, Behind the fierce sun the 
dark eyes of a deeper sun were watching, and between the 
bluish ribs of the mountains a powerful heart was secretly 
beating, the heart of the earth. 

Her house was what she wanted; a low, L-shaped, tiled 
building with rough red floors and deep veranda, and the 
other two sides of the patio completed by the thick, dark little 
mango-forest outside the low wall. The square of the pasia, 
within the precincts of the house and the mango-trees, was gay 
with oleanders and hibiscus, and there was a basin of water in 
the seedy grass. The flower-pots along the veranda were full of 
flowering geranium and foreign flowers. At the far end of the 
patio the chickens were scratching under the silent motionless- 
ness of ragged banana-trees. 

There she had it; her stone, cool, dark house, every room 
opening on tothe veranda; her deep, shady veranda, or piazza, or 
corridor, looking out to the brilliant sun, the sparkling flowers 
and the seed-grass, the still water and the yellowing banana- 
trees, the dark splendour of the shadow-dense mango-ttees. 

THE MOVE DOWN THE LAKE 119 

With the house went a Mexican Juana with two thick-haired 
daughters and one son. This family lived in a den at the back 
of the projecting bay of the dining-room. There, half screened, 
was the well and the toilet, and a little kitchen anda sleeping- 

room where the family slept on mats on the floor. There the 
paltry chickens paddled, and the banana-trees made a chitter as 
the wind came. i 

Kate had four bedrooms to choose from. She chose the one 
whose low, barred window opened on the rough, grass and 
cobble-stone street, closed her doors and windows, and went 
to sleep, saying to herself as she lay down: Now I am alone. 
And now I have only one thing to do: not to get caught up in- 
to the world’s cog-wheels any more, and not to lose my hold 
on the hidden greater thing. 

She was tired with a strange weariness, fetline she could 
make no further effort. She smoke up at tea-time, but there was 
no tea. Juana hastened off to the hotel to buy a bit. 

Juana was a woman of about forty, rather short, with full 
dark face, cefttreless dark eyes, untidy hair, and a limping way 
of ‘walking. Shopoke rapidly, a rather plum-in-the- -mouth 
Spanish, adding ‘n’ to all her words. Something of a sloven, 
down to her speech. 4 ‘ 

‘No, Nifia, no hay masn’ — masn instead of mas. And calling 
Kate, in the old Mexican style, Nita, which means chi/d. It is 
the honourable title for a mistress. 

Juana was going to be a bit of a trial. She was a widow of 
doubtful antecedents, a creature with passion, but not much 
control, strong with a certain indifference and looseness. The 
hotel owner assured Kate that she was honest, but that if Kate 
would rather find another criada, all well and good. 

There was a bit of a battle to be fought between the two 
women. Juana was obstinate and reckless; she had not been 
treated very well by the world, And there was a touch of 
bottom-dog insolence about her. 

But also, sudden touches of passionate warmth and the 
peculiar selfless generosity of the natives. She would be honest 
out of rough defiance and indifference, so long as she was not 
in a state of antagonism. 

As yet, however, she was cautiously watching her ground, 
with that black-eyed touch of malice and wariness to be ex- 

7 

120 THE PLUMED SERPENT - 

pected. And Kate felt that the cry: Nifia—child! by which 
she was addressed, held in it a slight note of malevolent 
mockety. 

But there was nothing to do but to go ahead and trust the 
dark-faced, centreless woman. 

The second day, Kate had the energy to cast out one suite of 
bent-wood and cane furniture from her sa/on, remove pictures 
and little stands. 

If there is one social instinct more dreary than all the other 
social instincts in the world, it is the Mexican. In the centre of 
Kate’s red-tiled sa/on were two crescents: a black bent-wood 
cane settee flanked on each side by two black bent-wood cane 
chairs, exactly facing a brown bent-wood cane settee flanked on 
each side by two brown bent-wood cane chairs. It was as if 
the two settees and the eight chairs were occupied by the 
ghosts of all the Mexican banalities ever uttered, sitting facing 
one another with their knees towards one another, and their 
feet on the terrible piece of green-with-red-roses carpet, in the 
weary centre of the sa/on. The very sight of it was frightening. 

Kate shattered this face-to-face symmetry, and had the two 
girls, Maria and Concha, assisted by the ironic Juana, carrying 
off the brown bent-wood chairs and the bamboo stands into 
one of the spare bedrooms. Juana looked on cynically, and 
assisted officiously. But when Kate had her trunk, and fished 
out a couple of light rugs and a couple of fine shawls and a few 
things to make the place human, the criada began to exelaim: 
‘Oué bonita! Qué bonita, Nitia! Mire que bonita!’ 

CHAPTER VII 

The Plaza 

SAYULA was a little lake resort; not for the idle rich, for Mexi- 
co has few left; but for tradespeople from Guadalajara, and 
week-enders. Even of these, there were few. 

Nevertheless, there were two hotels, left over, really, ee 
the safe quiet days of Don Porfirio, as wete most of the villas. 
The outlying villas were shut up, some of them abandoned. 

THE PLAZA 121 

Those in the village lived in a perpetual quake of fear. There 
' were many terrors, but the two regnant were bandits and bol- 
shevists. 

Bandits are merely men who, in the outlying villages, having 
very often no money, no work, and no prospects, take to rob- 

_ bery and murder for a time — occasionally for a lifetime — as a 
profession. They live in their wild villages until troops are sent 
after them, when they retire into the savage mountains, or the 
marshes. 

Bolshevists, somehow, seem to be born on the tailway. 
Wherever the iron rails run, and passengers ate hauled back 
and forth in railway coaches, there the spirit of rootlessness, of 
transitoriness, of first and second class in separate compart- 
ments, of envy and malice, and of iron and demonish panting 
engines, seems to bring forth the logical children of material- 
ism, the bolshevists. 

Sayula had her little branch of railway, her one train a day. 
The railway did not pay, and fought with extinction. But it was 
enough. * 

Sayula also ha@l that real insanity of America, the automo- 
bile. As men used to want a horse and a sword, now they want 
a car. As women used to pine for a home and a box at the 
theatre, now it is a ‘machine.’ And the poor follow the middle 
class. There was a perpetual rush of ‘machines’, motor-cars 
and motor-buses — called camidnes — along the one forlorn road 

mw 
coming to Sayula from Guadalajara. One hope, one faith, one 
destiny; to ride'in a camion, to own a Cat. 

There was a little bandit scare when Kate arrived in the vil- 
lage, but she did not pay much heed. At evening she went into 
the plaza, to be with the people. The plaza was a square with 
big trees and a disused bandstand in the centre, a little promen- 

ade all round, and then the cobbled streets where the donkeys 
and the camiones passed. There was a further little section of 
real market-place, on the north side. 

The band played no more in Sayula, and the e/egancia strolled 
no more on the inner pavement around the plaza, under the 
trees. But the pavement was still good, and the benches were 
still more-or-less sound. Oh Don Porfirio’s day! And now it 
was the peons and Indians, in their blankets and white clothes, 
who filled the-benches and monopolized the square. True, the 

Bre 

122 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

law persisted that the peons must’ weat trousers in the p/aza, 
and not the loose great floppy drawers of the fields. But then 
the peons also wanted to wear trousers, instead of the drawers - 
that were the garb of their humble labour. 

The plaza now belonged to the peons. They sat thick on the 
benches, or slowly strolled round in their sandals and blankets. 
Across the cobbled road on the north side, the little booths 
selling soup and hot food were crowded with men after six 
o’clock; it was cheaper to eat out, at the end of a day’s work. 
The women at home could eat /orti//as, never mind the ca/do, 
the soup or the meat mess. At the booths which sold sequi/a, 
men, women, and boys sats on the benches with their elbows 
on the board. There was a mild gambling game, where the 
man in the centre turned the cards, and the p/aza rang to his 
voice: Cinco de Spadas! Rey de Copas! A large, stout, imperturb- 
able woman, with a cigarette on her lip and danger in her 
lowering black eye, sat on into the night, selling segui/a. The 
sweetmeat man stood by his board and sold sweets at one cen- 
tavo each. And down on the pavement, small tin torch-lamps 
flared upon tiny heaps of mangoes or nauseous tropical red 
plums, two or three centavos the little heap, while the vendor, a 
woman in the full wave of her skirt, or a man with curious 
patient humility, squatted waiting for a purchaser, with that 
strange fatal indifference and that gentle sort of patience so 
puzzling to a stranger. To have thirty cents’ worth of little red 
plums to’sell; to pile them on the pavement in tiny pyramids, 
five in a pyramid; and to wait all day and on into the night, 
squatting on the pavement and looking up from the feet to the 
far-off face of the passer-by and potential purchaser, this, ap- 
parently, is an occupation and a living. At night by the flare of 
the tin torch, blowing its flame on the wind. 

Usually there would bea couple of smallish young men with 
guitars of different sizes, standing close up facing one another 
like two fighting cocks that are uttering a long, endless swan- 
song, singing in tense subdued voices the eternal ballads, not 
very musical, mournful, endless, intense, audible only within 
close range; keeping on and on till their throats were scraped. 
And a few tall, dark men in red blankets standing around, list- 
ening casually, and rarely, very rarely making a contribution of 
one ceniavo. 

THE PLAZA 123 

In among the food-booths would be another trio, this time 
two guitars and a fiddle, and two of the musicians blind; the 
blind ones singing at a high pitch, full speed, yet not very 
audible. The very singing seemed secretive, the singers press- 
ing close in, face to face, as if to keep the wild, melancholy 
ballad re-echoing in their private breasts, their back to the 

world. 

And the whole village was in the p/aza, it was like a camp, 
with the low, rapid sound of voices. Rarely, very rarely, a voice 
rose above the deep murmur of the men, the musical ripple of 
the women, the twitter of children. Rarely any quick move- 
ment; the slow promenade of men in sandals, the sandals, 
called huaraches, making a slight cockroach shuffle on the pave- 
ment. Sometimes, darting among the trees, barelegged boys 
went sky-larking in and out of the shadow, in and out of the 
quiet people. They were the irrepressible boot-blacks, who 
swarm like tiresome flies in a barefooted country. 

At the%outh end of the p/aza, just across from the trees and 

*cornerwise tq¢he hotel, was a struggling attempt at an outdoor 
café, with little tables and chairs on the pavement. Here, on 
weekdays, the few who dared flaunt their prestige would sit 
and drink a beer or a glass of tequila. They were mostly stran- 
gers. And the peons, sitting immobile on the seats in the back- 
ground, looked on with basilisk eyes from under the great 
hats. 

But on Saturdays and Sundays there was something of a 
show. Then the camiones and motor-cars came in lurching and 
hissing. And, like strange birds alighting, you had slim and 
charming girls in organdie frocks and face-powder and bobbed 
hair, fluttering into the plaza. There they strolled, arm in arm, 
brilliant in red organdie and blue chiffon and white muslin and 
pink and mauve and tangerine frail stuffs, their black hair 
bobbed out, their dark slim arms interlaced, their dark faces 
curiously macabre in the heavy make-up; approximating to 
white, but the white of a clown or a corpse. 

In a world of big, handsome peon men, these flappers flap- 
ped with butterfly brightness and an incongruous shrillness, 
manless. The supply of iis, the male young elegants who are 
supposed to equate the flappers, was small. But still, fis there 
were, in white flannel trousers and white shoes, dark jackets, 

124 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

correct straw. hats, and canes. Fifis far more ladylike than the 
reckless flappers; and far more nervous, wincing. But fis none 
the less, gallant, smoking a cigarette with an elegant flourish, 
talking elegant Castilian, as near as possible, and looking as if 
they wete going to be sacrificed to some Mexican god within 
a twelvemonth; when they were properly plumped and per- 
fumed. The sacrificial calves being fattened. y 

On Saturday, the fifis and the flappers and the motor-car 
people from town — only a forlorn few, after all — tried to be 
butterfly gay, in sinister Mexico. They hired the musicians with 
guitars and fiddle, and the jazz music began to quaver, a little 
too tenderly, without enough kick. 

And on the pavement under the trees of the alameda — under 
the trees of the p/aza, just near the little tables and chairs of the 
_ café, the young couples began to gyrate a /a mode. The red and 
the pink and the yellow and the blue organdie frocks were 
turning sharply with all the white flannel trousers available, 
and some of the white flannel trousers had smart shoes, white 
with black strappings or with tan brogue bands. And some of 
the organdie frocks had green legs and green feet, some had 
legs a la nature, and white feet. And the slim, dark arms went 
around the dark blue /iff shoulders — or dark blue with a white 
thread. And the immeasruably soft faces of the males would 
smile with a self-conscious fatherliness at the whitened, pretty, 
reckless little faces of the females; soft, fatherly, sensuous 
smiles, suggestive of a victim’s luxuriousness. 

But they were dancing on the pavement of the plaza, and 
on this pavement the peons were slowly strolling, or standing 
in groups watching with black, inscrutable eyes the uncanny 
butterfly twitching of the dancers. Who knows what they 
thought? — whether they felt any admiration and envy at all, 
or only just a silent, cold, dark-faced opposition? Opposition 
there was. 

The young peons in their little white blouses, and the scarlet 
serape folded jauntily on one shoulder, strolled slowly on under 
their big heavy, poised hats, with a will to ignore the dancers. 
Slowly, with a heavy, calm balance, they moved irresistibly 
through the dance, as if the dance did not exist. And the Jifis in 
white trousers, with organdie in their arms, steered as best they 
might, to avoid the heavy, relentless passage of the young 

THE PLAZA 125 

peons, who went on talking to one another, smiling and flash- 
ing powerful white teeth, in a black, heavy sang-froid that 
settled like a blight even on the music. The dancers and the 
passing peons never touched, never jostled. In Mexico you do 
not run into people accidentally. But the dance broke against 
the invisible opposition. 

The Indians on the seats, they too watched the dancers for a 
while. Then they turned against them the heavy negation of in- 
difference, like a stone on the spirit. The mysterious faculty of 
the Indians, as they sit there, so quiet and dense, for killing off 
any ebullient life, for quenching any light and coloufful effer- 
vescence. 

There was indeed a little native dance-hall. But it was shut 
apart within four walls. And the whole rhythm and meaning 
was different, heavy, with a touch of violence. And even there, 
the dancers were artisans and mechanics or railway-porters, the 
half-urban people. No peons at all — or practically none. 

So, before ¥ery long, the organdie butterflies and the flannel- 
trouser fifis gaveasin, succumbed, crushed once more beneath 
the stone-heavy passivity of resistance in the demonish peons. 

The curious, radical opposition of the Indians to the thing 
we call the spirit. It is spirit which makes the flapper flap her 
organdie wings like a butterfly. It is spirit which creases the 
white flannel trousers of the fii and makes him cut his rather 
pathetic dash. They try to talk the elegancies and flippancies of 
the modern spirit. 

But down on it all, like a weight of obsidian, comes the pas- 
sive negation of the Indian. He understands soul, which is of 
the blood. But spirit, which is superior, and is the quality of 
our civilization, this, in the mass, he darkly and barbarically re- 
pudiates. Not until he becomes an artisan or connected with 
machinery does the modern spirit get him. 

And perhaps it is this ponderous repudiation of the modern 
spirit which makes Mexico what it is. 

But perhaps the automobile will make roads even through 
the inaccessible soul of the Indian. 

Kate was rather sad, seeing the dance swamped. She had 
been sitting at a little table, with Juana for duefa, sipping a 
glass of absinthe. ; 

The motor-cars returning to town left early, ina little group. 

126 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

If bandits were out, they had best keep together. Even the /ifis 
had a pistol on their hips. ~ 

But it was Saturday, so some of the young ‘elegance’ was 
staying on, till the next day; to bathe and flutter in the sun. 

It was Saturday, so the p/aza was very full, and along the 
cobbled streets stretching from the square many torches flut- 
tered and wavered upon the ground, illuminating a dark sales- 
man and an array of straw hats, or a heap of straw mats called 
petates, ot pyramids of oranges from across the lake. 

It was Saturday, and Sunday morning was market. So, as it 
were sufidenly, the life in the playa was dense and heavy with 
potency. The Indians had come in from all the villages, and 
from far across the lake. And with them they brought the 
curious heavy potency of life which seems to hum deeper and 
deeper when they collect together. 

In the afternoon, with the wind from the south, the big 
canoas, sailing-boats with black hulls and one huge sail, had 
come drifting across the waters, bringing the market-produce 
and the natives to their gathering ground. All the white specks 
of villages on the far shore, and on the far-off slopes, had sent 
their wild quota to the throng. 

It was Saturday, and the Indian instinct for living on into 
the night, once they ate gathered together, was now aroused. 
The people did not go home. Though market would begin at 
dawn, men had no thought of sleep. 

At about nine o’clock, after the 7 dance was shattered, Kate 
heard a new sound, the sound of a drum, or tom-tom, and saw 
a drift of the peons away to the dark side of the plaza, where 
the side market would open to-morrow. Already places 
had been taken, and little stalls set up, and huge egg-shaped 
baskets big enough to hold two men were lolling against the 
wall. 

There was a rippling and a pulse-like thudding of the drum, 
strangely arresting on the night air, then the long note of a 
flute playing a sort of wild, unemotional melody, with the 
drum for a syncopated rhythm. Kate, who had listened to the 
drums and the wild singing of the Red Indians in Arizona and 
New Mexico, instantly felt that timeless, primeval passion of 
the prehistoric races, with their intense and complicated reli- 
gious significance, spreading on the ait. 

oa ee 

— — 
é 

She looked inquiringly at Juana, and Juana’s black eyes 
glanced back at her furtively. 

“What is it?’ said Kate. 

“Musicians, singers,’ said Juana evasively. 

“But it’s different,’ said Kate. 

“Yes; itis new?” 

‘New?’ 

“Yes, it has only been coming for a short time.’ 

“Where does it come from?’ 

“Who knows!’ said Juana, with an evasive shrug of he 
shoulders. 

“IT want to hear,’ said Kate. E 

“It’s purely men,’ said Juana. 

“Still, one can stand a little way off.’ 

Kate moved towards the dense, silent throng of men in big 
hats. They all had their backs. to her. 

She stood on the step of one of the houses, and saw a little 
clearing at the centre of the dense throng of men, under the 
stone wall overavhich bougainvillea and plumbago flowers 
were hanging, lit up by the small, bfilliantly flaring torches of 
sweet-smelling wood, which a boy held in his two hands. 

The drum was in the centre of the clearing, the drummer 
standing facing the crowd. He was naked from the waist up, 
wote snow-white cotton drawers, very full, held round the 
waist by a red sash, and bound at the ankles with red cords. 
Round his uncovered head was a red cord, with three straight 
scatlet feathers rising from the back of his head, and on his 
forehead a totquoise ornament, a circle of blue with a round 
blue stone in the centre. The flute-player was also naked to the 
waist, but over his shoulder was folded a fine white serape with 
blue-and-dark edges, and fringe. Among the crowd, men with 
naked shoulders were giving little leaflets to the onlookers. 
And all the time, high and pure, the queer clay flute was repeat- 
ing a savage, rather difficult melody, and the drum was giving 
the blood-rhythm. 

More and more men were drifting in from the p/aza. Kate 
stepped from her perch and went rather shyly forward. She 
wanted one of the papers. The man gave her one without 
looking at her. And she went into the light to read. It was a 

sort of ballad, but without rhyme, in Spanish. At the top of the 

THE PLAZA 127 

128 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

leaflet was a rough print of an eagle within the ring ofa serpent 
that had its tail in its mouth; a curious deviation from the 
Mexican emblem, which is an eagle standing on a nopal, a 
cactus with great flat leaves, and holding in its beak and claws 
a writhing snake. 

This eagle stood slim upon the serpent, within the circle of 
the snake, that had black markings round its back, like short 
black rays pointing inwards. At a little distance, the emblem 
suggested an eye. 

In the place of the west 

In peace, beyond the lashing of the sun’s bright tail, 
In the stillness where waters are born 

Slept I, Quetzalcoatl. 

In the cave which is called Dark Eye, 

Behind the sun, looking through him as a window 
Is the place. There the waters rise, 

There the winds are born. 

On the waters of the after-life 

I rose again, to see a star falling, and feel a breath on my face. 
The breath said: Ga! And lo! 

Iam coming. 

The star that was falling was fading, was dying. 
I heard the star singing like a dying bird; 

My name is Jesus, I am Mary's Son. 

I am coming home. 

‘My mother the Moon is dark. 

Ob brother, Quetzalcoat] 

Hold back the dragon of the sun, 

Bind him with shadow while I pass - - 
Homewards. Let me come home. 

IT bound the bright fangs of the Sun 
And held him while Jesus passed . 
Into the lidless shade, 

Into the eye of the Father, 

Into the womb of refreshment. 

And the breath blew upon me again. 
So I took the sandals of the Saviour 
And started down the long slope 
Past the mount of the sun. 

Till I saw beneath me 

White breast-tips of my Mexico 

My bride. 

THE PLAZA 129 

Jesus the Cnicified 
Sleeps in the healing waters 
The long sleep. 

. Sleep, sleep, my brother, sleep. 
My bride between the seas 
Is combing her dark hair, 
Saying to herself: Quetzalcoatl. 

There was a dense throng of men gathered now, and from 
the centre the ruddy glow of ocote torches rose warm and 
strong, and the sweet scent of the cedar-like resin was on the 
air. Kate could see nothing for the mass of men in big hats. 

The flute had stopped its piping, and the drum was beating 
a slow, regular thud, acting straight on the blood. The incom- 
-prehensible hollow barking of the drum was like a spell on the 
mind, making the heart burst each stroke, and darkening the 
will. 

The men in the crowd began to subside, sitting and squat- 
ting on the ground, with their hats between their knees. And 
now it was a‘little sea of dark, proud heads leaning a little for- 
watd above the seft; strong male shoulders. ~ 

Near the wall was a clear circle, with the drum in the centre. 
The drummer with the naked torso stood tilting his drum to- 
wards him, his shoulders gleaming smooth and ruddy in the 
flare of light. Beside him stood another man holding a banner 
that hung from a light rod. On the blue field of the banneret 
was tHe yellow sun with a black centre, and between the four 
greater yellow rays, four black rays emerging, so that the sun 
looked like a wheel spinning with a dazzling motion. 

The crowd having all sat down, the six men with naked 
torsos, who had been giving out the leaflets and ordering the 
crowd, now came back and sat down in a ring, of which the 
drummer, with the drum tilted between his knees as he squat- 
ted on the ground, was the key. On his right hand sat the 
banner-bearer, on his left the flautist. They were nine men in 
the ring, the boy, who sat apart watching the two ocote torches, 
which he had laid upon a stone supported on a long cane tri- 
pod, being the tenth. 

The night seemed to have gone still. The curious seed- 
rattling hum of voices that filled the plaza was hushed. Under 
the trees, on the pavements, people were still passing uncon- 
cerned, but they looked curiously lonely, isolated figures drift- 

+ $3 : <a 
130 THE PLUMED SERPENT 
ing in the twilight of the electric lamps, and going about some 
exceptional business. They seemed outside the nucleus of life. 

Away on the north side, the booths were still flaring, people 
were buying and selling. But this quarter, too, looked lonely, 
and outside the actual reality, almost like memory. 

When the men sat down, the women began to drift up 
shyly, and seat themselves on the ground-at the outer tim, 
their full cotton skirts flowering out around them, and their 
dark reboxos drawn tight over their small, round, shy heads, as 
they squatted on the ground. Some, too shy to come right up, 
lingered on the nearest benches of the p/azya. And some had 
gone away. Indeed, a good many men and women had dis- 
appeared as soon as the drum was heard. 

So that the plaza was curiously void. There was the dense 
clot of people round the drum, and then the outer world, 
seeming empty and hostile. Only in the dark little street that 
gave on to the darkness of the lake, people were standing like 
ghosts, half lit-up, the men with their serapes over their faces, 
watching erect and.silent and concealed, from the shadow. 

But Kate, standing back in the doorway, with Juana sitting 
on the doorstep at her feet, was fascinated by the silent, half- 
naked ring of men in the torchlight. Their heads were black, 
their bodies soft and ruddy with the peculiar Indian beauty 
that has at the same time something terrible in it. The soft, 
full, handsome torsos of silent men with heads softly bent a 
little forward; the soft, easy shoulders, that are yet so broad, 
and which balance upon so powerful a backbone; shoulders 
drooping a little, with the relaxation of slumbering, quiescent 
power; the beautiful ruddy skin, gleaming with a dark fine- 
ness; the strong breasts, so male and so deep, yet without the 
muscular hardening that belongs to white men; and the dark, 
closed faces, closed upon a darkened consciousness, the black 
moustaches and delicate beards framing the closed silence of 
the mouth; all this was strangely impressive, moving strange, 
frighterting emotions in the soul. Those men who sat there in 
their dark, physical tenderness, so still and soft, they looked at 
the same time frightening. Something dark, heavy, and repti- 
lian in their silence and their softness. Their very naked torsos 
were clothed with a subtle shadow, a certain secret obscurity. 
White men sitting there would have been strong-muscled and 

vid oe a 
Ce 
wa oe 

g THE PLAZA 131 

frank, with an openness in their very physique, a certain osten- 
sible presence. But not so these men. Theit very nakedness 
only revealed the soft, heavy depths of their natural secrecy, 
their eternal invisibility. They did not belong to the realm of 
that which comes forth. 

Everybody was quite still; the expectant hush deepened to a 
kind of dead, night silence. The naked-shouldered men sat 
motionless, sunk into themselves, and listening with the dark 
eats of the blood. The red sash went tight round their waists, 
the wide white trousers, starched rather stiff, were bound 
round the ankles with red cords, and the dark feet in the glare 
of the torch looked almost black, in Auaraches that had red 
thongs. What did they want then, in life, these men who sat so 
softly and without any assertion, yet whose weight was so pon- 
derous, arresting ? 

Kate was at once attracted and repelled. She was attracted, 
almost fascinated by the strange nuclear power of the men in 
the circle. It “was like a darkly glowing, vivid nucleus of new 
life. Repellent the strange heaviness, the sinking of the spirit 
into the earth, like dark water. Repellent the silent, dense op- 
position to the pale-faced spiritual direction. 

Yet here, and here alone, it seemed to her, life burned with 
a deep, new fire. The rest of life, as she knew it, seemed wan, 
bleached and sterile. The pallid wanness and weariness of her 
worldf And here, the dark ruddy figures in the glare of a torch, 
like the centre of the everlasting fire, surely this was a new 
kindling of mankind! 

She knew it was so. Yet she preferred to be on the fringe, 
sufficiently out of contact. She could not bear to come into 
actual contact. 

The man with the banner of the sun lifted his face as if he 
were going to speak. And yet he did not speak. He was old; 
in his sparse beard were grey hairs, grey hairs over his thick, 
dark mouth. And his face had the peculiar thickness, with a 
few deep-scored lines, of the old among these people. Yet his 
hair rose vigorous and manly from his forehead, his body was 

‘smooth and strong. Only, perhaps, a little smoother, heavier, 
softer than the shoulders of the younger men. 

His black eyes gazed sightless for some time. Perhaps he was 
really blind; perhaps it was a heavy abstraction, a sort of heavy 

132 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

memory working in him, which made his face seem sightless. 

Then he began, in a.slow, clear, far-off voice, that seemed 
strangely to echo the vanished barking of the drum: 

‘Listen to me, men! Listen to me, women of these men! A 
long time ago, the lake started calling for men, in the quiet of 
the night. And there were no men. The little charales were 
swimming round the shore, looking for something, and the 
bagari and the other big fish would jump out of the water, to 
look around. But there were no men. 

“So one of the gods with hidden faces walked out of the 
water, and climbed the hill’ — he pointed with his hand in the 
night towards the invisible round hill at the back of the village 
— ‘and looked about. He looked up at the sun, and through the 
sun he saw the dark sun, the same that made the sun and the 
world, and will swallow it again like a draught of water. 

“He said: Is é¢ time? And from behind the bright sun the four 
dark arms of the greater. sun shot out, and in the shadow men 
arose. They could see the four dark arms of the sun in the sky. 
And they started walking. 

“The man on the top of the hill, who was a god, looked at‘ 
the mountains and the flat places, and saw men very thirsty, 
their tongues hanging out. So he said to them: Come! Come 
here! Here is my sweet water! 

“They came like dogs running with their tongues out, and 
kneeled on the shore of the lake. And the man on the top of 
the hill heard them panting with having drunk much water. 
He said to them: Have you drunk too much into yourselves? 
Ate your bones not dry enough? 

“The men made houses on the shore, and the man on the 
hill, who was a god, taught them to sow maize and beans, and 
build boats. But he said to them: No boat will save you, when 
the dark sun ceases to hold out his dark arms abroad in the sky. 

“The man on the hill said: 1am Quetzalcoatl, who breathed 
moisture on your dry mouths. I filled your breasts with breath 
from beyond the sun. I am the wind that whirls from the heart 
of the earth, the little winds that whirl like snakes round your 
feet and your legs and your thighs, lifting up the head of the 
snake of your body, in whom is your power. When the snake 
of yout body lifts its head, beware! It is 1, Quetzalcoatl, rearing 
up in you, tearing up and reaching beyond the bright day, to 

THE PLAZA 133 

the sun of darkness beyond, where is your home at last. Save 
for the dark sun at the back of the day-sun, save for the four 
dark arms in the heavens, you wete bone, and the stars were 
bone, and the moon an empty sea-shell on a dry beach, and the 
yellow sun were an empty cup, like the dry thin bone of a dead 
coyote’s head. So beware! 

“Without me you are nothing. Just as I, without the sun that 
is back of the sun, am nothing. 

“When the yellow sun is high in the sky, then say: Quetzal- 
coat! will lift his hand and screen me from this, else I shall burn 
out, and the land will wither. 

“For, say I, in the palm of my hand is the water of life, and 
on the back of my hand is the shadow of death. And when men 
forget me, I lift the back of my hand, farewell! Farewell, and 
the shadow of death. 

“But men forgot me. Their bones were moist, their hearts 
weak. When the snake of their body lifted its head, they said: 
This is the t#me snake that does as we wish. And when they 
couid not bear the fire of the sun, they said: The sun is angry. 
He wantsfo drink us up. Let us give him blood of victims. 

“And so it was, the dark/branches of shade were gone from 
heaven, and Quetzalcoatl mourned and grew old, holding his 
hand before his face, to hide his face from men. 

“He mourned and said: Let me go home. I am old, I am al- 
most bone. Bone triumphs in me, my heatt is a dry gourd. 1am 
weaty in Mexico. 

“So he cried to the Master-Sun, the dark one, of the un- 
uttered name: I am withering white like a perishing gourd- 
vine. I am turning to bone. I am denied of these Mexicans. I 
am waste and weary and old. Take me away. 

“Then the dark sun reached an arm, and lifted Quetzalcoatl 
into the sky. And the dark sun beckoned with a finger, and 
brought white men out of the east. And they came with a dead 
god on the Cross, saying: Lo!,This is the Son of God! He is 
dead, he is bone! Lo, your god is bled and dead, he is bone. 
Kneel and sorrow for him, and weep. For your tears he will 
give you comfort again, from the dead, and a place among the 
scentless rose-trees of the after-life, when you are dead. 

‘Lo! His mother weeps, and the waters of the world are in 

her hands. She will give you drink, and heal you, and lead you 

ee re eee > oi 
134 THE PLUMED SERPENT +" 

to the land of God. In the land of God you shall weep no mote. 
Beyond the gates of death, when you have passed from the 
house of bone into the garden of white roses. 

‘So the weeping Mother brought her Son who was dead on 
the Cross to Mexico, to live in the temples. And the people 
looked up no more, saying: The Mother weeps. The Son of 
her womb is bone. Let us hope for the place of the west, where 
the dead have peace among the scentless rose-trees, in the 
Paradise of God. 5 

‘For the priests would say: It is beautiful beyond the grave. 

_ ‘And then the priests grew old, and the tears of the Mother 
were exhausted, and the Son on the Cross cried out to the dark 
sun far beyond the sun: What is this that is done to me? Am I 
dead for ever, and only dead? Am I always and only dead, but bone on 
a Cross of bone? 

‘So this cry was heard in the world, and beyond the stars of 
the night, and beyond the sun of the day. 

‘Jesus said again: Is it time? My Mother is old like a sinking 
moon, the old bone of her can weep no more. Are we perished beyond 
redeem? 

“Then the greatest of the great suns spoke aloud from the 
back of the sun: I will take my Son to my bosom, I will take 
His Mother on my lap. Like a woman I will put them in my 
womb, like a mother I will lay them to sleep, in mercy I will 
dip them in the bath of forgetting and peace and renewal. 

“That is all. So hear now, you men, and you women of these 
men. 

“Jesus is going home, to the Father, and Mary is going back, 
to sleep in the belly of the Father. And they both will recover 
from death, during the long long sleep. 

‘But the Father will not leave us alone. We are not aban- 
doned. 

“The Father has looked around, and has seen the Morning 
Star, fearless between the rush of the oncoming yellow sun, 
and the backward reel of the night. So the Great One, whose 
name has never been spoken, says: Who art thou, bright 
watchman? And the dawn-star answering: It is I, the Morning 
Star, who in Mexico was Quetzalcoatl. It is I, ohn look at the 
yellow sun from behind, have my eye on the unseen side of 
the moon. It is I, the star, midway between the darkness and 

\ 
~ \ : .. 
4 a us 
i ‘. ere fe a, 

the rolling of the sun. I, called peebealonatl; waiting in the 
strength of my days. 

“The Father answered: It is well. It is well. And again: It is 
time. 

“Thus the big word was spoken behind the back of the 
world. The Nameless said: It is time. 

“Once more the word has been spoken: It is time. 

“Listen, men, and the women of men: It is time. Know now 
it is time. Those that left us are coming back. Those that came 
ate leaving again. Say welcome, and then farewell! 

“Welcome! Farewell!’ 

The old man ended with a strong, suppressed cry, as if really 
calling to the gods: 

‘Bienvenido! Bienvenido! Adios! Adids!” 

Even Juana, seated at Kate’s feet, cried out without know- 
ing what she did: 

“Bienvenido! Bienvenido! Adids! Adids! Adids-n!’ 

On the last“adi¢s! she trailed out to a natural human ‘n.’ 

The drum begas# to beat with an insistent, intensive rhythm, 
and the flute, or whistle, lifted its odd, far-off calling voice. It 
was playing again and again the peculiar melody Kate had 
heard at first. 

Then one of the men in the circle lifted his voice, and began 
to sing the hymn. He sang in the fashion of the old Red In- 
dians, with intensity and restraint, singing inwardly, singing to 
his own soul, not outward to the world, nor yet even upward 
to God, as the Christians sing. But with a sort of suppressed, 
tranced intensity, singing to the inner mystery, singing not 
into space, but into the other dimension of man’s existence, 
where he finds himself in the infinite room that lies inside the 
axis of out wheeling space. Space, like the world, cannot but 
move. And like the world, there is an axis. And the axis of our 

worldly space, when you enter, is a vastness where even the 
‘trees come and go, and the soul is at home in its own dream, 
noble and unquestioned. 

‘The strange, inward pulse of the drum, and the a sing- 
ing inwardly, swirled the soul back into the very centre of 
time, which is older than age. He began on a high, remote 

‘note, and holding the voice at a distance, ran on in subtle, 
running rhythms, apparently unmeasured, yet pulsed under- 

THE PLAZA 135 

We Perea 

al 

136 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

neath by the drum, and giving throbbing, three-fold lilts and 
lurches. For a long time, no melody at all was recognizable: 
it was just a lurching, running, far-off crying, something like 
the distant faint howling of a coyote. It was really the music of 
the old American Indian. 

There was no recognizable rhythm, no recognizable emo- 
tion, it was hardly music. Rather a far-off, perfect crying in the 
night. But it went straight through to the soul, the most 
ancient and everlasting soul of all men, where alone can the 
human family assemble in immediate contact. 

Kate knew it at once, like a sort of fate. It was no good re- 
sisting. There was neither urge nor effort, not any speciality. 
The sound sounded in the innermost far-off place of the human 
cote, the ever-present, where there is neither hope nor emo- 
tion, but passion sits with folded wings on the nest, and faith 
is a tree of shadow. 

Like fate, like doom. Faith is the Tree of Life itself, inevit- 
able, and the apples are upon us, like the apples of the eye, the 
apples of the chin, the apple of the heart, the apples of the 
breast, the apple of the belly, with its deep core, the apples of 
the loins, the apples of the knees, the little, side-by-side apples 
of the toes. What do change and evolution matter? We ate the 
Tree with the fruit forever upon it. And we are faith forever. 

Verbum sat. 

The one singer had finished, and only the drum kept on, 
touching the sensitive membrane of the night subtly and 
knowingly. Then a voice in the circle rose again on the song 
and like birds flying from a tree, one after the other, the ee 
dividual voices arose, till there was a strong, intense, curiously 
ee fees ee of male voices, like a dark flock 
seemed to have eoeere out SEeh na a is aes 
the masculine chest. att, In heseneeanrees 
canara iat Y ae ane 2 the crowd broke free, like birds 

§ in from a distance, caught by the spell 

The words did not matter. Any verse, any word a 
the song remained the same: a strong ee eine . er ine 
the caverns of the breast, from the ak s a ea 
self was too shy and wincing to sing: ee ms heey 
illusion. But che heard oe, evel wale 
: card the answer away back in her soul, like 

: THE PLAZA 137 

a far-off mocking-bird at night. And Juana was singing in spite 
of herself, in a crooning feminine voice, making up the words 
unconsciously. 

The half-naked men began to reach for their serapes: white 

_ Serapes, with borders of blue and earth-brown bars, and dark 
fringe. A man rose from the crowd and went towards the lake. 
He came back with ocofe and with faggots that a boat had 
brought over. And he started a little fire. After a whilé, an- 
other man went for fuel, and started another fire in the centre 
of the circle, in front of the drum. Then one of the women 
went off soft and bare-foot, in her full cotton skirt. And she 
made a little bonfire among the women. 

The-air was bronze with the glow of flame, and sweet with 
smoke like incense. The song rose and fell, then died away. 
Rose, and died. The drum ebbed on, faintly touching the dark 
membrane of the night. Then ebbed away. In the absolute 
silence could be heard the soundless stillness of the dark lake. 

Then the drum started again, with a new, strong pulse. One 

’ of the seated men¥in his white poncho with the dark blackish- 
and-blue border, got up, taking off his sandals as he did so, and 
began softly to dance the dance step. Mindless, dancing heavily 
and with a curious bird-like sensitiveness of the feet, he began 
to tread the earth with his bare soles, as if treading himself deep 
into the earth. Alone, with a curious pendulum rhythm, leaning 
alittle forward from a powerful backbone, he trod to the drum 
beat, his white knees lifting and lifting alternately against the 
dark fringe of his blanket, with a queer dark splash. And an- 
other man put his Awaraches into the centre of the ring, near the 
fire, and stood up to dance. The man at the drum lifted up his 
voice in a wild, blind song. The men were taking off their 
ponchos. And soon, with the firelight on their breasts and on 
their darkly abstracted faces, they were all afoot, with bare 
torsos and bare feet, dancing the savage bird-tread. 

‘Who sleeps shall wake! Who sleeps shall wake! Who treads 
down the path of the snake in the dust shall arrive at the place; 
in the path of the dust shall arrive at the place and be dressed 
in the skin of the snake: shall be dressed in the skin of the snake 
of the earth, that is father of stone; that is father of stone and 
the timber of earth; of the silver and gold, of the iron, the 
timber of earth from the bone of the father of earth, of the 

‘ 

~ ae ie 

138 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

snake of the world, of the heart of the world, that beats as a 
snake beats the dust in its motion on earth, from the heart of 
the world. ‘ 

‘Who slee-eeps sha-all wake! Who slee-eeps sha-all wake 
Who sleeps sha-ll wake in the way of the snake of the dust of 
the earth, of the stone of the earth, of the bone of the earth.’ 

The song seemed to take new wild flights, after it had sunk 
and rustled to a last ebb. It was like waves that rise out of the 
invisible, and rear up into form and a flying, disappearing 
whiteness and a rustle of extinction. And the dancers, after 
dancing ‘in a circle in a slow, deep absorption, each man 
changeless in his own place, treading the same dust with the 
soft churning of bare feet, slowly, slowly began to revolve, till 
the circle was slowly revolving round the fire, with always the 
same soft, down-sinking, churning tread. And the drum kept 
the changeless living beat, like a heart, and the song rose and 
soared and fell, ebbed and ebbed to a sort of extinction, then 
heaved up again. ; 

Till the young peons could stand it no more. They put off 
their sandals and their hats and their blankets, and shyly, with 
inexpert feet that yet knew the old echo of the tread, they stood 
behind the wheeling dancers, and danced without changing 
place. Till soon the revolving circle had a fixed yet throbbing 
circle of men outside. : 

Then suddenly one of the naked-shouldered dancers from 
the inner circle stepped back into the outer circle and with a 
slow leaning, slowly started the outer circle revolving in the 
reverse direction from the inner. So now there were two. 
wheels of the dance, one within the other, and revolving in 
different directions. : 

They kept on and on; with the drum and the song, revolving 
like wheels of shadow-shapes around the fite. Till the fire died 
Jow, and the drum suddenly stopped, and the men suddenly 
dispersed, returning to their seats again. 

There was Silence, then the low hum of voices and the 
sound of laughter. Kate had thought, so often, that the | augh- 
ter of the peons broke from them in a sound almost like pain 
But now the laughs came like little invisible flames, suddenl 
from the embers of the talk. y 

Everybody was waiting, waiting. Yet nobody moved at 

once, when the thud of the drum struck again like a summons. 
They sat still talking, listening with a second consciousness. 
Then a man arose and threw off his blanket, and threw wood 
on the central fire. Then he walked through the seated men to 
where the women clustered in the fullness of their skirts. 
There he waited, smiling with a look of abstraction. Till a girl 
rose and came with utmost shyness towards him, holding her 
reboxo tight over her lowered head with her right hand, and 
taking the hand of the man in her left. It was she who lifted the 
motionless hand of the man in her own, shyly, with a sudden 
shy snatching. He laughed, and led her through the now risen 
men, towards the inner fire. She went with dropped head, hid- 
ing her face in confusion. But side by side and loosely holding 
hands, they began to tread the soft, heavy dance-step, forming 
the first small segment of the inner, stationary circle. 

And now all the men were standing facing outwards, wait- 
ing to be chosen. And the women quickly, their shawled heads 
hidden, were slipping in and picking up the loose right hand 
of the man of t€ir choice. The inner men with the naked 
shouldersawere soon chosen. The inner circle, of men and wo- 
men in pairs, hand in hand; was closing. 

“Come, Nifia, come!’ said Juana, looking up at Kate with 
black, gleaming eyes. 

‘I amp afraid!’ said Kate. And she spoke the truth. 

One of the bare-breasted men had come across the stteet, 
out of the crowd, and was standing waiting, near the doorway 
in which Kate stood, silently, with averted face. 

‘Look! Nifa! This master is waiting for you. Then come! 
Oh, Nifia, come!’ 

The voice of the criada had sunk to the low, crooning, al- 
most magical appeal of the women of the people, and her black 
eyes glistened strangely, watching Kate’s face. Kate, almost 
mesmerized, took slow, reluctant steps forward, towards the 
man who was standing with averted face. 

‘Do you mind?’ she said in English, in great confusion. 
And she touched his fingers with her own. . 

His hand, warm and dark and savagely suave, loosely, al- 
most with indifference, and yet with the soft barbaric nearness, 
held her fingers, and he led her to the circle. She dropped her 
head, and longed to be able to veil her face. In her white dress 

THE PLAZA 139 

“ae 
x me 

140 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

and gteen straw hat, she felt a virgin again, a young virgin. 
This was the quality these men had been able to give back to her. 

Shyly, awkwardly, she tried to tread the dance-step. But in 
her shoes she felt inflexible, insulated, and the rhythm was not 
in her. She moved in confusion. 

But the man beside her held her hand in the same light, soft 
grasp, and the slow, pulsing pendulum of his body swayed un- 
trammelled. He took no notice of her. And yet he held her 
fingers in his soft, light touch. 

Juana had discarded her boots and stockings, and with her 
dark, creased face like a mask of obsidian, her eyes gleaming 
with the timeless female flame, dark and unquenchable, she was 
treading the step of the dance. 

‘As the bird of the sun treads the earth at the dawn of the 
day like a brown hen under his feet, like a hen and the branches 
of her belly droop with the apples of birth, with the eggs of 
gold, with the eggs that hide the globe of the sun in the waters 
of heaven, in the purse of the shell of earth that is white from 
the fire of the blood, tread the earth, and the earth will con- 
ceive like the hen "neath the feet of the bird of the sun; ’neath 
the feet of the heart, ’neath the heart’s twin feet. Tread the 
earth, tread the earth that squats as a pullet with wings closed 
in—’ 

The circle began to shift, and Kate was slowly moving 
round between two silent and absorbed men, whose arms 
touched her arms. And the one held her fingers softly, loosely, 
but with transcendent nearness. And the wild song rose again 
like a bird that has alighted for a second, and the drum changed 
rhythm incomprehensibly. 

The outer wheel was all men. She seemed to feel the strange 
dark glow of them upon her back. Men, dark, collective men, 
non-individual. And herself woman, wheeling upon the great 
wheel of womanhood. 

Men and women alike danced with faces lowered and ex- 
pressionless, abstract, gone in the deep absorption of men into 
the greater manhood, women into the great womanhood. It 
was sex, but the greater, not thé lesser sex. The waters over the 
earth wheeling upon the waters under the earth, like an eagle 
silently wheeling above its own shadow. 

She felt her sex and her womanhood caught up and identi- 

a 
tg ead) ee 

a al et Fe . 

2 

THE PLAZA 141 

fied in the slowly revolving ocean of nascent life, the dark sky 
of the men lowering and wheeling above. She was not herself, 
she was gone, and her own desites were gone in the ocean of 
the great desire. As the man whose fingers touched hers was 
gone in the ocean that is male, stooping over the face of the 
waters. 

The slow, vast, soft-touching revolution of the ocean above 
upon ocean below, with no vestige of rustling or foam. Only 
the pure sliding conjunction. Herself gone into her greater 
self, her womanhood consummated in the greater womanhood. 
And where her fingers touched the fingers of the man, the 
quiet spark, like the dawn-star, shining between her and the 
greater manhood of men. 

How strange, to be merged in desire beyond desire, to be 
gone in the body beyond the individualism of the body, with 
the spark of contact lingering like a morning star between her 
and the man, her woman’s greater self, and the greater self of 
man. Even of the two men next to her. What a beautiful slow 
wheel of dance, €vo great streams streaming in contact, in 
opposite directions. 

She did not know the face of the man whose fingers she 
held. Her personal eyes had gone blind, his face was the face of 
dark heaven, only the touch of his fingers a star that was both 
hers and his. 

Her feet were feeling the way into the dance-step. She was 
beginning to learn softly to loosen her weight, to loosen the 
uplift of all her life, and let it pour slowly, darkly, with an ebb- 
ing gush, rhythmical in soft, rhythmic gushes from her feet 
into the dark body of the earth. Erect, strong like a staff of life, 
yet to loosen all the sap of her strength and let it flow down 
into the roots of the earth. 

She had lost count of time. But the dance of itself seemed to 
be wheeling to a close, though the rhythm remained exactly 
the same to the end. 

The voice finished singing, only the drum kept on. Sud- 
denly the drum gave a rapid little shudder, and there was 
silence. And immediately the hands were loosened, the dance 
broke up into fragments. The man gave her a quick, far-off 
smile and was gone. She would never know him by sight. But 
by presence she might know him. 

142 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

The women slipped apart, clutching their rebozos tight round 
their shoulders. The men hid themselves in their blankets. And 
Kate turned to the darkness of the lake. 

‘Already you are going, Nifia?’ came Juana’s voice of mild, 
aloof disappointment. 

- ‘I must go now,’ said Kate hurriedly. 

And she hastened towards the dark of the lake, Juana run- 
ning behind her with shoes and stockings in her hand. 

Kate wanted to hurry home with her new secret, the strange 
secret of her greater womanhood, that she could not get used 
to. She would have to sink into this mystery. 

She hastened along the uneven path of the edge of the lake 
shore, that lay dark in shadow, though the stars gave enough 
light to show the dark bulks and masts of the sailing-canoes 
against the downy obscurity of the water. Night, timeless, 

~hourless night! She would not look at her watch. She would 
lay her watch face down, to hide its phosphorus figures. She 
would not be timed. 

And as she sank into sleep, she could hear the drum again, 
like a pulse inside a stone beating. z 

CHAPTER VIII 

Night in the House 

Over the gateway of Kate’s house was a big tree called a 
cuenta tree, because it dropped its fruits, that were little, round, 
hard balls like little dark marbles, perfect in shape, for the 
natives to gather up and string for beads, cuentas, or, more 
particularly, for the Pater Noster beads of the rosary. At night, 
the little road outside was quite dark, and the dropping of the 
cuentas startled the silence. 

The nights, which at first had seemed perfectly friendly, be- 
gan to be full of terrors. Fear had risen again. A band of rob- 
bers had gathered in one of the outlying villages on the lake, 
a village where the men had bad characters, as being ready to © 
turn bandit at any moment. And this gang, invisible in the 
daytime, consisting during the day of lake fishermen and 

A 
a 

NIGHT IN THE HOUSE 143 

labourers on the land, at night would set off on horseback to 
sack any lonely, or insufficiently-protected house. 

Then the fact that a gang of bandits was out always set the 
isolated thieves and scoundrels in action. Whatever happened, 
it would be attributed to the bandits. And so, many an unsus- 
pected, seemingly honest man, with the old lust in his soul, 
would steal out by night with his machete and perhaps a pistol, 
to put his fingers in the pie of the darkness. 

And again Kate felt the terror clot and thicken in the black 

-stlence of the Mexican night, till the sound of a cuenta falling 
was terrible. She would lie and listen to the thickening dark- 
ness. A little way off would sound the long, shrill whistle of 
the police watch. And in a while, the police patrol, on horse- 
back, would go clattering lightly by. But-the police in most 
countries are never present save where there is no trouble. 

The rainy season was coming, and the night-wind rose from 
the lake, malgns strange noises in the trees, and shaking the 
many loose doors of the house. The servants were away in 
their distant reces®& And in Mexico, at night, each little distance 
isolates itself absolutely, like a man in a black cloak turning his 
back. 7 

In the morning, Juana would appear from the p/aza, her 
eyes blob-like and inky, and the old, weary, monkey look of 
subjection to fear settled on her bronze face. A race old in sub- 
jection to fear, and unable to shake it off. She would immedi- 
ately begin to pour forth to Kate, in a babbling, half-intelligent 
stream, some story of a house broken into and a woman stab- 
bed. And she would say, the owner of the hotel had sent word 
that it was not safe for Kate to sleep alone in the house. She 
must go to the hotel to sleep. 

The whole village was in that state of curious, reptile appre- 
hension which comes over dark people. A panic fear, a sense 
of devilment and horror thick in the night air. When blue 
morning came they would cheer up. But at night, like clotting 
blood the air would begin to thicken again. 

The fear, of course, was communicated from one person to 
another. Kate was sure that if Juana and her family had not 
been huddled in reptile terror away at the far end of the house, 
she herself would have been unafraid. As it was, Juana was 
like a terror-struck lizard. 

144 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

There was no man about the place. Juana had two sons, 
Jestis, who was about twenty, and Ezequiel, about seventeen. 
But Jesus — she pronounced it Hezoosn — ran the little gasoline 
motor for the electric light, and he and Ezequiel slept together 
on the floor of the little engine-house. So that Juana huddled 
with her two gitls, Concha and Maria, in the den at the end of 
Kate’s house, and seemed to sweat a tank odour of fear. 

The village was submerged. Usually the p/aza kept alive till 
ten o’clock, with the charcoal fires burning and the ice-cream 
man going round with his bucket on his head, endlessly cry- 
ing: Nieve! Nieve! and the people gossiping on the streets or 
listening to the young men with guitars. 

Now, by nine o’clock, the place was deserted, curiously 
stony and vacuous. And the Jefe sent out the order that any- 
body in the streets after ten o’clock would be arrested. 

Kate hurried to her house and locked herself in. It is not 
easy to withstand the panic fear of a black-eyed, semi-barbaric 
people. The thing communicates itself like some drug on the 
ait, wringing the heart and paralysing the soul with a sense of 
evil; black, horrible evil. 

She would lie in her bed in the absolute dark: the electric 
light was cut off completely, everywhere, at ten o’clock, and 
primitive darkness reigned. And she could feel the demonish 
breath of evil moving on the air in waves. 

She thought of the grisly stories of the country, which she 
had heard. And she thought again of the people, outwardly so 
quiet, so nice, with a gentle smile. But even Humboldt had said 
of the Mexicans, that few people had such a gentle smile, and 
at the same time, such fierce eyes. It was not that their eyes 
were exactly fierce. But their blackness was inchoate, with a 
dagger of white light in it. And in the inchoate blackness the 
blood-lust might arise, out of the sediment of the uncteated past. 

Uncreated, half-created, such a people was at the mercy of 
old black influences that lay in a sediment at the bottom of 
them. While they were quiet, they were gentle and kindly, with 
a sort of limpid naiveté. But when anything shook them at the 
depths, the black clouds would arise, and they were gone again 
in the old grisly passions of death, blood-lust, incarnate hate. 
A people incomplete, and at the mercy of old, upstarting lusts. 

Somewhere at the bottom of their souls, she felt, was a 

NIGHT IN THE HOUSE 145 

fathomless resentment, like a raw wound. The heavy, bloody- 
eyed resentment of men who have never been able to win a 
soul for themselves, never been able to win themselves a nu- 
cleus, an individual integrity out of the chaos of passions and 
potencies and death. They are caught in the toils of old lusts 
and old activities as in the folds of a black serpent that strangles 
the heart. The heavy, evil-smelling weight of an unconquered 
past. 

And under this weight they live and die, not really sorty to 
die. Clogged and tangled in the elements, never able to extri- 
cate themselves. Blackened under a too-strong sun, surcharged 
with the heavy sundering electricity of the Mexican air, and 
tormented by the bubbling of volcanoes away below the feet. 
The tremendous potent elements of the American continent, 
that give men powerful bodies, but which weigh the soul 
down and prevent its rising into birth. Or, if a man arrives’ 
with a soul, e maleficent elements gradually break it, grad- 
ually, till he decomposes into ideas and mechanistic activities, 
in a body full of ffechanical energy, but with his blood-soul 
dead and patrescent. 

So, these men, unable to‘overcome the elements, men held 
down by the serpent tangle of sun and electricity and volcanic 
emission, they are subject to an ever-recurring, fathomless lust 
of resentment, a demonish hatred of life itself. Then, the in- 
striking thud of a heavy knife, stabbing into a living body, this 
is the best. No lust of women can equal that lust. The clutching 
throb of gratification as the knife strikes in and the blood 
spurts out! 

It is the inevitable supreme gratification of a people en- 
tangled in the past, and unable to extricate itself. A people that 
has never been redeemed, that has not known a Saviout. 

For Jesus is no Saviour to the Mexicans. He is a dead god 
in their tomb. As a miner who is entombed underground by 
the collapsing of the earth in the gangways, so do whole 
nations become entombed under the slow subsidence of their 
past. Unless there comes some Saviour, some Redeemer to 
_ drive a new way out, to the sun. 

But the white men brought no salvation to Mexico. On the 
contrary, they find themselves at last shut in the tomb along 
with their dead god and the conquered race. 

* a ae a 
tae 

146 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Which is the status quo. 

Kate lay and thought hard, in the black nigh: At the same 
time, she was listening intensely, with a clutch of horror. She 
could not control her heart. It seemed wrenched out of place, 
and really hurt her. She was, as she had never been before, 
absolute physically afraid, blood afraid. Her blood was 
wrenched in a paralysis of fear. 

In England, in Ireland, during the war and the revolution 
she had known spiritual fear. The ghastly fear of the rabble; 
and during the war, nations were nearly all rabble. The terror 
of the rabble that, mongrel-like, wanted to break the free spirit 
in individual men and women. It was the cold, collective lust 
of millions of people, to break the spirit in the outstanding in- 
dividuals. They wanted to break this spirit, so that they could 
start the great downhill rush back to old underworld levels, 
old gold-worship and murder lust. The rabble. 

In those days Kate had known the the agony of cold social 
fear, as ifa democracy were a huge, huge cold centipede which, 
if you resisted it, would dig every claw into you. And the flesh 
would mortify around every claw. 

That had been her worst agony of fear. And she had survived. 

Now she knew the real heart-wrench of blood fear. Her 
heart seemed pulled out of place, in a stretched pain. 

She dozed, and wakened suddenly, at a small noise. She sat 
up in bed. Her doors on to the veranda had shutters. The doors 
themselves were fastened, but the shutters were open for air, 
leaving the upper space, like the window of the door, open. 
And against the dark grey of the night she saw what looked 
like a black cat crouching on the bottom of the panel-space. 

“What is that?’ she said automatically. 

Instantly, the thing moved, slid away, and she knew it was 
the arm of a man that had been reaching inside to pull the bolt 
of the door. She lay for a second paralysed, prepared to scream. 
There was no movement. So she leaned and lit a candle. 

The curious panic fear was an agony to her. It paralysed her 
and wrenched her heart out of place. She lay prostrate in the 
anguish of night-terror. The candle blazed duskily. There was 
a far-off mutter of thunder. And the night was horrible, hor- 
tible. Mexico was ghastly to her beyond description. 

She could not relax, she could not get her heart into place. 

NIGHT IN THE HOUSE 147 

‘Now,’ she thought to herself, ‘I am at the metcy of this thing, 
and I have lost myself.’ And it was a terrible feeling, to be lost, 
_ scattered, as it were, from herself in a horror of fear. 

“What can I do?’ she thought, summoning her spirit. ‘How 
can I help myself?’ She knew she was all alone. 

For a long time she could do nothing. Then a certain relief 
came to her as she thought: ‘I am believing in evil. I mustn’t 
believe in evil. Panic and murder never start unless the leading 
people let slip the control. I don’t really believe in evil. I don’t 
believe the old Pan can wrench us back into the old, evil forms 
of consciousness, unless we wish it. I do believe there is a 
greater power, which will give us the greater strength, while 
we keep the faith in it, and the spark of contact. Even the man 
who wanted to break in here, I don’t think he really had the 
power. He was just trying to be mean and wicked, but some- 
thing in him would have to submit to a greater faith and a 
greater power.’ 

So she rea§sured herself, till she had the courage to get up 
and fasten her dowr-shutters at the top. After which she went 
from room to room, to see that all was made fast. And she was 
thankful to realize that she was aftaid of scorpions on the floor, 
as well as of the panic horror. 

Now she had seen that the five doors and the six windows of 
her wing of communicating rooms were fast. She was sealed 
inside the darkness, with her candle. To get to the other part 
of the house, the dining-room and kitchen, she had to go out- 
side on the veranda. 

She grew quieter, shut up with the dusky glow of her 
candle. And her heart, still wrenched with the pain of fear, was 
thinking: ‘Joachim said that evil was the lapsing back to old 
life-modes that have been surpassed in us. This brings murder 
and lust. But the drums of Saturday night are the old rhythm, 
and that dancing round the drum is the old savage form of ex- 
pression. Consciously reverting to the savage. So perhaps it is 
evil.’ 

But then again her instinct to believe came up. 

‘No! It’s not a helpless, panic reversal. It is conscious, care- 
fully chosen. We must go back to pick up old threads. We 
must take up the old, broken impulse that will connect us with 
the mystery of the cosmos again, now we are at the end of our 

“* 

own tether. We must do it. Don Ramon is right. He must be 

a great man, really. I thought there were no really great men 
any more: only great financiers and great artists and so on, but _ 
no great men. He must be a great man.’ 

She was again infinitely reassured by this thought. 

But again, just as she had blown out the candle, vivid flares 
of white light spurted through all the window-cracks, and 
thunder broke in great round balls, smashing down. The bolts 
of thunder seemed to fall on her heart. She lay absolutely 
crushed, in a kind of quiescent hysterics, tortured. And the 
hysterics held her listening and tense and abject, until dawn. 
And then she was a wreck. 

In the morning came Juana, also looking like a dead insect, 
with the conventional phrase: ‘How have you passed the 
night, N7fa?’ ; 

‘Badly!’ said Kate. Then she told the story of the black cat, 
ot the man’s arm. 

‘Mire!’ said Juana, in a hushed voice. ‘The poor innocent 
will be murdered in her bed. No, Ni#a, you must go and sleep ~ 
in the hotel. No, no, Nifia, you can’t leave your window shut- 
ter open. No, no, impossible. See now, will you go to the hotel 
to sleep? The other sefiora does it.’ 

‘IT don’t want to,’ said Kate. 

“You don’t want to, Nifia? Ah! Entonces! Entonces, Nina, 1 
will tell Ezequiel to sleep here outside your door, with his pis- 
tol. He has a pistol, and he will sleep outside your door, and 
you can leave your shutter open, for air in the hot night. Ah, 
Nifia, we poot women, we need a man and a pistol. We ought 
not to be left alone all the night. We are afraid, the children are 
afraid. And imagine it, that there was a robber trying to open 
the bolt of your door! Imagine it to yourself! No, Nifia, we will 
tell Ezequiel at mid-day.’ 

Ezequiel came striding proudly in, at mid-day. He was a 
wild, shy youth, very erect and proud, and half savage. His 
voice was breaking, and had a queer resonance. 

He stood shyly while the announcement was being made to ~ 
him. Then he looked at Kate with flashing black eyes, very 
much the man to the rescue. 

“Yes! yes!’ he said. ‘I will sleep here on the corridor. Don’t 
have any fear. I shall have my pistol.’ 

148 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

CASA DE LAS CUENTAS 149 

He marched off, and returned with the pistol, an old long- 
barrelled affair. 

“It has five shots,’ he said, showing the weapon. ‘If you 
open the door in the night, you must say a word to me first. 
Because if I see anything move, I shall fire five shots. Pst! Pst? 

She saw by the flash of his eyes what satisfaction it would give 
him to fire five shots at something moving in the night. The 
thought of shots being fired at him gave him not the least con- 
cern. 

“And Nifa,’ said Juana, ‘if you come home late, after the 
light is out, you must call Exeguiel! Because if not, Brumm! 
Brumm! —and who knows who will be killed!’ 

Ezequiel slept on a straw mat on the brick veranda outside 
Kate’s door, rolled up in his blanket, and with the pistol at his 
side. So she could leave her shutter open for air. And the first 
night she was kept awake once more by his fierce snoring. 
Never had shesheard such a tremendous resonant sound! What 
a chest that boy myst have! It was sound from some strange, 
savage other world. The noise kept"her awake, but there was 
something“in it which she liked. Some sort of wild strength. 

CHAPTER IX 

Casa de las Cuentas 

K ATE was soon fond of the limping, untidy Juana, and of the 
girls. Concha was fourteen, a thick, heavy, barbaric girl with a 
mass of black waving hair which she was always scratching. 
Maria was eleven, a shy, thin bird-like thing with big eyes that 
seemed almost to absorb the light round her. 

It was a reckless family. Juana admitted a different father for 
Jesus, but to judge from the rest, one would have suspected a - 
different father for each of them. There was a basic, sardonic 
catelessness in the face of life, in all the family. They lived 
from day to day, a stubborn, heavy, obstinate life of indiffer- 
ence, careless about the past, careless about the present, cate- 
less about the future. They had even no interest in money. 
Whatever they got they spent in a minute, and forgot it again. 

Without aim or purpose, they lived absolutely 4 ¢erre, down 

2 WE Se 
= Bic: 
* ae 

on the dark, volcanic earth. They were not animals, because 
men and women and their children cannot be animals. It is not 
granted us. Go, for once gone, thou never canst return! says the 
gteat Urge, which drives us creatively on. When man tries 
brutally to return to the older, previous levels of evolution, he 
does so in the spirit of cruelty and misery. 

So in the black eyes of the family, a certain vicious fear and 
wonder and misery. The misery of human beings who squat 
helpless outside their own unbuilt selves, unable to win their 
souls out of the chaos, and indifferent to all other victories. 

White people are becoming soulless too. But they have con- 
quered the lower worlds of metal and energy, so they whizz 
around in machines, circling the void of their own emptiness. 

To Kate, there was a great pathos in her family. Also a cer- 
tain repulsiveness. 

Juana and her children, once they accepted their Nz#a as 
their own, were honest with intensity. Point of honour, they 
were honest to the least little plum in the fruit bowl. And al- 
most intensely eager to serve. 

Themselves indifferent to their surroundings, they would 
live in squalor. The earth was the great garbage-bowl. Every- 
thing discarded was flung on the earth and they did not care. 
Almost they liked to live in a mi/iew of fleas and old rags, bits 
of paper, banana skins and mango stones. Here’s a piece torn 
off my dress! Earth, take it. Here’s the combings of my hair! 
Earth, take them! 

But Kate could not bear it. She cared. And immediately, the 
family were quite glad, thrilled that she cared. They swept the 
patio with the twig broom till they swept the very surface of 
the earth away. Fun! The Naa had feelings about it. 

She was a source of wonder and amusement to them. But 
she was never a class superior. She was a half-incomprehen- 

. sible, half-amusing wonder-being. 

The Nifia wanted the aguador to bring two doses of hot water, 
quick, from the hot springs, to wash herself all over every 
morning. Fun! Go, Maria, tell the aguador to run with the Nifia’s 
water, 

Then they almost resented it that she shut herself off to have — 
her bath. She was a sort of goddess to them, to provide them 
with fun and wonder; but she ought always to be accessible. 

Iso THE PLUMED SERPENT 

CASA DE LAS CUENTAS Ist 

And a god who is forever accessible to human beings has an 
unenviable time of it, Kate soon discovered. 

- No, it was no sinecure, being a Nifia. At dawn began the 
scrape-scrape of the twig broom outside. Kate stayed on in 
bed, doors fastened but shutters open. Flutter outside! Some- 
body wanted to sell two eggs. Where is the Nifia? She is sleep- 
ing! The visitor does not go. Continual flutter outside. 

The aguador! Ah, the water for the Nifia’s bath! She is sleep- 
ing, she is sleeping. ‘No!’ called Kate, slipping into a dressing- 
gown and unbolting the door. In come the children with the 
bath-tub, in comes the aguador with the two square kerosene 
cans full of hot water. Twelve centavos! Twelve centavos for the 
aguador\ No hay! We haven’t got twelve centavos. Later! Later! 
Away trots the aguador, pole over his shoulder. Kate shuts her 
doors and shutters and starts her bath. 

‘Nifia? Nita?’ 

‘What do you want?’ 

‘Eggs boiléd or fried or rancheros? Which do you want?” 

‘Boiled.’ wo 

“Coffee,or chocolate?’ 

‘Coffee.’ / 

‘Or do you want tea?’ 

“No, coffee.’ 

Bath proceeds. 

‘Nifla?’ 

ives: 

“There is no coffee. We are going to buy some.’ 

‘T’ll take tea.’ 

‘No, Nifia! lam going. Wait for me.’ 

“Go then.’ 

Kate comes out to breakfast on the veranda. The table is set, 
heaped with fruit and white bread and sweet buns. 

‘Good morning, Ni#ia. How have you passed the night? 
Well! Ah, praised be God! Maria, the coffee. I’m going to put 
the eggs in the water. Oh, Nifia, that they may not be boiled 
hard! — Look, what feet of the Madonna! Look! Bonitos!’ 

And Juana stooped down, fascinated to touch with her 
black finger Kate’s white soft feet, that were thrust in light 
_ sandals, just a thong across the foot. 

The day had begun. Juana looked upon herself as dedicated 

eas 

a 

entirely to Kate. As soon as possible she shooed her girls away, 
to school. Sometimes they went: mostly they didn’t. The Nz#a 
said they must go to school. Listen! Listen now! Says the 
Nifia that you must go to school! Away! Walk! 

Juana would limp back and forth down the long veranda 
from kitchen to the breakfast table, carrying away the dishes 
one by one. Then, with a great splash, she was washing up. 

Morning! Brilliant sun pouring into the patio, on the hibis- 
cus flowers and the fluttering yellow and green rags of the 
banana-trees. Birds swiftly coming and going, with tropical 
suddenness. In the dense shadow of the mango-grove, white- 
clad Indians going like ghosts. The sense of fierce sun and, al- 
most more impressive, of dark, intense shadow. A twitter of 
life, yet a certain heavy weight of silence. A dazzling flicker 
and brilliance of light, yet the feeling of weight. 

Kate would sit alone, rocking on her veranda, pretending to 
sew. Silently appears an old man with one egg held up mys- 
teriously, like some symbol. Would the patrona buy it for five 
centavos? La Juana only gives four centavos. All right. Whete is 
Juana? 

Juana appears from the p/axa with more purchases. The egg! 
The four centavos! Theaccount of thespendings. Extonces! Enton- 
ces! Luego! Luego! Ah, Nita, no tengo memoria! Juana could not 
read nor write. She scuffled off to the market with her pesos, 
bought endless little things at one or two centavos each, evety 
morning. And every morning there was a reckoning up. Ah! 
Ah! Where are we? I have no memory. Well then —ah- yes —I 
~ bought ocofe for three centavos! How much? How much, Nifia? 
How much is it now? 

It was a game which thrilled Juana to the marrow, reckon- 
ing up the cenzavos to get it just right. If she was a centfavo short 
in the change, she was paralysed. Time after time she would 
reappear. There is a centavo short, Nita! Ah, how stupid I am! 
But I will give you one of mine! 

“Don’t bother,’ said Kate. ‘Don’t think of it any more.’ 

“But yes. But yes!’ and away she limped in distraction. 

Till an hour later, loud cry from the far end of the house. 
Juana waving a scrap of greenery. 

“Mire! Nina! Compré perejil a un centavo —1 bought parsley for 
one cent, Is it right?’ 

Ij2 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

— 

oa Ss 
te E 
tt 

CASA DE LAS CUENTAS 153 

“It is right,’ said Kate. 

And life could proceed once mote. 

There were two kitchens, the one next the dining-room, be- 
longing to Kate, and the narrow little shed under the banana- 
trees, belonging to the servants. From her veranda: Kate 
looked away down to Juana’s kitchen shed. It had a black 
window-hole. ; 

Clap! Clap! Clap! Clap! Why, 1 thought Concha was at 
school! said Kate to herself. 

No! — there, in the darkness of the window-hole, was Con- 
cha’s swarthy face and mane, peering out like some animal 
from a cave, as she made the /ortillas. Tortillas are flat pancakes 
of maize dough, baked dry on a flat earthenware plate over the 
fire. And the making consists of clapping a bit of new dough 
from the palm of one hand to the other, till the or#/a is of the 
requisite thinness, roundness, and so-called lightness. 

Clap! Clap!Clap! Clap! Clap! Clap! Clap! It was as inevit- 
able as the tick of some spider, the sound of Concha making 
tortillas in the he&t of the morning, peering out of her dark 
window-hele. And some time after mid-day, the smoke would 
be coming out of the window-hole; Concha was throwing the 
taw /ortillas on the big earthen plate over the slow wood fite. 

Then Ezequiel might or might not stride in, very much the 
man, sezape poised over one shoulder and big straw hat jauntily 
curled, to eat the mid-day sortillas. If he had work in the fields 
at any distance, he would not appear till nightfall. If he ap- 
peared, he sat on the doorstep and the women served him his 
tortillas and fetched him his drink of water as if he was a king, 
boy though he might be. And his rough, breaking voice was 
heard in quiet command. 

Command was the word. Though he was quiet and gentle, 
and very conscientious, there was calm, kingly command in his 
voice when he spoke to his mother or sisters. The old male 
pterogative. Somehow, it made Kate want to ridicule him. 

Came her own meal: one of her trials. Hot, rather greasy 
soup. Inevitable hot, greasy, rather peppery rice. Inevitable 
meat in hot, thick, rather greasy sauce. Boiled ca/abacitas or 
egg-plant, salad, perhaps some dulce made with milk —and the 
big basket of fruit. Overhead, the blazing tropical sun of late 
May. 

154 THE PLUMED SERPENT : 

Afternoon, and greater heat. Juana set off with the girls and 
the dishes. They would do the washing up in the lake. Squat- 
ting on the stones, they would dabble the plates one by one, 
the spoons and the forks one by one in the filmy water of the 
lake, then put them in the sun to dry. After which Juana might 
wash a couple of towels in the lake and the girls might bathe. 
Sauntering the day away — sauntering the day away. 

Jestis, the eldest son, a queer, heavy, greasy fellow, usually 
appeared in the afternoon, to water the garden. But he ate his 
meals at the hotel, and really lived there, had his home there. 
Not that he had any home, any more than a vopilote had a 
home. But he ran the p/anta, and did odd jobs about the hotel, 
and worked every day in the year till half-past ten at night, 
eatning twenty-two pesos, eleven dollars, a month. He wore a 
black shirt, and his thick, massive black hair dropped over his 
low brow. Very near to an animal. And though, to order, he 
wore a black Fascisti shirt, he had the queer, animal jeering of 
the socialists, an instinct for pulling things down. 

His mother and he had a funny little intimacy of quiet and 
indifferent mutual taunting of one another. He would give her 
some money if she were in a strait. And there was a thin little 
thread of blood-bondage between them, Apart from that, com- 
plete indifference. 

Ezequiel was a finer type. He was slender and so erect that 
he almost curved backwards. He was very shy, farouche. Proud 
also, and mote responsible to his family. He would not go to 
work in an hotel. No. He was a worker in the fields, and he was 
proud of it. A man’s work. No equivocal sort of half-service 
for him. 

Though he was just a hired labourer, yet working on the * 
land he never felt he was working for a master. It was the land 
he worked for. Somewhere inside himself he felt that the land 
was his, and he belonged in a measure to it. Perhaps a lingering 
feeling of tribal, communal land-ownership and service. 

When there was work, he was due to eatn a peso a day. 
There was often no work: and often only seventy-five centavos 
a day for wage. When the land was dry, he would try to get 
work on the road, though this he did not like. But he earned ~ 
his peso a day. 

Often, there was no work. Often, for days, sometimes for 

CASA DE LAS CUENTAS 155 

weeks, he would have to hang about, nothing to do, nothing 
to do. Only, when the Socialist Government had begun giving - 
the peasants bits of land, dividing up the big haciendas, Eze- 
quiel had been allotted a little piece outside the village. He 
would go and gather the stones together there, and prepare to 
build a little hut. And he would break the earth witha hoe, his 
only implement, as far as possible. But he had no blood con- 
nection with this square allotment of unnatural earth, and he 
could not get himself into relations with it. He was fitful and 
diffident about it. There was no incentive, no urge. 

On workdays he would come striding in about six o’clock, 
shyly greeting Kate as he passed. He was a gentleman in his 

- barbarism. Then, away in the far recess, he would rapidly fold 

tortilla after tortilla, sitting on the floor with his back to the 
wall, rapidly eating the leathery things that taste of mortar, be- 
cause the maize is first boiled with lime to loosen the husk, and 
accepting anather little pile, served on a leaf, from the cook, 
Concha. Juana, cgok for the Ni#a, would no longer conde- 

~ scend to cook for her own family. And sometimes there was a 

mess of meat and chile for Ezequiel to scoop up out of the 
- 47 . * . 
eatthenware casserole, with his sorti//as. And sometimes there 

~ was not. But always, he ate with a certain blind, rapid indiffer- 

—_ 

ence, that also seems to be Mexican. They seem to eat even 
with a €ertain hostile reluctance, and have a strange indiffer- 
ence to what or when they eat. 

His supper finished, as a rule he was off again like a shot, to 
the plaza, to be among men. And the women would sit desul- 
torily about, on the ground. Sometimes Kate would come in at 
nine o’clock to an empty place — Ezequiel in the playa, Juana 
and Maria disappeared somewhere or other, and Choncha ly- 
ing asleep like a heap of rags on the gravel of the patio. When 
Kate called her, she would raise her head, stupefied and hope- 
less; then get up like a dog and crawl away to the gate. The 
strange stupor of boredom and hopelessness that was always 
sinking upon them would make Kate’s heart stand still with 
dread. 

The peculiar indifference to everything, even to one an- 
other. Juana washed a cotton shirt and a pair of cotton trousers 
for each of her sons, once a week, and there her maternal efforts 
ended. She saw hardly anything of them, and was often com- 

156 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

pletely unaware of what Ezequiel was doing, where he was 
working, or-at what. He had just gone off to work, no mote. 

Yet again, sometimes she had hot, fierce pangs of maternal 
protectiveness, wherf&the boy was unjustly treated, as he often 
was. And if she thought he were ill, a black sort of fatalistic 
fear came over her. But Kate had to rouse her into getting 
some simple medicine. 

Like animals, yet not at all like animals. For animals are 
complete i in their isolation and their snsouciance. With them it 
is not indifference. It is completeness in themselves. But with 
the family there was always a kind of bleeding of incomplete- 
ness, a terrible stupor of boredom settling down. 

The two girls could not be apart: they must always be run- 
ning after one another. Yet Concha continually teased the big- 
eyed, naive simpleton of a Maria. And Maria was always in 
teats. Or the two were suddenly throwing stones at one an- 
other. But with no real aim to hit. And Juana was abusing 
them with sudden vehemence, that flickered in a minute to 
complete indifference again. 

Queer, the savage ferocity with which the girls would sud- 
denly be throwing stones at one another. But queerer still, they 
always aimed /ust fo miss. Kate noticed the same in the savage 
attacks the boys made on one another, on the beach; hurling 
large stones with intense, terrible ferocity. But almost always, 
aiming with a curious cast in the eyes, just to miss. 

But sometimes not. Sometimes hitting with a sharp cut. And 
then the wounded one would drop right down, with a howl, 
as if dead. And the other boys would edge away, in a silent 
kind of dread. And the wounded boy would be prostrate, not 
really much hurt, but as if he was killed. 

Then, maybe, suddenly he would be up, with a convulsion 
of murder in his face, pursuing his adversary witha stone. And 
the adversary would abjectly flee. 

Always the same thing among the young: a ceaseless, end- 
less taunting and tormenting. ‘The same as among the Red In- 
dians. But the Pueblo Indians rarely lapsing from speech into 
violence. The Mexican boys.almost always. And almost always, 
one boy in murderous rage, pursuing his taunter till he had 
hurt him: then an abject collapse of the one hurt. Then, usu- 
ally, a revival of the one hurt, the murderous frenzy transferred 

CASA DE LAS CUENTAS 157 

to him, and the first attacker fleeing abjectly, in terror. One or 
the other always abject. 

They were a strange puzzle to Kate. She felt something must 
be done. She herself was inspired to help. So she had the two 
girls for an hour a day, teaching them to read, to sew, to draw. 
Maria wanted to learn to read: that she did want. For the rest, 
they began well. But soon, the regularity and the slight insist- 
ence of Kate on their attention made them take again that 
peculiar invisible jeering tone, something peculiar to the 
American Continent. A quiet, invisible; malevolent mockery, 
a desire to wound. They would press upon her, trespassing up- - 
on her privacy, and with a queer effrontery, doing all they 
could to walk over her. With their ugly little wills, trying to 
pull her will down. 

‘No, don’t lean on me, Concha. Stand on your own feet.’ 

The slight grin of malevolence on Concha’ s face, as she 
stood on her qpvn feet. Then: 

“Do you have lice in your hair, Nzfia?’ 

The question asked with a peculiar, subtle, Indian insolence. 

“No,” said Kate, suddenly angry. ‘And now go! Go! Go 
away from me! Don’t comé near me.’ 

They slunk out, abject. So much for educating them. 

Kate had visitors from Guadalajara — great excitement. But 
while the visitors were drinking tea with Kate on the veranda, 
at the other side of the patio, fullin view, Juana, Concha, Maria 
and Felipa, a cousin of about sixteen, squatted on the gravel 
with their splendid black hair down their backs, displaying 
themselves as they hunted iri each other’s hair for lice. They 
wanted to be full in view. And they were it. They wanted the 
basic fact of lice to be thrust under the noses of those white 
people. 

Kate strode down the veranda. 

‘If you must pick lice,’ she said in a shaking voice to Juana, 
shaking with anger, ‘pick them there, in your own place,where 
you can’t be seen.’ 

One instant, Juana’s black inchoate eyes gleamed with a 
malevolent ridicule, meeting Kate’s. The next instant, humble 
and abject, the four with their black hair down their backs 
slunk into the recess out of sight. 

But it pleased Juana that she had been able to make Kate’s 

158 THE PLUMED SERPENT a 

eyes blaze with anger. It pleased her. She felt a certain low 
power in herself. True, she was a little afraid of that anger. But 
that was what she wanted. She would have no use for a Nifa 
of whom she was not a bit afraid. And she wanted to be able 
to provoke that anger, of which she felt a certain abject twinge 
of fear. } 

Ah the dark races! Kate’s own Irish were near enough for 
her to have glimpsed some of the mystery. The dark races be- 
long to a bygone cycle of humanity. They are left behind in a 
gulf out of which they have never been able to climb. And on 
to the particular white man’s levels they never will be able to 
climb. They can only follow as servants. 

While the white man keeps the impetus of his own proud, 
onwatd march, the dark races will yield and serve, perforce. 
But let the white man once have a misgiving about his own 
leadership, and the dark races will at once attack him, to pull 
him down into the old gulfs. To engulf him again. . 

Which is what is happening. For the white man, let him 
bluster as he may, is hollow with misgiving about his own 
supremacy. 

Full speed ahead, then, for the debacle. 

But once Kate had been roused to a passion of revulsion 
from these lice-picking, down-dragging people, they changed 
again, and served her with a certain true wistfulness that could 
not but touch her. Juana cared really about nothing. But just 
that last thread of relationship that connected her with Kate 
and the upper world of daylight and fresh air, she didn’t want 
to break. No, no, she didn’t want finally to drive her Nifa 
away. No, no, the only one thing she did want, ultimately, was 
to serve her Néfa. 

But at the same time, she cherished a deep malevolent 
grudge against rich people, white people, superior people. 
Perhaps the white man has finally betrayed his own leadership. 
Who knows! But it is a thing of the brave, on-martching soul, 
and perhaps this has been betrayed already by the white man. 
So that the dark are rising upon him. 

Juana would come to Kate, telling her stories from the past. 
And the sinister mocking film would be on her black eyes, and 
her lined copper face would take on its reptile mask as she - 
would continue: ‘Usted sabe, Nifia, los gringos, los gringuitos llevan 

CASA DE LAS CUENTAS 159 

todo — you know, Nifia, the gringos and the gringuitos take away 
everything ...’ 

The gringos are the Americans. But Kate herself was included 
by Juana in the gringuitos: the white foreigners. The woman was 
making another sliding, insolent attack. 

“It is possible,” said Kate coldly. ‘But tell me what I take 
away from Mexico.’ 

“No, Nifia, no!’ The subtle smile of satisfaction lurked under 
_ the bronze tarnish of Juana’s face. She had been able to get at 
the other woman, touch the raw. ‘I don’t speak of you, Nifia!’ 
But there was too much protest in it. 

Almost, they wanted to drive her away: to insult her and 
drag her down and make her want to go away. They couldn’t 
help it. Like the Irish, they could cut off their nose to see their 
face. 

The backward races! ‘ 

At the same time there was a true pathos about them. Eze- 
quiel had worked fpr.a man for two months, building a house, 
when he was a boy of fourteen, in otder to get a serape. At the 
end of thetwo months, the man had put him off, and he had 
not got the serape: had never got it. A bitter disappointment. 

But, then, Kate was not responsible for that. And Juana 
seemed almost to make her so. 

A pe6ple without the energy of getting on, how could they 
fail to be hopelessly exploited. They had been hopelessly and 
cruelly exploited, for centuries. And their backbones were 
locked in malevolent resistance. 

‘But,’ as Kate said to herself, ‘I don’t want to exploit them. 
Not a bit. On the contrary, I am willing to give more than I 
get. But that nasty insinuating insultingness is not fair in the 
game. I never insult them. I am so careful not to hurt them. 
And then they deliberately make these centipede attacks on me, 
and are pleased when I am hurt.’ 

But she knew her own Irish at the game. So she was able to 
put Juana and the girls away from her, and isolate herself from 
them. Once they were put away, their malevolence subsided 
and they remembered what Kate wanted. While she stayed 
amiable, they forgot. They forgot to sweep the patio, they for- 
got to keep themselves clean. Only when they were shoved 
back, into isolation, did they remember again. 

160 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

The boy, Ezequiel, seemed to her-to have more honour than 
the women. He never made these insidious attacks. 

And when her house was clean and quiet and the air seemed 
cleaned again, the soul renewed, her old fondness for the 
family came back. Their curious flitting, coming and going, 
like birds: the busy clap — clap — clapping of /ortz//as, the ex- 
cited scrunching of tomatoes and chile on the mefate, as Juana 
ptepared sauce. The noise of the bucket in the well. Jesus, 
come to water the garden. 

The game, the game of it all! Everything they did must be 
fun, or they could not do it. They could not abstract them- 
selves to a routine. Never. Everything must be fun, must be 
vatiable, must be a bit of an adventure. It was confusion, but 
after all, a living confusion, not a dead, dreary thing. Kate re- 
membered her English servants in the English kitchens: so - 
mechanical and somehow inhuman. Well, this was the other 
extreme. / 

Here there was no discipline nor method at all. Although 
Juana and her brats really wanted to do the things Kate wished 
they must do them their own way. Sometimes Kate felt dis- 
tracted: after all, the mechanical lines are so much easier to fol- 
low. But as far as possible, she let the family be. She had to get 
used, for example, to the vagaries of her dining-table: a little 
round table that always stood on the veranda. At breakfast 
time it would be discreetly set under the p/antas by the salon; 
for dinner, at one o’clock, it would have travelled way down 
the veranda; for tea it might be under a little tree on the grass. 
And then Juana would decide that the Ni#a must take supper, 
two eggs, rancheros, in the dining-room itself, isolated at the 
corner of the long dining-table meant for fourteen people. 

The same with the dishes. Why they should, after washing 
up in the big bowls in the kitchen for several days, suddenly 
struggle way down to the lake with the unwashed pots in a 
basket on Concha’s shoulder, Kate never knew. Except for the 
fun of the thing. 

Children! But, then, not at all children. None of the wonder- 
ing insouciance of childhood. Something datk and cognisant 
in their souls all the time: some heavy weight of resistance. 
They worked in fits and starts, and could be very industrious; 
then came days when they lay about on the ground like pigs. 

CASA DE LAS CUENTAS 161 

At times they were merty, seated round on the ground in 
groups, like Arabian nights, and laughing away. Then sud- 
denly resisting even merriment in themselves, relapsing into 
the numb gloom. When they were busily working, suddenly, 
for no reason, throwing away the tool, as if resenting having 
given themselves. Careless in their morals, always changing 
their loves, the men at least resisted all the time any real giving 
of themselves. They didn’t want the thing they were pursuing. 
Tt was the women who drew them on. And a young man anda 
girl going down the road from the lake in the dark, teasing and 
poking each other in excitement, would startle Kate because of © 
their unusualness — the men and women never walked their sex 
abroad, as white people do. And the sudden, sexual laugh of the 
man, so strange a sound of pain and desire, obstinate reluc- 
tance, and helpless passion, a noise as if something tearing in 
his breast, was a sound to remember. 

Kate felt her household a burden. In a sense, they were like 
parasites, they wapted to live on her life, and pull her down, 
pull her down. Again, they were so-generous with her, so good 
and gentlé, she felt they were wonderful. And then once more 
she came up against that uftconscious, heavy, reptilian indiffer- 
ence in them, indifference and resistance. 

Her servants were the clue to all the native life, for her. The 
men alavays together, erect, handsome, balancing their great 
hats on the top of their heads and sitting, standing, crouching 
with a snake-like impassivity. The women together separately, 
soft, and as if Aidden, wrapped tight in their dark reboxos. Men 
and women seemed always to be turning their back on one an- 
other, as if they didn’t want to see one another. No flirting, no 
coutting. Only an occasional quick, dark look, the signal of a 
weapon-like desire, given and taken. 

The women seemed, on the whole, softly callous and deter- 
mined to go their own way: to change men if they wished. 
And the men seemed not to care very profoundly. But it was 
the women who wanted the men. - 

The native women, with their long black hair streaming 
down their full, fuddy backs, would bathe at one end of the 
beach, usually wearing their chemise, or a little skirt. The men 
took absolutely no notice. They didn’t even look the other 
way. It was the women bathing, that was all. As if it were, like 

2 

162 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

the charales swimming, just a natural part of the lake life. The 
men just left’ that part of the lake to the women. And the wo- 
men sat in the shallows of the lake, isolated in themselves like 
moor-fowl, pouring water over their heads and over their 
ruddy arms from a gourd scoop. a 

The quiet, unobtrusive, but by no means down-trodden 
women of the peon class. They went their own way, enveloped 
in their rebozos as in their own darkness. They hurried nimbly 
along, their full cotton skirts swinging, chirping and quick 
like birds. Or they sat in the lake with long hair streaming, 
pouring water over themselves: again like birds. Or they 
passed with a curious slow inevitability up the lake-shore, with 
a heavy red jar of water perched on one shoulder, one arm 
over the head, holding the rim of the jar. They had to carry all 
water from the lake to their houses. There was no town supply. 
Or, especially on Sunday afternoons, they sat in their door- 
ways de-lousing one another. The most resplendent be//es, with 
magnificent black wavy hair, were most thoroughly de-loused. 
It was as if it were a meritorious public act. 

The men were the obvious figures. They assert themselves 
on the air. They are the dominant. Usually they are in loose 
groups, talking quietly, or silent: always standing or sitting 
apart, rarely touching one another. Often a single man would 
stand alone at a street corner in his serape, motionless for hours, 
like some powerful spectre. Or a man would lie on the beach 
as if he had been cast up dead from the waters. Impassive, 
motionless, they would sit side by side on the benches of 
the p/aza, not exchanging a word. Each one isolated in his 
own fate, his eyes black and quick like a snake’s, and as 
blank, 

It seemed to Kate that the highest thing this country might 
produce would be some powerful relationship of man to man. 
Marriage itself would always be a casual thing. Though the 
men seemed very gentle and protective to the little children. 
Then they forgot them. 

But sex itself was a powerful, potent thing, not to be played 
with or paraded. The one mystery. And a mystery greater than 
the individual. The individual hardly counted. 

It was strange to Kate to see the Indian huts on the shore, 
little holes built of straw or corn-stalks, with half-naked child- 

* 

CASA DE LAS CUENTAS 163 

ren squatting on the naked earth floor, and a lousy woman- 
squalor around, a litter of rags and bones, and a sharp smell of 
human excrement. The people have no noses. And standing 
silent and erect not far from the hole of the doorway, the man, 

handsome and impassive. How could it be, that such a fine- 
looking human male should be so absolutely indifferent, con- 
tent with such paltry squalor? 

But there he was, unconscious. He seemed to have life and 
passion in him. And she knew he was strong. No men in the 
world can carry heavier loads on their backs, for longer dis- 
tances, than these Indians. She had seen an Indian trotting 
down a street with a piano on his back: holding it, also, by a 
band round his forehead. From his forehead, and on his spine 
he carried it, trotting along. The women carry with a band 
round the breast. 

So there is strength. And apparentl , there is passionate are 
But no energy. Nowhere in Mexico is there any/sign of eee ys 
This is, as it were, switched off. 

Even the newMrtisan class, though it imitates the artisan 
class of the United States, has fo real energy. There are work- 
men’s clubs. The workmert dress up and parade a best girl on 
theit arm. But somehow it seems what it is, only a weak imita- 
tion. 

Kate’s family was increased, without her expecting it. One 
day there arrived from Ocotlan a beautiful ox-eyed girl of 
about fifteen, wrapped in her black cotton rebozo, and some- 
what towny in her Madonna-meeckness: Maria del Carmen. 
With her, Julio, a straight and fierce young man of twenty- 
two. They had just been married, and had come to Sayula for 
a visit. Julio was Juana’s cousin. 

Might they sleep in the patio with herself and the girls, was 
Juana’s request. They would stay only two days. 

Kate was amazed. Maria del Carmen must have had some 
Spanish blood, her beauty was touched with Spain. She seemed 
even refined and superior. Yet she was to sleep out on the 
ground like a dog, with her young husband. And he, so erect 
and proud-looking, possessed nothing in the world but an old 
serape. 

‘There are three spate odeoncisit said Kate. ‘They may 
sleep in one of those.’ 

| 
164 : THE PLUMED SERPENT 

The beds were single beds. Would they need more blankets? 
she asked Juana. 

No! They would manage with the one serape of Julio’s. _ 

The new family had arrived. Julio was a bricklayer. That is 
to say, he worked building the adobe walls of the little houses. 
He belonged to Sayula, and had come back for a visit. 

The visit continued. Julio would come striding in at mid- 
day and at evening; he was looking for work. Maria del Car- 
men, in her one black dress, would squat on the floor and pat 
tortillas. She was allowed to cook them in Juana’s kitchen hole. 
And she talked and laughed with the girls. At night, when 
Julio was home, he would lie on the ground with his back to 
the wall, impassive, while Maria del Carmen fondled his thick 
black hair. ° 

They were in love. But even now, he was not yielding to his 
love. 

She wanted to go back to Ocotlan, where she was at home, 
and more a sefiorita than here in Sayula. But he refused. There 
was no money: the young ménage lived on about five Ameri- 
can cents a day. j 

Kate was sewing. Maria del Carmen, who didn’t even know 
how to put a chemise together, watched with great eyes. Kate 
taught her, and bought a length of cotton material. Maria del 
Carmen was sewing herself a dress! 

Julio had got work at a peso a day. The visit continued. Kate 
thought Julio wasn’t very nice with Maria del Carmen: his 
quiet voice was so overbearing in command when he spoke to 
her. And Maria del Carmen, who was a bit towny, did not take 
it well. She brooded a little. 

The visit stretched into weeks. And now Juana was getting 
a bit tired of her relative. 

But Julio had got a bit of money. He had rented a little one- 
room adobe house, at one peso fifty per week. Maria del Carmen 
was going to move into her own home. 

Kate saw the new outfit got together. It consisted of one 
straw mat, three cooking-plates of earthenware, five bits of 
native crockery, two wooden spoons, one knife and Julio’ssold 
blanket, That was all. But Maria del Carmen was moving in. 

Kate presented her with a large old eiderdown, whose silk 
was rather worn, a couple of bowls, and a few mote bits of 

. 

DON RAMON AND DONA CARLOTA 165 

ctockery. Maria del Carmen was set up. Good! Good! Oh good! 
Kate heard her voice down the patio. I have got a coverlet! I have 
got a coverlet! 

In the rainy season, the nights can be very cold, owing to 
evaporation. Then the natives lie through the small hours Tike 
lizards, numb and prostrate with cold. “They are lying on the 
damp earth ona thin straw mat, with a corner of an old blanket 
to cever them. And the same terrible inertia makes them en- 
dure it, without trying to make any change. They could carry 
in corn husks or dry banana leaves for a bed. They could even 
cover themselves with banana leaves. 

But no! On a thin mat on damp cold earth they lie and 
tremble with cold, night after night, night after night, night 
after night. 

But Maria del Carmen was a bit towny. Oh good! Ob good! 
TPve got a coverlet! 

e 

oo” a x 

j 

wy 

CHAPTER x 

Don Ramon and Dona Carlota 

Katrvhad been in Sayula ten days before she had any sign 
from Don Ramon. She had been out in a boat on the lake, and 
had seen his house, round the bend of the western point. It was 
a reddish-and-yellow two-storey house with a little stone basin 
for the boats, and a mango grove between it and the lake. 
Among the trees, away from the lake, were the black adobe 
huts, two rows, of the peons. 

The hacienda bad once been a large one. But it had been irri- 
gated from the hills, and the revolutions had broken all the 
aqueducts. Only a small supply of water was available. Then \ 
Don Ramon had had enemies in the Government. So that a 
good deal of his land was taken away to be divided among the 
peons. Now, he had only some three hundred acres. The two 
hundred acres along the lake-shore were mostly lost to him. 
He worked a few acres of fruit land round the house, and ina 
tiny valley just in the hills he raised sugar-cane. On the patches 
of the mountain slope little patches of maize were to be seen. 

Z =e oe 
4 Ne 

166 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

But Dofia Carlota had money. She was from Torreon and 
drew still a good income from the mines. 

A mozo came with a note frotn Don Ramon: might he eo 
his wife to call on Kate? 

Dofia Carlota was a thin, gentle, wide-eyed woman, with a 
slightly startled expression, and soft, brownish hair. She was 
pure European in extraction, of a Spanish father and French 
mother: very different from the usual stout, over-powdered, 
ox-like Mexican matron. Her face was pale, faded, and without 
any make-up at all. Her thin, eager figure had something Eng- 
lish about it, but her strange, wide brown eyes were not Eng- 
lish. She spoke only Spanish — or French. But her Spanish was 
so slow and distinct and slightly plaintive, that Kate under- 
stood her at once. 

The two women understood one another quickly, but were 
a little nervous of one another. Dofia Carlota was delicate and 
sensitive like a Chihuahua dog, and with the same slightly pro- 
minent eyes. Kate felt she had rarely met a woman with sucha 
dog-like finesse, of gentleness. And the two women talked. 
Ramon, large and muted, kept himself in reserve. It was as if 
the two women rushed together to unite against his silence 
and his powerful, different significance. 

Kate knew at once that Dofia Carlota loved him, but with a 
love that was now nearly all wi//. She had worshipped him, 
and she had had to leave off worshipping him. She had had 
to question him. And she would never now cease from 
questioning, 

So he sat apart, a little constrained, his handsome head hang- 
ing a little, and his dark, sensitive hands dangling between his 
thighs. 

‘I had such a wonderful time!’ Kate said suddenly to him. 
“I danced a dance round the drum with the Men of Quetzal- 
coatl.’ 

‘T heard,’ he said, with a rather stiff smile. 

Dofia Carlota understood English, though she would not 
speak it. 

“You danced with the men of Quetzalcoatl!’ she said’ in 
Spanish, in a pained voice. ‘But, Sefiora, why did you do such 
a thing? Oh why?’ 

“I was fascinated,’ said Kate. 

< 
a 

DON RAMQGN AND DONA CARLOTA 167 

“No, you must not be fascinated. No! No! It is not good. I 
tell you. I am so sorry my husband interests himself in this 
thing. Iam so sorry.’ 

Juana was bringing a bottle of vermouth: all that Kate had 
to offer her visitors, in the morning. 

“You went to see your boys in the United States?’ said Kate 
to Dofia Carlota. ‘How were they?’ 

“Oh, better, thank you. They are well; that is, the younger 
is very delicate.’ 

“You didn’t bring him home?’ 

“No! No! I think they are better at school. Here — here - 
there are so many things to trouble them. No! But they will 
come home next month, for the vacation.’ i 

“How nice!’ said Kate. “Then I shall see them. They will be 
here, won’t they? — on the lake?’ 

“Well! —I am not sure. Perhaps for a little while. an see I 
am so busy i in, Mexico with my Cwna.’ 

‘What is a Cuna?’ said Kate; she only knew it was the 
Spanish for cradlé. 

It turned out to be a foundlings’ home, run by a few obscure 
Carmelite sisters. And Dofia Carlota was the director. Kate 
gathered that Don Ramén’s wife was an intense, almost 
exalted Catholic. She exalted herself in the Church, and in her 
work for the Cuna. 

“There are so many children born in Mexico,’ said Dofia 
Carlota, ‘and so many die. If only we could save them, and 
equip them for life. We do a little, all we can.’ 

It seemed the waste, unwanted babies could be delivered in 
at the door of the Cwna, like parcels. The mother had only to 
knock, and hand in the little living bundle. 

‘It saves so many mothers from neglecting their babies, and © 
letting them die,’ said Dofia Carlota. “Then we do what we 
can. If the mother doesn’t leave a name, I name the child. Very 

- often I do. The mothers just hand over a little naked thing, 

sometimes without a name or a rag to cover it. And we never 
ask.’ 

The children were not all kept in the Home. Only a small 
number. Of the others, some decent Indian woman was paid a 
small sum to take the child into her home. Every month she 
must come with the little one to the Cuna, to receive her wage. 

The Indians ate so very rarely unkind to children. Careless, 
yes. But rarely, rarely unkind. 

In former days, Dofia Carlota said, nearly every well-born 
lady in Mexico would receive one or more of these foundlings 
into her home, and have it brought up with the family. It was 
the loose, patriarchal generosity innate in the bosoms of the 
Spanish-Mexicans. But now, few children were adopted. In- 
stead, they were taught as far as possible to be carpenters or 
gardeners, or house-servants, or, among the girls, dress- 
makers, even school-teachets. 

Kate listened with uneasy interest. She felt there was so 
much teal human feeling in this Mexican charity: she was al- 

-most rebuked. Perhaps what Dofia Carlota was doing was the 
best that could be done, in this half-wild, helpless country. At 
the same time, it was such a forlorn hope. it made one’s heart 
sink. 

And Dofia Carlota, confident as she was in her good works, 
still had just a bit the look of a victim; a gentle, sensitive, 
slightly startled victim. As if some secret enemy drained her 
blood. 

Don Ramon sat there impassive, listening without heeding; 
solid and unmoving against the charitable quiver of his wife’s 
emotion. He let her do as she would. But against her work and 
against her flow he was in silent, heavy, unchanging opposi- 
tion. She knew this, and trembled in her nervous eagerness, as 
she talked to Kate about the Cana, and won Kate’s sympathy. 
Till it seemed to her that there was something cruel in Don 
Ram6n’s passive, masked poise. An impassive male cruelty, 
changeless as a stone idol. 

‘Now won’t you come and spend the day with me while I 
am here with Don Ram6n?’ said Dofia Carlota. ‘The house is 
very poor and rough. It is no longer what it used to be. But it 
is your house if you will come.’ 

Kate accepted, and said she would prefer to walk out. It was 
only four miles, and surely she would be safe, with Juana. 

‘I will send a man to come with you,’ said Don Ramon. ‘It 
might not be quite safe.’ 

“Where is General Viedma?’ asked Kate. 

“We shall try to get him out when you come,’ replied Dofia 
Carlota. ‘I am so very fond of Don Cipriano, I have known 

168 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

DON RAMON AND DONA CARLOTA 169 

him for many years, and he is the godfather of my younger 
son. But now he is in command of the Guadalajara division, he 
is not very often able to come out.’ 

“I wonder why he is a General?’ said Kate. ‘He seems to me 
too human.’ 

“Oh, but he is very human too. But he is a general; yes, yes, 
he wants to be in command of the soldiers. And I tell you, he 
is very strong. He has great power with his regiments. They 
believe in him, oh, they ‘believe i in him. He has that power, you 
know, that some of the higher types of Indians have, to make 
many others want to follow them and fight for them. You 
know? Don Cipriano is like that. You can never change him. 
But I think a woman might be wonderful for him. He has lived . 
so without any woman in his life. He won’t care about them.’ 

‘What does he care about?’ asked Kate. 

“Ah!” Dofia Carlota started as if stung. Then she Ansel 
quickly, involantarily at her husband, as she added: ‘I don’t 
know. Really, I don’t know.’ 

‘The Men of Quetzalcoatl,’ said Don Ramén heavily, with 
a little smfle. : 

But Dofia Carlota seemed to be able to take all the ease and 
the banter out of him. He seemed stiffand a bit stupid. 

‘Ah, there! There! There you have it! The Men of Quetzal- 
coat! — that is a nice thing for him to care about! A nice thing, 
I say,’ fluttered Dofia Carlota, in her gentle, fragile, scolding 
way. And it was evident to Kate that she adored both the men, 
and trembled in opposition to their wrongness, and would 
never give in to them. 

To Ramon it was a terrible burden, his wife’s quivering, 
absolute, blind opposition, taken in conjunction with her help- 
less adoration. 

A man-setvant appeared at nine o’clock one morning, to ac- 
company Kate to the hacienda, which was called Jamiltepec. He 
had a basket, and had been shopping in the market. An elderly 
man, with grey in his moustache, he had bright young eyes and 
seemed full of energy. His bare feet in the huaraches were almost 
black with exposure, but his clothes were brilliantly white. 

Kate was glad to be walking. The one depressing thing 
about life in the villages was that one could not walk out into 
the country. There was always the liability to be held up or 

170 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

attacked. And she had walked already, as far as OES in 
every direction, in the neighbourhood of the village, accom- 
panied usually by Ezequiel. Now she was beginning to feel a 
prisoner. 

She was glad, then, to be setting off. The morning was clear 
and hot, the pale brown lake quite still, like a phantom. People 
wete moving on the beach, in the distance tiny, like dots of 
white: white dots of men following the faint dust of donkeys. 
She wondered often why humanity was like specks in the 
Mexican landscape; just specks of life. 

They passed from the lake shore to the rough, dusty road 
going west, between the steep slope of the hills and the bit of 
“ flat by the lake. For almost a mile there were villas, most of 
them shut up fast, some of them smashed, with broken walls 
and smashed windows. Only flowers bloomed in masses above 
the rubble. 

In the empty places were flimsy straw huts of the natives, 
haphazard, as if blown there. By the road under the hill were 
black-grey adobe huts, like boxes, and fowls running about, 
and brown pigs or grey pigs spotted with black careered and 
grunted, and half-naked children, dark orange-brown, trotted 
or lay flat on their faces in the ‘oad; their little naked pos- 
tetiors hunched up, fast asleep. Already asleep again. 

The houses were many of them being re-thatched, or the 
tiled roofs were being patched by men who assumed a great 
air of importance at having undertaken such a task. They 
wete pretending to hurry, too, because the real rains might 
begin any day. And in the little stony levels by the lake, the 
land was being scratch-ploughed by a pair of oxen and a lump 
of pointed wood. 

But this part of the road Kate knew. She knew the fine villa 
on the knoll, with its tufts of palms, and the laid-out avenues 
that were laid out, indeed, as the dead are, to crumble back 
again. She was glad to be past the villas, where the road came 
down to the lake again, under big shady trees that had twisted, 
wriggly beans. On the left was the water, the colour of turtle- 
doves, lapping the pale fawn stones. At a water-hole of a 
stream in the beach, a cluster of women were busily washing 
clothes. In the shallows of the lake itself two women sat bath- 
ing, their black hair hanging dense and wet. A little farther 

gee 

5 

DON RAMON AND DONA CARLOTA 171 

along a man was wading slowly, stopping to throw his round 
net skilfully upon the water, then slowly stooping and gather- 
ing it in, picking out the tiny, glittery fish called charales. 
Strangely silent and remote everything, in the gleaming morn- 
ing, as if it were some distant period of time. 

A little breeze was coming from the lake, but the deep dust 
underfoot was hot. On the right the hill rose precipitous, 
baked and yellowish, giving back the sun and.the intense dry- 
ness, and exhaling the faint, desiccated, peculiar smell of 
Mexico, that smells as if the earth had sweated itself dry. 

All the time strings of donkeys trotted laden through the 
dust, their drivers stalking erect and rapid behind, watching | 
with eyes like black holes, but always answering Kate’s salute 
with a respectful Adids! And Juana echoed her laconic Adiésn! 
She was limping, and she thought it horrible of Kate to walk 
four miles, when they might have struggled out in an old hired 
motor-car, ow gone in a boat, or even ridden donkey-back. 

But to go on fggt! Kate could hear all her criada’s feelings in 
the drawled, sardonic Adidsn! Butthe man behind strode 
bravely and called cheerfully. His pistol was prominent in his 
belt. 

A bluff of yellow rock came jutting at the road. The road 

- wound round it, and into a piece of flat open country. There 

were fiélds of dry stone, and hedges of dusty thorn and cactus. 
To the left the bright green of the willows by the lake-shore. 
To the right the hills swerved inland, to meet the sheer, fluted 
sides of dry mountains. Away ahead, the hills curved back at 
the shore, and a queer little crack or niche showed. This crack 
in the hills led from Don Ramén’s shore-property to the little 
valley where he grew the sugar-cane. And where the hills ap- 
proached the lake again there was a dark clustering of mango- 
trees, and the red upper storey of the hacienda house. 

‘There it is!’ cried the man behind. ‘Jamiltepec, Sefiorita. 
La hacienda de Don Raméa!’ 

And his eyes shone as he said the name. He was a proud 
peon, and he really seemed happy. 

‘Look! How far!’ cried Juana. 

‘Another time,’ said Kate, ‘I shall come alone, or with Eze- 
quiel.’ : 

‘No, Nifa! Don’t say so. Only my foot hurts this morning.’ 

7 
172) THE PLUMED SERPENT 

“Yes. Better not to bring you.’ 

‘No, Nia! I like to come, vety much!’ 

The tall windmill fan for dtawing up water from the lake 
was spinning gaily. A little valley came down from the niche 
in the hills, and at the bottom a little water running. Towards 
the lake, where this valley flattened out, was a grove of banana- 
plants, screened a little from the lake breeze by a vivid row of 
willow-trees. And on the top of the slope, where the road ran 
into the shade of mango-trees, were the two rows of adobe 
huts, like a village, set a little back from the road. 

Women were coming up between the trees, on the patch 
from the lake, with jars of water on their shoulders; children 
wete playing around the doors, squatting with little naked pos- 
teriors in deep dust; and here and there a goat was tethered. 
Men in soiled white clothes were lounging, with folded arms 
and one leg crossed in front of the other, against the corner of 
a house, or crouching under the walls. Not by any means dolce 
far niente. They seemed to be waiting, eternally waiting for 
something. 

‘That way, Sefiorita!’ called the man with the basket, run- 
. ning to her side and indicating the smoother road sloping 
down between some big trees, towards the white gate of the 
hacienda. ‘We are here!’ 

Always he spoke with pleased delight, as if the place were 
a wondet-place to him. 

The big doors of the yagudn, the entrance, stood open, and 
in the shade of the entrance-way a couple of little soldiers were 
seated. Across the cleared, straw-littered space in front of the 
gates two peons were trotting, each with a big bunch of 
bananas on his head. The soldiers said something, and the two 
peons halted in their trotting, and slowly turned under their 
yellow-green load, to look back at Kate and Juana and the 
man Martin, approaching down the road. Then they turned 
again and trotted into the courtyard, barefoot. 

The soldiers stood up. Martin, trotting at Kate’s side again, 
ushered her into the arched entrance, where the ox-wagons 
rumbling through had worn deep ruts. Juana came behind, 
making a humble nose. 

Kate found herself in a big, barren yard, that seemed empty. 
There were high walls on the three sides, with sheds and 

= bd 
DON RAMON AND DONA CARLOTA 173 

stables. The fourth side, facing, was the house, with heavily- 
barred windows looking on to the courtyard, but with no door. 
Instead, there was another yagudn, ot passage with closed doors 
piercing the house. 

Martin trotted ahead to knock on the closed doors. Kate 
stood looking round at the big yard. In a shed in one corner, 
four half-naked men were packing bunches of bananas. A man 
in the shade was sawing poles, and two men in the sun were 
unloading tiles from a donkey. In a corner was a bullock- 
wagon, and a pair of big black-and-white oxen standing with 
heads pressed down, waiting. 

The big doors opened, and Kate entered the second yagudn. 
It was a wide entrance way, with stairs going up on one side, 
and Kate lingered to look through the open iron gates in front 
of her, down a formal garden hemmed in with huge mango- 
trees, to the lake, with its little artificial harbour where two 
boats were mgored. The lake seemed to give off a great light, 
between the dark walls of mango. 

At the back ofthe new-comers the servant woman closed 
the big doors on to the yard, then waved Kate to the stairs. 

“Pass this way, Sefiorita? 

A bell tinkled above. Kate climbed the stone stairs. And 
there above her was Dofia Carlota, in white muslin and with 
white shoes and stockings, her face looking curiously yellow 
and faded by contrast. Her soft brown hair was low over her 
ears, and she held out her-thin brownish arms with queer 
effusiveness. 

‘So you have come! And you have walked, walked all the 
way? Oh, imagine walking in so much sun and dust! Come, 
come in and rest.’ 

She took Kate’s hands and led her across the open terrace at 
the top of the stairs. 

‘It is beautiful here,’ said Kate. 

She stood on the terrace, looking out past the mango-trees 
at the lake. A distant sailing-canoe was going down the breeze, 
on the pallid, unreal water. Away across tose the bluish, 
grooved mountains, with the white speck of a village: far away 
in the morning it seemed, in another world, in another life, in 
another mode of time. 

‘What is that village?’ Kate asked. 

174 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘That one? That one there? It is San Ildefonso,’ said Dofia 
Carlota, in her fluttering eagerness. 

‘But it is beautiful here!’ Kate repeated. 

‘“Hermoso — si! Si, bonito!’ quavered the other woman un- 
easily, always answering in Spanish. 

The house, reddish and yellow in colour, had two short 
wings towards the lake. The terrace, with green plants on the 
terrace wall, went round the three sides, the roof above sup- 
ported by big square pillars that rose from the ground. Down 
below, the pillars made a sort of cloisters around the three 
sides, and in the little stone court was a pool of water. Be- 
yond, the rather neglected formal garden with strong sun and 
deep mango-shade. 

‘Come, you will need to rest!’ said Dofia Carlota. 

‘I would like to change my shoes,’ said Kate. 

She was shown into a high, simple, rather bare bedroom 
with red-tiled floor. There she changed into the shoes and 
stockings Juana had carried, and rested a little. 

As she lay resting, she heard the dulled thud-thud of the 
tom-tom drum, but, save the crowing of a cock in the distance, 
no other sound on the bright, yet curiously hollow Mexican 
morning. And the drum, thudding with its dulled, black in- 
sistence, made her uneasy. It sounded like something coming 
overt the horizon. 

She rose, and went into the long, high sa/oz where Dofia 
Carlota was sitting talking to a man in black. The salon, with 
its three window-doors open on to the terrace, its worn, red 
floor tiled with old square bricks, its high walls colour- 
washed a faint green, and the many-beamed ceiling white- 
washed; and with its bareness of furniture; seemed like part of 
the out-of-doors, like some garden-arbour put for shade. The 
sense, which houses have in hot climates, of being just three 
walls wherein one lingers for a moment, then goes away again. 

As Kate entered the room, the man in black rose and shook 
hands with Dofia Carlota, bowing very low and deferential. 
Then with a deferential sideways sort of bow to Kate, he 
vanished out of doors. 

“Comel’ said Dofia Carlota to Kate. ‘Are you sure now you 
are rested?’ And she pulled forward one of the cane rocking- 
chairs that had poised itself in the room, en route to nowhere. 

DON RAMON AND DONA CARLOTA 175 

\ 

“Perfectly!” said Kate. “How still it seems here! Except for 
the drum. Perhaps it is the drum that makes it seem so still. 
Though I always think the lake makes a sort of silence.’ 

“Ah, the drum!’ cried Dofia Carlota, lifting her hand with a 
gesture of nervous, spent exasperation. ‘I cannot hear it. No, 
I cannot, I cannot bear to heart it.’ 

And she rocked herself in a sudden access of agitation. 

“It does hit one rather below the belt,’ said Kate. ‘ What is it?’ 

“Ah, do not ask me! It is my husband.’ 

- She made a gesture of despair, and rocked herself almost in- 
to unconsciousness. 

“Is Don Ramon drumming?’ 

‘Drumming?’ Dofia Carlota seemed to start. “No! Oh no! 
He is not drumming, himself. He brought down two Indians 
from the north to do that.’ 

“Did he!’ said Kate, non-committal. 

But Dofia €arlota was rocking in a sort of semi-conscious- 
ness. Then she segmed to pull herself together. 

“I must: talk to somebody, I must!’ she said, suddenly 
straightening herself in her chairy her face creamy and creased, 
her soft brown hair sagging over her ears, her brown eyes 
oddly desperate. ‘May I talk to you?’ 

‘Do!’ said Kate, rather uneasy. 

‘Yo know what Ramon is doing?’ she said, looking at 
Kate almost furtively, suspiciously. 

‘Does he want to bring back the old gods?’ said Kate 
vaguely. * 

‘Ah!’ cried Dofia Carlota, again with that desperate, flying 
jerk of her hand. ‘As if it were possible! As if it were possible! 
The old gods! Imagine it, Sefiora! The old gods! Why, what 

‘are they? Nothing but dead illusions. And ugly, repulsive illu- 
sions! Ah! I always thought my husband such a clever man, so 
superior to me! Ah, it is terrible to have to change one’s idea! 
This is such nonsense. How date he! How dare he take such 
nonsense seriously! How does he dare!’ 

‘Does he believe in it himself?’ asked Kate. 

‘Himself? But, Sefiora —-’ and Dofia Carlota gave a pitiful, 
pitying smile of contempt. ‘How could he! As if it were pos- 
sible. After all, he is an educated man! How could he believe 
in such nonsense!’ 

se 
176 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘Then why does he do it?’ 

‘Why? Why?’ There was a tone of unspeakable weariness 
in Dofia Carlota’s voice. ‘I wish I knew. I think he has gone in- 
sane, as Mexicans do. Insane like Francisco Villa, the bandit.’ 

Kate thought of the pug-faced notorious Pancho Villa in - 
wonder, unable to connect him with Don Ramon. 

‘All the Mexicans, as soon as they rise above themselves, go 
that way,’ said Dofia Carlota. ‘Their pride gets the better of 
them. And then they understand nothing, nothing but their 
own foolish will, their will to be very, very important. It is 
just the male vanity. Don’t you think, Sefiora, that the begin- 
’ ning and the end of a man is his vanity? Don’t you think it was 
just against this danger that Christ came, to teach men a pro- 

per humility? To teach them the sin of pride. But that is why 
they hate Christ so much, and His teaching. First and last, 
they want their own vanity.’ 

Kate had often thought so herself. Her own final conclusion ~ 
about men was that ¢hey were the vanity of vanities, nothing 
but vanity. They must be flattered and made to feel great: 
Nothing else. 

‘And now, my husband wants to go to the other extreme 
of Jesus. He wants to exalt pride and vanity higher than God, 
Ah, it is terrible, terrible! And foolish like a little boy! Ah, 
what is a man but a little boy who needs a nurse and a mother! 
Ah, Sefiora, I can’t bear it.’ 

Dofia Carlota covered her face with her hand, as if swooning. 

“But there is something wonderful, too, about Don Ramén,’ 
said Kate coaxingly: though at the moment she hated him. 

“Wonderful! Ah yes, he has gifts. He has great gifts! But 
what are gifts to a man who perverts them!’ 

“Tell me what you think he really wants,”’ said Kate. 

‘Power! Just power! Just foolish, wicked power. As if there 
had not been enough horrible, wicked power let loose in this 
country. But he — he — wants to be beyond them all. He — he - 
he wants to be worshipped. To be worshipped! To be wor- 
shipped! A God! He, whom I’ve held, I’ve held in my arms! 
He is a child, as all men are children. And now he wants — to be 
worshipped —!’ She went off into a shrill, wild laughter, cover- 
ing her face with her hands, and laughing shrilly, her laughter 
punctuated by hollow, ghastly sobs. 

DON RAMON AND DONA CARLOTA 177 

Kate sat in absolute dismay, waiting for the other woman to 
recover herself. She felt cold against these hysterics, and exert- 
ed all her heavy female will to stop them. 

“After all,’ she said, when Dofia Carlota became quiet, her 
face in her hands, ‘it isn’t your fault. We can’t be responsible, 
even for our husbands. I know “hat, since my husband died, 
and I couldn’t prevent him dying. And then — then I learned 
that no matter how you love another person, you can’t really 
do anything, you are helpless when it comes to the last things. 
You have to leave them to themselves, when they want to die: 
or when they warit to do things that seem foolish, so, so fool- 
ish, to a woman.’ 

Dofia Carlota looked up at the other woman. 

“You loved your husband very much — and he died?? she 
said softly. 

_ ‘I didl\ove him. And I shall never, never love another man. 
I couldn’t. I’ve lost the power.’ 

“And why did hg die?’ 

“Ah, even that was really his own fault. He broke his own 
soul and sfirit, in those Irish politics. I knew it was wrong. 
What does Ireland matter, what does nationalism and all that 
rubbish matter, really! And revolutions! They are so, so stupid 
and vieux jeu. Ah! It would have been so much better if Joachim 
had beew content to live his life in peace, with me. It could be 
so jolly, so lovely. And I tried and tried and tried with him. 
But it was no good. He wanted to kill himself with that beastly 
Irish business, and I tried in vain to prevent him.’ 

Dofia Carlota stared slowly at Kate. 

‘As a woman must tty to prevent a man, when he is going 
wrong,’ she said. ‘As I try to prevent Ramon. As he will get 
himself killed, as surely as they all do, down to Francisco Villa. 
And when they are dead, what good is it all?’ 

‘When they are dead,’ said Kate, ‘then you know it’s no 
good.’ 

‘You do! Oh, Sefiora, if you think you can help me with 
Ramén, do help me, do! For it means the death either of me or 
him. And I shall die, though he is wrong. Unless he gets 
killed.’ 

‘Tell me what he wants to do,’ said Kate. ‘What does he 
think he wants to do, anyhow? — Like my husband thought he 

178 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

wanted to make a free Ireland and a great Irish people. But I 
knew all the time, the Irish aren’t a great people any more, and 
you can’t make them free. Théy are only good at destroying — 
just mere stupid destroying. How can you make a people free, 
if they aren’t free? If something inside them compels them to 
go on destroying!’ 

‘I know! I know! And that is Ram6én. He wants to destroy 
even Jesus and the Blessed Virgin, for this people. Imagine it! 
To destroy Jesus and the Blessed Virgin! the last thing they’ve 
got!’ ; 

‘But what does he say himself, that he wants to do?’ 

‘He says he wants to make a new connection between the 
people and God. He says himself, God is always God. But man 
loses his connection with God. And then he can never recover 
it again, unless some new Saviour comes to give him his new 
connection. And every new connection is different from the 
last, though God is always God. And now, Ramon says, the 
people have lost God. And the Saviour cannot lead them to 
Him anymore. There must be a new Saviour with a new vision. 
But ah, Senora, that is not true for me. God is love, and if 
Ramon would only submit to love, he would know that he 
had found God. But he is perverse. Ah, if we could be to- 
gether, quietly loving, and enjoying the beautiful world, and 
waiting in the love of God! Ah, Sefiora, why, why, why can’t he see 
it? Oh, why can’t he see it! Instead of doing all these ~ 

The tears came to Dofia Carlota’s eyes, and spilled over her 
cheeks. Kate also was in tears, mopping her face: 

“It’s no good!’ she said, sobbing. “I know it’s no good, no 
matter what we do. They don’t want to be happy and peaceful. 
They want this strife and these other false, horrible connec- 
tions. It’s no good whatever we do! That’s what’s so-bitter, so 
bitter!’ 

The two women sat in their bent-wood rocking-chairs and 
just sobbed. And as they sobbed, they heard a step coming 
along the terrace, the faint swish of the sandals of the people. 

It was Don Ramon, drawn unconsciously by the emotional 
disturbance of the two women. 

Dofia Carlota hastily dabbed het eyes, and her sniffing nose, 
Kate blew her nose like a trumpet, and Don Ramon stood in 
the doorway. 

a 

DON RAMON AND DONA CARLOTA 179 

He was dressed in white, dazzling, in the costume of the 
peons, the white blouse jacket and the white, wide pantaloon 
trousers. But the white was linen, slightly starched, and bril- 
liant, almost unnatural in its whiteness. From under his blouse, 
in front, hung the ends of a narrow woollen sash, white, with 
blue and black bars, and a fringe of scarlet. And on his naked 
feet were the plaited Awaraches, of blue and black strips of 
leather, with thick, red-dyed soles. His loose trousets were 
bound round the ankles with blue, red, and black woollen 
braids. 

Kate glanced at him as he stood in the sun, so dazzingly 
white, that his black hair and dark face looked like a hole in the 
atmosphere. He came forward, the ends of his sash swinging 
against his thighs, his sandals slightly swishing. 

“I am pleased to see you,’ he said, shaking hands with Kate. 
“How did you come?’ 

He dropped nto a chair, and sat quite still. The two women 
hung their heads, hiding their faces. The presence of the man 
seemed to put theff emotion out of-joint. He ignored all the 
signs of their discomfort, overlooking i it with a powerful will. 
There was a certain strength in his presence. They all cheered 

‘up a bit. 

“You didn’t know my husband had become one of the 
people =a real peon-— a Sefior Peon, like Count Tolstoy be- 
came a Scior SVS Bae said Dofia Carlota; with an attempt at 
raillery. 

‘Anyway it suits him,’ said Kate. 

‘There!’ said Don Ramon. “Give the devil his dues.’ 

But there was something unyielding, unbending about him. 
He laughed and spoke to the women only from a surface self. 
Underneath, powerful and inscrutable, he made no connection 
with them. 

So it was at lunch. There was a flitting conversation, with 
intervals of silence. It was evident that Ramon was thinking in 
another world, in the silence. And the ponderous stillness of 
his will, working in another sphere, made the women feel over- 
shadowed. 

‘The Sefiora is like me, Ramon,’ said Dofia Carlota. ‘She 
cannot bear the sound of that drum. Must it play any more this 
afternoon?’ 

There was a moment’s pause, before he answered: 

‘After four o’clock only. : 

‘Must we have that noise to-day?’ Carlota persisted. « 

‘Why not to-day like other days!’ he said. But a certain dark- 
ness was on his brow, and it was evident he wanted to leave 
the presence of the two women. 

‘Because the Sefiora is here: and I am here: and we neither 
of us like it. And to-morrow the Sefiora will not be here, and I 
shall be gone back to Mexico. So why not spare us to-day! 
Surely you can show us this consideration.’ 

Ramon looked at her, and then at Kate. There was anger in 
his eyes. And Kate could almost feel, in his powerful chest, 
the big heart swelling with a suffocation of anger. Both women 
kept mum. But it pleased them, anyhow, that they could make’ 
him angry. 

“Why not row with Mrs Leslie on the lake!’ he said, with 
quiet control. 

But under his dark brows was a level, indignant anger. 

“We may not want to,’ said Carlota. 

Then he did what Kate had not known anyone to do before. 
He withdrew his consciousness away from them as they all 
three sat at table, leaving the two women, as it were, seated 
outside a closed door, with nothing more happening. Kate felt 
for the time startled and forlorn, then a slow anger burned in 
her warm ivory cheek. 

“Oh, yes,’ she said. ‘I can’start home before then.’ 

“No! No!’ said Dofia Carlota, with a Spanish wail. ‘Don’t 
leave me. Stay with me till evening, and help me to amuse Don 
Cipriano, He is coming to supper.’ 

180 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

CHAPTER XI 

Lords of the Day and Night 

W.HEN lunch was over, Ramén went to his room, to sleep for 
an hour. It was a hot, still afternoon. Clouds were standing 
erect and splendid, at the west end of the lake, like messengers. 
Ramon went into his room and closed the window-doors and 

A ong 

ae 

+ 

LORDS OF THE DAY AND NIGHT 181 

the shutters, till it was quite dark, save for yellow pencils of 
light that stood like substance on the darkness, from the cracks 
of the shutters. 

He took off his clothes, and in the darkness thrust his 
clenched fists upwards above his head, in a terrible tension of 
stretched, upright prayer. In his eyes was only darkness, and 
slowly the darkness revolved in his brain, too, till he was 
mindless. Only a powerful will stretched itself and quivered 
from his spine in an immense tension of prayer. Stretched the 
invisible bow of the body in the darkness with inhuman ten- 
sion, erect, till the arrows of the soul, mindless, shot to the 
mark, and the prayer reached its goal. 

Then, suddenly, the clenched and quivering arms dropped, 
the body relaxed into softness. The man had reached his 
strength again. He had broken the cords of the world, and was 
free in the other strength. — 

Softly, delicately, taking great care not to think, not to re- 
“member, not to disturb the poisonous snakes of mental con- 
sciousness, he picked up a thin, fine blanket, wrapped it round 
him, and lay down on the pile of mats on the floor. In an in- 
stant he was asleep. 

He slept in complete oblivion for about an hour. Then sud- 
denly he opened his eyes wide. He saw the velvety darkness, 
and the pencils of light gone frail. The sun had moved. Listen- 
ing, there seemed nota sound in the world: there was no world. 

Then he began to hear. He heard the faint rumble of an Ox- 
wagon: then leaves in a wind: then a faint tapping noise: 
then the creak of some bird calling. 

He rose and quickly dressed in the dark, and threw open the 
doors. It was mid-afternoon, with a hot wind blowing, and 
clouds reared up dark and bronze in the west, the sun hidden. 
But the rain would not fall yet. He took a big straw hat and 
balanced it on his head. It had a round crest of black and white 
and blue feathers, like an eye, or a sun, in front. He heard the 
low sound of women talking. Ah, the strange woman! He had 
forgotten her. And Carlota! Carlota was here! He thought of 
her for a moment, and of her curious opposition. Then, before 
he could be angry, he lifted his breast again in the black, mind- 
less prayer, his eyes went dark, and the sense of opposition left 
him. 

182 THE PLUMED SERPENT ‘ 

He went quickly, driftingly along the terrace to the stone 
stairs that led down to the inner entrance-way. Going through 
to the courtyard, he saw two men packing bales of bananas 
upon donkeys, under a shed. The soldiers were sleeping in the 
zagudn. Through the open doors, up the avenue of trees, he 
could see an ox-wagon slowly retreating. Within the courtyard - 
there was the sharp ringing of metal hammered on an anvil. It 
came from a corner whete was a smithy, where a man anda 
boy were working. In another shed a carpenter was planing 
wood. 

Don Ramén stood a moment to look around. This was his 
own world. His own spirit was spread over it like a soft, 
nourishing shadow, and the silence of his own power gave it 
peace. 

The men working were almost instantly aware of his pre- 
sence. One after the other the dark, hot faces glanced up at him, 
and glanced away again. They were men, and his presence was 
wonderful to them; but they were afraid to approach him, 
even by staring at him. They worked the quicker for having 
seen him, as if it gave them new life. 

He went across to the smithy, where the boy was blowing 
the old-fashioned bellows, and the man was hammering a piece 
of metal, with quick, light blows. The man worked on without 
lifting his head, as the patron drew near. 

“It is the bird?’ said Ramon, standing watching the piece of 
metal, now cold upon the anvil. 

“Yes, Patron! It is the bird. Is it right?’ And the man looked 
up with black, bright, waiting eyes. 

The smith lifted with the tongs the black, flat, tongue-shaped 
piece of metal, and Ramon looked at it a long time. 

_ ‘I put the wings on after,’ said the smith. 

Ramon traced with his dark, sensitive hand an imaginary 
line, outside the edge of the iron. Three times he did it. And 
the movement fascinated the smith. 

‘A little more slender — so!’ said Ramon. 

“Yes, Patron! Yes! Yes! I understand,’ said the man eagerly. 

“And the rest?’ 

“Here it is!” The man pointed to two hoops of iron, one 
smaller than the other, and to some flat discs of iron, triangular 
in shape. 

| ae LORDS OF THE DAY AND NIGHT 183 

_ ‘Lay them on the ground.’ 

The man put the hoops on the ground, one within the other. 
Then, taking the triangular discs, he placed them with quick, 
sensitive hands, so that their bases were upon the outer citcle, 
and their apices touched the inner. There were seven. And thus 
they made a seven-pointed sun of the space inside. 

“Now the bird,’ said Ramon. 

The man quickly took the long piece of iron: it was the rudi- 
mentary form of a bird, with two feet, but, as yet without 
‘wings. He placed it in the centre of the inner circle, so that the 
feet touched the circle and the crest of the head touched 
opposite. 

“So! It fits,’ said the man. 

Ramon stood looking at the big iron symbol on the ground. 
He heard the doors of the inner entrance: Kate and Carlota 
walking across the courtyard. 

“I take it away?’ asked the workman quickly., 

‘Never mind,’ Ramon answered quietly. 

Kate stood and4tared at the great wreath of iron on the 

ground. é 
‘What is it?’ she asked brightly. 

‘The bird within the sun.’ 

“Is that a bird?’ 

“When it has wings.’ 

‘Ah, yes! When it has wings. And what is it for?’ 

‘For a symbol to the people.’ 

“It is pretty.’ 

eo 

‘Ramon!’ said Dofia Carlota, ‘will you give me the key for 
the boat? Martin will row us out.’ 

He produced the key from under his sash. 

‘Where did you get that beautiful sash?’ asked Kate. 

It was the white sash with blue and brown-black bars, and 
with a heavy red fringe. 

‘This?’ he said. ‘We wove it here.’ 

‘And did you make the sandals too?’ 

‘Yes! They were made by Manuel. Later I will show you.’ 

‘Oh, I should like to see! — They are beautiful, don’t you 
think, Dofia Carlota?’ 

‘Yes! Yes! It is true. But whether beautiful things are wise 

IS “ 
Leek 
v 

things, I don’t know. So much I don’t know, Sefiora. Ay, so 
much! — And you, do you know what is wise?’ 

‘I?’ said Kate. ‘I don’t care very much.’ 

‘Ah! You don’t care! — You think Ramon is wise, to wear 
the peasants’ clothes, and the Awaraches?’ For once Dofia Car- 
lota was speaking in slow English. 

‘Oh, yes!’ cried Kate. ‘He looks so handsome! — Men’s 
clothes are so hideous, and Don Ramon looks so handsome in 
those!’ With the big hat poised on his head, he had a certain _ 
air of nobility and authority. 

‘Ah!’ cried Dofia Carlota, looking at the other woman with 
intelligent, half-scared eyes, and Ps 3 the key of the boat. . 
‘Shall we go to the lake?’ © 

The two women departed. Ramon, tion to himself, 
went out of the gate and across the outer yard, to where a big, 
barn-like building stood near the trees. He entered the barn, 
and gave a low whistle. It was answered from the loft above, 
and a trap-door opened. Don Ramon went up the steps, and 
found himself in a sort of studio and carpentet’s shop. A fattish 
young man with curly hair, wearing an artist’s blouse, and 
with mallet and chisels in his hand, greeted him. 

“How is it going?’ asked Ramon. 

“Yes — well - 

The artist was working on a head, in wood. It was larger 
than life, conventionalized. Yet under the conventional lines 
the likeness to Ramon revealed itself. 

“Sit for me for half an hour,’ said the sculptor. 

Ramon sat in silence, while the other man bent over his 
model, working in silent concentration. And all the time, 
Ramon sat erect, almost motionless, with a great stillness of 
repose and concentration, thinking about nothing, but throw- 
ing out the dark aura of power, in the spell of which the artist 
worked. 

“That is enough,’ he said at last, quietly rising. 

“But give me the pose before you go,’ said the artist. 

Ramon slowly took off his blouse-skirt, and stood with 
naked torso, the sash with its blue and black bars tight round 
his naked waist. For some moments he stood gathering him- 
self together. Then suddenly, in a concentration of intense, 
proud prayer, he flung his right arm up above his head, and 

184 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

LORDS OF THE DAY AND NIGHT 185 

stood transfixed, his left arm hanging softly by his side, the 
fingers touching his thigh. And on his face that fixed, intense 
look of pride which was at once a prayer. 

The artist gazed with wonder, and with an appreciation 
touched with fear. The other man, large and intense, with big 
dark eyes staring with intense pride, yet prayerful, beyond the 
natural horizons, sent a thrill of dread and of joy through the 
attist. He bowed his head as he looked. 

Don Ramon turned to him. 

“Now you!” he said. 

The artist was afraid. He seemed to quail. But he met 
Ram6n’s eyes. And instantly, that stillness of concentration 
came over him, like a trance. And then suddenly, out of the 
trance, he shot his arm aloft, and his fat, pale face took on an 
expression of peace, a noble, motionless transfiguration, the - 
blue-grey eyes calm, proud, reaching into the beyond, with 
prayer. And though he stood in his blouse, with a rather 
pudgy figure and curly hair, he ir the perfect stillness of 
nobility. o# 

“It is good! said Ramon, nt his head. 

The artist suddenly changed; Ramon held out his two hands; - 
the artist took them in his two hands. Then he lifted Ramon’s 

. right hand and placed the back of it on his brow. 

‘ Adiés!’ said Ramon, taking his blouse again. 

‘ Adiés, Sefior!’ said the artist. 

And with a proud, white look of joy in his face, he turned 
again to his work. 

Ramon visited the adobe house, its yard fenced with cane 
and overshadowed by a great mango-tree, where Manuel and 
his wife and children, and two assistants, were spinning and 
weaving. Two little girls were assiduously carding white wool 
and brown wool under a cluster of banana-trees: the wife and 
a young maiden were spinning fine, fine thread. On the line 
hung dyed wool, red, and blue, and green. And under the shed 
stood Manuel and a youth, weaving at two heavy hand-looms. 

‘How is it going?’ called Don Ramon. 

‘Muy bien! Muy bien! answeted Manuel, with that curious. 
look of transfiguration glistening in his black eyes and in the 
smile of his face. ‘It is going well, very well, Sefor!’ 

Ramé6n paused to look at the fine white serape on the loom. 

1 my ee aa 
186 THE PLUMED SERPENT ; 

It had a zig-zag border of natural black wool and blue, in little 
diamonds, and the ends a complication of. blackish and blue 
diamond-pattern. The man was just beginning to do the centre 
— called the boca, the mouth: and he looked anxiously at the 
design that was tacked to the loom. But it was simple: the same 
as the iron symbol the smith was making: a snake with his tail 
in his mouth, the black triangles on his back being the outside 
of the circle: and in the middle, a blue eagle standing erect, 
with slim wings touching the belly of the snake with their tips, 
and slim feet upon the snake, within the hoop. 

Ramon went back to the house, to the upper terrace, and 
round to the short wing where his room was. He put a folded 
serape overt his shoulder, and went along the terrace. At the end 
of this wing, projecting to the lake, was a square terrace witha 
low, thick wall and a tiled roof, and a coral-scarlet bignonia 
dangling from the massive pillars. The terrace, or loggia, was 
strewn with the native palm-leaf mats, pefates, and there was a 
drum in one corner, with the drum-stick upon it. At the far 
inner cotner went down an enclosed stone staircase, with an 
iron door at the bottom. 

Ramon stood a while looking out at the lake. The clouds 
wete dissolving again, the sheet of water gave off a whitish 
light. In the distance he could see the dancing speck of a boat, . 
probably Martin with the two women. 

He took off his hat and his blouse, and stood motionless, 
naked to the waist. Then he lifted the drum-stick, and after 
waiting a moment or two, to become still in soul, he sounded 
the rhythmic summons, rather slow, yet with a curious urge in 
its strong-weak, one-two rhythm. He had got the old barbaric 
power into the drum. 

For some time he stood alone, the drum, or tom-tom, lifted 
by its thong against his legs, his right hand drumming, his face 
expressionless. A man entered, bareheaded, running from the 
inner terrace. He was in the white cotton clothes, snow white, . 
but with a dark serape folded on his shoulder, and he held a key 
in his hand. He saluted Ramon by putting the back of his right 
hand in front of his eyes for a moment, then he went down the 
stone stairway and opened the iron door. 

Immediately men were coming up, all dressed alike, in the 
white cotton clothes and the Awaraches, each with a folded 

i 
‘ LORDS OF THE DAY AND NIGHT 187 

serape over his shoulder. But their sashes were all blue, and 
their sandals blue and white. The sculptor came too, and Mira- 
bal was there, also dressed in the cotton clothes. 

There were seven men, besides Ramon. At the top of the 
stairs, one after another, they saluted. Then they took their 
serapes, dark brown, with blue eyes filled with white, along the 
edges, and threw them down along the wall, their hats beside 
them. Then they took off their blouses, and flung them on their 
hats. 

Ramon left the drum, and sat down on his own serape, that 
was white with the blue and black bars, and the scarlet fringe. 
The drummer sat down and took the drum. The circle of men 
sat cross-legged, naked to the waist, silent. Some were of a 
dark, ruddy coffee-brown, two were white, Ramon was of a 
soft creamy brown. They sat in, silence for a time, only the 
monotonous, hypnotic sound of the drum pulsing, touching 
the inner air. [hen the drummer began to sing; in the curious, 
small, inner voice, that hardly emerges from the circle, singing 
in the ancient falsetto of the Indians: , 

“Who Sleeps — shall wake! Who sleeps —- shall wake! Who 
treads down the path of the snake shall arrive at the place; in 
the path of the dust shall arrive at the place and be dressed in 
the skin of the snake — 

Onesby one the voices of the men joined in, till they wete all 
singing in the strange, blind infallible rhythm of the ancient 

_ barbaric world. And all in the small, inward voices, as if they 
were singing from the oldest, darkest recess of the soul, not 
outwards, but inwards, the soul singing back to herself. 

They sang for a time in the peculiar unison like a flock of 
birds that fly in one consciousness. And when the drum shud- 
dered for an end, they all let their voices fade out, with the 
same broad, clapping sound in the throat. 

There was silence. The men turned, speaking to one an- 
other, laughing in a quiet way. But their daytime voices, and 
their daytime eyes had gone. 

Then Ram6n’s voice was heard, and the men were suddenly 
silent, listening with bent heads. Ramon sat with his face lifted, 
looking far away, in the pride of prayer. 

‘There is no Before and After, there is only Now,’ he ae 
speaking in a proud, but inward voice. 

188 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘The great Snake coils and uncoils the plasm of his folds, 
and stats appear, and worlds fade out. It is no more than the 
changing and easing of the plasm. 

‘I always am, says his sleep. 

‘As a man in a deep sleep knows not, but is, so is the Snake 
of the coiled cosmos, wearing its plasm. 

‘As a man ina deep sleep has no to-morrow, no yesterday, 
nor to-day, but only zs, so is the limpid, far-reaching Snake of 
the eternal Cosmos, Now, and forever Now. 

‘Now, and only Now, and forever Now. 

‘But dreams arise and fade in the sleep of the Snake. 

‘And worlds arise as dreams, and are gone as dreams. 

‘And man is a dream in the sleep of the Snake. 
~ And only the sleep that is dreamless breathes I_ Am! 

‘In the dreamless Now, I Am. . 

‘Dreams arise as they must arise, and man is a dream 
arisen. 

‘But the dreamless plasm of the Snake is the plasm of a man, 
of his body, his soul, and his spirit at one. 

‘And the perfect sleep of the Snake I Am is the plasm of a 
, man, who is whole. 

“When the plasm of the body, and the plasm of the soul, and 
the plasm of the spirit are at one, in the Snake I Am. 

‘Iam Now. 

“Was-not is a dream, and shall-be is a dream, like two separ- 
ate, heavy feet. 

“But Now, I Am. 

‘The trees put forth their leaves in their sleep, and flowering 
emerge out of dreams, into pure I Am. 

“The birds forget the stress of their dreams, and sing aloud 
in the Now, Am! I Am! 

‘For dreams have wings and feet, and journeys to take, and 
efforts to make. 

“But the glimmering Snake of the Now is wingless and foot- 
less, and undivided, and perfectly coiled. 

Tei is thus the cat lies down, in the coil of Now, and the cow 
curves round her nose to her Belly: lying down. 

“In the feet of a dream the hare runs uphill. But when he 
pauses, the dream has passed, he has entered the timeless Now, 
and his eyes are the wide I Am. 

: 

LORDS OF THE DAY AND NIGHT 189 

“Only man dreams, dreams, and dreams, and changes from 
dream to dream, like a man who tosses on his bed. 

“With his eyes and his mouth he dreams, with his hands and 
his feet, with phallos and heart and belly, with body and spitit 
and soul, in a tempest of dreams. 

“And rushes from dream to dream, in the hope of the Periecs 
dream. 

“But I, I say to you, there is no dream that is perfect, for 
every dream has an ache and an urge, an urge and an ache. 

‘And nothing is perfect, save the dream pass out into the 
sleep, I Am. 

“When the dream of the eyes is darkened, and encompassed 
with Now. 

“And the dream of the mouth peaks in the last I Am. 

“And the dream of the hands is a sleep like a bird on the sea, 
that sleeps and is lifted and shifted, and knows not. 

“And the dreams of the feet and the toes touch the core oF 
the world, saa the Serpent sleeps. 

‘And the dreanfof the phallos reaches the great I Know Not. 

“And the dream of the body is the stillness of a lower in the 
dark. / 

‘And the dream of the soul is gone in the perfume ee Now. 

‘And the dream of the spirit lapses, and lays down its head, 
and is still with the Morning Star. 

“Fort each dream starts out of Now, and is accomplished in 
Now. 

‘In the core of the flower, the glimmering, wakeless Snake. 

‘And what falls away is a dream, and what accrues is a dream. 
There is always and only Now, Now and I Am.’ 

There was silence in the circle of men. Outside, the sound 
of the bullock-wagon could be heard, and from the lake, the 
faint knocking of oars. But the seven men sat with their heads 
bent, in the semi-trance, listening inwardly. 

Then the drum began softly to beat, as if of itself. And a 
man began to sing, in a small voice: 

The Lotd of the Morning Star 

Stood between the day and the night: 
As a bird that lifts its wings, and stands 
With the bright wing on the right 

And the wing of the dark on the left, 
The Dawn Star stood into sight. 

190 

2 

THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Lo! I am always here! 

Far in the hollow of space 

I brush the wing of the day 

And put light on your face. 

The other wing brushes the dark. 
But I, I am always in place. 

Yea, I am always here. I am Lord 

In every way. And the lords among men 
See me through the flashing of wings. 
They see me and lose me again. 

But lo! Iam always here 

Within ken. 

The multitudes see me not. 

They see only the waving of wings, 
The coming and going of things. 
The cold and the hot. 

But ye that perceive me between 
The tremors of night and the day, 
I make you the Lords of the Way 
Unseen. 

The path between gulfs of the dark and the steeps of the light; 
The path like a snake that is gone, like the length of a fuse to ignite 
The substance of shadow, that bursts and explodes into sight. 

Tam here undeparting. I sit tight 
Between wings of the endless flight, 
At the depths of the peace and the fight. 

Deep in the moistures of peace, 

And. far down the muzzle of the fight 

You shall find me, who am neither increase 
Nor destruction, different quite. 

Tam far beyond 

~ The horizons of love and strife. 

Like a star, like a pond 
That washes the lords of life. 

¢ 

‘Listen!’ said Ramon, in the stillness. ‘We will be masters 
among men, and lords among men. But lords of men and mas- 
ters of men we will not be. Listen! We are lords of the night. 
Lords of the day and night. Sons of the Morning Star, sons of 
the Evening Star. Men of the Morning and the’ Evening Star. 

‘We are not lords of men: how can men make us lords? Nor 
are we masters of men, for men ate not wotth it. 

“But Iam the Morning and the Evening Star, and lord of the 

a 

LORDS OF THE DAY AND NIGHT 191 

day and the night. By the power that is put in my left hand, and 
the power that I grasp in my right, I am lord of the two 
ways. 

“And my flower on earth is the jasmine flower, and in 
heaven the Hower Hesperus. 

‘I will not command you, nor serve you, for the snake goes 
crooked to his own house. 

“Yet I will be with you, so you depart not from yourselves. 

‘There is no giving, and no taking. When the fingers that 
give touch the fingers that receive, the Morning Star shines at 
once, from the contact, and the jasmine gleams between the 
hands. And thus there is neither giving nor taking, nor hand 
that proffers nor hand that receives, but the star between them 
is all, and the dark hand and the light hand are invisible on each 
side. The jasmine takes the giving and the receiving in her cup, 
and the scent of the oneness is fragrant on the air. 

‘Think neither to give nor to receive, only let the jasmine 
flower. 

‘Let nothing spfll from you in CaO: let nothing be reived 
from you.* 

‘And reive nothing away? Not even the scent from the rose, 
nor the juice from the pomegranate, nor the warmth from the 
fire. 

“But gay to the rose: Lo! I take you away from yout tree, 
and your breath is in my nostrils, and my breath is warm in 
your depths. Let it be a sacrament between us. 

‘And beware when you break the pomegranate; it is sunset 
you take in your hands. Say: lam coming, come thou. Let the 
Evening Star stand between us. 

‘And when the fire burns up and the wind is cold and you 
spread your hands to the blaze, listen to the flame saying: Ah! 
Is it thou? Comest thou to me? Lo, I was going the longest 
journey, down the path of the greatest snake. But since thou 
comest to me, I come to thee. And where thou fallest into my 
hands, fall I into thine, and jasmine flowers on the burning 
bush between us. Our meeting is the burning bush, whence the 
jasmine flowers. 

‘Reive nothing away, and let nothing be reived from you. 
For reiver and bereaved alike break the root of the j jasmine 
flower, and spit upon the Evening Star. 

192 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘Take nothing, to say: I have :¢/ For you can possess nothing, 
not even peace. 

‘Nought is possessible, neither gold, nor land, nor love, nor 
life, nor peace, nor even sorrow nor death, nor yet salvation. 

‘Say of nothing: It is mine. 

“Say only: It is with me. 

‘For the gold that is with thee lingers as a departing moon, 
looking across space thy way, saying: Lo! We are beholden of 
each other. Lo! for-this little ee to each other thou and I 
ate beholden. 

‘And thy land says to thee: ree my child of a far-off father! 
Come, lift me, lift me a little while, that poppies and wheat may 
blow on the level wind that moves between my breast and 
thine! Then sink with me, and we will make one mound. 

‘And listen to thy love saying: Beloved! Iam mown by thy 
sword like mown grass, and darkness is upon me, and the 
tremble of the Evening Star. And to me thou art darkness and 
nowhere. Oh thou, when thou risest up and goest thy way, 
speak to me, only say: The star rose between us. 

“And say to thy life: Am I thine? Art thou mine? Am I the 
blue.curve of day around thine uncurved night? Are my eyes 
twilight of neither of us, where the star hangs? Is my upper 
lip the sunset and my lower lip the dawn, does the star tremble 
inside my mouth? 

“And say to thy peace: Ah! risen, deathless star! Already the 
waters of dawn sweep over thee, and wash me away on the 
flood! 

‘And say to thy sorrow: Axe, thou art cutting me down! — 

“Yet did a spark fly from out of thy edge and my wound! 

“Cut then, while I cover my face, fdther « of the Star, 

‘And say to thy strength: Lo, the night is foaming up my 
feet and my loins, day is foaming down from my eyes and my 
mouth to the sea of my breast. Lo, they meet! My belly is a 
flood of power, that races in down the sluice of bone at my 
back, and a star hangs low on the flood, over a troubled dawn. 

“And say to thy death: Be it so! I, and my soul, we come to 
thee, Evening Star. Flesh, go thou into the night. Spirit, fare- 
well, ’tis thy day. Leave me now. I go in last nakedness now to 
the nakedest Star.’ 

_ 

. 

CHAPTER XIT 

The First Waters 

THE men had risen and covered themselves, and put on their 
hats, and covered their eyes for a second, in salute before Ra- 
mon, as they departed down the stone stair. And the iron door 
at the bottom had clanged, the doorkeeper had returned with 
the key, laid it on the drum, and softly, delicately departed. 

Still Ramon sat on his serape, leaning his naked shoulders on 
the wall, and closing his eyes. He was tired, and in that state of 
extreme separateness which makes it very hard to come back 
to the world. On the outside of his ears he could hear the 
noises of the Aacienda, even the tinkle of tea-spoons, and the 
low voice of women, and Iater, the low, labouring sound of a 
motor-cat stgiggling over the uneven road, then swirling 
triumphantly into the courtyard. 

It was hard to come back to these things. The noise of them 
sounded 6n the outside of his ears, but inside them was the 
slow, vast, inaudible roar 6f the cosmos, like in a sea-shell. It 
was hard to have to bear the contact of commonplace daily 
things, when his soul and body were naked to the cosmos. 

He wished they would leave him the veils of his isolation 
awhile. But they would not: especially Carlota. She wanted’ 
him to be present to her: in familiar contact. 

She was calling: ‘Ramon! Ramon! Have you finished? Ci- _ 
ptiano is here.’ And even so, in her voice was fear, and an over- 
riding temerity. 

He pushed back his hair and rose, and very quickly went 
out, as he was, with naked torso. He didn’t want to dress him- 
self into everyday familiarity, since his soul was unfamiliar. 

They had a tea-table out on the terrace, and Cipriano, in 
uniform, was there. He got up quickly, and came down the 
terrace with outstretched arms, his black eyes gleaming with 
an intensity almost like pain, upon the face of the other man, 
And Ramén looked back at him with wide, seeing, yet un- 
changing eyes. 

The two men embraced, breast to breast, and for a moment 
Cipriano laid his little blackish hands on the naked shoulders of 

4 

194 THE PLUMED SERPENT 3 

the bigger man, and for a moment was perfectly still on his 
breast. Then very softly, he stood back and looked at him, 
_ saying not a word. : 

Ramon abstractedly laid his hand on Cipriano’s shoulder, 
looking down at him with a little smile. 

‘Oué tal?’ he said, from the edge of his lips. “How goes it?” 

‘Bien! Muy bien!’ said Cipriano, still gazing into the other 
man’s face with black, wondering, childlike, searching eyes, as 
if he, Cipriano, were searching for Aimself, in Raméon’s face. 
Ramon looked back into Cipriano’s black, Indian eyes with a 
faint, kind smile of recognition, and Cipriano hung his head as 
if to hide his face, the black hair, which he wore rather long 
and brushed sideways, dropping over his forehead. 

The women watched in absolute silence. Then, as the two 
men began slowly to come along the terrace to the tea-table, 
Carlota began to pour tea. But her hand trembled so much, the 
teapot wobbled as she held it, and she had to put it down and 
clasp her hands in the lap of her white muslin dress. 

‘You rowed on the lake?’ said Ramon abstractedly, coming 
ap. 22° 

“It was lovely!’ said Kate. ‘But hot when the sun came.’ 

Ramon smiled a little, then pushed his hand through his 
hair. Then, leaning one hand on the parapet of the terrace wall, 
he turned to look at the lake, and a sigh lifted his shoulders 

‘unconsciously. 

He stood thus, naked to the waist, his black hair ruffled and 
splendid, his back to the women, looking out at the lake. 
Cipriano stood lingering beside him. 

Kate saw the sigh lift the soft, quiescent, cream-brown 
shoulders. The soft, cream-brown skin of his back, of asmooth 
pure sensuality, made her shudder. The broad, squate, rather 
high shoulders, with neck and head rising steep, proudly. The 
full-fleshed, deep-chested, rich body of the man made her feel 
dizzy. In spite of herself, she could not help imagining a knife 
stuck between those pure, male shoulders. If only to break the 
atrogance of their remoteness. 

That was it. His nakedness was so aloof, far-off and intan- 
gible, in another day. So that to ¢hink of it was almost a viola- 
tion, even to look at it with-prying eyes. Kate’s heart suddenly 
shrank in her breast. This was how Salome had looked at 

4 

ale 

THE FIRST WATERS . 195 

John. And this was the beauty of John, that he had had; like a 
pomegranate on a dark tree in the distance, naked, but not un- 
dressed! Forever still and clothe-less, and with another light 
about it, of a richer day than our paltry, prying, sneak-thieving 
day. 

- The moment Kate had imagined a knife between his shoul- 
ders her heart shrank with grief and shame, and a gteat stillness 
came over her. Better to take the hush into one’s heart, and the 
sharp, prying beams out of one’s eyes. Better to lapse away from 
one’s own prying, assertive self, into the soft, untrespassing 
self, to whom nakedness is neither shame nor excitement, but 
clothed like a flower in its own deep, soft consciousness, 
beyond cheap awareness. 

The evening breeze was blowing very faintly. Sailing- 
boats were advancing through the pearly atmosphere, far 
off, the sun above had a golden quality. The opposite shore, 
twenty miles away, was distinct, and yet there seemed an opal- 
escent, spume- ike haze in the air, the same quality as in the 
filmy water. Kate*could see the white specks of the far-off 
church towers of Tuliapan. 

Below, in the garden below thehouse, was a thick grove of 
mango-trees. Among the dark and reddish leaves of the man- 
gos, scarlet little birds were bustling, like suddenly-opening 
poppy-buds, and pairs of yellow birds, yellow underneath as 
yellow butterflies, so perfectly clear, went skimming past. 
When they settled for a moment and closed their wings, they 
disappeared, for they were grey on top. And when the cardinal 
birds settled, they too disappeared, for the outside of their 
wings was brown, like a sheath. 

‘Birds in this country have all their colour below,’ ii Kate. 

Ramon turned to her suddenly. 

‘They say the word Mexico means below this!’ he said, smil- 
ing, and sinking into a rocking-chair. 

Dofia Carlota had made a great effort over herself, and with 
eyes fixed on the tea-cups, she poured out the tea. She handed 
him his cup without looking at him. She did not trust herself to 
look at him. It made her tremble with a strange, hysterical 
anger: she, who had been married to him for years, and knew 
him, ah, knew him: and yet, and yet, had not got him at all. 
None of him. 

‘Give me a piece of sugar, Carlota,’ he said, in his quiet | 
voice. 

But at the sound of it, his wife stopped as if some hand had 
suddenly grasped her. 

‘Sugar! Sugar!’ she repeated abstractedly to herself. 

Ramon sat forward in his rocking-chair, holding his cup in 
his hand, his breasts rising in relief. And on his thighs the thin 
linen seemed to reveal him almost more than his own dark 
nakedness revealed him. She understood why the cotton pan- 
taloons were forbidden on the p/aza. The living flesh seemed 
to emanate through them. 

He was handsome, almost horribly handsome, with his 
black head poised as it were without weight, above his dark- 
ened, smooth neck. A pure sensuality, with a powerful purity 
of its own, hostile to her sort of purity. With the blue sash 
round his waist, pressing a fold in the flesh, and the thin linen 
seeming to gleam with the life of his hips and his thighs, he 
emanated a fascination almost like a narcotic, asserting his 
pure, fine sensuality against her. The strange, soft, still sure- 
ness of him, as if he sat secure within his own dark aura. And 
as if this dark aura of his militated against her presence, and 
against the presence of his wife. He emitted an effluence so 
powerful, that it seemed to hamper her consciousness, to bind 
down her limbs. 

And he was utterly still and quiescent, without desire, soft 
and unroused, within his own ambiente. Cipriano going the 
same, the pair of them so quiet and dark and heavy, like a great 
weight bearing the women down. 

Kate knew now how Salome felt. She knew now how John 
the Baptist had been, with his terrible, aloof beauty, inacces- 
sible, yet so potent. 

‘Ah!’ she said to herself. “Let me close my eyes to him, and 
open only my soul, Let me close my prying, see/ng eyes, and sit 
in dark stillness along with these two men. They have got 
more than I, they have a richness that I haven’t got. They have 
got rid of that itching of the eye, and the desire that works 
through the eye. The itching, prurient, knowing, imagining eye, 
I am cursed with it, Iam hampered up in it. It is my curse of 
curses, the curse of Eve. The curse of Eve is upon me, my 
eyes ate like hooks, my knowledge is like a fish-hook through 

196 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

THE FIRST WATERS 197 

my gills, pulling me in spasmodic desire. Oh, who will free me 
from the grappling of my eyes, from the impurity of sharp 
sight! Daughter of Eve, of greedy vision, why don’t these men 
save me from the sharpness of my own eyes!’ 

She rose and went to the edge of the terrace. Yellow as daffo- 

_ dils underneath, two birds emerged out of their own invisibil- 
ity. In the little shingle bay, with a small breakwater, where the 
boat was pulled up and chained, two men were standing in the 
water, throwing out a big, fine round net, catching the little 
silvery fish called charales, which flicked out of the brownish 
water sometimes like splinters of glass. 

‘Ramon!’ Kate heard Dofia Carlota’s voice. ‘Won’t you put 
something on?’ 

The wife had been able to bear it no mote. 

“Yes! Thank you for the tea,’ said Ramon, rising. 

Kate watched him go down the terrace, in his own peculiar 
silence, his sagdals making a faint swish on the tiles. 

“Oh, Sefiora Caterina!’ came the voice of Carlota. “Come 
and drink your té%. Come!’ Wty . 

Kate returned to the table, saying: 

“It seems so wonderfully peaceful here.’ 

‘Peaceful!’ echoed Carlota. ‘Ah, I do not find it peaceful. 
There is a horrible stillness, which makes me afraid.’ 

‘Do you come out very often?’ said Kate to Cipriano. 

“Yes. Fairly often. Once a week. Or twice,’ he replied, look- 
ing at her with a secret consciousness which she could not 
understand lurking in his black eyes. 

These men wanted to take her w2// away from her, as if they 
wanted to deny her the light of day. 

‘I must be going home now,’ she said. “The sun will be 
setting.’ é 

‘Ya va?’ said Cipriano, in his soft, velvety Indian voice, with 
a note of distant surprise and reproach. “Will you go already?’ 

“Oh, no, Sefiora!’ cried Carlota. ‘Stay until to-morrow. Oh, 
yes, stay until to-morrow, with me.’ 

‘They will expect us home,’ she said, wavering. 

‘Ah, no! I can send a boy to say you will come to-morrow. 
Yes? You will stay? Ah, good, good!’ 

And she laid her hand caressively on Kate’s arm, then rose 
to hurry away to the servants. 

198 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Cipriano had taken out his cigarette-case. He offered it to 
Kate. 5 

‘Shall I take one?’ she said. ‘It is my vice.’ 

‘Do take one,” he said. ‘It isn’t good to be perfect.” 

“It isn’t, is it?’ she laughed, puffing her cigarette. 

“Now would you call it peace?’ he asked with incomprehen- 
sible irony. 

‘Why?’ she cried. 

‘Why do white people always want peace?’ he asked. 

‘Surely peace is natural! Don’t all people want it? Don’t 
you?’ 

‘Peace is only the rest after war,’ he said. ‘So it is not more . 
natural than fighting: perhaps not so natural.’ 

‘No, but there is another peace: the peace that passes all 
understanding. Don’t you know that?’ 

‘I don’t think I do,’ he said. 

‘What a pity!’ she cried. . 

‘Ah!’ he said. ‘You want to teach me! But to me it is differ- 
ent. Each man has two spirits in him. The one is like the early 
morning in the time of rain, very quiet, and sweet, moist, no? — 
with the mocking-bird singing, and birds flying about, 
very fresh. And the other is ‘like the dry season, the steady, ~ 
strong hot light of the day, which seems as if it will never 
change.’ 

“But you like the first better,’ she cried. 

‘I don’t know!’ he replied. ‘The other lasts longer.’ 

‘Tam sure you like the fresh morning better,’ she said. 

‘T don’t know! I don’t know!’ He smiled a crumpled sort of 
smile, and she could tell he really did not know. ‘In the first 
time, you can feel the flowers on their stem, the stem very 
strong and full of sap, no? — and the flower opening on top 
like a face that has the perfume of desire. And a woman might 
be like that. — But this passes, and the sun begins to shine very 
strong, very hot, no? Then everything inside a man changes, 
goes dark, no? And the flowers crumple up, and the breast of 
a man becomes like a steel mirror. And he is all darkness inside, 
coiling and uncoiling like a snake. All the flowers withered up 
on shrunk stems, no? And then women don’t exist for a man. 
They disappear like the flowets.’ 

“And then what does he want?’ said Kate. 

2 
HK 
4s 

- 

THE FIRST. WATERS 199 

_ ‘I don’t know. Perhaps he wants to be a very big man, and 
master all the people.’ 
_ *Then why doesn’t he?’ said Kate. 

He lifted his shoulders. 

“And you,’ he said to her. ‘You seem to me like that morn- 
ing I told you about.’ 

‘Tam just forty years old,’ she laughed shakily. 

Again he lifted his shoulders. 

“It doesn’t matter,’ he said. ‘It is the same. Your body seems 
to me like the stem of the flower I told you about, and i in your 
face it will always be morning, of the time of the rains.’ 

“Why do you say that to me?’ she said, as an involuntary 
strange shudder shook her. 

“Why not say it!” he replied. ‘You are like the cool morning, 
very fresh. In Mexico, we are the end of the hot dry day.’ 

He watched her, with a strange lingering desire in his black 
eyes, and what seemed to her a curious, lurking sort of inso- 
lence. She dropped ber head to hide from him, and rocked in 
her chair. a 

‘I would like to marry you,’ he said;“if ever you will marry. 
I would like to marry you.’ , 4 

‘I don’t think I shall ever marry again,’ she flashed, her 

bosom heaving like suffocation, and a dark flush suffusing over 
her face, against her will. 

‘Whd knows!’ said he. 

Ramon was coming down the terrace, his fine white serape 
folded over his naked shoulder, with its blue-and-dark pattern 
at the borders, and its long scarlet fringe dangling and swaying 
as he walked. He leaned against one of the pillars of the terrace, 
and looked down at Kate and Cipriano. Cipriano glanced up 
with that peculiar glance of primitive intimacy. 

‘T told the Sefiora Caterina,’ he said, ‘if ever she wanted to 
marty a man, she should marry me.’ 

‘It is plain talk,’ said Ramon, glancing at Cipriano with the 
same intimacy, and smiling. 

Then he looked at Kate, with a slow smile in his brown eyes, 
and a shadow of curious knowledge on his face. He folded his 
arms over his breast, as the natives do when it is cold and they 
ate protecting themselves; and the cream-brown flesh, like 
age lifted the bosses of his breasts, full and smooth. 

7 

‘Don Cipriano says that white people always want peace,’ 
she said, looking up at Ramon with haunted eyes. “Don’t you ~ 
consider youtselves white people?’ she asked, with a slight, 
deliberate impertinence. 

‘No whiter than we are,’ smiled Ramon. ‘Not lily-white, at 
least.’ : 

‘And don’t you want peace?’ she asked. 

‘I? I shouldn’t think of it. The meek have inherited the 
earth, according to prophecy. But who am I, that I should envy 
them their peace! No, Sefiora. Do I look like a gospel of peace? 
— ot a gospel of war either? Life doesn’t split down that divi- 
sion, for me.’ 

‘I don’t know what you want,’ said she, looking up at him 
with haunted eyes. » 

‘We only half know ourselves,’ he replied, smiling with 
changeful eyes. ‘Perhaps not so much as half.’ 

There was a certain vulnerable kindliness about him, which 
made her wonder, startled, if she had ever realized what real 
fatherliness meant. The mystery, the nobility, the inaccessi- 
bility, and the vulnerable compassion of man in his separate 
fatherhood. 

* *You don’t like brown-skinned people?’ he asked her gently. 

‘I think it is beautiful to look at,’ she said. ‘But’? — with a 
faint shudder — ‘I am glad I am white.’ 

“You feel there could be no contact?’ he said, simply. 

‘Yes!’ she said. “I mean that.’ 

‘It is as you feel,’ he said. 

And as he said it, she knew he was more beautiful to her 
than any blond white man, and that, in a remote, far-off way, 
the contact with him was more precious than any contact she 
had known. 

But then, though he cast over her a certain shadow, he 
would never encroach on her, he would never seek any close 
contact. It was the incompleteness in Cipriano that sought her 
out, and seemed to trespass on her. 

Hearing Ram6n’s voice, Carlota appeared uneasily in a door- 
way. Hearing him speak English, she disappeared again, on a 
gust of anger. But after a little while, she came once more, with 
a little vase containing the creamy-coloured, thick flowers that 
are coloured like freesias, and that smell very sweet. 

200 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

= 

THE FIRST WATERS 201 

“Oh, how nice!’ said Kate. ‘They are temple flowets! In 
Ceylon the natives tiptoe into the little temples and lay one 
flower on the table at the foot of the big Buddha statues. And 
the tables of offering are all covered with these flowers, all put 
so neatly. The natives have that delicate oriental way of putting 
things down,’ 

“Ah!” said Carlota, setting the vase on the table. ‘I did not 
bring them for any gods, especially strange ones. I brought 
them for you, Sefiora. They smell so sweet.’ 

“Don’t they!’ said Kate. 

The two men went away, Ramon laughing. 

“Ah, Sefora!’ said Carlota, sitting down tense at the table. 
“Could you follow Ramon? Could you give up the Blessed Vir- 
gin? —I could sooner die!’ 

‘Ha!’ said Kate, with a little weariness. ‘Surely we don’t 
want any more gods.’ 

“More gods, Sefiora!’ said Dofia Carlota, shocked. ‘But how 
is it possiblef - Don Ramén is in mottal sin.’ 

’ Kate was silenw ~ 

‘And hg wants to lead more and mote people into the same,’ 
continued Carlota. ‘It is the sin of pride. Men wise in their own 
conceit! — The cardinal sin of men. Ah, I have told him. — Amd 
Iam so glad, Sefiora, that you feel as I feel. I am so afraid of 
American women, women like that. They wish to have men’s 
minds so they accept all the follies and wickedness of men. - 
You ate Catholic, Sefiora?’ 

‘I was educated in a convent,’ said Kate. 

‘Ah, of course! Of course! — Ah, Sefiora, as ifa woman who 
had ever known the Blessed Virgin could ever part from her 
again. Ah, Sefiora, what woman would have the heart to put 
Christ back on the Cross, to crucify him twice! But men, men! 
This Quetzalcoatl business! What buffoonery, Sefiora; if it 
were not horrible sin! And two clever, well-educated men! 
Wise in their own conceit!’ 

‘Men usually are,’ said Kate. 

It was sunset, with a big level cloud like fur overhead, only 
the sides of the horizon fairly clear. The sun was not visible. 
It had gone down in a thick, rose-red fume behind the wavy 
ridge of the mountains. Now the hills stood up bluish, all the 
ait was a salmon-red flush, the fawn water had pinkish ripples. 

x 

a oan 

Boys and men, bathing a little way along the shore, were the 
colout of deep flame. 

Kate and Carlota had climbed up to the axozea, the flat roof, 
from the stone stairway at the end of the terrace. They could 
see the world: the Aacienda with its courtyard like a fortress, the 
road between deep trees, the black mud huts near the broken 
highroad, and little naked fires already twinkling outside the 
doors. All the air was pinkish, melting to a lavender blue, and 
the willows on the shore, in the pink light, were apple-green 
and glowing. The hills behind rose abruptly, like mounds, dry 
and pinky. Away in the distance, down the lake, the two white 
obelisk towers of Sayula glinted among the trees, and villas 
peeped out. Boats were creeping into the shadow, from the 
outer brightness of the lake. 

And in one of these boats was Juana, being rowed, dis- 
consolate, home. 

202 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

CHAPTER XIII 

. The First Rain 

RamMON and Cipriano were out by the lake. Cipriano also had 
changed into the white clothes and sandals, and he looked bet- 
ter than when in uniform. 

‘I had a talk with Montes when he came to Guadalajara,’ 
Cipriano said to Ramén. Montes was the President of the 
Republic. 

“And what did he say?’ 

“He is careful. But he doesn’t like his colleagues. I think he 
feels lonely. I think he would like to know you better.’ 

‘Why?’ . 

“Perhaps that you could give him your moral support. Per- 
haps that you might be Secretary, and President when Montes’ 
term is up.’ ‘ 

‘I like Montes,’ said Ramon. ‘He is sincere and passionate. 
Did you like him?’ 

“Yes!” said Cipriano. ‘More or less. He is suspicious, and 
jealous for fear anyone else might want to share in his power. 

aed 
; THE FIRST RAIN 203 

~ He has the cravings of a dictator. He wanted to find out if I 
would stick to him.’ 

“You let him know you would?’ 

“I told him that all I cared for was for you and for Mexico.” 

“What did he say?’ 

“Well, he ts no fool. He said: ‘‘Don Ramén sees the world 
with different eyes from mine. Who knows which of us is 
right ? want to savemycountry from poverty and unenlighten- 
ment, he wants to save its soul. I say, a hungry and ignorant 
man has no place for a soul. An empty belly grinds upon itself, 
so does an empty mind, and the soul doesn’t exist. Don Ramén 
says, if a man has no soul, it doesn’t matter whether he is hun- 
gry or ignorant. Well, he can go his way, and I mine. We shall 
never hinder one another, I believe. I give you my word I 
won’t have him interfered with. He sweeps the patio and I 
sweep the street.”’’ 

“Sensible!4said Ramon. ‘And honest in his/convictions.’ 

Why should you not be Secretary in a few months’ time? 
And follow to the Presidency?’ said Cipriano. 

“You Know I don’t want that. I must stand in another 
world, and act in another world. — Politics must go their own 
way, and society must do as it will. Leave me alone, Cipriaffo. 
I know you want me to be another Porfirio Diaz, or something 

- like that. But for me that would be failure pure and simple.’ 

Cipriano was watching Ramon with black, guarded eyes, in 
which was an element of love, and of fear, and of trust, but 
also incomprehension, and the suspicion that goes with incom- 
prehension. 

‘IT don’t understand, myself, what you want,’ he muttered. 

‘Yes, yes, you do. Politics and all this socéa/ religion that 
Montes has-got is like washing the outside of the egg, to make 
it look clean. But I, myself, I want to get inside the egg, right 
to the middle, to start it growing into a new bird. Ay! Cip- 
riano! Mexico is like an old, old egg that the bird of Time laid 
long ago; and she has been sitting on it for centuries, till it 
looks foul in the nest of the world. But still, Cipriano, it is a 
good egg. It is not addled. Only the spark of fire has never 
gone into the middle of it, to start it. - Montes- wants to clean 
the nest and wash the egg. But meanwhile, the egg will go cold 
and die..The more you save these people from poverty and 

204 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

ignorance, the quicker they will die: like a dirty egg that you 
take from under the hen-eagle, to wash it. While you wash the 
egg, it chills and dies. Poor old Montes, all his ideas are Ameri- 
can and European. And the old Dove of Europe will never 
hatch the egg of dark-skinned America. The United States can’t 
die, because it isn’t alive. It is a nestful of china eggs, made of 
pot. So they can be kept clean. — But here, Cipriano, here, let 
us hatch the chick before we start cleaning up the nest.’ 

Cipriano hung his head. He was always testing Ramon, to 
see if he could change him. When he found he couldn’t, then 
he submitted, and new little fires of joy sprang up in him. But 
meanwhile, he had to try, and try again. 

‘It is no good, trying to mix the two things. At this stage e 
affairs, at least, they won’t mix. We have to shut our eyes and 
sink down, sink away from the surface, away, like shadows, 
down to the bottom. Like the pearl divers. But you keep bob- 
bing up like a cork.’ 

Cipriano smiled subtly. He knew well enough. 

“We’ve got to open the oyster of the cosmos, and get our 
manhood out of it. Till we’ve got the pearl, we are only gnats 

_on the surface of the ocean,’ said Ramon. 
My manhood ts like a devil inside me,’ said Cipriano. 

“It’s very true,’ said Ramon. ‘That’s because the old oyster 
has him shut up, like a black pearl. You must let him walk out.’ 

‘Ramon,’ said Cipriano, ‘wouldn’t it be good to be a ser- 
pent, and be big enough to wrap one’s folds round the globe 
of the world, and crush it like that egg?’ 

Ramon looked at him and laughed. 

‘T believe we could do that,’ said Cipriano, a slow smile curl- 
ing round his mouth. ‘And wouldn’t it be good?’ 

Ramon shook his head, laughing. 

“There would be ove good moment, at least,’ he said. 

“Who asks for more!’ said Cipriano. 

A spark flashed out of Ramon’s eyes too. Then he checked 
himself, and gathered himself together. 

‘What would be the good!’ he said heavily. ‘If the egg was 
crushed, and we remained, what could we do but go howling 
down the empty passages of darkness? What’s the good, 
Cipriano?’ 

Ramon got up and walked away. The sun had set, the night 

— Ses 
ae 
THE FIRST RAIN 205 

was falling. And in his soul the great, writhing anger was alive 
again. Carlota provoked it into life: the two women seemed to 
breathe life into the black monster of his inward rage, till it 
began to lash again. And Cipriano stirred it up till it howled 
with desire. 

“My manhood is like a demon howling inside me,’ said 
Ramon to himself, in Cipriano’s words. 

And he admitted the justice of the howling, his manhood 
being pent up, humiliated, goaded with insult inside him. And 
tage came over him, against Carlota, against Cipriano, against 
his own people, against all mankind, till he was filled with rage 
like the devil. 

His people would betray him, he knew that. Cipriano would 
betray him. Given one little vulnerable chink, they would 
pierce him. They would jeap at the place out of nowhere, like a 
tarantula, and bite in the poison. 

While ever there was one little vulnerable chink. And what 
man can be iffvulnerable? 

"He went upsta#ts ‘by the outer stairway, through the iron 
door at the side of the house, under the heavy trees, up to his 
room, and sat on his bed. The night was hot, heavy, and omin- 
ously still. 2 * 

“The waters are coming,’ he heard a servant say. He shut the 
doors of his room till it was black dark inside. Then he threw 
aside hfs clothing, saying: I put off the world with my clothes. 
And standing nude and invisible in the centre of his room he 
thrust his clenched fist upwards, with all his might, feeling he 
would break the walls of his chest. And his left hand hung 
loose, the fingers softly curving downwards. 

And tense like the gush of a soundless fountain, he thrust up © 
and reached down in the invisible dark, convulsed with pas- 
sion. Till the black waves began to wash over his conscious- 
ness, over his mind, waves of darkness broke over his memory 
overt his being, like an incoming tide, till at last it was full tide 
and he trembled, and fell to rest. Invisible in the darkness, he 
stood soft and relaxed, staring with wide eyes at the dark, and 
feeling the dark fecundity of the inner tide washing over his 
heart, over his belly, his mind dissolved away in the greater, 
dark mind, which is undisturbed by thoughts. 

He covered his face with his hands, and stood still, in pure 

206 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

unconsciousness, neither hearing nor feeling nor knowing, like 
a dark sea-weed deep in the sea. With no Time and no World, 
in the deeps that are timeless and worldless. 

Then when his heart and his belly were restored, his mind 
began to flicker again softly, like a soft flame flowing without 
departing. 

So he wiped his face with his hands, and put his serape over 
his head, and, silent inside an aura of pain, he went out and 
took the drum, carrying it downstairs. 

Martin, the man who loved him, was hovering in the zagudn. 

‘Ya, Patron?’ he said. 

‘Ya!’ said Ramon. 

The man ran indoors, where a lamp was burning in the big, 
dark kitchen, and ran out again with an armful of the woven 
straw mats. 

“Where, Patron?’ he said. 

Ramon hesitated in the centre of the courtyard, and looked 
at the sky. 

“Viene el agua?’ he said. 

“Creo que st, Patron. 

They went to the shed where the bananas had been packed 
afid carried away on donkeys. There the man threw down the 
petates. Ramon arranged them. Guisleno ran with canes. He 
was going to make lights, the simplest possible. Three pieces 
of thick cane, tied at the neck with a cord, stood up three- 
legged, waist high. In the three-pronged fork at the top he laid 
a piece of flat, slightly hollow lava stone. Then he came run- 
ning from the house with a bit of burning ocote wood. Three 
or four bits of ocote, each bit no bigger than a long finger, 
flickered and rose in quick flames from the stone, and the 
courtyard danced with shadow. 

Ramon took off his serape, folded it, and sat upon it. Guis- 
leno lit another tripod-torch. Ramén sat with his back to the 
wall, the fire-light dancing on his dark brows, that were sunk 
in a sort of frown. His breast shone like gold in the flame. He 
' took the drum and sounded the summons, slow, monotonous, 
rather sad. In a moment two or three men came running. The 
drummer came, Ramon stood up and handed him the drum. 
He ran with it to the great outer doorway, and out into the 
dark lane, and there sounded the summons, quick, shatp. 

ae 

Ramon put on his serape, whose scarlet fringe touched his 
knees, and stood motionless, with ruffled hair. Round his 
shoulders went the woven snake, and his head was through the 
middle of the blue, woven bird. 

Cipriano came from the house. He was wearing a serape all 
scarlet and dark brown, a great scarlet sun at the centre, deep 
scatlet zigzags at the borders, and dark brown fringe at his 
knees. He came and stood at Ramon’s side, glancing up into 
Ramon’s face. But the other man’s. brows were low, his eyes 
were fixed in the darkness of the sheds away across the court- 
yard. He was looking into the heart of the world; because the 
faces of men, and the hearts of men are helpless quicksands. 
Only in the heart of the cosmos man can look for strength. 
And if he can keep his soul in touch with the heart of the 
world, then from the heart of the world new blood will beat in 
strength and stillness into him, fulfilling his manhood. 

Cipriano tygned his black eyes to the courtyard. His sol- 
diers bad drawn neat, in a little group. Three or four men 
were standing in fark Serapes, round the fire. Cipriano stood 
brilliant like a cardinal bird, next to Ramon. Even his sandals 
were bright, sealing-wax red, and his loose linen trousers were 
bound at the ankles with red and black bands. His face looked 
vety dark and ruddy in the firelight, his little black tuft of a 
beard hang odd and devilish, his eyes were glittering sardoni- 
cally. But he caught Ramon’s hand in his small hand, and stood 
holding it. 

The peons were coming through the entrance-way, balan- 
cing their big hats. Women were hurrying barefoot, swishing 
their full skirts, carrying babies inside the dark wrap of their 
reboxos, children running after. They all clustered towards the 
flame-light, like wild animals gazing in at the circle of men in 
dark serapes, Ramon, magnificent in his white and blue and 
shadow, poising his beautiful head, Cipriano at his side like a 
glittering cardinal bird. 

Carlota and Kate emerged from the inner doorway of the , 
house. But there Carlota remained, wrapped in a black silk 
shawl, seated on a wooden bench where the soldiers usually 
sat, looking across at the ruddy flare of light, the circle of dark 
men, the tall beauty of her husband, the poppy-petal glitter of 

‘red, of Cipriano, the group of little, dust-coloured soldiers, and 

THE FIRST RAIN 207 

f 
eee 

ae 

the solid throng of peons and women and children, standing 
gazing like animals. While through the gate men still came 
hurrying, and from outside, the drum sounded, and a high 
voice sang again and again: 

208 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Someone will enter between the gates, 
Now, at this moment, Ay! 

See the light on the man that waits. 
Shall you? Shall I? 

Someone will come to the place of fire, 
Now, at this moment, Ay! 

And hark to the words of their heart’s desire. 
Shall you? Shall I? 

Someone will knock when the door is shut, 
Ay! ina moment, Ay! 

Hear a voice saying: I know you not! 
Shall you? Shall I? . 

There was a queer, wild yell each time on the Ay/ and like a 
bugle refrain: Sha// you? Shall I? It made Carlota shiver. 

Kate, wrapping her yellow shawl round her, walked slowly 
towards the group. 

The drum outside gave a rapid shudder, and was finished. 
The drummer came in, the great doors were shut and barred, 
the drummer took his place in the ring of standing men. A 
dead silence supervened. r 

Ramon continued to gaze from under lowered brows, into 
space. Then in a quiet, inward voice, he said: 

‘As I take off this cover, I put away the day that is gone from 
upon me.’ 

He took off his serape, and stood with it over his arm. All the 
men in the circle did the same, till they stood with naked 
breasts and shoulders, Cipriano very dark and strong-looking, 
in his smallness, beside Ramon. 

‘I put away the day that is gone,’ Ramén continued, in the 
same still, inward voice, ‘and stand with my heart uncovered 
in the night of the gods.’ 

Then he looked down at the ground. 

“Serpent of the earth,’ he said; ‘snake that lies in the fire at 
the heart of the world, come! Come! Snake of the fire of the 
heart of the world, coil like gold round my ankles, and rise like 
life around my knee, and lay your head against my thigh. 

THE FIRST RAIN 209 

Come, put yout head in my hand, cradle your head in my fin- 
gers, snake of the deeps. Kiss my feet and my ankles with your 
mouth of gold, kiss my knees and my inner thigh, snake 
branded with flame and shadow, come! and rest your head in 
my finger-basket! So!’ 

The voice was soft and hypnotic. It died upon a stillness. 
And it seemed as if really a mysterious presence had entered 
unseen from the underworld. It seemed to the peons as if really 
they saw a snake of brilliant gold and living blackness softly 
coiled around Ramén’s ankle and knee, and resting its head 
in his fingers, licking his palm with forked tongue. 

He looked out at the big, dilated, glittering eyes of his 
people, and his own eyes were wide and uncanny. 

“T tell you,’ he said, ‘and I tell you truly. At the heart of this 
earth sleeps a great serpent, in the midst of fire. Those that go 
down in mines feel the heat and the sweat of him, they feel him 
move. It is the diving fire of the earth, for the earth is alive. The 
snake of the worldis huge, and the rocks are his scales, trees 
grow between them. I tell you the éarth you dig is alive as a 
snake that Sleeps. So vast a serpent you walk on, this lake lies 
between his folds as a drop of rain in the folds of a sleeping 
tattlesnake. Yet he none the less lives. The earth is alive. 

‘And if he died, we should all perish. Only his living keeps 
the soil sweet, that grows you maize. From the roots of his 
scales we dig silver and gold, and the trees have root in him, 
as the hair of my face has root in my lips. 

“The earth is alive. But he is very big and we are very small, 
smaller than dust. But he is very big in his life, and sometimes 
he is angry. These people, smaller than dust, he says, they stamp on 
me and say 1 am dead. Even to their asses they speak, and shout 
Harreh! Burro! But to me they speak no word. Therefore I will turn 
against them, like awoman who lies angry with her man in bed, and eats 
away his spirit with her anger, turning her back to him. 

‘That is what the earth says to us. He sends sorrow into our 
feet, and depression into our loins. 

‘Because as an angry woman in the house can make a man 
heavy, taking his life from him, so the earth can make us heavy, 
make our souls cold, and our life dreary in our feet. 

‘Speak then to the snake of the heart of the world, put oil on 
your fingers and lower your fingers for him to taste the oil of 

210 ; THE PLUMED SERPENT 

the earth, and let him send life into your feet and ankles and 
knees, like sap in the young maize pressing against the joint 
and making the milk of the maize bud among its hair. 

~ ‘From the heart of the earth man feels his manhood rise up 
in him, like the maize that is proud, turning its green leaves 
outwards. Be proud like the maize, and let your roots go deep, 
deep, for the rains are here, and it is time for us to be growing 
in Mexico.’ 

Ramon ceased speaking, the drum softly tania All the men 
of the ring were looking down at the earth and softly letting 
their left hands hang. 

Carlota, who had not been able to hear, drifted up to Kate’ S 
side, spellbound by her husband. Kate unconsciously glanced 
down at the earth, and secretly let her fingers hang softly 
against her dress. But then she was afraid of what might happen 
to her, and she caught her hand up into her shawl. 

Suddenly the drum began to give a very strong note, fol- 
lowed by a weak: a strange, exciting thud. 

Everybody looked up. Ramon had flung his right arm tense 
into the air, and was looking up at the black dark sky. The 
men of the ring did the same, and the naked arms were thrust 
aloft like so many rockets. 

‘Up! up! up!’ said a wild voice. 

‘Up! up!’ cried the men of the ring, in a wild chorus. 

And involuntarily the men in the crowd twitched, then shot 
their arms upwards, turning their faces to the dark heavens. 
Even some of the women boldly thrust up their naked arms, 
and relief entered their hearts as they did so. 

But Kate would not lift her arm. 

There was dead silence, even the drum was silent. Then the 
voice of Ram6n was heard, speaking upwards to the black sky: 

“Your big wings are dark, Bird, you are flying low to-night. 
You ate flying low over Mexico, we shall soon feel the fan of 
your wings on out face. 

“Ay, Bird! You fly about where you will. You fly past the — 
stars, and you perch on the sun. You fly out of sight, and are 
gone beyond the white river of the sky. But you come back 
like the ducks of the north, looking for water and winter. 

“You sit in the middle of the sun, and preen your feathers. 
You crouch in the rivers of stars, and make the star-dust rise 

THE FIRST RAIN : 211 

around you. You fly away into the deepest hollow place of the 
sky, whence there seems no return. 

“You come back to us, and hover overhead, and we feel 
your wings fanning our faces —’ 

Even as he spoke the wind rose, in sudden gusts, and a door 
could be heard slamming in the house, with a shivering of 
glass, and the trees gave off a tearing sound. 

“Conte then, Bird of the great sky!’ Ramon called wildly. 
“Come! Oh Bird, settle a moment on my wrist, over my head, 
and give me power of the sky, and wisdom. Oh Bird! Bird of 
all the wide heavens, even if you drum your feathers in thun- 
der, and drop the white snake of fire from your beak back to 
the earth again, where he can run in, deep down the rocks 
again, home: even if you come as the Thunderer, come! Settle 
on my wrist a moment, with the clutch of the power of thun- 
der, and arch your wings over my head, like a shadow of 
clouds; and bemd your breast to my brow, and bless me with 
the sun. Bird, roaming Bird of the Beyond, with thunder in 
your pinions and ta snake of lightning in your beak, with the 
blue heaven in the socket of your wings and cloud in the arch 
of your neck, with sun in the burnt feathers of your breast and 
power in your feet, with terrible wisdom in your flight, swoop 
to me a moment, swoop!’ 

Sudden gusts of wind tore at the little fires of flame, till they 
could be heard to rustle, and the lake began to speak in a vast 
hollow noise, beyond the tearing of trees. Distant lightning 
was beating far off, over the black hills. 

Ramén dropped his arm, which had been bent over his head. 
The drum began to beat. Then he said: 

“Sit down a moment, before the Bird shakes water out of bis 
wings. It will come soon. Sit down.’ 

There was a stir. Men put their serapes over their faces, 
women clutched their rebovos tighter, and all sat down on the 
ground. Only Kate and Carlota remained standing, on the 
outer edge. Gusts of wind tore at the flames, the men put their 
hats on the ground in front of them. 

‘The earth is alive, and the sky is alive,’ said Ramon in his 
natural voice, ‘and between them, we live. Earth has kissed 
my knees, and put strength in my belly. Sky has perched on 
my wrist, and sent power into my breast. 

2EZ THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘But as in the morning the Morning-star stands between 
earth and sky, a star can rise in us, and stand between the heart 
and the loins. 

‘That is the manhood of man, and for woman, her woman- 
hood. 

‘You ate not yet men. And women, you ate not yet women. 

‘You run about and toss about and die, and still you have 
not found the star of your manhood rise within you, the stars 
of your womanhood shine’ out serene between your breasts, 
women. 

‘T tell you, for him that wishes it, the star of his manhood 
shall rise within him, and he shall be proud, and perfect even 
as the Morning-star is perfect. 

‘And the star of a woman’s womanhood can rise at last, from 
between the heavy rim of the earth and the lost grey void of 
the sky. 

“But how? How shall we do it? How shall it be? 

‘How shall we men become Men of the Morning Star? And 
the women the Dawn-Star Women? 

‘Lower your fingers to the caress of the Snake of the earth. 

‘Lift your wrist for a perch to the far-lying Bird. 

“Have the courage of both, the courage of lightning and the 
eatthquake. 

‘And wisdom of both, the wisdom of the snake and the 
eagle. , ; 
“And the peace of both, the peace of the serpent and the sun. 

“And the power of both, the power of the innermost earth 
and the outermost heaven, 

“But on your brow, Men! the undimmed Mornizig Star, that 
‘neither day nor ig nor earth nor sky can swallow and put 
out. 

‘And between your breasts, Women! the Dawn-Star, that 
cannot be dimmed. 

‘And your home at last is the Morning Star. Neither heaven 
nor earth shall swallow you up at the last, but you shall pass 
the place beyond both, into the bright star that is lonely yet 
feels itself never alone. 

“The Morning Star is sending you a messenger, a god who 
died in Mexico. But he slept his sleep, and the invisible Ones 
washed his body with water of resurrection. So he has risen, - 

pe ? 
a g “ = 
THE FIRST RAIN 213 

and pushed the stone from the mouth of the tomb, and has 
stretched himself. And now he is striding across the horizons 
even quicker than the great stone from the tomb is tumbling 
back to the earth, to crush those that rolled it up. 

“The Son of the Star is coming back to the Sons of Men, 
with big, bright strides. 

“Prepare to receive him. And wash yourselves, and put oil 
on your hands and your feet, on your mouth and eyes and ears 
and nostrils, on your breast and navel and on the secret places 
of your body, that nothing of the dead days, no dust of 
skeletons and evil things may pass into you and make you 
unclean. 

“Do not look with the eyes of yesterday, nor like yesterday 
listen, nor breathe, nor smell, nor taste, nor swallow food and 
drink. Do not kiss with the mouths of yesterday, nor touch 
with the hands, nor walk with yesterday’s feet. And let your 
navel know ngthing of yesterday, and go into your women 
witha new body, enter the new body in her. 

“For yesterday’ “body is dead, and carrion, the Xopilote is 
hovering above it. Rishi; 

‘Put yesterday’s body from off you, and have a new body. 
Even as your God who is coming. Quetzalcoatl is coming with 
a new body, like a star, from the shadows of death. 

“Yes, even as you sit upon the earth this moment, with the 
round of your body touching the round of the earth, say: 
Earth! Earth! you are alive as the globes of my body are alive. 
Breathe the kiss of the inner earth upon me, evenas I sit upon 

ou. 
s ‘And so, it is said. The earth is stirring beneath you, the sky 
is rushing its wings above. Go home to your homes, in front 
of the waters that will fall and cut you off forever from your 
_ yesterdays. 

“Go home, and hope to be Men of the Morning Star, 
Women of the Star of Dawn. 

“You are not yet men and women —” 

He rose up and waved to the people to be gone. And ina 
moment they were on their feet, scurrying and hastening with 
the quiet Mexican hurry, that seems to run low down upon the 
surface of the earth. 

The black wind was all loose in the sky, tearing with the 

oe 
ee 
“< 

thin shriek of torn fabrics, in the mango-trees. Men held their | 
big hats on their heads and ran with bent knees, their serapes 
blowing. Women clutched their rebozos tighter and ran bare- 
foot to the zaguan. 

The big doors were open, a soldier stood with a gun across 
his back, holding a hurricane lamp. And the people fled like 
ghosts through the doors, and away up the black lane like bits 
of paper veering away into nothingness, blown out of their 
line of flight. In a moment, they had all silently gone. 

Martin barred the great doors. The soldier put down his 
lamp on the wooden bench, and he and his comrades sat 
huddled in their dark shawls, in a little bunch like toadstools in 
the dark cavern of the zagudn. Already one had curled himself 
up on the wooden bench, wrapped like a snail in his blanket, 
head disappeared. 

“The water is coming!’ cried the servants excitedly, as Kate 
went upstairs with Dona Carlota. 

The lake was quite black, like a great pit. The wind suddenly 
blew with violence, with a strange ripping sound in the mango- 
trees, as if some membrane in the air were being ripped. The _ 
white-flowered oleanders in the garden below leaned over — 
quite flat, their white flowers ghostly, going right down to the 
earth, in the pale beam of the lamp — like a street lamp — that 
shone on the wall at the front entrance. A young palm-tree 
bent and spread its leaves on the ground. Some invisible 
juggernaut car rolling in the dark over the outside world. 

Away across the lake, south-west, lightning blazed and ran 
down the sky like some portentous writing. And soft, velvety — 
thunder broke inwardly, strangely. 

“It frightens me!’ cried Dofia Carlota, putting her hand over 
her eyes and hastening into a far corner of the bate salon. 

Cipriano and Kate stood on the terrace, watching the 
coloured flowers in the pots shake and fly to bits, disappearing 
up into the void of darkness. Kate clutched her shawl. But the 
wind suddenly got under Cipriano’s blanket, and lifted it 
straight up into the air, then dropped it in a scarlet flare over 
his head. Kate watched his deep, strong Indian chest lift as his 
arms quickly fought to free his head. How dark he was, and — 
how primitively physical, beautiful, and deep-breasted, with 
soft, full flesh! But all, as it were, for himself. Nothing that 

214 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

THE FIRST RAIN 215 

came forth from him to meet with one outside. All Section? 
of the outside, all for himself. 
‘Ah! the water!’ he cried, holding down his serape. 

The first great drops were flying darkly at the flowers, like 
arrows. Kate stood back into the doorway of the sa/on. A pure 
blaze of lightning slipped three-fold above the black hills, 
seemed to stand a moment, then slip back into the dark. 

Down came the rain with a smash, as if some great vessel 
had broken. With it, came a waft of icy air. And all the time, 
first in one part of the sky, then in another, in quick succession 
the blue lightning, very blue, broke out of heaven and lit up 
the air for a blue, breathless moment, looming trees and ghost 
of a garden, then was gone, while thunder dropped and ex- 
ploded continually. 

Kate watched the dropping masses of water in wonder. Al- 
ready, in the blue moments of lightning, she saw the garden 
below a pon@, the walks were rushing rivers. It was cold. She 
turaed indoors. 

A servant was going round thé rooms with a lantern, to 
look if scorpions were coming out. He found one scuttling 
actoss the floor of Kate’s room, and one fallen from the ceiling 
beams on to Carlota’s bed. 

They sat in the sa/on in rocking-chairs, Carlota and Kate, and 
rockedg smelling the good wetness, breathing the good, chilled 
air. Kate had already forgotten what really chill air was like. 
She wrapped her shaw] tighter round her. 

‘Ah, yes, you feel cold! You must take care in the Mobs 

now. Sometimes in the rainy season the nights are very cold. 
You must be ready with an extra blanket. And the servants, 
poor things, they just lie and shudder, and they get up in the 
morning like corpses. — But the sun soon warms them again, 
and they seem to think they must bear what comes. So they 
complain sometimes, but still they don’t provide.’ 
' The wind had gone, suddenly. Kate was uneasy, uneasy, 
with the smell of water, almost of ice, in her nostrils, and her 
blood still hot and dark. She got up and went again to the ter- 
race. Cipriano was still standing there, motionless and inscrut- 
able, like a monument, in his red and dark serape. 

The rain was abating. Down below in the garden two bare- 
footed women-servants were running through the water, in the 

ae 

216 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

faint light of the zagadn lamp, running across the garden and 
putting ol/as and square gasoline cans under the arching spouts 
of water that seethed down from the roof, then darting away 
while they filled, then struggling in with the frothy vessel. It 
would save making trips to the lake, for water. 

‘What do you think of us?’ Cipriano said to her. 

_ ‘Itis strange to me,’ she replied, wondering and a little awed 
by the night. 

‘Good, no?’ he said, in an exultant tone. 

‘A little scaring,’ she replied, with a slight laugh. 

‘When you ate used to it,’ he said, ‘it seems natural, no? It 
seems natural so — as it is. And when you go to a country like 
England, where all is so safe and ready-made, then you miss it. 
You keep saying to yourself: ‘‘ What am I missing? What is it 
that is not here?’”’ 

He seemed to be gloating in his native darkness. It was curi- 
ous, that though he spoke such good English, it seemed always 
foreign to her, more foreign than Dofia Carlota’s Spanish. 

‘I can’t understand that people want to have everything, all 
life, no? — so safe and ready-made as in England and America. 
It is good to be awake. On the qui vive, no?’ 

‘Perhaps,’ she said. 

“So I like it,’ he said, ‘when Ramon tells the people the earth 
is alive, and the sky has a big bird in it, that you don’t see. I 
think it is true. Certainly! And it is good to know it, because 
then one is on the gu vive, no?’ 

“But it’s tiring to be always on the gui vive,’ she said. 

“Why? Why tiring? No, I think, on the contrary, it is re- 
freshing. — Ah, you should marry, and live in Mexico. At last, 
Iam sure, you would like it. You would keep waking up more 
and more to it.’ 

“Or else going more and more deadened,’ she said. ‘That is 
how most foreigners go, it seems to me.’ 

“Why deadened?’ he said to her. ‘I don’t understand. Why 
deadened? Here you have a country where night is night, and 
rain comes down and you know it. And you havea people with 
whom you must be on the qwi vive all the time, all the time. And 
that is very good, no? You don’t go sleepy. Like a pear! Don’t 
you say a peat goes sleepy, no? — cwando s¢ echa a perder?’ 

“Yes!” she said. 

be 

; 

THE FIRST RAIN Qile7, 

“And here you have also Ramén. How does Ramon seem to 
you?’ 

“IT don’t know. I don’t want to say anything. But I do think 
he is almost too much: too far. — And I don’t think he is Mexi- 
can.” 

“Why not? Why not Mexican? He is Mexican.’ 

“Not as you are.’ 

“How not as lam? He is Mexican.’ 

“He seems to me to belong to the old, old Europe,’ she said. 

“And he seems to me to belong to the old, old Mexico — and 
also to the new,’ he added quickly. 

“But you don’t believe in him.’ 

“How??’ 

“You — yourself. You don’t believe in him. You think it is 
like everything else, a sort of game. Everything is a sort of 
game, a put-up job, to you Mexicans. You don’t really believe, 
in anything.’ » 

“How not believe? I not believe in Ramén? — Well, perhaps 
not, in that way of kneeling before him and spreading out my 
arms and Shedding tears on his feet. But I - I believe in him, 
too. Not in your way, but in mine. I tell you why. Because he 

_ has the power to compel me. If he hadn’t the power to compel 

me, how should I believe?’ 

“It isa queer sort of belief that is compelled,’ she said. 

‘How else should one believe, except by being compelled? 
I like Ramon for that, that he can compel me. When I grew 
up, and my godfather could not compel me to believe, I was 
very unhappy. It made me very unhappy. — But Ramon compels 
me, and that is very good. It makes me very happy, when I 
know I can’t escape. It would make you happy too.’ 

“To know I could not escape from Don Ramén?’ she said 
ironically. 

‘Yes, that also. And to know you could not escape from 
Mexico. And even from such a man as me.’ 

She paused in the dark before she answered, sardonically: 

‘I don’t think it would make me happy to feel I couldn’t 
escape from Mexico. No,;I feel, unless I was sure I could get 
out any day, I couldn’t bear to be here.’ 

In her mind she thought: And perhaps Ramon is the only 
one I couldn’t quite escape from, because he really touches me 

218 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

somewhere inside. But from you, you little Cipriano, I should 
have no need even to escape, because I could not be caught by 
ou. . ; 

‘Ah!’ he said quickly. ‘You think so. But then you don’t 
know. You can only think with American thoughts. It is 
natural. From your education, you have only American 
thoughts, U.S.A. thoughts, to think with. Nearly all women 

are like that: even Mexican women of the Spanish-Mexican - 

class. They are all thinking nothing but U.S.A. thoughts, be- 
cause those are the ones that go with the way they dress their 
hair. And so it is with you. You think like a modern woman, 
because you belong to the Anglo-Saxon or Teutonic world, 
and dress your hair in a certain way, and have money, and are 
altogether free. —- But you only think like this because you have 
had these thoughts put in your head, just as in Mexico you 
spend centavos and pesos, because that is the Mexican money 
- you have put in your pocket. It’s what they give you at the 
bank. — So when you say you are free, you ate nor free. You are 
compelled all the time to be thinking U.S.A. thoughts — com- 
pelled, 1 must say. You have not as much choice as a slave. As 
the peons must eat sortillas, tortillas, tortillas, because there is 
nothing else, you must think these U.S.A. thoughts, about 
being a woman and being free. Every day you must eat those 
tortillas, tortillas.—'Till you don’t know how you would like 
something else.’ : 

‘What else should I like?’ she said, with a grimace at the 
darkness. ; 

“Other thoughts, other feelings. - You are afraid of such a 
man as me, because you think I should not treat you 4 /’améri- 
caine. You ate quite right. I should not treat you as an American 
woman must be treated. Why should I? I don’t wish to. It 
doesn’t seem good to me.’ ; 

“You wouldtreat awomanlikearealold Mexican, would you? 
Keep her ignorant, and shut her up?’ said Kate sarcastically. 

‘I could not keep her ignorant if she did not start ignorant. 
But what more I had to teach her wouldn’t be in the American 
style of teaching.’ 

“What then?’ 

‘Quien sabe! Ca reste a voir. ; 

“Et continuera ay rester,’ said Kate, laughing. 

HOME TO SAYULA 219 

CHAPTER XIV 

Home to Sayula 

THE morning came perfectly blue, with a freshness in the air 
and a blue luminousness over the trees and the distant moun- 
tains, and birds so bright, absolutely like new-opened buds 
sparking in the air. 

Cipriano was returning to Guadalajara in the automobile, 
and Carlota was going with him. Kate would be rowed home 
on the lake. 

To Ramon, Carlota was still, at times, a torture. She seemed 
to have the power still to lacerate him, inside his bowels. Not 
in his mind or spirit, but in his old emotional, passional self: 
right in the middle of his belly, to tear him and make him feel 
he bled inwaadly. : 

Because he had loved her, he had cared for her: for the 
affectionate, passionate, whimsical; sometimes elfish creature 
she had béen. He had made much of her, and spoiled her, for 
many years. “ 

But all the while, gradually, his nature was changing inside 
him. Not that he ceased to care for her, or wanted other 
womem That she could have understood. But inside him was a 
slow, blind imperative, urging him to cast his emotional and 
spiritual and mental self into the slow furnace, and smelt them 
into a new, whole being. 

But he had Carlota to reckon with. She loved him, and that, 
to her, was the outstanding factor. She loved him, emotionally. 
And spiritually, she loved mankind. And mentally, she was 
sure she was quite right. 

Yet, as time went on, he had to change. He had to cast that 
emotional self, which she loved, into the furnace, to be smelted 
down to another self. 

And she felt she was robbed, cheated. Why couldn’t he go 
on being gentle, good, and loving, and trying to make the 
whole world more gentle, good, and loving? ; 

He couldn’t, because it was borne in upon him that the 
world had gone as far as it-could go in the good, gentle, and 
loving direction, and anything farther in that line meant per- 

~ => war 
fn, eS. 

versity. So the time had come for the slow, great change to 
something else — what, he didn’t know. 

The emotion of love, and the greater emotion of liberty for | 
mankind seemed to go hard and congeal upon him, like the 
‘shell onachrysalis. It was the old caterpillar stage of Christian- 
ity evolving into something else. 

But Carlota felt this was all she had, this emotion of love, 
for her husband, her children, for her people, for the animals 
and birds and trees of the world. It was her all, her Christ, and 
her Blessed Virgin. How could she let it go? 

So she continued to love him, and to love the world, 
steadily, pathetically, obstinately, and devilishly. She prayed 
- for him, and she engaged in works of charity. 

But her love had turned from being the spontaneous flow, 
subject to the unforeseen comings and goings of the Holy 
Ghost, and had turned into will. She loved now with her wi//: 
as the white world now tends to do. She became filled with 
charity: that cruel kindness. 

Her winsomeness and her elfishness departed from her, she 
began to wither, she grew tense. And she blamed him, and 
. prayed for him. Even as the spontaneous mystery died in her, 
the will hardened, till she was nothing but a will: a lost 
will. \ 

She soon succeeded in drawing the life of her young boys 
all to herself, with her pathos and her subtle will. Ramon was 
too proud and angry to fight for them. They were her children. 
Let her have them. 

- They were the children of his old body. His new body had 
no children: would probably never have any. 

‘But remember,’ he said to her, with southern logic, ‘you 
do not love, save with your will. I don’t like the love you have ’ 
for your god: it is an assertion of your own will. I don’t like 
the love you have for me: it is the same. I don’t like the love 
you have for your children. If ever I see in them a spark of de- 
site to be saved from it, I shall do my best to save them. Mean- 
while have your love, have your will. But you know I dislike 
it. I dislike your insistence. I dislike your monopoly of one 
feeling, I dislike your charity works. I disapprove of the whole 
trend of your life. You are weakening and vitiating the boys. 
You do not love them, you are only putting your love-will over 

220 THE PLUMED SERPENT. 

HOME TO SAYULA. ~ 221 

them. One day they will turn and hate you for it. Remember I 
have said this to you.’ 

Dofia Carlota had trembled in every fibre of her body, under 
the shock of this. But she went away to the chapel of the 
Annunciation Convent, and prayed. And, praying for his soul, 
she seemed to gain a victory over him, in the odour of sanctity. 
She came home in frail, pure triumph, like a flower that 
blooms on a grave: his grave. 

And Ram6n henceforth watched her in her beautiful, vathier 
fluttering, rather irritating gentleness, as he watched his: closest 
enemy. 

Life had done its work on one more human being, quenched 
the spontaneous life and left only the will. Killed the god in 
the woman, or the goddess, and left om charity, with a 
will. 

‘Carlota,’ he had said to her, “how happy you would be if 
you could weag deep, deep mourning for me. —I shall not give 
you this happiness.’ 

She gave.him a strange look from her hazel-brown eyes. 

“Even that is in the hands of God,’ she had replied, as she 
hurried away from him. 

And now, on this morning after the first rains, she came to 
the door of his room as he was sitting writing. As yesterday, he 
was naked to the waist, the blue-marked sash tied round his 
middle confined the white linen, loose trousers — like big, wide 
pyjama trousers crossed in front and tied round his waist. 

‘May I come in?’ she said nervously. 

‘Do!’ he replied, putting down his pen and rising. 

There was only one chair — he was offering it her, but she sat 
down on the unmade bed, as if asserting her natural right. And 
in the same way she glanced at his naked breast — as if asserting 
her natural right. 

‘Lam going with Cipriano after breakfast,’ she said. 

“Yes, so you said.’ 

‘The boys will be home in three weeks.’ 

“Ses.” 

‘Don’t you want to see them?’ 

‘If they want to see me.’ 

‘Iam sure-they do.’ 

‘Then bring them here.’ 

‘Do you think it is pleasant for me?’ she said, clasping her 
hands. 

‘You do not make it pleasant for me, Carlota.’ 

‘How can I? You know I think you are wrong. When I lis- 
tened to you last night — there is something so beautiful in it 
all —and yet so monstrous. So monstrous! - Oh! I think to my- 
self: What is this man doing? This man of all men, who might 
be such a blessing to his country and mankind —’ 

‘Well,’ said Ramon. ‘And what is he instead?’ - 

‘You know! You know! I can’t bear it. — It zs’t for 
you to save Mexico, Ramén. Christ has already saved ~ 
it.’ 

“It seems to me not so.’ 

‘He has! He has! And He made you the wonderful being 
that you are, so that you should work out the salvation, in the 
name of Christ and of love. Instead of which 

‘Instead of which, Carlota, I try something else. — But be- 
lieve me, if the real Christ has not been able to save Mexico — 
and He hasn’t — then I am sure the white Anti-Christ of char- 
ity, and socialism, and politics, and reform, will only succeed 
in finally destroying her. That, and that alone, makes me take 
my stand. — You, Carlota, with your charity works and your 
pity: and men like Benito Juarez, with their Reform and their 
Liberty: and the rest of the benevolent people, politicians and 
socialists and so forth, surcharged with pity for living men, in 
their mouths, but really with hate — the hate of the materialist 
have-nots for the materialist aves: they are the Anti-Christ. The - 
old world, that’s just the world. But the new world, that wants 
to save the People, this is the Anti-Christ. This is Christ with 
real poison in the communion cup. — And for this reason I step 
out of my ordinary privacy and individuality. I don’t want 
evetybody poisoned. About the great mass I don’t care. But I 
don’t want everybody poisoned.’ 

“How can you be so sure that you yourself are not a poisoner 
of the people? — I think you ate.’ 

‘Think it then. I think of you, Carlota, merely that you have 
not been able to come to your complete, final womanhood: 
which is a different thing from the old womanhoods.’ 

“Womanhood is always the same.’ 

“Ah, no, it isn’t! Neither is manhood.’ 

2207 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

se... es 

“But what do you think you can do? What do you think this 
Quetzalcoatl nonsense amounts to?’ 

. Quetzalcoatl is just a living word, for these people, no 
mote. All I want them to do is to find the beginnings of the 
way to their own manhood, their own womanhood. Men are 
not yet men in full, and women are not yet women. They ate 
all half and half, incoherent, part horrible, part pathetic, part 
good creatures. Half arrived. — I mean you as well, Carlota. I 
mean all the world. — But these people don’t assert any righte- 
ousness of their own, these Mexican people of ours. That 
makes me think that grace is still with them. And so, having 
got hold of some kind of clue to my own whole manhood, it is 

part of me now to try with them.’ 

“You will fail.’ 

“I shan’t. Whatever happens to me, there will be a new vi- 
bration, a new call in the air, and a new answer inside some 
men.’ 
“They will ee y.you. — Do you know what even your 
friend Toussaint said of you? — Ramon Carrasco’s future is just 
the past of*mankind.’ 

“A i great deal of it is the f past. Naturally Toussaint sees that 

att.’ 
; ‘But the boys don’t believe in you. Instinctively, they: dis- 
believe.eCyprian said to me, when I went to see him: “‘Is father 
doing any more of that silly talk about old gods coming back, 
mother? I wish he wouldn’t. It would be pretty nasty for us if 
he got himself into the newspapers with it.””’ 

Ramon laughed. 

‘Little boys,’ he said, ‘are like little gramophones. They only 
talk according to the record that’s put into them.’ 

‘You don’t believe out of the mouths of babes and sucklings,’ 
said Carlota bitterly. 

‘Why, Carlota, the babes and sucklings don’t get much 
chance. Their mothers and their teachers turn them into little 
gramophones from the first, so what can they do, but say and 
feel according to the record the mother and teacher puts into 
them? Perhaps in the time of Christ babes and sucklings were 
riot so perfectly exploited by their elders.’ 

Suddenly, however, the smile went off his face. He rose up, 
and pointed to the door. 

HOME TO SAYULA 223 

‘Go away,’ he said in a low tone. ‘Go away! I have smelt the 
smell of your spirit long enough.’ 

She sat on the bed, spell-bound, gazing at him with fright- 
ened, yet obstinate, insolent eyes, wincing from his out- 
stretched arm as if he had threatened to strike her. 

Then again the fire went out of his eyes, and his arm sank. 
The still, far-away look came on his face. 

‘What have I to do with it!’ he murmured softly. 

And taking up his blouse and his hat, he went silently out 
on to the terrace, departing from her in body and in soul. She 
heard the soft swish of his sandals. She heard the faint reson- 
ance of the iron door to the terrace, to which he alone had 
access. And she sat like a heap of ash on his bed, ashes to ashes, 
burnt out, with only the coals of her will still smouldering. 

Her eyes were very bright, as she went to join Kate and 
Cipriano. 

After breakfast, Kate was rowed home down the lake. She 
felt a curious depression at leaving the hacienda: as if, for her, 

-life now was there, and not anywhere else. 

Her own house seemed empty, banal, vulgar. For the first 
time in her life, she felt the banality and emptiness even of her 
own milieu. Though the Casa de las Cuentas was not purely aoe 
own milieu. 

‘Ah, Nifia, how good! How good that you have come! Ay, 
in the night, how much water! Much! Much!-But you were 
safe in the hacienda, Nina. Ah, how nice, that hacienda of Jamil- 
tepec. Such a good man, Don Ramon — isn’t he, Nifia? He cares 
a great deal for his people. And the Sefiora, ah, how sym- 
pathetic she is!’ 

Kate smiled and was pleasant. But she felt more like going 
into her room and saying: For God’s sake, leave me alone, 
with your cheap rattle. 

She suffered again from the servants. Again that quiet, sub- 
terranean insolence against life, which seems to belong to 
modern life. The unbearable note of flippant jeering, which is 
underneath almost all modern utterance. It was underneath 
Juana’s constant cry. — Nita! Nina! 

At meal-times Juana would seat herself on the ground at a 
little distance from Kate, and talk, talk in her rapid mouthfuls 
of conglomerate words with trailing, wistful endings: and all 

224 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

HOME TO SAYULA 225 

the time watch her mistress with those black, unseeing eyes on 
which the spark of light would stir with the peculiar slow, 
malevolent jeering of the Indian. 

Kate was not rich — she had only her moderate income. 

“Ah, the rich people —!? Juana would say. 

‘Iam not rich,’ said Kate. 

“You are not rich, Nifia?’ came the singing, caressive bird- 
like voice: “Then, you are poor?’—this was indescribable irony. 

“No, Iam not poor either. Iam not rich, and Iam not poor,’ 
said Kate. , 

“You are not rich, and you are not poor, Nifia!’ repeated 
Juana, in her bird-like voice, that covered the real bird’s end- 
less, vindictive jeering. 

For the words meant nothing to her. To her, who had noth- 
ing, could never have anything, Kate was one of that weird 
class, the rich. And, Kate felt, in Mexico it was a crime to be 
rich, or to be classed with the rich. Not even a crime, really, so 
much as a freak. The rich class was a freak class, like dogs with 
two heads or calves with five legs.-To be looked upon, not 
with envy, “but with the slow, undying antagonism and curi- 
osity which ‘normals’ have towards ‘freaks.’ The slow, power- 
ful, corrosive Indian mockery, issuing from the lava-rock 
Indian nature, against anything which strives to be above the 
grey, lava-rock level. 

“Is it true, N#a, that your country is through there?’ Juana_ . 

asked, jabbing her finger downward, towards the bowels of 
the earth. 

‘Not quite!’ said Kate. ‘My country is more there —’ and she 
slanted her finger at the earth’s surface. 

‘Ah — that way!’ said Juana. And she looked at Kate witha 
subtle leer, as if to say: what could you expect from people 

_who came out of the earth sideways, like sprouts of camote! 

‘And is it true that over there, there are people with only 
one eye — here!’ Juana punched herself in the middle of her 
forehead. 

‘No. That isn’t true. That is just a story.’ 

‘Ah!’ said Juana. ‘Isn’t it true! Do you know? Have you 
been to the country where they are, these people?’ 

“Yes,” said Kate. ‘I have been to all the countries, and there 
are no such people.’ 

P| & 
226 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘Verdad!.Verdad!’ breathed Juana awestruck. ‘You have 
been to all the countries, and there are no such people! — But 
in your country, they are all gringos? Nothing but gringos?’ 

She meant, no real people and salt of the earth like her own 
Mexican self. 

‘They are all people like me,’ said Kate coldly. 

‘Like you, Ni#a? And they all talk like you?’ 

‘Yes! Like:me.’ 

‘And there are many?’ 

“Many! Many!’ 

‘Look now!’ breathed Juana, almost awestruck to think a 
there could be whole worlds of these freak, mockable people. 

And Concha, that young, belching savage, would stare 
through her window-grating at the strange menagerie of the 
Nifia and the Nifia’s white visitors. Concha, slapping forti//as, 
was real. 

Kate walked down towards the kitchen. Concha was slap- 
ping the masa, the maize dough which she bought in the p/aza 
at eight centavos a kilo. | 

‘Nifia!’ she called in her raucous voice. ‘Do you eat forti/Jas>?’ 

‘Sometimes,’ said Kate. 

‘Eh?’ shouted the young savage. 

‘Sometimes.’ 

“Here! Eat one now!’ And Concha thrust a brown paw with 
a pinkish palm, and a dingy-looking sorti//a, at Kate. 

“Not now,’ said Kate. 

She disliked the heavy plasters that tasted of lime. 

‘Don’t you want it? Don’t you eat it?’ said Concha, with an 
impudent, strident laugh. And she flung the rejected /orfi//a on 
the little pile. 

She was one of those who won’t eat bread: say they don’t 
like it, that it is not food. 

Kate would sit and rock on her terrace, while the sun poured 
in the green square of the garden, the palm-tree spread its great 
fans translucent at the light, the hibiscus dangled great double- 
red flowers, rosy red, from its very dark tree, and the dark 
green oranges looked as if they were sweating as they grew. 

Came lunch time, madly hot: and greasy hot soup, greasy 
rice, splintery little fried fishes, bits of boiled meat and boiled 
egg-plant vegetables, a big basket piled with mangoes, papa- — 

= 

yas, zapotes — all the tropical fruits one did not want, in hot 
weather. 

And the barefoot little Maria, in a limp, torn, faded red 
frock, to wait at table. She was the loving one. She would 
stand by Juana as Juana bubbled with talk, like dark bubbles 
in her mouth, and she would stealthily touch Kate’s white arm; 
stealthily touch her again. Not being rebuked, she would 
stealthily lay her thin little black arm on Kate’s shoulder, with 
the softest, lightest touch imaginable, and her strange, wide 
black eyes would gleam with ghostly black beatitude, very 
curious, and her childish, pock-marked, slightly imbecile face 
would take on a black, arch, beatitudinous look. Then Kate 
would quickly remove the thin, dark, pock-marked arm, the 
child would withdraw half a yard, the beatitudinous look 
foiled, but her very black eyes still shining exposed and 
absorbedly, in a rapt, reptilian sort of ecstasy. 

Till Conchagcame to hit her with her elbow,’ making some 
brutal, savage remgrk which Kate could not urderstand, So 
the glozing: black eyes of the child-would twitch, and Maria 
would break into meaningless tears, Concha into a loud, brutal, 
mocking laugh, like some violent bird. And Juana interrupted 
her black and gluey flow of words to glance at her daughters 
and throw out some ineffectual remark. 

The victim, the inevitable victim, and the inevitable victimizer. 

The terrible, terrible hot emptiness of the Mexican morn- 
ings, the weight of black exnw that hung in the air! It made 
Kate feel as if the bottom had fallen out of her soul. She went 
out to the lake, to escape that house, that family. 

Since the rains, the trees in the broken gardens of the lake © 
front had flamed into scarlet, and poured themselves out into 
lavender flowers. Rose red, scarlet and lavender, quick, tropi- 
cal flowers. Wonderful splashes of colour. But that was all: 
splashes! They made a splash, like fireworks. 

And Kate thought of the blackthorn puffing white, in the 
early year, in Ireland, and hawthorn with coral grains, in a 
damp still morning in the lanes, and foxgloves by the bare 
rock, and tufts of ling and heather, and a ravel of harebells. 
And a terrible, terrible longing for home came over her. To 
escape from these tropical brilliancies and meaninglessnesses. 

In Mexico, the wind was a hard draught, the rain was a sluice 

HOME TO SAYULA 227 

228 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

of water, to be avoided, and the sun hit down on one with hos- — 
tility, terrific and stunning. Stiff, dry, unreal land, with sun- 
shine beating on it like metal. Or blackness and lightning and 
crashing violence of rain. 

No lovely fusion, no communion. No beautiful mingling of 
sun and mist, no softness in the air, never. Either hard heat or 
hard chill. Hard, straight lies and zigzags, wounding the breast. 
No soft, sweet smell of earth. The smell of Mexico, however 
subtle, suggested violence and things in chemical conflict. 

And Kate felt herself filled with an anger of resentment. She 
would sit under a willow-tree by the lake, reading a Pio Baroja 
novel that was angry and full of No! No! No! - ich bin der Geist 
der stets verneint! But she herself was so much angrier and fuller 
of repudiation than Pio Baroja. Spain cannot stand for No! as 
Mexico can. 

The tree hung fleecy above her. She sat on the warm sand in 
the shadow, careful not to let even her ankles lie in the biting 
shine of the sun. There was a faint, old smell of urine. The lake 
was so still and filmy as to be almost invisible. In the near dis- 
tance, some dark women were kneeling on the edge of the 
lake, dressed only in their long wet chemises in which they had 
bathed. Some were washing garments, some were pouring 
water over themselves, scooping it up in gourd scoops and 
pouring it over their black heads and ruddy-dark shoulders, in 
the intense pressure of the sunshine. On her left were two big 
trees, and a cane fence, and little straw huts of Indians. There 
the beach itself ended, and the little Indian plots of land went 
down to the lake-front. 

Glancing around in the great light, she seemed to be sitting 
isolated in a dark core of shadow, while the world moved in 
inconsequential specks through the hollow glare. She noticed 
a dark urchin, nearly naked, marching with naked, manly 
solemnity down to the water’s edge. He would be about four 
years old, but more manly than an adult man. With sex comes 
a cettain vulnerability which these round-faced, black-headed, 
stiff-backed infant men have not got. Kate knew the urchin. 
She knew his tattered rag of a red shirt, and the weird rags 
that were his little man’s white trousers. She knew his black 
round head, his stiff, sturdy march of a walk, his round eyes, 
and his swift, scuttling run, like a bolting animal. 

"a 
a 
Z 

“What’s the brat got?’ she said to herself, gazing at the mov- 
ing little figure within the great light. 

Dangling from his tiny outstretched arm, held by the web- 
bed toe, head down and feebly flapping its out-sinking wings, 
was a bird, a water-fowl. It was a black mud-chick with a white 
bar across the under-wing, one of the many dark fowl! that 
bobbed in little flocks along the edge of the sun-stunned 
lake. 

The urchin marched stiffly down to the water’s edge, hold- 
ing the upside-down bird, that seemed big as an eagle in the 
tiny fist. Another brat came scuttling after. The two infant 
men paddled a yard into the warm, lapping water, under the 
great light, and gravely stooping, like old men, set the fowl on 
the water. It floated, but could hardly paddle. The lift of the 
ripples moved it. The urchins dragged it in, like a rag, by a 
string tied to its leg. 

So quiet, sagstill, so dark, like tiny, chubby little infant men, 
the two solemn figyres with the rag of a bird! 

Kate turned uneasily to her book, her nerves on edge. She 
heard the Splash of a stone. The bird was on the water, but ap- 
parently the string that held it by the leg was tied to a stone. It 
lay wavering, a couple of yards out. And the two little he-men, 
with sober steadfastness and a quiet, dark lust, were picking up 
stones, and throwing them with the fierce Indian aim at the 
feebly fluttering bird: right down upon it. Like a little warrior 
stood the mite in the red rag, his arm upraised, to throw the 
stone with all his might down on the tethered bird. 

In a whiff, Kate was darting down the beach. 

‘Ugly boys! Ugly children! Go! Go away, ugly children, 
ugly boys!’ she said on one breath, with quiet intensity. 

The round-headed dot gave her one black glance from his 
manly eyes, then the two of them scuttled up the beach into 
invisibility. 

Kate went into the water, and lifted the wet, warm bird. The 
bit of coarse fibre-string hung from its limp, greenish, water- 
fowl’s ankle. It feebly tried to bite her. 

She rapidly stepped out of the water and stood in the sun to 
unfasten the string. The bird was about as big as a pigeon. It 
lay in her hand with the absolute motionlessness of a caught 
wild thing. 

HOME TO SAYULA 229 

230 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Kate stooped and pulled off her shoes and stockings. She 
looked round. No sign of life from the reed huts dark in the 
shadow of the trees. She lifted her skirts and staggered out 
barefoot in the hot shallows of the water, almost falling on the 
cruel stones under the water. The lake-side was very shallow. 
She staggered on and on, in agony, holding up her skirts in one 
hand, holding the warm, wet, motionless bird in the other. Till 
at last she was up to her knees. Then she launched the greeny- 
black bird, and gave it a little push to the uprearing expanse of 
filmy water, that was almost dim, invisible with the glare of 
light. 

a lay wet and draggled on the pale, moving sperm of the 
water, like a buoyant rag. 

‘Swim then! Swim!’ she said, trying to urge it away into the 
lake. 

Either it couldn’t or wouldn’t. Anyhow it didn’t. 

But it was out of reach of those urchins. Kate struggled back 
from those stones, to her tree, to her shade, to her book, away 
from the rage of the sun. Silent with slow anger, she kept glanc- 
ing up at the floating bird, and sideways at the reed huts of 

. the Indians in the black shadow 

Yes, the bird was dipping its beak in the water, and shaking 
its head. It was coming to itself. But it did not paddle. It let it- 
self be lifted, lifted on the ripples, and the Hipp would drift it 
ashore. 

‘Fool of a thing!’ said Kate nervously, using all her con- 
sciousness to make it paddle away into the lake. 

Two companions, two black dots with white specks of 
faces, were coming out of the pale glare of the lake. Two mud- 
chicks swam busily forward. The first swam up and poked its 
beak at the inert bird, as if to say Hello! What's up? Then im- 
mediately it turned away and paddled in complete oblivion to 
the shore, its companion following. 

Kate watched the rag of feathered misery anxiously. Would 
it not rouse itself? wouldn’t it follow? 

No! Thete it lay, slowly, inertly drifting on the ripples, only 
sometimes shaking its head. 

The other two alert birds waded confidently, busily among 
the stones. 

Kate read a bit more. 

When she looked again, she could not see her bird. But the 
other two were walking among the stones, jauntily. 

She read a bit more. ; 

The next thing was a rather loutish youth of eighteen or so, 
in overall trousers, running with big strides towards the water, 
and the stiff little man-brat scuttling after with determined bare 
feet. Her heart stood still. 

The two busy mud-chicks rose in flight and went low over 
the water into the blare of light. Gone! 
~ But the lout in the big hat and overall trousers and those stiff 
Indian shoulders she sometimes hated so much was peering 
among the stones. She, however, was sure her. bird had gone. 

No! Actually no! The stiff-shoulder lout stooped and picked 
up the damp thing. It had let itself drift back. 

He turned, dangling it like a rag from the end of one wing, 
and handed it to the man-brat. Then he stalked self-satisfied up 
the shore. Fo : 

Ugh! and that mpment how Kate hated these people: their 
terrible lowness, a terre, a terre. Their. stiff broad American 
shoulders, and high chests, and above all, their walk, their 
prancing, insentient walk. ‘As if some motor-engine drove 
them at the bottom of their back. 

. Stooping rather forward and looking at the ground so that 
he couldeurn his eyes sideways to her, without showing her his 
face, the lout returned to the shadow of the huts. And after 
him, diminutive, the dot of a man marched stiffly, hurriedly, 
dangling the wretched bird, that stirred very feebly, down- 
wards from the tip of one wing. And from time to time turning 
his round, black-eyed face in Kate’s direction, vindictively, ap- 
prehensively, lest she should swoop down on him again. 
Black, apprehensive male defiance of the great, white weird 
female. 

Kate glared back from under her tree. 

‘If looks would kill you, brat, I’d kill you,’ she said. And the 
urchin turned his face like clockwork at her from time to time, 
as he strutted palpitating towards the gap in the cane hedge, 
into which the youth had disappeared. 

Kate debated whether to rescue the foolish bird again. But 
what was the good! 

This country would have its victim. America would have 

HOME TO SAYULA . 

a 

232 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

its victim. As long as time lasts, it will be the continent divided 
between Victims and Victimizers. What is the good of trying 
to interfere! 

She rose up in detestation of the flabby bird, and of the 
sulky-faced brat turning his full moon on her in apprehension. 

Lumps of women were by the water’s edge. Westwards, 
down the glare, rose the broken-looking villas and the white 
twin towers of the church, holding up its two fingers in mock- 
ety above the scarlet flame-trees and the dark mangoes. She 
saw the rather lousy shore, and smelt the smell of Mexico come 
out in the hot sun after the rains: excrement, human and ani- 
mal dried in the sun on a dry, dry earth; and dry leaves; and 
mango leaves; and pure air with a little refuse-smoke in it. 

‘But the day will come when I shall go away,’ she said to 
herself. 

And sitting rocking once more on her veranda, hearing the 
clap-clap of sorti/las from the far end of the patio, the odd, 
metallic noises of birds, and feeling the clouds already assem- 
bling in the west, with a weight of unborn thunder upon them, 
she felt she could bear it no more: the vacuity, and the pres- 
sure: the horrible uncreate elementality, so uncouth, even sun. 
and rain uncouth, uncouth. 

And she wondered over the black vision in the eyes of that 
urchin. The curious void. 

He could not see that the bird was a real living creature with 
a life of its own. This, his race had never seen. With black eyes 
they stared out on an elemental world, where the elements were 
monstrous and cruel, as the sun was monstrous, and the cold, 
crushing black water of the rain was monstrous, and the dry, 
dry, cruel earth. 

And among the monstrosity of the elements flickered and 
towered other presences: terrible uncouth things called gringos, 
white. people, and dressed up monsters of rich people, with 
powers like gods, but uncouth, demonish gods. And uncouth _ 
things like birds that could fly and snakes that could crawl and 
fish that could swim and bite. An uncouth, monstrous universe 
of monsters big and little, in which man held his own by sheer 
resistance and guardedness, never, never going forth from his 
own darkness. 

And sometimes, it was good to have revenge on the mon- 

/ 

THE WRITTEN HYMNS OF QUETZALCOATL 233 

sters that fluttered and strode. The monsters big and the mon- 
sters little. Even the monster of that bird, which had its own 
monstrous bird-nature. On this the mite could wreck the long 
human vengeance, and for once be master. 

Blind to the creature as a soft, struggling thing finding its 
own fluttering way through life. Seeing only another monster 
of the outer void. 

Walking forever through a menace of monsters, blind to the 
sympathy in things, holding one’s own, and not giving in, nor 
going forth. Hence the lifted chests and the prancing walk. 
Hence the stiff, insentient spines, the rich physique, and the 
heavy, dreary natures, heavy like the dark-grey mud-bricks, 
with a terrible obstinate ponderosity and a dry sort of gloom. 

¢ CHAPTER XV 

“The Witten Hymns of Quetzalcoatl 

THE electric light in Sayula was as inconstant as everything 
else. It would come on at half-past six in the evening, and it 
might bravely burn till ten at night, when the village went dark 
with a click. But usually it did no such thing. Often it refused 
to sputter into being till seven, or half-past, or even eight 
o’clock, But its worst trick was that of popping out just in the 
middle of supper, or just when you were writing a letter. All of 
a sudden, the black Mexican night came down on you with a 
thud. And then everybody running blindly for matches and 
candles, with a calling of frightened voices. Why were they al- 
ways frightened? Fhen the electric light, like a wounded thing, 
would try to revive, and a red glow would burn in the bulbs, 
sinister. All held their breath — was it coming or not? Some- 
times it expired for good, sometimes it got its breath back and 
shone, rather dully, but better than nothing. 

Once the rainy season had set in, it was hopeless. Night after 
night it collapsed. And Kate would sit with her weary, flutter- 
ing candle, while blue lightning revealed the dark shapes of 
things in the patio. And half-seen people went swiftly down to 
Juana’s end of the patio, secretly. 

234 . THE PLUMED SERPENT 

On such a night Kate sat on her veranda facing the deepness 
of the black night. A candle shone in her desert sa/on. Now and | 
again she saw the oleanders and the papaya in the patio garden, 
by the blue gleam of lightning that fell with a noiseless splash _ 
into the pitch darkness. There was a distant noise of thunder, 
several storms prowling round like hungry jaguars, above the 
lake. 

And several times the gate clicked, and crunching steps 
came along the gravel, someone passed on the gravel walk, 
saluting her, going down to Juana’s quarters, where the dull 
light of a floating oil-wick shone through the grated window- 
hole. Then there was a low, monotonous sound of a voice, re- 
citing or reading. And as the wind blew and the lightning 
alighted again like a blue bird among the plants, there would 
come the sharp noise of the round cuentas falling from the 
cuenta-tree. 

Kate was uneasy and a bit forlorn. She felt something was 
happening down in the servants’ corner, something secret in 
the dark. And she was stranded in her isolation on her terrace. 

But, after all, it was her house, and she had a right to know 
what her own people were up to. She rose from her rocking- 
chair and walked down the veranda and round the dining- 
room bay. The dining-room, which had its own two doors on 
the patio, was already locked up. 

In the fat corner beyond the well she saw a group sitting on 
the ground, outside the doorway of Juana’s kitchen-hole. Out 
of this little kitchen-shed shone the light of the floating-wick 
lamp, and a voice was slowly intoning, all the faces were look- 
ing into the dim light, the women dark-hooded in rebozos, the 
men with their hats on, their serapes over their shouldets. 

When they heard Kate’s footsteps, the fac@s looked her way, 
and a voice murmured in warning. Juana struggled to het feet. 

“It is the Nifia!’ she said. “Come, then, Ni#a, you poor inno- 
cent all alone in the evening.’ 3 

The men in the group rose to their feet — she recognized the 
young Ezequiel, taking his hat off to her. And there was Maria 
del Carmen, the bride. And inside the little shed, with the wick 
lamp on the floor, was Julio, the bridegroom of a few weeks 
ago. Concha and little Maria were there, and a couple of | - 
strangers. 

7? 

- 

THE WRITTEN HYMNS OF QUETZALCOATL 235 

‘IT could hear the voice —’ said Kate. ‘I didn’t know it was 
you, Julio. How do you do? — And I wondered so much what 
it was.’ 

There was a moment’s dead silence. Then Juana plunged in. 

“Yes, Nifia! Come! It’s very nice that you come. Concha, 
the chair for the Nifia!’ 

Concha got up rather unwillingly, and fetched the little low 
chair which formed Juana’s sole article of furniture, save the 
one bed. 

“I don’t disturb you?’ said Kate. 

“No, Nifia, you are a friend of Don Ram6n, verdad?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Kate. 

‘And we — we are reading the Hymns.’ 

‘Yes?’ said Kate. 

“The Hymns of Quetzalcoatl,’ said ee in his barking 
young voice, with sudden btavado. 

‘Do go on! May I listen!’ 

“You hear! The ,Nifia wants to listen. Read, Julio, read! 
Read then.’ 

They all Sat down once more on the ground, and Julio sat 
down by the lamp, but he hving his head, hiding his face in the 
shadow of his big hat. 

‘Entonces! — Read then,’ said Juana. 

‘He isafraid,’ murmured Maria del Carmen, laying her hand 
on the young man’s knee. ‘However, read, Julio! Because the 
Nifia wants to heat.’ 

And after a moment’s struggle, Julio said in a muffled voice: 

‘Do I begin from the beginning.’ 

“Yes, from the beginning! Read!’ said Juana. 

The young man took a sheet of paper, like an advertisement 
leaflet, from under*his blanket. At the top it had the Quetzal- 
coatl symbol, called the Eye, the ring with the bird-shape 
standing in the middle. 

He began to read in a rather muffled voice: 

‘IT am Quetzalcoatl with the dark face, who lived in Mexico 
in other days. 

“Till there came a stranger from over the seas, and his face 
was white, and he spoke with strange words. He showed his 
hands and his feet, that in both there were holes. And he said: 
“‘My nameis Jesus,and they called me Christ. Men crucified me 

236 THE PLUMED SERPENT - 

ona Cross till I died. But I rose up out of the place where they 
put me, and I went up to heaven to my Father. Now my Father 
has told me to come to Mexico.” 

‘Ouetzalcoatl said: You alone? 

‘Jesus said: My mother is here. She shed many tears for me, 
seeing me crucify. So she will hold the Sons of Mexico on her 
lap, and soothe them when they suffer, and when the women 
of Mexico weep, she will take them on her bosom and comfort 
them. And when she cries to the Father for her people, He will 
make everything well. 

‘Ouetzalcoatl said: That is well. And Brother with the name 
Jesus, what will you do in Mexico? 

‘Jesus said: 1 will bring peace into Mexico. And on the naked 
I will put clothes, and food between the lips of the hungry, and 
gifts in all men’s hands, and peace and love in their hearts. 

‘Quetzalcoatl said: It is very good. I am old. I could not do 
so much. I must go now. Farewell, people of Mexico. Farewell, 
strange brother called Jesus. Farewell, woman called Mary. It 
is time for me to go. 

‘So Quetzalcoat! looked at his people; and he embraced 
Jesus, the Son of Heaven; and he embraced Maria, the Blessed 
Virgin, the Holy Mother of Jesus, and he turned away. Slowly 
he went. But in his ears was the sound of the tearing down of 
his temples in Mexico. Nevertheless he went on slowly, being 
old, and weary with much living. He climbed the steep of the 
mountain, and over the white snow of the volcano. As he went, 
behind him rose a cry of people dying, and a flame of places _ 
burning. He said to himself: Surely those are Mexicans crying! 
Yet I must not hear, for Jesus has come to the land, and he will 
wipe the tears from all eyes, and his Mother will make them all 
glad. - 

‘He also said: Surely that is Mexico burning. But I must not 
look, for all men will be brothers, now Jesus has come to the 
land, and the women will sit by the blue skirts of Mary, smiling 
with peace and with love. 

“So the old god reached the top of the mountain, and looked 
up into the blue of heaven. And through a door in the blue 
wall he saw a great datkness, and stars and a moon shining. 
And beyond the darkness he saw one great star, like a bright © 
gateway. 

a: oa 

THE WRITTEN HYMNS OF QUETZALCOATL 237 

“Then fire rose from the volcano around the old Quetzal- 
coatl, in wings and glittering feathers. And with the wings of 
fire and the glitter of sparks Quetzalcoatl flew up, up, like a 
wafting fire, like a glittering bird, up, into the space, and away 
to the white steps of heaven, that lead to the blue walls, where 
is the door to the dark. So he entered in and was gone. 

“Night fell, and Quetzalcoatl was gone, and men in the 
world saw only a star travelling back into heaven, departing 
under the low branches of darkness. 

“Then men in Mexico said: Quetzalcoatl has gone. Even his 
star has departed. We must listen to this Jesus, who speaks in 
a foreign tongue. 

“So they learned a new speech from the priests that came from 
upon the great waters to the east. And they became Christians.’ 

Julio, who had become absorbed, ended abruptly, as the tale 
of the leaflet was ended. 

“It is beautifal,’ said Kate. 

“Aad it is true!’ gied the sceptical Juana. 

“It seems fe me true,’ said Kate. ~ » 

‘Sefiora!* yelled Concha. ‘Is it true that heaven is up there, 
and you come down steps like clouds to the edge of the sky, 
like the steps from the mole into the lake? Is it true that El 
Sefior comes and stands on the steps and looks down at us like 
we look down into the lake to see the charales?’ 

Concha shoved up her fierce swarthy face, and shook her 
masses of hair, glaring at Kate, waiting for an answer. 

cE don’t know everything,’ laughed Kate. ‘But it seems to - 
me true.’ 

“She believes it,’said Concha; turning her face to her mother. 

‘And is it true,’ asked Juana, ‘that El Sefior, El Cristo del 
Mundo, is a gringo, and that He comes from your country, with 
His Holy Mother?’ 

‘Not from my country, but from a country near.’ 

‘Listen!’ exclaimed Juana, awestruck. ‘El Sefior is a gringuito, 
and His Holy Mother is a gringuita. Yes, one really knows. 
Look! Look at the feet of the Nefia! Pure feet of the Santisima! 
Look!’ Kate was barefoot, wearing sandals with a simple strap 
across the foot. Juana touched one of the Néfa’s white feet, 
fascinated. ‘Feet of the Santisima. And She, the Holy Mary, is a 
gringuita. She came over the sea, like you, Nifa?’ 

238 THE PLUMED SERPENT é 

“Yes, she came over the sea!’ 

‘Ah! You know it?’ 

‘Yes. We know that.’ 

‘Think of it! The Santisima is a gringuita, and She came overt 
the Sea like the Nifa, from the countries of the Nif#a!’ Juana 
spoke in a wicked wonder, horrified, delighted, mocking. 

‘And the Lord is a Gringuito — pure Gringuito?” barked Concha. 

‘And Nifia—it was the gringos who killed El Sefior? It wasn’t 
the Mexicans? It was those other gringos who put Him on the 
Cross?” 

“Yes!” said Kate. ‘It wasn’t the Mexicans.’ 

“The gringos?? 

“Yes, the gringos.” 

‘And He Himself was a Gringo?’ 

‘Yes!’ said Kate, not knowing what else to say. E 

‘Look!’ said Juana, in her hushed, awed, malevolent voice. 
“He was a Gringo, and the gringos put him on the Cross.’ 

‘But a long time ago,’ said Kate hastily. 

“A long time ago, says the Nifa,’ echoed Juana, in her awed 
voice. 

There was a moment of silence. The dark faces of the girls 
and men seated on the ground were turned up to Kate, watch- 
ing her fixedly, in the half light, counting every word. In the 
outer air, thunder muttered in different places. 

‘And now, N7fa,’ came the cool, clear voice of Maria del 
Carmen, ‘El Sefior is going back again to His Father, and our 
Quetzalcoatl is coming back to us?’ 

‘And the Santisima is leaving us?’ put in the hurried voice of 
Juana. ‘Think of it! The Santisima is leaving us, and this Quet- 
zalcoatl is coming! He has no mother, he!’ 

“Perhaps he has a wife,’ said Kate. 

‘Ouién sabe!’ murmured Juana. 

‘They say,’ said the bold Concha, ‘that in Paradise he has 
grown young.’ 

“Who?’ asked Juana. 

‘I don’t know how they call him,’ muttered Concha, ashamed 
to say the word, 

‘Quetzalcoatl!’ said Ezequiel, in his barking strong young 
voice. “Yes, he is young. He is a god in the flower of life, and 
finely built.’ 

THE WRITTEN HYMNS OF QUETZALCOATL — 239 

“They say so! They say so!’ murmured Juana. “Think of it!’ 

‘Here it says so!’ cried Ezequiel. ‘Here it is written. In the 
second Hymn.’ 

“Read it then, Julio.’ 

And Julio, now nothing loth, took out a second paper. 

“I, Quetzalcoatl, of Mexico, I travelled the longest journey. 

“Beyond the blue outer wall of heaven, beyond the bright 
place of the Sun, across the plains of darkness where the stars 
spread out like trees, like trees and bushes, far away to the 
heart of all the worlds, low down like the Morning Star. 

“And at the heart of all the worlds those were waiting whose 
faces I could not see. And in voices like bees they murmured 
among themselves: This 7s Ouetzalcoatl whose hair is white with 
fanning the fires of life. He comes alone, and slowly, - 

“Then with hands I could not see, they took my hands, and 
in their arms that I could not see, at last I died. 

“But whend was dead, and bone, they cast’ not my bones 
away, they did not giye me up to the four winds, nor to the six. 
No, not even to the wind that blows down to the middle of 
earth, nor fo him that blows upward like a finger pointing, did 
they give me. 

“He is dead, they aa but unrelinquished. 

‘So they took the oil of the darkness, and laid it on my brow 
and my.yes, they put it in my ears and nostrils and my mouth, 
they put it on the two-fold silence of my breasts, and on my 
sunken navel, and on my secret places, before and behind: and 
in the palms of my hands, and on the mounds of my knees, and 
under the tread of my feet. 

‘Lastly, they anointed all my head with the oil that comes 
out of the darkness. They they said: He is sealed up. Lay him 
awa 

‘So they laid me in the fountain that bubbles darkly at the 
heart of the worlds, far, far behind the sun, and there lay I, 
Quetzalcoatl, in warm oblivion. 

‘I slept the great sleep, and dreamed not. 

‘Till a voice was calling: Quetzalcoatl! 

‘I said: Who is that? 

“No one answered, but the voice said: Quetzalcoatl! 

‘I said: Where art thou? 

‘So! he said. Iam neither here nor there. Iam thyself. Get up. 

240 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘Now all was: very heavy upon me, like a tomb-stone of 
darkness. 

‘I said: Am I not old? How shall I roll this stone away? 

‘How art thou old, when Iam new man? I will roll away the 
stone. Sit up! 

‘I sat up, and the stone went rolling, crashing down the gulfs 
of space. 

‘I said to myself: I am new man. I am younger —e the 
young and older than the old. Lo! I am unfolded on the stem 
of time like a flower, I am at the midst of the flower of my 
manhood. Neither do I ache with desire, to tear, to burst the 
bud; neither do I yearn away like a seed that floats into heaven. 
The cup of my flowering is unfolded, in its middle the stars 
float balanced with array. My stem is in the air, my roots are in 
all the dark, the sun is no more than a cupful within me. 

‘Lo! I am neither young nor old, Il am the flower unfolded, 
Iam new. 

“So I rose and stretched my limbs and looked around. The 
sun was below me in a daze of heat, like a hot humming-bird 
hovering at mid-day over the worlds. And his beak was long 
and very sharp, he was like a dragon. 

‘And a faint star was hesitating wearily, waiting to pass. 

‘T called aloud, saying: ‘‘ Who is that?”’ 
My name is Jesus, lam Mary’s son. 

I am coming home. 
My mother the Moon is dark. 

Brother, Quetzalcoat/, 

Hold back the wild hot sun. 

Bind him with shadow while I pass. 
Let me come home. 

‘IT caught the sun and held him, and in my shade the faint 
star slipped past, going slowly into the dark reaches beyond 
the burning of the sun. Then on the slope of silence he sat 
down and took off his sandals, and I put them on. 

“How do they wear,the wings of love, Jesus, the Mexican 
people?” 

' ***T’he souls of the Mexican people are heavy for the wings 
of love, they have swallowed the stone of despair.”’ 

““Where is your Lady Mother in the mantle of blue, sis 
with comfort in her lap?” 

THE WRITTEN HYMNS OF QUETZALCOATL 2AlI 

“““Her mantle faded in the dust of the world, she was weary 
without sleep, for the voices of people cried night and day, 
and the knives of the Mexican people were sharper than the 
Pinions of love, and their stubbornness was stronger than 
hope. Lo! the fountain of tears dries up in the eyes of the old, 
and the lap of the aged is comfortless, they look for rest. Quet- 
zalcoatl, Sir, my mother went even before me, to her still white 
bed in the moon.” 

“**She is gone, and thou art gone, Jesus, the Crucified. Then 
what of Mexico?” 

““*The images stand in their churches, Oh Quetzalcoatl, they 
don’t know that I and my Mother have departed. They are 
angry souls, Brother, my Lord! They vent their anger. They 
broke my Churches, they stole my strength, they withered the 
lips of the Virgin. They drove us away, and we crept away like 
a tottering old man and a woman, tearless and bent double 
with age. Sg we fled while they were not looking. And we seek 
but rest, to forget forever the children of men who have swal- 
lowed the stoné of despair.” 

‘Therf said I: It is good, pass on. I, Quetzalcoat], will go 
down. Sleep thou-the sléep without dreams. Farewell at the 
cross-roads, Brother Jesus. 

“He said: Oh, Quetzalcoatl! They have forgotten thee. The 
feathered snake! The serpent — silent bird! They are asking for | 
none of thee. 

‘I said: Go thy way, for the dust of earth is in thy eyes and 
on thy lips. For me the serpent of middle-earth sleeps in my 
loins and my belly, the bird of the outer air perches on my 
brow and sweeps her bill across my breast. But I, I am lord of 
two ways. I am master of up and down. Iam as a man who is a 
new man, with new limbs and life, and the light of the Morning 
Star in his eyes. Lo! Iam I! The lord of both ways. Thou wert 
lord of the one way. Now it leads thee to the sleep. Farewell! 

“So Jesus went on towards the sleep. And Mary the Mother 
of Sorrows lay down on the bed of the white moon, weary be- 
yond any mote tears. 

‘And I, I am on the threshold. I am stepping across the bor- 
der. I am Quetzalcoatl, lord of both ways, star between day 
and the dark.’ 

There was silence as the young man finished reading. 

* Wwe a 

CHAPTER XVI 

Cipriano and Kate 

On Saturday afternoons the big black canoes with their large 
square sails came slowly approaching out of the thin haze 
across the lake, from the west, from Tlapaltepec, with big 
straw hats and with blankets and earthenware stuff, from Ixtla- 
huacan and Jaramay and Las Zemas with mats and timber and 
charcoal and oranges, from Tuliapan and Cuxcueco and San 
Cristobal with boatloads of dark-green, globular water-melons, 
and piles of red tomatoes, mangoes, vegetables, oranges: and 

‘boat-loads of bricks and tiles, burnt red, but rather friable; 
then more charcoal, more wood, from the stark dry mountains 
overt the lake. 

Kate nearly always went out about five o’clock, on Satur- 
days, to see the boats, flat-bottomed, drift up to the shallow 
shores, and begin to unload in the glow of the evening. It 
pleased her to see the men running along the planks with the 
dark-green melons, and piling them in a mound on the rough 
sand, melons dark-green like creatures with pale bellies. To see 
the tomatoes all poured out into a shallow place in the lake, © 
bobbing about while the women washed them, a bobbing scar- 
let upon the water. 

The long, heavy bricks were piled in heaps along the scrap 
of demolished breakwater, and little gangs of asses came ttot- 
ting down the rough beach, to be laden, pressing their little 
feet in the gravelly sand, and flopping their ears. - 

The cargadores were busy at the charcoal boats, carrying out 
the rough sacks. 

‘Do you want charcoal, Nia?’ shouted a grimy cargador, 
who had carried the trunks from the station on his back. 

“At how much?’ 

“Twenty-five reales the two sacks.’ 

‘I pay twenty reales.’ 

“At twenty rea/es then, Sefiorita. But you give me two reales 
for the transport?’ 

“The owner pays the transport,’ said Kate. ‘But I will give 
you twenty centavos.’ 

CIPRIANO AND KATE 243 

Away went the man, trotting barelegged, barefoot, over the 
stony ground, with two large sacks of charcoal on his shoul- 
ders. The men carty huge weights, without seeming ever to 
think they are heavy. Almost as if they liked to feel a huge 
weight crushing on their iron spines, and to be able to resist 
it. 

Baskets of spring guavas, baskets of sweet lemons called 
limas, basket of tiny green and yellow lemons, big as walnuts; 
orange-red and greenish mangoes, oranges, carrots, cactus 
fruits in great abundance, a few knobbly potatoes, flat, pearl- 
white onions, little ca/abazitas and speckled green calabazitas 
like frogs, camotes cooked and raw - she loved to watch the 
baskets trotting up the beach past the church. 

Then, rather late as a rule, big red pots, bulging red oM/as for 
water-jars, earthenware casseroles and earthenware jugs with 
cream and black scratched pattern in glaze, bowls, big flat 
earthenwarg discs for cooking sorti//as —- much earthenware. 

On the west shore, men were running up the beach wearing 
twelve enormofis hats at once, like a trotting pagoda. Men 
trotting“with finely woven Ayaraches and rough strip sandals. 
And men with a few dark serapes, with gaudy rose-pink pat- 
terns, in a pile on their shoulders. 

It was fascinating. But at the same time, there was a heavy, 
almost sullen feeling on the air. These people came to market 
to a sort of battle. They came, not for the joy of selling, but for 
the sullen contest with those who wanted what they had got. 
The strange, black resentment always present. 

By the time the church bells clanged for sunset, the market 
had already begun. On all the pavements round the p/aza 
squatted the Indians with their wares, pyramids of green water- 
melons, atrays of rough earthenware, hats in piles, pairs of 
sandals side by side, a great array of fruit, a spread of collar- 
studs and knick-knacks, called novedades, little trays with sweets. 
And people arriving all the time out of the wild country, with 
laden asses. 

Yet never a shout, hardly a voice to be heard. None of the 
animation and the frank wild clamour of a Mediterranean 
market. Always the heavy friction of the will; always, always, 
gtinding upon the spirit, like the grey black grind of lava-rock. 

When dark fell, the vendors lighted their tin torch-lamps, 

244 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

and the flames wavered and streamed as the dark-faced men 
squatted on the ground in their white clothes and big hats, 
waiting to sell. They never asked you to buy. They never 
showed their wares. They didn’t even look at you. It was as if 
their static resentment and indifference would hardly let them 
sell at all. 

Kate sometimes felt the market cheerful and easy. But more 
often she felt an unutterable weight slowly, invisibly sinking 
on her spirits. And she wanted to run. She wanted, above all, 
the comfort of Don Ramon and the Hymns of Quetzalcoatl. — 
This seemed to her the only oer from a. world gone 
ghastly. 

There was talk of revolution again, so the market was un- 
easy and grinding the black grit into the spirit. Foreign-look- 
ing soldiers were about, with looped hats, and knives and pis- 
tols, and savage northern faces: tall, rather thin figures. They 
would loiter about in pairs, talking in a strange northern 
speech, and seeming more alien even than Kate herself. 

The food-stalls were brilliantly lighted. Rows of men sat at 
the plank boards, drinking soup and eating hot food with their 
fingers. The milkman rode in on horseback, his two big cans 
of milk slung before him, and he made his way slowly through 
the people to the food-stalls. There, still sitting unmoved on 
horseback, he delivered bowls of milk from the can in front of 
him, and then, on horseback like a monument, took his supper, 
his bowl of soup, and his plate of tamales, or of minced, fiery 
meat spread on /ortillas. The peons drifted slowly round. Gui- 
tars were sounding, half-secretly. A motor-car worked its way 
in from the city, choked with people, girls, young men, city 
papas, children, in a pile. 

The rich press of life, above the flare of torches upon the 
ground! The throng of white-clad, big-hatted men circulating 
slowly, the women with dark rebozos slipping silently. Dark 
trees overhead. The doorway of the hotel bright with electri- 
city. Girls in organdie frocks, white, cherry-red, blue, from the 
city. Groups of singers singing inwardly. And all the noise 
subdued, suppressed. 

The sense of strange, heavy suppression, the dead black 
power of negation in the souls of the peons. It was almost piti- 
ful to see the pretty, pretty slim girls from Guadalajara going 

CIPRIANO AND KATE Ras 

round and round, their naked arms linked togethet, so light 
in their gauzy, scarlet, white, blue, orange dresses, looking for 
someone to look at them, to take note of them. And the peon 
men only emitting from their souls the black vapour of nega- 
tion, that perhaps was hate. They seemed, the natives, to have 
the power of blighting the air with their black, rock-bottom 
resistance. 

- Kate almost wept over the slim, eager girls, pretty as rather 
papery flowers, eager for attention, but thrust away, victim- 
ized. 

Suddenly there was a shot. The market-place was on its feet 
in amoment, scattering, pouring away into the streets and the 
shops. Another shot! Kate, from where she stood, saw across 
the rapidly-emptying p/aya a man sitting back on one of the 
benches, firing a pistol into the air. He was a lout from the city, 
and he was half drunk. The people knew what it was. Yet any 
moment he might lower the pistol and start firing at random. 
Everybody — silently, melting away, leaving the plaza 
void. 

Two more shots, pap-pap! still into the air. And at the same 
moment a little officer in‘uniform darted out of the dark street 
where the military station was, and where now the big hats 
were piled on the ground; he rushed straight to the drunkard, 
who yas spreading his legs and waving the pistol: and before 
you could breathe, s/ap! and again s/ap/ He had slapped the 
pistol-firer first on one side of the face, then on the other, with 
slaps that resounded almost like shots. And in the same breath 
he seized the arm that held the pistol and wrested the weapon 
away. 

Two of the strange soldiers instantly rushed up and seized 
the man by the arms. The officer spoke two words, they saluted 
and marched off their prisoner. 

Instantly the crowd was ebbing back into the p/aya, uncon- 
cerned. Kate sat on a bench with her heart beating. She saw the 
prisoner pass under a lamp, streaks of blood on his cheek. And 
Juana, who had fled, now came scuttling back and took Kate’s 
hand, saying: 

‘Look! Néfa! It is the General! 

She rose startled to her feet. The officer was saluting her. 

‘Don Cipriano!’ she said. 

246 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘The same!’ he replied. ‘Did that drunken fellow frighten 
ou?’ 

; ‘Not much! Only startled me. I didn’t fee/ any evil intention 
behind it.’ 

‘No, only drunk.’ 

‘But I shall go home now.’ 

‘Shall I walk with you?’ 

‘Would you care to?’ 

He took his place at her side, and ie turned down by the _ 

church, to the lake shore. There was a moon above the moun- 
tain and the air was coming fresh, not too strong, from the 
west. From the Pacific. Little lights were burning ruddy by the 
boats at the water’s edge, some outside, and some inside, under 
the roof-tilt of the boat’s little inward shed. Women were pre- 
paring a mouthful of food. 

‘But the night is beautiful,’ said Kate, breathing deep. 

“With the moon clipped away just a little,’ he said. 

Juana was following close on her heels: and behind, two 
soldiers in slouched hats. 

“Do the soldiers escort you?’ she said. 

‘I suppose so,’ said he. 

“But the moon,’ she said, ‘isn’t lovely and friendly as it is in 
England or Italy.’ 

“It is the same planet,’ he replied. 

“But the moonshine in America isn’t the same. It doesn’t 
make one feel glad as it does in seer One feels it would like 
to hurt one.’ 

He was silent for some moments. Then he said: 

“Perhaps there is in you something European, which hurts 
out Mexican Moon.’ ; 

‘But I come in good faith.’ 

“European good faith. Perhaps it is not the same as Mexi- 
can,” 

Kate was silent, almost stunned. 

“Fancy your Mexican moon objecting to me!’ she laughed 
ironically. 

“Fancy yout objecting to our Mexican moon!’ said he. 

“I wasn’t,’ said she. 

They came to the corner of Kate’s road. At the corner was 
a group of trees, and under the trees, behind the hedge, several 

CIPRIANO AND KATE 247 

reed huts. Kate often laughed at the donkey looking over the 
dry-stone low wall, and at the black sheep with curved horns, 
tied to a bitten tree, and at the lad, naked but for a bit of a shirt, 
fleeing into the corner under the thorn screen. 

Kate and Cipriano sat on the veranda of the House of the 
Cuentas. She offered him vermouth, but he refused. 

They were still. There came the faint pip!-pip! from the 
little electric plant just up the road, which Jestis tended. Then 
a cock from beyond the bananas crowed powerfully and 
hoarsely. 

“But how absurd!’ said Kate. ‘Cocks don’t crow at this 
hour.’ 

“Only in Mexico,’ laughed Cipriano. 

“Yes! Only here!’ 

“He thinks your moon is the sun, no?’ he said, teasing her. 

The cock crowed powerfully, again and again. 

“This is ygry nice, your house, your pavio,’ said Cipriano. 

But Kate was silent. 

“Or don’t yof like it?’ he said. 

“Yousee,’ she answered, ‘I have nothing to do! The servants 
won’t let me do anything. If I sweep my room, they stand and 
say Oué Nitia! Oué Nina!’As if I was standing on my head for 
their benefit. I sew, though I’ve no interest in sewing. — What 
is it, for a life?’ 

‘And you read!’ he said, glancing at the magazines and 
books. 

‘Ah, it is all such stupid, lifeless stuff, in the books and 
papers,’ she said. 

There was a silence. After which he said: 

‘But what would you like to do? As you say, you take no 
interest in sewing. You know the Navajo women, when they 
weave a blanket, leave a little place for their soul to come out, 
at the end: not to weave their soul into it. —- I always think 
England has woven her soul into her fabrics, into all the things 
she has made. And she never left a place for it to come out. So 
now all her soul is in her goods, and nowhere else.’ 

‘But Mexico sas no soul,’ said Kate. ‘She’s swallowed the 
stone of despair, as the hymn says.’ 

‘Ah! You think so? I think not. The soul is also a thing you 
make, like a pattern in a blanket. It is very nice while all the 

| 
z 

wools are rolling their different threads and different colours, 
and the pattern is being made. But once it is finished — then 
finished it has no interest any more. Mexico hasn’t started to 
weave the pattern of her soul. Or she is only just starting: with 
Ramon. Don’t you believe in Ramon?’ 

Kate hesitated before she answered. 

‘Ramon, yes! I do! But whether it’s any good trying here in 
Mexico, as he is trying —’ she said slowly. 

“He is in Mexico. He tries here. Why should not you?’ 

“Te? 

“Yes! You! Ramon doesn’t believe in womanless gods, he 
says. Why should you not be the woman in the Quetzalcoatl 
pantheon? If you will, the goddess!’ 

‘I, a goddess in the Mexican pantheon?’ cried Kate, with a 
burst of startled laughter. 

“Why not?’ said he. 

‘But Iam not Mexican,’ said she. 

“You may easily be a goddess,’ said he, ‘in the same pan- 
theon with Don Ramon and me.’ | 

A strange, inscrutable flame of desire seemed to be burning 
on Cipriano’s face, as his eyes watched her glittering. Kate 
could not help feeling that it was a’sort of intense, blind am- 
bition, of which she was partly an object: a passionate object 
also: which kindled the Indian to the hottest pitch of his being. 

‘But I don’t feel like a goddess in a Mexican pantheon,’ she 
said. ‘Mexico is a bit horrible to me. Don Ram6n is wonderful: 
but I’m so afraid they will destroy him.’ 

“Come, and help to prevent it.’ 

“How?” ; 

“You marry me. You complain you have nothing to do. 
Then marry me. Marry me, and help Ram6n and me. We need 
a woman, Ramon says, to be with us. And you are the woman. 
There is a great deal to do.’ 

“But can’t I help without marrying anybody?’ said Kate. 

“How can you?’ he said simply. 

And she knew it was true. 

“But you see,’ she said, ‘I have no zmpulse to marry you, so 
how can I?’ 

“Why?’ he said. 

“You see, Mexico is rea//y a bit horrible to me. And the black 

248 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Bre 

- 

CIPRIANO AND KATE 249 

eyes of the people really make my heart contract, and my flesh 
shrink. There’s a bit of horror in it. And I don’t want horror 
n my soul.’ 

He was silent and unfathomable. She did not know in the 
east what he was thinking, only a black cloud seemed over 
im. 

“Why not?’ he said at last. ‘Horror is real. otis not a bit of 
1orror, as you say, among all the rest?’ 

He gazed at her with complete, glittering earnestness, some- 
hing heavy upon her. 

“But —’ she stammered in amazement. 

“You feel a bit of horror for me too. — But why not? Perhaps 
[ feel a bit of horror for you too, for your light-coloured eyes 
and your strong white hands. But that is good.’ 

Kate looked at him in amazement. And all she wanted was 
0 flee, to flee away beyond the bounds of this gruesome conti- 
nent. 

_ Get used’to it,’ he said. ‘Get used to it that there must be a 
bit of fear, and Pit of horror in your life. And marry me, and 
you. will4ind many things that are not horror. The bit of hor- 
ror is like the sesame seed in the 1 nougat, it gives the sharp wild 
Havour. It is good to have it there.’ 

He sat watching her with black, glittering eyes, and talking 
with strange, uncanny reason. His desire seemed curiously im- 
>ersonal, physical, and yet not personal at all. She felt as if, for 
him, she had some other name, she moved within another 
species. As if her name were, for example, Itzpapalotl, and she 
had been born in unknown places, and was a woman unknown 
to herself. 

Yet surely, surely he was only putting his will over her? 

_She was breathless with amazement, because he had made 
her see the physical possibility of marrying him: a thing she 
had never even glimpsed before. But surely, surely it would 
not be herself who could marry him. It would be some curious 
female within her, whom she did not know and did not own. 

He was emanating a dark, exultant sort of passion. 

. ‘I can’t believe,’ she said, ‘that I could do it.’ 

‘Do it,’ he said. ‘And then you will know.’ 

She shuddered slightly, and went indoors for a wrap. She 
came out again ina silk Spanish shawl, brown, but deeply em- 

broidered in silver-coloured silk. She tangled her fingers ner- 
vously in the long brown fringe. 

Really, he seemed sinister to her, almost repellent. Yet she 
hated to think that she merely was afraid: that she had not the 
courage. She sat with her head bent, the light falling on her 
soft hair and on the heavy, silvery-coloured embroidery of her 
shawl, which she wrapped round her tight, as the Indian 
women do their rebozos. And his black eyes watched her, and 
watched the rich shawl, with a peculiar intense glitter. The 
shawl, too, fascinated him. 

‘Well!’ he said suddenly. ‘When shall it be?’ 

‘What?’ she said, glancing up into his black eyes with real 
fear. 

“The marriage.’ 

She looked at him, almost hypnotized with amazement that 
he should have gone so far. And even now, she had not the 
power to make him retreat. 

“I don’t know,’ she said. 

“Will you say in August? On the first of ae 

‘I won’t say any time,’ she said. 

Suddenly the black gloom and anger of the Indians came 
over him. Then again he shook it off, with a certain callous in- 
difference. 

“Will you come to Jamiltepec to-morrow to see Ramo6n?’ he 
asked. ‘He wants to speak with you.’ 

Kate also wanted to see Ramon: she always did. 

‘Shall I?’ she said. 

“Yes! Come with me in the morning in the automobile. 
¥esr* 

“I would like to see Don Ramon again,’ she said. 

“You are not afraid of him, eh? Not the bit of horror, eh?’ 
he said, smiling peculiarly. 

‘No. But Don Ramon isn’t really Mexican,’ she said. 

“Not really Mexican?’ 

“No! — He feels European.’ 

“Really! To me he is — Mexico.’ 

She paused and gathered herself together. 

‘T will row in a boat to Jamiltepec to-morrow, or I will take 
Alonso’s motor-boat. I will come about ten o’clock.’ 

‘Very good!’ said Cipriano, rising to leave. 

250 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

CIPRIANO AND KATE 251 

When he had gone, she heard the sound of the drum from 
the p/aza. It would be another meeting of the men of Quetzal- 
coatl. But she had not the desire nor the courage to set out 
afresh that day. 

Instead, she went to bed, and lay breathing the inner dark- 
ness. Through the window-cracks she saw the whiteness of the 
moon, and through the walls she heard the small pulse of the 
drum. And it all oppressed her and made her aftaid. She lay 
forming plans to escape. She must escape. She would hurriedly 
pack her trunks and disappear: perhaps take the train to Man- 
zanillo, on the coast, and thence sail up to California, to Los 
Angeles or to San Francisco. Suddenly escape, and flee away to 
a white man’s country, where she could once more breathe 
freely. How good it would be! — Yes, this was what she would 
do. 

The night grew late, the drum ceased, she heard Ezequiel 
come home and lie down on the mattress outside her door. 
The only sound was the hoarse crowing of cocks in the moon- 
li? night. And #1 her room, like someone striking a match, 
came the greenish light of a firefly, i intermittent, now here, now 
there. 4 

Thoroughly uneasy and cowed, she went to sleep. But then 
she slept deeply. 

And curiously enough, she awoke in the morning with a 
new feeling of strength. It was six o’clock, the sun was making 
yellow pencils through her shutter-cracks. She threw open her 
window to the street, and looked through the iron grating at 
the little lane with deep shadow under the garden wall, and 
above the wall, banana leaves fraying translucent green, and 
shaggy mops-of palm-trees perching high, towards the twin 
white tower-tips of the church, crowned by the Greek cross 
with four equal arms. 

In the lane it was already motion: big cows marching slowly 
to the lake, under the bluish shadow of the wall, and a small 
calf, big- eyed and adventurous, trotting aside to gaze through ' 
her gate at the green watered grass and the flowers. The silent 
peon, following, lifted his two arms with a sudden swoop up- 
wards, noiselessly, and the calf careered on. Only the sound of 
the feet of calves. . 

Then two boys vainly trying to urge a young bull- calf to the 

252 THE PLUMED SERPENT 
lake. It kept on jerking up its sharp rump, and giving dry little 
kicks, from which the boys ran away. They pushed its shoul- 
der, and it butted them with its blunt young head. They were 
in the state of semi-frenzied bewilderment which the Indians 
fall into when they are opposed and frustrated. And they took 
the usual recourse of running to a little distance, picking up 
heavy stones, and hurling them viciously at the animal. 

‘No!’ cried Kate from her window. ‘Don’t throw stones. 
Drive it sensibly!’ 

They started as if the skies had opened, dropped their stones, 
and crept very much diminished after the see-sawing bull-calf. 

An ancient crone appeared at the window with a plate of — 
chopped-up young cactus leaves, for three centavos. Kate didn’t 
like cactus vegetable, but she bought it. An old man was 
thrusting a young cockerel through the window-bars. 

‘Go,’ said Kate,-“into the parvo.’ 

And she shut her window on the street, for the invasion had 
begun. 

But it had only changed doors. 

‘Nina! Nia!’ came Juana’s voice. ‘Says the old man that 
you buy this chicken?’ 

‘At how much?’ shouted Kate, slipping ona dressing gown. 

“At ten reales.’ 

‘Oh, no!’ said Kate, flinging open her patio doors, and ap- 
pearing in her fresh wrap of pale pink cotton crepe, embroid- 
ered with heavy white flowers. ‘Not more than a peso!’ 

“A peso and ten centavos!’ pleaded the old man, balancing the 
staring-eyed red cock between his hands. ‘He is nice and fat, 
Sefiorita. See!’ 

And he held out the cock for Kate to take it and balance it 
between her hands, to try its weight. She motioned to him to 
hand it to Juana. The red cock fluttered, and suddenly crowed 
in the transfer. Juana balanced him, and made a grimace. 

“No, only a peso!’ said Kate. 

The man gave a sudden gesture of assent, received the peso, 
and disappeared like a shadow. Concha lurched up and took 
the cock, and instantly she bawled in derision: 

“Esta muy flaco! He is very thin.’ 

‘Put him in the pen,’ said Kate. ‘We'll let him grow.’ 

The patio was liquid with sunshine and shadows. Ezequiel 

ae 
CIPRIANO AND KATE 253 

had rolled up his mattress and gone. Great rose-coloured hibis- 
cus dangled from the tips of their boughs, there was a faint 
scent from the half-wild, creamy roses. The great mango-trees 
were most sumptuous in the morning, like cliffs, with their 
hard green fruits dropping like the organs of some animal from 
the new bronze leaves, so curiously heavy with life. 

‘Esta muy flaco!’ the young Concha was bawling still in deti- 
sion as she bore off the young cock to the pen under the 
banana-trees. ‘He’s very scraggy.’ 

Everybody watched intent while the red cock was put in 
among the few scraggy fowls. The grey cock, elder, retreated 
to the - far end of the pen, and eyed the newcomer with an eye 
of thunder. The red cock, muy flaco, stood diminished in a dry 
corner. Then suddenly he stretched himself and crowed shrilly, 
his red gills lifted like an aggressive beard. And the grey cock 
stirred around, preparing the thunders of his vengeance. The 
hens took not the slightest notice. 

Kate laughed, and went back to her room to dress, in the 
powerful newness’ of the motning. Outside her window the 
women avere passing quietly, the red water-jar on one shoul-' 
der, going to the lake for~water: They always put one arm over 
their head, and held the jar on the other shoulder. It had a con- 
torted look, different from the proud way the women carried 
See in Sicily. 

‘Nina! Nifia!’ Juana was crying outside. 

‘Wait a minute,’ said Kate. 

It was another of the hymn-sheets, with a Hymn of Quetzal- 
coatl. 

‘See, Nifia, the new hymn from last evening.’ 

Kate took the leaflet and sat upon her bed to read it. 

QuUETZALCOATL Loo xs Down ON MExI€o 

Jesus had gone far up the dark slope, when he looked back. 
Quetzalcoatl, my brother! he called. Send me my images, 

And the images of my mother, and the images of my saints. 

Send me them by the swift way, the way of the sparks, 

That I may hold them like memories in my arms when I go to sleep. 

And Quetzalcoatl called back: I will do it. 

Then he laughed, seeing the sun dart fiercely at him. 
He put up his hand, and held back the sun with his shadow. 

4 

254 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

So he passed the yellow one, who lashed like a dragon in vain. 
And having passed the yellow one, he saw the earth beneath. ae 
And he saw Mexico lying like a dark woman with white breast-tips. 

Wondering he stepped nearer, and looked at her, 
At her trains, at her railways and her automobiles, 
At her cities of stone and her huts of straw, 

And he said: Surely this looks very curious! 

He sat within the hollow of a cloud, and saw the men that worked in the 
fields, with foreign overseers. 

He saw the men that were blind, reeling with aguardiente. 

He saw the women that were not clean. 

He saw the hearts of them all, that were black, and heavy, with a stone of 
anger at the bottom. 

Surely, he said, this is a curious people I have found! 

So leaning forward on his cloud, he said to himself: 

I will call to them. 

Hold! Hold! Mexicanos! Glance away a moment towards me. 
Just turn your eyes this way, Mexicanos! 

They turned not at all, they glanced not one his way. 
‘Holald! Mexicanos! Holald! 
They have gone stone deaf! he said. 

So he blew down on them, to blow his breath in their faces. 
But in the weight of their stupefaction, none of them knew. 

Holala! What a pretty people! 
All gone stupefied! 

A falling star was running like a white dog over a plain. 
Herwhistled to it loudly, twice, tilFit fell to his hand. 

In his hand it lay and went dark. 

It was the Stone of Change. 

This is the stone of change! he said. 

So he tossed it awhile in his hand, and played with it. 
Then suddenly he spied the old lake, and he threw it in. 
It fell in. 

And two men looked up. 

Holald ! he said. Mexicanos! 
Are there two of you awake? 
So he laughed, and one heard him laughing. 

Why are you laughing? asked the first man of Quetzalcoatl. 

nai. teehee. ae ¥ 
Tine ; 
eh 

CIPRIANO AND KATE 255 

Thear the voice of my First Man ask me why I am laughing? 
Holald, Mexicanos! It is funny! 
To see them so glum and so lumpish! 

Hey! First Man of my name! Hark here! 
Here is my sign. 
Get a place ready for me. 

Send Jesus his images back, Mary and the saints and all. 

Wash yourself, and rub oil in your skin. 

On the seventh day, let every man wash himself, and put oil on his skin; 
let every woman. 

Let him have no animal walk on his body, nor through the shadow of his 
hair. Say the same to the women. * 

Tell them they all are fools, that ’'m laughing at them. 

The first thing I did when I saw them, was to laugh at the sight of such 
fools. 

Such lumps, such frogs with stones in their bellies. 

Tell them they are like frogs with stones in their bellies, can’t hop! 

‘Tell them they must get the stones out of their bellies, 

Get rid of their heaviness, 

Their lumpishfiess, 

Orn smother them all. 

Ill shake the earth, and swallow them up, Stith their cities. 
Ill send fire and ashes upon them, and smother them all. 
Tll turn their blood like sour milk rotten with thunder, 
They will bleed rotten blood, in pestilence. 

Even their bones shall crumble. 

Tell th€m so, First Man of my Name. 

For the sun and the moon are alive, and watching with gleaming eyes. 
And the earth is alive, and ready to shake off his fleas. 

And the stars are ready with stones to throw in the faces of men. 

And the air that blows good breath in the nostrils of people and beasts 
Ts ready to blow bad breath upon them, to perish them all. 

The stars and the earth and the sun and the moon and the winds 
Are about to dance the war dance round you, men! 

When I say the word, they will start. 

For sun and stats and earth and the very rains are weary 

Of tossing and rolling the substance of life to your lips. 

They are saying to one another: Let us make an end 

Of those ill-smelling tribes of men, these frogs that can’t jump, 
These cocks that can’t crow 

These pigs that can’t grunt 

This flesh that smells 

These words that are all flat 

These money vermin: 

™ 

These white men, and red men, and yellow men, and brown men, and © 
black men 

That are neither white, nor red, nor yellow, nor brown, nor black 

But everyone of them dirtyish. , 

Let us have a spring cleaning in the world. 

For men upon the body of the earth are like lice, 

Devouting the earth into sores. 

This is what stars and sun and earth and moon and winds and rain 

Are discussing with one another; they are making ready to start. 

So tell the men I am coming to, 

To make themselves clean, inside and out. 

To roll the grave-stone off their souls, from the cave of their bellies, 

To ptepate to be men. 

256 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Or else prepare for the other things. 

Kate read this long leaflet again and again, and a swift dark- 
ness like a whirlwind seemed to envelop the morning. She 
drank her coffee on the veranda, and the heavy papayas in their ~ 
grouping seemed to be oozing like great drops from the invis- 
ible spouting of the fountain of non-human life. She seemed to 
see the great sprouting and urging of the cosmos, moving into 
weird life. And men only like green-fly clustering on the tender 
tips, an aberration there. So monstrous the rolling and unfold- 
ing of the life of the cosmos, as if even iron could grow like — 
lichen deep in the earth, and cease growing, and prepare to 
perish. Iron and stone render up their life, when the hour 
comes. And men are less than the green-fly sucking the stems 
of the bush, so long as they live by business and bread alone. 
Parasites on the face of the earth. 

She strayed to the shore. The lake was blue in the morning 
light, the opposite mountains pale and dry and ribbed like 
mountains in the desert. Only at their feet, next the lake, the 
dark strip of trees and white specks of villages. 

Near her against the light five cows stood with their noses 
to the water, drinking. Women were kneeling on the stones, 
filling red jars. On forked sticks stuck up on the foreshore, 
frail fishing-nets were hung out, drying, and on the nets a 
small bird sat facing the sun; he was red as a drop of new 
blood, from the arteries of the air. 

From the straw huts under the trees, her urchin of the mud- 
chick was scuttling towards her, clutching something in his _ 
fist. He opened his hand to her, and on the palm lay three of 

70cxg tid 
mr 
CIPRIANO AND KATE 257 

_ the tiny cooking-pots, the o//itas which the natives had thrown 
into the water long ago, to the gods. 

“Muy chiquitas! ? he said, in his brisk way, a little, fighting 
tradesman; ‘do you buy them?’ 

“I have no money. To-morrow!’ said Kate. 

“To-morrow!” he said, like a pistol shot. 

‘To-morrow.’ 

He had forgiven her, but she had not forgiven him. 

Somebody in the fresh Sunday morning was singing rather 
beautifully, letting the sound, as it were, produce itself. 

A boy was prowling with a sling, prowling like a cat, to get 
the little birds. The red bird like a drop of new blood twittered 
upon the almost invisible fish-nets, then in a flash was gone. 

_ The boy prowled under the delicate green of the willow-trees, 
stumbling over the great roots in the sand. 

Along the edge of the water flew four dark birds, their necks 
pushed out, skimming silent near the silent surface of the lake, 
in a jagged Kvel rush. 

- Kate knew thgse mornings by the lake. They hypnotized her 

almost like death. Scarlet birds liké drops of blood, in very 
green willow-trees. The gguador trotting to her house with a 
pole over his shoulder, and two heavy square gasoline catis, 
one at each end of the pole, filled with hot water. He had been 
to the hot spring for her daily supply. Now barefoot, with one 
bare l€g, the young man trotted softly beneath the load, his 
dark, handsome face sunk beneath the shadows of the big hat, 
as he trotted in a silence, mindlessness that was like death. 

Dark heads out on the water in little groups, like black 

_ water-fowl bobbing. Were they birds? Were they heads? Was 
this human life, or something intermediate, that lifted its 
otange, wet, glistening shoulders a little out of the lake, 
beneath the dark head? 

She knew so well what the day would be. Slowly the sun 
thickening and intensifying in the air overhead. And slowly 

- the electricity clotting invisibly as afternoon approached. The 

- beach in the blind heat, strewn with refuse, smelling of refuse 
and the urine of creatures. 

Everything going vague in the immense sunshine, as the air 
invisibly thickened, and Kate could feel the electricity pressing 
like hot i iron on the back of her head. It stupefied her like mor- 

1 

258 THE PLUMED SERPENT } 

phine. Meanwhile the clouds rose like white trees from behind 
the mountains, as the afternoon swooned in silence, rose and 
spread black branches, quickly, in the sky, from which the 
lightning stabbed like birds. 

And in the midst of the siesta stupor, the sudden round 
bolts of thunder, and the crash and the chill of rain. 

Tea-time, and evening coming. The last sailing-boats mak- 
ing to depart, waiting for the wind. The-wind was from the 
west, the boats going east and south had gone, their sails were 
lapsing far away on the lake. But the boats towards the west 
were waiting, waiting, while the water rattled under their black 
flat keels. 

The big boat from Tlapaltepec, bringing many people from 
the west, waited on into the night. She was anchored a few 
yards out, and in the early night her passengers came down the 
dark beach, weaty of the day, to go on board. They clustered 
in a group at the edge of the flapping water. 

The big, wide, flat-bottomed canoe, with her wooden awn- 
ing and her one straight mast, lay black, a few yards out, in the 
dark night. A lamp was burning under the wooden roof; one 
looked in, from the shore. And this was home for the passengers. 

A short man with trousers rolled up came to carry the people 
on board. The men stood with their backs to him, legs apart. 
He suddenly dived at them, ducked his head between the fork 
of their legs and rose, with a man on his shoulders. So he 
waded out through the water to the black boat, and heaved his 
living load on board. 

For a woman, he crouched down before her, and she sat on- 
one of his shoulders. He clasped her legs with his right arm, 
she clasped his dark head. So he carried her to the ship, as if she 
were nothing. 

Soon the boat was full of people. They sat on the mats on the 
floor, with their backs to the sides of the vessel, baskets hang- 
ing from the pent roof, swaying as the vessel swayed. Men 
spread their: serapes and curled up to sleep. The light of the 
lantern lit them up, as they sat and lay and slept, or talked in 
murmurs. 

A little woman came up out of the darkness; then suddenly 
ran back again. She had forgotten something. But the vessel 
would not sail without her, for the wind would not change yet. 

FOURTH HYMN AND THE BISHOP 259 

The tall mast stood high, the great sail lay in folds along the 
roof, ready. Under the roof, the lantern swayed, the people 
slept and stretched. Probably they would not sail till midnight. 
Then down the lake to Tlapaltepec, with its reeds at the end of 
the lake, and its dead, dead playa, its dead dry houses of black 
adobe, *its ruined streets, its strange, buried silence, like 
Pompeii. 

Kate knew it. So strange and deathlike, it frightened her, 
and mystified her. 

But to-day! To-day she would not loiter by the shore all 
morning. She must go to Jamiltepec in a motort-boat, to see 
Ramon. To talk to him even about marrying Cipriano. 

Ah, how could she marry Cipriano, and give her body to 
this death? Take the weight of this darkness on her breast, the 
heaviness of this strange gloom? Die before dying, and pass 
away whilst still beneath the sun? © 

Ah no! Better to escape to the white men’s lands. 

But she went to arrange with Alonso for the motor-boat. 

» > a 7 

Sar 

J 
CHAPTER XVII 

a Fourth Hymn and the Bishop 

é 
Tue President of the Republic, as a new broom, had been 
sweeping perhaps a little too clean for the common liking, so 
there was a ‘rebellion.’ It was not a very large one. But it 
meant, of course, banditry, robbery, and cowed villages. 
Ramon was determined to keep free from the taint of poli- 
tics. But already the Church, and with the Church the Knights 
of Cortés and a certain ‘black’ faction, was preparing against 
him. The priests began to denounce him from the pulpits — but 
not very loudly — as an ambitious Anti-Christ. With Cipriano 
_ beside him, however, and with Cipriano the army of the west, 
he had not much to fear. 
But it was possible Cipriano would have to march away in 
defence of the Government. 
‘Above all things,’ said Ramon, ‘I don’t want to acquire a 
political smell. I don’t want to be pushed in the direction of 
* 

any party. Unless I can stand uncontaminated, I had bettet 
abandon everything. But the Church will push me over to the 
socialists — and the socialists will betray me on the first oppor- 
tunity. It is not myself. It is the new spirit. The surest way to 
kill it — and it can be killed, like any other living thing — is to 
get it connected with’any political patty.’ 

‘Why don’t you see the Bishop?’ said Cipriano. ‘I will see 
him too. Am I to be chief of the division in the west for noth- 
ing?’ 

Ves, said Ramon slowly, ‘I will see Jimenez. I have thought 
of it. Yes, I intend to use every means in my power. — Montes 
will stand for us, because he hates the Church and hates any 
hint of dictation from outside. He sees the possibility of a 
*national’’ church. Though myself, I don’t care about national 
churches. Only one has to speak the language of one’s own 
people. You know the priests are forbidding the people to read 
the Hymns?’ 

“What does that matter?’ said Cipriano. ‘These people are 
nothing if not perverse, nowadays. They will read them all the 
more.’ 

“Maybe! — I shall take no notice. Ill let my new legend, as 
they call it, grow while the earth is moist. But we have to keep 
our eye very close on all the little bunches of “‘interests”’.’ 

‘Ramon!’ said Cipriano. ‘If you can turn Mexico entirely 
into a Quetzalcoatl country, what then?’ 

‘I shall be First Man of Quetzalcoatl — I know no more.’ 

“You won’t trouble about the rest of the world?’ 

Ramon smiled. Already he saw in Cipriano’s eye the gleam 
of a Holy War. 

‘IT would like,’ he said, smiling, ‘to be one of the Initiates of 
the Earth. One of the Initiators. Every country its own 
Saviour, Cipriano: or every people its own Saviour. And the 
First Men of every people, forming a Natural Aristocracy of 
the World. One must have aristocrats, that we know. But 
natural ones, not artificial. And in some way the world must be. 
organically united: the world of man. But in the concrete, not 
in the abstract. Leagues and Covenants and International Pro- 
grammes. Ah! Cipriano! it’s like an international pestilence. 
The leaves of one great tree can’t hang on the boughs of an- 
other great tree. The races of the earth are like trees; in the end 

260 - THE PLUMED SERPENT 

i ae 

< 

FOURTH HYMN AND THE BISHOP 261 

they neither mix nor mingle. They stand out of each othet’s 
way, like trees. Or else they crowd on one.another, and their 
roots grapple, and it is the fight to the death. - Only from the 
flowers there is commingling. And the flowets of every race 
are the natural aristocrats of that race. And the spirit of the 
world can fly from flower to flower, likea humming-bird, and 
slowly fertilize the great trees in their blossoms. Only the 
Natural Aristocrats can rise above their nation; and even then 
they do not rise beyond their race. Only the Natural Aristo- 
crats of the World can be international, or cosmopolitan, or 
cosmic. It has always been so. The peoples are no more capable 
of it than the leaves of the mango-tree are capable of attaching 
themselves to the pine. — So if I want Mexicans to learn the 
name of Quetzalcoatl, it is because I want them to speak with 
the tongues of their own blood. I wish the Teutonic world 
would once more think in terms of Thor and Wotan, and the 
tree Igdrasil. And I wish the Druidic world would see, hon- 
estly, that ithe mistletoe is their mystery, and that they them- 
selves are the Tyatha De Danaan, alive, but submerged. And a 
new Hermes’ should come back to’the Mediterranean, and a 
new Ashtaroth to Tunis; and-Mithras again to Persia, and 
Brahma unbroken to India, and the oldest of dragons to 
China. Then I, Cipriano, I, First Man of Quetzalcoatl, with 
you, First Man of Huitzilopochtli, and perhaps your wife, First 
Woman of Itzpapalotl, could we not meet, with sure souls, the 
other great aristocrats of the world, the First Man of Wotan 
and the First Woman of Freya, First, Lord of Hermes, and the 
Lady of Astarte, the Best-Born of Brahma, and the Son of the 
Greatest Dragon? I tell you, Cipriano, then the earth might re- 
joice, when the First Lords of the West met the First Lords of 
South and East, in the Valley of the Soul. Ah, the earth ‘has 
Valleys of the Soul, that are not cities of commerce and in- 
dustry. And the mystery is one mystery, but men fhust see it 
differently. The hibiscus and the thistle and the gentian all 
flower on the Tree of Life, but in the world they are far apart; 
and must be. And I am hibiscus and you ate a yucca flower, and 
your Caterina is a wild daffodil, and my Carlota is a white 
pansy. Only four of us, yet we make a curious bunch, So it is. 
The men and women of the earth are not manufactured goods, 
to be interchangeable. But the Tree of Life is one tree, as we 

os oe 

262 THE PLUMED SERPENT } 

know when our souls open in the last blossoming. We can’t 
change ourselves, and we don’t want to. But when our souls 
open out in the final blossoming, then as blossoms we share 
one mystery with all blossoms, beyond the knowledge of any 
leaves and stems and roots: something transcendent. 

‘But it doesn’t matter. At the present time I have to fight 
my way in Mexico, and you have to fight yours. So let us go 
and do it.’ 

He went away to his workshops and his men who were 
labouring under his directions, while Cipriano sat down to his 
correspondence and his military planning. 

They were both interrupted by the thudding of a motor- 
boat entering the little bay. It was Kate, escorted by the black- 
scatved Juana. 

Ramon, in his white clothes, with the blue-and-black figured 
sash and the big hat with the turquoise-inlaid Eye of Quetzal- 
coatl, went down to meet her. She was in white, too, with a 
green hat and the shaw] of pale yellow silk. 

‘I was so glad to come again,’ she said, holding out her hand 
to him. ‘Jamiltepec has become a sort of Mecca to me, my in- 
side yearns for it.’ 

“Then why don’t you come oftener? I wish you would 
come.’ 

‘T am afraid of intruding.’ 

“No! You could help if you would.’ 

‘Oh!’ she said. ‘I am so frightened, and so sceptical of big 
undertakings. I think it is because, at the very bottom of me, I 
dislike the masses of people — anywhere. I’m afraid I rather des- 
pise people; I don’t want them to touch me, and I don’t want 
to touch them. — So how could I pretend to join any - any - 
any sort of Salvation Army? — which is a horrid way of putting 
ag 

Don Ramon laughed. 

‘I do myself,’ he said. “I detest and despise masses of people. 
But these are my own people.’ 

“I, ever since I was a child, since I can remember. — They say 
of me, when I was a little girl of four, and my parents were 
having a big dinner-party, they had the nurse bring me in to 
say good night to all the people they had there dressed up and 
eating and drinking. And I suppose they all said nice things to 

FOURTH HYMN AND THE BISHOP 263 

me, as they do. I only answered: You are all monkeys! It was a 
great success! — But I felt it even as a child, and I feel it now. 
People are all monkeys to me, performing in different ways.’ 
~ “Kven the people nearest you?’ 

Kate hesitated. Then she confessed, rather unwillingly: 

“Yes! I’m afraid so. Both my husbafds — even Joachim — 
they seemed, somehow, so obstinate in their little stupidities — 

rather like monkeys. I felt a terrible revulsion from Joachim 
‘when he was dead. I thought: What peaked monkey is that, 
that I have been losing my blood about. — Do you think it’s 
rather awful?’ 

‘I do! But then I think we a// feel like that, at moments. Or 
we would if we dared. It’s only one of our moments.’ 

‘Sometimes,’ said she, ‘I think that is my permanent feeling 
towards people. I like the world, the sky and the earth and the 
gteater mystery beyond. But people — yes, they are all monkeys 
to me.’ 

He coul@see that, at the bottom of her soul, it was true. 

»‘Puros mOnOS ig y he said to himself i in Spanish. ‘Y /o que hacen, 
: ‘padead monerias.” A8 

‘Pure monkeys! And the things they do, sheer monkey- 
dom!? Then he added: ‘Yet you have children!” 

“Yes! Yes!’ she said, struggling with herself. ‘My first hus- 
band’s children.’ ' 

‘And they? — monos y no mas?’ 

‘No!’ she said, frowning and looking angry with herself. 
“Only partly.’ 

‘It is bad,’ he said, shaking his head. ‘But then!’ he added. - 
‘What are my own children to me, but little monkeys? And 
their mother — and their mother — Ah, no! Sefiora Caterina! It | 
is no good. One must be able to disentangle oneself from per- 
sons, from people. If I go to a rose-bush, to be intimate with it, 
it is a nasty thing that hurts me. One must disentangle oneself 
from persons and personalities, and see people as one sees the 
trees in the landscape. People in some way dominate you. In 
some way, humanity dominates your consciousness. So you 
must hate people and humanity, and you want to escape. But 
there is only one way of escape: to turn beyond them, to the 
greater life.’ 

‘But I do!’ ctied Kate. ‘I do nothing else. When I was with 

264 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Joachim absolutely alone in a cottage, doing all the work my- 
self, and knowing nobody at all, just living, and Seeling the 
greater thing all the time; then I was free, I was happy.’ 

‘But he?’ said Ramon. ‘Was he free and happy?’ 

‘He was really. But that’s where the monkeyishness comes 
in. He wouldn’t let himself be content. He insisted on havihg 
people and a cause, just to torture himself with.” 

‘Then why didn’t you live in your cottage quite alone, and 
without him?’ he said. ‘Why do you travel and see people?’ 

She was silent, very angry. She knew she could not live 
quite alone. The vacuity crushed her. She needed a man there, ~ 
to stop the gap, and to keep her balanced. But even when she 
had him, in her heart of hearts she despised him, as she despised 
the dog and the cat. Between herself and humanity there was 
the bond of subtle, helpless antagonism. 

She was naturally quite free-handed and she left people their 
liberty. Servants would get attached to her, and casual people 
all liked and admired her. She had a strong life-flow of her own, 
and a certain assertive joie de vivre. 

But underneath it all was the unconquerable dislike, almost 
disgust of people. More than hate, it was disgust. Whoever it 
was, wherever it was, however it was, after a little while this 
disgust overcame her. Her mother, her father, her sisters, her 
first husband, even her children whom she loved, and Joachim, 
for whom she had felt such passionate love, even these, being 
near her, filled her with a certain disgust and repulsion after a 
little while, and she longed to fling them down the great and 
final oubliette. 

But there is no great and final ovb/ierte: or at least, it is never 
final, until one has flung onese/f down. 

Soi it was with Kate. Till she flung herself down the last dark 
oubliette of death, she would never escape from her deep, her 
bottomless disgust with human beings. Brief contacts were all 
right, thrilling ¢ even. But close contacts, or long contacts, were 
short and long revulsions of violent disgust. 

She and Ramon had sat down on a bench under the white- 
flowering oleander of the garden downstairs. His face was im- 
passive and still. In the stillness, with a certain pain and nausea,” 
he realized the state she was in, and realized that his own state, 
as regards personal people, was the same. Mere personal contact, 

FOURTH HYMN AND THE BISHOP 265 

mete human contact filled him, too, with disgust. Carlota dis- 
gusted him. Kate herself disgusted him. Sometimes, Cipriano 
disgusted him. 

But this was because, or when, he met them on a merely 
human, personal plane. To do so was disaster: it filled him 
with disgust of them and loathing of himself. 

He had to meet them on another plane, where the contact 
was different; intangible, remote, and without sntimacy. His 
soul was concerned elsewhere. So that the quick of him need 
not be bound to anybody. The quick of a man must turn to 
God alone: in some way or other. 

With Cipriano he was most sure. Cipriano and he, even 
when they embraced each other with passion, when they met 
after an absence, embraced in the recognition of each other’s 
eternal and abiding loneliness; like the Morning Star. _ 

But women would not have this. They wanted intimacy — 
and intimacy means disgust. Carlota wanted to be eternally and 
closely identified with Ramon, consequently she hated him 
and hated everytZing which she thought drew him away from 
this eternal close identification with herself. It was just a horror 
and he knew it. 4 “ 

Men and women should know that they cannot, absolutely, 
meet on earth. In the closest kiss, the dearest touch, there is the 
small gulf which is none the less complete because it is so nar- 
row, go nearly non-existent. They must bow and submit in 
reverence, to the gulf. Even though I eat the body and drink 
the blood of Christ, Christ is Christ and I am I, and the gulf is 
impassable. Though a woman be dearer to a man than his own 
life, yet he is he and she is she, and the gulf can never close up. 
Any attempt to close it is a violation, and the crime against the 

Holy Ghost. 

That which we get from the beyond, we get it alone. The 
final me I am, comes from the farthest off, from the Morning 
Star. The rest is assembled. All that of me which is assembled 
from the mighty cosmos can meet and touch all that is assem- 
bled in the beloved. But this is never the quick. Never can be. 

If we would meet in the quick, we must give up the assem- 
bled self, the daily I, and, putting off ourselves one after the 
other, meet unconscious in the Morning Star. Body, soul, and 
spirit can be transfigured into the Morning Star. But without 

~ fa 
= 
< 

266 THE PLUMED SERPENT : 
transfiguration we shall never get there. We shall gnash at the 
leash. : 

Ramon knew what it was to gnash at his leashes. He had 
gnashed himself almost to pieces, before he had found the way 
to pass out in himself, in the quick of himself, to the Quick of 
all being and existence, which he called the Morning Star, since 
men must give all things names. To pass in the quick of him- 
self, with transfiguration, to the Morning Star, and there, there 
alone meet his fellow man. 

He knew what it was to fail even now, and to keep on fail- 
ing. With Carlota he failed absolutely. She claimed him and he 
restrained himself in resistance. Even his very naked breast, 
when Carlota was there, was self-conscious and assertively 
naked. But then that was because she claimed it as her pro- 

erty. z9 
rf When men meet at the quick of all things, they are neither 
naked nor clothed; in the transfiguration they are just com- 
plete, they are not seen in part. The final perfect strength has 
also the power of innocence. ; 

Sitting on the seat beside Kate, Ramon was sad with the 
sense of heaviness and inadequacy. His third Hymn was angry 
and bitter. Carlota almost embittered his soul. In Mexico, tur- 
bulent fellows had*caught at his idea and burlesqued it. They 
had invaded one of the churches of the city, thrown out the 
sacted images, and hung in their place the grotesque papier 
maché Judas figures, which the Mexicans explode at Easter 
time. This of course made a scandal. And Cipriano, whenever 
he was away on his own for some time, slipped back into the 
inevitable Mexican General, fascinated by the opportunity for 
furthering his own personal ambition and imposing his owa 
personal will. Then came Kate, with this centre of sheer repu- 
diation deep in the middle of her, the will to explode the 
world. 

He felt his spirits sinking again, his limbs going like lead. 
There is only one thing that a man really wants to do, all his 
life; and that is, to find his way to his God, his Morning Star, 
and be alone there. Then afterwards, in the Morning Star, 
salute his fellow man, and enjoy the woman who has come the 
long way with him. 

But to find the way, far, far along, to the bright Quick of all 

Se Lee ta 
a ” 
te 4 . 

FOURTH HYMN AND THE BISHOP 267 

things, this is difficult, and requires all a man’s strength and 
courage, for himself. If he breaks a trail alone, it is terrible. But 
if every hand pulls at him, to stay him in the human places; if 
the hands of love drag at his entrails and the hands of hate seize 
him by the hair, it becomes almost impossible. 

This was how Ramon felt at the moment: — 1 am attempting 
the impossible. I had better either go and take my pleasure of 
life while it lasts, hopeless of the pleasure which is beyond all 
pleasures. Or else I had better go into the desert and take my 
way all alone, to the Star where at last I have my wholeness, 
holiness. The way of the anchorites and the men who went in- 
to the wilderness to pray. For surely my soul is craving for her 

~ consummation, and Lam weary of the thing men call life. Liv- 
ing, I want to depart to where I am. 

. Yet, he said to himself, the woman that was with me in the 
Morning Star, how glad I should be of her! And the man that 
was with me there, what a delight his presence would be! 
Surely the Morning Star is a meeting-ground for us, for the 
joy! Ee 
isting side by side on the bench, Ramon and Kate forgot 
one another, she thinking, back on the past, with the long dis- 
gust of it all, he thinking on into his future, and trying to re- 
vive his heavy spirits. . 

In the silence, Cipriano came out on to the balcony above, 
lookifig around. He almost started as he saw the two figures 
seated on the bench below, under the white oleander tree, 
miles apart, worlds apart, in their silence. 

Ramon heard the step, and glanced up. 

‘We are coming up!’ he called, rising and looking round at 
Kate. ‘Shall we go upstairs? Will you drink something cool, 
tepache, or squeezed oranges? There is no ice.’ 

‘I would like orange juice and water,’ she said. 

He called to his servant and gave the order. 

Cipriano was in the white pantaloons and blouse, like Ra- 
mon. But his sash was scarlet, with black curves, something 
like the markings on a snake. 

‘I heard you come. I thought perhaps you had gone away 
again,” he said, looking at her with a certain black reproachful- 
ness: an odd, hesitating wistfulness of the barbarian, who feels 
himself at a loss. Then also a certain resentment. 

268 THE PLUMED SERPENT i | 

‘Not yet,’ she said. 

Ramon laughed, and flung himself into a chair. 

‘The Sefiora Caterina thinks we are all monkeys, but per- 
haps this particular monkey-show is the most amusing after 
all,’ he said. ‘So she will see a little more of it.’ 

Cipriano, a real Indian, was offended in his pride, and the 
little black imperial on his chin seemed to become portentous. 
‘That’s rather an unfait way of putting it!’ laughed Kate. 

The black eyes of Cipriano glanced at her in hostility. He 
thought she was laughing at him. And so, at the depths of her 
female soul, she was. She was jeering at him inwardly. Which 
no man can stand, least of all a dark-skinned man. 

“No!” she said. ‘There’s something else beside that.’ 

‘Ah!’ said Ramon. ‘Take care! A little mercy is a dangerous 
thing.’ 

‘No! Not mercy!’ she said, flushing. ‘Why are you being 
horrid to me?’ 

‘Monkeys always end by being horrid to the spectators,’ 
said Ramon. 

She looked up at him, and caught Sy flash of anger in his 
eyes. 

‘I came,’ she said, ‘to hear about the Mexican pantheon. I 
was even given to understand I might be admitted.’ 

‘Ah, that is good!’ laughed Ramon. “A rare specimen of the . 
female monkey has been added to the Ramon menagerie! I am 
sure you would be a good draw. There have been some pretty 
goddesses, I assure you, in the Aztec pantheon.’ 

“How horrid!’ she said. 

‘Come! Come!’ he cried. ‘Let us keep to the bedrock of 
things, Sefora mia. We are all monkeys. Monos somos. — Ihr seid 
alle Affen! Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings was it 
spoken, as Carlota said. You see that little male monkey, Cipri- 
ano. He had the monkey’s idea of marrying you. Say the word. 
Marriage is a monkey’s game. Say the word. Me will let you go 
when you’ve had enough; and he’s had enough. He is a general 
and a very great /efe. He can make you monkey-queen of mon- 
key-Mexico, if it please you. And what should monkeys do, 
but amuse themselves! Vamos! Embobémonos! Shall I be priest? 
Vamos! Vamos!’ 

He rose with sudden volcanic violence, and rushed away. 

FOURTH HYMN AND THE BISHOP 269 

Cipriano looked at Kate in wonder. She had gone pale. 
“What have you been saying to him?’ he asked. 
“Nothing!” she said, rising. ‘I’d better go now.’ 

Juana was collected: and Alonso and oe set off back down 
the lake. She sat with a certain obstinate offendedness under 
the awning of the boat. The sun was terrifically hot, and the 
water blinded her. She put on black spectacles, in which she 
looked a monster. 

“Mucho calor, Nia! Mucho calor !? Juana was repeating behind 
her. The criada had evidently imbibed sepache. 

On the pale-brown water little tufts of water-hyacinth were 
vaguely sailing, holding up the hand of a leaf for a sail. Every- 
where the lake was dotted with these sailing tufts. The heavy 
tains had washed in flood down the Lerma river into the lake, 
washing the acres of /rio.loose from the marshy end of the 
waters, thirty miles away, and slowly sétting them travelling 
over all the expanse of the inland sea, till the shores began to’ 
be piled, and #he far-off Santiago river, which flowed out of the 
lake, was choked., . 

That day Ramon wrote his Fourth Hymn. 

WHat QuUETZALCOATL SAW IN MEXICO 

Who are these strange faces in Mexico? 
Palefaces, yellowfaces, blackfaces? These are no Mexicans! 
Where do they come from, and why? 

6 

Lord of the Two Ways, these are the foreigners. 
They come out of nowhere. 

Sometimes they come to tell us things, 

Mostly they are the greedy ones. 

What then do they want? 

They want gold, they want silver from the mountains, 

And oil, much oil from the coast. 

They take sugar from the tall tubes of the cane, 

Wheat from the high lands, and maize; 

Coffee from the bushes in the hot lands; even the i. rubber. 
They put up tall chimneys that smoke, 

And in the biggest houses they keep their machines, that talk 
And work iron elbows up and down, 

And hold myriad threads from their claws! 

Wonderful are the machines of the greedy ones! 

And you, Mexicans and peons, what do you do? 

270° THE PLUMBD SERPENT 

We work with their machines, we work in their fields, 
They give us pesos made of Mexican silver. 
They are the clever ones. 

Do you love them then? 

We love them not, and never. 

Their faces are ugly, yet they make wonderful things. 
And their wills are like their machines of iron. 

What can we do? 

I see dark things rushing across the country. 
Yea, Lord! Even trains and camiones and automobiles. 

Trains and camiones, automobiles and aeroplanes. 

How nice! says the peon, to go rushing in a train! 

How nice, to get in the camion, and for twenty centavos, to be gone! 

- How nice, in the great cities, where all things rush, and huge hie flare 
bright, to wander and do nothing! 

How nice to sit in the cine, where the picture of all the world dances before 
the eyes! 

How nice if we could take all these things away from the foreigners, and 
possess them! 

Take back our lands and silver and oil, take the trains and the factories 
and the automobiles 

And play with them all the time! 

How nice! 

Oh, fools! Mexicans and peons! 

Who are you, to be masters of machines which you cannot make? 
Which you can only break! 

Those that can make are masters of these machines. 

Not you, poor boobs. 

How have these palefaces, yellowfaces crossed the waters of the world? 

Oh, fools! Mexicans and peons, with muddy hearts! 

Did they do it by squatting on their hams? 

You do nothing but squat on your hams, and stare with vacant eyes, and 
drink fire-waters, and quarrel and stab. 

And then run like surly dogs at the bidding of paleface masters. 

Oh, dogs and fools, Mexicans and peons! 
Watery-hearted, with wishy-washy knees. 

Sulky in spirit, and inert. 

What are you good for, but to be slaves, and rot away? 

You are not worth a god! 
Lo! the universe tangles its great dragons, 
The dragons in the cosmos are stirring with anger again. 

FOURTH HYMN AND THE BISHOP 271 

The dragon of the disappointed dead, that sleeps in the snow-white north 
Is lashing his tail in his sleep; the winds howl], the cold rocks round. 

The spirits of the cold dead whistle in the ears of the world. 

Prepare for doom. 

For I tell you, there are no dead dead, not even your dead. 
There are dead that sleep in the waves of the Morning Star, with freshen- 
ing limbs. 
There are dead that weep in bitter rains. 
_ There are dead that cluster in the frozen north, shuddering and chattering 
among the ice 
And howling with hate. 
There are dead that creep through the burning bowels of the earth, 
Stirring the fires to acid of bitterness. 
There are dead that sit under the trees, watching with ash-grey eyes for 
their victims. 
There are dead that attack the sun like swarms of black flies, to suck his 
life. 
There are dead that stand upon you, when you go in to your women, 
_ And they dart to her womb, they fight for the chance to be born, they 
; struggle at the gate you awe opened, 
They gnash wieen it closes, and hate the one that got i in to be born again, 
Child of the living dead, the dead that live and are not refreshed. 
I tell you, sorrow upon you; you shall all die. 
And beingsdead, you shall not be refreshed. 
There are no dead dead. Z 
Being dead, you shall rove like dogs with broken haunches 
Seeking the offal and garbage of life, in the invisible lanes of the air. 

The dead that have mastered fire live on, salamanders, in fire. 
The dead of the water-lords rock and glimmer in the seas. 
The dead of the steel machines go up in motion, away! 
Thedead of electric masters are electricity itself. 

But the dead of those who have mastered nothing, nothing at all, 
Craw] like masterless dogs in the back streets of the air, 
Creeping for the garbage of life, and biting with venomous mouths. 

Those that have mastered the forces of the world, die into the forces, they 
have homes in death. 

But you! what have you mastered, among the dragon hosts of the cosmos? 

There are dragons of sun and ice, dragons of the moon and the earth, 
dragons of salty waters, dragons of thunder; 

There is the spangled dragon of the stars at large. 

And far at the centre, with one unblinking eye, the dragon of the Morning 
Star. 

Conquer! says the Morning Star. Pass the dragons, and pass on to me. 
For I am sweet, I am the last and the best, the pool of new life. 

But lo! you inert ones, I will set the dragons upon you. 

They shall crunch your bones. 

~ 

a ¢ } . 
- SS , 25 4 ch _ 3 . 

272 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

And even then they shall spit you out, as broken-haunched dogs, 
You shall have nowhete to die into. 

Lo! in the back streets of the air, dead ones ate crawling like curs! 

Lo! I release the dragons! The great white one of the north, 

Him of the disappointed dead, he is lashing and turning round. 

He is breathing cold corruption upon you, you shall bleed in your chests. 

Iam going to speak to the dragon of the inner fires, 
He who housels the dead of the guns, 
To withdraw his warmth from your feet, so your feet turn cold with death. 

Iam about to tell the dragon of the waters to turn round on you 
And spew out corrosion into your streams, on your rains. 

And I wait for the final day, when the dragon of thunder, waking under 
the spider-web nets 

Which you’ve thrown upon him, shall suddenly shake with rage, 

And dart his electric needles into your bones, and curdle your blood like 
milk with electric venom. 

Wait! Only wait! Little by little it all shall come upon you. 

Ramon put on his black city clothes, and a black hat, and 
went himself with this hymn to the printer in the city. The sign 
of Quetzalcoatl he had printed in black and red, and the sign 
of the dragon, at the end, in Steen and black and red. And the 
sheet was folded. 

Six soldiers of Cipriano’s command took the bundles of 
hymns by train; one to the capital, one to Puebla and Jalapa, 
one to Tampico and Monterrey, one to Torreon and Chihua- 
hua, one to Sinaloa and Sonora, and one to the mines in Pa- 
chucha, Guanajuato, and the central region. Each soldier took 
only a hundred sheets. But in every town there was a recog- 
nized Reader of the Hymns; or two, or three,.or four, or even 
ten Readers in one city. And readers who went round to the 
villages. 

Because there was a strange, submerged desire in the people 
for things beyond the world. They were weary of events, and 
weaty of news and the newspapers, weary even of the things 
that are taught in education. Weary is the spirit of man with 
man’s importunity. Of all things human, and humanly in- 
vented, we have had enough, they seemed to say. And though 
they took not much active notice of the Hymns, they craved 

f 
FOURTH HYMN AND THE BISHOP 278 

for them, as men crave for alcohol, as a relief from the weati- 
ness and exnui of mankind’s man-made world. 

Evetywhere, in all the towns and villages, at night-time the 

little flames would be seen flickering, a cluster of people was 
seen, sometimes standing, sometimes sitting upon the ground, 
listening to the slow voice of some Reader. 

Mote tarely, in some smali, out-of-the-way p/aya, would 
sound the sinister thud of the tom-tom, beating out of the hol- 
low of the ages. And there would be two men with white 
serapes with the blue edges. Then the singing of the Songs of 
Quetzalcoatl, and perhaps the slow round dance, with the an- 
cient rhythm of the feet on the earth, belonging to aboriginal 
America. 

For the old dances of the Aztecs and the Zapotecs, of all the 
submerged Indian races, are based upon the old, sinking bird- 
step of the Red Indians of the north. It is in the blood of the 
people; they cannot quite forget it. It comes back to them, 
with a sense ef fear, and joy, and telief. , 

Of themselves, they dared not revive the old motion, nor 
stir the blood-in the old way. The’spell of the past is too ter- 
rible. Buf in the Songs and the Hymns of Quetzalcoatl there 
spoke a new voice, the véice of a master and authority. And 
though they were slow to trust, the slowest and the most un- 
trusting, they seized upon the new-old thrill, with a certain 
fear, and joy, and relief. 

The Men of Quetzalcoatl avoided the great market-places 
and centres of activity. They took their stand in the little side 
places. On the rim of a fountain a man in a dark blanket with 
blue borders, or with the sign of Quetzalcoatl in his hat, would 
‘sit down and begin to read aloud. It was enough. The people 
lingered to listen. He would read to the end, then say: ‘I have 
finished this reading of the Fourth Hymn of Quetzalcoatl. 
Now I will begin again.’ 

In this way, by a sort of far-away note in the voice, and by. 
the slow monotony of repetition, the thing would drift darkly 
into the consciousness of the listeners. 

Already in the beginning there had been the scandal of the 
Judases. Holy Week, in Mexico City, is, to all appearance, the 
gteat week of Judas. Everywhere you see men carrying home 
in triumph the great, gaudily-varnished dolls of papier-maché. 

é 

te 

ai ui | 

They are all men-dolls, more or less life-like grotesque. Most 
frequently it is a fat Mexican-Spanish hacendado, landowner and 
big farmer, who is represented with his tight trousers, sticking- 
out belly, and huge upturned moustaches. The old-fashioned 
patrén. Some of the figures are like Punch, some are like harle- 
quin. But they all have fosy faces and the white man’s get-up. 
You never see the dark-faced image of a native-blooded Mexi- 
can; always a stiff, haughty grotesque of a white man. 

And all these are Judases. Judas is the fun of the fair, the 
victim, the big man of Holy Week, just as the Skeleton, and the 
skeleton on horseback, is the idol of the first week in Novem- 
ber, the days of the dead and of all the saints. 

On Easter Saturday the Judases are hung from the balconies, 
the string is lighted, and at length, bang! Shrieks of joy, Judas 
has exploded into nothingness, from a big cracker in the middle 
of him! — All the town is popping with Judases. 

There was the scandal of the Holy Images thrown out of one 
of the churches in Mexico City, and these Judases put in their 
place. The Church began to move. = 

But then the Church in Mexico has to move gingerly; it is 
not popular, and its claws are cut. The priest may not ring the 
church bells for more than three minutes. Neither priests nor 
monks may wear any habit in the street, beyond the hideous 
black vest and white collar of the Protestant clergy. So that the 
priest shows himself as little as possible in the street, and prac- 
tically never in the chief streets and the chief plazas. 

Nevertheless, he still has influence. Processions in the streets 
ate forbidden, but not sermons from the pulpit, nor advice 
from the confessional. Montes, the President, had no love for 
the Church, and was meditating the expulsion of all foreign 
ptiests. The Archbishop himself was an Italian. But he was also 
a fighter. 

He gave orders to all the priests, to forbid the people from 
- listening to anything concerned with Quetzalcoatl, to destroy 
any hymn-sheet that might fall into their hands, and to prevent 
as far as possible the Hymns from being read, and the Songs 
from being sung, in the parishes. 

But Montes had given orders to the police and the military 
to afford such protection to the Men of Quetzalcoatl as was 
accotded to any other law-abiding citizen. 

274 _ ‘THE PLUMED SERPENT 

FOURTH HYMN AND THE BISHOP 275 

Mexico is not Mexico for nothing, however, and already 
blood had been shed on both sides. This Ramén particularly 
wanted to avoid, as he felt that violent death was not so easily. 
wiped out of the air and out of the souls of men, as spilt blood 
was washed off the pavements. 

Therefore, when he was in the City, he asked the Bishop of 
the West if he would consent to an interview with himself and 
Don Cipriano, and would he name the place. The Bishop — who 
was at old friend and adviser of Carlota, and who knew Ra- 
mon well enough — replied that he would be pleased to see 
Don Ramon and the Sefor Genera! the next day, if they would 
be so good as to come to his house. 

The Bishop no longer occupied the great episcopal palace. 
This was turned into the post-office building. But he had a 
large house not far from the Cathedral, which had been pre- 
sented by the faithful. 

Ramon and Cipriano found the thin old man ina dusty, un- 
interestine“library, waiting. He wore a simple black cassock, 
rfot too clean, grith purple buttons. He received Ramon, who 
was in g black town suit, and Cipriano, who was in uniform, 
with an affable manner and suspicious looks. But he played at 
being the lively, genial old bird. 

‘Ah, Don Ramon, it is long since I saw you! How goes it, 
eh? Well, well? That is good! That is very good!’ And he 
pattéd Ramon on the sleeve like a fussy old uncle. ‘Ah, my 
General, much honour, much honour! Welcome to this poor 
house of yours. It is the house of your Honour! To setve you! 
Gentlemen! Won’t you take a seat ?’ 

They all sat down, in the dusty, dreary room, in the old 
leather chairs. The Bishop nervously looked at his thin old 
hands, at the fine, but rather dull amethyst ring he wore. 

‘Good! Sefiores!’ he said, glancing up with his little 
black eyes. ‘At your sérvice! Entirely at the service of your 
Honouts.’ 

‘Dojfia Carlota is in the city, Father. You have seen her?’ said 
Ramon. 

‘Yes, son of mine,’ said the Bishop. 

“Then you know the latest news about me. She told you 
everything.’ 

‘Somewhat! Somewhat! She coke somewhat of you, the 

1 a 

276 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

poor little thing. Thanks to God she has her sons with her. 
They ate safely back in their native country, in good health.’ 

‘Did you see them?’ 

‘Yes! yes! Two of my dearest children! Very sympathetic, 
very intelligent, like their father; and, like him, promising to 
be of very handsome presence. Yes! yes! Smoke if you will, 
my General. Don’t hesitate.’ 

Cipriano lit a cigarette. From old associations, he was net- 
vous, albeit amused. 

‘You know all about what I want to do, Father?’ said 
Ramon. 

‘I don’t know all, son of mine, but I know enough. I 
wouldn’t want to hear more. Eh!’ he sighed. ‘It is very sad.’ 

‘Not so very sad, Father, if we don’t make it sad. Why make 
a sad thing out of it, Father? We are in Mexico for the most 
part Indians. They cannot understand the high Christianity, 
Father, and the Church knows it. Christianity is a religion of 
the spirit, and must needs be understood if it is to have any 
effect. The Indians cannot understand it, any more than the 
rabbits of the hills.’ 

“Very good! Very good! Son of mine! But we can convey 
it to them. The rabbits of the hills are in the hands of God.’ 

“No, Father, it is impossible. And without a religion that 
will connect them with the universe, they will all perish. Only 
religion will serve; not socialism, nor education, nor anything.’ 

“Thou speakest well,’ said the Bishop. 

“The rabbits of the hills may be in the hands of God, Father. 
But they are at the mercy of men. The same with Mexico. The 
people sink heavier and heavier into inertia, and the Church 
cannot help them, because the Church does not possess the 
key-word to the Mexican soul.’ 

“Doesn’t the Mexican soul know the Voice of God?’ said 
the Bishop. , 

“Your own children may know your voice, Father. But if 
you go out to speak to the birds on the lake, or the deer among 
the mountains, will they know your voice? Will they wait and 
listen?’ : 

“Who knows? It is said théy waited to listen to the Holy 
Francisco of Assisi.’ 

“Now, Father, we must speak to the Mexicans in their own 

= = 
FOURTH HYMN AND THE BISHOP 7 tf 

language, and give them the clue-word to their own souls. I 
shall say Quetzaleoatl. If I am wrong, let me perish. But I am 
not wrong.’ 

The Bishop fidgeted rather restlessly. He didn’t want to 
hear all this. And he did not want to answer. He was impotent 
anyhow. 

“Your Chutch is the Catholic Church, Father >’ 

“Surely!” said the Bishop. 

“And Catholic Church means the Church of All, the Univer- 
sal Church?’ 
~ “Surely, son of mine.’ 

“Then why not let it be really catholic? Why call it catholic, 
when it is not only just one among many Churches, but is even 
hostile to all the rest of the churches? Father, why not let the, 
Catholic Church become really the Universal Church?’ 

“It is the Universal Church of Christ, my son.’ 

“Why not let it be the Universal Church of Mohammed as 
well; since filtimately, God is One God, but the peoples speak 
varying languages, and each needs its own prophet to speak 
with its pwn tongue. The Universal Church of Christ, and Mo- 
hammed, and Buddha, and Quetzalcoatl, and all the others — 
that would be a Catholic Church, Father.’ 

“You speak of things beyond me,’ said the Bishop, ‘arping 
his ring. 

‘Not beyond any man,’ said Don Ramén. ‘A Catholic 
Chutch is a church of all the religions, a home on earth for all 
the prophets and the Christs, a big tree under which every man 
who acknowledges the greater life of the soul can sit and be 

_tefreshed. Isn’t that the Catholic Church, Father?’ 

‘Alas, my son, I know the Apostolic Church of Christ in 

Rome, of which I am a humble servant. a do not understand 
these clever things you are saying to me.’ 
. ‘Tam asking you for peace, Father. Iam not one who hates 
the Church of Christ, the Roman Catholic Church. But in Mexico 
I think it has no place. When my heart is not bitter, I am 
grateful forever to Christ, the Son of God. The affair of the 
Judases grieves me more than it does you, and the affairs of 
bloodshed are far bitterer to me.’ 

‘I am no innovator, my son, to provoke bloodshed.’ 

‘Listen! I am going to remove the holy images from the 

278 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

church at Sayula, with reverence, and with reverence burn 
them upon the lake. Then I shall put the image of Quetzalcoatl 
in the church at Sayula.’ 

The Bishop looked up furtively. For some moments he said 
nothing. But his silence was furtive, cornered. 

‘Would you dare do that, Don Ramon?’ he said. 

“Yes! And I shall not be prevented. General Viedma is with 
me.’- 
The Bishop glanced sideways at Cipriano. . 

‘Certainly,’ said Cipriano. 

‘Nevertheless it is illegal,’ said the Bishop, with acid bitter- 
ness. 

“What is illegal in Mexico?’ said Ramon. ‘What is weak is ~ 

illegal. I will not be weak, My Lord.’ 

“Lucky you!’ said the Bishop, lifting his shoulders. 

There was a break of silence. 

‘No!’ said Ramon. ‘I come to ask you for peace. Tell the 
Archbishop what I say. Let him tell the Cardinals and the Pope 
that the time has come for a Catholic Church of the Earth, the 
Catholic Church of All the Sons of Men. The Saviours are 
more than one, and let us pray they will still be increased. But 
God is one God, and the Saviours are the Sons of the One 
God. Let the Tree of the Church spread its branches over all 
the earth, and shelter the prophets in its shade, as they sit and 
speak their knowledge of the beyond.’ 

“Are you one of these prophets, Don Ramon?’ 

‘T surely am, Father. And I would speak about Quetzalcoatl 
in Mexico, and build his Church here.’ 

“Nay! You would invade the Churches of Christ and the 
Blessed Virgin, I heard you say.’ 

“You know my intentions. But I do not want to quarrel 
with the Church of Rome, nor have bloodshed and enmity, 
Father. Can you not understand me? Should there not be 
peace between the men who strive down their different ways 
to the God-Mystery ?’ : 

“Once more desecrate the altars!’ Bring in strange idols. 
Burn the images of Our Lord and Our Lady, and ask for 
peace?’ said the poor Bishop, who helplessly longed to be left 
alone. : 

‘All that, Father,’ said Ramon. 

ee, 

FOURTH HYMN AND THE BISHOP 279 

“Son, what can I answer? You ate a good man smitten with 
the madness of pride. Don Cipriano is one more Mexican 
general. I am the poor old Bishop of this diocese, faithful set- 
vant of the Holy Church, humble child of the Holy Father in 
Rome. What can I do? What can I answer? Take me out to the 
cemetery and shoot me at once, General!’ 

“I don’t want to,’ said Cipriano: 

‘It will end like that,’ said the Bishop. 

“But why?’ cried Don Ramon. ‘Is there no sense in what I 
say ? Cannot you understand?’ ; 

“My son, my understanding goes no farther than my faith, 
my duty, will allow. Iam not a clever man. I live by faith and 
my duty to my sacred office. Understand that I do not under- 
stand.’ 

“Good-day, Father!’ said Ramon, suddenly rising. 

‘Go with God, my son,’ said the Bishop, rising and lifting 
his fingers. 

‘ Adiés, Sefior!’ said Cipriano, clicking his spurs, and put- 
ting his hand oft his sword as he turned to the door. 

‘ Adiés, Sefior General,’ said the’ Bishop, darting after them 
his eyes of old malice, which they could feel in their 
backs. . \ 

‘He will say nothing,’ said Cipriano, as he and Ramon went 
down the steps. “The old jesuit, he only wants to keep his job 
and his power, and prevent the heart’s beating. I know them. 
All they treasure, even more than their money, is their centi- 
pede power over the frightened people; especially over the 
women.’ 

‘T didn’t know you hated them,’ laughed Ramon. 

‘Waste no more breath on them, my dear one,’ said Cip- 
riano. ‘Go forward, you can walk over broken snakes such as 
those.’ 

As they went on foot past the post-office square, where the 
modern scribes at little tables under the arches sat tapping out 
letters on their typewriters for the poor and illiterate, who 
waited with their few centavos to have their messages turned 
into florid Castilian, Ramon and Cipriano met with an almost 
stattled respect. 

‘Why talk to the Bishop? — he doesn’t exist any more. I hear 
his Knights of Cortés had a big dinner the other evening, and 

280 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

it is said — I don’t believe it — that they drank oaths in blood to 
have my life and yours. But I think the oaths of the Catholic 
Dames would frighten me more. Why, if a man stops to un- 
fasten his trousers to make water, the Knights of Cortés run 
for their lives, thinking the pistol is pointed at them. Don’t 
think about them, man! Don’t try to conciliate them. They will 
only puff up and become insolent, thinking you are.afraid of 
them. Six soldiers will trample down all that dirt,’ said the 
General. 

It was the city, and the spirit of the city. 

Cipriano had a suite in the big Palace on the Plaza de 
Armas. 

‘If I marry,’ he said, as they passed into the stone patio, 
where soldiers stood at attention, ‘I shall take a house in the 
colony, to be mote private.’ 

' Cipriano in town was amusing. He seemed to exude pride 
and arrogant authority as he walked about. But his black eyes, 
glancing above his fine nose and that little goat beard, were not 
to be laughed at. They seemed to get everything, in the stab of 
a glance. A demoniacal little fellow. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

Auto da Fe 

RAMON saw Carlota and his boys in the city, but it was a rather 
fruitless meeting. The elder boy was just uncomfortable in the 
presence of his father, but the younger Cyprian, who was delicate 
and very intelligent, had a rather lofty air of displeasure with his 
parent. 

‘Do you know what they sing, papa?’ he said. 

“Not all the things they sing,’ said Ramon. 

“They sing —’ the boy hesitated. Then, in -his clear young 
voice, he piped up, to the tune of La Cucaracha: 

“Don Ramén don’t dtink, don’t smoke. 
Dojfia Carlota wished he would. 
He’s going to weat the sky-blue cloak 
That he’s stolen from the Mother of God.’ 

a 

AUTO DA FE 281 
“No, I’m not,’ said Ramon, smiling. ‘Mine’s got a snake and 

a bird in the middle, and black zigzags and a red fringe. You’d 

better come and see it.’ 
“No, papa! I don’t want to.’ 
“Why not?’ 

‘I don’t want to be mixed up in this affair. It makes us all 
look ridiculous.” 

“But how do you think you look, anyhow, in your striped 
little sailor suit and your little saintly look? We’d better dress 
you as the Infant Jesus.’ 

“No, papa! You are in bad taste. One doesn’t say those 
things.’ 

“Now you'll have to confess to a fib. You say one doesn’t. 
say those things, when I, who am your father, said them only 
a moment ago, and you heard me.’ 

‘I mean good people don’t. Decent people.’ 

“Now you’ll have to confess again, for calling your father 

; ae ae — Terrible child!’ 

ie 

"The child fluehed, and tears tose to his eyes. There was 
silence fgr a while. 

“So you don’t want to come to Terulecnecy! said Ramon, to 
his boys. 

“Yes!’ said the elder boy, slowly. ‘I want to come and bathe 
in the lake, and have a boat. But — they say it is impossible.’ 

‘Why?’ 

“They say you make yourself a peon, in your clothes.’ — The 
boy was shy. 

“They’re very nice clothes, you know. Nicer than those little 
breeches of yours.’ 

‘They say, also, that you pretend to be the Aztec god Quet- 
zalcoatl.’ 

‘Not at all. I only pretend that the Aztec god Quetzalcoatl is 
coming back to the Mexicans.’ 

“But, papa, it is not true.’ 

‘How do you know?’ 

‘Because it is impossible.’ 

¢ Why? 2 

“There never was any Quetzalcoatl, except idols.’ 

‘Is there any Jesus, except images?’ 

“Yes, papa.’ 

282 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

“Where?” 

“In heaven.’ 

‘Then in heaven there is also Quetzalcoatl. And what is in 
heaven is capable of coming back to earth. Don’t you believe 
me?’ 

“I can’t.’ 

‘Then go on unbelieving,’ said the father, laughing at them 
and rising to leave them. 

‘It is very bad that they sing songs about you, and put 
mama in; like about Pancho Villa,’ said the younger boy. ‘It 
hurts me very much.’ 

‘Rub it with Vapour-rub, my pet,’ said Ramon. ‘Rub it with 
-Vapour-rub, where it hurts you.’ 

‘What a real bad man you are, papa!’ 

‘What a teal good child are you, my son! Isn’t that so?’ 

‘I don’t know, papa. I only know you are bad.’ 

‘Oh! Oh! Is that all they teach thee at thy American school?” 

‘Next term,’ said Ciprianito, ‘I want to change my name. I 
don’t want to be called Carrasco any more. When thou art in 
the newspapers, they will laugh at us.’ 

“Oh! Oh! I am laughing at thee ow, little frog! What name 
wilt thou choose, then? Espina, perhaps. Thou knowest Car- 
tasco is a wild bush, on the moors in Spain, where we come 
from. Wilt thou be the little thorn on the bush? Call thyself 
Espina, thou art a sprig of the old tree. Entonces, adiés! Sefior 
Espina Espinita!’ 

“Adids!’ said the boy abruptly, flushing with rage. 

Ramon took a motor-car to Sayula, for there was-a made 
toad. But already the rains were washing it away. The cat 
lurched and bumped in the great gaps. In one place a camion 
jay on its back, where it had overturned. 

On the flat desert there were already small smeats of water, 
and the pink cosmos flowers, and the yellow, were just sprout- 
ing their tufts of buds. The hills in the distance were- going 
opaque, as leaves came out on the invisible trees and bushes. 
The earth was coming to life. 

Ram6n called in Sayula at Kate’s house. She was out, but 
the wild Concha came scouring across the beach, to fetch her. — 
‘There is Don Ramon! There is Don Ramén!’ 

Kate hurried home, with sand in her shoes. 

AUTO DA FE 283 

She thought Ramén looked tited, and, in his black suit, 
sinister. 

“I didn’t expect you,’ she said. 

‘Iam on my way back from town.’ 

He sat very still, with that angry look on his creamy dark 
face, and he kept pushing back his black moustache from his 
closed, angry lips. 

- ‘Did you see anybody in town?’ she asked. 

‘I saw Don Cipriano — and Dojia Carlota, and my boys!’ 

“Oh, how nice for you! Are they quite well?’ 

“In excellent health, I believe.’ 

She laughed suddenly. 

“You are still cross,’ she said. ‘Is it about the monkeys still?’ 

“Sefiora,’ he said, leaning forward, so that his black hair 
dropped a little on his brow, ‘in monkeydom I don’t know 
who is prince. But in the kingdom of fools, I believe it is I.’ 

“Why >?’ she said. 

And as heedid not answer, she added: 

éIt must be a.gpmfort to be a prince, even of fools.’ 

He looked daggers at her, then burst into a laugh. 

“Oh, Sefora mia! What ails us men, when we are always 
wanting to be good?’ 

‘Are you repenting of it?’ she laughed. 

‘Yes!’ he said. ‘I am a prince of fools! Why have I started 
this Qtetzalcoatl business? Why? Pray tell me why.’ 

‘I suppose you wanted to.’ 

He pondered for a time, pushing up his moustache. 

‘Perhaps it is better to be a monkey than a fool. I object to 
being called a monkey, nevertheless. Carlota is a monkey, no 
more; and my two boys are prize young monkeys in sailor 
‘suits. And I am a fool. Yet what is the difference between a 
fool and a monkey?’ 

‘Ouién sabe?’ said Kate. 

‘One wants to be good, and the other is sure he zs good. So 
I make a fool of myself. They are sure they are always good, so 
that makes monkeys of them. Oh, if only the world would 
blow up like a bomb!’ 

‘It won't!’ said Kate. 

‘True enough. — Ah, well!’ 

He drew himself erect, pulling himself together. 

ee 

s Fg Mii a | 

‘Do you think, Sefiora Caterina, you might marry our 
mutual General?’ Ramon had put himself aside again. 

‘I-I don’t know!’ stammered Kate. ‘I hardly think so.’ 

‘He is not sympathetic to you at all?’ 

“Yes, he is. He is alive, and there is even a certain fascination 
about him. — But one shouldn’t try marrying a man of another 
race, do you think, even if he were more sympathetic?’ 

‘Ah!’ sighed Ramon. ‘It’s no good generalizing. It’s no 
good marrying anybody, unless there will be a real fusion 
somewhere.’ 

‘And I feel there wouldn’t,’ said Kate. “I feel he just wants 
something of me; and perhaps I just want something of him. 
But he would never meet me. He would never come forward 
himself, to meet me. He would come to take something from 
me and I should have to let him. And I don’t want merely that. 
I want a man who will come half-way, just half-way, to meet 
me.’ 

Don Ramon pondered, and shook his head. 

“You are right,’ he said. ‘Yet, in these matters, one never 
knows what is half-way, nor where it is. A woman who just 
wants to be taken, and then to cling on, is a parasite. And a 
man who wants just to take, without giving, is a creature of 
ptey.’ 

“And I’m afraid Don Cipriano might be that,’ said Kate.. 

‘Possibly,’ said Ramon. ‘He is not so with me. But perhaps 
he would be, if we did not meet — perhaps it is our half-way — _ 
in some physical belief that is at the very middle of us, and — 
which we recognize in one another. Don’t you think there 
might be that between you and him?’ 

‘I doubt if he’d feel it necessary, with a woman. A woman 
wouldn’t be important enough.’ 

Ramon was silent. 

‘Perhaps!’ he said. ‘With a woman, a man always wants to 
let himself go. And it is precisely with a woman that he should 
never let himself go. It is precisely with a woman that he © 
should never let himself go, but stick to his innermost belief, 
and meet her just there. Because when the innermost belief co- 
incides in them both, if it’s physical, there, and then, and no- 
where else, they can meet. And it’s no good unless there is a 
meeting. It’s no good a man ravishing a woman, and it’s abso- 

284 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Be. 

AUTO DA FE 285 

lutely no good a woman ravishing a man. It’s a sin, that is. 
There is such a thing as sin, and that’s the centre of it. Men and 
women_keep on ravishing one another. Absurd as it may 
sound, it is not I who would ravish Carlota. It is she who 
would ravish me. Strange and absurd and a little shameful, it 
is true. — Letting oneself go, is either ravishing or being rav- 
_ ished. Oh, if we could only abide by our own souls, and meet 
in the abiding place. — Sefiora, I have not a very great respect 
for myself. Woman and I have failed with one another, and it 
- it a bad failure to have in the middle of oneself.’ 

Kate looked at him in wonder, with a little fear. Why was he 
confessing to her? Was he going to love her? She almost sus- 
pended her breathing. He looked at her with a sort of sorrow 
on his brow, and in his dark eyes, anger, vexation, wisdom, 
and a dull pain. 

‘I am sorty,’ he went on, ‘that Carlota and I are as we are 
with one another. Who am I, even to talk about Quetzalcoatl, 
when my heart is hollow with anger against the woman I have 
martied and theghildren she bore me? —- We never met in our 
souls, she and IJ. At first I loved her, and she wanted me to 
ravish her. Then after a while aman becomes uneasy. He can’t 
keep on wanting to ravish a woman, the same woman. He has 
tevulsions. Then she loved me, and she wanted to ravish me. 
And I liked it for a time. But she had revulsions too. The eldest 
boy ig really my boy, when I ravished her. And the youngest is 
her boy, when she ravished me. See how miserable it is! And 
now we can never meet; she turns to her crucified Jesus, and I 
to my unctucified and unctucifiable Quetzalcoatl, who at least 
cannot be ravished.’ t 

‘And I’m sure you won’t make him a ravisher,’ she said. 

‘Who knows? If I err, it will be on that side. But you know, 
Sefiora, Quetzalcoatl is to me only the symbol of the best a 
man may be, in the next days. The universe is a nest of dragons, 
with a perfectly unfathomable life-mystery at the centre of it. 
If I call the mystery the Morning Star, surely it doesn’t matter! 
A man’s blood can’t beat in the abstract. And man is a creature 
who wins his own creation inch by inch from the nest of the 
cosmic dragons. Or else he loses it little by little, and goes to 

, pieces. Now we are all losing it, in the ravishing and ravished 
disintegration. We must pull ourselves together, hard, both 

} 
286 THE PLUMED SERPENT ‘ . 

men and women, or we ate all lost. - We must pull ourselves 
together, hard.’ ; 

‘But ate you a man who needs a woman in his life?’ she said. 

‘I am a man who yearn’ for the sensual fulfilment of my 
soul, Sefiora,’ he said. ‘I am a man who has no belief in abnega- 
tion of the blood desites. I am a man who is always on the 
verge of taking wives and concubines to live with me, so deep 
is my desire for that fulfilment. Except that now I know that is 
useless — not momentarily useless, but in the long run — my 
ravishing a woman with hot desire. No matter how much she 
is in love with me and desires me to ravish her. It is no good, 
and the very inside of me knows it is no good. Wine, woman, ~ 
and song — all that — all that game is up. Our insides won’t 
really have it any more. Yet it is hard to pull ourselves to- 
gether.’ 

‘So that you really want a woman to be with you?’ said 
Kate. 

“Ah, Sefiora! If I could trust myself; and trust her! Iam no 
longer a young man, who can afford to make mistakes. I am 
forty-two years old, and I am making my last — and perhaps in 
truth, my first great effort as a man. I hope I may perish before 
I make a big mistake.’ 

“Why should you make a mistake? You needn’t?’ 

‘I? It is very easy for me to make a mistake. Very easy, on 
the one hand, for me to become arrogant and a ravisher. And 
very easy, on the other hand, for me to deny myself, and make 
a sott of sacrifice of my life. Which is being ravished. Easy to 
let myself, in a certain sense, be ravished. I did it to a small de- 
gree even yesterday, with the Bishop of Guadalajara. And it is 
bad. If I had to end my life in a mistake, Sefiora, I had rather 
end it in being a ravisher, than in being ravished. As a hot 
ravisher, I can still slash and cut at the disease of the other 
thing, the horrible pandering and the desire men have to be 
ravished, the hateful, ignoble desire they have.’ 

‘But why don’t you do as you say, stick by the innermost 
soul that is in you, and meet a woman there, meet her, as you 
say, where your two souls coincide in their deepest desire? Not 
always that horrible unbalance that you call ravishing.’ 

“Why don’t I? But which woman can I meet in the body, 
without that slow degradation of ravishing, or being ravished, 

» : eee 
S . . wile <i 

~ AUTO DA FE 287 

setting in? If I marry a Spanish woman or a dark Mexican, she 
will give herself up to me to be ravished. If I marry a woman 
of the Anglo-Saxon or any blonde northern stock, she will 
want to ravish me, with the will of all the ancient white de- 
mons. Those that want to be ravished are parasites on the soul, 
and one has revulsions. Those that want to ravish a man are 
vampires. And between the two, there is nothing.’ 

“Sutely there are some really good women?’ 

“Well, show me them. They are all potential Carlotas or — or 
— yes, Caterinas. I am sure you ravished your Joachim till he 
died. No doubt he wanted it; even more than you wanted it. 
It is not just sex. It lies in the will. Victims and victimizers. The 
upper classes, craving to be victims to the lower classes; or 
else craving to make victims of the lower classes. The politi- 
cians, craving to make one people victims to another. The 
Church, with its evil will for turning the people into humble, 
writhing things that shall crave to be victimized, to be ravished 
—I tell you,he earth is a place of shame.’ 

But if you want to be different,’ said Kate, ‘surely a few 

- other people do — really.’ a 
“It may be,’ he said, becoming calm. “It may be. I wish I 
' kept myself together better. I must keep myself together, keep 
myself within the middle place, where I am still. My Morning 
Star. Now I am ashamed of having talked like this to you, 
Sefiofa Caterina.’ 
‘Why?’ she cried. And for the first time, the flush of dasaet 
and humiliation came into her face. 

He saw it at once, and put his hand on hers for a moment. 

‘No,’ he said. ‘I am not ashamed. I am relieved.’ 

She flushed deeply at his touch, and was silent. He rose 
hastily, to leave, craving to be alone again with his own soul. 

‘On Sunday,’ he said, ‘will you come into the p/aza, in the 
morning, when the drum sounds? Will you come?’ 

‘What for?’ she said. 

‘Well! Come, and you will see.’ 

He was gone in a flash. 

There were many soldiers in the village. When she went to 
the post-office, she saw the men in theis cotton uniforms lying 
about in the entrance to the military station. There must have 
been fifty or more, little men, not the tall soldiers in slouched 

K 

e s \ 
an Te 

288 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

hats. These were little, quick, compact men, like Cipriano, and 
they talked in a strange Indian language, very subdued. 
They were very rarely seen in the streets. They kept out of 
sight. f 

But at night everyone was requested to be indoors by ten 
o’clock, and through the darkness Kate heard the patrols of 
horse-soldiers riding round. 

There was an air of excitement and mystery in the place. The 
parish priest, a rather overbearing, fat man of fifty or so, had 
preached a famous Saturday evening serrnon against Ramon 
and Quetzalcoatl, forbidding the heathen name to be men- 
tioned, threatening with all the penalties any parishioner who 
read the Hymns, or even listened. 

So, of course, he was attacked when he left the church, and 
had to be rescued by soldiers who were in the doorway. They 
matched him safely home. But his ¢riada, the old woman who | 
setved him, was told by more women than one that the next 
time the padre opened his mouth against Quetzalcoatl, he 
would have a few inches of machete in his fat guts. 

So his reverence stayed at home, and a curate officiated. 

Practically all the people who came over the lake in boats on 
Saturdays went to mass in Sayula church. The great-doors © 
stood open all the day. Men as they passed to and fro to the 
lake, took off their big hats, with a curious cringing gesture, 
as they went by the gateway of the church. All day long, scat- 
tered people were kneeling in the aisles or among the benches, | 
the men kneeling erect, their big hats down by their knees, 
their curious tall-shaped Indian heads with the thick black 
hair also erect; only the kneeling legs, close together, humble. 
The women hooded themselves in their dark reboxos and 
spread their elbows as they kneeled at a bench, ina slack sort of 
voluptuousness. 

On Saturday night, a great ruddy flickering of many candle- 
points, away down the dark cavern of the church; and a clus- 
tering of dark men’s heads, a shuffling of women, a come and 
go of men arriving from the lake, of men departing to the 
market. A hush, not exactly of worship, but of a certain volup- 
tuous admiration of the loftiness and glitter, a sensual, almost 
victimized self-abandon to the god of death, the Crucified 
streaked with blood, or to the pretty white woman in a blue 

ss 
AUTO DA FE 289 

mantle, with her little doll’s face under her crown, Mary, the 
doll of dolls, Nrfa of Nifias. 

It was not worship. It was a sort of numbness and letting the 
soul sink uncontrolled. And it was a luxuty, after all the week 
of unwashed dullness in their squalid villages of straw huts. 
But it irritated Kate. 

The men got up and tiptoed away in their sandals, crossing 
themselves front and back, on the navel and on the back of the 
head, with holy water. And their black eyes shone with a loose, 
sensuous look. Instead of having gathered themselves together 
and become graver, stronger, more collected and deep in theit 
own integrity, they emerged only the more loose and sloppy 
and uncontrolled. 

Oh, if there is one thing men need to learn, but the Mexican 
Indians especially, it is to collect each man his own soul to- 
gether deep inside him, and-to abide by it. The Church, in- 
stead of helping men to this, pushes them more and mote into 
a soft, emotional helplessness, with the unpleasant sensuous 

- gratification of feeling themselves victims, victimized, victim- - 
ized, but at the same time with the lurking sardonic conscious- 
ness that in the end a victim is stronget than the victimizer. In 
the end, the victims pull down their victimizer, like a pack of 
hyenas on an unwary lion. They know it. Cursed ate the falsely 
meek, for they are inheriting the earth. 

On’ Sunday morning there was early mass at sunrise, an- 
other mass at seven o’clock, another at nine, another at eleven. 
Then there was a little band of violins and ’cellos, playing old- 
fashioned dance music; there was, especially early in the morn- 
ing, a solid mass of peons and women, kneeling on the floor; 
and a flapping of dusky candles, a smell of the exhaust air of 
candles, a heavy, tolling fume of incense, and the heavy choir _ 
of men’s voices, solid, powerful, impressive, from the gallery. 

And the people went away in sensuous looseness, which 
soon turned, in the market, to hate, the old, unfathomable 
hate which lies at the bottom of the Indian heart, and which 
always rises black and turbid when they have swayed awhile in 
sensuous gratification. 

The church inside was a dead interior, like all Mexican 
churches, even the gorgeous Puebla cathedral. The interior of 
almost any Mexican church gives the impression of cynical 

. 

1 
barrenness, cynical meaninglessness, an empty, cynical, mock- _ 
ing shell. The Italian churches are built much in the same style, 
and yet in them lingers a shadow and stillness of old, mysteri- 
ous holiness. The hush. * 

But not in Mexico. The churches outside are impressive. In- 
side, and it is curious to define it, they are blatant; void of 
sound and yet with no hush, simple, and yet completely vul- 
gar, barren, sterile. More barren than a bank or a schoolroom 
of an empty concett-hall, less mysterious than any of these. 
You get a sense of plaster, of mortar, of whitewash, of smeared 
blue-wash or grey-wash; and of gilt laid on and ready to peel 
off. Even in the most gorgeous churches, the gilt is hatefully 
gilt, never golden. Nothing is soft nor mellow. 

So the interior of Sayula church; and Kate had often been 
in. The white exterior was chatming, and so valuable in the 
landscape, with the twin white pagoda-towers peering out of 
the green willow-trees. But inside, it seemed nothing but 
whitewash, stencilled over with grey scroll-work decorations. 
The windows were high, and many, letting in the light as into 
a schoolroom. Jesus, streaked with blood, was in one of the 
transepts, and the Virgin, a doll in faded satin, stood startled 
inside a glass case. There were rag flowers and paper flowers, 
coarse lace and silver that looked like tin. 

Nevertheless, it was quite clean, and very much frequented. 

The Month of Mary had gone by, the blue and white paper 
ribbons were all taken down, the palm-trees in pots were al! 
removed from the aisle, the little girls in white dresses and 
little crowns of flowers no longer came with posies in their 
hand, at evening. Curious, the old gentle ceremonials of 
Europe, how trashy they seem in Mexico, just a cheap sort 
of charade. 

The day of Corpus Christi came, with high mass and the 
church full to the doors with kneeling peons, from dawn till 
noon. Then a feeble little procession of children within the 
church, because the law forbids religious processions outside. 
But all, somehow, for nothing. Just so that the people could 
call it a fiesta, and so have an excuse to be more slack, more 
sloshy and uncontrolled than ever. The one Mexican desire; 
to let themselves go in sloppy inertia. 

And this was the all-in-all of the religion. Instead of doing 

290 i THE PLUMED SERPENT 

AUTO DA FE 291 

as it should, collecting the"soul into its own strength and in- 
tegrity, the religious day left it all the more decomposed and 
degenerate. 

However, the weeks passed, the crowd in the church seemed 
the same as ever. But the crowd in the church one hour was 
the crowd of Quetzalcoat! the next hour. Just a sensation. 

Till the mote socialistic Readers mingled a little anti-clerical 
bitterness in their reading. And all the peons began to say: was . 
El Seftor a gringo, and the Santisima, was she nothing but a 
gringuita? 

This provoked retaliation on the part of the priests, first 
mete admonitions, then at last the loud denunciations and 
threat of that sermon. Which meant war. 

Everybody waited for Saturday. Saturday came, and the 
church remained shut. Saturday night, the church was dark 
and closed. Sunday, the church was silent and the doors blank 
fastened. 

Something like consternation spread through the market 
host. They had nowhere to go! — But among the consternation 
was a piqued curiosity. Perhaps something exciting was going 
to happefi. 

Things had happened before. In the revolutions, many of 
the churches in Mexico have been used for stables and for bar- 
racks. And churches are turned into schools, and concert halls, 
and cigematograph theatres. The convents and the monasteries 
are most of them barracks for the rag-tag-and-bobtail soldiers. 
The world changes, is bound to change. 

The second Saturday of the closed church was, as it happen- 
ed, a big-market. Much fruit and stuff had come up the lake, 
from the south from far distances, even from Colima. There 
wete men with lacquer wooden bowls, and women with glazed 
pottery. And as usual, men crouching in guard over twenty 
centavos worth of nauseous tropical plums, or chiles, or man- 
goes, in tiny pyramids along the roadway. 

A crowded market, with the much and the.little of the In- 
dians. And the church doors shut and locked, the church bells 
silent, even the clock stopped. True, the clock was always 
stopping. But not with such a final arrest. 

No mass, no confession, no little orgy of incense and slack 
emotion! The low rumble of murmuring tones, the quick, ap- 

292 THE PLUMED SERPENT 1 

prehensive glances around. Vendofs by the causeway squatted 
tight, as if to make themselves dense and small, squatting down 
on their haunches with their knees up to their shoulders, like 
the Aztec idols. And soldiers in twos and threes sprinkled 
everywhere. And Sefioras and Sefioritas, in their black gauze 
scatves or mantillas, tripping to the church for mass and shrill- 
ing round the gateway of the church, all a bubble and a froth 
of chatter; though they had known quite well the church was 
shut. 

But it was Sunday morning, and something was due to 
happen. 

At about half-past ten, a boat appeared, and men in snow- 
white clothes got out, one carrying a drum. They marched 
quickly through the people, under the old trees on the sand, 
actoss to the church. They passed through the broken iron 
gates into the stone courtyard in front of the church. 

At the church doors, which were still shut, they took off 
their blouses, and stood in a ring, with dark naked shoulders 
and the blue-and-black sashes of Quetzalcoatl round their 
waists. 

The drum began to beat, with a powerful, pounding note, 
as the men stood bare-headed and bare-breasted in a circle out- 
side the church doors; a strange ring of lustrous, bluey-black 

“heads and dark shoulders, above the snowy-white pantaloons. 
Monotonously the drum beat, on and on. Then the little clay 
flute with the husky sound wheezed a clear melody. 

The whole market pressed densely towards the gateways of | 
the church, But there, soldiers stood guard. And on the inside — 
of the stone yard in front of the church, soldiers quietly guard- 
ed the low walls, letting nobody mount. So that outside, under 
the old willow- and pepper-trees, in the hot morning sun, the 
dense crowd stood gazing at the church doors. They were 
mostly men in big hats; but some townsmen were there, and 
some women, and Kate with a parasol lined with dark blue. A 
close, silent, tense throng under the spangled shade, pressing 
round the trunks of the palm-trees, climbing on the roots of the 
pepper-trees. And behind were the camiones and the motor- 
cars drawn up. 

The drum shuddered and went still, and the earthen flute 
was silent. The lake could be heard lapping, and a clink of 

- 

AUTO DA FE 293 

glasses and a sound of chauffeurs’ voices at the little cantina- 
booth. For the rest, the silent breathing of the crowd. — Sol- 
diers were quickly distributing a few leaflets among the ctowd. 
A strong, far-carrying male voice began to sing to the softened 

thud of the drum. 

Jesus’ FAREWELL 

Farewell, Farewell, Despedida! 
The last of my days is gone. 

.To-morrow Jesus and Holy Mary 

Will be bone. 

It is a long, long way 

From Mexico to the Pool of Heaven. 
Look back the last time, Mary Mother. 
Let us call the eleven. 

James, and John, and Mark, 
Felipe and Sar Cristobal, 
All my saints, and ‘Anna, Teresa, 

Guadalupe whose face is oval. 
¢ 

Come then, now, it is finished for all of us. 
Let & all be gone. 

Follow me now up the featets, of sparks, 
Every one. : 

4 

Joaquin, Francis, and Anthony 
And many-named Maria, 
Purisima, Refugio, and Soledad 
Follow here. 

Ho!-all my saints and my Virgins 
Troop out of your shrines, 

After your master, the Crucified; 
Bring all your signs. 

Run up the flames, and with feet on the sparks 
Troop into the sky. 

Once more following the Master, 

Back again now, on high. 

Farewell, let all be forgotten 

In Mexico. 

To the pool of peace and forgetting in heaven 
We go. 

While this was singing, another boat had arrived, and sol- 

diets made way through the crowd for Ramon, in his white 
serape with the blue edges and scarlet fringe, and a young priest 

: 

294 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

of the church in a black cassock, and six men in dark serapes 
with the blue borders of Quetzalcoatl. This strange procession 
_ marched through the crowd and through the gateways of the 
ard. : 

: As they approached, the ring of men round the drum open- 
ed, and spread into a crescent. Ramon stood tall behind the 
drum, the six men in dark serapes divided and went to the 
wings of the crescent, the young, slim priest in a black cassock 
stood alone, in front of the crescent, facing the crowd. 

He lifted his hand; Ramon took off his hat; all the men in 
the crowd took off their hats. 

The priest turned, met Ramon at the centre of the crescent, 
and, across the drum, handed him the key of the church. Then 
the priest waited. 

Ramon unlocked the church doors and flung them open. 
The men in front of the crowd kneeled down suddenly, seeing 
the church dark like a cavern, but a trembling blaze of many 
candles, away, seemingly far down the mysterious darkness, 
shuddering with dark, rippling flame, like the Presence of the 
burning bush. 

The crowd swayed and’ rustled, and subsided, kneeling. 
Only here and there a labourer, a chauffeur or a railway man 
stood erect. 

The priest raised his hand a little higher, re-turning towards 
the people. 

“My children,’ he said; and as he spoke the lake seemed to 
rustle; ‘God the Almighty has called home His Son, and the 
Holy Mother of the Son: Their days are over in Mexico. They - 
go back to the Father. 

Jesus, the Son of God, bids you farewell. 

Mary, the Mother of God, bids you farewell. 

For the last time they bless you, as they leave you. 
Answer Adiés ! 

Say Adids! my children.’ 

The men in the circle said a deep Adiés! And from the sol- 
diers, and from the kneeling crowd, a ragged, muttered, 
strange repeating of Adios! again and again, like a sort of 
storm. 

Suddenly, in a blast, down the darkness of the church into 
which the kneeling people were staring, the burning bush of 

> 

= 

- AUTO. DA FE 295 
candles was gone, there Was only darkness. Across the sun- 

shine, lit here and there by a frail light of a taper, was a cave of 
darkness. 

Men in the crowd exclaimed and groaned. 

Then the drum softly touched, and two men in the crescent 
began to sing, in magnificent, terrible voices, the Farewell 
Hymn again. They were men whom Ramon, or his followers, 
had found in low drinking-dens in Mexico City, men with 

_ trained and amazing voices, the powerful Mexican tenor that 
seemed to tear the earth open. Men whom the ‘times’ have re- 
duced to singing in low city dives. And now they sang with all 
the terrible desperation that was in them, the hopeless, demon- 
ish recklessness. 

When they finished, the priest again lifted his hand, and 
gave the benediction; adding in a quiet voice: 

“And now, with all the saints, let Me go, saith Jesus: For I 
go back to my Father which is in heaven, and I lead my 
Mother in my right hand, home to peace.’ 

e turned and went into the church. Ramon followed. Then 
slowly, all the nfén of the crescent. Overhead the church bell 
rang a little while, on the deathly silence. It ceased. 

And in a moment, fromthe depths of the church sounded a 
drum, with a remote, fearsome thud, and a slow monotony. 

The priest, in his white vestments with rich lace, appeared 
in the doorway of the church, bearing a tall crucifix. He hesi- 
tated, then came into the sun. The kneeling people clasped their 
hands. ¢ 

Candles in the dark church were clustering towards the 
door, lonely flames. Don Ramon came out of the dark, naked 
to the waist, his serape over one shoulder, bearing the front 
pole of the great bier whereon lies, within a glass case, the life- 

like, terrible dead Christ of Holy Week. A tall, dark man, 
naked to the waist, held the other end of the pole on his shoul. 
der. The crowd moaned and crossed themselves. The lifelike 
Dead Christ seemed really dead, as he passed the gate. As He 
entered the crowd, kneeling men and women lifted sightless 

faces and flung their arms wide apart, and so remained, arms 
tigid and outflung, in an unspeakable ecstasy of fear, supplica- 
tion, acknowledgement of death. 

After the bier of the Dead Christ, a slow procession of men 

~~ 

am 
Ni, i ? ‘ 
ee fae: File) 4h ‘ a 

296 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

naked to the waist, carrying litter dfter litter. First the terrible 
scourged Christ, with naked body striped like a tiger with 
blood. Then the image of the Saviour of the Sacred Heart, the 
well-known figure from the side altar, with long hair and out- 
stretched hands. Then the image of Jesus of Nazareth, with a 
crown of thorns. 

Then the Virgin with the blue mantle and lace, and the . 
golden crown. The women began to moan as she emerged — 
rather ttashily into the blazing sunlight. Behind her, in the 
church, the candles were one by one going out. 

Then came brown Saint Anthony of Padua, with a child in 
his arms. Then Saint Francis, looking strangely at a cross in 
his hand. Then Saint Anna. And last, Saint Joaquin. And as he 
emerged, the last candles in the dark church went out, there 
were only open doors upon a darkness. 

The images on the shoulders of the brown-skinned men 
rode rather childishly out through the blazing sun, into the 
shadow of trees. The drum followed last, slowly thudding. On 
the glass case of the big Dead Christ the sun flashed with start- 
ling flashes, as the powerful men carrying it turned towards the 
water. The crowd murmured and swayed on its knees. Women 
ctied: Purtsima! Purisima! Don’t leave us! and some men ejacu- 
lated in strangled anguish, over and over again: Sefor! Sefor! 
Senor! 

But the strange procession made its way slowly under the 
trees, to the coarse sands, and descended again into the great 
light towards the lake. There was a little breeze under a blaze 
of sun. Folded serapes on naked, soft shoulders swung un- 
evenly, the images rocked and tottered a little. But onwards to 
the edge of the water went the tall crucifix, then the flashing 
glass box. And after, came Jesus in a red silk robe, fluttering, 
then a wooden Jesus all paint and streaks, then Jesus in white 
with a purple mantle that blew like a kerchief, Mary in lace that 
fluttered upon stiff white and blue satin. But the Saints were 
only painted; painted wood. 

The slim, lace-smocked priest staggered down the sand un- 
der the heavy crucifix, which had a white Christ Crucified 
stretched aloft, facing the lake. By the little wall was a large 
black canoa, sailing boat, with a broad plank gangway up to her © 
stern. Two bare-legged, white-clad men walked by the slim 

= 

AUTO DA FE 297 

priest, whose white sleeves blew like flags as he slowly climb- 
ed the gangway to the ship. Men helped him on board, and he 
walked away to the prow, whete at length he stood the big 
crucifix, with the Christ still facing outwards. 

The ship was open, without deck or hatches, but with fixed 
tables for the images. Slowly Ramén ascended and descended 
into the boat, the great glass case was laid down on its rest, the 
two men could wipe their wet brows and their hot, black hair. 
Ramon put on his blanket and his hat, against the sun. The 
boat heaved very slightly. The wind was from the west. The 
lake was pale and unreal, sun-blinded. 

One after another the fmages rose over the stern of the boat, 
against the sky, then descended into the vessel, to be set down 
on their rests; where they rose above the black sides of the 
canoa, in view of the throng on the shore. 

It was a strange and tawdry collection of images. And yet, 
each image had a certain pathos of its own, and a certain touch 
of horror, gs they were grouped together for their last ride, 
upon the trestle-supports, within the vessels. By each image 
stood the bearers, in hats and serapes, keeping a steady hand on 
the polés. P 

There was a little liné of soldiers on the shore, and three 
motor-boats with soldiers waited by the big cazoa. The shore 
was covered with a mass of people. Many row-boats came row- 

ing ipquisitively round, like fishes. But none came too neat. 

Bare-legged sailors began to pole the ship from the shore. 
They leaned heavily on the poles, and walked along the rims 
of the vessel. Slowly she began to move upon the waters, in the 
shallows. Slowly she was leaving the shore, and the throng. 

Two other sailors swiftly began to hoist the huge, square 
white sail. Quickly, yet heavily it rose in the air, and took the 
wind. It had the great sign of Quetzalcoatl, the circling blue 
snake and the blue eagle upon a yellow field, at the centre, like 
a great eye. 

The wind came from the west, but the boat was steering 
south-east, for the little Island of the Scorpions, which rose like 
a small dim hummock from the haze of the lake. So the sail 
reached out, and the great eye seemed to be glancing back, at 
the village with the green willows and the empty white church, 
the throng on the shore. 

298 THE PLUMED SERPENT 
Motor-boats circled the huge, slow canoe, small boats like 

insects followed and ranged round at a distance, never coming» 

too close. The running water clucked and spoke, the men by 
the images steadied the poles with one hand, their hats with 
the other, the great eye on the sail ever looked back at the land, 
the sweep of the white canvas sweeping low above the glass 
case of death, the Christ caked with gore, the i images in their 
fluttering mantles. 

On the shore, the people wandered away, or sat on ak 
sands waiting and watching in a sort of dumb patience 
that was half indifference. The canoe grew smaller, more 
inconspicuous, lapsing into the lighf, the little boats circled 
around it like mere dots. The lake tired the eyes with its 
light. 

Away under the trees, in a half silence, a half vacancy, a wo- 
man bought a dark water-melon, smashed it open on a stone, 
and gave the big pinky fragments to her children. In silence, 
men sprinkled salt on the thick slice of cucumber sold by the 
woman under the tree. In silence they wandered into the 
church, past the soldiers on guard at the door. 

The church was absolutely dark, save for the light that enter- 
ed the doorway, and absolutely bare; walls, floor, altar, tran- 
septs, all stark bare and empty. The people wandered away 
again, in silence. 

It was noon, and a hot day. The canog slowly ranged to the | 

small hummock of the island amid the waters, where lived one 
family of Indians — fishers, with a few goats and one dry little 
place where they grew a few beans and heads of maize. For the 
rest, the island was all dry rock and thorny bushes, and scor- 
pions. 

The vessel was poled round to the one rocky bay. Slowly she 
drew near the island. The motor-boats and the little boats hur- 

ried ahead. Already brown, naked men were bathing among 

the rocks. 

The great sail sank, the canoa edged up to the rocky shore, 
men sprang from her into the water, the images were lowered 
and slowly carried on to the rocks. Thete they waited for the 
bearers. 

Slowly the procession went again up the bank of the dis- 
hevelled island, past the couple of huts, where a red cock was 

i 

AUTO DA FE 299 

crowing among the litter, and over to rocks, beyond the 
bushes, on the far side. 

The side facing Sayula was all rock, naked and painful to 
tread on. In a rocky hollow at the water’s edge, tall stones had 
been put up on end, with iron bars across the top, like a grill. 
Underneath, a pile of faggots ready; and at the side, a pile of 
faggots. 

The images, the glass box of the great Dead Christ, were 
Jaid on the iron bars of the grill, in a pathetic cluster all to- 
gether. The crucifix was leaned against them. It was noon, the 
heat and the light were fierce and erect. But already down the 
lake clouds were pushing up fantastically. 

Beyond the water, beyond the glare, the village looked like 
a mirage, with its trees and villages and white church towers. 

Men who had come in boats crowded on the rocks of the 
little amphitheatre. In silence, Ramon kindled shreds of cane 
and ocofe, with a burning-glass. Little hasty flames like young 
snakes arose in the solid sunlight, with vapour of smoke. He 
set fire to the grefully-arranged pyramid of faggots beneath 
the grill-table of the images. ~ » 

Theré was a crackling, and a puffing of whitish smoke, the 
sweet scent of ocote, and orange-red tongues of half-substantial 
flame were leaping up in the hot white air. Hot breaths blew 
suddenly, sudden flames gushed up, and the ooze, full of sweet 
resing began to roar. The glass of the great box emitted strange, 
painful yelps as it splintered and fell tinkling. Between the iron 
bars, brownish flames pushed up among the images, which at 
once went black. The little vestments of silk and satin withered 
in a moment to blackness, the caked wounds of paint bubbled 
black. 

The young priest took off his linen vestment, his stole, and 
his chasuble, and with flushed face flung them in the flame. 
Then he stripped off his black cassock, and emerged in the 
white cotton of the men of Quetzalcoatl, his white drawers 
rolled up to the Knee. He threw his cassock in the fire. Some- 
one handed him a big hat, and a white serape with blue ends. 

There was a smell of burning paint, and wool, and ocoze. ‘The 
fire rushed in a dusky mass upon the blackened, flickering | 
images, till nothing was to be seen but a confused bush of 
smoke and brown-red flames, puthering, reeking, roaring. The 

Be CULAR Oe : " pa 

300 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

flaming crucifix slipped aside, and fell. A man seized it and 
pushed it into the fire, under the images. Men in a sort of 
ecstasy threw on mote of the heavy, resinous wood, that almost 
exploded into flame. Rocks‘ cracked and exploded like guns. 
Everybody drew back from that roaring tree of flame, which 
rose ever higher and higher, its dark smoke and its sparks oo 
folding into heaven. 

One of the supporting stones burst with a bang, bars of iron 
and blazing stumps of images tumbled in a confused roar. The 
glass case had disappeared, but ribbons of iron waved, then 
curled over red, into the torrent of the sudden fire. Strange 
rods of iron appeared out of nowhere, protruding from solid 
red coals. 

And soon, all that was left was a fierce glow of red coals of 
wood, with a medley of half-fused iron. 

Ramon stood aside and watched in silence, his dark brow 
quite expressionless. 

Then, when only the last bluish flames flickered out of a 
tumble of red fire, from the eminence above rockets began to 
shoot into the air with a swish, exploding high in the sightless 
hot blue, with a glimmer of bluish showers, and of gold. 

The people from the shore had seen the tree of smoke with 
its trunk of flame. Now they heard the heavy firing of the 
rockets, they looked again, exclaiming, half in dismay, half in 
the joyful lust of destruction: 

‘Seftor! Senor! La Purisima! La Santisima!’ 

The flame and the smoke and the rockets melted as if by 
miracle, into nothingness, leaving the hot air unblemished. 
The coals of fire were shovelled and dropped down a steep 
hole. 

As the canoa sailed back, the side of the lake, through filmy 
ait, looked brownish and changeless. A cloud was rising in the 
south-west, from behind the dry, silent mountains, like a vast 
white tail, like the vast white fleecy tail of some squirrel, that 
had just dived out of sight behind the mountains. This wild 
white tail fleeced up and up, to the zenith, straight at the sun. 
And as the canoa spread her sail to tack back, already a delicate 
film of shadow was over the chalk-white lake. 

Only on the low end of the isle of Scorpions, hot air still 
quivered. 

= 

THE ATTACK ON JAMILTEPEC 301 

_ Ramén returned in one of the motor-boats. Slowly the sky 
was clouding for the thunder and the rain. The canoa, unable to 

make her way across, was sailing for Tuliapan. The little boats 
hurried in silence. 

They landed before the wind rose. Ramén went and locked 

» the doors of the church. 

The crowd scattered in the wind, rebozos waving wildly, 
leaves torn, dust racing. Sayula was empty of God, and, at 
heart, they were glad. 

CHAPTER XIX 

The Attack on Jamiltepec 

SUDDENLY, nearly all the soldiers disappeared from the vil- 
lage, there was a ‘rebellion’ in Colima. A train had been held 
up, people killed. And somebody, Generals Fulano and Tu- 
lano, had ‘pronSunced’ against the government. 

Stir irf the air, everybody enjoying those periodical shivers 
of fear! But for these shivers, ‘everything much the same as 
usual. The church remained shut up, and dumb. The clock 
didn’t go. Time suddenly fell off, the days walked naked and 
timeless, in the old, uncounted manner of the past. The strange, 
old, uncounted, unregistered, unreckoning days of the ancient 
heathen world. 

Kate felt a bit like a mermaid trying to swim in a wrong ele- 
ment. She was swept away in some silent tide, to the old, ante- 
diluvian silence, where things moved without contact. She 
moved and existed without contact. Even the striking of the 
hours had ceased. As a drowning person Sees nothing but the 
waters, so Kate saw nothing but the face of the timeless waters. 

So, of course, she clutched at her straw. She couldn’t bear it. 
She ordered an old, rickety Ford car, to take her bumping out 
to Jamiltepec, over the ruinous roads in the afternoon. 

The country had gone strange and void, as it does when 
these ‘rebellions’ start. As if the life-spirit were sucked away, 
and only some empty, anti-life void remained in the wicked 
hollow countryside. Though it was not far to Jamiltepec, once 

gy 

Beas: 

302 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

outside the village, the chauffeur and his little attendant lad be- 
gan to get frightened, and to go frog-like with fear. 

There is something truly mysterious about the Mexican 
quality of fear. As if man and woman collapsed and lay wrig- 
gling on the ground like broken reptiles, unable to rise. Kate 
used all her will, against this cringing nonsense. 

They arrived without ado at Jamiltepec. The place seemed 
quiet, but normal. An oxen wagon stood empty in the court- 
yatd. There were no soldiers on guard. They had all been with- 
drawn, against the rebellion. But several peons were moving 
round, in a desultory fashion. The day was a fiesta, when not 
much work was doing. In the houses of the peons, the women 
were patting /orti//as, and preparing hot chile sauce, grinding 
away on the metates. A fiesta! Only the windmill that pumped 
up water from the lake was spinning quickly, with a little noise. 

Kate drove into the yard in silence, and two mozos with guns 
and belts of cartridges came to talk in low tones to the chauf- 
feur. 

“Is Dofia Carlota here?’ asked Kate. 

. ‘No, Sefiora. The pafrona is not here.’ 

“Don Ramén?’ 

“Sz, Sefiora! Esta’ 

Even as she hesitated, rather nervous, Ramon came out of 
the inner doorway of the courtyard, in his dazzling white 
clothes. 

‘I came to see you,’ said Kate. ‘I don’t know if you’d rather 
I hadn’t. But I can go back in the motor-car.’ 

‘No,’ he said. ‘I am glad. I was feeling deserted, I don’t 
know why. Let us go upstairs.’ 

‘Patron!’ said the chauffeur, in a low voice. ‘Must I stay?’ 

Ramon said a few words to him. The chauffeur was uneasy, 
and didn’t want to stay. He said he had to be back in Sayula at 
such and such a time. Excuses, anyhow. But it was evident he 
wanted to get away. 

“Then best let him go,’ said Ram6én to Kate. ‘You do not 
mind going home in the boat?’ 

‘I don’t want to give you trouble.’ 

“It is least trouble to let this fellow go, and you can leave by 
boat just whenever you wish to. So we shall all be more free.’ 

Kate paid the chauffeur, and the Ford started rattling. After 

THE ATTACK ON JAMILTEPEC 303 

rattling a while, it moved in a curve round the courtyard, and 
lurched through the xagudn, disappearing as fast as possible. 

Ramon spoke to his two mozos with the guns. They went to 
the outer doorway, obediently. 

“Why do you have to have armed men?’ she said. 

“Oh, they’re afraid of bandits,’ he said. ‘Whenever thete’s a 
rebellion anywhere, everybody is afraid of bandits. So of course 
that calls bandits into life.’ 

“But where do they come from?’ said Kate, as they passed 
into the inner doorways. 

‘From the villages,’ he said, closing the heavy door of that 
entrance behind him, and putting the heavy iron bars across, 
from wall to wall. 

The inner archway was now a little prison, for the strong 
iron gates at the lake end of the passage were shut fast. She 
looked through, at the little round pond. It had some blue 
water-lilies on it. Beyond, the pallid lake seemed almost like a 
ghost, in the glare of the sun. 

» A servant wagsent to the kitchen quarters, Ramon and Kate 
climbed ‘the stone stairs to the~upper terrace. How lonely, 
stonily fonesome and forlorn the hacienda could feel! The very 
stone walls could give off emptiness, loneliness, negation. 

‘But which villages do the bandits come from?’ she insisted. 

‘Any of them. Mostly, they say, from San Pablo or from 
Ahudjijic.’ 

“Quite near!’ she cried. 
 *Or from Sayula,’ he added. “Any of the ordinary men in big 
hats you see around the p/aya may possibly be bandits, when 
banditry pays, as a profession, and isn’t punished with any par- 
ticular severity.’ 

‘It is hard to believe!’ she said. 

‘It is so obvious!’ he said, dropping into one of the rocking- 
chaits opposite her, and smiling across the onyx table. 

‘I suppose it is!’ she said. 

He clapped his hands, and his mozo Martin came up. Ramon 
ordered something, in a low, subdued tone. The man replied 
in an even lower, more subdued tone. Then the master and 
man nodded at one another, and the man Sepacted, his 

huaraches swishing a little on the terrace. 

ih) 

Ramon had fallen into the low, crushed sort of voice so 

Be on, 
io RS ae) 

304 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

common in the country, as if everyone were aftaid to speak. 
aloud, so they mutmured guardedly. This was unusual, and 
Kate noticed it in him with displeasure. She sat looking. past 
the thick mango-ttees, whose fruit was changing colour like 
something gradually growing hot, to the ruffled, pale-brown 
lake. The mountains of the opposite shore were very dark. 
Above them lay a heavy, but distant black cloud, out of which 
lightning flapped suddenly and uneasily. 

“Where is Don Cipriano?’ she asked. 

‘Don Cipriano is very much General Viedma at the mo- 
ment,’ he replied. ‘Chasing rebels in the State of Colima.’ 

“Will they be very hard to chase?’ 

‘Probably not. Anyhow Cipriano will enjoy chasing them. 
He is Zapotec, and most of his men are Zapotecans, from the 
hills. They love chasing men who aten’t.’ 

‘I wondered why he wasn’t there on Sunday when you car- 
ried away the images,’ she said. ‘I think it was an awfully brave 
thing to do.’ 

“Do you?’ he laughed. ‘It wasn’t. It’s never half so brave to 
catty something off, and destroy it, as to set a new pulse beat- 
ing. | 

‘But you have to destroy those old things, first.’ 

“Those frowsty images — why, yes. But it’s no good until 
you've got something else moving, from the inside.’ . 

“And have you?’ 

‘I think I have. Don’t you?’ 

‘Yes,’ she said, a little doubtful. 

‘I think I have,’ he said. ‘I feel there’s a new thing moving _ 
inside me.’ He was laughing at her, for her hesitation. ‘Why 
don’t you come and j join us ?” he added. 

‘How?’ she said. “By being married off to Don Cipriano?’ 

“Not necessarily. Not necessarily. Not necessarily by being 
martied to anybody.’ 

“What are you going to do next?’ she said. 

‘I? I am going to re-open the church, for Quetzalcoatl to 
come in. But I don’t like lonely gods. There should be several 
of them, I think, for them to be happy together.’ 

‘Does one need gods?’ she said. 

“Why yes. One needs manifestations, it seems to me.’ 

Kate sat in unwilling silence. 

THE ATTACK ON JAMILTEPEC 305 
“One needs goddesses too. That is also a dilemma,’ he 
added, with a laugh. 

“How I would hare,’ said Kate, ‘to have to be a goddess for 
people.’ 

. ‘For the monkeys?’ he said, smiling. 

“Yes! Of course.’ 

At that moment, he sat erect, listening. There had been a 
shot, which Kate had heard, but which she had hardly noticed; 
to her ears, it might have been a motor-cat back-firing, or even 
a motor-boat. 

Suddenly, a sharp little volley of shots. 

_ Ramon rose swiftly, swift as a great cat, and slammed to the 
iron door at the top of the stairway, shooting the bars. 

- “Won’t you go into that room?’ he said to her, pointing to 
a dark doorway. ‘You will be all right there. Just stay a few 
minutes till I come back.’ 

As he spoke, there came a shriek from the courtyard at the 
back, and a man’s death-voice yelled Patrén! — 

Ramo6n’s eyes gilated with terrible anger, the anger of death. 
His face went pale and strange, as He looked at her without see- 
ing her, the black flame filling his eyes. He had drawn a long- 
barrelled steel revolver from his hip. 

Still without seeing her, he strode rapidly, Soft and catlike, 
along the terrace, and leaped up the end staircase on to the 
roof. The soft, eternal passion of anger in his limbs. 

Kate stood in the doorway of the room, transfixed. The 
light of day seemed to have darkened before her face. 

‘Hold! You there!’ she heard his voice from the roof, in such 
anger it was almost a laugh, from far away: 

For angwer,a confused noise from the courtyard, and several 
shots. The slow, steady answer of shots! 

She started as a rushing hiss broke on the air. In terror she 
waited. Then she saw it was a rocket bursting with a sound 
like a gun, high over the lake, and emitting a shower of red 
balls of light. A signal from Ramon! 

Unable to go into the dark room, Kate waited as if smitten 
to death. Then something stirred deep in her, she flew along 
the terrace and up the steps to the roof. She realized that she 
didn’t mind dying so long as she died with that man. Not 
alone. 

306 THE PLUMED SERPENT q 

The roof was glaring with sunshine. It was flat, but its dif- 
ferent levels were uneven. She tan straight out into the light, 
towards the parapet wall, and had nearly come in sight of the 
gateway of the courtyard below, when something gave a slight 
smack, and bits of plaster flew in her face and her hair. She — 
turned and fled back like a bee to the stairway. 

The stairs came up in a corner, where there was a little sort 
of stone turret, square, with stone seats. She sank on one of 
these seats, looking down in terror at the turn of the stairs. It 
was 4 narrow little stone stairway, between the solid stone 
walls. 

She was almost paralysed with shock and with fear. Yet 
something within her was calm. Leaning and looking out 
across calm sunshine of the level roof, she could not believe in 
death. 

She saw the white figure and the dark head of Ramon within 
one of the small square turrets across the roof. The little tower 
was open, and hardly higher than his head. He was standing in 
a cotner, looking sideways down a loop-hole, perfectly mo- 
tionless. Snap!. went his revolver, deliberately. There was a 
muffled cry below, and a sudden volley of shots. 

‘Ramon stood away from the loop-hole and took off his 
white blouse, so that it should not betray him. Above his sash 
was a belt of cartridges. In the shadow of the turret, his body 
looked curiously dark, rising from the white of his trousers. 
Again he took his stand quietly at the side of the long, narrow 
slanting aperture. He lifted his revolver carefully,and the shots, 
one, two, three, slow and deliberate, startled her nerves. And 
again there was a volley of shots from below, and bits of stone 
and plaster smoking against the sky. Then again, silgnce, long 
silence. Kate pressed her hands against her body, as she sat. 

The clouds had shifted, the sun shone yellowish. In the 
heavier light, the mountains beyond the parapet showed a 
fleece of young green, smoky and beautiful. 

All was silent.. Ramon in the shadow did not move, pressing 
himself against the wall, and looking down. He commanded, 
she knew, the big inner doors. 

Suddenly, however, he shifted. With his revolver in his 
hand he stooped and ran, like some terrible cat, the sun gleam- 
ing on his naked back as he crouched under the shelter of the 

; | 
x. vee 

= 

* 

THE ATTACK ON JAMILTEPEC 307 
thick parapet wall, running along the roof to the correspond- 
ing front turret. 

This turret was roofless, and it was nearer to Kate, as she 
sat spellbound, in a sort of eternity, on the stone seat at the 
head of the stairs, watching Ramon. He pressed himself against 
the wall, and lifted his revolver to the slit. And again, one, two, 
three, four, five, the shots exploded deliberately. Some voice 
below yelled Ay-ee! Ay-ee! Ay-ee! in yelps of animal pain. A 
voice was heard shouting command. Ramon kneeled on one 
knee, re-loading his revolver. Then he struck a match, and 
again Kate almost started out of her skin, as a rocket rushed 
ferociously up into the sky, exploded like a gun, and let fall the 
balls of red flame that lingered as if loth to die away, in the 
high, remote air. 

She sighed, wondering what it all was. It was death, she 
knew. But so strange, so vacant. Just these noises of shots! 
And she could see nothing outside. She wanted to see what was 
in the courtygrd. 

Ramon was at his post, pressing himself close to the wall, 
looking down, with bent head, motionless. There were shots, 
and a spatter of lead from below. But he did not move. She 
could not see his face, only part of his back; the proud, heavy, 
creamy-brown shoulders, the black head bent a little forward, 
in concentration, the cartridge-belt dropping above his loins, 
over the white, floppy linen of the trousers. Still and soft in 
watchful concentration, almost like silence itself. Then with 
soft, diabolic swiftness in his movements, he changed his posi- 
tion, and took aim. 

He was utterly unaware of her; even of her existence.. 
Which was as it should be, no doubt. She sat motionless, wait- 
ing. Waiting, waiting, waiting, in that yellowish sunlight of 
eternity, with a certain changeless suspense of stillness inside 
her. Someone would come from the village. There would be 
an end. There would be an end. 

At the same time, she started every time he fired, and looked 
at him. And she heard his voice saying: ‘One needs manifesta- 
tions, it seems to me.’ Ah, how she hated the noise of shots. 

Suddenly she gave a piercing shriek, and in one leap was out 
of her retreat. She had seen a black head turning the stairs. 

Before she knew it, Ramon jumped past her like a great cat, 

\ 

308 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

and two men clashed in mid-air, as the unseen fellow leaped up - 

from the stairs. Two men in a crash went down on the floor, a 
revolver went off, terrible limbs were writhing. 

Ram6n’s revolver was gn the floor. But again there was’a 
shot from the tangled men, and a redness of blood suddenly 
appearing out of nowhere, on the white cotton clothing, as the 
two men twisted and fought on the floor. 

They were both big men. Struggling on the ground, Hier ; 

looked huge. Ramon had the bandit’s revolver-hand by the 
wrist. The bandit, with a ghastly black face with rolling eyes 

and sparse moustache, had got Ramon’s naked arm in his white ~ 

teeth, and was hanging on, showing his red gums, while with 
his free hand he was feeling for his knife. 

Kate could not believe that the black, ghastly face with the 
sightless eyes and biting mouth was conscious. Ramon had 
him clasped round the hodv. The bandit’s revolver fell, and 
the fellow’s loose black hand scrabbled on the concrete, feeling 
for it. Blood was flowing over his teeth. Yet some blind super- 
consciousness seemed to possess him, as if he were a devil, not 
a man. 

His hand nearly touched Ramén’s revolver. In horror Kate 
ran and snatched the weapon from the warm concrete, running 
away as the bandit gave a heave, a great sudden heave of his 
body, under the body of Ramon. Kate raised the revolver. She 
hated that horrible devil under Ramon as she had never hated 
in her life. Yet she dared not fire. 

Ramon shouted something, glancing at her. She could nor 
understand. But she ran round, to be able to shoot the man 

under Ramon, Even as she ran, the bandit twisted with a great 
lunge of his body, heaved Ramon up, and with his short free 
hand got Ram6n’s own knife from the belt at the groin, and 
stabbed. 

Kate gave a cry! Oh, how she wanted to shoot! She saw the 
knife strike sideways, slanting in a short jab into Ramdén’s back. 
At the same moment there was a stumble on the stairs, and an- 
other black-headed man was leaping on to the roof from the 
turret. 

She stiffened her wrist and fired without looking, in a sud- 
den second of pure control. The black head came crashing at 
her. She recoiled in horror, lifted the revolver and fired again, 

_ 
THE ATTACK ON JAMILTEPEC 309 

and missed. But even as it passed her, she saw red blood among 

' the black hairs of that head. It crashed down, the buttocks of 
the body heaving up, the whole thing twitching and jerking 
along, the face seeming to grin in a mortal grin. 

Glancing from horror to horror, she saw Ramon, his face 
still as death, blood running down his arm and his back, hold- 
ing down the head of the bandit by the hair and stabbing him 
with short stabs in the throat, one, two, while blood shot out 
like a.red projectile; there was a strange sound like a soda- 
‘syphon, a ghastly bubbling, one final terrible convulsion from 
the loins of the stricken man, throwing Ramon off, and Ramoén 
lay twisted, still clutching the man’s hair in one hand, the 
bloody knife in the other, and gazing into the livid, distorted 
face, in which ferocity seemed to have gone frozen, with a 
steady, intent, inhuman gaze. 

Then, without letting go his victim’s hair, he looked up, 
cautiously. To see Kate’s man, with black hair wet with blood, 
and blood tanning down into his glazed, awful eyes, slowly 
rising to his knegs. It was the strangest face in the world; the 
high, domed head with blood-soddened hair, blood running iff 
several sfreams down the narrow, corrugated brow and along 
the black eyebrows above the glazed, black, numb eyes, in 
which the last glazing was of ferocity, stranger even than won- 
der, the glazed and absolute ferocity which the man’s last con- 
sciousness showed. 

It was a long, thin, handsome face, save for those eyes of 
glazed ferocity, and for the longish white teeth under the 
sparse moustache. 

The man was reduced to his last, blank term of being; a 
glazed and ghastly ferocity: 

Ramon dropped the hair of his victim, whose head dropped 
sideways with a gaping red throat, and rose to a crouching 
position. The second bandit was on his knees, but his hand al- 
ready clasped his knife. Ramon crouched. They were both per- 
fectly still. But Ramon had got his balance, crouching between 
his feet. 

The bandit’s black, glazed eyes of blank ferocity took a glint 
of cunning. He was stretching. He was going to leap to his feet 
for his stroke. 

And even as he leaped, Ramon shot the knife, that was all 

310 THE PLUMED SERPENT : 

bright red as a cardinal bird. It flew red like a bird, and the 
drops of Ramén’s handful of blood flew with it, splashing even » 
Kate, who kept her revolver ready, watching near the stair- 
way. . i 

The bandit dropped on his knees again, and remained for a 
moment kneeling as if in prayer, the red pommel of the knife 
sticking out of his abdomen, from his white trousers. Then he 
slowly bowed over, doubled up, and went on his face again, 
once mote with his buttocks in the air. 

Ramon still crouched at attention, almost supernatural, his 
dark eyes glittering with watchfulness, in pure, savage atten- 
tiveness. Then he rose, very smooth and quiet, crossed the 
blood-stained concrete to the fallen man, picked up the clean, 
fallen knife that belonged to the fellow, lifted the red-dripping 
chin, and with one stroke drove the knife into the man’s 
throat. The man subsided with the blow, not even twitching. 

Then again, Ramon turned to look at the first man. He gazed 
a moment attentively. But that horrible black face was dead. 

And then Ramon glanced at Kate, as she stood near the 
Stairs with the revolver. His brow was like a boy’s, very pure 
and primitive, and the eyes underneath had a certain primitive 
gleaming look of virginity. As men must have been, in the first © 
awful days, with that strange beauty that goes with pristine 
rudimentariness. 

For the most part, he did not recognize her. But there was 
one remote glint of recognition. 

“Are they both dead?’ she asked, awestruck. 

“Creo que st!’ he replied in Spanish. 

He turned to look once more, and to pick up the pistol that 
lay on the concrete. As he did so, he noticed that his right hand 
was bright red, with the blood that flowed still down his arm. 
He wiped it on the jacket of the dead man. But his trousers on 
his loins were also sodden with blood, they stuck red to his 
hips. He did not notice. 

He was like a pristine being, remote in consciousness, and 
with far, remote sex. 

Curious rattling, bubbling noises still came from the second 
man, just physical sounds. The first man lay sprawling in a 
ghastly fashion, his evil face fixed above a pool of blackening 
blood. 

| 

. THE ATTACK ON JAMILTEPEC 311 

“Watch the stairs!’ said Ramon in Spanish to her, glancing 
at her with farouche eyes, from some fat remote jungle. Yet still 
the glint of recognition sparked furtively out of the darkness. 

He crept to the turret, and stealthily looked out. Then he 
crept back, with the same stealth, and dragged the nearest dead 
man to the parapet, raising the body till the head looked over. 
There was no sound. Then he raised himself, and peeped over, 
No sign, no sound. 

He looked at the dead body as he let it drop. Then 2 went 
to Kate, to look down the stairs. 

“You grazed that man with your first shot, you only stunned 
him, I believe,’ he said. 

“Ate there any more?’ she asked, shuddering.. 

‘I think they are all gone.’ 

He was pale, almost white, with that same pristine clear 
brow, like a boy’s, a sort of twilight changelessness. 

‘Are you much hurt?’ she said. 

“I? No!’ apd he put his fingers round to his back, to feel the . 
slowly welling wound, with his bloody fingers. 

The afternoorwas passing towards yellow, heavy evening. 

He wefit again to look ns the. tetrible face of the first dead 
man. 

‘Did you know him?’ she said. 

He shook his head. 

“Nog that I am aware,’ he said. Then: ‘Good that he is dead. 
Good that he is dead. - Good that we killed them both.’ 

He looked at her with that glint of savage recognition from 
afar. 

‘Ugh! No! It’s terrible!’ she said, shuddering. 

‘Good for me that you were there! Good that we killed 
them between us! Good they are dead.’ 

The heavy, luxurious yellow light from below the clouds 
gilded the mountains of evening. There was the sound of a 
motor-car honking its horn. 

Ramon went in silence to the parapet, the blood wetting his — 
pantaloons lower and lower, since they stuck to him when he 
bent down. Rich yellow light flooded the blood-stained roof. 
There was a terrible smell of blood. 

‘There is a cat coming,’ he said. 

She followed, frightened, across the roof. 

oi St : / 
aa 

312 THE PLUMED SERPENT ' 

She saw the hills and lower slopes inland swimming in gold 
light like lacquer. The black huts of the peons, the lurid leaves 
of bananas showed up uncannily, the trees green-gold stood 
up, with boughs of shadow. And away up the road was a 
puther of dust, then the flash of glass as the automobile turned. 

‘Stay here,’ said Ramon, ‘while I go down.’ 

‘Why didn’t your peons come and help you?’ she said. 

‘They never do!’ he replied. ‘Unless they are armed on pur- 

ose.’ 
He'went, picking up his blouse and putting it on. And im- 
mediately the blood came through. 

He went down. She listened to his steps. Below, the court- 
yatd was all shadow, and empty, save for two dead white- 
clothed bodies of men, one near the zagudn, one against a pillar 
of the shed. 

The motor-car came sounding its horn wildly all the way 
between the trees. It lurched into the xaguan. It was full of 
soldiers, soldiers standing on the running-boards, hanging 
on. 

‘Don Ramén! Don Ramon!’ shouted the officer, leaping 
out of the car. ‘Don Ramon!’ He was thundering at the doors 
of the inner zagudn. 

Why did not Ramon open? Where was he? 

She leaned over the parapet and screamed like a wild bird. 

‘Viene! Viene Don Ramon! El viene!’ 

The soldiers all looked up at her. She drew back in terror. 
Then, in a panic, she turned downstairs, to the terrace. There ~ 
was blood on the stone stairs, at the bottom, a great pool. And 
on the terrace near the rocking-chairs, two dead men ina great 
pool of blood. 

Onewas Ramon! For a moment she went unconscious. Then 
slowly she crept forward. Ramon had fallen, reeking with 
blood from his wound, his arms round the body of the other 
man, who was bleeding too. The second man opened his eyes, 
wildly, and in a rattling voice, blind and dying, said: 

‘Patron!’ ; 

It was Martin, Ram6n’s own mozo. He was stiffening and 
dying in Ramén’s arms. And Ramon, lifting him, had made 
his own wound gush with blood, and had fainted. He lay like. 
dead. But Kate could see the faintest pulse in his neck. 

THE ATTACK ON JAMILTEPEC 313 

She ran blindly down the stairs, and fought to get the great 
iron bars from across the door, screaming all the time: 

“Come! Somebody! Come to Don Remén! He will die.’ 

A terrified boy and a woman appeared from. the kitchen 
quarters. The door was opened, just as six horse-soldiers gal- 
loped into the courtyard. The officer leaped from his horse and 
ran like a hare, his revolver drawn, his spurts flashing, straight 
through the doors and up the stairs, like a madman. When 
Kate got up the stairs again, the officer was standing with 
drawn revolver, gazing down at Ramon. . 

“He is dead?’ he said, stupefied, looking at Kate. 

‘No!’ she said. ‘It is only loss of blood.’ 

The officers lifted Ramon and laid him on the terrace. Then 
quickly they got off his blouse. The wound was bleeding 
thickly in the back. 

“We’ve got to stop this wound,’ said the lieutenant. ‘Where 
is Pablo?’ 

Instantly there was a cry for Pablo. 

Kate rannto a bedroom for water, and she switched an old 
lifien sheet fromthe bed. Pablo was a young doctor among the 

soldiersKate gave him the bow! of water and the towel, and 
was teating the sheet into bands: Ramon lay naked on the floor, 
all streaked with blood. And the light was going. 

‘Bring light!’ said the young doctor. 

With swift hands he washed the wound, peering with his 
nose 4lmost touching it. 

“It is not much!’ he said. 

Kate had prepared bandages and_a pad. She crouched to 
hand them to the young man. The woman-servant set a lamp 
with a white shade on the floor by the doctor. He lifted it, 
peering again at the wound. 

“No!” he said. ‘It is not much.’ 

Then glancing up at the soldiers who stood motionless, 
peering down, the light on their dark faces. 

‘Tu!’ he said, making a gesture. 

Quickly the lieutenant took the lamp, holding it over the 
inert body, and the doctor, with Kate to help, proceeded to 
staunch and bind the wound. And Kate, as she touched the 
soft, inert flesh of Ramon, was thinking to herself: This too is 
he, this silent body! And that face that stabbed the throat of 

314 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

the bandit was he! And that twilit brow, and those remote 
_ eyes, like a death-virgin, was he. Even a savage out of the twi- 
light! And the man that knows me, where is he? One among 
these many men, no more! Oh God! give the man his soul 
back, into this bloody body. Let the soul come back, or the 
universe will be cold for me and for many men. 

The doctor finished his temporary bandage, looked at the 
wound in the arm, swiftly wiped the blood off the loins and 
buttocks and legs, ‘and said: 

“We must put him in bed. Lift his head.’ 

Quickly Kate lifted the heavy, inert head. The eyes were 
half open. The doctor pressed the closed lips, under the sparse 
black moustache. But the teeth were firmly shut. 

The doctor shook his head. 

‘Bring a mattress,’ he said. 

The wind was suddenly roaring, the lamp was leaping with 
a long, smoky needle of flame, inside its chimney. Leaves and 
dust flew rattling on the terrace, there was a splash of light- 
ning. Ramon’s body lay there uncovered and motionless, the 
bandage was already soaked with blood, under the darkening, 
leaping light of the lamp. 

And again Kate saw, vividly, how the body is the flame of 
the soul, leaping and sinking upon the invisible wick of the 
soul, And now the soul, like a wick, seemed spent, the body ~ 
was a sinking, fading flame. 

“Kindle his soul again, oh God!’ she cried to herself. 

All she could see of the naked body was the terrible absence 
of the living soul of it. All she wanted was for the soul to come ~ 
back, the eyes to open. 

They got him upon the bed and covered him, closing the 
doors against the wind and the rain. The doctor chafed his 
brow and hands with cognac. And at length the eyes opened; 
the soul was there, but standing far back. 

For some moments Ramon lay with open eyes, without see- 
ing or moving. Then he stirred a little. 

“What’s the matter?’ he said. 

“Keep still, Don Ramon,’ said the doctor, who with his slim 
dark hands was even more delicate than a woman. ‘You have 
lost much blood. Keep still.’ 

“Where is Martin?’ 
“a an by i |e. te on 

si 

THE ATTACK ON JAMILTEPEC 315 

“He is outside.’ 

“How is he?’ 

“He is dead.’ 

The dark eyes under the black lashes were perfectly steady 
and changeless. Then came the voice: 

‘Pity we did not kill them all. Pity we did not kill them all. 
We have got to kill them all. - Where is the Sefiora Inglesa?’ 

“Here she is.’ 

His black eyes looked up at Kate. Then more of his con- 
sciousness came back. 

“Thank you for my life,’ he said, closing his eyes. Then: 
“Put the lamp aside.’ 

Soldiers were tapping at the glass pane, for the lieutenant. 
A black little fellow entered, wiping the rain from his black 
face and pushing his thick black hair back. 

“There ate two more dead on the azofea,’ he announced to 
his officer. 

The lieutenant rose, and followed him out. Kate too went 
on to the tefrace. In the early darkness the rain was threshing 
down. A lanteréf was coming down from the roof: it came 
along the terrace to the stairs, and after it two soldiers in the 
pouring rain, carrying a dead body, then behind, two mote, 
with the other body. The /uaraches of the soldiers clicked and 

‘shuffled on the wet terrace. The dismal cortege went down- 

stairs. 

Kate stood on the terrace facing the darkness, while the rain 
threshed down. She felt uneasy here, in this house of men and 
of soldiers. She found her way down to the kitchen, where the 
boy was fanning a charcoal fire, and the woman was crushing 
tomatoes on the metate, for a sauce. 

‘Ay, Sefiora!’ cried the woman. ‘Five men dead, and the 
Patrén wounded to death! Ay! Ay!’ 

“Seven men dead!’ said the boy. ‘Two on the azote!’ 

‘Seven men! Seven men!’ 

Kate sat on her chair, stunned, unable to hear anything but 
the threshing rain, unable to feel anything more. Two or three 
peons came in, and two more women, the men wrapped to 
their noses in their blankets. The women brought masa, and 
began a great clapping of sorti//as. The people conversed in 
low, rapid tones, in the dialect, and Kate could not listen. 

316 THE PLUMED SERPENT : 

At length the rain began to abate. She knew it would leave 
off suddenly. There was a great sound of water running, gush- 
ing, splashing, pouring into the cistern. And she thought to 
herself: The rain will wash the blood off the roof and down the 
spouts into the cistern. There will be blood in the water.’ 

She looked at her own blood-smeared white frock. She felt 
chilly. She rose to go upstairs again, into the dark, empty, — 
mastetless house. 

‘Ah, Sefiora! You are going upstairs? Go, Daniel, carry the 
lantern for the Sefora!’ 

The boy lit a candle in a lantern, and Kate returned to “ 
upper terrace. The light shone out of the room where Ramon 
was. She went into the sa/on and got her hat and her brown 
shawl. The lieutenant heard her, and came to her quickly, very 
kindly and respectful. 

“Won't you come in, Sefiora?’ he said, holding the door to 
the room where Ramon lay; the guest-room. 

Kate went in. Ramon lay on his side, his black, rather thin 
moustache pushed against the pillow. He was himself. 

‘It is very unpleasant for you here, Sefiora Caterina,’ he said. 
‘Would you like to go to your house? The lieutenant will’send 
you in the motor-car.’ 

‘Is there nothing I can do here?’ she said. 

“Ah no! Don’t stay here! It is too unpleasant for you. — I 
shall soon get up, and I shall come to thank you for my life.’ 

He looked at her, into her eyes. And she saw that his soul | 
had come back to him, and with his soul he saw her and ac- © 
knowledged her; though always from the peculiar remoteness ; 
that was inevitable in him. 

She went downstairs with the young lieutenant. 

‘Ah, what a horrible affair! They were not bandits, Sefiora!’ 
said the young man, with passion. ‘They didn’t come to rob. 
They came to murder Don Ramon, you know, Sefiora! simply 
to murder Don Ramon. And but for your being here, they 
would have done it! — Ah, think of it, Sefiora! Don Ramén is 
the most precious man in Mexico. It is possible that in the 
world there is not a man like him. And personally, he hasn’t 
got enemies. As a man among ‘men, he hasn’t got enemies. | 
No, Sefiora. Not one! But do you know who it will be? the 
priests, and the Knights of Cortés.’ 

THE ATTACK ON JAMILTEPEC 317 

“Are you sure?’ said Kate. 

“Sure, Sefiora!’ cried the lieutenant indignantly. ‘Look! 
There are seven men dead. Two were the mozos with guns, 
watching in the yagudn. One was Don Ramén’s own moxo 
Martin! - ah, what a faithful man, what a brave one! Never 
will Don Ramon pardon his death. Then moreover, the two 
men killed on the azotea, and two men in the courtyard, shot 
by Don Ramon. Besides these, a man whom Martin wounded, 
who fell and broke his leg, so we have got him. Come and see 
_ them, Sefiora.’ 

They were down in the wet courtyard. Little fires had been 
lighted under the sheds, and the little, black, devil-may-care 
soldiers were crouching round them, with a bunch of peons in 
blankets standing round. Across the courtyard, horses stamped 
and jingled their harness. A boy came running with sorti//as in 
a cloth. The dark-faced little soldiers crouched like animals, 
sprinkled salt on the sortillas, and devoured them with small, 
white, strong teeth. 

Kate sawthe great oxen tied in their sheds, lying down, the 
wagons standing inert. And a little crowd of asses was munch- 
ing alfalfa ina corner. ei 

The officer marched beside Kate, his spurs sparkling in the 
firelight. He went to the muddy car, that stood in the middle 
of the yard, then to his horse. From a saddle-pocket he took an 
electric torch, and led Kate across to the end shed. 

THere he suddenly flashed his light upon seven dead bodies, 
laid side by side. The two from the roof were wet. Ramon’s 
dead man lay with his dark, strong breast bare, and his black- 
ish, thick, devilish face sideways; a big fellow. Kate’s man lay 
rigid. Martin had been stabbed in the collar bone; he looked as 
if he were staring at the roof of the shed. The others were two 
more peons, and two fellows in black boots and grey trousers 
and blue overall jackets. They were all inert and straight and 
dead, and somehow, a little ridiculous. Perhaps it is clothing 
that makes dead people gruesome and absurd. But also, the 
grotesque fact that the bodies ate vacant, is always present. 

‘Look!’ said the lieutenant, touching a body with his toe. 
‘This is a chauffeur from Sayula; this is a boatman from Sayula. 
_ These two ate peons from San Pablo. This man’ —the lieuten- 
ant kicked the dead body — ‘we don’t know.’ It was Ram6n’s 

318 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

dead man. ‘But this man’— he kicked her dead man, with the © 
tall domed head - ‘is from Ahuajijic, and he was married to the — 
woman that now lives with a peon here. — You see, Sefiora! A _ 
chauffeur and a boatman from Sayula — they are Knights-of- 
Cortés men; and those two peons from San Pablo are priests’ — 
men. — These are not bandits. It was an attempt at assassina- 
tion. But of course they would have robbed everything, every- 
thing, if they had killed Don Ramon.’ 

Kate was staring at the dead men. Three of them were hand- 
some; one, the boatman, with a thin line of black beard fram- 
ing his shapely face, was beautiful. But dead, with the mockery 
of death in his face. All of them men who had been in the flush 
of life. Yet dead, they did not even matter. They were grue- 
some, but it did not matter that they were dead men. They were 
vacant. Perhaps even in life there had been a certain vacancy, 
. nothingness, in their handsome physique. 

For a pure moment, she wished for men who were not 
handsome as these dark natives were. Even their beauty was 
suddenly repulsive to her; the dark beauty of half-created, 
half-evolved things, left in the old, reptile-like smoothness. It 
made her shudder. . 

The soul! If only the soul in man, in woman, would speak 
to her, not always this strange, perverse materialism, or a dis- 
torted animalism. If only people were souls, and their bodies 
were gestures from the soul! If one could but forget both 
bodies and facts, and be present with strong, living souls! 

She went across the courtyard, that was littered with horse- — 
_ droppings, to the car. The lieutenant was choosing the soldiers 
who should stay behind. The horse-soldiers would stay. A 
peon on a delicate speckled horse, a flea-bitten roan, came trot- 
ting past the soldiers in the xaguén. He had been to Sayula for 
doctor’s stuff, and to give messages to the Jefe. 

At last the car, with little soldiers clinging on to it all round, 
moved slowly out of the courtyard. The lieutenant sat beside 
Kate. He stopped the car again at the big white barn under the 
trees, to talk to two soldiers picketed there. 

Then they moved slowly on, under the wet trees, in the 
mud that crackled beneath the wheels, up the avenue to the 
highroad, where were the little black huts of the peons. Little 
fires were flapping in front of one or two huts, women wete 

MARRIAGE BY QUETZALCOATL 319 

baking /orti//as on the flat earthenware plates, upon the small 
wood fires. A woman was going to her hut with a blazing 
brand, like a torch, to kindle her fire. A few peons in dirty- 
white clothes squatted silent against the walls of their houses, 
utterly silent. As the motor-car turned its great glaring head- 
lights upon the highroad, little sandy pigs with short, curly 
hair started up squealing, and faces and figures stood out 
blindly, as in a searchlight. 

There was a hut with a wide opening in the black wall, and 
a grey old man was standing inside. The car stopped for the 
lieutenant to call to the peons under the wall. They came to the 
car with their black eyes glaring and glittering apprehensively. 
They seemed very much abashed, and humble, answering the 
lieutenant. 

Meanwhile Kate watched a boy buy a drink for one centavo 
and a piece of rope for three centavos, from the grey old man at 
the dark hole, which was a shop. 

The car went on, the great lights glaring unnaturally upon 
the hedges of cactus and mesquite and pa/o blanco trees, and 

= : * 
upon the great ools of water in the road. It was a slow pro- 
gress. « f A 

#4 

CHAPTER XX 

Marriage by Quetzalcoatl 

Kare hid in her own house, numbed. She could not bear to 
talk to people. She could not bear even Juana’s bubbling dis- 
course. The common threads that bound her to humanity 
seemed to have snapped. The little human things didn’t in- 
terest her any more. Her eyes seemed to have gone dark, and 
blind to individuals. They were all just individuals, like leaves 
in the dark, making a noise. And she was alone under the trees. 
The egg-woman wanted six centavos for an egg. 
‘And I said to her —I said to her — we buy them at five cen- 
tavos\’? Juana went on. 
‘Yes!’ said Kate. She didn’t care whether they were bought 
at five or fifty, or not bought at all. \ 

320 THE PLUMED SERPENT 1 

She didn’t care, she didn’t care, she didn’t care. She didn’t 
even care about life any more. There was no escaping her own 
complete indifference. She felt indifferent to everything in the 
whole world, almost she felt indifferent to death. 

‘Nita! Nina! Here is the man with the sandals! ioaks Look 
how nicely he has made them for you, Nifia! Look what Mexi- 
can huaraches the Nifia is going to wear!” ; 

She tried them on. The man charged her too much. She 
looked at him with her remote, indifferent eyes. But she knew, 
in the world one must live, so she paid him less than he asked, 
though more than he really would have accepted. 

She sat down again in her rocking-chair in the shade of the 
room. Only to be alone! Only that no one should speak to her. 
Only that no one should come near her! Because in reality her 
soul and spirit were gone, departed into the middle of some 
desert, and the effort of reaching across to people to effect an 
apparent meeting, or contact, was almost more than she could 
bear. 

Never had she been so alone, and so inert, and so Saati 
without desire; plunged in a wan indifference, like death. 
Never had she passed her days so blindly, so unknowingly, in 
stretches of nothingness. 

Sometimes, to get away from her household, she sat under 
a tree by the lake. And there, without knowing it, she let the — 
sun scotch her foot and bare her face inflamed. jont made a 
great outcry over her. The foot blistered and swelled, her face 
was red and painful. But it all seemed to happen merely to her 
shell. And she was wearily, wanly indifferent. 

Only at the very centre of her sometimes a little flame rose, 
and she knew that what she wanted was for her soul to live. 
The life of days and facts and happenings was dead on her, and 
she was like a corpse. But away inside her a little light was 
burning, the light of her innermost soul. Sometimes it sank 
and seemed extinct. Then it was there again. 

Ramon had lighted it. And once it was lighted the world 
went hollow and dead, all the world-activities were empty 
weariness to her. Her soul! Her frail, innermost soul! She 
wanted to live zfs life, not her own life. 

The time would come again when she would see Ramén 
and Cipriano, and the soul that was guttering would kindle 

me: 
‘ 

MARRIAGE BY QUETZALCOATL 321 

again in her, and feel strong. Meanwhile she only felt weak, 
weak, weak, weak as the dying. She felt that afternoon of 

- bloodshed had blown all their souls into the twilight of death, 
for the time. But they would come back. They would come 
back, Nothing to do but to submit, and wait. Wait, with a soul 
almast dead, and hands and heart of uttermost inert heaviness, 
indifference. 

Ramon had lost much blood. And she, too, in other ways, 
had been drained of the blood of the body. She felt bloodless 
and powerless. 

But wait, wait, wait, the new blood would come. 

One day Cipriano came. She was rocking in her salon, in a 
cotton housedress, and her face red and rather swollen. She 
saw him, in uniform, pass by the window. He stood in the 
doorway on the terrace, a dark, grave, small, handsome 
man. 

“Do come in,’ she said with effort. 

Her eyelids felt burnt. He looked at her with his full black 
eyes, that always had in them so many things she 'did not 
understand. She¥elt she could not look back at him. 

- “Havesyou chased all your rebels?’ she said. 

‘For the present,’ he replied. © 

He seemed to be watching, watching for something. 

‘And you didn’t get hurt?’ 

“No, I didn’t get hurt.’ 

She looked away out of the door, having nothing to say in 
the world. 

‘I went to Jamiltepec yesterday evening,’ he said. 

‘How is Don Ramén?’ 

“Yes, he is better.’ 

‘Quite better?’ 

‘No. Not quite better. But he walks a little.’ 

“Wonderful how people heal.’ 

“Yes. We die very easily. But we also come quickly back to 
life.’ 

‘And you? Did you fight the rebels, or didn’t they want to 
fight ?” 

“Yes, they wanted to. We fought once or twice; not vety 
much,’ 

‘Men killed?’ 

422 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

“Yes! Some! Not many, no? Perhaps a hundred. We can 
never tell, no? Maybe two hundred.’ 

He waved his hand vaguely. 

‘But you had the worst rebellion at Jamiltepec, no?’ he said 
suddenly, with heavy Indian gravity, gloom suddenly gree 
down. 

‘Tt didn’t last long, but it was rather awful while it did. : 

‘Rather awful, no? —IfI had known! I said to Ramon, won’t 
you keep the soldiers? — the guard, no? He said they were not 
necessaty. But here — you never know, no?’ 

‘Nina!’ cried Juana, from the terrace. ‘Nifia! Don Antonio 
says he is coming to see you.’ 

‘Tell him to come to-morrow.’ " = 

‘Already he is on the way!’ cried Juana, in helplessness. Don 
Antonio was Kate’s.fat landlord; and, of course, Juana’s per- 
manent master, more important in her eyes, then, even than 
Kate. 

“Here he is!’ she cried, and fled. 

Kate leaned forward in her chair, to see the stout iigexe of 
her landlord on the walk outside ihe window, taking off his 
cloth cap and bowing low to her. A cloth cap! ~ She knew he 
was a great Fascista, the reactionary Knights of Cortés held 
him in great esteem. 

Kate bowed coldly. 

He bowed low again, with the cloth cap. 

Kate said not a word. 

He stood on ‘one foot, then on the other, and then marched 
forward up the gravel walk, towards the kitchen quarters, as 
if he had not seen either Kate or General Viedma. In a few 
moments he matched back, as if he could not see either Kate 
or the General, through the open door. 

Cipriano looked at the passing stout figure of Don Antonio 
in a cloth ¢ap as if it were the wind blowing. 

‘It is my landlord!’ said Kate. ‘I expect he wants to leniiw if 
I am taking on the house for another three months.’ 

“Ramon wanted me to come and see you — to see how you 
are, no? —and to ask you to come to Jamiltepec. Will you come 
with me now? The car is here.’ 

“Must I?’ said Kate, uneasily. 

“No. Not unless you ‘wish, Ramén said, not rome you wished. 

MARRIAGE BY QUETZALCOATL 323 

He said, perhaps it would be painful to you, no? — to go to 
Jamiltepec again — so soon after —’ 

How curious Cipriano was! He stated things as if they were 
mete bare facts with no emotional content at all. As for its be- 
ing painful to Kate to go to Jamiltepec, that meant nothing to 
him. « 

“Lucky thing you were there that day, no?’ he said. ‘They 
might have killed him. Very likely they would! Very likely! 
Awful, no?’ 

“They might have killed me too,’ she said. 

“Yes! Yes! They might!’ he acquiesced. 

Curious he was! With a sort of glaze of the ordinary world 
on top, and underneath’a black volcano with hell knows what 
depths of lava. And talking half-abstractedly from his glazed, 
top self, the words came out small and quick, and he was al- 
ways hesitating, and saying: No? It wasn’t himself at all 
talking. * 

*° What wouldtyou have done if they had killed Ramon?’ she 
said, tegtatively. \ 

‘I?’ — He looked up at her ih a black flare of apprehension. 
The volcano was rousing. ‘If they had killed him? -’ His eyes 
took on that fixed glare of ferocity, staring her down. 

‘Would you have cared very much?’ she said. 

‘1? Would I?’ he repeated, and the black suspicious look 
came into his Indian eyes. 

‘Would it have meant very much to you’ 

He still watched her with a glare of ferocity and suspicion. 

“To me!’ he said, and he pressed his hand against the but- 
tons of his tunic. ‘To me Ramon is more than life. More than 
life.’ His eyes seemed to glare and go sightless, as he said it, the 
ferocity melting in a strange blind, confiding glare, that seemed 
sightless, either looking inward, or out at the whole vast void 
of the cosmos, where no vision is left. 

‘More than anything >’ she said. 

‘Yes!’ he replied abstractedly, with a blind nod of the head. 

Then abruptly he looked at her and said: 

“You saved his life.’ 

By this he meant that therefore — But she could not under- 
stand the therefore. 

She went to change, and they set off to Jamiltepec. Cipriano 

ea eee : 

324 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

made her a little uneasy, sitting beside him. He made her physi- 
cally aware of him, of his small but strong and assertive body, 
with its black currents and’storms of desire. The range of him 
was very limited, really. The great part of his nature was just - 
inert and heavy, ‘untesponsive, limited as a snake or a lizard is 
limited. But within his own heavy, dark range he had a curious 
power. Almost she could see the black fume of power which he 
emitted, the dark, heavy vibration of his blood, which cast a 
spell over her. 

As they sat side by side in the motor-car, silent, swaying to 
the broken road, she could feel the curious tingling heat of his 
blood, and the heavy power of the »7// that lay unemerged in 
his blood. She could see again the skieg go dark, and the phallic 
mystery rearing itself like a whirling dark cloud, to the zenith, 
till it pierced the sombre, twilit zenith; the old, supreme phallic 
mystery. And herself in the everlasting twilight, a sky above 
where the sun ran smokily, an earth below whete the trees and 
creatures rose up in blackness, and man strode along naked, 
dark, half-visible, and suddenly whirled in supreme power, 
towering like a dark whirlwind column, whirling to pierce the 
very zenith. 

- The mystery of the primeval world! She could feel it now 
in all its shadowy, furious magnificence. She knew now what 
was the black, glinting look in Cipriano’s eyes. She could 
understand marrying him, now. In the shadowy world 
where men were visionless, and winds of fury rose up from the 
earth, Cipriano was still a power. Once you entered his mystery 
the scale of all things changed, and he became a living male 
power, undefined, and unconfined. The smallness, the limita- 
tions ceased to exist. In his black, glinting eyes the power was 
limitless, and it was as if, from him, from his body of blood 
could rise up that pillar of cloud which swayed and swung, like 
a rearing serpent or a rising tree, till it swept the zenith, and all 
the earth below was dark and prone, and consummated. Those 
small hands, that little natural tuft of black goats’ beard hang- 
ing light from his chin, the tilt of his brows and the slight slant 
of his eyes, the domed Indian head with its thick black hair, 
they were like symbols to her, of another mystery, the 
mystery of the twilit, primitive world, where shapes that are 
small suddenly loom up huge, gigantic on the shadow, and a 

MARRIAGE BY QUETZALCOATL 325 

face like Cipriano’s is the face at once of a god and a devil, the 
undying Pan face. The bygone mystery, that has indeed gone 
by, but has not passed away. Never shall pass away. 

As he sat in silence, casting the old, twilit Pan-power over 
her, she felt herself submitting, succumbing. He was once 
more the old dominant male, shadowy, intangible, looming 
suddenly tall, and covering the sky, making a darkness that 
was himself and nothing but himself, the Pan male. And she 
was swooned prone beneath, perfect in her proneness. 

It was the ancient phallic mystery, the ancient god-devil of 
the male Pan. Cipriano unyielding forever, in the ancient twi- 
light, keeping the ancient twilight around him. She understood 
now his power with his’soldiers. He had the old gift of demon- 
power. 

He would never woo; she saw this. When the power of his 
blood rose in him, the dark aura streamed from him like a 
cloud preghant with power, like thunder, and rose like a whirl- 
Wind that rises@uddenly i in the twilight and raises a great pliant 
columy, swaying and iri with power, clear between 
heaven and earth. y, 

Ah! and what a mystery of prone submission, on her part, 
this huge erection would imply! Submission absolute, like the 
eatth under the sky. Beneath an over-arching absolute. 

Afi! what a marriage! How terrible! and how complete! 
With the finality of death, and yet more than death. The arms 
of the twilit Pan. And the awful, half-intelligible voice from 
the cloud. 

She could conceive now her marriage with Cipriano; the 
supreme passivity, like the earth below the twilight, consum- 
mate in living lifelessness, the sheer solid mystery of passivity. 
Ah, what an abandon, what an abandon, what an abandon! — 
of so many things she wanted to abandon. 

Cipriano put his hand, with its strange soft warmth and 
weight, upon her knee, and her soul melted like fused metal. 

“En poco tiempo, verdad? ’ he said to her, looking into her eyes 
with the old, black, glinting look, of power about to consum- 
mate itself. 

“In a little while, no?’ 

She looked back at him, wordless. Language had abandoned 
her, and she leaned silent and helpless in the vast, unspoken 

» iia. | 
326 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

twilight of the Pan world. Her self had abandoned her, and all 
her day was gone. Only she said to herself: 

“My demon lover!’ : 

Her world could end in many ways, and this was one of 
them. Back to the twilight of the ancient Pan world, where the 
soul of woman was dumb, to be forever unspoken. 

The car had stopped, they had come to Jamiltepec. He looked 
at her again, as reluctantly he opened the door. And as he 
stepped out, she realized again his uniform, his small figure in 
uniform. She had lost it entirely. She had only known his face, 
the face of the supreme god-demon; with the arching brows 
and slightly slanting eyes, and the loose, light tuft of a goat- 
beard. The Master. The everlasting Pan. 

He was looking back at her again, using all his power to 
prevent her seeing in him the little General in uniform, in the 
worldly vision. And she avoided his eyes, and saw nothing. 

They found Ramon sitting in his white clothes in a long 
chair on the terrace. He was creamy-brown in his pallor. 

He saw at once the change in Kate. She had the face of one 
waking from the dead, curiously dipped in death, with a ten- 
derness far more new and vulnerable than a child’s. He glanced 
at Cipriano. Cipriano’s face seemed darker than usual, with 
that secret hauteur and aloofness of the savage. He knew it well. 

‘Are you better?’ Kate asked. 

“Very nearly!’ he said, looking up at her gently. “And you?’ 

“Yes, I am all right.’ 

“You are?’ 

“Yes, I think so. — I have felt myself all lost, since that day. 
Spiritually, I mean. Otherwise I am all right. Are you healing 
well?’ 

“Oh, yes! I always heal quickly.’ 

“Knives and bullets are horrible things.’ 5 

“Yes — in the wrong place.’ 

Kate felt rather as if she were coming to, from a swoon, as 
Ramon spoke to her and looked at her. His eyes, his voice 
seemed kind. Kind? The word suddenly was strange to her, 
she had to try to get its meaning. 

There was no ‘kindness in Cipriano. The god-demon Pan 
preceded kindness. She wondered if she wanted kindness. She 
did not know. Everything felt numb. 

ae 

“Iwas wondering whether to go to England,’ she said. 

‘Again?’ said Ramon, with a slight smile. ‘Away from the 
bullets and the knives, is that it >’ 

“Yes! — to get away.’ And she sighed deeply. 

‘No!’ said Ramon. ‘Don’t go away. You will find nothing 
in England.’ 

“But can I go on here?’ 

“Can you help it?’ 

“I wish I knew what to do.’ 

“How can one know? Something happens inside you, and ~ 
all your decisions ate smoke. — Let happen what will happen.’ 

‘I can’t quite drift as if I had no soul of my own, can I?’ 

“Sometimes it is best.’ 

There was a pause. Cipriano stayed outside the conversation 
altogether, in a dusky world of his own, apart and secretly 
hostile. 

‘I have $een thinking so much about you, ’ she said to 
Ramon, ‘and wendering whether is worth while.’ 

‘Whats’ 

“What you ate doing; trying’to oe the religion of these 
people. If they have any religion to change. I don’t think they 
ate a teligious people. They are only superstitious. I have no 
use for men and women who go crawling down a church aisle 
on thfeir knees, or holding up their arms for hours. There’s 
something stupid and wrong about it. They never worship a 
God. Only some little evil power. I have been wondering so 
much if it is worth while giving yourself to them, and exposing 
yourself to them. It would be horrible if you were really killed. 
I have seen you /o0k& dead.’ 

“Now you see me look alive again,’ he soilen 

But a heavy silence followed. 

‘I believe Don Cipriano knows them better than you do. I 
believe he knows best, if it is any good,’ she said. 

‘And what does he say?’ asked Ramon. 

‘I say Iam Ramon’s man,’ replied Cipriano stubbornly. 

Kate looked at him, and mistrusted him. In the long tun he 
was nobody’s man. He was that old, masterless Pan-male, that 
could not even conceive of service; particularly the service of 
mankind. He saw only glory; the black mystery of glory con- 
summated. And himself like a wind of glory. 

MARRIAGE BY QUETZALCOATL 4327 

328. THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘T feel they'll let you down,’ said Kate to Ramon. 

‘Maybe! But I shan’t let myself down. I do what I believe 
in. Possibly Iam only the first step round the corner of change. 
But: ce n'est que le premier pas qui coute —- Why will you not go 
round the corner with us? At least it is better than sitting still.’ 

Kate did not answer his question. She sat looking at the 
mango-trees and the lake, and the thought of that afternoon 
came over her again. 

‘How did those two men get in; those two bandits on the 
roof?’ she asked wonderingly. 

“It was a woman this time; a girl whom Carlota brought here 
from the Cuna in Mexico City, to be a sewing girl and to teach 
the peon’s wives to sew and do little things. She had a little 
room at the end of the terrace there —’ Ramon pointed to the 
terrace projecting towards the lake, opposite the one where his 
own room was, and the covered balcony. “She got entangled 
with one of the peons; a sort of second overseer, called Guil- 
lermo. Guillermo had got a wife and four children, but he 
came to me to say could he change and take Maruca — the sew- 
ing girl. I said no, he could stay with his family. And I sent 
Maruca back to Mexico. But she had had a smattering of edu- 
cation, and thought she was equal to anything. She got mes- 
sages through to Guillermo, and he ran away and joined her in 
Mexico, leaving wife and four children here. The wife then 
went to live with another peon — the blacksmith — whose wife 
had died and who was supposed to be a good match; a decent 
fellow. 

“One day appeared Guillermo, and said: could he come 
back? I said not with Maruca. He said he didn’t want Maruca, 
he wanted to come back. His wife was willing to go back to 
him again with the children. The blacksmith was willing to let 
her go. I said very well; but he had forfeited his job as sub- 
overseer, and must be a peon again. 

‘And he seemed all right — satisfied. But then Maruca came 
and stayed in Sayula, pretending to make her living as a dress- 
maker. She was in with the priest;.and she got Guillermo 
again. 

‘It seems the Knights of Cortés had promised a big reward 
for the man who would bring in my scalp; secretly, of course. 
The girl got Guillermo: Guillermo got those two peons, one 

MARRIAGE BY QUETZALCOATL 329 
from San Pablo and one from Ahuajijic; somebody else ar- 
tanged for the rest. 

“The bedroom the girl used to have is that one, on the ter- 
race not far from where the stairs go up to the roof. The bed- 
room has a lattice window, high up, looking out on the trees. 
There’s a big /aurel de India growing outside. It appears the girl 
climbed on a table and knocked the iron lattice of the window 
loose, while she was living here, and that Guillermo, by taking 

a jump from the bough — a very risky thing, but then he was 
one of that sort — could land on the window-sill and pull him- 
self into the room. 

“Apparently he and the other two men were going to get the 
scalp and pillage the house before the others could enter. So 
the first one, the man I killed, climbed the tree, and with a long 
pole shoved in the lattice of the window, and so got into the | 
room, and up the terrace stairs. 

“Martin, fhy man, who was waiting on the other stairs, ready 
ifthey tried to blow out the iron door, heard the smash of the 
window,and rushed round just as the second bandit — the one 
you shot — was crouching on the window-sill to jump down 
into the room. The window is quite small, and high up. 

“Before Martin could do anything the man had jumped 
down on top of him and stabbed him twice with his machete. 
Then‘he took Martin’s knife and came up the stairs, when you 
shot him in the head. 

‘Martin was on the floor when he saw the hands of a third 

- man gripping through the window. Then the face of Guiller- 
mo. Martin got up and gave the hands a slash with the heavy 
machete, and Guillermo fell smash back down on to the rocks 
under the wall. 

‘When I came down, I found Martin lying outside the door 
of that room. He told me — They came through there, Patron. Guil- 
lermo was one of them. 

‘Guillermo broke his thigh on the rocks, and the soldiers 
found him. He confessed everything, and said he was sorry, 
and begged my pardon. He’s in the prison hospital now.’ 

‘And Maruca?’ said Kate. 

‘They’ve got her too.’ 

‘There will always bea traitor,’ said Kate gloomily. 

‘Let us hope thete will also be a Caterina,’ said Ramon, 

3,30 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘But will you go on with it — your Quetzalcoatl?’ 

‘How can I leave off? It’s my métier now. Why don’t you 
join us? Why don’t you help me?’ 

“How?” 

‘You will see. Soon you will hear the drums again. Soon the 
first day of Quetzalcoatl will come. You will see. Then Cipri- 
ano will appear — in the red serape — and Huitzilopochtli will 
share the Mexican Olympus with Quetzalcoatl. Then I want a 
goddess.’ 

‘But will Don Cipriano be the god Huitzilopochtli?’ she 
asked, taken aback. 

‘First Man of Huitzilopochtli, as I am First Man of Quetzal- 
coatl.’ 

‘Will you?’ said Kate to Cipriano. ‘That horrible Huitzilo- 
pochtli?’ 

“Yes, Sefiora!’ said Cipriano, with a subtle smile of hauteur, 
the secret savage coming into his own. 

‘Not the old Huitzilopochtli — but the new,’ said Ramon. 
‘And then there must come a goddess; wife or virgin, there 
must come a goddess. Why not you, as the First Woman of — 
say Itzpapalotl, just for the sound of the name?’ 

‘I?’ said Kate. “Never! I should die of shame.’ 

‘Shame?’ laughed Ramon. ‘Ah, Sefiora Caterina, why 
shame? This is a thing that wust be done. There must be mani- 
festations. We must change back to the vision of the living cos 
mos; we must. The oldest Pan is in us, and he will not be 
denied. In cold blood and in hot blood both, we must make 
the change. That is how man is made. I accept the must from 
the oldest Pan in my soul, and from the newest me. Once a man 
gathers his whole soul together and arrives at a conclusion, the 
time of alternatives has gone. I must. No more than that. I am 
the First Man of Quetzalcoatl. I am Quetzalcoatl himself, if 
you like. A manifestation, as well as a man. I accept myself 
entire, and proceed to make destiny. Why, what else can I do?’ 

Kate was silent. His loss of blood seemed to have washed 
him curiously fresh again, and he was carried again out of the 
range of human emotion. A strange sort of categorical impera- 
tive! She saw now his power over Cipriano. It lay in this im- 
perative which he acknowledged in his own soul, and which 
really was like a messenger from the beyond. 

~ MARRIAGE BY QUETZALCOATL 331 

She looked on like a child looking through a railing; rather 
wistful, and rather frightened. 

Ah, the soul! The soul was always flashing and darkening 
into new shapes, each one strange to the other. She had thought 

_ Ramon and she had looked into each other’s souls. And now, 
he was this pale, distant man, with a curious gleam, like a mes- 
senger from the beyond, in-his soul. And he was remote, re- 
mote from any woman. 

Whereas Cipriano had suddenly opened a new world to her, , 
a world of twilight, with the dark, half-visible face of the god- 
demon Pan, who can never perish, but ever returns upon man- 
kind from the shadows. The world of shadows and dark pros- 
tration, with the phallic wind rushing through the dark. 

Cipriano had to go to the town at the end of the lake, near 
the State of Colima; to Jaramay. He was going in a motor- 
boat with a couple of soldiers. Would Kate go with him? 

He waited, in heavy silence, for her answer. 

She said she would. She was desperate. She did not want to 
to be sent back to her own empty, dead house. 

It was one of those little periods when the rain seems 
strangled, the air thick with thunder, silent, ponderous thun- 
der latent in the air from day to day, among the thick, heavy 
sunshine. Kate, in these days in Mexico, felt that between the 
volcaflic violence under the earth, and the electric violence of 
the air above, men walked dark and incalculable, like demons 
from another planet. 

The wind on the lake seemed fresh, from the west, but it was ~ 
a tunning mass of electricity, that burned her face and her 
eyes and the roots of her hair. When she had wakened in the 
night and pushed the sheets, heavy sparks fell from her finger- 
tips. She felt she could not live. 

The lake was like some frail milk of thunder; the dark sol- 
diers curled under the awning of the boat, motionless. They 
seemed dark as lava and sulphur, and full of a dormant, dia- 

“bolic electricity. Like salamanders. The boatman in the stern, 
steering, was handsome, almost like the man she had killed. 
But this one had pale greyish eyes, phosphorescent with flecks 
of silver. 

Cipriano sat in silence in front of her. He had removed his 
tunic, and his neck rose almost black from his white shirt. She 

“Rae | | 
; =| 
332 _ THE PLUMED SERPENT 

could see how different his blood was from hers, dark, black- 
ish, like the blood of lizards among hot black rocks. She could 
feel its changeless surge, holding up his light, bluey-black head 
as on a fountain. And she would feel her own pride dissolving, 
going. 

She felt he wanted his blood-stream to envelop hers. As if it 
could possibly be. He was so still, so unnoticing, and the dark- 
ness of the nape of his neck was so like invisibility. Yet he was 
always waiting, waiting, waiting, invisibly and ponderously 
waiting. 

She lay under the awning in the heat and light without look- 
ing out. The wind made the canvas crackle. 

Whether the time was long or short, she knew not. But they 
wete coming to the silent lake-end, where the beach curved 
round in front of them. It seemed sheer lonely sunlight. 

But beyond the shingle there were willow-trees, and a low 
ranch-house. Three anchored canoas rode with their black, stiff 
lines. There were flat lands, with maize half grown and blowing 
its green flags sideways. But all was as if invisible, in the intense 
hot light. . 

The watm, thin water ran shallower and shallower, to the 
reach of shingle beyond. Black water-fowl bobbed like corks. 
The motor stopped. The boat ebbed on. Under the thin water 
were round stones, with thin green hair of weed. They would 
not reach the shore — not by twenty yards. 

The soldiers took off their waraches, rolled their cotton © 
trousers up their black legs, and got into the water. The tall 
boatman did the same, pulling forward the boat. She would go 
no farther. He anchored her with a big stone. Then with his 
uncanny pale eyes, under the black lashes, he asked Kate in a 
low tone if he could carry her ashore, offering her his shoulder. 

“No, no!’ she said. ‘Pll paddle.’ 

And hastily she took off her shoes and stockings and stepped 
into the shallow water, holding up her thin skirt of striped silk. 
The man laughed; so did the soldiers. 

The water was almost hot. She went blindly forward, her 
head dropped. Cipriano watched her with the silent, heavy, 
changeless patience of his race, then when she reached the 
shingle he came ashore on the boatman’s shoulders. 

They crossed the hot shingle to the. willow-trees by the 

MARRIAGE BY QUETZALCOATL 333 

maize-fields, and sat upon boulders. The lake stretched pale 
and unreal, far, far away into the invisible, with dimmed moun- 
tains rising on either side, bare and abstract. The canoas were 
black and stiff, their masts motionless. The white motor-boat 
rode near. Black birds were bobbing like corks, at this place of 
the water’s end and the world’s end. 

A lonely woman went up the shingle with a water-jar on her 
shoulder. Hearing a sound, Kate looked, and saw a group of 
fishermen holding a conclave in a dug-out hollow by a tree. 
They saluted, looking at her with black, black eyes. They 
saluted humbly, and yet in their black eyes was — ancient 
remote hardness and hauteur. 

Cipriano had sent the soldiers for horses. It was too hot to 
walk. 

They sat silent in the invisibility of this end of the ka the 
great light taking sight away. 

“Why ari I not the living Huitzilopochtli?’ said Cipriano 
quietly, lookinggfull at her with his black eyes. 

‘Do you feel you are?’ she said, startled. 

“Yes,” he replied, in the same low, secret voice. ‘It is what 
I feel.’ 

The black eyes looked at her with a rather awful challenge. 
And the small, dark voice seemed to take all her will away. 
They’ sat in silence, and she felt she was fainting, losing her 
consciousness for ever. 

The soldiers came, with a black Arab hotse for him; a deli- 

- cate thing; and for her a donkey, on which she could sit side- 

ways. He lifted her into the saddle, where she sat only half- 
conscious. A soldier led the donkey, and they set off, past the 
long, frail, hanging fishing-nets, that made long filmy festoons, 
into the lane. 

Then out into the sun and the grey-black dust, towards the 

_ grey-black, low huts of Jaramay, that lined the wide, desert 

road. 
Jaramay was hot as a lava oven. Black low hut-houses with 

tiled roofs lined the broken, long, dilapidated street. Broken 

houses. Blazing sun. A brick pavement all smashed.and sun- 
worn. A dog leading a blind man along the little black walls, 

on the broken pavement. A few goats. And unspeakable life- 

lessness, emptiness. 

a | 
334 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

They came to the broken p/aza, with sun-decayed church 
and ragged palm trees. Emptiness, sun, sun-decay, sun-dilapi- 
dation. One man on a dainty Arab horse trotting lightly over 
the stones, gun behind, big hat making a dark face. For the 
rest, the waste space of the centre of life. Curious how dainty 
the horse looked, and the horseman sitting erect, amid the sun- 
roasted ruin. 

They came to a big building. A few soldiers were drawn up _ 
at the entrance. They saluted Cipriano as if they were trans- 
fixed, rolling their dark eyes. 

Cipriano was down from his horse in a moment. Emitting 
the dark rays of dangerous power, he found the Jefe all obse- 
quious; a fat man in dirty white clothes. They put their wills 
entirely in his power. 

He asked for a room where his esposa could rest. Kate was 
pale and all her will had left her. He was carrying her on his 
will. 

He accepted a large room with a brick-tiled floor and a 
large, new brass bed with a coloured cotton cover thrown over 
it, and with two chairs. The strange, dry, stark emptiness, that 
looked almost cold in the heat. 

“The sun makes you pale. Lie down and rest. I will close the 
windows,’ he said. 

He closed the shutters till only a darkness remained. 

Then in the darkness, suddenly, softly he touched her, — 
stroking her hip. s 

‘I said you were my wife,’ he said, in his small, soft Indian 
voice. ‘It is true, isn’t it?’ 

She trembled, and her limbs seemed to fuse like metal melt- 
ing down. She fused into a molten unconsciousness, her will, 
her very self gone, leaving her lying in molten life, like a lake 
of still fire, unconscious of everything save the eternality of the 
fire in which she was gone. Gone in the fadeless fire, which has 
no death. Only the fire can leave ws, and we can die. 

And Cipriano the master of fire. The Living Huitzilopochtli, 
he had called himself. The living firemaster. The god in the 
flame; the salamander. 

One cannot have one’s own way, and the way of the gods. 
It has to be one or the other. 

When she went out into the next room, he was sitting alone, 

a MARRIAGE BY QUETZALCOATL 335 

waiting for her. He rose quickly, looking at her with hlack, 
flashing eyes from which dark flashes of light seemed to play 
upon her. And he took her hand, to touch her again. 

“Will you come to eat at the little restaurant?’ he said. 

In the uncanny flashing of his eyes she saw a gladness that 
frightened her a little. His touch on her hand was uncannily 
soft and inward. His words said nothing; would never say any- 
thing. But she turned aside her face, a little afraid of that flash- 
ing, primitive gladness, which was so impersonal and beyond 

her. 

Wrapping a big yellow-silk shaw] around her, Spanish fash- 
ion, against the heat, and taking her white sunshade lined with 
green, she stepped out with him past the bowing Jefe and the 
lieutenant, and the saluting soldiers. She shook hands with the 
Jefe and the lieutenant. They were men of flesh and blood, they 
understood her presence, and bowed low, looking up at her 
with flashifig eyes. And she knew what it was to be a goddess 
in the old styleg saluted by the rat fire in men’s eyes, not by 
their lips. 

In her big, soft velourhat of jade green, her feseact wrapped 
round with the yellow brocade shawl, she stepped across the 
sun-eaten plaza, a sort of desert made fs man, softly, softly be- 
side her Cipriano, soft as a cat, hiding her face under her green 
hat 4nd her sunshade, keeping her body secret and elusive. 
And the soldiers and the officers and clerks of the Jefatura, 
watching her with fixed black eyes, saw, not the physical wo- 
man herself, but the inaccessible, voluptuous mystery of man’s 
physical consummation. 

They ate in the dusky little cavern of a fonda kept by a queer 
old woman with Spanish blood in her veins. Cipriano was very 
sharp and imperious in his orders, the old woman scuffed and 
ran in a sort of terror. But she was thrilled to her soul. 

Kate was bewildered by the new mystery of her own elusive- 
ness. She was elusive even to herself. Cipriano hardly talked to 
her at all; which was quite right. She did not want to be talked 
to, and words addressed straight at her, without the curious 
soft veiling which these people knew how to put into their 
voices, speaking only to the unconcerned, thitd person in her, 
came at her like blows. Ah, the ugly blows of direct, brutal 

speech! She had suffered so much from them. Now she wanted 

this veiled elusiveness in herself, she wanted to be addressed in 
the third person. 

After the lunch they went to look at the serapes which were 
being spun for Ramon. Their two soldiers escorted them a few 
yatds up a broken, sun-wasted wide street of little, low black 
houses, then knocked at big doors. 

Kate entered the grateful shade of the xagudn. In the dark 
shade of the inner court, or patio, where sun blazed on bana- 
nas beyond, was a whole weaver’s establishment. A fat, one- 
eyed man sent a little boy to fetch chairs. But Kate wandered, 
fascinated. 

In the zagudn was a great heap of silky white wool, very fine, | 
and in the dark corridor of the pario all the people at work. Two 
boys with flat square boards bristling with many little wire 
bristles were carding the white wool into thin films, which 
they took off the boards in fine rolls like mist, and laid beside 
the two girls at the end of the shed. 

These girls stood by their wheels, spinning, standing beside 
the running wheel, which they set going with one hand, while 
with the other hand they kept a long, miraculous thread of 
white wool-yarn dancing at the very tip of the rapidly-spinning 
spool-needle, the filmy rolls of the carded wool just touching 
the point of the spool, and at once running out into a long, 
pure thread of white, which wound itself on to the spool, and 
another piece of carded wool was attached. One of the girls, a 
beautiful oval-faced one, who smiled shyly at Kate, was very 
clever. It was almost miraculous the way she touched the spool — 
and drew out the thread of wool almost as fine as sewing 
cotton. ‘ 

At the other end of the corridor, under the black shed, were 
two looms, and two men weaving. They treddled at the wood- 
en tread-looms, first with one foot and then the other, absorb- 
ed and silent, in the shadow of the black mud walls. One man 
was weaving a brilliant scarlet serape, very fine, and of the beau- 
tiful cochineal red. It was difficult work. From the pure scarlet 
centre zigzags of black and white were running in a sort of 
whorl, away to the edge, that was pure black. Wonderful to 
see the man, with small bobbins of fine red and white yarn, and 
black, weaving a bit of the ground, weaving the zigzag of 
black up to it, and, up to that, the zigzag of white, with deft, 

336 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

— 

s 

MARRIAGE: BY QUETZALCOATL 337 

dark fingers, quickly adjusting his setting needle, quick as 
lightning threading his pattern, then bringing down the beam 
heavily to préss it tight. The serape was woven on a black warp, 
long fine threads of black, like a harp. But beautiful beyond 
words the perfect, delicate scarlet weaving in. 

“For whom is that?’ said Kate to Cipriano. ‘For you?’ 

“Yes,” he said. ‘For me!’ 

The other weaver was weaving a plain white serape with blue 
and natural-black ends, throwing the spool of yarn from side 
to side, between the white harp-strings, pressing down each 
thread of his woof heavily, with the wooden bar, then tredd- 
ling to change the long, fine threads of the warp. 

In the shadow of the mud shed, the pure colours of the 
lastrous wool looked mystical, the cardinal scarlet, the pure, 
silky white, the lovely blue, and the black, gleaming in the 
shadow of the blackish walls. / 

The fat #nan with the one eye brought serapes, and two boys 
opened them gme: by one. There was a new one, white, with 
close flowers of blue on black stalks, and with green leaves, 
forming the borders, and at the boca, the mouth, where the 
head went through, a whole lot of little, rainbow-coloured 
flowers, in a coiling blue circle. 

‘T love that!’ said Kate. ‘What is that for?’ 

“I is one of Ramon’s; they are Quetzalcoatl’s colours, the 
blue and white and natural black. But this one is for the day of 
the opening of the flowers, when he brings in the goddess who 
will come,’ said Cipriano. 

Kate was silent with fear. 

There were two scarlet serapes with a diamond at the centre, 
all black, and a border-pattern of black diamonds. 

‘Are these yours?’ 

‘Well, they are for the messengers of Huitzilopochtli. Those 
are my colours: scarlet and black. But I myself have white as 
well, just as Ramon has a fringe of my scarlet.’ 

‘Doesn’t it make you afraid?’ she said to him, looking at 
him rather blenched. 

‘How make me afraid?’ 

‘To do this. To be the living Baielopochay’ she 
said. 

‘l am the living Huitzilopochtli,’ he said. ‘When Ramon 

338 THE PLUMED SERPENT } 

dates to be the living Quetzalcoatl, I dare to be the living Huit- 
zilopochtli. I aw he. - Am I not?’ 

Kate looked at him, at his dark face with the little hanging 
tuft of beard, the arched brows, the slightly slanting black 
eyes. In the round, fierce gaze of his eyes there was a certain 
silence, like tenderness, for her. But beyond that, an inhuman 
assurance, which looked far, far beyond her, in the darkness. 

And she hid her face from him, murmuring: 

‘I. know you ate.’ 

‘And on the day of flowers,’ he said, “you, too, shall come, 
in a green dress they shall weave you, with blue flowers at the 
seam, and on your head the new moon of flowers.’ 

She hid her face, afraid. 

‘Come and look at the wools,’ he said, leading her across the 
patio to the shade where, on a line, the yarn hung in dripping ~ 
tresses of colour, scarlet and blue and yellow and green and 
brown. 

“See!” he said. “You shall have a dress of green, that leaves 
the arms bare, and a white under-dress with blue flowers.’ 

The green was a strong apple-green colour. 

Two women under the shed were crouching over osbig 
earthenwate vessels, which sat over a fire which burned slowly 
in a hole dug in the ground. They were watching the steaming 
water. One took dried, yellow-brown flowers, and flung them 
in her water as if she were a witch brewing decoctions. She © 
watched as the flowers rose, watched as they tutned softly in — 

the boiling water. Then she threw in a little white powder. 

' ‘And on the day of flowers you, too, will come. Ah! If 
Ramon is the centre of a new world, a world of new flowers 
shall spring up round him, and push the old world back. I call 
you the First Flower.’ 

They left the courtyard. The soldiers had brought the black 
Arab stallion for Cipriano, and for her the donkey, on which 
she could perch sideways, like a peasant woman. So they went 
through the hot, deserted silence of the mud-brick town, down 
the lane of deep, dark-grey dust, under vivid green trees that 
were bursting into flower, again to the silent shore of the lake- 
end, where the delicate fishing-nets were hung in long lines 
and blowing in the wind, loop after loop striding above the 
shingle and blowing delicately in the wind, as away on the low 

Z 

places the green maize was blowing, and the fleecy willows 
shook like soft green feathers hanging down. 

- The lake stretched pale and unreal into nowhere; the motor- 
boat rode near in, the black canoas stood motionless a little 
farther out. Two women, tiny as birds, were kneeling on the 
water’s edge, washing. 

Kate jumped from her donkey on to the shingle. 

“Why not ride through the water to the boat?’ said Cipriano. 

She looked at the boat, and thought of the oe stum- 
bling and splashing. 

“No,” she said. ‘I will wade again.’ 

He rode his black Arab to the water. It sniffed, and entered 
with delicate feet into the warm shallows. Then, a little way in, 
it stood and suddenly started pawing the water, as a horse 
paws the ground, in the oddest manner possible, very rapidly 
striking the water with its fore-foot, so that little waves splash- 
ed up over ifs black legs and belly. 

‘But this splashed’Cipriano too. He lifted the reins and touch- 
ed the crgature with his spurs. It jurhped, and went half-stum- 
bling, half-dancing through the’ water, prettily, with a splash- 
ing noise. Cipriano quieted it, and it waded gingerly on 
through the shallows of the vast lake, bending its black head 
down to look, to look in a sort of fascination at the stony bot- 
tom, Swaying its black tail as it moved its glossy, raven 
haunches gingerly. 

Then again it stood still, and suddenly, with a rapid Beating 
of its fore-paw, sent the water hollowly splashing up, till its 
black belly glistened wet like a black serpent, and its legs were 
shiny wet pillars. And again Cipriano lifted its head and touched 
it with the spurs, so the delicate creature danced in a churn of 
water. 

‘Oh, it looks so pretty! It looks so pretty when it paws the 
water!’ cried Kate from the shore. ‘Why does it do it?’ 

Cipriano turned in the saddle and looked back at her with 
the sudden, gay Indian laugh. 

‘Tt likes to be wet - who knows?” he said. 

A soldier hurried wading through the water and took the 
horse’s bridle. Cipriano dismounted neatly from the stirrup, 
with a little backward leap into the boat, a real savage horse- 
man. The barefoot soldier leaped into the saddle, and turned 

MARRIAGE BY QUETZALCOATL 339 

340 THE PLUMED SERPENT . 

the horse to shore. But the black horse, male and wilful, in- 
sisted on stopping to paw the waters and splash himself, with 
a naive, wilful sort of delight. 

‘Look! Look!’ cried Kate. ‘It’s so pretty.’ 

But the soldier was perching in the saddle, drawing up his 
legs like a monkey, and shouting at the horse. It would wet its 
fine harness. 

He rode the Arab slanting through the water, to where an 
old woman, sitting in her own silence and almost invisible be- 
fore, was squatted in the water with brown bare shoulders 
emerging, ladling water from a half gourd-shell over her mat- 
ted grey head. The horse splashed and danced, the old woman 
rose with her rag of chemise clinging to her, scolding in a quiet 
voice and bending forward with her calabash cup; the soldier 
laughed, the black horse joyfully and excitedly pawed the 
water and made it splash high up, the soldier shouted again. — 
But the soldier knew he could make Cipriano responsible for 
the splashings. 

Kate waded slowly to the boat, and stepped in. The water 
was watm, but the wind was blowing with strong, electric 
heaviness. Kate quickly dried her feet and legs on her hand- 
kerchief, and pulled on her biscuit-coloured silk stockings and 
brown shoes. 

She sat looking back, at the lake-end, the desert of shingle, 
the blowing, gauzy nets, and, beyond them, the black land wit 
green maize standing, a further fleecy green of trees, and the 
broken lane leading deep into the rows of old trees, where the 
soldiers from Jaramay were now riding away on the black 
horse and the donkey. On the right there was a ranch, too; 4 
long, low black building and a cluster of black huts with tiled 
roofs, empty gardens with reed fences, clumps of banana and 
willow-trees. All in the changeless, heavy light of the after- 
noon, the long lake reaching into invisibility, between its un- 
real mountains. 

‘It is beautiful here!’ said Kate. ‘One could almost live 
here.’ 

‘Ramon says he will make the lake the centre of a new 
world,’ said Cipriano. ‘We will be the gods of the lake.’ 

‘I’m afraid I am just a woman,’ said Kate. 

His black eyes came round at her swiftly. 

MARRIAGE BY QUETZALCOATL - 341 

“What does it mean, just a woman?’ he said, quickly, 
sternly. 

She hung her head. What did it mean? What indeed did it 
mean? Just a woman! She let her soul sink again into the lovely 
elusiveness where everything is possible, even that oneself is 
elusive among the gods. 

The motor-boat, with waves slapping behind, was running 
quickly along the brownish pale water. The soldiers, who were 
in the front, for balance, crouched on the floor with the glazed, 
stupefied mask-faces of the people when they are sleepy. And 
soon they were a heap in the bottom of the boat, two little 
heaps lying in contact. 

Cipriano sat behind her, his tunic removed, spreading his 
white-sleeved arms on the back of his seat. The cartridge-belt 
was heavy on his hips. His face was completely expressionless, 
staring ahead. The wind blew his black hair on his forehead, 
and blew hf little beard. He met her eyes with a far-off, remote 

-sthile, far, far down his black eyes. ae it was a wonderful re- 
cognitign of her. 

The boatman in the stern sat tall and straight, watching with 
pale eyes of shallow, superficial consciousness. The great hat 
made his face dark, the chin-ribbon fell black against his cheek. 
Feeling her look at him, he glanced at her as if she were not 
there 

Turning, she pushed her cushion on to the floor and slid 
down. Cipriano got up, in the running, heaving boat, and pulled 
her another seat-cushion. She lay, covering her face with her 
shawl, while the motor chugged rapidly, the awning rattled 
with sudden wind, the hurrying waves rose behind, giving the 
boat a slap and throwing her forward, sending spray some-. 
times, in the heat and silence of the lake. 

Kate lost her consciousness, under her yellow shawl, in the 
silence of men. 

She woke to the sudden stopping of the engine, and sat up. 
They were near shore; the white towers of San Pablo among 
near trees. The boatman, wide-eyed, was bending over the en- 
gine, abandoning the tiller. The waves pushed the boat slowly 
round. | 

“What is it?’ said Cipriano. 

‘More gasoline, Excellency!’ said the boatman. 

' 4 
342 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

The soldiers woke and sat up. 

The breeze had died. 

“The water is coming,’ said Cipriano. 

‘The rain?’ said Kate. 

‘Yes ~’ and he pointed with his fine black finger, which was 
pale on the inside, to where black clouds were rushing up be- 
hind the mountains, and in another place farther off, great — 
heavy banks were rising with strange suddenness. The air 
seemed to be knitting together overhead. Lightning flashed in ~ 
various places, muffled thunder spoke fat away. 

Still the boat drifted. There was a smell of gasoline. The man 
pottered with the engine. The motor started again, only to 
stop again in a moment. ; 

The man rolled up his trousers, and, to Kate’s amazement, 
stepped into the lake, though they were a mile from the 
shote. The water was not up to his knees. They were on a 
bank. He slowly pushed the boat before him, wading in the 
silence. 

‘How deep is the lake farther in?’ asked Kate. 

‘There, Sefiorita, where the birds with the white breasts are 
swimming, it is eight and a half metres,’ he said, pointing as 
he waded. 

“We must make haste,’ said Cipriano. 

“Yes, Excellency!’ 

The man stepped in again, with his long, handsome brown 
legs. The motor spluttered. They were under way, running © 
fast. A new chill wind was springing up. 

But they rounded a bend, and saw ahead the flat promon- 
tory with the dark mango-trees, and the pale yellow upper 
story of the hacienda house of Jamittepec rising above the trees. 
Palm-trees stood motionless, the bougainvillea hung in heavy 
sheets of magenta colour. Kate could see huts of peons among 
the trees, and women washing, kneeling on stones at the lake 
side where the stream ran in, and a big plantation of bananas 
just above. 

A cool wind was spinning round in the heavens. Black 
clouds were filling up. Ramon came walking slowly down to 
the little harbour as they landed. 

“The water is coming,’ he said in Spanish. 

“We are in time,’ said Cipriano. 

= MARRIAGE BY QUETZALCOATL 343 

Ramon looked them both in the face, and knew. Kate, in her 
new elusiveness, laughed softly. 

“There is another flower opened in the garden of Quetzal- 
coatl,’ said Cipriano in Spanish. 

“Under the red cannas of Huitzilopochtli,’ said Ramon. 

“Yes, there, Sefior,’ said Cipriano. ‘Pero una florecita tan zarca! 
Y abrid en mi sombra, amigo.’ 

‘Seis hombre de la alta fortuna.’ 

“Verdad!’ 

It was about five in the afternoon. The wind hissed in the 
leaves, and suddenly the rain was streaming down in a white 
smoke of power. The ground was a solid white smoke of 
water, the lake was gone. ; 

“You will have to stay here to-night,’ said Sn Sas to Kate 
in Spanish, in the soft, lapping Indian voice. 

. “But the rain will leave off,’ she said. 

‘You wilf have to stay here,’ he repeated, in the same Span- 
ish phrase, in a@urious voice like a breath of wind. 

Kate looked at Ramén, blushing./He looked back at her, she 
thought, very remote, as,if looking at her from far, far away. 

“The bride of Huitzilopochtli,’ he said, with a faint smile. _ 

“Thou, Quetzalcoatl, thou wilt have to marry us,” said 
Cipriano. 

‘Do you wish it?’ said Ramon. 

‘Yes!’ she said. ‘I want you fo marry us, only you.’ 

‘When the sun goes down,’ said Ramon. 

And he went away to his room. Cipriano showed Kate to 
her. room, then left her and went to Ramon. 

The cool water continued to come down, rushing with.a 
smoke of speed down fromsheaven. fi 

As the twilight came through the unceasing rain, a woman- 
servant brought Kate a sleeveless dress or chemise of white 
linen, scalloped at the bottom and embroidered with stiff blue 
flowers upside-down on the black stalks, with two stiff green 
leaves. In the centre of the flowers was the tiny Bird of Quet- 
zalcoatl. 

“The Patrén asks that you put this on!’ said the woman, 
bringing also a lamp and a little note. 

The note was from Ramon, saying in Spanish: ‘Take the 
dress of the bride of Huitzilopochtli, and put it on, and take off 

Be fi 

everything but this. Leave no thread nor thing that can touch 
you from the past. The past is finished. It is the new twilight.’ 

Kate did not quite know how to put on the slip, for it had 
no sleeves nor arm-holes, but was just a straight slip with a 
running string, Then she remembered the old Indian way, and 
tied the string over her left shoulder; rather; slipped the tied 
string over her left shoulder, leaving her arms and part of her 
right breast bate, the slip gathered full over her breasts. And 
she sighed. For it was but a shirt with flowers upturned at the 
bottom. 

Ramon, barefoot, in his white clothes, came for her and took 
* her in silence downstairs into the garden. The zagudn was dark, 
the rain fell steadily in the twilight, but was dace 2 All was 
dark twilight. 

Ramon took off his blouse and threw it on the stairs. Then 
with naked breast he led her into the garden, into the massive 
rain. Cipriano came forward, barefoot, with naked breast, 
bareheaded, in the floppy white pantaloons. : 
_ They stood barefoot on the earth, that still threw back a 
white smoke of waters. The rain drenched them in a moment. 

‘Barefoot on the living earth, with faces to the living rain,’ 
said Ramon in Spanish, quietly; ‘at twilight, between the night 
and the day; man, and woman, in presence of the unfading 
star, meet to be perfect i in one another. Lift your face, Caterina, 
and say: This man is my rain from heaven. : 

Kate lifted her face and shut her eyes in the downpour. : 

‘This man is my rain from heaven,’ she said. 

‘This woman is the earth to me — say that, Cipriano,’ said 
Ramon, kneeling on one knee and laying his hand flat on the 
earth, ; 

Cipriano kneeled and laid his nese on the earth. 

“This woman is the earth to me,’ he said. 

‘I, woman, kiss the feet and the heels of this man, for I will 
be strength to him, throughout the long twilight of the Morn- 
ing Star.’ ; 

Kate kneeled and kissed the feet and heels of Cipriano, and 
said her say. 

‘I, man, kiss the brow and the breast of this woman, for I 
will be het peace and her increase, through the long twilight of 
the Morning Star.’ 

344 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

2 

: MARRIAGE BY QUETZALCOATL 345 

Cipriano kissed her, and said his say. 
Then Ramon put Cipriano’s hand over the rain-wet eyes of 
Kate, and Kate’s hand over the rain-wet eyes of Cipriano. 

“I, a woman, beneath the darkness of this covering hand, 
ptay to this man to meet me in the heart of the night, and nevet 
deny me,’ said Kate. “But let it be an abiding place between us, 
for ever.’ 

“I, a man, beneath the darkness of this covering eet ptay 
to this woman to receive me in the heart of the night, in the 
abiding place that is between us for ever.’ 

“Man shall betray a woman, and woman shall betray a man,’ 
said Ramon, ‘and it shall be forgiven them, each of them. But 
if they have met as earth and rain, between day and night, in 
the hour of the Star; if the man has met the woman with his 
body and the star of his hope, and the woman has met the man 

_ with her body and the star of her yearning, so that a meeting 
has come te*pass, and an abiding place for the two where they 
afte as one star,hen shall neither of them betray the abiding 
place where the meeting lives like an unsetting star. For if 
either betray the abiding place of the two, it shall not be for- 
given, neither by day nor by night nor in the twilight of the 
star.’ 

The rain was leaving off, the night was dark. 

“Go and bathe in the warm water, which is peace between 
_us all. And put oil on your bodies, which is the stillness of the 
Morning Star. Anoint even the soles of your feet, and the roots 
of yout hair.’ 

Kate went up to her room and found a big earthenware bath 
with steaming water, and big towels. Also, in a beautiful little 
bow], oil, and a soft bit of white wool. 

She bathed her rain-wet body in the warm water, dried and 
anointed herself with the clear oil, that was clear as water. It 
was soft, and had a faint perfume, and was grateful to the skin. 
She rubbed all her body, even among her hair and under het 
feet, till she glowed softly. 

Then she put on another of the slips with the inverted pies 
flowers that had been laid on the bed for her, and over that a 
dress of green, hand-woven wool, made of two pieces joined 

_ openly together down the sides, showing a bit of the white, 
full under-dtess, and fastened on the left shoulder. There was 

346 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

a stiff flower, blue, on a black stem, with two black leaves, em- 
broidered at the bottom, at each side. And her white slip show- 
ed a bit at the breast, and.hung below the green: okitt; showing 
the blue flowers: 

It was strange and primitive, but beautiful. She pushed her 
feet into the plaited green Auaraches. But she wanted a belt. She 
tied a piece of ribbon round her waist. 

A mozo tapped to say supper was ready. - 

. Laughing rather shyly, she went along to the sa/on. 

Ramon and Cipriano were both waiting, in silence, in their 
white clothes. Cipriano had his red serape loosely thrown over 
his shoulders. 

‘So!’ said Cipriano, coming forward. ‘The boride of Huit- 
zilopochtli, like a green morning. But Huitzilopochtli will put’ 
on your sash, and. you will put on his shoes, so that he shall 
never leave you, and you shall be always in his spell.’ 

Cipriano tied round her waist a narrow woollen sash of white 
wool, with white, terraced towers upon a red and black 
ground. And she stooped and put on his small, dark feet the 
huaraches of woven red strips of leather, with a black cross on 
the toes. 

“One mote little gift,’ said Ramon. 

He made Kate put over Cipriano’s head a blue cord bearing 
a little symbol of Quetzalcoatl, the snake in silver and the bird 
in blue turquoise. Cipriano put over her head the same symbol, 
but in gold, with a bird in black dull jet, and hanging ona red | 
cord, 

‘There!’ said Ramon. ‘That is the symbol of Quek 
the Morning Star. Remember the marriage is.the meeting- 
ground, and the meeting-ground is the star. If there be no star, 
no meeting-ground, no true coming together of man with the 
woman, into a wholeness, there is no marriage. And if there is 
no marriage, there is nothing but an agitation. If there is no 
honourable meeting of man with woman and woman with 
man, there is no good thing come to pass. But if the meeting 
come to pass, then whosoever betrays the abiding place, which 
is the meeting-ground, which is that which lives like a star be- 
tween day and night, between the dark of woman and the 
dawn of man, between man’s night and woman’s morning, 
shall never be forgiven, neither here nor in the hereafter. For 

man is frail and woman is frail, and none can draw the line. 
down which another shall walk. But the star that is between 
two people and is their meeting-ground shall not be betrayed. 

“And the star that is between three people, and is their meet- 
ing-ground, shall not be betrayed. 

“And the star that is between all men and all women, and 
between all the children of men, shall not be betrayed. 

“Whosoever betrays another man, betrays a man like him- 
self, a fragment. For if there is no star between a man and a 
man, or even a man and a wife, there is nothing. But whoso- 
ever betrays the star that is between him and another man, be- 
trays all, and all is lost to the traitor. 

“Where there is no stat and no abiding place, nothing is, so 
nothing can be lost.’ 

THE OPENING OF THE CHURCH 347 

CHAPTER XXI 

The Opening of the Church 

ap 

€ 

Kare went back to her house in Sayula, and Cipriano went 
back to his command in the city. 

‘Will you not come with me?’ he said. ‘Shall we not make 
a civil’marriage, and live in the same house together?’ 

‘No,’ she said. ‘I am married to you by Quetzalcoatl, no 
other. I will be your wife in the world of Quetzalcoatl, no 
other. And if the star has risen between us, we will watch it.’ 

Conflicting feelings played in his dark eyes. He could not 
bear even to be the least bit thwarted. Then the strong, rather 
distant look came back. 

‘It is very good,’ he said. “It is the best.’ 

And he went away without looking back. 

Kate returned to her house, to her servants and her rocking- 
chair. Inside herself she kept very still and almost thoughtless, 
taking no count of time. What was going to unfold must un- 
fold of itself. 

She no longer feared the nights, when she was shut alone in 
her darkness. But she feared the days a little. She shrank so 
mortally from contact. 

She opened her bedroom window one morning, and looked 

pe atl ed) 
yal ee 
9 m 
= oo 

down to the lake. The sun had come, and queer blotty shadows 
were on the hills beyond the water. Way down at the water’s 
edge a woman was pouting water from a calabash bowl over 

a statuesque pig, dipping rapidly and assiduously. The little 
group was seen in silhouette against the pale, dun lake. 

But impossible to stand at her open window looking on the 
little lane. An old man suddenly appeared from nowhere, offer- 
ing her a leaf full of tiny fish, charales, like splinters of glass, for 
ten centavos, and a girl was unfolding three eggs from the rag- 
ged corner of her rebozo, thrusting them imploringly forward 
to Kate. An old woman was shambling up with a sad story, 
Kate knew. She fled from her window and the importunity. 

At the same instant the sound that always made her heart 
stand still woke on the invisible air. It was the sound of drums, 
of tom-toms rapidly beaten. The same sound she had heard in 
the distance, in the tropical dusk of Ceylon, from the temple at 
sunset. The sound she had heard from the edge of the forests 
in the north, when the Red Indians were dancing by the fire. 
The sound that wakes dark, ancient echoes in the heart of 
evety man, the thud of the primeval world. 

Two drums were violently throbbing against one another. 
Then gradually they were slowing down, in a peculiar uneven 
rhythm, till at last there was only left one slow, continual, 
monotonous note, like a great drop of darkness falling heavily, 
continually, dripping in the bright morning. 

The re-evoked past is frightening, and if it be re-evoked ta 
overwhelm the present, it is fiendish. Kate felt a real terror of 
the sound of a tom-tom. It seemed to beat straight on her solar 
plexus, to make her sick. 

She went to her window. Across the lane rose a tall garden- 
wall of adobe brick, and above that, the sun on the tops of the 
orange-trees, deep gold. Beyond the orange garden rose three 
tall, handsome, shaggy palm-trees, side by side on slim stems. 
And from the very top of the two outer palms rose the twin 
tips of the church towers. She had noticed it so often; the two 
ironwork Greek crosses seeming to stand on the mops of the 
palms. 

Now in an instant she saw the glitter of the symbol of Quet- 
zalcoatl in the places where the cross had been; two circular 
suns, with the dark bird at the centre. The gold, of the suns — 

348 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

—* oo 
<i eae 

e. 

THE OPENING OF THE CHURCH 349 

or the serpents ~ flashed new in the light of the sun, the bird 

lifted its wings dark in outline within the circle. 

Then again the two drums were speeding up, beating against 
one another with the peculiar uneven savage rhythm, which at 
first seems no rhythm, and then seems to contain a summons 
almost sinister in its power, acting on the helpless blood direct. 
Kate felt her hands flutter on her wrists, in fear. Almost, too, 
she could hear the heart of Cipriano beating; her husband in 
Quetzalcoatl. 

“Listen, Nzfa! Listen, Nea!’ came Juana’s frightened voice 
from the veranda. 

‘ Kate went to the veranda. Ezequiel had rolled up his mat- 

tress and was hitching up his pants. It was Sunday morning, 

when he sometimes lay on after sunrise. His thick black hair 

stood up, his dark face was blank with sleep, but in his quiet 

aloofness and his slightly bowed head Kate could see the 

secret satisfaction he took in the barbarous sound of the drums, 
»‘It comes frqm the Church!’ said Juana. 

Kate caught the other woman’s/black, reptilian eyes unex- 
pectedly. Usually, she forgot that Juana was dark, and different. 
For days she would not realize it. Till suddenly she met that 
black, void look with the glint in it, and she started inwardly, 
involuntarily asking herself: ‘Does she hate me?’ 

Or was it only the unspeakable difference in blood? 

Now, in the dark glitter which Juana showed her for one 
moment, Kate read fear, and triumph, and a slow, savage non- 
chalant defiance. Something very inhuman. 

“What does it mean?’ Kate said to her. 

‘It means, Ni#a, that they won’t ring the bells any more. 
They have taken the bells away, and they beat the drums in the 
church. Listen! Listen!’ 

The drums were shuddering rapidly again. 

Kate and Juana went across to the open window. 

‘Look! Nia! The Eye of the Other One! No mote crosses 

on the church. It is the Eye of the Other One. Look! How it 

shines! How nice!’ 

“It means,’ said Ezequiel’s breaking young voice, which was 
just turning deep, ‘that it is the church of Quetzalcoatl. Now it 
is the temple of Quetzalcoatl; our own God.’ 

He was evidently a staunch Man of Quetzalcoatl. 

i | 

= 

350 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘Think of it!’ murmured Juana, inan awed voice. She seemed 
like a heap of darkness low at Kate’s side. 

Then again she glanced up, and the eyes of the two women 
met for a moment. 

‘See the Nifia’s eyes of the sun!’ cried Juana, laying her 
hand on Kate’s arm. Kate’s eyes wete a sort of hazel, changing, 
grey-gold, flickering at the moment with wonder, and a touch 
of fear and dismay. Juana sounded triumphant. 

A man in a white serape, with the blue and black borders, 
suddenly appeared at the window, lifting his hat, on which was 
the sign of Quetzalcoatl, and pushing a little card through the 
window. 

The card said: Come to the church when you hear the one 
big drum; about seven o’clock. — It was signed with the sign 
of Quetzalcoatl. 

‘Very well!’ said Kate. ‘I will come.’ 

- It was a quarter to seven already. Outside the room was the 
noise of Juana sweeping the veranda. Kate put on a white 
dress and a yellow hat, and a long string of pale-coloured topaz 
that glimmered with yellow and mauve. 

The earth was all damp with rain, the leaves were all fresh 
and tropical thick, yet many old leaves were on the ground, 
beaten down. 

‘Nifia! You are going out already! Wait! Wait! The coffee. 
Concha! quick!’ ; 

There was a running of bare feet, the children bringing cup— 
and plate and sweet buns and sugar, the mother hastily limping - 
with the coffee. Ezequiel came striding along the walk, lifting 
his hat. He went down to the servants’ quarters. 

“Ezequiel says —!’ Juana came crying. When suddenly a soft, 
slack thud seemed to make a hole in the air, leaving a gap be- 
hind it. Thud! — Thud! — Thud! — rather slowly. It was the big 
drum, irresistible. 

Kate rose at once from her coffee. 

“Iam going to the church,’ she said. 

“Yes, Nita — Ezequiel says - Il am coming, Nia —’ 

And Juana scuttled away, to get her black reboxo. 

The man in the white serape with the blue and black ends 
was waiting by the gate. He lifted his hat, and walked behind 
Kate and Juana. 

= 

“He is following us!’ whispered Juana. 

Kate drew her yellow shawl around her shoulders. 

It was Sunday morning, sailing-boats lined the watet’s edge, 
with their black hulls. But the beach was empty. As the great 
drum let fall its slow, bellowing note, the last people were run- 

ning towards the church. 

In front of the church was a great throng of natives, the men 
with their dark serapes, or their red blankets over their shoul- 
ders; the nights of rain were cold; and their hats in their hands. 
The high, dark Indian heads! - Women in blue rebozos were 
pressing along. The big drum slowly, slackly exploded its 
note from the church-tower. Kate had her heart in her mouth. 

In the middle of the crowd, a double row of men in the scar- 

let serapes of Huitzilopochtli with the black diamond on the 
shoulders, stood with rifles, holding open a lane through the 
crowd. 

‘Pass!’ sa#d her guard to her. And Kate entered the lane of 
scarlet and blackyerapes, going slow and dazed between watch- 
ful black eyes of the men. Her guard followed her. But Juana 
had been turned back. , 

Kate looked at her feet, and stumbled. Then she looked up. 

In the gateway of the yard before the church stood a bril- 
liant figure in a serape whose zig-zag whorls of scarlet, white, 
and black ran curving, dazzling, to the black shoulders; above 
which was the face of Cipriano, calm, superb, with the little 
black beard and the arching brows. He lifted his hand to her in 
salute. 

Behind him, stretching from the gateway to the closed door 
of the church, was a double row of the guard of Quetzalcoatl, 
in their blankets with the blue and black borders. 

‘What shall I do?’ said Kate. 

‘Stand here with me a moment,’ said Cipriano, in the gate- 
wa 

‘e was no easy thing to rie to face all those dark faces and 
black, glittering eyes. After all, she was a gringuita, and she felt 
it. A sacrifice? Was she a sacrifice? She hung her head, under 
het yellow hat, and watched the string of topaz twinkling and 
shaking its delicate, bog-watery colours against her white dress. 

Joachim had given it her. He had had it made up for her, the 
string, in Cornwall. So far away! In another world, in another 

THE OPENING OF THE CHURCH 351 

352 THE PLUMED SERPENT | :3% $ 

life, in another era! Now she was condemned to go through 
these strange ordeals, like a victim. 

The big drum overhead ceased, and suddenly the little 
drums broke like a shower of hail on the air, and as suddenly 
ceased. 

In low, deep, inward voices, the guard of Quetzalcoatl began 
to speak, in heavy unison: 

“Oye! Oye! Oye! Oye!” 

The small, inset door within the heavy doors of the church 
opened and Don Ramon stepped through. In his white clothes, 
wearing the Quetzalcoatl serape, he stood at the head of his two 
rows of guards, until there was a silence. Then he raised his 
naked right arm. 

“What is God, we shall never know!’ he said, in a strong: 
voice, to all the people. 

The Guard of Quetzalcoatl turned to the people, thrusting 
up their right arm. 

_ ‘What is God, you shall never know!’ they repeated. 

Then again, in the crowd, the words were re-echoed by the 
Guard of Huitzilopochtli. 

After which there fell a dead silence, in which Kate was 
aware of a forest of black eyes glistening with white fire. 

“But the Sons of God come and go. 
They come from beyond the Morning Star; 
And thither they return, from the land of men.’ ; 

It was again the solemn, powerful voice of Ramon. Kate 
looked at his face; it was creamy-brown in its pallor, but 
changeless in expression, and seemed to be sending a change 
over the crowd, removing them from their vulgar compla- 
cency. 

The Guard of Quetzalcoatl turned again to the crowd, and 
repeated Ramon’s words to the crowd. 

“Mary and Jesus have left you, and gone to the place of renewal. 
And Quetzalcoatl has come. He is here. 
He is your lord.’ 

With his words, Ramon was able to put the power of his 
heavy, strong will over the people. ‘The crowd began to fuse 
under his influence. As he gazed back at all the black eyes, his 
eyes seemed to have no expression, save that they seemed to 

r THE OPENING OF THE CHURCH 353 

be seeing the heart of all darkness in front of him, where his 
unknowable God-mystery lived and moved. 

“Those that follow me, must cross the mountains of the sky, 
And pass the houses of the stars by night. 
They shall find me only in the Morning Star. 

But those that will not follow, must not peep. 
Peeping, they will lose their sight, and lingering, they will fall very lame.’ 

He stood a moment in silence, gazing with dark brows at the 
crowd. Then he dropped his arm, and turned. The big doors 
of the church opened, revealing a dim interior. Ramon entered 
the church alone. Inside the church, the drum began to beat. 

The guard of Quetzalcoatl slowly filed into the dim interior, 
the scarlet guard of Huitzilopochtli filed into the yard of the 
church, taking the place of the guard of Quetzalcoatl. Cipriano 
remained in the gateway of the churchyard. His voice tang out 
clear and mifitary. 

“Hear me, people. You may enter the house of Quetzalcoatl. 
Men must go to the right and left, and remove their shoes, and 
stand erect. To the new God no man shall kneel. 

“Women must go down the centre, and cover their faces. 
And they may sit upon the floor. 

“But men must stand erect. 

‘Pass now, those who date.’ 

Kate went with Cipriano into the church. 

It was all different, the floor was black and polished, the walls 
wete in stripes of colour, the place seemed dark. Two files of 
the white-clad men of Quetzalcoatl stood in a long avenue 
down the centre of the church. 

“This way,’ said one of the men of Quetzalcoatl, in a low 
voice, drawing her into the centre between the motionless files 
of men. 

She went alone and afraid over the polished black floor, 
covering her face with her yellow shawl. The pillars of the 
nave were dark green, like trees rising to a deep, blue roof. 

‘The walls were vertically striped in bars of black and white, 
vermilion and yellow and green, with the windows between 
rich with deep blue and crimson and black glass, having specks 
of light. A strange maze, the windows. 

The daylight came only from small windows, high up under 

Tay “a 
v : 

the deep blue roof, where the stripes of the walls had run into 
a maze of green, like banana leaves. Below, the church was all 
dark, and rich with hard célour. 

Kate went forward to the front, near the altar steps. High at 
the back of the chancel, above where the altar had been, burned 
asmall but intense bluey-white light, and just belowand in front 
of the light stood a huge dark figure, a strange looming block, 
apparently carved in wood. It was a naked man, carved archaic 
and rather flat, holding his right arm over his head, and on the 
tight arm balanced a carved wooden eagle with outspread 
wings whose upper surface gleamed with gold, near the light, 
whose under surface was black shadow. Round the heavy left 
leg of the man-image was carved a serpent, also glimmering 
gold, and its golden head rested in the hand of the figure, near 
the thigh. The face of the figure was dark. 

This great dark statue loomed stiff like a pillar, rather fright- 
ening in the white-lit blue chancel. 

At the foot of the statue was a stone altar with a small fire 
of ocote-wood burning. And on a low throne by the altar sat 
Ramon. 

People were beginning to file into the church. Kate heard 
the strange sound of the naked feet of the men on the black, 
polished floor, the white figures stole forward towards the 
altar steps, the dark faces gazing round in wonder, men cross- 
ing themselves involuntarily. Throngs of men slowly flooded. 
in, and woman came half running, to crouch on the floor and 
cover their faces. Kate crouched down too. 

A file of the men of Quetzalcoatl came and stood along the 
foot of the altar steps, like a fence with a gap in the middle, 
facing the people. Beyond the gap was the flickering altar, and 
Ramon. : 

Ramon rose to his feet. The men of Quetzalcoatl turned to 
face him, and shot up their naked right arms, in the gesture 
of the statue, Ramon lifted his arm, so that his blanket fell in 
towards his shoulder, revealing the naked side and the blue 
sash. 

“All men salute Quetzalcoatl!’ said a clear voice in com- 
mand. 

The scarlet men of Huitzilopochtli were threading among 
the men of the congregation, pulling the kneeling ones to their 

354 THE PLUMED: SERPENT 

- e 
THE OPENING OF THE CHURCH 355 

feet, causing all to thrust up their right arm, palm flat to heaven, 
face uplifted, body erect and tense. It was the statue receiving 
the eagle. 

So that around the low dark shrubs of the crouching women 
stood: a forest of erect, upthrusting men, powerful and tense 
with inexplicable passion. It was a forest of dark wrists and 
hands up-pressing, with the striped wall vibrating above, and’ 
higher, the maze of green going to the little, iron-barred win- 
dows that stood open, letting in the light and air of the roof. 

‘I am the living Quetzalcoatl,’ came the solemn, impassive 
voice of Ramon. 

“Iam the Son of the Morning Star, and child of the deeps. 
No man knows my Father, and I know Him not. 
My Father is deep within the deeps, whence He sent me forth. 
He sends the eagle of silence down on wide wings 
To lean over my head and my neck and my breast 
And fill them €trong with strength of wings. 
He sends the se af power up my feet and my loins 
So that strength wells up in me like water,in hot springs. 
But midmést shines as the Morning Star midmost shines 
Between night and day, my Soul-star ‘in one, 
Which is my Father whom I know not. 
I tell you, the day should not turn into glory, 
And the night should not turn deep, 
Save fgr the morning and evening stars, upon which they turn. 
Night turns upon me, and Day, who am the stat between. 
Between your breast and belly is a star. 
If it be not there 
You are empty gourd-shells filled with dust and wind, 
When you walk, the star walks with you, between your breast and your 
belly. 
When you sleep, it softly shines. 
When you speak true and true, it is bright on your lips and your teeth. 

When you lift your hands in courage and bravery, its glow is clear in your 

alms. 
When you turn to your wives as brave men turn to their women 
The Morning Star and the Evening Star shine together. 
For man is the Morning Star. 
And woman is the Star of Evening. 
I tell you, you are not men alone. 
The star of the beyond is within you. 
But have you seen a dead man, how his star has gone out of him ? 
So the star will go out of you, even as a woman will leave a man if his 
warmth never warms her. 
Should you say: I have no star; | am no star. 

So it will leave you, and you will hang like a gourd on the vine of life 

With nothing but rind: 

Waiting for the rats of the dark to come and gnaw your inside. 

Do you hear the rats of the darkness gnawing at your inside? 

Till you are as empty as tat-gnawed pomegranates hanging hollow on the 
Tree of Life? . 

If the star shone, they dare not, they could not. - 

If you were men with the Morning Star. 

If the star shone within you ; 

No rat of the dark dared gnaw you. 

But I am Quetzalcoatl, of the Morning Star. 

I am the living Quetzalcoatl. 

And you are men who should be men of the Morning Star. 

See you be not rat-gnawed gourds. 

Iam Quetzalcoatl of the eagle and the snake. 

The earth and air. 

Of the Morning Star. 

Iam Lord of the Two Ways —’ 

356 THB PLUMED SERPENT 

The drum began to beat, the men of Quetzalcoatl suddenly 
took off their serapes, and Ramon did the same. They were now 
men naked to the waist. The eight men from the altar-steps 
filed up to the altar where the fire burned, and one by one 
kindled tall green candles, which burned with a clear light. 
They ranged themselves on either side the chancel, holding 
the lights high, so that the wooden face of the image glowed 
as if alive, and the eyes of silver and jet flashed most curiously. 

‘A man shall take the wine of his spirit and the blood of his 
heart, the oil of his belly and the seed of his loins, and offer 
them first to the Morning Star,’ said Ramon, in a loud voice, 
turning to the people. 

Four men came to him. One put a blue crown with the bird 
on his brow, one put a red belt round his breast, another put 
a yellow belt around his middle, and the last fastened a white 
belt round his loins. Then the first one pressed a small glass 
bowl] to Ramon’s brow, and in the bowl was white liquid like 
bright water. The next touched a bowl to the breast, and 
the red shook in the bowl. At the navel the nian touched a 
bow] with yellow fluid, and at the loins a bow! with something 
dark. They held them all to the light. 

Then one by one they poured them into a silver mixing- 
bow] that Ramon held between his hands. 

“For save the Unknown God pours His Spirit over my head 

~-s 

; THE OPENING OF THE CHURCH 357 
and fire into my heart, and sends his power like a fountain of 
oil into my belly, and His lightning like a hot spring into my 
loins, I am not. I am nothing. I am a dead gourd. 

“And save I take the wine of my spirit and the red of my 
heart, the strength of my belly and the power of my loins, and 
mingle them all together, and kindle them to the Morning 
Star, I betray my body, I betray my soul, I betray my spirit 
and my God who is Unknown. 

“Fourfold is man. But the star is one star. And one man is 
but one star.’ 

He took the silver mixing-bowl and slowly circled it be- 
tween his hands, in the act of mixing. 

Then he turned his back to the people, and lifted the bowl 
high up, between his hands, as if offering it to the i image. 

. Then suddenly he threw the contents of the bowl into the 
altar fire. 

There was a soft puff of explosion, a blue flame leaped high 
into the air, fgJowed by a yellow flame, and then a rose-red 
smoke. In three successive instafits the faces of the men inside 
the chancel were lit bluish, then gold, then dusky red. And in 
the same moment Ramén had turned to the people and shot up 
his hand. 

‘Salute Quetzalcoatl!’ cried a voice, and men began to 
thrust up their arms, when another voice came moaning 
strangely. 

“No! Ah no! Ah no!’ — the voice rose ina hysterical cry. 

It came from among the crouching women, who glanced 
round in fear, to see a woman in black, kneeling on the floor, 
her black scarf falling back from her lifted face, thrusting up 
het white hands to the Madonna, in the old gesture. 

‘No! No! It is not permitted!’ shrieked the voice. ‘Lord! 
Lord! Lord Jesus! Holy Virgin! Prevent him! Prevent 
him!’ 

The voice sank again to a moan, the white hands clutched 
the breast, and the woman in black began to work her way for- 
ward on her knees, through the throng of women who pressed 
aside to make her way, towards the altar steps. She came with 
her head lowered, working her way on her knees, and moan- 
ing low prayers of supplication. 

Kate felt her blood run cold. Crouching near the altar steps, 

358 THE PLUMED SERPENT . 

she looked round. And she knew, by the shape of the head bent 
in the black scarf, it was Carlota, creeping along on her knees 
to the altar steps. . 

The whole church was frozen in horror. ‘Saviour! Saviour! 
Jesus! Oh Holy Virgin!’ Carlota was moaning to herself as she 
crawled along. 

It seemed hours before she reached the altar steps. Ramon 
still stood below the great Quetzalcoatl image with arm up- 
flung. 

Carlota crouched black at the altar steps and flung up the 
white hands and her white face in the frenzy of the old way. 

‘Lord! Lord!’ she cried, in a strange ecstatic voice that 
froze Kate’s bowels with horror: ‘Jesus! Jesus! Jesus! Jesus! 
Jesus! Jesus!’ Z 

Carlota strangled in her ecstasy. And all the while, Ramon, 
the living Quetzalcoatl, stood before the flickering altar with 
naked arm upraised, looking with dark, inalterable eyes down 
upon the woman. 

Throes and convulsions tortured the body of Carlota. She 
gazed sightlessly upwards. Then came her voice, in the mys- 
terious rhapsody of prayer: 

‘Lord! Lord! Forgive! 

“God of love, forgive! He knows not what he does. 

‘Lord! Lord Jesus! Make an end. Make an end, Lord of the 
world, Christ of the cross, make an end. Have mercy on him, ~ 
Father. Have pity on him! : 

“Oh, take his life from him now, now, that his soul may not _ 
die.’ 

Her voice had gathered strength till it rang out metallic and 
terrible. 

‘Almighty God, take his life from him, and save his soul.’ 

And in the silence after that cry her hands seemed to flicker 
in the air like flames of death. 

‘The Omnipotent,’ came the voice of Ramon, speaking 
quietly, as if to her, ‘is with me, and I serve Omnipotence!’ 

She remained with her white clasped hands upraised, her 
white arms and her white face showing mystical, like onyx, 
from her thin black dress. She was absolutely rigid. And Ra- 
mon, with his arm too upraised, looked down on her abstract- 
edly, his black brows a little contracted. 

Z THE OPENING OF THE CHURCH . 359 
A strong convulsion seized her body. She became -tense 
again, making inarticulate noises. Then another convulsion 
seized her. Once mote she recovered herself, and thrust up her 
clenched hands in frenzy. A third convulsion seized her as if 
from below, and she fell with a strangling moan in a heap on 
the altar steps. 

Kate had risen suddenly and ran to her, to lift her up. She 
found her stiff, with a little froth on her discoloured lips, and 
fixed, glazed eyes. 

Kate looked up in consternation at Ramon. He had dropped 
his arm, and stood with his hands against his thighs, like a 
statue. But he remained with his wide, absorbed dark eyes 
watching without any change. He met Kate’s glance of dis- 
may, and his eyes quickly glanced, like lightning, for Cipriano. 
Then he looked back at Carlota, across a changeless distance. 
Not a muscle of his face moved. And Kate could see that his 
heart hadelied in its connection with Carlota, his heart was 
quite, quite dead in him; out of the deathly vacancy he watched 
his wife. Only his brows frowned a little, from his smooth, 
male forehead. His old connections were broken. She could 
hear him say: There is no star between me and Carlota. — And how 
terribly true it was! 

Cipriano came quickly, switched off his brilliant serape, 
wrapped it round the poor, stiff figure, and picking up the bur- 
den lightly, walked with it through the lane of women to the 
door, and out into the brilliant sun; Kate following. And as she 
followed, she heard the slow, deep Voice of Ramén: 

‘JT am the Living Quetzalcoatl. 

Naked I come from out of the deep 

From the place which I call my Father, 
Naked have I travelled the long way round 
From heaven, past the sleeping sons of God. 

Out of the depths of the sky, I came like an eagle. 
Out of the bowels of the earth like a snake. 

All things that lift in the lift of living between earth and sky, know me. 

But J am the inward star invisible. 

And the star is the lamp in the hand of the Unknown Mover. 

Beyond me is a Lord who is terrible, and wonderful, and dark to me for- 
evet. 

Yet I have lain in his loins, ere he begot me in Mother space. 

’ dee al 
360 THE PLUMED SERPENT . 

Nowa am alone on earth, and this is mine. 

The roots are mine, down the dark, moist path of the snake. 
And the branches are mine, in the paths of the sky and the bird, 
But the spark of me that is me is more than mine own. 

And the feet of men, and the hands of the women know me. 

And knees and thighs and loins, and the bowels of strength and seed are 
lit with me. 

The snake of my left-hand out of the darkness is kissing your feet with his 
mouth of caressive fite, 

And putting his strength in your heels and ankles, his flame in your knees 
and your legs and your loins, his circle of rest in your belly. 

For I am Quetzalcoatl, the feathered snake, 

And I am not with you till my serpent has coiled his circle of rest in your 
belly. 

And I, Quetzalcoatl, the eagle of the air, am brushing your faces with 
vision. 

Iam fanning your breasts with my breath. 

And building my nest of peace in your bones. 

Tam Quetzalcoatl, of the Two Ways.’ 

Kate lingered to hear the end of this hymn. Cipriano also 
had lingered in the porch, with the strange figure in the bril- 
liant serape in his arms. His eyes met Kate’s. In his black glance 
was a sort of homage, to the mystery of the Two Ways; a sort 
of secret. And Kate was uneasy. 

They crossed quickly under the trees to the hotel, which was 
very neat, and Carlota was laid in bed. A soldier had gone al- 
ready to find a doctor; they sent also for a priest. 

Kate sat by the bed. Carlota lay on the bed, making small, 
horrible moaning noises. The drums outside on the church- 
roof started to roll, ina savage, complicated rhythm. Kate went 
to the window and looked out. People were streaming dazzled 
from the church. j 

And then, from the church roof, came the powerful singing 
of men’s voices, fanning like a dark eagle in the bright air; a 
deep, relentless chanting, with an undertone of passionate as- 
surance. She went to the window to look. She could see the 
men on the church roof, the people swarming down below. 
And the roll of that relentless chanting, with its undertone of 
exultance in power and life, rolled through the air like an in- 
visible dark presence. 

Cipriano came in again, glancing at Carlota and at Kate. 

‘They are singing the song of Welcome to Quetzaloeatl,” 
said he. 

“Is that it?’ said Kate. ‘What are the words?’ 

“T will find you a song-sheet,’ he said. 

_ He stood beside her, putting the spell of his presence over 
her. And she still struggled a little, as if she were drowning. 
When she wasn’t drowning, she wanted to, drown. But when 
it actually came, she fought for her old footing. 

There was a crying noise from Carlota. Kate hurried to the 
bed. 

“Where am I?’ said the white-faced, eS deathly-looking 
woman. 

“You are resting in bed,’ said Kate. ‘Don’t trouble.’ 

‘Where was I?’ came Carlota’s voice. 

“Perhaps the sun gave you a touch of sunstroke,’ said Kate. 

Carlota closed her eyes. 

Then sueldenly outside the noise of drums rolled again, a 
powerful soung, And outside in the sunshine life seemed to be 
rolling in powerful waves. 0c 

Carlota started, and opened her ey es. 

“What is that noise?’ 

THE OPENING OF THE CHURCH 361 

“It is a fiesta,’ said Kate. " 

“Ramon, he’s murdered me, and lost his own ay : aiid Car- 
lota.“ He has murdefed me, and lost his own soul. He is a mur- 
derer, and one of the damned. The man I married! The man I 
married! A murderer among the damned!’ 

It was evident she no longer hear@ the sounds outside. 
Cipriano could not bear the sound of her voice. He came 
quickly to the side of the bed. 

‘“Dofia Carlota!’ he said, looking down at her dulled hazel 
eyes, that were fixed and unseeing: ‘Do not die with wrong 
words on your lips. If you are murdered, you have murdered 
yourself. You were never married to Ramon. You were mar- 
ried to your own way.’ 

He spoke fiercely, avengingly. 

‘Ah!’ said the dying woman. ‘Ah! I never married Ramon. 
No! I never married him! How could I? He was not what I 
would have him be. How could I marry him? Ah! I thought I 
married him. Ah! Iam so glad I didn’t — so glad.’ ' 

‘You are glad! You are glad!’ said Cipriano in anger, angry 

4 
362 THE PLUMED SERPENT | 

with the very ghost of the woman, talking to the ghost. “You — 
ate glad because you never poured the wine of your body into 
the mixing-bow]! Yet in your day you have drunk the wine of 
his body and been soothed with his oil. You are glad you kept 
youts back? You are glad you kept back the wine of your body 
and the secret oil of your soul? That you gave only the water 
of your charity? I tell you the water of charity, the hissing 
water of the spirit, is bitter at last in the mouth and in the 
breast and in the belly; it puts out the fire. You would have put 
out the fire, Dofia Carlota. - But you cannot. You shall not. 
You have been charitable and compassionless to the man you 
called your own. So you have put out your own fire.’ 

‘Who is talking?’ said the ghost of Carlota. 

“I, Cipriano Viedma, am talking.’ 

“The oil and the wine! The oil and the wine and the bread! 
They are the sacrament! They are the body and the blessing of 
God! Where is the priest? I want the sacrament. Where is the 
priest? I want to confess, and take the sacrament, and have the © 

peace of God,’ said the ghost of Carlota. 

_ * The priest is coming. — But you can take no sacrament, un- 
less you give it. The oil and the wine and the bread! They are 
not for the priest to give. They are to be poured into the mix- 
ing-bowl, which Ramon calls the cup of the star. If you pour 
neither oil nor wine into the mixing-bowl, from the mixing- — 
bowl you cannot drink. So you have no sacrament.’ 

“The sacrament! The bread!’ said the ghost of Carlota. 

“There is no bread. There is no body without blood and oil, | 
as Shylock found out.’ 

‘A murderer, lost among the damned!’ murmured Carlota. 
‘The father of my children! The husband of my body! Ah no! 
It is better for me to call to the Holy Virgin, and die.’ 

“Call then, and die!’ said Cipriano. 

“My children!’ murmured Carlota. 

“It is well you must leave them. With your beggar’s bowl of 
charity you have stolen their oil and their wine as well. It is 
good for you to steal from them no more, you stale virgin, you 
spinster, you born widow, you weeping mother, you impec- 
cable wife, you just woman. You stole the very sunshine out 
of the sky and the sap out of the earth, Because back again, 
what did you pour? Only the water of dead dilution into the 

oe 

Zs 
J 
THE OPENING OF THE CHURCH 363 

mixing-bowl] of life, you thief. Oh die! — die! — die! Die and be 
a thousand times dead! Do nothing but utterly die!’ 

Dofna Carlota had relapsed into unconsciousness; even her 
ghost refused to hear. Cipriano flung his sinisterly-flaming 
Serape over his shoulders and his face, over his nose, till only 
his black, glittering eyes were visible as he blew out of the 

- room. 

Kate sat by the window, and laughed a little. The primeval 
woman inside her laughed to herself, for she had known all 
the time about the two thieves on the Cross with Jesus; the 
bullying, marauding thief of the male in his own rights, and 
the much more subtle, cold, sly, charitable thief of the woman 
in ser own tights, forever chanting her beggar’s whine about 
the love of God and the God of pity. 

But Kate, too, was a modern woman and a woman in her 
own right. So she sat on with Carlota. And when the doctor 
came, she a€cepted the obsequiousness of the man as part’ of 
her rights. And,when the priest came, she accepted the obse- 
quiousness from him, just the same, as part of her woman’s 
rights. These two ministers of love, what were they for, but to 
be obsequious to her? As for herself, she could hardly be called 
a thief, and a sneak-thief of the world’s virility, when these 
men came forcing their obsequiousness upon her, whining to 
her td take it and relieve them of the responsibility of their own 
manhood. No, if women are thieves, it is only because men 
want to be thieved from. If women thieve the world’s virility 
it is only because men want to have it thieved, since for men to 
be responsible for their own manhood seems to be the last 
thing men want. 

So Kate sat on in the room of the dying Carlota, smiling a 
little cynically. Outside she heard the roll of the tom-toms and 
the deep chanting of the men of Quetzalcoatl. Beyond, under 
the trees, in the smoothed, cleared space before the church, she 
saw the half-naked men dancing in a circle, to the drum; the 
round dance. Then later, dancing a religious dance of the re- 
turn of Quetzalcoatl. It was the old, barefooted, absorbed 
dancing of the Indians, the dance of downward-sinking absorp- 
tion. It was the dance of these people, too, just the same: the 
dance of the Aztecs and Zapotecs and the Huicholes, just the 
same in essence, indigenous to America; the curious, silent, 

.. ii | 
364 THE PLUMED SERPENT : 

absorbed dance of the softly-beating feet and ankles, the body 
coming down softly, but with deep weight, upon powerful 
knees and ankles, to the tread of the earth, as when a male bird 
treads the hen. And women softly stepping in unison. 

And Kate, listening to the drums, and the full-throated sing- 
ing, and watching the rich, soft bodies in the dance, thought to 
herself a little sceptically: Yes! For these it is easier. But all the 
white men, of the dominant race, what are they doing at this 
moment? 

In the afternoon there was a great dance of the Welcome off 
QOuetzalcoatl. Kate could only see a little of it, in front of the 
church. 

The drums beat vigorously all the time, the dance wound 
strangely to the water’s edge. Kate heard afterwards that the 
procession of women with baskets on their heads, filled with 
bread and fruits all wrapped in leaves, went down to the shore 
and loaded the boats. Then dancers and all got into the boats 
and canoas, and rowed to the island. 

They made a feast on the island, and learned the dance of the 
Welcome of Ouetzalcoat!, which they would dance every year on 
that day. And they learned the Song of the Welcome of Quet- 
zalcoatl; which later on Cipriano brought to Kate, as she sat in 
that dim room with the unconscious woman, who made small, 
terrible, mechanical noises. ; 

The doctor came hastening, and the priest came after a_ 
while. Neither could do anything. They came in the afternoon — 
again, and Kate walked out and wandered on the half-deserted 
beach, looking at the flock of boats drawing near the island, 
and feeling that life was a more terrible issue even than death. 
One could die and have done. But living was never done, it 
could never be finished, and the responsibility could never be 
shifted. 

She went back again to the sick-room, and with the aid of a 
woman she undressed poor Carlota and put a nightdress on 
her. Another doctor came from the city. But the sick woman 
was dying. And Kate was alone with her again. 

The men, where were they? 

The business of living? Were they really gone about the 
great business of living, abandoning her here to this business 
of dying? 

: THE OPENING OF THE CHURCH 3.65 

It was nightfall before she heard the drums returning. And 
again that deep, full, almost martial singing of men, savage and 
remote, to the sound of the drum. Perhaps after all, life would 

_ conquer again, and men would be men, so that women could 
be women. Till men are men indeed, women have no hope to 
be women. She knew that fatally enough. 

Cipriano came to her, smelling of sun and sweat, his face 
darkly glowing, his eyes flashing. He glanced at the bed, at the 
unconscious woman, at the medicine bottles. 

“What do they say?’ he asked. 

“The doctors think she may come round.’ 

“She will die,’ he said. 

Then he went with her to the window. 

“See!” he said. ‘This is what they are singing.’ 

It was the Song-sheet of the Welcome to Ouetzalcoatl. 

@ WELCOME TO QUETZALCOATL 

We are not wasted. We are not left out. 
Quetzalebatl has come! 

adhere is nothing mote to ask fot. 
Ouetzalcoatl has come} A 

He threw the Fish in the boat. 

~The cock rose, and crew over the waters. 
The naked one climbed in. 

Ouetzalcoatl has come! 

Quetzalcoatl loves the shade of trecs. 
Give him trees! Call back the trees! 
We are like trees, tall and rustling. 
Quetzalcoatl is among the trees. 

Do not tell me my face is shining. 
Quetzalcoatl has come! 

Over my head his noiseless eagle 
Fans a flame. 

Tie my spotted shoes for dancing, 
The snake has kissed my heel. 

Like a volcano my hips are moving 
With fire, and my throat is full. 

Blue daylight sinks in my hair. 

The star comes out between the two 
Wonders, shines out of everywhere, 
Saying without speech: Look you! 

366 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Ah, Quetzalcoatl! 

Put sleep as black as beauty in the secret of my belly. 
Put star-oil over me. 

Call me a man. 

Even as she read, she could hear the people outside singing 
it, as the reed-flutes unthreaded the melody time after time. 
This strange dumb people of Mexico was opening its voice at 
last. It was as if a stone had been rolled off them all, and she 
heard their voice for the first time, deep, wild, with a certain 
exultance and menace. ; ° 

“The naked one climbed in. 
Quetzalcoatl has come!” 

She could hear the curious defiance and exultance in the 
men’s voices. Then a woman’s voice, cleat almost as a star it- 
self, went up the road at the verse: 

‘Blue daylight sinks in my hair. 
The star comes out between the two 
Wonders ...’ 

Strange! The people had opened hearts at last. They, had 
rolled the stone of their heaviness away, a new world had 
begun. Kate was frightened. It was dusk. She laid her hand on 
Cipriano’s knee, lost. And he leaned and put his dark hand 
against her cheek, breathing silently. 

“To-day,” he said softly, “we have done well.’ 

She felt for his hand. All was so dark. But oh, so deep, so 
deep and beyond her, the vast, soft, living heat! So beyond 
her! 

“Put sleep as black as beauty in the secret of my belly. 
Put star-oil over me.’ 

She could almost feel her soul appealing to Cipriano for this 
sacrament. 

They sat side by side in darkness, as the night fell, and he 
held his hand loosely on hers. Outside, the people wete still 
singing. Some were dancing round the drum. On the church- 
towers, where the bells had been, there wete fires flickering, 
and white forms of men, the noise of a heavy drum, then again, 
the chant. In the yard before the church doors a fire was blaz- 
ing, and men of Huitzilopochtli stood watching two of their 

| 

THE OPENING OF THE CHURCH 367 

men, naked save for a breech-cloth and the scarlet feathers on 
their head, dancing the old spear-dance, whooping challenge 
in the firelight. 

Ramon came in, in his white clothes. He pulled off his big 
hat, and stood looking down at Carlota. She no longer made 
noises, and her eyes were turned up horribly, showing the 
whites. Ramon closed his eyes a moment, and turned away, 
saying nothing. He came to the window, where Cipriano still 
sat in his impenetrable but living silence, that satisfied where 
all speech had failed, holding Kate’s hand loosely. Nor did he 
let-go her hand. 

Ramon looked out, at the fires in the church towers, the fire 
before the church doors, the little fires on the beach by the 
lake; and the figures of men in white, the figures of women in 
dark reboyos, with full white skirts, the two naked dancers, the 
standing crowd, the occasional scarlet serapes of Huitzilo- 
pochtli, the white and blue of Quetzalcoatl, the creeping away 
of a motorecar, the running of boys, the men clustering round 
the drum, to sigg.. 

_ ‘It is life,’ he said, “which is*the mystery. Death is hardly 
mysterious in comparison.” , 

There was a knocking. The doctor had come again, and a 
sister to nurse the dying woman. Softly the sister paced round 
the room and bent over her charge. 

Cipriano and Kate went away in a boat over the dark lake, 
away from all the fires and the noise into the deep darkness of 
the lake beyond, to Jamiltepec. Kate felt she wanted to be 
covered with deep and living darkness, the deeps where Cipri- 
ano could lay her. 

Put sleep as black as beauty in the secret of my belly. 
Put star-oil over me. 

And Cipriano, as he sat in the boat with her, felt the inward 
sun rise darkly in him, diffusing through him; and felt the 
mysterious flower of her woman’s femaleness slowly opening 
to him, as a sea-anemone opens deep under the sea, with in- 
finite soft fleshliness. The hardness of self-will was gone, and 
the soft anemone of her deeps blossomed for him of itself, far 
down under the tides. 

Ramon remained behind in the hotel, in the impenetrable 

sanctuaty of his own stillness. Carlota temained unconscious. 
There was a consultation of doctors; to no effect. She died at 
dawn, before her boys could arrive from Mexico; as a canoa 
was putting off from the shore with a little breeze; and the pas- 
sengets were singing the Song of Welcome to Quetzalcoatl, 
unexpectedly, upon the pale water. 

368 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

CHAPTER XXII 
The Living Huitzilopochtli 

T HeEy buried Dofia Carlota in Sayula, and Kate, though a wo- 
man, went also to the funeral. Don Ramon followed the coffin, 
in his white clothes and big hat with the Quetzalcoatl sign. 
His boys went with him; and there were many strangers, men, 
in black. 

The boys looked odd young shoots, in their black suits with 
short breeches and bare knees. They were both round-faced 
and creamy brown in complexion, both had a touch of fairness. 
The elder, Pedro, was more like Don Ramon; but his hair was 
softer, more fluffy than his father’s, with a hint of brown. 
He was sulky and awkward, and kept his head ducked. The 
younger boy, Cyprian, had the fluffy, upstanding brown hait 
and the startled, hazel.eyes of his mother. 

They had come in a motor-car. with their aunt, from Gua- 
dalajara, and were returning straight to town. In her will, the 
mother had named guardians in place of the father, stating that 
the father would consent. And her considerable fortune she had 
left in trust for the boys. But the father was one of the trustees. 

Ramon sat in his room in the hotel, overlooking the lake, 
and his two boys sat on the cane settee opposite him. 

“What do you want to do, my sons?’ said Ramoén. ‘To go 
back with your Aunt Margarita, and return to school in the 
United States?’ 

The boys remained a while in sulky silence. 

‘Yes!’ said Cyprian at last, his brown hair seeming to fluff 
up with indignation. ‘That is what our mother wished us to 
do. So, of course, we shall do it.’ 

— a 

Sys 

, ee. 

THE LIVING HUITZILOPOCHTLI 369 

“Very well!’ said Ramon quietly. ‘But remember I am your 
father, and my door, and my arms, and my heart will always 
be open to you, when you come.’ 

The elder boy shuffled with his feet, and muttered, without 
looking up: 

“We cannot come, papa!’ 

“Why not, child?’ 

The boy looked up at him with brown eyes as slidllensing 
as his own. 

“You, papa, you call yourself The Living Quetzalcoatl?’ 

SCS. 

“But, papa, our father is called Ramon Carrasco.’ 

“It is also true,’ said Ramon, smiling. 

“We,’ said Pedro, rather heavily, ‘ate not the children of the 
Living Quetzalcoatl, papa. We are Carrasco y de Lata.’ 

“Good names both,’ said Ramén. 

‘Never,’ said the young Cyprian, his eyes flashing, ‘never 
can we love you, papa. You are our’enemy. You killed our 
mother.’ 

“No, nol’ said’ Ramon. ‘That you must not say. Your 
mother sotight her own death.’ , 

‘Mama loved you much; much, much!’ cried Cyprian, the 
teats rising to his eyes. “Always she loved you and prayed for 
you — He began to cry. 

‘Andd, my son?’ said Ramon. 

“You hated her and killed her! Oh, mama! Mama! Oh, 
mama! I want my mother!’ hé wept. 

“Come to me, little one!’ said Ramon softly, holding out his 
hands. 

‘No!’ cried Cyprian, stamping his foot and flashing his eyes 
through his tears. “No! No!’ 

- The elder boy hung his head and was crying too. Ramén had 

‘the little, perplexed frown of pain on his brow. He looked from 

side to side, as if for some issue. Then he gathered himself to- 

gether. 
‘Listen, my sons,’ he said. ‘ You also will be men; it will not 

_ belong. While you are little boys, you are neither men nor wo- 
men. But soon, the change will come, and you will have to be 
- men. And-then you will know that a man must bea man, When 

his soul tells him to do a thing, he must do it. When you are 

37° THE PLUMED SERPENT 

.men, you must listen carefully to your own souls, and be sure 
to be true. Be true to your own souls; there is nothing else for 
a man to do.’ 

‘Je men fiche de ton ame, mon pire!” said Cyprian, with one of 
his flashes into French. It was a language he often spoke with 
his mother. 

‘That you may, my boy,’ said Ramon. ‘But I may not.’ 

‘Papa!’ put in the elder boy. ‘Is your soul different from 
mama’s soul?’ 

‘Who knows?’ said Ramon. ‘I understand it eae te | 

‘Because mama always prayed for your soul.’ 

‘And I, in my way, pray for hers, child. If her soul comes 
back to me, I will take it into my heart.’ 

- ‘Mama’s soul,’ said Cyprian, ‘will go straight into Paradise.’ 

‘Who knows, child! Perhaps the Paradise for the souls of 
the dead is the hearts of the living.’ 

“I don’t understand what you say.’ 

“It is possible,’ said Ramon, ‘that even now the only Para- 
dise for the soul of your mother is in my heart.’ 

The two boys stared at him with open eyes. 

“Never will I believe that,’ said Cyprian. 

“Or it may be in “Ay heart,’ said Ramon. “Hast thou a place © 
in ¢hy heart for the soul of thy mother?’ 

The young Cyprian stared with bewildered hazel eyes. 

“The soul of my mother goes direct to Paradise, because she 
is a saint,’ he asserted flatly. 

“Which Paradise, my son?’ 

“The only one. Where God is.’ 

“And where is that?’ 

There was a pause. 

“In the sky,’ said Cyprian, stubbornly. 

“It is very far and very empty. But I believe, my son, that the 
hearts of living men are the very middle of the sky. And there 
God is; and Paradise; inside the hearts of living men and 
women. And there the souls of the dead come to rest, there, at 
the very centre, where the blood turns and returns; that is 
where the dead sleep best.’ 

There was a very blank pause. 

“And wilt thou go on saying thou art the Living Quetzal- 
coatl?’ said Cyprian. 

oo, 

THE LIVING HUITZILOPOCHTLI 371 

“Surely! And when you ate a little older, perhaps you will © 
come to me and say it too.’ 

“Never! Thou hast killed our mother, and we shall hate thee. 
When we are men we ought to kill thee.’ 

“Nay, that is bombast, child! Why wilt thou listen only to 
servants and priests and people of that sort? Are they not thy 
inferiors, since thou art my son, and thy mothet’s son? Why. 
dost thou take the talk of servants and inferiors into thy 
mouth? Hast thou no room for the speech of brave men? Thou 
wilt not kill me, neither will thy brother. For I would not allow 
you, even if you wished it. And you do not wish it. Talk no 
more of this empty lackey-talk to me, Cyprian, for I will not 
hear it. Art thou already a little lackey, or a priest? Come, thou 
art vulgar. Thou art a little vulgarian. We had better speak 
English; or thy French. Castilian is too good a language to 
turn into this currish talk.’ 

Ram6n rose and went to the window to look out at the lake, 
The drums o# the church were sounding for midday, when 
every man shouldyglance at the sun, and stand silent with a 
little prayer. f 
‘The sun has climbed the hill, thé day is on the downward slope. 
Between the morning and the afternoon, stand I here with my soul, and 

lift it up. 
My soul is heavy with sunshine, and steeped with strength. 
The sunheams have filled me like a honeycomb, 

It is the moment of fulness, 
And the top of the morning.’ 

Ramon turned and repeated the Mid-day verse to his boys. 
They listened in confused silence. 

“Come!” he said. ‘Why are you confused? If I talked to you 
about your new boots, or ten pesos, you would not be con- 
fused. But if I speak of the sun and your own souls filled from 
the sun like honeycombs, you sulk. You had better go back to 
your school in America, to learn to be business men. You had 
better say to everybody: Oh, no! we have no father! Our 
mother died, but we never had a father. We are children of an 
immaculate conception, so we should make excellent business 
men.’ 

‘I shall be a priest,’ said Cyprian. 

“And I a doctor,’ said Pedro. 

372 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘Very good! Very good! Shall-be is far from am, and to- 
morrow is another day. Come to me when your heart tells you 
to come. You ate my little boys, whatever you say, and I shall 
stroke your hair and laugh at you. Come! Come here!’ 

He looked at them, and they dared not refuse to obey, his 
power was so much greater than theirs. 

He took his eldest son in his arms and stroked his 
head. 

‘There!’ he said. ‘Thou art my eldest son, and I am thy 
father, who calls himself The Living Quetzalcoatl. When they 
say: ‘Is it thy father who calls himself The Living Quetzal- 
coatl?’’ — say to them: “‘ Yes, he is my father.’ And when they 
ask you what you think of such a father, say: “Iam young, and 
I do not understand him yet. But I do not judge my father 
without understanding him.’ Wilt thou say that, my boy, 
Pedro, my son?’ And Ramon stroked the boy’s hair with the 
gentleness and tenderness which filled the child with a sort of 
awe. 

‘Yes, papa! I will say that,’ said the boy, relieved. 

‘Tt is well,’ said Ramon, laying his hand on the child’s head 
for a moment, like a blessing. 

Then he turned to the younger son. 

“Come then,’ he said, ‘and let me stroke thy upstanding 
hair.’ 

‘If I love thee, I cannot love mama!’ said Cyprian. 

‘Nay, is thy heart so narrow? Love not at all, if it makes thee 
petty.’ 

“But I do not want to come to thee, papa.’ 

“Then stay away, my son, and come when thou dost want 
a 
‘TI do not think thou lovest me, papa.’ 

‘Nay, when thou art an obstinate monkey, I love thee, not. 
But when thy real manhood comes upon thee, and thou art 
brave and daring, rather than rash and impudent, then thou 
wilt be lovable. How can I love thee if thou art not lovable?’ 

“Mama always loved me.’ 

“She called thee her own. I do not call thee mine own. Thou 
art thyself. When thou art lovable, I can love thee. When thou 
art rash and impudent, nay, I cannot. The mill will not spin 
when the wind does not blow.’ 

THE LIVING HUITZILOPOCHTLI 373 

The boys went away. Ramon watched them as they stood in 
their black clothes and bare knees upon the jetty, and his heart 
yearned overt them. 

“Ah, the poor little devils!’ he said to himself. And then: 

“But I can do no more than keep my soul like a castle for 
them, to be a stronghold to them when they need it — if ever 
they do.’ 

These days Kate often sat by the lake shore, in the early light 
of the morning. Between the rains, the day came very clear, 
she could see every wrinkle in the great hills opposite, and the 
fold, or pass, through which a river came, away at Tuliapan, 
was so viyid to her she felt she had walked it. The red birds 
looked as if rains had freshened even their poppy-buds, and 
in the morning frogs were whirring. 

But the world was somehow different; all different. No 
jingle of bells from the church, no striking of the clock. The 
clock was taken away. 

And instead, the drums. At dawn, the heavy drum rolling its 
souad on the air. Then the sound of the Dawn-Verse chanted 
from the tower, in a strong man’s Voice: 

‘The dark is dividing, the suri is coming past the wall. 
Day is at hand. 

Lift your hand, say Farewell! say Welcome! 

Then be silent. 

Let the darkness leave you, let the light come into you, 
é : ae 
Man in the twilight. 

The voice and the great drum ceased. And in the dawn the 
men who had risen stood silent, with arm uplifted, in the mo- 
ment of change, the women covered their faces and bent their 
heads. All was changeless still for the moment of change. 

Then the light drum rattled swiftly, as the first sparkle of the 
bright sun flashed in sheer light from the crest of the great 
hills. The day had begun. People of the world moved on their 
way. 

e about nine o’clock the light drum rattled quickly, and the 
voice in the tower cried: 

‘Half-way! Half-way up the slope of the morning!* 

There was the heavy drum at noon, the light drum again at 
about three o’clock, with the cry: 

‘Half-way! Half-way down the slope of afternoon.’ 

374 THE PLUMED SERPENT : 

And at sunset again, the great drum rolling, and the voice 
crying: 
‘Leave off! Leave off! Leave off! 
Lift your hand, say Farewell! say Welcome! 
Man in the twilight. 
The sun is in the outer porch, cry to him: Thanks! Oh, Thanks! 
Then be silent. 
You belong to the night.’ 

And again in the sunset everywhere men stood with lifted 
faces and hands, and women covered their faces and stood with 
bowed heads; all was changeless still for the moment of change. 

Then the lighter drums suddenly beat, and people moved on 
into the night. 

The world was different, different. The drums seemed to 
leave the air soft and vulnerable, as if it were alive. Above all, 
no clang of metal on metal, during the moments of change. 

‘Metal for resistance. 
Drums for the beating heart. 
The heart ceases not.’ 

This was one of Ramon’s little verses. 

Strange, the change that was taking place in the world. Al- 
. ways the air had a softer, more velvety silence, it seemed alive. 
And there wete no hours. Dawn and noon and sunset, mid- 
morning, or the up-slope middle, and mid-afternoon, or the 
down-slope middle, this was the day, with the watches of the 
night. ‘They began to call the four watches of the day the watch 
of the rabbit, the watch of the hawk, the watch of the turkey- 
buzzard and the watch of the deer. And the four quarters of 
the night were the watch of the frog, the watch of the fire-fly, 
the watch of the fish, the watch of the squirrel. 

“I shall come for you,’ wrote Cipriano to her, ‘when the deer 
is thrusting his last foot towards the forest.’ 

That meant, she knew, in the last quarter of the hours of the 
deer; something after five o’clock. 

It was as if, from Ramon and Cipriano, from Jamiltepec and 
the lake region, a new world was unfolding, unrolling, as softly 
and subtly as twilight falling and removing the clutter of day. 
It was a soft, twilit newness slowly spreading and penetrating 
the world, even into the cities. Now, even in the cities the blue 
serapes of Quetzalcoatl were seen, and the drums were heard 

THE LIVING HUITZILOPOCHTLI 375 

_ at the Hours, casting a strange mesh of twilight over the clash 

of bells and the clash of traffic. Even in the capital the big drum 
tolled again, and men, even men in city clothes, would stand 

_ still with uplifted faces and arm upstretched, listening for the 

noon-verse, which they knew in their hearts, and trying not to 
hear the clash of metal. 

“Metal for resistance. 
Drums for the beating heart.’ 

But it was a world of metal, and a world of resistance. Cipti- 
ano, strangely powerful with the soldiers, in spite of the hatred 
he aroused in other officials, was for meeting metal with metal. 
For getting Montes to declare: The Religion of Quetzalcoatl 
is the religion of Mexico, official and declared. — Then backing 
up the declaration with the army. 

But no! no! said Ramon. Let it spread of itself. And wait 
awhile, till you can be declared the living Huitzilopochtli, and 
your men can have the red and black blanket, with the snake- 
cutve, Then perhaps we can have the open wedding with 
Caterina, and she will be a mother among the gods. 

All the tifne, Ramon tried as fat,as possible to avoid arous- 

ing resistance and hate: He wrote open letters to the clergy, 
saying: 

‘Who am I, that I should be enemy of the One Church? I 

am catholic of catholics. I would have One Church of all the 

world, with Rome for the Central City, if Rome wish. 

‘But different peoples must have different Saviours, as they 
have different speech and different colour. The final mystery 
is one mystery. But the manifestations are many. 

‘God must come to Mexico in a blanket and in Auaraches, 
else He is no God of the Mexicans, they cannot know Him. 
Naked, all men are but men. But the touch, the look, the word 
that goes from one naked man to another is the mystery of liv- 
ing. We live by manifestations. 

‘And men are fragile, and fragments, and strangely grouped 
in their fragmentariness. The invisible God has done it to us, 
darkened some faces and whitened others, and grouped us in 
groups, even as the zopilote is a bird, and the parrot of the hot 
lands is a bird, and the little oriole is a bird. But the angel of 
the zopilotes must be a zopilote, and the angel of the parrots a 

376 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

parrot. And to one, the dead carcase will ever smell good;.to 
the other, the fruit. 

‘Priests who will come to me do not forsake either faith or 
God. They change their manner of speech and vestments, as 
the peon calls with one cry to the oxen, and with another cry 
to the mules. Each responds to its own call in its own way —’ 

To the socialists and agitators he wrote: 

‘What do you want? Would you make all men as you are? 
And when every peon in Mexico wears an American suit of 
clothes and shiny black shoes, and looks for life in the news- 
paper and for his manhood to the government, will you be 
satisfied? Did the government, then, give you your manhood, 
that you expect it to give it to these others? 

‘It is time to forget. It is time to put away the grudge and 
the pity. No man was ever the better for being pitied, and every 
man is the worse for a grudge. 

‘We can do nothing with life, except live it. 

‘Let us seek life where it is to be found. And, having found 
it, life will solve the problems. But every time we deny the liv- 
ing life, in order to solve a problem, we cause ten problems to © 
spring up where was one before. Solving the problems of the 
people, we lose the people in a poisonous forest of problems. 

‘Life makes, and moulds, and changes the problem. The 
problem will always be there, and will always be different. So 
nothing can be solved, even by life and living, for life dissolves 
and resolves, solving it leaves alone. 

“Therefore we turn to life; and from the clock to the sun and 
from metal to membrane. 

“This way we hope the problem will dissolve, since it can 
never be solved. When men seek life first, they will not seek 
land nor gold. The land will lie on the lap of the gods, where 
men lie. And if the old communal system comes back, and the 
village and the land are one, it will be very good. For truly, no 
man can possess lands. ' 

‘But when we ate deep in a bog, it is no use attempting to 
gallop. We can only wade out with toil. And in our haste to 
have a child, it is no good tearing the babe from the womb. 

“Seek life, and life will bring the change. 

“Seek life itself, even pause at dawn and at sunset, and life 
will come back into us and prompt us through the transitions. 

bas 

THE LIVING HUITZILOPOCHTLI 377 

“Lay forcible hands on nothing, only be ready to resist, if 
forcible hands should be laid on you. For the new shoots of life 
are tender, and better ten deaths than that they should be torn 
or trampled down by the bullies of the world. When it comes 
to fighting for the tender shoots of life, fight as the jaguar 
fights for her young, as the she-bear for her cubs. ; 

“That which is life is vulnerable, only metal is invulnerable. 
Fight for the vulnerable unfolding of life. But for that, fight 
never to yield.’ 

Cipriano, too, was always speaking to his soldiers, always 
with the same cry: 

“We are men! We are fighters! 

“But what can we do? 

“Shall we march to simple death? 

“No! No! We must match to life. 

“The gringos are here. We have let them come. We must let. 
them stay, for we cannot drive them out. With guns and 
swords and bayonets we can never drive them out, for they 
havera thousand yhere we have one. And if they come in 
peace, let them stay in peace. ie 

“But we have not lost Mexico yet. We have not lost each 
other. 

‘We are the blood of America. We are the blood of Monte- 
zuma. 

‘Whaf is my hand for? Is it to turn the handle of a machine 
alone? 

‘My hand is to salute the God of Mexicans, beyond the sky. 

‘My hand is to touch the hand of a brave man. 

‘My hand is to hold a gun. 

‘My hand is to make the corn grow out of the ground. 

“What are my knees for? 

‘My knees are to hold me proud and erect. 

‘My knees are for marching on my way. 

‘My knees are the knees of a man. 

‘Our god is Quetzalcoatl of the blue sky, and Huitzilo- 
pochtli red at the gates, watching. 

‘Our gods hate a kneeling man. They shout Ho! Erect! 

‘Then what can we do? 

“Wait! 

‘I am a man, naked inside my clothes as you are. 

a 
378 THE PLUMED SERPENT ; 

‘Am I a big man? Am I a tall and powerful man, from — 
Tlascala, for example. 

‘Iam not. I am little. Iam from the south. I am small — 

‘Yet am I not your generale 

“Why? 

‘Why am Ia general, and you only saidiags? 

“I will tell you. 

‘I found the other strength. 

“There are two strengths ; the strength which is the strength © 
of oxen and mules and iron, of machines and guns, and of men 
who cannot get the second strength. 

‘Then there is the second strength. It is the strength you 
want. And you can get it, whether you are small or big. It is the 
strength that comes from behind the sun. And you can get it; 
you can get it here!’ — he struck his breast — ‘and here!’ — he © 
struck his belly — ‘and here!’ — he struck his loins. “The 
strength that comes from back of the sun.’ 

When Cipriano was roused, his eyes flashed, and it was as if 
dark feathers, like pinions, were starting out of him, out of his 
shoulders and back, as if these dark pinions clashed and flashed 
like a roused eagle. His men seemed to see him, as by second ~ 
sight, with the demonish clashing and dashing of wings, likean ~ 
old god. And they murmured, their eyes flashing: 

‘It is Cipriano! It is he! We are Ciprianistos, we are his 
children.’ 

“We are men! We are men!’ cried Cipriano. 

“But listen. There are two kinds of men. There are men with 
the second strength, and men without it. 

“When the first gringos came, we lost our second strength. 
And the padres taught us: Submit! Submit! 

‘The gringos had got the second strength! 

“How? 

“Like cunning ones, they stole it on the sly. They kept very 
still, like a tarantula in his hole. Then when neither sun nor 
moon nor stars knew he was there, Biff! — the tarantula sprang 
across, and bit, and left the poison and sucked the secret. 

‘So they got the secrets of the air and the water, and they 
got the secrets out of the earth. So the metals were theirs, and 
they made guns and machines and ships, and they made trains 
and telegrams and radio, 

| THE LIVING HUITZILOPOCHTLI 379 

“Why? Why did they make all these things ? How could they 

| do it? 

“Because, by cunning, they had got the secret of the second 
strength, which comes from behind the sun. 

“And we had to be slaves, because we had only got the first 
strength, we had lost the second strength. 

“Now we ate getting it back. We have found our way again 
to the secret sun behind the sun. There sat Quetzalcoatl, and at 
last Don Ramon found him. There sits the red Huitzilopochtli, 
and J have found him. For I have found the second strength. 

“When he comes, all yau who strive shall find the second 
strength. 

“And when you have it, where will you feel it? 

“Not here!’ — and he struck his forehead. ‘Not where the 
cunning gringos have it, in the head, and in their books. Not we. 
We are men, we are not spiders. 

“We shall have it here!’ = he struck his breast — ‘and dite? 
— he struck hig belly — ‘and here!’ — he struck his loins. 

‘Are we men? Can we not get the ponies strength? Can we 
not? Have we losfit forever? * 

‘I say no! Quetzalcoatl is among us. I have found the red 
Huitzilopochtli. The second strength! 

‘When you walk or sit, when you work or lie down, when 
you eat or sleep, think of the second strength, that you must 
have it., 

‘Be very quiet. It is shy as a bird in a dark tree. 

‘Be very clean, clean in your bodies and your clothes. It is 
like a star, that will not shine in dirt. 

‘Be very brave, and do not drink till you are drunk, nor soil 

- yourself with bad women, nor steal. Because a drunken man 

has lost his second strength, and a man loses his strength in bad 
women, and a thief is a coward, and the red Huitzilopochtli 
hates a coward. 

‘Try! Try for me second strength. sot we have it, the 
others will lose it.’ 

Cipriano struggled hard with his army. The curse of any 
army is the having nothing to do. Cipriano made all his men 
cook and wash for themselves, clean and paint the barracks, 

_ make a great garden to grow vegetables, and plant trees where- 

ever there was water. And he himself took a passionate interest 

a 

- 

in what they did. A dirty tunic, a sore foot, a badly-made hua- 
rache did not escape him. But even when they cooked their 
meals he went among them. 

‘Give me something to eat,’ he would say. ‘Give me an 
enchilada\’ 

Then he praised the cooking, or said it was bad. 

Like all savages, they liked doing small things. And, like 
most Mexicans, once they were a little sure of what they were 
doing, they loved doing it well. 

Cipriano was determined to get some discipline into them. 
Discipline is what Mexico needs, and what the whole world © 
needs. But it is the discipline from the inside that matters. The 
machine discipline, from the outside, breaks down. 

He had the wild Indians from the north beat their drums in 
the barrack-yard, and start the old.dances again. The dance, 
the dance which has meaning, is a deep discipline in itself. The 
old Indians of the north still have the secret of animistic dan- 
cing. They dance to gain power; power over the /iving forces 
or potencies of the earth. And these dances need intense dark 
concentration, and immense endurance. \ 

Cipriano encouraged the dances more than anything. He 
learned them himself, with curious passion. The shield and ~ 
spear dance, the knife dance, the dance of ambush, and the sur- 
prise dance, he learned them in the savage villages of the north, 
and he danced them in the barrack-yard, by the bonfire, at 
night, when the great doors were shut. 

Then, naked saved fora black breech-cloth, his body smeared 
with oil and red earth-powder, he would face some heavy 
naked Indian and with shield and spear dance the dance of the 
two warriors, champions in the midst of the dense ring of sol- 
diers. And the silent, rhythmic concentration of this duel in 
subtlety and rapidity kept the feet softly beating with the drum, 
the naked body suave and subtle, circling with suave, primi- 
tive stealth, then crouching and leaping like a panther, with the 

spear poised, to a clash of shields, parting again with the crow- 
ing yell of defiance and exultance. 

In this dance, no one was more suave and sudden than Cipri- 
ano. He could swerve along the ground with bent, naked back, 
as invisible as a lynx, circling round his opponent, his feet beat- 
ing and his suave body subtly lilting to the drum. Then in a 

380 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

=< 

q THE LIVING HUITZILOPOCHTLI 381 
ash he was in the air, his spear pointing down at the collar- 

bone of his enemy and gliding over his shoulder, as the oppo- 

nent swerved under, and the war-yell resounded. The soldiers 

in the deep circle watched,. fascinated, uttering the old low 

cries. 

And as the dance went on, Cipriano felt his strength increase 
and surge inside him. When all his limbs were glistening with 
sweat, and his spirit was at last satisfied, he was at once tired 
and surcharged with extraordinary power. Then he would 
throw his scarlet and dark serape around him, and motion other 
men to fight, giving his spear and shield to another officer or 
soldier, going himself to sit down on the ground and watch, by 
the firelight. And then he felt his limbs and his whole body 
immense with power, he felt the black mystery of power go 
out of him over all his soldiers. And he sat there imperturb- 
able, in silence, holding all those black-eyed men in the splen- 
dour of his own, silent self. His own dark consciousness seemed 
to radiate throygh their flesh and their bones; they were con- 
scious, not through themselves but through him. And as a 
man’s instinct is té’shield his own head, so that instinct was to 
shield Cipriano, for he was the most precious part of them- 
selves to them. It was.in him they were supreme. They got 
their splendour from his power and their greatest conscious- 
ness was his consciousness diffusing them. 

‘Tam pot of myself,’ he would say to them. ‘I am of the red 
Huitzilopochtli and the power from behind the sun. And you 
are not of yourselves. Of yourselves you are nothing. You are 
of me, my men.’ 

He encouraged them to dance naked, with the breech-cloth, 

to rub themselves with the red earth-powder, over the 
oil. 

‘This is the oil of the stars. Rub it well into your limbs and 
you will be strong as the starry sky. This is the red blood of | 
volcanoes. Rub yourselves. with it, you will have the power of 
the fire of the volcanoes, from the centre of the earth.’ 

He encouraged them to dance the silent, concentrated dances 
to the drum, to dance for hours, gathering power and 
strength. 

‘If you know how to tread the dance, you can tread deeper 
and deeper, till you touch the middle of the earth with your 

~ “~~ 

4 

TRO. THE PLUMED SERPENT 3 

foot. And when you touch the middle of the earth, you will _ 
have such power in your belly and your breast, no man will be 
able to overcome you. Get the second strength. Get it, get it 
out of the earth, get it from. behind the sun. Get the second 
strength.’ 

He made long, rapid marches across the wild Mexican coun- 
try, and through the mountains, moving light and swift. He 
liked to have his men camping in the open, with no tents: but 
the watch set, and the stars overhead. He pursued the bandits 
with swift movements. He stripped his captives, and tied them 
up. But if it seemed a brave man, he would swear him in. If it 
seemed to him a knave, a treacherous cur, he stabbed him to 
the heart, saying: = 

‘Tam the red Huitzilopochtli, of the knife.’ 

Already he had got his own small, picked body of men out 
of the ignominous drab uniform, dressed in white with the scar- — 
let sash and the scarlet ankle cords, and carrying the good, red 
and black serape. And his men must be clean. On the march 
they would stop by some river, with the order for every man 
to strip and wash, and wash his clothing. Then the men, dark © 
and ruddy, moved about naked, while the white clothing of 
strong white cotton dried on the earth. They moved on again, 
glittering with the peculiar whiteness of cotton clothes in 
Mexico, gun at their backs, serape and small pack on their backs, 
wearing the heavy straw hats with the scarlet crowns on their 
heads. 

“They must move!’ he said to his officers. ‘They must learn — 
again to move swiftly and untiringly, with the old power. They 
must not lie about. In the sleep hours, let them sleep. In the 
waking, let them work, or march, or drill, or dance.’ 

He divided his regiment up into little companies of a hun- 
dred each, with a centurion and a sergeant in command. Each 
company of a hundred must learn to act in perfect unison, free- 
ly and flexibly. ‘Perfect your hundred,’ Cipriano insisted, ‘and 
I will perfect your thousands and your tens of thousands.’ 

‘Listen!’ he said. ‘For us, no trench and cannon warfate. 
My men arte no cannon-fodder, nor trench-dung. Where can- 
non ate, we move away. Our hundreds break up, and we at- 
tack where the cannon are not. That we are swift, that we are 
silent, that we have no burdens, and that the second strength 

4 

THE LIVING HUITZILOPOCHTLI 383 

is in us: that is all. We intend to put up no battle-front, but to 
attack at our own moment, and at a thousand points.’ 

And always he reiterated: 

“If you can get the power from the heart of the earth, and 
the power from behind the sun; if you can summon the power 
of the red Huitzilopochtli into you, nobody can conquer you. 
Get the second strength.’ 

Ramon was pressing Cipriano now openly to assume the liv- 
ing Huitzilopochtli. . 

“Come!” he said. ‘It is time you let General Viedma be swal- 
lowed up in the red Huitzilopochtli. Don’t you think?’ 

“If I know what it means,’ said Cipriano. 

They were sitting on the mats in Ramon’s room, in the heat 
before the rain came, towards the end of the rainy season. 

“Stand up!’ said Ramén. 

Cipriano stood up at once, with that soft, startling alertness 
in his movement. : 

Ramon came quickly to him, placed one of his hands over 
Cipriano’s eyes, clgsing them. Ramon stood behind Cipriano, 
who remained motionless in the warm dark, his conscious- 
ness reelin'g in strange concentric waves, towards a centre’ 
where it suddenly plunges into the bottomless deeps, like 
sleep. 

‘Cipriano?’ — the voice sounded so far off. 

“Yes.# 

“Is it dark?’ 

“It is dark.’ 

‘Is it alive? Is the darkness alive?’ 

‘Surely it is alive.’ 

‘Who lives?” 

‘1? 

“Where?” 

‘J know not. In the living darkness.’ 

Ramon then bound Cipriano’s eyes and head with a strip of 
black fur. Then again, with a warm, soft pressure, he pressed 
one naked hand over Cipriano’s naked breast, and one between 
his shoulders. Cipriano stood in profound darkness, erect and 
silent. 

‘Cipriano?’ 

eax ess 

* 

Be 

384 THE PLUMED SERPENT : 

‘Is it dark in your heart?’ 

‘It is coming dark.’ 

Ramon felt the thud of the man’s heart slowly slackening. 
In Cipriano, another circle of darkness had started slowly to 
revolve, from his heart. It swung in widening rounds, like a 
greater sleep. 

“Ts it dark?’ 

“It is dark.’ 

“Who lives?’ : 

ca ie 

Ramon bound Cipriano’s arms at his sides, with a belt of fur 
round the breast. Then he put his one hand over the navel, his 
other hand in the small of the other man’s back, pressing with 
slow, warm, powerful pressure. 

‘Cipriano?’ 

peste 

The voice and the answer going farther and farther 
away. 

“Ts it dark?’ 

“No, my Lord.’ \. 

Ramon knelt and pressed his arms close round Cipriano’s 
waist, pressing his black head against his side. And Cipriano 
began to feel as if his mind, his head were melting away in the 
darkness; like a pearl in black wine, the other circle of sleep 
began to swing, vast. And he,was a man without a head, mov- 
ing like a dark wind over the face of the dark waters. 

“Is it perfect?’ 

“Tt is perfect.’ 

“Who lives?’ 

“Who -!” 

Cipriano no longer knew. 

Ram6n bound him fast round the middle, then, pressing his 
head against the hip, folded the arms round Cipriano’s loins, 
closing with his hands the secret places. 

“Cipriano?” 

a Yea? 

‘Is it all dark?’ 

But Cipriano could not answer. The last circle was sweeping 
round, and the breath upon the waters was sinking into the 
waters, there was no more utterance. Ramon kneeled with 

| a 

THE LIVING HUITZILOPOCHTLI 385 

ie 
| pressed head and arms and hands, for some moments still. 

Then he bound the loins, binding the wrists to the hips. 

Cipriano stood rigid and motionless. Ramén clasped the 
two knees with his hands, till they were warm, and he felt them: 
dark and asleep like two living stones, or two eggs. Then 
swiftly he bound them together, and grasped the ankles, as one 
might grasp the base of a young tree, as it emerges from the 
earth. Crouching on the earth, he gripped them in an intense 
grip, resting his head on the feet. The moments passed, and 
both men were unconscious. 

Then Ramon bound the ankles, lifted Cipriano suddenly, 
with a sleep-moving softness, laid him on the skin of a big 
mountain-lion, which was spread upon the blankets, threw 
over him the red and black serape of Huitzilopochtli, and lay 
down at his feet, holding Cipriano’s feet to his own abdomen. 

And both men passed into perfect unconsciousness, Cipri- 
ano within the womb of undisturbed creation, Ramon in the 
death sleep. , 

How long they were both dark, they never knew. It was 
twilight. Ramon was suddenly aroused by the jerking of Cipri- 
ano’s feet.“He sat up, and took the blanket off Cipriano’s face. 

‘Is it night?’ said Cipriano. 

‘Almost night,’ said Ramon. 

Silence followed, while Ramon unfastened the bonds, be- 
ginning at the feet. Before he unbound the eyes, he closed the 
window, so the room was almost dark. Then he unfastened the 
last binding, and Cipriano sat up, looking, then suddenly 
covering his eyes. 

“Make it quite dark!’ he said. 

Ramon closed the shutters, and the room was complete 
night. Then he returned and sat on the mat by Cipriano. Cipri- 
ano was asleep again. After a while, Ramon left him. 

He did not see him again till dawn. Then Ramon found him 
going down to the lake, to swim. The two men swam to- 
gether, while the sun rose. With the rain, the lake was colder. 
They went to the house to rub oil in their limbs. 

Cipriano looked at Ramon with black eyes which seemed to 
be looking at all space. 

‘IT went far,’ he said. ‘ 

‘To whete there is no beyond?’ said Rona 

386 THE PLUMED SERPENT , 
“Yes, there.’ 

And in a moment or two, Cipriano was wrapped in his blan- 
ket again, and asleep. 

He did not wake till the afternoon. Then he ate, and took a 
boat, and rowed down the lake to Kate. He found her at home. 
She was surprised to see him, in his white clothes and with his 
serape of Huitzilopochtli. 

‘I am going to be the living Huitzilopochtli,’ he said. 

‘Are you? When? Does it feel queer?’ — Kate was afraid of 
his eyes; they seemed inhuman. 

‘On Thursday. The day of Huitzilopochtli is to be Thurs- 
day. Won’t you sit beside me, and be wife of me when I am a 

od?’ 
; “But do you feel you are a god?” she asked, querulous. 

He turned his eyes on her strangely. 

‘I have been,’ he said. “And I have come back. But I belong 
there, where I went.’ 

‘Where?’ 

“Where there is no beyond, and the darkness sinks into the 
water, and waking and sleeping are one thing.’ 

“No,” said Kate, afraid. ‘I never understood mystical things. 

They make me uneasy.’ 
' “Is it mystical when I come in to you?’ 

‘No,’ said Kate. ‘Surely, that is physical.’ 

‘So is the other, only further. Won’t you be the bride of 
Huitzilopochtli?’ he asked again. 

‘Not so soon,’ said Kate. 

“Not so soon!” he re-echoed. 

There was a pause. 

“Will you come back with.me to Jamiltepec now?’ he asked. 

“Not now,’ she said. 

“Why not now?’ 

‘Oh, I don’t know. — You treat me as if I had no life of my 
own, > she said. ‘But I have.’ 

‘A life of your own? Who gave it you? Where did you get 

it?’ 

‘I don’t know. But I have got it. And I must live it. I can’t 
be just swallowed up.’ 

ie Malintzi?’ he said, giving her a name. ‘Why can’t 
you?’ 

THE LIVING HUITZILOPOCHTLI 387 

“Be just swallowed up?’ she said. ‘Well, I just can’t.’ 
‘IT am the living Huitzilopochtli,’ he said. ‘And I am swal- 

_lowed up. I thought, so could you be, Malintzi.’ 

“No! Not quite!’ she said. 
“Not quite! Not quite! Not now! Not just now! How often 

you say Nof, to-day! — I must go back to Ramon.’ 

“Yes. Go back to him. You only care about him, and your 
living Quetzalcoatl and your living Huitzilopochtli. -lam 
only a woman.’ 

“No, Malintzi, you are more. You are more than Kate, you 
are Malintzi.’ 

‘Iam not! I am only Kate, and I am only a woman. I mis- 
trust all that other stuff.’ 

‘I am more than just a man, Malintzi. - Don’t you see 
that?’ 

‘No!’ said Kate. ‘I don’t see it. Why should you be more than 
just a man?’ 

“Because I ai the living Huitzilopochtli. Didn’t I tell you? 
You’ye got dust in your mouth to-day, Malintzi.’ 

He went away, léaving her rocking in anger on her terrace, 
in love agafh with her old self, and hostile to the new thing. 
She was thinking of London“and Paris and New York, and all 
the people there. 

‘Oh!’ she cried to herself, stifling. ‘For heaven’s sake let me 
get out of this, and back to simple human people. I loathe the 
very sound of Quetzalcoatl and Huitzilopochtli. I would die 
rather than be mixed up in it any more. Horrible, really, both 
Ramon and Cipriano. And they want to put it over me, with 

their high-flown bunk, and their Malintzi. Malintzi! Iam Kate 

Forrester, really. 1am neither Kate Leslie nor Kate Tylor. lam 
sick of these men putting names over me. I was born Kate 
Forrester, and I shall die Kate Forrester. I want to go home. 
Loathsome, really, to be called Malintzi. — I’ve had it put over 

> 

me. 

CHAPTER XXIII 

Huitzilopochth’s Night 

Tey had the Huitzilopochtli ceremony at night, in the wide 

yard in front of the church. The guard of Huitzilopochtli, in - 
serapes of black, red, and yellow stripes, striped like tigers or 
wasps, stood holding torches of blazing ocofe. A tall bonfire was — 

built, but unkindled, in the centre of the yard. 
In the towers where the bells had been, fires were blazing 
and the heavy drum of Huitzilopochtli went rolling its deep, 

sinister notes. It had been sounding all the while sincé the sun = 

went down. 
The crowd gathered under the trees, outside the gates in 
front of the church. The church doors were closed. 

There was a bang of four firework cannons exploding simul- i 
taneously, then four rockets shot up into the sky, leaning in the | 

four directions, and exploding in showers of red, green, white, 
and yellow. ‘ 
The church doors opened, and Cipriano appeared, in his 

brilliant serape of Huitzilopochtli, and with three green parrot 

feathers erect on his brow. He was carrying a torch. He stoop- — 
ed and lit the big bonfire, then plucked out four blazing brands - 

and tossed them to four of his men, who stood waiting, naked 

save for their black breech-cloths. The men caught the brands 
as they flew, and ran in the four directions, to kindle the four 

bonfires that waited, one in each corner of the yard. 

The guard had taken off their blankets and blouses, and 

were naked to the red sash. The lighter drum began to beat for 
the dance, and the dance began, the half-naked men throwing 
their blazing torches whirling in the air, catching them as they 

came down, dancing all the while. Cipriano, in the centre, © 

threw up brand after brand from the fire. 

Now that he was stripped of his blanket, his body was seen — 

painted in horizontal bars of red and black, while from his 

mouth went a thin green line, and from his eyes a band of yellow. — 

The five fires, built hollow of little towers of ocote faggots, 
sent pure flame in a rush up to the dark sky, illuminating the 
dancing men, who sang in deep voices as they danced. 

A 

a 

' HUITZILOPOCHTLI’S NIGHT 389 
_ The fires rushed rapidly upwards in flame. The drum beat 
without ceasing. And the men of Huitzilopochtli danced on, 
like demons. Meanwhile the crowd sat in the old Indian 
silence, their black eyes glittering in the firelight. And gradu- 
ally the fires began to die down, the white fagade of the church, 
that had danced also to the yellow flames, began to go bluish 
above, merging into the night, rose-coloured below, behind 
the dark shapes that danced to the sinking fires. 

Suddenly the dance ceased, the men threw their serapes 
around them, and sat down. Little ocofe fires upon the cane tri- 
pods flickered here and there, in a silence that lasted for some 
minutes. Then the drum sounded, and a man began to sing, in 
a clear, defiant voice, the First Song of Huitxilopochtli: 

‘Tam Huitzilopochtli, 
The Red Huitzilopochtli, - 
The blood-red. 

lam Hluitzilopochtli, 
Yellow of the sun, 
x Sun in the#lood. 

14m Huitzilopochtli, _ ; 
White of the bone, 
Bone in the blood. 

lam Huitzilopochtli, 
With a blade of grass between my teeth. 

a 

lam Huitzilopochtli, sitting in the dark. 
With my redness staining the body of the dark. 

I watch by the fire. 
I wait behind men. 

In the stillness of my night 
The cactus sharpens his thorn. 
The grass feels with his roots for the other sun. 

Deeper than the roots of the mango tree 
Down in the centre of the earth 
Is the yellow, serpent-yellow shining of my sun. 

Oh, beware of him! 

Oh, beware of me! 
Who runs athwart my serpent-flame 
Gets bitten and must die. 

a 
a 

399 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Iam the sleeping and waking - 

Of the anger of the manhood of men. 
Iam the leaping and quaking 

Of fire bent back again.’ 

The song came to an end. There was a pause. Then all the ~ 
men of Huitzilopochtli ine’ it up again, changing the ‘I’ into 
‘He.’ 

‘He is Huitsilopocheli, 
The Red Huitzilopochtli, 
The blood-red. 

He is Huitzilopochtli, 
Yellow of the sun, 
Sun in the blood. 

He is Huitzilopochtli, 
White of the bone, 
Bone in the blood. 

He is Huitzilopochtli, 
With a blade of green grass between his teeth. 

He is Huitzilopochtli, sitting in the dark, 
With his redness staining the body of the night. 

He is watching by the fire. 
Waiting behind men. 

In the stillness of his night 
Cactuses sharpen their thorns. 
Grass feels downwards with his roots. 

Deeper than the roots of the mango tree 
Down in the centte of the earth 
Shines the yellow, serpent-yellow shining of the sun. 

Oh, men, take care, take care! 
Take care of him and it. 

Nor run aslant his rays. 

Who is bitten, dies. 

He is Huitzilopochtli, sleeping or waking 
Serpent in the bellies of men. 
Huitzilopochtli, leaping and quaking 
Fire of the passion of men.’ 

The big fires had all died down. Only the little flames on the 
tripods lit up the scene with a ruddy glow. The guard with- 
drew to the outer wall of the yard, holding bayonets erect. The 
big drum was going alone, slowly. 

7 

| 4 

ion 

(oe 

HUITZILOPOCHTLI’S NIGHT 391 

The yard was now a clear space, with the glowing red heaps 
of the bonfires, and the ocofe flames flapping. And now 
was seen a platform erected against the white wall of the 
church. 

In the silence the big doots of the church opened, and Cipri- 
ano came out, in his bright serape, holding in his hand a bunch 
of black leaves, or feathers, and with a tuft of scarlet feathers; 
black-tipped, rising from the back of his head. He mounted the 
platform and stood facing the crowd, the light of a torch on his 
face and on the brilliant feathers that rose like flames from the 
back of his head. 

After him came a strange procession: a peon in floppy white 
clothes, led prisoner between two of the guards of Huitzilo- 
pochtli: who wore their serapes with red and black and yellow 
and white and green stripes: then another peon prisoner: then 
another: in all, five, the fifth one tall, limping, and with a red 
cross painted on the breast of his white jacket. Last of all came 
a woman-prisoper, likewise between two guards/her hair flow- 
ing loose, over a red tunic. 

They mounted the platform. The peons, prisoners, were 
placed in a tow, their guards behind them. The limping peon 
was apatt, with his two guafds behind him: the woman again 
was apart, her two guards behind her. 

The big drum ceased, and a bugle rang out, a long, loud 
triumphant note, repeated three times. Then the kettle-drums, 
or the small tom-toms like kettle-drums, rattled fierce as hail. 

Cipriano lifted his hand, and there was silence. 

Out of the silence he began to speak, in his short, martial 
sentences : 

“Man that is man is more than a man. 

No man is man till he is more than a man. 
Till the power is in him 

Which is not his own. 

The power is in me from behind the sun, 
And from middle earth. 

Iam Huitzilopochtli. 

J am dark as the sunless under-earth, 
And yellow as the fire that consumes, 
‘And white as bone, 

And red as blood. 

ul 

392 | THE PLUMED SERPENT : 
But I touched the hand of Quetzalcoatl. 

And between our fingers rose a blade of green grass. 

I touched the hand of Quetzalcoatl. 

Lo! I am lord of the watches of the night 
And the dream of the night rises from me like a red feather. 

I am the watcher, and master of the dream. 
In the dream of the night I see the grey dogs prowling. 
Prowling to devour the dream. 

In the night the soul of a coward creeps out of him = 

Like a grey dog whose mouth is foul with rabies, 

Creeping among the sleeping and the dreaming, who are lapped in my 
dark, 

And in whom the dream sits up like a rabbit, lifting long ears tipped with 
night, 

On the dream-slopes browsing like a deer in the dusk. 

In the night I see the grey dogs creeping, out of the sleeping men 

Who are cowatds, who are liars, who are traitors, who have no dreams 

That prick their ears like a rabbit, or browse in the dark like deer, 

But whose dreams are dogs, grey dogs with yellow mouths. 

From the liars, from the thieves, from the false and treacherous and mean 
Isee the grey dogs creeping out, where my deer are browsing in the dark. 
Then I take my knife, and throw it upon the grey dog. 

And lo! it sticks between the ribs of a man! Ne 
The house of the grey dog! 

Beware! Beware! 

Of the men and the women who walk among you. 
You know not how many are houses of grey dogs. 
Men that seem harmless, women with fair words, 
Maybe they kennel the grey dog.’ 

The drums began to beat and the singer began to sing, clear 
and pure: 

THE SONG OF THE GREY Doc 

‘When you sleep and know it not 

The grey dog creeps among you. 

In your sleep, you twist, your soul hurts you. 
The grey dog is chewing your entrails. 

Then call on Huitzilopochtli: 

The grey dog caught me at the cross-roads 
As I went down the road of sleep 

And crossed the road of the uneasy. 

The grey dog leapt at my entrails. 
Huitzilopochtli, call him off. 

Lo! the Great One answers. Track him down! 
Kill him in his unclean house. 

* 
HUITZILOPOCHTLI’S NIGHT 393 

Down the road of the uneasy 

You track the grey dog home 

To his house in the heart of a traitor, 
A thief, a murderer of dreams. 

And you kill him there with one stroke, 
Crying: Huitzilopochtli, is this well done? 
That your sleep be not as a cemetery 
Where dogs creep unclean.’ 

The song ceased, and there was silence. Then Cipriano beck- 

oned to the men to bring forward the peon with the black cross 
painted on his front and back. He limped forward. 

Cipriano: ‘What man is that, limping?’ 

Guards: ‘It is Guillermo, overseer of Don Ramén, who be- 
trayed: Don Ramon, his master.’ 

Cipriano: ‘Why does he limp?’ 

Guards: ‘He fell from the window on to the rocks.’ 

Cipriano: ‘What made him wish to betray his master?’ 

Guards: ‘ His heart is a grey dog, and a woman, a grey bitch, 
enticed him forth.’ 

Cipriano: ‘Whawoman enticed the grey dog forth?’ 

The guasds came forward with the woman. 

Guards: ‘This woman, Maruca, my Lord, with the grey 
bitch heart.” 

Cipriano: ‘Is it she, indeed?’ 

Guards: ‘It is she.’ 

Cipriano: “The grey dog, and the grey bitch, we kill, for 
their mouths are yellow with poison, Is it well, men of 
Huitzilopochtli?’ 

Guards: ‘It is very well, my Lord.’ 

The guards stripped the peon Guillermo of his white clothes, 

leaving him naked, in a grey loin-cloth, with a grey-white 
cross painted on his naked breast. The woman, too, had a grey- 
white cross painted on her body. She stood in a short petticoat 
of grey wool. 

Cipriano: ‘The grey dog and the grey bitch shall run no 
more about the world. We will bury their bodies in 
quick-lime, till their souls are eaten, and their bodies, 
and nothing is left. For lime is the thirsty bone that 
swallows even a soul and is not slaked. — Bind them 
with the grey cords, put ash on their heads.’ 

. 
394 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

The guards quickly obeyed. The prisoners, ash-grey, gazed 
with black, glittering eyes, making not a sound. A guard stood 
behind each of them. Cipriano gave a sign, and quick as light- 
ning the guards had got the throats of the two victims in a grey 
cloth, and with a sharp jerk had broken their necks, lifting 
them backwards in one movement. The grey cloths they tied 
hard and tight round the throats, laying the twitching bodies 
on the floor. 

Cipriano turned to the crowd: 

‘The Lords of Life are the Masters of Death. 
Blue is the breath of Quetzalcoatl. 

Red is Huitzilopochtli’s blood. 

But the grey dog belongs to the ash of the world. 
The Lords of Life are the Masters of Death. 
Dead are the grey dogs. 

Living are the Lords of Life. 

Blue is the deep sky and the deep water. 

Red is the blood and the fire. 

Yellow is the flame. 

The bone is white and alive. 

The hair of night is dark over our faces. 

But the grey dogs are among the ashes. 

The Lords of Life are the Masters of Death.” _ 

Then he turned once mote, to the other, imprisoned peons. 

Cipriano: ‘Who are these four?’ 

Guards: ‘Four who came to kill Don Ramon.’ 

Cipriano: ‘Four men, against one man?’ 

Guards: ‘They were more than four, my Lord.’ 

Cipriano: ‘When many men come against one, what is the 
name of the many?’ J 

Guards: ‘Cowards, my Lord.’ a 

Cipriano: ‘Cowards it is. They are less than men. Men that 
are less than men ate not good enough for the light of 
the sun. If men that are men will live, men that ate less 
than men must be put away, lest they multiply too 
much. Men that are more than men have the judgment 
of men that are less than men. Shall they die?’ ~ 

Guards: ‘They shall surely die, my Lord.’ 4 

Cipriano: “Yet my hand has touched the hand of Quetzal- z 
coatl, and among the black leaves one sprung green, 
with the colour of Malintzi.’ 

aS ak a Ts OES SP yd 

OGM yt 

ae SL 

. 

| ae 

> 
HUITZILOPOCHTLI’S NIGHT 395 

An attendant came and lifted Cipriano’s serape over his 
head, leaving his body bate to the waist. The guards likewise 
took off their serapes. 

_ Cipriano lifted up his fist, in which he held a little tuft of 
_ black feathers, or leaves. 

| Then he said slowly: 

Huitzilopochtli gives the black blade of death. 

Take it bravely. 

Take death bravely. 
Go bravely across the border, admitting your mistake. 

| - Determine to go on and on, till you enter the Morning Star. 
Quetzalcoatl will show you the way. 

Malintzi of the green dress will open the door. 

In the fountain you willliedown. 

If you reach the fountain, and lie down 

And the fountain covers your face, forever, 

You will have departed forever from your mistake. 

And the man that is more than a man in you 

Will wake at last from the clean forgetting 
» And stand uggand look about him, 

Ready again for the business of being a man. 

But Huitzilopochtli touched the hand of Quetzalcoatl 
And one green leaf sprang among the black. 
The green leaf of Malintzi 

: Who pardons once, and no more. 

Cipriano turned to the four peons. He held out his fist with 
the four black twigs, to the first. ‘This first one, a little man, 
peered at the leaves curiously. 

“There is no green one,’ he said sceptically. 

‘Good!’ said Cipriano. “Then receive a black.’ 

And he handed him a black leaf. 

‘T knew it,’ said the man, and he threw the leaf away with 
contempt and defiance. 

The second man drew a black leaf. He stood gazing at it, as 
if fascinated, turning it round. 

The third man drew a leaf whose lower half was green. 

‘See!’ said Cipriano. ‘The green leaf of Malintzi!’ 

And he handed the last black leaf to the last man. 

‘Have I got to die?’ said the last man. 

Gee 

*I don’t want to die, Patron.’ 

+e Se a ne ae 

= Nh A oye requir —inks ¢ 

ee, 
P or 
396 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘You played with death, and it has sprung upon you.’ 
The eyes of the three men were blindfolded «with black 
cloths, their blouses and pantaloons were taken away. Cipriano 
took a bright, thin dagger. * 
‘The Lords of Life are Masters of Death,’ he said in a loud, © 
clear voice. ~) 
And swift as lightning he stabbed the blindfolded mentothe __ 
heart, with three swift, heavy stabs. Then he lifted the red 
dagger and threw it down. } 
‘The Lords of Life are Masters of Death,’ he repeated. 4 
The guards lifted the bleeding bodies one by one, and car- 
ried them into the church. There remained only the one priso- 
ner, with the green leaf. 
‘Put the green leaf-of Malintzi between his brows; for 
Malintzi pardons once, and no more,’ said Cipriano. 

‘Yes, my Lord!’ replied the guard. 
And they led the man away into the church. z 
Cipriano followed, the last of his guard after him. s 

In a few minutes the drums began to beat and men came 
slowly streaming into the church. Women were not admitted. x 
All the interior was hung with red and black banners. At the 
side of the chancel was a new idol: a heavy, seated figure of 
Huitzilopochtli, done in black lava stone. And round him 
burned twelve red candles. The idol held the bunch of black — 
strips, or leaves, in his hand. And at his feet lay the five dead 
bodies. ; 

The fire on the altar was flickering high, to the dark statue i 
of Quetzalcoatl. On his little throne Ramon sat, wearing his _ 
blue and white colours of Quetzalcoatl. There was another _ 
corresponding throne next him, but it was empty. Six of the _ 
guard of Quetzalcoatl stood by Ramon: but Huitzilopochtli’s 

side of the chancel was empty save for the dead. 

The hard drums of Huitzilopochtli were beating incessantly 
* outside, with a noise like madness. Inside was the soft roll of 
the drum of Quetzalcoatl. And the men from the crowd out- _ 
side thronged slowly in, between the guard of Quetzalcoatl. 3 

A flute sounded the summons to close the doors. The drums 
of Quetzalcoatl ceased, and from the towers was heard again 
the wild bugle of Huitzilopochtli. 

Then down the centre of the church, in silence, barefoot, 

_ came the procession of Huitzilopochtli, naked save for the 

black loin-cloths and the paint, and the scarlet feathers of the 
head-dresses. Cipriano had his face painted with a white jaw, 
a thin band of green stretched from his mouth, a band of black 
across his nose, yellow from his eyes, and scarlet on his brow. 
One green feather rose from his forehead, and behind his head 
a beautiful head-dress of scarlet feathers. A band of red was 
painted round his breast, yellow round his middle. The rest 
was ash-grey. 

After him came his guard, their faces red, black, and white, 
their bodies painted as Cipriano’s, and a scarlet feather rising 
from the back of their head. The hard, dry drum of Huitzilo- 

' HUITZILOPOCHTLI’S NIGHT 397 
|: 
} 
| 

_ pochtli beat monotonously. 

mongtbeerkbnake bod Jnceces 

SSR eer aE pea tre 1a Danie athyh on 
yh 

As the Living Huitzilopochtli came near the altar steps, the 
Living Quetzalcoatl rose and came to meet him. The two 
saluted, each covering his eyes with his left hand for a moment, 
then touching fingers with the right hand. 

Cipriano stood before the statue of Huitzilopochtli, dipped 
hisshand in a stoge bowl, and giving the loud cry or whoop of 
Huitzilopochtli, lifted up his red hand. His guard uttered the 

loud cry, and quickly filed past, each man dipping his hand and 

raising his wet, red fist. The hard drums of Huitzilopochtli 
rattled like madness in the church, then fell suddenly silent. 

Ramon: ‘Why is your hand red, Huitzolopochtli, my 

“brother ?’ 

Cipriano: ‘It is the blood of the treacherous, Oh Quetzal- 
coatl.’ 

Ramon: ‘What have they betrayed?’ 

Cipriano: ‘The yellow sun and the heart of darkness; the 
hearts of men, and the buds of women. While they 
lived, the Morning Star could not be seen.’ 

Ramon: ‘And are they verily dead?’ 

Cipriano: ‘Verily dead, my Lord.’ 

Ramon: ‘Their blood is shed?’ 

Cipriano: ‘Yes, my Lord, save that the grey dogs shed no 
blood. Two died the bloodless death of the grey dogs, 
three died in blood.’ ‘ 

Ramon: ‘Give me the blood of the three, my brother“Huit- 
zilopochtli, to sprinkle the fire.’ 

Cipriano brought the stone bowl, and the little bunch of 

4 

398 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

black leaves from Huitzilopochtli’s idol. Ramon slowly, — 

gently, sprinkled a little blood on the fire, with the black 
leaves. 

Ramon: ‘Darkness, drink the blood of expiation. 

Sun, swallow up the blood of expiation. 
Rise, Morning Star, between the divided sea.’ 

He gave back the bowl and the leaves to Huitzilopochtli, 

who placed them by the black idol. 

Ramon: ‘Thou who didst take the lives of the three, Huit- 
zilopochtli, my brother, what wilt thou do with the 
souls?’ 

Cipriano: ‘Even give them to thee, my Lord, Qa 
my Lord of the Morning Star.’ 

Ramon: ‘Yea, give them to me and I will wrap them in my 
breath and send them the longest journey, to the sleep 
and the far awakening.’ 

Cipriano: ‘My Lord is lord of two ways.’ 

The naked, painted guard of Huitzilopochtli came and car- 
ried the dead bodies of the three stabbed men, carried them on 
red biers, and laid them at the foot of the Quetzalcoatl statue. 

Ramon: ‘So, there is a long way to go, past the sun to the 
gate of the Morning Star. And if the sun is angry he 
strikes swifter than a jaguar, and the whirr of the winds 
is like an angry eagle, and the upper waters strike in 
wrath like silver-coloured snakes. Ah, three souls, 
make peace now with the sun and winds and waters, 
and go in courage, with the breath of Quetzalcoatl 
around you like a cloak. Fear not and shrink not and 
fail not; but.come to the end of the longest journey, 

and let the fountain cover your face. So shall all at 

length be made new.’ 

When he had spoken to the dead, Ramoén took incense and 
threw it on the fire, so clouds of blue smoke arose. Then with 
- acenset he swung the blue smoke over the dead. Then he un- 
folded three blue cloths and covered the dead. Then the guards 
of Quetzalcoatl lifted the biers, and the flute of Quetzalcoatl 
sounded. 

“Salute the Morning Star!’ cried Ramon, turning to the 
light beyond the statue of Quetzalcoatl, and throwing up his 
right arm in the Quetzalcoatl prayer. Every man turned to the 

ee eee 

! } HUITZILOPOCHTLI’S NIGHT 399 

- light and:threw up his arm in the passion. And the silence of 
the Morning Star filled the church. 
The drum of Quetzalcoatl sounded: the guards slowly 
moved away with the three blue-wrapped dead. 
| Then came the voice of the Living Huitzilopochtli: 
| “Upon the dead grey dogs the face of Quetzalcoatl cannot 
_ look. Upon the corpses of grey dogs rises no Morning Star. 
_ But the fire of corpses shall consume them.’ 
| There was a sharp rattle of the dry drums of Huitzilo- 
_ pochtli. Ramon remained with his back to the church, his arm 
_uprtaised to the Morning Star. And the guard of Huitzilo- 
pochtli lifted the strangled bodies, laid them on biers, covered 
them with grey cloths, and bore them away. 
The bugle of Huitzilopochtli sounded. 
Cipriano: ‘The dead are on their way. Quetzalcoatl helps 
| them on the longest journey. — But the grey dogs sleep 
within the quick-lime, in the slow corpse-fire. — It is 
finisheel.’ 
Ramon droppeg,his arm and turned to the church. All men 
dropped their hands. The soft drunis of Quetzalcoatl sounded, 
mingling with the hard drums of Huitzilopochtli. Then both 

_ guards began to sing together: 

HuITZILOPOCHTLI’S WATCH 
vr P ‘Red Huitzilopochtli 
ff Keeps day and night apart. 

: Huitzilopochtli the golden 
Guards life from death, and death from life. 

ve 

No grey-dogs, cowards, pass him. 
No spotted traitors crawl by, 

False fair ones cannot slip through 
Past him, from the one to the other. 

ee a» 

Brave men have peace at nightfall, 
True men look up at the dawn, 

: Men in their manhood walk out 
Into blue day, past Huitzilopochtli. 

© AB ArT ie pt: 

Red Huitzilopochtli 
Is the purifier. 

Black Huitzilopochtli 
: Is doom. 

400 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Huitzilopochtli golden 
Is the liberating fire. 

White Huitzilopochtli 
Is washed bone. ‘ 

Green Huitzilopochtli 
Is Malintzi’s blade of grass.’ 

At the beginning of each stanza, the Guard of Huitzilo- — 
pochtli struck their left palm with their scarlet right fist, and — 
the drums gave a great crash, a terrific splash of noise. When 
the song ended, the drums gradually died down, like subsiding — 
thunder, leaving the hearts of men re-echoing. ; 

- Ramon: ‘Why is your hand so red, Huitzilopochtli?’ 

Cipriano: ‘With the blood of slain men, Brother.’ 

Ramon: ‘Must it always be red?’ 

Cipriano: ‘Till green-robed Malintzi brings her water-bowl.’ 

The bugle and the flute both sounded. The guard of Huit- 
zilopochtli put out the red"candles, one by one, the guard of © 
Quetzalcoatl extinguished the blue candles. The church was — 
dark, save for the small but fierce blue-white light beyond the — 
Quetzalcoatl statue, and the red smouldering on the altar. - 

Ramon began slowly to speak: 

“The dead are on their journey, the way is dark. 
There is only the Morning Star. 

Beyond the white of whiteness, 

Beyond the blackness of black, 

Beyond spoken day, 

Beyond the unspoken passion of night, 

The light which is fed from two vessels 

From the black oil and the white 

Shines at the gate. 

A gate to the innermost place 

Where the Breath and the Fountains commingle, 
Where the dead are living, and the living are dead. 
The deeps that life cannot fathom, 

The Source and the End, of which we know 

Only that it is, and its life is our life and our death. 
All men cover their eyes 

Before the unseen. 

All men be lost in silence, 

Within the noiseless.’ 

The church was utterly still, all men standing with a hand — 
pressed over their eyes. 

; 

4 
_ candles of Malintzi were being lighted in the altar place. - 
_ Ramén’s voice was heard again: 

a 

MALINTZI 401 

‘Till there was one note of a silver gong, and the green 

“Like the green candles of Malintzi 
Like a tree in new leaf. 
The rain of blood is fallen, is gone into the earth. 

The dead have gone the long journey 

Beyond the star. 

Huitzilopochtli has thrown his black mantle 

To those who would sleep. 

When the blue wind of Quetzalcoatl 4 
Waves softly, , 

When the water of Malintzi falls 

Making a greenness: 

Count the red grains of the Huitzilopochtli 
Fire in your hearts, O men. 
And blow the ash away. 

Fér the living live, 
» And the dead die. 
. But the fingers of all touch:the fingers of all 
€ Inthe Morning Star.’ ; 
v7 

CHAPTER XXTV 

Malintzi 

WHEN the women were shut out of the church, Kate went 

home gloomy and uneasy. The executions shocked and de- 

pressed her. She knew that Ramon and Cipriano did deliber- 
ately what they did: they believed in their deeds, they acted 
with all their conscience. And as men, probably they were 
right. 

But they seemed nothing but men. When Cipriano said: 
Man that is man is more than a man, he seemed to be driving the 
male significance to its utmost, and beyond, with a sort of 
demonism. It seemed to her all terrible »7//, the exertion of 
pure, awful will. 

And deep in her soul came a revulsion against this mani- 
festation of pure will. It was fascinating also. There was some- 

402 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

thing dark and lustrous and fascinating to her in Cipriano, and 
in Ramon. The black, relentless power, even passion of the 
will in men! The strange, sombre, lustrous beauty of it! She 

knew herself under the spell. * 

At the same time, as is so often the case with any spell, it did 
not bind her completely. She was spellbound, but not utterly 
acquiescent. In one corner of her soul was revulsion and a 
touch of nausea. 

Ramon and Cipriano no doubt were right for themselves, 
for their people and country. But for herself, ultimately, ulti- 
mately she belonged elsewhere. Not to this terrible, natural 
will which seemed to beat its wings in the very air of the Ameri- 
can continent. Always will, will, will, without remorse or re- 
lenting. This was America to her: all the Americas. Sheer 
will! 

The Will of God! She began to understand that once fear- 

some phrase. At the centre*of all things, a dark, momentous | 
Will sending out its terrific rays and vibrations, like some vast — 

octopus. And at the other end of the vibration, men, created 

men, erect in the dark potency, answering Will with will, like — 

gods or demons. 
It was wonderful too. But where was womag, in this terrible 
interchange of will? Truly only a subservient, instrumental 

thing: the soft stone on which the man sharpened the knife of | 

his relentless volition: the soft lode-stone to magnetize his 
blade of steel and keep all its molecules alive in the electric 
flow. 

Ah, yes, it was wonderful. It was, as Ramon said, a mani-_ 
festation, a manifestation of the Godhead. But to the Godhead 

as a sheer and awful Will she could not respond. 

Joachim, letting himself be bled to death for people who — 

would profit nothing by his sacrifice, he was the other extreme. 
The black and magnificent pride of will which comes out of 
the volcanic earth of Mexico had been unknown to him. He 
was one of the white, self-sacrificing gods. Hence her bitter- 
ness. And hence, naturally, the spell of beauty and lustrous 

satisfaction which Cipriano could cast over her. She was in love — 

with him, when he was with her; in his arms, she was quite 
gone in his spell. She was the deep, slumbrous lodestone which 
set all his bones glittering with the energy of relentless pride. 

die a id De caso: SE pABiD 

MALINTZI 403 

_ And she herself derived a great gratification in the embrace, a 

sense of passive, downward-sinking power, profound. , 
Yet she could not be purely this, this thing of sheer recipro- 

_ city. Surely, though her woman’s nature was reciprocal to his 

male, surely it was more than that! Surely he and she were not 

_ two potent and reciprocal currents between which the Morn- 

ing Star flashed like a spark out of nowhere. Surely this was not 
it? Surely she had one tiny Morning Star inside her, which was 

_ herself, her own very soul and star-self! 

But he would never admit this. The tiny star of her very 

' self he would never see. To him she was but the answer to his 

call, the sheath for his blade, the cloud to his lightning, the 
earth to his rain, the fuel to his fire. 

Alone, she was nothing. Only as the pure female correspond- 
ing to his pure male, did she signify. 

As an isolated individual, she had little or no significance. 
As a woman on her own, she wa* repulsive, and even evil, to 
him. She wasenot teal till she was reciprocal. 

‘Fo a great extegt this was true, and she knew it. Toa great 
extent, the'same was true of him, ahd without her to give him 
the power, he too would got achieve his own manhood and 

_ meaning. With her or without her, he would be beyond ordi- 
_ maty men, because the power was in him. But failing her, he 

would never make his ultimate achievement, he would never 
be whole. He would be chiefly an instrument. 

He knew this too: though perhaps not well enough. He 
would strive to keep her, to have her, for his own fulfilment. 
He would not let her go. 

But that little star of her own single self, would he ever re- 
cognize that? Nay, did he even recognize any single star of his 
own being? Did he not conceive of himself as a power and a 
potency on the face of the earth, an embodied will, like a rush- 
ing dark wind? And hence, inevitably, she was but the stone of 
test to his potency, his bed of sleep, the cave and lair of his 
male will. 

What else? To him there was nothing else. The star! Don 
Ramon’s Morning Star was something that sprang between 
him and her and hung shining, the strange third thing that was 
both of them and neither of them, between his night and her 
day. 

404 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Was it true? Was she nothing, nothing, by herself? Kod: he, 
alone, failing his last manhood, without her was he nothing, or 
next to nothing? As a fig tree which grows up, but never comes _ 
to flower. . 

Was this thing true, the same of both of them? — that alone, 
they were next to nothing? Each of them, separate, next to 
nothing. Apart in a sort of grey, mechanical twilight, without a 
star? 

And together, in strange reciprocity, flashing darkly till the 
Morning Star rose between them? 

He would say to her, as Ramon had said of Carlota: ‘Soul! © 
No, you have no soul of your own. You have at best only half 
a soul. It takes a man and a woman together to make a soul. 
The soul is the Morning Star, emerging from the two. One 
alone cannot have a soul.’ 

This Ramon said. And she knew it conveyed what Cipriano” 
really felt. Cipriano could not see Kate as a being by herself. 
And if he lived a thousand more years, he would never see her 
as such. He would see her only as reciprocal to himself. As the 
balance of him, and the correspondence on the other side of 
heaven. 

_ ‘Let the Morning Star rise between us,’ he would say. “Alone 
you ate nothing, and I am mangué. But together we are the 
wings of the Morning.’ 

Was it true? Was this the final answer to man’s assertion of 
individuality ? 

Was it true? And was it her sacred duty to sit beside him in 
the green dress of Malintzi, in the church, the goddess admit- 
ting her halfness? Her halfness! Was there no star of the single 
soul? Was that all an illusion? 

Was the individual an illusion? Man, any man, every man, 
by himself just a fragment, knowing no Morning Star? And 
every woman the same; by herself, starless and fragmentary. 
Even in the relation to the innermost God, still fragmentary 
and unblest. 

Was it true, that the gate was the Morning Star, the only 
entrance to the Innermost? And the Morning Star rises be- 
tween the two, and between the many, but never from one | 
alone. 

And was a man but a dark and arrowy will, and woman the 

Setbacks ah val Uda we 

oh 

piadyshacenpt tease umisnitrste kbps het S ip 

= 

Mttscery se 

lhe 
| Z 
: MALINTZI 405 

bow from which the arrow is shot? The bow without the 
arrow was as nothing, and the arrow without the bow only a 
short-range dart, ineffectual ? 

Poor Kate, it was hard to have to reflect this. It meant a sub- 
mission she had never made. It meant the death of her indivi- 
dual self. It meant abandoning so much, even her own very 
foundations. For she had believed truly that every man and 
every woman alike was founded on the individual. 

Now, must she admit that the individual was an illusion and 
a falsification? There was no such animal. Except in the mech- 
anical world. In the world of machines, the individual machine 
is effectual. The individual, like the perfect being, does not and 
cannot exist, in the vivid world. We are all fragments. And at 
the best, halves. The only whole thing is the Morning 

_ Star. Which can only rise between two: ot between many. 

And men can meet only in the light of the Morning Star. 

She thought again of Cipriano and the executions, and she 
covered her Dands over her face. Was this the knife to which 
she must be sheath? Was it such a star of power and relent- 
lessness that mu€ rise between her and him? Him naked and 
painted, with his soldiers, dancing and sweating and shouting 
among them. Herself unseen and nowhere! 

As she sat rocking in her terrible loneliness and misgiving, 
she heard the drums on the towers, and the sound of rockets, 
She went to the gate. Over the church, in the night sky, hung a 
spangling cloud of red and blue fire, the colours of Huitzilo- 
pochtli and Quetzalcoatl. The night of Huitzilopochtli would 
be over. The sky was dark again, and there were all the stars, 
beyond, far, far beyond where the spangling had been. 

She went indoors again, to retire. The servants had all run 
out to see the rockets. Ezequiel would be in with the men in 
church. 

She heard footsteps on the gravel walk, and suddenly Cipri- 
ano stood in the doorway, in his white clothes. He took off his 
hat, quickly. His black eyes were sparkling, almost blazing to 
her, with a flashing of light such as she had never seen. There 
were still smears of paint on his face. In the blazing of his eyes 
he seemed to be smiling to her, but in a dazzling, childish 
way. 

‘hiclinnis he said to her in Spanish. ‘Oh, come! Come and 

406 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

put on the green dress. I cannot be the Living Huitzilopochtli 
without a bride. I cannot be it, Malintzi!’ 

He stood before her, flickering and flashing and strangely 
young, vulnerable, as young and boyish as flame. She saw that 
when the fire came free in him, he would be like this always, 
flickering, flashing with a flame of virgin youth. Now, not will — 
at all. Sensitive as a boy. And calling her only with his boyish 
flame. The living, flickering, fiery Wish. This was first. The 
Will she had seen was subsidiary and instrumental, the W7sh in 
armour. 

She had been so used to fighting for her own soul with in- 
dividualistic men, that for a moment she felt old, and uncer- 
tain. The strange, flashing vulnerability in him, the nakedness 
of the living Wish, disconcerted her. She was used to men who _ 
had themselves well in hand, and were seeking their own ends — 
as individuals. : 

‘Where do you want me to come?’ she said. 

‘To the church,’ he said. ‘It is mine to-night. Iam Huitzilo- 

pochtli: but I cannot be it alone,’ he added with quick, wistful, — 4 | 

watchful smile, as if all his flesh were flickering with delicate 
fire. 
_ Kate wrapped herself in a dark tartan shawl and went with 
him. He stepped quickly, in the short, Indian way. The night 
was very dark. Down on the beach some fireworks were flam- 
ing, and the people were all watching. : 

They entered the yard of the church from the back, by the 
priest’s little gate. Soldiers were already rolled up in their blan- 
kets, sleeping under the wall. Cipriano opened the little vestry _ 
door. Kate passed into the darkness. He followed, lighting a 
candle. 

“My soldiers know I am watching to-night in the church,’ 
he said. ‘They will keep guard.’ 

The body of the church was quite dark, but the bluish white 
light burned above the statue of Quetzalcoatl, giving not much 
light. 

Cipriano lifted his candle to the black statue of Huitzilo- 
pochtli. Then he turned to Kate, his black eyes flashing. 

‘Tam Huitzilopochtli, Malintzi,’ he said in his low, Indian 
Spanish. ‘But I cannot be it without you, Stay with me, Ma- 
lintzi. Say you are the bride of the Living Huitzilopochtli.’ 

bs 

"| 

~ held out her left 

MALINTZI 407 
“Yes!” she replied, ‘I say it.’ 

Convulsive flames of j joy and triumph seemed to go over his 
face. He lit two candles in front of Huitzilopochtli. 

‘Come!’ he said. ‘Put on the green dress.’ 

He took her to the vestry, where were many folded serapes, 
and the silver bowl and other implements of the church, and 
left her while she put on the dress of Malintzi she had worn 
when Ramon married them. ~ 

When she stepped out she found Cipriano naked and in his 
paint, before the statue of Huitzilopochtli, on a rug of jaguar 
skins. 

“I am the living Huitzilopochtli,’ he murmured to her in a 
sort of ecstasy. 

“You are Malintzi,’ he said. ‘The bride of Hinintilopothets 

The convulsion of exultance went over his face. He took her 
hand in his left hand, and they stood facing the bluish light. 

“Cover your face!” he said to her. 

They covered their faces in the salute. 

sNow salute eee And he flung up his arm. She 
nd, in the womans salute. 

Then they turned to the statue of Huitzilopochtli. 
‘Salute Huitzilopochtli! ’ he said, bringing his right fist 

~ down with a smash in the palm of his left hand. But this was 
the male salute. He taught her to press her hands together in 

front ef her breast, then shoot them out towards the idol. 
Then he put a little lamp of earthenware between the feet of 

- Huitzilopochtli. From the right knee of the idol he took a little 
black vessel of oil, making her take a little white vessel ~ 

the god’s left knee. 
‘Now,’ he said, ‘together we fill the lamp.’ 
And together they poured the oil from their little pitchers, 
into the saucer-shaped lamp. 
‘Now together we light it,’ he said. 
He took one of the two candles burning before the black 

- idol, she took the other, and with the flames dripping and leap- 

ing together, they kindled the floating wick of the lamp. It 
burned in a round blue bud, then rose higher. 
‘Blow out your candle,’ he said. ‘It is our Morning Star.’ 
They blew out the two candles. It was almost dark now, 

with the slow light, like a snow-drop, of their united lives float- 
¢ 

408 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

ing between the feet of Huitzilopochtli, and the everlasting 
light burning small and bluish beyond the statue of Quetzal- 
coatl. 

At the foot of the altar, beside the chair of Huitzilopochtli, 
a third chair was placed. 

‘Sit in your throne of Malintzi,’ he said to her. 

They sat side by side, his hand holding her hand, in com- 
plete silence, looking down the dark church. He had placed 
tufts of greenish flowers, like thin, greenish lilac, above her 
chair, and their perfume was like a dream, strong, overpower- 
ingly sweet on the darkness. 

Strange how naive he was! He was not like Ramon, rather 
ponderous and deliberate in his ceremonials. Cipriano in his 
own little deeds to-night with her, was naive like a child. She 
could hardly look at that bud of light which he said meant 
their united lives, without a catch at her heart. It burned so 
soft and round, and he had such an implicit, childish satisfac- 
tion in its symbol. It all gave him a certain wild, childish joy. 
The strange convulsions like flames of joy and gratification 
went over his face! 

‘Ah, God!’ she thought. ‘There are more ways than one of 
becoming like a little child.’ 

The flaminess and the magnificence of the beginning: this 
was what Cipriano wanted to bring to his marriage. The reel- 
ing, powerful perfume of those invisible green flowers, that — 
the peons call buena de noche: good by night. 

Strange — that which he brought to marriage was something 
flamey and unabashed, forever virginal. Not, as she had always 
known in men, yearning and seeking his own ends. Naively 
bringing his flame to her flame. 

As she sat in that darkened church in the intense perfume of — 
flowers, in the seat of Malintzi, watching the bud of her life 
united with his, between the feet of the idol, and feeling his 
dark hand softly holding her own, with the soft, deep Indian 
heat, she felt her own childhood coming back on her. The 
yeats seemed to be reeling away in great circles, falling away 
from her. 

Leaving her sitting there like a gitl in her first adolescence. 
The Living Huitzilopochtli! Ah, easily he was the living Huit- 
zilopochtli. More than anything. More than Cipriano, more 

* 

MALINTZI 409 

than a male man, he was the living Huitzilopochtli. And she 
_ was the goddess bride, Malintzi of the green dress. 

Ah, yes, it was childish. But it was actually so. She was per- 
haps fourteen years old, and he was fifteen. And he was the 
young Huitzilopochtli, and she was the bride Malintzi, the 
bride-girl. She had seen it. When the flame came up in him 
and licked him all over, he was young and vulnerable as a boy 
of fifteen, and he would always be so, even when he was 
seventy. 

And this was her bridegroom. Here at last he was not a will. 
When he came clothed in his own free flame, it was not »7// 
that clothed him. Let him be a general, an executioner, what he 
liked, in the world. The flame of their united lives was a naked 
bud of flame. Their marriage was a young, vulnerable flame. 

So he sat in silence on his throne, holding her hand in silence 
till the years reeled away from her in fleeing circles, and she sat, 
as every real woman can sit, no matter at what age, a girl again, 
and for him, virgin. He held her hand in silence, till she was 
Malintzi, and virgin for him, and when they looked at one an- 
other, and their eyes met, the two flames rippled in oneness. 
She close@ her eyes, and was dark. 

Then later, when she opened her eyes and saw the bud of 
flame just above her, and the black idol invisibly crouching, 
she heard his strange voice, the voice of a boy hissing in naive 
ecstasy, in Spanish: 

“Miel! Miel de Malintzi! — Honey of Malintzi!’ 

And she pressed him to her breast, convulsively. His inner- 
most flame was always virginal, it was always the first time. 
And it made her again always a virgin girl. She could feel their 
two flames flowing together. 

How else, she said to herself, is one,to begin again, save by 
re-finding one’s virginity ? And when one finds one’s virginity, 
one realizes one is among the gods. He is of the gods, and so 
am I. Why should I judge him? 

So, when she thought of him and his soldiers, tales of swift 
cruelty she had heard of him: when she remembered his stab- 
bing the three helpless peons, she thought: Why should I 
judge him? He is of the gods. And when he comes to me he 
lays his pure, quick flame to mine, and every time I aria young 
girl again, and every time he takes the flower of my virginity, 

AIO THE PLUMED SERPENT 

and I his. It leaves me insouciante like a young girl. What do I~ 
cate if he kills people? His flame is young and clean. He is 

Huitzilopochtli, and I am Malintzi. What do I care, what Cipri- 

ano Viedma does or doesn’t doz Or even what Kate Leslie does 
ort doesn’t do! 

CHAPTER XXV 

Teresa 

RAMON somewhat surprised Kate by marrying again, a couple 

of months or so after the death of Dofia Carlota. The new — 

bride was a young woman of about twenty-eight, called Teresa. 
Thete was a very quiet civil wedding, and Ramon brought his 
new wife to Jamiltepec. ; 

He had known her since she was a child, for she was the — 
daughter of the famous Aacienda of Las Yemas, some twelve 
miles inland from Jamiltepec. Don Tomés, her father, had 
been a staunch friend of the Carrascos. 

_ But Don Tomas had died a year ago, leaving the large, 
flourishing tequila hacienda to his three children, to be adminis- 
tered by Teresa. Teresa was the youngest. Her two brothers 
had reverted to the usual wasteful, spendthrift, brutal Mexican 
way. Therefore Don Tomas, in order to save the hacienda from 
their destructive hands, had especially appointed Teresa ad- 
ministrador, and had got the brothers’ consent to this. Afterall, — 
they were shiftless ne’er-do-wells, and had never shown the 
slightest desire to help in the rather burdensome business of 
managing a large tequila hacienda, during their father’s life- 
time. Teresa had been the one. And during her father’s illness 
the whole charge had devolved on her, while her brothers 
wasted themselves and their substance in the squashy prosti- 
tution-living of Mexicans of their class, away in the cities. 

No sooner was the father dead, however, and Teresa in 
charge, than home came the two brothers, big with their inten- 
tion to be sacendados. By simple brute force they ousted their 
sister, cite orders over her head, jeered at her, and in crushing 
her united for once with each other. They were putting her 

| 
| TERESA 4it 

fback:i into her place as a woman -~ that is to say, back into a 
secluded sort of prostitution, to which, in their eyes, women 
belonged. 

_ But they were bullies, and, as bullies, cowards. And like so 
many Mexicans of that class, soft and suicidal towards them- 
selves. They made friends with judges and generals. They rode 
about in resplendent charro dress, and had motor-loads of 
rather doubtful visitors. 

Against their soft, sensuous brutality Teresa could do noth- 
ing, and she knew it. They were all soft and sensual, or sensuous, 
handsome in their way, open-handed, careless, but bullies, with 
no fear at the middle of them. 

“Make yourself desirable, and get a husband for yourself,’ 
they said to her. 

In their eyes, her greatest crime was that she did not make 
herself desirable to men of their sort. That she had never hada 
man, that she was not married, made her almost repulsive to 
them. What was woman for, but for loose, soft, prostitutional 
Sex?» o 

“Do you want to wear the trousers? ?they jeered at her. ‘No, 
Sefiorita! Not while there are two men on the place, you are 
not going to wear the trousérs. No, Sefiorita! The trousers, the 
men wear them. The women keep under their petticoats ‘that 
which they are women for.’ 

_ Teresa was used to these insults. But they made her soul 
burn. 

‘You, do you want to be an American woman?’ they said to 
her. ‘Go off to America, then, and bob your hair and wear 
breeches. Buy a ranch there, and get a husband to take your 
orders. Go!’ : 

She went to her lawyers, but they held up their hands. And 
she went to Ramon, whom she had known since she was a 
child. 

It would have meant a hopeless and ruinous law-suit, to get 
the brothers ejected from the hacienda. It would have meant the 
rapid ruin of the estate. Ramén instead asked Teresa to marry 
him, and he carefully arranged her dowry, so that she should 
always have het own provision. 

“It is a country where men despise sex, and live foe it,’ said 
Ramon. ‘Which is just suicide.’ 

412 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Ramon came with his wife, to see Kate. Teresa was rather 
small, pale, with a lot of loose black hair and big, wide black 
eyes. Yet in her quiet bearing and her well-closed mouth there — 
was an air of independence and authority. She had suffered — 

But now she loved Ramén with a wild, virgin loyalty. That, 
too, was evident. He had saved her sex from the ee: rem 

felt an almost fierce reverence for him. 3 
But with Kate she was shy and rather distant: a little afraidl 
of the travelled, experienced, rather assertive white-skinned — 
woman, the woman of the other race. She sat in Kate’s salon in 
her simple white dress with a black gauze rebozo, her brown 
hands motionless in her lap, her dark neck erect, her dark, | 
slender, well-shaped cheek averted. She seemed, Kate thought, - 
rather like a little sempstress. — 3 
But Kate was reckoning without that strange quiesceml 
power of authority which Teresa also possessed, in her slight, ~ 
dark body. And without the black, flashing glances which rest- 
ed on her from time to time, from Teresa’s eyes, full of search- 
ing fierceness and fiery misgiving. A fiery soul, in such a de- | 
mute, slight, dark body. Sometimes a muted word came from 
her mouth, and a constrained smile moved her lips. But her 
burning eyes never changed. She did not even look at Ramon, — 
‘How much do you charge per word, Chica?’ he asked her, © 
with a sort of soft fondness. F 
Then her dark eyes flashed at him, and her mouth gave a 
little smile. It was evident she was hopelessly in love with him, — 
in a sort of trance or muse of love. And she maintained sucha | 
cold sort of blankness towards Kate. 
“She despises me,’ thought Kate, ‘because I can’t be in love - 
as she is.’ p. 
And for one second Kate envied Teresa. The next second, — 
she despised her. ‘The harem type —’ ' 
Well, it was Ramon’s nature tobe a sort of Sultan. He look- 
ed very handsome in his white clothes, very serene and pasha- » 
like in his assurance, yet at the same time, soft, pleasant, some-— 3 
thing boyish also in his physical well- being: In his soft yet 

= TERESA 413 
rather pasha-like way, he was mixing a cocktail of gin and ver- 
—. and lime. Teresa watched him from the corner of her 
eye. And at the same time, she watched Kate, the potential 
“enemy, the woman who talked with men on their own plane. 
_ Kate rose to get spoons. At the same moment, he stepped 
back from the low table where he was squeezing a lime, so that 
‘he came into slight collision with her. And Kate noticed again 
how quick and subtle was his physical evasion of her, the soft, 
almost liquid, hot quickness of sliding out of contact with her. 
‘His natural voluptuousness avoided her as a flame Jeans away 
from a draught. 

_ She flushed slightly. And Teresa saw the quick flush under 
the fair, warm-white skin, the leap of yellow light, almost like 
-anger, into Kate’s grey-hazel eyes. The moment of evasion of 

two different blood-streams. 

And Teresa tose and went to Ramon’s side, bending over 
_and looking in the tumblers, asking, with that curious affected 
_childishness o#dark women: 

“What do you pyt in?’ 

‘Look!’ said Ramon. And with the same curious male child- 
ishness of dark men, he was explaining the cocktail to her, 
giving her a little gin ina spoon, to taste. 

‘It is an impure tequila,’ she said naively. 

“At eight pesos a bottle?’ he laughed. 

“So niuch! It is much!’ ! 

__ She looked into his eyes for a second, and saw all his face go 
darker, warmer, as if his flesh were fusing soft towards her. 
Her small head poised the prouder. She had got him back. 

“Harem tricks!’ said Kate to herself. And she was somewhat 
impatient, seeing the big, portentous Ramon enveloped in the 
toils of this little dark thing. She resented being made so con- 

scious of his physical presence, his full, male body inside his 
thin white clothes, the strong, yet soft shoulders, the full, rich 
male thighs. It was as if she herself, also, being in the presence 
of this Sultan, should succumb as part of the harem. 

What a curious will the little dark woman had! What a 
subtle female power inside” her rather skinny body! She had 
the power to make him into a big, golden full glory of a man. 
Whilst she herself became almost inconspicuous, save for her 
big black eyes lit with a tigerish power. 

A4l4 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Kate watched in wonder. She herself had known men who } 

made her feel a queen, who made her feel as if the sky rested on — 
her bosom and her head was among the stars. She knew what — 
it was to rise grander and grander, till she filled the universe 
with her womanhood. 5 
Now she saw the opposite taking place. This little bit of a — 
black-eyed woman had an almost uncanny power to make — 
Ramon great and gorgeous in the flesh, whilst she herself be- 
came inconspicuous, almost /nvisible, save for her great black 
eyes. Like a sultan, he was, like a full golden fruit in the sun, 
with a strange and magnificent presence, glamour. And then, _ 
by some mysterious power in her dark little body, the skinny — 
Teresa held him most completely. = 
And this was what Ramon wanted. And it made Kate angry, 
angty. The big, fluid male, gleaming, was somewhat repulsive 
to her. And the tense little female with her pale-dark face, wan © 
under her great, intense, black eyes, having all her female being 
tense in an effort to exalt this big glistening man, this enraged | 
Kate. She could not bear the glistening smile in Ramon’s dark 
eyes, a sort of pasha satisfaction. And she could not bear the — 
erect, tense little figure of the dark woman, using her power in 
_ this way. . 
This hidden, secretive power of the dark female! Kate called 
it harem, and self*prostitution. But was it? Yes, surely it was — 
the s/ae approach. Surely she wanted nothing but sex from 
him, like a prostitute! The ancient mystery of the female 
power, which consists in glorifying the blood-male. 4 
Was it right? Kate asked herself. Wasn’t it degrading for a_ 
woman? And didn’t it make the man either soft and sensuous, © 
or else hatefully autocratic? . 
Yet Kate herself had convinced herself of one thing, finally: 
that the clue to all living and to all moving-on into new living — 
lay in the vivid blood-relation between man and woman. A — 
man and a woman in this togetherness were the clue to all pre- — 
sent living and future possibility. Out of this clue of together- 
ness between a man and a woman, the whole of the new life 
arose. It was the quick of the whole. . 
And the togetherness needed a balance. Surely it needed a 

balance! And did not this Teresa throw herself entitely into the _ 

male balance, so that all the weight was on the man’s side? 

TERESA 41§ 
~ Ramon had not wanted Kate. Ramén had got what he want- 
ed — this black little creature, who was so servile to him and so 
haughty in her own power. Ramén had never wanted Kate: 
except as a friend, a clever friend. As a woman, no! — He want- 
ed this little viper of a Teresa. 
_ Cipriano wanted Kate. The little general, the strutting little 
soldier, he wanted Kate: just for moments. He did not really 
want to marry her. He wanted the moments, no more. She was 
to give him his moments, and then he was off again, to his 
army, to his men. It was what he wanted. 
It was what she wanted too. Her life was her own! It was 
not her meter to be fanning the blood in a man, to make 
him almighty and blood-glamorous. Her life was her 
own! 

She rose and went to her bedroom to look for a book she 
had promised Ramon. She could not bear the sight of him in 
love with Teresa any longer. The heavy, mindless smile on his 

face, the curiqus glisten of his eyes, and the strange, heavy, 
lordly aplomb of bjs body affected her like a madness. She 
wanted to run. my 

This waS seliat they were, these people! Savages, with the 
‘impossible fluid flesh of saVages, and that savage way of dis- 
solving into an awful black mass of desire. Emerging with the 
male conceit and haughtiness swelling his blood and making 
‘him feel endless. While his eyes glistened with a haughty 
blackness. 

The trouble was, that the power of the world, which she 
had known until now only in the eyes of blue-eyed men, who 
made queens of their women = even if they hated them for it in 
the end — was now fading in the blue eyes, and dawning in the 
black. In Ramén’s eyes at this moment was a steady, alien 
gleam of pride, and daring, and power, which she knew was 
masterly. The same was in Cipriano’s quick looks. The power 
‘of the world was dying in the blond men, their bravery and 
their supremacy was leaving them, going into the eyes of the 
dark men, who were rousing at last. 

Joachim, the eager, clever, fierce, sensitive genius, who 
could look into her soul, and laugh into her soul, with his blue 
eyes: he had died under her eyes. And her children were not 
even his children. 

416 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

If she could have fanned his blood as Teresa now fanned the — 
blood of Ramén, he would never have died. 3 
But it was impossible. Every dog has his day. - And every _ 
race. ’ 
Teresa came tapping timidly. 
‘May I come?’ 
‘Do!’ said Kate, rising from her knees and leaving little 
piles of books all round the book-trunk. 
It was a fairly large room, with doots opening on to the © 
' patio and the sun-hard garden, smooth mango-trees rising like 
elephant’s trunks out of the ground, green grass after the rains, — 
chickens beneath the ragged banana leaves. A red bird splashed — 
in the basin of water, opening and shutting brown wings above 
his pure scarlet, vivid. 
But Teresa looked at the room, not out of doors. She smelt — 
the smell of cigarettes and saw the many cigarette stumps in | 
the agate tray by the bed. She saw the littered books, the scat- _ 
tered jewellery, the brilliant New-Mexican rugs on the floor, 
the Persian curtain hung behind the bed, the handsome, colour- 
ed bedcover, the dresses of dark silk and bright velvet flung — 
over a trunk, the folded shawls with their long fringe, the scat- 
tered shoes, white, grey, pale-brown, dark-brown, black, on 
' the floor, the tall Chinese candlesticks. The room of a woman - 
who lived her own life, for her own self. 
Teresa was repelled, uneasy, and fascinated. 
“How nice this is!’ she said, touching the glowing bed- 
cover. 
‘A friend made it for me, in England.’ 
Teresa looked with wonder at everything, especially at the 
tangle of jewellery on the dressing-table. : 
‘Don’t you like those red stones!’ said Kate, kneeling again 
to put the books back, and looking at the brown neck bent 
absorbedly over the jewels. Thin shoulders, with a soft, dark — 
skin, in a bit of a white dress! And loosely folded masses of — 
black hair held by tortoise-shell pins. — An insignificant little — 
thing, humble, Kate thought to herself. I 
But she knew really that Teresa was neither insignificant nor _ 
humble, Under that soft brown skin, and in that stooping 
female spine was a strange old power to call up the blood ina — 
man, and glorify it, and, in some way, keep it for hetself. 

TERESA 417 

_ Onthesewing-table was a length of fine Indian muslin which 
Kate had bought in India, and did not know what to do with. 
It was a sort of yellow-peach colour, beautiful, but it did not 
suit Kate. Teresa was fingering the gold-thread selvedge. 

“It is not organdie?’ she said. .. 

_ ‘No, muslin. Hand-made muslin from India. - Why don’t 
you take it? It doesn’t suit me. It would be perfect for you.’ 

_ She rose and held the fabric against Teresa’s dark neck, 
pointing to the mirror. Teresa saw the warm-yellow muslin 
upon herself, and her eyes flashed. 

‘Nol’ she said. ‘I couldn’t take it.’ 

“Why not? It doesn’t suit me. I’ve had it lying about for a 
yeat now, and was wondering whether to cut it up for curtains. 
Do have it.’ 

Kate could be imperious, almost cruel in her giving. 

‘I can’t take it from you!’ 

“Of course you can!’ 

Ramon appeared in the doorway, glancing round the room, 
and at the two wogen. 

_ ‘Look!’ said Teresa, rather confused. ‘The Sefiora wants to 
give me thi§ Indian muslin.’ 7 She turned to him shyly, with the 
fabric held to her throat. . 

_ “You look very well in it,’ he said, his eyes resting on her. 

‘The Sefiora ought not to give it to me.’ 

_ ‘The Sefiora would not give it you unless she wished to.’ 

_ ‘Then!’ said Teresa to Kate. ‘Many thanks! But many 
thanks!” 

‘It is nothing,’ said Kate. 

‘But Ramon says it suits me.’ 

 *Yes, doesn’t it suit her!’ cried Kate to him. ‘It was made in 
India for someone as dark as she is. It does suit her.’ 

‘Very pretty!’ said Ramon. 

He had glanced round the room, at the different attractive 
things from different parts of the world, and at the cigarette 
ends in the agate bowl: the rather weary luxury and disorder, 
and the touch of barrenness, of a woman living her own life. 

She did not know what he was thinking. But to herself she 
thought: This is the man I defended on that roof. This is the 
man who lay with a hole in his back, naked and unconscious 
under the lamp. He didn’t look like a Sultan then. 

_ 

= 

418 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

said, looking at Ramon: 
“Sefiora! But for you Ramon would have been killed. s 
ways I think of it.’ ‘ 3 
‘Don’t think of it,’ said Kate. “Something else would have es 
happened. Anyhow it wasn’t I, it was destiny.’ 
‘Ah, but you were the destiny! said Teresa. 

at Jamiltepec?’ said Ramon. 
‘Oh, do! Do come!’ cried Teresa. 
‘But do you really want me?’ said Kate, incredulous. 
“Yes! Yes!’ cried Teresa. 
‘She needs a woman-friend,’ said Ramén gently. 

friend: only when I was at school, and we were girls.’ 
ee doubted very much her own capacity for being a ¢rue, 

them saw in her. As what did they see her? 
“Yes, I should like to come for a few days,’ she teplied= 
“Oh, yes!’ cried Teresa. ‘When will you come?’ 
The ‘day was agreed. 
‘And we will write the Song of Malintzi,’ said Ramon. 
“Don’t do that!’ cried Kate quickly. 

make her feel, at means as if ie were a seats of child st ie 
if he were a ghost. 
Kate went to Jamiltepec, and before the two women 

that somehow ale her look poor, i a few old aes creche 
She had lived for her father — who had a good library of Mexi- 
cana and was all his life writing a history of the State of Jalisco” 
~and for the hacienda. And it was her proud boast that La 
Yemas was the only hacienda, within a hundred miles range, 
which had not been smashed at all during the revolutions that 
followed the flight of Porfirio Diaz. 

TERESA 419 

So Kate pinned the muslin over the brown shoulders, won- 
ering again at the strange, uncanny softness of the dark skin, 
the heaviness of the black hair. Teresa’s family, the Romeros, 
fad been in Mexico since the early days of the Conquest. 
Teresa wanted long sleeves. 

“My arms are so thin!’ she murmured, hiding her slender 
brown atms with a sort of shame. ‘They are not beautiful like 
yours.’ 

Kate was a strong, full-developed woman of forty, with 
tound, strong white arms. 

_ ‘No!’ she said to Teresa. “Your arms are not thin: they 
are exactly right for your figure, and pretty and young and 
brown.’ 

“But make the sleeves long, to the wrist,’ pleaded Teresa. 

And Kate did so, realizing it became the other woman’s 
nature better. 

“The men here don’t like little thin women,’ ” said Teresa, 
wistfully. ¢ 

“One doesn’t cage what the men like,’ said Kate. ‘Do you 
think Don Ramon wishes you were a plump partridge?’ 

_ Teresa looked at her with a smile in her dark, big bright 

eyes, that were so quick, and in many ways so unseeing. 

_ ‘Who knows!’ she said. And in her quick, mischievous 
mile it was evident she would like also, sometimes, to be a 

plump partridge. 

Kate now saw mote of the hacienda life than she had done be- 
fore. When Ramon was at home, he consulted his overseer, or 
administrator, every morning. But already Teresa was taking 

is work off his hands. She would see to the estate. 

Ram6n was a good deal absent, either in Mexico City or in 

uadalajara, or even away in Sonora. He was already famous 
and notorious throughout the country, his name was a name to 
conjure with. But underneath the rather ready hero-worship 
of the Mexicans, Kate somehow felt their latent grudging. 
Perhaps they took more satisfaction in ultimately destroying 
theit heroes, than in temporarily raising them high. The real 

perfect moment-was when the hero was downed. 

And to Kate, sceptic as she was, it seemed much more likely 
that they were sharpening the machete to stick in Ramén’s 
heart, when he got a bit too big for them, than anything else. 

a 

420 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Though, to be sure, there was Cipriano to reckon with. And 
Cipriano was a little devil whom they quite rightly feared. And — 
Cipriano, for once, was faithful. He was, to himself, Huitzilo-_ 
pochtli, and to this he would maintain a demonish faith. He 
was Huitzilopochtli, Ramdén was Quetzalcoatl. To Cipriano 
this was a plain and living fact. And he kept his army keen as a — 
knife. Even the President would not care to run counter to 
Cipriano. And the President was a brave man too. 
‘One day,’ he said, ‘we will put Quetzalcoatl in Puebla 
Cathedral, and Huitzilopochtli in Mexico Cathedral and Ma- 
lintzi in Guadalupe. The day will come, Ramon.’ 
‘We will see that it comes,’ Ramon replied. 
But Ramon and Montes suffered alike from the deep, devil-_ 
ish animosity the country sent out in silence against them. It | 
was the same, whoever was in power, the Mexicans seemed to 
steam with invisible, grudging hate, the hate of demons foiled 
in their own souls, whose only motive is to foil everything, 
evetybody, in the everlasting hell of cramped frustration. 
This was the dragon of Mexico, that Ramon had to fight. 
Montes, the President, had it to fight the same. And it shattered 
his health. Cipriano also had it up against him. But he suc- 
ceeded best. With his drums, with his dances round the fire, 
with his soldiers kept keen as knives he drew real support 
from his men. He grew stronger and more brilliant. ~ aig 
Ramon also, at home in his own district, felt the power floy , 
into him from his people. He was their chief, and by his effort 
and his power he had almost overcome their ancient, fathom- 
less resistance. Almost he had awed them back into the soft 
mystery of living, awed them until the tension of their resist- 
ant, malevolent wills relaxed. At home, he would feel his 
strength upon him. 
But away from home, and particularly in the city of Mexico, 
he felt himself bled, bled, bled by the subtle, hidden mal- 
evolence of the Mexicans, and the ugly negation of the greedy, 
mechanical foreigners, birds of prey forever alighting in t 
cosmopolitan capital. 
While Ramon was away, Kate stayed with Teresa. The two 
women had this in common, that they felt it was better to stand 
faithfully behind a really brave man, than to push forward into | 
the ranks of cheap and obtrusive women. And this united — 

TERESA 421 

ics A certain deep, ultimate faithfulness in each woman, to 
her own man who needed her fidelity, kept Kate and Teresa 
kindred to one another. 

The rainy season had almost passed, though throughout 
September and even in October occasional heavy downpours 
ll. But the wonderful Mexican autumn, like a strange, in- 
verted spring, was upon the land. The waste places bloomed 
with pink and white cosmos, the strange wild trees flowered in 
a ghostly way, forests of small sunflowers shone in the sun, 
the sky was a pure, pure blue, the floods of sunshine lay tem- 

ered on the land, that in part was flooded with water, from 
the heavy rains. 
_ The lake was very full, strange and uneasy, and it had wash- 
ed up a bank of the avicked water-hyacinths along all its shores. 
The wild-fowl were coming from the north, clouds of wild 
ducks like dust in the high air, sprinkling the water like weeds. 
Many, many wild fowl, grebe, cranes, and white gulls of the 
‘inland seas, s6 that the northern mystery seemed to have 
lown so ae southyThere was a smell of water in the land, and 
Ss sense of soothing. For Kate firmly believed that part of the 
rrot of the Mexican people came from the unsoothed dry- 
ness of the land and the untempered crudity of the flat-edged 
‘sunshine. If only there could be a softening of water in the air, 
and a haze above trees, the unspoken and unspeakable mal- 
evolencé would die out of the human hearts. 
Kate rode out often with Teresa to see the fields. The sugar- 
‘cane in the inner valley was vivid green, and rising tall, tall. 
The peons were beginning to cut it with their sword-like ma- 
hetes, filling the bullock-wagons, to haul the cane to the fac- 
tory in Sayula. On the dry hill-slopes the spikey tequila plant — 
a sort of maguey — flourished in its iron wickedness. Low wild 
-cactuses put forth rose-like blossoms, wonderful and beautiful 
for such sinister plants. The beans were gathered from the 
bean-fields, some gourds and squashes still sprawled their un- 
‘canny weight across the land. Red chiles hung on withering 
i red tomatoes sank to the earth. Some maize still reared 
its flags, there was still young corn to eat on the cob. The ba- 
“nana crop was small, the children came in with the little wild 
yellow tejocote apples, for making preserves. Teresa was mak- 
ya preserves, even with the late figs and peaches. On the trees, 

422 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

the ponderous mango-trees, some fruit was again orange-yel- — 
low. and ripe, but the most still hung in strings, heavy and 
greenish and dropping like the testes of bulls. . 

It was autumn in Mexico, with wild duck on the waters, and 
hunters with guns, and small wild doves in the trees. Autumn 
in Mexico, and the coming of the dry season, with the sky go- 
ing higher and higher, pure pale blue, the sunset arriving with 
a strange flare of crystal yellow light. With the coffee berries” 
turning red on the struggling bushes under the trees, and bou- 
gainvillea in the strong light glowing with a glow of magenta 
colour so deep you could plunge your arms deep in it. With a 
few humming-birds in the sunshine, and the fish in the waters 
gone wild, and the flies, that steamed black in the first rains, 
now passing away again. 4 

Teresa attended to everything, and Kate helped. Whether it 
was a sick peon in one of the little houses, or the hosts of bees 
from the hives under the mangoes, or the yellow, yellow bees-. 
wax to be made into little bowlfuls, or the preserves, or the 
garden, or the calves, or the bit of butter and the little fresh 
cheeses made of strands of curd, or the turkeys to be over- 
looked: she saw to it along with Teresa. And she wondered 
the steady, urgent, efficient will which had to be exerted all the 
time. Everything was kept going by a heavy exertion of wi 
If once the will of the master broke, everything would break, 
and ruin would overtake the place almost at once. No real re- 
laxation, ever. Always the sombre, insistent will. 

Ramon arrived home one evening in November, from a long 
journey to Sonora. He had come overland from Tepic, and 
twice had been stopped by floods. The rains, so late, were vet y 
unusual. He was tired and remote-seeming. Kate’s heart stood. 
still a moment as she thought: He goes so remote, as if he 
might go away altogether into death. 

It was cloudy again, with lightning beating about on the 
horizons. But all was very still. She said good-night early, and 
wandered down her own side of the terrace, to the look-out at 
the end, which looked on to the lake. Everything was dark, 
save for the intermittent pallor of lightning. 

And she was startled to see, in a gleam of lightning, Teresa 
sitting with her back to the wall of the open terrace, Ramon 
lying with his head in her lap, while she slowly pushed her 

TERESA 423 

fingers through his thick black hair. They were as silent as the 

feht.. 
Kate gavea startled murmur and said: 
‘I’m so sorry! I didn’t know you wete here.’ 
_ ‘I wanted to be under the sky!’ said Ramén, heaving him- 
If to rise. 
“Oh, don’t move!’ said Kate. ‘It was stupid of me to come 
rere. You are tired.’ 
“Yes,” he said, sinking again. ‘Iam tired. These people make 
ne feel I have a hole in the middle of me. So I have come back 
o Teresa.’ 
“Yes!” said Kate. ‘One isn’t the Living Quetzalcoatl for 
iothing. Of course they eat holes in you. — Really, is it worth 
it? — To give yourself to be eaten away by them.’ 
“It must be so,’ he said. ‘The change has to be made. And 
some man has to make it. I sometimes wish it wasn’t I.’ 

*So do I wish it. So does Teresa. One wondets if it isn’t 
ter to be jus{a man,’ said Kate. Rid 
But, Teresa said nothing. 
~ *One does what One must. And after all, one is always just. 

an,’ he sfid. ‘And if one has wounds — a /a guerre comme a la 
Si 

His voice came out of the darkness like a ghost. 
‘Ah!’ sighed Kate. ‘It makes one wonder what a man is, that 

_ There was silence for a moment. 
Man is a column of blood, with a voice in it,’ he said. ‘And 

? 
. 

finite exhaustion in his voice. As if he had a hole, a wound in 
e middle of him. She could almost feel it, in her own 

Cipriano would come apart, and it would be all finished. 

_ Ah, why should a man have to make these efforts on behalf 
of a beastly, malevolent people who weren’t worth it! Better 
let the world come to an end, if that was what it wanted. 

a She thought of Teresa soothing him, soothing him and say- 
¥ 

a 
fi. 

424 THE PLUMED SERPENT _ a 
ing nothing. And him like a great Bree wounded pope 

damage themselves with this useless stipe and ae 
and then come home to their women to be restored! - ; 

To Kate, the fight simply wasn’t worth one wound. Let the 
beastly world of man come to an end, if that was its destiny, as 
soon as possible. Without lifting a finger to prevent it. — L 

rest go its own hellish way. 

She would have /ad to try to prevent Ramon from givir > 
himself to destruction this way. She was willing for him to be 
ten Living Quetzalcoatls. But not to expose himself to» 
devilish malevolence of people. 

Yet he would do it. Even as Joachim had done. And Tee = 
with her silence and her infinitely soft administering, she would 
heal him far better than Kate, with her expostulation and 
opposition. 

‘Ah!’ said Kate to herself. ‘I’m glad i isa sold er, 
and doesn’t get wounds in his soul.’ 

seemed very calm, hiding her emotions in her odd, brown, 
proud little way. = 
“How is Ramon?’ said Kate. 
“He is sleeping,’ said Teresa. 
‘Good! He seemed to me almost done up, last night.” ; 
‘Yes.’ — The black eyes looked at Kate, wide with unshed 
tears and courage, and a beautiful Saeet remote light. 

said Kate. ‘And I don’t’ 
Teresa still looked her full in the eyes. 
‘Ah!’ she said. ‘He doesn’t sacrifice himself. He feels 
must do as he does. And if he soi I must help him.’ 

lieve in that either,’ said bah 
“Oh, no!’ replied Teresa rie and a little flush burned is n 

TERESA 425 

hat is not sacrifice. It is ~ She did not finish, but her eyes 
ashed, and the flush burned darker. 
“It is love, I know,’ said Kate. ‘But it exhausts you too.’ 
~ ‘It is not simply love,’ flashed Teresa proudly. ‘I might have 
oved more than one man: many men are lovable. But Ramon! 
— My soul is with Ramon.’ — The tears rose to her eyes. ‘I do 
ot want to talk about it,’ she said, rising. “But you must not 
ouch me there, and judge me.’ 
_ She hurried out of the room, leaving Kate somewhat dis- 
mayed. Kate sighed, thinking of going home. 
_ But in an hour Teresa appeared again, putting her cool, soft, 
snake-like little hand on Kate’s arm, 
_ ‘Tam sorry if I was rude,’ she said. 
_ ‘No,’ said Kate. ‘Apparently it is | who am wrong.’ 
“Yes, I think you are,” said Teresa. “You think there is only 
love. Love is only such a little bit.’ 
“And what is the rest?’ 
- ‘How can I tell you if you do not know? — But do you think 
Ramon is no more tg me than a lover?’ 
‘A husband!” said Kate. ype 
‘Ah!’ Teresa put her head aside with an odd impatience. 
“Those little words! Those little words! Nor either a husband. 
— He is my life.’ 
_ ‘Surely it is better for one to live one’s own life! z 
‘No! Ie is like seed. It is no good till it is given. I know. I 
ept my own life for a long time. As you keep it longer, it dies. 
nd I tried to give it to God. But I couldn’t, quite. Then they 
told me, if I married Ramon and had any part in the Quetzal- 
coatl heresy, my soul would be damned. — But something 
ade me know it was not true. I even knew he needed my 
soul. — Ah, Sefiora —’ a subtle smile came on Teresa’s pale face 
- ‘I have lost my soul to Ramon. — What more can I say!’ 
‘And what about his soul?’ 
‘It comes home to me — ere!’ She put her hand over her 
womb, 
- Kate was silent for a time. 
‘And if he betrays you?’ she said. 
‘Ah, Sefiora!’ said Teresa. ‘Ramon is not just a lover. He is 
a brave man, and he doesn’t betray his own blood. And it is his 
soul that comes home to me. — And I would struggle to my 

( 
; 
§ 

J 

3 

426 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

last breath to give him sleep, when he came home to me with 
his soul, and needed it,’ she flashed. Then she added, murmur- 
ing to herself: ‘No, thank God! I have not got a life of my 
own! I have been able to give it to a man who is more than a 
man, as they say in their Quetzalcoatl language. And now it 
needn’t die inside me, like a bird in a cage. - Oh, yes, Sefiora! 
If he goes to Sinaloa and the west coast, my soul goes with him. 
and takes part in it all. It does not let him go alone. And he 
does not forget that he has my soul with him. I know it. - No, 
Sefiora! You must not criticise me or pity me.’ Z 
“Still? said Kate. ‘It still seems to me it would be better for 
each one to keep her own soul, and be responsible for it.’ 
‘If it were possible!’ said Teresa. “But you can no more keep 
your own soul inside you for yourself, without its dying, than 
you can keep the seed of your womb. Until a man gives you his 
seed, the seed of your womb is nothing. And the man’s seed is 
nothing to him. —- And until you give your soul to a man, and 
he takes it, your soul is nothing to you. — And when a man ha 
taken your whole soul. — Ah, do not talk to me about betray- 
ing. A man only betrays because he has been given a part, and 
not the whole. And a woman only betrays because only the 
part has been taken from her, and not the whole. That is all 
about betrayal. I know. - But when the whole is given, and 
taken, betrayal can’t exist. What I am to Ramon, I am. And 
what he is to me, he is. I do not care what he does. If he is awa’ 
from me, he does as he wishes. Solong as he will always keep’ 
safe what I am to him.’ 
Kate did not like having to learn lessons from this little waif 
of a Teresa. Kate was a woman of the world, handsome and 
experienced. She was accustomed to homage. Other women 
usually had a slight fear of her, for she was powerful and ruth- 
less in her own way. : 
Teresa also feared her a little, as a woman of the world. But 
as an intrinsic woman, not at all. Trenched inside her own 
fierce and proud little soul, Teresa looked on Kate as on one 
of those women of the outside world, who make a very splen ‘ 
did show, but who are not so sure of the real secret of woman- 
hood, and the innermost power. All Kate’s handsome, ruthle Ss 
female power was second-rate to Teresa, compared with her 
own quiet, deep passion of connection with Ramon, 

TERESA 427 
Yes, Kate was accustomed to looking on other women as 

infetiors. But the tables were suddenly turned. Even as, in her 
soul, she knew Ramon to be a greater man than Cipriano, sud- 
enly she had to question herself, whether Teresa was not a 
— woman than she. 

_ Teresa! A greater woman than Kate? What a blow! Surely 
it was impossible! 
Yet there it was. Ramon hag wanted to marry Teresa, not 
Kate. And the flame of his marriage with Teresa she saw both 
in his eyes and in Teresa’s. A flame that was not in Kate’s eyes. 
_ Kate’s marriage with Cipriano was curious and momentary. 
When Cipriano was away, Kate was her old individual self. 
Only when Cipriano was present, and then only sometimes, 
did the connection overwhelm her. 
_ When Teresa turned and looked at her with this certain 
flame, touched with indignation, Kate quailed. Perhaps for the 
first time in her life she quailed and felt abashed: repentant. 
Kate even khew that Teresa felt a little repugnance for her: 
for the foreign white woman who talked as cleverly as a man 
a nd who never gave her soul: who did not believe in giving 
her soul. All these well-dressed, beautiful women from America 

a sort of purse, as it were. 
at was determined that Kate should leave off treating 

A : Se lancniins to Ramon. 
- But Ramén! He could look at them and make them feel 
small, feel really nothing, in spite of all their money and their 
experience and their air of belonging to the ruling races. The 
ling races! Wait! Ramon was a challenge to all that. Let those 
cule who can. 
-£You did not sleep?’ Teresa said to Kate. 
_ ‘Not very well,’ said Kate. 
p< No, you look as if you had not slept very well. — Under 
your eyes.” 

Kate smoothed the skin under her eyes, querulously. 
“One gets that look in Mexico,’ she said. ‘It’s not an easy 
country to keep your youth in. — You are looking well.’ 

+428 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

“Yes, am very well.’ 

Teresa had a new, soft bloom on her dark skin, scieae 
frail and tender, which she did not want to have to defend 
against another woman. 

‘I think I will go home now Ramon has come,’ said Kate. 

‘Oh, why? Do you wish to?’ 

‘I think I'd better.’ 

‘Then I will go with you to Sayula. In the boat, no?? i 

Kate put her few things together. She had slept badly. The 
night had been black, black, with something of horror in it. 
As when the bandits had attacked Ramon. She could see the 

ing water, menacing and horrible, seemed to keep up fot 
hours. 
In her soul, Kate felt Teresa’s contempt for her way of wife- 
hood. 
‘I have been married too,’ Kate had said. “To a very excep- 
tional man, whom I /oved.’ 
‘Ah, yes!’ said Teresa. “And he died.’ 
“He wanted to die.’ 
' ‘Ah, yes! He wanted to die.’ 
‘I did my level best to prevent him from wearing himself 
out.’ 
‘Ah, yes, to prevent him.’ 
‘What else could I have done?’ flashed Kate in anger. 
‘If you could have given him your life, he would not even 
have wanted to die.’ 

a dl of my own.’ fal 

“Ah, yes, men are like that, when they are merely men. When 
aman is warm and brave — es he wants the woman to 
him her soul, and he keeps it in 47s womb, so he is more 
a mete man, a single man. I know it. I know where my so 
It is in Ram6n’s womb, the womb of a man, just as his se 
in my womb, the womb of a woman. He is a man, anda column 

tradict him: Now can I? My soul is inside baad and I am fa = 
from oe him when he is ~~ with: all his might 

TERESA 429 

won't kill him. No! The stream flows into him from the heart 
of the world: and from me. ~ I tell you, because you saved his 
life, and therefore we belong to the same thing, you and I and 
he — and Cipriano. But you should not misjudge me. That 
ther way of women, where a woman keeps her own soul — ah 
what is it but weariness!’ 

“And the men?’ 

“Ah! if there are men whose souls are warm and brave, how 
they comfort one’s womb, Caterina!’ 

_ Kate hung her head, stubborn and angry at being put down 
from her eminence. — The slave morale! she said to herself. 
The miserable old trick of a woman living just for the sake of 
a man. Only living to send her soul with him, inside his pre- 
cious body. And to carry his precious seed in her womb! Her- 
» apart from this, nothing. 

Kate wanted to make her indignation thorough, but she did 

> 

above all, ‘she envied her, with repifling, the comfort of a living 
nan permanent in her womb. And the secret, savage indomit- . 

- In the warm morning after the rain, the frogs were whiting 

rantically. Across the lake, the mountains were blue black, 

and little pieces of white, fluffy vapour wandered low across the 

ees. Clouds were along the mountain-tops, making a level 

sky-line of whitish softness the whole length of the range. On 

the lonely, fawn-coloured water, one sail was blowing. 

_ ‘It is like Europe — like the Tyrol to-day,’ said Kate wist- 
fully. 

“Do you love Europe very much?’ asked Teresa. 

“Yes, I think I love it.’ 

‘And must you go back to it?’ 

'- ‘T think so. Soon! To my mother and my children.’ 

~ ‘Do they want you very much?’ 

“Yes!” said Kate, rather hesitant. Then she added: ‘Not very 

~ much, really. But I want them.’ 

‘What for? — I mean,’ Teresa added, ‘do you long for 

them?’ 

‘Sometimes,’ said Kate, the tears coming to her eyes. 

430 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

The boat rowed on in silence. 

‘And Cipriano?’ Teresa asked timidly. 

‘Ah!’ said Kate shortly. ‘He is such a stranger to me.’ 

Teresa was silent for some moments. 

‘I think a man is always a stranger to a woman,’ said Teresa. 
‘Why should it not be so?’ 

‘But you,’ said Kate, ‘haven’t any children.’ 

‘Ramon has. —- And he says: “‘I cast my bread upon the 

waters. It is my children too. And if they return to me af 
many days, I shall be glad.”’ — Is it not the same for you?’ 

‘Not quite!’ said Kate. ‘Iam a woman, Iam not a man.” 

‘I, if I have children,’ said Teresa, “I shall try to cast my 
bread upon the waters, so my children come to me that way 
hope I shall. I hope I shall not try to fish them out of life for 

its own course. — Morning brings more than love. And I want 
to be true to the morning.’ = 

CHAPTER XXVI 

Kate is a Wife 

KATE was glad to get back to her own house, and to be m ) 
ot less alone. She felt a great change was being worked in 

theless if what was happening happened too rapidly, or vio- 
lently, she felt she would die. So, from time to time she had to 
withdraw from contact, to be alone. p<: 

She would sit alone for hours on the shore, under a green 
willow-tree that hung its curtains of pale-green fronds, on 
beach. The lake was much fuller and higher up the shore. 
softer, more mysterious. There was a smell of the piles o} 
water- pier decaying at the water’s edges. Distance seemed 

me 

KATE IS A WIFE 431 

bushes, like a Japanese drawing. Bullock-wagons with solid 
wheels came rolling to the village; high with sugar cane, 
drawn by eight oxen with ponderous heads and slowly swing- 
ing horns, while a peon walked in front, with the guiding- 
stick on the cross-beam of the yoke. So slow, so massive, yet 
' with such slight control! 

__ She had a strange feeling, in Mexico, of the old prehistoric 
humanity, the dark-eyed humanity of the days, perhaps, before 
the glacial period. When the world was colder, and the seas 
ptier, and all the land-formation was different. When the 
y vaters of the world were piled in stupendous glaciers on the 
high places, and high, high upon the poles. When great plains 
stretched away to the oceans, like Atlantis, and the lost conti- 
nents of Polynesia, so that seas were only great lakes, and the 
soft, dark-eyed people of that world could walk around the 
globe. Then there was a mysterious, hot-blooded, soft-footed 
humanity with a strange civilization of its own. 

_ Till the glagiers melted, and drove the peoples to the high 
places, like the loft tty plateaux of Mexico, separated them into 
_ cut-off nations. m 

_ Sometirhes, in America, the i aideows of that old pre-Flood 
world was so strong, that the day of historic humanity would 
“me elt out of Kate’s consciousness, and she would begin to ap- 
‘proximate to the old mode of consciousness, the old, dark will, 
e unconcern for death, the subtle, dark consciousness, non- 
ebral, but vertebrate. When the miad and the power of man 
was s in his blood and his backbone, and there was the strange, 
dark inter-communication between man and man and man and 
beast, from the powerful spine. 
_ The Mexicans were still this. That which is aboriginal in 
America still belongs to the way of the world before the Flood, 
before the mental-spiritual world came into being. In America, 
therefore, the mental-spiritual life of white people suddenly 
urishes like a great weed let loose in virgin soil. Probably it 
ll as quickly wither. A great death come. And after that, the 
ing results will be a new germ, a new conception of human 
e, that will arise from the fusion of the old blood-and-verte- 
ate consciousness with the white man’s present mental- 
iritual consciousness. The sinking of both beings, into a new 
being. 

432 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Kate was more Irish than anything; and the almost cath Z 
mysticism of the aboriginal Celtic or Iberian people lay at the _ 
bottom of her soul. It was a residue of memory, something that - 
lives on from the pre-Flood world, and cannot be killed. Some- — 
thing older, and more everlastingly potent, than our would- beg 
fair-and-square world. 

She knew more or less what Ramon was trying to effect: this _ 
fusion! She knew what it was that made Cipriano more signi- 
ficant to her than all her past, her husbands and her children. It 
was the leap of the old, antediluvian blood-male into unison — 
with her. And for this, without her knowing, her innermost — 
blood had been thudding all the time. 4 

Ireland would not and could not forget that other old, dark, 
‘sumptuous living. The Tuatha De Danaan might be under he ; 
western sea. But they are under the living blood, too, never 
quite to be silenced. Now they have to come forth again, toa 
new connection. And the scientific, fair-and-square — eC 
has to mate once more with the old giants. . 

But the change, Kate felt, must not come on her too soon 
and too suddenly, or it would rupture her and she would die. 
The old way has its horror. The heavy-footed, @ ferre spirit of 
. aboriginal Mexico could be so horrible to her, as to make her 
wicked. The slow, indomitable kind of existing and persisting, 
without hope or é/an, which is in the aboriginal American, 
sometimes made her feel she would go mad. The sullen wil ; 
persisting over the slow, dark centuries, counting the indivi- 
dual existence a trifle! A tenacity of demons, less than human. | 
And a sudden ferocity, a sudden lust of death rousing incaleu- 
lable and terrible. 

People who never really changed. Men who were not faith- 
ful to life, to the living actuality. Faithful to some dark neces-_ 
sity out of the past. The actual present suddenly collapsing in 
the souls of the men and the women, and the old, black, vol-_ 
canic lava bursting up in violence, followed by a lava-rock in- 
difference. 3 

The hope! The hope! Would it ever be possible to revive 
the hope in these black souls, and achieve the marriage which | 
is the only step to the new world of man? 

But meanwhile, a strange, almost torn nausea would come 
over Kate, and she felt she must go away, to spare herself. 1 

KATE IS A WIFE 433 

. strange, reptilian insistence of her very servants. Blood is one 
blood. We are all of oue blood-stream. Something aboriginal and 
_ tribal, and almost worse than death to the white individual. Out 
- of the dark eyes and the powerful spines of these people, all the 
- time the unknown assertion: The blood is one blood. It was a 
_ strange, overbearing insistence, a claim of blood-unison. 

__ Kate was of.a proud old family. She had been brought up 
with the English-Germanic idea of the intrinsic superiority of 
the hereditary aristocrat. Her blood was different from the 
_ common blood, another, finer fluid. 

- But in Mexico, none of this. Her eriada Juana, the aguador 
who carried the water, the boatman who rowed her on the 
_ lake, all looked at her with one look in their eyes. The blood is 
_ one blood. In the blood, you and I are undifferentiated. She saw it in 
their eyes, she heard it in their words, it tinged their deference 
and their mockery. And sometimes it made her feel physically 
sick: this overbearing blood-familiarity. 

_ And somegimes, when she tried to hold ays up, in the 
ip oeud old assertion: My blood is my own. Noli me tangere, she 
would see the terrible ancient hatred in their eyes, the hatred 
which leads them to atrocities and fearful maimings. 

_ They would defer to het spirit, her knowledge, her under- 
standing. They would give her deference, and a sort of grud- 
ing reverence for this. She belonged to the ruling races, the 
clever ones. But back again they demanded her acquiescence 
the primeval assertion: The blood is one blood. We are one blood. 
was the assertion that swept away all individualism, and 
left her immersed, drowned in the grand sea of the living 
blood, in immediate contact with all these men and all these 
“women. 

To this she must submit. Or they would ene in the slow 
—— 

And she could not submit, off-hand. It had to be a slow, 
rganic process. Anything sudden or violent would destroy 
her. 

Now she understood Ram6n’s assertion: Man is a column of 
blood: Woman is a valley of blood. It was the primeval one- 
‘ness of mankind, the opposite of the oneness of the spirit. 

_ But Kate had always looked upon her blood as. absolutely 
her own, her individual own. Her spirit she shared, in the 

434 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

spirit she communed. But her blood stayed by her in indivi- . 
duality. a 
Now she was confronted by the other great assertion: The. i 
blood is one blood. — It meant+a strange, marginless death of 
her individual self. 3 
Now she understood why Ramon and Cipriano wore the | 
white clothes and the sandals, and were naked, or half-naked, 
as living gods. It was the acquiescence in the primitive asser-_ 
tion. It was the renewal of the old, terrible bond of the blood-— 
unison of man, which made blood-sacrifice so potent a factor 
of life. The blood of the individual is given back to the ete 
blood-being, the god, the nation, the tribe. 
Now she understood the strange unison she could aaa S 
feel between Ramon and his men, and Cipriano and his men. 
It was the soft, quaking, deep communion of blood-oneness. — 
Sometimes it made her feel sick. Sometimes it made her revolt. 
But it was the power she could not get beyond. a 
Because, admitting his blood-unison, Ramon at the same 
time claimed a supremacy, even a godliness. He was a man, as 
the lowest of his peons was a man. At the same time, rising 
from the same pool of blood, from the same roots of manhood © 
_as they, and being, as they were, a man of the pulsing blood, he 
was still something more. Not in the blood nor in the spirit lay 

within him, an inexplicable star which rose out of the dark sea 
and shone between the flood and the great sky. The mysterious 
star which unites the vast universal blood with the universa 
breath of the spirit, and shines between them both. ie 
Not the rider on the white horse: nor the rider on the red. 
That which is beyond the riders. and the horses, the inexplic- 
able mystery of the stars whence no horseman comes and to 
which no horseman can arrive. The star which is a man’s inner- 
most clue, which rules the power of the blood on the one hand, 
and the power of the spirit on the other. 2 
For this, the only thing which is supreme above all power in 
a man, and at the same time, is power; which far transcends — 
knowledge; the strange star between the sky and the waters of 
the first cosmos: this is man’s divinity. 
And some men ate not divine at all. They have only facul- 
ties. They are slaves, or they should be slaves. 

KATE IS A WIFE 435 

But many a man has his own spark of divinity, and has it 
quenched, blown out by the winds of force or ground out of 
him by machines. 

And when the spirit and the blood in man begin to go 
asunder, bringing the great death, most stars die out. 

_ Only the man of a great star, a great divinity, can bring the 
‘opposites together again, in a new unison. 

And this was Ramon, and this was his great effort: to bring 
the great opposites into contact and into unison again. And 
‘this is the god-power in man. By this power you shall know the 
god in man. By none other. 

Ramon was a man as the least of his peons was a man, with 
the beating heart and the secret loins and the lips closed on the 
same secret of manhood. And he was human as Kate was hu- 
man, with the same yearning of the spirit, for pure knowledge 
and communion, the soul in the greatness of its comprehend- 

al fat only he¢had that starry power for bringing together the 
two*great human jmpulses to a point of fusion, for being the 
bitd between the vast wings of thedual-created power to 
which man has access and in which man has his being. The 
‘Morning Star, between the breath of dawn and the deeps of 
the dark. 

_ Men had tried to murder him with knives. Carlota would 
have mvfrdered him with her spirit. Each half separately wanted 
to commit the murder of him. 

But he kept himself beyond. He was the living Quetzalcoatl, 
and the tiny sparkle of a star was rising in his own men, in his 
own woman. 

The star between the two wings of power: that alone was 
divinity in a man, and final manhood. 

_ Kate had a message from Cipriano to say he was coming out 
to stay in the Villa Aragon. The Villa Aragon was the chief 
house on the lake, in small but rather beautiful grounds with 
‘tufts of palm-trees and heavy hedges of jasmine, a garden kept 
always green by constant watering. The house was built rather 
‘like a little castle, absurd, yet its deep, spacious verandas open- 
ing on to the slopes and knolls of the tree-clustered garden, 
above the lake, were pleasant. 

436 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

the boyish look. He wanted Kate to marry him, go through 

Mexican civil marriage, and install herself in the Villa Arago 
She hesitated. She knew she must go back to Europe, to Eng- 
land and Ireland, very soon. The necessity was imperative. T 
sense of menace that Mexico put over her, and the feelin 
inner nausea, was becoming too much to bear. She felt 
could not stand it, unless she went away to relax for a time. 

This she told to Cipriano. And his face fell. 

“It doesn’t matter to me very much whether I marry or 
before I go,’ she said. ‘But I must go soon — soon.’ 

“How soon?’ 

“By January.’ 

His face: lightened again. 

“Then marry me before you go,” he said. ‘Next week.” 

She agreed, with curious indifference, and he, his eyes fla 
ing again like a boy’s, moved quickly, to make the necess 
legal preparations. Ay 

She did not care whether she married or not. In one esser 
tial sense, she had married Cipriano already. He was first ai 
foremost a soldier, swift to come to her, and swift to go. § 
would always be a good deal alone. 

And him alone, just as a man and a soldier, she could mar 
easily enough. It was this terrible Mexico that frightened h 
with a sense of doom. ‘ 

The Quetzalcoatl movement had spread in the country, ul 
sinisterly. The Archbishop had declared against it, Ramon anc 
Cipriano and their adherents were excommunicated. An at 
tempt had been made to assassinate Montes. 

The adherents of Quetzalcoatl in the capital had made t 
Church of San Juan Bautisto, which was called the Church 
the Black Saviour, their Metropolitan House of Quetzalco 
The Archbishop, a choleric man, had summoned his fervs 
followers to march in procession to this Church of San J 
now called the House of Quetzalcoatl, and seize it, and res 
it to the Catholic Church. The government, knowing it wo 
have to fight sooner or later, arrested the Archbishop : 
broke up the procession after some bloodshed. 

Then a kind of war began. The Knights of Cortés brought 
out their famous hidden stores of arms, not very impres 
after all, and a clerical mob, headed by a fanatical priest, sur 

KATE IS A WIFE 437 

: into the Zdcalo. Montes had the guns turned on them. But it 
looked like the beginnings of a religious war. In the streets the 
: vhite and blue serapes of Quetzalcoatl and the scarlet and black 
srapes of Huitzilopochtli were seen in bands, matching to the 
sound of tom-toms, and holding up the curious round banners, 
made of eaacoectale) of Quetzalcoatl, and the tall staklet 
signs of Huitzilopochtli, long poles with the soft club of scar- 
- feathers at the top, tufted with a black point. — In the 
churches, the priests were still inflaming the orthodox to a 
holy war. In the streets, priests who had gone over to Quetzal- 
coatl were haranguing the crowd. 

_ It was 4 wild moment. In Zacatecas General Narciso Beltran 
had declared against Montes and for the Church. But Cipriano 
with his Huitzilopochtli soldiers had attacked with such swift- 
ness and ferocity, Beltran was taken and shot, his army dis- 
peared. 

Then Montes declared the old Church illegal in Mexico, and 
caused a law te be passed, making the religion of Quetzalcoatl 
the national religiog of the Republic. All churches wete closed. 
All Priests \ were compelled to take an oath of allegiance to the 
Republic, or condemned to exile. The armies of Huitzilopochtli 
and the white and blue serapes of Quetzalcoatl appeared in all 
the towns and villages of the Republic. Ramon laboured cease- 
lessly. Cipriano appeared in unexpected flashes, in unexpected 
aces. He managed to rouse the most discontented States, 
a Cruz, Tamaulipas, Yucatan, to a sort of religious frenzy. 
ge baptisms took place in the sea, and a scarlet and black 
towet of Huitzilopochtli rose along the shores. 

The whole country was thrilling with a new thing, with a re- 
ase of new energy. But there was a sense of violence and crud- 
ity in it all, a touch of horror. 

The Archbishop was deported, no more priests were seen in 
e streets. Only the white and blue and earth-coloured serapes 
of Quetzalcoatl, and the scarlet and black of Huitzilopochtli, 
‘were seen among the crowds. There was a great sense of re- 
ease, almost of exuberance. 

This is why Cipriano came to Kate with those black, flash- 
ng, boyish eyes. He was ina strange state of triumph. Kate was 
shtened, and she felt curiously hollow. Even the queer, new, 
hing triumph and the sense of a new thing on the face of the 

al 

438 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

earth could not quite save her. She belonged too much to the 
old world of Europe, she could not, could not make herself 
over so quickly. But she felt that if she could go back to Ite- 
land, and let her life and her ‘body pause for a time, then she 
could come back and take her share. 
For it was not her spirit alone which was changing, it was 
her body, and the constitution of her very blood. She could 
feel it, the terrible katabolism and metabolism in her blood, 
changing het even as a creature, changing her to another 
creature. 
And if it went too fast, she would die. 
So, she was legally married to Cipriano, and she went to live 
with him in the Villa Aragon, for a month. After a month, she 
would sail away, alone, to Ireland. He agreed too. : 
It was strange, to be married to him. He made her go all 
vague and quiet, as if she sank away heavy and still, away = m 
the surface of life, and lay deep in the under-life. 
The strange, heavy, positive passivity. For the first time in 
her life she felt absolutely at rest. And talk, and thought, had 
become trivial, superficial to her: as the tipples on the surface 
of the lake are as nothing, to the creatures that live away below 
. in the unwavering deeps. 
In her soul, she was still and proud. If only the body had no 
puileres the unbearable nausea of emai: She had sunk to a 

her. 

Cipriano was happy, in his curious Indian way. His eyes kept 
that flashing, black, dilated look of a boy looking newly on a 
strange, almost uncanny wonder of life. He did not look very 
definitely at Kate, or even aS —_ definite notice of her. H 

KATE IS A WIFE 439 

desire for frictional, irritant sensation. She realized how all her 
old love had been frictional, charged with the fire of irritation 
and the spasms of frictional voluptuousness. 
‘ - Cipriano, curiously, by refusing to share any of this with her, 
‘made it become external to her. Her strange seething feminine 
‘ will and desire subsided in her and Swept away, leaving her soft 
and powerfully potent, like the hot springs of water that gush- 
ed up, so noiseless, so soft, yet so powerful, with a sort of 
‘secret potency. 
_ She realized, almost with wonder, the death in her of the 
“Aphrodite of the foam: the seething, frictional, ecstatic Aphro- 
dite. By a swift dark instinct, Cipriano drew away from this in 
her. When, in their love, it came back on her, the seething 
ele tic female ecstasy, which knows such spasms of delirium, 
he recoiled from her. It was what she used to call her ‘satis- 
faction.’ She had loved Joachim for this, that again, and again, 
and again he could give her this orgiastic ‘satisfaction’, in 
spasms that nvade her cry aloud. 
_ But Cipriano would not. By a dark and powerful i instinct he 
drew away from her as soon as this desire rose again in her, for 
the white ecstasy of frictional satisfaction, the throes of Aphro- 
dite of the foam. She could see that to him, it was repulsive. 
He just removed himself, dark and unchangeable, away from 
er. 
_ And‘he, as she lay, would realize the worthlessness of this 
m-effervescence, its strange externality to her. It seemed to 
come upon her from without, not from within. And succeed- 
ing the first moment of disappointment, when this sort of 
tisfaction’ was denied her, came the knowledge that she did 
; — really want it, that it was really nauseous to her. 
_ And he, in his dark, hot silence would bring her back to the 
new, soft, heavy, hot hom when she was like a:fountain gush- 
= noiseless and with urgent softness from the volcanic deeps. 
hen she was open to him soft and hot, yet gushing with a 
seless soft power. And there was no such thing as conscious 
isfaction.’ What happened was dark and untellable. So dif- 
ent from the beak-like friction of Aphrodite of the foam, the 
‘iction which flares out in circles of phosphorescent ecstasy, 
the last wild spasm which utters the involuntary cry, like a 
ath-cry, the final love-cry. This she had known, and known 

440 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

to the end, with Joachim. And now this too was removed from 
her. What she had with Cipriano was curiously beyond her 
knowing: so deep and hot and flowing, as it were subterran- 
ean. She had to yield before it. She could not grip it into one 
final spasm of white ecstasy which was like sheer knowing. 

And as it was in the love-act, so it was with him. She could 
not Anow him. When she tried to know him, something went 

ing else wete possible. She, sometimes, felt it strange. She had 
so craved for intimacy, z#s7sted on intimacy. z 

Now she found herself accepting him finally and forever as 
the stranger in whose presence she lived. It was his impersonal 

. Spiritual intimacy whatever. A mindless communion of 
blood. r 

Therefore, when he had to go away, it did not matter so ve ry 
much. His prgsence was something he left with her, and he 
took her presence along with him. And somehow, there was 
no need for emotions. 

He had to leave early one motning for Mexico City. The dawn 
came perfect and clear. The sun was not yet on the lake, but it 
caught the mountains beyond Tuliapan, and they shone ma: 
cally distinct, as if some magic light were focussed on them. 
The green furrows of the mountain-sides were as if in her own 
hand. Two white gulls, flying, suddenly got the light, and glit- 
tered. But the full, soft, noiseless dun lake was pallid, unlit. 

She thought of the sea. The Pacific was not very far away 
The sea seemed to have retreated entirely out of her conscious- 
ness. Yet she knew she needed its breath again. 

Cipriano was going down to bathe. She saw him walk c out 
on the masonry of the square basin which was their own tiny 
harbour. He threw off his wrap and stood dark in sinoaea 

KATE IS A WIFE 441 

gainst the pale, unlit water. How dark he was! Dark as a 
falay. Curious that his body was as dark, almost, as his face. 
ind with that strange archaic fulness of physique, with the full 

hest and the full, yet beautiful buttocks of men on old Greek 

f He dropped off the edge of masonry and waded out in the 
dim, soft, uncanny water. “And at that moment the light tipped 

Indian. She looked at him in wonder, as he moved pure red 
and luminous further into the lake, unconscious. As if on fire! 
_ The Sons of the Morning! She let her effort at knowing slip 

e communion. 
_ It was his race, too. She had noticed before how the natives 
hone purée red when morning or evening light caught them, 
ather level. As fires they stood in the water. The Red Indian. 
_ He went away, with his man, on horseback. And she watch- 
ed him ride over the brow of the road, sitting dark and still on 
his silkys roan horse. He loved a red horse. Agd there was a 
ious motionlessness about him as he rode horseback, an old, 
e pride, and at the same time the half-ghostly, dark invisi- 
bility of the Indian, sitting close upon the horse as if he and it 
belonged to one birth. 
He was gone, and for a while she felt the old nostalgia for 
his presence. Not for him, exactly. Not even to see him or 
touch him or speak to him. Only to feel him about. 
_ Then quickly she recovered. She adjusted herself to the pre- 
ce he left behind with her. As soon as he had rea/ly gone, 
nd the act of going was over, his presence came back to her. 
_ She walked a little while by the shore, beyond the break- 
water wall. She loved to be alone: a great deal alone, with a 
arden and the lake and the morning. 
‘Iam like Teresa, really,’ she said to herself. 
_ Suddenly before her she saw a long, dark soft rope, lying 

442 THE PLUMED SERPENT ‘ 

lying there over a aa stone, with its head sunk down to ear 

It felt her presence, too, for suddenly, with incredible so’ 
quickness, it contracted itself down the boulder, and she sav 
it entering a little gap in the bottom of the wall. 

The hole was not very big. And as it entered it quickly 
looked back, poising its little, dark, wicked, pointed head, a 
flickering a dark tongue. Then it passed on, slowly = s 
dark length i into the hole. 

When it had all gone in, Kate could see the last fold still, 
and the flat little head resting on the fold, like the devil with 
his chin on his arms, looking out of a loop-hole. So the wich 
sparks of the eyes looked out at her, from — the recess 
- Watching out of its own invisibility. 

So she wondered over it, as it lay in its hidden places. At all 
the unseen things in the hidden places of the earth. And sl 
wondered if it was disappointed at not being able to rise hig 
in creation: to be able to run on four feet, and not ea 
belly on the ground. 

Perhaps not! Perhaps it had its own peace. She felt a cer rtain 
reconciliation between herself and it. 

CHAPTER XXVII 

Here/ 

SHE and Teresa visited one another along the lake. There 
a kinship and a gentleness between them, Baa now 
was going away ‘fot a while. 

There was a certain autumnal purity and lull on the lake 
The moisture still lingered, the bushes on the wild hills 
green in puffs. Sunlight lay in a rich gleam on the mountai 
and shadows were deep and velvety. The green almost cove 
the rocks and the pinkish land. Bright green the sugar cane, 
red the ploughed earth, dark the trees with white specks of 
villages here and there. And over the wild places, a Spal e of 
bushes, then stark grey rock still coming out. é 

HERE! 443 

_ The sky was very high and pure. In the morning came the 
sound of drums, and on the motionless, crystal air the cry for 
he pauses of the day. And always the day seemed to be pausing 
nd unfolding again to the greater mystery. The universe 
2emed to have opened vast and soft and delicate with life. 

_ There was something curiously soothing even in the full, 
pale, dove-brown water of the lake. A boat was coming over, 
with its sail hollowed out like a shell, pearly white, and its sharp 
black canoe-beak slipping past the water. It looked like the 
boat of Dionysos coming with a message, and the vine 
sprouting. 

Kate could hardly remember now the dry rigid pallor of the 
heat, when the whole earth seemed to crepitate viciously with 
dry malevolence: like memory gone dry and sterile, hellish. 
Ramon and Teresa came along the lake, and rowed into the 
basin. It was a morning when the shadows on the mountains 
were almost cornflower blue. 

_ “Yet you must go away?’ Ramon said to her. 

‘For a little whye- You don’t think I am Lot’s wife, do 

: ‘No! !? langhed Ramon: ‘I think-you’re Cipriano’s.’ 
_ ‘Iam really. But I want to go back for a little while.’ 
_ ‘Ah yes! Better go and then come again. Tell them in your 

_ ‘T will tell them,’ she said. ‘If there is anybody to listen.’ 
- £Yes!” he said. 

_ He watched the white sail blowing nearer. 

‘But why do you go away?’ he asked her, after a silence. 
~ £You don’t cate, do you?’ she said. 

- There was a dead pause. 

~ £Yes, I cate,’ he said. 

— ‘But why?’ 

_ Again it was some time before he answered. 

444 THE PLUMED SERPENT. 

“You are one of us, we need you,’ he said. 
‘Even when I don’t do anything? —- and when I get a 
bored with living Quetzalcoatls — and the rest, and wish for a 
simple Don Ramon?’ she replied. 4 

He laughed suddenly. 

‘What is a simple Don Ramon?’ he said. ‘A simple Dor 2 
Ramon has a living Quetzalcoatl inside him. But you help all 
the same.’ 

‘You go ahead so grandly, one would not think you ne 
help: especially from a mere woman who ~ who after all is 
the wife of your friend.’ 

They were sitting on a bench under a red-flowering © 
settia whose huge scarlet petal-leaves spread out like sharp 
plumes. 

better?’ 

“Of course,’ she said, more than equivocal. 

He was leaning his arms on his knees, and looking out t 
lake, abstract, and remote. There was a certain worn loo 
his face, and the vulnerability which always caught at Ka 
heart. She realized again the isolation and the deadly strain 
effort towards a new way of life put upon him. Yet he had to 
do it. 

4 

This again gave her a feeling of helplessness, a woman’ 

efforts. 
“Do you feel awfully sure of yourself?’ she said. 
“Sure of myself?’ he re-echoed. ‘No! Any day I may die 
disappear from the face of the earth. I not only know it, _ : 
it. So why should I be sure of myse/f?’ 
‘Why should you die?’ she said. 
‘Why should anybody ever die? — even Carlota!’ 
‘Ah! —her hour had come!’ 
“Can you set one’s hour as one sets an alarm clock?’ 
Kate paused. ; 
‘And if you’re not sure of yourself, what are you sure of? 
she esas: 

stand. 

HERE! 445 
_ ‘Tam sure — sure —’ he voice tailed off into vagueness, his 

woman, powerless before this suffering ghost which was still 
in the flesh. 

“You don’t think you are wrong, do you?’ she asked, in 
cold distress. 

“No! Iam not wrong. Only maybe I can’t hold out,’ he said. 

_ ‘And then what?’ she said, coldly. 

- “I shall go my way, alone.’ There seemed to be nothing left 
of him but the black, ghostly eyes that gazed on her. He began 
to speak Spanish. 

_ “It hurts me in my soul, as if I were dying,’ he said. 

“But why?’ she cried. ‘You are not ill?’ 

_ ‘T feel as if my soul were coming undone.’ 

“Then don’t let it,’ she cried, in fear and repulsion. 

But he only gazed with those fixed, blank eyes. A sudden 
deep stillness camg,over her; a sense of power in herself. 

“You should forget for a time,’ she said gently, compassion- 
ly laying her hand on his. What was the good of trying to: 
erstand him or wrestle with him? She was a woman. He 
a man, and — and — and therefore not quite real. Not true 

, “Yes! !? he said. ‘It is true!’ 
‘Of course it is!’ she replied. ‘If you want to be so — so ab- 

ike-an ostrich in the sand, and forget.’ 
5; Sol’ he said, aes “You ate angry again!’ 
"We can’t even prevent you,’ he said. 

“Yes, but you are against my going — you don’t let me go in 

4 “Why must you go?’ he said. 
isi: “1 must,’ she said. ‘I must go back to my children, and my 

446 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

“It is a necessity in you?’ he said. i 
‘Yes!’ ie: 
The moment she had admitted the necessity, she realized it 
was a certain duplicity in herself. It was as if she had 
selves: one, a new one, which belonged to Cipriano and 
Ramon, and which was her sensitive, desirous self: the oth 
hard and finished, accomplished, belonging to her mother, 
children, England, her whole past. This old accomplished s 
was curiously invulnerable and insentient, curiously hard 
‘free.’ In it, she was an individual and her own mistress. T 
other self was vulnerable, and organically connected with 
Cipriano, even with Ramon and Teresa, and so was not ‘free’ 
at all. 
She was aware of a duality in herself, and she suffered from 
it. She could not definitely commit herself, either to the old 
way of life, or to the new. She reacted from both. The old was 
a prison, and she loathed it. But in the new way she was not 
her own mistress at all, and her egoistic will recoiled. 
‘That’s just it!’ she said. ‘It zr a necessity in me, and you 
want to prevent me.’ 
‘No! No!’ said Ramon. ‘I hope not.’ 
“Yes! You put a weight on me, and paralyse me, to preven’ 
me from going,’ she said. . 
“We must not do that,’ he said. ‘We must leave you, a 
not come near you for a time, if you feel it is so.’ 
‘Why? Why can’t you be friendly? Why can’t you be with 

go?’ 
He looked at her with dispassionate eyes. 

is a turning back: there is something renegade in it. — Bu 
are all complicated. And if you /ee/ you must go back for a time, 
go! It isn’t terribly important. You have chosen, really. I am 
not afraid for you.’ 

in her connection with Cipriano and Ramén. Yet she said, 
mocking slightly: a 
“Why should you be afraid for me?’ 
“Aren’t you sometimes afraid for yourself?’ he asked. 

HERE! 447 

uttied, she could be in England for Christmas. It felt so safe, 
o familiar, so normal, the thought of Christmas at home, in 
ingland, with her mother. And all the exciting things she 
ould tell to the people at home! And all the exciting gossip 
he could hear! In the distance, it looked very attractive. — She 

. ‘What good ghing in particular?’ he asked her. 

“Ob - Quetzalcogtl. and all that!’ she said. ‘One can have 
roo much of it. 

‘Tt may be,’ he said, rising and poing quietly away; so 
uietly, he was gone before she knew. And when she realized 
had gone like that, she flushed with anger. But she sat on 
t the poinsettia tree, in the hot, still November sun, look- 
withganger at the hedge of jasmine, with its pure white 
wets, and its sere, withered flowers, and its pinkish buds 
g the dark leaves. Where had she heard something about 
ine? ‘And the jasmine flowers between us!’ 

Oh! how tired she was of all that! 

Teresa came down the garden slope. 

‘You ate still sitting here?’ she exclaimed. 

“Where else should I be?’ Kate answered. 

‘I don’t know. - Ramén has gone to Sayula, to see the Jefe. 
He wouldn’t wait for us, to come with us in the boat.’ 

“I suppose he was in a hurry,’ said Kate. 

‘How fine these Noche Buenas are!’ said Teresa, looking at 
the brilliant spread of the red poinsettias, 

“They are your Christmas flower, aren’t ithey.? said Kate. 
Yes — the flowers of the Noche Buena — 

‘How awful, Christmas with hibiscus and poinsettia! It 

448 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

makes me long to see mistletoe among the oranges, f 
fruiterer’s shop in Hampstead.’ 
‘Why that?’ laughed Teresa. : 
‘Oh!’ Kate sighed petulantly. ‘To get back to ad ife 
To see the buses rolling on the mud in Piccadilly, on Chr 
mas Eve, and the wet pavements crowded with people under 
the brilliant shops.’ Re 
‘Ts that life, to you?’ asked Teresa. 
Nes. Without all this abstraction, and will. Lites is go 
enough for me if I am allowed to live and be mysélf.’ 
“It is time Cipriano should come home,’ said Teresa. — 
But this made Kate rise from her seat, with sudden im. 
patience. She would not have this thing put over her! She 
would break free, and show them! 
She went with Teresa to the village. The air seemed 1 
teriously alive, with a new Breath. But Kate felt out o 
The two women sat under a tree on the beach at Sayula, | 
ing a little, and watching the full expanse of the dove-pale 
A black boat with a red-painted roof and a tall mast 
mooted to the low breakwater-wall, which rose about a 
high, from the shallow water. On the wall stood loose lit 
groups of white-clad men, looking into the black belly of | 
ship. And perched immobile in silhouette against the lake 
a black-and-white cow, and a huge monolithic black-and-wh 
bull. The whole silhouette frieze motionless, against the 1 
water that was coloured brown like turtle doves. 
_ It was near, yet seemed strange and remote. Two peons fixed 
a plank gangway up to the side of the boat. Then they bega 
shove the cow towards it. She pawed the new broad pl. 
tentatively, then, with that slow Mexican indifference, she 
bered unwillingly on to the gangway. They edged her slow] 
to the end, where she looked down into the boat. And at last, 
she dropped neatly into the hold. ‘ 
Now the group of men broke into motion, for the huge and 
spangled bull. A tall old Mexican, in fawn, skin-tight trouss 
and little leather jacket, and a huge felt hat heavily embroide: 
with silver, gently took the ring in the bull’s nose, gently 1 
the wedge of the bull’s head, so the great soft throat was 

HERE! 449 

Belegred, high-hatted old Mexican pulled evenly at the 
nose-ring. And with a calm and weighty poise, the bull stepped 
al long the crest of the wall, delicately and impassively, to the 
plank gangway. There he stopped. 
_ The peons began to re-group. The one behind, with his red 
Sa a tied so determinedly over his white hips, ceased to shove, 
7 e slim-legged Mexican let go the ring. 
Then two peons passed a rope loosely round the haunches 
of the bull. The high-hatted farmer stepped on to the planks, 
and took the nose-ring again, very gently. He pulled softly. 
The bull lifted its head, but held back. It struck the planks with 
an | unwilling foot. Then it stood, spangled with black on its 
whiteness, like a piece of the sky, immobile. 
The farmer pulled once more at the ring. Two men were 
pulling the rope, pressing in the flanks of the immoveable, pas- 
si spangled monster. Two peons, at the back, with their 
heads down and their red-sashed, flexible loins thrust out be- 
hind, shoved with all their strength in the soft flanks of the 
mighty creature. 
And all was utterly noiseless and changeless; against the. full- 
ness of the’pale lake, this silent, monumental group of life. 
_ Then the bull stepped slowly, imperturbably, yet against its 
will, on to the loose. planks, and was edged slowly along, to 
he ibfak of the boat. There he waited. 
He stood huge and silvery, dappled like the sky, with black 
snake matkings down his haunches, looming massive above 
red roof of the canoa. How would he ever duck to that roof, 
drop under, into the darkness of the ship? 
_ He lowered his head, and looked into the hold. The men 
= ind shoved his living flanks. He took no heed, but lowered 
his head and looked again. The men pushed with all their 
mi; night, in the dense Mexican silence. 
‘Slowly, carefully, the bull crouched himself, made himself 
S oh: 1, and with a quick, massive little movement dropped his 
forefeet down into the body of the boat, leaving his huge 
h d-quarters heaved up behind. There was a shuffle and a 
little stagger down below, then the soft thud as his hind-feet 
leaped down. He had gone. 
The planks were taken away. A peon fan to unfasten the 

m ooting rope from the stones of the shore. There was a 
er 

wk 

450 THE PLUMED SERPENT ~ 

strange thudding of soft feet within the belly of the boat. ] 
in the water were pushing the ship’s black stern, to push | 
off. But she was heavy. Slowly, casually they pulled the stone 
from under her flat bottom, and flung them aside. Slowly sh 
edged, swayed, moved a little, and was afloat. = 

The men climbed in. The two peons on the ship’s rims were 
poling her out, pressing their poles and walking heavily | till 
they reached the stern, then lifting their poles and monet to 
the high prow. She slid slowly out, on to the lake. 

Then quickly they hoisted the wide white sail. The 
thrust up her horn and curved in a whorl to the wind. The 
ship was going across the waters, with her massive, Sk 
spangled cargo of life invisible. : 

All so still and soft and remote. 

‘And will Ramon want you to sit beside him in the cht 
as the bride of Quetzalcoatl — with some strange name?” 
asked of Teresa. 

‘I don’t know,’ said Teresa. ‘Later, he says, when the time 
comes for them to have a goddess.’ a 

‘And will you mind?’ <td 

‘For myself, I am afraid of it. But I understand that Rames 
_ wants it. He says it is accepting the greater responsibilit 
one’s existence. And I think that is true. If there is God in 
and God as woman, then I must accept this part of myself a 
and He on the erect dress, and be for the time the God 

I know we must. So I shall white of the God that ale 
visible, like the heart of all the world. So when I have to v 

sacred self, because it is necessaty, and the right thing t 
do. It is right. I would not do it if I thought it was noi 
right.’ 
‘But I thought the green dress was for the Bride of Huitzilo- 
pochtli!’ said Kate. 
‘Ah yes!’ Teresa caught herself up. ‘Mine is the black d 
with the white edges, and the red clouds.’ 
“Would you rather have the green?’ Kate asked. ‘Have it if 
you would. Iam going away.’ 

HERE! : 451 

Teresa glanced up at her quickly. 

: ‘The gteen is for the wite of Huitzilopochtli,’ she said, as if 
numbed. 

‘I can’t see that it matters,’ said Kate. 

Teresa looked at her with quick, dark eyes. 

‘Different men must have different wives,’ she said. ‘Cipri- 
ino would never want a wife like me.’ 

And different women must have different husbands,’ said 
e. “Ramon would always be too abstract and overbearing 
or me.” 

_ Teresa flushed slowly, looking down at the ground. 
~Ramén needs far too much submission from a woman, to 
ease me,” Kate added. ‘He takes too much upon himself.’ 
feresa looked up quickly, and raised her head proudly, 
showing her brownish throat like a rearing, crested snake. 
dow do you know that Ramon needs submission from a 
man?’ she said. “How do you know? He has not asked any 
mission frém you. — And you are wrong. He does not ask 
subinission from me. He wants me to give myself gently to 
. im. And then he gives himself back to me far more gently 
than I give myself to him. Because a man like that is more 
gentle than a woman. He is not like Cipriano. Cipriano i isa oe 
diet But Ramon is gentle. You are mistaken in what you say.’ 

e laughed a little. 

Eton are a soldier among women, fighting all the time,’ 
a continued. ‘I am not such. But some women must be 
soldiers in their spirit, and they need soldier husbands. That is 
ry you ate Malintzi, and your dress is green. You would al- 
s fight. You would fight with yourself, if you were alone 
in the world.’ 

Tt was very still by the lake. They were waiting for Ramon. 
A man was stripping palm-stalks, squatting in silence under 
a tree, in his white clothes, his black head bent forward. Then 
he went to wet his long strips in the lake, returning with them 
da: ngling. 

Then he sat down again, and deftly, silently, with the dark, 
hildlike absorption of the people, took up his work. He was 
ading a chair bottom. When Kate watched him, he glanced 
with a flash of black eyes, saluting her. And she felt a 
ge power surge in her limbs, from the flash of living re- 

452 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

cognition and deference in his eyes. As if his défetcncem were 2 
sort of flame of life, rich in him when he saw her. 

the shore, neighing frantically. His mane flowed in the wind, 
his feet struck the pebbles as he*ran, and again he opened his 
long nose and neighed anxiously. Away up the shore — ran 
What had he ieee 

A peon had driven a high-wheeled wagon, drawn by f 
mules, deep into the lake, till the water was above the 
axles of the wheels, almost touching the bed of the ca 
looked like a dark square boat drawn by four soft, dark sea- 
horses which slowly waved their long dark ears like leaves, 
while the peon, in white with his big hat proudly balan 
stood erect. The mules deep in the water stepped gently, curv- 
ing to the shore. : 

It was winter, but like spring by the lake. White and jane 
calves, new and silky, were skipping, butting up their rea: 
ends, lifting their tails, trotting side by side down to the water. 
to sniff at it suspiciously. ; 

In the shadow of a great tree a mother-ass was fethoie 
her foal lay in the shadow, a little thing black as ink, curled up, 
with fluffy head erect and great black ears spreading up, like 
some jet-black hare full of witchcraft. : 

‘How many days?’ called Kate to the peon, who hadic ; 
out of the straw hut. 

ference. And she felt her breast surge with ers eee 
‘Last night, Patrona!’ he smiled in answer. 
‘So new! So new! He doesn’t get up, can’t he?’ 
The peon went round, put his arm under the foal and lifted 
it to its feet. There it straddled on high, in amaze, upon its 
black legs like bent hair-pins. 
“How nice it is!’ cried Kate in delight, and the peon laughed 
at her with a soft, grateful flame, touched with reverence. _ 3 
The ink-black ass-foal did not understand standing up: It 
rocked on its four loose legs, and wondered. Then it hobbled 
a few steps, to smell at some green, growing maize. It smel 
and smelled and smelled, as if all the dark aeons were stirri 1g 
awake in its nostrils. 
Then it turned, and looked with its bushy-velvet face strai 

HERE! 453 

at Kate, and put out a pink tongue at her. She laughed aloud. 
It stood wondering, dazed. Then it put out its tongue again. 
She laughed at it. It gave an awkward little skip, which sur- 
prised its own self very much. Then it ventured forward again, 
and all unexpectedly even to itself, exploded into another little 
skip. 

“Already it dances!’ cried Kate. ‘And it came into the world 
only last night.’ 

_ ‘Yes, already it dances!’ reiterated the peon. 

_ After bethinking itself for a time, the ass-foal walked un- 
cettainly towards the mother. She was a well-liking grey-and- 
brown she-ass, rather glossy and self-assured. The ass-foal 
straight found the udder, and was drinking. 

 Glancing up, Kate met again the peon’s eyes, with their 
black, full flame of life heavy with knowledge and with a cuti- 
‘ous feassurance. The black foal, the mother, the drinking, the 
new life, the mystery of the shadowy battlefield of creation; 
and the adoration of the full-breasted, glorious woman beyond 
him: all this seemed in the primitive black eyes of the man. 

_ “Adiés!? said Kate to him, lingeringly. 

_ ‘Adids; Patrona!’ he replied, suddenly lifting his hand high, 
in the Quetzalcoatl salute. 

_ She walked across the beach to the jetty, feeling the life 
weing vivid and resistant within her. ‘It is sex,’ she said to 
herself. “How wonderful sex can be, when men keep it power- 

should one give in, to anything!’ 

Ramon was coming down towards the boat, the blue sym- 
bol of Quetzalcoatl in his hat. And at that moment the drums 
began to sound for mid-day, and there came the mid-day call, 

stood erect, and shot up their right hands to the sky. The wo- 
xen sptead both palms to the light. Everything was motion- . 
less, save the moving animals. 

Then Ramon went on to the boat, the men saluting him with 

454 THE PLUMED SERPENT | 

‘Aren’t you?’ he said. ; 
‘Yes, lam. But everywhere else it is denied. Only beat 
feels the full force of one’s nobility. The natives still wors 
itt : 

‘At moments,’ said Ramon. ‘Later, they swell murder you 
and violate you, for having worshipped you.’ > 

‘Ts it inevitable?’ she said flippantly. 

‘I think so,’ he replied. ‘If you lived here alone in Sayula, 
and queened it for a time, you would get yourself murdered — 
ot worse — by the people who had worshipped you.’ 

‘I don’t think so,’ she said. 

‘I know,” he replied. 

‘Why?’ she said, obstinate. 

at last.’ 
‘I do get my nobility that way,’ she said. 
But she did not quite believe it. And she made up her mind 
still more definitely, to go away. 

on one side, with a queet boyish judiciousness, but she cae ld 
not tell at all what he felt. Paes 
‘You are going already? he said in Spanish. : 

was offended he never spoke English at all, but spoke Spani 
just as if he were addressing another Mexican. 
‘Yes,’ she said. ‘On the thirtieth.’ 
‘And when do you come back?’ he asked. 
‘Ouién sabe! — Who knows!’ she retorted. . 
He let his black eyes rest on her face for some minute: 
watching her, unchanging and incomprehensible. He was 
thinking, superficially, that if he liked, he could use the 

from leaving Sayula — since she was legally married to him. 
There was the old fixity of Indian anger, glinting fixed and te- 
lentless in the depths of his eyes. And then the almost invisible 
change in his face, as the hidden emotion sank down and the 

HERE! 455 

indifference, the emotionlessness of centuries, and the — 
c kind of tolerance came over him. She could almost feel 
e waves of successive shadow and coldness go through his 
blood, his mind hardly aware at all. And again a fear of losing 
his contact melted her heart. 
‘Te was somehow, to her, beautiful, to feel shadows, and cold 
gleams, and a hardness like stone, then the strange heavy 
inertia of the tropical mid-day, the stupor of the sun, moving 
upon him while he stood motionless, watching her. In the end 
= tr was that weird, sultry, tropical stupor of the hot hours, a 
heat-swoon of sheer indifference. 
; Gono quieres tu!” he said. ‘As you wish.’ 
_ And she knew he had already released her, in the dark, sultry 
por of his blood. He would make no further effort after her. 
uis also was the doom of his race. 
ie took a boat and went down to Jamiltepec, to Ramon: as 
she knew he would. 
_ She was alene, as usual. It occurred to her, that she herself 
led this aloneness. She could not relax and be with these 

peo ople. She fe not relax and be with anybody. She always 
had to recoil upon her own individuality, as a cat does. 
_ Sex, sexual correspondence, did it matter so very much to 
her? It might have mattered more, if she had not had it. But 
she had had it — and very finally and consummately, with Ci- 
now#So she knew all about it. It was as if she had conquered 
other territory, another field of life. The conqueress! And 
now she would retire to the lair of her own individuality, with 
> prey. 
Suddenly, she saw herself as men often saw her: the great 
, with its spasms of voluptuousness and its lifelong lustful 
joyment of its own isolated, isolated individuality. Volup- 
‘uously to enjoy a contact. Then with a lustful feline gratifica- 
Hi th to break the contact, and roam alone in a sense of power. 
time, to seize a sort of power, purring upon her own 
‘iso ied individuality. 
_ She knew so many women like that. They played with love 
and intimacy as a cat with a mouse. In the end, they quickly ate 
the love mouse, then trotted off with a full belly anda volup- - 
s sense of power. 

Only sometimes the love-mouse refused to be digested, and 

= 

456 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

‘there was life-long dyspepsia. Or, like Cipriano, turned intoa 
sort of serpent, that reared and looked at her with glittering 
eyes, then slid away into the void, leaving her blank, the sense = 
of power gone out of her. ‘ j 

Another thing, she had observed, with a touch of horror. 
One after the other, her women ‘friends’, the powerful love- 
women, at the age of forty, forty-five, fifty, they lost all their 
charm and allure, and turned into real grimalkins, greyish, 
avid, and horrifying, prowling around looking for prey that 
became scatcer and scarcer. As human beings they went to — 
pieces. And they remained these grey-ribbed grimalkins, 
dressed in elegant clothes, the grimalkin howl even passing 
into their smart chatter. 

Kate was a wise woman, wise enough to take a lesson. 

It is all very well for a woman to cultivate her ego, her in- 
dividuality. It is all very well for her to despise love, or to love 
love as a cat loves a mouse, that it plays with as long as p 
sible, before devouring it to vivify her own individuality and 
voluptuously fill the belly of her own ego. 

‘Woman has suffered far more from the suppression of hee 
ego than from sex suppression,’ says a woman writer, and it 
may well be true. But look, only look at the modern women of 
fifty and fifty-five, those who have cultivated their ego to the 
top of their bent! Usually, they ate grimalkins to fill one be: 
pity or with repulsion. 

cf 

membered it again. She had had her fling, even here in Mexia ; 
And these men would let her go again. She was no a Fe 
She could carry off any spoil she had Speen 

grimalkin women, her contemporaries, were the most repel- 
lent to her. Even the horrid old tom-cat men of the civilized 
roof gutters, did not fill her with such sickly dread. 

‘No!’ she said to herself. “My ego and my individuality are 
not worth that ghastly price. I'd better ates some oe my 

han 

a ee) 

HERE! 457 

r ‘ After all, when Cipriano touched her caressively, all her 
body Gniverad: That was the greater sex, that could fill all the 
world with lustre, and which she dared not think about, its 
| 3 Pr ower was so much greater than her own will. But on the 
other hand when she spread the wings of her own ego, and 
os ent forth her own spirit, the world could look very wonderful 
) to her, when she was alone. But after a while, the wonder 
faded, and a sort of jealous emptiness set in. 
: ‘I must have both,’ she said to herself. ‘I must not recoil 
against Cipriano and Ramén, they make my blood blossom in 
my body. I say they are limited. But then one must be limited. 
ones tries to be unlimited, one becomes horrible. Without 
Cipriano to touch me and limit me and submerge my will, I 
shall become a horrible, elderly female. I ought to want to be 
li m ited. 1 ought to be g/ad if a man will limit me with a strong 
will and a warm touch. Because what I call my greatness, and 
the vastness of the Lord behind me, lets me fall through a hol- 
low floor of nothingness, once there is no man’s hand there, to 
h 10 ld me warm and limited. Ah yes! Rather than become cides 
3 d a bit grisly, f will make my submission; as far as I need, 
and no fufther.’ ‘ 
_ She called a man-servant, and set off down the lake in a row- 
oat. It was a very lovely November morning, the world had 
lot yet gone dry again. In the sharp folds of the steep mountain 
Eppes to the north-east, the shadows were pure corn-flower 
blue . Below was the lingering delicacy of green, already dry- 
. The lake was full still, but subsided, and the water- 
cinths had drifted away. Birds flew low in the stillness. It 
very full and still, in the strong, hot light. Some maize- 
elds showed sere stubble, but the palo-blanco flowers were 
out, and the mesquite bushes wete frail green, and there were 
‘NY wafts of perfume from the little yellow flower-balls, like cassia. 
‘Why should I go away!’ said Kate. ‘Why should I see the 
b ses on the mud of Piccadilly, on Christmas Eve, and the 
c owds of people on the wet pavements, under the big shops 
‘§ like great caves of light? I may as well stay here, where my soul 
is less dreary. I shall have to tell Ramon I am sorry for the 
fh: gs I said. I won’t carp at them. After all, there is another 
kind of vastness here, with the sound of downs. and the cry of 
Quetzalcoatl.’ 

k 
a 
sl 

458 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

bougainvillea, from the high wall, with the pale spraying 
of plumbago flowers, and many loose creamy-coloured 
roses. 

‘Estdn tocando!’ said her boatman quietly, looking up at her 
with dark, pregnant eyes. 

He had heard already the sound of the light drum at Ja 
tepec. The boat rowed softly: and there came a sound of a 
man’s voice singing in the morning. 

Her boatman lifted an oar, as a signal to the house. And as 
the boat rounded the curve into the basin, a man-servant it 

drum, and the voice of singing, did not disturb. 

“Is Don Cipriano here?’ asked Kate. 

‘Estd!’ murmured the man, with a slight motion towards 
Ramon’s balcony, whence the singing came. ‘Shall I say you 
have come?’ z 

He did not lift his voice above the murmur. a 
_ ‘No! said Kate. ‘I shall sit here in the garden a while, be- 
fore I come up.’ 

“Then I will leave open the door,’ said the man, ‘and ae 
can come up when you will.’ 3 

Kate sat on a seat under a big tree. A creeping plant, wk ay 
great snake-like cords, and big sulphur-and-brown trumpet 
flowers, hung above. She listened to the singing. It was Ramon 
teaching one of the singers. 

Ramon had not a very good voice. He sang quietly, as if ah 
the inner air, with very beautiful, simple expression. But Kate 
could not catch the words. 

‘Ya?’ said Ramon, when he had finished. 

“Ya, Patron!’ said the man, the singer. ay 

And he began, in his strong, pure voice that caught at:the 
very bowels, to sing another of the Hymns. 

‘My way is not thy way, and thine is not mine. 
But come, before we patt 

Let us separately go to the Morning Star, 

And meet thete. 

HERE! 459 

2 I do not point you to my road, nor yet 
Call: “Oh come!” = 
But the Star is the same for fou of us, 
Winsome. 

The good ghost of me goes down the distance 
To the Holy Ghost. 

Oh you, in the tent of the cloven flame 

Meet me, you I like most. 

Each man his own way forever, but towards 
The hoverer between; 

Who opens his flame like a tent-flap, 

As we slip in unseen. 

A man cannot tread like a woman, 

Nor a woman step out like a man. 

The ghost of each through the leaves of shadow 
Moves as it can. 

But the Morning Star and the Evening Star - 
Pitch tents of flame 

ES Where we foregather like gypsies, none knowing 
’ >} How the other came. 

~ ask for nothing except to slip 

~ In the tent of the Holy Ghost 
And be there in the house of the cloven flame, 
Guest of the Host. 

Be with me there, my woman, 

é Be bodily there. 
Then let the flame wrap round us 
Like a snare. 

Be there along with me, O men! 

Reach across the hearth, _ 

And laugh with me while the woman rests 
For all we are worth.’ 

- The man had sung this hymn over several times, halting 
d forgetting, his pure, burning voice faltering out; then the 
w, tather husky voice of Ramon, with a subtler intensity, 
ming in, as if heard from the centre of a shell; then again the 
sudden ripping sound of the true singer’s tenor, going like a 

bce M0Z0, a fan-setvant, had followed her into the garden, 
d sat at a distance on his heels, under a tree, with his back to 

fe se 

460 THE PLUMED SERPENT 

spread dark and hard, in his open Auaraches, and the black braid 
of his hat-string hung against his dark cheek. For the rest he 
was pure white, the white cotton tight on his thighs. Be: 
When the singing had finished above, and the drum was 
silent, and even the voices speaking in low tones were silent, 
her mozo looked up at Kate, with his black hat-string dangli 
at his chin, his black eyes shining, and a timid sort of smile 
his face. 
‘Esta muy bien, Patrona?’ he said shyly. ‘It is good, isn oa it, 
Mistress ?’ 
“It is very good,” she replied, with the infallible echo. 
there were conflicting feelings in her breast, and the man k 
if. : 
He looked so young, when he smiled that gay, shy, excited 
little smile. Something of the eternal child in him. But a chil 
that could harden in an instant into a savage man, teven, 
and brutal. And a man always fully sex-alive, for the mom 
innocent in the fulness of sex, not in the absence. And Kate 
thought to herself, as she had thought before, that there were 
mote ways than one of “becoming again as a little child.” __ 
But the man had a sharp, watchful look in the corner of hi 
eye: to see if she were feeling some covert hostility. He wa 
- her to acquiesce in the hymn, in the drum, in the whole m 
Like a child he wanted her to acquiesce. But if she were g1 
to be hostile, he would be quick to be first in the hostility. Hi 
hostile judgment would make a pure enemy of him. 
Ah, all men were alike! 
At that moment the man stood up, with soft suddenness, 
and she heard Cipriano’s voice from the balcony above: 
“What is it, Lupe 
‘Estd la Patrona,’ answered the servant. 
Kate rose to her feet and looked up. She saw the headie nd 
the naked shoulders of Cipriano above the parapet of the bal. 
COBY: oe a 
“I will come up,’ she said. es 
And slowly she went through the great j iron gates into the 
passage-way. Lupe, following, bolted the doors behind her, — 

with their upper bodies naked, waiting for her in silence. She 
was embarrassed. 

HERE! 461 

‘I waited to hear the new hymn,’ she said. 

‘And how does it seem to you?’ said Ramon, in Spanish. 

‘T like it,’ she said. 

‘Let us sit down,” said Ramon, still in Spanish. He and she 
at in the cane rocking-chairs: Cipriano stood by the wall of 
ine terrace. 

She had come to make a sort of submission: to say she didn’t 
rant to go away. But finding them both in the thick of their 
etzalcoat] mood, with their manly breasts uncovered, she 

der. She did fot pause to ae that she was one. 
pe don’t meet in your Morning Star, apparently, do we?’ 

A Sener silence seemed suddenly to hold the two men. 
“And I suppose a woman is really de trop, even there, when 
‘men ate together.’ 

But she faltered a bit in the saying. Cipriano, she knew, was 
Hed and stuag whenshe taunted him. 

Xamon answered her, with the gentleness that could come 
ight out of his heart: but still in Spanish: 

Why, Cousin, what is it?’ 

Her lip quivered, as she suddenly said: 

‘I don’t really want to go away from you.’ 

amon looked swiftly at Cipriano, then said: 

shel again. She brimmed over with sudden tears, crying: 
You don’t really want me.’ 

“Yes, I want you! — Verdad! Verdad!’ exclaimed Cipriano, 
in his low, secret, almost muttering voice. 

And even amid her tears, Kate was thinking to herself: What 
t fraud I am! I know all the time it is I who dow’t EET, want 

For she heard the hot, phallic passion in * Cipriano” s 
_ Then came the voice of Ramon, like a chill: 

It is you who don’t want,’ he said, in English this time. 
“You needn’t commit yourself to ws. Listen to your own best 

462 THE PLUMED SERPENT . 
‘And if it tells me to go away?’ she flashed, defiant through 
the end of her tears. ’ 
“Then go! Oh certainly go!’ 
Suddenly her tears came afresh. 
‘I knew you didn’t really want me,’ she wept. 
Then Cipriano’s voice said, with a hot, furtive softness of 
persuasion: 
“You are not his! He would not tell you!’ ~ 
“That is very true, ’ said Ramon. ‘Don’t listen to me!’ 

her tears, to see him going quietly, but swiftly, away. 
She wiped her face, suddenly calm. Then she looked wit 
_ wet eyes at res He was standing erect and alert, me 

eyes. 
“You don’t want me to go, do you?’ she pleaded. 

body was slightly convulsed. Then came his soft-tongued in- 
dian speech, as if all his mouth were soft, saying in Ra h, 

_ but with the ‘r’ sound almost lost: ; 
“Yo! Yo!’ — his eyebrows lifted with queer mock surprise 
and a little convulsion went through his body again. ‘Te @ 
mucho! Mucho te quiero! Mucho! Mucho! 1 like you very much 
Very much!’ 
It sounded so soft, so soft-tongued, of the soft, wet, hot 
blood, that she shivered a little. : 
“You won’t let me go!’ she said to him. 

MORE ABOUT PENGUINS 

If you have enjoyed reading this book you may wish to 
know that Penguin Book News appeats every month. It is 
an attractively illustrated magazine containing a com- 
plete list of books published by Penguins and still in 
print, together with details of the month’s new books. 
A specimen copy will be sent free on request. 

Penguin Book News is obtainable from most book- 
shops; but you may prefer to become a regular sub- 
scriber at 3s. for twelve issues. Just write to Dept EP, 
Pengui@ Books Ltd, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, en- 
closing a cheque or postal order, and you will be put on 
the mailing Tist. 

Qther Penguins by D. H. Lawrence are listed on the 
- following page. 4 

Note: Penguin Boor News is not 
available in the U.S.A. 

D.H. LAWRENCE 

Ni ovels 

KANGAROO 
LADY CHATTERLEY S LOVER* 
THE LOST GIRL 
THE RAINBOW : 
SONS AND LOVERS 
THE TRESPASSER 
THE WHITE PEACOCK 
WOMEN IN LOVE 
THE BOY IN THE BUSH (with M. L. Skinner) 

Short Stories - 

ENGLAND, MY ENGLAND 
THE LADYBIRD 
LOVE AMONG THE HAYSTACKS & OTHER STORIES 

Other Works 

SELECTED ESSAYS 

SELECTED LETTERS 

SELECTED POEMS 
TWILIGHT IN ITALY 

* Not for sale in the U.S.A, 
Remainder not for sale in the U.S.A. or Canada 

A novel of 
compulsive power 

by a diviner of 
UNCONSCIOUS passions 

Kate Leslie, a widow of forty with a mind 
of her own, visits Mexico, where 
civilization is a scanty veil over the 
ancient inscrutable life of the senses. 
There she becomes involved in a 
subterranean world of primitive gods 3 
and mystic ritual. 

Between Kate Leslie and one of the 

leaders of a revolutionary religious 
movement, the vital Cipriano, the force of 
opposites weaves a violent paradox of love. 
Derisive, indifferent, and hostile as 

she is to many aspects of the cult of 

the Plumed Serpent,she yet finds 

through ita revelation which 

is decisive to her fulfilment. 

Cover illustration by Jack Larkin 

For copyright reasons this edition is not for sale in the U.S.A. or Canada
