St. Mawr (D. H. Lawrence, 1925)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1927 Martin Secker edition (https://archive.org/details/bwb_P2-BXZ-392)
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

> LRA 

“Mv g yyw 

ST. MAWR 

THE NOVELS OF D. H. LAWRENCE 
THIN-PAPER EDITION 

Tae WHITE Pracock 
Tur TRESPASSER 
Sons AND LOVERS 
THE PRUSSIAN OFFICER 
THE Lost Giri 
WoMEN IN LOVE 
AARON’S Rop 
ENGLAND, My ENGLAND 
St. Mawr 
THE PLUMED SERPENT 

Remaining volumes in 
active preparation 

ST. MAWR 

Together with THE PRINCESS 

BY D. H. LAWRENCE 

LONDON 
MARTIN SECKER 

NUMBER FIVE JOHN STREET ADELPHI 

First published May 1925 
Reprinted September 1927 

LONDON : MARTIN SECKER (LTD.), 1927 

CONTENTS 

St. Mawr 

THE PRINCESS 

ST. MAWR 

Lou Wirt had had her own way so long, that by the age 
of twenty-five she didn’t know where she was. Having 
one’s own way landed one completely at sea. 

To be sure for a while she had failed in her grand love 
affair with Rico. And then she had had something really 
to despair about. But even that had worked out as she 
wanted. Rico had come back to her, and was dutifully 
married to her. And now, when she was twenty-five 
and he was three months older, they were a charming 
married couple. He flirted with other women still, to 
be sure. He wouldn’t be the handsome Rico if he didn’t. 
But she had ** got ” him. Oh yes! You had only to 
see the uneasy backward glance at her, from his big blue 
eyes: just like a horse that is edging away from its 
master : to know how completely he was mastered. 

She, with her odd little museau, not exactly pretty, 
but very attractive; and her quaint air of playing at 
being well-bred, in a sort of charade game; and her queer 
familiarity with foreign cities and foreign languages; and 
the lurking sense of being an outsider everywhere, like 
a sort of gipsy, who is at home anywhere and nowhere : 
all this made up her charm and her failure. She didn’t 
quite belong. 

Of course she was American : Lousiana family, moved 
down to Texas. And she was moderately rich, with no 
close relation except her mother. But she had been 
sent to school in France when she was twelve, and since 
she had finished school, she had drifted from Paris to 
Palermo, Biarritz to Vienna and back via Munich to 
London, then down again to Rome. Only fleeting trips 
to her America. 

So what sort of American was she, after all? 

And what sort of European was she either? She didn’t 

7 

8 ST. MAWR 

** belong ’? anywhere. Perhaps most of all in Rome, 

among the artists and the Embassy people. 

It was in Rome she had met Rico. He was an 
Australian, son of a government official in Melbourne, 
who had been made a baronet. So one day Rico would 
be Sir Henry, as he was the only son. Meanwhile he 
floated round Europe on a very small allowance—his 
father wasn’t rich in capital—and was being an artist. 

They met in Rome when they were twenty-two, and 
had a love affair in Capri. Rico was handsome, elegant, 
but mostly he had spots of paint on his trousers and 
he ruined a necktie pulling it off. He behaved in a most 
floridly elegant fashion, fascinating to the Italians. But 
at the same time he was canny and shrewd and sensible 
as any young poser could be and, on principle, good- 
hearted, anxious. He was anxious for his future, and 
anxious for his place in the world, he was poor, and 
suddenly wasteful in spite of all his tension of economy, 
and suddenly spiteful in spite of all his ingratiating 
efforts, and suddenly ungrateful in spite of all his burden 
of gratitude, and suddenly rude in spite of all his good 
manners, and suddenly detestable in spite of all his 
suave, courtier-like amiability. 

He was fascinated by Lou’s quaint aplomb, her 
experiences, her ‘* knowledge,’’ her gamine knowing- 
ness, her aloneness, her pretty clothes that were som- 
times an utter failure, and her southern ‘* drawl ”’ that 
was sometimes so irritating. That sing-song which was 
so American. Yet she used no Americanisms at all, 
except when she lapsed into her odd spasms of acid 
irony, when she was very American indeed ! 

And she was fascinated by Rico. They played to each 
other like two butterflies at one flower. They pretended 
to be very poor in Rome—he was poor: and very rich 
in Naples. Everybody stared their eyes out at them. 
And they had that love affair in Capri. 

But they reacted badly on each other’s nerves. She 

ST. MAWR 9 

became ill. Her mother appeared. He couldn’t stand 
Mrs. Witt, and Mrs. Witt couldn’t stand him. There 
was a terrible fortnight. Then Lou was popped into a 
convent nursing-home in Umbria, and Rico dashed off to 
Paris. Nothing would stop him. He must go back to 
Australia. 

He went to Melbourne, and while there his father died, 
leaving him a baronet’s title and an income still very 
moderate. Lou visited America once more, as the 
strangest of strange lands to her. She came away dis- 
heartened, panting for Europe, and of course, doomed to 
meet Rico again. 

They couldn’t get away from one another, even though 
in the course of their rather restrained correspondence 
he informed her that he was ‘‘ probably ”? marrying a 
very dear girl, friend of his childhood, only daughter of 
one of the oldest families in Victoria. Not saying 
much. 

He didn’t commit the probability, but reappeared in 
Paris, wanting to paint his head off, terribly inspired 
by Cezanne and by old Renoir. He dined at the Rotonde 
with Lou and Mrs. Witt, who, with her queer democratic 
New-Orleans sort of conceit looked round the drinking- 
hall with savage contempt, and at Rico as part of the 
show. ‘“‘ Certainly,’’ she said, ‘* when these people here 
have got any money, they fall in love on a full stomach. 
And when they’ve got no money, they fall in love with a 
full pocket. I never was in a more disgusting place. 
They take their love like some people take after-dinner 
pills.”” 

She would watch with her arching, full, strong grey 
eyes, sitting there erect and silent in her well-bought 
American clothes. And then she would deliver some 
such charge of grape-shot. Rico always writhed. 

Mrs. Witt hated Paris : ‘‘ this sordid, unlucky city,” 
she called it. ‘‘ Something unlucky is bound to happen 
to me in this sinister, unclean town,’’ she said. ‘‘ I feel 

10 ST. MAWR 

contagion in the air of this place. For heaven’s sake, 
Louise, let us go to Morocco or somewhere.’’ 

** No, mother dear, I can’t now. Rico has proposed 
to me, and I have accepted him. Let us think about a 
wedding, shall we? ”’ 

‘* There!’ said Mrs. Witt. _**I said it was an 
unlucky city !”? 

And the peculiar look of extreme New Orleans annoy- 
ance came round her sharp nose. But Lou and Rico 
were both twenty-four years old, and beyond manage- 
ment. And anyhow, Lou would be Lady Carrington. 
But Mrs. Witt was exasperated beyond exasperation. 
She would almost rather have preferred Lou to elope 
with one of the great, evil porters at Les Halles. Mrs. 
Witt was at the age when the malevolent male in man, 
the old Adam, begins to loom above all the social tailor- 
ing. And yet—and yet—it was better to have Lady 
Carrington for a daughter, seeing Lou was that sort. 

There was a marriage, after which Mrs. Witt departed 
to America, Lou and Rico leased a little old house in 
Westminster, and began to settle into a certain layer of 
English society. Rico was becoming an almost fashion- 
able portrait painter. At least, he was almost fashionable, 
whether his portraits were or not. And Lou too was 
almost fashionable : almost a hits There was some flaw 
somewhere. In spite of their appearances, both Rico 
and she would never quite go down in any society. They 
were the drifting artist sort. Yet neither of them was 
content to be of the drifting artist sort. They wanted 
to fit in, to make good. 

Hence the little house in Westminster, the portraits, 
the dinners, the friends, and the visits. Mrs. Witt came 

and sardonically established herself in a suite in a quiet > 

but good-class hotel not far off. Being on the spot. And 
her terrible grey eyes with the touch of a leer looked on 
at the hollow mockery of things. As if she knew of any- 
thing better ! 

ST. MAWR 11 

Lou and Rico had a curious exhausting effect on one 
another: neither knew why. ‘They were fond of one 
another. Some inscrutable bond held them together. 
But it was a strange vibration of the nerves, rather than 
of the blood. A nervous attachment, rather than a 
sexual love. A curious tension of will, rather than a 
spontaneous passion. Each was curiously under the 
domination of the other. They were a pair—they had to 
be together. Yet quite soon they shrank from one 
another. This attachment of the will and the nerves was 
destructive. As soon as one felt strong, the other felt 
ill. As soon as the ill one recovered strength, down 
went the one who had been well. 

And soon, tacitly, the marriage became more like a 
friendship, Platonic. It was a marriage, but without 
sex. Sex was shattering and exhausting, they shrank 
from it, and became like brother and sister. But still 
they were husband and wife. And the lack of physical 
relation was a secret source of uneasiness and chagrin 
to both of them. They would neither of them accept it. 
Rico looked with contemplative, anxious eyes at other 
women. 

Mrs. Witt kept track of everything, watching as it 
were from outside the fence, like a potent well-dressed 
demon, full of uncanny energy and a shattering sort of 
sense. She said little : but her small, occasionally biting 
remarks revealed her attitude of contempt for the 
ménage. 

Rico entertained clever and well-known people. Mrs. 
Witt would appear, in her New York gowns and few 
good jewels. She was handsome, with her vigorous 
grey hair. But her heavy-lidded grey eyes were the 
despair of any hostess. They looked too many shatter- 
ing things. And it was but too obvious that these 
clever, well-known English people tot on her nerves 
terribly, with their finickiness and their fine-drawn dis- 
criminations. She wanted to put her foot through all 

12 ST. MAWR 

these fine-drawn distinctions. She thought continually 
of the house of her girlhood, the plantation, the negroes, 
the planters : the sardonic grimness that underlay all the 
big, shiftless life. And she wanted to cleave with some 
of this grimness of the big, dangerous America, into the 
safe, finicky drawing-rooms of London. So naturally she 
was not popular. 

But being a woman of energy, she had to do some- 
thing. During the latter part of the war she had 
worked in the American Red Cross in France, nursing. 
She loved men—real men. But, on close contact, it was 
difficult to define what she meant by ‘‘ real ’? men. She 
never met any. 

Out of the débacle of the war she had emerged with 
an odd piece of débris, in the shape of Geronimo 
Trujillo. He was an American, son of a Mexican father 
and a Navajo Indian mother, from Arizona. When you 
knew him well, you recognised the real half-breed, 
though at a glance he might pass as a sunburnt citizen 
of any nation, particularly of France. He looked like a 
certain sort of Frenchman, with his curiously-set dark 
eyes, his straight black hair, his thin black moustache, 
his rather long cheeks, and his almost slouching, diffi- 
dent, sardonic bearing. Only when you knew him, and 
looked right into his eyes, you saw that unforgettable 
glint of the Indian. 

He had been badly shell-shocked, and was for a time 
a wreck. Mrs. Witt, having nursed him into con- 
valescence, asked him where he was going next. He 
didn’t know. His father and mother were dead, 
and he had nothing to take him back to Phoenix, 
Arizona. Having had an education in one of the 
Indian high schools, the unhappy fellow had now 
no place in life at all. Another of the many 
misfits. 

There was something of the Paris Apache in his 
appearance : but he was all the time withheld, and ner- 

ST. MAWR 13 

vously shut inside himself. Mrs. Witt was intrigued by 
him. 
** Very well, Phoenix,” she said, refusing to adopt his 
Spanish name, “ I’ll see what I can do.”’ 

What she did was to get him a place on a sort of manor 
farm, with some acquaintances of hers. He was very 
good with horses, and had a curious success with turkeys 
and geese and fowls. 

Some time after Lou’s marriage, Mrs. Witt reappeared 
in London, from the country, with Phoenix in tow, and 
a couple of horses. She had decided that she would 
ride in the Park in the morning, and see the world that 
way. Phcenix was to be her groom. 

So, to the great misgiving of Rico, behold Mrs. Witt 
in splendidly tailored habit and perfect boots, a smart 
black hat on her smart grey hair, riding a grey gelding 
as smart as she was, and looking down her conceited, 
inquisitive, scornful, aristocratic-democratic Lousiana 
nose at the people in Piccadilly, as she crossed to the 
Row, followed by the taciturn shadow of Phoenix, who 
sat on a chestnut with three white feet as if he had 
grown there. 

Mrs. Witt, like many other people, always expected 
to find the real beau monde and the real grand monde 
somewhere or other. She didn’t quite give in to what 
she saw in the Bois de Boulogne, or in Monte Carlo, or 
on the Pincio; all a bit shoddy, and not very beau and 
not at all grand. There she was, with her grey eagle eye, 
her splendid complexion and her weapon-like health of 
a woman of fifty, dropping her eyelids a little, very 
slightly nervous, but completely prepared to despise the 
monde she was entering in Rotten Row. 

In she sailed, and up and down that regatta-canal of 
horsemen and horsewomen under the trees of the Park. 
And yes, there were lovely girls with fair hair down their 
backs, on happy ponies. And awfully well-groomed 
papas, and tight mamas who looked as if they were going 

14 ST. MAWR 

to pour tea between the ears of their horses, and con- 
verse with banal skill, one eye on the teapot, one on the 
visitor with whom she was talking, and all the rest of her 
hostess’ argus-eyes upon everybody in sight. That alert 
argus capability of the English matron was startling 
and a bit horrifying. Mrs. Witt would at once think of 
the old negro mammies, away in Lousiana. And her 
eyes became dagger-like as she watched the clipped, 
shorn, mincing young Englishmen. She refused to look 
at the prosperous Jews. 

It was still the days before motor-cars were allowed in 
the Park, but Rico and Lou, sliding round Hyde Park 
Corner and up Park Lane in their car would watch the 
steely horsewoman and the saturnine groom with a sort 
of dismay. Mrs. Witt seemed to be pointing a pistol at 
the bosom of every other horseman or horsewoman, and 
announcing : Your virility or your life! Your femininity 
or your life! She didn’t know herself what she really 
wanted them to be: but it was something as democratic 
as Abraham Lincoln and as aristocratic as a Russian 
Czar, as highbrow as Arthur Balfour, and as taciturn and 
unideal as Phoenix. Everything at once. 

There was nothing for it: Lou had to buy herself a 
horse and ride at her mother’s side, for very decency’s 
sake. Mrs. Witt was so like a smooth, levelled, gun- 
metal pistol, Lou had to be a sort of sheath. And she 
really looked pretty, with her clusters of dark, curly, 
New Orleans hair, like grapes, and her quaint brown 
eyes that didn’t quite match, and that looked a bit 
sleepy and vague, and at the same time quick as a 
squirrel’s. She was slight and elegant, and a tiny bit 
rakish, and somebody suggested she might be on the 
movies. 

Nevertheless, they were in the society columns next 
morning—two new and striking figures in the Row this 
morning were Lady Henry Carrington and her mother 
Mrs. Witt, etc.. And Mrs. Witt liked it, let her say what 

ST. MAWR 15 

she might. So did Lou. Lou liked it immensely. She 
simply luxuriated in the sun of publicity. 

** Rico dear, you must get a horse.”’ 

The tone was soft and southern and drawling, but 
the overtone had a decisive finality. In vain Rico 
squirmed—he had a way of writhing and squirming 
which perhaps he had caught at Oxford. In vain he 
protested that he couldn’t ride, and that he didn’t care 
for riding. He got quite angry, and his handsome arched 
nose tilted and his upper lip lifted from his teeth, like 
a dog that is going to bite. Yet daren’t quite bite. 

And that was Rico. He daren’t quite bite. Not that 
he was really afraid of the others. He was afraid of 
himself, once he let himself go. He might rip up in an 
eruption of life-long anger all this pretty-pretty picture 
of a charming young wife and a delightful little home 
and a fascinating success as a painter of fashionable, 
and at the same time “ great ’’ portraits : with colour, 
wonderful colour, and at the same time, form, mar- 
vellous form. He had composed this little tableau 
vivant with great effort. He didn’t want to erupt like 
some suddenly wicked horse—-Rico was really more like 
a horse than a dog, a horse that might go nasty any 
moment. For the time, he was good, very good, dan- 
gerously good. 

** Why, Rico dear, I thought you used to ride so 
much, in Australia, when you were young? Didn’t you 
tell me all about it, hm? ’’—and as she ended on that 
slow, singing hm?, which acted on him like an irritant 
and a drug, he knew he was beaten. 

Lou kept the sorrel mare in a mews just behind the 
house in Westminster, and she was always slipping round 
to the stables. She had a funny little nostalgia for the 
place : something that really surprised her. She had 
never had the faintest notion that she cared for horses 
and stables and grooms. But she did. She was fascin- 
ated. Perhaps it was her childhood’s Texas associa- 

16 ST. MAWR 

tions come back. Whatever it was, her life with Rico 
in the elegant little house, and all her social engagements 
seemed like a dream, the substantial reality of which 
was those mews in Westminster, her sorrel mare, the 
owner of the mews, Mr. Saintsbury, and the grooms 
he employed. Mr. Saintsbury was a horsey elderly man 
like an old maid, and he loved the sound of titles. 

‘** Lady Carrington !—well I never! You’ve come to 
us for a bit of company again, I see. I don’t know what- 
ever we shall do if you go away, we shall be that 
lonely!’ and he flashed his old-maid’s smile at her. 
‘* No matter how grey the morning, your ladyship would 
make a beam of sunshine. Poppy is all right, I 
think: 2...” 

Poppy was the sorrel mare with the no white feet and 
the startled eye, and she was all right. And Mr. Saints- 
bury was smiling with his old-maid’s mouth, and show- 
ing all his teeth. 

** Come across with me, Lady Carrington, and look at 
a new horse just up from the country. I think he’s 
worth a look, and I believe you have a moment to spare, 
your Ladyship.”’ 

Her Ladyship had too many moments to spare. She 
followed the sprightly, elderly, cleanshaven man across 
the yard to a loose box, and waited while he opened the 
door. 

In the inner dark she saw a handsome bay horse with 
his clean ears pricked like daggers from his naked head 
as he swung handsomely round to stare at the open 
doorway. He had big, black, brilliant eyes, with a sharp 
questioning glint, and that air of tense, alert quietness 
which betrays an animal that can be dangerous. 

‘“* Ts he quiet? *”? Lou asked. 

‘© Why—yes—my Lady! He’s quiet, with those that 
know how to handle him. Cup! my boy! Cup my 
beauty ! Cup then! St. Mawr! ” 

Loquacious even with the animals, he went softly 

ST. MAWR 17 

forward and laid his hand on the horse’s shoulder, soft 
and quiet as a fly settling. Lou saw the brilliant skin 
of the horse crinkle a little in apprehensive anticipation, 
like the shadow of the descending hand on a bright red- 
gold liquid. But then the animal relaxed again. 

** Quiet with those that know how to handle him, and 
a bit of a ruffian with those that don’t. Isn’t that the 
ticket, eh, St. Mawr? ”’ 

** What is his name? ”? Lou asked. 

The man repeated it, with a slight Welsh twist— 
** He’s from the Welsh borders, belonging to a Welsh 

‘gentleman, Mr. Griffith Edwards. But they’re wanting 

to sell him.” 

** How old is he? ” asked Lou. 

** About seven years—seven years and five months,” 
said Mr. Saintsbury, dropping his voice as if it were a 
secret. 

** Could one ride him in the Park? ” 

** Well—yes! I should say a gentleman who knew 
how to handle him could ride him very well and make a 
very handsome figure in the Park.’’ 

Lou at once decided that this handsome figure should 
be Rico’s. For she was already half in love with St. 
Mawr. He was of such a lovely red-gold colour, and a 
dark, invisible fire seemed to come out of him. But in 
his big black eyes there was a lurking afterthought. 
Something told her that the horse was not quite happy : 
that somewhere deep in his animal consciousness lived a 
dangerous, half-revealed resentment, a diffused sense of 
hostility. She realised that he was sensitive, in spite of 
his flaming, healthy strength, and nervous with a touchy 
uneasiness that might make him vindictive. 

** Has he got any tricks? ” she asked. 

‘* Not that I know of, my Lady: not tricks exactly. 
But he’s one of these temperamental creatures, as they 
say. Though I say, every horse is temperamental, when 
you come down to it. But this one, it is as if he was a 

B 

18 ST. MAWR 

trifle raw somewhere. ‘Touch this raw spot, and there’s 
no answering for him.”’ 

** Where is he raw? ”? asked Lou, somewhat mystified. 
She thought he might really have some physical sore. 

** Why, that’s hard to say, my Lady. If he was a 
human being, you’d say something had gone wrong in 
his life. But with a horse it’s not that, exactly. A 
high-bred animal like St. Mawr needs understanding, 
and I don’t know as anybody has quite got the hang 
of him. I confess I haven’t myself. But I do realise | 
that he is a special animal and needs a special sort of 
touch, and I’m willing he should have it, did I but know 
exactly what it is.” 

She looked at the glowing bay horse that stood there 
with his ears back, his face averted, but attending as if 
he were some lightning conductor. He was a stallion. 
When she realised this, she became more afraid of him. 

** Why does Mr. Griffith Edwards want to sell him? ”’ 
she asked. 

** Well—my Lady—they raised him for stud purposes 
—but he didn’t answer. There are horses like that: 
don’t seem to fancy the mares, for some reason. Well 
anyway, they couldn’t keep him for the stud. And as 
you see, he’s a powerful, beautiful hackney, clean as a 
whistle, and eaten up with his own power. But there’s 
no putting him between the shafts. He won’t stand it. 
He’s a fine saddle-horse, beautiful action, and lovely to 
ride. But he’s got to be handled, and there you are.” 

Lou felt there was something behind the man’s 
reticence. 

‘* Has he ever made a break? ”? she asked, apprehen- 
sive. \ 
‘* Made a break? ”? replied the man. ‘* Well, if I must 
admit it, he’s had two accidents. Mr. Griffith Edwards’ 
son rode him a bit wild, away there in the forest of 
Deane, and the young fellow had his skull smashed in, 
against a low oak bough. Last Autumn, that was. And 

ST. MAWR 19 

some time back, he crushed a groom against the side of 
the stall—injured him fatally. But they were both 
accidents, my Lady. Things will happen.”’’ 

The man spoke in a melancholy, fatalistic way. The 
horse, with his ears laid back, seemed to be listening 
tensely, his face averted. He looked like something 
finely bred and passionate, that has been judged and 
condemned. 

** May I say how do you do ? ”’ she said to the horse 
drawing a little nearer in her white, summery dress, and 
liftng her hand that glittered with emeralds and 
diamonds. 

He drifted away from her, as if some wind blew him. 
Then he ducked his head, and looked sideways at her, 
from his black, full eye. 

** J think I’m all right,’’ she said, edging nearer, while 
he watched her. 

She laid her hand on his side, and gently stroked him. 
Then she stroked his shoulder, and then the hard, tense 
arch of his neck. And she was startled to feel the vivid 
heat of his life come through to her, through the lacquer 
of red-gold gloss. So slippery with vivid, hot life! 

She paused, as if thinking, while her hand rested on 
the horse’s sun-arched neck. Dimly, in her weary young- 
woman’s soul, an ancient understanding seemed to flood 
in. 
She wanted to buy St. Mawr. 

*¢ T think,”’ she said to Saintsbury, “‘ if I can, I will 
buy him.” 

The man looked at her long and shrewdly. 

“* Well, my Lady,” he said at last, ‘‘ there shall be 
nothing kept from you. But what would your Ladyship 
do with him, if I may make so bold? ”” 

‘* T don’t know,”’ she replied, vaguely. ‘‘ I might take 
him to America.” 

The man paused once more, then said : 

** They say it’s been the making of some horses, to 

20 ST. MAWR 

take them over the water, to Australia or such places. 
It might repay you—you never know.”’’ 

She wanted to buy St. Mawr. She wanted him to 
belong to her. For some reason the sight of him, his 
power, his alive, alert intensity, his unyieldingness, made 
her want to cry. 

She never did cry : except sometimes with vexation, 
or to get her own way. As far as weeping went, her 
heart felt as dry as a Christmas walnut. What was the 
good of tears, anyhow? You had to keep on holding on, 
in this life, never give way, and never give in. Tears 
only left one weakened and ragged. 

But now, as if that mysterious fire of the horse’s body 
had split some rock in her, she went home and hid her- 
self in her room, and just cried. The wild, brilliant, 
alert head of St. Mawr seemed to look at her out of 
another world. It was as if she had had a vision, as if 
the walls of her own world had suddenly melted away, 
leaving her in a great darkness, in the midst of which 
the large, brilliant eyes of that horse looked at her with 
demonish question, while his naked ears stood up like 
daggers from the naked lines of his inhuman head, and 
his great body glowed red with power. 

What was it? Almost like a god looking at her 
terribly out of the everlasting dark, she had felt the 
eyes of that horse; great, giowing, fearsome eyes, arched 
with a question, and containing a white blade of light 
like a threat. What was his non-human question, and 
his uncanny threat? She didn’t know. He was some 
splendid demon, and she must worship him. 

She hid herself away from Rico. She could not bear 
the triviality and superficiality of her human relation-, 
ships. Looming like some god out of the darkness was 
the head of that horse, with the wide, terrible, question- 
ing eyes. And she felt that it forbade her to be her 
ordinary, commonplace self. It forbade her to be just 
Rico’s wife, young Lady Carrington, and all that. 

ST. MAWR 21 

It haunted her, the horse. It had looked at her as she 
had never been looked at before: terrible, gleaming, 
questioning eyes arching out of darkness, and backed 
by all the fire of that great ruddy body. What did it 
mean, and what ban did it put upon her? She felt it 
put a ban on her heart : wielded some uncanny authority 
over her, that she dared not, could not understand. 

No matter where she was, what she was doing, at the 
back of her consciousness loomed a great, over-aweing 
figure out of a dark background: St. Mawr, looking at 
her without really seeing her, yet gleaming a question 
at her, from his wide terrible eyes, and gleaming a sort 
of menace, doom. Master of doom, he seemed to be! 

** You are thinking about something, Lou dear! ” 
Rico said to her that evening. 

He was so quick and sensitive to detect her moods—so 
exciting in this respect. And his big, slightly prominent 
blue eyes, with the whites a little bloodshot, glanced at 
her quickly, with searching, and anxiety, and a touch of 
fear, as if his conscience were always uneasy. He, too, 
was rather like a horse—but forever quivering with a 
sort of cold, dangerous mistrust, which he covered with 
anxious love. 

At the middle of his eyes was a central powerlessness, 
that left him anxious. It used to touch her to pity, that 
central look of powerlessness in him. But now, since she 
had seen the full, dark, passionate blaze of power and 
of different life in the eyes of the thwarted horse, the 
anxious powerlessness of the man drove her mad. Rico 
was so handsome, and he was so self-controlled, he had a 
gallant sort of kindness and a real worldly shrewdness. 
One had to admire him : at least she had to. 

But after all, and after all, it was a bluff, an attitude. 
He kept it all working in himself, deliberately. It was 
an attitude. She read psychologists who said that every- 
thing was an attitude. Even the best of everything. 
But now she realised that, with men and women, every- 

22 ST. MAWR 

thing is an attitude only when something else is lacking. 
Something is lacking and they are thrown back on their 
own devices. That black fiery flow in the eyes of the 
horse was not ‘* attitude.”? It was something much more 
terrifying, and real, the only thing that was real. 
Gushing from the darkness in menace and question, and 
blazing out in the splendid body of the horse. 

** Was I thinking about something? ”’ she replied, in 
her slow, amused, casual fashion. As if everything was 
so casual and easy to her. And so it was, from the hard, 
polished side of herself. But that wasn’t the whole story. 

**T think you were, Loulina. May we offer the 
penny? ” 

** Don’t trouble,”’ she said. ‘* I was thinking, if I was 
thinking of anything, about a bay horse called St. 
Mawr.’’—Her secret almost crept into her eyes. 

‘The name is awfully attractive,’ he said with a 
laugh. 

** Not so attractive as the creature himself. I’m going 
to buy him.’’ 

‘* Not really! ’? he said. ‘* But why? ” 

** He is so attractive. I’m going to buy him for you.” 

** For me! Darling! how you do take me for granted. 
He may not be in the least attractive to me. As you 
know, I have hardly any feeling for horses at all.—Be- 
sides, how much does he cost? ”’ 

‘* That I don’t know, Rico dear. But I’m sure you’ll 
love him, for my sake.’’—She felt, now, she was merely 
playing for her own ends. 

‘* Lou dearest, don’t spend a fortune on a horse for 
me, which I don’t want. Honestly, I prefer a car.” 

** Won’t you ride with me in the Park, Rico? ” 

‘** Honestly, dear Lou, I don’t want to.” 

“‘ Why not, dear boy? You’d look so beautiful. I 
wish you would.—And anyhow, come with me to look 
at St. Mawr.”’ 

Rico was divided. He had a certain uneasy feeling 

ST. MAWR 23 

about horses. At the same time, he would like to cut a 
handsome figure in the Park. 

They went across to the mews. A little Welsh groom 
was watering the brilliant horse. 

** Yes dear, he certainly is beautiful: such a mar- 
vellous colour! Almost orange! But rather large, I 
should say, to ride in the Park.’ 

** No, for you he’s perfect. You are so tall.’? 

**He’d be marvellous in a Composition. That 
colour ! ”” 

And all Rico could do was to gaze with the artist’s eye 
at the horse, with a glance at the groom. 

** Don’t you think the man is rather fascinating too? ”’ 
he said, nursing his chin artistically and penetratingly. 

The groom, Lewis, was a little, quick, rather bow- 
legged, loosely-built fellow of indeterminate age, with a 
mop of black hair and a little black beard. He was 
grooming the brilliant St. Mawr, out in the open. The 
horse was really glorious : like a marigold, with a pure 
golden sheen, a shimmer of green-gold lacquer, upon a 
burning red-orange. There on the shoulder you saw 
the yellow lacquer glisten. Lewis, a little scrub of a 
fellow, worked absorbedly, unheedingly at the horse, 
with an absorption that was almost ritualistic. He 
seemed the attendant shadow of the ruddy animal. 

** He goes with the horse,’”’ said Lou. ‘* If we buy 
St. Mawr we get the man thrown in.” 

**They’d be so amusing to paint: such an extra- 
ordinary contrast! But darling, I hope you won’t insist 
on buying the horse. It’s so frightfully expensive.” 

** Mother will help me.—You’d look so well on him, 
Rico.”” 

“* If ever I dared take the liberty of getting on his 
back—! ” 

‘Why not? ”? She went quickly across the cobbled 
yard. 

** Good morning, Lewis. How is St. Mawr? ” 

24 ST. MAWR 

Lewis straightened himself and looked at her from 
under the falling mop of his black hair. 

** All right,”’ he said. 

He peered straight at her from under his overhanging 
black hair. He had pale grey eyes, that looked phos- 
phorescent, and suggested the eyes of a wild cat peering 
intent from under the darkness of some bush where it 
lies unseen. Lou, with her brown, unmatched, oddly 
perplexed eyes, felt herself found out.—*‘ He’s a common 
little fellow,’’? she thought to herself. ‘* But he knows 
a woman and a horse, at sight.’’—Aloud she said, in her 
southern drawl : 

‘** How do you think he’d be with Sir Henry? ”’ 

Lewis turned his remote, coldly watchful eyes on the 
young baronet. Rico was tall and handsome and 
balanced on his hips. His face was long and well- 
defined, and with the hair taken straight back from the 
brow. It seemed as well-made as his clothing, and as 
perpetually presentable. You could not imagine his face 
dirty, or scrubby and unshaven, or bearded, or even 
moustached. It was perfectly prepared for social pur- 
poses. If his head had been cut off, like John the 
Baptist’s, it would have been a thing complete in itself, 
would not have missed the body in the least. The body 
was perfectly tailored. The head was one of the famous 
*‘ talking heads ’? of modern youth, with eyebrows a 
trifle Mephistophelian, large blue eyes a trifle bold, and 
curved mouth thrilling to death to kiss. 

Lewis, the groom, staring from between his Pars of 
hair and his beard, watched like an animal from the 
underbrush. And Rico was still sufficiently a colonial | 
to be uneasily aware of the underbrush, uneasy under 
the watchfulness of the pale grey eyes, and uneasy in 
that man-to-man exposure which is characteristic of the . 
democratic colonies and of America. He knew he must 
ultimately be judged on his merits as a man, alone with- 
out a background : an ungarnished colonial. 

ST. MAWR 25 

This lack of background, this defenceless man-to-man 
_ business which left him at the mercy of every servant, 
was bad for his nerves. For he was also an artist. He 
bore up against it in a kind of desperation, and was easily 
moved to rancorous resentment. At the same time he 
was free of the Englishman’s water-tight suffisance. He 
really was aware that he would have to hold his own all 
alone, thrown alone on his own defences in the universe. 
The extreme democracy of the Colonies had taught him 
this. 

And this, the little aboriginal Lewis recognised in him. 
He recognised also Rico’s curious hollow misgiving, fear 
of some deficiency in himself, beneath all his handsome, 
young-hero appearance. 

** He’d be all right with anybody as would meet him 
half-way,’? said Lewis, in the quick Welsh manner of 
speech, impersonal. 

** You hear, Rico !’? said Lou in her sing-song, turning 
to her husband. 

‘* Perfectly, darling ! ”’ 

** Would you be willing to meet St. Mawr half-way, 
hmpP 99 

** All the way, darling! Mahomet would go all the 
way to that mountain. Who would dare do otherwise ?”’ 

He spoke with a laughing, yet piqued sarcasm. 

‘Why, I think St. Mawr would understand per- 
fectly,’’ she said in the soft voice of a woman haunted 
by love. And she went and laid her hand on the 
slippery, life-smooth shoulder of the horse. He, with 
his strange equine head lowered, its exquisite fine lines 
reaching a little snake-like forward, and his ears a little 
back, was watching her sideways, from the corner of 
his eye. He was in a state of absolute mistrust, like 
a cat crouching to spring. 

“© St. Mawr! ” she said. ‘‘ St. Mawr! What is the 
matter? Surely you and I are all right! ” 

And she spoke softly, dreamily stroked the animal’s 

26 ST. MAWR 

neck. She could feel a response gradually coming from 
him. But he would not lift up his head. And when 
Rico suddenly moved nearer, he sprang with a sudden 
jerk backwards, as if lightning exploded in his four hoofs. 

The groom spoke a few low words in Welsh. Lou, 
frightened, stood with lifted hand arrested. She had 
been going to stroke him. 

‘** Why did he do that,” she said. 

‘* They gave him a beating once or twice,’ said the 
groom in a neutral voice, ‘* and he doesn’t forget.” 

She could hear a neutral sort of judgment in Lewis’ 
voice. And she thought of the ‘* raw spot.”’ 

Not any raw spot at all. A battle between two worlds. 
She realised that St. Mawr drew his hot breaths in 
another world from Rico’s, from our world. Perhaps the 
old Greek horses had lived in St. Mawr’s world. And 
the old Greek heroes, even Hippolytus, had known it. 

With their strangely naked equine heads, and some- 
thing of a snake in their way of looking round, and lifting 
their sensitive, dangerous muzzles, they moved in a pre- 
historic twilight where all things loomed phantasmo- 
goric, all on one plane, sudden presences suddenly 
jutting out of the matrix. It was another world, an 
older, heavily potent world. And in this world the horse 
was swift and fierce and supreme, undominated and 
unsurpassed.—* Meet him half-way,’’ Lewis said. But 
half-way across from our human world to that terrific 
equine twilight was not a small step. It was a step, 
she knew, that Rico could never take. She knew it. 
But she was prepared to sacrifice Rico. 

St. Mawr was bought, and Lewis was hired along with’ 
him. At first, Lewis rode him behind Lou, in the Row, 
to get him going. He behaved perfectly. 

Pheenix, the half Indian, was very jealous when he saw > 
the black-bearded Welsh groom on St. Mawr. 

‘* What horse you got there? ”’ he asked, looking at 
the other man with the curious unseeing stare in his 

ST. MAWR 27 

hard, Navajo eyes, in which the Indian glint moved like 
a spark upon a dark chaos. In Phcenix’s high-boned 
face there was all the race-misery of the dispossessed 
Indian, with an added blankness left by shell-shock. 
But at the same time, there was that unyielding, save to 
death, which is characteristic of his tribe; his mother’s 
tribe. Difficult to say what subtle thread bound him to 
the Navajo, and made his destiny a Red Man’s destiny 
still. 

They were a curious pair of grooms, following the 
correct, and yet extraordinary, pair of American mis- 
tresses. Mrs. Witt and Phoenix both rode with long 
stirrups and straight leg, sitting close to the saddle, with- 
out posting. Phoenix looked as if he and the horse were 
all one piece, he never seemed to rise in the saddle at 
all, neither trotting nor galloping, but sat like a man 
riding bareback. And all the time he stared around, at 
the riders in the Row, at the people grouped outside the 
rail, chatting, at the children walking with their nurses, 
as if he were looking at a mirage, in whose actuality he 
never believed for a moment. London was all a sort 
of dark mirage to him. His wide, nervous-looking brown 
eyes with a smallish brown pupil, that showed the white 
all round, seemed to be focussed on the far distance, as 
if he could not see things too near. He was watching 
the pale deserts of Arizona shimmer with moving light, 
the long mirage of a shallow lake ripple, the great pallid 
concave of earth and sky expanding with interchanged 
light. And a horse-shape loom large and portentous in 
the mirage, like some pre-historic beast. 

That was real to him : the phantasm of Arizona. But 
this London was something his eye passed over, as a 
false mirage. 

He looked too smart in his well-tailored groom’s 
clothes, so smart, he might have been one of the satirised 
new-rich. Perhaps it was a sort of half-breed physical 
assertion that came through his clothing, the savage’s 

28 ST. MAWR 

physical assertion of himself. Anyhow, he looked 
** common,”’ rather horsey and loud. 

Except his face. In the golden suavity of his high- 
boned Indian face, that was hairless, with hardly any 
eyebrows, there was a blank, lost look that was almost 
touching. The same startled blank look was in his eyes. 
But in the smallish dark pupils the dagger-point of light 
still gleamed unbroken. 

He was a good groom, watchful, quick, and on the 
Spot in an instant if anything went wrong. He had a 
curious quiet power over the horses, unemotional, un- 
sympathetic, but silently potent. In the same way, 
watching the traffic of Piccadilly with his blank, glinting 
eye, he would calculate everything instinctively, as if it 
were an enemy, and pilot Mrs. Witt by the strength of 
his silent will. He threw around her the tense watch- 
fulness of her own America, and made her feel at home. 

‘© Pheenix,’’ she said, turning abruptly in her saddle 
as they walked the horses past the sheltering policeman 
at Hyde Park Corner, ‘‘ I can’t tell you how glad I am 
to have something a hundred per cent. American at the 
back of me, when I go through these gates.” 

She looked at him from dangerous grey eyes as if 
she meant it indeed, in vindietive earnest. A ghost of a 
smile went up to his high cheek-bones, but he did not 
answer. 

‘* Why, mother?’ said Lou, sing-song. ‘* It feels to 
me so friendly—! ”’ 

** Yes, Louise, it does. So friendly! That’s why I 
mistrust it so entirely—”’ 

And she set off at a canter up the Row, under the 
green trees, her face like the face of Medusa at fifty, a 
weapon in itself. She stared at everything and every- 
body, with that stare of cold dynamite waiting to explode » 
them all. Lou posted trotting at her side, graceful and 
elegant, and faintly amused. Behind came Pheenix, like 
a shadow, with his yellowish, high-boned face still look- 

ST. MAWR 29 

ing sick. And at his side, on the big brilliant bay horse, 
the smallish, black-bearded Welshman. 

Between Phoenix and Lewis there was a latent, but 
unspoken and wary sympathy. Phoenix was terribly 
impressed by St. Mawr, he could not leave off staring at 
him. And Lewis rode the brilliant, handsome-moving 
stallion so very quietly, like an insinuation. 

Of the two men, Lewis looked the darker, with his 
black beard coming up to his thick black eyebrows. He 
was swarthy, with a rather short nose, and the uncanny 
pale-grey eyes that watched everything and cared about 
nothing. He cared about nothing in the world, except, 
at the present, St. Mawr. People did not matter to 
him. He rode his horse and watched the world from 
the vantage ground of St. Mawr, with a final indifference. 

** You have been with that horse long?” asked 
Phoenix. 

** Since he was born.”’ 

Phoenix watched the action of St. Mawr as they went. 
The bay moved proud and springy, but with perfect good 
sense, among the stream of riders. It was a beautiful 
June morning, the leaves overhead were thick and green; 
there came the first whiff of lime-tree scent. To Phoenix, 
however, the city was a sort of nightmare mirage, and 
to Lewis, it was a sort of prison. The presence of people 
he felt as a prison around him. 

Mrs. Witt and Lou were turning, at the end of the 
Row, bowing to some acquaintances. The grooms pulled 
aside. Mrs. Witt looked at Lewis with a cold eye. 

** It seems an extraordinary thing to me, Louise,” she 
said, ‘* to see a groom with a beard.”’ 

‘© Tt isn’t usual, mother,’ said Lou. ‘* Do you 
mind? ” 

** Not at all. Atleast, I think I don’t. I get very tired of 
modern bare-faced young men, very! The clean, pure 
boy, don’t you know! Doesn’t it make you tired P— 
No, I think a groom with a beard is quite attractive.” 

30 ST. MAWR 

She gazed into the crowd defiantly, perching her finely 
shod toe with warlike firmness on the stirrup-iron. Then 
suddenly she reined in, and turned her horse towards the 
grooms. 

** Lewis! ’’ she said. ‘* I want to ask you a question. 
Supposing, now, that Lady Carrington wanted you to 
shave off that beard, what should you say? ”’ 

Lewis instinctively put up his hand to the said 
beard. 

‘© They’ve wanted me to shave it off, Mam,” he said. 
** But I’ve never done it.”’ 

** But why? Tell me why? ” 

** It’s part of me, Mam.”’ 

Mrs. Witt pulled on again. 

‘*¥sn’t that extraordinary, Louise? ’’? she said. 
** Don’t you like the way he says Mam? It sounds 
so impossible to me. Could any woman think of herself 
as Mam? Never !—Since Queen Victoria. But, do you 
know it hadn’t occurred to me that a man’s beard was 
really part of him. It always seemed to me that men 
wore their beards, like they wear their neckties, for show. 
I shall always remember Lewis for saying his beard was 
part of him. Isn’t it curious, the way he rides? He 
seems to sink himself in the horse. When I speak to 
him, I’m not sure whether I’m speaking to a man or to 
a horse.”’ 

A few days later, Rico himself appeared on St. Mawr, 
for the morning ride. He rode self-consciously, as he did 
everything, and he was just a little nervous. But his 
mother-in-law was benevolent. She made him ride 
between her and Lou, like three ships slowly sailing 
abreast. \ 

And that very day, who should come driving in an 
open carriage through the Park but the Queen Mother! 
Dear old Queen Alexandra, there was a flutter every- 
where. And she bowed expressly to Rico, mistaking 
him, no doubt, for somebody else. 

ST. MAWR 31 

**Do you know,” said Rico as they sat at lunch, he 
and Lou and Mrs. Witt, in Mrs. Witt’s sitting-room in 
the dark, quiet hotel in Mayfair; ‘‘ I really like riding 
St. Mawr so much. He really is a noble animal.—It 
ever I am made a Lord—which heaven forbid !—I shall 
be Lord St. Mawr.”’ 

** You mean,”’ said Mrs. Witt, ‘‘ his real lordship 
would be the horse? ” 

“* Very possible, I admit,’’ said Rico, with a curl of his 
long upper lip. 

** Don’t you think, mother,’’ said Lou, ‘‘ there is 
something quite noble about St. Mawr? He strikes me 
as the first noble thing I have ever seen.”’ 

** Certainly I’ve not seen any man that could compare 
with him. Because these English noblemen—well! I’d 
rather look at a negro Pullman-boy, if I was looking for 
what I call nobility.” 

Poor Rico was getting crosser and crosser. There was 
a devil in Mrs. Witt. She had a hard, bright devil inside 
her, that she seemed to be able to let loose at will. 

She let it loose the next day, when Rico and Lou 
joined her in the Row. She was silent but deadly with 
the horses, balking them in every way. She suddenly 
crowded over against the rail, in front of St. Mawr, so 
that the stallion had to rear to pull himself up. Then, 
having a clear track, she suddenly set off at a gallop, like 
an explosion, and the stallion, all on edge, set off after 
her. 

It seemed as if the whole Park, that morning, were 
in a state of nervous tension. Perhaps there was thunder 
in the air. But St. Mawr kept on dancing and pulling 
at the bit, and wheeling sideways up against the railing, 
to the terror of the children and the onlookers, who 
squealed and jumped back suddenly, sending the nerves 
of the stallion into a rush like rockets. He reared and 
fought as Rico pulled him round. 

Then he went on: dancing, pulling, springily pro- 

32 ST. MAWR 

gressing sideways, possessed with all the demons of per- 
versity. Poor Rico’s face grew longer and angrier. A 
fury rose in him, which he could hardly control. He 
hated his horse, and viciously tried to force him to a 
quiet, straight trot. Up went St. Mawr on his hind legs, 
to the terror of the Row. He got the bit in his teeth, 
and began to fight. 

But Pheenix, cleverly, was in front of him. : 

‘* You get off, Rico! ’’ called Mrs. Witt’s voice, with 
all the calm of her wicked exultance. 

And almost before he knew what he was acing Rico 
had sprung lightly to the ground, and was hanging on 
to the bridle of the rearing stallion. 

Pheenix also lightly jumped down, and ran to St. 
Mawr, handing his bridle to Rico. Then began a dancing 
and a splashing, a rearing and a plunging. St. Mawr 
was being wicked. But Phoenix, the indifference of con- 
flict in his face, sat tight and immovable, without any 
emotion, only the heaviness of his impersonal will 
settling down like a weight, all the time, on the horse. 
There was, perhaps, a curious barbaric exultance in bare, 
dark will devoid of emotion or personal feeling. 

So they had a little display in the Row for almost five 
minutes, the brilliant horse rearing and fighting. Rico, 
with a stiff long face, scrambled on to Phoenix’s horse, 
and withdrew to a safe distance. Policemen came, and 
an officious mounted police rode up to save the situa- 
tion. But it was obvious that Phoenix, detached and 
apparently unconcerned, but barbaricly potent in his 
will, would bring the horse to order. 

Which he did, and rode the creature home. Rico was 
requested not to ride St. Mawr in the Row any more, as 
the stallion was dangerous to public safety. The authori- _ 
ties knew all about him. 

Where ended the first fiasco of St. Mawr. 

“We didn’t get on very well with his lordship this 
morning,” said Mrs. Witt triumphantly. 

ST. MAWR 83 

**No, he didn’t like his company at all!’’ Rico 
snarled back. 

He wanted Lou to sell the horse again. 

** I doubt if anyone would buy him, dear,”’ she said. 
** He’s a known character.”’ 

‘Then make a gift of him—to your mother,’’ said 
Rico with venom. 

*¢ Why to mother? ”’ asked Lou innocently. 

** She might be able to cope with him—or he with 
her! ’? The last phrase was deadly. Having delivered 
it, Rico departed. 

Lou remained at a loss. She felt almost always a 
little bit dazed, as if she could not see clear nor feel clear. 
A curious deadness upon her, like the first touch of 
death. And through this cloud of numbness, or dead- 
ness, came all her muted experiences. 

Why was it? She did not know. But she felt that in 
some way it came from a battle of wills. Her mother, 
Rico, herself, it was always an unspoken, unconscious 
battle of wills, which was gradually numbing and 
paralysing her. She knew Rico meant nothing but kind- 
ness by her. She knew her mother only wanted to watch 
over her. Yet always there was this tension of will, that 
was so numbing. As if at the depths of him, Rico were 
always angry, though he seemed so ‘‘ happy ” on top. 
And Mrs. Witt was organically angry. So they were like 
a couple of bombs, timed to explode some day, but tick- 
ing on like two ordinary timepieces, in the meanwhile. 

She had come definitely to realise this : that Rico’s 
anger was wound up tight at the bottom of him, like a 
steel spring that kept his works going, while he himself 
was ‘‘ charming,”’ like a bomb-clock with Sevres paint- 
ings or Dresden figures on the outside. But his very 
charm was a sort of anger, and his love was a destruction 
in itself. He just couldn’t help it. 

And she? Perhaps she was a good deal the same her- 
self. Wound up tight inside, and enjoying herself being 

Cc 

34 ST. MAWR 

*lovely.”? But wound up tight on some tension that, 
she realised now with wonder, was really a sort of anger. 
This, the main-spring that drove her on the round of 
ce joys.”’ 

She used really to enjoy the tension, and the élan it 
gave her. While she knew nothing about it. So long 
as she felt it really was life and happiness, this élan, this 
tension and excitement of ‘* enjoying oneself.”’ 

Now suddenly she doubted the whole show. She 
-attributed to it the curious numbness that was over- 
coming her, as if she couldn’t feel any more. 

She wanted to come unwound. She wanted to escape 
this battle of wills. 

Only St. Mawr gave her some hint of the possibility. 
He was so powerful, and so dangerous. But in his dark 
eye, that looked, with its cloudy brown pupil, a cloud 
within a dark fire, like a world beyond our world, there 
was a dark vitality glowing, and within the fire, another 
sort of wisdom. She felt sure of it: even when he put 
his ears back, and bared his teeth, and his great eyes 
came bolting out of his naked horse’s head, and she 
saw demons upon demons in the chaos of his horrid 
eyes. 

Why did he seem to her like some living background, 
into which she wanted to retreat? When he reared his 
head and neighed from his deep chest, like deep wind- 
bells resounding, she seemed to hear the echoes of 
another darker, more spacious, more dangerous, more 
splendid world than ours, that was beyond her. And 
there she wanted to go. 

She kept it utterly a secret, to herself. Because Rico 
would just have lifted his long upper lip, in his bare face, 
in a condescending sort of “‘ understanding.”? And her 
mother would, as usual, have suspected her of side- 
stepping. People, all the people she knew, seemed so 
entirely contained within their cardboard lets-be-happy 
world. Their wills were fixed like machines on happi- 

ST. MAWR 85 

ness, or fun, or the-best-ever. This ghastly cheery-o ! 
touch, that made all her blood go numb. 

Since she had really seen St. Mawr looming fiery and 
terrible in an outer darkness, she could not believe the 
world she lived in. She could not believe it was actually 
happening, when she was dancing in the afternoon at 
Claridge’s, or in the evening at the Carlton, sliding about 
with some suave young man who wasn’t like a man at 
all to her. Or down in Sussex for the week-end with the 
Enderleys: the talk, the eating and drinking, the 
flirtation, the endless dancing: it all seemed far more 
bodiless and, in a strange way, wraith-like, than any 
fairy story. She seemed to be eating Barmecide food, 
that had been conjured up out of thin air, by the power 
of words. She seemed to be talking to handsome young 
bare-faced unrealities, not men at all: as she slid about 
with them, in the perpetual dance, they too seemed to 
have been conjured up out of air, merely for this soaring, 
slithering dance-business. And she could not believe 
that, when the lights went out, they wouldn’t melt back 
into thin air again, and complete nonentity. The strange 
nonentity of it all! Everything just conjured up, and 
nothing real. ‘* Isn’t this the best ever! ”’ they would 
beamingly assert, like the wraiths of enjoyment, without 
any genuine substance. And she would beam back : 
** Lots of fun! ” 

She was thankful the season was over, and everybody 
was leaving London. She and Rico were due to go to 
Scotland, but not till August. In the meantime they 
would go to her mother. 

Mrs. Witt had taken a cottage in Shropshire, on the 
Welsh border, and had moved down there with Phoenix 
and her horses. The open, heather-and-bilberry-covered 
hills were splendid for riding. 

Rico consented to spend the month in Shropshire, 
because for near neighbours Mrs. Witt had the Manbys, 
at Corrabach Hall. The Manbys were rich Australians 

36 ST. MAWR 

returned to the old country and set up as Squires, all 
in full blow. Rico had known them in Victoria: they 
were of good family : and the girls made a great fuss 
of him. 

So down went Lou and Rico, Lewis, Poppy and St. 
Mawr, to Shrewsbury, then out into the country. Mrs. 
Witt’s ‘** cottage ’’? was a tall red-brick Georgian house 
looking straight on to the Churchyard, and the dark, 
looming big Church. 

** T never knew what a comfort it would be,”’ said Mrs. 
Witt, ‘‘ to have grave-stones under my drawing-room 
windows, and funerals for lunch.”’ 

She really did take a strange pleasure in sitting in her 
panelled room, that was painted grey, and watching the 
Dean or one of the curates officiating at the graveside, 
among a group of black country mourners with black- 
bordered handkerchiefs luxuriantly in use. 

** Mother! ”’ said Lou. ‘‘ I think it’s gruesome! ”’ 

She had a room at the back, looking over the walled 
garden and the stables. Nevertheless there was the 
boom! boom! of the passing-bell, and the chiming and 
pealing on Sundays. The shadow of the Church, indeed ! 
A very audible shadow, making itself heard insistently. 

The Dean was a big, burly, fat man with a pleasant 
manner. He was a gentleman, and a man of learning 
in his own line. But he let Mrs. Witt know that he 
looked down on her just a trifle—as a parvenu American, 
a Yankee—though she never was a Yankee : and at the 
same time he had a sincere respect for her, as a rich 
woman. Yes, a sincere respect for her, as a rich 
woman. 

Lou knew that every Englishman, especially of the 
upper classes, has a wholesome respect for riches. But. 
then, who hasn’t? 

The Dean was more impressed by Mrs. Witt than by 
little Lou. But to Lady Carrington he was charming : 
she was almost ‘‘ one of us,’? you know. And he was 

ST. MAWR 87 

very gracious to Rico : *‘ your father’s splendid colonial 
service.”’ 

Mrs. Witt had now a new pantomime to amuse her : 
the Georgian house, her own pew in Church—it went 
with the old house : a village of thatched cottages—some 
of them with corrugated iron over the thatch: the 
cottage people, farm labourers and their families, with 
a few, very few, outsiders : the wicked little group of 
cottagers down at Mile End, famous for ill-living. The 
Mile-Enders were all Allisons and Jephsons, and in-bred, 
the Dean said: result of working through the centuries 
at the Quarry, and living isolated there at Mile End. 

Isolated! Imagine it! A mile and a half from the 
railway station, ten miles from Shrewsbury. Mrs. Witt 
thought of Texas, and said : 

** Yes, they are very isolated, away down there! ”’ 

And the Dean never for a moment suspected sarcasm. 

But there she had the whole thing staged complete for 
her : English village life. Even miners breaking in to 
shatter the rather stuffy, unwholesome harmony.—All 
the men touched their caps to her, all the women did a 
bit of a reverence, the children stood aside for her, if she 
appeared in the Street. 

They were all poor again: the labourers could no 
longer afford even a glass of beer in the evenings, since 
the Glorious War. 

** Now I think that is terrible,’’ said Mrs. Witt. ‘* Not 
to be able to get away from those stuffy, squalid, 
picturesque cottages for an hour in the evening, to drink 
a glass of beer.” 

** It’s a pity, I do agree with you, Mrs. Witt. But Mr. 
Watson has organised a men’s reading-room, where the 
men can smoke and play dominoes, and read if they 
wish.”’ 

** But that,’ said Mrs. Witt, ‘* is not the same as that 
cosy parlour in the ‘ Moon and Stars ’.”’ 

** IT quite agree,’’ said the Dean. ‘“‘ It isn’t.” 

88 ST. MAWR 

Mrs. Witt marched to the landlord of the ** Moon and 
Stars,’’ and asked for a glass of cider. 

** T want,’’ she said, in her American accent, ‘* these 
poor labourers to have their glass of beer in the 
evenings.”” 

** They want it themselves,’’ said Harvey. 

** Then they must have it—”’ 

The upshot was, she decided to supply one large barrel 
of beer per week and the landlord was to sell it to the 
_labourers at a penny a glass. 

‘* My own country has gone dry,” she asserted. ‘* But 
not because we can’t afford it.”’ 

By the time Lou and Rico appeared, she was deep in. 
She actually interfered very little: the barrel of beer 
was her one public act. But she did know everybody 
by sight, already, and she did know everybody’s cir- 
cumstances. And she had attended one prayer-meeting, 
one mother’s meeting, one sewing-bee, one “ social,”’ 
one Sunday School meeting, one Band of Hope meeting, 
and one Sunday School treat. She ignored the poky 
little Wesleyan and Baptist chapels, and was true-blue 
Episcopalian. 

*“* How strange these - picturesque old villages are, 
Louise! ’? she said, with a duskiness around her sharp, 
well-bred nose. ‘* How easy it. all seems, all on a definite 
pattern. And how false! And underneath, how 
corrupt ! ”? 

She gave that queer, triumphant leer from her grey 
eyes, and queer demonish wrinkles seemed to twitter on 
her face. 

Lou shrank away. She was beginning to be afraid of 
her mother’s insatiable curiosity, that always looked for 
the snake under the flowers. Or rather, for the maggots. 

Always this same morbid interest in other people and 
their doings, their privacies, their dirty linen. Always 
this air of alertness for personal happenings, person- 
alities, personalities, personalities. Always this subtle 

ST. MAWR 39 

criticism and appraisal of other people, this analysis of 
other people’s motives. If anatomy pre-supposes a 
corpse, then psychology pre-supposes a world of corpses. 
Personalities, which means personal criticism and 
analysis, pre-supposes a whole world-laboratory of 
human psyches waiting to be vivisected. If you cut a 
thing up, of course it will smell. Hence, nothing raises 
such an infernal stink, at last, as human psychology. 

Mrs. Witt was a pure psychologist, a fiendish psycholo- 
gist. And Rico, in his way, was a psychologist too. 
But he had a formula. ‘* Let’s know the worst, dear ! 
But let’s look on the bright side, and believe the best.”’ 

‘*Isn’t the Dean a priceless old darling! ”’ said Rico 
at breakfast. 

And it had begun. Work had started in the psychic 
vivisection laboratory. 

** Isn’t he wonderful! ’’ said Lou vaguely. 

** So delightfully worldly !—Some of us are not born to 
make money, dear boy. Luckily for us, we can marry 
it.”,—Rico made a priceless face. 

** Is Mrs. Vyner so rich? ”’ asked Lou. 

** She is, quite a wealthy woman—in coal,’ replied 
Mrs. Witt. ‘* But the Dean is surely worth his weight 
even in gold. And he’s a massive figure. I can 
imagine there would be great satisfaction in having him 
for a husband.”’ 

‘* Why, mother? ”? asked Lou. 

** Oh, such a presence! One of these old Englishmen, 
that nobody can put in their pocket. You can’t imagine 
his wife asking him to thread her needle. Something 
after all so robust! So different from young English- 
men, who all seem to me like ladies, perfect ladies.”’ 

** Somebody has to keep up the tradition of the perfect 
lady,’’? said Rico. 

** T know it,’? said Mrs. Witt. ‘* And if the women 
won’t do it, the young gentlemen take on the burden. 
They bear it very well.’’ 

40 ST. MAWR 

It was in full swing, the cut and thrust. And poor 
Lou, who had reached the point of stupefaction in the 
game, felt she did not know what to do with herself. 

Rico and Mrs. Witt were deadly enemies, yet neither 
could keep clear of the other. It might have been they 
who were married to one another, their duel and their 
duet were so relentless. : 

But Rico immediately started the social round : first 
the Manbys: then motor twenty miles to luncheon at 
Lady Tewkesbury’s : then young Mr Burns came flying 
down in his aeroplane from Chester: then they must 
motor to the sea, to Sir Edward Edwards’ place, where 
there was a moonlight bathing party. Everything 
intensely thrilling, and so innerly wearisome, Lou felt. 

But back of it all was St. Mawr, looming like a bonfire 
in the dark. He really was a tiresome horse to own. He 
worried the mares, if they were in the same paddock 
with him, always driving them round. And with any 
other horse he just fought with definite intent to kill. 
So he had to stay alone. 

‘© That St. Mawr, he’s a bad horse,”’’ said Phoenix. 

** Maybe! ”’ said Lewis. 

** You don’t like quiet horses? ”’ said Phoenix. 

‘** Most horses is quiet,’’ said Lewis. ‘* St. Mawr, he’s 
different.”’ 

** Why don’t he never get any foals? ” 

** Doesn’t want to, I should think. Same as me.”’ 

‘* What good is a horse like that? Better shoot him, 
before he kill somebody.” 

** What good’ll they get, shooting St. Mawr? ”’ said 
Lewis. 

** If he kills somebody ! ”’ said Phoenix. 

But there was no answer. 

The two grooms both lived over the stables, and Lou, 
from her window, saw a good deal of them. They were 
two quiet men, yet she was very much aware of their 
presence, aware of Phoenix’s rather high square shoulders 

ST. MAWR 41 

and his fine, straight, vigorous black hair that tended 
to stand up assertively on his head, as he went quietly 
drifting about his various jobs. He was not lazy, but he 
did everything with a sort of diffidence, as if from a 
distance, and handled his horses carefully, cautiously, 
and cleverly, but without sympathy. He seemed to be 
holding something back, all the time, unconsciously, as 
if in his very being there was some secret. But it was 
a secret of will. His quiet, reluctant movements, as if 
he never really wanted to do anything; his long flat- 
stepping stride; the permanent challenge in his high 
cheek-bones, the Indian glint in his eyes, and his peculiar 
stare, watchful and yet unseeing, made him unpopular 
with the women servants. 

Nevertheless, women had a certain fascination for 
him : he would stare at the pretty young maids with an 
intent blank stare, when they were not looking. Yet 
he was rather overbearing, domineering with them, and 
they resented him. It was evident to Lou that he looked 
upon himself as belonging to the master, not to the 
servant class. When he flirted with the maids, as he 
very often did, for he had a certain crude ostentatious- 
ness, he seemed to let them feel that he despised them as 
inferiors, servants, while he admired their pretty charms, 
as fresh, country maids. 

**T’m fair nervous of that Phoenix,” said Fanny, the 
fair-haired maid. ‘* He makes you feel what he’d do to 
you if he could.”’ 

** He’d better not try with me,” said Mabel. ‘* I’d 
scratch his cheeky eyes out. Cheek !—for it’s nothing 
else! He’s nobody—Common as they’re made! ”’ 

** He makes you feel you was there for him to trample 
on,”’ said Fanny. 

** Mercy, you are soft! If anyhody’s that it’s him. 
Oh my, Fanny, you’ve no right to let a fellow make you 
feel like that! Make them feel that they’re dirt, for you 
to trample on : which they are! ”’ 

42 ST. MAWR 

Fanny, however, being a shy little blonde thing, 
wasn’t good at assuming the trampling réle. She was 
definitely nervous of Phcenix. And he enjoyed it. An 
invisible smile seemed to creep up his cheek-bones, and 
the glint moved in his eyes as he teased her. He tor- 
mented her by his very presence, as he knew. 

He would come silently up when she was busy, and 
stand behind her perfectly still, so that she was 
unaware of his presence. Then, silently, he would make 
_ her aware. Till she glanced nervously round, and with a 
scream, saw him. 

One day Lou watched this little play. Fanny had been 
picking over a bowl of black currants, sitting on the 
bench under the maple tree in a corner of the yard. She 
didn’t look round till she had picked up her bowl to go 
to the kitchen. Then there was a scream and a crash. 

When Lou came out, Phoenix was crouching down 
silently gathering up the currants, which the little maid, 
scarlet and trembling, was collecting into another bowl. 
Phoenix seemed to be smiling down his back. 

** Phoenix! ”? said Lou. ‘* I wish you wouldn’t startle 
Fanny! ” 

He looked up, and she saw the glint of ridicule in his 
eyes. 

‘* Who, me? ”’ he said. 

** Yes, you. You go up behind Fanny, to startle her. 
You’re not to do it.’’ 

He slowly stood erect, and lapsed into his peculiar 
invisible silence. Only for a second his eyes glanced at 
Lou’s, and then she saw the cold anger, the gleam of 
malevolence and contempt. He could not bear peng 
commanded, or reprimanded, by a woman. 

Yet it was even worse with a man. 

“© What’s that, Lou? ”’ said Rico, appearing all hand- 
some and in the picture, in white flannels with an apricot 
silk shirt. 

** I’m telling Phoenix he’s not to torment Fanny ! ” 

ST. MAWR 43 

** Oh! ”—and Rico’s voice immediately became his 
father’s, the important government official’s. ‘* Cer- 
tainly not! Most certainly not! ’? He looked at the 
scattered currants and the broken bowl. Fanny melted 
into tears. ‘* This, I suppose, is some of the results! 
Now look here, Phoenix, you’re to leave the maids 
strictly alone. I shall ask them to report to me when- 
ever, or if ever, you interfere with them. But I hope 
you won’t interfere with them—in any way. You under- 
stand? ”’ 

As Rico became more and more Sir Henry and 
the government official, Lou’s bones melted more 
and more into discomfort. Phcenix stood in his 
peculiar silence, the invisible smile on his cheek- 
bones. 

** You understand what I’m saying to you? ”’ Rico 
demanded, in intensified acid tones. 

But Phcenix only stood there, as it were behind a cover 
of his own will, and looked back at Rico with a faint 
smile on his face and the glint moving in his eyes. 

** Do you intend to answer? ”? Rico’s upper lip lifted 
nastily. 

** Mrs. Witt is my boss,’’ came from Phoenix. 

The scarlet flew up Rico’s throat and flushed his face, 
his eyes went glaucous. Then quickly his face turned 
yellow. 

Lou looked at the two men : her husband, whose rages, 
over-controlled, were organically terrible : the half-breed, 
whose dark-coloured lips were widened in a faint smile 
of derision, but in whose eyes caution and hate were 
playing against one another. She realised that Phoenix 
would accept her reprimand, or her mother’s, because he 
could despise the two of them as mere women. But 
Rico’s bossiness aroused murder pure and simple. 

She took her husband’s arm. 

**Come dear! ”’ she said, in her half plaintive way. 
**T’m sure Phoenix understands. We all understand. 

44 ST. MAWR 

Go to the kitchen, Fanny, never mind the currants. 
There are plenty more in the garden.” 

Rico was always thankful to be drawn quickly, sub- 
missively away from his own rage. He was afraid of it. 
He was afraid lest he should fly at the groom in some 
horrible fashion. The very thought horrified him. But 
in actuality he came very near to it. 

He walked stiffly, feeling paralysed by his own fury. 
And those words, Mrs. Witt is my boss, were like hot 
acid in his brain. An insult! 

** By the way, Belle-Mére ! ”? he said when they joined 
Mrs. Witt—she hated being called Belle-Mére, and once 
said : *‘ If I’m the bell-mare, are you one of the colts? ”’ 
—She also hated his voice of smothered fury—** I had to 
speak to Phoenix about persecuting the maids. He took 
the liberty of informing me that you were his boss, so 
perhaps you had better speak to him.”’ 

** I certainly will. I believe they’re my maids, and 
nobody else’s, so its my duty to look after them. Who 
was he persecuting ? ”’ 

‘** 1’m the responsible one, mother,’’ said Lou 

Rico disappeared in a moment. He must get out: 
get away from the house. How? Something was wrong 
with the car. Yet he must get away, away. He would 
go over to Corrabach. He would ride St. Mawr. He 
had been talking about the horse, and Flora Manby was 
dying to see him. She had said: ‘* Oh, I can’t wait to 
see that marvellous horse of yours.”’ 

He would ride him over. It was only seven miles. 
He found Lou’s maid Flena, and sent her to tell Lewis. 

99 

Meanwhile, to soothe himself, he dressed himself most ; 

carefully in white riding breeches and a shirt of purple 
silk crape, with a flowing black tie spotted red like a 
ladybird, and black riding boots. Then he took a chic 
little white hat with a black band. t 

St. Mawr was saddled and waiting, and Lewis had 
saddled a second horse. 

— 

—— 

r 
¥ 
4 
' 
4 
i 

| 
3 

ST. MAWR 45 

** Thanks, Lewis, I’m going alone! ”’ said Rico. 

This was the first time he had ridden St. Mawr in the 
country, and he was nervous. But he was also in the 
hell of a smothered fury. All his careful dressing had 
not really soothed him. So his fury consumed his 
nervousness. 

He mounted with a swing, blind and rough. St. Mawr 
reared. 

“* Stop that ! ’? snarled Rico, and put him to the gate. 

Once out in the village street, the horse went dancing 
sideways. He insisted on dancing at the sidewalk, to the 
exaggerated terror of the children. Rico, exasperated, 
pulled him across. But no, he wouldn’t go down the 
centre of the village street. He began dancing and 
edging on to the other sidewalk, so the foot-passengers 
fled into the shops in terror. 

The devil was in him. He would turn down every 
turning where he was not meant to go. He reared with 
panic at a furniture van. He insisted on going down the 
wrong side of the road. Rico was riding him with a 
martingale, and he could see the rolling, bloodshot eye. 

** Damn you, go! ”? said Rico, giving him a dig with 
the spurs. 

And away they went, down the high road, in a 
thunderbolt. It was a hot day, with thunder threatening, 
so Rico was soon in a flame of heat. He held on tight, 
with fixed eyes, trying all the time to rein in the horse. 
What he really was afraid of was that the brute would 
shy suddenly, as he galloped. Watching for this, he 
didn’t care when they sailed past the turning to Corra- 
bach. ‘ 

St. Mawr flew on, in a sort of élan. Marvellous the 
power and life in the creature. There was really a great 
joy in the motion. If only he wouldn’t take the corners 
at a gallop, nearly swerving Rico off! Luckily the road 
was clear. To ride, to ride at this terrific gallop, on into 
eternity ! 

46 ' ST. MAWR 

After several miles, the horse slowed down, and Rico 
managed to pull him into a lane that might lead to Corra- 
bach. When all was said and done, it was a wonderful 
ride. St. Mawr could go like the wind, but with that 
luxurious heavy ripple of life which is like nothing else 
on earth. It seemed to carry one at once into another 
world, away from the life of the nerves. 

So Rico arrived after all something of a conqueror at 
Corrabach. To be sure, he was perspiring, and so was 
his horse. But he was a hero from another, heroic world. 

** Oh, such a hot ride! ’? he said, as he walked on to 
the lawn at Corrabach Hall. ‘* Between the sun and 
the horse, really !—between two fires! ” 

** Don’t you trouble, you’re looking dandy, a bit hot 
and flushed like,’’ said Flora Manby. ‘‘ Let’s go and see 
your horse.”’ 

And her exclamation was: ‘‘ Oh, he’s lovely! He’s 
fine! I’d love to try him once—”’ 

Rico decided to accept the invitation to stay overnight 
at Corrabach. Usually he was very careful, and refused 
to stay, unless Lou was with him. But they telephoned 
to the post-office at Chomesbury, would Mr. Jones please 
send a message to Lady Carrington that Sir Henry was 
staying the night at Corrabach Hall, but would be home 
next day. Mr. Jones received the request with unction, 
and said he would go over himself to give the message 
to Lady Carrington. 

Lady Carrington was in the walled garden. The 
peculiarity of Mrs. Witt’s house was that, for grounds 
proper, it had the churchyard. 

“* T never thought, Louise, that one day I should have 
an old English church-yard for my lawns and shrubbery © 
and park, and funeral mourners for my herds of deer. 
It’s curious. For the first time in my life a funeral has . 
become a real thing to me. I feel I could write a book on 
them.”’ 

But Louise only felt intimidated. 

ST. MAWR ‘ 47 

At the back of the house was a flagged courtyard, with 
stables and a maple tree in a corner, and big doors open- 
ing on to the village street. But at the side was a walled 
garden, with fruit trees and currant bushes and a great 
bed of rhubarb, and some tufts of flowers, peonies, pink 
roses, sweet williams. Phoenix, who had a certain taste 
for gardening, would be out there thinning the carrots 
or tying up the lettuce. He was not lazy. Only he 
would not take work seriously, as a job. He would be 
quite amused tying up lettuces, and would tie up head 
after head, quite prettily. Then, becoming bored, he 
would abandon his task, light a cigarette, and go and 
stand on the threshold of the big doors, in full view of 
the street, watching, and yet completely indifferent. 

After Rico’s departure on St. Mawr, Lou went mto the 
garden. And there she saw Phoenix working in the onion 
bed. He was bending over, in his own silence, busy with 
nimble, amused fingers among the grassy young onions. 
She thought he had not seen her, so she went down 
another path to where a swing bed hung under the apple 
trees. There she sat with a book and a bundle of maga- 
zines. But she did not read. 

She was musing vaguely. Vaguely, she was glad that 
Rico was away for a while. Vaguely, she felt a sense of 
bitterness, of complete futility : the complete futility of 
her living. This left her drifting in a sea of utter chagrin. 
And Rico seemed to her the symbol of the futility. 
Vaguely, she was aware that something else existed, but 
she didn’t know where it was or what it was. 

In the distance she could see Phoenix’s dark, rather 
tall-built head, with its black, fine, intensely-living hair 
tending to stand on end, like a brush with long, very fine 
black bristles. His hair, she thought, betrayed him as 
an animal of a different species. He was growing a little 
bored by weeding onions : that also she could tell. Soon 
he would want some other amusement. 

Presently Lewis appeared. He was small, energetic, a 

48 ST. MAWR 

little bit bow-legged, and he walked with a slight strut. 
He wore khaki riding-breeches, leather gaiters, and a blue 
shirt. And like Phoenix, he rarely had any cap or hat 
on his head. His thick black hair was parted at the side 
and brushed over heavily sideways, dropping on his fore- 
head at the right. It was very long, a real mop, under 
which his eyebrows were dark and steady. 

** Seen Lady Carrington? ’’ he asked of Phoenix. 

** Yes, she’s sitting on that swing over there—she’s 
been there quite a while.”’ 

The wretch—he had seen her from the very first! 

Lewis came striding over, looking towards her with his 
pale-grey eyes, from under his mop of hair. 

** Mr. Jones from the post office wants to see you, my 
Lady, with a message from Sir Henry.’’ 

Instantly alarm took possession of Lou’s soul. 

‘* Oh !—Does he want to see me personally >—What 
message? Is anything wrong? ’’—And her voice trailed 
out over the last word, with a sort of anxious nonchal- 
ance. 

“IT don’t think it’s anything amiss,’? said Lewis 
reassuringly. 

“Oh! You don’t”? the relief came into her voice. 
Then she looked at Lewis with a slight, winning smile 
in her unmatched eyes. ‘‘ I’m so afraid of St. Mawr, 
you know.”’ Her voice was soft and cajoling. Phoenix 
was listening in the distance. 

“St. Mawr’s all right, if you don’t do nothing to 
him,’’? Lewis replied. 

‘I’m sure he is!—But how is one to know when 
one is doing something to him?—Tell Mr. Jones 
to come here, please,’’ she concluded, on a changed 
tone. 

Mr. Jones, a man of forty-five, thick set, with a fresh 
complexion and rather foolish brown eyes, and a big 
brown moustache, came prancing down the path, 
smiling rather fatuously, and doffing his straw hat with 

ST. MAWR 49 

a gorgeous bow the moment he saw Lou sitting in her 
slim white frock on the coloured swing bed under the 
trees with their hard green apples. 

** Good morning Mr. Jones! ”’ 

** Good morning Lady Carrington.—If I may say so, 
what a picture you make—a beautiful picture—”’ 

He beamed under his big brown moustache like the 
greatest lady-killer. 

** Do I !—Did Sir Henry say he was all right? ” 

** He didn’t say exactly, but I should expect he is all 
right—’’ and Mr. Jones delivered his message, in the 
mayonnaise of his own unction. 

** Thank you so much, Mr. Jones. It’s awfully good 
of you to come and tell me. Now I shan’t worry about 
Sir Henry at all.’’ 

** It’s a great pleasure to come and deliver a satis- 
factory message to Lady Carrington. But it won’t be 
kind to Sir Henry if you don’t worry about him at all 
in his absence. We all enjoy being worried about by 
those we love—so long as there is nothing to worry about 
of course ! ”” 

** Quite! ”’? said Lou. ‘‘ Now won’t you take a glass 
of port and a biscuit, or a whisky and soda? And thank 
you ever so much.”’ 

‘Thank you, my Lady. I might drink a whisky and 
soda, since you are so good.” 

And he beamed fatuously. 

**Let Mr. Jones mix himself a whisky and soda, 
Lewis,’’ said Lou. 

** Heavens ! ’”? she thought, as the postmaster retreated 
a little uncomfortably down the garden path, his bald 
spot passing in and out of the sun, under the trees: 
** How ridiculous everything is, how ridiculous, ridicu- 
lous! ’’ Yet she didn’t really dislike Mr. Jones and his 
interlude. 

_ Phoenix was melting away out of the garden. He had 
to follow the fun. 
D 

50 ST. MAWR 

‘* Phoenix ! ’? Lou called. *‘ Bring me a glass of water, 
will you? Or send somebody with it.”’ 

He stood in the path looking round at her. 

‘* All right ! ’’ he said. 

And he turned away again. 

She did not like being alone in the garden. She liked 
to have the men working somewhere near. Curious how 
pleasant it was to sit there in the garden when Phoenix 
was about, or Lewis. It made her feel she could never 
be lonely or jumpy. But when Rico was there, she was 
all aching nerve. 

Phoenix came back with a glass of water, lemon juice, 
sugar, and a small bottle of brandy. He knew Lou liked 
a spoonful of brandy in her iced lemonade. 

** How thoughtful of you Phoenix! ” she said. ‘* Did 
Mr. Jones get his whisky? ”’ 

“* He was just getting it.”’ 

** That’s right.—By the way, Phoenix, I wish you 
wouldn’t get mad if Sir Henry speaks to you. He is 
really so kind.”’ 

She looked up at the man. He stood there watching 
her in silence, the invisible smile on his face, and the 
inscrutable Indian glint moving in his eyes. What was 
he thinking? There was something passive and almost 
submissive about him, but underneath this, an unyield- 
ing resistance and cruelty : yes, even cruelty. She felt 
that, on top, he was submissive and attentive, bringing 
her her lemonade as she liked it, without being told : 
thinking for her quite subtly. But underneath there was 
an unchanging hatred. He submitted circumstantially, 
he worked for a wage. And even circumstantially, he 
liked his mistress—la patrona—and her daughter. But 
much deeper than any circumstance or any circum- ~ 
stantial liking, was the categorical hatred upon which 
he was founded, and with which he was powerless. His 
liking for Lou and for Mrs. Witt, his serving them and 
working for a wage, was all side-tracking his own nature, 

ST. MAWR 51 

which was grounded on hatred of their very existence. 
But what was he to do? He had to live. Therefore he 
had to serve, to work for a wage, and even to be faithful. 

And yet their existence made his own existence 
negative. If he was to exist, positively, they would have 
to cease to exist. At the same time, a fatal sort of toler- 
ance made him serve these women, and go on serving. 

** Sir Henry is so kind to everybody,’’ Lou insisted. 

The half-breed met her eyes, and smiled uncomfort- 
ably. 

** Yes, he’s a kind man,’’ he replied, as if sincerely. 

** Then why do you mind if he speaks to you? ”’ 

** J don’t mind,”’ said Phoenix glibly. 

** But you do. Or else you wouldn’t make him so 
angry.” 

** Was he angry? I don’t know,”’ said Phoenix. 

** He was very angry. And you do know.’’ 

** No, I don’t know if he’s angry. I don’t know,” the 
fellow persisted. And there was a glib sort of satisfaction 
in his tone. 

** That’s awfully unkind of you, Phcenix,”’ she said, 
growing offended in her turn. 

** No, I don’t know if he’s angry. I don’t want to 
make him angry. I don’t know—’’ 

He had taken on a tone of naive ignorance, which at 
once gratified her pride as a woman, and deceived her. 

** Well, you believe me when I tell you you did make 
him angry, don’t you? ” 

“<* Yes, I believe when you tell me.”’ 

** And you promise me, won’t you, not to do it again? 
It’s so bad for him—so bad for his nerves, and for his 
eyes. It makes them inflamed, and injures his eye- 
sight. And you know, as an artist, it’s terrible if any- 
thing happens to his eyesight—”’ 

Phoenix was watching her closely, to take it in. He 
still was not good at understanding continuous, logical 
statement. Logical connection in speech seemed to 

52 ST. MAWR 

stupefy him, make him stupid. He understood in dis- 
connected assertions of fact. But he had gathered what 
she said. ‘‘ He gets mad at you. When he gets mad, it 
hurts his eyes. His eyes hurt him. He can’t see, 
because his eyes hurt him. He want to paint a picture, he 
can’t. He can’t paint a picture, he can’t see clear—”’ 

Yes, he had understood. She saw he had understood. 
The bright glint of satisfaction moved in his eyes. 

*¢ So now promise me, won’t you, you won’t make him 
mad again : you won’t make him angry? ”’ 

‘© No, I won’t make him angry. I don’t do anything 
to make him angry,”’ Phoenix answered, rather glibly. 

** And you do understand, don’t you? You do know 
how kind he is : how he’d do a good turn to anybody? ” 

** Yes, he’s a kind man,”’ said Phoenix. 

** I’m so glad you realise. There, that’s luncheon ! 
How nice it is to sit here in the garden, when every- 
body is nice to you! No, I can carry the tray, don’t 
you bother.’’ 

But he took the tray from her hand, and followed her 
to the house. And as he walked behind her, he watched 
the slim white nape of her neck, beneath the clustering 
of her bobbed hair, something as a stoat watches a rabbit 
he is following. 

In the afternoon Lou retreated once more to her place 
in the garden. There she lay, sitting with a bunch of 
pillows behind her, neither reading nor working, just 
musing. She had learned the new joy : to do absolutely 
nothing, but to lie and let the sunshine filter through the 

leaves, to see the bunch of red-hot-poker flowers pierce 

scarlet into the afternoon, beside the comparative 
neutrality of some foxgloves. The mere colour of hard 

red, like the big oriental poppies that had fallen, and 

these poker flowers, lingered in her consciousness like a 
communication. 

Into this peaceful indolence, when even the big, dark- 
grey tower of the church beyond the wall and the yew- 

y 

ST. MAWR 53 

trees, was keeping its bells in silence, advanced Mrs. 
Witt, in a broad panama hat and a white dress. 

** Don’t you want to ride, or do something, Louise? ”’ 
she asked ominously. 

** Don’t you want to be peaceful, mother? *? retorted 
Louise. 

** Yes—an active peace.—I can’t believe that my 
daughter can be content to lie on a hammock and do 
nothing, not even read or improve her mind, the greater 
part of the day.”’ 

“* Well, your daughter is content to do that. It’s her 
greatest pleasure.”’ 

**T know it. I can see it. And it surprises me very 
much. When I was your age, I was never still. I had so 
much go—’’ 

** * Those maids, thank God, 
Are ’neath the sod, 
And all their generation.’ 

No but, mother, I only take life differently. Perhaps 
you used up that sort of go. I’m the harem type, 
mother : only I never want the men inside the lattice.”’ 

‘* Are you really my daughter?—Well! A woman 
never knows what will happen to her. I’m an American 
woman, and I suppose I’ve got to remain one, no matter 
where I am.—What did you want, Lewis? ”’ 

The groom had approached down the path. 

“* If I am to saddle Poppy? ”’ said Lewis. 

** No, apparently not!’ replied Mrs. Witt. ‘* Your 
mistress prefers the hammock to the saddle.”’ 

‘* Thank you, Lewis. What mother says is true this 
afternoon, at least.’? And she gave him a peculiar little 
eross-eyed smile. 

** Who,” said Mrs. Witt to the man, “ has. been 
eutting at your hair ?”’ 

There was a moment of silent resentment. 

*T did it myself, Mam ! Sir Henry said it was too long.”’ 

54 ST. MAWR 

‘* He certainly spoke the truth. But I believe there’s 
a barber in the village on Saturdays—or you could ride 
over to Shrewsbury. Just turn round, and let me look 
at the back. Is it the money? ”’ 

‘“*No, Mam. I don’t like these fellows touching my 
head.”’ 

He spoke coldly, with a certain hostile reserve that at 
once piqued Mrs. Witt. 

** Don’t you really! ’’ she said. ‘* But it’s quite 
impossible for you to go about as you are. It gives you 
a half-witted appearance. Go now into the yard, and 
get a chair and a dust-sheet. Tl cut your hair.” 

The man hesitated, hostile. 

‘© Don’t be afraid, I know how it’s done. I’ve cut the 
hair of many a poor wounded boy in hospital: and 
shaved them too. You've got such a touch, nurse! 
Poor fellow, he was dying, though none of us knew it.— 
Those are the compliments I value, Louise.—Get that 
chair now, and a dust-sheet. Ill borrow your hair- 
scissors from Elena, Louise.’’ 

Mrs. Witt, happily on the war-path, was herself again. 
She didn’t care for work, actual work. But she loved 
trimming. She loved arranging unnatural and pretty 
salads, devising new and piquant-looking ice-creams, 
having a turkey stuffed exactly as she knew a stuffed 
turkey in Louisiana, with chestnuts and butter and stuff, 
or showing a servant how to turn waffles on a waffle-iron, 
or to bake a ham with brown sugar and cloves and a 
moistening of rum. She liked pruning rose-trees, or 
beginning to cut a yew hedge into shape. She liked 
ordering her own and Louise’s shoes, with an exactitude 
and a knowledge of shoe-making that sent the salesmen 

crazy. She was a demon in shoes. Reappearing from — 

America, she would pounce on her daughter. ‘* Louise, 
throw those shoes away. Give them to one of the 
maids.’’—‘* But, mother, they are some of the best 
French shoes. I like them.’’—** Throw them away. A 

ST. MAWR 55 

shoe has only two excuses for existing : perfect comfort 
or perfect appearance. Those have neither. I have 
brought you some shoes.’’—Yes, she had brought ten 
pairs of shoes from New York. She knew her daughter’s 
foot as she knew her own. 

So now she was in her element, looming behind Lewis 
as he sat in the middle of the yard swathed in a dust- 
sheet. She had on an overall and a pair of wash-leather 
gloves, and she poised a pair of long scissors like one of 
the Fates. In her big hat she looked curiously young, but 
with the youth of a by-gone generation. Her heavy- 
lidded, laconic grey eyes were alert, studying the groom’s 
black mop of hair. Her eyebrows made thin, uptilting 
black arches on her brow. Her fresh skin was slightly 
powdered, and she was really handsome, in a bold, by- 
gone, 18th century style. Some of the curious, adven- 
turous stoicism of the 18th century : and then a certain 
blatant American efficiency. 

Lou, who had strayed into the yard to see, looked so 
much younger and so many thousand of years older than 
her mother, as she stood in her wisp-like diffidence, the 
clusters of grape-like bobbed hair hanging beside her 
face, with its fresh colouring and its ancient weariness, 
her slightly squinting eyes, that were so disillusioned 
they were becoming faun-like. 

** Not too short, mother, not too short! ’? she remon- 
strated, as Mrs. Witt, with a terrific flourish of 
efficiency, darted at the man’s black hair, and the thick 
flakes fell like black snow. 

** Now, Louise, I’m right in this job, please don’t 
interfere. Two things I hate to see: a man with his 
wool in his neck and ears: and a bare-faced young man 
who looks as if he’d bought his face as well as his hair 
from a men’s beauty-specialist.”’ 

And efficiently she bent down, clip—clip—clipping ! 
while Lewis sat utterly immobile, with sunken head, in 
a sort of despair. 

56 ST. MAWR 

Phoenix stood against the stable door, with his restless, 
eternal cigarette. And in the kitchen doorway the 
maids appeared and fled, appeared and fled in delight. 
The old gardener, a fixture who went with the house, 
creaked in and stood with his legs apart, silent in intense 
condemnation. 

‘** First time I ever see such a thing! ”? he muttered 
to himself, as he creaked on into the garden. He was a 
bad-tempered old soul, who thoroughly disapproved of 
the household, and would have given notice, but that he 
knew which side his bread was buttered : and there was 
butter unstinted on his bread, in Mrs. Witt’s kitchen. 

Mrs. Witt stood back to survey her handywork, hold- 
ing those terrifying shears with their beak erect. Lewis 
lifted his head and looked stealthily round, like a creature 
in a trap. 

“© Keep still! ”’ she said. ‘* I haven’t finished.” 

And she went for his front hair, with vigour, lifting 
up long layers and snipping off the ends artistically : till 
at last he sat with a black aureole upon the floor, and 
his ears standing out with curious new alertness from the 
sides of his clean-clipped head. 

** Stand up,”’ she said, ‘* and let me look.’’ 

He stood up, looking absurdly young, with the hair 
all cut away from his neck and ears, left thick only on 
top. She surveyed her work with satisfaction. 

** You look so much younger,” she said; ‘‘ you would 
be surprised. Sit down again.”’ 

She clipped the back of his neck with the shears, and 
then, with a very slight hesitation, she said : 

‘* Now about the beard! °? _ 

But the man rose suddenly from the chair, pulling the 
dust-cloth from his neck with desperation. 

** No, I'll do that myself,’’ he said, looking her in the 
eyes with a cold light in his pale-grey, uncanny eyes. 

She hesitated in a kind of wonder at his queer male 
rebellion. 

ST. MAWR 57 

‘* Now, listen, I shall do it much better than you— 
and besides,”’ she added hurriedly, snatching at the dust- 
cloth he was flinging on the chair—‘‘ I haven’t quite 
finished round the ears.”’ 

** T think I shall do,” he said, again looking her in the 
eyes, with a cold, white gleam of finality. ‘* Thank you 
for what you’ve done.”’ 

And he walked away to the stable. 

** You’d better sweep up here,’’ Mrs. Witt called. 

** Yes, Mam,” he replied, looking round at her again 
with an odd resentment, but continuing to walk away. 

** However! ”? said Mrs. Witt. ‘* I suppose he’ll do.”’ 

And she divested herself of gloves and overall, and 
walked indoors to wash and to change. Lou went indoors 
too. 

** It is extraordinary what hair that man has! ”’ said 
Mrs. Witt. ‘* Did I tell you when I was in Paris, I saw 
a woman’s face in the hotel that I thought I knew? I 
couldn’t place her, till she was coming towards me. 
Aren’t you Rachel Fanniére? she said. Aren’t you 
Janette Leroy? We hadn’t seen each other since we were 
girls of twelve and thirteen, at school in New Orleans. 
Oh! she said to me. Is every illusion doomed to perish? 
You had such wonderful golden curls! All my life I’ve 
said, Oh, if only I had such lovely hair as Rachel 
Fanniére! Ive seen those beautiful golden curls of yours 
all my life. And now I meet you, you’re grey! Wasn’t 
that terrible, Louise? Well, that man’s hair made me 
think of it—so thick and curious. It’s strange, what a 
difference there is in hair; I suppose it’s because he’s just 
an animal—no mind! There’s nothing I admire in a man 
like a good mind. Your father was a very clever man, 
and all the men I’ve admired have been clever. But 
isn’t it curious now, I’ve never cared much to touch their 
hair. How strange life is! If it gives one thing, it takes 
away another.—And even those poor boys in hospital : 
Ihave shaved them, or cut their hair, like a mother, never 

58 ST. MAWR 

thinking anything of it. Lovely, intelligent, clean boys, 
most of them were. Yet it never did anything to me. 
I never knew before that something could happen to one 
from a person’s hair! Like to Janette Leroy from my 
curls when I was a child. And now I’m grey, as she 
says.—I wonder how old a man Lewis is, Louise! Didn’t 
he look absurdly young, with his ears pricking up? ” 

** T think Rico said he was forty or forty-one.”’ 

** And never been married? ”’ 

** No—not as far as I know.”’ 

‘** Isn’t that curious now !—just an animal! no mind! 
A man with no mind! I’ve always thought that the 
most despicable thing. Yet such wonderful hair to 
touch. Your Henry has quite a-good mind, yet I would 
simply shrink from touching his hair. I suppose one 
likes stroking a cat’s fur, just the same. Just the animal 
in man. Curious that I never seem to have met it, 
Louise. Now I come to think of it, he has the eyes of a 
human cat: a human tom-cat. Would you call him 
stupid? Yes, he’s very stupid.”’ 

‘* No, mother, he’s not stupid. He only doesn’t care 
about most things.”’ 

** Like an animal! But what a strange look he has 
in his eyes! a strange sort of intelligence! and a con- 
fidence in himself. Isn’t that curious, Louise, in a man 
with as little mind as he has? Do you know, I should 
say he could see through a woman pretty well.” 

** Why, mother! ”? said Lou impatiently. ‘‘ I think 
one gets so tired of your men with mind, as you call it. 

There are so many of that sort of clever men. And there’ 
are lots of men who aren’t very clever, but are rather ° 

nice : and lots are stupid. It seems to me there’s some- 

thing else besides mind and cleverness, or niceness or 

cleanness. Perhaps it is the animal. Just think of St. 
Mawr! I’ve thought so much about him. We call him 
an animal, but we never know what it means. He seems 
a far greater mystery to me than a clever man. He’s 

ST. MAWR 59 

a horse. Why can’t one say in the same way, of a man: 
He’s a man? There seems no mystery in being a man. 
But there’s a terrible mystery in St. Mawr.”’ 

Mrs. Witt watched her daughter quizzically. 

** Louise,’? she said, ‘* you won’t tell me that the 
mere animal is all that counts in a man. I will never 
believe it. Man is wonderful because he is able to 
think.” 

‘* But is he? ’? cried Lou, with sudden exasperation. 
‘** Their thinking seems to me all so childish : like string- 
ing the same beads over and over again. Ah, men! 
They and their thinking are all so paltry. How can you 
be impressed ? ”” 

Mrs. Witt raised her eyebrows sardonically. 

** Perhaps I’m not—any more,” she said with a grim 
smile. 

** But,”’ she added, “ I still can’t see that I am to be 
impressed by the mere animal in man. The animals are 
the same as we are. It seems to me they have the same 
feelings and wants as we do in a commonplace way. The 
only difference is that they have no minds: no human 
minds, at least. And no matter what you say, Louise, 
lack of mind makes the commonplace.”’ 

Lou knitted her brows nervously. 

** TI suppose it does, mother.—But men’s minds are 
so commonplace : look at Dean Vyner and his mind! 
Or look at Arthur Balfour, as a shining example. Isn’t 
that commonplace, that cleverness? I would hate St. 
Mawr to be spoilt by such a mind.”’ 

** Yes, Louise, so would I. Because the men you 
mention are really old women, knitting the same pattern 
over and over again. Nevertheless, I shall never alter 
my belief that real mind is all that matters in a man, 
and it’s that that we women love.”’ 

‘© Yes, mother !—But what is real mind? The old 
woman who knits the most complicated pattern? Oh, 
I can hear all their needles clicking, the clever men! As 

60 ST. MAWR 

a matter of fact, mother, I believe Lewis has far more 
real mind than Dean Vyner or any of the clever ones. 
He has a good intuitive mind, he knows things without 
thinking them.”’ 

‘© That may be, Louise! But he is a servant. He is 
under. A real man should never be under. And then 
you could never be intimate with a man like Lewis.” 

‘* T don’t want intimacy, mother. I’m too tired of it 
all. I love St. Mawr because he isn’t intimate. He 
stands where one can’t get at him. And he burns with 
life. And where does his life come from, to him? That’s 
the mystery. That great burning life in him, which 
never is dead. Most men have a deadness in them, that 
frightens me so, because of my own deadness. Why 
can’t men get their life straight, like St. Mawr, and then 
think? Why can’t they think quick, mother: quick as 
a woman: only farther than we do? Why isn’t men’s 
thinking quick like fire, mother? Why is it so slow, so 
dead, so deadly dull? ” 

** T can’t tell you, Louise. My own opinion of the men 
of to-day has grown very small. But I can live in spite 
of it.”’ 

** No, mother. We seem to be living off old fuel, like 
the camel when he lives off his hump. Life doesn’t rush 
into us, as it does even into St. Mawr, and he’s a depen- 
dent animal. I can’t live, mother. I just can’t.’’ 

** JT don’t see why not? I’m full of life.” 

** | know you are, mother. But I’m not, and I’m your 
daughter.—And don’t misunderstand me, mother. I 
don’t want to be an animal like a horse or a cat or a_ 
lioness, though they all fascinate me, the way they get 
their life straight, not from a lot of old tanks, as we do. 
I don’t admire the cave man, and that sort of thing. — 
But think mother, if we could get our lives straight from 
the source, as the animals do, and still be ourselves. 
You don’t like men yourself. But you’ve no idea how 
men just tire me out: even the very thought of them. 

ST. MAWR 61 

You say they are too animal. But they’re not, mother. 
It’s the animal in them has gone perverse, or cringing, 
or humble, or domesticated, like dogs. I don’t know one 
single man who is a proud living animal. I know they’ve 
left off really thinking. But then men always do leave off 
really thinking, when the last bit of wild animal dies in 
them.”’ 

** Because we have minds—”’ 

** We have no minds once we are tame, mother. Men 
are all women, knitting and crochetting words together.’’ 

**T can’t altogether agree, you know, Louise.’’ 

** T know you don’t.—You like clever men. But clever 
men are mostly such unpleasant animals. As animals, so 
very unpleasant. And in men like Rico, the animal has 
gone queer and wrong. And in those nice clean boys 
you liked so much in the war, there is no wild animal 
left in them. They’re all tame dogs, even when they’re 
brave and well-bred. They’re all tame dogs, mother, 
with human masters. There’s no mystery in them.” 

** What do you want, Louise? You do want the cave 
man, who’ll knock you on the head with a club.”’ 

** Don’t be silly, mother. That’s much more your sub- 
conscious line, you admirer of Mind.—I don’t consider 
the cave man is a real human animal at all. He’s a 
brute, a degenerate. A pure animal man would be as 
lovely as a deer or a leopard, burning like a flame fed 
straight from underneath. And he’d be part of the 
unseen, like a mouse is, even. And he’d never cease to 
wonder, he’d breathe silence and unseen wonder, as the 
partridges do, running in the stubble. He’d be all the 
animals in turn, instead of one, fixed, automatic thing, 
which he is now, grinding on the nerves.—Ah no, 
mother, I want the wonder back again, or I shall die. 
I don’t want to be like you, just criticising and annihil- 
ating these dreary people, and enjoying it.”’ 

** My dear daughter, whatever else the human animal 
might be, he’d be a dangerous commodity.”’ 

62 ST. MAWR 

‘* T wish he would, mother. I’m dying of these empty, 
dangerless men, who are only sentimental and spiteful.”’ 

** Nonsense, you’re not dying.”” 

** Tam, mother. And I should be dead if there weren’t 
St. Mawr and Phoenix and Lewis in the world.”’ 

** St. Mawr and Phoenix and Lewis! I thought you 
said they were servants.” 

** That’s the worst of it. If only they were masters ! 
If only there were some men with as much natural life 
as they have, and their brave, quick minds that com- 
manded instead of serving! ”’ 

** There are no such men,’’ said Mrs. Witt, with a 
certain grim satisfaction. 

**T know it. But I’m young, and I’ve got to live. 
And the thing that is offered me as life just starves me, 
starves me to death, mother. What am I todo? You 
enjoy shattering people like Dean Vyner. But I am 
young, I can’t live that way.”’ 

‘© That may be.” 

It had long ago struck Lou how much more her mother 
realised and understood than ever Rico did. Rico was 
afraid, always afraid of realising. Rico, with his good 
manners and his habitual kindness, and that peculiar 
imprisoned sneer of his. 

He arrived home next morning on St. Mawr, rather 
flushed and gaudy, and over-kind, with an empressé 
anxiety about Lou’s welfare which spoke too many 
volumes. Especially as he was accompanied by Flora 
Manby, and by Flora’s sister Elsie, and Elsie’s husband, 
Frederick Edwards. They all came on horseback. 

** Such awful ages since I saw you! ”’ said Flora to 
Lou. ‘* Sorry if we burst in on you. We’re only just 
saying How do you do! and going‘on to the inn. They’ve 
got rooms all ready for us there. We thought we’d stay 
just one night over here, and ride to-morrow to the 
Devil’s Chair. Won’t you come? Lots of fun! Isn’t 
Mrs. Witt at home? ”’ 

ST. MAWR 63 

Mrs. Witt was out for the moment. When she 
returned she had on her curious stiff face, yet she greeted 
the newcomers with a certain cordiality : she felt it would 
be diplomatic, no deubt. 

** There are two rooms here,” she said, *‘ and if you 
care to poke into them, why we shall be delighted to 
have you. But I’ll show them to you first, because they 
are poor, inconvenient rooms, with no running water 
and miles from the baths.”’ 

Flora and Elsie declared that they were “* perfectly 
darling sweet rooms—not overcrowded.”’ 

** Well,”’ said Mrs. Witt, ‘* the conveniences certainly 
don’t fill up much space. But if you like to take them 
for what they are—”’ 

** Why we feel absolutely overwhelmed, don’t we, 
Elsie !—But we’ve no clothes—! ”’ 

Suddenly the silence had turned into a house-party. 
The Manby girls appeared to lunch in fine muslin dresses, 
bought in Paris, fresh as daisies. | Women’s clothing 
takes up so little space, especially in summer! Fred 
Edwards was one of those blond Englishmen with a 
little brush moustache and those strong blue eyes which 
were always attempting the sentimental, but which Lou, 
in her prejudice, considered cruel: upon what grounds 
she never analysed. However, he took a gallant tone with 
her at once, and she had to seem to simper. Rico, watch- 
ing her, was so relieved when he saw the simper coming. 

It had begun again, the whole clockwork of “ lots of 
fun ! ”’ 

*¢ Tsn’t Fred flirting perfectly outrageously with Lady 
Carrington !—She looks so sweet! ’’ cried Flora, over her 
coffee-cup. ‘* Don’t you mind, Harry! ”’ 

They called Rico ‘‘ Harry”?! His boy-name. 

“© Only a very little,”? said Harry. ‘“‘ L’uomo é 
cacciatore.*” 

** Oh now, what does that mean? ”’ cried Flora, who 
always thrilled to Rico’s bits of affectation. 

64 ST. MAWR 

‘*Tt means,” said Mrs. Witt, leaning forward and 
speaking in her most suave voice, ‘* that man is a 
hunter.”’ 

Even Flora shrank under the smooth acid of the irony. 

“Oh, well now! ”’ she cried. ‘‘ If he is, then what is 
woman? ” 

‘* The hunted,’? said Mrs. Witt, in a still smoother 
acid. 

** At least,’’ said Rico, ‘‘ she is always game! ”’ 

** Ah, is she though! ’’ came Fred’s manly, well-bred 
tones. ‘* I’m not so sure.”’ 

Mrs. Witt looked from one man to the other, as if she 
were dropping them down the bottomless pit. 

Lou escaped to look at St. Mawr. He was still moist 
where the saddle had been. And he seemed a little bit 
extinguished, as if virtue had gone out of him. 

But when he lifted his lovely naked head, like a bunch 
of flames, to see who it was had entered, she saw he was 
still himself. For ever sensitive and alert, his head lifted 
like the summit of a fountain. And within him the clean 
bones striking to the earth, his hoofs intervening between 
him and the ground like lesser jewels. 

He knew her and did not resent her. But he took no 
notice of her. He would never ‘* respond.’’ At first she 
had resented it. Now she was glad. He would never be 
intimate, thank heaven. 

She hid herself away till tea-time, but she could not 
hide from the sound of voices. Dinner was early, at 
seven. Dean Vyner came—Mrs. Vyner was an invalid— 
and also an artist who had a studio in the village and 
did etchings. He was a man of about thirty-eight, and, 
poor, just beginning to accept himself as a failure, as 
far as making money goes. But he worked at his etchings. 
and studied esoteric matters like astrology and alchemy. 
Rico patronised him, and was a little afraid of him. 
Lou could not quite make him out. After knocking 
about Paris and London and Munich, he was trying to 

ST. MAWR 65 

become staid, and to persuade himself that English 
village life, with squire and dean in the background, 
humble artist in the middle, and labourer in the common 
foreground, was a genuine life. His self-persuasion was 
only moderately successful. This was betrayed by the 
curious arrest in his body: he seemed to have to force 
himself into movement: and by the curious duplicity 
in his yellow-grey, twinkling eyes, that twinkled and 
expanded like a goat’s; with mockery, irony, and frustra- 
tion. 

** Your face is curiously like Pan’s,’’ said Lou to him 
at dinner. 

It was true, in a commonplace sense. He had the 
tilted eyebrows, the twinkling goaty look, and the 
pointed ears of a goat-Pan. 

** People have said so,”’ he replied. ‘* But I’m afraid 
it’s not the face of the Great God Pan. Isn’t it rather 
the Great Goat Pan! ”’ 

** T say, that’s good! ”’ cried Rico. ‘* The Great Goat 
iran f *? 

‘*T have always found it difficult,” said the Dean, 
“to see the Great God Pan in that goat-legged 
old father of satyrs. He may have a good deal of 
influence—the world will always be full of goaty 
old satyrs. But we find them somewhat vulgar. The 
goaty old satyrs are too comprehensible to me to be 
venerable, and I fail to see a Great God in the father 
of them all.”’ 

** Your ears should be getting red,’”’ said Lou to Cart- 
wright. She, too, had an odd squinting smile that sug- 
gested nymphs, so irresponsible and unbelieving. 

** Oh no, nothing personal! ’? cried the Dean. 

** T am not sure,’’ said Cartwright, with a small smile. 
** But don’t you imagine Pan once was a great god, 
before the anthropomorphic Greeks turned him into half 
a man? ” 

‘* Ah!—maybe. That is very possible. But—I have 

E 

66 ST. MAWR 

noticed the limitation in myself—my mind has no grasp 
whatsoever of Europe before the Greeks arose. Mr. 
Wells’ Outline does not help me there, either,’’ the Dean 
added with a smile. 

** But what was Pan before he was a man with goat 
legs? ’’ asked Lou. 

** Before he looked like me? ”’ said Cartwright, with 
a faint grin. ‘* I should say he was the god that is 
hidden in everything. In those days you saw the thing, 
you never saw the god in it : I mean in the tree or the 
fountain or the animal. If you ever saw the God instead 
of the thing, you died. If you saw it with the naked eye, 
that is. But in the night you might see the God. And 
you knew it was there.”’ 

‘‘ The modern pantheist not only sees the God in 
everything, he takes photographs of it,’’ said the Dean. 

“¢ Oh, and the divine pictures he paints! ’’ cried Rico. 

** Quite ! ’’ said Cartwright. 

** But if they never saw the God in the thing, the old 
ones, how did they know he was there? How did they 
have any Pan at all? ”’ said Lou. 

** Pan was the hidden mystery—the hidden cause. 
That’s how it was a Great God. Pan wasn’t he at all: 
not even a great God. He was Pan. All: what you see 
when you see in full. In the daytime you see the thing. 
But if your third eye is open, which sees only the things 
that can’t be seen, you may see Pan within the thing, 
hidden : you may see with your third eye, which is dark- 
ness.”’ 

“Do you think I might see Pan in a horse, for 
example? ”’ 

“ Kasily. In St. Mawr! ’—Cartwright gave her a - 
knowing look. ‘ 

‘¢ But,” said Mrs. Witt, “it would be difficult, I 
should say, to open the third eye and see Pan in a man.”’ 

** Probably,”’ said Cartwright, smiling. ‘‘ In man he is 
over-visible : the old satyr : the fallen Pan.” 

ST. MAWR 67 

‘* Exactly! ’? said Mrs. Witt. And she fell into a 
muse. ‘* The fallen Pan! ”’ she re-echoed. ‘‘ Wouldn’t 
a man be wonderful in whom Pan hadn’t fallen! ’’ 

Over the coffee in the grey drawing-room she suddenly 
asked : 

** Supposing, Mr. Cartwright, one did open the third 
eye and see Pan in an actual man—I wonder what it 
would be like? ” 

She half lowered her eyelids and tilted her face in a 
strange way, as if she were tasting something, and not 
quite sure. 

** I wonder!” he said, smiling his enigmatic smile. 
But she could see he did not understand. 

** Louise! ’’ said Mrs. Witt at bedtime. ‘* Come into 
my room for a moment, I want to ask you something.”’ 

6 What is it, mother? ”’ 

** You, you get something from what Mr. Cartwright 
said about seeing Pan with the third eye? Seeing Pan 
in something? ”’ 

Mrs. Witt came rather close, and tilted her face with 
strange insinuating question at her daughter. 

** T think I do, mother.’’ 

** In what? ’’—The question came as a pistol-shot. 

**T think, mother,’? said Lou reluctantly, ‘* in St. 
Mawr.’’ . 

“In a horse! *’—Mrs. Witt contracted her eyes 
slightly. ‘* Yes, I can see that. I know what you mean. 
It is in St. Mawr. Itis! But in St. Mawr it makes me 
afraid—”’ she dragged out the word. Then she came a 
step closer. ‘* But, Louise, did you ever see it in a 
man ?”’ 

** What, mother? ”’ 

** Pan. Did you ever see Pan in a man, as you see 
Pan in St. Mawr? ”’ 

Louise hesitated. 

** No, mother, I don’t think I did. When I look at 
men with my third eye, as you call it—I think I see— 

68 ST. MAWR 

mostly—a sort of—pan-cake.’’ She uttered the last word 
with a despairing grin, not knowing quite what to say. 

‘Oh Louise, isn’t that it! Doesn’t one always see 
a pancake! Now listen, Louise. Have you ever been 
in love? ” 

** Yes, as far as I understand it.”’ 

‘¢ Listen now. Did you ever see Pan in the man you 
loved? Tell me if you did? ”’ 

“© As I see Pan in St. Mawr?—no, mother.”? And 
suddenly her lips began to tremble and the tears came to 
her eyes. 

*‘ Listen, Louise. I’ve been in love innumerable 
times—and really in love twice. Twice !—yet for fifteen 
years I’ve left off wanting to have anything to do with 
a man, really. For fifteen years! And why? Do you 
know? Because I couldn’t see that peculiar hidden Pan 
in any of them. And I became that I needed to. I needed 
it. But it wasn’t there. Not in any man. Even when 
I was in love with a man, it was for other things : because 
I understood him so well, or he understood me, or we 
had such sympathy. Never the hidden Pan. Do you 
understand what I mean? Unfallen Pan! ”’ 

‘* More or less, mother.”’ 

** But now my third eye is coming open, I believe. I 
am tired of all these men like breakfast cakes, with a 
tea-spoonful of mind or a tea-spoonful of spirit in them, 
for baking powder. Isn’t it extraordinary : that young 
man Cartwright talks about Pan, but he knows nothing 
of it all. He knows nothing of the unfallen Pan : only the 
fallen Pan with goat legs and a leer—and that sort of. 
power, don’t you know.”’ 

‘But what do you know of the unfallen Pan, 
mother P ”” i 

“* Don’t ask me, Louise! I feel all of a tremble, as if 
I was just on the verge.”’ 

She flashed a little look of incipient triumph, and said 
good-night. 

ae 

ST. MAWR 69 

An excursion on horseback had been arranged for the 
next day, to two old groups of rocks, called the Angel’s 
Chair and the Devil’s Chair, which crowned the moor- 
like hills looking into Wales, ten miles away. LEvery- 
body was going—they were to start early in the morning, 
and Lewis would be the guide, since no one exactly knew 
the way. 

Lou got up soon after sunrise. There was a summer 
scent in the trees of early morning, and monkshood 
flowers stood up dark and tall, with shadows. She 
dressed in the green linen riding-skirt her maid had put 
ready for her, with a close bluish smock. 

** Are you going out already, dear? ”’ called Rico from 
his room. 

** Just to smell the roses before we start, Rico.”’ 

He appeared in the doorway in his yellow silk pyjamas. 
His large blue eyes had that rolling irritable look and 
the slightly bloodshot whites which made her want to 
escape. 

** Booted and spurred !—the energy ! ”’ he cried. 

** It’s a lovely day to ride,”’ she said. 

** A lovely day to do anything except ride! ”’ he said. 
** Why spoil the day riding! ’”’—A curious bitter-acid 
escaped into his tone. It was evident he hated the 
excursion. 

** Why, we needn’t go if you don’t want to, Rico.” 

** Oh, I’m sure I shall love it, once I get started. It’s 
all this business of starting, with horses and parapher- 
nalia—”’ 

Lou went into the yard. The horses were drinking at 
the trough under the pump, their colours strong and 
rich in the shadow of the tree. 

** You’re not coming with us, Phoenix? ”’ she said. 

** Lewis, he’s riding my horse.” 

She could tell Phoenix did not like being left behind. 

By half-past seven everybody was ready. The sun was 
in the yard, the horses were saddled. They came swish- 

70 ST. MAWR 

ing their tails. Lewis brought out St. Mawr from his 
separate box, speaking to him very quietly in Welsh : 
a murmuring, soothing little speech. Lou, alert, could 
see that he was uneasy. 

‘* How is St. Mawr this morning? ”’ she asked. 

** He’s all right. He doesn’t like so many people. 
He’ll be all right once he’s started.”’ 

The strangers were in the saddle: they moved out to 
the deep shade of the village road outside. Rico came to 
his horse to mount, St. Mawr jumped away as if he had 
seen the devil. 

** Steady, fool! ”? cried Rico. 

The bay stood with his four feet spread, his neck 
arched, his big dark eye glancing sideways with that 
watchful, frightening look. 

** You shouldn’t be irritable with him, Rico! ”’ said 
Lou. ‘“‘ Steady then, St. Mawr! Be steady.”’ 

But a certain anger rose also in her. The creature 
was so big, so brilliant, and so stupid, standing there 
with his hind legs spread, ready to jump aside or to rear 
terrifically, and his great eye glancing with a sort of 
suspicious frenzy. What was there to be suspicious of, 
after all?—Rico would do him no harm. 

**'No one will harm you, St. Mawr,” she reasoned, a 
bit exasperated. 

The groom was talking quietly, murmuringly, in 
Welsh. Rico was slowly advancing again, to put his 
foot in the stirrup. The stallion was watching from the 

corner of his eye, a strange glare of suspicious frenzy — 

burning stupidly. Any moment his immense physical | 

force might be let loose in a frenzy of panic—or malice. © 

He was really very irritating. 

** Probably he doesn’t like that apricot shirt,” said 
Mrs. Witt, “ although it tones into him wonderfully 
well.”’ 

She pronounced it ap—ricot, and it irritated Rico 
terribly. 

f 

a” ee, 

TT 

ST. MAWR 71 

** Ought we to have asked him before we put it on? ”’ 
he flashed, his upper lip lifting venomously. 

** T should say you should,”’ replied Mrs. Witt coolly. 

Rico turned with a sudden rush to the horse. Back 
went the great animal, with a sudden splashing crash of 
hoofs on the cobble-stones, and Lewis hanging on like 
a shadow. Up went the fore feet, showing the belly. 

** The thing is accursed,”’ said Rico, who had dropped 
the reins in sudden shock, and stood marooned. His 
rage overwhelmed him like a black flood. 

** Nothing in the world is so irritating as a horse that 
is acting up,”’ thought Lou. 

** Say, Harry! ”’ called Flora from the road. ‘* Come 
out here into the road to mount him.”’ 

Lewis looked at Rico and nodded. Then soothing the 
big, quivering animal, he led him springily out to the 
road under the trees, where the three friends were wait- 
ing. Lou and her mother got quickly into the saddle 
to follow. And in another moment Rico was mounted 
and bouncing down the road in the wrong direction, 
Lewis following on the chestnut. It was some time before 
Rico could get St. Mawr round. Watching him from 
behind, those waiting could judge how the young 
Baronet hated it. 

But at last they set off—Rico ahead, unevenly but 
quietly, with the two Manby girls, Lou following with 
the fair young man who had been in a cavalry regiment 
and who kept looking round for Mrs. Witt. 

** Don’t look round for me,’’ she called. ‘* I’m riding 
behind, out of the dust.’’ 

Just behind Mrs. Witt came Lewis. It was a whole 
cavalcade trotting in the morning sun past the cottages 
and the cottage gardens, round the field that was the 
recreation ground, into the deep hedges of the lane. 

** Why is St. Mawr so bad at starting? Can’t you get 
him into better shape? ’’ she asked over her shoulder. 

** Beg your pardon, Mam! ”’ 

72 ST. MAWR 

Lewis trotted a little nearer. She glanced over her 
shoulder at him, at his dark, unmoved face, his cool 
little figure. 

**T think Mam is so ugly. Why not leave it out! ” 
she said. Then she repeated her question. 

** St. Mawr doesn’t trust anybody,’’ Lewis replied. 

** Not your ”’ 

“© Yes, he trusts me—mostly.”’ 

‘* Then why not other people? ” 

** They’re different.”’ 

‘* All of them? ” 

** About all of them.” 

** How are they different? ”’ 

He looked at her with his remote, uncanny grey eyes. 

‘* Different,’’ he said, not knowing how else to put it. 

They rode on slowly, up the steep rise of the wood, 
then down into a glade where ran a little railway built 
for hauling some mysterious mineral out of the hill, in 
war-time, and now already abandoned. Even on this 
countryside the dead hand of the war lay like a corpse 
decomposing. 

They rode up again, past the foxgloves under the 
trees. Ahead the brilliant St. Mawr and the sorrel and 
grey horses were swimming like butterflies through the 
sea of bracken, glittering from sun to shade, shade to 
sun. Then once more they were on a crest, and through 
the thinning trees could see the slopes of the moors 
beyond the next dip. 

Soon they were in the open, rolling hills, golden in the 
morning and empty save for a couple of distant bilberry-. 
pickers, whitish figures pick—pick—picking with curious, : 
rather disgusting assiduity. The horses were on an old 

trail which climbed through the pinky tips of heather and | 7 

ling, across patches of green bilberry. Here and there 
were tufts of harebells blue as bubbles. 

They were out, high on the hills. And there to west 
lay Wales, folded in crumpled folds, goldish in the 

ST. MAWR 73 

morning light, with its moor-like slopes and patches of 
corn uncannily distinct. Between was a hollow, wide 
valley of summer haze, showing white farms among 
trees, and grey slate roofs. 

** Ride beside me,”’ she saidto Lewis. ‘* Nothing makes 
me want to go back to America like the old look of these 
little villages.—You have never been to America? ”’ 

** No, Mam.’’ 

** Don’t you ever went to go? ”’ 

**T wouldn’t mind going.’ 

‘* But you’re not just crazy to go? ” 

** No, Mam.?’’ 

** Quite content as you are? ”’ 

He looked at her, and his pale, remote eyes met hers. 

** IT don’t fret myself,”’ he replied. 

** Not about anything at all—ever? ”’ 

His eyes glanced ahead, at the other riders. 

** No, Mam! ” he replied, without looking at her 

She rode a few moments in silence. 

‘‘ What is that over there? ’”? she asked, pointing 
across the valley. ‘‘ What is it called? ” 

** Yon’s Montgomery.”’ 

‘‘ Montgomery! And is that Wales—? ” she trailed 
the ending curiously. 

Wes, Mam,7? 

‘* Where you come from? ” 

‘© No, Mam! I come from Merioneth.”’ 

‘* Not from Wales? I thought you were Welsh? ” 

‘© Yes, Mam. Merioneth is Wales.” 

** And you are Welsh? ” 

** Yes, Mam.’’ 

“©T had a Welsh grandmother. But I come from 
Lousiana, and when I go back home, the negroes still 
call me Miss Rachel. Oh, my, it’s little Miss Rachel 
come back home! Why, ain’t I mighty glad to see 
you—u, Miss Rachel! That gives me such a strange 
_ feeling, you know.” 

74 ST. MAWR 

The man glanced at her curiously, especially when 
she imitated the negroes. 

**Do you feel strange when you go home?” she 
asked. 

‘* T was brought up by an aunt and uncle,” he said. 
I never want to see them.”’ 

‘* And you don’t have any home? ” 

** No, Mam.’’ 

** No wife nor anything? ” 

** No, Mam.”’ 

*¢ But what do you do with your life? ” 

** | keep to myself.”” 

** And care about nothing? ” 

**T mind St. Mawr.”’ 

** But you’ve not always had St. Mawr—and you 
won’t always have him.—Were you in the war? ” 

* Yes, Mam:’’ 

** At the front? ” 

** Yes, Mam—but I was a groom.”’ 

** And you came out all right? ” 

** I lost my little finger from a bullet.” 

He held up his small, dark left hand, from which the 
little finger was missing. 

** And did you like the war—or didn’t you? ”’ 

** ¥ didn’t like it.”’ 

Again his pale grey eyes met hers, and they looked 
so non-human and uncommunicative, so without con- 
nection, and inaccessible, she was troubled. 

** Tell me,’’ she said. ‘* Did you never want a wife 
and a home and children, like other men? ”’ es 

**No, Mam. I never wanted a home of my own.” 

** Nor a wife of your own? ”* . 

** No, Mam.” . 

‘© Nor children of your own? ” 

** No, Mam.”’ 

She reined in her horse. 

‘* Now wait a minute,”’ she said. ‘* Now tell me why.” 

6é 

ST. MAWR 75 

His horse came to standstill, and the two riders faced 
one another. 

** Tell me why—I must know why you never wanted a 
wife and children and a home. I must know why you’re 
not like other men.”’ 

**T never felt like it,’? he said. ‘*I made my life 
with horses.’’ 

‘© Did you hate people very much? Did you have a 
very unhappy time as a child? ” 

** My aunt and uncle didn’t like me, and I didn’t like 
them.”’ 

‘** So you’ve never liked anybody? ” 

‘© Maybe not,”’ he said. ‘* Not to get as far as marry- 
ing them.” 

She touched her horse and moved on. 

** Isn’t that curious! ’’ she said. ‘* I’ve loved people, 
at various times. But I don’t believe I’ve ever liked 
anybody, except a few of our negroes. I don’t like 
Louise, though she’s my daughter and I love her. But 
I don’t really like her.—I think you’re the first person 
I’ve ever liked since I was on our plantation, and we had 
some very fine negroes.—And I think that’s very curious. 
—Now I want to know if you like me.” 

She looked at him searchingly, but he did not answer. 

** Tell me,’’ she said. ‘* I don’t mind if you say no. 
But tell me if you like me. I feel I must know.’’ 

The flicker of a smile went over his face—a very rare 
thing with him. 

** Maybe I do,”’ he said. He was thinking that she put 
him on a level with a negro slave on a plantation : in 
his idea, negroes were still slaves. But he did not care 
where she put him. 

“© Well, I’m glad—I’m glad if you like me. Because 
you don’t like most people, I know that.” 

They had passed the hollow where the old Aldecar 
Chapel hid in damp isolation, beside the ruined mill, 
over the stream that came down from the moors. 

76 ST. MAWR 

Climbing the sharp slope, they saw the folded hills like 
great shut fingers, with steep, deep clefts between. On 
the near skyline was a bunch of rocks : and away to the 
right another bunch. 

**'Yon’s the Angel’s Chair,’’ said Lewis, pointing to 
the nearer rocks. ‘* And yon’s the Devil’s Chair, where 
we’re going.”’ 

‘Oh! ” said Mrs. Witt. ‘* And aren’t we going to 
the Angel’s Chair? ”’ 

** No, Mam! ”? 

‘© Why not? ” 

** There’s nothing to see there. The other’s higher, 
and bigger, and that’s where folks mostly go.”’ 

** Is that so!—They give the Devil the higher seat in 
this country, do they? I think they’re right.”? And 
as she got no answer, she added: ‘* You believe in the 
Devil, don’t you? ”’ 

**T never met him,” he answered, evasively. 

Ahead, they could see the other horses twinkling in a 
cavalcade up the slope, the black, the bay, the two 
greys and the sorrel, sometimes bunching, sometimes 
straggling. At a gate all waited for Mrs. Witt. The 
fair young man fell in beside her, and talked hunting © 
at her. He had hunted the fox over these hills, and was 
vigorously excited locating the spot where the -hounds 
first gave cry, etc. 

‘* Really ! ”? said Mrs. Witt. ‘* Really! Is that so! ” 

If irony could have been condensed to prussic acid, 
the fair young man would have ended his life’s history 
with his reminiscences. 

They came at last, trotting in file along a narrow 
track between heather, along the saddle of a hill, to 
where the knot of pale granite suddenly cropped out. It — 
was one of those places where the spirit of aboriginal 
England still lingers, the old savage England, whose last 
blood flows still in a few Englishmen, Welshmen, 
Cornishmen. The rocks, whitish with weather of all the 

ST. MAWR hi 

ages, jutted against the blue August sky, heavy with 
age-moulded roundnesses. 

Lewis stayed below with the horses, the party 
scrambled rather awkwardly, in their riding-boots, up 
the foot-worn boulders. At length they stood in the 
place called the Chair, looking west, west towards Wales, 
that rolled in golden folds upwards. It was neither 
impressive nor a very picturesque landscape : the hollow 
valley with farms, and then the rather bare upheaval of 
hills, slopes with corn and moor and pasture, rising like 
a barricade, seemingly high, slantingly. Yet it had a 
strange effect on the imagination. 

** Oh mother,”’ said Lou, ‘‘ doesn’t it make you feel 
old, old, older than anything ever was? ”’ 

‘* Tt certainly does seem aged,’’ said Mrs. Witt. 

** It makes me want to die,’”’ said Lou. ‘“ I feel we’ve 
lasted almost too long.”’ 

** Don’t say that, Lady Carrington. Why, you’re a 
spring chicken yet : or shall I say an unopened rosebud,”’ 
remarked the fair young man. 

“No,” said Lou. ‘* All these millions of ancestors 
have used all the life up. We’re not really alive, in the 
sense that they were alive.” 

** But who? ”’ said Rico. ‘‘ Who are they? ” 

‘*'The people who lived on these hills, in the days 
gone by.” 

‘* But the same people still live on the hills, darling. 
It’s just the same stock.” 

**No, Rico. That old fighting stock that worshipped 
devils among these stones—I’m sure they did—’’ 

** But look here, do you mean they were any better 
than we are? ”’ asked the fair young man. 

Lou looked at him quizzically. 

** We don’t exist,’’ she said, squinting at him oddly. 

*¢ J jolly well know I do,’’ said the fair young man. 

“¢ T consider these days are the best ever, especially for 
girls,”? said Flora Manby. ‘‘ And anyhow they’re our 

78 ST. MAWR 

own days, so I don’t jolly well see the use of crying them 
down.”’ 

They were all silent, with the last echoes of emphatic 
joie de vivre trumpeting on the air, across the hills of 
Wales. 

** Spoken like a brick, Flora,’? said Rico. ‘* Say it 
again, we may not have the Devil’s Chair for a pulpit 
next time.”’ 

**T do,”’ reiterated Flora. ‘‘ I think this is the best 
age there ever was for a girl to have a good time in. f 
read all through H.G. Wells’ history, and I shut it up and 
thanked my stars I live in nineteen-twenty odd, not in 
some other beastly date when a woman had to cringe 
before mouldy domineering men.”’ 

After this they turned to scramble to another part of 
the rocks, to the famous Needle’s Eye. 

‘* Thank you so much, I am really better without 
help,’’ said Mrs. Witt to the fair young man, as she slid 
downwards till a piece of grey silk stocking showed above 
her tall boot. But she got her toe in a safe place, and 
in a moment stood beside him, while he caught her arm 
protectingly. He might as well have caught the paw of 
a mountain lion protectingly. 

** T should like so much to know,”’’ she said suavely, 
looking into his eyes with a demonish straight look, 
‘* what makes you so certain that you exist? ” 

He looked back at her, and his jaunty blue eyes went 
baffled. Then a slow, hot, salmon-coloured flush stole 
over his face, and he turned abruptly round. 

The Needle’s Eye was a hole in the ancient grey rock, 
like a window, looking to England; England at the. 
moment in shadow. A stream wound and glinted in the 
flat shadow, and beyond that the flat, insignificant hills — 
heaped in mounds of shade. Cloud was coming—the 
English side was in shadow. Wales was still in the sun, 
but the shadow was spreading. The day was going 
to disappoint them. Lou was a tiny bit chilled, already. 

ST. MAWR 79 

Luncheon was still several miles away. The party 
hastened down to the horses. Lou picked a few sprigs of 
ling, and some hare-bells, and some straggling yellow 
fiowers : not because she wanted them, but to distract 
herself. The atmosphere of ‘* enjoying ourselves ’’ was 
becoming cruel to her : it sapped all the life out of her. 
** Oh, if only I needn’t enjoy myself,’? she moaned 
inwardly. But the Manby girls were enjoying them- 
selves so much. ‘‘I think it’s frantically lovely up 
here,’”’ said the other one—not Flora—Elsie. 

** It is beautiful, isn’t it! I’m so glad you like it,”’ 
replied Rico. And he was really relieved and gratified, 
because the other one said she was enjoying it so fright- 
fully. He dared not say to Lou, as he wanted to: ‘* I’m 
afraid, Lou darling, you don’t love it as much as we do.”’ 
—He was afraid of her answer: ‘* No dear, I don’t love 
it at all! I want to be away from these people.”’ 

Slightly piqued, he rode on with the Manby group, and 
Lou came behind with her mother. Cloud was covering 
the sky with grey. There was a cold wind. Everybody 
was anxious to get to the farm for luncheon, and be 
safely home before rain came. 

They were riding along one of the narrow little foot- 
tracks, mere grooves of grass between heather and bright 
green bilberry. The blond young man was ahead, then 
his wife, then Flora, then Rico. Lou, from a little dis- 
tance, watched the glossy, powerful haunches of St. 
Mawr swaying with life, always too much life, like a 
menace. The fair young man was whistling a new dance 
tune. 

** That’s an awfully attractive tune,’? Rico called. 
** Do whistle it again, Fred, I should like to memorise it.”’ 

Fred began to whistle it again. 

At that moment St. Mawr exploded again, shied side- 
ways as if a bomb had gone off, and kept backing 
through the heather. 

** Fool! ’’ cried Rico, thoroughly unnerved : he had 

80 ST. MAWR 

been terribly sideways in the saddle, Lou had feared he 
was going to fall. But he got his seat, and pulled the 
reins viciously, to bring the horse to order, and put him 
on the track again. St. Mawr began to rear: his 
favourite trick. Rico got him forward a few yards, when 
up he went again. 

‘** Fool! ’? yelled Rico, hanging in the air. 

' He pulled the horse over backwards on top of him. 

Lou gave a loud, unnatural, horrible scream: she 
heard it herself, at the same time as she heard the crash 
of the falling horse. Then she saw a pale gold belly, and 
hoofs that worked and flashed in the air, and St. Mawr 
writhing, straining his head terrifically upwards, his 
great eyes starting from the naked lines of his nose. 
With a great neck arching cruelly from the ground, he 
was pulling frantically at the reins, which Rico still held 
tight.—Yes, Rico, lying strangely sideways, his eyes 
also starting from his yellow-white face, among the 
heather, still clutched the reins. 

Young Edwards was rushing forward, and circling 
round the writhing, immense horse, whose pale-gold, 
panied bulk seemed to fill the universe. 

** Let him get up, Carrington! Let him get up! ” he 
was yelling, darting warily near, to get the reins. — 
Another spasmodic convulsion of the horse. 

Horror! The young man reeled backwards with his 
face in his hands. He had got a kick in the face. Red 
blood running down his chin ! 

Lewis was there, on the ground, getting the reins out 
of Rico’s hands. St. Mawr gave a great curve like a 
fish, spread his forefeet on the earth and reared his head, 
looking round in a ghastly fashion. His eyes were 
arched, his nostrils wide, his face ghastly in a sort of > 
panic. He rested thus, seated with his fore-feet planted 
and his face in panic, almost like some terrible lizard, 
for several moments. Then he heaved sickeningly to his 
feet, and stood convulsed, trembling. 

ST. MAWR 81 

There lay Rico, crumpled and rather sideways, staring 
at the heavens from a yellow, dead-looking face. Lewis, 
glancing round in a sort of horror, looked in dread at St. 
Mawr again. Flora had been hovering.—She now rushed 
screeching to the prostrate Rico : 

‘Harry! Harry! you’re not dead! Oh, Harry! 
Harry! Harry! ” 

Lou had dismounted.—She didn’t know when. She 
stood a little way off, as if spellbound, while Flora cried 
Harry! Harry! Harry! 

Suddenly Rico sat up. 

** Where is the horse? ” he said. 

At the same time an added whiteness came on his 
face, and he bit his lip with pain, and he fell prostrate 
again in a faint. Flora rushed to put her arm round 
him. 

Where was the horse? He had backed slowly away, 
in an agony of suspicion, while Lewis murmured to him 
in vain. His head was raised again, the eyes still starting 
from their sockets, and a terrible guilty, ghost-like look 
on his face. When Lewis drew a little nearer he twitched 
and shrank like a shaken steel spring, away—not to be 
touched. He seemed to be seeing legions of ghosts, down 
the dark avenues of all the centuries that have lapsed 
since the horse became subject to man. 

And the other young man? He was still standing, at 
a little distance, with his face in his hands, motionless, 
the blood falling on his white shirt, and his wife at his 

side, pleading, distracted. 
_ Mrs. Witt too was there, as if cast in steel, watching. 
She made no sound and did not move, only, from a fixed, 
impassive face, watched each thing. 

** Do tell me what you think is the matter? ’? Lou 
pleaded, distracted, to Flora, who was supporting Rico 
and weeping torrents of unknown tears. 

Then Mrs. Witt came forward and began in a very 
practical manner to unclose the shirt-neck and feel the 

F 

82 ST. _MAWR 

young man’s heart. Rico opened his eyes again, said 
** Really! ’’ and closed his eyes once more, 

*‘ It’s fainting! ’? said Mrs. Witt. ‘* We have no 
brandy.”’ 

Lou, too weary to be able to feel anything, said : 

** T’ll go and get some.”’ 

She went to her alarmed horse, who stood among the 
others with her head down, in suspense. Almost uncon- 
sciously Lou mounted, set her face ahead, and was riding 
away. 

Then Poppy shied too, with a sudden start, and Lou 
pulled up. ‘‘ Why? ”’ she said to her horse. ‘* Why did 
you do that? ” 

She looked round, and saw in the heather a glimpse of 
yellow and black. 

** A snake ! ”’ she said wonderingly. 

And she looked closer. 

It was a dead adder that had been drinking at a reedy 
pool in a little depression just off the road, and had been 
killed with stones. There it lay, also crumpled, its head 
crushed, its gold-and-yellow back still glittering dully, 
and a bit of pale-blue belly showing, killed that morning. 

Lou rode on, her face set towards the farm. An 
unspeakable weariness had overcome her. She could not 
even suffer. Weariness of spirit left her in a sort of 
apathy. 

And she had a vision, a vision of evil. Or not strictly 
a vision. She became aware of evil, evil, evil, rolling in 
great waves over the earth. Always she had thought there 
was no such thing—only a mere negation of good. Now, 
like an ocean to whose surface she had risen, she saw 
the dark-grey waves of evil rearing in a great tide. 

And it had swept mankind away without mankind’s 
knowing. It had caught up the nations as the rising 
ocean might lift the fishes, and was sweeping them on 
in a great tide of evil. They did not know. The people 
did not know. They did not even wish it. They wanted 

ST. MAWR 88 

to be good and to have everything joyful and enjoyable. 
Everything joyful and enjoyable : for everybody. This 
was what they wanted, if you asked them. 

But at the same time, they had fallen under the spell 
of evil. It was a soft, subtle thing, soft as water, and 
its motion was soft and imperceptible, as the running 
of a tide is invisible to one who is out on the ocean. And 
they were all out on the ocean, being borne along in the 
current of the mysterious evil, creatures of the evil prin- 
ciple, as fishes are creatures of the sea. 

There was no relief. The whole world was enveloped 
in one great flood. All the nations, the white, the brown, 
the black, the yellow, all were immersed in the strange 
tide of evil that was subtly, irresistibly rising. No one, 
perhaps, deliberately wished it. Nearly every individual 
wanted peace and a good time all round : everybody to 
have a good time. 

But some strange thing had happened, and the vast, 
mysterious force of positive evil was let loose. She felt 
that from the core of Asia the evil welled up, as from 
some strange pole, and slowly was drowning earth. 

It was something horrifying, something you could not 
escape from. It had come to her as in a vision, when she 
saw the pale gold belly of the stallion upturned, the hoofs 
working wildly, the wicked curved hams of the horse, 
and then the evil straining of that arched, fish-like neck, 
with the dilated eyes of the head. Thrown backwards, 
and working its hoofs in the air. Reversed, and purely 
evil. 

She saw the same in people. They were thrown back- 
wards, and writhing with evil. And the rider, crushed, 
was still reining them down. 

What did it mean? Evil, evil, and a rapid return 
to the sordid chaos. Which was wrong, the horse or the 
rider? Or both? 

She thought with horror of St. Mawr, and of the look 
on his face. But she thought with horror, a colder 

84 ST. MAWR 

horror, of Rico’s face as he snarled Fool! His fear, his 
impotence as a master, as a rider, his presumption. And 
she thought with horror of those other people, so glib, 
so glibly evil. 

What did they want to do, those Manby girls? Under- 
mine, undermine, undermine. They wanted to under- 
mine Rico, just as that fair young man would have liked 
to undermine her. Believe in nothing, care about 
nothing: but keep the surface easy, and have a good 
time. Let us undermine one another. There is nothing 
to believe in, so let us undermine everything. But look 
out! No scenes, no spoiling the game. Stick to the rules 
of the game. Be sporting, and don’t do anything that 
would make a commotion. Keep the game going smooth 
and jolly, and bear your bit like a sport. Never, by any 
chance, injure your fellow man openly. But always 
injure him secretly. Make a fool of him, and undermine 
his nature. Break him up by undermining him, if you 
can. It’s good sport. 

The evil! The mysterious potency of evil. She could 
see it all the time, in individuals, in society, in the press. 
There it was in socialism and bolshevism : the same evil. 
But bolshevism made a mess of the outside of life, so 
turn it down. Try fascism. Fascism would keep the 
surface of life intact, and carry on the undermining 
business all the better. All the better sport. Never 
draw blood. Keep the hemorrhage internal, invis- 
ible. 

And as soon as fascism makes a break—which it is 
bound to, because all evil works up to a break—then turn , 
it down. With gusto, turn it down. 

Mankind, like a horse, ridden by a stranger, smooth- 
faced, evil rider. Evil himself, smooth-faced and pseudo- 
handsome, riding mankind past the dead snake, to the 
last break. 

Mankind no longer its own master. Ridden by this 
pseudo-handsome ghoul of outward loyalty, inward 

ST. MAWR 85 

treachery, in a game of betrayal, betrayal, betrayal. The 
last of the gods of our era, Judas supreme! 

People performing outward acts of loyalty, piety, self- 
sacrifice. But inwardly bent on undermining, betraying. 
Directing all their subtle evil will against any positive 
living thing. Masquerading as the ideal, in order to 
poison the real. 

Creation destroys as it goes, throws down one tree for 
the rise of another. But ideal mankind would abolish 
death, multiply itself million upon million, rear up city 
upon city, save every parasite alive, until the accumu- 
lation of mere existence is swollen to a horror. But go 
on saving life, the ghastly salvation army of ideal man- 
kind. At the same time secretly, viciously, potently 
undermine the natural creation, betray it with kiss after 
kiss, destroy it from the inside, till you have the swollen 
rottenness of our teeming existences.—But keep the 
game going. Nobody’s going to make another bad 
break, such as Germany and Russia made. 

Two bad breaks the secret evil has made : in Germany 
and in Russia. Watch it! Let evil keep a policeman’s 
eye on evil! The surface of life must remain un- 
ruptured. Production must be heaped upon production. 
And the natural creation must be betrayed by many 
more kisses, yet. Judas is the last God, and, by heaven, 
the most potent. 

But even Judas made a break : hanged himself, and 
his bowels gushed out. Not long after his triumph. 

Man must destroy as he goes, as trees fall for trees 
to rise. The accumulation of life and things means 
rottenness. Life must destroy life, in the unfolding of 
creation. We save up life at the expense of the unfold- 
ing, till all is full of rottenness. Then at last, we make 
a break. 

What’s to be done? Generally speaking, nothing. 
The dead will have to bury their dead, while the earth 
stinks of corpses. The individual can but depart from 

86 ST. MAWR 

the mass, and try to cleanse himself. Try to hold fast 
to the living thing, which destroys as it goes, but remains 
sweet. And in his soul fight, fight, fight to preserve that 
which is life in him from the ghastly kisses and poison- 
bites of the myriad evil ones. Retreat to the desert, and 
fight. But in his soul adhere to that which is life itself, 
creatively destroying as it goes: destroying the stiff old 
thing to let the new bud come through. The one pas- 
sionate principle of creative being, which recognises the 
natural good, and has a sword for the swarms of evil. 
Fights, fights, fights to protect itself. But with itself, 
is strong and at peace. 

Lou came to the farm, and got brandy, and asked 
the men to come out to carry in the injured. 

It turned out that the kick in the face had knocked 
a couple of young Edward’s teeth out, and would dis- 
figure him a little. 

‘*To go through the war, and then get this! ’’ he 
mumbled, with a vindictive glance at St. Mawr. 

And it turned out that Rico had two broken ribs and 
a crushed ankle. Poor Rico, he would limp for life. 

** T want St. Mawr shot! ’? was almost his first word, 
when he was in bed at the farm and Lou was sitting 
beside him. 

** What good would that do, dear? ” she said. 

** The brute is evil. I want him shot! ”’ 

Rico could make the last word sound like the spitting 
of a bullet. 

** Do you want to shoot him yourself? ” 

“No. But I want to have him shot. I shall never 
be easy till I know he has a bullet through him. He’s' 
got a wicked character. I don’t feel you are safe, with 
him down there. I shall get one of the Manby’s game-. 
keepers to shoot him. You might tell Flora—or Ill tell 
her myself, when she comes.”’ 

perature.” 

** Don’t talk about it now, dear. You’ve got a tem- 

ST. MAWR 87 

Was it true St. Mawr was evil? She would never 
forget him writhing and lunging on the ground, nor his 
awful face when he reared up. But then that noble look 
of his : surely he was not mean? Whereas all evil had 
an inner meanness, mean! Was he mean! Was he 
meanly treacherous? Did he know he could kill, and 
meanly wait his opportunity ? 

She was afraid. And if this were true, then he should 
be shot. Perhaps he ought to be shot. 

This thought haunted her. Was there something 
mean and treacherous in St. Mawr’s spirit, the vulgar 
evil? If so, then have him shot. At moments, an anger 
would rise in her, as she thought of his frenzied rearing, 
and his mad, hideous writhing on the ground, and in the 
heat of her anger she would want to hurry down to her 
mother’s house and have the creature shot at once. It 
would be a satisfaction, and a vindication of human 
rights. Because after all, Rico was so considerate of the 
brutal horse. But not a spark of consideration did the 
stallion have for Rico. No, it was the slavish malevo- 
lence of a domesticated creature that kept cropping up in 
St. Mawr, The slave, taking his slavish vengeance, then 
dropping back into subservience. 

All the slaves of this world, accumulating their pre- 
parations for slavish vengeance, and then, when they 
have taken it, ready to drop back into servility. Free- 
dom! Most slaves can’t be freed, no matter how you let 
them loose. Like domestic animals, they are, in the 
long run, more afraid of freedom than of masters : and 
freed by some generous master, they will at last crawl 
back to some mean boss, who will have no scruples about 
kicking them. Because, for them, far better kicks and 
servility than the hard, lonely responsibility of real 
freedom. 

The wild animal is at every moment intensely self- 
disciplined, poised in the tension of self-defence, self- 
preservation, and self-assertion. The moments of relaxa- 

88 ST. MAWR 

tion are rare and most carefully chosen. Even sleep is 
watchful, guarded, unrelaxing, the wild courage pitched 
one degree higher than the wild fear. Courage, the wild 
thing’s courage to maintain itself alone and living in the 
midst of a diverse universe. 

Did St. Mawr have this courage? 

And did Rico? 

Ah, Rico! He was one of mankind’s myriad conspir- 
ators, who conspire to live in absolute physical safety, 
whilst willing the minor disintegration of all positive 
living. 

But St. Mawr? Was it the natural wild thing in him 
which caused these disasters? Or was it the slave, assert- 
ing himself for vengeance? 

If the latter, let him be shot. It would be a great 
satisfaction to see him dead. 

But if the former— 

When she could leave Rico with the nurse, she motored 
down to her mother for a couple of days. Rico lay in 
bed at the farm. 

Everything seemed curiously changed. There was a 
new silence about the place, a new coolness. Summer 
had passed with several thunderstorms, and the blue, 
cool touch of autumn was about the house. Dahlias and 
perennial yellow sunflowers were out, the yellow of 
ending summer, the red coals of early autumn. First 
mauve tips of Michaelmas daisies were showing. Some- 
thing suddenly carried her away to the great bare spaces 
of Texas, the blue sky, the flat, burnt earth, the miles 
of sunflowers. Another sky, another silence, towards the 
setting sun. 

And suddenly, she craved again for the more absolute’ 
silence of America. English stillness was so soft, like an 
inaudible murmur of voices, of presences. But the silence . 
in the empty spaces of America was still unutterable, 
almost cruel. 

St. Mawr was in a small field by himself : she could 

ST. MAWR 89 

not bear that he should be always in stable. Slowly she 
went through the gate towards him. And he stood there 
looking at her, the bright bay creature. 

She could tell he was feeling somewhat subdued, after 
his late escapade. He was aware of the general human 
condemnation: the human damning. But something 
obstinate and uncanny in him made him not relent. 

** Hello! St. Mawr! ’ she said, as she drew near, and 
he stood watching her, his ears pricked, his big eyes 
glancing sideways at her. 

But he moved away when she wanted to touch him. 

** Don’t trouble,’’ she said. ‘* I don’t want to catch 
you or do anything to you.”’ 

He stood still, listening to the sound of her voice, and 
giving quick, small glances at her. His underlip 
trembled. But he did not blink. His eyes remained 
wide and unrelenting. There was a curious malicious 
obstinacy in him which roused her anger. 

**T don’t want to touch you,” she said. ‘* I only 
want to look at you, and even you can’t prevent that.”’ 

She stood gazing hard at him, wanting to know, to 
settle the question of his meanness or his spirit. A thing 
with a brave spirit is not mean. 

He was uneasy as she watched him. He pretended 
to hear something, the mares two fields away, and he 
lifted his head and neighed. She knew the powerful, 
splendid sound so well: like bells made of living mem- 
brane. And he looked so noble again, with his head 
tilted up, listening, and his male eyes looking proudly 
over the distance, eagerly. 

But it was all a bluff. 

He knew, and became silent again. And as he stood 
there a few yards away from her, his head lifted and 
wary, his body full of power and tension, his face 
slightly averted from her, she felt a great animal sadness 
come from him. A strange animal atmosphere of sad- 
ness, that was vague and disseminated through the air, 

90 ST. MAWR 

and made her feel as though she breathed grief. She 
breathed it into her breast, as if it were a great sigh down 
the ages, that passed into her breast. And she felt a 
great woe: the woe of human unworthiness. The race 
of men judged in the consciousness of the animals they 
have subdued, and there found unworthy, ignoble. 

Ignoble men, unworthy of the animals they have 
subjugated, bred the woe in the spirit of their creatures. 
St. Mawr, that bright horse, one of the kings of creation 
in the order below man, it had been a fulfilment for him 
to serve the brave, reckless, perhaps cruel men of the 
past, who had a flickering, rising flame of nobility in 
them. To serve that flame of mysterious further 
nobility. Nothing matters, but that strange flame, of 
inborn nobility that obliges men to be brave, and onward 
plunging. And the horse will bear him on. 

But now where is the flame of dangerous, forward- 
pressing nobility in men? Dead, dead, guttering out 
in a stink of self-sacrifice whose feeble light is a light of 
exhaustion and laissez-faire. 

And the horse, is he to go on carrying man forward 
into this?—this gutter? 

No! Man wisely invents motor-cars and other 
machines, automobile and locomotive. The horse is 
superannuated, for man. 

But alas, man is even more superannuated, for the 
horse. 

Dimly in a woman’s muse, Lou realised this, as she 
breathed the horse’s sadness, his accumulated vague woe 
from the generations of latter-day ignobility. And a grief 
and a sympathy flooded her, for the horse. She realised 
now how his sadness recoiled into these frenzies of 
obstinacy and malevolence. Underneath it all was grief,» 
an unconscious, vague, pervading animal grief, which 
perhaps only Lewis understood, because he felt the same. 
The grief of the generous creature which sees all ends 
turning to the morass of ignoble living. 

ST. MAWR 91 

She did not want to say any more to the horse : she did 
not want to look at him any more. The grief flooded 
her soul, that made her want to be alone. She knew now 
what it all amounted to. She knew that the horse, born 
to serve nobly, had waited in vain for some one noble 
to serve. His spirit knew that nobility had gone out of 
men. And this left him high and dry, in a sort of despair. 

As she walked away from him, towards the gate, 
slowly he began to walk after her. 

Phoenix came striding through the gate towards her. 

** You not afraid of that horse? ’’ he asked sardoni- 
cally, in his quiet, subtle voice. 

** Not at the present moment,’’ she replied, even more 
quietly, looking direct at him. She was not in any 
mood to be jeered at. 

And instantly the sardonic grimace left his face, fol- 
lowed by the sudden blankness, and the look of race- 
misery in the keen eyes. 

** Do you want me to be afraid? ”’ she said, continuing 
to the gate. 

** No, I don’t want it,’’ he replied, dejected. 

** Are you afraid of him yourself? *’ she said, glancing 
round. St. Mawr had stopped, seeing Phoenix, and had 
turned away again. 

** I’m not afraid of no horses,’’ said Phoenix. 

Lou went on quietly. At the gate, she asked him : 

** Don’t you like St. Mawr, Phoenix? ” 

**T like him. He’s a very good horse.”’ 

** Even after what he’s done to Sir Henry? ”’ 

‘* That don’t make no difference to him being a good 
horse.”’ 

‘** But suppose he’d done it to you? ” 

**¥ don’t care. I say it my own fault.” 

** Don’t you think he is wicked? ”’ 

**T don’t think so. He don’t kick anybody. He don’t 
bite anybody. He don’t pitch, he don’t buck, he don’t 
do nothing.”’ 

92 ST. MAWR 

** He rears,’’ said Lou. 

‘© Well, what is rearing! ’? said the man, with a slow, 
contemptuous smile. 

** A good deal, when a horse falls back on you.” 

** That horse don’t want to fall back on you, if you 
don’t make him. If you know how to ride him. That 
horse want his own way sometime. If you don’t let him, 
you got to fight him. Then look out! ”’ 

** Look out he doesn’t kill you, you mean! ” 

** Look out you don’t let him,” said Phoenix, with his 
slow, grim, sardonic smile. 

Lou watched the smooth, golden face with its thin line 
of moustache and its sad eyes with the glint in them. 
Cruel—there was something cruel in him, right down in 
the abyss of him. But at the same time, there was an 
aloneness, and a grim little satisfaction in a fight, and 
the peculiar courage of an inherited despair. People who 
inherit despair may at last turn it into greater 
heroism. It was almost so with Phoenix. Three 
quarters of his blood was probably Indian and the 
remaining quarter, that came through the Mexican 
father, had the Spanish-American despair to add to the 
Indian. It was almost complete enough to leave him 
free to be heroic. 

‘* What are we going to do with him, though? ”’ she 
asked. 

“* Why don’t you and Mrs. Witt go back to America 
—you never been west. You go west.”’ 

** Where, to California? ”’ 

**No. To Arizona or New Mexico or Colorado or 
Wyoming, anywhere. Not to California.”’ 

Phoenix looked at her keenly, and she saw the desire 
dark in him. He wanted to go back. But he was afraid 
to go back alone, empty-handed, as it were. He had 
suffered too much, and in that country his sufferings 
would overcome him, unless he had some other back- 
ground. He had been too much in contact with the 

ST. MAWR 93 

white world, and his own world was too dejected, in a 
sense, too hopeless for his own hoplessness. He needed 
an alien contact to give him relief. 

But he wanted to go back. His necessity to go back 
was becoming too strong for him. 

** What is it like in Arizona? ”’ she asked. ‘ Isn’t 
it all pale-coloured sand and alkali, and a few cactuses, 
and terribly hot and deathly? ”’ 

** No! ”? he cried. ‘‘ I don’t take you there. I take 
you to the mountains—trees—”’ he lifted up his hand 
and looked at the sky—*‘ big trees—pine! Pino-real 
and pinovetes, smell good. And then you come down, 
pifion, not very tall, and cedro, cedar, smell good in the 
fire. And then you see the desert, away below, go miles . 
and miles, and where the canyon go, the crack where it 
look red! I know, I been there, working a cattle 
ranch.” 

He looked at her with a haunted glow in his dark 
eyes. The poor fellow was suffering from nostalgia. And 
as he glowed at her in that queer mystical way, she too 
seemed to see that country, with its dark, heavy moun- 
tains holding in their lap the great stretches of pale, 
creased, silent desert that still is virgin of idea, its word 
unspoken. 

Phoenix was watching her closely andsubtly. He wanted 
something of her. He wanted it intensely, heavily, and 
he watched her as if he could force her to give it him. 
He wanted her to take him back to America, because, 
rudderless, he was afraid to go back alone. He wanted 
her to take him back : avidly he wanted it. She was to 
be the means to his end. 

Why shouldn’t he go back by himself? Why should 
he crave for her to go too? Why should he want her 
there ? 

There was no answer, except that he did. 

‘© Why, Phoenix,’? she said. ‘‘I might possibly go 
back to America. But you know, Sir Henry would never 

94 ST. MAWR 

go there. He doesn’t like America, though he’s never 
been. But I’m sure he’d never go there to live.” 

** Let him stay here,’’ said Phoenix abruptly, the 
sardonic look on his face as he watched her face. ‘* You 
come, and let him stay here.”’ 

** Ah, that’s a whole story! ’? she said, and moved 
away. 

As she went, he looked after her, standing silent 
and arrested and watching as an Indian watches. It 
was not love. Personal love counts so little when 
the greater griefs, the greater hopes, the great 
despairs and the great resolutions come upon 
us. 

She found Mrs. Witt rather more silent, more firmly 
closed within herself, than usual. Her mouth was shut 
tight, her brows were arched rather more imperiously 
than ever, she was revolving some inward problem about 
which Lou was far too wise to enquire. 

In the afternoon Dean Vyner and Mrs. Vyner came 
to call on Lady Carrington. 

ae eo bad luck this is, Lady Carrington ! ’”’ said the 
Dean. ‘* Knocks Scotland on the head for you this year, 
oD afraid. How did you leave your husband? ”’ 

‘ He seems to be doing as well as he could do! ” said 
Lou. 

** But how very unfortunate ! ’? murmured the invalid 
Mrs. Vyner. ‘* Such a handsome young man, in the 
bloom of youth! Does he suffer much pain? ”’ 

** Chiefly his foot,’’ said Lou. 

‘** Oh, I do so hope they’ll be able to restore the ankle., 
Oh, how dreadful, to be lamed at his age! ” 

‘‘ The doctor doesn’t know. There may be a limp,”’ 
said Lou. 

“¢ That horse has certainly left his mark on two good- 
looking young fellows,’’ said the Dean. ‘* If you don’t 
mind my saying so, Lady Carrington, I think he’s a bad 
egg.”” 

ST. MAWR 95 

** Who, St. Mawr? ”’ said Lou, in her American sing- 
song. 

** Yes, Lady Carrington,’? murmured Mrs. Vyner, in 
her invalid’s low tone. ‘* Don’t you think he ought to 
be put away? He seems to me the incarnation of cruelty. 
His neigh. It goes through me like knives. Cruel! 
Cruel! Oh, I think he should be put away.”’ 

** How put away? ’’? murmured Lou, taking on an 
invalid’s low tone herself. 

** Shot, I suppose,” said the Dean. 

** Tt is quite painless. He’ll know nothing,’’ mur- 
mured Mrs. Vyner hastily. *‘ And think of the harm he 
has done already! Horrible ! Horrible! ’’ she 
shuddered. ‘* Poor Sir Henry lame for life, and Eddy 
Edwards disfigured. Besides all that has gone before. 
Ah no, such a creature ought not to live! ” 

“To live, and have a groom to look after him and 
feed him,’’ said the Dean. ‘“‘ It’s a bit thick, while he’s 
smashing up the very people that give him bread—or 
oats, since he’s a horse. But I suppose you'll be wanting 
to get rid of him? ” 

** Rico does,’? murmured Lou. 

** Very naturally. So should I. A vicious horse is 
worse than a vicious man—except that you are free to 
put him six feet underground, and end his vice finally, 
by your own act.” 

** Do you think St. Mawr is vicious? ”’ said Lou. 

** Well, of course—if we’re driven to definitions !—I 
know he’s dangerous.”’ 

*¢ And do you think we ought to shoot everything that 
is dangerous? ’’ asked Lou, her colour rising. 

** But Lady Carrington, have you consulted your hus- 
band? Surely his wish should be law, in a matter of 
this sort! And on such an occasion! For you, who are a 
woman, it is enough that the horse is cruel, cruel, evil! 
I felt it long before anything happened. That evil male 
cruelty! Ah! ”? and she clasped her hands convulsively. 

99 

96 ST. MAWR 

** I suppose,” said Lou slowly, ‘‘ that St. Mawr is 
really Rico’s horse : I gave him to him, I suppose. But 
I don’t believe I could let him shoot him, for all that.’’ 

‘© Ah, Lady Carrington,’’ said the Dean breezily, 
** you can shift the responsibility. The horse is a public 
menace, put it at that. We can get an order to have 
him done away with, at the public expense. And among 
ourselves we can find some suitable compensation for 
you, as a mark of sympathy. Which, believe me, is 
very sincere! One hates to have to destroy a fine looking 
animal. But I would sacrifice a dozen rather than have 
our Rico limping.”’ 

‘¢ Yes, indeed,’? murmured Mrs. Vyner. 

** Will you excuse me one moment, while I see about 
tea,’’ said Lou, rising and leaving the room. Her colour 
was high, and there was a glint in her eye. These people 
almost roused her to hatred. Oh, these awful, house- 
bred, house-inbred human-beings, how repulsive they 
were ! 

She hurried to her mother’s dressing-room. Mrs. Witt 
was very carefully putting a touch of red on her lips. 

‘© Mother, they want to shoot St. Mawr,” she said. 

** TI know,”’ said Mrs. Witt, as calmly as if Lou had 
said tea was ready. 

** Well—”’ stammered Lou, rather put out. ‘* Don’t 
you think it cheek? ”’ 

** It depends, I suppose, on the point of view,’ said 
Mrs. Witt dispassionately, looking closely at her lips. 
‘*T don’t think the English climate agrees with me. I 
need something to stand up against, no matter whether, 
it’s great heat or great cold. This climate, like the food 
and the people, is most always lukewarm or tepid, one 
or the other. And the tepid and the lukewarm are not 
really my line.”? She spoke with a slow drawl. 

‘© But they’re in the drawing-room, mother, trying to 
force me to have St. Mawr killed.”’ 

‘¢ What about tea? ”’ said Mrs. Witt. 

ST. MAWR 97 

*“*T don’t care,’’ said Lou. 

Mrs. Witt worked the bell-handle. 

** T suppose, Louise,’’ she said, in her most beaming 
eighteenth-century manner, ‘‘ that these are your guests, 
so you will preside over the ceremony of pouring out.” 

** No, mother, you do it. I can’t smile to-day.”’ 

** I can,’’ said Mrs. Witt. 

And she bowed her head slowly, with a faint, ceremo- 
niously-effusive smile, as if handing a cup of tea. 

Lou’s face flickered to a smile. 

** Then you pour out for them. You can stand them 
better than I can.” 

** Yes,’ said Mrs. Witt. ‘*I saw Mrs. Vyner’s hat 
coming across the churchyard. It looks so like a 
crumpled cup and saucer, that I have been saying to 
myself ever since : Dear Mrs. Vyner, can’t I fill your cup! 
—and then pouring tea into that hat. And I hear the 
Dean responding : My head is covered with cream, my 
cup runneth over.—That is the way they make me 
feel,?” 

They marched downstairs, and Mrs. Witt poured tea 
with that devastating correctness which made Mrs. 
Vyner, who was utterly impervious to sarcasm, pro- 
nounce her ‘‘ indecipherably vulgar.”’ 

But the Dean was the old bull-dog, and he had set his 
teeth in a subject. 

‘*T was talking to Lady Carrington about that stallion, 
Mrs. Witt.”’ 

** Did you say stallion? *? asked Mrs. Witt, with per- 
fect neutrality. 

** Why, yes, I presume that’s what he is.”’ 

** T presume so,”’ said Mrs. Witt colourlessly. 

**T’m afraid Lady Carrington is a little sensitive on 
the wrong score,’’ said the Dean. 

*‘ T beg your pardon,”’ said Mrs Witt, leaning forward 
in her most colourless polite manner. ‘*‘ You mean the 
stallion’s score? ” 

G 

98 ST.- MAWR 

** Yes,’’ said the Dean testily. ‘The horse St. 
Mawr.”’ 

‘* The stallion St. Mawr,’? echoed Mrs. Witt, with 
utmost mild vagueness. She completely ignored Mrs. 
Vyner, who felt plunged like a specimen into methylated 
spirit. There was a moment’s full-stop. 

** Yes? *? said Mrs. Witt naively. 

** ‘You agree that we can’t have any more of these 
accidents to your young men? ”’ said the Dean rather 
hastily. 

‘**T certainly do! ’? Mrs. Witt spoke very slowly, and 
the Dean’s lady began to look up. She might find a 
loop-hole through which to wriggle into the contest. 
** ‘You know, Dean, that my son-in-law calls me, for pre- 
ference, belle mére! It sounds so awfully English when 
he says it; I always see myself as an old grey mare with 
a bell round her neck, leading a bunch of horses.’? She 
smiled a prim little smile, very conversationally. 
“© Well! ’? and she pulled herself up from the aside. 
“* Now as the bell-mare of the bunch of horses, I shall 
see to it that my son-in-law doesn’t go too near that 
stallion again. That stallion won’t stand mischief.” 

She spoke so earnestly that the Dean looked at her 
with round wide eyes, completely taken aback. 

‘‘ We all know, Mrs. Witt, that the author of the 
mischief is St. Mawr himself,’? he said, in a loud 
tone. 

** Really! you think that? ’? Her voice went up in 
American surprise. ‘‘ Why, how strange—!”? and she 
lingered over the last word. 

‘¢ Strange, eh?—After what’s just happened? ” said 
the Dean, with a deadly little smile. 

‘Why, yes! Most strange! I saw with my own eyes. 

my son-in-law pull that stallion over backwards, and 
hold him down with the reins as tight as he could hold 
them; pull St. Mawr’s head backwards on to the ground, 
till the groom had to crawl up and force the reins out of 

ST. MAWR 99 

my son-in-law’s hands. Don’t you think that was mis- 
chievous on Sir Henry’s part? ”’ 

The Dean was growing purple. He made an apoplectic 
movement with his hand. Mrs. Vyner was turned to a 
seated pillar of salt, strangely dressed up. 

** Mrs. Witt, you are playing on words.”’ 

** No, Dean Vyner, I am not. My son-in-law pulled 
that horse over backwards and pinned him down with 
the reins.”’ 

‘* T am sorry for the horse,”’ said the Dean, with heavy 
sarcasm. 

“IT am very,” said Mrs. Witt, “sorry for that 
stallion : very !’’ 

Here Mrs. Vyner rose as if a chair-spring had suddenly 
propelled her to her feet. She was streaky pink in the face. 

‘Mrs. Witt,’? she panted, ‘* you misdirect your 
sympathies. That poor young man—in the beauty of 
youth.” 

**Isn’t he beautiful—’’ murmured Mrs. Witt, extra- 
vagantly in sympathy. ‘* He’s my daughter’s hus- 
band! ’? And she looked at the petrified Lou. 

** Certainly!’ panted the Dean’s wife. ‘* And you 
can defend that—that—”’ 

** That stallion,”’ said Mrs. Witt. ‘* But you see, Mrs. 
Vyner,’’ she added, leaning forward female and con- 
fidential, *‘ if the old grey mare doesn’t defend the 
stallion, who will? All the blooming young ladies will 
defend my beautiful son-in-law. You feel so warmly for 
him yourself! I’m an American woman, and I always 
have to stand up for the accused. And I stand up for 
that stallion. I say it is not right. He was pulled over 
backwards and then pinned down by my son-in-law— 
who may have meant to do it, or may not. And now 
people abuse him.—Just tell everybody, Mrs. Vyner and 
Dean Vyner ’’—she looked round at the Dean—* that 
the belle-mére’s sympathies are with the stallion.”’ 

She looked from one to the other with a faint and 

100 ST. MAWR 

gracious little bow, her black eyebrows arching in her 
eighteenth-century face like black rainbows, and her full, 
bold grey eyes absolutely incomprehensible. 

** Well, it’s a peculiar message to have to hand round, 
Mrs. Witt,’’? the Dean began to boom, when she inter- 
rupted him by laying her hand on his arm and leaning 
forward, looking up into his face like a clinging, pleading 
female : 

** Oh, but do hand it, Dean, do hand it,’ she pleaded, 
gazing intently into his face. 

He backed uncomfortably from that gaze. 

‘* Since you wish it,”’ he said, in a chest voice. 

** IT most certainly do—’’ she said, as if she were wish- 
ing the sweetest wish on earth. Then turning to Mrs. 
Vyner : 

** Good-bye, Mrs. Vyner. We do appreciate your 
coming, my daughter and I.”’ 

**T came out of kindness—’’ said Mrs Vyner. 

** Oh, I know it, I know it,” said Mrs. Witt. ** Thank 
you so much. Good-bye! Good-bye Dean! Who is 
taking the morning service on Sunday. I hope it is you, 
because I want to come.”’ 

** It is me,”’ said the Dean. ‘* Good-bye! Well, good- 
bye Lady Carrington. I shall be going over to see our 
young man to-morrow, and will gladly take you or any- 
thing you have to send.”’ 

‘* Perhaps mother would like to go,’’ said Lou, softly, 
plaintively. 

** Well, we shall see,”’ said the Dean. ‘‘ Good-bye for 
the present ! ”’ . 

Mother and daughter stood at the window watching 
the two cross the churchyard. Dean and wife knew 
it, but daren’t look round, and daren’t admit the fact to ~ 
one another. 

Lou was grinning with a complete grin that gave her 
an odd, dryad or faun look, intensified. 

** It was almost as good as pouring tea into her hat,”’ 

ST. MAWR 101 

said Mrs. Witt serenely. ‘* People like that tire me out. 
I shall take a glass of sherry.” 

** So will I, mother.—It was even better than pouring 
tea in her hat.—You meant, didn’t you, if you poured 
tea in her hat, to put cream and sugar in first? ”’ 

**T did,’”’ said Mrs. Witt. 

But after the excitement of the encounter had passed 
away, Lou felt as if her life had passed away too. She 
went to bed, feeling she could stand no more. 

In the morning she found her mother sitting at a 
window watching a funeral. It was raining heavily, so 
that some of the mourners even wore mackintosh coats. 
The funeral was in the poorer corner of the churchyard, 
where another new grave was covered with wreaths of 
sodden, shrivelling flowers. The yellowish coffin stood 
on the wet earth, in the rain: the curate held his hat, 
in a sort of permanent salute, above his head, like a little 
umbrella, as he hastened on with the service. The people 
seemed too wet to weep more wet. 

It was a long coffin. 

** Mother, do you really like watching? ”? asked Lou 
irritably, as Mrs. Witt sat in complete absorption. 

** IT do, Louise, I really enjoy it.” 

** Enjoy, mother! ’’—Lou was almost disgusted. 

** T’ll tell you why. I imagine I’m the one in the 
coffin—this is a girl of eighteen, who died of consump- 
tion—and those are my relatives, and I’m watching them 
put me away. And you know, Louise, I’ve come to the 
conclusion that hardly anybody in the world really lives, 
and so hardly anybody really dies. They may well say 
Oh Death where is thy sting-a-ling-a-ling? Even Death 
can’t sting those that have never really lived.—I always 
used to want that—to die without death stinging me.— 
And I’m sure the girl in the coffin is saying to herself : 
Fancy Aunt Emma putting on a drab slicker, and wear- 
ing it while they bury me. Doesn’t show much respect. 
But then my mother’s family always were common! I 

102 ST. MAWR 

feel there should be a solemn burial of a roll of news- 
papers containing the account of the death and funeral, 
next week. It would be just as serious: the grave of 
all the world’s remarks—’’ 

** T don’t want to think about it, mother. One ought 
to be able to laugh at it. I want to laugh at it.” 

** Well, Louise, I think it’s just as great a mistake 
to laugh at everything as to cry at everything. 
Laughter’s not the one panacea, either. I should really 
like, before I do come to be buried in a box, to know 
where I am. That young girl in that coffin never was 
anywhere—any more than the newspaper remarks on 
her death and burial. And I begin to wonder if I’ve ever 
been anywhere. I seem to have been a daily sequence 
of newspaper remarks, myself. I’m sure I never really 
conceived you and gave you birth. It all happened in 
newspaper notices. It’s a newspaper fact that you are 
my child, and that’s about all there is to it.” 

Lou smiled as she listened. 

**T always knew you were philosophic, mother. But 
I never dreamed it would come to elegies in a country 
churchyard, written to your motherhood.”’ 

‘* Exactly, Louise! Here I sit and sing the elegy to 
my own motherhood. I never had any motherhood, 
except in newspaper fact. I never was a wife, except 
in newspaper notices. I never was a young girl, except 
in newspaper remarks. Bury everything I ever said or 
that was said about me, and you’ve buried me. But 
since Kind Words Can Never Die, I can’t be buried, 
and death has no sting-a-ling-a-ling for me !—Now 
listen to me, Louise : I want death to be real to me—  ~ 
not as it was to that young girl. I want it to hurt me,. 
Louise. If it hurts me enough, I shall know I was 
alive.”’ 

She set her face and gazed under half-dropped lids at 
the funeral, stoic, fate-like, and yet, for the first time, 
with a certain pure wist{ulness of a young, virgin girl. 

ST. MAWR 103 

This frightened Lou very much. She was so used to the 
matchless Amazon in her mother, that when she saw her 
sit there, still, wistful, virginal, tender as a girl who has 
never taken armour, wistful at the window that only 
looked on graves, a serious terror took hold of the young 
woman. The terror of too late! 

Lou felt years, centuries older than her mother, at that 
moment, with the tiresome responsibility of youth to pro- 
tect and guide their elders. 

** What can we do about it, mother? ’’ she asked 
protectively. 

** Do nothing, Louise. I’m not going to have anybody 
wisely steering my canoe, now I feel the rapids are near. 
I shall go with the river. Don’t you pretend to do any- 
thing for me. I’ve done enough mischief myself, that 
way. I’m going down the stream, at last.”’ 

There was a pause. 

** But in actuality, what? ”’ asked Lou, a little ironi- 
cally. 

**T don’t quite know. Wait a while.” 

** Go back to America? ” 

** That is possible.”’ 

** T may come too.”’ 

** I’ve always waited for you to go back of your own 
will.”’ 

Lou went away, wandering round the house. She was 
so unutterably tired of everything—weary of the house, 
the graveyard, weary of the thought of Rico. She would 
have to go back to him to-morrow, to nurse him. Poor 
old Rico, going on like an amiable machine from day 
to day. It wasn’t his fault. But his life was a rattling 
nullity, and her life rattled in null correspondence. She 
had hardly strength enough to stop rattling and be still. 
Perhaps she had not strength enough. 

She did not know. She felt so weak, that unless some- 
thing carried her away she would go on rattling her bit in 
the great machine of human life, till she collapsed, and 

104 ST. MAWR 

her rattle rattled itself out, and there was a sort of barren 
silence where the sound of her had been. 

She wandered out in the rain, to the coach-house where 
Lewis and Phoenix were sitting facing one another, one 
on a bin, the other on the inner doorstep. 

“* Well,”? she said, smiling oddly. ‘‘ What’s to be 
done? ”’ 

The two men stood up. Outside the rain fell steadily 
on the flagstones of the yard, past the leaves of trees. 
Lou sat down on the little iron step of the dogcart. 

** That’s cold,’’ said Phoenix. ‘* You sit here.’? And 
he threw a yellow horse-blanket on the box where he 
had been sitting. 

** T don’t want to take your seat,’’ she said. 

‘* All right, you take it.” 

He moved across and sat gingerly on the shaft of the 
dogeart. Lou seated herself, and loosened her soft 
tartan shawl. Her face was pink and fresh, and her dark 
hair curled almost merrily in the damp. But under her 
eyes were the finger-prints of deadly weariness. 

She looked up at the two men, again smiling in her 
odd fashion. 

‘* What are we going to do? ”’ she asked. 

They looked at her closely, seeking her meaning. 

** What about? ”’ said Phcenix, a faint smile reflecting 
on his face, merely because she smiled. 

** Oh, everything,”’ she said, hugging her shawl again. 
** You know what they want? They want to shoot St. 
Mawr.”’ 

The two men exchanged glances. 

** Who want it? ’’ said Phoenix. 

** Why—all our friends! ’’ she made a little moue. — 
** Dean Vyner does.”’ i 

Again the men exchanged glances. There was a pause. 
Then Phcenix said, looking aside : 

‘¢ The boss is selling him.” 

66 Who? 99 

ST. MAWR 105 

** Sir Henry.’’—The half-breed always spoke the title 
with difficulty, and with a sort of sneer. ‘* He sell him to 
Miss Manby.”’ 

‘* How do you know? ”’ 

** The man from Corrabach told me last night. Flora, 
she say it.”’ 

Lou’s eyes met the sardonic, empty-seeing eyes of 
Phoenix direct. There was too much sarcastic under- 
standing. She looked aside. 

** What else did he say? ”’ she asked. 

**T don’t know,”’ said Phoenix, evasively. ‘* He say 
they cut him—else shoot him. Think they cut him—and 
if he die, he die.”’ 

Lou understood. He meant they would geld St. Mawr 
—at his age. 

She looked at Lewis. He sat with his head down, so 
she could not see his face. 

** Do you think it is true? ”? she asked. ‘* Lewis? 
Do you think they would try to geld St. Mawr—to make 
him a gelding? ”’ 

Lewis looked up at her. There was a faint deadly 
glimmer of contempt on his face. 

** Very likely, Mam,”’ he said. 

She was afraid of his cold, uncanny pale eyes, with 
their uneasy grey dawn of contempt. These two men, 
with their silent, deadly inner purpose, were not like 
other men. They seemed like two silent enemies of all 
the other men she knew. Enemies in the great white 
camp, disguised as servants, waiting the incalculable 
opportunity. What the opportunity might be, none 
knew. 

** Sir Henry hasn’t mentioned anything to me about 
selling St. Mawr to Miss Manby,”’ she said. 

The derisive flicker of a smile came on Phcenix’s face. 

‘¢ He sell him first, and tell you then,”’ he said, with 
his deadly impassive manner. 

** But do you really think so? ’’ she asked. 

106 ST. MAWR 

It was extraordinary how much corrosive contempt 
Phoenix could convey, saying nothing. She felt it almost 
as an insult. Yet it was a relief to her. 

“You know, I can’t believe it. I can’t believe Sir 
Henry would want to have St. Mawr mutilated. I 
believe he’d rather shoot him.”’ 

** You think so? ”’ said Phoenix, with a faint grin. 

Lou turned to Lewis. 

** Lewis, will you tell me what you truly think? ” 

Lewis looked at her with a hard, straight, fearless 
British stare. 

‘That man Philips was in the ‘Moon and Stars ’ 
last night. He said Miss Manby told him she was 
buying St. Mawr, and she asked him, if he thought it 
would be safe to cut him, and make a horse of him. He 
said it would be better, take some of the nonsense out 
of him. He’s no good for a sire, anyhow—”’ 

Lewis dropped his head again, and tapped a tattoo 
with the toe of his rather small foot. 

** And what do you think? ”? said Lou. It occurred 
to her how sensible and practical Miss Manby was, so 
much more so than the Dean. 

Lewis looked up at her with his pale eyes. 

“* Tt won’t have anything to do with me,” he said. 
** I shan’t go to Corrabach Hall.”’ 

‘** What will you do, then? ” 

Lewis did not answer. He looked at Phoenix. 

** Maybe him and me go to America,”’ said Phcenix, 
looking at the void. 

** Can he get in? ” said Lou. 

** Yes, he can. I know how,”’’ said Phoenix. 

** And the money? ”’ she said. 

** We got money.”’ 

There was a silence, after which she asked of Lewis : 

*¢ You’d leave St. Mawr to his fate? ” 

“I can’t help his fate,”? said Lewis. ‘‘ There’s too 
many people in the world for me to help anything.” 

ST. MAWR 107 

** Poor St. Mawr! ” 

She went indoors again, and up to her room: then 
higher, to the top rooms of the tall Georgian house. 
From one window she could see the fields in the 
rain. She could see St. Mawr himself, alone as 
usual, standing with his head up, looking across 
the fences. He was streaked dark with rain. Beauti- 
ful, with his poised head and massive neck, and 
his supple hindquarters. He was neighing to Poppy. 
Clear on the wet wind came the sound of his bell-like, 
stallion’s calling, that Mrs. Vyner called cruel. It was 
a strange noise, with a splendour that belonged to 
another world-age. The mean cruelty of Mrs. Vyner’s 
humanitarianism, the barren cruelty of Flora Manby, 
the eunuch cruelty of Rico. Our whole eunuch civilisa- 
tion, nasty-minded as eunuchs are, with their kind of 
sneaking, sterilising cruelty. 

Yet even she herself, seeing St. Mawr’s conceited 
march along the fence, could not help addressing him : 

‘Yes, my boy! If you knew what Miss Flora Manby 
was preparing for you! She’ll sharpen a knife that will 
settle you.”’ 

And Lou called her mother. 

The two American women stood high at the window, 
overlooking the wet, close, hedged-and-feneed English 
landscape. Everything enclosed, enclosed, to stifling. 
The very apples on the trees looked so shut in, it was 
impossible to imagine any speck of ‘* Knowledge ” 
lurking inside them. Good to eat, good to cook, good 
even for show. But the wild sap of untameable and 
inexhaustible knowledge—no! Bred out of them. Geld- 
ings, even the apples. 

Mrs. Witt listened to Lou’s half-humorous statements. 

** You must admit, mother, Flora is a sensible girl,” 
she said. 

**T admit it, Louise.”’ 

** She goes straight to the root of the matter.” 

108 ST. MAWR 

‘* And eradicates the root. Wise girl! And what is 
your answer? ” ; 

** J don’t know, mother. What would you say? ”’ 

**T know what I should say.”’ 

** Tell me.”? 

** IT should say : Miss Manby, you may have my hus- 
band, but not my horse. My husband won’t need 
emasculating, and my horse I won’t have you meddle 
with. Pll preserve one last male thing in the museum 
of this world, if I can.”’ 

Lou listened, smiling faintly. 

** That’s what I will say,’”’ she replied at length. ‘‘ The 
funny thing is, mother, they think all their men with 
their bare faces or their little quotation-mark’s mous- 
taches are so tremendously male. That fox-hunting 
one! ” . 

‘I know it. Like little male motor-cars. Give him 
a little gas, and start him on the low gear, and away he 
goes : all his male gear rattling, like a cheap motor-car.”’ 

** I’m afraid I dislike men altogether, mother.”’ 

** You may, Louise. Think of Flora Manby, and how 
you love the fair sex.’’ 

** After all, St. Mawr is better. And I’m glad if he 
gives them a kick in the face.”’ 

** Ah, Louise! ’? Mrs. Witt suddenly clasped her hands 
with wicked passion. ‘* Ay, qué gozo! as our Juan used 
to say, on your father’s ranch in Texas.”? She gazed 
in a sort of wicked ecstasy out of the window. 

They heard Lou’s maid softly calling Lady Canminaec 
from below. Lou went to the stairs. 

oO Dats site) i 

‘* Lewis wants to speak to you, my Lady.”’ 

** Send him into the sitting-room.”’ 

The two women went down. 

** What is it, Lewis? ’? asked Lou. 

** Am I to bring in St. Mawr, in case they send for 
him from Corrabach? ”’ 

ST. MAWR 109 

** No,”’ said Lou swiftly. 

‘** Wait a minute,” put in Mrs. Witt. ‘‘ What makes 
you think they will send for St. Mawr from Corra- 
bach, Lewis? ”? she asked, suave as a grey leopard 
cat. 

** Miss Manby went up to Flints Farm with Dean 
Vyner this morning, and they’ve just come back. They 
stopped the car, and Miss Manby got out at the field 
gate, to look at St. Mawr. I’m thinking, if she made the 
bargain with Sir Henry, she’ll be sending a man over this 
afternoon, and if I’d better brush St. Mawr down a bit, 
in case.”’ 

The man stood strangely still, and the words came 
like shadows of his real meaning. It was a challenge. 

** I see,’’ said Mrs. Witt slowly. 

Lou’s face darkened. She too saw. 

‘* So that is her game,”’ she said. ‘* That is why they 
got me down here.”’ 

** Never mind, Louise,’? said Mrs. Witt. Then to 
Lewis : ‘“‘ Yes, please bring in St. Mawr. You wish it, 
don’t you, Louise? ” 

** Yes,’’ hesitated Lou. She saw by Mrs. Witt’s closed 
face that a counter-move was prepared. 

** And Lewis,’ said Mrs. Witt, ‘‘ my daughter may 
wish you to ride St. Mawr this afternoon—not to Corra- 
bach Hall.” 

** Very good, Mam.”’ 

Mrs. Witt sat silent for some time, after Lewis had 
gone, gathering inspiration from the wet, grisly grave- 
stones. 

**Don’t you think it’s time we made a move, 
daughter? *’ she asked. 

** Any move,’’ said Lou desperately. 

‘Very well then. My dearest friends, and my only 
friends, in this country, are in Oxfordshire. I will set 
off to ride to Merriton this afternoon, and Lewis will 
ride with me on St. Mawr.”’ 

110 ST. MAWR 

** But you can’t ride to Merriton in an afternoon,’ — 
said Lou. 

** T know it. I shall ride across country. I shall enjoy 
it, Louise.—Yes.—I shall consider I am on my way back 
to America. I am most deadly tired of this country. 
From Merriton I shall make my arrangements to go to 
America, and take Lewis and Phoenix and St. Mawr 
along with me. I think they want to go.—You will 
decide for yourself.”’ 

** Yes, Ill come too,’’ said Lou casually. 

** Very well. I'll start immediately after lunch, for 
I can’t breathe in this place any longer. Where are 
Henry’s automobile maps? ”’ 

Afternoon saw Mrs. Witt, in a large waterproof cape, 
mounted on her horse, Lewis, in another cape, mounted 
on St. Mawr, trotting through the rain, splashing in the 
puddles, moving slowly southwards. They took the open 
country, and would pass quite near to Flints Farm. But 
Mrs. Witt did not care. With great difficulty she had 
managed to fasten a small waterproof roll behind her, 
containing her night things. She seemed to breathe the 
first breath of freedom. 

And sure enough, an hour or so after Mrs. Witt’s 
departure, arrived Flora Manby in a splashed up motor- 
car, accompanied by her sister, and bringing a groom and 
a saddle. 

** Do you know, Harry sold me St. Mawr,”’ she said. 
‘¢ I’m just wild to get that horse in hand.” 

** How? ” said Lou. 

** Oh, I don’t know. There are ways. Do you mind 
if Philips rides him over ne to Corrabach?—Oh, I 
forgot, Harry sent you a note.’ 

** Dearest Loulina: Have .you been gone from here — 

two days or two years. It seems the latter. You are 
terribly missed. Flora wanted so much to buy St. Mawr, 
to save us further trouble, that I have sold him to her. 
She is giving me what we paid: rather, what you paid; 

ST. MAWR 111 

so of course the money is yours. I am thankful we are 
rid of the animal, and that he falls into competent hands 
—I asked her please to remove him from your charge 
to-day. And I can’t tell how much easier I am in my 
mind, to think of him gone. You are coming back to 
me to-morrow, aren’t you? I shall think of nothing else 
but you, till I see you. Arrivederci, darling dear! R.” 

** I’m so sorry,”’ said Lou. ‘* Mother went on horse- 
back to see some friends, and Lewis went with her on 
St. Mawr. He knows the road.’’ 

** She’ll be back this evening? ”’ said Flora. 

** T don’t know. Mother is so uncertain. She may be 
away a day or two.”’ 

“* Well, here’s the cheque for St. Mawr.”’ 

** No, I won’t take it now—no, thank you—not till 
mother comes back with the goods.’’ 

Flora was chagrined. The two women knew they 
hated one another. The visit was a brief one. 

Mrs. Witt rode on in the rain, which abated as the 
afternoon wore down, and the evening came without 
rain, and with a suffusion of pale yellow light. All the 
time she had trotted in silence, with Lewis just behind 
her. And she scarcely saw the heather-covered hills with 
the deep clefts between them, nor the oak-woods, nor 
the lingering foxgloves, nor the earth at all. Inside 
herself she felt a profound repugnance for the English 
country : she preferred even the crudeness of Central 
Park in New York. 

And she felt an almost savage desire to get away from 
Europe, from everything European. Now she was really 
en route, she cared not a straw for St. Mawr or for Lewis 
or anything. Something just writhed inside her, all the 
time, against Europe. That closeness, that sense of 
cohesion, that sense of being fused into a lump with all 
the rest—no matter how much distance you kept—this 
drove her mad. In America the cohesion was a matter 
of choice and will. But in Europe it was organic, like the 

112 ST. MAWR 

helpless particles of one sprawling body. And the great 
body in a state of incipient decay. 

She was a woman of fifty-one : and she seemed hardly 
to have lived a day. She looked behind her—the thin 
trees and swamps of Lousiana, the sultry, sub-tropical 
excitement of decaying New Orleans, the vast bare dry- 
ness of Texas, with mobs of cattle in an illumined dust ! 
The half-European thrills of New York! The false 
stability of Boston! A clever husband, who was a 
brilliant lawyer, but who was far more thrilled by his 
cattle ranch than by his law: and who drank heavily 
and died. The years of first widowhood in Boston, con- 
soled by a self-satisfied sort of intellectual courtship 
from clever men.—For curiously enough, while she 
wanted it, she had always been able to compel men to 
pay court to her. All kinds of men.—Then a rather 
dashing time in New York—when she was in her early 
forties. Then the long visual philandering in Europe. 
She left off ‘‘ loving,’’ save through the eye, when she 
came to Europe. And when she made her trips to 
America, she found it was finished there also, her 
** loving.” 

What was the matter? Examining herself, she had 
long ago decided that her nature was a destructive force. 
But then, she justified herself, she had only destroyed 
that which was destructible. If she could have found 
something indestructible, especially in men, though she 
would have fought against it, she would have been glad 
at last to be defeated by it. 

That was the point. She really wanted to be defeated, 
in her own eyes. And nobody had ever defeated her. 
Men were never really her match. A woman of terrible 
strong health, she felt even that in her strong limbs there » 
was far more electric power than in the limbs of any man 
she had met. That curious fluid electric force, that could 
make any man kiss her hand, if she so willed it. A 
queen, as far as she wished. And not having been very 

ST. MAWR 113 

clever at school, she always had the greatest respect for 
the mental powers. Her own were not mental powers. 
Rather electric, as of some strange physical dynamo 
within her. So she had been ready to bow before Mind. 

But alas! After a brief time, she had found Mind, 
at least the man who was supposed to have the mind, 
bowing before her. Her own peculiar dynamic force 
was stronger than the force of Mind. She could make 
Mind kiss her hand. 

And not by any sensual tricks. She did not really care 
about sensualities, especially as a younger woman. Sex 
was a mere adjunct. She cared about the mysterious, 
intense, dynamic sympathy that could flow between her 
and some * live’? man—a man who was highly con- 
scious, a real live wire. That she cared about. 

But she had never rested until she had made the man 
she admired—and admiration was the root of her attrac- 
tion to any man—made him kiss her hand. In both 
senses, actual and metaphorical. Physical and meta- 
physical. Conquered his country. 

She had always succeeded. And she believed that, if 
she cared, she always would succeed. In the world of 
living men. Because of the power that was in her, in her 
arms, in her strong, shapely, but terrible hands, in all 
the great dynamo of her body. 

For this reason she had been so terribly contemptu- 
ous of Rico, and of Lou’s infatuation. Ye gods! what 
was Rico in the scale of men! 

Perhaps she despised the younger generation too easily. 
Because she did not see its sources of power, she con- 
cluded it was powerless. Whereas perhaps the power 
of accommodating oneself to any circumstance and com- 
mitting oneself to no circumstance is the last triumph of 
mankind. 

Her generation had had its day. She had had her 
day. The world of her men had sunk into a sort of in- 
significance. And with a great contempt she despised 

H 

114 ST. MAWR 

the world that had come into place instead : the world 
of Rico and Flora Manby, the world represented, to her, 
by the Prince of Wales. 

In such a world there was nothing even to conquer. 
It gave everything and gave nothing to everybody and 
anybody all the time. Dio benedetto! as Rico would 
say. A great complicated tangle of nonentities ravelled 
in nothingness. So it seemed to her. 

Great God! This was the generation she had helped 
to bring into the world. 

She had had her day. And, as far as the mysterious 
battle of life went, she had won all the way. Just as 
Cleopatra, in the mysterious business of a woman’s life, 
won all the way. 

Though that bald tough Cesar had drawn his iron 
from the fire without losing much of its temper. And 
he had gone his way. And Antony surely was splendid 
to die with. 

In her life there had been no tough Czsar to go his way 
in cold blood, away from her. Her men had gone from 
her like dogs on three legs, into the crowd. And cer- 
tainly there was no gorgeous Antony to die for and 
with. 

Almost she was tempted in her heart to cry: ‘* Con- 
quer me, oh God, before I die! *—But then she had a 
terrible contempt for the God that was supposed to rule 
this universe. She felt she could make Him kiss her 
hand. Here she was a woman of fifty-one, past the 
change of life. And her great dread was to die an empty, 

barren death. Oh, if only Death might open dark wings . 

of mystery and consolation. To die an easy, barren 
death. To pass out as she had passed in, without mystery 
or the rustling of darkness! That was her last, final, 
ashy dread. 

** Old! ” she said to herself. ‘‘ I am not old! Ihave 
lived many years, that is all. But I am as timeless as 
an hour-glass that turns morning and night, and spills 

= 

ST. MAWR 115 

the hours of sleep one way, the hours of consciousness 
the other way, without itself being affected. Nothing 
in all my life has ever truly affected me.—I believe Cleo- 
patra only tried the asp, as she tried her pearls in wine, 
to see if it would really, really have any effect on her. 
Nothing had ever really had any effect on her, neither 
Czsar nor Antony nor any of them. Never once had she 
really been lost, lost to herself. Then try death, see 
if that trick would work. If she would lose herself to 
herself that way.—Ah death— ! ” 

But Mrs. Witt mistrusted death too. She felt she 
might pass out as a bed of asters passes out in autumn, 
to mere nothingness.—And something in her longed to 
die, at least, positively : to be folded then at last into 
throbbing wings of mystery, like a hawk that goes to 
sleep. Not like a thing made into a parcel and put into 
the last rubbish-heap. 

So she rode trotting across the hills, mile after mile, 
in silence. Avoiding the roads, avoiding everything, 
avoiding everybody, just trotting forwards, towards 
night. 

And by nightfall they had travelled twenty-five miles. 
She had motored around this country, and knew the little 
towns and the inns. She knew where she would sleep. 

The morning came beautiful and sunny. A woman so 
strong in health, why should she ride with the fact of 
death before her eyes? But she did. 

Yet in sunny morning she must do something about it. 

** Lewis! *? she said. ‘* Come here and tell me some- 
thing, please! Tell me,’’ she said, ‘* do you believe in 
God? ”’ 

“In God!” he said, wondering. ‘I never think 
about it.”’ 

** But do you say your prayers? ” 

** No, Mam! ”? 

** Why don’t you? ”’ 

He thought about it for some minutes. 

116 ST. MAWR 

**T don’t like religion. My aunt and uncle were | 

religious.”’ 

** You don’t like religion,’? she repeated. ‘* And you 

don’t believe in God.—Well then—”’ 

** Nay! ” he hesitated. ‘* I never said I didn’t believe 
in God.—Only I’m sure I’m not a Methodist. And I feel 
a fool in a proper church.—And I feel a fool saying my 
prayers.—And I feel a fool when ministers and parsons 
come getting at me.—I never think about God, if folks 
don’t try to make me.’’ He had a small, sly smile, 
almost gay. 

** And you don’t like feeling a fool? ”? She smiled 
rather patronisingly. 

** No, Mam.”’ 

** Do I make you feel a fool? ”’ she asked, drily. 

He looked at her without answering. 

** Why don’t you answer? ”’ she said, pressing. 

** T think you’d like to make a fool of me sometimes,”’ 
he said. 

‘* Now? ”’ she pressed. 

He looked at her with that slow, distant look. 

** Maybe! ”? he said, rather unconcernedly. 

Curiously, she couldn’t touch him. He always seemed 
to be watching her from a distance, as if from another 
country. Even if she made a fool of him, something in 
him would all the time be far away from her, not impli- 
cated. 

She caught herself up in the personal game, and re- 
turned to her own isolated question. A vicious habit made 
her start the personal tricks. She didn’t want to, really. 

There was something about this little man—some- 
times, to herself, she called him Little Jack Horner, Sat 
im a corner—that irritated her and made her want to. 
taunt him. His peculiar little inaccessibility, that was 
so tight and easy. 

Then again, there was something, his way of looking 
at her as if he looked from out of another country, a 

oS 

ST. MAWR 117 

country of which he was an inhabitant, and where she 
had never been: this touched her strangely. Perhaps 
behind this little man was the mystery. In spite of the 
fact that in actual life, in her world, he was only a groom, 
almost chétif, with his legs a little bit horsey and bowed ; 
and of no education, saying Yes Mam! and No Mam! 
and accomplishing nothing, simply nothing at all on 
the face of the earth. Strictly a nonentity. 

And yet, what made him perhaps the only real entity 
to her, his seeming to inhabit another world than hers. 
A world dark and still, where language never ruffled the 
growing leaves, and seared their edges like a bad 
wind. 

Was it an illusion, however? Sometimes she thought 
it was. Just bunkum, which she had faked up, in order 
to have something to mystify about. 

But then, when she saw Phoenix and Lewis silently 
together, she knew there was another communion, silent, 
excluding her. And sometimes when Lewis was alone 
with St. Mawr: and once, when she saw him pick up a 
bird that had stunned itself against a wire: she had 
realised another world, silent, where each creature is 
alone in its own aura of silence, the mystery of power : 
as Lewis had power with St. Mawr, and even with 
Pheenix. 

The visible world, and the invisible. Or rather, the 
audible and the inaudible. She had lived so long, and 
so completely, in the visible, audible world. She would 
not easily admit that other, inaudible. She always 
wanted to jeer, as she approached the brink of it. 

Even now, she wanted to jeer at the little fellow, 
because of his holding himself inaccessible within the 
inaudible, silent world. And she knew he knew it. 

** Did you never want to be rich, and be a gentleman, 
like Sir Henry? ”’ she asked. 

** TI would many times have liked to be rich. But I 
never exactly wanted to be a gentleman,”’ he said. 

118 ST. MAWR 

“* Why not? ” 

** T can’t exactly say. I should be uncomfortable if I 
was like they are.”’ 

** And are you comfortable now? ” 

** When I’m let alone.”’ 

** And do they let you alone? Does the world let you 
alone? ”’ 

‘* No, they don’t.”” 

** Well then—! ”’ 

‘© T keep to myself all I can.” 

** And are you comfortable, as you call it, when you 
keep to yourself? ”’ 

eyes lam. 

‘© But when you keep to yourself, what do you keep 
to? What precious treasure have you to keep to? ”’ 

He looked, and saw she was jeering. 

** None,”’ he said. ‘* I’ve got nothing of that sort.’’ 

She rode impatiently on ahead. 

And the moment she had done so, she regretted it. 
She might put the little fellow, with contempt, out of 
her reckoning. But no, she would not do it. 

She had put so much out of her reckoning : soon she 
would be left in an empty circle, with her empty self at 
the. centre. 

She reined in again. 

** Lewis! *? she said. ‘*I don’t want you to take 
offence at anything I say.” 

** No, Mam.”’ 

**T don’t want you to say just No Mam! all the 
time! ’? she cried impulsively. ‘‘ Promise me.”’ \ 

** Yes, Mam! ” 

** But really! Promise me you won’t be offended at_ 

whatever I say.” 

«© Yes, Mam! ” 

She looked at him searchingly. To her surprise, she 
was almost in tears. A woman of her years! And with a 
servant ! 

a 

ST. MAWR 119 

But his face was blank and stony, with a stony, dis- 
tant look of pride that made him inaccessible to her 
emotions. He met her eyes again: with that cold dis- 
tant look, looking straight into her hot, confused, pained 
self. So cold and as if merely refuting her. He didn’t 
believe her, nor trust her, nor like her even. She was 
an attacking enemy to him. Only he stayed really far 
away from her, looking down at her from a sort of dis- 
tant hill where her weapons could not reach : not quite. 

And at the same time, it hurt him in a dumb, living 
way, that she made these attacks on him. She could see 
the cloud of hurt in his eyes, no matter how distantly he 
looked at her. 

They bought food in a village shop, and sat under a 
tree near a field where men were already cutting oats, 
in a warm valley. Lewis had stabled the horses for a 
couple of hours, to feed and rest. But he came to join 
her under the tree, to eat.—He sat at a little distance 
from her, with the bread and cheese in his small brown 
hands, eating silently, and watching the harvesters. She 
was cross with him, and therefore she was stingy, would 
give him nothing to eat but dry bread and cheese. Her- 
self, she was not hungry.—So all the time he kept his 
face a little averted from her. As a matter of fact, he 
kept his whole being averted from her, away from her. 
He did not want to touch her, nor to be touched by her. 
He kept his spirit there, alert, on its guard, but out of 
contact. It was as if he had unconsciously accepted the 
battle, the old battle. He was her target, the old object 
of her deadly weapons. But he refused to shoot back. 
It was as if he caught all her missiles in full flight, before 
they touched him, and silently threw them on the ground 
behind him. And in some essential part of himself he 
ignored her, staying in another world. 

That other world! Mere male armour of artificial 
imperviousness! It angered her. 

Yet she knew, by the way he watched the harvesters, 

120 ST. MAWR 

and the grasshoppers popping into notice, that it was 
another world. And when a girl went by, carrying food 
to the field, it was at him she glanced. And he gave 
that quick, animal little smile that came from him 
unawares. Another world ! 

Yet also, there was a sort of meanness about him : 

a suffisance! A keep-yourself-for-yourself, and don’t 
give yourself away. 

Well !—she rose impatiently. 

It was hot in the afternoon, and she was rather tired. 
She went to the inn and slept, and did not start again 
till tea-time. 

Then they had to ride rather late. The sun sank, 
among a smell of cornfields, clear and yellow-red behind 
motionless dark trees. Pale smoke rose from cottage 
chimneys. Not a cloud was in the sky, which held the 
upward-floating light like a bowl inverted on purpose. A 
new moon sparkled and was gone. It was beginning of 
night. 

Away in the distance, they saw a curious pinkish glare 
of fire, probably furnaces. And Mrs. Witt thought she 
could detect the scent of furnace smoke, or factory 
smoke. But then she always said that of the English 
air : it was never quite free of the smell of smoke, coal- 
smoke. 

They were riding slowly on a path through fields, down 
a long slope. Away below was a puther of lights. All 
the darkness seemed full of half-spent crossing lights, a 
curious uneasiness. High in the sky a star seemed to be 
walking. It was an aeroplane with a light. Its buzz 
rattled above. Not a space, not a speck of this country 
that wasn’t humanised, occupied by the human claim. ~ 
Not even the sky. ¥ 

They descended slowly through a dark wood, which 
they had entered through a gate. Lewis was all the | 
time dismounting and opening gates, letting her pass, — 
shutting the gate and mounting again. 

ST. MAWR 121 

So, in a while she came to the edge of the wood’s dark- 
ness, and saw the open pale concave of the world beyond. 
The darkness was never dark. It shook with the con- 
cussion of many invisible lights, lights of towns, villages, 
mines, factories, furnaces, squatting in the valleys and 
behind all the hills. 

Yet, as Rachel Witt drew rein at the gate emerging 
from the wood, a very big, soft star fell in heaven, cleav- 
ing the hubbub of this human night with a gleam from 
the greater world. 

“* See! a star falling! ’? said Lewis, as he opened the 
gate. 

** I saw it,’? said Mrs. Witt, walking her horse past 
him. 

There was a curious excitement of wonder, or magic, 
in the little man’s voice. Even in this night something 
strange had stirred awake in him. 

** You ask me about God,’ he said to her, walking 
his horse along side in the shadow of the wood’s-edge, 
the darkness of the old Pan, that kept our artificially- 
lit world at bay. ‘‘ I don’t know about God. But when 
I see a star fall like that out of long-distance places in 
the sky : and the moon sinking saying Good-bye ! Good- 
bye! Good-bye! and nobody listening: I think I hear 
something, though I wouldn’t call it God.” 

** What then? ” said Rachel Witt. 

** And you smell the smell of oak-leaves now,” he said, 
** now the air is cold. They smell to me more alive than 
people. The trees hold their bodies hard and still, but 
they watch and listen with their leaves. And I think 
they say to me: Is that you passing there, Morgan 
Lewis ? All right, you pass quickly, we shan’t do any- 
thing to you. Youare like a holly-bush.” 

* Yes,”? said Rachel Witt, drily. ‘“‘ Why? ” 

‘* All the time, the trees grow, and listen. And if you 
cut a tree down without asking pardon, trees will hurt 
you some time in your life, in the night time.” 

122 ST. MAWR 

** T suppose,”’ said Rachel Witt, ‘* that’s an old super- 

stition.”’ 

‘** They say that ash-trees don’t like people. When 
the other people were most in the country—I mean like 
what they call fairies, that have all gone now—they 
liked ash-trees best. And you know the little green 
things with little small nuts in them, that come flying 
down from ash-trees—pigeons, we call them—they’re the 
seeds—the other people used to catch them and eat them 
before they fell to the ground. And that made the people 
so they could hear trees living and feeling things.—But 
when all these people that there are now came to 
England, they liked the oak-trees best, because their 
pigs ate the acorns. So now you can tell the ash-trees 
are mad, they want to kill all these people. But the 
oak-trees are many more than the ash-trees.”” 

** And do you eat the ash-tree seeds? ’’ she asked. 

** T always ate them, when I was little. Then I wasn’t 
frightened of ash-trees, like most of the others. And I 
wasn’t frightened of the moon. If you didn’t go near 
the fire all day, and if you didn’t eat any cooked food 
nor anything that had been in the sun, but only things 
like turnips or radishes or pig-nuts, and then went with- 
out any clothes: on, in the full moon, then you could 
see the people in the moon, and go with them. They 
never have fire, and they never speak, and their bodies 
are clear almost like jelly. They die in a minute if 
there’s a bit of fire near them. But they know more 
than we. Because unless fire touches them, they never 
die. They see people live and they see people perish, 
and they say, people are only like twigs on a tree, you 
break them off the tree, and kindle fire with them. You 

a 

made a fire of them, and they are gone, the fire is gone, 
everything is gone. But the people of the moon don’t — 

die, and fire is nothing to them. They look at it from the 

distance of the sky, and see it burning things up, people © 

all appearing and disappearing like twigs that come in 

ST. MAWR 123 

spring and you cut them in autumn and make a fire of 
them and they are gone. And they say : what do people 
matter? If you want to matter, you must become a 
moon-boy. Then all your life, fire can’t blind you and 
people can’t hurt you. Because at full moon you can 
join the moon people, and go through the air and pass 
any cool places, pass through rocks and through the 
trunks of trees, and when you come to people lying warm 
in bed, you punish them.”’ 

66 Howe 99 

‘* You sit on the pillow where they breathe, and you 
put a web across their mouth, so they can’t breathe the 
fresh air that comes from the moon. So they go on breath- 
ing the same air again and again, and that makes them 
more and more stupefied. The sun gives out heat, but 
the moon gives out fresh air. That’s what the moon 
people do : they wash the air clean with moonlight.”’ 

He was talking with a strange eager naiveté that 
amused Rachel Witt, and made her a little uncomfort- 
able in her skin. Was he after all no more than a sort 
of imbecile? 

‘** Who told you all this stuff? ’? she asked abruptly. 

And, as abruptly, he pulled himself up. 

‘* We used to say it, when we were children.”’ 

** But you don’t believe it? It is only childishness, 
after all.” 

He paused a moment or two. 

** No,”’ he said, in his ironical little day-voice. “I 
know I shan’t make anything but a fool of myself, with 
that talk. But all sorts of things go through our heads, 
and some seem to linger, and some don’t. But you 
asking me about God put it into my mind, I suppose. 
I don’t know what sort of things I believe in: only I 
know it’s not what the chapel-folks believe in. We 
none of us believe in them when it comes to earning a 
living, or, with you people, when it comes to spending 
your fortune. Then we know that bread costs money, 

124 ST. MAWR 

and even your sleep you have to pay for.—That’s work. 
Or, with you people, it’s just owning property and seeing 
you get your value for your money.—But a man’s mind 
is always full of things. And some people’s minds, like 
my aunt and uncle, are full of religion and hell for every- 
body except themselves. And some people’s minds are 
all money, money, money, and how to get hold of some- 
thing they haven’t got hold of yet. And some people, like 
you, are always curious about what everybody else in 
the world is after. And some people are all for enjoying 
themselves and being thought much of, and some, like 
Lady Carrington, don’t know what to do with them- 
selves. Myself, I don’t want to have in my mind the 
things other people have in their minds. I’m one that 
likes my own things best. And if, when I see a bright 
star fall, like to-night, I think to myself : There’s move- 
ment in the sky. The world is going to change again. 
They’re throwing something to us from the distance, and 
we’ve got to have it, whether we want it or not. To- 
morrow there will be a difference for everybody, thrown 
out of the sky upon us, whether we want it or not: then 
that’s how I want to think, so let me please myself.”’ 

** You know what a shooting star actually is, I sup- 
pose?—and that there are always many in August, 
because we pass through a region of them? ” 

** Yes, Mam, I’ve been told. But stones don’t come 
at us from the sky for nothing. Hither it’s like when a 
man tosses an apple to you out of his orchard, as you go 
by. Or it’s like when somebody shies a stone at you, to 
cut your head open. You’ll never make me believe the 
sky is like an empty house with a slate falling from the 
roof. The world has its own life, the sky has a life of its 
own, and never is it like stones rolling down a rubbish 
heap and falling into a pond. Many things twitch and 
twitter within the sky, and many things happen beyond 
us. My own way of thinking is my own way.”’ 

‘“* T never knew you talk so much.”’ 

ST. MAWR 125 

“No, Mam. It’s your asking me that about God. Or 
else it’s the night-time. I don’t believe in God and being 
good and going to Heaven. Neither do I worship idols, 
so I’m not a heathen as my aunt called me. Never from 
a boy did I want to believe the things they kept grinding 
in their guts at home, and at Sunday School, and at 
school. A man’s mind has to be full of something, so I 
keep to what we used to think as lads. It’s childish 
nonsense, I know it. But it suits me. Better than other 
people’s stuff. Your man Pheenix is about the same, 
when he lets on.—Anyhow, it’s my own stuff, that we 
believed as lads, and I like it better than other people’s 
stuff.—You asking about God made me let on. But I 
would never belong to any club, or trades* union, and 
God’s the same to my mind.”’ 

With this he gave a little kick to his horse, and St. 
Mawr went dancing excitedly along the highway they 
now entered, leaving Mrs. Witt to trot after as rapidly 
as she could. 

When she came to the hotel, to which she had tele- 
graphed for rooms, Lewis disappeared, and she was left 
thinking hard. ° 

It was not till they were twenty miles from Merriton, 
riding through a slow morning mist, and she had a rather 
far-away, wistful look on her face, unusual for her, that 
she turned to him in the saddle and said : 

** Now don’t be surprised, Lewis, at what I am going 
to say. I am going to ask you, now, supposing I wanted 
to marry you, what should you say? ”’ 

He looked at her quickly, and was at once on his 
guard. 

** That you didn’t mean it,’’ he replied hastily. 

** Yes ’’—she hesitated, and her face looked wistful 
and tired.—‘* Supposing I did mean it. Supposing I did 
really, from my heart, want to marry you and be a wife 
to you—”’ she looked away across the fields—** then what 
should you say? ” 

126 ST. MAWR 

Her voice sounded sad, a little broken. 

** Why, Mam!’’ he replied, knitting his brow and 
shaking his head a little. ‘*‘ I should say you didn’t 
mean it, you know. Something would have come over 
you.”” 

‘* But supposing I wanted something to come over 
me? ”? 

He shook his head. 

** It would never do, Mam! Some people’s flesh and 
blood is kneaded like bread : and that’s me. And some 
are rolled like fine pastry, like Lady Carrington. And 
some are mixed with gunpowder. They’re like a cart- 
ridge you put in a gun, Mam.”’ 

She listened impatiently. 

** Don’t talk,’’ she said, ** about bread and cakes and 
pastry, it all means nothing. You used to answer short 
enough, Yes Mam! No Mam! That will do now. Do 
you mean Yes! or No? ” 

His eyes met hers. She was again hectoring. 

‘No, Mam! ”’ he said, quite neutral. 

66 Why? 99 

As She waited for his answer, she saw the foundations 
of his loquacity dry up, his face go distant and mute 
again, as it always used to be, till these last two days, 
when it had had a funny touch of inconsequential merri- 
ness. 

He looked steadily into her eyes, and his look was 
neutral, sombre, and hurt. He looked at her as if infinite 
seas, infinite spaces divided him and her. And his eyes 

seemed to put her away beyond some sort of fence. An 

anger congealed cold like lava, set impassive against her 
and all her sort. 

** No, Mam. I couldn’t give my body to any woman : 

who didn’t respect it.”’ 

‘** But I do respect it, I do! ’*—she flushed hot like a 
girl. 

“* No, Mam. Not as I mean it,’’ he replied. 

ST. MAWR 127 

There was a touch of anger against her in his voice, 
and a distance of distaste. 

** And how do you mean it? ’”’ she replied, the full 
sarcasm coming back into her tones. She could see that, 
as a woman to touch and fondle he saw her as repellant : 
only repellant. 

**I have to be a servant to women now,” he said, 
** even to earn my wage. I could never touch with my 
body a woman whose servant I was.”’ 

‘* You’re not my servant: my daughter pays your 
wages.—And all that is beside the point, between a man 
and a woman.”’ 

** No woman who I touched with my body should ever 
speak to me as you speak to me, or think of me as you 
think of me,”’’ he said. 

** But !—”? she stammered. ‘‘ I think of you—with 
love. And can you be so unkind as to notice the way I 
speak? You know it’s only my way.”’ 

** You, as a woman,”’ he said, ‘* you have no respect 
for a man.”’ 

‘** Respect ! Respect! ” she cried. ‘* I’m likely to lose 
what respect I have left. I know I can love aman. But 
whether a man can love a woman—’”’ 

“* No,”? said Lewis. ‘‘ I never could, and I think I 
never shall. Because I don’t want to. The thought of 
it makes me feel shame.”’ 

** What do you mean? ”’ she cried. 

** Nothing in the world,’”’ he said, ‘‘ would make me 
feel such shame as to have a woman shouting at me, or 
mocking at me, as I see women mocking and despising 
the men they marry. No woman shall touch my body, 
and mock me or despise me. No woman.” 

** But men must be mocked, or despised even, some- 
times.”” 

** No. Not this man. Not by the woman I touch 
with my body.” 

** Are you perfect? ”” 

128 ST. MAWR 

** 1 don’t know. But if I touch a woman with my 
body, it must put a lock on her, to respect what I will 
never have despised : never! ”’ 

‘* What will you never have despised ? ”” 

‘* My body! And my touch upon the woman.’’ 

‘* Why insist so on your body? ??—And she looked at 
him with a touch of contemptuous mockery, raillery. 

He looked her in the eyes, steadily, and coldly, putting 
her away from him, and himself far away from her. 

**Do you expect that any woman will stay your 
humble slave, to-day? ”’ she asked cuttingly. 

But he only watched her, coldly, distant, refusing any 
connection. 

‘* Between men and women, it’s a question of give and 
take. A man can’t expect always to be humbly 
adored.”’ 

He watched her still, cold, rather pale, putting her far 
from him. Then he turned his horse and set off rapidly 
along the road, leaving her to follow. 

She walked her horse and let him go, thinking to her- 
self : 

‘‘ There’s a little bantam cock. And a groom! 
Imagine it! Thinking he can dictate to a woman! ” 

She was in love with him. And he, in an odd way, 
was in love with her. She had known it by the odd, 
uncanny merriment in him, and his unexpected 
loquacity. But he would not have her come physically 
near him. Unapproachable there as a cactus, guarding 
his ‘* body ”? from her contact. As if contact with her 
would be mortal insult and fatal injury to his marvellous 
“ee body.”’ ( 

What a little cock-sparrow ! 

Let him ride ahead. He would have to wait for her 
somewhere. 

She found him at the entrance to the next village. His 
face was pallid and set. She could tell he felt he had 
been insulted, so he had congealed into stiff insentience. 

: 

ST. MAWR 129 

** At the bottom of all men is the same,”’ she said to | 
herself : ‘‘ an empty, male conceit of themselves.” 

She too rode up with a face like a mask, and straight 
on to the hotel. 

** Can you serve dinner to myself and my servant? ”’ 
she asked at the inn : which, fortunately for her, accom- 
modated motorists, otherwise they would have said No! 

** J think,”’ said Lewis as they came in sight of Merri- 
ton, * I’d better give Lady Carrington a week’s notice.”’ 

A complete little stranger! And an impudent one. 

** Exactly as you please,”’ she said. 

She found several letters from her daughter at Marshal 
Place. 

‘* Dear Mother : No sooner had you gone off than Flora 
appeared, not at all in the bud, but rather in full blow. 
She demanded her victim ; Shylock demanding the pound 
of flesh : and wanted to hand over the shekels. 

** Joyfully I refused them. She said ‘ Harry’ was 
much better, and invited him and me to stay at Corra- 
bach Hall till he was quite well : it would be less strain 
on your household, while he was still in bed and helpless. 
So the plan is, that he shall be brought down on Friday, 
if he is really fit for the journey, and we drive straight 
to Corrabach. I am packing his bags and mine, clearing 
up our traces: his trunks to go to Corrabach, mine to 
stay here and make up their minds.—I am going to Flints 
Farm again to-morrow, dutifully, though I am no flower 
for the bedside.—I do so want to know if Rico has 
already called her Fiorita: or perhaps Florecita. It 
reminds me of old William’s joke : Now yuh tell me, little 
Missy: which is the best posey that grow? And the 
hushed whisper in which he said the answer: The 
Collyposy! Oh dear, I am so tired of feeling spiteful, but 
how else is one to feel. 

** You looked most prosaically romantic, setting off 
in a rubber cape, followed by Lewis. Hope the roads 
were not very slippery, and that you had a good time, 

I 

130 ST. MAWR 

4 la Mademoiselle de Maupin. Do remember, dear, not 
to devour little Lewis before you have got half way—”’ 

** Dear Mother : I half expected word from you before 
I left, but nothing came. Forrester drove me up here 
just before lunch. Rico seems much better, almost him- 
self, and a little more than that. He broached our 
staying at Corrabach very tactfully. I told him Flora 
had asked me, and it seemed a good plan. Then I told 
him about St. Mawr. He was a little piqued, and there 
was a pause of very disapproving silence. Then he said : 
Very well, darling. If you wish to keep the animal, do 
so by all means. I make a present of him again. Me: 
That’s so good of you, Rico. Because I know revenge is 
sweet. Rico: Revenge, Loulina! I don’t think I was 
selling him for vengeance! Merely to get rid of him to 
Flora, who can keep better hold over him. Me: But you 
know, dear, she was going to geld him! Rico: I don’t 
think anybody knew it. We only wondered if it were 
possible, to make him more amenable. Did she tell you? 
Me : No—Pheenia did. He had it from a groom. Rico: 
Dear me! A concatenation of grooms! So your mother 
rode off with Lewis, and carried St. Mawr out of danger! 
I understand! Let us hope worse won’t befall. Me: 
Whom? Rico: Never mind, dear! It’s so lovely to see 
you. You are looking rested. I thought those Countess 
of Witton roses the most marvellous things in the world, 
till you came, now they’re quite in the background. He 
had some very lovely red roses, in a crystal bowl: the 
room smelled of roses. Me: Where did they come from? 
Rico: Oh Flora brought them! Me: Bowl and all? 
Rico : Bowl and all! Wasn’t it dear of her? Me: Why 
yes! But then she’s the goddess of flowers isn’t she? 

b 

Poor darling, he was offended that I should twit him~ — 

while he is ill, so I relented. He has had a couple of 
marvellous invalid’s bed-jackets sent from London : one 
a pinkish yellow, with rose-arabesque facings : this one 
in fine cloth. But unfortunately he has already dropped 

ST. MAWR 131 

soup on it. The other is a lovely silvery and blue and 
green soft brocade. He had that one on to receive me, 
and I at once complimented him on it. He has got a 
new ring too: sent by Aspasia Weingartner, a rather 
lovely intaglio of Priapus under an apple bough, at least, 
so he says it is. He made a naughty face, and said : 
The Priapus stage is rather advanced for poor me. I 
asked what the Priapus stage was, but he said Oh, 
nothing! Then nurse said: There’s a big classical 
dictionary that Miss Manby brought up, if you wish to 
see it. So I have been studying the Classical Gods. The 
world always was a queer place. It’s a very queer one 
when Rico is the god Priapus. He would go round the 
orchard painting life-like apples on the trees, and inviting 
nymphs to come and eat them. And the nymphs would 
pretend they were real: Why, Sir Prippy, what stun- 
ningly naughty apples! There’s nothing so artificial as 
sinning nowadays. I suppose it once was real. 

** 1’m bored here : wish I had my horse.”’ 

** Dear Mother: I’m so glad you are enjoying your 
ride. I’m sure it is like riding into history, like the 
Yankee at the Court of King Arthur, in those old bye- 
lanes and Roman roads. _ They still fascinate me: at 
least, more before I get there than when I am actually 
there. I begin to feel real American and to resent the 
past. Why doesn’t the past decently bury itself, instead 
of sitting waiting to be admired by the present? 

** Phoenix brought Poppy. I am so fond of her : rode 
for five hours yesterday. I was glad to get away from 
this farm. The doctor came, and said Rico would be able 
to go down to Corrabach to-morrow. Flora came to 
hear the bulletin, and sailed back full of zest. Apparently 
Rico is going to do a portrait of her, sitting up in bed. 
What a mercy the bedclothes won’t be mine, when 
Priapus wields his palette from the pillow. 

‘* Phoenix thinks you intend to go to America with St. 
Mawr, and that I am coming too, leaving Rico this side. 

132 ST. MAWR 

—I wonder. I feel so unreal, nowadays, as if I too were 
nothing more than a painting by Rico on a millboard. I 
feel almost too unreal even to make up my mind to any- 
thing. It is terrible when the life-flow dies out of one, 
and everything is like cardboard, and oneself is like card- 
board. I’m sure it is worse than being dead. I realised 
it yesterday when Phcenix and I had a picnic lunch by 
a stream. You see I must imitate you in all things. He 
found me some watercresses, and they tasted so damp 
and alive, I knew how deadened I was. Phoenix wants 
us to go and have a ranch in Arizona, and raise horses, 
with St. Mawr, if willing, for Father Abraham. I wonder 
if it matters what one does : if it isn’t all the same thing 
over again? Only Phcenix, his funny blank face, makes 
my heart melt and go sad. But I believe he’d be cruel 
too. I saw it in his face when he didn’t know I was 
looking. Anything though, rather than this deadness 
and this paint-Priapus business. Au revoir, mother 
dear! Keep on having a good time—”’ 

** Dear Mother : I had your letter from Merriton : am 
so glad you arrived safe and sound in body and temper. 
There was such a funny letter from Lewis, too : I enclose 
it. What makes him take this extraordinary line? But 
I’m writing to tell him to take St. Mawr to London, and 
wait for me there. I have telegraphed Mrs. Squire to 
get the house ready for me. I shall go straight there. 

‘‘ Things developed here, as they were bound to. I 
just couldn’t bear it. No sooner was Rico put in the 
automobile than a self-conscious importance came over 
him, like when the wounded hero is carried into the 
middle of the stage. Why so solemn, Rico dear ? I asked 
him, trying to laugh him out of it. Not solemn, dear, 

only feeling a little transient. I don’t think he knew © 

himself what he meant. Flora was on the steps as the 
car drew up, dressed in severe white. She only needed 
an apron, to become a nurse: or a veil, to become a 

bride. Between the two, she had an unbearable air of | 

ST. MAWR 133 

a woman in seduced circumstances, as The Times said. 
She ordered two menservants about in subdued, you 
would have said hushed, but competent tones. And 
then I saw there was a touch of the priestess about her 
as well: Cassandra preparing for her violation: 
Iphegenia, with Rico for Orestes, on a stretcher: he 
looking like Adonis, fully prepared to be an unconscion- 
able time in dying. They had given him a lovely room, 
downstairs, with doors opening on to a little garden all 
of its own. I believe it was Flora’s boudoir. I left 
nurse and the men to put him to bed. Flora was hover- 
ing anxiously in the passage outside. Oh what a mar- 
vellous room! Oh how colourful, how beautiful! came 
Rico’s tones, the hero behind the scenes. I must say, 
it was like a harvest festival, with roses and gaillardias 
in the shadow, and cornflowers in the light, and a bowl 
_ of grapes, and nectarines among leaves. I’m so anwious 
that he should be happy, Flora said to me in the passage. 
You know him best. Is there anything else I could do 
for him? Me: Why, if you went to the piano and sang, 
I’m sure he’d love it. Couldn’t you sing: Oh my love 
is like a rred, rred rrose !—You know how Rico imitates 
Scotch ! 

** Thank goodness I have a bedroom upstairs : nurse 
sleeps in a little ante-chamber to Rico’s room. The 
Edwards are still here, the blonde young man with some 
very futuristic plaster on his face. Awfully good of you 
to come! he said to me, looking at me out of one eye, 
and holding my hand fervently. How’s that for cheek? 
It’s awfully good of Miss Manby to let me come, said I. 
He: Ah, but Flora is always a sport, a topping good 
sport! 

** T don’t know what’s the matter, but it just all put 
me into a fiendish temper. I felt I couldn’t sit there at 
luncheon with that bright, youthful company, and hear 
about their tennis and their polo and their hunting and 
have their flirtatiousness making me sick. So I asked 

134 ST. MAWR 

for a tray in my room. Do as I might, I couldn’t help 
being horrid. 

** Oh, and Rico! He really is too awful. Lying there 
in bed with every ear open, like Adonis waiting to be 
persuaded not to die. Seizing a hushed moment to take 
Flora’s hand and press it to his lips, murmuring : How 
awfully good you are to me, dear Flora! And Flora: 
I'd be better, if I knew how, Harry! So cheerful with it 
all! No, it’s too much. My sense of humour is leaving 
me : which means, I’m getting into too bad a temper to 
be able to ridicule it all. I suppose I feel in the minority. 
It’s an awful thought, to think that most all the young 
people in the world are like this : so bright and cheerful, 
and sporting, and so brimming with libido. How awful! 

** T said to Rico : You’re very comfortable here, aren’t 
you ? He: Comfortable! It’s comparative heaven. Me: 
Would you mind if I went away ? A deadly pause. He 
is deadly afraid of being left alone with Flora. He feels 
safe so long as I am about, and he can take refuge in 
his marriage ties. He: Where do you want to go, dear ? 
Me: To mother. To London. Mother is planning to go 
to America, and she wants me to go. Rico: But you 
don’t want to go t—he—e—re—e! You know, mother, 
how Rico can put a venomous emphasis on a word, till it 
suggests pure poison. It nettled me. I’m not sure, I said. 
Rico : Oh, but you can’t stand that awful America. Me: 
I want to try again. Rico: But Lou dear, it will be 
winter before you get there. And this is absolutely the 
wrong moment for me to go over there. I am only just 
making headway over here. When I am absolutely sure 
of a position in England, then we nip across the Atlantic 
and scoop in a few dollars, if you like. Just now, even 
when I am well, would be fatal. I’ve only just sketched 
in the outline of my success in London, and one ought to 
arrive in New York ready-made as a famous and impor- 
tant Artist. Me: But mother and I didn’t think of going 
to New York. We thought we’d sail straight to New 

ST. MAWR 135 

Orleans—if we could: or to Havana. And then go west 
to Arizona. The poor boy looked at me in such distress. 
But Loulina darling, do you mean you want to leave me 
in the lurch for the winter season ? You can’t mean it. 
We’re just getting on so splendidly, really !—I was sur- 
prised at the depth of feeling in his voice : how tremend- 
ously his career as an artist—a popular artist—matters 
to him. I can never believe it.—You know, mother, you 
and I feel alike about daubing paint on canvas: every 
possible daub that can be daubed has already been 
done, so people ought to leave off. Rico is so shrewd. 
I always think he’s got his tongue in his cheek, and I’m 
always staggered once more to find that he takes it 
absolutely seriously. His career! The Modern British 
Society of Painters : perhaps even the Royal Academy ! 
Those people we see in London, and those portraits 
Rico does! He may even be a second Laszlo, or a 
thirteenth Orpen, and die happy! Oh! mother! How 
can it really matter to anybody ! 

** But I was really rather upset, when I realised how 
his heart was fixed on his career, and that I might be 
spoiling everything for him. So I went away to think 
about it. And then I realised how unpopular you are, 
and how unpopular I shall be myself, in a little while. 
A sort of hatred for people has come over me. I hate 
their ways and their bunk, and I feel like kicking them 
in the face, as St. Mawr did that young man. Not that 
I should ever do it. And I don’t think I should ever have 
made my final announcement to Rico, if he hadn’t been 
such a beautiful pig in clover, here at Corrabach Hall. 
He has known the Manbys all his life; they and he are 
sections of one engine. He would be far happier with 
Flora: or I won’t say happier, because there is some- 
thing in him which rebels : but he would on the whole 
fit much better. I myself am at the end of my limit, and 
beyond it. I can’t ‘ mix’ any more, and I refuse to. 
I feel like a bit of eggshell in the mayonnaise : the only 

136 ST. MAWR 

thing is to take it out, you can’t beat it in. I know I 
shall cause a fiasco, even in Rico’s career, if I stay. I 
shall go on being rude and hateful to people as I am at 
Corrabach, and Rico will lose all his nerve. 

** So I have told him. I said this evening, when no 
one was about: Rico dear, listen-to me seriously. I 
can’t stand these people. If you ask me to endure 
another week of them, I shall either become ill, or insult 
them, as mother does. And I don’t want to do either. 
Rico : But darling, isn’t everybody perfect to you! Me: 
I tell you, I shall just make a break, like St. Mawr, if I 
don’t get out. I simply can’t stand people.—The poor 
darling, his face goes so blank and anxious. He knows 
what I mean, because, except that they tickle his vanity 
all the time, he hates them as much as I do. But his 
vanity is the chief thing to him. He: Lou darling, can’t 
you wait till I get up, and we can go away to the Tyrol 
or somewhere for a spell ? Me: Won’t you come with me 
to America, to the South-West ? I believe it’s marvellous 
country.—I saw his face switch into hostility; quite 
vicious. He: Are you so keen on spoiling everything for 
me? Is that what I married you for? Do you do it 
deliberately ? Me: Everything is already spoilt for me. 
I tell you I can’t stand people, your Floras and your 
Aspasias, and your forthcoming young Englishmen. 
After all, I am an American, like mother, and I’ve got 
to go back. He: Really! And am I to come along as 
part of the luggage ? Labelled cabin! Me: You do as 
you wish, Rico. He: I wish to God you did as you 
wished, Lou dear. I’m afraid you do as Mrs. Witt 
wishes. I always heard that the holiest thing in the 
world was a mother. Me: No dear, it’s just that I can’t 
stand people. He (with a snarl): And I suppose I’m 
lumped in as propLe! And when he’d said it, it was 
true. We neither of us said anything for a time. Then 
he said, calculating: Very well, dear! You take a trip 
to the land of stars and stripes, and I’ll stay here and go 

ST. MAWR 1387 

on with my work. And when you’ve seen enough of their 
stars and tasted enough of their stripes, you can come 
back and take your place again with me.—We left it at 
that. 

** You and I are supposed to have important business 
connected with our estates in Texas—it sounds so well— 
so we are making a hurried trip to the States, as they 
call them. I shall leave for London early next week—”’ 

Mrs. Witt read this long letter with satisfaction. She 
herself had one strange craving : to get back to America. 
It was not that she idealised her native country: she 
was a tartar of restlessness there, quite as much as in 
Kurope. It was not that she expected to arrive at any 
blessed abiding place. No, in America she would go on 
fuming and chafing the same. But at least she would 
be in America, in her own country. And that was what 
she wanted. 

She picked up the sheet of poor paper, that had been 
folded in Lou’s letter. It was the letter from Lewis, 
quite nicely written. ‘* Lady Carrington, I write to tell 
you and Sir Henry that I think I had better quit your 
service, as it would be more comfortable all round. If 
you will write and tell me what you want me to do with 
St. Mawr, I will do whatever you tell me. With kind 
regards to Lady Carrington and Sir Henry, I remain, 
Your obedient servant, Morgan Lewis.”’ 

Mrs. Witt put the letter aside, and sat looking out of 
the window. She felt, strangely, as if already her soul 
had gone away from her actual surroundings. She was 
there, in Oxfordshire, in the body, but her spirit had 
departed elsewhere. A listlessness was upon her. It was 
with an effort she roused herself, to write to her lawyer 
in London, to get her release from her English obliga- 
tions. Then she wrote to the London hotel. 

For the first time in her life she wished she had a 
maid, to do little things for her. All her life, she had 
had too much energy to endure anyone hanging round 

138 ST. MAWR 

her, personally. Now she gave up. Her wrists seemed 
numb, as if the power in her were switched off. 

When she went down they said Lewis had asked to 
speak to her. She had hardly seen him since they had 
arrived at Merriton. 

‘* I’ve had a letter from Lady Carrington, Mam. She 
says will I take St. Mawr to London and wait for her 
_there. But she says I am to come to you, Mam, for 
definite orders.”’ 

** Very well, Lewis. I shall be going to London in a 
few days’ time. You arrange for St. Mawr to go up one 
day this week, and you will take him to the Mews. Come 
to me for anything you want. And don’t talk of leaving 
my daughter. We want you to go with St. Mawr to 
America, with us and Pheenix.”’ 

** And your horse, Mam? ”’ 

‘* T shall leave him here at Merriton. I shall give him 
to Miss Atherton.’ 

‘** Very good Mam! ”’ 

** Dear Daughter: I shall be in my old quarters in 
Mayfair next Saturday, calling the same day at your 
house to see if everything is ready for you. Lewis has 
fixed up with the railway : he goes to town to-morrow. 
The reason of his letter was that I had asked him if he 
would care to marry me, and he turned me down with 
emphasis. But I will tell you about it. You and I are 
the scribe and the Pharisee; I never could write a letter, 
and you could never leave off—’’ 

‘** Dearest Mother: I smelt something rash, but I 
know it’s no use saying: How could you? I only 
wonder, though, that you should think of marriage. 
You know, dear, I ache in every fibre to be left alene, 
from all that sort of thing. I feel all bruises, like one 
who has been assassinated. I do so understand why 
Jesus said: Noli me tangere. Touch me not, I am not 
yet ascended unto the Father. Everything had hurt him 
so much, wearied him so beyond endurance, he felt he 

ST. MAWR 189 

could not bear one little human touch on his body. I 
am like that. I can hardly bear even Elena to hand me 
a dress. As for a man—and marriage—ah no! Noli 
me tangere, homine! I am not yet ascended unto the 
Father. Oh, leave me alone, leave me alone! That is 
all my cry to all the world. 

** Curiously, I feel that Phoenix understands what I 
feel. He leaves me so understandingly alone, he almost 
gives me my sheath of aloneness : or at least, he protects 
me in my sheath. I am grateful for him. 

** Whereas Rico feels my aloneness as a sort of shame to 
himself. He wants at least a blinding pretence of 
intimacy. Ah intimacy! The thought of it fills me with 
aches, and the pretence of it exhausts me beyond myself. 

** Yes, I long to go away to the west, to be away from 
the world like one dead and in another life, in a valley 
that life has not yet entered. 

** Rico asked me : What are you doing with St. Mawr? 
When I said we were taking him with us, he said : Oh, 
the Corpus delicti! Whether that means anything I don’t 
know. But he has grown sarcastic beyond my depth. 

**T shall see you to-morrow—”’ 

Lou arrived in town, at the dead end of August, with 
her maid and Phcenix. How wonderful it seemed to have 
London empty of all her set : her own little house to her- 
self, with just the housekeeper and her own maid. The 
fact of being alone in those surroundings was so wonder- 
ful. It made the surroundings themselves seem all the 
more ghastly. Everything that had been actual to her 
was turning ghostly : even her little drawing-room was 
the ghost of a room, belonging to the dead people who 
had known it, or to all the dead generations that had 
brought such a room into being, evolved it out of their 
quaint domestic desires. And now, in herself, those 
desires were suddenly spent : gone out like a lamp that 
suddenly dies. And then she saw her pale, delicate room 
with its little green agate bowl and its two little porce- 

140 ST. MAWR 

lain birds and its soft, roundish chairs, turned into some- 
thing ghostly, like a room set out in a museum. She 
felt like fastening little labels on the furniture: Lady 
Louise Carrington Lounge Chair, Last used August 1923. 
Not for the benefit of posterity : but to remove her own 
self into another world, another realm of existence. 

‘* My house, my house, my house, how can I ever 
have taken so much pains about it! ’’ she kept saying 
~to herself. It was like one of her old hats, suddenly dis- 
covered neatly put away in an old hatbox. And what a 
horror : an old ‘‘ fashionable ”’ hat. 

Lewis came to see her, and he sat there in one of her 
delicate mauve chairs, with his feet on a delicate old 
carpet from Turkestan, and she just wondered. He wore 
his leather gaiters and khaki breeches as usual, and a 
faded blue shirt. But his beard and hair were trimmed, 
he was tidy. There was a certain fineness of contour 
about him, a certain subtle gleam, which made him 
seem, apart from his rough boots, not at all gross, or 
coarse, in that setting of rather silky, oriental furnish- 
ings. Rather he made the Asiatic, sensuous exquisite- 
ness of her old rugs and her old white Chinese figures 
seem a weariness. Beauty! What was beauty, she 
asked herself? The Oriental exquisiteness seemed to 
her all like dead flowers whose hour had come, to be 
thrown away. 

Lou could understand her mother’s wanting, for a 
moment, to marry him. His detachedness and his 
acceptance of something in destiny which people cannot 
accept. Right in the middle of him he accepted some- 
thing from destiny, that gave him a quality of eternity. 
He did not care about persons, people, even events. In 
his own odd way he was an aristocrat, inaccessible in 
his aristocracy. But it was the aristocracy of the invis- 
ible powers, the greater influences, nothing to do with 
human society. 

‘* You don’t really want to leave St. Mawr, do you? ” 

ST. MAWR 141 

Lou asked him. ‘* You don’t really want to quit, as you 
said? ”” 

He looked at her steadily, from his pale grey eyes, 
without answering, not knowing what to say. 

** Mother told me what she said to you.—But she 
doesn’t mind, she says you are entirely within your 
rights. She has a real regard for you. But we mustn’t 
let our regards run us into actions which are beyond our 
scope, must we? That makes everything unreal. But 
you will come with us to America with St. Mawr, won’t 
you? We depend on you.”’ 

**T don’t want to be uncomfortable,’’ he said. 

** Don’t be,’’ she smiled. ‘* I myself hate unreal situa- 
tions—I feel I can’t stand them any more. And most 
marriages are unreal situations. But apart from any- 
thing exaggerated, you like being with mother and me, 
don’t you? ” 

** Yes, Ido. I like Mrs. Witt as well. But not—’’ 

‘“*T know. There won’t be any more of that—’’ 

** You see, Lady Carrington,” he said, with a little 
heat, ‘‘I’m not by nature a marrying man. And I 
feel I was selling myself.”’ 

** Quite !—Why do you think you are not a marrying 
man, though? ” 

“Me! I don’t feel myself after I’ve been with 
women.”? He spoke in a low tone, looking down at his 
hands. ‘‘I feel messed up. I’m better to keep to 
myself.—Because—”’ and here he looked up with a flare in 
his eyes : ‘* women—they only want to make you give in 
to them, so that they feel almighty, and you feel small.”’ 

*€ Don’t you like feeling small??? Lou smiled. ‘* And 
don’t you want to make them give in to you? ” 

** Not me,’’ he said. *‘ I don’t want nothing. Nothing, 
I want.”’ 

‘* Poor mother! ” said Lou. ‘‘ She thinks if she feels 
moved by a man, it must result by marriage—or that 
kind of thing. Surely she makes a mistake. I think 

142 ST. MAWR 

you and Phoenix and mother and I might live somewhere 
in a far-away wild place, and make a good life : so long 
as we didn’t begin to mix up marriage, or love or that 
sort of thing into it. It seems to me men and women 
have really hurt one another so.much, nowadays, that 
they had better stay apart till they have learned to be 
gentle with one another again. Not all this forced 
passion and destructive philandering. Men and women 
“should stay apart, till their hearts grow gentle towards 
one another again. Now, it’s only each one fighting 
for his own—or her own—underneath the cover of tender- 
ness.” 

** Dear !—darling !—_Yes my love!’? mocked Lewis, 
with a faint smile of amused contempt. 

** Exactly. People always say dearest! when they 
hate each other most.”’ 

Lewis nodded, looking at her with a sudden sombre 
gloom in his eyes. A queer bitterness showed on his 
mouth. But even then he was so still and remote. 

The housekeeper came and announced The Honourable 
Laura Ridley. This was like a blow in the face to Lou.. 
She rose hurriedly—and Lewis rose, moving to the door. 

** Don’t go please, Lewis,’’ said Lou—and then Laura 
Ridley appeared in the doorway. She was a woman a 
few years older than Lou, but she looked younger. She 
might have been a shy girl of twenty-two, with her fresh 
complexion, her hesitant manner, her round, startled 
brown eyes, her bobbed hair. 

‘* Hello! ’? said the newcomer. ‘* Imagine your being 
back! I saw you in Paddington.” 

Those sharp eyes would see everything. 

“*T thought everyone was out of town,” said Lou. 
‘* This is Mr. Lewis.’’ < 

Laura gave him a little nod, then sat on the edge of 
her chair. 

“No,” she said. ‘ I did go to Ireland to my people, 
but I came back. I prefer London when I can be more 

ST. MAWR 143 

or less alone in it. I thought I’d just run in for a 
moment, before you’re gone again.—Scotland, isn’t it? ”’ 

‘* No, mother and I are going to America.’ 

** America! Oh, I thought it was Scotland.”’ 

“It was. But we have suddenly to go to America.”’ 

**T see !—And what about Rico? ”’ 

‘* He is staying on in Shropshire. Didn’t you hear of 
his accident? ”’ 

Lou told about it briefly. 

** But how awful!” said Laura. ‘* But there! I 
knew it! I had a premonition when I saw that horse. 
We had a horse that killed a man. Then my father got 
rid of it. But ours was a mare, that one. Yours is a 
boy.”’ 

** A full grown man I’m afraid.’ 

‘Yes of course, I remember.—But how awful! I 
suppose you won’t ride in the Row. The awful people ~ 
that ride there nowadays, anyhow! Oh, aren’t they 
awful! Aren’t people monstrous, really! My word, 
when I see the horses crossing Hyde Park Corner, on a 
wet day, and coming down smash on those slippery 
stones, giving their riders a fractured skull !—No 
joke!” 

She enquired details of Rico. 

** Oh, I suppose I shall see him when he gets back,”’ 
she said. ‘* But I’m sorry you are going. I shall miss 
you, I’m afraid. Though you won’t be staying long in 
America. No one stays there longer than they can 
help.” 

‘* J think the winter through, at least,”’ said Lou. 

** Oh, all the winter! So long? I’m sorry to hear 
that. You’re one of the few, very few people one can 
talk really simply with. Extraordinary, isn’t it, how few 
really simple people there are! And they get fewer and 
fewer. I stayed a fortnight with my people, and a week 
of that I was in bed. It was really horrible. They really 
try to take the life out of one, really! Just because 

144 ST. MAWR 

one won’t be as they are, and play their game. I simply 
refused, and came away.” 

“** But you can’t cut yourself off altogether,’’ said Lou. 

‘*No, I suppose not. One has to see somebody. 
Luckily one has a few artists for friends. They’re the 
only real people, anyhow—”’’ She glanced round inquisi- 
tively at Lewis, and said, with a slight, impertinent 
elvish smile on her virgin face : 

** Are you an artist? ”’ 

** No, Mam!” he said. ‘* I’m a groom.”’ 

** Oh, I see! ’? She looked him up and down. 

** Lewis is St. Mawr’s master,”’ said Lou. 

‘** Oh, the horse! the terrible horse! ’”? She paused a 
moment. Then again she turned to Lewis with that faint 
smile, slightly condescending, slightly impertinent, 
slightly flirtatious. 

** Aren’t you afraid of him? ’’ she asked. 

‘* No, Mam.”’ 

** Aren’t you really!—And can you always master 
him? ”* 

** Mostly. He knows me.”’ 

** Yes! I suppose that’s it.”,—She looked him up and 
down again, then turned away to Lou. 

‘‘ What have you been painting lately? ’’ said Lou. 
Laura was not a bad painter. 

“* Oh, hardly anything. I haven’t been able to get on 
at all. This is one of my bad intervals.” 

Here Lewis rose, and looked at Lou. 

‘‘ All right,”? she said. ‘‘ Come in after lunch, and 
we’ll finish those arrangements.’ 

Laura gazed after the man, as he dived out of the 
room, as if her eyes were gimlets that could bore into 
his secret. 

In the course of the conversation she said : 

‘¢ What a curious little man that was! ”’ 

** Which? ” 

‘* The groom who was here just now. Very curious! 

ST. MAWR 145 

Such peculiar eyes. I shouldn’t wonder if he had psychic 
powers.”’ 

** What sort of psychic powers? ”’ said Lou. 

** Could see things.—And hypnotic too. He might 
have hypnotic powers.’’ 

** What makes you think so? ”’ 

‘* He gives me that sort of feeling. Very curious! 
Probably he hypnotises the horse.—Are you leaving the 
horse here, by the way, in stable? ”’ 

‘© No, taking him to America.”’ 

‘** Taking him to America! How extraordinary ! ”’ 

** It’s mother’s idea. She thinks he might be valuable 
as a stock horse on a ranch. You know we still have 
interest in a ranch in Texas.”’ 

‘© Oh, I see! Yes, probably he’d be very valuable, 
to improve the breed of the horses over there.—My 
father has some very lovely hunters. Isn’t it disgrace- 
ful, he would never let me ride! ”’ 

6é Why? 2) 

** Because we girls weren’t important, in his opinion. 
—So you’re taking the horse to America! With the little 
man? ” 

** Yes, St. Mawr will hardly behave without him.”’ 

** T see !—I see—ee—ee! Just you and Mrs. Witt and 
the little man. I’m sure you’ll find he has psychic 
powers.” 

*¢ T’m afraid I’m not so good at finding things out,’’ 
said Lou. 

** Aren’t you? No, I suppose not. Iam. I have a 
flair. I sort of smell things.—Then the horse is already 
here, is he? When do you think you'll sail? ”’ 

‘* Mother is finding a merchant boat that will go to 
Galveston, Texas, and take us along with the horse. She 
knows people who will find the right thing. But it 
takes time.” 

‘* What a much nicer way to travel, than on one of 
those great liners! Oh, how awful they are! So vulgar! 

K 

146 ST. MAWR 

Floating palaces they call them! My word, the people 
inside the palaces !—Yes, I should say that would be a 
much pleasanter way of travelling: on a cargo boat.”’ 

Laura wanted to go down to the Mews to see St. Mawr. 
The two women went together. 

St. Mawr stood in his box, bright and tense as usual. 

** Yes!’ said Laura Ridley, with a slight hiss. 
“* Yes! Isn’t he beautiful. Such very perfect legs! ??— 
_ She eyed him round with those gimlet, sharp eyes of hers. 
** Almost a pity to let him go out of England. We need 
some of his perfect bone, I feel.—But his eye! Hasn’t 
he got a look in it, my word! ”’ 

** T can never see that he looks wicked,”’ said Lou. 

** Can’t you! ?—Laura had a slight hiss in her speech, 
a sort of aristocratic decision in her enunciation, that got 
on Lou’s nerves.—‘*‘ He looks wicked to me! ” 

‘© He’s not mean,’’ said Lou. ‘* He’d never do any- 
thing mean to you.”’ 

**Oh, mean! I daresay not. No! I’ll grant him 
that, he gives fair warning. His eye says Beware !— 
But isn’t he a beauty, isn’t he! ’? Lou could feel the 
peculiar reverence for St. Mawr’s breeding, his show 
qualities. Herself, all she cared about was the horse 
himself, his real nature. ‘* Isn’t it extraordinary,’’ 
Laura continued, ‘* that you never get a really perfectly 
satisfactory animal! There’s always something wrong. 
And in men too. Isn’t it curious? there’s always some- 
thing—something wrong—or something missing. Why is 
ire” 

**T don’t know,”’ said Lou. She felt unable to cope 
with any more. And she was glad when Laura left her. 

The days passed slowly, quietly, London almost empty - 
of Lou’s acquaintances. Mrs. Witt was busy getting all 
sorts of papers and permits: such a fuss! The battle 
light was still in her eye. But about her nose was a 
dusky, pinched look that made Lou wonder. 

Both women wanted to be gone: they felt they had 

ST. MAWR 147 

already flown in spirit, and it was weary, having the 
body left behind. 

At last all was ready : they only awaited the telegram 
to say when their cargo-boat would sail. Trunks stood 
there packed, like great stones locked for ever. The 
Westminster house seemed already a shell. Rico wrote 
and telegraphed, tenderly, but there was a sense of 
relentless effort in it all, rather than of any real tender- 
ness. He had taken his position. 

Then the telegram came, the boat was ready to sail. 

** There now! ”’ said Mrs. Witt, as if it had been a 
sentence of death. 

** Why do you look like that, mother? ” 

** I feel I haven’t an ounce of energy left in my body.”’ 

** But how queer, for you, mother. Do you think you 
are ill? ” 

** No, Louise. I just feel that way: as if I hadn’t an 
ounce of energy left in my body.”’ 

** You’ll feel yourself again, once you are away.’’ 

‘© Maybe I shall.”’ 

After all, it was only a matter of telephoning. The 
hotel and the railway porters and taxi-men would do the 
rest. 

It was a grey, cloudy day, cold even. Mother and 
daughter sat in a cold first-class carriage and watched 
the little Hampshire countryside go past: little, old, 
unreal it seemed to them both, and passing away like a 
dream whose edges only are in consciousness. Autumn! 
Was this autumn? Were these trees, fields, villages? 
It seemed but the dim, dissolving edges of a dream, 
without inward substance. 

At Southampton it was raining : and just a chaos, till 
they stepped on to a clean boat, and were received by 
a clean young captain, quite sympathetic, and quite a 
gentleman. Mrs. Witt, however, hardly looked at him, 
but went down to her cabin and lay down in her bunk. 

There, lying concealed, she felt the engines start, she 

148 ST.. MAWR 

knew the voyage had begun. But she lay still. She saw 
the clouds and the rain, and refused to be disturbed. 

Lou had lunch with the young captain, and she felt 
she ought to be flirty. The young man was so polite 
and attentive. And she wished so much she were alone. 

Afterwards, she sat on deck and saw the Isle of Wight 
pass shadowly, in a misty rain. She didn’t know it was 
the Isle of Wight. To her, it was just the lowest bit of 
the British Isles. She saw it fading away : and with it, 
her life, going like a clot of shadow in a mist of nothing- 
ness. She had no feelings about it, none : neither about 
Rico, nor her London house, nor anything. All passing 
in a grey curtain of rainy drizzle, like a death, and she, 
with not a feeling left. 

They entered the Channel, and felt the slow heave 
of the sea. And soon, the clouds broke in a little wind. 
The sky began to clear. By mid-afternoon it was blue 
summer, on the blue, running waters of the Channel. 
And soon, the ship steering for Santander, there was the 
coast of France, the rocks twinkling like some magic 
world. 

The magic world! And back of it, that post-war 
Paris, which Lou knew only too well, and which de- 
pressed her so thoroughly. Or that post-war Monte 
Carlo, the Riviera still more depressing even than Paris. 
No, no one must land, even on magic coasts. Else 
you found yourself in a railway station and a “‘ centre 
of civilisation ’? in five minutes. 

Mrs. Witt hated the sea, and stayed, as a rule, prac- 
tically the whole time of the crossing, in her bunk. There 
she was now, silent, shut up like a steel trap, as in her © 
tomb. She did not even read. . Just lay and stared at 

the passing sky. And the only thing to do was to leave 
her alone. 

Lewis and Phoenix hung on the rail, and watched 
everything. Or they went down to see St. Mawr. Or 
they stood talking in the doorway of the wireless 

ST. MAWR 149 

operator’s cabin. Lou begged the Captain to give them 
jobs to do. 

The queer, transitory, unreal feeling, as the ship 
crossed the great, heavy Atlantic. It was rather bad 
weather. And Lou felt, as she had felt before, that this 
grey, wolf-like, cold-blooded Ocean hated men and their 
ships and their smoky passage. Heavy grey waves, a 
low-sagging sky: rain: yellow, weird evenings with 
snatches of sun: soit went on. Till they got way South, 
into the westward-running stream. Then they began to 
get blue weather and blue water. 

To go South! Always to go South, away from the 
arctic horror as far as possible! That was Lou’s instinct. 
To go out of the clutch of greyness and low skies, of 
sweeping rain, and of slow, blanketting snow. Never 
again to see the mud and rain and snow of a northern 
winter, nor to feel the idealistic, Christianised tension 
of the now irreligious North. 

As they neared Havana, andthe water sparkled at night 
with phosphorus, and the flying-fishes came like drops of 
bright water, sailing out of the massive-slippery waves, 
Mrs. Witt emerged once more. She still had that shut- 
up, deathly look on her face. But she prowled round 
the deck, and manifested at least a little interest in 
affairs not her own. Here at sea, she hardly remem- 
bered the existence of St. Mawr or Lewis or Phcenix. 
She was not very deeply aware even of Lou’s existence. 
—But of course, it would all come back, once they were 
on land. 

They sailed in hot sunshine out of a blue, blue sea, 
past the castle into the harbour at Havana. There was 
a lot of shipping : and this was already America. Mrs. 
Witt had herself and Lou put ashore immediately. They 
took a motor-car and drove at once to the great boule- 
vard that is the centre of Havana. Here they saw a long 
rank of motor-cars, all drawn up ready to take a couple 
of hundred American tourists for one more tour. There 

150 ST. MAWR 

were the tourists, all with badges in their coats, lest they 
should get lost. 

** They get so drunk by night,’’ said the driver in 
Spanish, ‘‘ that the policemen find them lying in the 
road—turn them over, see the badge—and, hup !— 
carry them to their hotel.”” He grinned sardonically. 

Lou and her mother lunched at the Hotel d’Angleterre, 
and Mrs. Witt watched transfixed while a couple of her 
countrymen, a stout successful man and his wife, lunched 
abroad. They had cocktails—then lobster—and a bottle 
of hock—then a bottle of champagne—then a half-bottle 
of port.—And Mrs. Witt rose in haste as the liqueurs 
came. For that successful man and his wife had gone 
on imbibing with a sort of fixed and deliberate will, 
apparently tasting nothing, but saying to themselves : 
Now we’re drinking Rhine wine! Now we’re drinking 
1912 champagne. Yah, Prohibition! Thou canst not 
put it over me.—Their complexions became more and 
more lurid. Mrs. Witt fled, fearing a Havana débacle. 
But she said nothing. 

In the afternoon, they motored into the country, to 
see the great brewery gardens, the new villa suburb, 
and through the lanes past the old, decaying planta- 
tions with palm-trees. In one lane they met the fifty 
motor-cars with the two hundred tourists all with badges 
on their chests and self-satisfaction on their faces. Mrs. 
Witt watched in grim silence. 

‘* Plus ca change, plus c’est la méme chose,”’ said Lou, 
with a wicked little smile. ‘‘ On n’est pas mieux ici, 
mother.”’ 

** T know it,’ said Mrs. Witt. 

The hotels by the sea were all shut up : it was not yet _ 
the ‘ season.’’? Not till November. And then !—Why, 
then Havana would be an American city, in full leaf of 
green dollar bills. The green leaf of American prosperity 
shedding itself recklessly, from every roaming sprig of 
a tourist, over this city of sunshine and alcohol. Green ~ 

ST. MAWR 151 

leaves unfolded in Pittsburg and Chicago, showering in 
winter downfall in Havana. 

Mother and daughter drank tea in a corner of the 
Hotel d’Angleterre once more, and returned to the 
ferry. 

The Gulf of Mexico was blue and rippling, with the 
phantom of islands on the south. Great porpoises rolled 
and leaped, running in front of the ship in the clear water, 
diving, travelling in perfect motion, straight, with the 
tip of the ship touching the tip of their tails, then rolling 
over, cork-screwing, and showing their bellies as they 
went. Marvellous! The marvellous beauty and fascin- 
ation of natural wild things! The horror of man’s 
unnatural life, his heaped-up civilisation ! 

The flying fishes burst out of the sea in clouds of 
silvery, transparent motion. Blue above and below, the 
Gulf seemed a silent, empty, timeless place where man 
did not really reach. And Lou was again fascinated by 
the glamour of the universe. 

But bump! She and her mother were in a first-class 
hotel again, calling down the telephone for the bell-boy 
and ice-water. And soon they were in a Pullman, off 
towards San Antonio. 

It was America, it was Texas. They were at their 
ranch, on the great level of yellow autumn, with the vast 
sky above. And after all, from the hot wide sky, and the 
hot, wide, red earth, there did come something new, 
something not used-up. Lou did feel exhilarated. 

The Texans were there, tall blonde people, ingenuously 
cheerful, ingenuously, childishly intimate, as if the fact 
that you had never seen them before was as nothing com- 
pared to the fact that you’d all been living in one room 
together all your lives, so that nothing was hidden from 
either of you. The one room being the mere shanty of 
the world in which we all live. Strange, uninspired 
cheerfulness, filling, as it were, the blank of complete 
incomprehension. 

152 ST. MAWR 

And off they set in their motor-cars, chiefly high-legged 
Fords, rattling away down the red trails between yellow 
sunflowers or sere grass or dry cotton, away, away into 
great distances, cheerfully raising the dust of haste. It 
left Lou in a sort of blank amazement. But it left her 
amused, not depressed. The old screws of emotion and 
intimacy that had been screwed down so tightly upon 
her fell out of their holes, here. The Texan intimacy 
weighed no more on her than a postage stamp, even if, 
for the moment, it stuck as close. And there was a 
certain underneath recklessness, even a stoicism in all 
the apparently childish people, which left one free. They 
might appear childish : but they stoically depended on 
themselves alone, in reality. Not as in England, where 
every man waited to pour the burden of himself upon 
you. 

St. Mawr arrived safely, a bit bewildered. The Texans 
eyed him closely, struck silent, as ever, by anything 
pure-bred and beautiful. He was somehow too beauti- 
ful, too perfected, in this great open country. The long- 
legged Texan horses, with their elaborate saddles, 
seemed somehow more natural. 

Even St. Mawr felt himself strange, as it were- 
naked and singled out, in this rough place. Like a jewel 
among stones, a pearl before swine, maybe. But the 
swine were no fools. They knew a pearl from a grain 
of maize, and a grain of maize from a pearl. And they 
knew what they wanted. When it was pearls, it was 
pearls; though chiefly, it was maize. Which shows good 
sense. They could see St. Mawr’s points. Only he , 
needn’t draw the point too fine, or it would just not 
pierce the tough skin of this country. 

The ranch-man mounted him—just threw a soft skin 
over his back, jumped on, and away down the red trail, 
raising the dust among the tall wild yellow of sunflowers, 
in the hot wild sun. Then back again in a fume, and 
the man slipped off. 

ST. MAWR 153 

** He’s got the stuff in him, he sure has,’’ said the 
man. 

And the horse seemed pleased with this rough hand- 
ling. Lewis looked on in wonder, and a little envy. 

Lou and her mother stayed a fortnight on the ranch. 
It was all so queer : so crude, so rough, so easy, so arti- 
ficially civilised, and so meaningless. Lou could not get 
over the feeling that it all meant nothing. There were 
no roots of reality at all. No consciousness below the 
surface, no meaning in anything save the obvious, the 
blatantly obvious. It was like life enacted in a mirror. 
Visually, it was wildly vital. But there was nothing 
behind it. Or like a cinematograph: flat shapes, 
exactly like men, but without any substance of reality, 
rapidly rattling away with talk, emotions, activity, all in 
the flat, nothing behind it. No deeper consciousness at 
all. So it seemed to her. 

One moved from dream to dream, from phantasm 
to phantasm. 

But at least, this Texan life, if it had no bowels, no 
vitals, at least it could not prey on one’s own vitals. It 
was this much better than Europe. 

Lewis was silent, and rather piqued. St. Mawr had 
already made advances to the boss’ long-legged, arched- 
necked, glossy-maned Texan mare. And the boss was 
pleased. 

What a world ! 

Mrs. Witt eyed it all shrewdly. But she failed to par- 
ticipate. Lou was a bit scared at the emptiness of it 
all, and the queer, phantasmal self-consciousness. Cow- 
boys just as self-conscious as Rico, far more sentimental, 
inwardly vague and unreal. Cowboys that went after 
their cows in black Ford motor-cars : and who self-con- 
sciously saw Lady Carrington falling to them, as elegant 
young ladies from the East fall to the noble cowboy of 
the films, or in Zane Grey. It was all film-psychology. 

And at the same time, these boys led a hard, hard life, 

154 ST. MAWR 

often dangerous and gruesome. Nevertheless, inwardly 
they were self-conscious film-heroes. The boss himself, 
a man over forty, long and lean and with a great deal of 
stringy energy, showed off before her in a strong silent 
manner, existing for the time being purely in his imag- 
ination of the sort of picture he made to her, the sort of 
impression he made on her. 

So they all were, coloured up like a Zane Grey book- 
jacket, all of them living in the mirror. The kind of 
picture they made to somebody else. 

And at the same time, with energy, courage, and a 
stoical grit getting their work done, and putting through 
what they had to put through. 

It left Lou blank with wonder. And in the face of 
this strange cheerful living in the mirror—a rather cheap 
mirror at that—England began to seem real to her again. 

Then she had to remember herself back in England. 
And no, oh God, England was not real either, except 
poisonously. 

What was real? What under heaven was real? 

Her mother had gone dumb and, as it were, out of 
range. Phoenix was a bit assured and bouncy, back 
more or less in his own conditions. Lewis was a bit 
impressed by the emptiness of everything, the lack of 
concentration. And St. Mawr followed at the heels of 
the boss’ long-legged black Texan mare, almost slavishly. 

What, in heaven’s name, was one to make of it all? 

Soon, she could not stand this sort of living in a film- 
setting, with the mechanical energy of ‘* making good,”’ 
that is, making money, to keep the show going. The mystic, 
duty to ‘*‘ make good,’”? meaning to make the ranch pay 

a laudable interest on the ‘‘ owners’ ’’ investment. Lou — 

herself being one of the owners. And the interest that 
came to her, from her father’s will, being the money she 
spent to buy St. Mawr and to fit up that house in West- 
minster. Then also the mystic duty to “ feel good.” 
Everybody had to feel good, fine! ‘‘ How are you this 

a 

ST. MAWR 155 

morning, Mr. Latham? ?—“‘ Fine! Eh! Don’t you feel 
good out here, eh? Lady Carrington? ?—* Fine! ”’— 
Lou pronounced it with the same ringing conviction. It 
was Coué all the time! 

‘* Shall we stay here long, mother? ”’ she asked. 

** Not a day longer than you want to, Louise. I stay 
entirely for your sake.” 

** Then let us go, mother.” 

They left St. Mawr and Lewis. But Phcenix wanted 
to come along. So they motored to San Antonio, got into 
the Pullman, and travelled as far as El Paso. Then 
they changed to go North. Santa Fé would be at least 
* easy.’” And Mrs. Witt had acquaintances there. 

They found the fiesta over in Santa Fé: Indians, 
Mexicans, artists had finished their great effort to amuse 
and attract the tourists. Welcome Mr. Tourist said a 
great board on one side of the high-road. And on the 
other side, a little nearer to town: Thank You, Mr. 
Tourist, 

** Plus ¢a change—’’ Lou began. 

** Ca ne change jamais—except for the worse! ”’ said 
Mrs. Witt, like a pistol going off. And Lou held her 
peace, after she had sighed to herself, and said in her 
own mind: ** Welcome Also Mrs and Miss Tourist! ”’ 

There was no getting a word out of Mrs. Witt, 
these days. Whereas Phoenix was becoming almost 
loquacious. 

They stayed a while in Santa Fé, in the clean, com- 
fortable, ‘*‘ homely ’’ hotel, where ‘* every room had its 
bath ”: a spotless white bath, with very hot water 
night and day. The tourists and commercial travellers 
sat in the big hall down below, everybody living in the 
mirror! And of course, they knew Lady Carrington 
down to her shoe-soles. And they all expected her to 
know them down to their shoe-soles. For the only object 
of the mirror is to reflect images. 

For two days mother and daughter ate in the mayon- 

156 ST. MAWR 

naise intimacy of the dining-room. Then Mrs. Witt 
struck, and telephoned down every meal-time, for her 
meal in her room. She got to staying in bed later and 
later, as on the ship. Lou became uneasy. This was 
worse than Europe. 

Phoenix was still there, as a sort of half-friend, half- 
servant retainer. He was perfectly happy, roving round 
among the Mexicans and Indians, talking Spanish all 
~day, and telling about England and his two mistresses, 
rolling the ball of his own importance. 

** I’m afraid we’ve got Phoenix for life,’’ said Lou. 

** Not unless we wish,’’ said Mrs. Witt indifferently. 
And she picked up a novel which she didn’t want to read, 
but which she was going to read. 

‘© What shall we do next, mother? ’’ Lou asked. 

‘* As far as I am concerned, there is no next,’ said 
Mrs. Witt. 

‘* Come, mother! Let’s go back to Italy or some- 
where, if it’s as bad as that.’’ 

‘Never again, Louise, shall I cross that water. I 
have come home to die.”’ 

** J don’t see much home ebout it—the Gonsalez Hotel 
in Santa Fé.” 

** Indeed not! But as good as anywhere else, to die 
in.”’ 

** Oh mother, don’t be silly! Shall we look for some- 
where where we can be by ourselves? ”” 

**T leave it to you, Louise. I have made my last 
decision.”’ 

‘* What is that, mother.”’ 

‘¢ Never, never to make another decision.” 

‘* Not even to decide to die? ”* 

** No, not even that.” 

** Or not to die? ”’ 

** Not that either.”? 

Mrs. Witt shut up like a trap. She refused to rise from 
her bed that day. 

ST. MAWR 157 

Lou went to consult Phoenix. The result was, the two 
set out to look at a little ranch that was for sale. 

It was autumn, and the loveliest time in the south- 
west, where there is no spring, snow blowing into the hot 
lap of summer; and no real summer, hail falling in thick 

‘ice, from the thunderstorms : and even no very definite 
winter, hot sun melting the snow and giving an impres- 
sion of spring at any time. But autumn there is, when 
the winds of the desert are almost still, and the moun- 
tains fume no clouds. But morning comes cold and 
delicate, upon the wild sunflowers and the puffing, 
yellow-flowered greasewood. For the desert blooms in 
autumn. In spring it is grey ash all the time, and only 
the strong breath of the summer sun, and the heavy 
splashing of thunder rain succeeds at last, by Septem- 
ber, in blowing it into soft, puffy yellow fire. 

It was such a delicate morning when Lou drove out 
with Phoenix towards the mountains, to look at this 
ranch that a Mexican wanted to sell. For the brief 
moment the high mountains had lost their snow: it 
would be back again in a fortnight : and stood dim and 
delicate with autumn haze. The desert stretched away 
pale, as pale as the sky, but silvery and sere, with 
hummock-mounds of shadow, and Jong wings of shadow, 
like the reflection of some great bird. The same eagle- 
shadows came like rude paintings of the outstretched 
bird, upon the mountains, where the aspens were turning 
yellow. For the moment, the brief moment, the great 
desert-and-mountain landscape had lost its certain 
cruelty, and looked tender, dreamy. And many, many 
birds were flickering around. 

Lou and Phcenix bumped and hesitated over a long 
trail : then wound down into a deep canyon: and then 
the car began to climb, climb, climb, in steep rushes, 
and in long heart-breaking, uneven pulls. The road was 
bad, and driving was no joke. But it was the sort of 
road Phoenix was used to. He sat impassive and watch- 

158 ST. MAWR 

ful, and kept on, till his engine boiled. He was himself 
in this country : impassive, detached, self-satisfied, and 
silently assertive. Guarding himself at every moment, 
but, on his guard, sure of himself. Seeing no difference 
at all between Lou or Mrs. Witt and himself, except 
that they had money and he had none, while he had a 
native importance which they lacked. He depended on 
them for money, they on him for the power to live out 
— here in the West. Intimately, he was as good as they. 
Money was their only advantage. 

As Lou sat beside him in the front seat of the car, where 
it bumped less than behind, she felt this. She felt a 
peculiar tough-necked arrogance in him, as if he were 
asserting himself tc put something over her. He wanted 
her to allow him to make advances to her, to allow him 
to suggest that he should be her lover. And then, 
finally, she would marry him, and he would be on the 
same footing as she and her mother. 

In return, he would look after her, and give her his 
support and countenance, as a man, and stand between 
her and the world. In this sense, he would be faithful 
to her, and loyal. But as far as other women went, 
Mexican women or Indian women: why, that was none 
of her business. His marrying her would be a pact 
between two aliens, on behalf of one another, and he 
would keep his part of it all right. But himself, as a 
private man and a predative alien-blooded male, this had 
nothing to do with her. It didn’t enter into her scope 
and count. She was one of these nervous white women 
with lots of money. She was very nice too. But as a 
squaw—as a real woman in a shawl whom a man went 
after for the pleasure of the night—why, she hardly 
counted. One of these white women who talk clever. 
and know things like a man. She could hardly expect 
a half-savage male to acknowledge her as his female 
counterpart.—No! She had the bucks! And she had 
all the paraphernalia of the white man’s civilisation, 

ST. MAWR 159 

which a savage can play with and so escape his own 
hollow boredom. But his own real female counterpart ? 
—Phcenix would just have shrugged his shoulders, and 
thought the question not worth answering. How could 
there be any answer in her, to the phallic male in him? 
Couldn’t! Yet it would flatter his vanity and his self- 
esteem immensely, to possess her. That would be pos- 
sessing the very clue to the white man’s overwhelming 
world. And if she would let him possess her, he would 
be absolutely loyal to her, as far as affairs and appear- 
ances went. Only, the aboriginal phallic male in him 
simply couldn’t recognise her as a woman at all. In this 
respect, she didn’t exist. It needed the shawled Indian 
or Mexican women, with their squeaky, plaintive voices, 
their shuffling, watery humility, and the dark glances 
of their big, knowing eyes. When an Indian woman 
looked at him from under her black fringe, with dark, 
half-secretive suggestion in her big eyes : and when she 
stood before him hugged in her shawl, in such apparently 
complete quiescent humility : and when she spoke to him 
in her mousey squeak of a high, plaintive voice, as if it 
were difficult for her female bashfulness even to emit so 
much sound : and when she shuffled away with her legs 
wide apart, because of her wide-topped, white, high buck- 
skin boots with tiny white feet, and her dark-knotted hair 
so full of hard, yet subtle lure : and when he remembered 
the almost watery softness of the Indian woman’s dark, 
warm flesh : then he was a male, an old, secretive, rat- 
like male. But before Lou’s straightforwardness and 
utter sexual incompetence, he just stood in contempt. 
And to him, even a French cocotte was utterly devoid of 
the right sort of sex. She couldn’t really move him. 
She couldn’t satisfy the furtivenessin him. He needed this 
plaintive, squeaky, dark-fringed Indian quality. Some- 
thing furtive and soft and rat-like, really to rouse him. 

Nevertheless he was ready to trade his sex, which, in 
his opinion, every white woman was secretly pining for, 

160 ST. MAWR 

for the white woman’s money and social privileges. In 
the daytime, all the thrill and excitement of the white 
man’s motor-cars and moving pictures and ice-cream 
sodas and so forth. In the night, the soft, watery-soft 
warmth of an Indian or half-Indian woman. This was 
Phcenix’s idea of life for himself. 

Meanwhile, if a white woman gave him the privileges 
of the white man’s world, he would do his duty by her 
as far as all that went. 

Lou, sitting very, very still beside him as he drove the. 
car—he was not a very good driver, not quick and mar- 
vellous as some, white men are, particularly some French 
chauffeurs she had known, but usually a little behind- 
hand in his movements—she knew more or less all that 
he felt. More or less she divined as a woman does. Even 
from a certain rather assured stupidity of his shoulders, 
and a certain rather stupid assertiveness of his knees, 
she knew him. 

But she did not judge him too harshly. Somewhere 
deep, deep in herself she knew she too was at fault. And 
this made her sometimes inclined to humble herself, as 
a woman, before the furtive assertiveness of this under- 
ground, ‘‘ knowing ’’ savage. He was so different from 
Rico. 

Yet, after all, was he? In his rootlessness, his drifting, 
his real meaninglessness, was he different from Rico? 
And his childish, spellbound absorption in the motor- 
car, or in the moving-pictures, or in an ice-cream soda— 
was it very different from Rico? Anyhow, was it really 
any better? Pleasanter, perhaps, to a woman, because 
of the childishness of it. 

The same with his opinion of himself as a sexual male ! 
So childish, really, it was almost thrilling to a woman.. 
But then, so stupid also, with that furtive lurking in 
holes and imagining it could not be detected. He 
imagined he kept himself dark, in his sexual rat holes. 
He imagined he was not detected ! 

ST. MAWR 161 

No, no, Lou was not such a fool as she looked, in his 
eyes anyhow. She knew what she wanted. She wanted 
relief from the nervous tension and irritation of her life, 
she wanted to escape from the friction which is the whole 
stimulus in modern social life. She wanted to be still : 
only that, to be very, very still, and recover her own 
soul. 

When Phcenix presumed she was looking for some 
secretly sexual male such as himself, he was ridiculously 
mistaken. Even the illusion of the beautiful St. Mawr 
was gone. And Phcenix, roaming round like a sexual 
rat in promiscuous back yards !—Merci, mon cher! , For 
that was all he was : a sexual rat in the great barn-yard of 
man’s habitat, looking for female rats ! 

Merci, mon cher! You are had. 

Nevertheless, in his very mistakenness, he was a relief 
to her. His mistake was amusing rather than impressive. 
And the fact that one half of his intelligence was a com- 
plete dark blank, that too was a relief. 

Strictly, and perhaps in the best sense, he was a 
servant. His very unconsciousness and his very limita- 
tion served as a shelter, as one shelters within the limi- 
tations of four walls. The very decided limits to his 
intelligence were a shelter to her. They made her feel 
safe. 

But that feeling of safety did not deceive her. It was 
the feeling one derived from having a true servant 
attached to one, a man whose psychic limitations left 
him incapable of anything but service, and whose strong 
flow of natural life, at the same time, made him need 
to serve. 

And Lou, sitting there so very still and frail, yet self- 
contained, had not lived for nothing. She no longer 
wanted to fool herself. She had no desire at all to fool 
herself into thinking that a Phoenix might be a husband 
and a mate. No desire that way at all. His obtuseness 
was a servant’s obtuseness. She was grateful to him 

L 

162 ST. MAWR 

for serving, and she paid him a wage. Moreover, she 
provided him with something to do, to occupy his life. 
In a sense, she gave him his life, and rescued him from 
his own boredom. It was a balance. 

He did not know what she was thinking. There was a 
certain physical sympathy between them. His obtuse- 
ness made him think it was also a sexual sympathy. 

** It’s a nice trip, you and me,’ he said suddenly, 
turning and looking her in the eyes with an excited look, 
and ending on a foolish little laugh. 

She realised that she should have sat in the back seat. 

‘* But it’s a bad road,” she said. ‘* Hadn’t you better 
stop and put the sides of the hood up? your engine is 
boiling.” 

He looked away with a quick switch of interest to the 
red thermometer in front of his machine. 

** She’s boiling,’’ he said, stopping, and getting out 
with a quick alacrity to go to look at the engine. 

Lou got out also, and went to the back seat, shutting 
the door decisively. 

**T think T’ll ride at the back,” she said, “‘ it gets so 
frightfully hot in front, when the engine heats up.—Do 
you think she needs some water? Have you got some in 
the canteen? ”’ 

“* She’s full,’’ he said, peering into the steaming valve. 

** You can run a bit out, if you think there’s any 
need. I wonder if it’s much further! ” 

** Quien sabe!” said he, slightly impertinent. 

She relapsed into her own stillness. She realised how 
careful, how very careful she must be of relaxing intc 
sympathy, and reposing, as it were, on Phoenix. He 
would read it as a sexual appeal. Perhaps he couldn’ 
help it. She had only herself to blame. He was obtuse. 
as a man and a savage. He had only one interpretation, 
sex, for any woman’s approach to him. 

And she knew, with the last clear knowledge of weary 
disillusion, that she did not want to be mixed up in 

ST. MAWR 163 

Phoenix’s sexual promiscuities. The very thought was 
an insult to her. The crude, clumsy servant-male : no, 
no, not that. He was a good fellow, a very good fellow, 
as far as he went. But he fell far short of physical 
intimacy. 

** No, no,’’ she said to herself, ‘*‘ I was wrong to ride 
in the front seat with him. I must sit alone, just alone. 
Because sex, mere sex, is repellent to me. I will never 
prostitute myself again. Unless something touches my 
very spirit, the very quick of me, I will stay alone, just 
alone. Alone, and give myself only to the unseen pre- 
sences, serve only the other, unseen presences.”’ 

She understood now the meaning of the Vestal Virgins, 
the Virgins of the holy fire in the old temples. They were 
symbolic of herself, of woman weary of the embrace of 
incompetent men, weary, weary, weary of all that, turn- 
ing to the unseen gods, the unseen spirits, the hidden 
fire, and devoting herself to that, and that alone. 
Receiving thence her pacification and her fulfilment. 

Not these little, incompetent, childish self-opinionated 
men! Not these to touch her. She watched Phcenix’s 
rather stupid shoulders, as he drove the car on between 
the pifion trees and the cedars of the narrow mesa ridge, 
to the mountain foot. He was a good fellow. But let 
him run among women of his own sort. Something was 
beyond him. And this something must remain beyond 
him, never allow itself to come within his reach. Other- 
wise he would paw it and mess it up, and be as miser- 
able as a child that has broken its father’s watch. 

No, no! She had loved an American, and lived with 
him for a fortnight. She had had a long, intimate friend- 
ship with an Italian. Perhaps it was love on his part. 
And she had yielded to him. Then her love and marriage 
to Rico. 

And what of it all? Nothing. It was almost nothing. 
It was as if only the outside of herself, her top layers, 
were human. This inveigled her into intimacies. As 

164 ST. MAWR 

soon as the intimacy penetrated, or attempted to pene- 
trate inside her, it was a disaster. Just a humiliation 
and a breaking down. 

Within these outer layers of herself lay the successive 
inner sanctuaries of herself. And these were inviolable. 
She accepted it. 

‘*T am not a marrying woman,” she said to herself. 
‘IT am not a lover nor a mistress nor a wife. It is no 
good. Love can’t really come into me from the outside, 
and I can never, never mate with any man, since the 
mystic new man will never come to me. No, no, let me 
know myself and my role. I am one of the eternal 
Virgins, serving the eternal fire. My dealings with men 
have only broken my stillness and messed up my door- 
ways. It has been my own fault. I ought to stay virgin, 
and still, very, very still, and serve the most perfect 
service. I want my temple and my loneliness and my 
Apollo mystery of the inner fire. And with men, only 
the delicate, subtler, more remote relations. No coming 
near. A coming near only breaks the delicate veils, and 
broken veils, like broken flowers, only lead to rottenness.”’ 

She felt a great peace inside herself as she made this 
realisation. And a thankfulness. Because, after all, it 
seemed to her that the hidden fire was alive and burning 
in this sky, over the desert, in the mountains. She felt 
a certain latent holiness in the very atmosphere, a young, 
spring-fire of latent holiness, such as she had never felt 
in Europe, or in the East. ‘* For me,” she said, as she 
looked away at the mountains in shadow and the pale- 
warm desert beneath, with wings of shadow upon it: 
‘* For me, this place is sacred. It is blessed.”’ 

But as she watched Phoenix: as she remembered the. 
motor-cars and tourists, and the rather dreary Mexicans 
of Santa Fé, and the lurking, invidious Indians, with 
something of a rat-like secretiveness and defeatedness in 
their bearing, she realised that the latent fire of the vast 
landscape struggled under a great weight of dirt-like 

ST. MAWR 165 

inertia. She had to mind the dirt, most carefully and 
vividly avoid it and keep it away from her, here in this 
place that at last seemed sacred to her. 

The motor-car climbed up, past the tall pine-trees, to 
the foot of the mountains, and came at last to a wire 
gate, where nothing was to be expected. Phcenix opened 
the gate, and they drove on, through more trees, into a 
clearing where dried up bean-plants were yellow. 

‘* This man got no water for his beans,’’ said Phoenix. 
‘* Not got much beans this year.” 

They climbed slowly up the incline, through more 
pine trees, and out into another clearing, where a couple 
of horses were grazing. And there they saw the ranch 
itself, little low cabins with patched roofs, under a few 
pine-trees, and facing the long twelve-acre clearing, or 
field, where the michaelmas daisies were purple mist, 
and spangled with clumps of yellow flowers. 

** Not got no alfalfa here neither! ”? said Phoenix, as 
the car waded past the flowers. ‘‘ Must be a dry place 
up here. Got no waier, sure they haven’t.”’ 

Yet it was the place Lou wanted. In an instant, her 
heart sprang to it. The instant the car stopped, and she 
saw the two cabins inside the rickety fence, the rather 
broken corral beyond, and behind all, tall, blue balsam 
pines, the round hills, the solid uprise of the mountain 
flank : and getting down, she looked across the purple 
and gold of the clearing, downwards at the ring of pine- 
trees standing so still, so crude and untameable, the 
motionless desert beyond the bristles of the pine crests, a 
thousand feet below: and beyond the desert, blue 
mountains, and far, far-off blue mountains in Arizona: 
‘* This is the place,’’ she said to herself. 

This little tumble-down ranch, only a homestead of a 
hundred-and-sixty acres, was, as it were, man’s last 
effort towards the wild heart of the Rockies, at this point. 
Sixty years before, a restless schoolmaster had wandered 
out from the East, looking for gold among the moun- 

166 ST. MAWR 

tains. He found a very little, then no more. But the 
mountains had got hold of him, he could not go back. 

There was a little trickling spring of pure water, a 
thread of treasure perhaps better than gold. So the 
schoolmaster took up a homestead on the lot where this 
little spring arose. He struggled, and got himself his 
log cabin erected, his fence put up, sloping at the 
mountain-side through the pine-trees and dropping into 
the hollows where the ghost-white mariposa lilies stood 
leafless and naked in flower, in spring, on tall invisible 
stems. He made the long clearing for alfalfa. 

And fell so into debt, that he had to trade his home- 
stead away, to clear his debt. Then he made a tiny 
living teaching the children of the few American pro- 
spectors who had squatted in the valleys, beside the 
Mexicans. 

The trader who got the ranch tackled it with a will. 
He built another log cabin, and a big corral, and brought 
water from the canyon two miles and more across the 
mountain slope, in a little runnel ditch, and more water, 
piped a mile or more down the little canyon immediately 
above the cabins. He got a flow of water for his houses : 
for being a true American, he felt he could not really say 
he had conquered his environment till he had got running 
water, taps, and wash-hand basins inside his house. 

Taps, running water and wash-hand basins he accom- 
plished. And, undaunted through the years, he prepared 
the basin for a fountain in the little fenced-in enclosure, 
and he built a little bath-house. After a number of 
years, he sent up the enamelled bath-tub to be put in 
the little log bath-house on the little wild ranch 
hung right against the savage Rockies, above the 
desert. ; 

But here the mountains finished him. He was a 
trader down below, in the Mexican village. This little 
ranch was, as it were, his hobby, his ideal. He and his 
New England wife spent their summers there: and 

ST. MAWR 167 

curned on the taps in the cabins and turned them off 
gain, and felt really that civilisation had con- 
juered. 

All this plumbing from the savage ravines of the 
sanyons—one of them nameless to this day—cost, how- 
aver, money. In fact, the ranch cost a great deal of 
money. But it was all to be got back. The big clearing 
was to be irrigated for alfalfa, the little clearing for beans, 
and the third clearing, under the corral, for potatoes. 
All these things the trader could trade to the Mexicans, 
very advantageously. ‘ 

And moreover, since somebody had started a praise of 
the famous goats’ cheese made by Mexican peasants in 
New Mexico, goats there should be. 

Goats there were: five hundred of them, eventually. 
And they fed chiefly in the wild mountain hollows, the 
no-man’s-land. The Mexicans call them fire-mouths, 
because everything they nibble dies. Not because of 
their flaming mouths, really, but because they nibble a 
live plant down, down to the quick, till it can put forth 
no more. 

So, the energetic trader, in the course of five or six 
years, had got the ranch ready. The long three-roomed 
cabin was for him and his New England wife. In the 
two-roomed cabin lived the Mexican family who really 
had charge of the ranch. For the trader was mostly 
fixed to his store, seventeen miles away, down in the 
Mexican village. 

The ranch lay over eight thousand feet up, the snows 
of winter came deep and the white goats, looking dirty 
yellow, swam in snow with their poor curved horns 
poking out like dead sticks. But the corral had a long, 
cosy, shut-in goat-shed all down one side, and into this 
crowded the five hundred, their acrid goat-smell rising 
like hot acid over the snow. And the thin, pock-marked 
Mexican threw them alfalfa out of the log barn. Until 
the hot sun sank the snow again, and froze the surface, 

168 ) sr. awe al 

when patter-patter went the two thousand little post 
hovis, over the silver-frozen snow, up at the mountam. 
Nibble, nibble, mibble, the fire-mouths, at every tender 
twig. And the gozt-bell dimbed, and the basing eame 
from among the dense and shagzy pmetreess. And 
somciunes, im a soft drift under the trees, a goat, or 
several goats, went through, into the white depths, and 
some were lost thus, to reappear dead and frozen at the 

: thaw. 

By evening, they were driven down again, like a dirty 
ydlowish-white stream carrying dark sticks on its yeasty 
suriace, tripping and bleating over the frozen snow, past 
the busting dark green pime-trees, down to the trampled 
mess Of the corral Amd everywhere, everywhere over 
the snow, ydlow stains and dark pills of goat-droppings 
meitimg mio the surface erystal. On sidl, olitterme 
nights, when the frost was hard, the smell of goats eame 
up like some uncanny acid fire, and great stars siftme 
on the mouutam’s edge seemed to be watching like the 

ren like shadows over the snow. But the goat corral bad 
been built tight. 

Ip the course of years the gost-berd had grown from 
fifty to five hundred, and surely thet wes imerease. The 
gostaudk ebeeses s2i dryimg on their Hiile racks. In 
spring, there was a great Sowing and skipping of kids. 
In summer and carly autumn, there was a pest of flies, 
rising from all that sost-smell and that east-out whey of 
goats sznilk, after the cheese meking. The rats came, 
Ste songenge ae sam 

And zfter oll, % wes GifGeukt to sell or trade the 
cheeses, and little profit to be made. And im dry 
summers, nO weiter came down im the narrow ditch 
channd, that straddled im wooden ruunels over the deep 
clefts im the mountam side. No water meant no alfalfa 
In wisier the gozis searecly drank at all In summer 

ST. MAWR 169 

they could be watered at the little spring. But the 
thirsty land was noi so easy to accommodate. 

Five hundred fine white Angora goats, with their 
massive handsome padres! They were beautiful enough. 
And the trader made all he could of them. Come 
summer, they were run down into the narrow tank filled 
with the fiery dipping fluid. Then their lovely white 
wool was clipped. Ii was beautiful, and valuable, but 
comparatively little of it. 

And it all cost, cost, cost. And a man was always let 
down. At one time no water. At another a poison- 
weed. Then a sickness. Always, some mysterious male- 
volence fighting, fighting against the will of man. A 
strange invisible influence coming out of the livid rock- 
fastnesses in the bowels of those uncreated Rocky 
Mountains, preying upon the will of man, and slowly 
wearing down his resistance, his onward-pushing spirit. 
The curious, subtle thing, like a mountain fever, got into 
the blood, so that the men ai the ranch, and the animals 
with them, had bursts of queer, violent, halftrenzied 
energy, in which, however, they were wont to lose their 
wariness. And then, damage of some sort. The horses 
ripped and cut themselves, or they were struck by 
lightning, the men had great hurts, or sickness. <A 
curious disintegration working all the time, a sort of 
malevolent breath, like a stupefying, irritant gas, coming 
out of the unfathomed mountains. 

The pack-rats with their bushy tails and big ears came 
down out of the hills, and were jumping and bouncing 
about : symbols of the curious debasing malevolence that 
was in the spirit of the place. The Mexicans in charge, 
good honest men, worked all they could. But they were 
like most of the Mexicans in the south-west, as if they 
had been pithed, to use one of Kipling’s words. As if the 
invidious malevolence of the country itself had slowly 
taken all the pith of manhood from them, leaving a 
hopeless sort of corpus of a man. 

170 ST. MAWR 

And the same happened to the white men, exposed to 
the open country. Slowly, they were pithed. The 
energy went out of them. And more than that, the 
interest. An inertia of indifference invading the soul, 
leaving the body healthy and active, but wasting the 
soul, the living interest, quite away. 

It was the New England wife of the trader who put 
most energy into the ranch. She looked on it as her 
-home. She had a little white fence put all round the 
two cabins : the bright brass water-taps she kept shining 
in the two kitchens : outside the kitchen door she had a 
little kitchen garden and nasturtiums, after a great fight 
with invading animals, that nibbled everything away. 
And she got so far as the preparation of the round con- 
crete basin which was to be a little pool, under the few 
enclosed pine-trees between the two cabins, a pool with 
a tiny fountain jet. 

But this, with the bath-tub, was her limit, as the five 
hundred goats were her man’s limit. Out of the moun- 
tains came two breaths of influence : the breath of the 
curious, frenzied energy, that took away one’s intelli- 
gence as alcohol or any other stimulus does: and then 
the most strange invidiousness that ate away the soul. 
The woman loved her ranch, almost with passion. It 
was she who felt the stimulus, more than the men. It 
seemed to enter her like a sort of sex passion, intensi- 
fying her ego, making her full of violence and of blind 
female energy. The energy, and the blindness of it! A 
strange blind frenzy, like an intoxication while it lasted. 
And the sense of beauty that thrilled her New England 
woman’s soul. \ 

Her cabin faced the slow downslope of the clearing, 
the alfalfa field: her long, low cabin, crouching under 
the great pine-tree that threw up its trunk sheer in front 
of the house, in the yard. That pine-tree was the 
guardian of the place. But a bristling, almost demonish 
guardian, from the far-off crude ages of the world. Its 

ST. MAWR 171 

great pillar of pale, flakey-ribbed copper rose there in 
strange callous indifference, and the grim permanence, 
which is in pine-trees. A passionless, non-phallic column, 
rising in the shadows of the pre-sexual world, before the 
hot-blooded ithyphallic column ever erected itself. A 
cold, blossomless, resinous sap surging and oozing gum, 
from that pallid brownish bark. And the wind hissing 
in the needles, like a vast nest of serpents. And the pine 
cones falling plumb as the hail hit them. Then lying all 
over the yard, open in the sun like wooden roses, but 
hard, sexless, rigid with a blind will. 

Past the column of that pine-tree, the alfalfa field 
sloped gently down, to the circling guard of pine-trees, 
from which silent, living barrier isolated pines rose to 
ragged heights at intervals, in blind assertiveness. 
Strange, those pine-trees ! In some lights all their 
needles glistened like polished steel, all subtly glittering 
with a whitish glitter among darkness, like real needles. 
Then again, at evening, the trunks would flare up orange 
red, and the tufts would be dark, alert tufts like a wolf’s 
tail touching the air. Again, in the morning sunlight 
they would be soft and still, hardly noticeable. But all 
the same, present, and watchful. Never sympathetic, 
always watchfully on their guard, and resistant, they 
hedged one in with the aroma and the power and the 
slight horror of the pre-sexual primeval world. The 
world where each creature was crudely limited to its 
own ego, crude and bristling and cold, and then crowding 
in packs like pine-trees and wolves. 

But beyond the pine-trees, ah, there beyond, there 
was beauty for the spirit to soar in. The circle of pines, 
with the loose trees rising high and ragged at intervals, 
this was the barrier, the fence to the foreground. Beyond 
was only distance, the desert a thousand feet below, 
and beyond. 

The desert swept its great fawn-coloured circle around, 
away beyond and below like a beach, with a long moun- 

172 ST. MAWR 

tain-side of pure blue shadow closing in the near corner, 
and strange bluish hummocks of mountains rising like 
wet rock from a vast strand, away in the middle distance, 
and beyond, in the farthest distance, pale blue crests of 
mountains looking over the horizon, from the west, as if 
peering in from another world altogether. 

Ah, that was beauty !—perhaps the most beautiful 
thing in the world. It was pure beauty, absolute beauty ! 
“There! That was it. To the little woman from New 
England, with her tense, fierce soul and her egoistic 
passion of service, this beauty was absolute, a ne plus 
ultra. From her doorway, from her porch, she could 
watch the vast, eagle-like wheeling of the daylight, that 
turned as the eagles which lived in the near rocks turned 
overhead in the blue, turning their luminous, dark-edged- 
patterned bellies and underwings upon the pure air, like 
winged orbs. So the daylight made the vast turn upon 
the desert, brushing the farthest outwatching mountains. 
And sometimes, the vast strand of the desert would float 
with curious undulations and exhalations amid the blue 
fragility of mountains, whose upper edges were harder 
than the floating bases. And sometimes she would see the 
little brown adobe houses of the village Mexicans, twenty 
miles away, like little cube crystals of insect-houses 
dotting upon the desert, very distinct, with a cotton- | 
wood tree or two rising near. And sometimes she would 
see the far-off rocks, thirty miles away, where the canyon 
made a gateway between the mountains. Quite clear, 
like an open gateway out of a vast yard, she would see 
the cut-out bit of the canyon-passage. And on the desert 
itself, curious puckered folds of mesa-sides. And a 
blackish crack which in places revealed the otherwise 
invisible canyon of the Rio Grande. And beyond every- - 
thing, the mountains like icebergs showing up from an 
outer sea. Then later, the sun would go down blazing 
above the shallow cauldron of simmering darkness, and 
the round mountain of Colorado would lump up into 

ST. MAWR 178 

uncanny significance, northwards. That was always 
rather frightening. But morning came again, with the 
sun peeping over the mountain slopes and lighting the 
desert away in the distance long, long before it lighted 
on her yard. And then she would see another valley, like 
magic and very lovely, with green fields and long tufts 
of cotton-wood trees, and a few long-cubical adobe 
houses, lying floating in shallow light below, like a vision. 

Ah! it was beauty, beauty absolute, at any hour of 
the day : whether the perfect clarity of morning, or the 
mountains beyond the simmering desert at noon, or the 
purple lumping of northern mounds under a red sun at 
night. Or whether the dust whirled in tall columns, 
travelling across the desert far away, like pillars of cloud 
by day, tall, leaning pillars of dust hastening with 
ghostly haste : or whether, in the early part of the year, 
suddenly in the morning a whole sea of solid white would 
rise rolling below, a solid mist from melted snow, ghost- 
white under the mountain sun, the world below blotted 
out : or whether the black rain and cloud streaked down, 
far across the desert, and lightning stung down with 
sharp white stings on the horizon : or the cloud travelled 
and burst overhead, with rivers of fluid blue fire running 
out of heaven and exploding on earth, and hail coming 
down like a world of ice shattered above: or the hot 
sun rode in again : or snow fell in heavy silence : or the 
world was blinding white under a blue sky, and one must 
hurry under the pine-trees for shelter against that vast, 
white, back-beating light which rushed up at one and 
made one almost unconscious, amid the snow. 

It was always beauty, always! It was always great, 
and splendid, and, for some reason, natural. It was 
never grandiose or theatrical. Always, for some reason, 
perfect. And quite simple, in spite of it all. 

So it was, when you watched the vast and living 
landscape. The landscape lived, and lived as the 
world of the gods, unsullied and unconcerned. The 

174 ST. MAWR 

great circling landscape lived its own life, sumptuous 
and uncaring. Man did not exist for it. 

And if it had been a question simply of living through 
the eyes, into the distance, then this would have been 
Paradise, and the little New England woman on her 
ranch would have found what she was always looking for, 
the earthly paradise of the spirit. 

But even a woman cannot live only into the distance, 
-the beyond. Willy-nilly she finds herself juxtaposed to 
the near things, the thing in itself. And willy-nilly she 
is caught up into the fight with the immediate object. 

The New England woman had fought to make the 
nearness as perfect as the distance : for the distance was 
absolute beauty. She had been confident of success. 
She had felt quite assured, when the water came running 
out of her bright brass taps, the wild water of the hills 
caught, tricked into the narrow iron pipes, and led 
tamely to her kitchen, to jump out over her sink, into 
her wash-basin, at her service. There! she said. I have 
tamed the waters of the mountain to my service. 

So she had, for the moment. 

At the same time, the invisible attack was being made 
upon her. While she revelled in the beauty of the 
luminous world that wheeled around and below her, the 
grey, rat-like spirit of the inner mountains was attacking 
her from behind. She could not keep her attention. 
And, curiously, she could not keep even her speech. 
When she was saying something, suddenly the next 
word would be gone out of her, as if a pack-rat had 
carried it off. And she sat blank, stuttering, staring in 
the empty cupboard of her mind, like Mother Hubbard, 
and seeing the cupboard bare. And this irritated her 
husband intensely. ‘ 

Her chickens, of which she was so proud, were carried 
away. Or they strayed. Or they fell sick. At first she 
could cope with their circumstances. But after a 
while, she couldn’t. She couldn’t care. A drug-like 

ST. MAWR 175 

numbness possessed her spirit, and at the very middle of 
her, she couldn’t care what happened to her chickens. 

The same when a couple of horses were struck by 
lightning. It frightened her. The rivers of fluid fire 
that suddenly fell out of the sky and exploded on the 
earth near by, as if the whole earth had burst like a 
bomb, frightened her from the very core of her, and 
made her know, secretly and with cynical certainty, that 
there was no merciful God in the heavens. A very tall, 
elegant pine-tree just above her cabin took the lightning, 
and stood tall and elegant as before, but with a white 
seam spiralling from its crest, all down its tall trunk, to 
earth. The perfect scar, white and long as lightning itself. 
And every time she looked at it, she said to herself, in spite 
of herself: There is no Almighty loving God. The God 
thereis shaggy as the pine-trees, and horrible as the light- 
ning. Outwardly, she never confessed this. Openly, she 
thought of her dear New England Church as usual. But 
in the violent undercurrent of her woman’s soul, after 
the storms, she would look at that living seamed 
tree, and the voice would say in her, almost savagely : 
What nonsense about Jesus and a God of Love, in a 
place like this! This is more awful and more splendid. 
I like it better. The very chipmunks, in their jerky 
helter-skelter, the blue jays wrangling in the pine-tree in 
the dawn, the grey squirrel undulating to the tree-trunk, 
then pausing to chatter at her and scold her, with a 
shrewd fearlessness, as if she were the alien, the out- 
sider, the creature that should not be permitted among 
the trees, all destroyed the illusion she cherished, of love, 
universal love. There was no love on this ranch. There 
was life, intense, bristling life, full of energy, but also, 
with an undertone of savage sordidness. 

The black ants in her cupboard, the pack-rats bouncing 
on her ceiling like hippopotamuses in the night, the two 
sick goats : there was a peculiar undercurrent of squalor, 
flowing under the curious tussle of wild life. That was it. 

176 ST. MAWR 

The wild life, even the life of the trees and flowers, 
seemed one bristling, hair-raising tussle. The very 
flowers came up bristly, and many of them were fang- 
mouthed, like the dead-nettle : and none had any real 
scent. But they were very fascinating, too, in their very 
fierceness. In May, the curious columbines of the 
stream-beds, columbines scarlet outside and yellow in, 
like the red and yellow of a herald’s uniform—farther 
from the dove nothing could be : then the beautiful rosy- 
blue of the great tufts of the flower they called blue-bell, 
but which was really a flower of the snap-dragon family : 
these grew in powerful beauty in the little clearing of the 
pine-trees, followed by the flower the settlers had 
mysteriously called herb honeysuckle : a tangle of long 
drops of pure fire-red, hanging from slim invisible stalks 
of smoke colour. The purest, most perfect vermilion 
scarlet, cleanest fire-colour, hanging in long drops like a 
shower of fire-rain that is just going to strike the earth. 
A little later, more in the open, there came another sheer 
fire-red flower, sparking, fierce red stars running up a 
bristly grey ladder, as if the earth’s fire-centre had blown 
out some red sparks, white-speckled and deadly inside, 
puffing for a moment in the day air. 

So it was! The alfalfa field was one raging, seething 
conflict of plants trying to get hold. One dry year, and 
the bristly wild things had got hold: the spiky, blue- 
leaved thistle-poppy with its moon-white flowers, the low 
clumps of blue nettle-flower, the later rush, after the 
sereness of June and July, the rush of red sparks and 
michaelmas daisies, and the tough wild sunflowers, 
strangling and choking the dark, tender green of the 
clover-like alfalfa! A battle, a battle, with banners of . 
bright scarlet and yellow. 

When a really defenceless flower did issue, like the 
moth-still, ghost-centred mariposa lily, with its inner 
moth-dust of yellow, it came invisible. There was 
nothing to be seen, but a hair of greyish grass near the 

ST. MAWR 177 

oak-scrub. Behold, this invisible long stalk was balan- 
cing a white, ghostly, three-petalled flower, naked out of 
nothingness. A mariposa lily ! 

Only the pink wild roses smelled sweet, like the old 
world. They were sweet-briar roses. And the dark blue 
hare-bells among the oak-scrub, like the ice-dark bubbles 
of the mountain flowers in the Alps, the Alpenglocken. 

The roses of the desert are the cactus flowers, crystal of 
translucent yellow or of rose-colour. But set among 
spines the devil himself must have conceived in a 
moment of sheer ecstasy. 

Nay, it was a world before and after the God of Love. 
Even the very humming-birds hanging about the 
flowering squaw-berry bushes, when the snow had gone, 
in May, they were before and after the God of Love. 
And the blue jays were crested dark with challenge, and 
the yellow-and-dark woodpecker was fearless like a 
warrior in war-paint, as he struck the wood. While on 
the fence the hawks sat motionless, like dark fists 
clenched under heaven, ignoring man and his ways. 

Summer, it was true, unfolded the tender cotton-wood - 
leaves, and the tender aspen. But what a tangle and a 
ghostly aloofness in the aspen thickets high up on the 
mountains, the coldness that is in the eyes and the long 
cornelian talons of the bear. 

Summer brought the little wild strawberries, with their 
savage aroma, and the late summer brought the rose- 
jewel raspberries in the valley cleft. But how lonely, 
how harsh-lonely and menacing it was, to be alone in 
that shadowy, steep cleft of a canyon just above the 
cabins, picking raspberries, while the thunder gathered 
thick and blue-purple at the mountain tops. The many 
wild raspberries hanging rose-red in the thickets. But 
the stream bed below all silent, waterless. And the trees 
all bristling in silence, and waiting like warriors at an 
out-post. And the berries waiting for the sharp-eyed, 
cold, long-snouted bear to come rambling and shaking 

M 

178 ST. MAWR 

his heavy sharp fur. The berries grew for the bears, 
and the little New England woman, with her uncanny 
sensitiveness to underlying influences, felt all the time 
she was stealing. Stealing the wild raspberries in the 
secret little canyon behind her home. And when she 
had made them into jam, she could almost taste the theft 
in her preserves. 

She confessed nothing of this. She tried even to con- 
_fess nothing of her dread. But she was afraid. Especi- 
ally she was conscious of the prowling, intense aerial 
electricity all the summer, after June. The air was thick 
with wandering currents of fierce electric fluid, waiting 
to discharge themselves. And almost every day there 
was the rage and battle of thunder. But the air was 
never cleared. There was no relief. However the 
thunder raged, and spent itself, yet, afterwards, among 
th sunshine was the strange lurking and wandering of 
the electric currents, moving invisible, with strange 
menace, between the atoms of the air. She knew. Oh, 
she knew! 

And her love for her ranch turned sometimes into a 
certain repulsion. The underlying rat-dirt, the ever- 
lasting bristling tussle of the wild life, with the tangle 
and the bones strewing. Bones of horses struck by 
lightning, bones of dead cattle, skulls of goats with little 
horns : bleached, unburied bones. Then the cruel elec- 
tricity of the mountains. And then, most mysterious 
but worst of all, the animosity of the spirit of place : the 
crude, half-created spirit of place, like some serpent- 
bird forever attacking man, in a hatred of man’s onward- 
struggle towards further creation. 

The seething cauldron of lower life, seething on the 
very tissue of the higher life, seething the soul away, 
seething at the marrow. The vast and unrelenting will 
of the swarming lower life, working forever against man’s 
attempt at a higher life, a further created being. 

At last, after many years, the little woman admitted 

ST. MAWR 179 

to herself that she was glad to go down from the ranch, 
when November came with snows. She was glad to come 
to a more human home, her house in the village. And 
as winter passed by, and spring came again, she knew 
she did not want to go up to the ranch again. It had 
broken something in her. It had hurt her terribly. It 
had maimed her for ever in her hope, her belief in para- 
dise on earth. Now, she hid from herself her own corpse, 
the corpse of her New England belief in a world ulti- 
mately all for love. The belief, and herself with it, was a 
corpse. The gods of those inner mountains were grim 
and invidious and relentless, huger than man, and lower 
than man. Yet man could never master them. 

The little woman in her flower-garden away below, 
by the stream-irrigated village, hid away from the 
thought of it all. She would not go to the ranch any 
more. 

The Mexicans stayed in charge, looking after the goats. 
But the place didn’t pay. It didn’t pay, not quite. It 
had paid. It might pay. But the effort, the effort! 
And as the marrow is eaten out of a man’s bones and 
the soul out of his belly, contending with the strange 
rapacity of savage life, the lower stage of creation, he 
cannot make the effort any more. 

Then also, the war came, making many men give up 
their enterprises at civilisation. 

Every new stroke of civilisation has cost the lives 
of countless brave men, who have fallen defeated by the 
‘¢ dragon,’ in their efforts to win the apples of the 
Hesperides, or the fleece of gold. Fallen in their efforts 
to overcome the old, half-sordid savagery of the lower 
stages of creation, and win to the next stage. 

For all savagery is half-sordid. And man is only him- 
self when he is fighting on and on, to overcome the 
sordidness. 

And every civilisation, when it loses its inward vision 
and its cleaner energy, falls into a new sort of sordidness, 

180 ST. MAWR 

more vast and more stupendous than the old savage sort. 
An Augean stables of metallic filth. 

And all the time, man has to rouse himself afresh, 
to cleanse the new accumulations of refuse. To win from 
the crude wild nature the victory and the power to make 
another start, and to cleanse behind him the century- 
deep deposits of layer upon layer of refuse : even of tin 
cans. 

The ranch dwindled. The flock of goats declined. The 
water ceased to flow. And at length the trader gave it 
up. 

He rented the place to a Mexican, who lived on the 
handful of beans he raised, and who was being slowly 
driven out by the vermin. 

And now arrived Lou, new blood to the attack. She 
went back to Santa Fé, saw the trader and a lawyer, and 
bought the ranch for twelve hundred dollars. She was 
so pleased with herself. 

She went upstairs to tell her mother. 

** Mother, I’ve bought a ranch.” 

** It is just as well, for I can’t stand the noise of auto- 
mobiles outside here another week.”’ 

‘* It is quiet on my ranch, mother : the stillness simply 
speaks.”’ 

** T had rather it held its tongue. I am simply 
drugged with all the bad novels I have read. I feel as if 
the sky was a big cracked bell and a million clappers 
were hammering human speech out of it.” 

‘** Aren’t you interested in my ranch, mother? ” 

‘* T hope I may be, by and by.”’ 

Mrs. Witt actually got up the next morning, and 
accompanied her daughter in the hired motor-car, driven 
by Phoenix, to the ranch : which was called Las Chivas. 
She sat like a pillar of salt, her face looking what the 
Indians call a False Face, meaning a mask. She seemed 
to have crystallised into neutrality. She watched the 
desert with its tufts of yellow greasewood go lurching 

ST. MAWR 181 

past : she saw the fallen apples on the ground in the 
orchards near the adobe cottages : she looked down into 
the deep arroyo, and at the stream they forded in the 
car, and at the mountains blocking up the sky ahead, all 
with indifference. High on the mountains was snow : 
lower, blue-grey livid rock : and below the livid rock the 
aspens were expiring their daffodil yellow, this year, 
and the oak-scrub was dark and reddish, like gore. She 
saw it all with a sort of stony indifference. 

** Don’t you think it’s lovely? ”’ said Lou. 

** I can see it is lovely,’’ replied her mother. 

The michaelmas daisies in the clearing as they drove 
up to the ranch were sharp-rayed with purple, like a 
coming night. 

Mrs. Witt eyed the two log cabins, one of which was 
delapidated and practically abandoned. She looked at the 
rather ricketty corral, whose long planks had silvered and 
warped in the fierce sun. On one of the roof-planks 
a pack-rat was sitting erect like an old Indian keeping 
watch on a pueblo roof. He showed his white belly, and 
folded his hands and lifted his big ears, for all the world 
like an old immobile Indian. 

** Tsn’t it for all the world as if he were the real boss 
of the place, Louise? ’’ she said cynically. 

And turning to the Mexican, who was a rag of a man 
but a pleasant, courteous fellow, she asked him why he 
didn’t shoot the rat. 

** Not worth a shell! ’? said the Mexican, with a faint 
hopeless smile. 

Mrs. Witt paced round and saw everything : it did not 
take long. She gazed in silence at the water of the 
spring, trickling out of an iron pipe into a barrel, under 
the cottonwood tree in an arroyo. 

** Well, Louise,”’ she said. ‘‘ I am glad you feel com- 
petent to cope with so much hopelessness and so many 
rats.”’ 

‘* But, mother, you must admit it is beautiful.” 

182 ST. MAWR 

** Yes, I suppose it is. But to use one of your Henry’s 
phrases, beauty is a cold egg, as far as I am concerned.” 

** Rico never would have said that beauty was a cold 
egg to him.” 

** No, he wouldn’t. He sits on it like a broody old 
hen on a china imitation.—Are you going to bring him 
here? 7° 

** Bring him!—No. But he can come if he likes,” 
stammered Lou. 

**Oh—h! won’t it be beau—ti—ful! *’ cried Mrs. 
Witt, rolling her head and lifting her shoulders in savage 
imitation of her son-in-law. 

‘* Perhaps he won’t come, mother,’’ said Lou, hurt. 

** He will most certainly come, Louise, to see what’s 
doing : unless you tell him you don’t want him.” 

** Anyhow, I needn’t think about it till spring,”’ said 
Lou, anxiously pushing the matter aside. 

Mrs. Witt climbed the steep slope above the cabins, 
to the mouth of the little canyon. There she sat on a 
fallen tree, and surveyed the world beyond : a world not 
of men. She could not fail to be roused. 

‘¢ What is your idea in coming here, daughter? *’ she 
asked. 

**T love it here, mother.’’ 

‘¢ But what do you expect to achieve by it? ” 

** T was rather hoping, mother, to escape achievement. 
I'll tell you—and you musn’t get cross if it sounds silly. 
As far as people go, my heart is quite broken. As far as 
people go, I don’t want any more. I can’t stand any 
more. What heart I ever had for it—for life with people 
—is quite broken. I want to be alone, mother: with 
you here, and Phoenix perhaps to look after horses and 
drive a car. But I want to be by myself, really.’ . 

*€ With Phoenix in the background! Are you sure he 
won’t be coming into the foreground before long? ” 

‘“*No, mother, no more of that. If I’ve got to say 
it, Phoenix is a servant: he’s really placed, as far as I 

ST. MAWR 183 

can see. Always the same, playing about in the old 
back-yard. I can’t take those men seriously. I can’t 
fool round with them, or fool myself about them. I 
can’t and I won’t fool myself any more, mother, especi- 
ally about men. They don’t count. So why should you 
want them to pay me out? ” 

For the moment, this silenced Mrs. Witt. Then she 
said : 

‘* Why, I don’t want it. Why should I! But after 
all you’ve got to live. You’ve never lived yet: not in 
my opinion.” 

** Neither, mother, in my opinion, have you,” said 
Lou drily. 

And this silenced Mrs. Witt altogether. She had to be 
silent, or angrily on the defensive. And the latter she 
wouldn’t be. She couldn’t, really, in honesty. 

** What do you call life? ’? Lou continued. -** Wrigg- 
ling half-naked at a public show, and going off in a taxi 
to sleep with some half-drunken fool who thinks he’s a 
man because—Oh, mother, I don’t even want to think 
of it. I know you have a lurking idea that that is life. 
Let it_be so then. But leave me out. Men in that 
aspect simply nauseate me : so grovelling and ratty. Life 
in that aspect simply drains all my life away. I tell you, 
for all that sort of thing, I’m broken, absolutely broken : 
if I wasn’t broken to start with.”’ 

** Well, Louise,’’ said Mrs. Witt after a pause, *‘ I’m 
convinced that ever since men and women were men and 
women, people who took things seriously, and had time 
for it, got their hearts broken. MHaven’t I had mine 
broken! It’s as sure as having your virginity broken : 
and it amounts to about as much. It’s a beginning rather 
than an end.”’ 

** So it is, mother. It’s the beginning of something 
else, and the end of something that’s done with. I know, 
and there’s no altering it, that I’ve got to live differently. 
It sounds silly, but I don’t know how else to put it. 

184 ST. MAWR 

I’ve got to live for something that matters, way, way 
down in me. And [I think sex would matter, to my 
very soul, if it was really sacred. But cheap sex kills 
me.”? 

‘© You have had a fancy for rather cheap men, per- 
haps.”’ 

‘** Perhaps I have. Perhaps I should always be a fool, 
where people are concerned. Now I want to leave off 
that kind of foolery. There’s something else, mother, 
that I want to give myself to. I know it. I know it 
absolutely. Why should I let myself be shouted down 
any more? ”’ 

Mrs. Witt sat staring at the distance, her face a cynical 
mask. 

‘* What is the something bigger? And pray, what is 
it bigger than? ’’ she asked, in that tone of honied 
suavity which was her deadliest poison. ‘* I want to 
learn. I am out to know. I’m terribly intrigued by it. 
Something bigger! Girls in my generation occasionally 
entered convents, for something bigger. I always won- 
ered if they found it. They seemed to me inclined in the 
imbecile direction, but perhaps that was because I was 
something less—’’ 

There was a definite pause between the mother and 
daughter, a silence that was a pure breach. Then Lou 
said : 

‘You know quite well I’m not conventy, mother, 
whatever else I am—even a bit of an imbecile. But that 
kind of religion seems to me the other half of men. 
Instead of running after them you run away from them, 
and get the thrill that way. I don’t hate men because 
they’re men, as nuns do I dislike them because they’re 
not men enough : babies, and playboys, and poor things 
showing off all the time, even to themselves. I don’t say 
I’m any better. I only wish, with all my soul, that some 
men were bigger and stronger and deeper thanI am...” 

** How do you know they’re not P—’’ asked Mrs. Witt. 

ST. MAWR 185 

** How do I know?—” said Lou mockingly. 

And the pause that was a breach resumed itself. Mrs. 
Witt was teasing with a little stick the bewildered black 
ants among the fir-needles. 

** And no doubt you are right about men,”’ she said at 
length. ‘‘ But at your age, the only sensible thing is 
to try and keep up the illusion. After all, as you say, 
you may be no better.”’ 

**T may be no better. But keeping up the illusion 
means fooling myself. And I won’t do it. When I see 
a man who is even a bit attractive to me—even as much 
as Phoenix—I say to myself: Would you care for him 
afterwards ? Does he really mean anything to you, 
except just a sensation ?—And I know he doesn’t. No, 
mother, of this I am convinced : either my taking a man 
shall have a meaning and a mystery that penetrates my 
very soul, or I will keep to myself.—And what I know 
is, that the time has come for me to keep to myself. No 
more messing about.’ 

** Very well, daughter. You will probably spend your 
life keeping to yourself.” 

**Do you think I mind! There’s something else for 
me, mother. There’s something else even that loves me 
and wants me. I can’t tell you what it is. It’s a spirit. 
And it’s here, on this ranch. It’s here, in this landscape. 
It’s something more real to me than men are, and it 
soothes me, and it holds me up. I don’t know what it 
it, definitely. It’s something wild, that will hurt me 
sometimes and will wear me down sometimes. I know 
it. But it’s something big, bigger than men, bigger 
than people, bigger than religion. It’s something 
to do with wild America. And it’s something 
to do with me. It’s a mission, if you like. I am 
imbecile enough for that !—But it’s my mission to keep 
myself for the spirit that is wild, and has waited so long 
here : even waited for such as me. Now I’ve come! 
Now I’m here. Now I am where I want to be : with the 

186 ST. MAWR 

spirit that wants me.—And that’s how it is. And neither 
Rico nor Phoenix nor anybody else really matters to me. 
They are in the world’s back-yard. And I am here, right 
deep in America, where there’s a wild spirit wants me, a 
wild spirit more than men. And it doesn’t want to save 
me either. It needs me. It craves for me. And to it, 
my sex is deep and sacred, deeper than I am, with a 
deep nature aware deep down of my sex. It saves me 
_ from cheapness, mother. And even you could never do 
that for me.” 

Mrs. Witt rose to her feet, and stood looking far, far 
away, at the turquoise ridge of mountains half sunk 
under the horizon. 

‘* How much did you say you paid for Las Chivas? ”’ 
she asked. 

‘* Twelve hundred dollars,’’ said Lou, surprised. 

‘* Then I call it cheap, considering all there is to it: 
even the name.”’ 

THE PRINCESS 

THE PRINCESS 

To her father, she was The Princess. To her Boston 
aunts and uncles she was just Dollie Urquhart, poor 
little thing. 

Colin Urquhart was just a bit mad. He was of an old 
Scottish family, and he claimed royal blood. The blood 
of Scottish kings flowed in his veins. On this point, his 
American relatives said, he was just a bit “ off.” They 
could not bear any more to be told which royal blood of 
Scotland blued his veins. The whole thing was rather 
ridiculous, and a sore point. The only fact they remem- 
bered was that it was not Stuart. 

He was a handsome man, with a wide-open blue eye 
that seemed sometimes to be looking at nothing, soft 
black hair brushed rather low on his low, broad brow, 
and a very attractive body. Add to this a most beautiful 
speaking voice, usually rather hushed and diffident, but 
sometimes resonant and powerful like bronze, and you 
have the sum of his charms. He looked like some old 
Celtic hero. He looked as if he should have worn a 
greyish kilt and a sporran, and shown his knees. His 
voice came direct out of the hushed Ossianic past. 

For the rest, he was one of those gentlemen of suffi- 
cient but not excessive means who fifty years ago 
wandered vaguely about, never arriving anywhere, never 
doing anything, and never definitely being anything, yet 
well received and familiar in the good society of more 
than one country. 

He did not marry till he was nearly forty, and then it 
was a wealthy Miss Prescott, from New England. 
Hannah Prescott at twenty-two was fascinated by the 
man with the soft black hair not yet touched by grey, 
and the wide, rather vague blue eyes. Many women had 

189 

190 THE PRINCESS 

been fascinated before her. But Colin Urquhart, by his 
very vagueness, had avoided any decisive connection. 

Mrs. Urquhart lived three years in the mist and 
glamour of her husband’s presence. And then it broke 
her. It was like living with a fascinating spectre. About 
most things he was completely, even ghostly oblivious. 
He was always charming, courteous, perfectly gracious 
in that hushed, musical voice of his. But absent. When 
all came to all, he just wasn’t there. ‘* Not all there,”’ 
as the vulgar say. 

He was the father of the little girl she bore at the end 
of the first year. But this did not substantiate him the 
more. His very beauty and his haunting musical quality 
became dreadful to her after the first few months. The 
strange echo : he was like a living echo! His very flesh, 
when you touched it, did not seem quite the flesh of a 
real man. 

Perhaps it was that he was a little bit mad. She 
thought it definitely the night her baby was born. 

** Ah, so my little princess has come at last ! ’’ he said, 
in his throaty, singing Celtic voice, like a glad chant, 
swaying absorbed. 

It was a tiny, frail baby, with wide, amazed blue eyes. 
They christened it Mary Henrietta. She called the little 
thing My Dollie. He called it always My Princess. 

It was useless to fly at him. He just opened his wide 
blue eyes wider, and took a childlike, silent dignity there 
was no getting past. 

Hannah Prescott had never been robust. She had no 
great desire to live. So when the baby was two years 
old she suddenly died. 

The Prescotts felt a deep but unadmitted resentment 
against Colin Urquhart. They said he was selfish. 
Therefore they discontinued Hannah’s income, a month 
after her burial in Florence, after they had urged the 
father to give the child over to them, and he had cour- 
teously, musically, but quite finally refused. He treated 

THE PRINCESS 191 

the Prescotts as if they were not of his world, not realities 
to him : just casual phenomena, or gramophones, talking- 
machines that had to be answered. He answered them. 
But of their actual existence he was never once aware. 

They debated having him certified unsuitable to be 
guardian of his own child. But that would have created 
a scandal. So they did the simplest thing, after all— 
washed their hands of him. But they wrote scrupulously 
to the child, and sent her modest presents of money at 
Christmas, and on the anniversary of the death of her 
mother. 

To The Princess her Boston relatives were for many 
years just a nominal reality. She lived with her father, 
and he travelled continually, though in a modest way, 
living on his moderate income. And never going to 
America. The child changed nurses all the time. In 
Italy it was a contadina; in India she had an ayah; in 
Germany she had a yellow-haired peasant girl. 

Father and child were inseparable. He was not a 
recluse. Wherever he went he was to be seen paying 
formal calls, going out to luncheon or to tea, rarely to 
dinner. And always with the child. People called her 
Princess Urquhart, as if that were her christened name. 

She was a quick, dainty little thing with dark gold 
hair that went a soft brown, and wide, slightly prominent 
blue eyes that were at once so candid and so knowing. 
She was always grown up; she never really grew up. 
Always strangely wise, and always childish. 

It was her father’s fault. 

‘* My little Princess must never take too much notice 
of people and the things they say and do,”’ he repeated 
to her. ‘* People don’t know what they are doing and 
saying. They chatter-chatter, and they hurt one 
another, and they hurt themselves very often, till they 
ery. But don’t take any notice, my little Princess. 
Because it is all nothing. Inside everybody there is 
another creature, a demon which doesn’t care at all. You 

192 THE PRINCESS 

peel away all the things they say and do and feel, as 
cook peels away the outside of the onions. And in the 
middle of everybody there is a green demon which you 
can’t peel away. And this green demon never changes, 
and it dosn’t care at all about all the things that happen 
to the outside leaves of the person, all the chatter- 
chatter, and all the, husbands and wives and children, 
and troubles and fusses. You peel everything away from 
_ people, and there is a green, upright demon in every 
man and woman; and this demon is a man’s real self, 
and a woman’s real self. It doesn’t really care about 
anybody, it belongs to the demons and the primitive 
fairies, who never care. But, even so, there are big 
demons and mean demons, and splendid demonish 
fairies, and vulgar ones. But there are no royal fairy 
women left. Only you, my little Princess. You are the 
last of the royal race of the old people; the last, my 
Princess. There are no others. You and I are the last. 
When I am dead there will be only you. And that is 
why, darling, you will never care for any of the people 
in the world very much. Because their demons are all 
dwindled and vulgar. They are not royal. Only you are 
royal, after me. Always remember that. And always 
remember, it is a great secret. If you tell people, they 
will try to kill you, because they will envy you for being 
a Princess. It is our great secret, darling. Iam a prince, 
and you a princess, of the old, old blood. And we keep 
our secret between us, all alone. And so, darling, you 
must treat all people very politely, because noblesse 
oblige. But you must never forget that you alone are 
the last of Princesses, and that all others are less than 
you are, less noble, more vulgar. Treat them politely 
and gently and kindly, daing. But you are the 
Princess, and they are commoners. Never try to think of 
them as if they were like you. They are not. You will 
find, always, that they are lacking, lacking in the royal 
touch, which only you have—.”’ 

THE PRINCESS 193 

The Princess learned her lesson early—the first lesson, 
of absolute reticence, the impossibility of intimacy with 
any other than her father; the second lesson, of naive, 
slightly benevolent politeness. As a small child, some- 
thing crystallised in her character, making her clear and 
finished, and as impervious as crystal. 

** Dear child! ’’ her hostesses said of her. ‘* She is so 
quaint and old-fashioned ; such a lady, poor little mite !”” 

She was erect, and very dainty. Always small, nearly 
tiny in physique, she seemed like a changeling beside 
her big, handsome, slightly mad father. She dressed 
very simply, usually in blues or delicate greys, with little 
collars of old Milan point, or very finely-worked linen. 
She had exquisite little hands, that made the piano sound 
like a spinet when she played. She was rather given 
to wearing cloaks and capes, instead of coats, out of 
doors, and little eighteenth-century sort of hats. Her 
complexion was pure apple-blossom. 

She looked as if she had stepped out of a picture. But 
no one, to her dying day, ever knew exactly the strange 
picture her father had framed her in, and from which 
she never stepped. 

Her grandfather and grandmother and her Aunt Maud 
demanded twice to see her, once in Rome and once in 
Paris. Each time they were charmed, piqued, and 
annoyed. She was so exquisite and such a little virgin. 
At the same time so knowing and so oddly assured. That 
odd, assured touch of condescension, and the inward 
coldness, infuriated her American relations. 

Only she really fascinated her grandfather. He was 
spellbound; in a way, in love with the little faultless 
thing. His wife would catch him brooding, musing over 
his grandchild, long months after the meeting, and 
craving to see her again. He cherished to the end the 
fond hope that she might come to live with him and her 
grandmother. 

‘¢ Thank you so much, grandfather. You are so very 

N 

194 THE PRINCESS 

kind. But Papa and I are such an old couple, you see, 
such a crochety old couple, living in a world of our own.”’ 

Her father let her see the world—from the outside. 
And he let her read. When she was in her teens she read 
Zola and Maupassant, and with the eyes of Zola and 
Maupassant she looked on Paris. A little later she read 
Tolstoi and Dostoevsky. The latter confused her. The 
others, she seemed to understand with a very shrewd, 
canny understanding, just as she understood the 
Decameron stories as she read them in their old Italian, 
or the Nibelung poems. Strange and uncanny, she 
seemed to understand things in a cold light perfectly, 
with all the flush of fire absent. She was something like 
a changeling, not quite human. 

This earned her, also, strange antipathies. Cabmen 
and railway-porters, especially in Paris and Rome, would 
suddenly treat her with brutal rudeness, when she was 
alone. They seemed to look on her with sudden violent 
antipathy. They sensed in her curious impertinence, an 
easy, sterile impertinence towards the things they felt 
most. She was so assured, and her flower of maidenhood 
was so scentless. She could look at a lusty, sensual 
Roman cabman as if he were a sort of grotesque, to make 
her smile. She knew all about him, in Zola. And the 
peculiar condescension with which she would give him 
her order, as if she, frail, beautiful thing, were the only 
reality, and he, coarse monster, were a sort of Caliban 
floundering in the mud on the margin of the pool of the 
perfect lotus, would suddenly enrage the fellow, the real 
Mediterranean who prided himself on his beauté male, 
and to whom the phallic mystery was still the only 
mystery. And he would turn a terrible face on her, bully 
her in a brutal, coarse fashion—hideous. For to him she 
had only the blasphemous impertinence of her own 
sterility. 

Encounters like these made her tremble, and made 
her know she must have support from the outside. The 

THE PRINCESS 195 

power of her spirit did not extend to these low people, 
and they had all the physical power. She realised an 
implacability of hatred in their turning on her. But she 
did not lose her head. She quietly paid out money and 
turned away. 

Those were dangerous moments, though, and she 
learned to be prepared for them. The Princess she was, 
and the fairy from the North, and could never under- 
stand the volcanic phallic rage with which coarse people 
could turn on her in a paroxysm of hatred. They never 
turned on her father like that. And quite early she 
decided it was the New England mother in her whom 
they hated. Never for one minute could she see with 
the old Roman eyes, see herself as sterility, the barren 
flower taken on airs and an intolerable impertinence. 
This was what the Roman cabman saw in her. And he 
longed to crush the barren blossom. Its sexless beauty 
and its authority put him in a passion of brutal 
revolt, 

When she was nineteen her grandfather died, leaving 
her a considerable fortune in the safe hands of responsible 
trustees. They would deliver her her income, but only 
on condition that she resided for six months in the year 
in the United States. 

** Why should they make me conditions? ” she said 
to her father. ‘‘I refuse to be imprisoned six months 
in the year in the United States. We will tell them to 
keep their money.”’ 

** Let us be wise, my little Princess, let us be wise. 
No, we are almost poor, and we are never safe from 
rudeness. I cannot allow anybody to be rude to me. I 
hate it, I hate it! ’? His eyes flamed as he said it. ‘I 
could kill any man or woman who is rude to me. But 
we are in exile in the world. We are powerless. If we 
were really poor, we should be quite powerless, and then 
I should die. No, my Princess. Let us take their 
money, then they will not dare to be rude to us. Let us 

196 THE PRINCESS 

take it, as we put on clothes, to cover ourselves from 
their aggressions.”’ 

There began a new phase, when the father and 
daughter spent their summers on the Great Lakes or in 
California, or in the South-West. The father was some- 
thing of a poet, the daughter something of a painter. 
He wrote poems about the lakes or the red-wood trees, 
and she made dainty drawings. He was physically a 
strong man, and he loved the out-of-doors. He would 
go off with her for days, paddling in a canoe and sleeping 
by a camp-fire. Frail little Princess, she was always 
undaunted; always undaunted. She would ride with 
him on horseback over the mountain trails till she was 
so tired she was nothing but a bodiless consciousness 
sitting astride her pony. But she never gave in. And 
at night he folded her in her blankets on a bed of balsam- 
pine twigs, and she lay and looked at the stars unmur- 
muring. She was fulfilling her role. 

People said to her as the years passed, and she was a 
woman of twenty-five, then a woman of thirty, and 
always the same virgin dainty Princess, ‘* knowing ”’ in 
a dispassionate way, like an old woman, and utterly 
intact : 

** Don’t you ever think what you will do when your 
father is no longer with you? ”’ 

She looked at her interlocutor with that cold, elfin 
detachment of hers : 

** No, I never think of it,’’ she said. 

She had a tiny, but exquisite little house in London, 
and another small, perfect house in Connecticut, each 
with a faithful housekeeper. Two homes, if she chose. 
And she knew many interesting literary and artistic 
people. What more? 

So the years passed imperceptibly. And she had that 
quality of the sexless fairies, she did not change. At 
thirty-three she looked twenty-three. 

Her father, however, was ageing, and becoming more 

THE PRINCESS 197 

and more queer. It was now her task to be his guardian 
in his private madness. He spent the last three years of 
life in the house in Connecticut. He was very much 
estranged, sometimes had fits of violence which almost 
killed the little Princess. Physical violence was horrible 
to her; it seemed to shatter her heart. But she found a 
woman a few years younger than herself, well educated 
and sensitive, to be a sort of nurse-companion to the mad 
old man. So the fact of madness was never openly 
admitted. Miss Cummins, the companion, had a passion- 
ate loyalty to the Princess, and a curious affection, tinged 
with love, for the handsome, white-haired, courteous 
old man, who was never at all aware of his fits of violence 
once they had passed. 

The Princess was thirty-eight years old when her 
father died. And quite unchanged. She was still tiny, 
and like a dignified, scentless flower. Her soft brownish 
hair, almost the colour of beaver fur, was bobbed, and 
fluffed softly round her apple-blossom face, that was 
modelled with an arched nose like a proud old Florentine 
portrait. In her voice, manner and bearing she was 
exceedingly still, like a flower that has blossomed in a 
shadowy place. And from her blue eyes looked out the 
Princess’s eternal laconic challenge, that grew almost 
sardonic as the years passed. She was the Princess, and 
sardonically she looked out on a princeless world. 

She was relieved when her father died, and at the same 
time, it was as if everything had evaporated around her. 
She had lived in a sort of hot-house, in the aura of her 
father’s madness. Suddenly the hot-house had been 
removed from around her, and she was in the raw, vast, 
vulgar open air. 

Quoi faire? What was she to do? She seemed faced 
with absolute nothingness. Only she had Miss Cummins, 
who shared with her the secret, and almost the passion 
for her father. In fact the Princess felt that her passion 
for her mad father had in some curious way transferred 

198 THE PRINCESS 

itself largely to Charlotte Cummins during the last years. 
And now Miss Cummins was the vessel that held the 
passion for the dead man. She herself, the Princess, 
was an empty vessel. 

An empty vessel in the enormous warehouse of the 
world. 

Quoi faire? What was she to do? She felt that, since 
she could not evaporate into nothingness, like alcohol 
from an unstoppered bottle, she must do something. 
Never before in her life had she felt the incumbency. 
Never, never had she felt she must do anything. That 
was left to the vulgar. 

Now her father was dead, she found herself on the 
fringe of the vulgar crowd, sharing their necessity to 
do something. It was a little humiliating. She felt 
herself becoming vulgarised. At the same time she 
found herself looking at men with a shrewder eye: an 
eye to marriage. Not that she felt any sudden interest 
in men, or attraction towards them. No. She was still 
neither interested nor attracted towards men vitally. 
But marriage, that peculiar abstraction, had imposed 
a sort of spell on her. She thought that marriage, in 
the blank abstract, was the thing she ought to do. That 
marriage implied a man she also knew. She knew all 
the facts. But the man seemed a property of her own 
mind rather than a thing in himself, another being. 

Her father died in the summer, the month after her 
thirty-eighth birthday. When all was over, the obvious 
thing to do, of course, was to travel. With Miss 
Cummins. The two women knew each other intimately, 
but they were always Miss Urquhart and Miss Cummins 

to one another, and a certain distance was instinctively 

maintained. Miss Cummins, from Philadelphia, of 
scholastic stock, and intelligent but untravelled, four 
years younger than the Princess, felt herself immensely 
the junior of her *‘ lady.’’? She had a sort of passionate 
veneration for the Princess, who seemed to her ageless, 

4 

THE PRINCESS 199 

timeless. She could not see the rows of tiny, dainty, 
exquisite shoes in the Princess’s cupboard without feeling 
a stab at the heart, a stab of tenderness and reverence, 
almost of awe. 

Miss Cummins also was virginal, but with a look of 
puzzled surprise in her brown eyes. Her skin was pale 
and clear, her features well modelled, but there was a 
certain blankness in her expression, where the Princess 
had an odd touch of Renaissance grandeur. Miss 
Cummins’ voice was also hushed almost to a whisper; it 
was the inevitable effect of Colin Urquhart’s room. But 
the hushedness had a hoarse quality. 

The Princess did not want to go to Europe. Her face 
seemed turned west. Now her father was gone, she felt 
she would go west, westwards, as if for ever. Following, 
no doubt, the March of Empire, which is brought up 
rather short on the Pacific coast, among swarms of 
wallowing bathers. 

No, not the Pacific coast. She would stop short of 
that. The South-West was less vulgar. She would go 
to New Mexico. 

She and Miss Cummins arrived at the Rancho del 
Cerro Gordo towards the end of August, when the crowd 
was beginning to drift back east. The ranch lay by a 
stream on the desert some four miles from the foot of 
the mountains, a mile away from the Indian pueblo of 
San Cristobal. It was a ranch for the rich; the Princess 
paid thirty dollars a day for herself and Miss Cummins. 
But then she had a little cottage to herself, among the 
apple-trees of the orchard, with an excellent cook. She 
and Miss Cummins, however, took dinner at evening in 
the large guest-house. For the Princess still entertained 
the idea of marriage. 

The guests at the Rancho del Cerro Gordo were of 
all sorts, except the poor sort. They were practically 
all rich, and many were romantic. Some were charming, 
others were vulgar, some were movie people, quite quaint 

200 THE PRINCESS 

and not unattractive in their vulgarity, and many were 
Jews. The Princess did not care for Jews, though they 
were usually the most interesting to talk to. So she 
talked a good deal with the Jews, and painted with the 
artists, and rode with the young men from College, and 
had altogether quite a good time. And yet she felt some- 
thing of a fish out of water, or a bird in the wrong forest. 
And marriage remained still completely in the abstract. 
No connecting it with any of these young men, even the 
nice ones. 

The Princess looked just twenty-five. The freshness 
of her mouth, the hushed, delicate-complexioned 
virginity of her face gave her not a day more. Only a 
certain laconic look in her eyes was disconcerting. When 
she was forced to write her age, she put twenty-eight, 
making the figure two rather badly, so that it just 
avoided being a three. 

Men hinted marriage at her. Especially boys from 
college suggested it from a distance. But they all failed 
before the look of sardonic ridicule in the Princess’s eyes. 
It always seemed to her rather preposterous, quite 
ridiculous, and a tiny bit impertinent on their part. 

The only man that intrigued her at all was one of the 
guides, a man called Romero—Domingo Romero. It 
was he who had sold the ranch itself to the Wilkiesons, 
ten years before, for two thousand dollars. He had gone 
away, then reappeared at the old place. For he was 
the son of the old Romero, the last of the Spanish family 
that had owned miles of land around San Cristobal. But 
the coming of the white man and the failure of the vast 
flocks of sheep, and the fatal inertia which overcomes 
all men, at last, on the desert near the mountains, had 
finished the Romero family. The last descendants were 
just Mexican peasants. 

Domingo, the heir, had spent his two thousand 
dollars, and was working for white people. He was now 
about thirty years old, a tall, silent fellow, with a heavy 

THE PRINCESS 201 

closed mouth and black eyes that looked across at one 
almost sullenly. From behind he was handsome, with a 
strong, natural body, and the back of his neck very dark 
and well-shapen, strong with life. But his dark face 
was long and heavy, almost sinister, with that peculiar 
heavy meaninglessness in it, characteristic of the Mexi- 
cans of his own locality. They are strong, they seem 
healthy. They laugh and joke with one another. But 
their physique and their natures seem static, as if there 
were nowhere, nowhere at all for their energies to go, 
and their faces, degenerating to misshapen heaviness, 
seem to have no raison d’étre, no radical meaning. 
Waiting either to die or to be aroused into passion and 
hope. In some of the black eyes a queer, haunting mystic 
quality, sombre and a bit gruesome, the skull-and-cross- 
bones look of the Penitentes. They had found their 
raison d’étre in self-torture and death-worship. Unable 
to wrest a positive significance for themselves from the 
vast, beautiful, but vindictive landscape they were born 
into, they turned on their own selves, and worshipped 
death through self-torture. The mystic gloom of this 
showed in their eyes. 

But as a rule the dark eyes of the Mexicans were 
heavy and half-alive, sometimes hostile, sometimes 
kindly, often with the fatal Indian glaze on them, or the 
fatal Indian glint. 

Domingo Romero was almost a typical Mexican to look 
at, with the typical heavy, dark, long face, clean-shaven, 
with an almost brutally heavy mouth. His eyes were 
black and Indian-looking. Only, at the centre of their 
hopelessness was a spark of pride, or self-confidence, or 
dauntlessness. Just a spark in the midst of the blackness 
of static despair. 

But this spark was the difference between him and the 
mass of men. It gave a certain alert sensitiveness to his 
bearing and a certain beauty to his appearance. He wore 
a low-crowned black hat, instead of the ponderous head- 

202 THE PRINCESS 

gear of the usual Mexican, and his clothes were thinnish 
and graceful. Silent, aloof, almost imperceptible in the 
landscape, he was an admirable guide, with a startling 
quick intelligence that anticipated difficulties about to 
arise. He could cook, too, crouching over the camp- 
fire and moving his lean, deft brown hands. The only 
fault he had was that he was not forthcoming, he wasn’t 
chatty and cosy. 

** Oh, don’t send Romero with us,’’ the Jews would 
say. ‘* One can’t get any response from him.”’ 

Tourists come and go, but they rarely see anything, 
inwardly. None of them ever saw the spark at the middle 
of Romero’s eye; they were not alive enough to see it. 

The Princess caught it one day, when she had him for 
a guide. She was fishing for trout in the canyon, Miss 
Cummins was reading a book, the horses were tied under 
the trees, Romero was fixing a proper fly on her line. 
He fixed the fly and handed her the line, looking up at 
her. And at that moment she caught the spark in his 
eye. And instantly she knew that he was a gentleman, 
that his ** demon,”’ as her father would have said, was a 
fine demon. And instantly her manner towards him 
changed. 

He had perched her on a rock over a quiet pool, beyond 
the cotton-wood trees. It was early September, and the 
canyon already cool, but the leaves of the cotton-woods 
were still green. The Princess stood on her rock, a small 
but perfectly-formed figure, wearing a soft, close grey 
sweater and neatly-cut grey riding breeches, with tall 
black boots, her fluffy brown hair straggling from under 
a little grey felt hat. A woman? Not quite. A change- 
ling of some sort, perched in outline there on the rock, 
in the bristling wild canyon. She knew perfectly well 
how to handle a line. Her father had made a fisherman 
of her. 

Romero, in a black shirt and with loose black trousers 
pushed into wide black riding boots, was fishing a little 

THE PRINCESS 203 

further down. He had put his hat on a rock behind 
him; his dark head was bent a little forward, watching 
the water. He had caught three trout. From time to 
time he glanced upstream at the Princess, perched there 
so daintily. He saw she had caught nothing. 

Soon he quietly drew in his line and came up to her. 
His keen eye watched her line, watched her position. 
Then, quietly, he suggested certain changes to her, 
putting his sensitive brown hand before her. And he with- 
drew a little, and stood in silence, leaning against a tree, 
watching her. He was helping her across the distance. 
She knew it, and thrilled. And in a moment she had a 
bite. In two minutes she had landed a good trout. She 
looked round at him quickly, her eyes sparkling, the 
colour heightened in her cheeks. And as she met his 
eyes a smile of greeting went over his dark face, very 
sudden, with an odd sweetness. 

She knew he was helping her. And she felt in his 
presence a subtle, insidious male kindliness she had never 
known before waiting upon her. Her cheek flushed, and 
her blue eyes darkened. 

After this, she always looked for him, and for that 
curious dark beam of a man’s kindliness which he could 
give her, as it were, from his chest, from his heart. It 
was something she had never known before. 

A vague, unspoken intimacy grew up between them. 
She liked his voice, his appearance, his presence. His 
natural language was Spanish; he spoke English like a 
foreign language, rather slow, with a slight hesitation, 
but with a sad, plamgent sonority lingering over from 
his Spanish. There was a certain subtle correctness in 
his appearance; he was always perfectly shaved; his 
hair was thick and rather long on top, but always care- 
fully groomed behind. And his fine black cashmere 
shirt, his wide leather belt, his well-cut, wide black 
trousers going into the embroidered cowboy boots had 
a certain inextinguishable elegance. He wore no silver 

204 THE PRINCESS 

rings or buckles. Only his boots were embroidered and 
decorated at the top with an inlay of white suede. He 
seemed elegant, slender, yet he was very strong. 

And at the same time, curiously, he gave her the 
feeling that death was not far from him. Perhaps he too 
was half in love with death. However that may be, the 
sense she had that death was not far from him made him 
‘* possible ”? to her. 

Small as she was, she was quite a good horsewoman. 
They gave her at the ranch a sorrel mare, very lovely 
in colour, and well-made, with a powerful broad neck 
and the hollow back that betokens a swift runner. 
Tansy, she was called. Her only fault was the usual 
mare’s failing, she was inclined to be hysterical. 

So that every day the Princess set off with Miss 
Cummins and Romero, on horseback, riding into the 
mountains. Once they went camping for several days, 
with two more friends in the party. 

**]T think I like it better,’? the Princess said to 
Romero, ‘* when we three go alone.”’ 

And he gave her one of his quick, transfiguring smiles. 

It was curious no white man had ever showed her this 
capacity for subtle gentleness, this power to help her in 
silence across a distance, if she were fishing without 
success, or tired of her horse, or if Tansy suddenly got 
scared. It was as if Romero could send her from his 
heart a dark beam of succour and sustaining. She had 
never know this before, and it was very thrilling. 

Then the smile that suddenly creased his dark face, 
showing the strong white teeth. It creased his face 
almost into a savage grotesque. And at the same time 
there was in it something so warm, such a dark flame 
of kindliness for her, she was elated into her true Princess 
self. ‘ 
Then that vivid, latent spark in his eye, which she 
had seen, and which she knew he was aware she had 
seen. It made an inter-recognition between them, silent 

THE PRINCESS 205 

and delicate. Here he was delicate as a woman in this 
subtle inter-recognition. 

And yet his presence only put to flight in her the idée 
fixe of *“*marriage.’’ For some reason, in her strange little 
brain, the idea of marrying him could not enter. Not 
for any definite reason. He was in himself a gentleman, 
and she had plenty of money for two. There was no 
actual obstacle. Nor was she conventional. 

No, now she came down to it, it was as if their two 
** demons ”’ could marry, were perhaps married. Only 
their two selves, Miss Urquhart and Sefor Domingo 
Romero, were for some reason incompatible. There was 
a peculiar subtle intimacy of inter-recognition between 
them. But she did not see in the least how it would 
lead to marriage. Almost she could more easily marry 
one of the nice boys from Harvard or Yale. 

The time passed, and she let it pass. The end of 
September came, with aspens going yellow on the 
mountain heights, and oak-scrub going red. But as yet 
the cotton-woods in the valley and canyons had not 
changed. 

** When will you go away? ’? Romero asked her, 
looking at her fixedly, with a blank black eye. 

‘* By the end of October,’”’ she said. ‘I have pro- 
mised to be in Santa Barbara at the beginning of 
November.” 

He was hiding the spark in his eye from her. But she 
saw the peculiar sullen thickening of his heavy mouth. 

She had complained to him many times that one never 
saw any wild animals, except chipmunks and squirrels, 
and perhaps a skunk and a porcupine. Never a deer, 
or a bear, or a mountain lion. 

‘* Are there no bigger animals in these mountains? ” 
she asked, dissatisfied. 

‘* Yes,”? he said. ‘* There are deer—I see their tracks. 
And I saw the tracks of a bear.”’ 

‘But why can one never see the animals them- 

206 THE PRINCESS 

selves? ’? She looked dissatisfied and wistful like a 
child. 

** Why, it’s pretty hard for you to see them. They 
won’t let you some close. You have to keep still, in a 
place where they come. Or else you have to follow their 
tracks a long way.”’ 

** I can’t bear to go away till I’ve seen them : a bear, 
or a deer—”’ 

The smile came suddenly on his face, indulgent. 

** Well, what do you want? Do you want to go up 
into the mountains to some place, to wait till they 
come? ”’ 

** Yes,’’ she said, looking up at him with a sudden 
naive impulse of recklessness. 

And immediately his face became sombre again, 
responsible. 

‘* Well,’ he said, with slight irony, a touch of mockery 
of her. ‘* You will have to find a house. It’s very cold 
at night now. You would have to stay all night in a 
house.”’ 

‘© And there are no houses up there? ”’ she said. 

** 'Yes,’? he replied. ‘* There is a little shack that 
belongs to me, that a miner built a long time ago, looking 
for gold. You can go there and stay one night, and 
maybe you see something. Maybe! [I don’t know. 
Maybe nothing come.” 

‘* How much chance is there? ”’ 

*© Well, I don’t know. Last time when I was there 
I see three deer come down to drink at the water, and 
I shot two raccoons. But maybe this time we don’t see 
anything.” 

** Is there water there? ”? she asked. 

*¢ Yes, there is a little round pond, you know, below 
the spruce trees. And the water from the snow runs into. 
it.” 

** Is it far away? ”’ she asked. 

‘Yes, pretty far. You see that ridge there °*—and 

THE PRINCESS 207 

turning to the mountains he lifted his arm in the gesture 
which is somehow so moving, out in the West, pointing 
to the distance—* that ridge where there are no trees, 
only rock ’’—his black eyes were focussed on the dis- 
tance, his face impassive, but as if in pain—*‘ you go 
round that ridge, and along, then you come down 
through the spruce trees to where that cabin is. My 
father bought that placer claim from a miner who was 
broke, but nobody ever found any gold or anything, and 
nobody ever goes there. Too lonesome! ” 

The Princess watched the massive, heavy-sitting, 
beautiful bulk of the Rocky Mountains. It was early in 
October, and the aspens were already losing their gold 
leaves; high up, the spruce and pine seemed to be 
growing darker; the great flat patches of oak-scrub on 
the heights were red like gore. 

**Can I go over there? ’’ she asked, turning to him 
and meeting the spark in his eye. 

His face was heavy with responsibility. 

** Yes,’’ he said, ‘* you can go. But there’ll be snow 
over the ridge, and it’s awful cold, and awful lone- 
some.”’ 

**T should like to go,” she said, persistent. 

** All right,”? he said. ‘* You can go if you want 
to.”? 

She doubted, though, if the Wilkiesons would let her 
go; at least alone with Romero and Miss Cummins. 

Yet an obstinacy characteristic of her nature, an 
obstinacy tinged perhaps with madness, had taken hold 
of her. She wanted to look over the mountains into 
their secret heart. She wanted to descend to the cabin 
below the spruce trees, near the tarn of bright green 
water. She wanted to see the wild animals move about 
in their wild unconsciousness. 

‘** Let us say to the Wilkiesons that we want to make 
the trip round the Frijoles canyon,”’ she said. 

The trip round the Frijoles canyon was a usual thing. 

208 THE PRINCESS 

It would not be strenuous, nor cold, nor lonely : they 
could sleep in the log house that was called an hotel. 

Romero looked at her quickly. 

** Tf you want to say that,’’ he replied, ‘* you can 
tell Mrs. Wilkieson. Only I know she’ll be mad with 
me if I take you up in the mountains to that place. And 
I’ve got to go there first with a pack-horse, to take lots 
of blankets and some bread. Maybe Miss Cummins can’t 
stand it. Maybe not. It’s a hard trip.” 

He was speaking, and thinking, in the heavy, discon- 
nected Mexican fashion. 

** Never mind! *’? The Princess was suddenly very 
decisive and stiff with authority. ‘‘ I want to do it. I will 
arrange with Mrs. Wilkieson. And we’ll go on Saturday.”’ 

He shook his head slowly. 

**T’ve got to go up on Sunday with a pack-horse and 
blankets,’’ he said. ‘‘ Can’t do it before.”’ 

‘* Very well! ’’ she said, rather piqued. ‘* Then we’ll 
start on Monday.”’ 

She hated being thwarted even the tiniest bit. 

He knew that if he started with the pack on Sunday 
at dawn he would not be back until late at night. But 
he consented that they should start on Monday morning 
at seven. The obedient Miss Cummins was told to pre- 
pare for the Frijoles trip. On Sunday Romero had his 
day off. He had not put in an appearance when the 
Princess retired on Sunday night, but on Monday 
morning, as she was dressing, she saw him bringing in 
the three horses from the corral. She was in high spirits. 

The night had been cold. There was ice at the edges 
of the irrigation ditch, and the chipmunks crawled into 
the sun and lay with wide, dumb, anxious eyes, almost 
too numb to run. 

‘““We may be away two or three days,’? said the 
Princess. 

** Very well. We won’t begin to be anxious about — 
you before Thursday, then,’’ said Mrs Wilkieson, who 

THE PRINCESS 209 

was young and capable: from Chicago. ‘* Anyway,” 
she added, ‘* Romero will see you through. He’s so 
trustworthy.” 

The sun was already on the desert as they set off 
towards the mountains, making the greasewood and the 
sage pale as pale-grey sands, luminous the great level 
around them. To the right glinted the shadows of the 
adobe pueblo, flat and almost invisible on the plain, 
earth of its earth. Behind lay the ranch and the tufts 
of tall, plumy cottonwoods, whose summits were yellow- 
ing under the perfect blue sky. 

Autumn breaking into colour in the great spaces of 
the South-West. 

But the three trotted gently along the trail, towards 
the sun that sparkled yellow just above the dark bulk 
of the ponderous mountains. Sideslopes were already 
gleaming yellow, flaming with a second light, under the 
coldish blue of the pale sky. The front slopes were in 
shadow, with submerged lustre of red oak-scrub and dull- 
gold aspens, blue-black pines and grey-blue rock. While 
the canyon was full of a deep blueness. 

They rode single file, Romero first, on a black horse. 
Himself in black, he made a flickering black spot in the 
delicate pallor of the great landscape, where even pine- 
trees at a distance take a film of blue paler than their 
green. Romero rode on in silence past the tufts of furry 
greasewood. The Princess came next, on her sorrel 
mare. And Miss Cummins, who was not quite happy on 
horseback, came last, in the pale dust that the others 
kicked up. Sometimes her horse sneezed, and she started. 

But on they went, at a gentle trot. Romero never 
looked round. He could hear the sound of the hoofs 
following, and that was all he wanted. 

For the rest, he held ahead. And the Princess, with 
that black, unheeding figure always travelling away from 
her, felt strangely helpless, withal elated. 

They neared the pale, round foot-hills, dotted with 

oO 

210 THE PRINCESS 

the round dark pifion and cedar shrubs. The horses 
clinked and clattered among stones. Occasionally a big 
round greasewood held out fleecy tufts of flowers, pure 
gold. They wound into blue shadow, then up a steep 
stony slope, with the world lying pallid away behind 
and below. Then they dropped into the shadow of the 
San Cristobal canyon. 

The stream was running full and swift. Occasionally 
the horses snatched at a tuft of grass. The trail 
narrowed and became rocky; the rocks closed in; it was 
dark and cool as the horses climbed and climbed 
upwards, and the tree-trunks crowded in in the 
shadowy, silent tightness of the canyon. They were 
among cottonwood trees that ran up straight and 
smooth and round to an extraordinary height. Above, 
the tips were gold, and it was sun. But away below, 
where the horses struggled up the rocks and wound 
among the trunks, there was still blue shadow by the 
sound of waters and an occasional grey festoon of old 
man’s beard, and here and there a pale, dipping cranes- 
bill flower among the tangle and the débris of the virgin 
place. And again the chill entered the Princess’s heart 
as she realised what a tangle of decay and despair lay in 
the virgin forests. 

They scrambled downwards, splashed across stream, 
up rocks and along the trail of the other side. Romero’s 
black horse stopped, looked down quizzically at the 
fallen trees, then stepped over lightly. The Princess’s 
sorrel followed, carefully. But Miss Cummins’s buck- 
skin made a fuss, and had to be got round. 

In the same silence, save for the clinking of the horses 
and the splashing as the trail crossed stream, they 
worked their way upwards in the tight, tangled shadow. 
of the canyon. Sometimes, crossing stream, the Princess 
would glance upwards, and then always her heart caught 
in her breast. For high up, away in heaven, the 
mountain heights shone yellow, dappled with dark spruce 

THE PRINCESS 211 

firs, clear almost as speckled daffodils against the pale 
turquoise blue lying high and serene above the dark- 
blue shadew where the Princess was. And she would 
snatch at the blood-red leaves of the oak as her horse 
crossed a more open slope, not knowing what she felt. 

They were getting fairly high, occasionally lifted above 
the canyon itself, in the low groove below the speckled, 
gold-sparkling heights which towered beyond. Then 
again they dipped and crossed stream, the horses 
stepping gingerly across a tangle of fallen, frail aspen 
stems, then suddenly fioundering in a mass of rocks. 
The black emerged ahead, his black tail waving. The 
Princess let her mare find her own footing; then she too 
emerged from the clatter. She rode on after the black. 
Then came a great frantic rattle of the buckskin behind. 
The Princess was aware of Romero’s dark face looking 
round, with a strange, demon-like watchfulness, before 
she herself looked round, to see the buckskin scrambling 
rather lamely beyond the rocks, with one of his pale 
buff knees already red with blood. 

** He almost went down! ” called Miss Cummins. 

But Romero was already out of the saddle and hasten- 
ing down the path. He made quiet little noises to the 
buckskin, and began examining the cut knee. 

“Ts he hurt? ”? cried Miss Cummins anxiously, and 
she climbed hastily down. 

** Oh, my goodness ! *’ she cried, as she saw the blood 
running down the slender buff leg of the horse in a thin 
trickle. ‘* Isn’t that awful? ’? She spoke in a stricken 
voice, and her face was white. 

Romero was still carefully feeling the knee of the buck- 
skin. Then he made him walk a few paces. And at 
last he stood up straight and shook his head. 

** Not very bad! ” he said. ‘‘ Nothing broken.” 

Again he bent and worked at the knee. Then he 
looked up at the Princess. 

** He can go on,”’ he said. “‘ It’s not bad.” 

212 THE PRINCESS 

The Princess looked down at the dark face in silence. 

** What, go on right up here? ”? cried Miss Cummins. 
** How many hours? ”’ 

** About five,’’ said Romero simply. 

** Five hours! ’’ cried Miss Cummins. ‘‘ A horse with 
alame knee! And a steep mountain! Why-y! ” 

** Yes, it’s pretty steep up there,’? said Romero, 
pushing back his hat and staring fixedly at the bleeding 
knee. The buckskin stood in a stricken sort of dejection. 
** But I think he’ll make it all right,’’ the man added. 

**Oh! ” cried Miss Cummins, her eyes bright with 
sudden passion of unshed tears. ‘‘ I wouldn’t think of 
it. I wouldn’t ride him up there, not for any money.” 

** Why wouldn’t you? ”’ asked Romero. 

** Tt hurts him.”’ 

Romero bent down again to the horse’s knee. 

** Maybe it hurts him a little,’’ he said. ‘* But he can 
make it all right, and his leg won’t get stiff.”’ 

‘What! Ride him five hours up the steep 
mountains? *’ cried Miss Cummins. ‘‘ I couldn’t. I just 
couldn’t do it. Ill lead him a little way and see if he can 
go. But I couldn’t ride him again. I couldn’t. Let 
me walk.”’ 

‘* But Miss Cummins, dear, if Romero says he’ll be 
all right? ’’ said the Princess. 

** T know it hurts him. Oh, I just couldn’t bear it.” 

There was no doing anything with Miss Cummins. 
The thought of a hurt animal always put her into a sort 
of hysterics. 

They walked forward a little, leading the buckskin. 
He limped rather badly. Miss Cummins sat on a rock. 

“* Why, it’s agony to see him!” she cried. ‘* It’s 
cruel | *” . 
‘* He won’t limp after a bit, if you take no notice of 
him,’? said Romero. ‘‘ Now he plays up, and limps very 

much, because he wants to make you see.”’ 

** I don’t think there can be much playing up,’ said 

THE PRINCESS 213 

Miss Cummins bitterly. ‘* We can see how it must hurt 
him.”’ 

** Tt don’t hurt much,”’ said Romero. 

But now Miss Cummins was silent with antipathy. 

It was a deadlock. The party remained motionless on 
the trail, the Princess in the saddle, Miss Cummins seated 
on a rock, Romero standing black and remote near the 
drooping buckskin. 

** Well! ’’ said the man suddenly at last. ‘‘I guess 
we go back, then.’ 

And he looked up swiftly at his horse, which was 
cropping at the mountain herbage and treading on the 
trailing reins. 

** No!” cried the Princess. ‘‘ Oh no!’ Her voice 
rang with a great wail of disappointment and anger. 
Then she checked herself. 

Miss Cummins rose with energy. 

** Let me lead the buckskin home,’ she said, with 
cold dignity, ‘* and you two go on.”’ 

This was received in silence. The Princess was looking 
down at her with a sardonic, almost cruel gaze. 

‘* We’ve only come about two hours,’’ said Miss 
Cummins. ‘* I don’t mind a bit leading him home. But 
I couldn’t ride him. I couldn’t have him ridden with 
that knee.’’ 

This again was received in dead silence. Romero 
remained impassive, almost inert. 

** Very well, then,”’ said the Princess. ‘* You lead 
him home. You’ll be quite all right. Nothing can 
happen to you, possibly. And say to them that we have 
gone on and shall be home to-morrow—or the day after.”’ 

She spoke coldly and distinctly. For she could not 
bear to be thwarted. 

** Better all go back, and come again another day,”’ 
said Romero—non-committal. 

‘* There will never be another day,’’ cried the Princess. 
** J want to go on.”’ 

214 THE PRINCESS 

She looked at him square in the eyes, and met the 
spark in his eye. 

He raised his shoulders slightly. 

‘* Tf you want it,” he said. ‘* I’ll go on with you. 
But Miss Cummins can ride my horse to the end of the 
canyon, and I lead the buckskin. Then I come back to 
you.”’ 

It was arranged so. Miss Cummins had her saddle 
put on Romero’s black horse, Romero took the buck- 
~skin’s bridle, and they started back. The Princess rode 
very slowly on, upwards, alone. She was at first so 
angry with Miss Cummins that she was blind to every- 
thing else. She just let her mare follow her own 
inclinations. 

The peculiar spell of anger carried the Princess on, 
almost unconscious, for an hour or so. And by this time 
she was beginning to climb pretty high. Her horse 
walked steadily all the time. They emerged on a bare 
slope, and the trail wound through frail aspen-stems. 
Here a wind swept, and some of the aspens were already 
bare. Others were fluttering their discs of pure, solid 
yellow leaves, so nearly like petals, while the slope ahead 
was one soft, glowing fleece of daffodil yellow; fleecy 
like a golden foxskin, and yellow as daffodils alive in the 
wind and the high mountain sun. 

She paused and looked back. The near great slopes 
were mottled with gold and the dark hue of spruce, like 
some unsinged eagle, and the light lay gleaming upon 
them. Away through the gap of the canyon she could 
see the pale blue of the egg-like desert, with the crumpled 
dark crack of the Rio Grande Canyon. And far, far off, 
the blue mountains like a fence of angels on the horizon. 

And she thought of her adventure. She was going on 
alone with Romero. But then she was very sure of her- 
self, and Romero was not the kind of man to do anything 
to her against her will. This was her first thought. And 
she just had a fixed desire to go over the brim of the 

THE PRINCESS 215 

mountains, to look into the inner chaos of the Rockies. 
And she wanted to go with Romero, because he had 
some peculiar kinship with her; there was some peculiar 
link between the two of them. Miss Cummins anyhow 
would have been only a discordant note. 

She rode on, and emerged at length in the lap of the 
summit. Beyond her was a great concave of stone and 
stark, dead-grey trees, where the mountain ended against 
the sky. But nearer was the dense black, bristling 
spruce, and at her feet was the lap of the summit, a flat 
little valley of sere grass and quiet-standing yellow 
aspens, the stream trickling like a thread across. 

It was a little valley or shell from which the stream 
was gently poured into the lower rocks and trees of the 
canyon. Around her was a fairy-like gentleness, the 
delicate sere grass, the groves of delicate-stemmed aspens 
dropping their flakes of bright yellow. And the delicate, 
quick little stream threading through the wild, sere grass. 

Here one might expect deer and fawns and wild things, 
as in a little paradise. Here she was to wait for Romero, 
and they were to have lunch. 

She unfastened her saddle and pulled it to the ground 
with a crash, letting her horse wander with a long rope. 
How beautiful Tansy looked, sorrel, among the yellow 
leaves that lay like a patina on the sere ground. The 
Princess herself wore a fleecy sweater of a pale, sere 
buff, like the grass, and riding breeches of a pure orange- 
tawny colour. She felt quite in the picture. 

From her saddle pouches she took the packages of 
lunch, spread a little cloth, and sat to wait for Romero. 
Then she made a little fire. Then she ate a devilled egg. 
Then she ran after Tansy, who was straying across- 
stream. Then she sat in the sun, in the stillness near 
the aspens, and waited. 

The sky was blue. Her little alp was soft and delicate 
as fairy-land. But beyond and up jutted the great 
slopes, dark with the pointed feathers of spruce, bristling 

216 THE PRINCESS 

with grey dead trees among grey rock, or dappled with 
dark and gold. The beautiful, but fierce, heavy, cruel 
mountains, with their moments of tenderness. 

She saw Tansy start, and begin to run. Two ghost- 
like figures on horseback emerged from the black of the 
spruce across the stream. It was two Indians on horse- 
back, swathed like seated mummies in their pale-grey 
cotton blankets. Their guns jutted beyond the saddles. 
They rode straight towards her, to her thread of smoke. 

As they came near, they unswathed themselves and 
greeted her, looking at her curiously from their dark 
eyes. Their black hair was somewhat untidy, the long 
rolled plaits on their shoulders were soiled. They looked 
tired. 

They got down from their horses near her little fire— 
a camp was a camp—swathed their blankets round their 
hips, pulled the saddles from their ponies and turned 
them loose, then sat down. One was a young Indian 
whom she had met before, the other was an older man. 

** You all alone? ” said the younger man. 

** Romero will be here in a minute,”’ she said, glancing 
back along the trail. 

‘* Ah, Romero! You with him? Where are you 
going? ”’ 

‘* Round the ridge,”? she said. ‘‘ Where are you 
going? ”’ 

** We going down to Pueblo.”’ 

** Been out hunting? How long have you been out? ”’ 

** Yes. Been out five days.”? The young Indian gave 
a little meaningless laugh. 

** Got anything? ”’ 

“No. We see tracks of two deer—but not got 
nothing.” 

The Princess noticed a suspicious looking bulk under 
one of the saddles—surely a folded-up deer. But she 
said nothing. 

*“* You must have been cold,’ she said. 

THE PRINCESS 217 

** Yes, very cold in the night. And hungry. Got 
nothing to eat since yesterday. [Eat it all up.”? And 
again he laughed his little meaningless laugh. Under 
their dark skins, the two men looked peaked and hungry. 
The Princess rummaged for food among the saddle-bags. 
There was a lump of bacon—the regular stand-back— 
and some bread. She gave them this, and they began 
toasting slices of it on long sticks at the fire. Such was 
the little camp Romero saw as he rode down the slope : 
the Princess in her orange breeches, her head tied in a 
blue-and-brown silk kerchief, sitting opposite the two 
dark-headed Indians across the camp-fire, while one of 
the Indians was leaning forward toasting bacon, his 
two plaits of braid-swathed hair dangling as if wearily. 

Romero rode up, his face expressionless. The Indians 
greeted him in Spanish. He unsaddled his horse, took 
food from the bags, and sat down at the camp to eat. 
The Princess went to the stream for water, and to wash 
her hands. 

** Got coffee? *? asked the Indians. 

** No coffee this outfit,’’ said Romero. 

They lingered an hour or more in the warm midday 
sun. Then Romero saddled the horses. The Indians 
still squatted by the fire. Romero and the Princess rode 
away, calling Adios! to the Indians, over the stream and 
into the dense spruce whence the two strange figures 
had emerged. 

When they were alone, Romero turned and looked at 
her curiously, in a way she could not understand, with 
such a hard glint in his eyes. And for the first time she 
wondered if she was rash. 

‘“T hope you don’t mind going alone with me,’’ she 
said. 

*¢ Tf you want it,”’ he replied. 

They emerged at the foot of the great bare slope of 
rocky summit, where dead spruce-trees stood sparse and 
bristling like bristles on a grey dead hog. Romero said 

218 THE PRINCESS 

the Mexicans, twenty years back, had fired the moun- 
tains, to drive out the whites. This grey concave slope of 
summit was corpse-like. 

The trail was almost invisible. Romero watched for 
the trees which the Forest Service had blazed. And they 
climbed the stark corpse slope, among dead spruce, 
fallen and ash-grey, into the wind. The wind came 
rushing from the west, up the funnel of the canyon, 
from the desert. And there was the desert, like a vast 
mirage tilting slowly upwards towards the west, immense 
and pallid, away beyond the funnel of the canyon. The 
Princess could hardly look. 

For an hour their horses rushed the slope, hastening 
with a great working of the haunches upwards, and 
halting to breathe, scrambling again, and rowing their 
way up length by length, on the livid, slanting wall. 
While the wind blew like some vast machine. 

After an hour they were working their way on the 
incline, no longer forcing straight up. All was grey and 
dead around them; the horses picked their way over the 
silver-grey corpses of the spruce. But they were near the 
top, near the ridge. 

Even the horses made a rush for the last bit. They 
had worked round to a scrap of spruce forest near the 
very top. They hurried in, out of the huge, monstrous, 
mechanical wind, that whistled inhumanly and was 
palely cold. So, stepping through the dark screen of 
trees, they emerged over the crest. 

In front now was nothing but mountains, ponderous, 
massive, down-sitting mountains, in a huge and intricate 
knot, empty of life or soul. Under the bristling black 
feathers of spruce near by lay patches of white snow. 
The lifeless valleys were concaves of rock and spruce, 
the rounded summits and the hog-backed summits of 
grey rock crowded one behind the other like some mon- 
strous herd in arrest. 

It frightened the Princess, it was so inhuman. She 

THE PRINCESS 219 

had not thought it could be so inhuman, so, as it were, 
anti-life. And yet now one of her desires was fulfilled. 
She had seen it, the massive, gruesome, repellent core of 
the Rockies. She saw it there beneath her eyes, in its 
gigantic, heavy gruesomeness. 

And she wanted to go back. At this moment she 
wanted to turn back. She had looked down into the 
intestinal knot of these mountains. She was frightened. 
She wanted to go back. 

But Romero was riding on, on the lee side of the spruce 
forest, above the concaves of the inner mountains. He 
turned round to her and pointed at the slope with a dark 
hand. 

‘* Here a miner has been trying for gold,’’ he said. 
It was a grey, scratched-out heap near a hole—like a 
great badger hole. And it looked quite fresh. 

** Quite lately? ’? said the Princess. 

**No, long ago—twenty, thirty years.”? He had 
reined in his horse and was looking at the mountains. 
‘Look! ”? he said. ‘* There goes the Forest Service 
trail—along those ridges, on the top, way over there till it 
comes to Lucytown, where is the Government road. We 
go down there—no trail—see behind that mountain—you 
see the top, no trees, and some grass? ”’ 

His arm was lifted, his brown hand pointing, his dark 
eyes piercing into the distance, as he sat on his black 
horse twisting round to her. Strange and ominous, only 
the demon of himself, he seemed to her. She was dazed 
and a little sick, at that height, and she could not see 
any more. Only she saw an eagle turning in the air 
beyond, and the light from the west showed the pattern 
on him underneath. 

‘¢ Shall I ever be able to go so far? ”’ asked the Prin- 
cess faintly, petulantly. 

**Oh yes! All easy now. No more hard places.” 

They worked along the ridge, up and down, keeping 
on the lee side, the inner side, in the dark shadow. It 

220 THE PRINCESS 

was cold. Then the trail laddered up again, and they 
emerged on a narrow ridge-track, with the mountain 
slipping away enormously on either side. The Princess 
was afraid. For one moment she looked out, and saw the 
desert, the desert ridges, more desert, more blue ridges, 
shining pale and very vast, far below, vastly palely 
tilting to the western horizon. It was ethereal and 
terrifying in its gleaming, pale, half-burnished immen- 
sity, tilted at the west. She could not bear it. To the 
left was the ponderous, involved mass of mountains all 
kneeling heavily. 

She closed her eyes and let her consciousness evaporate 
away. The mare followed the trail. So on and on, in 
the wind again. 

They turned their backs to the wind, facing inwards 
to the mountains. She thought they had left the trail; 
it was quite invisible. 

** No,” he said, lifting his hand and pointing. ‘** Don’t 
you see the blazed trees? ”’ 

And making an effort of consciousness, she was able 
to perceive on a pale-grey dead spruce stem the old marks 
where an axe had chipped a piece away. But with the 
height, the cold, the wind, her brain was numb. 

They turned again and began to descend; he told her 
they had left the trail. The horses slithered in the loose 
stones, picking their way downward. It was afternoon, 
the sun stood obtrusive and gleaming in the lower 
heavens—about four o’clock. The horses went steadily, 
slowly, but obstinately onwards. The air was getting 
colder. They were in among the lumpish peaks and 
steep concave valleys. She was barely conscious at all 
of Romero. 

He dismounted and came to help her from her saddle. 
She tottered, but would not betray her feebleness. 

** We must slide down here,”’ he said. ‘* I can lead 
the horses.”’ 

They were on a ridge, and facing a steep bare slope 

THE PRINCESS 221 

of pallid, tawny mountain grass on which the western 
sun shone full. It was steep and concave. The Princess 
felt she might start slipping, and go down like a toboggan 
into the great hollow. 

But she pulled herself together. Her eye blazed up 
again with excitement and determination. A wind 
rushed past her; she could hear the shriek of spruce trees 
far below. Bright spots came on her cheeks as her hair 
blew across. She looked a wild, fairy-like little thing. 

** No,”’ she said. ‘*I will take my horse.”’ 

** Then mind she doesn’t slip down on top of you,”’ said 
Romero. And away he went, nimbly dropping down 
the pale, steep incline, making from rock to rock, down 
the grass, and following any little slanting groove. His 
horse hopped and slithered after him, and sometimes 
stopped dead, with forefeet pressed back, refusing to go 
further. He, below his horse, looked up and pulled the 
reins gently, and encouraged the creature. Then the 
horse once more dropped his forefeet with a jerk, and the 
descent continued. 

The Princess set off in blind, reckless pursuit, tottering 
and yet nimble. And Romero, looking constantly back 
to see how she was faring, saw her fluttering down like 
some queer little bird, her orange breeches twinkling 
like the legs of some duck, and her head, tied in the blue 
and buff kerchief, bound round and round like the head 
of some blue-topped bird. The sorrel mare rocked and 
slipped behind her. But down came the Princess in a 
reckless intensity, a tiny, vivid spot on the great hollow 
flank of the tawny mountain. So tiny! Tiny as a frail 
bird’s egg. It made Romero’s mind go blank with 
wonder. 

But they had to get down, out of that cold and 
dragging wind. The spruce trees stood below, where a 
tiny stream emerged in stones. Away plunged Romero, 
zigzagging down. And away behind, up the slope, 
fluttered the tiny, bright-coloured Princess, holding the 

222 THE PRINCESS 

end of the long reins, and leading the lumbering, four- 
footed, sliding mare. 

At last they were down. Romero sat in the sun, below 
the wind, beside some squaw-berry bushes. The Princess 
came near, the colour flaming in her cheeks, her eyes 
dark blue, much darker than the kerchief on her head, 
and glowing unnaturally. 

** We make it,’’ said Romero. 

‘* Yes,’’ said the Princess, dropping the reins and sub- 
siding on to the grass, unable to speak, unable to think. 

But, thank heaven, they were out of the wind and in 
the sun. 

In a few minutes her consciousness and her control 
began to come back. She drank a little water. Romero 
was attending to the saddles. Then they set off again, 
leading the horses still a little further down the tiny 
stream-bed. Then they could mount. 

They rode down a bank and into a valley grove dense 
with aspens. Winding through the thin, crowding, pale- 
smooth stems, the sun shone flickering beyond them, and 
the disc-like aspen leaves, waving queer mechanical 
signals, seemed to be splashing the gold light before her 
eyes. She rode on in a splashing dazzle of gold. 

Then they entered shadow and the dark, resinous 
spruce trees. The fierce boughs always wanted to sweep 
her off her horse. She had to twist and squirm past. 

But there was a semblance of an old trail. And all at 
once they emerged in the sun on the edge of the spruce- 
grove, and there was a little cabin, and the bottom of a 
small, naked valley with grey rock and heaps of stones, 
and a round pool of intense green water, dark green. 
The sun was just about to leave it. 

Indeed, as she stood, the shadow came over the cabin 
and over herself; they were in the lower gloom, a twi- 
light. Above, the heights still blazed. 

It was a little hole of a cabin, near the spruce trees, 
with an earthen floor and an unhinged door. There was 

THE PRINCESS 2238 

a wooden bed-bunk, three old sawn-off log-lengths to sit 
on as stools, and a sort of fireplace; no room for any- 
thing else. The little hole would hardly contain two 
people. The roof had gone—but Romero had laid on 
thick spruce-boughs. 

The strange squalor of the primitive forest pervaded 
the place, the squalor of animals and their droppings, the 
squalor of the wild. The Princess knew the peculiar 
repulsiveness of it. She was tired and faint. 

Romero hastily got a handful of twigs, set a little fire 
going in the stove grate, and went out to attend to the 
horses. The Princess vaguely, mechanically, put sticks 
on the fire, in a sort of stupor, watching the blaze, 
stupefied and fascinated. She could not make much fire 
—it would set the whole cabin alight. And smoke oozed 
out of the dilapidated mud-and-stone chimney. 

When Romero came in with the saddle-pouches and 
saddles, hanging the saddles on the wall, there sat the 
little Princess on her stump of wood in front of the dil- 
apidated fire-grate, warming her tiny hands at the blaze, 
while her orange breeches glowed almost like another 
fire. She was in a sort of stupor. 

** You have some whisky now, or some tea? Or wait 
for some soup? ”’ he asked. 

She rose and looked at him with bright, dazed eyes, 
half comprehending; the colour glowing hectic in her 
cheeks. 

** Some tea,’’ she said, ‘* with a little whisky in it. 
Where’s the kettle? ”’ 

‘* Wait,”’ he said. ‘ I’ll bring the things.”’ 

She took her cloak from the back of her saddle, and 
followed him into the open. It was a deep cup of shadow. 
But above the sky was still shining, and the heights of 
the mountains were blazing with aspen like fire blazing. 

Their horses were cropping the grass among the stones. 
Romero clambered up a heap of grey stones and began 
lifting away logs and rocks, till he had opened the 

224 THE PRINCESS 

mouth of one of the miner’s little old workings. This 
was his cache. He brought out bundles of blankets, 
pans for cooking, a little petrol camp-stove, an axe, 
the regular camp outfit. He seemed so quick and 
energetic and full of force. This quick force dismayed 
the Princess a little. 

She took a saucepan and went down the stones to the 
water. It was very still and mysterious, and of a deep 
green colour, yet pure, transparent as glass. How cold 
the place was! How mysterious and fearful. 

She crouched in her dark cloak by the water, rinsing 
the saucepan, feeling the cold heavy above her, the 
shadow like a vast weight upon her, bowing her down. 
The sun was leaving the mountain tops, departing, 
leaving her under profound shadow. Soon it would 
crush her down completely. 

Sparks P—or eyes looking at her across the water? She 
gazed, hypnotised. And with her sharp eyes she made 
out in the dusk the pale form of a bob-cat crouching by 
the water’s edge, pale as the stones among which it 
crouched, opposite. And it was watching her with cold, 
electric eyes of strange intentness, a sort of cold, icy 
wonder and fearlessness. She saw its museau pushed 
forward, its tufted ears pricking intensely up. It was 
watching her with cold, animal curiosity, something 
demonish and conscienceless. 

She made a swift movement, spilling her water. And 
in a flash the creature was gone, leaping like a cat that 
is escaping; but strange and soft in its motion, with its 
little bob-tail. Rather fascinating. Yet that cold, 
intent, demonish watching! She shivered with cold and 
fear. She knew well enough the dread and repulsiveness 
of the wild. 

Romero carried in the bundles of bedding and the. 
camp outfit. The windowless cabin was already dark 
inside. He lit a lantern, and then went out again with 
the axe. She heard him chopping wood as she fed sticks 

THE PRINCESS 225 

to the fire under her water. When he came in with an 
armful of oak-scrub faggots, she had just thrown the tea 
into the water. 

‘* Sit down,”’ she said, * and drink tea.’’ 

He poured a little bootleg whisky into the enamel 
cups, and in the silence the two sat on the log-ends, 
sipping the hot liquid and coughing occasionally from 
the smoke. 

‘* We burn these oak sticks,’’ he said. ‘* They don’t 
make hardly any smoke.”’ 

Curious and remote he was, saying nothing except 
what had to be said. And she, for her part, was as 
remote from him. They seemed far, far apart, worlds 
apart, now they were so near. 

He unwrapped one bundle of bedding, and spread the 
blankets and the sheepskin in the wooden bunk. 

** You lie down and rest,’’ he said, ‘* and I make the 
supper.”’ 

She decided to do so. Wrapping her cloak round her, 
she lay down in the bunk, turning her face to the wall. 
She could hear him preparing supper over the little petrol 
stove. Soon she could smell the soup he was heating; 
and soon she heard the hissing of fried chicken in a 
pan. 

** You eat your supper now? ” he said. 

With a jerky, despairing movement, she sat up in the 
bunk, tossing back her hair. She felt cornered. 

** Give it me here,”’ she said. 

He handed her first the cupful of soup. She sat 
among the blankets, eating it slowly. She was hungry. 
Then he gave her an enamel plate with pieces of fried 
chicken and currant jelly, butter and bread. It was 
very good. As they ate the chicken he made the coffee. 
She said never a word. A certain resentment filled her. 
She was cornered. 

When supper was over he washed the dishes, dried 
them, and put everything away carefully, else there 

P 

226 THE PRINCESS 

would have been no room to move in the hole of a cabin. 
The oak-wood gave out a good bright heat. 

He stood for a few moments at a loss. Then he asked 
her : 

** You want to go to bed soon? ” 

‘* Soon,”’ she said. ‘* Where are you going to sleep? ” 

** T make my bed here—’’ he pointed to the floor along 
the wall. ‘* Too cold out of doors.” 

** Yes,’’? she said. ‘‘ I suppose it is.”’ 

She sat immobile, her cheeks hot, full of conflicting 
thoughts. And she watched him while he folded the 
blankets on the floor, a sheepskin underneath. Then 
she went out into the night. 

The stars were big. Mars sat on the edge of a 
mountain, for all the world like the blazing eye of a 
crouching mountain lion. But she herself was deep, 
deep below in a pit of shadow. In the intense silence she 
seemed to hear the spruce forest crackling with electricity 
and cold. Strange, foreign stars floated on that un- 
moving water. The night was going to freeze. Over the 
hills came the far sobbing-singing howling of the coyotes. 
She wondered how the horses would be. 

Shuddering a little, she turned to the cabin. Warm 
light showed through its chinks. She pushed at the 
rickety, half-opened door. 

‘¢ What about the horses? ”? she said. 

** My black, he won’t go away. And your mare will 
stay with him. You want to go to bed now? ” 

“* J think I do.” 

“* All right. I feed the horses some oats.” 

And he went out into the night. 

He did not come back for some time. She was lying 
wrapped up tight in the bunk. . 

He blew out the lantern, and sat down on his bedding 
to take off his clothes. She lay with her back turned. 
And soon, in the silence, she was asleep. 

She dreamed it was snowing, and the snow was falling 

THE PRINCESS 227 

on her through the roof, softly, softly, helplessly, and 
she was going to be buried alive. She was growing 
colder and colder, the snow was weighing down on her. 
The snow was going to absorb her. 

She awoke with a sudden convulsion, like pain. She 
was really very cold; perhaps the heavy blankets had 
numbed her. Her heart seemed unable to beat, she felt 
she could not move. 

With another convulsion she sat up. It was intensely 
dark. There was not even a spark of fire, the light wood 
had burned right away. She sat in thick oblivious 
darkness. Only through a chink she could see a star. 

What did she want? Oh, what did she want? She 
sat in bed and rocked herself wofully. She could hear the 
steady breathing of the sleeping man. She was shivering 
with cold; her heart seemed as if it could not beat. She 
wanted warmth, protection, she wanted to be taken 
away from herself. And at the same time, perhaps more 
deeply than anything, she wanted to keep herself intact, 
intact, untouched, that no one should have any power 
over her, or rights to her. It was a wild necessity in her 
that no one, particularly no man, should have any rights 
or power over her, that no one and nothing should 
possess her. 

Yet that other thing! And she was so eold, so shiver- 
ing, and her heart could not beat. Oh, would not some- 
one help her heart to beat? 

She tried to speak, and could not. Then she cleared 
her throat. 

‘* Romero,” she said strangely, *‘ it is so cold.” 

Where did her voice come from, and whose voice was 
it, in the dark? 

She heard him at once sit up, and his voice, startled, 
with a resonance that seemed to vibrate against her, 
saying : 

** You want me to make you warm? ” 

6eé Yes.”? 

228 THE PRINCESS 

As soon as he had lifted her in his arms, she wanted 
to scream to him not to touch her. She stiffened herself. 
Yet she was dumb. 

And he was warm, but with a terrible animal warmth 
that seemed to annihilate her. He panted like an animal 
with desire. And she was given over to this thing. 

She had never, never wanted to be given over to this. 
But she had willed that it should happen to her. And 
according to her will, she lay and let it happen. But she 
never wanted it. She never wanted to be thus assailed 
and handled, and mauled. She wanted to keep herself 
to herself. 

However, she had willed it to happen, and it had 
happened. She panted with relief when it was over. 

Yet even now she had to lie within the hard, powerful 
clasp of this other creature, this man. She dreaded to 
struggle to go away. She dreaded almost too much the 
icy cold of that other bunk. 

**Do you want to go away from me?” asked his 
strange voice. Oh, if it could only have been a thousand 
miles away from her! Yet she had willed to have it thus 
close. 

‘* No,” she said. 

And she could feel & curious joy and pride surging up 
again in him : at her expense. Because he had got her. 
She felt like a victim there. And he was exulting in his 
power over her, his possession, his pleasure. 

When dawn came, he was fast asleep. She sat up 
suddenly. 

**T want a fire,’’ she said. 

He opened his brown eyes wide, and smiled with a 
curious tender luxuriousness. 

‘¢ IT want you to make a fire,’”’ she said. 

He glanced at the chinks of light. His brown face 
hardened to the day. 

‘¢ All right,’? he said. ‘‘ I’ll make it.” 

She hid her face while he dressed. She could not bear 

THE PRINCESS 229 

to look at him. He was so suffused with pride and 
luxury. She hid her face almost in despair. But feeling 
the cold blast of air as he opened the door, she wriggled 
down into the warm place where he had been. How 
soon the warmth ebbed, when he had gone! 

He made a fire and went out, returning after a while 
with water. 

** You stay in bed till the sun comes,”’ he said. ‘ It’s 
very cold.”’ 

** Hand me my cloak.”’ 

She wrapped the cloak fast round her, and sat up 
among the blankets. The warmth was already spreading 
from the fire. 

**T suppose we will start back as soon as we’ve had 
breakfast? ”’ 

He was crouching at his camp-stove making scrambled 
eggs. He looked up suddenly, transfixed, and his brown 
eyes, so soft and luxuriously widened, looked straight at 
her. 

** You want to? ”’ he said. 

‘© We’d better get back as soon as possible,” she said, 
turning aside from his eyes. 

‘You want to get away from me?” he asked, 
repeating the question of the night in a sort of dread. 

**T want to get away from here,”’ she said decisively. 
And it was true. She wanted supremely to get away, 
back to the world of people. 

He rose slowly to his feet, holding the aluminium 
frying-pan. 

** Don’t you like last night? ’’ he asked. 

** Not really,” she said. ‘* Why? Do you? ” 

He put down the frying-pan and stood staring at the 
wall. She could see she had given him a cruel blow. 
But she did not relent. She was getting her own back. 
She wanted to regain possession of all herself, and in 
some mysterious way she felt that he possessed some 
part of her still. 

230 THE PRINCESS 

He looked round at her slowly, his face greyish and 
heavy. 

** You Americans,’’ he said, *‘ you always want to do 
a man down.”’ 

** IT am not American,” she said. ‘* I am British. And 
I don’t want to do any man down. I only want to go 
go back, now.’’ 

** And what will you say about me, down there? ” 

‘* That you were very kind to me, and very good.”’ 

He crouched down again, and went on turning the 
eggs. He gave her her plate, and her coffee, and sat 
down to his own feod. 

But again he seemed not to be able to swallow. He 
looked up at her. 

** You don’t like last night? ’’ he asked. 

‘* Not really,’ she said, though with some difficulty. 
** T don’t care for that kind of thing.’’ 

A blank sort of wonder spread over his face, at these 
words, followed immediately by a black look of anger, 
and then a stony, sinister despair. 

** You don’t? *’ he said, looking her in the eyes. 

‘* Not really,’’ she replied, looking back with steady 
hostility into his eyes. 

Then a dark flame seemed to come from his face. 

** T make you,”’ he said, as if to himself. 

He rose and reached her clothes, that hung on a peg: 
the fine linen underwear, the orange breeches, the fleecy 
jumper, the blue-and-buff kerchief; then he took up her 
riding boots and her bead moccasins. Crushing every- 
thing in his arms, he opened the door. Sitting up, she 
saw him stride down to the dark-green pool in the frozen 
shadow of that deep cup of a valley. He tossed the 
clothing and the boots out on the pool. Ice had formed. » 
And on the pure, dark green mirror, in the slaty shadow, 
the Princess saw her things lying, the white linen, the 
orange breeches, the black boots, the blue moccasins, 
a tangled heap of colour. Romero picked up rocks and 

THE PRINCESS 231 

heaved them out at the ice, till the surface broke and 
the fluttering clothing disappeared in the rattling water, 
while the valley echoed and shouted again with the 
sound. 

She sat in despair among the blankets, hugging tight 
her pale-blue cloak. Romero strode straight back to the 
cabin. 

** Now you stay here with me,”’ he said. 

She was furious. Her blue eyes met his. They were 
like two demons watching one another. In his face, 
beyond a sort of unrelieved gloom, was a demonish desire 
for death. 

He saw her looking round the cabin, scheming. He 
saw her eyes on his rifle. He took the gun and went out 
with it. Returning, he pulled out her saddle, carried it 
to the tarn, and threw it in. Then he fetched his own 
saddle, and did the same. 

‘Now will you go away? ”’ he said, looking at her 
with a smile. 

She debated within herself whether to coax him and 
wheedle him. But she knew he was already beyond it. 
She sat among her blankets in a frozen sort of despair, 
hard as hard ice with anger. 

He did the chores, and disappeared with the gun. She 
got up in her blue pyjamas, huddled in her cloak, and 
stood in the doorway. The dark-green pool was motion- 
less again, the stony slopes were pallid and frozen. 
Shadow still lay, like an after-death, deep in this valley. 
Always in the distance she saw the horses feeding. 
If she could catch one! The brilliant yellow sun 
was half way down the mountain. It was nine 
o’clock. 

All day she was alone, and she was frightened. What 
she was frightened of she didn’t know. Perhaps the 
crackling in the dark spruce wood. Perhaps just the 
savage, heartless wildness of the mountains. But all 
day she sat in the sun in the doorway of the cabin, 

232 THE PRINCESS 

watching, watching for hope. And all the time her 
bowels were cramped with fear. 

She saw a dark spot that probably was a bear, roving 
across the pale grassy slope in the far distance, in the 
sun. 

When, in the afternoon, she saw Romero approaching, 
with silent suddenness, carrying his gun and a dead deer, 
the cramp in her bowels relaxed, then became colder. 
She dreaded him with a cold dread. 

‘* There is deer-meat,’’ he said, throwing the dead 
doe at her feet. 

** You don’t want to go away from here,’’ he said. 
‘* This is a nice place.’’ 

She shrank into the cabin. 

‘* Come into the sun,’ he said, following her. She 
looked up at him with hostile, frightened eyes. 

‘* Come into the sun,’’ he repeated, taking her gently 
by the arm, in a powerful grasp. 

She knew it was useless to rebel. Quietly he led her 
out, and seated himself in the doorway, holding her still 
by the arm. 

‘© In the sun it is warm,’’ he said. ‘* Look, this is a 
nice place. You are such a pretty white woman, why do 
you want to act mean to me? Isn’t this a nice place? 
Come? Come here! It is sure warm here.”’ 

He drew her to him, and in spite of her stony resist- 
ance, he took her cloak from her, holding her in her 
thin blue pyjamas. 

** You sure are a pretty little white woman, small 
and pretty,’’ he said. ‘‘ You sure won’t act mean to 
me—you don’t want to, I know you don’t.” 

She, stony and powerless, had to submit to him. The 
sun shone on her white, delicate skin. | 

** T sure don’t mind hell fire,’? he said. ‘‘ After this.’” 

A queer, luxurious good-humour seemed to possess 
him again. But though outwardly she was powerless, 
inwardly she resisted him, absolutely and stonily. 

THE PRINCESS 233 

When later he was leaving her again, she said to him 
suddenly : 

** You think you can conquer me this way. But you 
can’t. You can never conquer me.’’ 

He stood arrested, looking back at her, with many 
emotions conflicting in his face—wonder, surprise, a 
touch of horror, and an unconscious pain that crumpled 
his face till it was like a mask. Then he went out 
without saying a word, hung the dead deer on a bough, 
and started to flay it. While he was at this butcher’s 
work, the sun sank and cold night came on again. 

** You see,”’ he said to her as he crouched, cooking 
the supper, ‘‘ I ain’t going to let you go. I reckon you 
called to me in the night, and I’ve some right. If you 
want to fix it up right now with me, and say you want to 
be with me, we’ll fix it up now and go down to the ranch 
to-morrow and get married or whatever you want. But 
you’ve got to say you want to be with me. Else I shall 
stay right here, till something happens.”’ 

She waited a while before she answered : 

**T don’t want to be with anybody against my will. 
I don’t dislike you; at least, I didn’t, till you tried to put 
your will over mine. I won’t have anybody’s will put 
over me. You can’t succeed. Nobody could. You can 
never get me under your will. And you won’t have long 
to try, because soon they will send someone to look for 
me.”’ 

He pondered this last, and she regretted having said 
it. Then, sombre, he bent to the cooking again. 

He could not conquer her, however much he violated 
her. Because her spirit was hard and flawless as a 
diamond. But he could shatter her. This she knew. 
Much more, and she would be shattered. 

In a sombre, violent excess he tried to expend his 
desire for her. And she was racked with agony, and felt 
each time she would die. Because, in some peculiar way, 
he had got hold of her, some unrealised part of her which 

234 THE PRINCESS 

she never wished to realise. Racked with a burning, 
tearing anguish, she felt that the thread of her being 
would break, and she would die. The burning heat that 
racked her inwardly. 

If only, only she could be alone again, cool and intact ! 
If only she could recover herself again, cool and intact ! 
Would she ever, ever, ever be able to bear herself again? 

Even now she did not hate him. It was beyond that. 
Like some racking, hot doom. Personally he hardly 
existed. 

The next day he would not let her have any fire, 
because of attracting attention with the smoke. It was a 
grey day, and she was cold. He stayed around, and 
heated soup on the petrol stove. She lay motionless in 
the blankets. 

And in the afternoon she pulled the clothes over her 
head and broke into tears. She had never really cried in 
her life. He dragged the blankets away and looked to see 
what was shaking her. She sobbed in helpless hysterics. 
He covered her over again and went outside, looking at 
the mountains, where clouds were dragging and leaving 
a little snow. It was a violent windy, horrible day, 
the evil of winter rushing down. 

She cried for hours. And after this a great silence 
came between them. They were two people who had 
died. He did not touch her any more. In the night she 
lay and shivered like a dying dog. She felt that her very 
shivering would rupture something in her body, and she 
would die. 

At last she had to speak. 

“Could you make a fire? I am so cold,” she said, 
with chattering teeth. 

** Want to come over here? ”? came his voice. 

**T would rather you made me a fire,’’ she said, her 
teeth knocking together and chopping the words in two. 

He got up and kindled a fire. At last the warmth 
spread, and she could sleep. 

THE PRINCESS 285 

The next day was still chilly, with some wind. But 
the sun shone. He went about in silence, with a dead- 
looking face. It was now so dreary and so like death she 
wished he would do anything rather than continue in this 
negation. If now he asked her to go down with him to 
the world and marry him, she would do it. What did it 
matter? Nothing mattered any more. 

But he would not ask her. His desire was dead and 
heavy like ice within him. He kept watch around the 
house. 

On the fourth day as she sat huddled in the doorway 
in the sun, hugged in a blanket, she saw two horsemen 
come over the crest of the grassy slope—small figures. 
She gave a cry. He looked up quickly and saw the 
figures. The men had dismounted. They were looking 
for the trail. 

** They are looking for me,” she said. 

** Muy bien,”’ he answered in Spanish. 

He went and fetched his gun, and sat with it across 
his knees. 

“Oh! ”? she said. ‘* Don’t shoot! ” 

He looked across at her. 

** Why? ”? he said. ‘‘ You like staying with me? ”’ 

** No,”? she said. ‘* But don’t shoot.”’ 

** T ain’t going to Pen,”’ he said. 

“© You won’t have to go to Pen,’’ she said. ‘* Don’t 
shoot ! ’’ 

‘¢ I’m going to shoot,” he muttered. 

And straightaway he kneeled and took very careful 
aim. The Princess sat on in an agony of helplessness 
and hopelessness. 

The shot rang out. In an instant she saw one of the 
horses on the pale grassy slope rear and go rolling down. 
The man had dropped in the grass, and was invisible. 
The second man clambered on his horse, and on that 
precipitous place went at a gallop in a long swerve 
towards the nearest spruce-tree cover. Bang! Bang! 

236 THE PRINCESS 

went Romero’s shots. But each time he missed, and the 
running horse leaped like a kangaroo towards cover. 

It was hidden. Romero now got behind a rock; tense 
silence, in the brilliant sunshine. The Princess sat on 
the bunk inside the cabin, crouching, paralysed. For 
hours, it seemed, Romero knelt behind this rock, in his 
black shirt, bare-headed, watching. He had a beautiful, 
alert figure. The Princess wondered why she did not 
feel sorry for him. But her spirit was hard and cold, 
her heart could not melt. Though now she would have 
called him to her, with love. 

But no, she did not love him. She would never love 
any man. Never! It was fixed and sealed in her, 
almost vindictively. 

Suddenly she was so startled she almost fell from the 
bunk. A shot rang out quite close from behind the 
cabin. Romero leaped straight into the air, his arms fell 
outstretched, turning as he leaped. And even while he 
was in the air, a second shot rang out, and he fell with 
a crash, squirming, his hands clutching the earth towards 
the cabin door. 

The Princess sat absolutely motionless, transfixed, 
staring at the prostrate figure. In a few moments the 
figure of a man in the Forest Service appeared close to 
the house; a young man in a broad-brimmed Stetson hat, 
dark flannel shirt, and riding-boots, carrying a gun. 
He strode over to the prostrate figure. 

** Got you, Romero! ”? he said aloud. And he turned 
the dead man over. There was already a little pool of 
blood where Romero’s breast had been. 

**H’m!” said the Forest Service man. ‘‘ Guess I 
got you nearer than I thought.”’ 

And he squatted there, staring at the dead man. 

The distant calling of his comrade aroused him. He 
stood up. 

‘Hullo, Bill! ”? he shouted. ‘ Yep! Got him! 
Yep! Done him in, apparently.” 

THE PRINCESS 237 

The second man rode out of the forest on a grey horse. 
He had a ruddy, kind face, and round brown eyes, 
dilated with dismay. 

‘* He’s not passed out? ’? he asked anxiously. 

** Looks like it,’’ said the first young man, coolly. 

The second dismounted and bent over the body. Then 
he stood up again, and nodded. 

** Yea-a!’’ he said. ‘‘ He’s done in all right. It’s 
him all right, boy! It’s Domingo Romero.” 

** Yep ! I know it! ’’ replied the other. 

Then in perplexity he turned and looked into the 
cabin, where the Princess squatted, staring with big 
owl eyes from her red blanket. 

*‘ Hello! ? he said, coming towards the hut. And 
he took his hat off. Oh, the sense of ridicule she felt ! 
Though he did not mean any. 

But she could not speak, no matter what she felt. 

** What’d this man start firing for? ’’ he asked. 

She fumbled for words, with numb lips. 

** He had gone out of his mind!” she said, with 
solemn, stammering conviction. 

** Good Lord! You mean to say he’d gone out of his 
mind? Whew! That’s pretty awful! That explains it 
then. H’m!” 

He accepted the explanation without more ado. 

With some difficulty they succeeded in getting the 
Princess down to the ranch. But she, too, was not a 
little mad. 

** I’m not quite sure where I am,” she said to Mrs. 
Wilkieson, as she lay in bed. “Do you mind 
explaining? ”’ 

Mrs. Wilkieson explained tactfully. 

** Oh, yes! *’ said the Princess. ‘‘ I remember. And 
I had an accident in the mountains, didn’t I? Didn’t 
we meet a man who’d gone mad, and who shot my horse 
from under me? ”’ 

** Yes, you met a man who had gone out of his mind.”® 

238 THE PRINCESS 

The real affair was hushed up. The Princess departed 
east in a fortnight’s time, in Miss Cummin’s care. 
Apparently she had recovered herself entirely. She was 
the Princess, and a virgin intact. 

But her bobbed hair was grey at the temples, and her 
eyes were a little mad. She was slightly crazy. 

** Since my accident in the mountains, when a man 
went mad and shot my horse from under me, and my 
guide had to shoot him dead, I have never felt quite 
myself.”’ 

So she put it. 

Later, she married an elderly man, and seemed 
pleased. 

ee 

Printed in Great Britain by 
The Dunedin Press Limited, Edinburgh. 

Date Due 

BRODART, INC Cat. No. 23 233 Printed in USA 

| 

| Rae ee D. 4H. 
author St. Mawr together with The 

title 
t PR 6023 -A93S8 1927 Go Ole 

borrower's name 

PR 6023 .A93S8 1927 
Lawrence, D. H. (David Herbert), 1885-1930. 
St. Mawr together with The Princess 

| date due 

ie 

Heat 
OMT a letatt 
Bane
