The Boy in the Bush (D. H. Lawrence, 1924)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1928 Martin Secker edition (https://archive.org/details/boyinbush0000dhla_l3r8)
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

. 

pf 

t 

<¢: 
pointe 3 

Stas 4s 

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2026 

https://archive.org/details/boyinbushOOOOdhla_I3r8 

THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

THE NOVELS OF D. H. LAWRENCE 
THIN-PAPER EDITION 

THE WHITE PEACOCK 
THE TRESPASSER 
SONS AND LOVERS 
THE PRUSSIAN OFFICER 
THE RAINBOW 
THE Lost Gru 
WomeEN IN LOVE 
AARON’s Rop 
THE LADYBIRD 
KANGAROO 
ENGLAND, My ENGLAND 
THE Boy IN THE BusH 
St. Mawr 
THE PLUMED SERPENT 

THE 
BOY IN THE BUSH 

BY. 
D. H. LAWRENCE 
AND 
M. L. SKINNER 

LONDON 
MARTIN SECKER 

NUMBER FIVE JOHN STREET ADELPHI 

First published August 1924 

Reprinted August 1924 
Reprinted September 1924 
Reprinted October 1924 
Reprinted August 1928 

LONDON ; MARTIN SECKER (LTD.), 1928 

CONTENTS 

JACK ARRIVES IN AUSTRALIA 
THE TWIN LAMBS 

DRIVING TO WANDOO 

WANDOO 

THE LAMBS COME HOME 

IN THE YARD 

OUT BACK AND SOME LETTERS 
HOME FOR CHRISTMAS 

NEW YEAR’S EVE 

SHADOWS BEFORE 

BLOWS 

THE GREAT PASSING 

TOM AND JACK RIDE TOGETHER 
JAMBOREE 

UNCLE JOHN GRANT 

ON THE ROAD 

AFTER TWO YEARS 

THE GOVERNOR’S DANCE 

THE WELCOME AT WANDOO 

THE LAST OF EASU 

CUNLZLENIS 

LOST 
THE FIND 

GOLD 

THE OFFER TO MARY 
TROT, TROT, BACK AGAIN 

THE RIDER ON THE RED HORSE 

CHAP: 1. JACK ARRIVES IN AUSTRALIA 

i 
HE stepped ashore, looking like alamb. Far be it from me 
to say he was the lamb he looked. Else why should he 
have been sent out of England? But a good-looking boy 
he was, with dark blue eyes and the complexion of a girl, 
and a bearing just a little too lamb-like to be convincing. 

He stepped ashore in the newest of new colonies, glancing 
quickly around, but preserving his lamb-like quietness. 
Down came his elegant kit, and was dumped on the wharf : 
a kit that included a brand-new pigskin saddle and bridle, 
nailed up in a box straight from a smart shop in London. 
He kept his eye on that also, the tail of his well-bred eye. 

Behind him was the wool ship that had brought him 
from England. This nondescript port was Fremantle, in 
West Australia; might have been anywhere or nowhere. 
‘In his pocket he had a letter of introduction to a well-known 
colonial lawyer, in which, as he was aware, was folded also 
a draft on a West Australian bank. In his purse he had a 
five pound note. In his head were a few irritating memories. 
In his heart he felt a certain excited flutter at being in a 
real new land, where a man could be really free. Though 
what he meant by “ free ’’ he never stopped to define. He 
left everything suitably vague. 

Meanwhile, he waited for events to develop, as if it were 
none of his business. 

This was forty years ago, when it was still a long, long 
way to Australia, and the land was still full of the lure of 
promise. There were gold and pearl findings, bush and 
bush-ranging, the back of beyond and everything desirable. 
Much misery, too, ignored by all except the miserable. 

And Jack was not quite eighteen, so he ignored a great 
deal. He didn’t pay much attention even to his surround- 
ings, yet from the end of the wharf he saw pure sky above, 
the pure, unknown, unsullied sea to westward; the ruffled, 
tumbled sand glistened like fine silver, the air was the air 
of a new world, unbreathed by man. 

The only prize Jack had ever won at school was for 

A 1 

4 Laem DU SY LIN “LER DUO 2s 

Scripture. The Bible language exerted a certain fascina- 
tion over him, and in the background of his consciousness 
the Bible images always hovered. When he was moved, 
it was Scripture that came to his aid. So now he stood, 
silent with the shyness of youth, thinking over and over: 
‘‘ There shall be a new heaven and a new earth.”’ 

Not far off among the sand near the harbour mouth lay 
the township, a place of strong, ugly, oblong houses of 
white stone with unshuttered bottle-glass windows and a 
low white-washed wall going round, like a sort of com- 
pound; then there was a huge stone prison with a high 
white-washed wall. Nearer the narbour, a few new tall 
warehouse buildings, and sheds, long sheds, and a little 
wooden railway station. Further out again, windmills for 
milling flour, the mill-sails turning in the transparent breeze 
from the sea. Right in the middle of the township was a 
stolid new Victorian Church with a turret : and this was the 
one thing he knew he disliked in the view. 

On the wharf everything was busy. The old wool steamer 
lay important in dock, people were crowding on deck and 
crowding the wharf in a very informal manner, porters were 
running with baggage, a chain was clanking, and little 
groups of emigrants stood forlorn, looking for their wooden 
chests, swinging their odd bundles done up in coloured 
kerchiefs. The uttermost ends of the earth! All so lost 
and yet so familiar. So familiar, and so lost. The people 
like provincial people at home. The railway running 
through the sand hills. And the feeling of remote unreality. 

This was his mother’s country. She had been born and 
raised here, and she had told him about it, many a time, 
like a fable. And this was what it was like! How could 
she feel she actually belonged to it? Nobody could belong 
to it. 

Himself, he belonged to Bedford, England. And Bedford 
College. But his mind turned away from this in repugnance. 
Suddenly he turned desirously to the unreality of this 
remote place. 

Jack was waiting for Mr George, the lawyer to whom his 
letter of introduction was addressed. Mr George had shaken 
hands with him on deck; a stout and breezy gentleman, 
_ who had been carried away again on the gusts of his own 
breeze, among the steamer crowd, and had forgotten his 

JACK ARRIVES IN AUSTRALIA 3 

young charge. Jack patiently waited. Adult and 
responsible people with stout waistcoats had a habit, he 
knew, of being needed elsewhere. 

Mr George! And all his mother’s humorous stories about 
him! This notable character of the Western lonely colony, 
this rumbustical old gentleman who had a “ terrific 
memory ”’ who was “ full of quotations ”? and who “ never 
forgot a face ’*—Jack waited the more calmly, sure of being 
recognised again by him—was to be seen in the distance 
with his thumbs hooked in his waistcoat armholes, passively 
surveying the scene with a quiet, shrewd eye, before hail- 
ing another acquaintance and delivering another sally. He 
had a ‘** tongue like a razor ”? and frightened the women 
to death. Seeing him there on the wharf, elderly, stout 
and decidedly old-fashioned, Jack had a little difficulty in 
reconciling him with the hearty colonial hero of his mother’s 
stories. 

How he had missed a seat on the bench, for example. 
He was to become a judge. But while acting on probation, 
or whatever it is called, a man came up before him charged 
with wife-beating, and serious maltreatment of his better 
half. A verdict of ‘‘ not guilty ’? was returned. ‘* Two 
years’ hard labour,’”’ said Mr George, who didn’t like the 
looks of the fellow. There was a protest. ‘* Verdict 
stands! ’? said Mr George. ‘* Two years’ hard labour. 
Give it him for not beating her and breaking her head. He 
should have done. He should have done. *Twas fairly 
proved ! ” 

So Mr George had remained a lawyer, instead of becom- 
ing a judge. A stout, shabby, provincial-looking old man 
with baggy trousers that seemed as if they were slipping 
down. Jack had still to get used to that sort of trousers. 
One of his mother’s heroes ! 

But the whole scene was still outside the boy’s vague, 
almost trance-like state. The commotion of unloading went 
on—people stood in groups, the lumpers were already at 
work with the winches, bringing bales and boxes from the 
hold. The Jewish gentleman standing just there had a red 
nose. He swung his cane uneasily. He must be well-off, 
fo judge by his links and watch-chain. But then why did 
nis trousers hang so low and baggy, and why was his waist- 
soat of yellow cloth—that cloth cost a guinea a yard, Jack 

4 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

knew it from his horsey acquaintances—so dirty and 
frayed ? 

Western Australia in the year 1882. Jack had read all 
about it in the official report on the steamer. The colony 
had three years before celebrated its fiftieth anniversary. 
Many people still remembered the fiasco of the first attempt 
at the Swan River Settlement. Captain Stirling brought 
the first boatload of prospective settlers. The Government 
promised not to defile the land with convicts. But the 
promise was broken. The convicts had come: and that 
stone prison-building must have been the convict station. | 
He knew from his mother’s stories. But he also knew that 
the convicts were now gone again. The ‘‘ Establishment ”’ 
had been closed down already for ten years or more. 

A land must have its ups and downs. And the first thing 
the old world had to ship to the new world was its sins, 
and the first shipments were of sinners. ‘That was what his 
mother said. Jack felt a certain sympathy. He felt a 
sympathy with the empty ‘* Establishment’? and the 
departed convicts. He himself was mysteriously a ‘* sinner.”’ 
He felt he was born such: just as he was born with his © 
deceptive handsome look of innocence. He was a sinner, a 
Cain. Not that he was aware of having committed anything 
that seemed to himself particularly sinful. No, he was not 
aware of having ‘* sinned.’’ He was not aware that he ever 
would ‘** sin.”’ 

But that wasn’t the point. Curiously enough, that 
wasn’t the point. The men who commit sins and who 
know they commit sins usually get on quite well with the 
world. Jack knew he would never get on well with the 
world. He was a sinner. He knew that as far as the world 
went, he was a sinner, born condemned. Perhaps it had 
come to him from his mother’s careless, rich, uncanny 
Australian blood. Perhaps it was a recoil from his father’s 
military-gentleman nature. His father was an officer in 
Her Majesty’s Army. An officer in Her Majesty’s Army. 
For some reason there was always a touch of the fantastic 
and ridiculous, to Jack, in being an officer in Her Majesty’s 
Army. Quite a high and responsible officer usually 
stationed in command in one or other of Her Britannic 
Majesty’s Colonies. 

Why did Jack find his father slightly fantastic? Why 

JACK ARRIVES IN AUSTRALIA 5 

was that gentleman in uniform who appeared occasionally, 
very resplendent and somehow very ‘“ good,”? why was he 
always unreal and fantastic to the little boy left at home 
in England? Why was he even more fantastic when he 
wore a black coat and genteel grey trousers? He was 
handsome and pleasant, and indisputably “‘ good.’? Then 
why, oh why, should he have appeared fantastic to his own 
little boy, who was so much like him in appearance? 

** The spitten image! ’’ one of his nurses had said. And 
Jack never forgave it. He thought it meant a spat-upon 
image, or an image in spit. This he resented and repudiated 
absolutely, though it remained vague. 

*° Oh, you little sinner! ’? said the same nurse, half 
caressingly. And this the boy had accepted as his natural 
appellation. He was a little sinner. As he grew older, he 
was a young sinner. Now, as he approached manhood, he 
was a sinner without modification. 

Not, we repeat, that he was ever able to understand 
wherein his sinfulness lay. He knew his father was a 
** good man ’’—** The colonel, your father, is such a good 
man, so you must be a good little boy and grow up like 
him ’?—** There is no better example of an English gentle- 
man than your father, the general. All you have to do is 
to grow up like him.”’ 

Jack knew from the start that he wouldn’t. And therein 
lay the sin, presumably. Or the root of the sin. 

He did not dislike his father. The general was kind and 
simple and amiable. How could anyone dislike him? But 
to the boy he was always just a little fantastic, like the 
policeman in a Punch and Judy show. 

Jack loved his mother with a love that could not but be 
intermittent, for sometimes she stayed in England and 
*¢ lived ’? with him, and more often she left him and went 
off with his father to Jamaica or some such place—or to 
India or Khartoum, names that were in his blood—leaving 
the boy in the charge of a paternal aunt. He didn’t think 
much of the aunt. 

But he liked the warm, flushed, rather muddled delight of 
his mother. She was a handsome, ripe Australian woman 
with warm colouring and soft flesh, absolutely kindly in a 
humorous, off-hand fashion, warm with a jolly sensuous- 
ness, and good in a wicked sort of way. She sat in the sun 

6 THE BOY IN THE BUSH ; 

and laughed and refused to quarrel, refused also to weep. 
When she had to leave her little boy a spasm would con- 
tract her face and make her look ugly, so the child was glad 
if she went quickly. But she was in love with her husband, 
who was still more in love with her, so off she went laugh- 
ing sensuously across seven seas, quarrelling with nobody, 
pitching her camp in true colonial fashion wherever she 
found herself, yet always with a touch of sensuous luxury, 
Persian rugs and silk cushions and dresses of rich material. 
She was the despair of the true English wives, for you 
couldn’t disapprove of her, she was the dearest thing. 
imaginable, and yet she introduced a pleasant, semi- 
luxurious sense of—of what? Why, almost of sin. Not 
positive sin. She was really the dearest thing imaginable. 
But the feeling that there was no fence between sin and 
virtue. As if sin were, so to speak, the unreclaimed bush, 
and goodness were only the claims that the settlers had 
managed to fence in. And there was so much more bush 
than settlement. And the one was as good as the other, 
save that they served different ends. And that you always 
had the wild and endless bush all round your little claim. 
And coming and going was always through the wild and 
innocent, but non-moral bush. Which non-moral bush had 
a devil in it. Oh, yes! But a wild and comprehensible 
devil, like bush-rangers who did brutal and lawless things. 
Whereas the tame devil of the settlements, drunkenness 
and greediness and foolish pride, he was more scaring. 

‘* My dear, there’s tame innocence and wild innocence, 
and tame devils and wild devils, and tame morality and 
wild morality. Let’s camp in the bush and be good.” 

That was her attitude, always. ‘‘ Let’s camp in the bush 
and be good.” She was an Australian from a wild 
Australian homestead. And she was like a wild sweet 
animal. Always the sense of space and lack of restrictions, 
and it didn’t matter what you did, so long as you were good 
inside yourself. 

Her husband was in love with her, completely. To him 
it mattered very much what you did. So perhaps her easy 
indifference to English rail-fences satisfied in him the icono- 
clast that lies at the bottom of all men. 

She was not well-bred. There was a certain ‘ cottage *? 
geniality about her. But also a sense of great, unfenced 

JACK ARRIVES IN AUSTRALIA % 

‘spaces, that put the ordinary ladylikeness rather at a loss. 
A real colonial, from the newest, wildest, remotest colony. 

She loved her little boy. But also she loved her husband, 
and she loved the army life. She preferred, really, to be 
with her husband. And you can’t trail a child about. And 
she lived in all the world, and she couldn’t bear to be poked 
in a village in England. Not for long. And she was used 
to having men about her. Mostly men. Jolly men. 

So her heart smarted for her little boy. But she had to 
leave him. And he loved her, but did not dream of depend- 
ing on her. He knew it as a tiny child. He would never 
have to depend on anybody. His father would pay money 
for him. But his father was rather jealous of him. Jealous 
even of his beauty as a tiny child, in spite of the fact that 
the child was the ‘* spitten *”’ image of the father: dark 
blue eyes, curly hair, peach-bloom skin. Only the child 
had the easy way of accommodating himself to life and 
circumstances, like his mother, and a certain readiness to 
laugh, even when he was by himself. The easy laugh that 
made his nurse say ‘* You little sinner !”’ 

_ He knew he was a little sinner. It rather amused him. 

Jack’s mind jolted awake as he made a grab at his hat, 
nearly knocking it off, realizing that he was being intro- 
duced to two men: or that two men were being introduced 
to him. They shook hands very casually, giggling at the 
same time to one another in a suppressed manner. Jack 
blushed furiously, embarrassed, not knowing what they 
were laughing at. 

Just beside him, the Jewish gentleman was effusively 
greeting another Jewish gentleman. In fact, they were 
kissing : which made Jack curl with disgust. But he 
couldn’t move away, because there were bales behind him, 
people on two sides, and a big dog was dancing and 
barking in front of him, at something which it saw away 
below through a crack in the wharf timbers. The dog 
seemed to be a mixture of wolf and grey-hound. Queer 
specimen! Later, he knew it was called a kangaroo dog. 

‘© Mr A. Bell and Mr Swallow. Mr Jack Grant from 
England.” This was Mr George introducing him to the two 
men, and going on without any change, with a queer puffing 
of the lips: “‘ Prh! Bah! Wolf and Hider! Wolf and 
Hider ! ”’ 

8 THE BOY AN THE BUSH 

This left Jack completely mystified. And why were Mr 
Bell and Mr Swallow laughing so convulsedly? Was it 
the dog? 

‘© You remember his father, Bell, out here in ’59—Captain 
Grant. Married Surgeon-Captain Reid’s youngest daughter, 
from Woolamooloo Station.”’ 

The gentleman said: ‘‘ Pleased to make your acquaint- 
ance,’ which was a phrase that embarrassed Jack because 
he didn’t know what to answer. Should one say, ** Thank 
you! ”—or ‘‘ The pleasure is mine! ’—or “‘ So am I to 
make yours! ’? He mumbled: ‘* How do you do! ” . 

However, it didn’t matter, for the two men kept the 
laugh between themselves, while Mr George took on a 
colonial distrait look, then blew out his cheeks and ejacu- 
lated : ‘‘ Mercy and truth have met together: righteous- 
ness and peace have kissed each other.’’ This was said in 
a matter-of-fact way. Jack knew it was a quotation from 
the Psalms, but not what it was aimed at. The two men 
were laughing more openly at the joke. 

Was the joke against himself? Was it his own righteous- 
ness that was funny? He blushed furiously once more. 

ii 

But Mr George ignored the boy’s evident embarrassment, 
and strolled off with one of the gentlemen—whether Bell or 
Swallow Jack did not know—towards the train. 

The remaining gentleman—either Bell or Swallow— 
clapped the uncomfortable youth comfortably on the 
shoulder. 

‘New chum, eh? Not in the know? I'll tell you.” 
They set off after the other two. 

** By gad, ’s a funny thing! You’ve got to laugh if old 
George is about, though he never moves a muscle. Dry 
as.a ship’s biscuit. D’y’see the Jews kissing? They’ve 
been at law for two years, those two blossoms. One’s 
name is Wolf and the other’s Hider, and Mr George is 
Wolf’s attorney. Never able to do anything, because you 
couldn’t get Hider into the open. See the joke? Hider! 
Sneak Hider! Hider under the rafters! Hider hidden! 
And the Wolf couldn’t unearth him. Though George 
showed up Wolf for what he is: a mean, grasping, con- 

JACK ARRIVES IN AUSTRALIA 9 

tentious mongrel of a man. Now they meet to kiss. See 
them? The suit ended in a mush. But that dog there 
hunting a rat right under their feet—wasn’t that beautiful ? 
Old George couldn’t miss it—* Mercy and truth have met 
together,’ ha! ha! However he finds his text for every- 
thing beats me 4 

Jack laughed, and walked in a daze beside his new 
acquaintance. He felt he had fallen overhead into Australia, 
instead of arriving naturally. 

The wood-eating little engine was gasping in front of a 
little train of open carriages. Jack remarked on her tender 
piled high with chunks of wood. 

** Yes, we stoke ’er with timber. We carry all we can. 
And if we’re going a long way, to York, when she’s burned 
up all she can carry she stops in the bush and we all get 
down, passengers and all, to chop a new supply. See the 
axe there? She carries half a dozen on a long trip.”’ 

The three men, all wearing old-fashioned whiskers, pulled 
out tobacco pouches the moment they were seated, and 
started their pipes. They were all stout, and their clothes 
were slack, and they behaved with such absolute uncon- 
cern that it made Jack self-conscious. 

He sat rather stiffly, remembering the things his mother 
had told him. Her father, Surgeon-Captain Reid, had 
arrived at the Swan river on a man-of-war, on his very 
first voyage. He had landed with Captain Fremantle from 
H.M.S. ‘‘ Challenger,’’ when that officer took formal posses- 
sion of the country in the name of His Majesty King George 
IV. He had seen the first transport, the ‘‘ Parmelia,’’ pre- 
vented by heavy gales from landing her goods and 
passengers on the mainland, disembark all on Garden 
Island, where the men of the ‘* Challenger ’? were busy 
clearing ground and erecting temporary houses. That was 
in midwinter, June, 1827; and Jack’s grandfather. Now 
it was mid-winter, June, 1882; and mere Jack. 

Midwinter! A pure blue sky and a warm, crystal air. 
The brush outside green, rather dull green, the sandy 
country dry. It was like English June, English midsummer. 
Why call it midwinter? Except for a certain dull look of 
the bushes. 

They were passing the convict station. The ‘* Establish- 
ment ”’ had not lasted long; from about 1850 to 1870. Not 

_ * 

10 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

like New South Wales, which had a purely convict origin. 
Western Australia was more respectable. 

He remembered his mother always praised the convicts, 
said they had been a blessing to the colony. Western 
Australia had been too big and barren a mouthful for the 
first pioneers to chew, even though they were gentlemen 
of pluck and education, and bit off their claims bravely. 
Came the rush that followed occupation, a rush of estim- 
able and highly respectable British workmen. But even 
these were unprepared for the hardships that awaited them 
in Western Australia. The country was too much for them. 

It needed the convicts to make a real impression : the 
convicts with their law, and discipline, and all their govern- 
mental outfit, and their forced labour. Soldiers, doctors, 
lawyers, spiritual pastors and earthly masters . . . and 
the convicts condemned to obey. This was the beginning 
of the colony. 

Thought speaks! Mr Swallow, identified as the gentle- 
man with the long, lean, ruddy face and large nose and 
vague brown eye, leaned forward and jerked his pipe stem 
towards the open window. 

** See that beautiful road running through the sand, sir? 
That road extends to Perth and over the Causeway and 
away up country, branching in all directions, like the 
arteries of the human body. Built by the sappers and 
miners with convict labour, sir. Yes, with convict labour. 
Also the bridge over which we are crossing.’ 

Jack looked out at the road, but was much more 
enchanted by the full, soft river of heavenly blue water, on 
whose surface he looked eagerly for the black swans. He 
didn’t see any. 

** Oh, yes! Oh, yes! You'll find ’em wild in their native 
state a little way up,’’ said Mr Swallow. 

Beyond the river were sheets of sand again, white sand 
stretching around on every side. 

“It must have been here that the Carpenter wept,” 
Jack said in his unexpected young voice that was still 
slightly hoarse, as he poked his face out of the window. 

The three gentlemen were silent in passive consternation 
till Mr George swelled his cheeks and continued ; ; 

‘* Like anything to see such quantities of sand.?? Then 
he snorted and blew his nose. 

JACK ARRIVES IN AUSTRALIA ll 

__ Mr Bell at once recognised the Westralian joke, which 
had been handed on to Jack by his mother. 

** Hit it, my son! ’’ he cried, clapping his hands on his 
knees. ‘‘ In the first five minutes. Useless! Useless! A 
gentleman of discernment, that’s what you are. Just the 
sort we want in this colony—a gentleman of discernment. 
A gentleman without it planted us here, fifty years ago, in 
the blank, blank sand. What’s the consequence? Clogged, 
cloyed, cramped, sand-smothered, that’s what we 
are.”’ 

** Not a bit of it,’’ said Mr Swallow. 

** Sorrow, Sin, and Sand,’’ repeated Mr Bell. 

Jack was puzzled and amused by their free-and-easy, con- 
fidential way, which was still a little ceremonious. Slightly 
ceremonious, and in their shirt-sleeves, so to speak. The 
same with their curious, cockney pronunciation, their 
accurate grammar, and their slight pomposity. They never 
said ‘* you,”’ merely ‘* y’ ?—‘* That’s what y’are.’? And 
their drawling, almost sneering manner was very odd, 
contrasting with the shirt-sleeves familiarity, the shabby 
clothes and the pleasant way they had of nodding at you 
when they talked to you. 

** Yes, yes, Mr Grant,’’ continued Mr Bell, while Jack 
wished he wouldn’t Mister him—‘* A gentleman without 
discernment induced certain politicians in the British 
Cabinet to invest in these vast areas. This same gentleman 
got himself created King of Groperland, and came out here 
with a small number of fool followers. These fool followers, 
for every three quid’s worth of goods they brought with 
them, were given forty acres of land apiece tt 

*© Of sand,’’ said Mr George. 

£6 and a million acres of fine promises,’? continued 
Mr Bell unmoved. ‘“‘ Therefore the fool followers, mostly 
younger sons of good family, anxious to own property a 

‘* In parties of five females to one male—Prrrh !”’ snorted 
Mr George. 

zf came. They were informed that the soil was well 
adapted to the cultivation of tobacco! Of cotton! Of 
sugar! Of flax! And that cattle could be raised to supply 
His Majesty’s ships with salt beef—and horses could be 
reared to supply the army in India—— ” 

_ © With Kangaroos and Wallabies.”’ 

12 # THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

ie the cavalry, that is. So they came and were 
landed in the sand 4 

‘“‘ And told to stick their head in it, so they shouldn’t 
see death staring at ’em.”’ 

2 along with the goods they had brought.” 

‘A harp! ”? cried Mr George. ‘‘ My mother brought a 
harp and a Paisley shawl and got five hundred acres for 
’em—estimated value of harp being twenty guineas. She’d 
better have gone straight to heaven with it.” 

“Yes, sir! ’? continued Mr Bell, unheeding. 

‘““ No, sir! ’? broke in Mr George. ‘‘ Do you wish me | 
unborn.”’ 

Mr Bell paused to smile, then continued : 

‘‘ Mr Grant, sir, these gentle ladies and gentlemen were 
dumped in the sand along with their goods. Well, there 
were a few cattle and sheep and horses. But what else? 
Harps. Paisley shawls. Ornamental glass cases of wax 
fruit, for the mantelpiece ; family Bibles and a family coach, 
sir. For that family coach, sir, the bringer got a thousand 
acres of land. And it ended its days where they landed it, 
on the beach, for there wasn’t an inch of road to drive 
it over, nor anywhere to drive it to. They took off its 
wheels and there it lay. I myself have sat in it.” 

‘** Ridden in his coach,’? smiled Mr George. 

‘© My mother,”’ continued Mr Bell, ‘‘ was a clergyman’s 
daughter. I myself was born in a bush humpy, and my 
mother died shortly after 22 

** Of chagrin! Of chagrin! ’”? muttered Mr George. 

“We will draw a veil over the sufferings of those 
years 22 

** Oh, but we made good! We made good! ”? put in Mr 
Swallow comfortably. ‘* What are you grousing about? 
We made good. There you sit, Bell, made of money, and 
eeaetae? anybody would think you wanted a loan of two 

ob. 

““ By the waters of Babylon there we sat down—— ”? 
said Mr George. 

“Did we! No, we didn’t. We rowed up the Swan 
River. That’s what my father did. A sturdy British 
yeoman, Mr Grant.” 

* Where did he get the boat from? ”? asked Mr Bell. 

** An old ship. I was a baby, sir, in a tartan frock. 

JACK ARRIVES IN AUSTRALIA 13 

Remember it to this day, sitting in my mother’s lap. My 
father got that boat off a whaler. It had been stove in, 
and wasn’t fit for the sea. But he made it fit for the river, 
and they rowed up the Swan—my father and a couple of 
‘indented ’ servants, as we called them. We landed in 
the Upper Swan valley. I remember that camp fire, sir, 
as well as I remember anything.’’ 

** Better than most things,’’ put in Mr George. 

** We cleared off the scrub, we lifted the stones into 
heaps, we planted corn and wheat fe 

** The babe in the tartan frock steering the plough.”’ 

** Yes, sir, later on. Our flocks prospered, our land bore 
fruit, our family flourished fe 

** On milk and honey 

*° Oh, cry off, Swallow! ’’ ejaculated Mr Bell. ‘* Your 
father fought flood and drought for forty odd years. The 
floods of ’62 broke his heart, and the floods in ’72 ruined 
you. And this is *82, so don’t talk too loud.”’ 

** Ruined! When was I ever ruined?’ cried Mr 
Swallow. ‘‘ Sheep one-hundred-and-ten per cent; for some 
herds, as you know, gentlemen, throw twins and triplets. 
Cattle ninety per cent., horses fifty; and a ready market 
for ’em all.’’ 

*¢ Pests,’? Mr Bell was saying, ‘fone million per cent. 
Rust destroys fourteen thousand acres of wheat crop, just 
as the country is getting on its feet. Dingves breed 185 
per cent., and kill sheep to match. Cattle run wild and 
are no more seen. Horses cost the eyes out of your head 
before you can catch ’em, break ’em, train ’em, and ship 
*em to the Indian market.”’ 

‘© Moth and rust! Moth and rust! ’? murmured Mr 
George absently. 

99 

i 

Jack, with the uncomfortable philosophy of youth, sat 
still and let the verbal waters rage. Until he was startled 
by a question from Mr George. 

** Well, sir, what were you sent out for? ” 

This was a colonial little joke at the ‘‘ Establishment ” 
identity’s expense. But, unfortunately, it hit Jack too. 
He had been sent out, really, because he was too tiresome 

14. ##THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

to keep at home. Too fond of ‘ low’ company. Too 
often a frequenter of the stables. Too indifferent to the 
higher claims of society. They feared a waster in the bud. 
So they shipped the bud to the antipodes, to let it blossom 
there upside down. 

But Jack was not going to give himself away. 

‘* To go on the land, sir,’’ he replied. Which was true. 
But what had his father said in the letter? He flushed and 
looked angry, his dark blue eyes going very dark. ‘* I was 
expelled from school,’ he added calmly. ‘* And I was sent 
down from the Agricultural College. That’s why I have - 
come out a year before my time. But I was coming—to 
go on the land—anyway is 

He ended in a stammer. He rather hated adults; he 
definitely hated them in tribunal. 

Mr George held up his hand deprecatingly. 

**Say nothing! Say nothing! Your father made no 
mention of anything. Tell us when you know us, if y’like. 
But you aren’t called on to indict yourself. That was a 
silly joke of mine. Forget it. You came to go on the land, 
as your father informs me. I knew your father, long before 
you were born. But I knew your mother better.”’ 

** So did I,”? said Mr Swallow. ‘‘ And grieved the day 
that ever a military gentleman carried her away from 
Western Australia. She was one of our home-grown flowers, 
was Katie Reid, and I never saw a Rose of England that 
could touch her.” 

Jack now fiushed deeper than ever. 

** Though,” said Mr George slyly, “* if you’ve got a prank 
up y’r sleeve, that you can tell us about—come on with 
it, my son. We’ve none of us forgotten being shipped to 
England for a schooling.’’ 

** Oh, well! ” said Jack. He always said ‘* Oh, well! ” 
when he didn’t know what to say. ‘* You mean at the 
Agricultural College. Oh, well !—Well I was the youngest 
there, stable-boy and harness-cleaner, and all that. Oh, 
well! You see there’d been a chivoo the night before. 
The lads had a grudge against the council, because they 
gave us bread and cheese, and no butter, for supper, and 
cocoa with no milk. And we weren’t just little nippers. 
We were—Oh, well! Most of the chaps were men, really— 
eighteen—nineteen—twenty. As much as twenty-three. I 

JACK ARRIVES IN AUSTRALIA 15 

was the youngest. I didn’t care. But the chaps were 
different. There were many who had failed at the big 
entrance exams. for the Indian Civil, or the Naval or 
ys, and they rere big, hungry chaps, you can 
et 

** I should say so,”? nodded Mr George approvingly. 

‘* Well, there was a chivoo. They held me on their 
shoulders and I smashed the principal’s windows.” 

You could see by Jack’s face how he had enjoyed break- 
ing those windows. 

** What with? ’? asked Mr George. 

** With a wooden gym club.”’ 

** Wanton destruction of property. Prrrh! ” 

** The boss was frightened. But he raised Old Harry and 
said he’d go up to town and report us to the council. So 
he ordered the trap right away, to catch the nine o’clock 
train. And I had to take the trap round to the front 
door Hy 

Here Jack paused. He didn’t want to go further. 

** And so—— ”’ said Mr George. 

** And so, when I stepped away from the horse’s head, 
the principal jerked the reins in the nasty way he had and 
the horse bolted.”* 

*‘ Couldn’t the fellow pull her up? Man in a position 
like that ought to know how to drive a horse.”’ 

Jack watched their faces closely. On his own face was 
that subtle look of innocence, which veiled a look of life- 
and-death defiance. 

‘‘ The reins weren’t buckled into the bit, sir. No man 
could drive that horse,’’ he said quietly. 

A look of amusement tinged with misgiving spread over 
Mr George’s face. But he was a true colonial. He had to 
hear the end of a story against powers-that-be. 

** And how did it end? ” he asked. 

‘‘I’m sorry,’’ said Jack, ‘‘ he broke his leg in the 
accident.”’ 

The three Australians burst into a laugh. Chiefly because 
when Jack said *‘ I’m sorry,” he really meant it. He was 
really sorry for the hurt man. But for the hurt Principal 
he wasn’t sorry. As soon as the Principal was on the ground 
with a broken leg, Jack saw only the hurt man, and none 
of the office. And his heart was troubled for the hurt man. 

16 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

But if the mischief was to do again he would probably 
do it. He couldn’t repent. And yet his feelings were 
genuinely touched. Which made him comical. 

‘Youre a corker! ’? said Mr George, shaking his head 
with new misgiving. 

“So you were sent down,” said Mr Bell. ‘‘ And y’r 
father though he’d better ship you straight out here, eh? 
Best thing for you, I’ll be bound. I’ll bet you never learned 
a ha’porth at that place.” 

‘¢ Oh, well. I think I learned a lot.” 

‘‘ When to sow and when to reap and a Latin motto 
attached ! ” 

‘* No, sir, not that. I learned to vet.”’ 

ma Vetsri 72 

** Well, sir, you see, the head groom was a gentleman 
veterinary surgeon and he had a weakness, as he called it. 
So when he was strong he taught me to vet, and when he 
had his attacks I’d go out with the cart and collect him at 
a pub and bring him home under the straw, in return for 
kindness shown.”’ 

** A nice sort of school! Prrrh! Bah! ’’ snorted Mr 
George. 

“* Oh, that wasn’t on the curriculum, sir. My mother 
says there’ll be rascals in heaven, if you look for them.’’ 

‘© And you keep on looking, eh? Well—I wouldn’t, if I 
were you. Especially in this country, I wouldn’t. I wouldn’t 
go vetting any more for any drunken groom in the world, 
if I were you. Nor breaking windows, nor leaving reins 
unbuckled either. And I'll tell you for why. It becomes 
a habit. You get a habit of going with rascals, and then 
you’re done. Because in this country you’ll find plenty of 
scamps, and plenty of wasters. And the sight of them is 
enough—nasty, low-down lot. This is a great big country, 
where an honest man can go his own way into the back of 
beyond, if he likes. But the minute he begins to go crooked, 
or slack, the country breaks him. It breaks him, and he’s 
neither fit for god nor man any more. You beware of this 
country, my boy, and don’t try to play larks with it. It’s 
all right playing a prank on an old fool of a fossil out there 
in England. They need a few pranks played on them, they 
do. But out here—no! Keep all your strength and all your 
wits to fight the bush, It’s a great big country. And it 

JACK ARRIVES IN AUSTRALIA 17 

needs men, men, not wasters. It’s a great big country, 
and it wants men. You can go your way and do what you 
want : take up land, go on a sheep station, lumber, or try 
the gold fields. But whatever you do, live up to your fate 
like a man. And keep square with yourself. Never mind 
other people. But keep square with yourself.’’ 

Jack, staring out of the window, saw miles of dull dark- 
green scrub spreading away on every side to a bright sky- 
line. He could hear his mother’s voice : 

** Harn a good opinion of yourself and never mind the 
world’s opinion. You know when there’s the right glow 
inside you. That’s the spirit of God inside you.”’ 

But this ‘** right glow ’’ business puzzled him a little. 
He was inclined to believe he felt it while he was smashing 
the Principal’s window-glass, and while he was “‘ vetting ”’ 
with the drunken groom. Yet the words fascinated him : 
** The right glow inside you—the spirit of God inside 

ou.”” 

J He sat motionless on his seat, while the Australians kept 
on talking about the colony. ‘* Have y’patience? Per- 
severance? Have ye that? She wants y’ and y’ offspring. 
And the bones y’ll leave behind y’. All of y’ interests, y’ 
hopes, y’ life, and the same of y’ sons and son’s sons. An’ 
she doesn’t care if y’ go nor stay, neither. Makes no 
difference to her. She’s waiting, drowsy, no hurry. Wants 
millions of yer. But she’s waited endless ages and can 
wait endless more. Only she must have men—understand ? 
If they’re lazy derelicts and ne’er-do-wells, she’ll eat ’em 
up. But she’s waiting for real men—British to the 
bone as 

‘¢ The lad’s no more than a boy, yet, George. Dry up 
a bit with your men—British to the bone.” 

*‘ Don’t toll at me, Bell. I’ve been here since 781, so let 
me speak. Came in old sailing-ship, ‘ Rockingham ’— 
wrecked on coast—left nothing but her name, township of 
Rockingham. Nice place to fish. Was sent back to London 
to school, °41, in another sailing-vessel and wasn’t wrecked 
this time. ‘ Shepherd,’ laden colonial produce. The first 
steam vessel didn’t come till ’45—the ‘ Driver.” Wonder- 
ful advancement—wonderful advancement in the colony, 
too, when I came back. Came back a notary. Couple of 
churches, Mill Street Jetty, Grammar School opened, 

18 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Causeway built, lot of exploration done. Eyre had legged 
it from Adelaide—all in my time, all in my time a3 

iv 

Jack felt it might go on for ever. He was becoming 
stupefied. Mercifully, the train jerked to a standstill be- 
side a wooden platform, that was separated from a sandy 
space by a picket fence. A porter put his hand to his mouth 
and yelled ‘‘ Perth,” just for the look of the thing—because 
where else could it be? They all burst out of the train. 
The town stood up in the sand : wooden houses with wooden 
platforms blown over with sand. 

And Mr George was still at it. ‘* Yes, Bell, wait for the 
salty sand to mature. Wait for a few of us to die—and 
decay! Mature—manure, that’s what’s wanted. Dead 
men in the sand, dead men’s bones in the gravel. That’s 
what’ll mature this country. The people you bury in it. 
Only good fertilizer. Dead men are like seed in the ground. 
When a few more like you and me, Bell, are worked in——”? 

CHAP: II. THE TWIN LAMBS 
i 

JACK was tired and a little land-sick, after the long voyage. 
He felt dazed and rather unhappy, and saw as through a 
glass, darkly. For he could not yet get used to the fixed 
land under his feet, after the long weeks on the steamer. 
And these people went on as if they were wound up, 
curiously oblivious of him and his feelings. A dream 
world, with a dark glass between his eyes and it. An 
uneasy dream. 

He waited on the platform. Mr George had again dis- 
appeared somewhere. The train was backing already away. 

It was evening, and the setting sun from the west, where 
the great empty sea spread unseen, cast a radiance in the 
etherealised air, melting the brick shops and the wooden 
houses and the sandy places in a sort of amethyst glow. 
And again Jack saw the magic clarity of this new world, 
‘as through a glass, darkly. He felt the cool snap of night 
in the air, coming strange and crude out of the jewel sky. 
And it seemed to him he was looking through the wrong 
end of a field-glass, at a far, far country. 

Where was Mr George? Had he gone off to read the 
letter again, or to enquire about the draft on the bank? 
Everyone had left the station, the wagonette cabs had 
driven away. What was to be done? Ought he to have 
mentioned an hotel? He’d better say something. He’d 
better say. 

But here was Mr George, with a serious face, coming 
straight up to say something. 

‘* That vet,’ he said, ‘‘ did he think you had a natural 
gift for veterinary work? ”’ 

‘‘ He said so, sir. My mother’s father was a naval 
surgeon—if that has anything to do with it.”’ 

** Nothing at all. I knew the old gentleman—and an- 
other silly old cuckoo he was, too. But he’s dead, so we'll 
make the best of him. No, it was your character I wanted 
to get at. Your father wants you to go on a farm or a 
station for twelve months, and sends a pound a week for 
your board. Suppose you know poe 

19 

20 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

** Yes—I hope it’s enough.” 

‘© Oh, it’s enough, if you’re all right yourself—I was 
thinking of Ellis’s place. I’ve got the twins here now. 
They’re kinsmen of yours, the Ellises—and of mine, too. 
We're all related, in clans and cliques and gangs, out here 
in this colony. Your mother belongs to the Ellis clan. 
Well, now. Ellis’s place is a fine home farm, and not too 
far. Only he’s got a family of fine young lambs, my step- 
sister’s children into the bargain. And y’see, if y’re a wolf 
in sheep’s clothing—for you look mild enough—why, I 
oughtn’t to be sending you among them. Young lasses and ~ 
boys bred and reared out there in the bush, why Come 
now, son—y’father protected you by silence—but you’re 
not in court, and you needn’t heed me. Tell me straight 
out what you were expelled from your Bedford school 
for.”” 

Jack was silent for a moment, rather pale about the nose. 

** I was nabbed,’’ he said, in a colourless voice, ‘** at a 
fight with fists for a purse of sovereigns, laid either side. 
Plenty of others were there. But they got away, and the 
police nabbed me for the school colours on my cap. My 
father was just back from Ceylon, and he stood by me. 
But the Head said for the sake of example and for the 
name of the school I’d better be chucked out. They were 
talking about the school in the newspapers. The Head said 
he was sorry to expel me.”’ 

Mr George blew his nose into a large yellow red-spotted 
handkerchief, and looked for a few moments into the 
distance. 

** Seems to me you let yourself be made a bit of a cat’s 
paw of,’’ he said dubiously. 

** IT suppose it’s because I don’t care,’’ said Jack. 

‘* But you ought to care. Why don’t y’ ? ” 

There was no answer. 

** You’ll have to care some day or other,’ the old man 
continued. 

‘ HP you know, sir, which hotel I shall go to? ” asked 
ack. 

** You'll go to no hotel. You’ll come home with me. 
But, mind y’. I’ve got my two young nieces, Ellis’ twins 
couple of girls, Ellis’ daughters, where I’m going to send 
you. They’re at my house. And there’s my other niece, 

THE TWIN LAMBS 21 

Mary, who I’m very fond of. She’s not an Ellis, she’s a 
Rath, and an orphan, lives with her Aunt Matilda, my 
sister. They don’t live with me. None of ’em live with 
me. I live alone, except for a good plain cook, since my 
wife died. But I tell you, they’re visiting me. And I shall 
look to you to behave yourself, now; both here and at 
Wandoo, which is Ellis’ station. I’ll take you there in 
the morning. But y’see now where I’m taking you : among 
a pack of innocent sheep that’s probably never seen a 
goat to say Boh! to—or Baa! if you like—makes no 
difference. We don’t raise goats in Western Australia, as 
I’m aware of. But I’m telling you, if you’re a wolf in 
sheep’s clothing No, you needn’t say anything. You 
probably don’t know what you are, anyhow. So come on. 
I'll tell somebody to bring your bags—looks a rare jorum 
to me—and we'll walk.”’ 

ee 

i 

_ They walked off the timber platform into the sand, and 
Jack had his first experience of “‘ sand-groping.’? The 
sand was thick and fine and soft, so he was glad to reach 
the oyster-shell path running up Wellington Street, in front 
of the shops. They passed along the street of brick cot- 
tages and two-storied houses, to Barrack Street, where Jack 
looked with some surprise on the pretentious buildings that 
stood up in the dusk : the handsome square red brick tower 
of the Town Hall, and on the sandy hill to the left, the 
fine white edifice of the Roman Catholic Church, which 
building was already older than Jack himself. Beyond the 
Town Hall was the Church of England. ‘ See it! ” said 
Mr George. ‘* That’s where your father and mother were 
married. Slap-dash, military wedding, more muslin and 
red jackets than would stock a shop.” 

Mr George spoke to everybody he met, ladies and gentle- 
men alike. The ladies seemed a bit old-fashioned, the 
gentlemen all wore nether garments at least four sizes too 
large for them. Jack was much piqued by this pioneering 
habit. And they all seemed very friendly and easy-going, 
like men in a pub at home. 

‘‘ What did the Bedford Headmaster say he was sorry 
to lose you for? Smart at your books, were you? ”’ 

2 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘¢ I was good at Scripture and Shakespeare, but not at 
the other things. I expect he was sorry to lose me from 
the football eleven. I was the cock there.” 

Mr George blew his nose loudly, gasped, prrrhed, and 
said, ‘“* You’d better say rooster, my son, here in Australia ; 
especially in polite society. We’re a trifle more particular 
than they are in England, I suppose. Well, and what else 
have you got to crow about? ” 

If Jack had been the sulky sort, he would now have begun 
to get sulky. As it was, he was tired of being continually 
pulled up. But he fell back on his own peculiar callous 
indifference. 

*‘ I was captain of the first football eleven,’’ he said in 
his indifferent voice. ‘ And not bad in front of the sticks. 
And I took the long distance running cup a year under 
age. I tell you because you ask me.”’ 

Then Mr George astonished Jack again by turning and 
planting himself in front of him like Balaam’s ass, in the 
middle of the path, standing with feet apart in his big 
elephant trousers, snorting behind a walrus moustache, 
glaring and extending a large and powerful hand. He 
shook hands vigorously, saying, ‘* You’ll do, my son. You'll 
do for me.’’ 

Then he resumed his walk. 

ll 

** Yes, sir, you'll do for me,’? resumed the old man. 
** For I can see you’re a gentleman.” 

Jack was rather taken aback. He had come to Australia 
to be a Man, a wild, bushy man among men. His father 
was a gentleman. 

oa think I’d rather be a man than a gentleman,”? he 
said. 

Mr George stood still, feet apart, as if he had been shot. 

“* What’s the difference? ’? he cried in a falsetto, sar- 
castic tone. ‘* What’s the difference? Can’t be a man 
unless you are a gentleman. Take that from me. You 
might say I’m not a gentleman. Sense of the ridiculous 
runs away with me, for one thing. But, in order to be the 
best man I could, I’ve tried to be all the gentleman I 
could. No hanky-pankying about it. You're a gentleman 

THE TWIN LAMBS 23 

born. I’m not, not altogether. Don’t you go trying to 
upset what you are. But whether you’re a bush-whacker 
or a lumper you can be a gentleman. A gentleman’s a 
man who never laughs to wound, who’s honest with him- 
self, and his own judge in the sight of the Almighty. That’s 
the Government House down there among the trees, river 
just beyond. That’s my house, there, see. I’m going to 
hand you over io the girls once we get there. So I shan’t 
see you again, not to talk to. I want to tell you, then, 
that I put my confidence in you, and you’re going to play 
up like a gentleman. And I want you to know, as between 
gentlemen, not merely between an old man and a boy, 
but as between gentlemen, if you ever need any help, or a 
word of advice, come to me. Come to me, and I’ll do my 
best.” 

He once more shook hands, this time in a conclusive 
manner. 

Jack had looked to left and right as they walked, half 
listening to the endless old man. He saw sandy blocks of 
land beside the road, and scattered, ugly buildings, most 
of them new. He made out the turrets and gables of the 
Government House, in the dusk among trees, and he 
imagined the wide clear river below those trees. 

Turning down an unmade road, they approached a two- 
storied brick house with narrow verandahs, whose wooden 
supports rested nakedly on the sand below. There was no 
zarden, fence, or anything : just an oyster-shell path across 
the sand, a pipe-clayed doorstep, a brass knocker, a narrow 
wooden verandah, a few flower-pots. 

Mr George opened the door and showed the boy into the 
,arrow wooden hall. There was a delicious smell of cooking. 
Jack climbed the thin, flimsy stairs, and was shown into his 
yedroom. A four-poster bed with a crochet quilt and frilled 
yillows, a mahogany chest of drawers with swivel looking- 
slass, a washstand with china set complete. England all 
ver again. Even his bag was there, and his brushes were 
et out for him. 

He had landed! 

iv 
As he made his toilet he heard a certain fluttering out- 
ide his door. He waited for it to subside, and when all 

24 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

seemed still, opened to go downstairs. There stood two 
girls, giggling and blushing, waiting arm in arm to pounce 
on him. 

‘‘ Oh, isn’t he beau! *? exclaimed one of the girls, in a 
sort of aside. And the other broke into a high laugh. 

Jack remained dumbfounded, reddening to the roots of 
his hair. But his dark-blue eyes lingered for a moment on 
the two girlish faces. They were evidently the twins. 
-They had the same thin, soft, slightly-tanned, warm-look- 
ing faces, a little wild, and the same marked features. But 
the brows of one were level, and her fair hair, darkish fair, 
was all crisp, curly round her temples, and she looked up 
at you from under her level brows with queer yellow-grey 
eyes, shy, wild, and yet with a queer effrontery, like a 
wild-cat under a bush. The other had blue eyes and a 
bigger nose, and it was she who said, ‘* Oh, isn’t he beau!”? 

The one with the yellow eyes stuck out her slim hand 
awkwardly, gazing at him and saying : 

** TI suppose you’re cousin Jack, Beau.” 

He shook hands first with one then with the other, and 
could not find a word to say. The one with the yellow 
eyes was evidently the leader of the two. 

‘* Tea is ready,’ she said, ‘* if you’re coming down.” 

She spoke this over her shoulder. There was the same 
colour in her tawny eyes as in her crisp, tawny hair, but 
her brows were darker. She had a forehead, Jack decided, 
like the plaster-cast of Minerva. And she had the queerest 
way of looking at you under her brows, and over her 
shoulder. Funny pair of lambs, these. 

The two girls went downstairs arm in arm, at a run. This 
is quite a feat, but evidently they were used to it. 

Jack looked on life, social life inside a house, as some- 
thing to be borne in silence. These two girls were certainly 
a desperate addition. He heard them burst into the par- 
lour, the other one repeating : 

** He’s coming. Here comes Beau.” 

** I thought his name was Jack. Bow, is it! ’? exclaimed 
@ voice. 

He entered the parlour with his elbows at his sides, his 
starched collar feeling very stiff. He was aware of the usual 
hideous room, rather barer than at home: plush cushions 
on a horse-hair sofa. and a green carpet: a large stout 

THE TWIN LAMBS 25 

woman, with reddish hair, in a silk frock, and gold chains, 
and Mr George introducing her as Mrs Watson, otherwise 
Aunt Matilda. She put diamond-ringed hands on Jack’s 
shoulders and looked into his face, which he thought a repel- 
lant procedure. 

**So like your father, dear boy; how’s your dear 
mother? ”’ 

And in spite of his inward fury of resistance, she kissed 
him. For she was but a woman of forty-two. 

** Quite well, thank you,” said Jack, though considering 
he had been at sea for six weeks, he knew as little about his 
mother’s health as did Aunt Matilda herself. 

** Did y’ blow y’ candle out? ”’ asked Mr George. 

** No, he didn’t,’” answered the tawny girl. ‘I'll go 
and do it.”’ ' 

And she flashed away upstairs like a panther. 

** IT suppose the twins introduced themselves,’’ said Mr 
George. 

** No, they didn’t,”’ said the other one. 

_ ** Only christened you Bow. You’ll be somebody or 
other’s beau before very long, I’ll warrant. This is Grace, 
Grace Ellis, you know, where you’re going to live. And 
her sister who’s gone upstairs to blow your candle out, is 
Monica. Can’t be too careful of fire in these dry places. 
Most folks say they can’t tell ’em apart, but I call it 
nonsense.”” 

‘© Ancien, beau, bon, cher, adjectives which precede,”’ 
said the one called Monica, jerking herself into the room, 
after blowing out the candle. 

‘¢ There’s your father,’? said Mr George. And Aunt 
Matilda fluttered into the hall, while the twins betrayed 
no interest at all. The tawny one stared at Jack and kept 
slinking about like a lean young panther, to get a different 
view of him. For all the world as if she was going to pounce 
on him, like a cat on a bird. He, permanently flushed, kept 
his self-possession in a boyish and rather handsome, if stiff, 
manner. 

Mr Ellis was stout, clean-shaven, red-faced, and shabby 
and baggy and good-natured in appearance. 

“This is the young gentleman—Mr Grant—called in 
Westralia Bow, so named by Miss Monica Ellis.”’ 

‘¢ By Miss Grace, if you please,’’ snapped Monica. 

26 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

“‘Tea’s ready. Tea’s ready.” 

They trooped into the dining room where a large table 
was spread. Aunt Matilda seated herself behind the tea- 
kettle, Mr George sat at the other end, before the pile of 
plates and the carvers, and the others took their places 
where they would. Jack modestly sat on Aunt Matilda’s 
left hand, so the tawny Monica at once pounced on the 
chair opposite. 

Entered the Good Plain Cook with a dish covered with 
a pewter cover, and followed by a small, dark, ugly, quiet 
girl carrying the vegetable dishes. 

‘¢ That’s my niece, Mary, Jack. Lives with Aunt Matilda 
here, who won’t spare her or I’d have her to live here with 
me. Now you know everybody. What’s for tea? ” 

He was dangerously clashing the knife on the steel. Then 
lifting the cover, he disclosed a young pig roasted in all its 
glory of gravy. Mary meanwhile had nodded her head at 
Jack and looked at him with her big, queer, very black 
eyes. You might have thought she had native blood. She 
sat down to serve the vegetables. 

** Grace, there’s a fly in the milk,’’ said Aunt Matilda, 
who was already pouring large cups of tea. Grace seized 
the milk jug and jerked from the room. 

** Do you take milk and sugar, as your dear father used 
to, John? ’’ asked Aunt Matilda of the youth on her left. 

** Call him Bow. Bow’s his name out here—John’s too 
stiff and Jack’s too common!” exclaimed Mr George, 
elbows deep in carving. 

‘** Bow’ll do for me,’’ put in Mr Ellis, who said little. 

‘* Mary, is there any mustard? ’? said Aunt Matilda. 

Jack rose vaguely to go and get it, but Aunt Matilda 
seized him by the arm and pushed him back. 

** Sit still. She knows where it is.’’ 

‘* Monica, come and carry the cups, there’s a good girl.”’ 

‘** Now which end of the pig do you like, Jack? *? asked 
Mr George. 

** Matilda, will this do for you? ’? He held up a piece 
on the fork. Mary arrived with a ponderous gyrating cruet- 
stand, which she made place for in the middle of the table. 
_ “What about bread? ” said Aunt Matilda. * I’m sure 
John eats bread with his meat. Fetch some bread, Grace, 
for your cousin John.’’ 

THE TWIN LAMBS 27 

** Everybody did it,’’ thought Jack in despair, as he tried 
to eat amid the bustle. ‘* No servants, nothing ever still. 
On the go all the time.” 

** Girls going to the concert to-night? °? asked Mr George. 

** If anybody will go with us,’’ replied Monica, with a 
tawny look at Jack. 

** There’s Bow,” said Mr George, ‘* Bow’ll like to go.” 

Under the she-lion peering of Monica, Jack was incap- 
able of answer. 

** Let the poor boy rest,’? said Aunt Matilda. ‘* Just 
landed after a six thousand mile voyage, and you rush him 
out next minute to a concert. Let him stop at home quietly 
with me, and have a quiet chat about the dear ones he’s 
left behind. Aren’t you going to the concert with the girls, 
Jacob? ”* 

This was addressed to Mr Ellis, who took a gulp of tea 
and shook his head mutely. 

** I’d rather go to the concert, I think,”’ said Jack, under 
the queer yellow glower of Monica’s eyes, and the full 
black gaze of Mary’s. 

** Good for you, my boy,’’ said Mr George. ‘*‘ Bow by 
name and Bow by nature. And well set up, with three 
strings to his Bow already.”’ 

Monica once more peered tawnily, and Mary glanced a ~ 
black, furtive glance. Aunt Matilda looked down on him, 
and Grace, at his side, peered up. 

For the first time since childhood, Jack found himself in 
a really female setting. Imnstinctively he had avoided 
women : but particularly he avoided girls. With girls and 
women he felt exposed to some sort of danger—as if some- 
thing were going to seize him by the neck, from behind, 
when he wasn’t looking. He relied on men for safety. But 
curiously enough, these two elderly men gave him no 
shelter whatever. They seemed to throw him a victim to 
these frightful ‘‘ lambs.’? In England, there was an esprit 
de corps among men. Man for man was a tower of strength 
against the females. Here in this place men deserted one 
another as soon as the women put in an appearance. They 
eft the field entirely to the females. 

In the first half-hour Jack realised he was thrown a victim 
(o these tawny and black young cats. And there was 
1othing to do but bear up. F 

28 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘‘ Have you got an evening suit? ’’ asked Grace, who 
was always the one to ponder things out. 

‘© Yes—a sort of a one,”’ said Jack. 

‘Oh, good! Oh, put it on! Do put it on.” 

‘¢ Leave the lad alone,”’ said Mr George. ‘‘ Let him go 
as he is.”” 

“‘No,”? said Aunt Matilda. ‘‘ He has his father’s hand- 
some presence. Let him make the best of himself. I think 
I’ll go to the concert after all.”’ 

After dinner there was a bustle. Monica flew up to light 
his candle for him, and stood there peering behind the flame ~ 
when he came upstairs. 

** You haven’t much time,”’ she said, as if she were going 
to spear him. 

‘* All right,’”? he answered, in his hoarse young voice. 
And he stood in torment till she left his room. 

He was just tying his tie when there came a flutter and a 
tapping. Aunt Matilda’s voice was saying : ‘* Nearly time. 
Are you almost ready? ”’ 

‘** Half a minute! ’’ he crowed hoarsely, like an unhappy 

young cock. 
: But the door stealthily opened, and Aunt Matilda peeped 
in. 
“Oh, tying his tie! *’ she said, satisfactorily, when she 
perceived that he was dressed as far as discretion demanded. 
And she entered in full blow. Behind her hovered Grace— 
then Monica—and in the doorway, Mary. It seemed to 
Jack that Aunt Matilda was the most objectionable of the 
lot, Monica the brazenest, Grace the most ill-mannered, and 
Mary the most repulsive, with her dark face. He struggled 
in discomfort with his tie. 

** Let Mary do it,’’ said Aunt Matilda. 

‘* No, no,’’ he barked. ‘* I can do it.”’ 

** Come on, Mary. Come and tie John’s tie.’? 

Mary came quietly forward. 

** Let me do it for you, Bow,” she said in her quiet, 
insinuating voice, looking at him with her inky eyes and 
standing in front of him till his knees felt weak and his 
throat strangled. He was purple in the face, struggling 
with his tie in the presence of the lambs. 

** He’ll never get it done,’’ said Monica, from behind the 
yellow glare. 

THE TWIN LAMBS 29 

“Let me do it,’? said Mary, and lifting her hands 
decisively she took the two ends of the tie from him. 

He held his breath and lifted his eyes to the ceiling and 
felt as if the front of his body were being roasted. Mary, 
the devil-puss, seemed endless ages fastening the tie. Then 
she twitched it at his throat and it was done, just as he 
was on the point of suffocation. 

** Are those your best braces? ’? said Grace. ‘* They’re 
awfully pretty with rose-buds.’? And she fingered the 
band. 

“© T suppose you put on evening dress for the last dinner 
on board,’’ said Aunt Matilda. ‘‘ Nothing makes me cry 
like Auld Lang Syne, that last night, before you land next 
day. But it’s fifteen years since I went over to England.’’ 

** T don’t suppose we shall any of us ever go,”’ said Grace 
longingly. 

** Unless you marry Bow,”’ said Monica abruptly. 

** I can’t marry him unless he asks me,”’ said Grace. 

** He’ll ask nobody for a good many years to come,’’ 
said Aunt Matilda with satisfaction. 

** Hasn’t he got lovely eyelashes, 
sonally. 

** He’d almost do for a girl,’’ said Monica. 

** Not if you look at his ears,’’ said Mary, with odd 
decision. He felt that Mary was bent on saving his man- 
hood. 

He breathed as if the air around him were red-hot. He 
would have to get out, or die. He plunged into his coat, 
pulling down his shirt-cuffs with a jerk. 

** What funny green cuff-links,’’ said Grace. ‘* Are they 

oP?’ 

** Malachite,’ said Jack. 

** What’s malachite? ” 

There was no answer. He put a white silk muffler round 
his neck to protect his collar. 

*© Oh, look at his initials in lavender silk! ”’ 

At last he was in his overcoat, and in the street with the 
bevy. 

b tonvé your overcoat open, so it shows your shirt- 
ront as you walk,”’ said Grace, forcibly unbuttoning the 
aid coat. ‘I think that looks so lovely. Doesn’t he look 
ovely, Monica? Everybody will be asking who he is.” 

*? said Grace imper- 

80 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘¢ Tel] them he’s the son of General Grant,’’ said Aunt 
Matilda, with complete satisfaction, as she sailed at his 
side. 

Life is principally a matter of endurance. This was the 
sum of Jack’s philosophy. He put it into practice this 
evening. 

It was a benefit concert in the Town Hall, with the 
Episcopalian Choir singing ‘‘ Angels Ever Bright and Fair,” 
and a violinist from Germany playing violin solos, and a 
lady vocalist from Melbourne singing ‘*‘ home ”’ solos, 
while local stars variously coruscated. Aunt Matilda filled . 
up the end of the seat—like a massive book-end; and the 
others like slender volumes of romance were squeezed in 
between her and another stout book-end. Jack had the 
heaving warmth of Aunt Matilda on his right, the electric 
wriggle of Monica on his left, and he continued to breathe 
red-hot air. 

The concert was a ludicrous continuation of shameful and 
ridiculous noise, to him. Each item seemed inordinately 
long and he hoped for the next, which, when it came, seemed 
worse than the last. The people who performed seemed to 
him in a ghastly humiliating position. One stout mother- 
of-thousands leaned forward and simply gurgled about rid- 
ing over the brow of a hill and seeing a fair city beyond, 
and a young knight in silver armour riding toward her 
with shining face, to greet her on the spot as his lady fair 
and lady dear. Jack looked at her in pained amazement. 
And yet when the songstress from Melbourne, in a rich 
contralto, began to moan in a Scotch accent : i 

“* And it’s o-o-oh! that I’m longing for my ain folk, 
Though the-e-ey be but lowly, puir and plain folk— 
I am far across the sea 
But my heart will ever bee-ee 
At home in dear old Scotland with my ain folk.’ 

Jack suddenly wanted to howl. He had never been to 
Scotland and his father, General Grant, with his mother, 
was at present in Malta. And he hadn’t got any “ ain — 
folk,’ and he didn’t want any. Yet it was all he could do — 
to keep the tears from showing in his eyes, as his heart — 
fairly broke in him. And Aunt Matilda crowded him a 

TEE TWIN LAMBS 81 

little more suffocatingly on the right, and Monica wriggled 
more hatefully than ever on the left, and that beastly Mary 
leaned forward to glance appreciatively at him, with her 
low-down black eyes. And he felt as if the front of his 
body was scorched. And a smouldering desire for revenge 
awoke deep down in him. 

People were always trying to ‘* do things ’? to you. Why 
couldn’t they leave you alone? Dirty cads, to sing ‘“‘ My 
Ain Folk,’ and then stare in your face to see how it got 
you. 

But life was a matter of endurance, with possible revenge 
later on. 

When at last he got home and could go to bed, he felt he 
had gained a brief respite. There was no lock to the door 
—so he put the arm-chair against it, for a barricade. 

And he felt he had been once more sold. He had thought 
he was coming to a wild and woolly world. But all the 
way out he had been forced to play the gentlemanly son of 
his father. And here it was hell on earth, with these women 
let loose all over you, and these ghastly concerts, and these 
hideous meals, and these awful, flimsy, choky houses. Far 
better the Agricultural College. Far better England. 

He was sick with, homesickness as he flung himself into 
bed. And it seemed to him he was always homesick for 
some place which he had never known and perhaps never 
would know. He was always homesick for somewhere else. 
He always hated where he was, silently but deeply. 

Different people. The place would be all right, but for 
the people. 

He hated women. He hated the kind of nausea he felt 
after they had crowded on him. The yellow cat-eyes of 
that deadly Monica! The inky eyes of that low-down 
Mary! The big nose of that Grace : she was the most toler- 
able. And the indecency of the red-haired Aunt Matilda, 
with her gold chains. 

He flung his trousers in one direction, and the loathsome 
‘tarched shirt in another, and his underwear in another. 
When he was quite clear of all his clothing he clenched his 
ists and reached them up, and stretched hard, hard as if 
o stretch himself clear of it all. Then he did a few 
houghtless exercises, to shake off the world. He wanted 
he muscles of his body to move, to shake off the contact 

82 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

of the world. As a dog coming out of the water shakes 
himself, so Jack stood there slowly, intensely going through 
his exercises, slowly sloughing the contact of the world 
from his young, resistant white body. And his hair fell 
loose into curl, and the alert defiance came into his eyes 
as he threw apart his arms and opened his young chest. 
Anything, anything to forget the world and to throw the 
contact of people off his limbs and his chest. Keen and 
savage as a Greek gymnast he struck the air with his arms, 
with his legs. 

Till at last he felt he had broken through the mesh. His. 

blood was running free, he had shattered the film that other 
people put over him, as if snails had crawled over him. 
His skin was free and alive. He glowered at the door, and 
made the barricade more safe. 

Then he dived into his night-shirt, and felt the world was 
his own again. At least in his own immediate vicinity. 
Which was all he cared about for the moment. 

HAP. TI. DRIVING TO WANDOO 

i 
ACK started before dawn next morning, for Wandoo. Mr 
reorge had business which took him south, so he decided 
0 carry the boy along on the coach. Mr Ellis also was 
eturning home in the coach, but the twins, those lambs, 
rere staying behind. In the chilly dark, Jack climbed the 
ront of the buggy to sit on the seat beside the driver. 
le was huddled in his overcoat, the happiest boy alive. 
‘or now at last he was “ getting away,’’ as he always 
ranted to ** get away.’’? From what, he didn’t stop to 
onsider, and still less did he realise towards what. Because 
owever far you may get away from one thing, by so much 
Oo you draw near to another. 

And this is the Fata Morgana of Liberty, of Freedom. 
he may lead you very definitely away from to-day’s prison. 
ut she also very definitely leads you towards some other 
rison. Liberty is a changing of prisons, to people who seek 
nly liberty. 

Away went the buggy at a spanking trot, the drive 
pinting out the phosphoric glow of the river, as they 
escended to the Causeway. Stars still shone overhead, 
ut the sky was beginning to open inland. The buggy ran 
yitly over the damp sand, the two horses were full of life. 
here was an aroma of damp sand, and a fresh breeze from 
1e river as they crossed. 

Jack didn’t want to talk. But the driver couldn’t miss 
ie Opportunity. 

‘© J drives this coach backards and forrards to Albany 
eek in week out, years without end, amen, and a good 
vo hundred miles 0’ land to cover, taking six days clear 
ith two ’osses, and them in relays fifteen or twenty miles, 
ymetimes over, as on the outland reach past Wagin.”’ 

*¢ Ever get held up? ”” 

‘© No, sir, can’t say as I do. Who'd there be to hold 
e up in Western Australia? And if there was, the mounted 
jlice’d soon settle °em. There’s nobody to hold me up 
1t my old woman, and she drives the coach for me up 
iddle Swan way.”” 

B 83 

34 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘* Can she drive? ” : 

““ You back your life she can. Bred and born to it. 
Drive, an’ swear at the ’osses like a trooper, when she’s a 
mind. Swear! I’d never ha’ thought it of ’er, when I rode 
behind ’er as a groom.”’ 

“* How? ” 

‘‘ Oh, she took me in, she did, pretty. But, after all, 
what’s a lady but a woman! Though far be it from me to 
say : ‘ What’s a woman but a lady’! If I’d gone down 
on my hands an’ knees to her in them days I should have 
expected her to kick me. And what does she do? Rode 
out of the park gates and stopped. So she did. Turns 
to me. ‘ Grey,’ she says, ‘ here’s money. You go to 
London and buy yourself clothes like what a grocer would 
buy. Avoid looking like a butler or a groom. And when 
you’ve got an outfit, dress and make yourself look like a 
grocer,’ she said, though I never had any connections with 
grocery in my life, ‘ and go to the office in Victoria Street 
and take two passages to Australia.” That was what she 
said. Just Australia. When the man in the office asked me 
where to in Australia, I didn’t know what to say. ‘* Oh, 
we'll go in at the first gate,’ I said. And so it was Fre- 
mantle. ‘ Yes,’ she said, ‘ we’re going to elope.’ ‘ Nice 
thing for me,’ thinks I. But I says, ‘ All right, miss.? She 
was a pearl beyond price, was Miss Ethel. So she seemed 
to me then. Now she’s a termagant as ever was : in double 
’arness, collar-proud.”’ 

The coachman flicked the horses. Jack looked at him 
in amazement. He was a man with a whitish-looking beard, 
in the dim light. 

** And did she have any children? ”? 

‘* She’s got five.” 

** And does she regret it? ”? 

** At times, I suppose. But as I say to her, if anybody 
was took in, it was me. I always thought her a perfect 
lady. So when she lets fly at me : § Call yourself a man? ” 
I just say to her: ‘ Call yourself a lady? ’ And she comes 
round all right.’’ 

Jack’s consciousness began to go dim. He was aware of 
a strange dim booming almost like guns in the distance, and 
the driver’s voice saying, ‘‘ Frogs, sir. Way back in the 
days before ever a British ship came here, they say the 

DRIVING TO WANDOO 35 

Jutchmen came and was frightened off by the croaking of 
he bull frogs. Couldn’t make it out a-nohow’”’! The 
orses’ hoofs were echoing on the boarded Causeway, and 
rom the little islands alongside came the amazing croak- 
ng, barking, booing and booming of the frogs. 

ii 

When Jack looked round again it was day. And the 
river’s beard was black. He was a man with a thin red 
ace and black beard and queer grey eyes that had a mock- 
og sort of secret in them. 

** I thought your beard was white,’ said Jack. 

** Ay, with rime. With frost. Not with anything else.” 

** I didn’t expect hoar-frost here.’’ 

** Well—it’s not so very common. Not like the Old 
‘ountry.”’ 

Jack realised they always spoke patronisingly of the Old 
ountry, poor old place, as if it couldn’t help being what 
; Was. 

The man’s grey eyes with the amused secret glanced 
uickly at Jack. 

** Not quite awake yet? ”’ he said. 

** Oh, yes,’’ said Jack. 

** Coming out to settle, I hope,”’ said the driver. ‘* We 
an do with a few spruce young lads. I’ve got five daughters 
> contend with. Why, there’s six A.1l. families in Perth, 
aybe you’ve heard, and six in the country, and possibly 
x round Fremantle, and nary one of ’em but’s got seven 
aughters. Seven daughters 2 

Jack did not hear. He seemed to be saying, in reply to 
yme question, *‘ I’m Jack Hector Grant.”’ 

“‘ Contrairy ’? the servants had called him, and 

naughty little boy,’’ his aunts. Insubordinate, untrust- 
orthy. Such things they said of him. His soul pricked 
om all the things, but he guessed they were not far wrong. 

What did his mother think of him? And his father? He 
dn’t know them very well. They oniy came home some- 
mes, and then they seemed to him reasonable and delight- 
| people. The Wandering Grants, Lady Bewley had called 
em. 

Was he a liar? When they called him a liar, was it true? 

86 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

It was. And yet he never really felt a liar. ‘‘ Don’t ask, 
and you’ll get no lies told you.”? It was a phrase from his 
nurse, and he always wanted to use it to his hateful Aunts. 
‘‘ Say you’re sorry! Say you’re sorry! ’’ Wasn’t that 
forcing him to tell lies, when he wasn’t sorry. His aunts 
always seemed to him despicable liars. He himself was just 
an ordinary liar. He lied because he didn’t want them 
to know what he’d done, even when he’d done right. 

So they threatened him with that loathsome ‘‘ police- 
man.’ Or they dropped him over the garden fence into the 
field beyond. There he sat in a sort of Crusoe solitary con-. 
finement. A vast row of back fences, and a vast, vast field. 
Himself squatting immovable, and an Aunt coming to 
demand sharply through the fence: ‘‘ Say you’re sorry. 
Say you want to be a good little boy. Say it, or you won’t 
come in to dinner. You’ll stay there all night.”’ 

He wasn’t sorry, he didn’t want to be a good little boy, 
therefore he wouldn’t *‘ say it ’?; so he got a piece of bread 
and butter pushed through the fence. And then he faced 
the emptiness of the field and set off, to find himself some- 
how in the kitchen-garden of the manor-house. A servant 
had seen him, and brought him before her ladyship, who 
was herself walking in the garden. 

‘© Who are you, little boy? ” 

** I’m Jack Hector Grant ’’—a pause—* Who are you? ”’ 

**T’m Lady Bewley.” 

They eyed one another. 

** And where were you wandering to, in my garden? ”’ 

**T wasn’t wand’rin’. I was walkin’.’’ 

** Were you? Come then, and walk with me, will 
you? ”° 

She took his hand and led him along a path. He didn’t 
quite know if he was a prisoner. But her hand was gentle, 
and she seemed a quiet, sad lady. She stepped with him 
through wide-open window-doors. He looked uneasily 
round the drawing-room, then at the quiet lady. 

** Where was you born? ” he asked her. 

‘** Why, you funny boy, I was born in this house.?? 

‘* My mother wasn’t. She was born in Australia. And 
my father was born in India. And I can’t remember where 
I was born.”’ 

A servant had brought in the tea-tray. The child was 

DRIVING TO WANDOO 87 

sitting on a foot-stool. The lady seemed not to be listen- 
ing. There was a dark cake. 

** My mother said I wasn’t never to ask for cake, but if 
somebody was to offer me some I needn’t say No fank you.”’ 

** Yes, you shall have some cake,”* said the lady. ‘‘ So 
you are one of the wandering Grants, and you don’t know 
where you were born? ”’ 

** But I think I was born in my mother’s bed.” 

** I suppose you were. And how old are you? ” 

**1’m four. How old are you? ”’ 

‘** A great deal older than that. But tell me, what were 
you doing in my garden? ”’ 

**T don’t know. Well, I comed by mistake.” 

** How was that? ” 

** *Cause I wouldn’t say I was sorry I told a lie. Well, 
[ wasn’t sorry. But I wasn’t wandrin’ in your garden. I 
was only walkin’. I was walkin’ out of the meadow where 
they put me ig 

** ___And as I says, she may have been born in a ’all, 
yut she’ll die in a wooden shack * 

‘© Who? Who will? ” 
- © T was tellin’ you about my old woman. Look! There’s 
y joey runnin’ there along the track.”’ 

Jack looked and saw a funny little animal half leaping, 
ialf running along. 

** We call them baby ’roos joeys, you understand, and 
hey make the cutest little pets you ever did imagine.”’ 

They were still in sandy country, on a good road not far 
rom the river, and Jack saw the little chap jump to cover. 
fhe tall gum trees with their brownish pale smooth stems 
nd loose strips of bark stood tall and straight and still, 
cattered like a thin forest that spread unending, rising 
rom a low, heath-like undergrowth. It seemed open, and 
et weird, enclosing you in its vast emptiness. This bush, 
hat he had heard so much of! The sun had climbed out 
f the mist, and was becoming gold and powerful in a limpid 
ky. The leaves of the gum trees hung like heavy narrow 
lades, inert and colourless, in a weight of silence. Save 
vyhen they came to a more open place, and a flock of green 
arrots flew shrieking ‘‘ Twenty-eight! Twenty-eight! ”’ 
\t least that was what the driver said they cried. The 
ower air was still somewhat chilly from the mist. A 

33 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

number of black-and-white handsome birds, that they call 
magpies, flew alongside in the bush, keeping pace for a 
time with the buggy. And once a wallaby ran alongside 
for a while on the path, a bigger ’roo than the joey, and 
very funny, leaping persistently alongside with his little 
hands dangling. 

It was a new country, after all. It was different. A small 
exultance grew inside the youth. After all, he had got 
away, into a country that men had not yet clutched into 
their grip. Where you could do as you liked, without being 
stifled by people. He still had a secret intention of doing 
as he liked, though what it was he would do when he could 
do as he liked, he did not know. Nothing very definite. And 
yet something stirred in his bowels as he saw the endless 
bush, and the noisy green parrots and the queer, tame 
kangaroos : and no man. 

** It’s dingy country down here,’’ the coachman was say- 
ing: *‘ Not good for much. No good for nothing except 
cemetery, though Mr George says he believes in it. And 
there’s nothing you can do with it, seeing as how many 
gents what come in the first place has gone away for ever, 
lock, stock and barrel, leaving nothing but their ‘ claims ” 
on the land itself, so nobody else can touch it.’? Here he 
shook the reins on the horses’ backs. ‘* But I hopes you 
settles, and makes good, and marries and has children, like 
me and my old woman, sir. She’ve put five daughters into 
the total, born in a shack, though their mother was born 
in Pontesbeach Hall 43 

But Jack’s mind drifted away from the driver. He was 
in that third state, not uncommon to youth, which seems 
to intervene between reality and dream. The bush, the 
coach, the wallabies, the coach-driver were not very real to 
him. Neither was his own self and his own past very real 
to him. There seemed to him to be another mute core to 
himself. Apart from the known Jack Grant, and apart 
from the world as he had known it. Even apart from this 
Australia which was so unknown to him. 

As a matter of fact, he had not yet come-to in Australia. 
He had not yet extricated himself from England and the 
ship. Half of himself was left behind, and the other half 
was gone ahead. So there he sat, mute and stupid. 

He only knew he wanted something, and he resented 

DRIVING TO WANDOO 389 

omething. He resented having been so much found fault 
vith. They had hated him because he preferred to make 
riends among ‘* good-for-nothings.’? But as he saw it, 
* good-for-nothings ’? were the only ones that had any dar- 
ng. Not altogether tamed. He loathed the thought of 
arness. He hated tameness, hated it, hated it. The 
hought of it made his innocent face take on a really devilish 
p0k. And because of his hatred of harness, he hated 
mswering the questions that people put to him. Neither 
lid he ask many, for his own part. But now one popped 
ut. 

** There are policemen here, are there? ” 

‘* Yes, sir, a good force of mounted police, a smart body 
f men. And they’re needed. Western Australia is full of 
Id prisoners, black fellers, and white ones too. The whites, 
orn here, is called ‘ gropers,’ if you take me, sir. Sand- 
ropers. And they all need protection one from the other. 
ind there’s half-pay officers, civil and military, and clergy, 
cattered through the bush i 

** Need protecting from one another, and yet he says 
here’s nobody to hold up the coach,”’ thought Jack to 
imself, cynically. 

The bush had alternated with patches of wild scrub. 
jut now came clearings: a little wooden house, and an 
rchard of trees planted in rows, with a grazing field beyond. 
‘hen more fiat meadows, and ploughed spaces, and a 
umpy or a shack here and there : children playing around, 
nd hens: then a regular homestead, with verandah on 
ither side, and creepers climbing up, and fences about. 

*¢ The soil is red! *? said Jack. 

** Clay! That’s clay! No more sand, except in patches, 
ll the way to Albany. This is Guildford where the roses 
row.”’ 

They clattered across a narrow wooden bridge with a white 
ailing, and up to a wooden inn where the horses were to 
e changed. Jack got down in the road, and saw Mr George 
nd Mr Ellis both sleepily emerge and pass without a word 
ito the place marked Bar. 

‘¢ J think I’l] walk on a bit,’’ said Jack, ‘* if you’ll pick 
1e up.”’ 

But at that moment a fleecy white head peering out of the 
ack of the coach cried : 

40 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘¢ Oh, Mr Gwey! Mr Gwey! They’ve frowed away @ 
perfeckly good cat.” 

The driver went over with Jack to where the chubby 
arm was pointing, and saw the body of a cat stretched by 
the trodden grass. It was quite dead. They stood looking 
at it, Grey explaining that it was a good skin and it certainly 
was a pity to waste it, and he hoped someone would find it 
who would tan it before it went too far, for as for him, he 
could not take it along in the coach, the passengers might 
object before they reached Albany, though the weather 
was cooling up a bit. 

Jack laughed and went back to the coach to throw off 
his overcoat. He loved the crazy inconsequence of every- 
thing. He stepped along the road feeling his legs thrilling 
with new life. The thrill and exultance of new life. And 
yet somewhere in his breast and throat tears were heaving. 
Why? Why? He didn’t know. Only he wanted to cry 
till he died. And at the same time, he felt such a strength 
and a new power of life in his legs as he strode the Australian 
way, that he threw back his head in a sort of exultance. 

Let the exultance conquer. Let the tears go to blazes. 

When the coach came alongside, there was the old danger- 
look in his eyes, a defiance, and something of the cat-look 
of a young lion. He did not mount, but walked on up the 
hill. They were climbing the steep Darling Ranges, and 
soon he had a wonderful view. There was the wonderful 
clean new country spread out below him, so big, so soft, 
so ancient in its virginity. And far beyond, the gleam of 
that strange empty sea. He saw the grey-green bush 
ribboned with blue rivers, winding to an unknown sea. And 
in his heart he was determining to get what he wanted. 
Even though he did not know what it was he wanted. In 
his heart he clinched his determination to get it. To get 
it out of this ancient country’s virginity. 

He waited at the top of the hill. The horses came clop- 
clopping up. Morning was warm and full of sun. They had 
rolled up the flaps of the wagonette, and there was the 
beaming face of Mr George, and the purple face of Mr Ellis, 
and the back of the head of the floss-haired child. 

Jack looked back again, when he had climbed to his seat 
and the horses were breathing, to where the foot of the 
grey-bush hills rested in a valley ribboned with rivers and 

DRIVING TO WANDOO 41 

patched with cultivation, all frail and delicate in a dim 
ethereal light. 

** A land of promise! A land of promise,” said Mr George. 
** When I was young I bid £1080 for 2,700 acres of it. But 
Hammersley bid twenty pounds more, and got it. Take 
up land, Jack Grant, take up land. Buy, beg, borrow or 
steal land, but get it, sir, get it.’ 

** He’ll have to go farther back to find it,’? said Mr Ellis 
from his blue face. ‘* He’ll get none of what he sees there.”’ 

** Oh, if he means to stay, he can jump it. The law is 
always bendin’ and breakin’, bendin’ and breakin’.”’ 

** Well, if he’s going to live with me, Mr George, don’t 
put him on to land-snaiching,’”’ said Mr Ellis. And the 
two men fell to a discussion of Land Acts, Grants, Holdings, 
Claims, and Jack soon ceased to listen. He thought the 
land looked lovely. But he had no desire to own any of it. 
He never felt the possibility of ‘*‘ owning ’’ land. There the 
land was, for eternity. How could he own it? Anyhow, it 
made no appeal to him along those lines. 

But Mr Ellis loved ‘‘ timber ”? and broke the spell by 
pointing and saying : 

** See them trees, Jack, my boy? Jarrah! Hills run 
one into the other way to the Blackwood River. Hundreds 
of miles of beautiful Jarrah timber. The trees like this 
barren ironstone formation. It’s well they do, for nothing 
else does.”’ 

*‘ There’s one o’ the mud-brick buildings the convicts 
lived in, while they were building the road,”’ said the driver, 
not to be done out of his say. ‘* One of the convicts broke 
and got away. Mostly when they went off they was driven 
m by the bush. But this one never. They say he’s 
wandering yet. I say, dead.”’ 

Mr George was explaining the landscape. 

‘© Down there, Darlington. Governor Darling went down 
and never came back. Went home the quick way. Boya, 
native word for rock. Mahogany Creek just above there. 
They’ll see us coming. Kids watch from the rise, run back 
und holloa. Pa catches rooster, black girl blows fire, ma 
mixes paste, yardman peels spuds—dinner when we get 
shere.”? 

«© And, sir, Sam has a good brew, none better. Also, sir, 
hough it looks lonesome, he’s mostly got company.” 

422 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘* How’s that? ” 

‘¢ Well, sir, everyone comes for miles round to hear his 
missus play the harmonium. Got it out from England, and 
if it doesn’t break your heart to hear it! The voice of the 
past! You’d love to hear it, Mr Grant, being new from 
home.”’ 

‘‘ I’m sure I should,” said Jack, thinking of the concert. 

The dinner at Mahogany Creek was as Mr George had 
said. Afterwards, on again through the bush. 

Towards the end of the afternoon the coach pulled up at 
a little by-road, where stood a basket-work shay, and a- 
tall young fellow in very old clothes lounging with loose 
legs. 

“* *Kre y’are! *? said Grey, and walking the horses to the 
side of the road, he scrambled down to pull water from a 
well. 

‘* Here we are! ’? said Mr Ellis from the back of the 
coach, where the tall youth was just receiving the floss- 
haired baby between his big red hands. Fat Mr Ellis got 
down. The youth began pulling out Jack’s bags and boxes, 
and Jack hurried round to help him. 

** This is Tom,’’ said Mr Ellis. 

‘‘ Pleased to meet you,”’ said Tom, holding out a big 
hand and clasping Jack’s hand hard for a moment. Then 
they went on piling the luggage on the wicker shay. 

** That’s the lot! ’? called Mr Ellis. 

‘* Good-bye, Jack!” said Mr George, leaning his grey 
head out of the coach. ‘* Be good and you’ll be happy.’ 

Over which speech Jack puzzled mutely. But the floss- 
haired baby girl was embracing his trouser legs. 

*¢ IT never knew you were an Ellis,’’ he said to her. 

‘* Ay, she’s another of ’em,”’ said Mr Ellis. 

The coach was going. Jack went over awkwardly and 
offered the driver a two-shilling piece. 

** Put it back in y’r pocket, lad, y’ll want it more than 
I shall,”’ said Grey unceremoniously. ‘* The best o’ luck 
to you, an’ I mean it.’ 

They all packed into the shay, Jack sitting with his back — 
to the horses, the little girl tied in beside him, his smaller 
luggage bundled where it could be stowed; and in absolute 
silence they drove through the silence of the standing, — 
motionless gum-trees. Jack had never felt such silence. 

DRIVING TO WANDOO 43 

At last they pulled up. Tom jumped down and drew a slip- 
rail, and they passed a log fence, inside which there were 
many sheep, though it was still bush. Tom got in again 
and they drove through bush with occasional sheep. Then 
Tom got down again—Jack could not see for what purpose. 
The youth fetched an axe out of the cart and started 
chopping. A tree was across the road: he was chopping 
at the broken part. There came a sweet scent. 

** Raspberry jam!’ said Mr Ellis. ‘* That’s acacia 
acuminata, a beautiful wood, good for fences, posts, pipes, 
walking-sticks. And they’re burning it off by the million 
acres.”” 

Tom pulled the trunk aside, and drove on again till he 
came to another gate. Then they saw ahead a great clear- 
ing in the bush, and in the midst of the clearing a ‘ ginger- 
bread ’? house, made of wood slabs, with a shingle roof 
running low all round to the verandahs. A woman in dark 
homespun cloth with an apron and sunbonnet, and a young 
bearded man in moleskins and blue shirt, came out with a 
cheery shout. 

** You get along inside and have some tea,’’ said the 
young bearded man. ‘* I’ll change the horses.’’ 

The woman lifted down the baby, after having untied 
her. 

There was a door in the front of the house, a window on 
each side. But they all went round under the eaves to the 
mud-brick kitchen behind, and had tea. The woman hardly 
spoke, but she smiled and passed the tea and nursed Ellie. 
When the young bearded man came in he smiled and said : 

** T’ve got the mail out of the shay, Mr Ellis.” 

*¢ That’s all right,’’ said Mr Ellis. 

After which no one spoke again. 

When they set off once more there was a splendid pair of 
greys on either side the pole. 

*¢ Bill and Lil,” said Mr Ellis. ‘* My own breed. Angus 
lends us his for the twenty miles to the cross roads. We’ve 
lust changed them and got our own. There’s another twenty 
niles yet.” 

It now began to rain, and gradually grew dark and cold. 
[he bush was dree, the dreest thing Jack had ever known. 
Rugs and mackintoshes were fetched out, the baby was 
‘astened snug in a corner out of the wet, and the horses 

44 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

kept up a steady pace. And then, as Nature went to roost, 
Mr Ellis woke up and pulled out his pipe, to begin a 
conversatior. 

** How’s MaP ” 

** Great ! ”’ 

“* How’s Gran? ”? 

‘* Same.”’ 

“¢ All well? ” 

66 Wes.’ 

‘‘ He’s come twenty miles,”? thought Jack, ‘* and he 
only asks now! ”’ 

*© See the doctor in town, Dad? ”’ asked Tom. 

pe Lecid 2? 

‘¢ What’d he say? ” 

‘‘ Oh, heart’s wrong all right, just what Rackett said. 
But might live to be older than he is. So I might too, 
lad.” 

‘© So you will an’ all, Dad.’’ 

And then Mr Ellis, as if desperate to change the con- 
versation, pulling hard at his pipe: 

** Jersey cow calved? ”’ 

6¢é Yes.’’ 

** Bull again? ”* 

‘© No, heifer. Beauty.” 

They both smiled silently. Then Tom’s tongue suddenly 
was loose. 

‘* Little beauty she is. And the Berkshire has farrowed 
nine little prize-winners. Cowslip came on with ’er butter 
since she come on to the barley. I cot them twins Og an’ 
Magog peltin’ the dogs with eggs, an’ them so scarce, so I 
wopped ’em both. That black spaniel bitch I had to kill 
her for she worried one 0’ the last batch o’ sucking pigs, 
though I don’t know how she come to do such a thing. 
I’ve finished fallowin’ in the bottom meadow, an’ I’m glad 
you’re back to tell us what to get on wif.”’ 

‘* How’s clearing in th’ Long Mile Paddock? ”? 

** Only bin down there once. Sam’s doin’ all right.°? 

** Hear anything of the Gum Tree Gully clearing gang P”’ 

** Message from Spencer, an’ y’ t’go down some time— 
as soon’s y’ can.”’ 

** Well, I want the land reclaimed this year, an’ I want 
it gone on with. Never know what'll happen, Tom. I’d 

DRIVING TO WANDOO 45 

like for you to go down there, Tom. You c’n take th’ 
young feller behind here with you, soon’s the girls come 
home.”’ 

** What’s he like? ” 

** Seems a likely enough young chap. Old George put 
in a good word for’m.”’ 

7 Bit ofa, toff,”’ 

** Never you mind, s’ long’s his head’s not toffy.” 

** Know anything? ” 

** Shouldn’t say so.”? 

** Some fool? ” 

** Don’t know. You find out for y’self.”’ 

Silence. 

Jack heard it all. But if he hadn’t heard it, he could 
easily have imagined it. 

** Yes, you find out,’’ he thought to himself, going dazed 
with fatigue and indifference as he huddled under the 
blanket, hearing the horses’ hoofs clop-clop! and the rain 
splash on his shoulders. Sometimes the horses pulled slow 
and hard in the dark, sometimes they bowled along. He 
could see nothing. Sometimes there was a snort and jangle 
of harness, and the wheels resounding hollow. ‘* Bridging 
something ’? thought Jack. And he wondered how they 
found their way in the utter dark, for there were no lamps. 
The trees dripped heavily. 

And then, at the end of all things, Tom jumped down 
and opened a gate. Hope! But on and on and on. Stop! 
—hope !—another gate. On and on. Same again. And so 
interminably. 

Till at last some intuition seemed to communicate to 
Jack the presence of home. The rain had stopped, the 
moon was out. Ghostly and weird the bush, with white 
trunks spreading like skeletons. There opened a clearing, 
and a dog barked. A horse neighed near at hand. There 
were no trees, a herd of animals was moving in the dusk. 
And then a dark house loomed ahead, unlighted. The shay 
drove on, and round to the back. A door opened, a woman’s 
figure stood in the candle-light and firelight. 

s* All right, Ma!” called Tom. 

© All right, dear,’”’ called Mr Ellis. 

‘¢ All right! ’? shrilled a little voice . . . 

Well, here they were in the kitchen. Mrs Ellis was a 

46 “THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

brown-haired woman with a tired look in her eyes. She 
looked a long time at Jack, holding his hand in her one 
hand and feeling his wet coat with the other. 

‘ You’re wet. But you can go to bed when you’ve had 
your supper. I hope you’ll be all right. Tom/ll look after 

ou.”’ 

i She was hoping that he would only bring good with him. 
She was all mother : and mother of her own children first. 
She felt kindly towards him. But he was another woman’s 
son. 

When they had eaten, Tom led the newcomer away out 
of the house, across a little yard, threw open a door in 
the dark, and lit a candle stuck in the neck of a bottle. 
Jack looked round at the mud floor, the windowless window, 
the unlined wooden walls, the calico ceiling, and he was 
glad. He was to share this cubby hole, as they called it, 
with the other Ellis boys. His truckle bed was fresh and 
clean. He was content. It wasn’t stuffy, it was rough and 
remote. 

When he opened his portmanteau to get out his night- 
shirt he asked Tom where he was to put his clothes. For 
there was no cupboard or chest of drawers or any- 
thing. 

‘© On your back or under your bed,”’ said Tom. ‘* Or I 
might find y’ an old packing case, if y’re decent. But say, 
ol’ bloke, lemme give y’a hint. Don’t y’ get sidey or 
nosey up here, puttin’ on jam an’ suchlike, f’r if y’do y’ll 
shame me in front of strangers, an’ I won’t stand it.’ 

‘* Jam did you say? ”’ 

‘* Yes, jam, macaroni, cockadoodle. We’re plain people 
out here-aways, not mantle ornaments nor dickey-toffs, an’ 
we want no flash sparks round, see? ”’ 

** I’m no flash spark,”’ said Jack. ‘‘ Not enough for ’em 
at home. It’s too much fist and too little toff, that’s the 
matter with me.”’ 

*° C’n y’ use y’r fists? ”? 

** Like to try me? ” 

Jack shaped up to him. 

** Oh, for the love 0’ Mike,”? laughed Tom, ** stow the 
haw-haw gab! You’ll do me though, I think.” 

** T’'ll try to oblige,” said Jack, rolling into bed. 

“‘ Here! ”’ said Tom sharply, ‘ out y’ get an’ say y’ 

DRIVING TO WANDOO 47 

prayers. What sortta example for them kids of ours, gettin’ 
into bed an’ forgettin’ y’r prayers? ”’ 

Jack eyed the youth. 

** You say yours? ”? he asked. 

** Should say I do. Gran is on ter me right cruel if I 
don’t see to it, whoever sleeps in this cubby. They has 
ter say their prayers, see? ”’ 

** All right ! *? said Jack laconically. 

And he obediently got up, kneeled on the mud floor, and 
gabbled through his quota. Somewhere in his heart he was 
touched by the simple honesty of the boy. And somewhere 
else he was writhing with slow, contemptuous repugnance 
at the vulgar tyranny. 

But he called again to his aid that natural indifference of 
his, grounded on contempt. And also a natural boyish 
tolerance, because he saw that Tom had a naive, if rather 
vulgar, good-will. 

He gabbled through his prayers wearily, but scrupulously, 
to the last Amen. Then rolled again into bed to sleep till 
morning, and forget, forget, forget! He depended on his 
power of absolute forgetting. 

CHAP: IV. WANDOO 
i 

Two things struggled in Jack’s mind when he awoke in 
the morning. The first was the brave idea that he had 
left everything behind, that he had done with his boyhood 
and was going to enter into his own. The second was a 
noise of somebody quoting Latin and clicking wooden dumb- ~ 
bells. 

Jack opened his eyes. There were four beds in the 
cubby hole. Between two beds stood a thin boy of about 
thirteen, swinging dumb-bells, and facing two small urchins 
who were faithfully imitating him, except that they did 
not repeat the Latin tags. They were all dressed in short 
breeches loosely held up by braces, and under-vests. 

Veni, up went their arms smartly—vidi, down came the 
clubs to horizontal—vici, the clubs were down by their 
sides. 

Jack smiled to himself and dozed again. It was scarcely 
dawn. He was dimly aware of the rain pattering on the 
shingle roof. 

** Ain’t ye gettin’ up this morning? ” 

It was Tom standing contemplating him. The children 
had run out barefoot and bare-armed in the rain. 

** Is it morning? ”? asked Jack stretching. 

** Not half. We’ve fed th’ ’osses. Come on.” 

** Where do I wash? ”’ 

** At the pump. Look slippy and get your clothes on. 
Our men live over at Red’s, we have to look sharp in the 
morning.”’ 

Jack looked slippy, and went out to wash in the tin 
dish by the pump. The rain was abating, but it seemed a 
damp performance. 

By the time he was really awake, the day had come 
clear. It was a fine morning, the air fresh with the smell 
of flowering shrubs: silver wattle, spirea, daphne and 
syringa which Ellis grew in his garden. Already the sun 
was coming warm. 

The house was a low stone building with a few trees 

48 

WANDOO 49 

round it. But all the life went on here at the back, here 
where the pump was, and the various yards and wooden 
out-buildings. There was a vista of open clearing, and a 
few huge gum-trees. The sky was already blue, a certain 
mist lay below the great isolated trees. 

In the yard a score of motherless lambs were penned, 
bleating, their silly faces looking up at Jack confidently, 
expecting the milk bottle. He walked with his hands in 
the pockets of his old English tweeds, feeling over-dressed 
and a bit out of place. Cows were tethered to posts or 
standing loose about the fenced yard, and the half-caste 
Tim, and Lennie, the dumb-bell boy, and a girl, were 
silently milking. The heavy, pure silence of the Australian 
morning. 

Jack stood at a little distance. A cat whisked across the 
yard and ran up a queer-looking pine-tree, a dissipated old 
2ow moved about at random. 

** Hey, you! ’? shouted Tom impatiently, ‘* Take hoult 

of that cart ’oss nosin’ his way inter th’ chaff-house, and 
ring him here. An’ see to that grey’s ropes : she’s chewin’ 
em free. Look slippy, make yourself useful.” 
_ There was a tone of amiability and intimacy mixed with 
his bossy shouting. Jack ran to the cart ’oss. He couldn’t 
1elp liking Tom and the rest. They were so queer and naive, 
ind they seemed oddly forlorn, like waifs lost in this new 
ountry. Jack had always had a leaning towards waifs 
nd lost people. They were the only people whose bossing 
1e didn’t mind. 

The children at their various tasks were singing in shrill, 
lear voices, with a sort of street-arab abandon. Lennie, 
he boy, would break the shrilling of the twin urchins with 
, sudden musical yell, from the side of the cow he was 
nilking. And they seemed to sing anything, songs, poetry, 
onsense, anything that came into their heads, like birds 
inging variously and at random. 

*¢ The blue, the fresh, the ever free 
I am where I would ever be 
With the blue above, and the blue below—— ” 
‘hen a yell from Lennie by the cows : 

‘¢ And wherever thus in childhood s’our * 

50  ##THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

The twins: 

*‘ IT never was on the dull tame shore 
But I loved the great sea more and more ” 

Again a sudden and commanding yell from Lennie: 

‘¢T never loved a dear gazelle 
To glad me with its soft black eye, 
But, when it came to know me well 
And love me—— ”’ 

Here the twins, as if hypnotised, howled out: 

‘* It was sure to die.” 

They kept up this ragged yelling in the new soft morn- 
ing, like lost wild things. Jack laughed to himself. But — 
they were quite serious. The elders were dumb-silent. 
Only the youngsters made all this noise. Was it a sort of 
protest against the great silence of the country? Was it 
their young, lost effort in the noiseless antipodes, whose 
noiselessness seems like a doom at last? They yelled away 
like wild little lost things, with an uncanny abandon. It 
pleased Jack. 

il 

They had all gone silent again, and collected under the 
peppermint tree at the back door, where Ma ladled out tea 
into mugs for everybody. Ma was Mrs Ellis. She still had — 
the tired, distant look in her eyes, and a tired bearing, and — 
she seemed to take no notice of anybody, either when she 
was in the kitchen or when she came out with pie to the 
group squatting under the tree. When anyone said: 
** Some more tea, Ma! ”’ she silently ladled out the brew. 
Jack was not a very intent observer. But he was struck — 
by Mrs Ellis’ silence and her ‘ drawn ”’ look. 

Tom came and hitched himself up against the trunk of 
the tree. Lennie was sitting opposite on a log, holding his — 
tin mug and eyeing the stranger in silence. On another 
log sat the two urchins, sturdy, wild little brats, bare- 
footed, bare-legged, bare-armed, as Jack had first seen 

WANDOO 51 

them, their dress still consisting of a little pair of pants 
and a cotton undervest, and a pair of braces. The last 
seemed by far the most important garment. Lennie was 
slothed, or unclothed, the same, while Tom had added a 
air of boots. The bare arms out of the cotton vests were 
srown and smooth, and they gave the boys and the youth 
2 curiously naked look. A girl of about twelve, in a dark- 
sue spotted pinafore and a rag of red hair-ribbon, sat on 
2 little stump near the twins. She was silent like her 
nother—but not yet ‘* drawn.”’ 

“* What d’e think of Og an’ Magog? ”’ said Tom, point- 
ng with his mug at the twins. ‘‘ Called for giants cos 
hey’re so small.’’ 

Jack did not know what to think. He tried to smile 
yenevolently. 

** An’ that’s Katie,’’ continued Tom, indicating the girl, 
vho at once looked foolish. ‘* She’s younger’n Lennie, but 
he’s pretty near his size. He’s another little ’un. Little 
in’ cheeky, that’s what he is. Too much cheek for his age 
—which is fourteen. You’ll have to keep him in his place, 
tell you straight.” 

_** Ef ye ken! ”? murmured Len with a sour face. 

Then, chirping up with a real street-arab pertness, he 
eemed to ignore Jack as he asked brightly of Tom : 

** An’ who’s My Lord Duke of Early Risin,’ if I might be 
old? For before Gosh he sports a tidy raiment.” 

‘Now, Len, none o’ yer lingo! ”? warned Tom. 

** Who is he, anyway, as you should go tellin’ him to 
€ep me in my place? ” 

‘© No offence intended, I’m sure,” said Jack pleasantly. 

*‘ Taken though! ’”’ said Lennie, with such a black look 
hat Jack’s colour rose in spite of himself. 

*¢ You keep a civil tongue in your head, or Il] punch it 
or you,”’ he said. He and Lennie stared each other in the 

Gs 

Bennie had a beautiful little face, with an odd pathos 
ke some lovely girl, and grey eyes that could change to 
lack. Jack felt a certain pang of love for him, and in the 
ume instant remembered that she-lioness cub of a Monica. 
erhaps she too had the same odd, lovely pathos, like a 
oung animal that runs alert and alone in the wood. Why 
id these children seem so motherless and fatherless, so 

52 ####THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

much on their own? It was very much how Jack felt him-— 
self. Yet he was not pathetic. 

Lennie suddenly smiled whimsically, and Jack knew he 
was let into the boy’s heart. Queer! Up till now they 
had all kept a door shut against him. Now Len had opened 
the door. Jack saw the winsomeness and pathos of the 
boy vividly, and loved him, too. But it was still remote. 
And still mixed up in it was the Jong stare of that Monica. 

‘¢ That’s right, you tell ’im,’? said Tom. ‘* What I say 
here, goes—no back chat, an’ no tales told. That’s what’s 
the motto on this station.”’ 

** Obey an’ please my Lord Tom Noddy, 
So God shall love and angels aid ye—— ” 

said Lennie, standing tip-toe on his log and balancing his 
bare feet, and repeating his rhyme with an abstract impud- 
ence, as if the fiends of air could hear him. 

‘* Aw, shut up, you! ”’ said Tom. ‘‘ You’ve got ter get 
them ’osses down to Red’s. Take Jack an’ show him.’’ 

‘* T’ll show him,” said Len, munching a large piece of pie 
as he set off. 

** Ken ye ride, Jack? ” 

ance didn’t answer, because his riding didn’t amount to 
much. 

iii 

Len unhitched four heavy horses, led them into the 
yard, and put the ropes into Jack’s hands. The child 
marched so confidently under the noses of the great 
creatures, as they planted their shaggy feet. And he was 
such a midget, and with his brown bare arms and bare legs 
and feet, and his vivid face, he looked so ** tender.’? Jack’s 
heart moved with tenderness. 

** Don’t you ever wear boots? ” he asked. 

_ © Not if Ik’n help it. Them kids now, they won’t neither, © 
*n I don’t blame ’em. Last boots Ma sent for was found all 
over the manure heap, so the old man said he’d buy no 
more boots an’ a good job too. The only thing as scares 
me is double-gees: spikes all roads and Satan’s face on 
three sides. Ever see double-gees? ”° 

WANDOO 53 

Len was leading three ponderous horses. He started 
veering on the road, the horses marching just behind his 
juick little figure. Then he found a burr with three queer 
ides and a sort of face on each side, with sticking-out hair. 

He was a funny kid, with his scraps of Latin and tags of 
oetry. Jack wondered that he wasn’t self-conscious and 
shamed to quote poetry. But he wasn’t. He chirped 
hem off, the bits of verse, as if they were a natural form 
f expression. 

They had led the horses to another stable. Len again 
fave the ropes to Jack, disappeared, and returned leading 
, saddled stock-horse. Holding the reins of the saddle- 
jorse, the boy scrambled up the neck of one of the big draft 
iorses like a monkey. 

** Which are you goin’ to ride? ’? he asked Jack from 
he height. ‘‘ I’m taking three an’ leading Lucy. You 
ake the other three.”’ 

So he received the three halter ropes. 

** T think I’ll walk,”’ said Jack. 

** Please y’self. You k’n open the gates easy walkin’, 
nd comin’ back I’ll do it, ’n you k’n ride Lucy an’ I’ll ride 
ehind pinion se’s I can slip down easy.”’ 

Yes, Lennie was a joy. On the return journey, when 
ack was in the saddle riding Lucy, Len flew up behind him 
nd stood on the horse’s crupper, his hands on Jack’s 
houlders, crying: ‘‘ Let ’er go!’ At the first gate he 
lid down like a drop of water, then up again, this time 
itting back to back with Jack, facing the horse’s tail, and 
rhistling briskly. 

Suddenly he stopped whistling, and said : 

6 Y’ve seen everybody but Gran an’ Doc. Rackett, haven’ 
ou? He teaches me—a rum sortta dock he is, too, never 
here when he’s wanted. But he’s a real doctor all right : 
igns death certificates an’ no questions asked. Y’ c’d do 

murder, ’n if you was on the right side of him, y’d never 
e hung. He’d say the corpse died of natural causes.”’ 

© T didn’t know a corpse died,”’ said Jack laughing. 

** Didn’t yer? Well, yer know now! Gran’s as good as 

corpse, an’ she don’t want ter die. She put on Granfer’s 
rave : § Left desolate, but not without hope.’ So they all 
nought she’d get married again. But she never. Did y’ 
o to one of them English schools? ”’ / 

54 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

66 Yes.’ 

‘‘ Ever wear a bell-topper? ” 

‘** Once or twice.” 

“Gosh! May I never go to school, God help me. I 
should die of shame and disgrace. Arrayed like a little black 
pea in a pod, learnin’ to be useless. Look at Rackett. 
School, an’? Cambridge, an’ comes inter money. Wastes 
it. Wastes his life. Now he’s teachin’ me, an’ th’ only 
useful thing he ever did.”’ 

After a pause, Jack ventured. 

** Who is Doctor Rackett? ”’ 

‘* A waster. Down and out waster. He’s got a sin. I 
don’t know what it is, but it’s wastin’ his soul away.”’ 

iv 

It was no use Jack’s trying to thread it all together. It 
was a bewilderment, so he let it remain so. It seemed to 
him, that right at the very core of all of them was the 
same bewildered vagueness : Mr Ellis, Mrs Ellis, Tom, the 
men—they all had that empty bewildered vagueness at 
the middle of them. Perhaps Lennie was most on the spot. 
The others just could attend to their jobs, no more. 

Jack still had no acquaintance with anyone but Tom and 
Len. He never got an answer from Og and Magog. They 
just grinned and wriggled. Then there was Katie. Then 
Harry, a fat, blue-eyed small boy. And then that floss- 
haired Ellie who had come from Perth. And smaller than 
her, the baby. All very confusing. 

The second morning, when they were at the proper 
breakfast, Dad suddenly said : 

‘“*Ma! D’ye know where the new narcissus bulbs are 
gone? I was waiting to plant ’em till I got back.”’ 

** I’ve not seen them since ye put them in the shed at the 
end of the verandah, dear.’’ 

‘* Well, they’re gone.”? 

Dead silence. 

“Is *em like onions? ”? asked Og, pricking up intelli- 
gently. 

** Yes. They are! Have you seen them? ”? asked Dad 
sternly. ; 

“*I see baby eatin’ ’em, Dad,” replied Og calmly. 

WANDOO 55 

** What! My bulbs as I got out from England! Why, 
what the dickens, Ma, d’you let that mischievous monkey 
loose for? My precious narcissus bulbs, the first I’ve ever 
had. An’, besides, Ma! I’m not sure but what they’re 
poison.”’ 

The parents looked at one another, then at the gay 
baby. There is a general consternation. Ma gets the long, 
evil, blue bottle of castor oil and forcibly administers a 
spoonful to the screaming baby. Dad hurries away, unable 
to look on the torture of the baby—the last of his name. 
He goes to hunt for the bulbs in the verandah shed. Tom 
says, ** By gosh!” and sits stupefied. Katie jumps up 
and smacks Og for telling tales, and Magog flies at Katie for 
touching Og. Jack, as a visitor, unused to family life, is 
a little puzzled. 

Lennie meanwhile calmly continues to eat his large 
mutton chop. The floss-haired Ellie toddles off talking to 
herself. She comes back just as intent, wriggles on her chair 
yn her stomach, manages to mount, and puts her two fists 
on the table, clutching various nibbled, onion-like roots. 
_** Vem’s vem, ain’t they, Dad? She never ate ’em. She 
yot *em out vis mornin’, and was suckin’ ’em, so I took ’em 
rom her an’ hid ’em for you.”’ 

** Should Dad have said narcissi or narcissuses? *’ asked 
Len from over his coffee mug, in the hollow voice of one 
who speaks out of his cups. 

Nobody answered. The baby was shining with castor oil. 
Jack sat in a kind of stupefaction. Everybody ate mutton 
shops in noisy silence, oppressively, and chewed huge door- 
teps of bread. 

Then there entered a melancholy, well-dressed young 
ellow who looked like a daguerreotype of a melancholy 
roung gentleman. He sauntered in in silence, and pulling out 
is chair, sat down at table without a word. Katie ran to 
wring his breakfast, which was on a plate on the hearth, 
‘eeping warm. Then she sat down again. The meal was 
ven more oppressive. Everybody was eating quickly, to 
ret away. 

And then Gran opened the door leading from the parlour, 
nd stood there like the portrait of an old, old lady, stood 
here immovable, just looking on, like some ghost. Jack’s 
Jlood ran cold. The boys, pushing back their empty plates, 

566 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

went quietly out to the verandah, to the air. Jack followed, 
clutching his cap, that he had held all the time on his knee. 

Len was pulling off his shirt. The boys had to wear shirts 
at meal times. 

This was the wild new country! Jack’s sense of bewilder- 
ment deepened. Also he felt a sort of passionate love for 
the family—as a savage must feel for his tribe. He felt he 
would never leave the family. He must always be near 
them, always in close physical contact with them. And 
yet he was just a trifle horrified by it all. 

CHAP: V. THE LAMBS COME HOME 
i 

A MONTH later Tom and Lennie went off with the greys, Bill 
and Lil, to fetch the girls. It had been wet, so Jack had 
spent most of his day in the sheds mending corn sacks. He 
was dressed now in thick cotton trousers, coloured shirt, 
and grey woollen socks, and copper-toed boots. When he 
went ploughing, by Tom’s advice, he wore ‘* lasting ”’ 
socks—none. 

His tweed coat hung on a nail on the wall of the cubby, 
his good trousers and vest were under the mattress of his 
bed. The only useful garment he had brought had been 
the old riding breeches of the Agricultural College days. 

On the back of his Tom-clipped hair was an ant-heap of 
an old felt hat, and so he sat, hour after hour, sewing the 
sacks with a big needle. He was certainly not unhappy. 
He had a sort of passion for the family. The family was 
almost his vice. He felt he must be there with the family, 
and then nothing else mattered. Dad and Ma were the 
silent, unobtrusive pillars of the house. Tom was the 
mportant young person. Lennie was the soul of the place. 
Og and Magog were the mischievous life. Then there was 
Harry, whom Jack didn’t like, and the little girls, to be 
ooked after. Dr. Rackett hovered round like an uneasy 
shost, and Gran was there in her room. Now the girls 
were coming home. 

Jack felt he had sunk into the family, merged his individu- 
lity and he would never get out. His own father and 
nother, England, or the future, meant nothing to him. He 
oved this family. He loved Tom, and Lennie, and he 
vanted always to be with all of them. This was how it had 
aken him : as a real passion. 

He loved, too, the ugly stone house, especially the south 
ide, the shady side, which was the back where the pepper- 
nint tree stood. If you entered the front door—which 
\obody did—you were in a tiny passage from which opened 
he parlour on one side, and the dying room on the other. 
fom called it the dying room because it had never been 

uf 

58 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

used for any other purpose, by the family. Old Mr Ellis 
had been carried down there to die. So had his brother 
Willie. As Tom explained : ‘‘ The staircase is too narrow 
to handle a coffin.” 

Through the passage you dropped a step into the living 
room. On the right from this you stepped up a step into 
the kitchen, and on the left, up a step into Gran’s room. 
Gran’s room had once been the whole house : the rest had 
been added on. It is often so in Australia. 

From the sitting room you went straight on to the back 
verandah, and there were the four trees, and a fenced-in 
garden, and the yards. The garden had gay flowers, be- 
cause Mr Ellis loved them, and a round, stone-walled well. 
Alongside was the yard, marked off by the four trees into 
a square : a mulberry one side the kitchen door, a pepper 
the other, a photosphorum with a seat under it a little way 
off, and across, a Norfolk pine and half a fir tree. 

Tom would talk to Jack about the family: a terrible 
tangle, they both thought. Why there was Gran, endless 
years old! Dad was fifty, and he and Uncle Easu (dead) 
were her twins and her only sons. However, she had seven 
daughters and, it seemed to Jack, hundreds of grand- 
children, most of them grown up with more children of 
their own. 

** T could never remember all their names,’’ he declared. 

‘*T don’t try,” said Tom. ‘* Neither does Gran. And 
I don’t believe she cares a tuppenny for ’em—for any of 
’em, except Dad and us.” 

Gran was a delicate old lady, with a lace cap, and white 
curly hair, and an ivory face. She made a great impression 
on Jack, as if she were the presiding deity of the family. 
Over her head as she sat by the sitting-room fire an old clock 
tick-tocked. That impressed Jack, too. There was some- 
thing weird in her age, her pallor, her white hair and white 
cap, her remoteness. She was very important in the house, 
but mostly invisible. 

Lennie, Katie, Og and Magog, Harry, Ellie with the floss- 
hair, and the baby : these counted as “ the children.’? Tom, 

who had had another mother, not Ma, was different. And — 

now the other twins, Monica and Grace, were coming. These 

were the lambs. Jack, as he sat mending the sacks, passion- _ 

ately in love with the family and happy doing any sort of 

: 
=I 
, | 
e 
i 

THE LAMBS COME HOME 59 

work there, thought of himself as a wolf in sheep’s clothing, 
and laughed. 

He wondered why he didn’t like Harry. Harry was six, 
rather fat and handsome, and strong as a baby bull. But 
he was always tormenting baby. Or was it baby tormenting 
Harry? 

Harry had got a picture book, and was finding out letters. 
Baby crawled over and fell on the book. Harry snatched 
it away. Baby began to scream. Ma interfered. 

** Let baby have it, dear.’’ 

_ §§ She’ll tear it, Ma.’’ 

** Let her, dear. I’ll get you another.” 

“© When? ”’ 

** Some day, Harry. When I go to Perth.”’ 

*°'Ya! Some day! Will ye get it Monday ¢ 2 

** Oh, Harry, do be quiet, do . . 

Then Baby and Harry tore the book between them in 
their shrieking struggles, while Harry battered the cover 
on the baby’s head. And a hot, dangerous, bullying look 
would come into his eyes, the look of a bully. Jack knew 
that look already. He would know it better before he had 
done with Australia. 

And yet Baby adored Harry. He was her one god. 

Jack always marvelled over that baby. To him it was 
a little monster. It had not lived twelve months, yet God 
alone knew the things it knew. The ecstasy with which it 
smacked its red lips and showed its toothless gums over 
sweet, sloppy food. The diabolic screams if it was thwarted. 
The way it spat out ‘‘ lumps ”’ from the porridge. How 
ym earth, at that age, had it come to have such a mortal 
1atred for lumps in porridge? The way its nose had to be 
1eld when it was given castor oil! And, again, though it 
srotested so violently against lumps in porridge, how it 
oved such abominations as plaster, earth, or the scrapings 
yf the pig’s bucket. 

When you found it cramming dirt into its mouth, and 
eolded it, it would hold up its hands wistfully to have them 
Jeaned. And it didn’t mind a bit, then, if you swabbed 
ts mouth out with a lump of rag. 

It was a girl. It loved having a new clean frock on. 
Nould sit gurgling and patting its stomach, in a new smart 
rock, so pleased with itself. Astounding! 

60 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

It loved bulls and stallions and great pigs, running 
between their legs. And yet it yelled in unholy terror if 
fowls or dogs came near. Went into convulsions over the 
friendly old dog, or a quiet hen pecking near its feet. 

It was always trying to scuttle into the stable, where the 
horses stood. And it had an imbecile desire to put its hand 
in the fire. And it adored that blue-eyed bully of a Harry, 
and didn’t care a straw for the mother that slaved for it. 
Harry, who treated it with scorn and hate, pinching it, 
cuffing it, shoving it out of its favourite positions—off the 
grass patch, off the hearth-rug, off the sofa-end. But it | 
knew exactly the moment to retaliate, to claw his cap from 
his head and clutch his fair curls, or to sweep his bread and 
jam on to the floor, into the dust, if possible. . . . 

To Jack it was all just incredible. 

ii 

But it was part of the family, and so he loved it. 

He dearly loved the cheeky Len. 

‘* What d’y’want ter say ‘ feece® for? Why can’t yer 
say ‘ fyce’ like any other bloke? And why d’y’wash y’ 
fyce before y’wash y’hands? ”’ 

‘© J like the water clean for my face.” 

sect igs about your dirty hands, smarmin’ them over 
it 

** You use a flannel or a sponge.”’ 

°° If y’ve got one! Y’don’t find ’em growin’ in th’ bush. 
Why can’t y’learn offa me now, an’ be proper. Ye’ll be © 
such an awful sukey when y’goes out campin’, y’ll shame 
y’self. Y’should wash y’hands first. Frow away th’ water 
if y’not short, but y’ will be. Then when y’ve got y’hands 
all soapy, sop y’ fyce up an’ down, not round an’ round like 
a cat does. Then pop y’ nut under th’ pump an’ wring it 
dry. Don’t never waste y’ huckaback on it. Y’ll want 
that f’ somefin’ else.”’ 

‘* What else shall I want my towel for? ”” 

** Wroppin’ up things in, meat an’ damper, an’t’lay down 
for y’meal, against th’ ants, or to put over it against th’ 
insex.”” : 

Then from Tom : 

** Hey, nipper knowall, dry up! I’ve taught you the | 

THE LAMBS COME HOME 61 

way you should behave, haven’t I? Well, I can teach Jack 
Grant, without any help from you. Skedaddle! *? 

** Hope y’ can! Sorry for y’, havin’ to try,” said Len 
as he skedaddled. 

Tom was the head of the clan, and the others gave him 
eal obedience and a genuine, if impudent homage. 

** What a funny kid! ’? said Jack. ‘* He’s different from 
the rest of you, and his lingo’s rotten.” 

** He’s not dif! ’? said Tom. ‘* ’Xactly same. Same’s 
all of us—same’s all the nips round here. He went t’ same 
school as Monica an’ Grace an’ me, to Aunt’s school in th’ 
settlement, till Dr. Rackett came. If he’s any different, 
he got it from him : he’s English.”’ 

Jack noticed they always spoke of Dr. Rackett as if he 
were a Species of rattlesnake that they kept tame about the 
olace. 

** But Ma got Dad to get the Doc, cos she can’t bear to 
sart with Len even for a day—to give ’m lessons at home. I 
suppose he’s her eldest son—Dock needn’t, he’s well-to-do. 
But he likes it, when he’s here. When he’s not, Lennie 
slopes off and reads what he pleases. But it makes no 
lifference to Len, he’s real clever. And ’—Tom added 
srinning—‘* he wouldn’t speak like you do neither, not for 
ul] the tin in a cow’s bucket.”’ 

To Jack, fresh from an English public school, Len was 
ymazing. If he hurt himself sharply, he sat and cried for 
1 minute or two. Tears came straight out, as if smitten 
tom a rock. If he read a piece of sorrowful poetry, he 
ust sat and cried, wiping his eyes on his arm without heed- 
ng anybody. He was greedy, and when he wanted to, he 
ite enormously, in front of grown up people. And yet you 
lever minded. He talked poetry, or raggy bits of Latin, 
vith great sententiousness and in the most awful accent, 
nd without a qualm. Everything he did was right in his 
wn eyes. Perfectly right in his own eyes. 

His mother was fascinated by him. 

Three things he did well: he rode, bare-back, standing 
ip, lying down, anyhow. He rode like a circus rider. Also 
ie boasted—heavens high. And thirdly, he could laugh. 
‘here was something so sudden, so blithe, so impish, so dar- 
ng, and so wistful in his lit-up face when he laughed, that 
‘our heart melted in you like a drop of water. 

62 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Jack loved him passionately : as one of the family. 

And yet even to Lennie, Tom was the hero. Tom, the 
slow Tom, the rather stupid Tom. To Lennie Tom’s very 
stupidity was manly. Tom was so dependable, so manly, 
such a capable director. He never gave trouble to anyone, 
he was so complacent and self-reliant. Lennie was the love- 
child, the elf. But Tom was the good, ordinary Man, and 
therefore the hero. 

Jack also loved Tom. But he did not accept his manli- 
ness so absolutely. And it hurt him a little, that the 
strange, sensitive Len should put himself so absolutely in ~ 
obedience and second place to the good plain fellow. But 
it was so. Tom was the chief. Even to Jack. 

iii 

When Tom was away Jack felt as if the pivot of all 
activity was missing. Mr Ellis was not the real pivot. It 
was the plain, red-faced Tom. 

Tom had talked a good deal, in snatches, to Jack. It 
was the family that bothered him, as usual. He always 
talked the family. 

** My grandfather came out here in the early days. He 
was a merchant and lost all his money in some East India 
business. He married Gran in Melbourne, then they came 
out here. They had a bit of a struggle, but they made good. — 
Then Granpa died without leaving a will: which compli- — 
cated things for Gran. Dad and Easu was twins, but Dad | 
was the oldest. But Dad had wandered : he was gone for 
years, and no one knows what he did all the time. 

‘* But Gran liked him best, and he was the eldest son, 
so she had this place all fixed up for him when he came 
back. She’d a deal of trouble getting the Reds out. All 
the A’nts were on their side—on the Red’s side. We always 
call Uncle Easu’s family the Reds. And Aunt Emmie says 
she’s sure Uncle Easu was born first, and not Dad. And — 
that Gran took a fancy to Dad from the first, so she said — 
he was the eldest. Anyhow, it’s neither here nor there. 
I hope to goodness I never get twins. It runs in the family 
and of all the awful things! Though the Easu’s have got 
no twins. Seven sons and no girls, and no twins. Uncle 
Easu’s dead, so young Red runs their place. . 

THE LAMBS COME HOME 68 

_* Uncle Easu was a nasty scrub, anyway. He married 
the servant girl, and a servant girl no better than she should 
be, they say. 

** He didn’t make no will, either. Making no wills runs 
in the family, as well as twins. Dad won’t. His Dad 
wouldn’t, and he won’t neither.’’ 

Which meant, Jack knew, that by the law of the colony, 
the property would come to Tom. 

** Oh, Gran’s crafty all right! She never got herself 
talked about, turning the Reds out! She saved up a 
stocking—Gran always has a stocking. And she saved up 
an’ bought ’em out. She persuaded them that the land 
beyond this was better’n this. She worked in with ’em 
while Dad was away, like the fingers on your hand: and 
bought that old barn of a place over yonder for ’em, and 
bounced ’em into it. Gran’s crafty, when it’s anyone she 
eares about. Now it’s Len. 

** Anyhow, there it was when Dad came back, ‘ Wandoo ’ 
all ready for him. He brought me wrapped in a blanket. 
Old Tim, our half-caste man, was his servant, and there 
was my old nurse. That’s all there is we know about me. 
I know no more, neither who I am nor where I sprung from. 
And Dad never lets on. 

** He came back with a bit of money, and Gran made 
him marry Ma to mind me. She said I was such a squalling 
little grub, and she wanted me brought up decent. So Ma 
did it. But Gran never quite fancied me. 

** It’s a funny thing, seeing how I come, that I should 
be so steady and ordinary, and Len should be so clever and 
unsteady. You’d ha’ thought I should be Len and him 
me. 

‘© Who was my mother? That’s what I want to know. 
Who was she? And Dad won’t never say. 

** Anyhow, she wasn’t black, so what does it matter, 
anyhow ?P 

‘© But it does matter! ’? Tom brought his fist down with 
a smack in the palm of his other hand. ‘* Nobody is ordin- 
ary to their mother, and I’m ordinary to everybody, and 
[ wish I wasn’t.”” 

Funny of Tom. Everybody depended on him so, he was 
the hero of the establishment, because he was so steady 
and ordinary and dependable. And now even he was wish- 

64 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

ing himself different. You never knew how folks would 
take themselves. 

iv 

As for the Reds, Jack had been over to their place once 
or twice. They were a rough crowd of men and youths, 
father and mother both dead. A bachelor establishment. 
When there was any extra work to be done, the Wandoos 
went over there to help. And the Reds came over to Wan- 
doo the same. In fact they came more often to Wandoo ~ 
than the Ellises went to them. 

Jack felt the Reds didn’t like him. So he didn’t care 
for them. Red Ellis, the eldest son, was about thirty years 
old, a tall, sinewy, red-faced man with reddish hair and 
reddish beard, and staring blue eyes. One morning when 
Tom and Mr Ellis were out mustering and tallying, Jack 
was sent over to the Red house. This was during Jack’s 
first fortnight at Wandoo. : 

Red the eldest met him in the yard. 

‘© Where’s y’oss? ”” 

** T haven’t one. Mr Ellis said you’d lend me one.” 

scCanyy atidere. 

‘© More or less.’? 

‘© What d’ye want wearin’ that Hyde Park costume out 
here for? ” 

** T’ve nothing else to ride in,’”? said Jack, who was in 
his old riding breeches. 

‘© Can’t y’ ride in trousers? *” 

** Cant’? keep ’em over my knees, yet.” 

‘* Better learn then, smart n’ lively. Keep them down, 
n’ y’socks up. Come on then, blast ye, an’ I’ll see about 
a horse.’? 

They went to the stockyard, an immense place. But it 
was an empty desert now, save for a couple of black boys 
holding a wild-looking bay. Red called out to them : 

** Caught Stampede, have y’? Well, let ’im go again 
afore y’ break y’ necks. Y’r not to ride him, d’y hear. 
What’s in the stables, Ned? ”” 

‘* Your mare, master. Waiting for you.” 

‘* What y’ got besides, ye grinning jackasses. Find 
something for Mr Grant here, an’ look slippy.” 7 

THE LAMBS COME HOME 65 

** Oh, master, no horse in, no knowin’ stranger come.” 

Red turned to Jack. Easu was a coarse, swivel-eyed, 
loose-jointed tall fellow. 

“Y’ hear that. Th’ only thing left in this yard is 
Stampede. Ye k’n take him or leave him, if y’r frightened 
of him. I’m goin’ tallyin’ sheep, an’ goin’ now. If ye 
stop around idlin’ all day, y’needn’t tell Uncle ’twas my 
fault.’’ 

Jack hesitated. From a colonial point of view he couldn’t 
ride well, and he knew it. Yet he hated Easu’s insulting 
way. Hasu went grinning to the stable to fetch his mare, 
pleased with himself. He didn’t want the young Jackeroo 
planted on him, to teach any blankey thing to. 

Jack went slowly over to the quivering Stampede, and 
asked the blacks if they had ever ridden him. One answered : 

‘© Me only fella ride ’em some time master not to-morrow. 
Me an’ Ned catch him in mob longa time. Try break him 
—no good. He come back paddock one day. Ned wantta 
break him. No good. Master tell ’im let ’*im go now.” 

Red Easu came walking out of the stable, chewing a 
stalk. 

** Put the saddle on him,”’ said Jack to the blacks. ** I'll 
Ty.” 

The boys grinned and scuffled round. They rather liked 
the job. By being very quick and light, Jack got into the 
saddle, and gripped. The boys stood back, the horse stood 
ip, and then whirled around on his hind legs, and round 
und down. Then up and away like a squib round the yard. 
[he boys scattered, so did Easu, but Jack, because it was 
vatural for his legs to grip and stick, stuck on. His bones 
attled, his hat flew off, his heart beat high. But unless the 
10rse came down backwards on top of him, he could stay 
m. And he was not really afraid. He thought: ‘‘ If he 
loesn’t go down backwards on top of me, I shall be all 
ight.” And to the boys he called: ‘* Open the gate.” 
Meanwhile, he tried to quiet the horse. ‘‘ Steady now, 
teady! ”? he said, in a low, intimate voice. ‘‘ Steady, 
oy! ’? And all the time he held on with his thighs and 
nees, like iron. 

He did not believe in the innate viciousness of the horse. 
le never believed in the innate viciousness of anything, 
xcept aman. And he did not want to fight the horse for 

c 

66 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

simple mastery. He wanted just to hold it hard with his 
legs until it soothed down a little, and he and it could come 
to an understanding. But he must never relax the hold of 
his hard legs, or he was dead. 

Stampede was not ready for the gate. He sprang fiercely 
at it as if it had been guarded by fire. Once in the open, 
he ran, and bucked, and bucked, and ran, and kicked, and 
bucked, and ran. Jack stuck on with the lower half of his 
body like a vice, feeling as if his head would be jerked off 
his shoulders. It was becoming hard work. But he knew, 
unless he stuck on, he was a dead man. 

Then he was aware that Stampede was bolting, and Easu 
was coming along on a grey mare. 

Now they reached the far gate, and a miracle happened. 
Stampede stood still while Red came up and opened the 
gate. Jack was conscious of a body of live muscle and 
palpitating fire between his legs, of a furious head tossing 
hair like hot wire, and bits of white foam. Also he was 
aware of the trembling in his own thighs, and the sensual 
exertion of gripping that hot wild body in the power of his 
own legs. Gripping the hot horse in a grip of sensual 
mastery that made him tremble with a curious quivering. 
Yet he dared not relax. 

‘*Go! ” said Red. And away they went. Stampede 
bolted like the wind, and Jack held on with his knees and 
by balance. He was thrilled, really; frightened externally, 
but internally keyed up. And never for a moment did he 
relax his mind’s attention, nor the attention of his own 
tossed body. The worst was the corkscrew buck, when he 
nearly went over the brute’s head. And the moments of 
vindictive hate, when he would kill the beast and be killed 
a thousand times rather than be beaten. Up he went, off 
the saddle, and down he came again, with a shattering 
jerk, down on the front of the saddle. The balance he kept 
was a mystery even to himself, his body was so flung about 
by the volcano of furious life beneath him. He felt himself 
shaken to pieces, his bones rattled all out of socket. But 
they got there, out to the sheep paddock where a group of 
Reds and black boys stood staring in silence. 

Jack jumped off, though his knees were weak and his 
hands trembling. The horse stood dark with sweat. 
Quickly he unbuckled the saddle and bridle and pulled them 

THE LAMBS COME HOME 67 

ff, and gave the horse a clap on its wet neck. Away it 
vent, wild again, and free. 

Jack glanced at the Reds, and then at Easu. Red Easu 
net his eyes, and the two stared at one another. It was 
he defiance of the hostile colonial, brutal and retrogres- 
ive, against the old mastery of the old country. Jack 
vas barely conscious. Yet he was not afraid, inside himself, 
f the swivel-eyed brute of a fellow. He knew that Easu 
vas not a better man than himself, though he was bigger, 
Ider, and on his own ground. But Jack had the pride of 
is Own, old, well-bred country behind him, and he would 
ever go back on his breeding. He was not going to yield 
is manliness before the colonial way of life: the brutish- 
ess, the commonness. Inwardly he would not give in to it. 
sut the best of it, the colonial honesty and simplicity, that 
ie loved. 

There are two sides to colonials, as to everything. One 
ide he loved. The other he refused and defied. 

These decisions are not mental, but they are critical in 
he soul of a boy of eighteen. And the destiny of nations 
angs on such silent, almost unconscious, decisions. 
_Esau—they called him Easu, but the name was Esau— 
urned to a black, and bellowed : 

** Give master your horse, and carry that bally saddle 
ome.”’ 

Then silently they all turned to the sheep-tallying. 

Vv 

Jack was still sewing sacks. It was afternoon. He 
stened for the sound of the shay, though he did not expect 
; until nightfall at least. 

His ear, training to the Australian alertness, began to 
etect unusual sounds. Or perhaps it was not his ear. The 
Id bushman seems to have developed a further faculty, a 
sychic faculty of ‘‘ sensing ’? some unusual disturbance in 
he atmosphere, and reading it. Jack was a very new 
ustralian. Yet he had become aware of this faculty in 
‘om, and he wanted it for himself. He wanted to be able 
» hear the inaudible, like a sort of clair-audience. 

All he could hear was the audible: and all he could see 
yas the visible. The children were playing in the yard: 

68 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

he could see them in the dust. Mrs Ellis was still at the 
wash-tub : he saw the steam. Katie was upstairs : he had 
seen her catching a hornet in the window. The men were 
out ploughing, the horses were away. The pigs were walk- 
ing round grunting, the cows and poultry were all in the 
paddock. Gran never made a sound, unless she suddenly 
appeared on the scene like the Lord in Judgment. And Dr. 
Rackett was always quiet : often uncannily so. 

It was still rainy season, but a warm, mellow, sleepy after- 
noon, with no real sound at all. He got up and stood on 
the threshold to stretch himself. And there, coming by — 
the grain-shed, he saw a little cortege in which the first 
individual he distinguished was Red Easu. 

‘* Go in,”’ shouted Red, ‘* and tell A’nt as Herbert’s had 
an accident, and we’re bringin’ him in.”’ 

Sure enough, they were carrying a man on a gate. 

Mrs Ellis clicked : 

“¢ Tt-tt-tt-tt-tt | They run to us when they’re in trouble.” 
But she went at once to the linen closet, and on into the 
living room. 

Gran was sitting in a corner by a little fire. 

** Who’s hurt? ”? she inquired testily. ‘‘ Not one of the 
family, I hope and pray.”’ 

** Jack says it’s Red Herbert,’’ replied Mrs Ellis. 

** Put him in the cubby with the boys, then.’’ 

But Mrs Ellis thought of her beloved boys, and hesitated. 

** Do you think it’s much, Jack? ”’ she asked. 

- : They’re carrying him on a gate,’’ said Jack. ‘* It looks 
ad. 

‘* Dear o’me! *’ snapped Gran, in her brittle fashion. 
“* Why couldn’t you say so. Well, then, if you don’t want 
to put him in the cubby, there’s a bed in my room. Put 
him there. But I should have thought he could have had 
Tom’s bed, and Tom could have slept here on the sofa.’? 

** Poor Tom,”’ thought Jack. 

** Don’t ”’—Gran banged her stick on the floor— stand 
there like a pair of sawneys! Get to work! Get to work! ”? 

Jack was staring at the ground and twirling his hat. 
Gran hobbled forward. He noticed to his surprise that she 
had a wooden leg. And she stamped it at him : 

** Go and fetch that rascal of a doctor,’’ she cried, in a 
startling loud voice. 

THE LAMBS COME HOME 69 

Jack went. Dr. Rackett was not in his room, for Jack 
halloed and knocked at every door. He peeped into the 
rooms, whose doors were slightly opened. This must be 
the girls’ room—two beds, neat white quilts, blue bow at 
the window. When would they be home? Here was the 
‘amily bed, with two cots in the room as well. He came to 
2 shut door. This must be it. He knocked and halloed 
again. No sound. Jack felt as if he were bound to come 
ipon a Bluebeard’s chamber. He hated looking in these 
sedrooms. 

He knocked again, and opened the door. A queer smell, 

ike chemicals. A dark room, with the blind down: a few 
00ks, a feeling of dark dreariness. But no doctor. ‘* So 
hat’s that! ’’ thought Jack. 
In spite of himself his boots clattered going down, and 
nade him nervous. Why did the inside of the house, where 
le Never went, seem so secret, and rather horrible? He 
yeeped into the dismal little drawing room. Not there, of 
ourse ! Opposite was the dying room, the door wide open. 
Nobody ever was there. 

Rackett was not in the house, that was certain. Jack 
lunk out, went to the paddock, caught Lucy, the saddle- 
iorse, saddled her and cantered aimlessly round, within 
earing of the homestead. ‘The afternoon was passing. 
Yot a soul was in sight. The gum-trees hung their sharp 
saves like obvious ghosts, with the hateful motionlessness 
f gum-trees. And though flowers were out, they were 
ueer, scentless, unspeaking sort of flowers, even the red 
nes that were ragged like fire. Nothing spoke. The dis- 
ances were clear and mellow and beautiful, but soulless, 
nd nobody alive in the world. The silent, lonely gruesome- 
ess of Australia gave Jack the blues. 

It surely was milking time. Jack returned quietly to 
ne yard. Still nobody alive in the world. As if everyone 
ad died. Yes, there was the half-caste Tim in the distance, 
ringing up the slow, unwilling cows, slowly, like slow 
reams. 

And there was Dad coming out of the back door, in his 
1irt sleeves : bluer and puffier than ever, with his usual 
rene expression, and his look of boss, which came from 
is waistcoat and watchchain. Dad always wore his waist- 
yat and watchchain, and seemed almost over-dressed in it. 

7”  4THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Came Og and Magog running with quick little steps, and 
Len slinking round the doorpost, and Harry marching alone, 
and Katie dragging her feet, and baby crawling. Jack was 
glad to see them. They had all been indoors to look at the 
accident. And it had been a dull, dead, empty afternoon, 
with all the life emptied out of it. Even now the family, 
the beloved family, seemed a trifle gruesome to Jack. 

He helped to milk : a job he was not good at. Dad even 
took a stool and milked also. As usual, Dad did nothing 
but supervise. It was a good thing to have a real large 
family, that made supervising worth while. So Tom said, 
‘It’s a good thing to have nine children, you can clear 
some work with ’em, if you’re their dad.’? That’s why 
Jack was by no means one too many. Dad supervised him 
too. 

They got the milking done somehow. Jack changed his 
boots, washed himself, and put on his coat. He nearly trod 
on the baby as he walked across to the kitchen in the dying 
light. He lifted her and carried her in. 

Usually ‘‘ tea ’’—which meant mutton chops and eggs 
and steaks as well—was ready when they came in from 
milking. To-day Mr Ellis was putting eucalyptus sticks 
under the kettle, making the eternally familiar scent of the 
kitchen, and Mrs Ellis was setting the table there. Usually 
they lived in the living room from breakfast on. But to-day 
tea was to be in the kitchen, with a silence and a cloud in 
the air like a funeral. But there was plenty of noise coming 
from Gran’s room. 

Jack had to have baby beside him for the meal. And 
she put sticky hands in his hair and leaned over and chewed 
and sputtered crumbs, wet crumbs, in his ear. Then she 
tried to wriggle down, but the evening was chill and her 
hands and feet were cold and Mrs Ellis said to keep her up. 
Jack felt he couldn’t stand it any longer, when suddenly 
she fell asleep, the most unexpected thing in the world, 
and Mrs Ellis carried off her and Harry to bed. 

Ah, the family! the family! Jack still loved it. It 
seemed to fill the whole of life for him. He did not want 
to be alone, save at moments. And yet, on an afternoon 
like to-day, he somehow realised that even the family 
wouldn’t last for ever. What then? What then? 

He couldn’t bear the thought of getting married to one 

THE LAMBS COME HOME 71 

yoman and coming home to a house with only himself and 
his one woman in it. Then the slow and lonely process of 
abies coming. The thought of such a future was dreadful 
Oo him. He didn’t want it. He didn’t want his own 
hildren. He wanted this family : always this family. And 
et there was something gruesome to him about the empty 
edrooms and the uncanny privacies even of this family. 
le didn’t want to think of their privacies. 

vi 

Three of the Reds trooped out through the sitting-room, 
san, red-faced, hairy, heavy-footed, uncouth figures, for 
heir tea. The Wandoo Ellises were aristocratic in com- 
arison. They asked Jack to go and help hold Herbert 
own, because he was fractious. ‘* He’s that fractious! ”’ 

Jack didn’t in the least want to have to handle any of 
ne Reds, but he had to go. He found himself taking the 
wo steps down into the dark living room, and the two steps 
p into Gran’s room beyond. 

Why need the family be so quiet in the kitchen, when 
1ere was such a hubbub in here? Alan Ellis was holding 
ne leg of the injured party, and Ross Ellis the other, and 
ey both addressed the recumbent figure as if it were an 
yjured horse with a Whoa there! Steady on, now! Steady, 
oy, steady! Whilst Easu, bending terribly over the pros- 
ate figure, clutched both its arms in a vice, and cursed 
ack for not coming sooner to take one arm. 

Herbert had hurt his head, and turned fractious. Jack 
ok the one arm. Easu was on the other side of the bed, 
s reddish fair beard glowing. There was a queer power 
_Easu, which fascinated Jack a little. Beyond, Gran 
as sitting up in bed, among many white pillows, like Red 
iding Hood’s grandmother. A bright fire of wood logs 
as burning in the open hearth, and four or five tallow 
ndles smoked duskily. But a screen was put between 
ran’s four-poster and Herbert’s bed, a screen made of a 
ooden clothes-horse covered with sheets. Jack, however, 
om his position by Herbert’s pillow, could see beyond the 
reen to Gran’s section. 

His attention was drawn by the patient.  Herbert’s 
ovements were sudden and convulsive, and always in a 

7 

72 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

sudden jerking towards the right side of the bed. Easu had 
given Jack the left arm to hold, and as soon as Herbert 
became violent, Jack couldn’t hold him. The left arm, lean 
and hard as iron, broke free, and Easu jumped up and 
cursed Jack. 

Here was a pretty scene! With Gran mumbling to her- 
self on the other side the hideous sheeted screen ! 

There was nothing for it but to use cool intelligence—a 
thing the Reds did not possess. Jack had lost his hold 
again, and Easu, like a reddish, glistening demon, was 
gripping the sick man’s two arms and arching over him. 
Jack called up his old veterinary experience and proceeded 
to detach himself. 

He noticed first that Herbert was far less fierce when 
they didn’t resist him. Second, that he stopped groaning 
when his eyes fell away from the men around him. Third, 
that all the convulsive jerky movements, which had thrown 
him out of the bed several times, were towards the right 
side of the bed. Every time he had fallen out on the right 
side of the bed. 

Then why not bind him to the left? 

The left arm had again escaped his grasp, and Easu’s 
exasperated fury was only held in check by Gran’s presence. 
Jack went out of the room and found Katie. 

‘* Hunt me out an old sheet,’’ he said. 

‘* What for? ”’ she asked, but went off to do his bidding. 

When she came back she said : 

** Mother says they don’t want to bandage Herbert, do 
they? ”’ 

‘** I’m going to try and bind him. I shan’t hurt him,’? 
he replied. 

‘© Oh, Jack, don’t let them send for me to sit with him 
—I hate sickness.’’ 

‘* You give us a hand then with this sheet.” 

Between them they prepared strong bands. Jack noosed 
one with sailor’s knots round Katie’s hands, and fastened 
it to the table leg. 

** Pull! *? he ordered. ‘¢ Pull as hard as you can.”? And 
as she pulled : ‘* Does it hurt now? ” 

** Not a bit,’’ she said. 

Jack went back to the sick room. Herbert was quiet, 
the three brothers were sulky and silent. They wanted 

THE LAMBS COME HOME 73 

above all things to get out, to get away. You could see 
that. Easu glanced at Jack’s hand. There was something 
tense and alert about Easu, like a great, wiry bird with 
enormous power in its lean, red neck and its lean limbs. 

** T thought we’d best bind him so as not to hurt him,” 
said Jack. ‘ I know how to do it, I think.”’ 

The brothers said not a word, but let him go ahead. 
And Jack bound the left arm and the left leg, and put a 
band round the body of the patient. They looked on, rather 
distantly interested. Easu released the convulsive left arm 
of his brother. Jack took the sick man’s hand soothingly, 
held it soothingly, then slipped his hand up the hairy fore- 
arm and got the band attached just above the elbow. Then 
he fastened the ends to the bed-head. He felt quite certain 
he was doing right. While he was busy Mrs Ellis came in. 
She watched in silence, too. When it was done Jack looked 
at her. 

** I believe it’ll do,’? she said with a nod of approval. 
And then, to the cowed, hulking brothers, ‘*‘ You might as 
well go and get your tea.”’ 

They bumped into one another trying to get through the 
door. Jack noticed they were in their stocking feet. They 
stooped outside the door to pick up their boots. 

** Good idea! ’? he thought. And he took off his own 
boots. It made him feel more on the job. 

Mrs Ellis went round the white bed-sheet screen to sit 
with Gran. Jack went blowing out the reeking candles on 
the sick man’s side of the same screen. Then he sat on a 
hard chair facing the staring, grimacing patient. He felt 
sorry for him, but repelled by him. Yet as Herbert tossed 
his wiry, hairy free arm and jerked his hairy, sharp-featured 
face, Jack wanted to help him. 

He remembered the vet’s advice: ** Get the creatures’ 
confidence, lad, and you can do anything with ’em. Horse 
or man, cat or canary, get the creature’s confidence, and 
if anything can be done, you can do it.”’ 

Jack wanted now to proceed to get the creature’s con- 
fidence. He knew it was a matter of will: of holding the 
other creature’s will with his own will. But gently, and in 
a kindly spirit. 

He held Herbert’s hard fingers softly in his own hand, 
and said softly : ‘‘ Keep quiet, old man, keep quiet. I’m 

4 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

here. Dll take care of you. You rest. You go to sleep. 
I won’t leave you. I’ll take care of you.” 

Herbert lay still as if listening. His muscles relaxed. 
He seemed dreadfully tired—Jack could feel it. He was 
dreadfully, dreadfully tired. Perhaps the womanless, 
brutal life of the Reds had made him so tired. He seemed 
to go to sleep. Then he jerked awake, and the convulsive 
struggling began again, with the frightful rolling of the 
eyes. 

But the steady bonds that held him seemed to comfort 
him, and Jack quietly took the clutching fingers again. — 
And the sick man’s eyes, in their rolling, rested on the 
quiet, abstract face of the youth, with strange watching. 
Jack did not move. And again Herbert’s tension seemed to 
relax. He seemed in an agony of desire to sleep, but the 
agony of desire was so great, that the very fear of it jerked 
the sick man into horrible wakefulness. 

Jack was saying silently, with his will: ** Don’t worry! 
Don’t worry, old man! Don’t worry! You go to sleep. 
I'll look after you.”’ 

And as he sat in dead silence, saying these things, he 
felt as if the fluid of his life ran out of his fingers into the 
fingers of the hurt man. He was left weak and limp. And 
Herbert began to go to sleep, really to sleep. 

Jack sat in a daze, with the virtue gone out of him. And 
Herbert’s fingers were soft and childlike again in their 
relaxation. 

The boy started a little, feeling someone pat him on the 
shoulder. It was Mrs. Ellis, patting him in commendation, 
because the patient was sunk deep in sleep. Then she went 
out. 

Following her with his eyes, Jack saw another figure in 
the doorway. It was Red Easu, like a wolf out of the 
shadow, looking in. And Jack quietly let slip the heavy, 
sleeping fingers of the sick man. But he did not move his 
posture. | 

Then he was aware that Easu had gone again. 

Vii 

‘Tt was late, and the noise of rain outside, and weird 
wind blowing. Mrs. Ellis had been in and whispered that 

tHE LAMBS COME HOME 75 

Dr. Rackett was not home yet—that he had probably 
waited somewhere for the shay. And that she had told the 
Reds to keep away. 

There was dead silence save for the weather outside, and 
a noise of the fire. The candles were all blown out. 

He was startled by hearing Gran’s voice : 

** Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings. .. .” 

** She’s reading,’? thought Jack, though there was no 
light to read by. And he wondered why the old lady 
wasn’t asleep. ; 

**T knew y’r mother’s father, Jack Grant,’? came the 
thin, petulant voice. ‘‘ He cut off my leg. Devil of a 
fella wouldn’t let me die when I wanted to. Cut it off 
without a murmur, and no chloroform.”’ 

The thin voice was so devilishly awake, in the darkness 
of the night, like a voice out of the past piercing the inert 
present. 

** What did he care! What did he care! Not a bit,’’ 
Gran went on. ‘* And y’re another. You take after him. 
You’re such another. You’re a throw-back, to your 
mother’s father. I was wondering what I was going to 
do with those great galoots in my room all night. I’m glad 
it’s you.”’ 

Jack thought : ‘* Lord, have I got to sit here all night! ” 

§° You’ve got the night before you,”’ said Gran’s demon- 
ishly wakeful voice, uncanny in its thin alertness, in the 
leep night. ‘* So come round here to the fireside an’ make 
y’self comfortable.’’ 

Jack rose obediently and went round the screen. After 
all, an arm-chair would be welcome. 

*¢ Well, say something,’’ said Gran. 

The boy peered at her in the dusk, in a kind of fear. 

*‘ Then light me a candle, for the land’s sake,’ she said 
yettishly. 

He took a tin candle-stick with a tallow candle, blew the 
ire and made a yellow light. She looked like a carved 
vory Chinese figure, almost grotesque, among her pillows. 

** Yes, y’r like y’r grandfather : a stocky, stubborn man 
is didn’t say much, but dare do anything. And never had 
,son. Hard as nails the man was.’ 

** More family! ”? thought Jack wearily, mee 
f Gran’s language thoroughly. 

7¢064~THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘‘ Had two daughters though, and disowned the eldest. 
Your mother was the youngest. The eldest got herself into 
trouble and he turned her out. Regular obstinate fool, 
and no bowels of compassion. That’s how men are when 
y’ let °em. You’re the same.” 

Jack was so sleepy, so sleepy, and the words of the old 
woman seemed like something pricking him. 

‘1’ have stood by her—but I was her age, and what 
could I do? I’d have married her father if I could, for he 
was a widower. But he married another woman for his 
second, and I went by ship to Melbourne, and then I took 
poor old Ellis.” 

What on earth made her say these things, he didn’t know, 
for he was dead sleepy, and if he’d been wide awake he 
wouldn’t have wanted her to unload this sort of stuff on 
him. But she went on, like the old demon she was : 

*¢ Men are fools, and women make ’em what they are. 
I followed your Aunt Lizzie up, years after. She married 
a man in the mounted police, and he sent the boy off. The 
boy was a bit weak-minded, and the man wouldn’t have 
him. So the lad disappeared into the bush. They say he 
was canny enough about business and farming, but a bit 
off about people. Anyway he was Mary’s half-brother : 
you met Mary in Perth. Her scamp of a father was father 
of that illegitimate boy. But she’s an orphan now, poor 
child : like that illegitimate half-brother of hers.’’ 

Jack looked up pathetically. He didn’t want to hear. 
And Gran suddenly laughed at him, with the sudden daring, 
winsome laugh, like Lennie. 

** 'Y’re a bundle of conventions, like y’r grandfather,” 
she said tenderly. ‘‘ But y’ve got a kinder heart. I sup- 
pose that’s from y’r English father. Folks are tough in 
Australia : tough as whit-leather. Y’ll be tempted to sin, 
but y’ won’t be tempted to condemn. And never you 
mind. ‘Trust yourself, Jack Grant. Earn a good opinion 
of yourself, and never mind other folks. You’ve only got 
to live once. You know when you’re spirit glows—trust 
that. That’s you! That’s the spirit of God in you. Trust 
in that, and you’ll never grow old. If you knuckle under 
you'll grow old.”’ : 

She paused for a time. 

* Though I don’t know that I’ve muck room to talk,?? 

THE LAMBS COME HOME V7 

‘she ruminated on. ‘* There was my son, Esau, he never 
knuckled under, and though he’s dead, I’ve not much 
good to say of him. But then he never had a kind heart : 
never. Never a woman loved Esau, though some feared 
him. I was not among ’em. Not I. I feared no man, 
not even your grandfather : except a little. But look at 
Dad here now. He’s got a kind heart: as kind a heart as 
ever beat. And he’s gone old. And he’s got heart disease. 
And he knuckled under. Ay, he knuckled under to me, 
he did, poor lad. And he’ll go off sudden, when his heart 
gives way. That’s how it is with kind-hearted men. They 
knuckle under, and they die young. Like Dad here. He’ll 
never make old bones. Poor lad! ” 

She mused again in silence. 

** There’s nothing to win in life, when all’s said and 
done, but a good opinion of yourself. I’ve watched and I 
know. God is y’rself. Or put it the other way if you like : 
y’rself is God. So win a good opinion of yourself, and 
watch the glow inside you.”’ 

Queer, thought Jack, that this should be an old woman’s 
philosophy. Yourself is God! Partly he believed it, partly 
he didn’t. He didn’t know what he believed. Watch the 
glow inside you. That he understood. 

He liked Gran. She was so alone in life, amid all her 
children. He himself was a lone wolf too : among the lambs 
of the family. And perhaps Red Easu was a lone wolf. 

** But what was I telling you? ’? Gran resumed. ‘* About 
your illegitimate cousin. I followed him up too. He went 
back beyond Atherton, and took up land. He’s got a tidy 
place now, and he’s never married. He’s wrong in his head 
about people, but all right about the farm. I’m hoping 
that place’ll come to Mary one day, for the child’s got 
nothing. She’s a good child—a good child. Her mother 
was a niece of mine.” 

She seemed to be going to sleep. But, like Herbert, she 
roused again. 

*¢-Y’d better marry Mary. Make up your mind to it,” 
she said. 

And instantly he rebelled against the thought. Never. 

** Perhaps I’d ought to have said.: § The best in yourself 
is God,’ ’? she mused. ‘* Perhaps that’s more it. The best 
in yourself is God. But then who’s going to say what is 

72 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

the best in yourself. A kind man knuckles under, and 
thinks it’s the best in himself. And a hard man holds out, 
and thinks that’s the best in himself. And it’s not good 
for a kind man to knuckle under, and it’s not good for a 
hard-hearted man to hold out. What’s to be done, dreary- 
me, what’s to be done. And no matter what we say, people 
will be as they are. You can but watch the glow.” 

She really did doze off. And Jack stole away to the other 
side of the screen to escape her, leaving the candle burning. 

Viil 

He sat down thankfully on the hard chair by Herbert’s 
side, glad to get away from women. Glad to be with men, 
if it was only Herbert. Glad to doze and feel alone: to 
feel alone. 

He awoke with a jerk and a cramped neck, and there 
was Tom peeping in. Tom? They must be back. Jack’s 
chair creaked as he made a movement to get up. But Tom 
only waved his hand and disappeared. Mean of Tom. 

They must be back. The twins must be back. The 
family was replenished. He stared with sleepy eyes, and 
a heavy, sleepy, sleepy head. 

And the next thing he heard was a soft, alert voice 
saying : 

** Hello, Bow! * 
Queer how it echoed in his dark consciousness as he slept, 
this soft, *‘ Hello, Bow! ”’ 

There they were, both laughing, fresh with the wind and 
rain. Grace standing just behind Monica, Monica’s hair 
all tight crisp with rain, blond at the temples, darker on 
the head, and her fresh face laughing, and her yellow eyes 
looking with that long, meaningful look that had no mean- 
ing, peering into his sleepy eyes. He felt something stir 
inside him. . 

** Hello, Bow! ” she said again, putting her fingers on 
his sleeve. ‘‘ We’ve got back.’? And still in his sleep- 
stupor he stared without answering a word. 

** You aren’t awake! ”? she whispered, putting her cold 
hand suddenly on his face, and laughing as he started back. 
A new look came into his eyes as he stared startled at her 
and she bent her head, turning aside. ; 

THE LAMBS COME HOME 79 

** Poo! Smells of stinking candles in here! *? whispered 
Grace. 

Someone else was there. It was Red Easu in the door- 
Way, Saying in a hoarse voice : 

** Want me to take a spell with Herbert? ”’ 

Monica glanced back at him with a strange look. He 
loomed weird and tall, with his rather long, red neck and 
glistening beard and quick blue eyes. A certain sense of 
power came with him. 

** Hello, girls, got back! ’? he added to the twins, who 
watched him without speaking. 

‘© Who’s there? *? said Gran’s voice from the other side 
of the screen. ‘* Is it the girls back? Has Mary come with 
your” 

As if in answer to the summons, Mary appeared in the 
doorway, wearing a white apron. She glanced first at 
Jack, with her black eyes, and then at Gran. Monica was 
watching her with a sideways lynx look, and Grace was 
looking at everybody with big blue eyes, while Easu looked 
down from his uncouth, ostrich height. 

_ * Hello, Gran! ’? said Mary, going to the other side of 
the screen to kiss the old lady. The twins followed suit. 

_ ** Want me to take a spell in here? ” said Easu, jerking 
his thumb at the sleeping Herbert. Easu wore black trousers 
hitched up high with braces over a dark-grey flannel shirt, 
and leather leggings, but no boots. His shirt-sleeves were 
rolled up from his sinewy brown arms. His reddish fair 
hair was thick and rather long. He spoke in a deep gruff 
voice, that he made as quiet as possible, and he seemed to 
show a gruff sort of submissiveness to Jack at the moment. 

** No, Easu,’’ replied Gran. ‘‘I can’t do with you. 
Jack Grant will manage.” 

The sick man was sleeping through it all like the dead. 

** J can take a turn,’’ said Mary’s soft, low, insidious 
yoice. 

** No, not you either, Mary. You go to sleep after that 
lrive. Go, all of you, go to bed. I can’t do with you all 
n here. Has Dr. Rackett come? * 

** No,”’ said Easu. 

‘* Then go away, all of you. I can’t do with you,” said 
ran. 

Mary came round the screen and shook hands with Jack, 

s0 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

looking him full in the eyes with her black eyes, so that he 
was uncomfortable. She made him more uncomfortable 
than Monica did. Monica had slunk also round the screen, 
and was standing with one foot trailing, watching. She 
watched just as closely when Mary shook hands with the 
embarrassed Hasu. 

They all retreated silently to the door. Grace went first. 
And with her big, dark-blue eyes she glanced back inquisi- 
tively at Jack. Mary went next—she too turning in the 
door to give him a look and an intimate, furtive-seeming 
smile. Then came Monica, and like a wolf she lingered in 
the door looking back with a long, meaningful, meaningless 
sidelong look before she took her departure. Then on her 
heels went Easu, and he did not look back. He seemed to 
loom over the girls. 

‘* Blow the light out,’’ said Gran. 

He went round to blow out the candle. Gran lay there 
like an old angel. Queer old soul—framed by pillow frills. 

** Yourself is God ! ”? 

Jack thought of that with a certain exultance. 

He went over and made up the fire. Then he sat in the 
arm-chair. Herbert was moving. He went over to soothe 
him. The sick man moaned steadily for some time, for a 
long time, then went still again. Jack slept in the hard 
chair. 

He woke up cramped and cold, and went round to the 
arm-chair by the fire. Gran was sleeping like an inert bit 
of ivory. He softly attended to the fire and sat down in the 
arm-chair. | 

He was riding a horse a long, long way, on a journey that 
would never end. He couldn’t stop the horse till it stopped 
of itself. And it would never stop. A voice said : What 
has he done? And a voice answered: Conquered the 
world. But the horse did not stop. And he woke and saw 
shadows on the wall, and slept again. Things had all turned 
to dough—his hands were heavy with dough. He woke and 
looked at his hands to see if it were so. How loudly and 
fiercely the clock ticked. 

Not dough, but boxing-gloves. He was fighting inside a 
ring, fighting with somebody who was and who wasn’t Easu. 
He could beat Easu—he couldn’t beat Easu. Easu had 
knocked him down : he was lying writhing with pain and 

THE LAMBS COME HOME 81 

ouldn’t rise, while they were counting him out. In three 
10re seconds he would be counted out! Horror! 

He woke, it was midnight and Herbert was writhing. 
** Did I sleep a minute, Herbert? ’’ he whispered. 

** My head! My head! It jerks so! ” 

** Does it, old man. Never mind.” 

And the next thought was : ‘‘ There must have been gun- 
owder in that piece of wood, in the fire.’’ 

ix 
It was half-past one, and Mary unexpectedly appeared 
ith tray and lighted candle, and cocoa-milk for Jack and 
rrowroot for Herbert. She fed Herbert with a spoon, and 
e swallowed, but made no sign that he understood. 
‘* How did he get the accident? ’? Jack whispered. 
** His horse threw him against a tree.”’ 
** Wish Rackett would come,’’ whispered Jack. 
Mary shook her head and they were silent. 
** How old are you, Mary? ’? Jack asked. 
** Nineteen.” 
** I’m eighteen at the end of this month.”’ 
§* ¥ know—but I’m much older than you.”’ 
Jack looked at her queer dark muzzle. She seemed to 
ave a queer, humble complacency of her own. 
** She ”—Jack nodded his head towards Gran—* says 
1at knuckling under makes you old.’’ 
Mary laughed suddenly. 
*¢ Then I’m a thousand,”’ she said. 
§© What do you knuckle under for? ”’ he asked. 
She looked up at him slowly, and again something quick 
id hot stirred in him, from her dark, queer, humble, yet 
ssured face. 
** It’s my way,’’ she said, with an odd smile. 
‘* Funny way to have,’’ he replied, and suddenly he was 
mbarrassed. And he thought of Monica’s dare-devil way. 
He felt embarrassed. 
**T must have my own way,’’ said Mary, with another 
id, beseeching, and yet darkly confident smile. 
“* Yourself is God,’? thought Jack. But he said nothing, 
scause he felt uncomfortable. 

82 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

And Mary went away with the tray and the light, and — 
he was glad when she was gone. 

The worst part of the night. Nothing happened—and 
that was perhaps the worst part of it. Fortified by the 
powers of darkness, the slightest sounds took on momentous 
importance, but nothing happened. He expected some- 
thing—but nothing came. 

Gran asleep there, in all the fixed motionlessness of her — 
years, a queer white clot. And young Herbert asleep or 
unconscious, sending wild vibrations from his brain. 

The thought of Monica seemed to flutter subjectively in 
Jack’s soul, the thought of Mary objectively. That is, 
Monica was somehow inside him, in his blood, like a sister. — 
And Mary was outside him, like a black-boy. Both of them — 
engaging his soul. And yet he was alone, all alone in the 
universe. These two only beset him. Or did he beset them? 

The oppossums made a furious bombilation as they ran 
up and down, back and forth between the roof and ceiling, 
like an army moving. And suddenly, shatteringly, a nut 
would come down on the old shingle roof from the Moreton 
Bay fig outside, with a crash like a gun, while the branches 
dangled and clanked against the timber walls. An immense 
uncanny strider! And him alone in the lonely, uncanny, ~ 
timeless core of the night. 

Slowly the night went by. And weird things awoke in 
the boy’s soul, things he could never quite put to sleep 
again. He felt as if this night he had entered into a dense 
impenetrable thicket. As if he would never get out. He 
knew he would never get out. 

He awoke again with a start. Was it the first light? 
Herbert was stirring. Jack went quickly to him. 

Herbert opened dazed eyes, and mutely looked at Jack. 
A look of intelligence came, and as quickly passed. He 
groaned, and the torment came over him once more. What- 
ever was the matter with him? He writhed and struggled, 
groaning—then relapsed into a cold, inert silence. It was 
as if he were dying. As if he, or something in him, had 
decided to die. . 

Jack was terribly startled. In terror, he mixed a little 

j 

3 
4 
' 

THE LAMBS COME HOME 838 

randy and milk, and tried to pour spoonfuls down the 
inresisting throat. He quickly fetched a hot stone from the 
ire, wrapped it in a piece of blanket, and put it in the bed. 

Then he sat down and took the young man’s hand softly 
n his own and whispered intensely : ‘*‘ Come back, Her- 
vert! Come back! Come back! ”’ 

With all his will he summoned the inert spirit. He was 
erribly afraid the other would die. He sat and watched 
vith a fixed, intent will. And Herbert relaxed again, the 
ife came round his eyes again. 

** Oh, God! ”? thought Jack. ‘I shall die. I shall die 
nyself. What sort of a life have I got to live before I die? 
Yh, God, what sort of a life have I got between me and 
vhen I die? ”° 

And it all seemed a mystery to him. The God he called 
m was a dark, almost fearful mystery. The life he had to 
ive was a kind of doom. The choice he had was no choice. 
‘ Yourself is God.” It wasn’t true. There was a terrible 
rod somewhere else. And nothing else than this. 

Because, inside himself, he was alone, without father or 
nother or place or people. Just a separate living thing. 
ind he could not choose his doom of living nor his dying. 
jomewhere outside himself was a terrible God who decreed. 

He was afraid of the thicket of life, in which he found 
imself like a solitary, strange animal. He would have to 
ind his way through : all the way to death. But what sort 
f way? What sort of lifer What sort of life between him 
nd death? 

He didn’t know. He only knew that something must be. 
‘hat he was in a strange bush, and by himself. And that 
e must find his way through. 

CHAP: VI. IN THE YARD 

i 
AH, good to be out in the open air again! Beyond all tell- 
ing good! Those indoor rooms were like coffins. To be 
dead, and to writhe unreleased in the coffin, that was what 
those indoor rooms were like. 

‘“* God, when I die, let me pass right away,’ prayed Jack. 
‘* Lord, I promise to live my life right out, so that when I 
die I pass over and don’t lie wriggling in the coffin! ” 

Mary had come as soon as it was light, and found Her- 
bert asleep and Jack staring at him in a stupor. 

‘* You go to sleep now, Bow,” said Mary softly, laying 
her hand on his arm. 

He looked at her in a kind of horror, as if she were part 
of the dark interior. He didn’t want to go to sleep. He 
wanted to wake. He stood in the yard and stared around 
stupefied at the early morning. Then he went and hauled 
Lennie and the twins out of their bunks. Tom was already 
up. Then he went, stripped to the waist, to the pump. 

** Pump over my nut, Lennie,’’ he shouted, holding his 
head at the pump spout. Oh, ’twas so good to shout at 
somebody. He must shout. 

And Lennie pumped away like a little imp. 

When Jack looked out of the towel at the day, he saw 
the sky fresh with yellow light, and some red still on the 
horizon above the grey gum-trees. It all seemed crisp 
and snappy. It was life. 

‘* Ain’t yer goin’ ter do any of yer monkey trickin’ this 
morning? *? shouted Lennie at him. . 

Jack shook his head, and rubbed his white young shoulders 
with the towel. Lennie, standing by the wash-tin in his 
little under-vest and loose little breeches, was watching 
closely. . 

** Can you answer me a riddle, Lennie? ”? asked Jack. 

** Pll try,” said Len briskly, and Og and Magog jumped 
up in gay expectation. : 

‘* What is God, anyhow? ” asked Jack. ] 

‘* Y’d better let my father hear y’,’’ replied Lennie, with 
a dangerous nod of the head. 

84 

oo 

IN THE YARD 85 

** No, but I mean it. Suppose Herbert had died. I 
ant to know what God is.”’ 

Jack still had the inner darkness of that room in his eyes. 
** Pll tell y’,”? said Len briskly. ‘* God is a Higher Law 
ian the Constitution.’’ 

Jack thought about it. A higher law than the law of the 
nd. Maybe! The answer left him cold. 

** And what is self? ’? he asked. 

*““ Crickey! Stop up another night! It’ud make ye 
wwney. But I’ll tell y’ what self is. 

** * Self is a wilderness of sweets. And selves 
They eat, they drink, and in communion sweet 
Quaff immortality and joy.’ ” 

Len was pleased with this. But Jack heard only words. 
** Ask me one, Jack! Ask me one! ”’ pleaded Og. 

** All right. What’s success, Og? ”’ asked Jack, smiling. 
** Success! Success! Why, success ig 

** Success is t’grow a big bingy like a bloke from town, 
a watch-chain acrost it with a gold dial in y’ fob, and 
r be allowed ter spout as much gab as y’ve got bref left 
rer from y’ indigest,’’ cut in Lennie, with delight. 

*¢ That was my riddle,”’ yelled Og, rushing at him. 

** Ask me one! Ask me one, Jack! Ask me one,’’ yelled 
agog. 

“© What’s failure? ’? asked Jack, laughing. 

s* T? be down on y’ uppers an’ hev no visible means of 
pporting y’r pants up whilst y’ slog t’ th’ nearest pub 
sadge a beer spot,’’ crowed Lennie in delight, while he 
nced off Og. 

Both twins made an assault and battery upon him. 

‘6 D’ye know y’r own answers? ”’ yelled Len at Jack. 

66 No.?? 

The brazenness of the admission flabbergasted the twins. 
yey stalked off. Len drew up a three-legged stool, and 
t down to milk, explaining impatiently that success comes 
those that work and don’t drink. 

‘¢ But ?’—he reverted to his original thought—* ye’ve 
tta work, not go wastin’ y’r time as you generally do of a 
yrning—boundin’ about makin’ a kangaroo of y’self; 
pin’ y’elbows and holdin’ back y’ nut as if y’ had a 

86 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

woppin’ fine drink in both hands, and gone screwed with 
joy afore you drained it; lyin’ flat on y’ hands an’ toes, 
an’ heavin’? up an’? down, up an’ down, like a race-horse 
iguana frightened by a cat; an’ stalkin’ an’ stoopin’ as if 
y’wanted ter catch a bird round a corner; or roundin’ up 
on imaginary things, makin’ out t’hit ’em slap-bang-whizz 
on the mitts they ain’t got; whippin’ round an’ bobbin’ like 
a cornered billy-goat; skippin’ up an’ down like sis wif a 
rope, an’ makin’ a general high falutin’ ass of y’self.”’ 

‘¢ T see you and the twins with clubs,”’ said Jack. 

‘¢ Oh, that! That’s more for music an’ one—two—three 
—four,”’ said Len. 

‘© You see I’m in training,”’ said Jack. 

‘‘ What for? Want ter teach the old sows to start 
dancin’ on th’ corn-bin floor? ”’ 

‘* No, I want to keep in training, for if I ever have a big 
fight.” 

** Who with? ” 

*© Oh, I don’t know. But I love a round with the fists. 
T’ll teach you.” 

** All right. But why don’t y’ chuck farmin’ an’ go in f’ 
prize fightin’? ”” 

_ **T wish I could. But my father said no. An’ perhaps 
he’s right. But the best thing I know is to fight a fair 
round. I'll teach you, Len.”’ 

‘* Huh! What’s the sense! If y’ want exercise, y’ e’n 
tub that horse down a bit cleaner than y’ are doin’.’’ 

‘* Stop y’ sauce, nipper, or I’ll be after y’ with a strap !” 
called Tom. ‘* Come on, Jack. Tea! Timothy’s bangin’ 
the billy-can. And just you land that nipper a clout.”’ 

** Let him *it me! Garn, let him! ’? cried Len, scooting 
up with his milk-stool and pail and looking like David skir- 
mishing before Goliath. He wasn’t laughing. There was a 
demonish little street-arab hostility in his face. | 

se Don’t you like me, Len? ”? Jack asked, a bit soft this — 
morning. lLen’s face at once suffused with a delightful 
roguishness. 

ae Aw, yes—if y’like. I'll be dressin’ up in Katie’s skirts 
n’ spoonin’ y’ one of these bright nights.” | 
He whipped away with his milk-pail, like a young lizard 

IN THE YARD 87 

i 

** Look at Bow, he looks like an owl,’ said Grace at 
reakfast. 

** What d’y call ’im Bow for? ” asked Len. 

** Like a girl, with his eyes double size,’’ said Monica. 
** You’d better go to sleep, Jack,”? said Mrs Ellis. 

** Take a nap, lad,’ said Mr Ellis. ‘* There’s nothin’ 
r y to do this morning.”’ 

Jack was going stupefied again as the sun grew warm. 
e didn’t hear half that was said. But the girls were very 
ttentive to him. Mary was not there : she was sitting with 
erbert. But Monica and Grace waited on him as if he had 
sen their lord. It was a new experience for him : Monica 
mping up and whipping away his cup with her slim hand, 
) bring it back filled, and Grace insisting on opening a 
yecial jar of jam for him. Drowsy as he was, their atten- 
on made his blood stir. It was so new to him. 

Mary came in from the sitting-room : they were still in 
ie kitchen. 

** Herbert is awake,’’ she said. ‘* He wants to be untied. 
ow, do you think he ought to? ” 

Jack rose in silence and went through to Gran’s room. 
erbert lay quite still, but he was himself. Only shattered 
1d wordless. He looked at Jack and murmured : 

*© Can’t y’untie me? ”’ 

Jack went at once to unfasten the linen bands. The 
vins, Monica and Grace, stood watching from the door- 
ay. Mary was at his side to help. 

‘6 Don’t let ’em come in,’’ said Herbert, looking into 
ack’s face. 

Jack nodded and went to the door. 

‘6 He wants to be left alone,”’ he said. 

‘6 Mustn’t we come, Bow? ” said Monica, making queer 
siiow eyes at him. 

‘6 Best not,”? he said. ‘* Don’t let anybody come. He 
ants absolute quiet.” 

‘* All right.’? She looked at him with a heavy look of 
yedience, as if making him an offering. They were not 
ying to question his authority. She drew Grace away : 
sth the girls humble. Jack slowly and unconsciously 
ished. Then he went back to the bed. 

88 . THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘‘ J want something,’? murmured Herbert wanly. ‘‘ Send 
that other away.” : 

“© Go away, Mary. He wants a man to attend to him,” 
said Jack. 

Mary looked a long, dark look at Jack. Then she, too, 
submitted. 

‘* All right,’? she said, turning darkly away. 

And it came into his mind, with utter absurdity, that he 
ought to kiss her for this submission. And he hated the 
thought. 

Herbert was a boy of nineteen, uncouth, and savagely 
shy. Jack had to do the menial offices for him. 

The sick man went to sleep again almost immediately, 
and Jack returned to the kitchen. He heard voices from 
outside. 

Ma and Grace were washing up at the slab. Dad was 
sitting under the photosphorum tree, with Effie on one 
knee, cutting up tobacco in the palm of his hand. Tom 
was leaning against the tree, the children sat about. Lennie 
skipped up and offered a seat on a stump. 

‘* Sit yourself down, Bow,”’ he said, using the nickname. 
**I’d be a knot instead of a bow if I had to nurse Red 
Herbert.”’ 

Monica came slinking up from the shade, and stood with 
her skirt touching Jack’s arm. Mary was carrying away 
the dishes. | 

‘‘ I’ve been telling Tom,’’ said Mr Ellis, *‘ that he can 
take the clearing gang over to his A’nt Greenlow’s for the 
shearing, an’ then get back an’ clear for all he’s worth, 
till Christmas. Y’might as well go along with him, Jack. 
We can get along all right here without y’, now th’ girls 
are back. Till Christmas that is. We s’ll want y’ back 
for the harvest.”’ | 

There was a dead silence. Jack didn’t want to go. 

‘* Then y’ can go back to the clearing and burn off. I 
need that land reclaimed, over against the little chaps 
grows up and wants to be farmers. Besides ’’—and_he 
looked round at Ma—* we’re a bit overstocked in the house 
just now, an’ we'll be glad of the cubby for Herbert, if 
he’s on the mend.” 

‘ Dad resumed cutting up his tobacco in the palm of hi: 
and. j 

IN THE YARD 89 

“* Jack can’t leave Herbert, Uncle,” said Mary quietly, 
“he won’t let anybody else do for him.” 

** Eh? ” said Mr Ellis, looking up. 

** Herbert won’t let me do for him,” said Mary. ‘“ He’ll 
nly let Bow.” 

Mr Ellis dropped his head in silence. 

** In that case,’’ he said slowly, ‘‘ in that case, we must 
vait a bit. Where’s that darned Rackett put himself? This 
s his job.”’ 

There was still silence. 

** Somebody had best go an’ look for him,’’ said Tom. 

‘* Ay,’’ said Mr Ellis. 

There was more silence. Monica, standing close to Jack, 
eemed to be fiercely sheltering him from this eviction. 
ind Mary, at a distance, was like Moses’ sister watching 
wer events. It made Jack feel queer and thrilled, the 
‘irls all concentrating on him. It was as if it put power in 
is chest, and made a man of him. 

Someone was riding up. It was Red Easu. He slung 
imself off his horse, and stalked slowly up. 

** Herbert dead? ”? he asked humorously. 

** Doing nicely,’”’ said Dad, very brief. 

*° T’ll go an’ have a look at ’m,”’ said Easu, sitting on 
he step and pulling off his boots. 

*© Don’t wake him if he’s asleep. Don’t frighten him, 
rhatever you do,” said Jack, anxious for his charge. 

Easu looked at Jack with an insolent stare: a curious 
tare. 

*‘ Frighten him? ”’ he said. ‘* What with? ” 

** Jack’s been up with him all night,’’ put in Monica, 
ercely. 

‘‘ He nearly died in the night,”’ said Jack. 

There was a dead silence. Easu stared, poised like some 
enacing bird. Then he went indoors in his stocking feet. 

*‘ Did he nearly die, Jack? ”’? asked Tom. 

Jack nodded. His soul was feeling bleached. 

‘© If Doctor Rackett isn’t coming—see if you can trail 
im up, Tom. And, Len, can you go on Lucy and fetch 
joctor Mallett? ” 

** Course I can,”’ said Len, jumping up. ; 

*¢ You go and get a nap in the cubby, son,”’ said Mr Ellis. 

They were now all in motion. Jack followed vaguely into 

90 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

the kitchen. Lennie was the centre of excitement for the 
moment. 

‘* Well, Ma, I has no socks fitta wear. If y’ll fix me 
some, I’ll go.?? For he was determined to go to York in 
decent raiment, as he said. 

‘‘ Find me a decent shirt, Ma; decent! None o’ your 
creases down th’ front for me. ’N a starch collar, real 
starch.”’ 

And so on. He was late. Lennie was always late. 

‘‘ Ma, weer’s my tie—th’ blue one wif gold horse-shoes? 
Grace—there’s an angel—me boots. Clean ’em up a bit, 
goon. Monica! Oh, Monica; there y’are! Fix this collar — 
on for me, proper, do! Y’re a bloke at it, so y’are, an’ I’m 
no good. . . . Gitt outta th’ way, you nips—how k’n I 
get dressed with you buzzin’ round me feet? Ma! Ma! 
Come an’ brush me ’air with that dinkey nice-smellin’ stuff. 
- . There, Ma, don’t your Lennie look a dream now? 
Ooha, Ma, don’t kiss me, Ma, I ’ate it.”’ 

** Lennie, love, don’t drop your aitches.”’ 

**T never, Ma. I said I ’ate it. Y’ kissed me, did y’ 
or didn’t y’? Well, I ’ate it.’’ ) 

He was gone on Lucy, like a little demon. Jack, sitting 
stupid on a chair, felt part of his soul go with him. 

** Come on, Bow! ”’ said Monica, taking him by the arm. 
** Come and go to sleep. Mary will wake you if Herbert 
wants you.” 

And she led him off to the door of the cubby, while he 
submitted and Easu stood in his stocking feet on the 
verandah watching. 

** He saved Herbert’s life,’’ said Monica, looking up at 
Easu with a kind of defiance, when she came back. 

** Who asked him? ” said Easu. 

oH 

Tom and Jack were to leave the next day. The girls 
brought out a lot of stores from the cupboard, and blankets 
and billies and a lantern. They packed the sacks standing 
there. 

** Get y’ swag f’y’selves,”? said Dad. ‘* The m 
everything for themselves. Take an axe an’ a gun snleee 

Gun! Gee! K’nI go, Dad? ” ; 

IN THE YARD 91 

** Shut up, Len. Destroy all the dingoes y’ can. I’ll give 
y’ sixpence a head, an’ the Government gives another. 
Haven’t y’ a saddle, Jack Grant, somewhere in a box. 
Because I’d be short of one off the place, if you took one 
rom here.”? 

** It must be somewhere,”’ said Jack. 

** Get it unpacked. An’ you can have Lucy to put it 
across. It’s forty mile from here to virgin forest: real 
orest. If you get strayed, ever, all you have to do is te 
jrop th’ reins on Lucy’s neck ’n she’ll bring y’ in.” 

The saddle came out of the dusty box. All were there in 
2 circle to look on. Jack expected deep admiration. But 
1e was hurt to feel Monica laughing derisively. Everybody 
was laughing, but he minded Monica most. She could jeer 
ruelly. 

** Jolly good saddle,”’ said Jack. 

** Mighty little of it,’ said Len. 

** What’s wrong with it, Tom? ” said Jack. 

** Slithery. No knee-pads, saddle-bags, strap-holder, 

scooped seat, or any sortta comfort. It’s a whale, on the 
wrong side.”’ 
_ Lennie closely examined the London ticket. The unpack- 
ng continued in silence, under Tom’s majestic eye. Whip, 
yellow horse-rug, bridle, leathers, a heavy bar bit with 
louble rings and curb, saddle cloths, reins, extra special 
jlue-and-gold girths wrapped in tissue paper, nickel cross 
owell jockey spurs, and glittering steel stirrup-irons. Cord 
yreeches, assam silk coat, white water-proof linen stocks, 
eather gaiters, and a pair of leather gauntlets completed 
he amazing disclosure. It was all a mighty gift from one 
f the unforgiven aunts. 

Half way through the unpacking Tom gave a groan and 
valked away; but walked back. Og and Magog stole the 
addle, slung it across a bar, and slid off and on rapturously. 
fonica was laughing at him disagreeably: strange and 
rutal, as if she hated him: rather like Easu. And Lennie 
vas tittering with joy. 

‘Oh, Og! Here! Y’re missin’ it. Leave that hog’s 
ack saddle, No. 1 Grade—picked material—hand forged— 
ree mounted, guaranteed—a topper off; see this princess 
alfrey bridle for you, rosettes ornamented, periwinkle an’ 
ll. An’, oh, look you! a canary belly-band f’r Dada 

3 

2 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

t’strap round th’ heifer’s neck when she gets first prize at 
the Royal York show. Look at that crush-bone cage to 
put round Stampede’s mouth when the niggers catches 
him again. Oh, Lor’, oh, my 32 

‘* Shut up! ’? said Tom abruptly, catching the boy by 
the back of his pants and tossing him out of the barn. 
** Now, roll up y’r bluey ’—meaning the new rug, which 
was yellow. ‘* Fix them stirrup leathers, take the bridle off 
that bit an’ we’ll find you something decent to put the reins 
on. An’ kick th’ rest t’gether. What a gear. Glad it’s 
you, not me, as has got to ride that leather, me boy. But © 
ride on’t y’ll have to, for there’s nought else. Now, 
Monica, close down that mirth of yours. You’re not asked 
for it.” 

‘* Let brotherly love continue,’”’ said Monica spitefully. 
** Wonder if it will, even unto camp.” 

She went, leaving Jack feeling suddenly tired. 

99 

HAP: VII. OUT BACK AND SOME LETTERS 
i 

ACK was absolutely happy, in camp with Tom. Perhaps 
1e most completely happy time in his life. He had escaped 
1e strange, new complications that life was weaving round 
im. Yet he had not left the beloved family. He was 
ith Tom : who, after all, was the one that mattered most. 
‘om was the growing trunk of the tree. 

All real living hurts as well as fulfils. Happiness comes 
hen we have lived and have a respite for sheer forgetting. 
[appiness, in the vulgar sense, is just a holiday experience. 
he life-long happiness lies in being used by life; hurt by 
fe, driven and goaded by life, replenished and overjoyed 
ith life, fighting for life’s sake. That is real happiness. 
o the undergoing, a large part of it is pain. But the end 

like Jack’s camping expedition, a time of real happiness. 

Perhaps death, after a life of real courage, is like a happy 
amping expedition in the unknown, before a new start. 

It was spring in Western Australia, and a wonder of 
elicate blueness, of frail, unearthly beauty. The earth was 
ill of weird flowers, star-shaped, needle-pointed, fringed, 
sarlet, white, blue, a whole world of strange flowers. Like 
eing in a new Paradise from which man had not been cast 
at. 

The trees in the dawn, so ghostly still. The scent of 
lossoming eucalyptus trees : the scent of burning eucalyp- 
is leaves and sticks in the camp fire. Trailing blossoms 
et with dew; the scrub after the rain; the bitter-sweet 
agrance of fresh-cut timber. 

And the sounds! Magpies calling, parrots chattering, 
range birds flitting in the renewed stillness. Then kan- 
iroos calling to one another out of the frail, paradisal 
stance. And the birr! of crickets in the heat of the day. 
nd the sound of axes, the voices of men, the crash of 
lling timber. The strange slobbering talk of the blacks! 
he mysterious night coming round the camp fire. 

Red gum everywhere! Fringed leaves dappling, the 
owing new sun coming through, the large, feathery, 

93 

4% THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

honey-sweet blossoms flowering in clumps, the hard, rough- 
marked, red-bronze trunks rising like pillars of burnt copper, 
or lying sadly felled, giving up the ghost. Everywhere — 
scattered the red gum, making leaves and herbage under- 
neath seem bestrewed with blood. 

And it was spring : the short, swift, fierce, flower-strange — 
spring of Western Australia, in the month of August. 

Then evening came, and the small aromatic fire was 
burning amid the felled trees. Tom stood, hands on hips. 
giving directions, while the blackened billy-can hung sus- | 
pended from a cross-bar over the fire. The water bubbling, © 
a handful of tea is thrown in. It sinks. It rises. ‘‘ Bring © 
it off! °? yells Tom. Jack balances the cross-stick, hold- — 
ing the wobbling can, until it rests safely on the ground. 
Then snatching the handle holds the can aloft. Tea is 
made. | 

The clearing gang had a hut with one side for the horses, — 
the other for the men’s sleeping place. Inside were stakes — 
driven into the ground, bearing cross-bars with sacks © 
fastened across, for beds. On the partition-poles hung the ~ 
wardrobes, and in a couple of boxes lay the treasures, in © 
shape of watches, knives, razors, looking-glasses, etc., safe 
from the stray thief. But the men were always tormenting © 
one another, hiding away a razor, or a strop, or a beloved - 
watch. 

Just in front of this shelter the camp oven had been 
built, for baking damper and roasting meat, and to one 
side was the well, a very important necessity, built by 
contract, timbered, and provided with winch, rope and 
bucket. 

All around, the bush was dense like a forest, much denser 
than usual. The slim-girthed trees grew in silent array, 
all alike and all asleep, with undergrowth of scrub and fern — 
and flowers, banksia short and sturdy with its cone-shaped, 
red-yellow flowers like fairy lamps, and here and there a 
perfect wattle, or mimosa tree, with its pale gold flowers 
like little balls of sun-dust, and here and there sandal-wood — 
trees. Jack never forgot the beauty of the first bushes and — 
trees of mimosa, in a damp place in the wild bush. — 
Occasionally there was still an immense karri tree, or a 
jarrah slightly smaller, though this was not the region for 
these giants. a 

OUT BACK AND SOME LETTERS 95 

And far away, unending, upslope and downslope and 
ock-face, one far unending dimness of these changeless 
rees, going on and on without variation, open enough to 
et one see ahead and all around, yet dense enough to form 
, monotony and a sense of helplessness in the mind, a sense 
f timelessness. Strongly the gang impressed on Jack that 
ie must not go even for five minutes’ walk out of sight of 
he clearing. The weird silent timelessness of the bush 
mpressed him as nothing else ever did, in its motionless 
loofness. ‘* What would my father mean, out here? ’? he 
aid to himself. And it seemed as if his father and his 
ather’s world and his father’s gods withered and went to 
lust at the thought of this bush. And when he saw one 
f the men on a red sorrel horse galloping like a phantom 
way through the dim, red-trunked, silent trees, followed 
yy another man on a black horse; and when he heard their 
ar, far-off yelling Coo-ee! or a shot as they fired at a dingo 
r a kangaroo, he felt as if the old world had given him up 
rom the womb, and put him into a new weird grey-blue 
aradise, where man has to begin all over again. That 
vas his feeling : that the human way of life was all to be 
egun over again. 

The home that he and Tom made for themselves seemed 
o be a matter of forked sticks. If you wanted an upright 
f any sort, drive a forked stick into the ground, or dig it 
1, fork-end up. If you wanted a cross bar, lay a stick or 
pole across two forks. Down the sides of your house you 
7ove brushwood. For the roof you plaited the long, 
tringy strips of gum-bark. With a couple of axes and a 
ack-knife they built a house fit for a savage king. Then 
hey went out and made a kitchen, with pegs hammered 
ito the bole of a tree, for the frying-pans, the sawn sur- 
ace of a large stump for a table, and logs to lie back against. 

North of the clearing lay the nucleus of a settlement, with 
ub, sawmill, store, one or two homes, and a farm or two 
ut-lying. And as they cleared the land, the teamsters 
arried the best of the timber on jinkers, or dragged it with 
hains hitched to bullock or horse teams, to the mill. But 
illing was expensive, and most of the wood was hand- 
lit. Jack learned to cut palings and poles, and then to 
slit slabs that would serve to build slab houses, or sheds. 
1 the spare time they would have little hunts of wallabies 

96 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

or bandicoots or bungarras, or boody-rats; or they would — 
snare opossums or stalk dingoes. ) 
But because he was really away in the wild, Jack felt he 
must write letters home. So it is. The letters from home 
hardly interested him at all. The thin sheets with their 
interminable writing were almost repulsive to him. He 
would stow them in the barn and leave them for days with- 
out reading them: he was “ busy.’? And sometimes the 
mice nibbled them, and in that way read them for him. 
He was a little ashamed of this indifference. But he 
noticed other men were the same. When they got these 
endless thin sheets from home, covered with ink of words, 
they stowed them away in a kind of nausea, without read- 
ing more than a few lines. And the people at home had 
such a pitying admonishing tone: like the young naval 
lieutenant who made friends with the black aborigines by — 
promptly shaving them. And then letters were not profit-_ 
able. A stamp home cost sixpence, and a letter took about 
two months on the way. It was always four months before 
you got an answer. And after you’d written to your mother 
about something really important—like money—and waited 
impatiently several months for the answer, when it came 
it never mentioned the money and made a mountain of a 
cold in your head which you couldn’t remember having had. 
What was the good of people at home writing : ‘* We are 
having true November weather, very cold, with fog and 
sleet”? when you were grilling under a fierce sun and the 
rush of the intense antipodal summer. What was the good 
of it all? All dull as ditchwater, and no use to anybody. 
He had promised his mother he would write once a week. 
And his mother was his mother, he wanted to keep his. 
promise. Which he did for a month. But in camp, he 
didn’t even know what day it was, hardly what month : 
though the mail did come once a fortnight, via the saw- 
mill. He took out his mother’s letter. ‘* You said in your 
letter from Colombo that you were sneezing. Do take care 
in Australia in the rainy season. Ask not to be sent out 
in the rain. I recollect the climate, always sunny and bright 
between showers. That is what we miss so much now we 
are back in England, the sunny skies. Of course, I do no 
want you to be a mollycoddle, but I know the climate of 
Western Australia, it is very trying, particularly so in the 

) 
* 

OUT BACK AND SOME LETTERS 97 

ainy season. I do hope and pray you are on a good 
tation with a good woman who will see you are not out 
etting drenched in those cold downpours—— ” 

Jack groaned aloud, astonished that his mother had got 
) far from her own early days. How in the name of heaven 
ad he come to mention sneezing? Never again. He would 
ot even say he was camping. 

Dear Mother, 

‘IT am quite well and like farming out 
ere all right. Old Mrs Ellis knew your father. She says 
e cut off her leg. I hope Father has got rid of his Liver, 
ou said he was taking variolettes for it. I hope they have 
one him good. Mr Ellis says a cockles pill and a ten-mile 
alk will cure anything. He says it would cure a pig’s 
ver. But when old Tim, the half-caste, tried to swallow 
1e pill it came out of the gap where his front tooth used 
» be, so Mrs Ellis gave him a teaspoonful of sulphur, which 
e said would make him blow up. But it didn’t. I think 
was more likely to blow up because she gave me a big 
aspoon of paraffin which they call kerosene out here. She 
a fine doctor, far better than the medical man who lodges 
ere, whose name is Rackett. 

**T hope you are quite well. Give my love to all my 
ants and sister and father. I hope they are all quite 
ell——. ”” 

Jack hurried this letter in confusion into its envelope, and 
yent sixpence on it, knowing perfectly well it was all 
mnsense. 

il 

There was a pause in the clearing work, after the early 
9t spell, and word from Lennie that there was to be a 
yngaroo hunt, and they were to come down. An old man 
yngaroo, a king of boomers, had been seen around, hoof- 
arks, and paw-pad trails near the pool. 

They met at dawn, by the well : Easu with two kangaroo 
yunds, like greyhounds, on leash; Lennie peacocking on an 
ormous hairy-heeled roadster; a ‘* superior? young 
ueenslander who had been sent west because his father 

D 

98 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

found him unmanageable and who wasn’t a bad sort, though 
his nickname was Pink-eye Percy; Lennie’s ‘‘ Cornseed ”” 
friend, Joe Low; Alec Rice, the young fellow who was 
courting Grace; Ross Ellis, and Herbert, who was well 
again, then Tom on a grey stallion; and Jack, in riding 
breeches and gaiters and clean shirt, astride the famous 
Lucy. 

mean was born in the saddle, he rode easy on his big 
roan. He waved his hat excitedly at the group, and led 
off into the scrub, through the slender, white-barked trees 
of the open bush. The others rode fast in ragged order, 
among the thin, open trees. Jack let Lucy pick her way, 
sometimes ahead, sometimes in sight of the others. They 
rode in silence. 

Then they came out unexpectedly into low, grey-green 
scrub without trees, and crisp grey-white soil that crumbled 
under the hoofs of the horses. There they were, all out 
in the blue and gold light, with billows of blue-green scrub 
running away to right and left, towards a rise in front. 

‘* Hold hard there! ’? sang out Easu, holding up the 
whip in his right hand. He held the reins loosely in his 
left, and with the reins, the leash on which the dogs were 
pulling. Dogs and horse he held in that left hand. 

‘*T want y’ t’ divide. Tom, y’ lead on a zigzag course 
down north. Ross, you work south. And this—this fox- 
hunting gentleman—— ”? He paused, and Jack felt himself 
going scarlet. 

** Says thank ye, an’ hopes he’s a gentleman, since y’ve 
mentioned it,’’ put in Lennie, in his mild, inconsequential 
way. 

There was a laugh against Red : for there was no mistak- 
ing him for a gentleman, in any sense of the word. How- 
ever, he was too much excited by the hunt to 
persevere. 

The fellows were stowing away their pipes in their 
pockets, and buttoning their coats, ready for the dash. 
Kasu, thrilled by his own unquestioned leadership, gave the 
orders. All listened closely. 

** Call up! Call up! Follow my leader and find the trail. 
Biggest boomer ever ye—— ”? 

** Come! ” cried Tom. 

§* And I’m here! ”’ cried Lennie, 

OUT BACK AND SOME LETTERS 99 

Away they went into the gully and through the scrub, rid- 
ng light but swift, in different directions. 

** Let go th’ mare’s head,’’ yelled Tom over his shoulder. 
* We’re coming to timber, an’ she’d best pilot herself.’ 

** Right! *? cried Jack. 

** Don’t ye kill Lucy,’ shrieked Lennie. ‘‘ Because me 
1eart’s set on her. Keep y’ hands an’ y’ heel off y’ horse, 
in’ y’ head on y’ shoulders.”’ 

The bolt of horsemen through the bush sent parrots 
creaming savagely over the feathery tree-tops. Jack let 
uucy have her way. She was light and swift and sure- 
ooted, old steeple-chaser that she was. The slim straight 
rees slipped past, the motion of the horse surging her own 
vay was exhilarating to a degree. 

But Tom had heard something : not the parrots, not the 
oft thud of the following horses. He must have heard 
vith his sixth sense: perhaps the warning call of the 
yoomer. With face set and eyes burning he swung and 
irged his horse in a new direction. And like men coming 
n to supper from different directions, the handful of horse- 
nen came swish-swish through the scrub, toward a centre. 
_Lucy pricked one ear. Perhaps she too had heard some- 
hing. Then she gathers herself together and goes like the 
vind after the twinkling grey quarters of Tom’s stallion. 
fer excitement mounts to Jack’s head, and he rides like a 
rojectile on the wind. 

Again Tom was reining in, pulling his horse almost on to 
‘ss haunches. And Jack must hold like a vise with his knees, 
or Lucy was pawing the air, frantic at being held up. 

*© Coo-ee ! ’? came Tom’s clear tenor, ringing through the 
ush. ‘* Coo-ee! Coo-ee! Coo-ee! ’? A marvellous sound, 
nd Lucy pawing and dancing among the scrub. 

** Coo-ee! Coo-ee! Coo-ee! ” 

It seemed to Jack this sound in the bush was like God. 
ike the call of the heroic soul seeking its body. Like the 
all of the bodiless soul, sounding through the immense 
ead spaces of the dim, open bush, strange and heroic and 
uhuman. The deep long ‘‘ coo ’’ mastering the silence, 
1e high summons of the long “ eee.’’ The ‘‘ coo ”’ rising 
ore imperious, and then the “ eee! ” thrilling and hold- 
g aloft. Then the swift lift and fall : ‘‘ Coo-eee ! Coo-eee ! 
oo-eee! ”’ till the air rocks with the fierce pulse, as if a 

100 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

new heart were in motion, and the shriek and scream of the 
eee!’ rips in strange flashes into the far-off, far-off 
consciousness. 

Much stranger than the weird yelp of the Red Indians’ 
war-cry was this rocking, ripping noise in the vast grey 
bush. 

The others were coming in from right and left, like silent 
phantoms through the sunny evanescence of the bush, rid- 
ing hard. Tom is displaced by Red. A few quick words 
given and taken. Easu has unleashed the dogs, slashed the 
long lash with a resounding crack in the air. The long lean ~ 
dogs stretch out—uncannily long, from tip to tip. Tom 
lets go and away. Jack lets go and away, and uncon- 
sciously his hand goes down for the bow of the slippery 
saddle. [ 

Lucy had the situation well in hand, which was more 
than Jack had. Thud-thud. Thud-thud. Thud-thud! Up, 
fly ! Crash !—Hello?—All right. A beauty! a dream of a 
jumper, this Lucy. But Jack wished his seat weren’t so 
slippery. 

They were turning into bigger timber: trees further 
apart, but much bigger, and with hanging limbs. ‘ Look 
out! Look out f’? y’ head! ”? Jack kept all his eyes open, 
till he knew by second sight when to duck. He watched 
the twinkling hind quarters of Tom’s grey, among the trees. 

There was a short yapping of the dogs. Lucy was going 
like the wind. Jack was riding light, but she was beginning 
to breathe heavily. No longer so young as she was. How 
hot the sun was, in the almost shadeless bush. And what 
was leading, where was the ’roo? Jack strained his eyes 
almost out of his head, but could see nothing. 

They were on the edge of the hills, and the country 
changed continually. No sooner were you used to scrub 
than it was thin trees. No sooner did you know that Lucy 
could manipulate thin trees, than you were among big 
timber, with more space and dangerous boughs. Then it 
was salty paper-bark country—and back to forest again : 
close trees, fallen logs, boody-rat holes and sudden out- 
cropping of dark-brown, ancient-looking rocks with little 
flat crags, to be avoided. But the other men were going full 
speed, and full speed you must follow, watching with all 
your eyes, and riding light, and swept along in the run. 

OUT BACK AND SOME LETTERS ‘101 

Up! That was over an elephant log, and down went a 
man at Tom’s heels. It was Grace’s young man. No 
matter. Jack was going to look over his shoulder when 
Tom again shouted “‘ Up! ”, and Jack and Lennie followed 
over the fallen timber. 

Suddenly they were in a great black blanket of burnt 
country, clear of undergrowth or scrub, with skeletons of 
black, charred trees standing gruesome. And there, right 
under their noses, leapt three kangaroos, swerving across. 
The baby one, Joey, was first, lithe, light, apparently not 
a bit afraid, but wildly excited; then the mother doe, all 
out, panting, anxious-eyed, stiffly jumping; and behind, 
a long way, with the dogs like needles coming after, ran the 
Old Man boomer; a great big chap making mighty springs 
and in varying directions. Yes, he was making a rear-guard 
action for the safety of his mate and spawn. Leaping with 
preat leaps, as if to the end of the world, leaning forward, 
his little hands curled in, his immense massive tail straight 
out behind him like some immense living rudder. And 
seeming perfectly calm, almost indifferent. With steady, 
easy, enormous springs he went this way, that way, de- 
touring, but making for the same ridge his doe and Joey 
had passed. 

The charred ground proved treacherous, holes, smoulder- 
ng trunks of trees, smouldering hollows where trunks had 
yeen. Soon two horses were running loose, with men limp- 
ng after them. But on went the rest. Thud and crackle 
went the hoofs of the galloping horses in the charcoal, as 
ifter the dogs, after the ’roos they followed, kicking up 
Jouds of grey ash-mounds and red-burnt earth, jumping 
uddenly over the still-glowing logs. : 

The chase paused on the ridge, for the drop was sudden 
ind steep, with rocks and boulders cropping out. Down 
lid the dogs in a cloud, yelping hard, making Easu at all 
osts turn to try the right, Tom to try the left. 

They dropped awkwardly and joltingly down, between 
ocks, in loose charcoal powder and loose earth. 

s6 Ain’t that ole mare a marvel, Jack!’ said Tom. 
‘This nag is rode stiff, all-under my knees.” 

Jack’s face was full of wild joy. The stones rattled, the 
nen stood back from the stirrups, the horses seemed to be 
iving. But Lucy was light and sure. 

12 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Down they jolted into the gully. Easu came up swear- 
ing—lost the quarry and dogs, Jack pulled Lucy over a 
boulder to get out of Easu’s way: a thing he shouldn’t 
have done. Crack! went his head against a branch, and 
Jack was bruising himself on the ground before he knew 
where he was. 

But he was on his feet again, intently chasing Lucy. 

‘‘ Here y’are! ”? It was Herbert who leaned down, picked 
up the reins of the scampering mare, and threw them to 
Jack. Jack’s face was bleeding. Lennie came up and 
opened his mouth in dismay. But somebody coo-eed, and. 
the chase was too good to lose. They are all gone. 

Jack stiffly mounted, to find himself blinded by trickling 
blood. Lucy once more was stirring between his knees, 
stretching herself out, and he had to let her go, fumbling 
meanwhile for a handkerchief which he pushed under his 
hat-brim, and pulled down the old felt firmly. Wiping his 
eyes with his sleeve, he found the wound staunched by the 
impromptu dressing. 

The scene had completely changed. Lucy was whisking 
him around the side of a huge dark boulder. They were in 
the dry bed of the gully, on stones. 

Lucy stopped dead, practically on her haunches, but her 
impetus carried her over, and she was slithering down into 
a loose gravelly hole. Jack jumped off, to find himself 
face to face with the biggest boomer kangaroo he had ever 
imagined. It was the Old Man, sitting there at the bottom 
of the gravel-hole, in the hollow of a barren she-oak, his 
absurd paws drooping dejectedly before him and his silly 
dribbling under-jaw working miserably. 

** He’s trying to get the wind up for another fly,”’ thought 
Jack, standing there as dazed as the ’roo itself, and feeling 
himself very much in the same condition. Then he won- 
dered where the doe and Joey were, and where were all the 
other hunters. He hoped they wouldn’t come. Lucy 
stood by, as calm as a cucumber. 

Jack took a step nearer the Old Man ’roo, and instantly 
brought up his fists as the animal doubled its queer front 
paws and hit out wildly at him. He wanted to hit back. 

‘Mind the claws!” called somebody, with a quiet 
chuckle, from above. 

Jack looked round, and there was Lennie and the heavy 

OUT BACK AND SOME LETTERS 108 

horse, the horse head-down, tail up, feet spread, like a 
salamander lizard on a wall, slithering down the grade into 
the hole, Lennie erect in the stirrups. Jack gave a loud 
augh. 

And the Old Man, either possessed of a sense of humour 
or terrified to death, seized the nearest thing at hand— 
which happened to be Jack; grabbed him, gripped him, 
iugged him in desperate fury, and tried to get up his huge, 
lail-like hind leg, to rip up the enemy with the toe claw. 
Ine stroke of that claw, and Jack was done. 

In terror, anger, surprise, Jack jumped at the kangaroo’s 
hroat, as far as the animal’s grip would let him. The ’roo, 
rying all the time to use his hind legs, upset, so that the 
‘wo went rolling on the gravel together. Jack was in horrid 
yroximity to the weird grey fur, clutched by the weird- 
melling, violent animal, in a sort of living earthquake, as 
he kangaroo writhed and bounced to use his great, oar-like 
ind legs, and Jack clung close and hit at the creature’s 
ody, hit, hit, hit. It was like hitting living wire bands. 
jomebody was roaring, or else it was his own consciousness 
houting : ‘* Don’t let the hind claw get to work.’’ How 
orrible a wild thing was, when you were mixed up with it! 
“he terrible nausea of its powerful, furry, violent-blooded 
ontact. Its unnatural, almost obscene power! Its differ- 
nt consciousness! Its overpowering smell ! 

The others were coming back up the stream-bed, jumping 
he rocks, towards this place where Jack had fallen and 
ennie had come down after him. Esau was calling off 
he dogs, ferociously. Tom rushed in and got the ’roo by 
he head. 

Lennie was lying on the gravel laughing so hard he 
ouldn’t stand on his legs. 

ili 
Jack wrote a letter to his old friend, the vet. with the 
weakness,’’ in England. 
** We arc out at a place back of beyond, at a place called 
um Tree Valley, so I take up my pen to write as I have 
me. Tom Ellis is here bossing the clearing gang, and he 

as a lot of aunts, whom he rightly calls ants. One of them 
as a place near here, and we go to dinner on Sundays, and 

14° THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

to help when wanted. We stayed all last week and helped 
muster in the sheep for the shearing. We rode all round 
their paddock boundaries and rounded in the sheep that had 
strayed and got lost. They had run off from the main— 
about a score of flocks—and were feeding in little herds 
and groups miles apart. It’s a grand sight to see them all 
running before you, their woolly backs bobbing up and down 
like brown water. I can tell you I know now the meaning 
of the Lost Sheep, and the sort of joy you have in cursing 
him when you find him. 

‘‘ You told me to let you know if I heard any first-hand 
news of gold finding. Well, I haven’t heard much. But a 
man rode into Greenlow’s—that’s Tom’s aunt—place on 
Sunday, and he said to Tom: ‘ Are those the Stirling 
Ranges?’ Tom said: ‘ No, they’re not. They’re the 
Darling Ranges.’ He said : ‘ Are you sure? ’—and got very 
excited. The black-fellows came and stood by and they 
were vastly amused, grinning and looking away. He got 
out a compass and said : ‘ You are wrong, Mr. Ellis, they 
are the Stirling Ranges.’ Tom said: ‘ Call ’°em what you 
choose, chum. We call ’em Darling—and them others 
forty mile south-west we call the Stirling.” The man 
groaned. Minnie Greenlow called us to come in to tea, and 
he came along as well. His manners were awful. He fid- 
getted and pushed his hat back on his head and leant forward 
and spat in the fire at a long shot, and tipped his cup so that 
his tea swobbed in his saucer, then drank it out of the saucer. 
Then he pushed the cake back when handed to him, and 
leaned his head on his arms on the table and groaned. 
You’d have thought he was drunk, but he wasn’t, because 
he said to Tom: ‘ Are ye sure them’s not the Stirling 
Ranges? I can’t drink my tea for thinkin’ about it.? And 
Tom said: * Sure.’—and then he seemed more distracted 
than ever, and blew through his teeth and mopped his head 
and te upset s a degree. ‘ 

en we had finished tea and we all went outsi 
said : © Well, I think I'll get back now. It’s no ae 
the compass turns you down. I’ll never find it.? We didn’t 
know what he was talking about, but when he’d got into 
his buggy and drove away the blacks told us: Master 
lookin’ for big lump yellow dirt. He think that very big 
fish, an’ he bury him longa time. Comin’ back no finda 

OUT BACK AND SOME LETTERS 105 

him.’ While the boys were talking, who should shout to 
have the slip rail let down but this same stranger, and he 
drove right past us and away down the long paddock. When 
he got to the gate there he turned round and came back and 
drew up by us muttering, and said : ‘ Where did you tell 
me the Stirling Ranges were? ’ Tom pointed it out, and he 
said : ‘ So long! ’ and drove off. We didn’t see him again. 
We didn’t want to. But Tom is almost sure he found a 
lump of gold some time back and buried it for safety’s sake 
and now can’t find it. 

‘** That’s all the gold I’ve heard about out here. 

** Now. for news. One day I went out with tucker to old 
Jack Moss. He’s keeping a bit of land warm for the Green- 
lows, shepherds sheep down there, about forty miles from 
everywhere. He talked and talked, and when he didn’t talk 
he didn’t listen to me. He looked away over the scrub and 
sucked his cutty. They say he’s hoarded wealth but I 
didn’t see any signs. He was in tatters and wore rags round 
his feet for boots, which were like a gorilla’s. Another day 
we had a kangaroo hunt. We all chased an Old Man for 
miles and at last he turned and faced us. I was so close 
[ had no time to think and was on him before I had time 
fo pull up. I jumped to the ground and grappled, and we 
rolled over and over down the gully. They couldn’t shoot 
him because of me, but they fought him off and killed him. 
And then we saw his mate standing near among the stones, 
mn her hind legs, with her front paws hanging like a help- 
ess woman. Then Tom, who was tying up my cuts, called 
gut : * Look at her pouch! It’s plum full of little nippers ! ’ 
and so it was. You never saw such a trick. So we let her 
30. But we got the Old Man. 

‘‘ Another day we rode round the surveyed area here, 
which Mr Ellis is taking up for the twins Og and Magog. 
[ asked Tom a lot of questions about taking up land. I 
shink I should like to try. Perhaps if I do you will come 
gut. You would like the horses. There are quite a lot wild. 
We hunt them in and pick out the best and use them. 
[That’s how lots of people raise their horse-flesh. They are 
valled brumbies. Excuse me for not ending properly, the 
nailman is coming along, he comes once a fortnight. We 
ire lucky. 

66 Jack.” 

106° THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

iv 
To his friend, the pugilist, he wrote : 

°° Dear Pug, 

‘¢ You ask me what I think about sending Ned 
out here. Well, there’s no opening that I can see for a gym. 
But work, that’s another question, there’s more than 
enough. I am at work at a place called Gum Tree Valley, 
clearing, but we came up to Tom’s Aunt’s place last week, 
to help, and we’ve been shearing. At least I haven’t. I’ve 
been the chap who tars. You splash tar on like paint when 
the shearers make a mis-fire and gash the poor brutes and 
curse you. Lord, don’t they curse, if the boss isn’t round. 
He’s got a grey beard and dribbles on it, and the flies get 
caught in it and buzz as if it was a spider’s web. He 
makes everyone work from morn till night like the Devil. 
Gosh, if it wasn’t that it is only for a short spell, I’d get. 
Don’t you worry, up-country folk know how to get your 
tucker’s worth out of you all right. To-day, the Sabbath, 
we had a rest. I don’t think! We washed our clothes. 
Talk about a goodly pile! Only a rumour. For the old 
man fetched along his vests and pants, and greasy overalls 
and aprons, his socks, his slimy hanks and night-shirt. 
Imagine our horror. He’s Tom’s Aunt’s husband, and has 
no sons, only herds of daughters, so we had to do it. We 
scrubbed *em with horse-brushes on the stones. Jinks, 
but I rubbed some holes in ’em! 

** But cheer up. I’m not grumbling. I like getting 
experience as it is called. 

** I mean to take up land and have a place of my own 
some day, then you and Ned could visit me and we could 
have some fun with the gloves. Lennie says I’m like a 
kangaroo shaping and punching at nothing, so I got a cow’s 
bladder and blew it up and tied it to a branch, and I batter 
on it. Must have something to hit. You know kangaroos 
shape up and make a punch. They are pretty doing that. 
We have a baby one, Joey, and it takes a cup in its little 
hands and drinks. Honest to God it’s got hands, you never 
saw such a thing. 

** Kindest regards to your old woman and Ned. Lord 
only knows how I’ve missed you, and pray that some day 

OUT BACK AND SOME LETTERS 107 

I will be fortunate enough to meet you again. Until then 

** Farewell. 

‘* A Merry Xmas and a Glad New Year, by the time you 
get this. Think of me in the broiling heat battling with 
sheep, their Boss, and the flies, and you’ll think of me 
true. 

*‘ Ever your sincere friend, 

s* Jack.” 

v 

As the time for returning from camp drew near, Jack 
dwelt more and more on this question of the future—of 
taking up land. He wished so often that life could always 
be a matter of camping, land-clearing, kangaroo hunting, 
shearing, and generally messing about. But deep under- 
neath himself he knew it couldn’t: not for him at least. 
Plenty of fellows lived all their life messing from camp to 
camp and station to station. But himself—sooner or later 
he would have to bite on to something. He’d have to plunge 
into that cold water of responsible living, some time or 
other. 

He asked Tom about it. 

** You must make up y’ mind what you want to go in 
for, cattle, sheep, horses, wheat, or mixed farming like 
us,’? said Tom. ‘‘ Then you can go out to select. But it’s 
no good before you know what you want.”’ 

Jack was surprised to find how little information he got 
from the men he mixed with. They knew their jobs: 
teamsters knew about teams, and jobs on the miil; the 
timber workers knew hauling and sawing; township people 
knew trading; the general hands knew about hunting and 
bush-craft and axe handling; and farmers knew what was 
under their nose, but nothing of the laws of the land, or 
how he himself was to get a start. 

At last. he found a small holder who went out as a hired 
man after he had put in the seed on his own land. And 
this, apparently, was how Jack would have to start. The 
man brought out various grubby Government papers, and 
handed them over. 

Jack had a bad time with them: Government reports, 

1008 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

blue books, narratives of operations. But he swotted 
grimly. And he made out so much : 

1. Any reputable immigrant over 21 years could procure 
fifty acres of unimproved rural Crown land open for selec- 
tion ; if between the ages of 14 and 21, twenty-five acres. 

2. Such land must be held by “‘ occupation certificate,”’ 
deemed transferable only in case of death, etc. 

8. The occupation certificate would be exchanged for a 
grant at the end of five years, or before that time, provid- 
ing the land had been enclosed with a substantial fence 
and at least a quarter cultivated. But if at the end of the 
five years the above conditions, or any of them, had not 
been observed, the lots should revert to the Crown. 

4. Country land was sub-divided into agricultural and 
pastoral, either purchasable at the sum of 10s. an acre, or 
leased : the former for eight years at the nominal sum of 
1s. an acre, with the right of purchase, the latter for one 
year at annual rental of 2s. per hundred acres, with pre- 
sumptive renewal; or five pounds per 1000 acres with 
rights. 

Jack got all this into his mind, and at once loathed it. 
He loathed the thought of an ‘* occupation certificate.” 
He loathed the thought of being responsible to the Govern- 
ment for a piece of land. He almost loathed the thought 
of being tied to land at all. He didn’t want to own things; 
especially land, that is like a grave to you as soon as you 
do own it. He didn’t want to own anything. He simply 
couldn’t bear the thought of being tied down. Even his 
own unpacked luggage he had detested. 

But he had started in with this taking-up land business, 
so he thought he’d try an easy way to get through with it. 

“* Dear Father, 

** T could take up land on my own account 
now if you sent a few hundred pounds for that purpose, 
per Mr George. He would pay the deposit and arrange 
it for me. I have my eye on one or two improved farms 
falling idle shortly down this Gum Valley district, which 
is very flourishing. When they fall vacant on account of 

OUT BACK AND SOME LETTERS 109 

settlers dropping them, they can be picked up very 
cheap. 
** I hope you are quite well, as I am at present. 

** Your affec. son, 
s¢ JACK.” 

Jack spent his sixpence on this important document, and 
forgot all about it. And in the dead end of the hot summer, 
just in the nick of time, he got this answer. 

Sea View Terrace, 
Bournemouth, 
2/2/83. 
** Dear Jack, ; 

** Thank you for your most comprehensive 
letter of 80/11/82. It is quite impossible for me to raise 
several hundreds of pounds, or for the matter of that, one 
hundred pounds, in this off-hand manner. I don’t want to 
be hard on you, but we want you to be independent as soon 
as possible. We have so many expenses, and I have no 
intention of sinking funds in the virgin Australian wild, 
at any rate until I see a way clear to getting some return 
for my money, in some form of safe interest accruing to 
you at my death. You must not expect to run before you 
can walk. Stay where you are and learn what you can till 
your year is up, and then we will see about a jackeroo’s 
job, at which, your mother tells me, you will earn £1 a 
week, instead of our having to pay it for you. 

66 We all send felicitations. 

** Your affectionate father, 
*° G. B. Grant.” 

But this is running ahead. It is not yet Christmas, 1882. 

CHAP: VIII. HOME FOR CHRISTMAS 
i 

Iv was a red hot Christmas that year—’ot, ’ot, ’ot, all day 
long. Good Lord, how hot it was !—till blessed evening. 
Sun-down brought blessings in its trail. After six o’clock 
you would sense the breeze coming from the sea. Whisper- 
ing, sighing, hesitating. Then, puff! there it was. Delicious, 
sweet, it seemed to save one’s life. 

It had been splendid out back, but it was nice to get 
home again and sit down to regular meals, have clean 
clothes and sheets to one’s bed. To have your ironing and 
cooking done for you, and sit down to dinner at a big table 
with fresh, hailstorm-patterned tablecloth on it. There 
was a sense almost of glory in a big, white, glossy hailstorm 
table-cloth. It lifted you up. 

Mr Ellis had taken Gran away for the time, so the place 
seemed freer, noisier. There was nothing to keep quiet ~ 
for. It was holiday—pinkie, the natives called it; the 
fierce mid-summer Christmas. Everybody was allowed to 
** spell ”? a great deal. 

Tom and Jack were roasted like Red Indians, rather un- 
couth, and more manly. At first they seemed rather 
bumptious, thinking themselves very much men. Jack 
could now ride his slippery saddle in fine style, and handle 
a rope or an axe, and shoot straight. He knew jarrah, 
karri, eucalyptus, sandal, wattle, peppermint, banksia, she- 
oaks, pines, paper-back and gum trees; he had learned to 
tan a kangaroo hide, pegging it on to a tree; he had looked 
far into the wilderness, and seen the beyond, and been 
seized with a desire to explore it; he had made excursions 
over “* likely places,”? with hammer and pick, looking for 
gold. He had hunted and brought home meat, had trapped 
and destroyed many native cats and dingoes. He had lain 
awake at night and listened to the more-porks, and in the 
early morning had heard with delight the warbling of the 
timeline and thickhead thrushes that abounded round the 
camp, mingled with the noises of magpies, tits, and wrens. 
He had watched the manceuvres of willy-wagtails, and of a 

110 

HOME FOR CHRISTMAS 111 

brilliant variety of birds : weavers, finches, parrots, honey- 
eaters, and pigeons. But the banded wrens and blue-birds 
were his favourites in the bush world. 

Well, on such a hero as this, the young home-hussies 
Monica and Grace had better not look too lightly. He was 
so grand they could hardly reach him with a long pole. 

** An’ how many emus did y’ see? ’’ asked Og. For 
lately at Wandoo they had had a plague of emus, which 
got into the paddocks and ate down the sheeps’ food-stuff, 
and then got out again by running at the fences and bash- 
ing a way through. 

Jack had never seen one. 

** Never seen an emu!” Even little Ellie shrilled in 
derisive amazement. ‘* Monica} he’s never seen an emu!’? 

Already they had snipped the tip off the high feather he 
had in his cap. 

But he was still a hero, and Lennie followed him round 
like a satellite, while the girls were obviously thrilled at 
having Tom and him back again. They would giggle and 
whisper behind Bow’s back, and wherever he was, they 
were always sauntering out to stand not far off from him. 
So that, of course, their thrill entered also into Jack’s 
veins, he felt a cocky young lord, a young life-master. This 
suited him very well. 

But there was no love-making, of course. They all 
laughed and joked together over the milking and pail- 
carrying and feeding and butter-making and cheese-making 
and everything, and life was a happy delirium. 

They had waited for Tom to come home, to rob the bees. 
Tom hated the bees and they hated him, but he was staunch. 
Veils, bonnets, gloves, gaiters were produced, and off they 
all set, in great joy at their own appearance, with gong, 
fire, and endless laughter. Tom was to direct from a dis- 
tance: he stood afar **‘ Smoking them off.’? Grace and 
Monica worked merrily among the hives, manipulating the 
boxes which held the comb, lifting them on to the milk pans 
to save the honey, and handing the pans to the boys to 
carry in. 

*¢ Oooh,”? yelled Tom suddenly, ‘‘ Oooh! ” 

A cloud of angry bees was round his head. Down went 
his fire-protector—a tin full of smouldering chips—down 
went flappers and bellows as with a shriek he beat the air. 

112 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

The more he beat the darker the venomous cloud. Crippled 
with terror, he ran on shaking legs. The girls and youngsters 
were paralysed with joy. They swarmed after him shrieking 
with laughter. His head was completely hidden by bees, 
but his arms like windmills waved wildly to and fro. He 
dashed into the cubby, but the bees went with him. He 
appeared at the window for a moment, showing a demented 
face, then he jumped out, and the bees with him. Leap- 
ing the drain gap and yelling in terror, he made for the 
house. The bees swung with him and the children after. 
Jack and the girls stood speechless, looking at one another. ~ 
Monica had on man’s trousers with an old uniform buttoned 
close to her neck, workmen’s socks over her shoes and 
trouser-ends, and a Chinaman’s hat with a veil over it, 
netted round her head like a meat-safe. Jack noticed that 
she was funny. Suddenly, somehow, she looked mysterious 
to him, and not just the ordinary image of a girl. Sud- 
denly a new cavern seemed to open before his eyes; the 
mysterious, fascinating cavern of the female unknown. He 
was not definitely conscious of this. But seeing Monica there 
in the long white flannel trousers and the Chinaman’s hat 
meat-safe over her face, something else awoke in him, a 
new awareness of a new wonder. He had but lately stood 
on the inward ranges and looked inland into the blue, vast 
mystery of the Australian interior. And now with another 
opposite vision he saw an opposite mystery opposing him : 
the mystery of the female, the young female there in her 
grotesque garb. 
A new awareness of Monica began to trouble him. 
**Oooh! Oooh! Ma! Ma! Ma!’? Out rushed Tom 
straight from the kitchen door, the bees still with him. 
Straight he dashed to the garden, and to the well in the 
middle. He loosed the windlass and stood on the coping 
screaming while the bucket clanged and clashed to the 
bottom. Then Tom seized the rope, and turning his legs 
round it, slid silently into the hidden, cool, dark depths. 
The children shrieked with bliss, Jack and the girls 
rocked with helpless laughter, convulsed by this last exit. 
The bees were puzzled. They poised buzzbee fashion 
above the well-head, explored the mouth of the shaft, and 
rose again and hovered. Then they began to straggle away. 
They melted into the hot air. 

HOME FOR CHRISTMAS 118 

And now the girls and Jack drew up from the well a raging 
and soaking Tom. Drew him up uncertainly, wobblingly, a 
terrible weight on the straining, creaking windlass. Ma 
and Ellie took him in hand and daubed him a sublime blue : 
like an ancient Briton, Grace said. Then they gave him 
bread and jam and a cup of tea. 

Then occurred another honey-bee tragedy. Ellie, who 
had done nothing at all to the bees, suddenly shrieked 
loudly and ran pelting round screaming: “ I’ve got a bee 
in my head! I’ve got a bee in my head! ’? Monica caught 
and held her, while Jack took the bee, a big drone, out 
of the silky meshes of her honey hair. And as he lifted his 
eyes he met the yellow eyes of Monica. And the two 
exchanged a moment’s look of intimacy and communication 
and secret shame, so that they both went away avoiding 
one another. 

ii 

On New Year’s Eve there was always a foregathering 
of the settlers at the Wandoo homestead. They must fore- 
gather somewhere, and Wandoo was the oldest and most 
flourishing place. It occupied the banks of the so-called 
Avon River, which was mostly just a great dry bed of 
stones. But it had plenty of fresh water in the soaks and 
wells, among the scorched rocks, and these wells were fed 
by underground springs, not brackish, as is so often the 
case. Wandoo was therefore a favoured place. 

‘* What am I to wear? ’”? said Jack aghast, when he 
heard of the affair. 

** Anything,’ said Tom. 

‘* Nothing,”’ said Len. . eaters 

“© Your new riding suit,’’ said Monica, who had begun to 
assume airs of proprietorship over him. ‘* And you needn’t 
say anything, young Len,’’ she continued venomously, 
‘‘ because you’ve got to wear that new holland suit Ma 
got you from England, and boots and socks as well.” 

“6 It’s awful. Oo-er! It’s awful! *? groaned Lennie. 

It was. A tight-fitting brown holland suit with pants 
halfway down the shin and many pearl-buttons across the 
stomach, the coat with a stiff stand-up collar and rigid 
seams. Harry had a similar rig, but the twins out-did 

114 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Solomon in sailor suits with gold braid and floppy legs. 
At least they started in glory. 

Tom in his father’s old tennis-flannels and a neat linen 
jacket looked quite handsome. But when he saw Jack in 
his real pukka riding rig, he exclaimed : 

‘© God Almighty, but you’ve got the goods! ” 

‘¢ A bit too dashing? * asked Jack anxiously. 

‘“* Not on your life! You'll do fine. Reds all go in for 
riding breeks and coats as near sporting dog’s yank as they 
k’n get ’m. There’s a couple o’ white washing suits 0’ 
Dad’s as he’s grown out of, as I’ll plank up in the loft to — 
change into to-night. We can’t come in this here cubby 
again. Once we leave it it’ll be jumped by all the women 
and children from round the country, to put their things in.” 

** Won’t they go into the house? ”’ 

* Hallelujah, no! Only relations go upstairs. Quality 
into the dyin’ room. Yahoos anywhere, and the ladies 
always bag our cubby.’’ 

66 Lor! 99 

But it had to be so. For the New Year’s chivoo the 
settlers all saved up, and they all dressed up. By ten o’clock 
the place was like a fair ground. Horses of all sorts nosing 
their feed bags; conveyances of all sorts unhitched; girls 
all muslin and ribbon; boys with hats on at an angle, and 
boots on; men in clean shirts and brilliant ties; mothers in 
frill and furbelow, with stiffly-starched little children half 
hidden under sunbonnets ; old dames and ancient patriarchs, 
young, bearded farmers, and shaven civilians ridden over 
from York. Children rushing relentlessly in the heat, amid 
paper bags, orange peel, concertina playing, baskets of 
victuals and fruit, canvas, rubbish and nuts all over the 
scorched grass. Christmas ! 

Tom had asked Jack to organise a cricket eleven to play 
against the Reds. The Reds were dangerous opponents, 
and the dandies of the day. In riding breeches made India 
fashion, with cotton gaiters, and rubber-soled shoes, white 
shirts, and broad-brimmed hats, they looked a handsome 
colonial set. And they had a complete eleven. 

Tom was sitting on a bat bemoaning his fate. He had 
only five reliable men. 

“* Aw, shut up!” said Lennie. ‘‘ Somebody’ll turn up. 
Who’s comin’ in at the gate now? Ain’t it the parson 

HOME FOR CHRISTMAS 115 

from York, and five gents what can handle a bat. Hell! 
ain’t my name cockadoodle! ”? 

In top hats and white linen suits these gentlemen had 
ridden their twenty-five miles for a game. What price the 
Reds now ! 

Tom’s side was in first, Easu and Rosy Ellis bowling. 
Easu, big, loose, easy, looked strange and native, as if he 
belonged to the natural salt of the earth there. He seemed 
at home, like an emu or a yellow mimosa tree. He was a 
s0wler of repute. But somehow Jack could not bear to see 
1im palm the ball before he bowled: could not bear to 
watch it. Whereas fat Ross Ellis, the other bowler, 
spitting on his hand and rolling the ball in elation after 
vetting the wicket of the best man from York, Jack didn’t 
nind him. But unable to watch Easu, he walked away 
cross the paddock, among the squatting mothers whose 
error was the flying leather ball. 

_** Your turn at the wickets, Mr. Grant,’’ called the excited 
ed-faced parson, who, Lennie declared, ‘‘ couldn’t preach 
ess or act more.”’ 

** We’re eight men out for twenty-six rounds, so smack 
it *em. If ye can get the loose end on Ross, do it. I'll be 
n t’other end next and stop ’em off Easu. I come in right 
here as th’ useful block.”’ 

Jack was excited. And when he was excited, phrases 
ways came up in his mind. He had the sun in his eyes, 
ut the bat felt good. 

*‘ Tf a gentleman sees bad, he ignores it. He—— ”? 

Here comes the ball from that devil Easu! 

_How’s that! 

‘¢ Finds good and fans it to flame—fans it to— * 

Joe Low, that stripling, had the other wicket. 

Smack! Jack scored the first run off Easu, running for 
is life. 

‘© You can be a gentleman even if you are a bush- 
fhacker.’’ 

Nine wickets had fallen to Easu for twenty-seven runs, 
nd Easu was elated. Then the parson came forth and 
tood opposite Jack. He at once whacked Ross’ ball suc- 
essfully, for three. Jack hitched his belt after the run, 
nd hit out for another. . 

Smack! No need to run that time. It was a boundary. 

116 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Lennie’s voice outside yelling admiration roused his soul, 
as did Easu’s yelling angrily to Ross: ‘* You give that 
ball to Sam, this over. You blanky idjut! ” 

Ross picked up the returning leather, and sent down a 
sulky grubber which Jack naturally skied. Herbert, placed 
at a point in the shade, came out to catch it, and missed. 

Somehow the parson had steadied Jack’s spirit. And 
when, in a crisis, Jack got his spirit steadied, it seemed to 
him he could get a semi-magical grip over a situation. 
Almost as if he could alter the swerve of the ball by his pure, 
clairvoyant will. So it seemed. And keyed up against the | 
weird, handsome, native Easu, as if by a magic of will 
Jack held the wicket and got the runs. It was one of those 
subtle battles which are beyond our understanding. And 
Jack won. 

But Easu got him out in the end. In the first innings, 
a terrific full pitch came down crash over his head on to the 
middle wicket, when he had made his first half-century; 
that was Easu; and Easu stumped him out in the second 
innings, for twenty. _ 

Nevertheless the Reds were beaten by a margin of sixteen 
runs, before the parson and the gentlemen in top hats set 
off for their long and dusty ride to York. 

iii 

Jack hated the Reds with all the wholesale hatred of 
eighteen. There they were, all of them, swaggering round 
as if the place belonged to them, taking everything and 
giving nothing. Their peculiar air of assertion was par- 
ticularly maddening, in contrast with the complete lack of 
assumption on the part of the other Australians. It was as 
if the Reds had made up their minds, all of them, to leave 
a bruise on everything they touched. They were all big 
men, and all older than Jack. Easu must have been over 
thirty, and unmarried, with a bad reputation among the 
women of the colony. Yet, apparently, he could always 
find a girl. That slow, laconic assurance of his, his peculiar, 
meaning smile as he drifted up loose-jointed to a girl, seemed 
nearly always to get through. The women watched him out 
of the corner of their eye. They didn’t like him. But they 
felt his power. And that was perhaps even more effective. 

HOME FOR CHRISTMAS IW 

For he had power. And this was what Jack felt lacking 
n himself. Jack had quick, intuitive understanding, and a 
juick facility. But he had not Easu’s power. Sometimes 
fasu could look really handsome, strolling slowly across to 
ome girl with a peculiar rolling gait that distinguished 
im, and smiling that little, meaningful, evil smile. Then 
e looked handsome, and as if he belonged to another race 
Mf men, men who were like small-headed demons out to 
lestroy the world. 

“I'm fighting him,’? thought Jack. ‘ I wouldn’t have 
} good opinion of myself if I didn’t.” — 

For he saw in Easu a malevolent priniciple, a kind of 
renom. 

Ross Ellis, the youngest of the Reds, was old enough to 
ye joining the mounted police force in a few days, and Mr. 
tllis had sent up a strong chestnut mount for him, from 
he coast. Easu, tall, broad, sinewy, with sinewy power- 
ul legs and small buttocks, was sitting close on the pranc- 
ng chestnut, showing off, his malevolence seeming to smile 
mder his blonde beard, and his blue, rivet eyes taking in 
verything. All the time he went fooling the simple farmers 
vho had come to the sports, raising a laugh where he could, 
nd always a laugh of derision. 

“© Tom,”’ said Jack it last, ** couldn’t you boss it a bit 
ver those Reds? It’s your place, it’s your house, not 
heirs. Go on, put them down a bit, do.” 

‘* Aw,’ said Tom. ‘* They’re older’n me, and the place 
yy rights belongs to them : leastways they think so. And 
hey are crack sportsmen.” 
© Why they’re not! Look at Easu parading on that 
olice horse your father sent up from the coast! And look 
t all the other cockeys getting ready to compete against 
im in the riding events. They haven’t a chance, and he 
nows it.’’ ‘ . 

‘‘ He won’t risk taking that police horse over the jumps, 
on’t you fret.”’ 

‘¢ No, but he has the pick of your stable, and he’ll beat 
li the others while you stand idling by. Why should he 
e cock of the walk? ” 4 

“‘ Why,” cried Lennie breaking in, “‘ I could beat anyfin 
n Lucy. But Tom won’t let me go in against the other 
haps, will you, Tom? ” 

118 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Tom smiled. He had a plain brick-red face, patient and 
unchanging, with white teeth, and brown, sensitive eyes. 
When he smiled he had a great charm. But he did not 
often smile, and his mouth was marred by the look so many 
men develop in Australia, facing the bush: that lipless 
look, which Jack, as he grew more used to it, came to call 
the suffering look. As if they had bitten and been bitten 
hard, perhaps too hard. 

‘Well, Nipper,’’ he said after a moment’s hesitation ; 
‘‘ if you finds them Waybacks has it between ’em, you 
stand out. But y’c’n have Lucy if you like, an’ if y’ beat. 
the Reds—y’e’n beat *em.”’ 

‘¢ That’s what J mean all right! *’ cried Lennie, capering. 
“IT savvy O.K. IJ'll give ’em googlies and sneaks an’ leg- 
breaks, y’ see if I don’t, an’ even up for ’em.”’ 

iv 

Monica came up and took Jack’s arm with sudden im- 
pulsive affection, on this very public day. Drawing him 
away, she said : 

** Come and sit down a bit under the Bay Fig, Jack. I 
want to rest. All these people tearing us in two from 
morning till night.” 

Jack found himself thrilling to the girl’s touch, to his own 
surprise and disgust. He flushed slowly, and went on stiff 
legs, hoping nobody was looking at him. Nobody was look- 
ing specially, of course. But Monica kept hold of his arm, 
with her light, tense girlish hand, and he found it difficult 
to walk naturally. And again the queer electric thrills went 
through him, from that light blade of her hand. 

She was very lovely to-day, with a sort of winsomeness, 
a sort of fierce appeal. As a matter of fact, she had been 
flirting dangerously with Red Easu, till she was a bit scared. 
And she had been laughing and fooling with Hal Stockley— 
otherwise Pink-eye Percy—whom all the girls were mad 
about, but who didn’t affect her seriously. Easu affected 
her, though. And she didn’t really like him. That was 
why she had come for Jack, whom she liked very much 
indeed. She felt so safe and happy with him. And she 
loved his delicate, English, virgin quality, his shyness and 
his natural purity. He was purer than she was. So she 

HOME FOR CHRISTMAS 119 

wanted to make him in love with her. She was sure he 
was in love with her. But it was such a shy, unwilling 
love, she was half annoyed. 

So she leaned forward to him, with her fierce young face 
and her queer, yellow, glowering eyes, not far from his, and 
she seemed to yearn to him with a yearning like a young 
leopard. Sometimes she touched his hand, and sometimes, 
laughing and showing her small, pointed teeth winsomely, 
she would look straight into his eyes, as if searching for 
something. And he flushed with a dazed sort of delight, 
unwilling to be overpowered by the new delight, yet dazed 
by it, even to the point of forgetting the other people and 
the party, and Easu on the chestnut horse. 

But he made no move. When she touched his hand, 
though his eyes shone with a queer suffused light, he would 
not take her hand in his. He would not touch her. He 
would not make any definite response. To all she said, he 
answered in simple monosyllables. And there he sat, suf- 
fused with delight, yet making no move whatsoever. 

Till at last Monica, who was used to defending herself, 
was niffed. She thought him a muff. So she suddenly rose 
and left him. Went right away. And he was very much 
surprised and chagrined, feeling that somehow it wasn’t 
possible, and feeling as if the sun had gone out of the sky. 

Vv 

The sun really was low in the heavens. The breeze came 
at last from the sea and freshened the air and lifted the 
sweet crushed scent of the trampled dry grass. It was time 
for the last events of the sports. Hverybody was eager, 
revived by the approach of evening, and Jack felt the 
drunkenness of new delight upon him. He was still vague, 
however, and unwilling even to think of Monica, much less 
seek her out. 

The black-boys’ event, with unbroken buckjumpers, was 
finishing down by the river. Joe Low, with a serious face 
out sparkling eyes, went riding by on a brumby colt he had 
saught and broken himself. Jack sat alone under a tree, 
waiting for the flat race, in which he was entered, and feel- 
ng sure of himself. 

Easu came dancing up on the raw chestnut that had been 

120 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

sent up from the coast along with the police horse. He 
wore spurs, and had a long parrot-feather in his hat. 

‘Here you, young Pommy Grant,”? he said to Jack. 
‘‘ Ketch hold of me bit while I fix me girths a bit tighter, 
and then you c’n hold your breath while I show them Corn- 
seeds what.’’ : 

He had a peculiarly insolent manner towards Jack. The 
latter nevertheless held the frothy chestnut while Easu 
swung out of the saddle and hitched up the girth. As he 
bent there beside the horse, Jack noticed his broad shoulders 
and narrow waist and small, hard, tense hips. Yes, he was 
aman. But ugh! what an objectionable one! Especially 
the slight hateful smile of derision on the red face and in the 
light-blue, small-pupilled eyes. 

But he clipped into the saddle again, and once more it 
was impossible not to admire his seat, his close, fine, clean, 
small seat in the saddle. There was no spread about him 
there. And the power of the long, muscular thighs. Then 
once more he dismounted, leaving Jack to hold the bridle 
of the chestnut whilst he himself strolled away. 

The other farmers were waiting on their horses, so serious 
and quiet : in their patience and unobtrusiveness, so gentle- 
manly, Jack thought. So unlike the assertive, jeering Easu. 

Lennie came up and whipped the pin out of Jack’s favour. 
It was a rosette of yellow ribbon, shiny as a buttercup, that 
Monica had made him. 

‘* Here, what’re you doing? ” he cried. 

s* Aw, shut it. Keep still! ’? said Lennie. 

And slipping round, he pushed the pin, point downward, 
into the back saddle-pad of the chestnut Jack was holding. 
That wasn’t fair. But Jack let be. 

The judge called his warning, the Cornseeds lined up, 
along with Joe Low and a young yellow-faced dairyman and 
a slender skin-hunter, and a woolly old stockman. Easu 
came and took his chafing horse, but did not mount. 

“One!” Easu swung up, standing in his stirrups, 
scarce touching the saddle-seat. : 

**Two! Three!’ and the sharp crack of a pistol. 

Away went the scraggy brumby and Joe, and, like 8 
torrent, the dairyman and the skin-hunter and the stock- 
man. But the chestnut had never heard a pistol shot before, 
and was jumping round wildly. . 

HOME FOR CHRISTMAS 121 

** Blood and pace, mark you! ”’ said the judge, waving 
towards the chestnut. ‘‘ Them cockeys does their best on 
what they got, but watch that chestnut under Red Ellis. 
It’s a pleasure to see good horse-flesh like them Ellises brings 
up to these parts.” 

Easu, seeing the field running well and far ahead, wheeled 
his mount on to the track at that minute, and sat 
down. 

The chestnut sat up, stopped, bucked, threw Easu, and 
then galloped madly away. It was all so sudden and some- 
how unnatural, that everybody was stunned. Easu rose 
and stared, with hell in his face, after the running chestnut. 
People began to laugh aloud. 

** Oh, Gawd my fathers! ’? murmured Tom in Jack’s ear. 
‘* Think of Hasu getting a toss! TEasu letting any horse 
get the soft side of him! Oh, my Gawd, if I’m not sorry 
for Easu when that crowd o’ Reds sets on to him with their 
tongues to-morrow.”’ 

‘* I’m jolly glad,’’ said Jack complacently. 

** So am I,’’ said Lennie. ‘* An’ I did it, an’ I wish it 
had killed him. I put a pin under the saddle-crease, Tom. 
Don’t look at me, y’needn’t. I’ve had one up again ’im 
for a long time, for Jack’s sake. D’y’ know what he did? 
He put Jack on that Stampede stallion, when Jack hadn’t 
been on our place a fortnight. So he did. An’ if Jack had 
been killed, who’d ha’ called him a murderer? Zah, one 
of the blacks told me. And nobody durst tell you, cos they 
lurstn’t.”’ 

‘© On Stampede! ”? exclaimed Tom, going yellow, and 
nell coming into his brown eyes. ‘* An’ a new chum my 
‘ather trusted to him to show him round.” 

“© Oh, well,’ said Jack. 

e** The ! *? said Tom : and that was final. 

Then after a moment : 

“If the Reds is going over the jumps, you go and get 
Lucy, Len.”’ 

‘* T likes your sperrit, Tom. I was goin’ to anyway, case 
hey get that dark ’oss.’? Lennie threw off his coat, hat, 
und tie, then sat on the trodden brown grass to take off his 
yoots and stockings. Thus stripped, he stood up and 
1itched his braces looser, remarking : 

‘* Jack Grant said he’d bash Easu’s head for ’im if he said 

122 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

anything to me after I beat ’im over the jumps, so I was 
goin’ to risk it anyway.” 

Jack had said no such thing, but was prepared to take 
the hint. 

The chestnut had been caught and tied up. Down the 
field they could see Easu persuading Sept to ride a smart 
piebald filly that had been brought in. Sept was the thinnest 
of the Reds. The jumping events continued away on the 
left, the sun was almost setting. 

‘* Hurry up there for the final! ’’ called the judge. 

Sept came up on the delicate piebald filly which they had — 
brought over from their own place. She was dark chestnut, 
and with flames of pure white, she seemed dazzling. 

‘“* That’s the dark ’oss I mentioned! ’’ said Len. ‘* Gosh, 
but me heart is beatin’! It’ll be a real match between me 
and him, for that there filly can jump like a ’roo, P’ve 
watched ’er.”’ 

Joe Low rode up to the jumping yard, and lifted his 
brumby over. The filly danced down and followed. Lennie 
was in the saddle like a cat and Lucy went over the rail 
without effort. 

When the rail was at five feet two, Joe Low’s brumby 
was done. Lucy clipped the rail and the filly cleared it. 
Sept brought his creature round to the judge, with raised 
eyebrows. 

‘No y’ don’t,”’ yelled Lennie, riding down the track hell 
for leather, and Lucy went over like a swallow. Sept 
laughed, and came down to the rail that was raised an inch. 
The filly sailed it, but hit the bar. Lucy baulked. Len 
swung her round and came again. A perfect over. 

Next! The filly, snorting and frothing, tore down, 
jibbed, and was sworn at loudly by Easu standing near. 
Sept whipped and spurred her over. 

But at that rail, raised to five feet nine, she would not be 
persuaded, though Lucy cleared it with a curious casual 
ease. The filly would not take it. 

** Say, Mister! ’? called Lennie when he knew he was 
winner. ** Raise that barrier five inches and see us bound 
it. 

He made his detour, brought Lucy along on twinkling 
feet, and cleared it prettily. 

The roar of delight from the crowd sent Easu mad. Jack 

HOME FOR CHRISTMAS 123 

kept an eye on him, in case he meant mischief. But Easu 
only went away to where the niggers were still trying out 
the buckjumpers. Taking hold of a huge rogue of a mare, 
he sprang on her back and came bucking all along the track, 
apparently to give a specimen of horsemanship. The crowd 
watched the queer massive pulsing up and down of the man 
and the powerful bucking horse, all in a whirl of long hair, 
like some queer fountain of life. And there was Monica 
watching Easu’s cruel, changeless face, that seemed to have 
something fixed and eternal in it, amid all that heaving. 

Jack felt he had a volcano inside him. He knew that 
Stampede had been caught again, and was being led about 
down there, securely roped, as part of the show. Down 
there among the outlaws. 

Away ran Jack. Anything rather than be beaten by Easu. 
But as he ran, he kept inside him that queer little flame of 
white-hot calm which was his invincibility. 

He patted Stampede’s arching neck, and told Sam to 
saddle him. Sam showed the whites of his eyes, but obeyed, 
and Stampede took it. Jack stood by, intense in his own 
001 calmness. He didn’t care what happened to him. If 
1e was to be killed he would be killed. But at the same 
ime, he was not reckless. He watched the horse with 
nystical closeness, and glanced over the saddle and bridle 
o see if they were all right. 

Then, swiit and light, he mounted and knew the joy of 
yeing a horseman, the thrill of being a real horseman. He 
ad the gift, and he knew it. If not the gift of sheer power, 
ike Easu, who seemed to overpower his horse as he rode it, 
lack had the gift of adjustment. He adjusted himself to 
iis horse. Intuitively, he yielded to Stampede, up to a 
ertain point. Beyond that certain flexible point, there 
vould be no yielding, none, and never. 

Jack came bucking along in Easu’s wake, on a much 
rilder horse. But though Stampede was wild and wicked, 
e never exerted his last efforts. He bucked like the devil. 
Sut he never let himself altogether go. And Jack seemed to 
e listening with an inward ear to the animal, listening to 
’s passion. After all, it was a live creature, to be mastered, 
ut not to be overborne. Intuitively, the boy gave way 
) it as much as possible. But he never for one moment 
oubted his own mastery over it. In his mastery there must 

124 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

be a living tolerance. This his instinct told him. And the 
stallion, bucking and sitting up, seemed somehow to accept — 
it. 

For, after all, if the horse had gone really wicked, abso- 
lutely wicked, it would have been too much for Master 
Jack. What he depended on was the bit of response the 
animal was capable of. And this he knew. 

He found he could sit the stallion with much greater ease 
than before. And that strange, powerful life beneath him 
and between his thighs, heaving and breaking like some 
enormous alive wave, exhilarated him with great exultance, 
the exultance in the power of life. . 

Monica’s eyes turned from the red, fixed, overbearing face 
of Easu, to the queer, abstract, radiant male face of Jack, 
and a great pang went through her heart, and a cloud 
came over her brow. The boy balanced on the trembling, 
spurting stallion, looking down at it with dark-blue, wide, 
dark-looking eyes, and thinking of nothing, yet feeling so 
much; his face looking soft and warm with a certain master- 
fulness that was more animal than human, like a centaur, 
as if he were one blood with the horse, and had the centaur’s 
superlative horse-sense, its non-human power, and wisdom 
of hot blood-knowledge. She watched the boy, and her 
brow darkened and her face was fretted as if she were denied 
something. She wanted to look again at Easu, with his 
fixed hard will that excited her. But she couldn’t. The 
queer soft power of the boy was too much for her, she could 
not save herself. _ 

So they rode, the two men, and all the people watched 
them, as the sun went down in the wild empty sea west- 
ward from hot Australia. 

“HAP : IX. NEW YEAR’S EVE 
i 

New Year’s Eve was celebrated Scotch style, at ‘* Wandoo.”” 
it was already night, and Jack and Tom had been round 
eeing if the visitors had everything they wanted. Ma and 
i few select guests were still in the kitchen. The cold 
collation in the parlour still waited majestically. The twins 
ind Harry were no longer visible: they had subsided on 
heir stomachs by the wood-pile, in the hot evening, and 
ound refuge in sleep; for all the world like sailors sunk 
lilapidated and demoralised, after a high old spree. But 
illie and Baby were at their zenith. Having been kept out 
Mf the ruck most carefully upstairs, they were now produced 
it their best. Mr. Ellis was again away in Perth, seeing the 
loctor. 

Tom and Jack went into the loft and changed into clean 
vhite duck. They came forth like new men, jerking their 
rms in the stiff starched sleeves. And they proceeded to 
ight the many chinese lanterns hung in the barn, till the 
reat place was mellow with soft light. Already in the fore- 
oon they had scraped candle ends on to the floor, and 
ubbed them in. Now they rubbed in the wax a little more, 
o get the proper slipperiness. 4 

The light brought the people, like moths. Of course the 
feds were there, brazen as brass. They, too, had changed 
ato white suits, tight round the calf and hollow at the 
yaist, and, for the moment, with high collars rising to their 
ars above the black cravats. Also they sported elastic- 
ided boots of patent leather, whereas most of the other 
ellows were in their heavy hob-nailed boots, nicely blacked, 
ideed, but destitute of grace. With their hair brushed 
own in a curl over their foreheads, and their beards brushed 
part, their strong sinewy bodies filling out the white duck, 
hey felt absolutely invincible, and almost they looked it. 
‘or Jack was growing blind to the rustic absurdities, 
linded by the animal force of these Australians. 

Jack sat down by Herbert, who was pleasant and mild 
fter his illness, always a little shy with the English boy. 

125 

126 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

But the other Reds had taken possession of the place. Their 
bounce and their brass were astounding. Jack watched 
them in wonder at their aggressive self-assertion. They 
were real bounders, more crude and more bouncy than ever 
the Old Country could produce. But that was Australian. 
The bulk of the people, perhaps, were dumb and unassum- 
ing. But there was always a proportion of real brassy 
bounders, ready to walk over you and jump in your stomach, 
if you’d let them. 

Easu had constituted himself Master of the Ceremonies, 
and we know what an important post that is, in a country © 
bean-feast. Wherever he was, he must be in the front, 
bossing and hectoring other people. He had appointed his 
brothers ‘‘ stewards.’? The Reds were to run the show. 
There was to be but one will: the will of the big, loose- 
jointed, domineering Easu, with his reddish blonde beard 
brushed apart and his keen eyes spying everything with a 
slight jeer. 

Most of the guests, of course, were as they had been all — 
day, in their Sunday suits or new dungarees. Joe Low, trim — 
in a clean cotton jacket, sat by the great open doors very 
seriously blowing notes out of an old brass cornet, that had 
belonged to his father, a retired sergeant of the Foot. Near 
him, a half-caste Huck was sliding a bow up and down a 
yellow-looking fiddle, while other musicians stood with their 
instruments under their arms. Outside in the warm night 
bearded farmers smoked and talked. Mammas sat on the 
forms round the barn, and the girls, most of them fresh and 
gay in billowy cotton frocks, clustered around in excitement. 
It was the great day of all the year. 

For the rest, most of the young men were leaning holding 
up the big timber supports of the barn, or framing the 
great opening of the sliding doors, which showed the 
enormous dark gap of the naked night. 

Fire-eating Easu waved energetically to Joe, who blew 
a blast on the cornet. This done, the strong but 
** common ” Australian voice of Easu, shouted effectively : 

‘* Take partners. Get ready for the Grand March.”? 

For of course he plumed himself on doing everything in 
** style,’ everything grand and correct, this Australian who 
so despised the effete Old Country. The rest of the Reds 
straight away marched to the sheepish and awkward fel- 

NEW YEAR’S EVE 127 

lows who stood propped up against any available prop, 
seized them by the arm, and rushed them up to some equally 
sheepish maiden. And, instead of resenting it, the poor 
clowns were glad at being forced into company. They 
grinned and blushed and the girls giggled and bridled as 
they coupled and arranged themselves, two by two, close 
behind one another. 

A blast of music. Easu seized Monica, who was self- 
consciously waiting on the arm of another young fellow. 
He just flung his arm around her waist and heaved her to 
the head of the column. Then the procession set off, Easu 
in front with his arm round Monica’s waist, he shining with 
his own brass and self-esteem, she looking falsely demure. 
After them came the other couples, self-conscious but ex- 
tremely pleased with themselves, slowly marching round the 
barn. 

Jack, who had precipitated himself into the night rather 
than be hauled into action by one of the Red stewards, 
stood and looked on from afar, feeling out of it. He felt out 
in the cold. He hated Easu’s common, gloating self- 
satisfaction, there at the head with Monica. Red cared 
nothing about Monica, really. Only she was the star of the 
evening, the chief girl, so he had got her. She was the chief 
yirl for miles around. And that was enough for Easu. He 
was determined to leave his mark on her. 

After the March, the girls went back to their mammas, 
the youths to their shoulder-supports; and, following a 
pause, Hasu again came into the middle of the floor, and 
oegan bellowing instructions. He was so pleased with the 
sound of his own voice, when it was lifted in authority. 
Everybody listened with ‘all their ears, afraid of disobeying 
Easu. \ 

When the ovation was over, the boldest of the young men 
made a bee-line for the prettiest girls, and there was a 
wubbub. In a twinkling any girl whom Jack would have 
leigned to dance with, was monopolised, only the poorest 
‘emained. Meanwhile the stewards were busy sorting the 
couples into groups. 

Jack could not dance. He had not intended to dance. 
3ut he didn’t at all like being left out entirely, in oblivion 
1s if he did not exist. Not at all. So he drifted towards 
she group of youths in the doorway. But he slid away 

128 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

again as Ross Ellis plunged in, seized whom he could by — 
the arm, and led them off to the crude and unprepossessing ~ 
maidens left still unchosen. 

He felt he would resent intensely being grabbed by the 
arm and hustled into a partner by one of the Reds. 

What was to be done? He seemed to be marooned in 
his own isolation like some shipwrecked mariner : and he 
was becoming aware of the size of his own hands and feet. 
He looked for Tom. Tom was steering a stout but willing 
mother into the swim, and Lennie, like a faithful little tug, 
was following in his wake with a gentle but squint-eyed © 
girl. 

Jack became desperate. He looked round quickly. Mrs. 
Ellis was sitting alone on a packing-case. At the same 
moment he saw Ross Ellis bearing down on him with sar- 
donic satisfaction. 

Action was quicker than thought. Jack stood bowing 
awkwardly before his hostess. 

‘¢ Won’t you do me the honour, Mrs. Ellis? ” 

‘© Oh, dear me! Oh, dear, Jack Grant! But I believe 
I will. I never thought of such a thing. But why not? 
Yes, I will, it will give me great pleasure. We shall have 
to lead off, you know. And I was supposed to lead with 
Easu, seeing my husband isn’t here. But never mind, we’ll 
lead off, you and I, just as well.” 

She rose to her feet briskly, seeming young again. Lately 
Jack thought she seemed always to have some trouble on 
her mind. For the moment she shook it off. 

As for him, he was panic-stricken. He wished he could 
ascend into heaven; or at least as high as the loft. 

‘* You'll help me through, marm, won’t you? ” he said. 
‘* This dance is new to me.” 

And he bowed to her, and she bowed to him, and it was 
horrible. The horrible things people did for enjoyment ! 

** This dance is new to him,” Mrs. Ellis passed over his 
shoulder to a pretty girl in pink. ‘‘ Help him through, 
Alice.”’ 

Feeling a fool, Jack turned and met a wide smile and a 
nod. He bowed confusedly. 

‘I’m your corner,”’ said the girl. ‘ I’ll pass it on to 
Monica, she’ll be your vis-a-vis.” 

*¢ Pick up partners,’? Easu was yelling with his domineer- 

NEW YEAR’S EVE 129 

Ing voice. ‘ All in place, please! One more couple! One 
more couple! ’? He was at the other end of the barn, 
coming forward now, looking around like a general. He 
was coming for his aunt. 

““ An!’ he said when he saw Mrs. Ellis and Jack. 
** You’re dancing with Jack Grant, Aunt Jane? Thought 
he couldn’t dance.’’ 

And he straightway turned his back on them, looking 
for Monica. Monica was standing with a young man from 
York. 

** Monica, I want you,’’ said Easu. ‘‘ You can find a 
girl there,’’ he said, nodding from the young fellow to a 
half-caste girl with fuzzy hair. The young fellow went 
white. But Monica crossed over to Easu, for she was a 
wicked little thing, and this evening she was hating Jack 
Grant, the booby. 

** One more couple not needed,’? howled Easu. ‘* Top 
centre. Where are you, Aunt Jane? Couple from here, 
lower centre, go to third set on left.”’ 

Easu was standing near the top. He stepped backward, 
and down came his heel on Jack’s foot. Jack got away, 
but an angry light came into his eyes. His face, however, 
still kept that cherubic expression characteristic of it, and 
so ill-fitting his feelings. Easu was staring over the room, 
and never even looked round. 

** All in place? Music! ’? cried the M.C. 

The music started with a crash and a bang, Mrs. Ellis 
nad seized Jack’s arm and was leading him into the middle 
of the set. 

** Catch hands, Monica,”’ she said. 

He loved Monica’s thin, nervous, impulsive hands. His 
heart went hot as he held them. But Monica wouldn’t look 
at him. She looked demurely sideways. But he felt the 
electric thrill that came to him from her hands, and he 
didn’t want to let go. 

She loosed his grasp and pushed him from her. 

‘© Get back to Ma,” she whispered. ‘‘ Corner with Alice.’? 

‘6 Oh, Lor! ’? thought Jack. For he was cornered and 
grabbed and twisted by the girl with the wide smile, before 
he was let go to fall into place beside Ma, panting with a 
sort of exasperation. : 

So it continued, grabbing and twisting and twirling, all 

E 

9 

130 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

perfectly ridiculous and undignified. Why, oh, why did 
human beings do it! Yet it was better than being left out. 
He was half-pleased with himself. 

Something hard and vicious dug him in the ribs. It was 
the elbow of Easu, who passed skipping like a goat. 

Was Easu making a dead set at him? The devil’s own 
anger began to rise in the boy’s heart, bringing up with it 
all the sullen dare-devil that was in him. When he was 

roused, he cared for nothing in earth or heaven. But his 

face remained cherubic. 

“* Follow! ’? said a gentle voice. Perhaps it was all a- 

mistake. He found himself back by Mrs Ellis, watching 
other folks prance. There he stood and mopped his brow, 

in the hot, hot night. He was wet with sweat all over. — 
But before he could wipe his face the pink Alice had caught © 

and twirled him, taking him unawares. He waited alert. 
Nothing happened. Actually peace for a few seconds. 
The music stopped. Perhaps it was over. Oh, enjoy- 
ment ! Why did people do such things to enjoy themselves ? 
Only he would have liked to hold Monica’s thin, keen 

hands again. The thin, keen, wild, wistful Monica. He’ 

would like to be near her. 

Easu was bawling something. Figure Number Two. He 
could not listen to instructions in Easu’s voice. 

They were dancing again, and he knew no more than at 
first what he was doing. Alla maze. A natural diffidence 
and a dislike of being touched by any casual stranger made 
dancing unpleasant to him. But he kept up. And sud- 
denly he found himself with Monica folded in his arms, 
and she clinged to him with sudden fierce young abandon. 
His heart stood still, as he realised that not only did he 
want to hold her hands—he had thought it was just that; 
but he wanted to hold her altogether in his arms. Terrible 
and embarrassing thought! He wished himself on the 
moon, to escape his new emotions. At the same time there 
was the instantaneous pang of disappointment as she broke 
away from him. Why could she not have stayed! And, 
why, oh, why, were they both doing this beastly dancing ! 

He received a clean clear kick on the shin as he passed 
Easu. Dazed with a confusion of feelings, keenest among 
which perhaps was anger, he pulled up again beside Ma. 
And there was Monica suddenly in his arms again. 

PNW a RARES) 2 

NEW YEAR’S EVE 181 

_ ** You always go again,’’ he said in a vague murmur. 

‘** What did you say? ”’ she asked archly, as she floated 
rom him, just at the moment when Easu jolted him 
‘oughly. Across the little distance she was watching the hot 
inger in the boy’s confused, dark-blue eyes. 

Another pause. More beastly instructions. Different 
nusic. Different evolutions. 

** Steady now! ”’ he said to himself, trying to make his 
Nay in the new figure. But what work it was! He tried 
© keep his brain steady. But Ma on his arm was heavy 
is lead. 

And then, with great ease and perfect abandon, in spite 
yf her years, Ma threw herself on his left bosom and reclined 
n peace there. He was overcome. She seemed absolutely 
o like resting on his bosom. 

** Throw out your right hand, dear boy,” she whispered, 
nd before he knew he had done it, Easu had seized his 
and in a big, brutal, bullying grasp, and was grinding 
is knuckles. And then sixteen people began to spin. 

The startled agony of it made a different man of him. 
‘or Ma was heavy as a log on his left side, clinging to him 
s if she liked to cling to his body. He never quite forgave 
er. And Easu had his unprotected right hand gripped in 
. vice and was torturing him on purpose with the weight 
nd the grind. Jack’s hands were naturally small, and 
asu’s were big. And to be gripped by that great malicious 
aw was horrible. Oh, the tension, the pain and rage of 
hat giddy-go-rounding, first forward, then abruptly back- 
yards. It broke some of his innocence for ever. 

But although paralytic with rage when released, Jack’s 
ace still looked innocent and cherubic. He had that sort 
f face, and that diabolic sort of stoicism. Mrs Ellis 
hought : ** What a nice, kind boy! but late waking up to 
he facts of life! ’? She thought he had not even noticed 
tasu’s behaviour. And again she thought to herself her 
usband would be jealous if he saw her. Poor old Jacob! 
loud she said : 

‘‘ The next is the last figure. You’re doing very well, 
ack. You go off round the ring, now, handing the ladies 
rst your right and then your left hand.” ; 

He felt no desire to hand anybody his hand. But in the 
1iddle of the ring he met Monica, and her slim grasp took 

182. THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

his hurt right hand, and seemed to heal it for a 
moment. 

Easu grabbed his arm, and he saw three others, suffer- 
ing fools gladly, locked arm in arm, playing soldiers, as 
they called it. Oh, God! Easu, much taller than Jack, was 
twisting his arm abominably, almost pulling it out of the 
socket. And Jack was saving up his anger. 

It was over. ‘* That was very kind of you, my dear boy,” 
Mrs Ellis was saying. ‘‘ I haven’t enjoyed a dance so much 
for years.” 

Enjoyed! That ghastly word! Why would people insist — 
on enjoying themselves in these awful ways! Why “‘enjoy”’ 
oneself at all? He didn’t see it. He decided he didn’t care 
for enjoyment, it wasn’t natural to him. Too humiliating, 
for one thing. 

Twenty steps envolved in the black skirts of Mrs Ellis, 
and he was politely rid of her. She was very nice. And 
by some mystery she had really enjoyed herself in this 
awful mélée. He gave it up. She was too distant in years 
and experience for him to try to understand her. Did these 
people never have living anger, like a bright black 
snake with unclosing eyes, at the bottom of their 
souls? Apparently not. 

ui 

There was an interval in the dancing, and they were hav- 
ing games. Red was, of course, still bawling out instruc- 
tions and directions, being the colonel of the feast. He was 
in his element, playing top sawyer. 

The next game was to be ‘* Modern Proposals.”? It 
sounded rotten to Jack. Each young man was to make an 
original proposal to an appointed girl. Great giggling and 
squirming even at the mention of it. 

Easu still held the middle of the floor. Jack thought it 
was time to butt in. With his hands in his pockets he 
walked coolly into the middle of the room. 

** You people don’t know me, and I don’t know you,” 
he found himself announcing in his clear English voice. 
‘* Supposing I call this game.’ 

Carried Unanimously ! 

The young men lined up, and Easu, after standing loose 

NEW YEAR’S EVE . 188 

on his legs for some time just behind Jack, went and sat 
down somewhat discomfited. 

Jack pushed Tom on to his knees before the prettiest girl 
in the room—the prettiest strange girl, anyhow. Tom, 
furiously embarrassed on his knees, stammered : 

*““I say! There’s a considerable pile 0’ socks wantin’ 
darning in my ol’ camp. I’d go so far as to face the parson, 
if you’d do ’em for me.”’ 

It was beautifully non-committal. For all the Bushies 
were at heart terrified lest they might by accident contract 
a Scotch marriage, and be held accountable for it. 

Jack was amused by the odd, humorous expression of 
the young bush-farmers. Joe Low, scratching his head 
funnily, said : ** Ill put the pot on, if you’ll cook the stew.”’ 
But the most approved proposal was that of a well-to-do 
young farmer who is now a J.P., and head of a prosperous 
family. 

** Me ol’ dad an’ me ol’ lady, they never had no 
daughters. They gettin’ on well in years, and they kind 
0’ fancy one. I’ve gotter get ’em one, quick an’ lively. 
I’ve fifteen head 0’ cattle an’ seventy-six sheep, eighteen 
pigs an ’a fallowin’ sow. I’ve got one hundred an’ ninety- 
nine acres o’ cleared land, and ten improved with fruit trees. 
I’ve got forty ducks an’ hens an’ a flock o’ geese, an’ no 
one home to feed ’em. Meet me Sunday mornin’, eight- 
forty sharp, at the cross roads, an’ I’ll be there in me old 
sulky to drive y’out an’ show y’.” 

And the girl in pink, with a wide smile, answered 
seriously : 

6 T will if Mother’ll let me, Mr Burton.” 

The next girl had been looming up like a big coal-barge. 
she was a half-caste, of course named Lily, and she sat 
iweressively forwards, her long elbows and wrists much in 
svidence, and her pleasant swarthy face alight and eager 
vith anticipation. Oh, these Missioner half-castes ! 

Jack ordered Easu forward. 

But Easu was not to be baited. He strode over, put his 
1and on the fuzzy head, and said in his strong voice : 

‘© Hump y’r bluey and come home.”’ 

The laugh was with him, he had won again. 

134 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

ai 

They went down to the cold collation. There Jack found 
other arrivals. Mary had come in via York with Gran’s 
spinster daughters. Also the Greenlow girls from away 
back, and they made a great fuss of him. The doctor, too, 
turned up. He had been missing all day, but now he strolled - 
back and forth, chatting politely first to one and then an- 
other, but vague and washed-out to a degree. 

Jack’s anger coiled to rest at the supper, for Monica was 
very attentive to him. She sat next to him, found him 
the best pieces, and shared her glass with him, in her quick, 
dangerous, generous fashion, looking up at him with strange 
wide looks of offering, so that he felt very manly and very 
shy at the same time. But very glad to be near her. He 
felt that it was his spell that was upon her, after all, and 
though he didn’t really like flirting with her there in the 
public supper room, he loved her hand finding his under 
the cover of her sash, and her fingers twining into his as if 
she were entering into his body. Safely under the cover 
of her silk sash. He would have liked to hold her again, 
close, close; her agile, live body, quick as a cat’s. She was 
mysterious to him as some cat-goddess, and she excited him 
in a queer electric fashion. 

But soon she was gone again, elusive as a cat. And, of 
course, she was in great request. So Jack found himself 
talking to the little elderly Mary, with her dark animal’s 
museau. Mary was like another kind of cat : not the panther 
sort, but the quiet, dark, knowing sort. She was comfort- 
able to talk to, also, soft and stimulating. 

Jack and Mary sat on the edge of the barn, in the hot 
night, looking at the trees against the strange, ragged 
southern sky, hearing the frogs occasionally, and fighting 
the mosquitoes. Mrs Ellis also sat on the ledge not far off. 
And presently Jack and Mary were joined by the doctor. 
Then came Grace and Alec Rice, sitting a little farther 
down, and talking in low tones. The night seemed full of 
low, half-mysterious talking, in a starry darkness that 
seemed pregnant with the scent and presence of the black 
people. Jack often wondered why, in the night, the country 
still seemed to belong to the black people, with their strange 
big, liquid eyes. ; 

NEW YEAR’S EVE 135 

Where was Easu? Was he talking to Monica? Or to 
the black half-caste Lily? It might as well be the one as 
the other. The odd way he had placed his head on Lily’s 
black fuzzy head, as if he were master, and she a sort of 
concubine. She would give him all the submission he 
wanted. 

But then, why Monica? Monica in her white, full-skirted 
frock with its moulded bodice, her slender, golden-white 
arms and throat! Why Monica in the same class with the 
half-caste Lily? 

Anger against Easu was sharpening Jack’s wits, and 
curiously detaching him from his surroundings. He listened 
to the Australian voices and the Australian accent around 
him. The careless, slovenly speech in the unconirolled, 
slack, caressive voices. At first he had thought the accent 
awful. And it was awful. But gradually, as he got into 
the rhythm of the people, he began even to sympathise 
with ‘* Kytie *’ instead of ** Katie.’? There was an aban- 
don in it all—an abandon of restrictions and confining con- 
trol. Why have control? Why have authority? Why not 
let everybody do as they liked? Why not? 

That was what Australia was for, a careless freedom. An 
easy, unrestricted freedom. At least out in the bush. 
Every man to do as he liked. Easu to run round with 
Monica, or with the black Lily, or to kick Jack’s shins in 
the dance. 

Yes, even this. But Jack had scored it up. He was 
going to have his own back on Easu. He thought of Easu 
with his hand on the black girl’s fuzzy head. That would 
be just like Easu. And afterwards to want Monica. And 
Monica wouldn’t really mind about the black girl. Since 
EKasu was Hasu. 

Sitting there on the barn ledge, Jack in a vague way 
understood it all. And in a vague way tolerated it all. 
But with a dim yet fecund germ of revenge in his heart. 
He was not morally shocked. But he was going to be 
revenged. He did not mind Easu’s running with a black 
yirl, and afterwards Monica. Morally he did not mind it. 
But physically—perhaps pride of race—he minded. Physic- 
ally he could never go so far as to lay his hand on the 
jJarky’s fuzzy head. His pride of blood was too intense. 

He had no objection at all to Lily, until it came to actual 

136 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

physical contact. And then his blood recoiled with old 
haughtiness and pride of race. It was bad enough to have 
to come into contact with a woman of his own race; to have 
to give himself away even so far. The other was impossible. 

And yet he wanted Monica. But he knew she was fooling 
round with Easu. So deep in his soul formed the motive of 
revenge. 

There are times when a flood of realisation and purpose 
sweeps through a man. This was one of Jack’s times. He 
was not definitely conscious of what he realised and of what 
he purposed. Yet, there it was, resolved in him. 

He was trying not to hear Dr. Rackett’s voice talking © 
to Mary. Even Dr. Rackett was losing his Oxford drawl, 
and taking on some of the Australian ding-dong. But 
Rackett, like Jack, was absolutely fixed in his pride of 
race, no matter what extraneous vice he might have. Jack 
had a vague idea it was opium. Some chemical stuff. 

see's free run of old George’s books? I should say 
it was a doubtful privilege for a young lady. But you 
hardly seem to belong to West Australia. I think England 
is really your place. Do you actually want to belong, may 
Beaskrats 

‘*To Western Australia? To the country, yes, very 
much. I love the land, the country life, Dr. Rackett. I 
don’t care for the social life of a town like Perth. But I 
should like to live all my life on a farm—in the bush.’ 

** Would you now! ” said Rackett. ‘‘ I wonder where 
you get that idea from. You are the grand-daughter of 
an earl.”’ 

** Oh, my grandfather is further away from me than the 
moon. You would never know how far! ’? laughed Mary. 
** No, I am colonial born and bred. Though, of course, 
there is a fascination about the English. But I hardly 
knew Papa. He was a tenth child, so there wasn’t much 
of the earldom left to him. And then he was a busy A.D.C. 
to the Governor-General. And he married quite late in 
life. And then Mother died when I was little, and I got 
passed on to Aunt Matilda. Mother was Australian born. 
I don’t think there is much English in me.” 

Mary said it in a queer complacent way, as if there were 
some peculiar, subtle antagonism between England and the 
colonial, and she was ranged on the colonial side. As if 

NEW YEAR’S EVE 187 

pe were subtle enemy of the father, the English father in 
er. 

** Queer! Queer thing to me! ”? said Rackett, as if he 
half felt the antagonism. For he would never be colonial, 
not if he lived another hundred years in Australia. “ I 
suppose,”’ he added, pointing his pipe-stem upwards, ‘¢ it 
comes from those unnatural stars up there. I always feel 
they are doing something to me.”’ 

**T don’t think it’s the stars,’ laughed Mary. ‘*I am 
just Australian, in the biggest part of me, that’s all.’’ 

Jack could feel in the statement some of the antagonism 
that burned in his own heart, against his own country, his 
own father, his own empty fate at home. 

** If I’d been born in this country, I’d stick to it,’’ he 
broke in. 

** But since you weren’t born in it, what will you do, 
Grant? ”? asked the doctor ironically. 

** Stick to myself,”’ said Jack stubbornly, rather sulkily. 

** You won’t stick to Old England, then? ’”’ asked 
Rackett. 

' §* Seems I’m a misfit in Old England,”’ said Jack. ‘‘And 
I’m not going to squeeze my feet into tight boots.”’ 

Rackett laughed. 

‘* Rather go barefoot like Lennie? ”’ he laughed. 

Jack relapsed into silence, and turned a deaf ear, look- 
ing into the alien night of the southern hemisphere. And 
having turned a deaf ear to Rackett and Mary, he heard, 
as if by divination, the low voice of Alec Rice proposing 
in real earnest to Grace : proposing in a low, urgent voice 
that sounded like a conspiracy... 

He -rose to go away. But Mary laid a detaining hand 
on his arm, as if she wished to include him in the conversa- 
tion, and did not wish to be left alone with Dr. Rackett. 

** Don’t you sympathise with me, Jack, for wishing I had 
been a boy, to make my own way in the world, and have 
my own friends, and size things up for myself? ” 

** Seems to me you do size things up for yourself,”’ said 
Jack rather crossly. ‘* A great deal more than most men 
do.”’ 

‘6 Yes, but I can’t do things as I could if I were a man.” 

‘¢ What can a man do, then, more than a woman—that’s 
worth doing? ”? asked Rackett. 

188 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘‘ He can see the world, and love as he wishes to love, 
and work.”* 

‘‘ No man can love as he wishes to love,’’ said Rackett. 
‘‘ He’s nearly always stumped, in the love game.” 

“* But he can choose! ’’ persisted Mary. 

And Jack with his other ear was hearing Alec Rice’s 
low voice persisting : 4 

“‘ Go on, Grace, you’re not too young. You’re just right. 
You’re just the ticket now. Go on, let’s be engaged and 
tell your Dad and fix it up. We’re meant for one another, 
you know we are. Don’t you think we’re meant for one — 
another? ” 

‘¢ T never thought about it that way, truly.” 

‘¢ But don’t you think so now? Yes, you do.” 

Silence—the sort that gives consent. And the silence of 
a young, spontaneous embrace. 

Jack was on tenterhooks. He wanted to be gone. But 
Mary was persisting, in her obstinate voice—he wished she’d 
shut up, too. 

‘© I wanted to be a sailor at ten, and an explorer at 
twelve. At nineteen I wanted to become a painter of 
wonderful pictures with very noble subjects.”” Jack 
wished she wouldn’t say all this. ‘* And then I had a 
streak of humility, and wanted to be a gardener. Yet ”’ 
—she laughed—*‘ not a sort of gardener such as Aunt 
Matilda hires. I wanted to grow things and see them come 
up out of the earth. And see baby chicks hatched, and 
calves and lambs born.”’ 

She had lifted her hand from Jack’s sleeve, to his relief. 

‘*'Then marry a farmer like Tom,’ he said roughly. 
Mary received this with dead silence. ‘ 

‘* And drudge your soul away like Mrs Ellis,’ said 
Rackett. ‘* Worn out before your time, between babies 
and heavy house-work. Groping on the earth all your life, 
grinding yourself into ugliness at work which some animal 
of a servant-lass would do with half the effort. Don’t you 
think of it, Miss Mary. Let the servant lasses marry the 
farmers. You’ve got too much in you. Don’t go and have 
what you’ve got in you trampled out of you by marrying 
some cooky farmer. Tom’s as good as gold, but he wants 
a brawny lass of his own sort for a wife. You be careful, 
Miss Mary. Women can find themselves in ugly harness, 

NEW YEAR’S EVE 189 

put here in these god-forsaken colonies. | Worse harness 
than any you’ve ever kicked against.”’ 

Monica seemed to have scented the tense atmosphere 
under the barn, for she appeared like a young witch, in a 
whirlwind. 

** Hello, Mary! Hello, Dr. Rackett! It’s just on mid- 
uight.”” And she flitted over to Grace. “ Just on mid- 
light, Grace and Alec. Are you coming? You seem as if 
you were fixed here.’’ 

** We’re not fixed on the spot, but we’re fixed up all 
ight, otherwise,’’ said Alec, in a slight tone of resentment, 
is he rose from Grace’s side. 

** Oh, have you and Grace fixed it up! ” exclaimed 
Monica, with a false vagueness and innocence. “I’m 
wiully glad. I’m awfully glad, Grace.’’ 

**T am,’’ said Grace, with a faint touch of resentment, 
nd she rose and took Alec’s arm. 

They were already like a married couple armed against 
hat witch. Had she been flirting with Alec, and then 
ushed him over on to Grace? Jack sensed it with the 
ixth sense which divines these matters. 

Monica appeared at his side. 

** It’s just twelve. Come and hold my hand in the ring. 
fary can hold your other hand. Come on! Come on, Alec, 
s well. I don’t want any strangers next to me to-night.”’ 

Jack smiled sardonically to himself as she impulsively 
aught hold of his hand. Monica was ** a circumstance over 
Thich we have no control,’’ Lennie said. Jack felt that 
e had a certain control. 

They all took hands as she directed, and moved into 
he barn to link up with the rest of the chain. There, in 
ne soft light of the big chamber, Easu suddenly appeared, 
jthout collar or cravat, his hair ruffled, his white suit 
mnsiderably creased. But he lurched up in his usual 
geressive way, with his assertive good humour, demand- 
ig to break in between Jack and Monica. Jack held on, 
nd Monica said : 

** You mustn’t break in, you know it makes enemies.” 
* Does it! ’? grinned Easu. And with sardonic good 
amour he lurched away to an unjoined part of the ring. 
e carried about with him a sense of hostile power. But 
ack was learning to keep within himself another sort of 

140 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

power, small and concentrated and fixed like a stone, the | 
sort of power that ultimately would break through the bulk 
of Easu’s domineering. 

The ring complete at last, they all began to sing : “ Cheer, 
boys, cheer!’ and ‘‘ God Bless the Prince of Wales,” 
‘‘ John Brown’s Body,’? and ‘‘ Britons Never Never 
Never.”’ 

Then Easu bawled : * Midnight !”? There was a moment’s 
frightened pause. Joe Low blasted on the cornet, his toe 
beating time madly all the while. Fiddles, whistles, con- 
certinas, Jew’s harps raggedly began to try out the tune. — 
The clasped hands began to rock, and taking Easu’s shout- 
ing lead, they all began to sing in the ring : 

** Should auld acquaintance be forgot, 
An’ never brought to min’? 
Should auld acquaintance be forgot, 
And the days of auld lang syne? 

For auld lang syne, my dear, 
For auld lang syne, 

We’ll tak’ a cup o’ kindness yet 
For the days of auld lang syne.’ 

They all sang heartily and with feeling. There was a 
queer Scottish tang in the colony, that made the Scottish 
emotion dominant. Jack disliked it. There was no auld 
acquaintance, or auld lang syne, at least for him. And he 
didn’t care for these particular cups of kindness, in one ring 
with Easu, black Lily, Dr. Rackett, and Monica, and all. 
He didn’t like the chain of emotion and supposed pathetic 
clanship. It was worse here even than on shipboard. 

Why start the New Year like this? As a matter of fact 
he wanted to forget most of his own Auld Acquaintance, 
and start something a little different. And any rate, the 
ce was spurious, the chain was artificial, the flow was 
alse. 

Monica seemed to take a wicked pleasure in it, and sang 
more emotionally than anybody, in a sweet but smallish 
voice. And poor little Mary, with her half audible murmur 
had her eyes full of tears and seemed so moved, : 

Auld lang syne! 

NEW YEAR’S EVE 141 

Old Long Since. 
Why not put it in plain English? 

iv 

The celebration did not end with Auld Lang Syne. By 
half-past two most of the ladies had retired, though some 
ardent dancers still footed the floor, and a chaperone or 
two, like crumpled rag-bags, slept on their boxes. A good 
number of young men and boys were asleep with Herbert 
on the sacks, handkerchiefs knotted round their throats 
in place of collars. The concertina, the cornet, the fiddles 
and the rest of the band had gone down to demolish the 
remains of the cold collation, whilst Tom, Ross, and Ned 
sat on the barn steps singing as uproariously as they could, 
though a little hoarse, for the last dancers to dance to. 
Someone was whistling very sweetly. 

Where was Easu? Jack wondered as he wandered aim- 
lessly out into the night. Where was Easu? For Jack had 
it on his mind that he ought to fight him. Felt he would 
be a coward if he didn’t tackle him this very night. 

But it was three o’clock, the night was very still and rich, 
still warm, rather close, but not oppressive. The strange 
heaviness of the hot summer night, with the stars thick 
in clouds and clusters overhead, the moon being gone. 
Jack strayed aimlessly through the motionless, dark, warm 
air, till he came to the paddock gate, and there he leaned 
with his chin on his arms, half asleep. It seemed to be 
growing cooler, and a dampness was bringing out the scent 
of the sorched grass, the essence of the earth, like incense. 
There was a half-wild bush with a few pale pink roses 
near the gate. He could just get their fragrance. If it were 
as it should be, Monica would be here, in one of her wistful, 
her fiercely wistful moments! When she looked at him 
with her yellow eyes and her fierce, naive look of yearning, 
he was ready to give all his blood to her. If things were 
as they should be, she would be clinging to him now like 
that, and nestling against his breast. If things were as they 
should be! 

He didn’t want to go to sleep. He wanted what he 
wanted. He wanted the night, the young, changeable, 
yearning Monica, and an answer to his own awake young 

142 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

blood. He insisted on it. He would not go to sleep, he 
would insist on an answer. And he wanted to fight Hasu. 
He ought to fight Easu. His manhood depended on it. 

He could hear the cattle stirring down the meadow. 
Soon it would begin to be day. What was it now? It 
was night, dark night towards morning, with a faint breath- 
ing of air from the sea. And where was he? He was in 
Australia, leaning on the paddock gate and seeing the stars 
and the dim shape of the gum tree. There was a faint 
scent of eucalyptus in the night. His mother was far away. 
England was far away. He was alone there leaning on the 
paddock gate, in Australia. ; 

After all, perhaps the very best thing was to be alone. 
Better even than having Monica or fighting Easu. Because 
where you are alone you are at one with your own God. 
The spirit in you is God in you. And when you are alone 
you are one with the spirit of God inside you. Other people 
are chiefly an interruption. 

And, moreover, he could never say he was lonely while 
he was at ‘* Wandoo,’’ while there was Tom and Lennie, 
and Monica, and all the rest. He hoped he would have 
them all his life. He hoped he would never, in all his life, 
say good-bye to them. 

No, he would take up land as near this homestead as 
possible, and build a brick house on it. And he would have 
a number of fine horses, better than anyone else’s, and some 
sheep that would pay, and a few cows. Always milk and 
butter with the wheat-meal damper. 

What was that? Only a morepork. He laid his head 
on his arms again, on the gate. He wanted a place of his 
own, now. He would have it now if he had any money. 
And marry Monica. Would he marry Monica? Would he 
marry anybody? He much preferred the whole family. 
But he wanted a place of his own. If he could hurry up 
his father. And old Mr George. He might persuade Mr 
George to be on his side. Why was there never any money? 
No money! A father ought to have some money for a son. 

What was that? He saw a dim white figure stealing across 
the near distance. Pah! must have been a girl sitting out 
under the pitosperum tree. When he had thought he was 
quite alone. 

The thought upset him. And he ought to find Easu. 

NEW YEAR’S EVE 148 

Obstinately he insisted to himself that he ought to find 
Easu. 

He drifted towards the shed near the cubby, where Mr 
Ellis kept the tools. Somebody unknown and unauthorised 
had put a barrel of beer inside the shed. Men were there 
drinking, as he knew they would be. 

** Have a pot, youngster? ”? 

** Thanks.*? 

He sat down on a case beside the door, and drank the 
rather warm beer. His head began to drop. He knew he 
was almost asleep. 

Easu loomed up from the dark, coatless, hatless, with 
his shirt front open, asking for a drink. He was thirsty. 
Easu was thirsty. How could you be angry with a thirsty 
man! And he wasn’t so bad, after all. No, Easu wasn’t 
so bad after all! What did it matter! What did it matter, 
anyhow? 

Jack slipped to the ground and lay there fast asleep. 

CHAP: X. SHADOWS BEFORE 
i 

But in the morning memory was back, and the unquenched 
smouldering of passion. Easu had insulted him. EHasu 
had insulted him, and that should never be forgiven. And 
he had this new, half painful, more than half painful desire 
to see Monica, to be near her, to touch her hand; a sort 
of necessity upon him all the while which he was not used — 
to. It made him restless, uneasy, and for the first time in 
his life, a little melancholy. He was used to feeling angry : 
a steady, almost blithe sort of anger. And beyond that 
he had always been able to summon up an indifference to 
things, cover them with oblivion : to retreat upon himself 
and insulate himself from contact. 

Now he could no longer do this, and it fretted him, made 
him accessible to melancholy. The hot, hot January days, 
all dry flaming heat, and flies, and mosquitoes, passed over 
him, leaving him strange even to himself. There was 
work, the drudging work of the farm, all the while. And 
one just sweated. He learned to submit to it, to the sweat- 
ing all the time during the day, and the mosquitoes at 
night. It was like a narcotic. The old, English alertness 
grew darker and darker. He seemed to be moving, a dim 
consciousness and an unyielding will, in a dark cloud of 
heat, in a perspiring, dissolving body. He could feel his 
body, the English cool body of his being, slowly melting 
down and being invaded by a new tropical quality. Some- 
times, he said to himself, he was sweating his soul away. 
That was how it felt : as if he were sweating his soul away. 
And he let his soul go, let it slowly melt away out of his 
wet, hot body. 

Any man who has been in the tropics, unless he has kept 
all his mind and his consciousness focussed homewards, 
fixed towards the old people of home, will know how this 
feels. Now, Jack did not turn homewards, back to Eng- 
land. He never wanted to go back. There was in him a 
slow, abiding anger against this same ‘‘ home.?? There- 
fore he let himself go down the dark tide of the heat. He 
did not cling on to his oe soul, the soul of an 

SHADOWS BEFORE 145 

English gentleman. He let that dissolve out of him, leaving 
what residuum of a man it might leave. But out of very 
sbstinacy he hung on to his own integrity : a small, dark, 
obscure integrity. 

_ Usually he was too busy perspiring, panting, and working 
0 think about anything. His mind also seemed dissolving 
way in perspiration and in the curious eucalyptus solvent 
i the Australian air. He was too busy and too much heat- 
yppressed even to think of Monica or of Easu, though 
Monica was a live wire in his body. Only on Sundays he 
eemed to come half out of his trance. And then every- 
hing went queer and strange, a little uncanny. 

Dad was back again for the harvest, but his heart was 
10 better, and a queer frightening cloud seemed over him. 
ind Gran, they said, was failing. Somehow Gran was the 
residing deity of the house. Her queer spirit controlled, 
ven now. And she was failing. She adored Lennie, but 
e was afraid of her. 

** Gran’s the limit,’? he asserted. ‘* She’s that wilful. 
\lways the same with them women when they gets well on 
n years. I clear out from her if I can, she’s that obstropul- 
us—tells y’t’wipe y’nose, pull up y’pants, brush y’teeth, 
ot sniff: golly, I can’t stand it! ”’ 

Sunday was the day when you really came into contact 
rith the family. The rule was, that each one took it in 
urns to get up and make breakfast, while everybody else 
tayed on in bed, for a much-needed rest. If it was your turn, 
ou rolled out of bed at dawn when Timothy banged on the 
all, you slipped on your shirt and pants and went to the 
everlasting ’’ fire. Raking the ashes together with a 
andful of sticks, you blew a blaze and once more smelt 
ne burning eucalyptus leaves. You filled the black iron 
ettle at the pump, and set if over the flame. Then you 
rashed yourself. After which you carved bread and butter : 
ny bits for Gran, moderate pieces for upstairs, and door- 
eps for the cubby. After which you made the tea, and 
olloa’d! while you poured it out. One of the girls, with a. 
at over her nighty and her hair in a chinon, would come 
arefoot to carry the trays, to Gran and to the upstairs. 
his was just the preliminary breakfast : the Sunday morn- 
ig luxury. Just tea in bed. 

Later the boys were shouting for clean shirts and towels, 

146 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

and the women were up. Proceeded the hair-cutting, nail- 
paring, button-sewing, and general murmur, all under the 

. superivision of Ma. Then down to the sand-bagged pool — 
for a dip. After which, clean and in clean raiment, you 
went to the parlour to hear Dad read the lessons. 

The family Bible was carefully kept warm in the parlour, — 
during the week, under a woollen crochet mat. A crochet 
mat above, and a crochet mat below. Nothing must ever 
stand on that book, nothing whatever. The children were 
quite superstitious about it. 

Lennie, the Benjamin of his father Jacob, each Sunday 
went importantly into the drawing-room, in a semi-religious . 
silence, and fetched the ponderous brass-bound book. He 
put it on the table in front of Dad. Gran came in with her 
stick and her lace cap, and sat in the arm-chair near the 
window. Mrs Ellis and the children folded their hands like 
saints. Mr Ellis wiped his spectacles, cleared his throat, 
looked again at the little church calendar of the lessons, 
found the place, and proceeded in a droning voice. Nobody 
looked at him, except Mrs Ellis. Everybody looked an- 
other way. Gran usually gazed sideways at the floor. - 
Tick, tock! went the clock. It was a little eternity. 

Jack knew the Bible pretty well, as a well-brought-up 
nephew of his aunts. He had no objection to the Bible. 
On the contrary, it supplied his imagination with a chief 
stock of images, his ear with the greatest solemn pleasure 
of words, and his soul with a queer heterogeneous ethic. 
He never really connected the Bible with Christianity 
proper, the Christianity of aunts and clergymen. He had 
no use for Christianity proper : just dismissed it. But the 
Bible was perhaps the foundation of his consciousness. Do 
what seems good to you in the sight of the Lord. This 
was the moral he always drew from Bible lore. And since 
the Lord, for him, was always the Lord Almighty, Almighty 
God, Maker of Heaven and Earth, Jesus being only a side 
issue; since the Lord was always Jehovah the great and 
dark, for him, one might do as David did, in the sight of 
the Lord, or as Jacob, or as Abraham or Moses or Joshua 
or Isaiah, in the sight of the Lord. The sight of the Lord 
was a vast strange scope of vision, in the semi-dark. 

Gran always listened the same, leaning on her stick and 
looking sideways to the ground, as if she did not quite see 

SHADOWS BEFORE 147 

the stout and purple-faced Jacob, her son, as the mouth- 
piece of the Word. As a matter of fact, the way he read 
Scripture irritated her. She wished Lennie could have 
read the lessons. But Dad was head of the house, and she 
was fond of him, poor old Jacob. 

And Jack always furtively watched Gran. She frightened 
him, and he had a little horror of her: but she fascinated 
him, too. She was like Monica, at the great distance of 
her years. Her lace cap was snowy white, with little 
lavendar ribbons. Her face was pure ivory, with fine- 
shaped features, that subtly arched nose, like Monica’s. 
Her silver hair came over her dead looking ears. And her 
dry, shiny, blue-veined hand remained fixed over the 
pommel of her black stick. How awful, how unspeakably 
awful, Jack felt, to be so old! No longer human. And 
she seemed so little inside her clothes. And one never 
<new what she was thinking. But surely some strange, 
uncanny, dim non-human thoughts. 

Sunday was full of strange, half painful impressions of 
leath and of life. After lessons the boys would escape to 
sche yards, and the stables, and lounge about. Or they 
would try the horses, or take a gun into the uncleared 
jush. Then came the enormous Sunday dinner, when 
-veryone ate himself stupid. 

In the afterngon Tom and Jack wandered to the loft, to 
he old concertina. Up there among the hay, they squeezed 
ind pulled the old instrument, till at last, after much 
yractice, they could draw forth tortured hymnal sounds 
rom its protesting internals. 

‘‘ Ha-a-appy Ho-ome! Ha-appy Ho-ome! 
Oh, Haa-py Ho-me! Oh, Haa-py Ho-me! 
In Paradise with thee! ”’ 

Over and over again the same tune, till Tom would drop 
ff to sleep, and Jack would have a go at it. And this 
earning sort of hymn always sent a chill to his bowels. 
‘hey were like Gran, on the brink of the grave. In fact 
he word Paradise made him shudder worse than.the word 
offin. Yet he would grind away at the tune. Till he, too, 
ell asleep. | : 

And then they would wake in the heat to the silence of 

148 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

the suspended, fiercely hot afternoon. Only to feel their 
own sweat trickling, and to hear the horses, the draught- 
horses which were in stable for the day, chop-chopping 
underneath. So, in spite of sweat and heat, another go 
at the fascinating concertina. 

ii 

One Sunday Jack strolled in an hour early for tea. He 
had made a mistake, as one does sometimes when one 
sleeps in the afternoon. Gran was sitting by a little fire 
in the dark living room. She had to have a little fire to 
look at. It was like life to her. ; 

*© Come here, Jack Grant,’’ she said in her thin imperious 
voice. He went on reluctant feet, for he had a dread of 
her years and her strange femaleness. What did she want 
of him? . 

** Did y’hear Mr George get my son to promise to make 
a will when y’were in Perth? ” 

‘* No, marm,”’ said Jack promptly. E 

** Well, take it from me, if he promised, he hasn’t done 
it. He never signed a paper in his life, unless it was his 
marriage register. And but for my driving he’d never have 
signed that. Sit down! ” ; 

Jack sat on the edge of a chair, his heart in his boots. 

** I told you before I’d ha’ married your grandfather if 
he hadn’t been married already. I wonder where you’d 
ha’ been then! Just as well I didn’t, for he wouldn’t look 
at me after he took my leg off. Just come here a minute.” 

Jack got up and went to her side. She put her soft, dry, 
dead old hand on his face and stroked it, pressing on the 
cheek-bones. 

‘* Ay,” she said. ‘* I suppose those are his bones again. 
And my bones are in Monica. Don’t stand up, lad, take 
your seat.”’ 

Jack sat down in extreme discomfort. 

** Well,”? she resumed, ‘‘ I was very well off with old 
Ellis, so I won’t complain. But you’ve got your English 
father’s eyes. You’d have been better with mine. Those 
bones, those beautiful bones, and my sort of eyes | 

Gran’s eyes were queer and remote now. But they had 

SHADOWS BEFORE 149 

geen perhaps like Monica’s, only a darker grey, and with a 
larker, subtler cat look in them. 

**I suppose it will be in the children’s children,’? she 
esumed, her eyes going out like a candle. ‘* For I married 
Id Ellis, though to this day I never quite believe it. And 
me thing Ido know. I won’t die in the dying room of this 
1ouse. I won’t do it, not if it was the custom of a hundred 
amilies. Not if he was here himself to see me do it. I 
vouldn’t. Though he was kindness itself. But not if he 
vas here himself and had the satisfaction of seeing me do 
t! A dreadful room! I’d be frightened to death to die 
nit. I like me sheets sun-kissed, heat or no heat, and no 
un ever gets into that room. But it’s better for a woman 
Oo marry, even if she marries the wrong man. I allus said 
o. An old maid, especially a decayed gentlewoman, is a 
light on the face of the earth.”’ 

** Why? ”? said Jack suddenly. The old woman was too 
uthoritative. 

*¢ That’s why! What do you know about it?’ she said 
ontemptuously. 

** I knew a nice old lady in England who’d never been 
aarried,’? he said, thinking of a really beautiful, gentle 
7oman who had kept all her perfume and her charm in spite 
f her fifty-odd years of single blessedness. But, then, she 
ad a naturally deep and religious nature, not like this 
agan old cat of a Gran. 

** Did you! ’? said Gran, eyeing him severely. ‘* What 
o you know at your age? I’ve got three unmarried 
aughters, and I’m ashamed of them. If I’d married your 
randfather I never should have had them. Self-centred, 
nd old as old boots, they are. I’d rather they’d gone 
rong and died in the bush, like your aunt who had a child 
y Mary’s father.”” 

Jack made round, English eyes of amazement at this 
peech. He disapproved thoroughly. 

“© You’ve got too much of your English father in you,” 
he said, *‘ and not enough of your hard-hearted grand- 
sther. Look at Lennie, what a beautiful boy he is.” 

There was a pause. Jack sat in a torment while she 
aited him. He was full of antagonism towards her and 
er years. 

‘¢ But, I tell you, you never realise you’re old till you 

150 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

see your friends slipping away. One by one they go—over 
the border. That’s what makes you feel old. I tell you. 
Nothing else. Annie Brockman died the other day. I was 
at school with her. She wasn’t old, though you’d have 
thought so.” : 

The way Gran said this was quite spiteful. And Jack 
thought to himself: ‘“‘ What nonsense, she was old if she 
was at school with Gran. If she was as old as Gran, she 
was awfully old.” 

‘‘ No, she wasn’t old—school-girls and fellows laughing 

in the ball room, or breathing fast after a hard ride. You — 

didn’t know Sydney in those days. And men grown old 
behind their beards for want of understanding; because 
they’re too dense to understand what living means. Men 
are dense. Are ye listening ?” 

The question came with such queer aged force that Jack 
started almost out of his chair. 

** Yes, marm,” he said. 

‘* ¢ Yes, marm ’ he says! ”? she repeated, with a queer 
little grin of amusement. ‘* Listen to this grandfather’s 
chit saying ‘ Yes, marm!’ tome! Well, they’ll have their 
way. My friends are nearly all gone, so I suppose I shali 

soon be going. Not but what there’s plenty of amusement 

here.”? 

She looked round in an odd way, as if she saw ghosts. | 

Jack would have given his skin to escape her. 

‘* Listen,’’ she said with sudden secrecy. ‘‘ I want ye to 

do something for me. You love Lennie, don’t ye? ”? 

Jack nodded. 

**So do I! And I’m going to help him.”? Her voice 
became sharp with secrecy. ‘* I’ve put by a stocking for 
him,” she hissed. ‘* At least it’s not a stocking, it’s a 
tin box, but it’s the same thing. It’s up there! *? She 
pointed with her stick at the wide black chimney. ‘ D’ye 
understand ? ”? 

She eyed Jack with aged keenness, and he nodded, though 
his understanding was rather vague. Truth to tell, nothing 
she said seemed to him quite real. As if, poor Gran, her 
age put her outside of reason. 

** That stocking is for Lennie. Tom’s mother was nobody 
knows who, though I’m not going to say Jacob never 
married her, if Jacob says he did. But Tom’ll get every- 

: 

SHADOWS BEFORE 151 

hing. The same as Jacob did. That’s how it hits back at 
ne. I wanted Jacob to have the place, and now it goes to 
fom, and my little Lennie gets nothing. Alice has been a 
ood woman, and a good wife to Jacob: better than he 
leserved. I’m going to stand by her. That stocking in 
here is for Lennie because he’s her eldest son. In a tin 
ox. Y’understand? ”* 

And she pointed again at the chimney. 

Jack nodded, though he didn’t really take it in. He had 
_ little horror of Gran at all times; but when she took on 
his witch-like portentousness, and whispered at him in a 
harp, aged whisper, about money, hidden money, it all 
eemed so abnormal to him that he refused to take it for 
eal. The queer aged female spirit that had schemed with 
1oney for the men-folk she chose, scheming to oust those 
he had not elected, was so strange and half-ghoulish, that 
e merely shrank from taking it in. When she pointed with 
er white-headed stick at the wide black mouth of the 
himney, he glanced and looked quickly away again. He 
id not want to think of a hoard of sovereigns in a stocking 
-or a tin box—secreted in there. He did not want to think 
f the subtle, scheming, vindictive old woman reaching up 
ito the soot to add more gold to the hoard. It was all 
anatural to him and to his generation. 

But Gran despised him and his generation. It was as 
nreal to her as hers to him. 

** Old George couldn’t even persuade that Jacob of mine 
) sign a marriage settlement,’’ she continued. ‘* And I 
asn’t going to force him. Would you believe a man could 
> such an obstinate fool? ” 

s‘ Yes, marm,’’ said Jack automatically. 

And Gran stamped her stick at him in sudden vicious 

ge. ; 
The stamping of the stick brought Grace, and he fled. 

iii 
That evening they were all sitting in the garden. The 
awing-room was thrown open, as usual on Sunday, but 
body even went in except to strum the piano. Monica 
4s strumming hymns now. Grace came along calling 
ary. Mary was staying on at “‘ Wandoo,”’ 

152 THE BOY IN THE BUSH . 

‘‘ Mary, Gran wants you. She feels faint. Come and see 
to her, will you? ” ; 

Ellie came and slipped her fat little hand into Jack S, 
hanging on to him. Katie and Lennie sat surreptitiously 
playing cats’-cradle, on the steps: forbidden act, on the 
Sabbath. The twin boys wriggled their backs against the 
gate-posts and their toes into the earth, asking each other 
riddles. Harry as usual aimed stones at birds. It was a 
close evening, the wind had not come. And they all were 
uneasy, with that uncanny uneasiness that attacks families, 
because Gran was not well. 

Harry was singing profanely, profaning the Sabbath. 

s* A blue jay sat on a hickory limb, 
He wink at me, I wink at him. 
I up with a stone, an’ hit him on the shin. 
Says he, Little Nigger, don’ do that agin } 
Clar de kitchen, ol’ folk, young folk! 
Clar de kitchen, ol’ folk, young folk} 
An’ let us dance till dawn O.” 

Harry shouted out these wicked words half loud to a 
tune of his own that was no tune. 

Jack did not speak. The sense of evening, Sunday even- 
ing, far away from any church or bell, was strong upon him. 
The sun was slow in the sky, and the light intensely strong, 
all fine gold. He went out to look. The sunlight flooded 
the dry, dry earth till it glowed again, and the gum trees 
that stood up hung tresses of liquid shadow from trunks of 
gold, and the buildings seemed to melt blue in the vision 
of light. Someone was riding in from westward, and a 
cloud of pure gold-dust rose fuming from the earth about 
the horse and the horseman, with a vast, overwhelming 
gold glow of the void heavens above. The whole west was 
so powerful with pure gold light, coming from immense 
space and the sea, that it seemed like a transfiguration, 
and another horseman rode fuming in a dust of light as if 
he were coming, small and Daniel-like, out of the vast 
furnace-mouth of creation. Jack looked west, into the 
welter of yellow light, in fear. He knew again, as he had 
known before, that his day was not the day of all the 
world, there was a huger sunset than the sunset of his race. 
There were vaster, more unspeakable gods than the gods of 

SHADOWS BEFORE 153 

is fathers. The god in this yellow fire was huger than the 
ee men could understand, and seemed to proclaim their 
oom. 

Out of this immense power of the glory seemed to come 
, proclamation of doom. Lesser glories must crumble to 
owder in this greater glow, as the horsemen rode trotting 
o the glorified cloud of the earth, spuming a glory all 
ound them. They seemed like messengers out of the great 
yest, coming with a proclamation of doom, the small, 
rotting, aureoled figures kicking up dust like sun-dust, and 
radually growing larger, hardening out of the sea of light. 
ike sun-arrivals. 

Though, after all, it was only Alec Rice and Tom. But 
hey were gilded men, dusty and sun-luminous, as they 
ame into the yard, with their brown faces strangely vague 
n shadow, unreal. 

The sun was setting, huge and liquid and sliding down 
t immense speed behind the far-off molten, wavering long 
idge towards the coast. Fearsome the great liquid sun 
fas, stooping fiercely down like an enemy stooping to hide 
is glory, leaving the sky hovering and pulsing above, with 

sense of wings, and a sense of proclamation, and of 
oom. It seemed to say to Jack : I and my race are doomed. 
ut even the doom is a splendour. 

Shadow lay very thin on the earth, pale as day, though 
he sun was gone. Jack turned back to the house. The 
my twins were staggering home to find their supper, their 
ands in the pockets of their Sunday breeches. The pockets 
f everyday breeches were, for some mysterious reason, 
lways sewn up, so Sunday alone knew this swagger. Harry 
as being calied in to bed. And Len and Katie, rarely far 
ff at meal times, were converging towards supper too. 

Monica was still drumming listlessly on the piano, and 
nging in a little voice. She had a very sweet voice, but she 
sually sang “* small.’? She was not singing a hymn, Jack 
ecame aware of this. She was singing, rather nervously, 
r irritably, and with her own queer yearning pathos : 

© Oh Jane, Oh Jane, my pretty Jane, Oh Jane 
Ah never, never look so shy. 
But meet me, meet me in the moonlight, 
When the dew is on the rye.” 

154 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Someone had lighted the piano candles, and she sat there - 
strumming and singing in a little voice, and looking queer 
and lonely. His heart went hot in his breast, and then 
started pounding. He crossed silently, and stood just 
behind her. For some moments she would not notice him, 
but went on singing the same. And he stood perfectly still 
close behind her. Then, at last, she glanced upward at 
him, and his heart stood still again with the same sense of 
doom the sun had given him. She still went on singing 
for afew moments. Then she stopped abruptly, and jerked 
her hand from the piano. : 

‘¢ Don’t you want to sing? ”’ she asked sharply. 

‘** Not particularly.” 

*¢ What do you want then? ”? 

** Let us go out.”’ 

She looked at him strangely, then rose in her abrupt 
fashion. She followed him across the yard in silence, while 
he felt the curious sense of doom settling down on him. 

He sat down on the step of the back-door of the barn, 
outside, looking southward into the vast, rapidly darken- 
ing country, and glanced up at her. She, rather petulantly, 
sat down beside him. He felt for her cool slip of a hand, 
and she let it lie in his hot one. But she averted 
her face. 

‘© Why don’t you like me? *” she asked petulantly. 

** But I love you,”’ he said thickly, with shame and the 
sense of doom piercing his heart. 

She turned swiftly and stared him in the face with a 
brilliant, oddly triumphant look. 

** Sure? ” she said. 

His heart seemed to go black with doom. But he turned 
away his face from her glowing eyes, and put his arm round 
her waist, and drew her to him. His whole body was 
trembling like a taut string, and she could feel the painful 
plunging of his heart as he pressed her fast against him, 
pressed the breath out of her. 

** Monica! ’? he murmured blindly, in pain, like a man 
who is in the dark. 

** What? ” she said softly. 

He hid his face against her shoulder, in the shame and 
anguish of desire. He would have given anything, if this 
need never have come upon him. But the strange fine 

SHADOWS BEFORE 155 

juivering of his body thrilled her. She put her cheek down 
aressingly against his hair. She could be very tender, 
very, very tender and caressing. And he grew quieter. 

He looked up at the night again, hot with pain and doom 
ind necessity. It had grown quite dark, the stars were out. 

** TI suppose we shall have to be married,’’ he said in a 
lismal voice. 

** Why? ”’ she laughed. It seemed a very sudden and 
ong stride to her. He had not even kissed her. 

But he did not answer, did not even hear her question. 
jhe watched his fine young face in the dark, looking sullen 
ind doomed at the stars. 

_** Kiss me! ”? she whispered, in the most secret whisper 
ie had ever heard. ‘‘ Kiss me! ”* 

He turned, in the same battle of unwillingness. But as 
f magnetised he put forward his face and kissed her on the 
nouth : the first kiss of his life. And she seemed to hold 
im. And the fierce, fiery pain of pleasure which came with 
hat kiss sent his soul rebelling in torment to hell. He had 
ever wanted to be given up, to be broken by the black 
ands of this doom. But broken he was, and his soul 
eemed to be leaving him, in the pain and obsession of this 
esire, against which he struggled so fiercely. 

She seemed to be pleased, to be laughing. And she was 
Xquisitely sweet to him. How could he be otherwise than 
aught, and broken. 

After an hour of this love-making she blackened him again 
y saying they must go in to supper. But she meant it, so 
1 he had to go. $ 

Only when he was alone again in the cubby did he re- 
ame the fight to recover himself from her again. To be 
ee as he had been before. Not to be under the torment 
f the spell of this desire. To preserve himself intact. To 
reserve himself from her. 

He lay awake in his bed in the cubby and thanked God he 
as away from her. Thanked God he was alone, with a 
ifficient space of loneliness around him. Thanked God he 
as immune from her, that he could sleep in the sanctity 
t his own isolation. He didn’t want even to think about 
oD 

156 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

iv 

Gran did not leave her room that week, and Tom talked 
of fetching the relations. 

‘* What for? ”? asked Jack. 

** They’d like to be present,”’ said Tom. 

Jack felt incredulous. 

Lennie came out of her room sniffing and wiping his eyes 
with his knuckles. 

“* Poor ol’ girl! ’? he sniffed. ‘* She do look frail. She’s 
almost like a little girl again.”’ | 

** You don’t think she’s dying, do you, Len? ” asked 
Jack. 

*©IT don’t think, I knows,’’ replied Len, with utmost 
scorn. ‘* Sooner or later she’s bound to go hence and be 
no more seen. But she’ll be missed, for many a day, she 
will.”? 

** But, Tom,” said Jack. ‘* Do you think Gran will like 
to have all the relations sniffling round her when she gets 
worse? *? 

** T should think so,’’ replied Tom. ‘* Anyway, I should 
like to die respectable, whether you would or not.”’ 

Jack gave it up. Some things were beyond him, and 
dying respectable was one of them. 

** Like they do in books,”’ said Len, seeing that Jack 
disapproved, and trying to justify Tom’s position. ‘* Even 
ol’? Nelson died proper. ‘ Kiss me, ’Ardy,’ he said, an’ 
*Ardy kissed him, grubby and filthy as he was. He could 
do no less, though it was beastly.” 

Still the boys were not sent for the relations until the 
following Sunday, which was a rest day. Jack went to the 
Gum Valley Homestead, because he knew the way. He 
set off before dawn. The terrific heat of the New Year had 
already passed, and the dawn came fresh and lovely. He 
was happy on that ride, Gran or no Gran. And that’s what 
he thought would be the happiest: always to ride on at 
dawn, in a nearly virgin country. Always to be riding 
away. 

The Greenlows seemed to expect him. They had been 
‘* warned.”’ After he had been refreshed with a good break- 
fast, they were ready to start, in the buggy. Jack rode in 
the buggy with them, his saddle under his seat and the 

SHADOWS BEFORE 157 

eck rope of the horse in his hand. The hack ran behind, 
nd nearly jerked Jack’s arms out of their sockets, with 
s halts and its disinclination to trot. Almost it hauled 
im out of the buggy sometimes. He would much rather 
ave ridden the animal, but he had been requested to take 
1e buggy, to spare it. 

Mr. and Mrs. Greenlow scarcely spoke on the journey; 
would not have been ‘* showing sorrow.’’ But Jack felt 
1ey were enjoying themselves immensely, driving in this 
orning air instead of being cooped up in the house, she 
0king and he with the Holy Book. The sun grew furiously 
ot. But Gum Valley Croft was seven miles nearer to 
Jandoo than the Ellis’ Gum Tree Selection, so they drove 
ito the yard, wet with perspiration, just before the mid-day 
eal was put on to the table. Mrs. Ellis, aproned and bare- 
rmed, greeted them as they drove up, calling out that they 
ould go right in, and Jack should take the horses out of 
le buggy. 

Quite a number of strange hacks were tethered here and 
ere in the yard, near odd empty vehicles, sulkies de- 
ctedly leaning forward on empty shafts, or buggies and 
agonettes sturdily important on four wheels. Yet the place 
emed strangely quiet. 

Jack came back to the narrow verandah outside the par- 
ur door, where Mrs. Ellis had her fuchsias, ferns, cycla- 
ens and musk growing in pots. A table had been set 
ere, and dinner was in progress, the girls coming round 
om the kitchen with the dishes. Grace saw Jack hesitate, 
| she nodded to him. He went to the kitchen and asked 
yubtfully : 

*S How is she? ” 

‘© Oh, bad! Poor old dear. They’re all in there to say 
od-bye.”” 

Lennie, who was sitting on the floor under the kitchen 
ndow, put his head down on his arms and sobbed from a 
rt of nervousness, wailing : 

«© Oh, my poor ol’ Gran! Oh, poor ol’ dear! ” 

Jack, though upset, almost grinned. Poor Gran indeed, 
th that ghastly swarm of relations. He sat there on a 
air, his nerves all on edge, noticing little things acutely, 
he always did when he was strung up : the flies standing 
stionless on the chopping-block just outside the window, 

158. THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

the smooth-tramped gravel walk, the curious surface of the 
mud floor in the kitchen, the smoky rafters overhead, the 
oven set in brick below the “ everlasting ’’ fire, the 
blackness of the pots and kettles above the horizontal 
bars. : 
‘Do you mind sitting in the parlour, Jack, in case they 
want anything? ”? Mrs. Ellis asked him. | 

Jack minded, but he went and sat in the parlour, like a 
chief lackey, or a buffer between all the relations and the 
outer world. . 

The house had become more quiet. Monica had gone 
over to the Reds with clean overalls for the little boys, who 
had been bundled off there. Jack got this piece of news 
from Grace, who was constantly washing more dishes and 
serving more relations. A certain anger burned in him as 
he heard, but he took no notice. Mary was lying down up-— 
stairs: she had been up all night with Gran. Tom was 
attending to the horses. Katie and Mrs. Ellis had gone 
upstairs with baby and Ellie, and Mr. Ellis was also up-— 
stairs. Lennie had slipped away again. So Jack had track © 
of all the family. He was always like that, wanting to 
know where they all were. 

Mrs. Greenlow came in from Gran’s inner room. 

‘* Mary? Where’s Mary? ” she asked hurriedly. | 
Jack shook his head, and she passed on. She had left 
the door of Gran’s room open, so Jack could see in. All 
the relations were there, horrible, the women weeping and 
perspiring, and wiping tears and perspiration away together, 
the men in their waistcoats and shirt-sleeves, perspiring and 
looking ugly. A Methodist parson son-in-law was saying 

prayers in an important monotone. 

At last Mary came, looking anxious. 

“Yes, Gran? Did you want me? ” Jack heard her voice, 
and saw her by the bed. : 
_ “T felt so overcome with all these people,” said Gran, 
in a curiously strong, yet frightened voice. ‘* What do 
they all want? ” 

““ They’ve come to see you. Come ”*__Mary hesitated— 
“* to see if they can do anything for you.”? 

“ To frighten the bit of life out of me that I’ve got, but 
they’re not going to. Get me some beef tea, Mary, and 
don’t leave me alone with them.”’ 

SHADOWS BEFORE 159 

Mary went out for the beef tea. Then Jack saw Gran’s 
hite hand feebly beckon. 

** Ruth! ” she said. ‘‘ Ruth! ” 

The eldest daughter went over and took the hand, mop- 
ing her eyes. She was the parson’s wife. 

** Well, Ruth, how are you? ”* said Gran’s high, quaver- 
1g voice, in a conversational tone. 

** I’m well, Mother. It’s how are you? ”’ replied Ruth 
smally. 

But Gran was again totally oblivious of her. So at length 
uth dropped away embarrassed from the bedside, shaking 
or head. 

Again Gran lifted her head on the pillow. 

** Where’s Jacob? ” 

** Upstairs, Mother.”’ 

** The only one that has the decency to leave me alone.”’ 
nd she subsided again. Then after a while she asked, 
ithout lifting her head from the pillow, in a distant voice : 
** And are the foolish virgins here? ”* 

** Who, Mother? ” 

*¢ The foolish virgins. You know who I mean.” 

Gran lay with her eyes shut as she spoke. 

There was an agitation among the family. It was the 
others-in-law who pushed the three Miss Ellises forward. 
ney, the poor things, wept audibly. 

Gran opened her eyes at the sound, and said, with a 
ost of a smile on her yellow, transparent old face : 

“* T hope virginity is its own reward.”’ 

Then she remained unmoved until Mary came with the 
up, which she took and slowly sipped as Mary adminis- 
red it in a spoon. It seemed to revive her. 

‘© Where’s Lennie and his mother? ’”’ she asked, in a 
mer tone. 

These also were sent for. Mrs. Ellis sat by the bed and 
ntly patted Gran’s arm; but Lennie, ‘* skeered stiff,” 
ivered at the door. His mother held out her hand to him, 
d he came in, inch by inch, watching the fragile old Gran, 
10 looked transparent and absolutely unreal, with a fas- 
1ation of horror. 

‘‘ Kiss me, Lennie,”? said Gran grimly: exactly like 
Ison. 

Lennie shrank away. Then, yielding to his mother’s 

160 «€69oTHE BOY IN THE BUSH 

pressure, he laid his dark smooth head and his brown face 
on the pillow next to Gran’s face, but he did not kiss her. 

‘‘ There’s my precious! ”? said Gran softly, with all the 
soft, cajoling gentleness that had made her so lovely, at 
moments, to her men. ; 

‘* Alice, you’ve been good to my Jacob,”’ she said, as iJ 
remembering something. ‘‘ There’s the stocking. It’s for 
you and Lennie.”’ She still managed to say the last words 
with a caress, though she was fading from consciousness 
again. 

Tae drew away and hid behind his mother. Gran lay 
still, exactly as if dead. But the laces of her eternal cap 
still stirred softly, to show she breathed. The silence was 
almost unbearable. 

To break it the Methodist son-in-law sank to his knees. 
the others followed his example, and he prayed in a low, 
solemn, extinguished voice. When he had said Amen the 
others whispered it and rose from their knees. And by 
one consent they glided from the room. They had had 
enough deathbed for the moment. 

Mary closed the inner door when they had gone, and re- 
mained alone in the room with Gran. 

Vv 

The sons-in-law all melted through the parlour and out 
on to the verandah, where they helped themselves from the 
decanter on the table, filling up from the canvas water-bag 
that swung in the draught to keep cool. The daughters 
sat down by the table and wept, lugubriously and rather 
angrily. The sons-in-law drank and looked afflicted. Jack 
remained on duty in the parlour, though he would dearly 
have liked to decamp. | 

But he was now interested in the relations. They began 
to weep less, and to talk in low, suppressed, vehement 
voices. He could only catch bits. ‘‘ It’s a question if he 
ever married Tom’s mother. I doubt if Tom’s legitimate, 
I don’t even doubt it, I’m sure. We've suffered from that 
before. Where’s the stocking? Stocking ! Stocking—saved 
up—bought Easu out. Mother should know better. 1] 
she’s made a will—Jacob’s first marriage. Children te 
educate and provide for. Unmarried daughters—first claim. 

SHADOWS BEFORE 161 

stocking”? _ And then quite plainly from Ruth: “ It’s 
2ard on our husbands if they have to support mother’s 
inmarried daughters.’? This said with dignity. 

Jack glanced at the three Miss Ellises, to see if they 
minded, and inwardly he vowed that if he ever married 
Monica, for example, and Grace was an unmarried sister, 
1e’d find some suitable way of supporting her, without 
naking her feel ashamed. But the three Miss Ellises did 
10t seem to mind. They were busy diving into secret 
ockets among their clothing, and fetching out secret little 
yackages. Someone dropped the glass stopper out of a 
0ttle of smelling salts, and spilled the contents on the floor. 
The pungent odour penetrated throughout the house. Jack 
lever again smelt lavender salts without having a forebod- 
ng of death, and seeing mysterious little packets. The 
hree Miss Ellises were surreptitiously laying out bits and 
ags of black braid, crape, beading, black cloth, black lace; 
ll black, wickedly black, on the table edge. Smoothing 
hem out. For as a matter of fact they kept a little shop. 
ind everybody was looking with interest. Jack felt quite 
lauseated at the sight of these black blotches, the row of 
lack patches. 

Mary came out of Gran’s room, going to the kitchen with 
he cup. She did not pass the verandah, so nobody noticed 
er. They were all intent on the muttering gloom of their 
nvestigation of those scraps of mourning patterns. 

Jack felt the door of Gran’s room slowly open. Mary 
ad left it just ajar. He looked round and his hair rose 
m his head. There stood Gran, all white save for her eyes, 
ike a yellow figure of aged female Time, standing with 
er hand on the door, looking across the parlour at the 
fternoon and the pre-occupied party on the verandah. Her 
ace was absolutely expressionless, timeless and awful. It 
rightened him very much. The inexorable female! He 
ttered an exclamation, and they all looked up, caught. 

CHAP: XI. BLOWS 

i 
JacK managed to escape. When the rooks were fluttered 
by the sight of that ghostly white starling, he just ran. He 
ran in disgust from the smell of lavender salts, the tags of 
mourning patterns, respectable dying, and these awful 
people. Surely there was something rotten at the bottom 
of people, he thought, to make them behave as they did. 
And again came over him the feeling he had often had, that” 
he was a changeling, that he didn’t belong to the so-called 
** normal ’? human race. Nor, by Jupiter, did he want to. 
The ‘ normal ’? human race filled him with unspeakable 
repulsion. And he knew they would kill him if they found 
out what he was. Hence that unconscious dissembling of 
his innocent face. 
He ran, glad to get into a sweat, glad to sweat it all out 
of himself. Glad to feel the sun hot on his damp hands, 
and then the afternoon breeze, just starting, cool on his 
wet skin. When he reached the sand-bagged pool he took” 
off his clothes and spread them in the sun, while he wallowed © 
in the luke-warm water. Ay! if one could wash off one’s | 
associations! If one could but be alone in the world. 
After bathing he sat in the sun awhile to dry, then dressed - 
and walked off to look at the lower dam pump. Tom had | 
said it needed attending to. And anyway it led him away 
from the house. ; 
The pump was all right. There had been a March shower 
that had put water in the dam. So after looking round at 
the sheep, he turned away. 
Which way? Not back home. Not yet. 
The land breeze had lifted and the sea breeze had come, 
clearing the hot dry atmosphere as if by magic, and re- 
placing the furnace breath by tender air. Which way? 
At the back of his mind was the thought of Monica not 
home yet from the Reds’ place, and evening coming on, 
another of the full golden evenings, when the light seemed 
fierce with declaration of another eternity, a different 
eternity from ours. 
Last Sunday, on such an evening, he had kissed her. And 
162 

oe 

BLOWS 163 

much as he wanted to avoid her, the desire to kiss her again 
drove him as if the great yellowing light were a wind that 
blew him, as a butterfly is blown twinkling out to sea. He 
drifted towards the trail from the Reds’ place. He walked 
slowly, listening to the queer evening noise of the magpies, 
and the more distant screeching of flying parrots. Someone 
had disturbed the parrots beyond the Black Barn gums. So, 
as if by intuition, he walked that way, slightly off the trail. 

And suddenly he heard the sound his spirit expected to 
hear : Monica crying out in expostulation, anger, and fear. 
It was the fear in her voice that made his face set. His 
first instinct was not to intrude on their privacy. Then 
again came the queer, magpie noise of Monica, this time 
with an edge of real hatred to her fear. Jack pushed 
through the bushes. He could smell the warm horses 
already. 

Yes, there was Lucy standing by a tree. And Monica, 
in a long skirt of pink-sprigged cotton, with a frill at the 
,0ttom, trying to get up into the side-saddle. While Easu, 
n his Sunday black reach-me-downs and white shirt and 
white rubber-soled cricketing boots, every time she set her 
oot in the stirrup, put his hand round her waist and spread 
iis fingers on her body, and lifted her down again, lifted her 
ym one hand in a childish and ridiculous fashion, and held 
ler in a moment’s embrace. She in her long cotton riding- 
lress with the close-fitting bodice, did indeed look absurd 
ung like a child on Easu’s hand, as he lifted her down and 
eld her struggling against him, then let her go once more, 
o mount her horse. Lucy was shifting uneasily, and Easu’s 
vig black horse, tethered to a tree, was jerking its head 
vith a jingle of the bit. The girth hung loose. EHasu had 
vidently dismounted to adjust it. 

Monica was becoming really angry, really afraid, and 
eally blind with dismay, feeling for the first time her 
bsolute powerlessness. To be powerless drove her mad, 
nd she would have killed Easu if she could, without a 
ualm. But her hate seemed to rouse the big Hasu to a 
assion of desire for her. He put his two big hands round 
er slender body and compassed her entirely. She gave a 
yud, strange, uncanny scream. And Jack came out of the 
ushes, making the black horse plunge. Easu glanced 
ound at the horse, and saw Jack. And at the same time 

164 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

our hero planted a straight, vicious blow on the bearded — 
chin. Easu, unprepared, staggered up against Lucy, who 
began to jump, while Monica, tangled in her long skirt, 
fell to her knees on the ground. 

“* Quite a picture! ’? Jack said it himself. Even he saw 
himself standing there, like Jack the Giant-killer. And of 
course he saw Monica on her knees, with tumbled hair and 
scarlet cheeks, unspeakably furious at being caught, angrily 
hitching herself out of her long cotton riding-skirt and 
pressing her cheeks to make them less red. She was silent, © 
with averted face, and she seemed small. He saw Easu in 
the Sunday white shirt and rather tight Sunday breeches, © 
facing round in unspeakable disgust and fury. He saw 
himself in a ready-made cotton suit and cheap brown canvas 
shoes, bought at the local store, standing awaiting an on- — 
slaught. | 

The onslaught did not come. Instead, Easu said, in a 
tone of unutterable contempt : | 

‘* Why, what’s up with you, you little sod? ” 

Jack turned to Monica. She had got on to her feet and — 
was pushing her hair under her hat. 

‘* Monica,”’ he said, ** you’d better get home. Gran’s 
dying.”’ 

She looked at him, and a slow, wicked smile of amuse- 
ment came over her face. Then she broke into a queer 
hollow laugh, at the bottom of which was rage and frustra- — 
tion. Then her laugh rose higher. 

‘“* Ha! Ha! Ha! ”? she laughed. ‘* Ah, ha-ha-ha-ha-ha! 
Ha-ha-ha! Ah!! MHa-ha-ha-ha-ha! MHa-ha-ha! Ah!!! 
Ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha! Ah! Ha-ha! Ha! Ah! Gran’s 
dying! Ha-ha-ha! Is she really? Oh, ha-ha-ha-ha-ha! 
No, I don’t mean it. But it seems so funny! Ah! Ha-ha- 
ha-ha-ha! Ah! Ha-ha-ha! ”’ 

She smothered herself into a confused bubbling. The 
two men stood aghast, shuddering at the strange hysterical 
woman’s laughter that went shrilling through the bush. 
They were horrified least someone else should hear. 

Monica in her cotton frock and long sweeping skirt, stood 
pushing her handkerchief in her mouth and trying in vain ~ 
to stifle the hysterical laughter that still shook her slender 
body. Occasionally a strange peal, like mad bells, would 
break out. And then she ended with a passionate sobbing. 

BLOWS 165 

**Tknow! Iknow! ” she sobbed, like a child. ‘* Gran’s 
dying, and you won’t let me go home.” 

** You can go home,” Jack said. ‘‘ You can go home. 
But don’t go with your face all puffed up with crying.” 

She gradually gained control of herself, and turned away 
to her horse. Jack went to help her mount. She got into 
the saddle, and he gave her the reins. She kept her face 
averted, and Lucy began to move away slowly, towards 
the home track. 

Easu still stood there, planted with his feet apart, his 
head a little dropped, and a furious, contemptuous, re- 
vengeful hate of the other two in his light blue eyes. He 
had his head down, ready for an attack. Jack saw this, 
and waited. 

** Going to take your punishment? ”’ said Easu, in a 
nasty voice. 

** Ready when you are,” said Jack. 

Ugh! How he hated Hasu’s ugly, jeering, evil eyes, how 
he would love to smash them out of his head. In the long 
run, hate was an even keener ecstasy than love, and the 
battle of hate, the fight with blood in the eyes, an orgasm 
of deadly gratification keener than any passionate orgasm 
of love. 

Easu slowly threw his hat on the ground. Jack did the 
ame, and started to pull off his coat. Easu glanced round 
o see if Monica was going. She was. Her back was 
ready turned, and Lucy was stepping gingerly through 
he bushes. He lifted his chin, unknotted his tie, and threw 
tin his hat. Then he unbuttoned his shirt cuffs, and pulled 
ff his shirt, and hitched his belt. He was now naked to 
he waist. He had a very white skin with reddish hair at 
he breast, and an angular kind of force. His red-haired 
awny arms were burnt bright red, as was his neck. For 
he rest his skin was pure white, with the dazzle of 
bsolute health. Yet he was ugly rather than beautiful. 
‘he queer angularity of his brawn, the sense of hostile 
nechanical power. The sense of the mechanism of power 
a him made him like some devil fallen into a lower grade. 

Jack’s torso was rather absurdly marked by the sun- 
urnt scallops of his vest-lines, for he worked a good deal 
1a vest. Easu always wore a shirt and no vest. And Jack, 
a spite of the thinness of youth, seemed to have softer 

166 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

lines and a more human proportion, more grace. And there 
was a warmth in his white skin, making it much less con- 
spicuous than the really dazzling brilliance of Easu. Hasu 
was a good deal bigger, but Jack was more concentrated, 
and a born fighter. He fought with all his soul. 

He shaped up to Easu, and Easu made ready, when they 
were interrupted by a cry from Monica, in a high, hysterical 
voice. They looked up. She had reined in her horse 
among the bushes, and was looking round at them with a 
queer, sharp, terrified face, from the distance. Her shrill 
voice cried : 

** Don’t forget he saved Herbert’s life.” 

Both men faced round and looked at her as if she had 
committed an indecency. She quailed in her saddle. Easu, 
with a queer jerk of the head, motioned to her to go. She 
sank a little forward in her saddle, and hurriedly urged her 
horse through the bush, out of sight, without ever looking 
round, leaving the men, as she knew, to their heart’s desire. 

They waited for a while. Then they lifted their fists 
again, and drew near. Jack began the light, subtle, har- 
monious dancing which preceded his attack. He always 
attacked, no matter whom he fought. He could not fight 
unless he took the initiative. So now he danced warily, 
subtly before Easu, and Easu stood ready to side-step. 
Easu was bigger, harder, much more powerful than Jack, 
and built in hard mechanical lines : the kind that is difficult 
e knock out, if you have not much weight behind your 

ow. 

** Are y’ insured? ’’ sneered Easu. 

But Jack did not listen. He had always fought with people 
bigger and older than himself. But he had never before 
had this strange lust dancing in his blood, the lust of rage 
dancing for its consummation in blows. He had known it 
before, as a sort of game. But now the lust bit into his 
very soul, and he was quivering with accumulated desire, 
the desire to hit Easu hard, hit him till he knocked him 
out. He wanted to hit him till he knocked him out. 

And he knew himself deficient in brute power. So he 
must make up in quickness and skill and concentration. 
When he did strike it must be a fine keen blow that went 
deep. He had confidence in his power to do it. Only—and 
this was the disturbing element—he knew there was not 

BLOWS 167 

much time. And he would rather be knocked out himself 
than have the fight spoiled in the middle. 

He moved lightly and led Easu on, ducked, bobbed up 
again, and began to be consummately happy. Easu could 
not get at him. 

** Come on! ” said Easu thickly. 

So suddenly he came on, and bang! bang! went his 
knuckles against that insulting chin. And he felt joy spring 
in his bowels. 

But he did not escape without punishment. Pat !—butt! 
Pat !—butt! went Easu’s swinging blows down over his 
back. But Jack got in two more. Bang! bang! He 
knew by the exquisite pain of his knuckles that he had 
struck deep, pierced the marrow of the other with pain of 
defeat. 

Pat—butt! Pat—butt! came the punishment. 

But Jack was out again, dancing softly, electric joy in 
his bowels. Then suddenly he sprang back at Easu, his 
arms swinging in strange, vindictive sideways swoops. 
Ping! Pong! Ping! Pong! rapid as lightning. Easu fell 
pack a little dazed before this sudden rain of white blows, 
out Jack followed, followed, followed, nimbly, warily, but 
with deadly, flickering intent. 

Crash! Easu went down, but caught Jack a heavy 
mash in the face with his right fist as he fell. Jack reeled 
yway. 

And then, poised, waiting, watching, with blood running 
rom bruised cuts on his swelling face, one eye rapidly 
losing, he stood well forward, fists in true boxing trim, and 
. deep gratification of joy in his dark belly. 

Easu rose slowly, foaming at the mouth; then, getting 
o his feet, rushed head down, in a convulsion, at his adver- 
ary. Jack stepped aside, but not quite quick enough. He 
aught Easu a blow with his left under the ear, but not in 
ime to stop the impact. Easu’s head butted right where 
e wanted it to—into his enemy’s stomach; though not full 
n the pit. Jack fell back winded, and Red also fell again, 
iving Jack time to throw back his head and whoop for a 
ew mouthfuls of air. So that when Red rushed in again, 
e was able feebly to fence and stall him off, stepping 
side and hitting again, but woefully clipping, smacking 
nly... 

168 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

“ Foul! He’s winded! Foul!” yelled someone from 
the bushes. ‘‘ Time! ” 

*‘ Not for mine,’’ roared Easu. 

He sprang and dashed at his gasping, gulping adversary, 
whirling his arms like iron piston-rods. Jack dodged the 
propelled whirl, but stumbled over one of the big feet stuck 
out to trip him. Easu hit as he fell, and swung a crashing 
left-right about the sinking, unprotected head. And when 
Jack was down, kicked the prostrate body in an orgasm of 
fury. : 
‘* Foul, you swine! °? screamed Rackett, springing in 
like a tiger. Easu, absolutely blind with rage and hate, — 
stared hellish and unseeing. Jack lay crumpled on the 
floor. Dr. Rackett stooped down to him, as Tom and 
Lennie and Alec Rice ran in. Easu went and dropped on — 
a fallen log, sitting blowing to get his wind and his con- 
sciousness back. He was unconscious with fury, like some 
awful Thing, not like a man. 

“* My God, Easu! ”’ screamed Rackett, who had lifted — 
the dead head of Jack on to his knees. ‘‘ If you’ve done 
for him I’ll have you indicted.” 

And Easu, slowly, heavily coming back to consciousness, 
lifted his head, and the blue pupils of his red eyes went — 
ugly with evil fear, his bruised face seemed to have dropped — 
with fear. 

He waited, vacant, empty with fear. 

At length Jack stirred. There was life in him. And at 
once the bully Easu began to talk wide. 

** Bloody little came at me bashing me jaw when 
I’d never touched him. Had to fight to defend myself. 
Bloody little pe 

Jack opened his eyes and struggled to rise. 

** Anybody counting? ”’ he said stupidly. But he could 
not get up. 

** Tt was a foul,’’ said Rackett. 

** Foul be blithered! ’? shouted Easu. ‘* It was a free 
fight and no blasted umpires asked for. If that bloody 
bastard wants some more, let him get up. I’m goin’ to 
teach him to come crowin’ over an Australian.’? 

But Jack was on his unsteady feet. He would fight now 
if he died for it. 

** Teach me!” he said vaguely, and sprang like a cat 

BLOWS 169 

out of a bag on the astonished and rather frightened Easu. 

But something was very wrong. When his left fist rang 
home it caused such an agony that a sheer scream of pain 
tore from him, clearing the mists from his brain in a strange 
white light. He was now fully conscious again, super- 
conscious. He knew he must hit with his right, and hit 
hard. He heard nothing, and saw nothing. But with a 
kind of trance vision he was super-awake. 

Man is like this. He has various levels of consciousness. 
When he is broken, killed at one level of consciousness, his 
very death leaves him on a higher level. And this is the 
soul in its entirety being conscious, super-conscious, far 
beyond mentality. It hardly needs eyes or ears. It is clair- 
voyant and clairaudient. And man’s divinity, and his ulti- 
mate power, is in this super-consciousness of the whole 
soul. Not in brute force, not in skill or intelligence alone. 
But in the soul’s extreme power of knowing and then will- 
ng. On this alone hangs the destiny of all mankind. 

Jack, uncertain on his feet, incorporate, wounded to 
horrible pain in his left hand, was now in the second state 
of consciousness and power. Meanwhile, the doctor was 
warning Hasu to play fair. Jack heard absolutely without 
1earing. But Easu was bothered by it. 

He was flustered by Jack’s unexpected uprising. He 
was weary and wavering, the paroxysm of his ungovernable 
ury had left him, and he had a desire to escape. His rage 
was dull and sullen. 

Jack was softly swaying. Easu shaped up and waited. 
And suddenly Jack sprang, with all the weight of his nine 
tone behind him, and all the mystery of his soul’s deadly 
vill, and planted a blow on Easu’s astonished chin with 
lis granite right fist. Before there was any recovery he 
rot in a second blow, and it was a knockout. Easu crashed 
nd Jack crashed after him, and both lay still. 

Doctor Rackett, watch in hand, counted. Easu stared 
it the darkening blue, and sat up. An oath came out of 
lis disfigured mouth. Dr. Rackett put the watch in his 
ocket as Easu got to his feet. But Jack did not move. 
Te Jay in a dead faint. 

Lennie, the emotional, began to cry when he saw Jack’s 
ruised, greenish-looking face. Dr. Rackett was feeling 
he pulse and the heart. 

170 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘Take the horse and fetch some whiskey and some — 
water, Tom,”’ he said. 3 

Tom turned to Easu, who stood with his head down and 
his mouth all cut, watching, waiting to depart, undecided. 

‘‘1’]] borrow your horse a minute, Easu,” he said. 
And Easu did not answer. He was getting into his shirt 
again, and for the moment none of him was visible save the 
belt of white skin round the waist. Tom pulled up the 
girth of the black horse, and jumped into the saddle. 
Lennie slipped up behind him, face still wet with tears. — 
Easu’s face emerged, disfigured, out of his white shirt, and 
watched them go. Rackett attended to Jack, who still © 
gave no signs of life. Alec Rice stood beside the kneeling 
doctor, silent and impassive. 

Easu slowly buttoned his shirt cuffs and shirt collar, — 
with numb fingers. The pain was just beginning to come 
out, and he made queer slight grimaces with his distorted — 
face. Slowly he got his black tie, and holding up his chin ~ 
fastened it round his throat, clumsily. He was not the same ~ 
Easu that had set off so huge and assertive, with Monica. 

Lennie came running with a tin of water. He had slipped 
off the horse at the lower dam, and found the tin which he 
kept secreted there. Dr. Rackett put a wet handkerchief 
on Jack’s still dead face. Under the livid skin the bruises 
and the blood showed terrifying, one eye already swollen 
up. The queer mask of a face looked as if the soul, or the — 
life, had retreated from it in weariness or disgust. It looked 
like somebody else’s altogether. | 

** He ain’t dead, is he? ’? whimpered Lennie, terrified 
most of all because Jack, with his swollen face and puffed 
eye, looked like somebody else. 

** No! But I wish Tom would come with that whiskey.” 

As he spoke, they heard the crashing sound of the horse 
through the bushes, and Tom’s red, anxious face appeared. 
He swung out of the saddle and dropped the reins on the 
ground. 

Dr. Rackett pressed the bruised chin, pressed the mouth 
open, and poured a little liquor down Jack’s throat. There 
was no response. He poured a little more whiskey. There 
came a slight choking sound, and then the one dark-blue 
eye opened vacant. It stared in vacancy for some moments, 
while everybody stood with held breath. Then the whiskey 

BLOWS 171 

began to have effect. Life seemed to give a movement of 
itself, in the boy’s body, and the wide-open eye took a con- 
scious direction. It stared straight into the eyes of Easu, 
who stood there looking down, detached, in humiliation, 
derision and uneasiness. It stared with a queer, natural 
recognition, and a faint jeering, uneasy grin was the reflex 
on Easu’s disfigured mask. 

** Guess he’s had enough for once,’’ said Easu, and, 
turning, he picked up his horse’s reins, dropped into the 
saddle, and rode straight away. 

** Feel bad? ”? Dr. Rackett asked. 

** Rotten ! ”’ said Jack. 

And at last Lennie recognised the voice. He could not 
recognise the face, especially with that bunged-up eye peer- 
ing gruesomely through a gradually diminishing slit, Hun- 
like. 

Dr. Rackett smiled slightly. 

** Where’s your pain? ”’ he asked. 

Jack thought about it. Then he looked into Rackett’s 
eyes without answering. 

_ ** Think you can stand? ” said Rackett. 

e Try me.’’ 

They got him to his feet. Everything began to swim 
again. Rackett’s arm came round him. 

** Did he knock me out? ” Jack asked. The question 
came from his half-consciousness : from a feeling that the 
battle with Easu was not yet finished. 

** No. You knocked him out. Let’s get your coat on.” 

But as he shoved his arm into his coat he knew he was 
fainting again, and he almost wept, feeling his conscious- 
ness and his control going. He thought it was just his 
stiff, swollen, unnatural face that caused it. 

** Can y’ walk? ”’ asked Tom anxiously. 

** Don’t walk on my face, do I? ’? came the words. But 
is they came, so did the reeling, nauseous oblivion. He 
ainted again, and was carried home like a sack over Tom’s 
yack. 

When he came to, he was on his bed, Lennie was 
everishly pulling off his shoes, and Dr. Rackett was feel- 
ng him all over. Dr. Rackett smelt of drugs. But now 
Rackett’s face was earnest and attentive, he looked a nice 
nau, only weak. 

172 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Jack thought at once of Gran. 

“¢ How’s Gran? ”’ he asked. . 

‘‘ She’s picked up again. The relations put her in a wax, 
so she came to life again.” 

“Youre the one now, you look an awful sight,” said 
Len. 

‘© Did anybody see me * asked Jack, dim and anxious. 

‘* Only Grace, so far.”’ 

Rackett, who was busy bandaging, saw the fever of 
anxiety coming into the one live eye. 

‘“‘ Don’t talk,”? he said. ‘* Len, he mustn’t talk at all. 
He’s got to go to sleep.” 

After they had got his night-shirt on, they gave him ~ 

something to drink, and he went to sleep. 

ii 

When he awoke it was dark. His head felt enormous. 

It was getting bigger and bigger, till soon it would fill the E 
room. Soon his head would be so big it would fill all the © 

room, and the room would be too small for it. Oh, horror ! 
He was so frightened, he cried out. 

‘© What’s amiss? ’’ a quick voice was asking. 

** Make a light! Make a light! *’ cried Jack. 

Lennie quickly lit a candle, and to Jack’s agonized relief — 
there was the cubby, the bed, the walls, all of natural — 
dimensions, and Tom and Lennie in their night-shirts stand- _ 

ing by his bed. 
‘* What’s a-matter, ol’ dear? *? Lennie asked caressively. 
“My head! I thought it was getting so big the room 
couldn’t hold it.” 

“Aw! Go on now!” said Lennie. ‘‘ Y’ face is a bit 

puffy, but y’ head’s same as ever it was.”’ 

Jack couldn’t believe it. He was so sensually convinced 

that his head had grown enormous, enormous, enormous. 

He stared at Lennie and Tom in dismay. Lennie stroked — 

his hair softly. 

** There’s y’ ol? nut! ? he said.  *Tain’t no bigger ’n 
it ever was. Just exactly same life-size.” 

Gradually Jack let himself be convinced. And at last 
he let them blow the candle out. He went to sleep. 

He woke again with a frenzy working in him. He had 

BLOWS 178 

pain, too. But far worse than the pain was the tearing of 
the raging discomfort, the frenzy of dislocation. And in 
his stiff, swollen head, there was something he remembered 
but could not drag into light. What was it? What was it? 
In the frenzy of struggle to know, he went vague. 

Then it came to him, words as plain as knives. 

And when I die 
In Hell I shall lie 
With fire and chains 
And awful pains. 

The aunts had repeated this to him, as a child, when he 
was naughty. And it had always struck a vague terror 
into his soul. He had forgotten it. Now it came again. 

In Hell I shall lie 
With fire and chains 
And awful pains. 

He had a vivid realisation of this hell. That was where he 
lay at that very moment. 

** You must be a good, loving little boy.”’ 

He had never wanted to be a good, loving little boy. 
Something in his bowels revolted from being a good, loving 
little boy, revolted in nausea. ‘* But if you’re not a good, 
loving little boy, 

Then when you die 
In hell you will lie—etc. 

** Let me lie in hell, then,’’ the bad and unloving little 
boy had answered, to the shocked horror of the aunts. 
And the answer had scared even himself. 

And now the hell was on him. And still he was not a 
good, loving little boy. 

He remembered his lessons: Love your enemies. 

‘© Do I love Easu? ” he asked himself. And he writhed 
over in bed in disgust. He loathed Easu. If he could 
crush him absolutely to powder, he would crush him to 

owder. Make him extinct. 

« Lord, Lord! ’? he groaned. ** I loathe Easu. I loathe 

him.” 

174 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

What was amiss with him? Did he want to leave off — 
loathing Easu? Was that the root of his sickness and — 
fever ? 

But when he thought of Easu’s figure and face, he knew © 
he didn’t want to leave off loathing him. He did loathe 
him, whether he wanted to or not, and the fact to him was 
sacred. It went right through the core of him. 

‘* Lord! Lord! ’? he groaned, writhing in fever. ‘* Lord, 
help me to loathe him properly. Lord, Pll kill him if you 
want me to; and if you don’t want me to, I won’t. Vil 
kill him if you want me to. But if you don’t want me to, — 
I won’t care any more.” 

The pledge seemed to soothe him. At the back of Jack’s 
consciousness was always this mysterious Lord, to whom 
he cried in the night. And this Lord put commands upon ~ 
him, but so darkly, Jack couldn’t easily find out what the 
commands were. The aunts had always said the command 
was to be a good, loving little boy. But when he tried 
being a good, loving little boy, his soul seemed to lose his 
Lord, and turn wicked. That was what made him fear 
hell. When he seemed to lose connection with his great, 
mysterious Lord, with whom he communed absolutely alone, 
he became aware of hell. And he couldn’t share with his 
aunts that Jesus whom they always commended. At the 
Sacrament, something in his soul stood still and cold. He 
knew that Sacrament was no Sacrament to him. 

He had his own Lord. And when he could get into com- 
munication or communion, with his own Lord, he always 
felt well and right again. 

Now, in his pain and battered fever, he was fighting for 
his Lord again. 

** Lord, I don’t love Easu, and I’ll kill him if you want 
me to. But if you don’t want me to, I won’t. I won’t. 
I won’t bother any more.”’ 

This pledge and this submission, soothed him strangely. 
He felt he was coming back to his own Lord. It was a 
pledge, and he would keep it. He gave no pledge to love 
Easu. Only not to kill him, if the Lord didn’t want it; 
and to kill him, if the Lord did. 

ss Lord, I don’t love Monica. I don’t love her. But if 
she’d give up to me, I’d love her if you wanted me to.”? 

He thought about this. Somewhere, his soul burned 

BLOWS 175 

against Monica. And, somewhere, his soul burned 
for her. 

But she must give up to him. She must give herself up. 
He demanded this submission, as if it were a submission 
to his mysterious Lord. She would never submit to the 
mysterious Lord direct. Like that old demon of a Gran, 
who knew the Lord, and played with Him, spited Him 
even. Monica would have first to submit to himself, Jack, 
in person, before she would really yield before the immense 
Lord. And yield before the immense Lord she must. 
Through him. 

** Lord ! ”? he said, invoking the supreme power; ‘‘ I love 
Lennie and Tom, and I want always to love them, and I 
want you to back them.”’ 

Then the prickles of pain entered his soul again. 

** Lord, I don’t love my father, but I don’t want to hurt 
him. Only, I don’t love him, Lord. And it’s not my fault, 
though he’s a good man, because I wasn’t born with love 
for him in me.”’ ; 

This had been a thorn in his consciousness since he was a 
child. Best get it out now. Because the fear of not loving 
his father had almost made him hate him. If he ought to 
love him, and he couldn’t love him, then there was nothing 
to do but hate him, because of the hopeless obligation. But 
if he needn’t love him, then he needn’t hate him, and they 
could both be in peace. He would leave it to his Lord. 

** Perhaps I ought to love Mary,”’ he continued. ‘ But 
I don’t really love her, because she doesn’t realise about 
the Lord. She doesn’t realise there is any Lord. She thinks 
there’s only me, and herself. But there is the Lord. And 
Monica knows. But Monica is spiteful against the Lord. 
Lord! Lord! ” 

He ended on the old human cry of invocation: a ery 
which is answered, when it comes from the extreme, passion- 
ate soul. The strange, dark comfort and power came back 
to him again, and he could go to sleep once more, with his 
Lord. 

When he woke in the morning, the fever had left him. 
Lennie was there at dawn, to see if he wanted anything. 
The quick little Lennie, who always came straight from the 
Lord, unless his emotions of pity got the better of him. 
Then he lost his connections, and became maudlin. 

176 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Jack wanted the family not to know. But the twins saw © 

his disfigured face, with horror. And Monica knew : it was 
she who had sent Dr. Rackett and Tom and Alec. And 

P 
rT 

Grace knew. And soon Ma came, and said : *‘ Dear 0’ me, ~ 

Jack Grant, what d’y’mean by going and getting messed 
up like this! ?? And Dad came slow and heavy, and said 
nothing, but looked dark and angry. They all knew. 

But Jack wanted to be left alone. He told Tom and Dr. 

Rackett, and Tom and Dr. Rackett ordered the family to — 

leave him alone. 

It was Grace who brought his meals. Poor old Grace, ~ 

with her big eyes and rather big nose, she had a gentle 

heart, and more real sense than that Monica. Jack only © 

got to know her while he was sick, and she really touched ~ 

his heart. She was so kind, and thought so little of herself, — 

and had such a sad wisdom at the bottom of her. Who 
would have thought it, of the pert, cheeky, nosy Grace? 

Monica slipped in, and stood staring down at him with 
her queer, brooding eyes, that shone with widened pupils. 
Heaven knows what she was thinking about. 

** I was awfully afraid he’d kill you,”’ she said. ‘** I was 
so frightened, that’s what made me laugh.”’ 

** Why should I let him kill me? ”’ said Jack. 

‘* How could you help it? He’s much stronger and 
crueler than you.”’ 

‘* He may be stronger, but I can match him in other 
ways.”” 

She looked at him incredulously. She did not believe 
him. He could see she did not believe in that other, inward 
power of his, upon which he himself depended. She thought 
him in every way weaker, frailer than Easu. Only, of 
course, nicer. This made Jack very angry. 

** I think I punished him as much as he punished me,”? 
he said. 

“* He’s not laid up in bed,” she replied. 

Then, with her quivering, exquisite gentleness, she 
touched his bandaged hand. 

** I’m awfully sorry he hurt you so,” she said. * I know 
you'll hate me for it.”’ 

** Why should I? ’ he replied coldly. 

She took up his bandaged hand and kissed it quickly, 
then she looked him long and beseechingly in the eyes : or 

BLOWS 177 

the one eye. Somehow she didn’t seem to see his caricature 
of a face. 

** Don’t hate me for it,”? she pleaded, still watching him 
with that strange, pleading, watchful look. 

The flame leapt in his bowels, and came into his eyes. 
And another flame as she, catching the change in his eyes, 
softened her look and smiled subtly, suddenly taking his 
wrist in a passionate, secret grasp. He felt the hot blood 
suffusing him like new life. 

** Good-bye ! ”? she said, looking back at him as she dis- 
yppeared. 

And when she had gone, he remembered the watchfulness 
n her eyes, the cat-like watchfulness at the back of all her 
winsome tenderness. There it was, like the devil. And he 
urned his face to the wall, to his Lord, and two smarting 
ears came under his eyes as if they were acid. 

The next day Mary came bringing his pap. She was not 
roing to be kept away any longer. And she would come as 
| ministering angel. 

He saw on her face that she was startled, shocked, and 
_ little repelled by his appearance. She hardly knew him. 
3ut she overcame her repulsion at once, and became the 
nore protective. 

** Why, how awful it must be for you! ”’ she said. 

** Not so bad now,’ he said, manfully swallowing his 
ap. 

He could see she longed for him to have his own good- 
yoking face again. She could not bear this strange horror. 
he refused to believe this was he. 

** T shall never forgive that cruel Easu! ”’ she said, and 
ne colour came to her dark cheek. ‘* I hope I never have 
> speak to him again.”’ 

** Oh, I began it. It was my fault.” 

** How could it be? ”’ cried Mary. ‘* That great hulking 
rute. How dare he lay a finger on you! ” 

Jack couldn’t smile, his face was of the fixed sort. But 
is one good eye had a gleam. 

** He dare, you see,’” he answered. 

But she turned away in smarting indignation. 

‘Tt makes one understand why such creatures had 
1eir hands cut off, in the old days,’’ she said, with cold 
erceness, 

178 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘‘ How dare he disfigure your beautiful face? How dare 
he? ’’ ; 

And tears of anger came to her eyes. 

A strangled grin caused considerable pain to Jack’s 
beautiful face. 

‘‘T suppose he didn’t rightly appreciate my sort of 
looks,’’ he said. 

** The jealous brute,’’ said Mary. ‘* But I hope he’ll pay 
for it. I hope he will. I do hope he hasn’t really disfigured 
you,”’ she ended on a note of agitation. | 

‘““ No, no! Besides that doesn’t matter all the world.”? — 

‘* Tt matters all the world,”’ she cried, with strange fierce- | 
ness, ‘6 to me,”’ 

CHAP: XII. THE GREAT PASSING 

i 
JACK soon got better. Soon he was sitting in the old arm- 
shair by the parlour fire. There was a little fire, against 
he damp. This was Gran’s place. But Gran did not leave 
ner bed. 

He had been in to see her, and she frightened him. The 
grey, dusky skin round the sunken mouth and sharpened 
10se, the eyes that were mostly shut, and never really open, 
the harsh breathing, the hands lying like old translucent 
tone on the bed-cover : it frightened him, and gave him a 
1orror of dissolution and decay. He wanted terribly to be 
yut again with the healthy Tom, among the horses. But 
1ot yet—he must wait yet awhile. So he took his turn 
itting by Gran, to relieve Mary, who got little rest. And 
1e became nervous, fanciful, frightened as he had never 
yeen before in his life. The family seemed to abandon him 
is they abandoned Gran. The cold isolation and horror 
f death. 

The first rains had set in. All night the water had 
hundered down on the slab roof of the cubby, as if the 
yottom had fallen out of some well above. Outside was 
loudy still, and a little chill. A wind was hush-sh-shing 
ound the house. Mary was sitting with Gran, and he was 
n the parlour, listening to that clock—Tick-tock! Tick- 
ock! He sat in the arm-chair with a shawl over his 
houlders, trying to read. Curiously enough, in Australia he 
ould not read. The words somehow meant nothing to him, 

It was Sunday afternoon, and the smell of roast beef, 
Yorkshire pudding, cabbage, apple pie and cinnamon 
ustard still seemed to taint the house. Jack had come to 
yathe Sunday dinners. They seemed to him degrading. 
‘hey hung so heavy afterwards. And now he was sick, it 
eemed to him particularly repulsive. The peculiar Sun- 
ayness of it. The one thing that took him in revulsion 
ack to England : Sunday dinner. The England he didn’t 
rant to be taken back to. But it had been a quiet meal. 
fonica and Grace, and the little boy twins had all been 
ivited to York, by Alec Rice’s parents, and they had gone 

179 

180 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

away from the shadowed house, leaving a great emptiness. — 
It seemed to Jack they should all have stayed, so that their 
young life could have united against this slow dissolution. 

Everything felt very strange. Tom and Lennie were out, © 
Mrs Ellis and the children were upstairs, Mr Ellis had gone 
to look at some sheep that had got into trouble in the rain. 
There seemed a darkness, a chill, a deathliness in the air. 
It is like that in Australia : usually so sunny and absolutely 
forgetful. Then comes a dark day, and the place seems like 
an immemorial grave. More gruesome than ever England — 
was, on her dark days. Mankind forever entombed in dis- — 
solution, in an endless grave. | 

Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord; or who shall 
stand in His holy place? 

He that hath clean hands and a pure heart, 

Who hath not yielded up himself unto vanity, nor sworn | 
deceitfully. 

Jack was thinking over the words Mr Ellis had read in 
the morning, as near as he remembered them. He looked 
at his own hands: already they seemed pale and soft and 
very clean. What had the Lord intended hands for? So 
many things hands must do, and still they remain clean. 
Clean hands! His left was still discoloured and out of. 
shape. Was it unclean? 

No, it was not unclean. Not unclean like the great paw 
of Easu’s hiking Monica out of the saddle. 

Clean hands and a pure heart! A pure heart! Jack 
thought of his own, with two heavy new desires in it: the 
sudden, shattering desire for Monica, that would rip through 
him sometimes like a flame. And the slow, smouldering 
desire to kill Easu. He had to be responsible for them both. 

And he was not going to try to pluck them out. They 
both belonged to his heart, they were sacred even while 
they were shocking in his blood. Only, driven back on him- 
self, he gave the old pledge : Lord, if you don’t want me to 
have Monica and kill Easu, I won’t. But if you want me to, 
I will. Somewhere he was inclined to cry out to be delivered 
from the cup. But that would be cowardice towards his 
own blood. It would be yielding himself up to vanity, if 
he pretended he hadn’t got the desires. And if he swore 
to eradicate them, it would be swearing deceitfully. Some- 
times the hands must move in the darkest acts, if they are 

THE GREAT PASSING 181 

O remain really clean, not deathly like Gran’s now. And 
he heart must beat hard in the storm of darkest desires, if 
t is to keep pure, and not go pale-corrupt. 

But always subject to the will of the Lord. 

** Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord; or who 
hall stand in His holy place.”’ 

The Seraphim and the Cherubim knew strange, awful 
ecrets of the Lord. That was why they covered their 
aces with their wings, for the wings of glory also had a 
lark side. 

The fire was burning low. Jack stooped to put on more 
food. Then he blew the red coals to make the wood catch. 
i yellow flame came, and he was glad. 

** Forsake me not, Oh God, in mine old age; when I am 
rey-headed ; until I have shown my strength to this genera- 
ion, and Thy power to all them that are yet to come.”’ 

Jack was always afraid of those times when the mysterious 
ayings of the Bible invaded him. He seemed to have no 
Ower against them. And his soul was always a little 
fraid, as if the walls of life grew thin, and he could hear 
he great everlasting wind of the mysterious going of the 
ord, on the other side. 

** Forsake me not, Oh God, in mine old age; when I am 
rey-headed.”’ 

Jack wished Gran would say this, so that the Lord would 
fay with her, and she would not look so awful. How could 
lary stand it, sitting with her day after day. 

** Until I have shown my strength to this generation, 
nd Thy power to all them that are yet to come.”’ 

And again his stubborn strength of life arose. What was 
e for, but to show his strength to the generation, and a 
gn of the power of the Lord for all them that were yet 
» come. 

The clock was ticking steadily in the room. But the 
ellow flames were bunching up in the grate. He wondered 
here Gran’s ** stocking ”’ really was? But the thought of 
ockings, of concealed money, of people hankering for 
oney, always made him feel sick. 

‘¢ There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the 
oon, and another glory of the stars . . . There is a 
atural body and a spiritual body .. .” 

‘¢ There is one glory of the sun.’? But men don’t all 

182 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

realise the same glory. In England the sun had seemed to- 
him to move with a domestic familiarity. It wasn’t till he 
was out here that he had been struck to the soul with the 
immense assertive vigour and sacred handsomeness of the 
sun. He knew it now: the wild, immense, fierce, untamed | 
sun, fiercer than a glowing-eyed lion with a vast mane of 
fire, crouching on the western horizon, staring at the earth 
as if to pounce on it, the mouse-like earth. He had seen 
this immense sun, fierce and powerful beyond all human 
considerations, glaring across the southern sea, as all men 
may see it if they go there. , 

‘* There is one glory of the sun.’? And it is a glory vast 
and fierce, of a Lord who is more than our small lives. 

** And another glory of the moon.’’ That too he knew. 
And he had not known, till the full moon had followed him © 
through the empty bush, in Australia, in the night. The 
immense liquid gleam of the far-south moon, following, 
following with a great, miraculous, liquid smile. That vast 
white, liquid smile, so vindictive! And himself, hurrying 
back to camp on Lucy, had known a terrible fear. The fear 
that the broad liquid fire of the cold moon would capture 
him, capture him and destroy him, like some white demon 
that slowly and coldly tastes and devours its prey. The 
moon had that power, he knew, to dissolve him, tissue, 
heart, body and soul, dissolve him away. The immense, 
gleaming, liquid, lusting white moon, following him inexor- 
ably, and the bush like white charred moon-embers. 

‘* There is another glory of the moon.’? And he was 
afraid of it. ‘* The sun is thy right hand, and the moon is 
thy left hand.’’ The two gleaming, immense living orbs, 
moving like weapons in the two hands of the Lord. 

** And there is another glory of the stars.”? The strange 
stars of the southern night, all in unfamiliar crowds and 
tufts and drooping clusters, with strange black wells in the 
sky. He never got used to the southern stars. Whenever 
he stood and looked up at them he felt as if his soul were 
leaving him, as if he belonged to another species of life, 
not to man as he knew man. As if there were a meta- 
morphosis, a terrible metamorphosis to take place. 

“¢ There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.” 
This phrase had haunted his mind from the earliest days. 
And he had always had a sort of hatred of the thing his 

THE GREAT PASSING 183 

1unts, and the parson, and the poets,,called The Spirit, with 
. capital S. It had always, with him, been connected with 
lis Sunday clothes, and best behaviour, and a certain 
xalted falseness. Part of his natural naughtiness had 
risen from his vindictive dislike and contempt of The 
spirit, and things of The Spirit. 

Now it began to seem different to him. He knew, he 
ways had known, that the Bible really meant something 
ibsolutely different from what the aunts and the parson 
nd even the poets meant by the Spirit, or the spiritual 
ody. 

Since he had seen the Great God in the roaring of the 
ellow sun, and the frightening vast smile in the gleaming 
ull-moon following him, the new moon like a delicate 
yeapon-threat in the western sky, and the stars in disarray, 
ike a scattered flock of sheep bunching and communing 
ogether in a strange bush, in the vast heavens, he had 
radually come to know the difference between the natural 
ody and the spiritual body. The natural body was like in 
ingland, where the sun rises naturally to make day, and 
asses naturally at sunset, owing to the earth’s revolving; 
there the moon “ raises her lamp above,” on a clear night, 
nd the stars are ‘‘ candles’? in heaven. That is the 
atural body : all the cosmos just a natural fact. And a 
1an loves a woman so that they can propagate their species. 
‘he natural body. 

And the spiritual body is supposed to be something thin 
nd immaterial, that can float through a brick wall and 
ibsist on mere thought. Jack had always hated this thin, 
afting object. He preferred his body solid. He loved 
1e beautiful weight and transfigured solidity of living 
mbs. He had no use whatsoever for the gossamer stuff 
ts the supposed “ ethereal,’’ or ‘* pure ”’ spirit: like 
yaporated alcohol. He had a natural dislike of Shelley 
ad vegetarians and socialists and all advocates of * spirit.”’ 
e hated Blake’s pictures, with people waving like the 
rong kind of sea-weed, in the sky, instead of underwater. 
Hated it all. Till hating it had almost made him 
icked. 

Now he had a new understanding. He had always known 
at the Old Testament never meant any of this Shelley 
uff, this Hindu Nirvana business. ‘* There is a natural 

184 THH BOY IN LHD DUNE 

body, and there is a spiritual body.”? And his natural — 
body got up in the morning to eat food and tend sheep and — 
earn money and prepare for having a family; to see the sun 
usefully making day and setting owing to the earth’s revolu- 
tion : the new moon so shapen because the earth’s shadow — 
fell on her; the stars being other worlds, other lumps in © 
space, shining according to their various distances, coloured 
according to their chemical composition. Well and good. 

That is man very cleverly finding out all about it, like 
a little boy pulling his toy to pieces. _ 

But, willy-nilly, in this country he had another sun and ~ 
another moon. He had seen the glory of the sun and the © 
glory of the moon, and both these glories had had a power- 
ful sensual effect on him. There had been a great passional 
reaction in himself, in his own body. And as the strange ~ 
new passion of fear and the sense of gloriousness burned — 
through him, like a new intoxication, he knew that this was — 
his real spiritual body. This glowing, intoxicated body, — 
drunk with the sun and the moon, drunk from the cup in 
the hand of the Lord, this was his spiritual body. ) 

And when the flame came up in him, tearing from his 
bowels, in the sudden new desire for Monica, this was his 
spiritual body, the body transfigured with fire. And that 
steady dark vibration which made him want to kill Easu— 
Easu seemed to him like the Antichrist—that was his own 
spiritual body. And when he had hit Easu with his broken 
left hand, and the white sheet of flame going through him 
had made him scream aloud, leaving him strange and distant 
but super-conscious and powerful, this, too, was his spiritua) 
body. The sun in his right hand and the moon in his left 
hand. When he drank from the burning right hand of the 
Lord, and wanted Monica in the same fire, it was his body 
spiritual burning from the right hand of the Lord. And 
when he knew he must destroy Easu, in the sheet of white 
pain, it was his body spiritual transfigured from the left 
hand of the Lord. And when he ate and drank and the 
food tasted good, it was the dark cup of life he was drink- 
ing, drinking the life of the dead ox from the meat. And 
this was the body spiritual communing with the sacrificed 
body of natural life: like a tiger glowing at evening and 
lapping blood. And when he rode after the sheep through 
the bush, and the horse between his knees went quick and 

THE GREAT PASSING 185 

elicate, it was the Lord tossing him in his spiritual body 
own the maze of living. 

But when Easu ground down his horse and shoved it 
fter the sheep, it was the natural body fiendishly sub- 
ugating the spiritual body. For the horse, too, is a spiritual 
ody and a natural body, and may be ridden as the one 
r as the other. And when Easu wanted Monica, it was 
he natural body malignantly degrading the spiritual body. 
Tonica also half wanted it. 

For Easu knew the spiritual body. And like a fallen 
ngel he hated it, he wanted always to overthrow it more, 
a this day when it is so abjectly overthrown. Monica, 
00, knew the spiritual body: the body of straight fire. 
ind she, too, seemed to have a grudge against it. It 
hwarted her ‘* natural *? will: which ‘* natural ’’ will is 
he barren devil of to-day. 

Gran, that old witch, she also knew the spiritual body. 
but she loved spiting it. And she was dying like clay. 

Mary, who was so spiritual and so self-sacrificing, she 
idn’t know the body of straight fire at all. Her spirit was 
li natural. She was so ** good,”’ and so heavily ‘* natural,”’ 
he would put out any fire of the glory of the burning Lord. 
he was more ** natural ’? even than Easu. 

And Jack’s father was the same. So good! Sqnice! So 
ind! So absolutely well-meaning! And he would bank 
ut the fire of the burning Lord with shovelfuls of kindness. 

They would none of them, none of them let the fire burn 
traight. None of them. There were no people at all who 
ared have the fire of the Lord, and drink from the cup of 
he fierce glory of the Lord, the sun in one hand and the 
100n in the other. 

Only this strange, wild, ash-coloured country with its 
ndiminished sun and its unblemished moon, would allow 
;; There was a great death between the two hands of the 
ord; between the sun and the moon. But let there be a 
reat death. Jack gave himself to it. 

He was almost asleep, in the half-trance of inner con- 
ciousness, when Dad came in. Jack opened his eyes and 
jade to rise, but Dad waved him to sit still, while he took 
he chair on the other side of the fire, and sat down inert. 
te seemed queer. Dad seemed queer. The same dusky 
90k over his face as over Gran’s. And a queer, pinched, 

186 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

far-away look. Jack wondered over it. And he could see 
Dad didn’t want to be spoken to. The clock tick-tocked. 
Jack went into a kind of sleep. 

He opened his eyes. Dad was very slowly, very slowly 
fingering the bowl of his pipe. How quiet it was! 

Jack dozed again, and wakened to a queer noise. It was 
Dad’s breathing : and perhaps the falling of his pipe. He 
had dropped his pipe. And his body had dropped over 
sideways, very heavy and uncomfortable, and he was breath- 
ing hoarsely, unnaturally in his sleep. Save for the breath- 
ing it was dreadfully quiet. Jack picked up the pipe and 
sat down again. He felt tired : awfully tired, for no reason” 
at all. 

He woke with a start. The afternoon was passing, there 
was a shower, the room seemed dark. The firelight 
flickered on Mr Ellis’ watchguard. He wore his unbuttoned 
waistcoat as ever, with the gold watch-chain showing. He 
was very stout, and very still. Terribly still and sagging 
sideways, the hoarse breathing had ceased. Jack would 
have liked to wake him from that queer position. 

How quiet it was! Upstairs someone had dragged a chair 
and that had made him realise. Far away, very far away, 
he could hear Harry and Ellie and baby, playing. ‘‘ There’s 
a quiet of the sun and another quiet of the moon, and an- 
other quiet of the stars; for one star differs from another 
in quiet. So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is 
sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body.”’ 

Was that Scripture? Or wasn’t it? There is a quiet of 
the sun. This was the quiet of the sun. He was sitting in 
the cold dead quiet of the sun. For one star differs from 
another in quiet. The sun had abstained from radiating, 
this was the quiet of the sun, and the strange, shadowy 
crowding of the stars’ differing quietness seemed to infest. 
the weak daylight. ; 

It is sown a natural body! Oh, bother the words! He 
didn’t want them. He wanted the sun to shine, and every- 
thing to be normal. If he didn’t feel so weak, and if it 
weren’t raining, he’d go out to the stable to the horses. To 
the hot-blooded animals. | 

Mr Ellis’ head hung sagging on his chest. Jack wished 
he would wake up and change his position, it looked 
horrible. | 

THE GREAT PASSING 187 

The inner door suddenly opened, and Mary came swiftly 
ut. She started seeing Mr Ellis asleep in the chair. Then 
he went to Jack’s side and took his arm, and leaned 
vhispering in his ear. 

** Jack! She’s gone! I think she’s gone. I think she 
assed in her sleep. We shall have to wake uncle.”’ 

Jack stood up trembling. There was a queer smell in 
he room. He walked across and touched the sleeping man 
m the sleeve. 

** Dad!” he said. ‘*‘ Dad! Mr Ellis.”’ 

There was no response. They both waited. Then Jack 
hook the arm more vigorously. It felt very inert. Mary 
ame across and put her hand on her uncle’s sunken fore- 
ead, to lift his head. She gave a litile scream. 

** Something’s the matter with him,’’ she said, whimper- 

ig. 

‘a 

Thank goodness, Dr. Rackett was upstairs. They fetched 
im and Timothy and Tom, and carried Mr Ellis into the 
ying room. 

** Better leave me alone with him now,”’’ said Rackett. 

After ten minutes he came out of the dying room and 
osed the door behind him. Tom was standing there. He 
oked at Rackett enquiringly. Rackett shook his head. 
** Dad’s not dead? ” said Tom. 

Rackett nodded. 

Tom’s face went to pieces for a moment. Then he com- 
osed it, and that Australian mouth of his, almost like a 
sar, shut close. He went into the dying room. 
Someone had to fetch the Methodist son-in-law from 
ork. Jack went in the sulky. Better die in the cart than 
op in that house. And he could drive the sulky quietly. 
The Methodist son-in-law, though he was stout and wore 
ack and Jack objected to him on principle, wasn’t really 
. bad, in his own home. His wife Ruth, of course, burst 
to tears and ran upstairs. Her husband kept his face 
raight, brought out the whiskey tantalus, and poured 
me for Jack and himself. This they both drank with 
fitting gravity. 

** IT must be in chapel in fifteen minutes; that will be 

ig THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

five minutes late,” said the parson. “ But they can’t com~ 
plain, under the circumstances. Mrs Blogg, of course, will 
stay at home. Er—is anyone making arrangements out at 
Wandoo? ”’ 

‘“* What arrangements? ”’ . 

“‘ Oh, seeing to things . . . the personal property, too.” 

““T was sent for you,” said Jack. ‘‘I suppose they 
thought you’d see to things.”’ 

“Yes! Certainly! Certainly! Ill be out with Mrs 
Blogg directly after Meeting. Let me see.” | 

He went to a table and laboriously wrote two notes. 
Twisting them into cocked hats, he handed them one after 
the other to Jack saying : : 

‘* This is to the Church of England parson. Leave it at 
his house. I’ve made it Toosday, Toosday at half-past 
ten. I suppose that’ll do. And this—this is to the joiner.”” 

He looked at Jack meaningly, and Jack looked vague. 

*‘ Joshua Jenkins, at the joiner’s shop. Third house 
from the end of the road. And you’ll find him in the loft 
over the stable, Sunday or not, if he isn’t in the house.”? — 

It was sunset and the single bells of the church and 
chapel were sounding their last ping! ping! ping-ping! as 
Jack drove slowly down the straggling street of York. 
People were going to church, the women in their best shawls 
and bonnets, hurrying a little along the muddy road, where 
already the cows were lying down to sleep, and the loose 
horses straggled uncomfortably. Occasionally a muddy 
buggy rattled up to the brick Church of England, people 
passed shadow-shape into the wooden Presbyterian Church, 
or waited outside the slab Meeting House of the Methodists. 
The choir band was already scraping fiddles and tooting 
cornets in the church. Lamps were lighted within, and one 
feeble lamp at the church gate. It was a cloudy evening. 
Odd horsemen went trotting through the mud, going out 
into the country again as night fell, rather forlorn. 

Jack always felt queer in York on Sundays. The attempt 
at Sunday seemed to him like children’s make believe. The 
churches weren’t real churches, the parsons weren’t real 
parsons, the people weren’t real worshippers. It was a 
sort of earnest make-belief, where people felt important like 
actors. And the pub, with its extra number of lamps, 
seemed to feel extra wicked. And the men riding home, 

THE GREAT PASSING 189 

ften tipsy, seemed vague as to what was real, this York 
sting Sunday, or their dark, rather dreary farms away out, 
r some other third unknown thing. Was anything quite 
sal? That was what the shadows, the people, the build- 
igs seemed all to be asking. It was like children’s games, 
al and not real, actual and yet unsubstantial, and the 
eople seemed to feel as children feel, very earnest, very 
ire that they were very real, but having to struggle all 
1e time to keep up the conviction. If they didn’t keep up 
1e conviction, the dark, strange Australian night might 
ear them and their little town all away into some final 
ipboard, and leave the aboriginal bush again. 

Joshua Jenkins, the godless, was in the loft with a chisel, 
orking by lantern light. He peered at the twisted note, 
id his face brightened. 

**'Two of ’em!” he exclaimed, with a certain gusto. 
Well, think o’ that, think o’ that! And I’ve not had a 
b o’ this sort for over a month. Well, I never, t’be sure! 
* never rains but it comes down cats and dogs seemingly. 
posday! Toosday! Toosday! Let’s see ’—and he 
ratched his head behind the ear. ‘* Pretty quick work 
at, pretty quick work. But, can be done; oh, yes, can 
» done. I’s’ll have t’send somebody t’ measure the Boss. 
ow deep should you say he was in the barrel? Never 
ind, though, I’ll send Sam over with the measure, come 
orning. But I can start right away on the old lady. 
st’s see! Let’s see! She wouldn’t be-e-e—she wouldn’t 
over five foot two or three, now, would she? ”’ 

**T don’t know,” said Jack hoarsely. ‘‘ Do you mean 
r her coffin? ’? He was filled with horror. 

** Well, I should say I do. I should say so. You don’t 
e no sewing-machines here, do you, for sewing her shroud. 
suppose I do mean her coffin, being joiner and carpenter, 
d J.P., and coroner as well, when required.”’ 

Jack fled, horrified. But as he lit his sulky candles, and 
t off at a slow trot out of the town, he laughed a bit to 
mself. He felt it was rather funny. Why shouldn’t it be 
ther funny? He hoped it would be a bit funny when he 
is dead too, to relieve matters. He sat in the easy sulky 
iving slowly down the washed-out road, in the dark, alien 
tht. The night was dark and strange. An animal ran 
yng the road in front of him, just discernible, at the far 

199 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 3 

edge of the dim yellow candle glow. It was a wild grey 

thing, running ahead into the dark. On into the dark. 

Why should one care? Beyond a certain point, one didn’t" 

care about anything, life or death. One just felt it all. Up 

to a certain point, one had to go through the mill, caring and - 
feeling bad. One had to cry out to the Lord, and fight the 
ugly brutes of life. And then for a time it was over, and 

one didn’t care, good or bad, Lord or no Lord. One paid 
one’s whack of caring and then one was let off for a time. 

When one was dead, one didn’t care any more. And that 
was death. But life too had its own indifference, its own 

deep, strong indifference : as the ocean is calm way down, 

under the most violent storm. 

When he got home, Tom came out to the sulky. Tom’s 
face was set with that queer Australian look, as if he were 
caught in a trap, and it wasn’t any use complaining about 

‘ 

2 

7 
7 

a 
: 

- 

it. He unharnessed the horse in a rough, flinging fashion. — 

Jack didn’t know what to say to him, so he thought he’d 
better keep quiet. 

Lennie came riding in on Lucy. He slid to the ground 
and dragged the mare’s bridle roughly. 

** Come on, yer blasted old idjut, can’t ye! ’’ he blubbed, 
dragging her to the stable door. ‘‘ Blasted idjut, my Uncle 

} 

: 

- 

Joe! ’’ he continued, between the sniffs and gulps of his 

blubbing. ‘* Questions! Questions! How c’n I answer 
questions when I don’t know myself! ’? A loud blub as 
he dragged the saddle down on top of himself, in his frenzy 

of untackling Lucy. ‘* Rackett says to me, ‘ Len,’ he says,” | 

blub and a loud sniff—‘‘ * y’ father’s took bad and pore ol? 

Gran’s gone,’ he says ’”’—blub! blub! blub. ‘* * Be off an? 

7 
7 
: 
: 
: 
1 

fetch y’ Uncle Joe an’ tell him to come at onst ’—an’ he 

can go to hell.’? Lennie ended on a shout of defiance as 

he staggered into the stable with the saddle. And from the — 

dark his voice came: ** An’ when I ask our Tom what’s 
amiss wi’ m’ Dad,” blub! blub! ‘* blasted idjut looks at 

me like a blasted owl—like a blasted owl! ’? And Lennie ~ 

sobbed before he sniffed and came out for the bridle. 

** Don’t y’ cry, Lennie,’”? said Jack, who was himself_ 

crying for all he was worth, under the cover of the dark. 

** I’m not crying, y’ bloomin’ fool, you! *? shouted Len. 
**T’m goin’ in to see Ma, I am. Get some sense outta 

her.’? 

THE GREAT PASSING 191 

He walked off towards the house, and then came back. 

** Why don’ you go in, Tom, an’ see? ”’ he cried. “© What 
’yer stan’ there like that for, what do yer? ” 

There was a dead and horrible silence, outside the stable 
oor in the dark. A silence that went to the core of the 
ight, having no word to say. 

The lights of a buggy were seen at the gate. The three 
aited. It was the unmarried aunts. One of them yan 
nd took Len in her arms. 

** Oh, you poor little lamb! ”’ she cried. ‘‘ Oh, your 
oor Ma! Your Ma! Your poor Ma! ”’ 

-** Ma’s not bad! She’s all right,’’ yelped Len in a new 
sar. Then there was a pause, and he became super- 
mscious. Then he drew away from the aunts. 

**Is Dad dead? ’”’ he asked in a queer, quizzical little 
oice, looking from Tom to Jack, in the dim buggy light. 
om stood as if paralysed. 

Lennie at last gave a queer, animal ‘* Whooo,’’ like a 
og dazed with pain, and flung himself into Tom’s arms. 
he only sounds in the night were Tom’s short, dry sobs, 
3 he held Lennie, and the whimpering of the aunts. 

** Come to your poor Mother, come to comfort her,”’ said 
ne of the aunts gently. 

ferom! Tom!” cried Lennie. ‘* I’m skeered! I’m 
ceered, Tom, o’ them two corpses! I’m skeered of ’em, 
om.’? Tom, who was a litile skeered too, gave a short, 
ry bark of a sob. 

** They won’t hurt you, precious! ”’ said the aunt. 
They won’t hurt you. Come to your poor Mother.”’ 

** No-o-o! ”? wailed Lennie in terror, and he flung away 
’ Timothy’s cabin, where he slept all night. 

When the horses were fixed up, Tom and Jack went to 
ie cubby. Tom flung himself on the bed without un- 
‘essing, and lay there in silence. Jack did the same. He 
dn’t know what else to do. At last he managed to say : 

** Don’t take it too hard, Tom! MDad’s lived his life, and 
2’s got all you children. We have to live. We all have 
)live. An’ then we’ve got to die.” 

There was unresponsive silence for a time. 

‘© What’s the blasted use of it all, anyhow? ” said Tom. 
‘© There’s no such thing as use,”’ said Jack. ‘* Dad lived, 
1d he had his life. He had his life. You'll have yours. 

192 THE BOY IN THE BUSH ; 

And I shall have mine. It’s just your life, and you live it." 

‘* What’s the good of it? ’’ persisted Tom heavily. ‘ 

‘‘ Neither good nor bad. You live your life because it’s — 
your own, and nobody can live it for you.” 

“‘ What good is it to me? ”? said Tom dully, drearily. “1 
don’t care if people live their lives or not.” 

Jack felt for the figure on the bed. 

‘* Shake hands though, Tom,”’ he said. ‘* You are alive, 
and so am I. Shake hands on it.” 

He found the hand and got a faint response, sulky, heavy. 
But for very shame Tom could not withhold all response. _ 

Tim came in the morning with tea and bread and butter, 
saying Tom was wanted inside, and would Jack go with 
him to attend to the grave. Poor Tim was very much — 
upset, and wept and wailed unrestrainedly. Which perhaps — 
was good, because it spared the others the necessity to weep 
and wail. 

They hitched up the old buggy, and set off with a pick 
and a couple of spades. Old black Timothy on the driving- 
box occasionally startled Jack by breaking forth into a new 
sudden wail, like a dog suddenly remembering again. It 
was a fine day. The earth had already dried up, and a hot, 
dry, gritty wind was blowing from inland, from the east. 
They drove out of the paddocks and along an overgrown 
trail, then they crossed the river, heaving and floundering" 
through the slough, for at this season it was no more. The 
SA of the driving here made Timothy forget to 
Wall. 

Rounding a steep little bluff, they came to a lonely, . 
forlorn little enclosed graveyard, which Jack had never seen. 
Tim wailed, then asked where the grave should be. The 
sun grew very hot. They nosed around the little, lonely, 
parched acre. 

Jack could not dig, so he unharnessed the outfit and put 
a box of chaff before the horses. Tim flung his spade over 
against a little grey headstone, and climbed in with the 
pick. Even then they weren’t quite sure how big to make 
the grave, so Jack lay on the ground while Tim picked out 
a line around him. They got a straight line with a rope. 

The soil was as hard as cement. Tim toiled and moiled, | 
and forgot all wailing. But he made little impression on 
the cement-like earth. 

THE GREAT PASSING 193 

** What we goin’ to do? ” he asked, scratching his sweat- 
ng head. ‘‘ What’n hell’s name we goin’ t’ do, sir? Gotta 
sury ’m Toosday, gotta.’ And he looked at the blazing 
= “ Gotta dig him hole sevenfut deep grave, gotta 
o 't. 

He set to again. Then two of the Reds came, sent to 
1elp. But the work was killing. The day became so hot, 
you forgot it, you passed into a kind of spell. But that 
work was heart-breaking. 

Jack went off for dynamite, and Rackett came along, 
vith Lennie, who would never miss a dynamiting show. Tim 
yrung his wet hair like a mop. The Reds, in their vests, 
vere scarlet, and the vests were wet and grimy. 

Much more fun with dynamite. Boom! Bang! Then 
omebody throwing out the dirt. Somebody going for a 
adder. Boom! Bang! The explosions seemed enormous. 

** Oh, for the love 0’ Mike! ”? cried the excited Lennie. 
‘ Ye’ll blow me ol’ grandfather sky high, if y’ don’t mind. 
for the love of Mike, don’t let me see his bones.”’ 

But the grandfather Ellis was safe in the next grave. 
Rackett laid another fuse. They all stood back. Bang! 
300m! Pouf! went the dust. 

iii 

Jack would have done anything to escape the funeral, 
ut Timothy, for some reason, kept hold of him. He wanted 
lim to help replace the turf: moral support rather than 
yhysical assistance. 
The two of them hid behind the pinch. At last they saw 
he cortege approaching. Easu Ellis held the reins of the 
irst team, and chewed the end of the whip. Beside him 
at Joshua Jenkins, as a mute, fearful in black, and like a 
carecrow with loose danglings of crape. In the buggy 
yehind them, on the floor-boards, was Gran’s coffin, shaking 
voefully, covered with a black cloth. Joe Low drove the 
econd buggy, which was the second hearse, and he looked 
trained and anxious as the heavy coffin bumped when the 
yuggy dropped into holes on the track. Then came the 
amily shay with the chief male mourners. Then a little 
rowd on foot. 

G 

194 THE BOY IN THE BUSH ; 

The Horses were behaving badly, not liking the road. It 
was hot, the vile east wind was blowing. THasu’s horse 
jibbed at the slough of the stream : would not take it. He 
was afraid they would jump, and toss the coffin out of the 
buggy. He had to get bearers to carry Gran’s poor remains 
across the mud and up the pinch to their last house. The 
bearers sunk almost to their knees in mud. The whole 
cortége was at a standstill. 

Joe Low’s horses, mortally frightened, were jumping 
round till they were almost facing the horses in the mourners’ 
shay. Easu ran to their heads. More bearers, strong men, 
came forward to lift out Dad’s heavy coffin. Everybody 
watched in terror as they staggered through the slough 
of the stream with that unnatural burden. Was it going to 
fall? 

No, they were through. Men were putting branches and 
big stones for the foot-mourners to cross, everybody sweat- 
ing and sweltering. The sporting parson, his white surplice 
waving in the hateful, gritty hot wind, came striding over, 
holding his book. Then Tom, with a wooden, stupid face. 
Then Lennie, cracking nuts between his teeth and spitting 
out the shells, in an agony of nervousness. Then the other 
mourners, some carrying a few late, weird bush-flowers, 
picking their way over like a train of gruesome fowls, 
staggering and clutching on the stones and boughs, landing 
safe on the other bank. Jack watched from a safe distance 
above. 

There were two coffins, one on either side of the grave. 
Some of the uncles had top hats with dangling crape. 
Nearly everybody was black. Poor Len, what a black little 
crow he looked! The sporting parson read the service man- 
fully. Then he announced hymn number 225. 

Jack could feel the hollow place below, with the black 
mourners, simmer with panic, when the parson in cold blood 
asked them to sing a hymn. But he read the first verse 
solemnly, like an overture : 

** Oh sweet and blessed country 
The home of God’s elect! _ 
Oh sweet and blessed country 
That eager hearts expect . . .” 

THE GREAT PASSING 195 

There was a deadly pause. There was going to be no 

answer from the uncomfortable congregation, under that 
hot sun. 
_ But Uncle Blogg was not to be daunted. He struck up in 
a rather fat, wheezy, Methodist voice, and Aunt Ruth piped 
feebly. The maiden aunts, who had insisted on following 
their mother, though women were not expected to attend, 
listened to this for an awful minute or two, then they 
waveringly “ tried ” to join in. It was really only funny. 
And Tom, in all his misery, suddenly started to laugh. 
Lennie looked up at him with wide eyes, but Tom’s 
shoulders shook, shook harder, especially when Aunt Minnie 
** tried ’’ to sing alto. That alto he could not bear. 

The Reds were beginning to grin sheepishly and to turn 
their heads over their shoulders, as if the open country 
would not object to their grins. It was becoming a scandal. 

Lennie saved the situation. His voice came clear and 
pure, like a chorister’s, rising above the melancholy ** try- 
ing ’’ of the relations, a clear, pure singing, that seemed to 
dominate the whole wild bush. 

** Oh sweet and blessed country 
That eager hearts expect. 

Jesu in mercy bring us 

To that dear land of rest; 
Who art with God the Father, 
And Spirit ever blessed.” 

At the sound of Lennie’s voice, Tom turned white as a 
sheet, and looked as if he were going to die, too. But the 
boy’s voice soared on, with that pure quality of innocence 
that was sheer agony to the elder brother. 

iv 
Jack, who was looking sick again, was sent away to the 
Greenlow’s next day. And he was glad to go, thankful to 
be out of it. He loathed death, he loathed death, and 
Wandoo had suddenly become full of death. 
The first cool days of the year, golden and blue, were at 
hand. The Greenlow girls made much of him. He rode 

196 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

with them after sheep, inspecting fences, examining far-off 
wells. They were not bad girls at all. They taught him to 
play solitaire at evening, to hold worsted, even to spin. 
Real companionable girls, thankful to have a young man In 
the house, spoiling him completely. Pa was home after 
the first day, and acted as a sort of hairy chimpanzee 
chaperone, but looking over his spectacles and hissing 
through his teeth was his severest form of reproof. He 
didn’t set Jack to wash that Sunday, but even gave him 
tit-bits from the joint, so that our young hero almost knew 
what it was to have a prospective father-in-law. 

Jack left Gum Tree Croft with regret. For he knew his 
life at Wandoo was over. Now Dad was dead, everything 
was going to break up. This was bitter to him, for it was 
the first place he had ever loved, ever wanted to stay in, 
for ever and ever. He loved the family. He-couldn’t bear 
to go away from them. 

‘* Never mind! ”? he said to himself. ‘‘ I shall always 
have them in some way or other, all my life.’’ 

Things seemed different when he got back. There wasn’t 
much real difference, except a bit of raking and clearing 
up had been done for the funeral. But Wandoo itself 
seemed to have died. For the meantime the homestead was 
as if dead. 

Grace and Monica looked unnatural in black frocks. They 
felt unnatural. 

Jack was told that Mr George was having a conclave in 
the parlour, and that he was to go in. 

Tom, Mrs Ellis, and Mr George and Dr. Rackett were 
there, seated round the table, on which were some papers. 
Jack shook hands, and sat uneasily in an empty chair on 
Dr. Rackett’s side of the table. Mr George was explaining 
things simply. 

Mr Ellis left no will. But the first marriage certificate 
had been found. Tom was to inherit Wandoo, but not till 
he came legally of age, in a year and a half’s time. Mean- 
while, Mrs Ellis could continue on the place, and carry on 
as best she might, on behalf of herself and all the children. 
For a year and a half, 

She heard in silence. After a year and a half she would 
be homeless : or at least dependent on Tom, who was not 
her son. She sat silent in her black dress. 

THE GREAT PASSING 197 

Tom cleared his throat and stared at the table. Then he 
looked up at Jack, and, scarlet in the face, said : 

** I’ve been thinking, Ma, I don’t want the place. You 
have it, for Len. I don’t want it. You have it, for Len 
an’ the kids. I’d rather go away. Best if that certificate 
hadn’t never been found, if you’re going to feel you’re 
turned out.”’ 

He dropped his head in confusion. Mr George held up 
his hand. 

‘** No more of that heroic talk,’? he said. ‘* When Jacob 
Ellis stored up that marriage certificate at the bottom of 
that box, he showed what he meant. And you may feel as 
you say to-day, but two years hence you might repent it.’’ 

Tom looked up angrily. 

** I don’t believe Tom would ever regret it,’? put in Mrs 
Ellis. ‘* But I couldn’t think of it. Len wouldn’t let me, 
even if I wanted to.”’ 

** Of course not,’’ said Mr George. ‘‘ We’ve got to be 
sensible, and the law’s the law. You can’t alter it yet, my 
boy, even if you want to. You’re not of age yet. 

** So you listen to me. My plan is for you and Jack to go 
out into the colony and get some experience. Sow your 
wild oats, if you’ve got any to sow, or else pick up a bit of 
good oat-seed. One or the other. 

** My idea is for you and Jack to go up for a year to 
Lang’s Well station, out Roeburne way. Lang’ll give you 
your keep and a pound a week each, and your fare refunded 
if you stay a year. 

‘© The Rob-Roy sails from Geraldton about a month from 
now; you can get passages on her. And I thought it would 
be just as well, Tom, if you and Jack rode up through that 
midland country. You’ve a hundred connections to see, 
who’ll change y’r horses for y’. And you’ll see the country. 
And y’ll be men of travel. We want men of experience, 
men of a wide outlook. Somebody’s got to be the head- 
piece of this colony when men like me and the rest of us 
are gone. It’ll be a three hundred mile ride, but ye’ve 
nigh on a month to do it. 

‘¢ Now, what do you say, my boy? Your mother will 
stop on here with the children. I'll see she gets a good man 
to run the place. And meanwhile she’ll be able to fix some- 
thing up for herself. Oh, we shall settle all right. Ill see 

=| 
18 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 1 

your mother through all right. No fear of that. And no 
fear of any deterioration to the place. I’ll watch that. You 
bet I will.”’ | 

Tom twisted his fingers, white at the gills, and mumbled 
his thanks vaguely. 

“‘ Jack,’? said Mr George. ‘* I know you’re game. And 
you will look after Tom.” 

Dr. Rackett said he thought it a wise plan, and further, 
that if Mrs Ellis would consent, he would like to bear the 
expenses of sending Lennie to school in England for the 
next three years. 

Mrs Ellis woke from her dream to say quickly : 

‘¢ Although I thank you kindly, Dr. Rackett, I think 
you’ll understand if I say No.’’ 

Her decision startled everybody. : 

‘‘Prrh! Bah! ’? snorted Mr George. ‘‘ There’s one 
thing. I doubt if we could make Lennie go. But, with 
your permission Alice, we'll ask him. Jack, find Lennie © 
for us.”’ 

** T’ll not say a word,” said Mrs Ellis, nervously clutch-— 
ing the edge of the table. ‘‘ I won’t influence him. But 
if he goes it’ll be the death of me. Poor old Lennie! Poor 
old Lennie !’? . 

‘*Prrh! Bah! That’s nonsense! Nonsense! ”? said: Mr 
George angrily. ‘* Give the boy his chance, leave your fool 
emotions out, d’ye hear, Alice Ellis.’’ 

Mrs Ellis sat like a martyr stubborn at the stake. Jack 
brought the mistrustful Len, who stood like a prisoner at 
the bar. Mr George put the case as attractively as 
possible. 

Len slowly shook his head, with a grimace of distaste. 

** No, I don’t think! ’? he remarked. ‘* Not fer mine, 
you bet! I stays alongside my pore ol? Ma, here in 
Western Austrylia.”? 

Mr George adjusted his eyeglasses severely. 

** Your mother is neither poor nor old,” he said coldly. 

**T never! ’? broke out Lennie. 

** And this country, thank God, is called Australia, not 
Austrylia. When you open your mouth you give proof 
enough of your need for education. I should like to hear 
different language in your mouth, my son, and sce different 
ideas working in your head.” 

: THE GREAT PASSING 199 

eo rather pale and nervous, stared with wide eyes at 
m. 

“* You never,’’ he said, ** you never ketch me talkin’ like 
Jack Grant, not if y’ skin me alive.’? And he shifted from 
one foot to the other. 

** I wouldn’t take the trouble to skin you, alive or dead. 
Your skin wouldn’t be worth it. But come. You’re an 
intelligent boy. You need education. You need it. Your 
nature needs it, child. Your mother ought to see that. 
Your nature needs you to be educated, well educated. 
You'll be wasted afterwards—you will. And you’ll repent 
it. Mark me, you’ll repent it, when you’re older, and your 
spirit, which should be trained and equipped, is all clumsy 
and half-baked as any other cornseed’s. You'll be a fretful, 
uneasy, wasted man, you will. Your mother ought to see 
that. You'll be a half-baked, quarter-educated bush- 
whacker, instead of a well-equipped man.”’ 

Len looked wonderingly at his mother. But she still sat 
like an obstinate martyr at the stake, and gave him no sign. 

“Don’t he educate me? * asked Len, pointing to 
Rackett. 

“As much as you'll let him,” said Mr George. 
66 But 29 

Lennie’s face crumpled up with irritation. 

‘© Oh, what for do you want me to be educated! ”? he 
cried testily. ‘‘ I don’t want to be like Uuncle Blogg. I 
don’? wantter be like Dr. Rackett even.’? He wrinkled his 
nose in distaste. ‘* ’N I don’t wantter be like Jack Grant, 
neither. I don’ wantta. I don’ wantta, I tell y’ I don’ 
wantta.”’ 

*€ Do you think they would want to be like you? ”? asked 
Mr George. _- 

Lennie looked from him to Rackett, and then to Jack. 

“© Jack’s not so very diff’rent,’’ he said slowly. And he 
shook his head. ‘* But can’t y’ believe me,”’ he cried. ‘TI 
Jon’ wantta go to England. I don’ wantta talk fine and be 
ike them. Can’t ye see I don’t? I don’ wantta. What’s 
the good! What’s the mortal use of it, anyhow? Aren’t 
[ right as T am? ” 

‘¢ What do you want to do? ” 

6‘ J wants to work. I wants to milk an’ feed, and plough 
snd reap and lay out irrigation, like Dad. An’ I wants to 

rites 

200 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

look after Ma an’ the kids. An’ then I’ll get married and 
be on a place of me own with kids of me own, an’ die, like 
Dad, an’ be done for. That’s what I wants. It is.”’ 

He looked desperately at his mother. 

Mr George slowly shook his head, staring at the keen, 
beautiful, but reluctant boy. 

‘* IT suppose that’s what we’ve come to,”’ said Rackett. 

‘¢ Didn’t you learn me! ”? cried Lennie defiantly. And 
striking a little attitude, like a naive earnest actor, he 
repeated : 

‘‘ Here rests, his head upon the lap of earth, 
A youth to fortune and to fame unknown. 
Fair science frowned not on his humble birth, 
And melancholy marked him for her own. 

Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere, 

Heaven did a recompense as largely send. 

He gave to misery all he had, a tear, 

He gained from heaven, ’twas all he wished, a 
friend.’’ 

‘* There,”’? he continued. ‘* That’s me! An’ I’ve got a 
friend already.”’ ! 
** You're a little fool,’ said Mr George. ‘‘ Much mark 
of melancholy there is on you! And do you think Misery 
is going to thank you for your idiotic tear? As for your 
friend, he’s going away. And you’re a fool, putting up a 
headstone to yourself while you’re alive still. Damn you, 

you little fool, and be damned to you.”’ 

Mr George was really cross. He flounced his spectacles 
off his nose. Len was frightened. Then he said, rather 
waveringly, turning to his mother : 

‘¢ We’re all right, Ma, ain’t we? ” 

Mrs Ellis looked at him with her subtlest, tenderest smile. 
And in Lennie’s eyes burned a light of youthful indignation 
against these old men. 

CHAP: XIII. TOM AND JACK RIDE TOGETHER 
i 

THESE days Monica was fascinating to Jack’s eyes. She 
wore a black dress, and her slimness, her impulsive girlish- 
ness under this cloud were wistful, exquisite. He would 
have liked to love her, soothingly, protectively, passion- 
ately. He would have liked to cherish her, with passion. 
Always he looked to her for a glance of intimacy, looked to 
see if she wouldn’t accept his passion and his cherishing. 
He wanted to touch her, to kiss her, to feel the eternal 
lightning of her slim body through the cloud of that black 
dress. He wanted to declare to her that he loved her, as 
Alec Rice had declared to Grace; and he wanted to ask her 
to marry him. To ask her to marry him at once. 
But mostly he wanted to touch her and hold her in his 
arms. He watched her all the time, hoping to get one of the 
‘old, long looks from her yellow eyes, from under her bended 
brows. Her long, deep, enigmatic looks, that used to worry 
him so. Now he longed for her to look at him like that. 

Or better still if she would let him see her trouble and 
her grief, and love her so, with a passionate cherishing. 

But she would do neither. She kept her grief and her 
provocation both out of sight, as if neither existed. Her 
little face remained mute and closed, like a shut-up bud. 
She only spoke to him with a vague distant voice, and she 
never really looked at him. Or if she did glance at him, it 
was in a kind of anger, and pain, as if she did not want to 
be interfered with; didn’t want to be pulled down. 

He was completely puzzled. Her present state was quite 
incomprehensible to him. She had nothing to reproach 
him with, surely. And if she had loved him, even a little, 
she could surely love him that little still. If she had so 
often taken his hand and clutched it, surely she could now 
let him take her hand, in real sympathy. 

It was as if she were angry with him because Dad had 
died. Jack hadn’t wanted Dad to die. Indeed, no. He 
was cut up by it as if he had been one of the family. And 
it was as bad a blow to his destiny as to hers. He was as 

201 

202 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

sore and sorry as anybody. Yet she kept her face shut 
against him, and avoided him, as if he were to blame. 
Completely. puzzled, Jack went on with his preparations 

seme 

+ 
* 

an 

| 

for departure. He had no choice. He was under orders 
from Mr George, and with Mrs Ellis’ approval, to quit © 

Wandoo, to ride with Tom up to Geraldton, and to spend 

at least a year on the sheep station up north. It had to be. — 

It was the wheel of fate. So let it be. 

And as the last day drew near, the strange volcano of 
anger which slumbered at the bottom of his soul—a queer, 
quiescent crater of anger which churned its deep hot lava — 
invisible—threw up jets of silver rage, which hardened ~ 
rapidly into a black, rocky indifference. And this was char- — 

acteristic of him : an indifference which was really congealed 
anger, and which gave him a kind of innocent, remote, 
childlike quietness. 

This was his nature. He was himself vaguely aware of — 

the unplumbed crater of silent anger which lay at the 
bottom of his soul. It was not anger against any particular 
thing, or because of anything in particular. It was just 
generic, inherent in him. It was himself. It did not make 
him hate people, individually, unless they were hateful. 
It did not make him hard or cruel. Indeed he was too 
yielding rather than otherwise, too gentle and mindful of 
horses and cattle, for example, unmindful of himself. Tom 
often laughed at him for it. If Lucy had a will of her own, 

and a caprice she wanted to execute, he always let her go : 

ahead, take her way, as far as was reasonable. If she 
exceeded her limits his anger roused and there was no doing 
any more with him. But he very rarely, very rarely got 
really angry. Only then in the long, slow accumulation of 
hostility, as with Easu. 

But anger! A deep, fathomless well-head of slowly-moy- 
ing, invisible fire. Somewhere in his consciousness he was 
aware of it, and in this awareness it was as if he belonged 
to a race apart. He never felt identified with the great 
humanity. He belonged to a race apart, like the race of 
Cain. This he had always known. 

Sometimes he met eyes that were eyes of his own outcast 
race. As a tiny boy it had been so. Fairs had always 
fascinated him because at the Fairs in England he met the 
eyes of gipsies who, in a glance, understood him. His own 

TOM AND JACK RIDE TOGETHER 208 

people could not understand. But in the black eyes of a 
gipsy woman he had seen the answer, even as a boy of ten. 
And he had thought: I ought to go away with her, run 
away with her. 

It was the anger, the deep, burning life-anger which was 
the kinship. Not a deathly, pale, nervous anger. But an 
anger of the old blood. And it was this which had attracted 
him to grooms, horsey surroundings, and to pugilists. In 
them was some of this same deep, generous anger of the 
blood. And now in Australia, too, he saw it like a secret 
away at the bottom of the black, full, strangely shining - 
eyes of the aborigines. There it lay, the secret, like an 
eternal, brilliant snake. And it established at once a kind 
of free-masonry between him and the blacks. They were 
curiously aware of him, when he came: aware of his com- 
ing, aware of his going. As if in him were the same great 
Serpent of their anger. And they were downcast now he 
was going away, as if their strength were being taken from 
them. Old Tim, who had taken a great fancy to Jack, re- 
lapsed into a sort of glumness as if he, too, now, were pre- 
paring to die. 

Since Jack had come back from the Greenlow’s farm, 
Monica had withdrawn to a distance, a kind of luminous 
distance, and put a chasm between herself and Jack. She 
moved mute and remote on the shining side of the chasm. 
He stood on the dark side, looking across the blackness of 
the gulf at her as if she were some kind of star. Surely 
the gulf would close up. Surely they both would be on 
natural ground again. 

But, no! always that incomprehensible little face with 
fringed lashes, and mouth that opened with a little smile, a 
vulnerable little smile, as if asking them all to be kind to 
her, to be pitiful towards her, and not try to touch her. 

*© Well, good-bye, Monica, for the present,”’ he said, as 
he sat in the saddle in the yard, and Tom started away 
riding towards the gate, leading the bulky-looking pack- 
horse. 

‘© Good-bye. Come back! ’’ said Monica, looking up with 
a queer, hard little question come into her eyes, but her 
face remote as ever. 

Jack kicked his horse and started. 

** T’ll come back,’ he said over his shoulder. But he 

204 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

didn’t look round at her. His heart had gone hard and hot 
in his breast. He was glad to be going. 

Lennie had opened the gate. He stood there as Jack 
rode through. 

‘< Why can’t I never come? ”’ he cried. 

4 
A 

| 

Jack laughed and rode on, after the faithful Tom. He — 

was glad to go. He was glad to leave Wandoo. He was 
glad to say no more good-byes, and to feel no more pain. 
He was glad to be gone, since he was going, from the un- 

lucky place. He was glad to be gone from its doom. There ~ 
was a doom over it, a doom. And he was glad to be gone. — 
The morning was still orange and green. Winter had — 

set in at last, the rains had begun to be heavy. They 
might have trouble with drenchings and boggings, but 

that, Tom said, was better than drought and sunstrokes. — 

And, anyhow, the weather this morning was perfect. 

The dark forest of Karri that ran to the left of Wandoo 
away on the distant horizon, cut a dark pattern on the egg- 
green sky. Good-bye! Good-bye! to it. The sown fields 
they were riding through glittered with tender blades of 
wheat. Good-bye! Good-bye! Somebody would reap it. 

The bush was now full of sparks of the beautiful, uncanny ~ 

flowers of Western Australia, and bright birds started and 
flew. Sombre the bush was in itself, but out of the heavy 
dullness came sharp scarlet, flame-spark flowers, and flowers 
as lambent gold as sunset, and wan white flowers, and 
flowers of a strange, darkish rich blue, like the vault of 
heaven just after sundown. The scent of rain, of eucalyp- 
tus, and of the strange brown-green shrubs of the bush ! 

They rode in silence, Tom ahead with the pack-horse, and — 
they did not draw near, but rode apart. They were travel-_ 

ling due west from York, along a bush track toward Paddy’s 
Crossing. And as they went they drew nearer and nearer 
to the dark, low fringe of hills behind which, for the last 
twelve months, Jack had seen the sun setting with its great 
golden glow. Trees grew along the ridge of the hills, scroll- 
like and mysterious. They had always seemed to Jack like 
the bar of heaven. 

By noon the riders reached the ridge, and the bar of 
heaven was the huge Karri trees which went up aloft so 
magnificently. But the Karri forest ended here with a 
jerk. Beyond, the earth ran away down long, long slopes 

TOM AND JACK RIDE TOGETHER 205 

covered with scrub, down the greyness and undulation of 
Australia, towards the great dimness where was the coast. 
The sun was hot at noon. Jack was glad when Tom called 
a halt under the last trees, facing the great, soft, open 
swaying of the land seaward, and they began to make 
tea. 

They had hardly sat down to drink their tea, when they 
heard a buggy approaching. It was the mysterious Dr. 
Rackett, driven by the grinning Sam. Rackett said nothing, 
just greeted the youths, pulled his tin mug and tucker from 
under the buggy seat, and joined in, chatting casually as 
if it had all been pre-arranged. 

Tom was none too pleased, but he showed nothing. And 
when the tea was finished, he made good by handing over 
the beast of a pack-horse to Sam. Poor Sam sat in the 
back of the vehicle lugging the animal along, jerking its 
reluctant neck. Rackett drove in lonely state on the driv- 
ing seat. Tom and Jack trotted quickly ahead, on the 
down-slope, and were soon out of sight. They were thank- 
ful to ride free. 

Over the ridge they felt Wandoo was left behind, and 
they were in the open world again, away from care. When- 
ever man drives his tent-pegs deep, to stay, he drives them 
into underlying water of sorrow. Best ride tentless. So 
thought the boys. 

They were going to a place called Paddy’s Crossing, a 
settlement new to Jack, but well known to Tom as the 
placewheremenwentwhentheywantedaprivatejamboree. 

What.a jamboree was, Jack, being a gentleman—that is, 
not a lady—would learn in due course. 

As the ground came to a rolling hollow, Tom set off at a 
good pace, and away they went, galloping beautifully along 
the soft earth trail, galloping, galloping, putting the miles 
between them and Wandoo and women and care. They 
both rode in a kind of passion for riding, for hurling them- 
selves ahead down the new road. To be men out alone in 
the world, away from the women and the dead stone of 
trouble. 

They reached the river hours before Rackett’s turn-out. 
Fording, they rode into the mushroom settlement, a string 
of slab cabins with shingle roofs and calico window-panes— 
or else shuttered-up windows. The stoves were outside 

206 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

the chimney-less cabins, under brush shelters. One such — 

| 

‘‘ kitchen,” a fore-runner, had already a roof of flattened- 
out, rusty tin cans. é ; 
But it was a cosy, canny nook, homely, nestling down in 

the golden corner of the earth, the mimosa in bloom by the ~ 

river. And it was beautifully ephemeral. As transient, as — 

casual as the bushes themselves. 

Jack for the moment had a dread of solid houses of brick : 
and stone and permanence. There was always horror some- 

where inside them. 

He wanted the empty, timeless Australia, with nooks like 
this of flimsy wooden cabins by a river with a wattle bush. 

There was one older, white-washed cabin with vine 
trellises. 

‘* That’s Paddy’s,”? said Tom. ‘* He grows grapes, and 
makes wine out of the little black ones. But the muscats 
is best. I’m not keen on wine anyhow. Something a drop 
more warming.’ 

Jack was amazed at the good Tom. He had never known 
him to drink. 

‘* There’s nobody about,”’ said Jack, as they rode up the 
incline between the straggling cabins. 

‘* All asleep,”’ said Tom. 

It was not so, however, because as they crested the slope 
and looked into the little hollow beyond, they saw a central 
wooden building, hall or mission or church, and people 
crowding like flies. 

But Tom turned up to Paddy’s white inn, up the side 
slope. He was remorseful about having galloped the horses 
at the beginning of such a long trip. The inn seemed 
deserted. Tom Coo-eeed! but there was no answer. 

** All shut up! ”? he said. ‘‘ What’s that paper on the 
door? ” 

Jack got down and walked stiffly to the door, for the ride 
had been long and hard and downhill, and his knees were 
hurting. ‘* Gone to the wedin be ome soon P. O. T.”? he 
read. ‘* What is P. O. T.? ” he asked. 

‘* What I stand in need of,” said the amazing Tom. 

They were just turning their horses towards the stable 
when, with a racket and a canter, an urchin drove round 
from the yard in a pitch-black wicker chaise, a bone-white, 
careworn horse slopping between the shafts. 

TOM AND JACK RIDE TOGETHER 207 

** You two blokes,” yelled the urchin, “ ’d better get 
onta th’ trail for th’ church, elst Father Prendy ’Il be on 
y’ tail, I tell y’.’’ 

** What’s up? ”? shouted Tom. 

** I’m just off fer th’ bride. Ol’ Nick ’ere ’eld me up 
runnin’ away from me in the paddock.’’ 

Tom grinned, the outfit swept past. Our heroes took 
their horses to the stable and settled them down conscien- 
tiously. Then they set off, glad to be on foot, down to the 
church. 

The crowd was buzzing. It was half-past three. Father 
Prendy, the old mission priest, who looked like a dusty old 
piece of furniture from a loft, was peering up the road. 
The black wicker buggy still made no appearance with the 
bride. 

*° Two o’clock’s the legal limit for marriages,”’ said Father 
Prendy. ‘* But, praise God, we’ve half an hour yet.’’ 

And he showed his huge watch, which said half-past one, 
since he had slipped away for a moment to put back the 
fingers. 

The slab-building, hall, school, and church—was now a 
church, though the oleographs of the Queen and the Prince 
Consort in robes still glowed on the walls, and a black-board 
stood with its face to the wall, and one of those wire-things 
with coloured beads poked out from behind, and the globe 
of the world could not be hidden entirely by the eucalyptus 
boughs. 

But it was a church. A table with a white cloth and a 
crucifix was the altar. Crimson-flowering gum-blossom em- 
bowered the walls, the blackboard, the windows, but left 
the Queen and Prince Consort in full isolation. Forms 
were ranked on the mud floor, and these forms were densely 
packed with settlers dressed in all kinds of clothes. It was 
not only a church, it was a wedding. Just inside the door, 
like a figure at Madame Tussaud’s, sat an elderly creature in 
greenish evening suit with white waistcoat, and copper- 
toed boots, waiting apparently for the Last Trump. On 
the other side was a brown-whiskered man in frock-coat, a 
grey bell-topper in his hand, leaning balanced on a stick. 
He was shod in white socks and carpet slippers. Later on 
his gentleman explained to Jack: ‘* I suffer from corns, 
ynd shouldn’t be happy in boots,” 

28 THE BOY IN THE BUSH ; 

There was a great murmuring and staring and shuffling © 
and shifting as Jack and Tom came up, as though one of 
them was the bride in disguise. The wooden church buzzed — 
like a cocoanut shell. A red-faced man seized Tom’s arm | 
as if Tom were a long-lost brother, and Jack was being — 
introduced, shaking the damp, hot, trembling hand of the — 
red-faced man, who was called Paddy. 

‘* It’s fair come over me, so ut has!—praise be to the © 
saints an’ may the devil run away with them two young 
turmagants! Father Prendy makin’ them come to this — 
pass all at onst! For, mark my words, in his own mind 
he’s thinkin’ the wrong they’ve done, neither of them 
speakin’ to confess, till he was driven to remark on the 
girl’s unnatural figure. And not a soul in the world, mark 
you, has seen ’em speak a word to one another for the last 
year in or out. But she says it’s he, an’ Danny Mackinnon, 
he payin’, I’ll be bound, that black priest of a Father 
Prendy to come over me an’ make me render up my poor 
innocent Pat to the hussy, in holy matrimony. May the © 
saints fly away with ’em.”’ ) 

He wiped away his sweat, speechless. And Danny 
Mackinnon, the hussy’s father—it could be no other than ~ 
he—in moth-eaten scarlet coat and overall trousers, and — 
top-boots slashed for his bunions, and forage-cap slashed 
for his increased head, stood bulging on the other side of 
the door, compressed in his youthful uniform, and scarlet 
in the face with the compression. He was a stout man with 
a black beard and a fixed, fierce, solemn expression. — 
Creator of this agitated occasion, he was almost bursting — 
with wrathful agitation as that hussy of a daughter of his 
still failed to appear. By his side stood an ancient man with 
a long grey beard, anciently clad. 

Patrick, the bridegroom to be, lurked near his father. 
He was a thin, pale, freckled, small-faced youth with broad 
brittle shoulders and brittle limbs, who would, no doubt, 
in time fill out into a burly fellow. As it was, he was 
agitated and unlovely in a new ready-made suit and a black 
bomb of a hard hat that wouldn’t stay on, and new boots 
that stank to heaven of improperly-dressed kangaroo hide : 
one of the filthiest of stinks. 

__ Poor Paddy, the father of the bridegroom, was a tall, 
thin, well set-up man with trembling hands and a face like 

TOM AND JACK RIDE TOGETHER 209 

beetroot, garbed in a blue coat with brass buttons, mole 
trousers, leggings, and a sideways-leaning top hat. His 
tie was a flowing red with white spots. His eyes were light 
blue and wickedly twinkling behind their slight wateriness. 

‘© What’s that yer sayin’ about me?” said Father 
Prendy, coming up rubbing his hands, bowing to the 
strangers, beaming with a cheerfulness that could outlast 
any delay under the sun. 

***Twas black I was callin’? ye, Father Prendy,” said 
Paddy. ‘‘ For the fine pair of black eyes ye carry, why 
not? Isn’t it a good drink ye’ll be havin’ on me afore the 
Jay is out, eh? Isn’t it a pretty penny ye’re costin’ me, 
with your marryin’ an’ givin’ in marriage? An’ why isn’t 
t Danny what pays the wedding breakfast, eh? ”* 

** Hold your peace, Paddy, my dear. I see a wagon 
xomin’, don’t IP *? 

Sure enough the black wicker buggy rattling down hill, 
she white horse seeming to swim, the urchin standing up, 
eet wide apart, elbows high up, bending forward and urging 
he bone-white steed with curses unnameable. 

- What now! What now! ’? murmured the priest, feel- 
ng in his pocket for his stole. ‘* What now! ” 

** Where’s Dad? ”’ yelled the urchin, pulling the bone- 
vhite steed on to its bony haunches, in front of the church. 

Dad had gone round the corner. But he came bustling 
nd puffing and bursting in his skin-tight scarlet coat, that 
Imost cut his arms off, his own ancient father, with a long 
rey beard, pushing him irritably, propelling him towards 
he slippery boy. As if this family, generation by genera- 
ion, got more and more behind-hand in its engagements. 

*¢ Gawd’s sake! ”? blowed the scarlet Dad, as the old grey 
rand-dad shoved him. 

‘¢ Hold ye breath, Dad, ’n come ’ome! ” said the urchin, 
ubsiding comfortably on to the seat and speaking as if he 
njoyed utmost privacy. ‘“‘ Sis can’t get away. She’s had 

baby. An’ Ma says I was to tell Mr. O’Burk as it’s a 
jine boy, an’ would Father Prendy step up, and Pat 
’ Burk can come ’n see with his own eyes.” 

——Pee 

CHAP: XIV. JAMBOREE 
i 
“ Ler’s get along,” said Jack uncomfortably in Tom’s ear. 

** Get! Not for mine! We’re in luck’s way, if ever we 
were.”? 

‘* There’s no fun under the circumstances.” :; : 

““ Oh, Lord my, ain’t there! What’s wrong? They’re 
all packing into the buggy. Father Prendy’s putting his” 
watch back a few more minutes. He’ll have ’em married 
before you can betcher life. It’s a wedding this is, boy! *? 

The people now came crowding, nudging, whispering, 
giggling, stumbling out of the church. The gentleman mm 
the carpet slippers rakishly adjusted his grey bell- ‘topper 
over his left brow, and came swaggering forward. 

‘* Major Brownlee—Mr. Jack Grant,’? Tom introduced 
them. 

‘* Retired and happy in the country,’’ the Major ex- 
plained, and he continued garrulously to explain his co 
cumstances, his history and his family history. This con- 
tinued all the way to the inn: a good half-hour, for i 
Major walked insecurely on his tender feet. 

When they arrived at Paddy’s white, trellised house, all 
was in festivity. Paddy had thrown open the doors, dis- 
closing the banquet spread in the bar parlour. Large joints 
of baked meat, ham, tongue, fowls, cakes and bottles and 
bunches of grapes and piles of apples: these Jack saw in” 
splendid confusion. | 

‘ Come along in, come along in! ’ cried Paddy, as the 
Major and his young ,companions hesitated under the vine- 
trellis. ‘‘ I guess ye’re the last. Come along in—all wel- 
come !—an’ wet the baby’s eye. Sure she’s a clever girl 
to get a baby an’ a man the same fine afternoon. A fine 
child, let me tell you. Father Prendy named him for me, 
Paddy O’Burk Tracy, on the spot, the minute the wedding 
was tied up. So yer can please yerselves whether it’s a 
christening ye’re coming to, or a wedding. I offer ye the 
choice. Come in.’ 

* P.O, T.,” thought Jack. He still did not feel at ease. 

210 | 

JAMBOREE 211 

Perhaps Paddy noticed it. He came over and slapped him 
on the back. 

** It’s yerself has brought good luck to the house, sir. 
Sit ye down an’ help y’self. Sit ye down an’ make y’self 
at home.” 

Jack sat down along with the rest of the heterogeneous 
company. Paddy went round pouring red wine into 
glasses. 

“© Gentlemen ! *? he announced from the head of the table. 
‘* We are all here, for the table’s full up. The first toast 
is: The stranger within our gates! ” 

Everybody drank but Jack. He was uncomfortably un- 
certain whether the baby was meant, or himself. At the 
ast moment he hastily drank, to transfer the honour to the 
oaby. 

Then came ‘‘ The Bride! ’?, then ** The Groom! ”’, then 
* The Priest! Father Prendy, that black limb o’ salva- 
ion! ’? Dozens of toasts, it didn’t seem to matter to whom. 
And everybody drank and laughed and made clumsy jokes. 
[here were no women present, at least no women seated. 
Jnly the women who went round the table, waiting. One! 
[wo! Three! Four! Five! Six! Seven! Westminster 
‘himes from the grandfather’s clock behind Jack. Seven 
clock! He had not even noticed them bring in the lights. 
‘ather Prendy was on his feet blessing the bride: ‘* at the 
noment absent on the high mission of motherhood.’? He 
hen blessed the bridegroom, at the moment asleep with his 
ead on the table. 

The table had been cleared, save for bottles, fruit, and 
errible cigars. The air was dense with smoke, bitter in the 
yes, thick in the head. Everything seemed to be turning 
hick and swimmy, and the people seemed to move like 
ving oysters in a natural, live liquor. A girl was sitting 
n Jack’s chair, putting her arm surreptitiously round his 
raist, sipping out of his glass. But he pushed her a little 
side, because he wanted to watch four men who had started 
laying euchre. 

‘* There’s a bright moon, gentlemen. Let’s go out and 
ave a bit o’ sparrin’,” said Paddy swimmingly from the 
ead of the table. 

That pleased Jack a lot. He was beginning to feel shut 

Le 

212 THE BOY IN THE BUSH ; 

He rose, and the girl—he had never really looked at her— 
followed him out. Why did she follow him? She ought 
to stay and clear away dishes. 

The yard, it seemed to Jack, was clear as daylight : or 
clearer, with a big, flat white moon. Someone was sizing 
up to a little square man with long thick arms, and the 
little man was probing them off expertly. Hello! Here 
was a master, in his way. 

The girl was leaning up against Jack, with her hand on 
his shoulder. This was a bore, but he supposed it was also 
a kind of tribute. He had still never looked at her. 

‘‘ That’s Jake,’ she said. ‘‘ He’s champion of these 
parts. Oh, my, if he sees me leanin’ on y’ arm like this, 
he’ll be after ye! ” 

‘* Well, don’t lean on me, then,’’ said Jack complacently. 

‘© Go on, he won’t see me. We’re in the dark right 
here.”’ 

** T don’t care if he sees you,”’ said Jack. 

** You do contradict yourself,’’ said the girl. : 

*¢ Oh, no, I don’t! ” said Jack. 

And he watched the long-armed man, and never once 
looked at the girl. So she leaned heavier on him. He 
disapproved, really, but felt rather manly under the 
burden. ‘ 

The little, square, long-armed man was oldish; with a 
grey beard. Jack saw this as he danced round, like a queer 
old satyr, half gorilla, half satyr, roaring, booing, fencing 
with a big yahoo of a young bushman, holding him off 
with his unnatural long arms. Over went the big young 
fellow sprawling on the ground, causing such a splother 
that everyone shifted a bit out of his way. They all roared 
delightedly. 

The long-armed man, looking round for his girl, saw her 
in the shadow leaning heavily and laughingly on Jack’s 
young shoulder. Up he sprang, snarling like a gorilla, his 
long hairy arms in front of him. The girl retreated, and 
Jack, in a state of semi-intoxicated readiness, opened his 
arms and locked them round the little gorilla of a man. 
Locked together, they rolled and twirled round the yard 
under the moon, scattering the delighted onlookers like a. 
wild cow. Jack was laughing to himself, because he had 
got the grip of the powerful long-armed old man. And there 

‘ 
A 

- 

JAMBOREE 213 

was no real anger in the tussle. The gorilla was an old 
sport. 

Jack was sitting in a chair under the vine, with his head 
in his hands and his elbows on his knees, getting his wind. 
Paddy was fanning him with a bunch of gum-leaves, and 
congratulating him heartily. 

** First chap as ever laid out Long-armed Jake.” 

** What’d he jump on me for? ” said Jack. ‘I said 
nothing to him.’’ 

** What y’ sayin’? ’’ ejaculated Paddy coaxingly. 
*Didn’t ye take his girl, now? ” 

** Take his girl? I? No! She leaned on me, I didn’t 
sake her.”’ 

** Arrah! Look at that now! The brazenness of it! 
Well, be it on ye! Take another drink. Will ye come an’ 
show the boys some 0’ ye tricks, belike? ”’ 

Jack was in the yard again, shaking hands with Long- 
irmed Jake. 

** Good on ye’! Good on y’! ” cried old Jake. ‘‘ Ye’re 
. cock bird in fine feather! What’s a wench between two 
yentlemen! Shake, my lad, shake! I’m Long-armed Jake, 
(am, an’ I set a cock bird before any whure of a hen.”’ 

They rounded up, sparred, staved off, showed off like two 
miable fighting-cocks, before the admiring cockeys. Then 
hey had good-natured turns with the young farmers, and 
nild wrestling bouts with the old veterans. Having another 
lrink, playing, gassing, swaggering . . . 

Tom came bawling as if he were deaf: 

‘© What about them ’osses! ”’ 

§* What about ’em! ”’ said Jack. 

** See to ’m!’’ said Tom. And he went back to where 
ie came from. 

‘* All right, Mister, we’ll see to ’m! ”’ yelled the admir- 
1g youngsters. ‘‘ We’ll water ’m an’ feed ’m.”’ 

** Water? ”’ said Jack. 

*‘ Yes. Show us how to double up, Mister, will y’? ” 

66 A’ right! ’? said Jack, who was considerably tipsy. 
~When—when I’ve—fed—th’osses.”’ 

He set off to the stables. The admiring youngsters ran 
elling ahead. They brought out the horses and led them 
own to the trough. Jack followed, feeling the moon-lit 
arth sway a little. 

214 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 3 

He shoved his head in between the noses of the horses, 
into the cool trough of water. When he lifted and wrung” 
out the shower from his hair, which curled when it was wet, 
he saw the girl standing near him. 

** YY’ need a towel, Mister,’’ she said. 

*¢ T could do with one,”’ said he. 

“© Come an’ I’ll get ye one,” she said. 4 

He followed meekly. She led him to an outside 
room, somewhere near the stable. He stood in the 
doorway. . 

‘* Here y’ are! °? she said, from the darkness inside. 

‘* Bring it me,’’ he said from the moon outside. : 

‘© Come in an’ I’ll dry your hair for yer.’? Her voice 
sounded like the voice of a wild creature in a black cave. - 
He ventured, unseeing, uncertain, into the den, half reluct-— 
ant. But there was a certain coaxing imperiousness in her 
wild-animal voice, out of the black darkness. 

He walked straight into her arms. He started and 
stiffened as if attacked. But her full, soft body was moulded © 
against him. Still he drew fiercely back. Then feeling her 
yield to draw away and leave him, the old flame flew over 
him, and he drew her close again. é 

‘“* Dearie! °? she murmured. ‘‘ Dearie! ’? and her hand 
went stroking the back of his wet head. “ 

** Come! ” she said. ‘* And let me dry your hair.”’ 

She led him and sat him on a pallet bed. Then she 
closed the door, through which the moonlight was stream- 7 
ing. The room had no window. It was pitch dark, and he. 
was trapped. So he felt as he sat there on the hard pallet. 
But she came instantly and sat by him and began softly, 
earessingly to rub his hair with a towel. Softly, slowly, 
caressingly she rubbed his hair with a towel. And in spite 
of himself, his arms, alive with a power of their own, went 
out and clasped her, drew her to him. 

** T’m supposed to be in love with a girl,”’ he said, really 
not speaking to her. 

‘** Are you, dearie? *? she said softly. And she left off 
rubbing his hair and softly put her mouth to his. | 
Later—he had no idea what time of the night it was— 
he went round looking for Tom. The place was mostly 
dark. The inn was half dark. Nobody seemed alive. But 
there was music somewhere, There was music. | 

eas 

JAMBOREE 215 

As he went looking for it, he came face to face with Dr. 
Rackett. 

** Where’s Tom? ” he asked. 

** Best look in the barn.” 

The dim-lighted barn was a cloud of half-illuminated 
lust, in which figures moved. But the music was still 
nartial and British. Jack, always tipsy, for he had drunk 
, good deal and it took effect slowly, deeply, felt something 
a him stir to this music. They were dancing a jig or a horn- 
ipe. The air was all old and dusty in the barn. There were 
our crosses of wooden swords on the floor. Young Patrick, 
o his shirt and trousers, had already left off dancing for 
reland, but the Scotsman, in a red flannel shirt and a 
eddish kilt, was still lustily springing and knocking his 
eels in a haze of dust. The Welshman was a little poor 
ellow in old shirt and trousers. But the Englishman, in 
ostermonger outfit, black bell-bottom trousers and lots of 
earl buttons, was going well. He was thin and wiry and 
ery neat about the feet. ‘Then he left off dancing, and 
(ood to watch the last two. 

Everybody was drunk, everybody was arguing, accord- 
ig to his nationality, as to who danced best. The English- 
an in the beli-bottom trousers knew he danced best, but 
gent his last efforts deciding between Sandy and Taffy. 
he music jigged on. But whether it was “ British 
renadiers ’? or ‘* Campbells are Coming,’’? Jack didn’t 
now. Only he suddenly felt intensely patriotic. 

6 T am an Englishman,”’ he thought, with savage pride. 
I am an Englishman. That is the best on earth. 
ustralian is English, English, English, she’d collapse like 
balloon but for the English in her. British means English 
rst. I’m a Britisher, but I am an Englishman! God! I 
yuld crumple the universe in my fist, I could. I’m an 
nglishman, and I could crush everything in my hand. 
nd the women are left behind. I’m an English- 
ar.” 

Voices had begun to snarl and roar, fists were lifted. 

** Mussen quarrel !—my weddin’! Mussen quarrel! 
at was drunkenly saying, sitting on a box shaking his 
ad. 

Then suddenly he sprang to his feet, and quick and sharp 

a stag, rushed to the wooden, swords and stood with arms 

216 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 3 

uplifted, smartly showing the steps. The fellow had spirit, 
a queer, staccato spirit. 

Somebody laughed and cheered, and then they all began 
to laugh and cheer, and Pat pranced faster, in a cloud of 
dust, and the quarrel was forgotten. 

Jack went to look for Tom. “ I’m an Englishman,” he 
thought, “ I’d better look after him.” 

He wasn’t in the barn. Jack looked and looked. 

He found Tom in the kitchen, sitting in a corner, a glass 
at his side, quite drunk. 

‘* It’s time to go to bed, Tom.’ | 

** G’on, ol’ duck. I’m waiting Nee me girl.’? 

“ You won’t get any girl to-night. Let’s go to bed.” 

*¢ Shan’t I get ? Yes shall! Yes shall! ”? 

‘* Where shall I find a bed? 72 

** Plenty ’r flore space.’ : 

And he staggered to his feet as a short, stout, red-faced, 
black-eyed, untidy girl slipped across the kitchen and out 
of the door, casting a black-eyed, meaningful look at the 
red-faced Tom, over her shoulder as she disappeared. Tom 
swayed to his feet and sloped after her with amazing quick- 
ness. Jack stood staring out of the open door, dazed. The 
both seemed to have melted. 

Himself, he wanted to sleep—only to sleep. ‘* Plenty of 
floor space,” Tom had said. He looked at the floor. Cock- 
roaches running by the dozen, in all directions : those brown, 
barge-like cockroaches of the south, that trail their huge 
bellies and sheer off in automatic straight lines and make a 
faint creaking noise, if you listen. Jack looked at the table : 
an old man already lay on it. He opened a cupboard : 
babies sleeping there. 

He swayed, drunk with sleep and alcohol, out of the 
kitchen in some direction : pushed a swing door : the power- 
ful smell of beer and sawdust made him know it was the 
bar. He could sleep on the seat. He could sleep in 
peace. ’ é 
He lurched forward and touched cloth. Something 
snored, started, and reared up. 

“ What y’ at?” 

Jack stood back breathless—the figure subsided —he 
could beat a retreat. 

Hopeless, he looked in on the remains of the breakfanm 

| 
¢ 
; 
: 

JAMBOREE 217 

Table and every bench occupied. He boldly opened an- 
other door. A small lamp burning, and what looked like 
Jozens of dishevelled elderly women’s awful figures heaped 
2ross-wise on the hugest double bed he had ever seen. 

He escaped into the open air. The moon was low. Some- 
me was singing. 

CHAP: XV. UNCLE JOHN GRANT 

i : 
Ir was day. The lie was hard. He didn’t want to wake. © 
He turned over and was asleep again, though the lie was 
very hard. : 
Someone pushing him. Tom, with a red, blank face was 
saying : 

** Wake up! Let’s go before Rackett starts.” 

And the rough hands pushing him crudely. He hated it. — 

He sat up. He had been lying on the bottom of the 
buggy, with a sack over him. No idea how he got there. © 
It was full day. ; 

** Old woman’s got some tea made. If y’ want t’ change 
y’ bags hop over ’n take a dip in the pool. Down th’ 
paddock there. MHere’s th’ bag. I’ve left soap *n comb 
on th’ splash board, an’ I’ve seen to th’ ’osses. I’m goin’ 
f’r a drink while you get ready.” 

Tom had got a false dawn on him. He had wakened 
with that false energy which sometimes follows a ‘*drunk,”’ 
and which fades all too quickly. For he had hardly slept at 
all. 

So when Jack was ready, Tom was not. His stupor was — 
overcoming him. He was cross—and half-way through his — 
second pewter mug of beer. 

** I’m not coming,” said Tom. 

** You are,’ said Jack. For the first time he felt that 
old call of the blood which made him master of Tom. 
Somewhere, in the night, the old spirit of a master had 
aroused in him. 

Tom finished his mug of beer slowly, sullenly. He put 
down the empty pot. 

** Get up! ” said Jack. And Tom got slowly to his feet. 

They set off, Jack leading the pack-horse. But the beer 
and the ** night before ’? had got Tom down. He rode like 
a sack in the saddle, sometimes semi-conscious, sometimes 
really asleep. Jack followed just behind, with the beast 
of a pack-horse dragging his arm out. And Tom ahead, 
like a sot, with no life in him. 

Jack himself felt hot inside, and dreary, and riding was a 

218 

ee | om 

UNCLE JOHN GRANT 219 

cruel effort, and the pack-horse dragging his arm from its 
socket was hell. He wished he had enough saddle-tree to 
turn the rope round : but he was in his English saddle. 

Nevertheless, he had decided something, in that Jam- 
boree. He belonged to the blood of masters, not servants. 
He belonged to the class of those that are sought, not those 
that seek. He was no seeker. He was not desirous. He 
would never be desirous. Desire should not lead him humbly 
by the nose. Not desire for anything. He was of the few 
that are masters. He was to be desired. He was master. 
He was a real Englishman. 

So he jogged along, in the hot, muggy day of early 
winter. Heavy clouds hung over the sky, lightning flashed 
seyond the purple hills. His body was a burden and a 
weariness to him, riding was a burden and a weariness, the 
yack-horse was hell. And Tom, asleep on his nag, like a 
lead thing, was hateful to have ahead. The road seemed 
ndless. 

Yet he had in him his new, half savage pride to keep 
lim up, and an isolate sort of resoluteness. 

At mid-day they got down, drank water, camped, and 
lept without eating. Thank God, the rain hadn’t come. 
jack slept like the dead till four o’clock. 

He woke sharp, wondering where he was. The clouds 
ooked threatening. He got up. Yes, the horses were there. 
fe still felt bruised, and hot and dry inside, from the 
amboree. Why, in heaven, did men want Jamborees? 

He made a fire, boiled the billy, prepared tea, and set 
ut some food, though he didn’t want any. 

** Get up there! ’? he shouted to Tom, who lay like a 
east. 

** Get up! ”? he shouted. But the beast slept. 
** Get up, you beast! ”’ he said, viciously kicking him. 
nd he was horrified because Tom got up, without any 

how of retaliation at all, and obediently drank his tea. 

They ate a little food, in silence. Saddled in silence, each 
nding the thought of speech repulsive. Watched one an- 
ther to see if they were ready. Mounted, and rode in re- 
ulsive silence away. But Jack had left the pack-horse to 
om this time. And it began to rain, softly, seepily. 

And Tom was cheering up. The rain seemed to revive 
im wonderfully. He was one who was soon bowled over 

20 THE BOY IN THE BUSH : 

by a drink. Consequently he didn’t absorb much, and he 
recovered sooner. Jack absorbed more, and it acted much 
more slowly, deeply, and lastingly on him. On they went, 
in the rain. . 

Tom began to show signs of new life. He swore at the 
pack-horse. He kicked his nag to a little trot, and the packs 
flap-flapped like shut wings, on the rear pony. Presently 
he reined up, and sat quite still for a minute. Then he 
broke into a laugh, lifting his face to the rain. 

“© Seems to me we’re off the road,’’ he said. ‘* We haven’t © 
passed a fence all day, have we? ”’ 

‘‘ No,” said Jack. ‘ But you were asleep all morning.” © 

“* We’re off the road. Listen! ” 

The rain was seeping down on the bush; in the grey 
evening the warm horses smelt of their own steam. Jack 
could hear nothing except the wind and the increasing rain. - 

** This track must lead somewhere. Let’s get to shelter 
for the night,’’ said Jack. . 

** Agreed! ?? replied Tom magnanimously. ‘* We’ll - 
follow on, and see what we shall see.”’ 

They walked slowly, pulling at the pack-horse, which 
was dragging at the rope, tired with the burden that grew 
every minute heavier with the rain. 

Tom reined in suddenly. 

** There is somebody behind,’? he said. ‘‘ It’s not the 
wind.” 

They sat there on their horses in the rain, and waited. 
Twilight was falling. Then Jack could distinguish the 
sound of a cart behind. It was Rackett in the old shay 
rolling along in the lonely dusk and rain, through the trees, 
approaching. Black Sam grinned mightily as he pulled up. 

** Thought I’d follow, though you are on the wrong road,” 
said Rackett from beneath his black waterproof. ‘* Sam 
showed me the turning two miles back. You missed it. 
Anyhow, we’d better camp in on these people ahead here.” 

** Is there a place ahead? ”? asked Jack. 

** Yes,’’ replied Rackett. ‘ Even a sort of relation of 
yours, that I promised Gran I would come and see. Hence 
my following on your heels.’? 

** Didn’t know I’d any relation hereabout,”? said Tom 
sulkily. He couldn’t bear Rackett’s interfering in the 
family in any way. 

UNCLE JOHN GRANT 221 

** You haven’t. I meant Jack. But we'll get along, 
shall we? *? 

** We’re a big flood,” remarked Tom. ‘ But if they’ll 
sive us the barn, we’ll manage. It’s getting wet to sleep 
out.’ 

They pressed ahead, the pack-horse trotting, but lifting 
up his head like a venomous snake, in unwillingness. They 
had come into the open fields. At last in the falling dark 
they saw a house and buildings. A man hove in sight, but 
lurked away from them. Rackett hailed him. The man 
seemed to oppose their coming further. He was a hairy, 
jueer figure, with his untrimmed beard. 

** Master never takes no strangers,’ he said. 

Rackett slipped a shilling in his hand, and would he ask 
1is master if they might camp in the barn, out of the rain. 

*° Y’ ain’t the police, now, by any manner of means? *’ 
isked the man. 

** God love you, no,’’ said Rackett. 

** We’re no police,” said Tom. ‘‘ I’m Tom Ellis, from 
Wandoo, over York way.”’ 

“ Ellis: I heared th’? name. Well, master’s sick, an’ 
keered to death o’ th’ police. They’re ready to drop in on 
he place, that they are, rot ’em, the minute he breathes 
uis last. And he’s skeered he’s dyin’ this time. Oh, he’s 
keered o’t. So I have me doubt of all strangers. I have 
ne doubts, no matter what they be. Master he’ve sent a 
etter to his only relation upon earth, to his nephew, which, 
hank the Lord, he’s writ for to come an’ lay hold on the 
lace, against he dies. If there’s no one to lay hold, the 
yolice steps in, without a word. That’s how they do it. 
They lets the places in grants like—lets a man have a grant 
—and when the poor man dies, his place is locked up by 
he Government. They takes it all.’’ 

** Gawd’s sake! ’? murmured Tom aside, * the man’s 
otty | *? 

** Bush mad,” supplemented Rackett, who was sitting in 
he buggy with his chin in his hand, intently listening to 
he queer, furtive, garrulous individual. 

** Say, friend,’’ he added aloud. ‘* Go and ask your 
naster if we harmless strangers can camp in the barn out 
f the wet.”’ 

** What might your names be, Mister? ”? asked the man, 

23 THE BOY IN THE BUSH : 
‘6 Mine’s Dr Rackett. This is Tom Ellis. And this is 
Jack Grant. And no harm in any of us.” : 
“‘ D’y’say Jack Grant? Would that be Mr John Grant?” 
asked the man, galvanised by sudden excitement. : 
“None other! ”? said Rackett. 
‘¢ Then he’s come! ”’ cried the man. 
*¢ He certainly has,’’ replied Rackett. } 
‘“‘ Oh, Glory, Glory! Why didn’t ye say so afore? Come 
in. Come in all of ye, come in! Come in, Mr Grant! 
Come in! ” : 
They got down, gave the reins to Sam, and were ready 
to follow the bearded man, looking one another in the face 

in amazement, and shaking their heads. 3 

« 

“© Gawd Almighty, I’d rather keep out o’ this! ”? mur- | 
mured Tom, standing by his horse and keeping the rope © 
of the pack-horse. ; 

“Case of mistaken identity,’? said Rackett coolly. 
** Hang on, boys. We'll get a night’s shelter.”’ 

A woman came out of the dilapidated stone house, clutch- 
ing her hands in distress and agitation. 

*‘ Missus! Missus! Here he is at last. God be praised !”? © 
cried the bearded man. She ran up in sudden effusion of 
welcome, but he ordered her into the house to brighten up © 
the fire, while he waved the way to the stables, knowing — 
that horse comes before man, in the bush. ; ‘ 

When they had shaken down in the stable, they left Sam 
to sleep there, while the three went across to the house. — 
Tom was most unwilling. } 

The man was at the door, to usher them in. 

** I’ve broke the news to him, sir! *’ he said in a mysteri- . 
ous voice to Jack, as he showed them into the parlour. | 

‘* What’s your master’s name? ”? asked Rackett. 

** Don’t y’ know y’re at your destination? ’? whispered 
the man. “ This is Mr John Grant’s. This is the place 
ye’re looking for.’’ 

A melancholy room! The calico ceiling drooped, the 
window and front door were hermetically sealed, an ornate 
glass lamp shone in murky, lonely splendour upon a wool 
mat on a ricketty round table. Six chairs stood against 
the papered walls. Nothing more. 

Tom wanted to beat it back to the kitchen, through which 
they had passed to get to this sarcophagus, and where a 

4 

UNCLE JOHN GRANT 223 

ire was burning and a woman was busy. But the man 
vas tapping at another door, and listening anxiously before 
mtering. 

He went into the dark room beyond, where a candle shone 
eebly, and they heard him say : 

** Your nephew’s come, Mr Grant, and brought a doctor 
md another gentleman, the Lord be praised.” 

** The Lord don’t need to be praised on my behalf, 
\mos,”” came a querulous voice. ‘* And I ain’t got no 
ephew, if I did send him a letter. I’ve got nobody. And 

want no doctor, because I died when I left my mother’s 
usband’s house.”? 

** They’re in the parlour.” 

** Tell *em to walk up.” 

The man appeared in the doorway. Rackett walked up, 
ack followed, and Tom hung nervously and disgustedly in 
he rear. 

** Here they are! Here’s the gentry,” said Amos. 

In the candle-light they saw a thin man in a red flannel 
ight-cap with a blanket round his shoulders, sitting up 
| bed under an old green cart-umbrella. He was not old, 
ut his face was thin and wasted, and his long colourless 
eard seemed papery. He had cunning shifty eyes with 
d rims, and looked as mad as his setting. 

Rackett had shoved Jack forward. The sick man stared 
; him and seemed suddenly pleased. He held out a thin 
und. Rackett nudged Jack, and Jack had to shake. The 
and seemed wet and icy, and Jack shuddered. 

** How d’you do!” he mumbled. ‘“ I’m sorry, you 
10w ; I’m not your nephew.”’ 

** I know ye’re not. But are y’ Jack Grant? ”’ 

* Yes,”’ said Jack. 

The man under the umbrella seemed hideously pleased. 
Jack heard Tom/’s ill-suppressed, awful chuckle from 
‘hind. 

The sick man peered irritably at the other two. Then 
. nodded slowly, under the green baldachino of the old 
rt-umbrella. 

* Jack Grant! Jack Grant! Jack Grant!” he 
urmured to himself. He was surely mad, obviously 
ad. 

*¢ I’m right glad you’ve come, cousin,’’ he said suddenly, 

224 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

looking again very pleased. ‘‘ I’m surely glad you’ve come 
in time. I’ve a nice tidy place put together for you, Jack 
a small proposition of three thousand acres, five hundrec 
cleared and cropped, fifty fenced—dog-leg fences, broke 
MacCullen’s back putting ’em up. But I’ll willingly put ir 
five hundred more for a gentleman like young master. 
Meaning old master will soon be underground. Well, wh¢ 
cares, now young master’s come to light, and the place 
doesn’t go out of the family! I am determined the place 
shall not go out of the family, Cousin Jack. Aren’t you 
pleased? ” 
“* Very,”? said Jack soothingly. 
“© Call me Cousin John. Or Uncle John, if you like. 
I’m more like your uncle, I should think. Shake hands, 
and say, Right you are, Uncle John. Call me Uncle John.” 
Jack shook hands once more, and dutifully, as to a crazy 
person, he said: 
** Right you are, Uncle John.” 
Tom, in the background, was going into convulsions. 
But Rackett remained quite serious. 
Uncle John closed his eyes, muttering, and fell back unde 
the cart-umbrella. . 
** Mr Grant,”’ said Dr. Rackett, *‘ I think Jack would 
like to eat something after his ride.” : 
** All right, let him go to the kitchen with yon buck 
wallaby as can’t keep a straight face. Stop with me ¢ 
minute yourself, Mister, if you will.” ; 
The two boys bundled away into the kitchen. The woman 
had a meal ready, and they sat down at the table. : 
‘**T thank my stars,’’ said Tom impressively, ‘* he’s nol 
my Uncle John.” 
** Shut up,”’ said Jack, because the woman was there. 
They ate heartily, the effects of the jamboree having 
passed. After the meal they strolled to the door to look 
out, away from that lugubrious parlour and bedroom. The} 
found a stiff wind blowing, the sky clear with running 
clouds and vivid stars in the spaces. ; 
** Let’s get! ”? said Tom. It was his constant craving. 
** We can’t leave Rackett.”? 
‘ We can. He pushed us in. Let’s get. Why can’ 
we 
** Oh, well, we can’t,”’ said Jack. : 

UNCLE JOHN GRANT 225 

Rackett had entered the kitchen, and was eating his meal. 
de asked the woman for ink. 

** There’s no ink,”’ she said. 

** Must be somewhere,” said Amos, her husband. ** Jack 
xrant’s letter was written in ink.’’ 

** I never got a letter,’’ said Jack, turning. 

** Eh, hark ye! How like old master over again! Ye’ve 
ome, haven’t ye? ”’ 

** By accident,’? said Jack. ‘‘I’m not Mr Grant’s 
lephew.”’ 

** Hark ye! Hark ye! It runs in the family, father to 
on, uncle to nephew. Allright! Allright! Have it your 
wn way,’ cried Amos. He had been struggling with crazy 
ontradictions too long. 

Tom was in convulsions. Rackett put his hand on Jack’s 
houlder. ‘‘ It’s all right,’’ he said. ‘‘ Don’t worry him. 
seave it to me.’’ And to the woman he said, if there was 
10 ink she was to kill a fowl and bring it to him, and he’d 
nake ink with lamp-black and gall. 

** You two boys had better be off to bed,’ he said. 
* You have to be off in good time in the morning.”’ 

** Oh, not going, not going so soon, surely. The young 
naster’s not going so soon! Surely! Surely! Master’s 
o weak in the head and stomach, we can’t cope with him 
ll by ourselves,”’ cried the old man and woman. 

** Perhaps I'll stay,’’ said Rackett. ‘* And Jack will 
ome back one day, don’t you worry. Now, let me make 
hat ink.” 

The boys were shown into a large, low room—the fourth 
oom of the house—that opened off the kitchen. It con- 
ained a big bed with clean sheets and white crochet quilt. 
ack surmised it was the old couple’s bed, and wanted to 
o to the barn. But Tom said, since they offered it, there 
yas nothing to do but to take it. 

Tom was soon snoring. Jack lay in the great feather 
ed feeling that life was all going crazy. Tom was already 
noring. He cared about nothing. Out of sight, out of 
ind. But Jack had a fit of remembering. His head was 
ot, and he could not sleep. The wind was blowing, it was 
ining again. He could not sleep, he had to remember. 

It was always so with him. He could go on careless and 
nheeding, like Tom, for a while. Then came these fits of 

H 

226 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

reckoning and remembering. Life seemed unhinged in 
Australia. In England there was a strong central pivot 
to all the living. But here the centre pin was gone, and the 
lives seemed to spin in a weird confusion. 

He felt that for himself. His life was all unhinged. What 
was he driving at? What was he making for? Where was 
he going? What was his life, anyhow? 7 

In England, you knew. You had your purpose. You 
had your profession and your family and your country. 
But out here you had no profession. You didn’t do any- 
thing for your country except boast of it to strangers and 
leave it to get along as best it might. And as for your 
family, you cared for that, but in a queer, centreless 
fashion. 

You didn’t really care for anything. The old impetus 
of civilisation kept you still going, but you were just rolling 
to rest. As Mr. Ellis had rolled to rest, leaving everything 
stranded. There was no grip, no hold. 

And yet, what Jack had rebelled against in England was 
the tight grip, the fixed hold over everything. He liked 
this looseness and carelessness of Australia. ‘Till it seemed 
to him crazy. And then it scared him. | 

To-night everything seemed to him crazy. He didn’t 
pay any serious attention to Uncle John Grant: he was 
obviously out of his mind. But then everything seemed 
crazy. Mr. Ellis’ death, and Gran’s death, and Monica and 
Easu Ellis—it all seemed as crazy as crazy. And the 
jamboree, and that girl who called him Dearie! And the 
journey, and this mad house in the rain. What did it all 
mean? What did it all stand for? : 

Everything seemed to be spinning to a darkness of death. 
Everybody seemed to be dancing a crazy dance of death. 
He could understand that the blacks painted themselves 
like white bone skeletons, and danced in the night like 
skeletons dancing, in their corrobees. That was how it was. 
The night, dark and fleshly, and skeletons dancing a clickety 
dry dance in it. 

Tom, so awfully upset at his father’s death! And now 
as careless as a lark, just spinning his way along the road, 
in a sort of weird dance, dancing humorously to the black 
verge of oblivion. That was how it was. To dance humor- 
ously to the black verge of oblivion. The children of death, 

UNCLE JOHN GRANT 227 

Nith a sort of horror of death around them. ‘‘ Wandoo °° 
uddenly grim and grisly with the horror of death. 

Death, the great end and goal. Death the black, void, 
yulsating reality which would swallow them all up, like a 
‘lack lover finally possessing them. The great black fleshli- 
less of the end, the huge body of death reeling to swallow 
hem all. And for this they danced, and for this they 
oved and reared families and made farms : to provide good 
neat and white, pure bones for the black, avid horror of 
leath. 

Something of the black, aboriginal horror came over 
um. He realised, to his amazement, the actuality of the 
reat, grinning black demon of death. The vast infinite 
lemon that eats our flesh and cracks our bones in the last 
lack potency of the end. And for this, for this demon one 
eeks for a woman, to lie with her and get children for the 
Moloch. Children for the Moloch! Lennie, Monica, the 
wins Og and Magog! Children for the Moloch. 

One God or the other must take them at the end. Hither 

he dim white god of the heavenly infinite. Or else the 
reat black Moloch of the living death. Devoured and 
ligested in the living death. 
Satan, Moloch, Death itself, all had been unreal to him 
yefore. But now, suddenly, he seemed to see the black 
foloch grinning huge in the sky, while human beings danced 
owards his grip, and He gripped and swallowed them into 
he black belly of death. That was their end. 

Dance! Dance! Death has its deep delights! And 
ver-recurring. Be careless, ironical, stoical and reckless. 
ind go your way to death with a will. With a dark hand- 
omeness and a dark lustre of fatality and a splendour of 
ecklessness. Oh, God, the Lords of Death! The big, 
arkly-smiling, heroic men who are Lords of Death! And 
hey too go on splendidly towards death, the great goal 
f unutterable satisfaction, and consummated fear. 

*©T am going my way the same,”’ Jack thought to him- 
elf. ‘* I am travelling in a reckless, slow dance, darker 
nd darker, into the black, hot belly of death, where is my 
nd. Oh, let me go gallantly, let me have the black joy of 
he road. Let me go with courage and a bit of splendour 
nd dark lustre, down to the great depths of death, that I 
m so frightened of, but which I long for in the last con- 

28 THE BOY IN THE BUSH ; 
summation. Let death take me in a last black embrace. 
Let me go on as the niggers go, with the last convulsion 
into the last black embrace. Since I am travelling the 
dark road, let me go in pride. Let me be a Lord of Death, 
since the reign of the white Lords of Life, like my father, 
has become sterile and a futility. Let me be a Lord of 
Death. Let me go that other great road, that the blacks 
0.”? 
The bed was soft and hot, and he stretched his arms 
fiercely. If he had Monica! Oh, if he had Monica! Hf 
that girl last night had been Monica ! } 

That girl last night! He didn’t even know her name. 
She had stroked his head—like—like—Mary! The associa- 
tion flashed into his mind. Yes, like Mary. And Mary 
would be humble and caressive and protective like that. So 
she would. And dark! It would be dark like that if one 
loved Mary. And brief! Brief! But sharp and good in 
the briefness. Mary! Mary! ; 

He realised with amazement it was Mary he was now 
wanting. Not Monica. Or was it Monica? Her slim keen 
hand. Her slim body like a slim cat, so full of life. Oh, 
it was Monica! First and foremost, most intensely, it was 
Monica, because she was really his, and she was his destiny. 
He dared not think of her. 

He rolled in the bed in misery. Tom slept unmoving. 
Oh, why couldn’t he be like Tom, slow and untormented. 
Why couldn’t he? Why was his body tortured? Why was 
he travelling this road? Why wasn’t Monica there like a 
gipsy with him? Why wasn’t Monica there? 

Or Mary! Why wasn’t Mary in the house? She would 
be so soft and understanding, so yielding. Like the girl of 
the long-armed man. The long-armed man didn’t mind 
that he had taken his girl, for once. 

Why was he himself rolling there in torment? Pug had 
advised him to ** punch the ball,’? when he was taken with 
ideas he wanted to get rid of. There was no ball to punch. 
“* Train the body hard, but train the mind hard too.”? Yes, 
all very well. He could think, now for example, of fighting 
Easu, or of building up a place and raising fine horses. But 
the moment his mind relaxed for sleep, back came the othe 
black flame. The women! The women! The women! 
Even the girl of last night. 

UNCLE JOHN GRANT 229 

What was a man born for? To find a mate, a woman, 
isn’t it? Then why try to think of something else? To 
have a woman—to make a home for her—to have children. 
And other women in the background, down the long, dusky, 
strange years towards death. So it seemed to him. And to 
fight the men that stand in one’s way. To fight them. 
Always a new one cropping up, along the strange dusky 
road of the years, where you go with your head up and 
your eyes open and your spine sharp and electric, ready to 
ight your man and take your woman, on and on down the 
years, into the last black embrace of death. Death that 
stands grinning with arms open and black breast ready. 
Death, like the last woman you embrace. Death, like the 
last man you die fighting with. And he beats you. But 
somehow you are not beaten, if you are a Lord of Death. 

Jack hoped he would die a violent death. He hoped he 
would live a defiant, unsubmissive life, and die a violent 
leath. A bullet, or a knife piercing home. And the women 
1e left behind—his women, enveloped in him as in a dark 
vet. And the children he left, laughing already at death. 

And himself! He hoped never to be downcast, never to 
9e melancholy, never to yield. Never to yield. To be a 
Lord of Death, and go on to the black arms of death, still 
aughing. To laugh, and bide one’s time, and leap at the 
ight moment, 

aeery ees. 

da dih 

CHAP: XVI. ON THE ROAD 

i 
‘‘ My dear nephew, I Haven’t sent you a letter since the 
last one which I never wrote, yet you have come in answer 
to the one you never got. I wrote because I wanted you 
to come and receive the property, and I never posted it. 
because I didn’t know your address, and you couldn’t come 
if I did, because you don’t exist. Yet here you are and I 
think you look very pleased to receive the property which 
you haven’t got yet. I was so afraid I should die sudden 
after this long lingering illness, but it’s you who has come 
suddenly and the illness hasn’t begun yet. So here am I 
speechless, but you are doing a lot of talking to your dear 
uncle who never had a nephew. What does it matter to 
me if you are Jack Grant because I am not, but took the 
name into the grant of land given me on the land grant 
system at a shilling an acre. So, like a bad shilling, the 
name turns up again on the register, so that the land goes 
back to the grant, and the Grant to the land. But a better- 
looking nephew I never wish to see, being as much like me 
as an ape is like meat. So when I’m dead I won’t be alive 
to trouble you, and I’ll trouble no further about you since 
you might as well be dead for all I care.” 

In this vein Tom ranted on the next morning, when they 
had set out in the glorious early dawn. Tom never wearied 
of the uncle under the umbrella. He told the tale to every- 
body who would listen, and wore out Jack’s ears with these 
long and facile pleasantries. 

They were both glad to get away from the crazy, 
lugubrious place. Jack refused to give it a thought further, 
though he felt vaguely, at the back of his mind, that he 
knew something about it already. Something somebody 
had told him. 

Rackett had stayed behind, so they made no very good 
pace, leading the pack-horse. But they pushed on, being 
already overdue at the homestead of one of Tom’s aunts, 
who was expecting them. 

Once on horseback and in the open morning, Jack wished 
for nothing more. Women, death, skeletons, the dance 

230 

ON THE ROAD 281 

into the darkness, the future, the past, love, home, and 
sorrow all disappeared in the bright well of the daylight, 
as if they’d dropped into a pool. He wanted nothing more 
than to ride, to jog along the track on the rather wet road, 
through bush and scrub still wet with rain, in a pure 
Westralian air that was like a clean beginning of every- 
thing, seeing the tiny bushman’s flowers sparking and gild- 
ing eerily in the dunness of the world. 

By mid-day they reached the highway to Geraldton, via 
Gingin, and camped at the Three-mile Government well in 
perfect good spirits. Everything was gone, everything was 
forgotten except the insouciance of the moment. ‘They 
<new the uselessness of thinking and remembering and 
worrying. When worry starts biting like mosquitoes, then, 
f it bites hard enough, you’ve got to attend. But it’s like 
IIness, avoid it, beat it back if you can. 

They found the high road merely a bush-track after all. 
if it was near a settlement, or allotments, or improved 
ands, it might run well for miles. But, for the most part, 
t was exceedingly bad, full of holes of water, and beginning 
n places to be a bog. 

Tom was now at his best, out in the bush again. All his 
yush lore came back to him, and he was like an animal in 
ts native surroundings. His charm came back, too, and 
lis confidence. He went ahead looking keenly about, like 
travelling animal, pointing out to Jack first this thing and 
hen the other, initiating him into bush wisdom, teaching 
im the big cipher-book of the bush. And Jack learned 
ladly. It was so good, so good to be away from home- 
teads, and women, and money, watching the trees and the 
and and the marks of wild life. And Tom, a talker once 
e was wound up, told the histories of settlers, their failures 
nd successes, and their peculiarities. It seemed to Jack 
here was a surplus of weird people out there. But, then, 
‘om said, the weird ones usually came first, and they got 
eirder in the wild. 

They passed an enormous hollow tree, from which issued 
n old man with a grey beard that came to his waist, dressed 
. rags. A grey-haired, very ragged woman also came out, 
arrying a baby. Other children crawled around. The 
‘avellers called Good-day ! as they passed. 

Tom said the woman’s baby was the youngest of seven- 

22 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 3 
x 

teen children. The eldest son was already grown up, & 
prosperous young man trading in sandal wood. But Dad 
and Mum liked the bush, and would accept nothing for 
their supposed welfare, either from their sons or anyone 
else. 
In the middle of the afternoon they passed a sundowner 
trekking with a cartful of produce down to Middle Swan. 
At four o’clock they camped for half an hour, to drink a 
billy of tea. Before the water boiled they saw two tramps 
coming down the road. The slouchers came straight up 
and greeted the boys, eyeing them curiously up and down. 
‘* Wot cheer, mate? ’’ said one, a ruffianly mongrel. | — 
“Good O! How’s the goin’ Gingin way? ’? asked Tom. 
‘¢‘ Plenty grass an’ water this time o’ the year. But 
look out for the settlers this side. They ain’t over hope- 
ful.”? He turned to stare at Jack. Then he continued, to” 
Tom : ** ?Ow’s it y’ got y’ baby out? ” j 
‘‘ New chum,” explained Tom. He spoke quietly, but 
his mouth had hardened. ‘* You blokes want anything of 
us?” ; 
‘* Yessir,’? said the spokesman, coming in close. * We 
wants bacca.”’ : 
** Do you? ”? said Tom pleasantly, and he pulled out his | 
pouch. ‘ I’ve only got three plugs. That’s one apiece for 
me an’ the baby an’ you can have the other to do as you 
likes with. But chum here doesn’t keer much for smokin’, 
so he might give you his.’’ ‘ 
There was a tone of finality in Tom’s voice. , 
‘* You’ve surely got more blasted cheek than most kids,”’ 
said the fellow. ‘‘ What’ve ye got planted away in y’ 
swags? ’? He glanced at his mate. ‘* We don’t want to use 
no bally persuasion, does we, Bill? *? | 
Bill was of villainous but not very imposing appearance. — 
He had weak eyes, a dirty, hairy face, and a purple mouth — 
showing unbecomingly through his whiskers. 
Tom calmly filled his pipe, and waving to the first 
tramp, gave him sufficient to fill his cutty. The fellow 
took it, ignoring his mate, and began to fill up eagerly, He 
sat down by the fire and, taking a hot ember, lit up, puff- 
ing avidly. 
‘The other can have my share, if he wants it,” said 
Jack, , 
4 
1 

ON THE ROAD 233 

** Thank you kindly,” said the other with a sneer. And 
is he stuffed it in his pipe: ‘* It’ll do for a start.”? But 
le was pufling almost before he could finish his words. 

They smoked in silence round the fire for some time. 
Then Tom rose and went over to the pack, as if he were 
‘oing to give in to the ruffians. One swaggy rose and 
ollowed him. 

The other tramp, taking not the slightest notice of the 
oy sitting there, reached out his filthy hand and began to 
il! his pockets with everything that lay near the fire: the 
acket of tea, a spoon, a knife. 

He had got as far as the spoon when the astonished Jack 
aid : ** Drop it! ”’ as if he were speaking to a dog. 

The man turned with a snarl, and made to cuff him. Jack 
eized his wrist and twisted it cruelly, making him drop the 
poon and shout with pain. The other swaggy at once 
an on Jack from the rear, and fell over him. Tom rushed 
n the second swaggy and fell, too. Over they all went in a 
eap. Jack laughed aloud in the scrimmage, as he gripped 
he swaggy’s wrist with one hand and with the other emptied 
ut the contents of the pocket again. He brought out two 
nives, one which didn’t belong to him. Dropping the Jot 
yr safety, he got to his feet. Tom and the second swaggy 
rere rolling and unlocking. That villain spied the open 
nife, seized it and sprang to his feet, snarling and 
randishing. 

*¢ Come on, ye pair of . . 

Jack gave another twist to the wrist of the prisoner, who 
owled, and then he kicked him three yards away. But 
is heart smote him, for the kick was so bony, the tramp 
as thin and frail. Then, full of the black joy of scatter- 
g such wastrels, he sprang unexpectedly on the other 
amp. The swaggy gave a yell, and fled. For a minute 
> two the couple of ragged, wretched, despicable figures 
yuld be seen bolting like running vermin down the trail. 
hen they were out of sight. 

Tom and Jack sat by the fire and roared with laughter, 
ared and roared till the bush was startled. 

They were just packing up when someone else came down 
e road. It was a young woman in a very wide skirt on a 
ry small pony, riding as if she were used to it. This was 
yt the figure they expected to see. 

2? 

24. THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘‘ Why!’ cried Tom, staring, ‘I do believe it’s Ma’ 
niece grown up.” J 

It was. She was quite pleasant, but her hands were 
stub-fingered and work-hardened, and her voice was 
common. : 3 

“< 'Y? didn’t come along yesterday as Ma expected,” she 
explained, ‘‘ So I just took Tubby to see if y’ was tae 
to-day. How’s the twins? How’s Monica and Grace? I 
do wish they’d come.”’ 

“¢ They’re all right,’? said Tom. 

‘We heard about your Dad and your Gran. Fancy 
But I wish Monica had come with you. She was such a 
little demon at school. I’m fair longing to see her.”’ 

** She’s not the only one of you that’s a demon! ” sai 
Tom, in the correct tone of banter, putting over his hors 
and drawing to the girl’s side and becoming very manly 
for her benefit. ‘* An’ what’s wrong with us, that you 

‘bik dat tl ee 

cae: 

& . 

aren’t glad to see us? ”° 
‘* Oh, you’re all right,’? said the cousin. ‘* But a gir 
of your own age is more fun, you know.”’ 

** Well, I don’t happen to be a girl of your own age,’ 
said Tom. ‘“* Just by accident, I’m aman. But, come on. 
There’s some roughs about. We might just as well get out 
of their way.”’ 

He trotted alongside the damsel, leaving Jack to bring 
the pack-horse. Jack didn’t mind. 

: 

So they went on, receiving a rough and generous hos- 
pitality from one or another of Tom’s or Jack’s relations, 
of whom there were astonishingly many, along the grand 
bush track to Geraldton. If they weren’t direct relations 
they were relations by marriage, and it served just as well. 
There were the Brockmans, there were the Browns, the 
Gales, and Davises, Edgars and Conollys, Burgesses, Cooks, 
Logues, Cradles, Morrises, Fitzgeralds and Glasses. 
Families united by some fine-drawn connection or other; 
and very often much more divided than united, by some 
very plain-drawn feud. Their names like brooks trickled 
across the land, and you crossed and re-crossed. You would 
lose a name entirely: like the Brockman name. Then 

q 

ON THE ROAD 285 

suddenly it re-appeared as Brackman, and ‘‘ Oh, yes, 
we're cousins ! ”* 

** Who isn’t cousin! ”? thought Jack. 

Some of them had huge tracts of land fenced in. Some 
1ad little bits of poor farms. Sometimes there were deserted 
‘arms. 

** And to think,” said Tom, ‘* that none of them is my 
yon mother’s relations. All Dad’s, or else Ma’s. Mostly 
Ma’s.”? 

It was queer the way he hankered after his own real 
nother. Jack, for his part, didn’t care a straw who was 
is mother’s relation and who wasn’t. But you would 
wave thought Tom lived under a Matriarchy, and derived 
verything from a lost mother. 

It was not wet enough yet to be really boggy, though 
amping out was damp. However, they mostly got a roof. 
f it wasn’t a relation’s, it was a barn, or the “ Bull and 
dorns ’’ by Gingin. And to the boys, all that mattered 
vas whether they were on the right road: often a very 
yuzzling question : or if the heavy rain would hold off: if 
here was plenty of grub: if the horses seemed tired or not 
juite fit : if they were going to get through a boggy place 
Il right : if the packs were fast : if they made good going. 
"he inns were ‘‘ low ”’ in every sense of the word, includ- 
ng the low-pitched roof. And full of bed-bugs, however new 
he country. With red-nosed, grassy-whiskered landlords 
7ho thumbed the glasses when there were any glasses to 
humb. And there were always men at these inns, almost 
Iways the same kind of brutal, empty roughs. 

** Look here,’’ said Jack, ‘* wherever we go there are 
hese roughs, and more roughs, and more. Where the 
evil do they come from, and how do they make a living? 
part from farm labourers, I mean.” 

‘© A lot of them are shearers,” said Tom, ‘* drifting from 
9b to job, according to climate. When shearing season’s 
ver here, they work on to the south-west, where it’s 
ooler. And then there are kangaroo and ’possum snarers. 
‘hat young fellow we saw rooked of all his sugar last night 
ras a skin hunter. They get half-a-crown apiece for good 
(oo skins, and it’s quite a trade. The others last night 
rere mostly sandal-wood getters. ‘There’s quite a lot of 
ven make money collecting bark for export, and manna- 

236 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

rrr, 

gum. That rowdy lot playing fifty-three were a gang of 
well-sinkers. Then what with timber-workers, haulers, 
teamsters, junkers—oh, there’s all sorts. But they’re 
mostly one sort, swabs, rough and rowdy, an’ can’t keep 
their pants hitched up enough to be decent. You’ve seen 
’em. They’re mostly like the dirty old braces they wear. 
All the snap gone out of ’em, all the elastic perished. They 
just work and booze and loaf and work and booze. I hope 
V’ll never get so that I don’t keep myself spruce. I hope 
I never will. But that’s the worst o’ the life out here. 
Nobody hardly keeps spruce.”’ ; 

Jack kept this well in mind. He, too, hated a man 
slouching along with a discoloured face and trousers slopping 
down his insignificant legs. He loathed that look which 
tramps and ne’er-do-wells usually have, as if their legs 
weren’t there, inside their beastly bags. Despicable about 
the rear and the legs. The best of the farmers, on the con- 
trary, had strong, sinewy legs, full of life. Easu was like 
that, his powerful legs holding his horse. And Tom had 
good, live legs. But poor Dad had not been very alive, 
inside his pants. 

“* Whatever I do, I’ll never go despicable and humiliated 
about the legs and seat,”’ said Jack to himself, as he pressed 
the stirrups with his toes and felt the powerful elasticity of 
his thighs, holding the live body of the horse between his 
muscles in permanent grip. And it seemed as if the power- 
ful animal life of the horse entered into him, through his 
legs and seat, and made him strong. | 

*¢ What’s a junker, Tom? ” 

‘* A low, four-wheeled log hauler, with a long pole.” i 

‘*T thought it was a man. A swab is a man? ” 3 

** Yes. He’s any-old drunk.’’ : 

** But a swaggy is a tramp? ”’ 

“It is. It is one who humps it. If he’s got a pack, its 
his swag. If he’s only got a blanket and a billy, it’s his’ 
bluey and his drum. And if he’s got nothing, it’s Waltzing 
Matilda.”? 

“I suppose so,” said Jack. ‘* And his money is his 
sugar? ”’ 

“* Right-O, son! *? 

** And Chink is Chinaman? ” 

** No, sir. That’s Chow. Chink means prison. An’ a 

ON THE ROAD 237 

lag is a ticketer : one who’s out on lease. Now, what more 
Child’s Guide to Knowledge do you want? ” 

** I’m only getting it straight. Jam and dog both mean 
‘side’? ” 

** Verily. Only dog is sometimes same as bully tinned 
meat.”? 

** And what’s stosh? ”* 

** Landin’ him one.”’ 

Jack rode on, thinking about it. 

** What’s a remittance man, really, Tom? ” 

** A waster. A useless bird shipped out here to be kept 
south 0’ the line, because he’s a disgrace to England. And 
his family soothes their conscience by sending him so much 
a month, which they call his remittance, ’stead o’ letting 
nim starve, or work. Like Rackett. Plenty o’ money sent 
but to him to stink on.” 

** Why don’t you like Rackett ? a 

** IT fairly despise him, an’ his money. He’s absolutely 
useless baggage, rotting life away. I can’t abear to see 
nim about. Old George gave me the tip he was leaving 
yur place, else I’d never have gone and left him loose 
shere.”” 

_ ** He is no harm.” 

‘* How do you know? If he hasn’t got a disease of the 
90dy, he’s got a disease of the soul.’? 

*© What disease? ”” 

** Dunno.” 

** Does he take drugs? ” 

** T reckon that’s about his figure. But he’s an eyesore 
o me, loafin’, loafin’. An’ he’s an eyesore to Ma, save for 
the bit he teaches Lennie. An’ when he starts talkin’ on 
he high fiddle, like he does to Mary the minute she comes 
lown, makes you want to walk on his face.’ 

Poor Rackett! Jack marvelled that Tom had always 
een SO civil. 

The two jogged along very amicably together. Tom was 
iail-fellow well-met with everybody. At the same time, he 
was in his own estimation a gentleman, and a person of 
sonsideration. It was “* thus far ”? with him. 

But whoever came along, they all drew up. 

* Hello, mate! How’s goin’? ’? . . . Well, so long! ” 

One youth was walking to Fremantle to take a job 

238 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

offered by his uncle, serving in a grocery shop. The lad 
was in tatters. His blanket was tied with twine, his 
battered billy hung on to it. But he was jubilant. And] 
now he is one of Australia’s leading lights. ven it is said 
of him that he never forgot the kindness he received on 
the road. 

But most of the trailers were sundowners, sloping along 
anyhow, subsisting anyhow, but ready with the ingenious 
explanation that they ‘‘ chopped a bit,”’ or “* fenced a bit,””” 
or ‘‘ trapped a bit.’? Perhaps they never realised how 
much bigger was the bit they loafed. 

They were not bad. The bad ones were the scoundrels 
down from the Never-Never, emerging in their rags and 
moral degradation after years on the sheep runs or cattle 
stations, years of earnings spent in drink and squalid, 
beastly debauchery. Some were hoarding their cheques 
for coast-town consumption, like the first two rogues, and 
cadging and stealing their way. 

But then there were families driving to the nearest settle- 
ment to do a bit of shopping, or visit their relations, or 
fetch the doctor to ‘* fix up Teddy’s little leg.’ Once there 
was a posse of mounted police, very important and gallant, 
with horses champing and chains clinking. They were out 
after a criminal supposed to have been landed on the coas 
by a dago boat “* from the other side.’? Then there was a 
occasional Minister of the Gospel, on a pony, dressed in 
black. Jack’s heart always sank when he saw that black. 
He decided that priests should be white, or in orange robes, 
like the Buddhist priests he had seen in Colombo, or in a 
good blue, like some nuns. | 

Gradually the road became a home: more a home than 

any homestead. 
_  Let’s get! ”? was Tom’s perpetual cry, when they were 
fixed up in the house of some relation, or in some inn. He 
only felt happy on the road. Sometimes they went utterly 
lonely for many miles. Sometimes they passed a deserted 
habitation. But there were always signs of life near a 
well. And often there were mile-stones. 

‘* Fifty-seven miles to where? ” 

**I don’t know. We're leagues from Gingin. Certainly 

fifty-seven miles to nowhere of any importance on the face 
of this earth.” 

ON THE ROAD 239 

** Wonder what Gingin means? ” 

‘* Better not ask. You never know what these natives’ll 
9e naming places after. Usually something vile. But gin 
means a woman, whatever Gingin is.” 

Gradually they got further and further, geographieally, 
nentally, and emotionally, from Wandoo and all permanent 
issociations. Jack was glad. He loved the earth, the wild 
country, the bush, the scent. He wanted to go on for ever. 
3eyond the settlements—beyond the ploughed land—be- 
yond all fences. That was it—beyond all fences. Beyond 
ill fences, where a man was alone with himself and the 
mtouched earth. 

Man escaping from Man! That’s how it is all the time. 
[he passion men have to escape from mankind. What do 
hey expect in the beyond? God? 

_They’ll never find the same God! Never again. They 
ire trying to escape from the God men acknowledge, as 
vell as from mankind, the acknowledger. 

The land untouched by man. The call of the mysterious, 
rast, unoccupied land. The strange inaudible calling, like 
he far-off call of a kangaroo. The strange, still, pure air. 
The strange shadows. The strange scent of wild, brown, 
boriginal honey. 

Being early for the boat, the boys camped for twenty- 
our hours in a perfectly lonely place. And in the utterly 
onely evening Jack began craving again: for Monica, for 
, woman, for some object for his passion to settle on. And 
ie knew again, as he had always known, that nowhere is 
ree, so long as man is passionate, desirous, yearning. His 
nly freedom is to find the object of his passion, and fulfil 
lis desires and satisfy his yearning, as far as his life can 
ucceed. Or else, which is more difficult, to harden him- 
elf away from all desire and craving, to harden himself 
nto pride, and refer himself to that other God. 

Yes, in the wild bush, God seemed another God. God 
eemed absolutely another God, vaster, more calm and more 
leeply, sensually potent. And this was a profound satis- 
action. To find another, more terrible, but also more 
leeply-fulfilling God stirring subtly in the uncontaminated 
ir about one. A dread God. But a great God, greater 
han any known. The sense of greatness, vastness, and 
ewness, in the air, And the strange, dusky, grey eucalyp- 

~ 

240 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

tus-smelling sense of depth, strange depth in the air, as of a 
great deep well of potency, which life had not yet tapped. 
Something which lay in a man’s blood as well—and in a 
woman’s blood—in Monica’s—in Mary’s—in the Australian 
blood. A strange, dusky, gum-smelling depth of potency 
that had never been tapped by experience. As if life still 
held great wells of reserve vitality, strange unknown wells 
of secret life-source, dusky, of a strange, dim, aromatic sap 
which had never stirred in the veins of man, to conscious- 
ness and effect. And if he could take Monica and set the 
dusky, secret, unknown sap flowing in himself and her, to” 
some unopened life consciousness—that was what he’ 
wanted. Dimly, uneasily, painfully he realised it. 

And then the bush began to frighten him, as if it would 
kill him, as it had killed so much man-life before, killed q 

~ 

J #e? 

before the life in man had time to come to realisation. 
He was glad when the road came down to the sea. 
There, the great, pale-blue, strange empty sea, on new 
shores, with new strange sea-birds flying, and strange rocks. 
sticking up, and strange blue distances up the bending coast. 
The sea that is always the same, always a relief, a vastness 
and a soothing. Coming out of the bush, and being a little 
afraid of the bush, he loved the sea with an English passion. 
It made him feel at home in the same known infinite of 
space. 
_ Especially on a windy day, when the track would a 
down to a greeny-grey opalescent sea that beat slowly on 
the red sands, like a dying grey bird with white wing | 
feathers. And the reddish cliffs with sage-green growth 
of herbs, stood almost like flesh. a 
Then the road went inland again, through a swamp, and 
to the bush. To emerge next morning in the sun, upon a 
massive deep indigo ocean, infinite, with pearl-clear horizon; 
and in the nearness, emerald-green and white flashing un- 
speakably bright on a pinkish shore, perfectly world-new. 
They were nearing the journey’s end. Nearing the little 
port, and the ship, and the world of men. 

° 

a ee 

CHAP: XVII. AFTER TWO YEARS 
i 

A SKY with clouds of white and grey, and patches of blue. 
A green sea flecked with white, and shadowed golden brown. 
On the horizon, the sense of a great open void, like an open 
valve, as if the bivalve oyster of the world, sea and sky, 
were Open away westward, open into another infinity, and 
the people on land, inside the oyster of the world, could look 
far out to the opening. 

They could see the bulk of near islands. Farther off, a 
tiny white sail coming down fast on the fresh great sea- 
wind, emanating out of the north-west. She seemed to be 
coming from the beyond, slipping into the slightly-open, 
living oyster of our world. 

The men on the wharf at Fremantle, watching her black 
hull emerge from the flecked sea, as she sailed magically 
nearer, knew she would be a cattle-boat coming in from 
the great Nor’ West. They watched her none the less. 

As she hesitated, turning to the harbour, she was recog- 
nised as the old fore-and-aft schooner ‘ Venus ”?; ; though if 
Venus ever smelled like that, we pity her lovers. Smell or 
not, she balanced nicely, and with a bit of manceuvring 
ebbed her delicate way up the wharf. 

There they are! There they are, Tom and Jack, though 
their own mothers wouldn’t know them ! Looking terribly 
ike their fellow-passengers: stubby beards, long hair, 
vreasy dirty dungarees, and a general air of disreputable 
sutcasts. But, no doubt, with cheques of some sort in their 
oockets. 

Two years, nearer three years have gone by, since they 
set out from Wandoo. It is more than three years since 
Jack landed fresh from England, in this very Fremantle. 
And he is so changed, he doesn’t even trouble to remember. 

They don’t trouble to remember anything : not yet. Back 
n the Never-Never, one by one the ties break, the emotional 
onnections snap, memory gives out, and you come undone. 
Then, when you have come undone from the great past, 
you drift in an unkempt nonchalance here and there, great 
listances across the great hinterland country, and there is 

241 

242 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

nothing but the moment, the instantaneous moment. Tf 
you are working your guts out, you are working your guts 

out. If you are rolling across for a drink, you are rolling” 
across for a drink. If you are just getting into a fight with - 
some lump of a brute, you are just getting into a fight with - 
some lump of a brute. If you are going to sleep in some 
low hole, you are going to sleep in some low hole. And if 

you wake feeling dry and hot and hellish, why, you feel | 
dry and hot and hellish till you leave off feeling dry and hot 
and hellish. There’s no more to it. The same if you're” 
sick. You’re just sick, and stubborn as hell, till your 

stubbornness gets the better of your sickness. . 

There are words like home, Wandoo, England, mother, 
father, sister, but they don’t carry very well. It’s like a 
radio message that’s so faint, so far off, it makes no im- 
pression on you; even if you can hear it in a shadowy way. 
Such a faint, unreal thing in the broadcast air. 

You have moved outside the pale, the pale of civilisation, 
the pale of the general human consciousness. The human 
consciousness is a definitely limited thing, even on the face 
of the earth. You can move into regions outside of it. As 
in Australia. The broadcasting of the vast human con- 
sciousness can’t get you. You are beyond. And since the 
call can’t get you, the answer begins to die down inside 
yourself, you don’t respond any more. You don’t respond, 
and you don’t correspond. 

There is no past: or if there is, it is so remote and in- 
effectual it can’t work on you at all. And there is no 
future. Why saddle yourself with such a spectre as the 
future? There is the moment. You sweat, you rest, the 
bugs bite you, you thirst, you drink, you think youre. 
going to die, you don’t care, and you know you won’t die, 
eee uee a certain stubbornness inside you keeps the upper 

and. 

So you go on. If you’ve got no work, you either get a 
horse or you tramp it off somewhere else. You keep your 
eyes open that you don’t get lost, or stranded for water. 
When you’re damned, infernally and absolutely sick of 
everything, you go to sleep. And then if the bugs bite 
you, you are beyond that too. 

But at the bottom of yourself, somewhere, like a tiny 
seed, lies the knowledge that you’re going back in a while, 

AFTER TWO YEARS 243 

That all the unreal will become real again, and this real 
will become ureal. That all that stuff, home, mother, re- 
sponsibility, family, duty, etc., it all will loom up again 
into actuality, and this, this heat, this parchedness, this 
dirt, this mutton, these dying sheep, these roving cattle that 
take the flies by the million, these burning tin gold-camps— 
all this will recede into the unreal, it will cease to be actual. 

Some men decide never to go back, and they are the dere- 
licts, the scarecrows and the warning. *‘ Going back ”’ was a 
problem in Jack’s soul. He didn’t really want to go back. 
All that which lay behind, society, homes, families, he felt 
a deep hostility towards. He didn’t want to go back. He 
was like an enemy, lurking outside the great camp of 
civilisation. And he didn’t want to go into camp again. 

Yet neither did he want to be a derelict. A mere derelict 

he would never be, though temporary derelicts both he and 
Tom were. But he saw enough of the real waster, the real 
out-and-out derelict, to know that this he would never be. 
_ No, in the end he would go back to civilization. But the 
thought of becoming a part of the civilized outfit was deeply 
repugnant to him. Some other queer hard resolve had 
formed in his soul. Something gradually went hard in the 
sentre of him. He couldn’t yield himself any more. The 
1ard core remained impregnable. 

They had dutifully spent their year on the sheep-run 
Mr. George had sent them to. But after that, it was shift 
or yourself. They had stuck at nothing. Only they had 
stuck together. 

They had cashed their cheques in many a well-known 
wooden ** hotel ’’ of the far-away coast. Oh, those wooden 
1otels with their uneasy verandahs, flies, flies, flies, flies, 
lies, their rum or whisky, their dirty glasses, their flimsy 
yartitions, their foul language, their bugs and dirt and 
lesolation. The brutal foul-mouthed desolation of them, 
vith the horses switching their tails at the hitching posts, 
he riders slowly soaking, staring at the blue heat and the 
ilent world of dust, too far gone even to speak. Gone 
inder the heat, the drought, the Never-Neverness of it, 
he unspeakable hot desolation. And evening coming, with 
nen already drunk, already ripe for brawling, obscenity, 
nd swindling gambling. 

They had gone away chequeless, mourning their cheque- 

244 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

7. TAC! 

lessness, back on their horses to the cable station. Then 
following the droves miles and miles through the tropical, 
or semi-tropical bush, and over the open country, camping 
by water for a week at a time, and going on. 

Then they had chucked cattle, wasted their cheques, E 
footed it for weary, weary miles, like the swaggies they had ~ 
so despised. Clothes in rags, boots in holes, another job; — 
away in out-back camps with horsemen prospectors, with — 
well-contractors; shepherding again, with utter wastrels of © 
shepherds camping along with them, chucking the job, — 
chucking the blasted rich aristocratic squatters with all their 
millions of acres and sheep and fence and blasted outfit, © 
all so dead bent on making money as quick as possible, all 
the machinery of civilization, as far as possible, starting to — 
grind and squeak there in the beyond. They had gone off © 
with well-sinkers, and laboured like navvies. Chucked that, F 
taken the road, spent the night at mission stations, watched — 
the blacks being saved, and got to the mining camps. . 

Poor old Tom had got into deep waters. Even now he 
more than thought that he was legally married to a bar- | 
maid, far away back in the sublimest town you can imagine, 
back there in the blasting heat which so often burns a man’s 
soul away even before it burns up his body. It had burned 
a hole in Tom’s soul, in that town away back in the blast- 
ing heat, a town consisting of a score or so of ready-made 
tin houses got up from the coast in pieces, and put together : 
by anybody that liked to try. There they stood or 
staggered, the tin ovens that men and women lived inal 
houses leaning like drunken men against stark tree-trunks, © 
others looking strange and forlorn with some of their parts — 
missing, said parts being under the seas, or elsewhere mis-_ 
laid. But the absence of one section of a wall did not spoil — 
the house for habitation. It merely gave you a better view 
of the inside happenings. Many of the tin shacks were 
windowless, and even shutterless : square holes in the raw 
corrugated erection. One was entirely wall-less, and this 
was the pub. It was just a tin roof reared on saplings 
against an old tree, with a sacking screen round the bar, 
through which sacking screen you saw the ghost of the 
landlady and her clients, if you approached from the back. 
The front view was open. 

Here sat the motionless landlady, in her cooking hot 

AFTER TWO YEARS 245 

shade, dispensing her indispensable grog, while her boss or 
husband rolled the barrels in. He had a team with which 
ne hauled up the indispensable from the coast. 

The nice-mannered Miss Snook took turns with her 
mamma in this palace of Circe. She was extremely “ nice ”’ 
n her manners, for the ‘‘ boss ’’ owned the team, the pub, 
and the boarding-house at which you stayed so long as you 
sould pay the outrageous prices. So Miss Snook, never 
‘amiliarized into Lucy, for she wouldn’t allow it, oscillated 
setween the closed oven of the boarding-house and the 
ypen oven of the pub. 

Father—or the ‘‘ boss ’—had been a barber in Sydney. 
Now he cooked in the boarding-house, and drove the team. 
* Mother ” had been the high-born daughter of a chemist; 
he had ruined all her prospects of continuing in the eastern 
‘swim *? by running away with the barber, now called 
* boss.’? However, she took her decline in the social scale 
vith dignity, and allowed no familiarities. Her previous 
tation helped her to keep up her prices. 

** We’re not, y’understand, Mr. Grant, a Provident con- 
ern, as some foot-sloggers seem to think us. We’re doing 
jut best to provide for Lucy, against she wants to get 
narried, or in case she doesn’t.”’ 

She and Lucy did the washing and cleaning between 
hem, but their efforts were nominal. Boss’s cooking left 
verything to be desired. The place was a perfect paradise. 

‘* We know a gentleman when we see one, Mr. Grant, and 
ve’re not going to throw out only child away on a penni- 
ess waster.”’ 

Jack wanted loudly to proclaim himself a penniless 
yvaster. But Tom and he had a pact, not to say anything 
bout themselves, or where they came from. They were 
ust ** looking round.”’ 

And in that heat, the plump, perspiring, cotton-clad Lucy 
hought that Tom seemed more amenable than Jack. Poor 
‘om seemed to fall for it, and Jack had to look on in silent 
lisgust. There was even a ghastly, gruesome wedding. 
{either of the boys could bear to think of it. Even in the 
tupefaction of that heat, when the brain seems to melt, 
nd the will degenerates, and nothing but the most rudi- 
aentary functions of the organism called man, continue to 
unction, even then a sense of shame overpowered them. 

246 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 7 

Tom continued in the trance for about a week after his s0- 

< 

: 
called marriage. Then he woke up from the welter of per- 
spiration, rum, and Lucy in an amazed horror, and the 
boys escaped. . 

The nightmare of this town—it was called ‘* Honey-— 
suckle was able to penetrate Tom’s most nonchalant 
mood, even when he was hundreds of trackless miles away. 
The young men covered their tracks carefully. The Snooks 
knew nothing but their names. But a name, alas, is a 
potent entity in the wilds. a 

They covered their tracks and disappeared again. But 
even so, an ancient letter from Wandoo followed them to a 
well-digging camp. It was from Monica to Tom, but it 
didn’t seem to mean much to either boy. ; 

For almost a year Tom and Jack had never written home, | 
There didn’t seem any reason. In his last letter, Tom, 
suddenly having some sort of qualm, had sent his cheque 
to his maiden aunts in York, because he knew, now Gran 
and Dad were gone, they’d be in shallow water. This off 
his conscience, he let Wandoo go out of his mind and spirit. 

But now wandered in a letter from Aunt Lucy—dreaded 
name! It was a ‘‘ thank you, my dear nephew,’’ and went 
on to say that though she would be the last to repeat things 
she hoped trouble was not hanging over Mrs. Ellis’ head. 

Tom looked at Jack. 

** We’d best go back,’’ said Jack, reading his eyes. 

‘* Seems like it.”’ 

So—the time had come. The ‘“‘ freedom ’? was over. 
They were going back. They caught the old ship ** Venus,” 
going south with cattle. 

To come back in body is not always to come back in 
mind and spirit. When Jack saw the white buildings of 
Fremanile he knew his soul was far from Fremantle. But 
nothing to be done. The old ship bumped against the 
wharf, and was tied up. Nothing to do but to step ashore. 

They loafed off that ship with a gang of similar unkempt, 
unshaved, greasy, scoundrelly returners. 

** Come an’ ’ave a spot! ”” 

‘© What about it, Tom? ” 

* 'Y’know I haven’t a bean above the couple o’ dollars 
to take me to Perth.’’ 

* Oh, dry it up,”’ cried the mate. ‘* What y’come ashore 

AFTER TWO YEARS 247 

or? You’re not goin’ without a spot. It’s on me. My 
hout.”? 

** Shout it back in Perth, then.’? 

** Wot’ll y’ave? ” 

And through the swing doors they went. 

** Best an’ bitter’s mine.”’ 

A 

Jack had not let himself be cleaned out entirely, as Tom 

iad. Tom seemed to want to be absolutely stumped. But 
jack, with deeper sense of the world’s enmity, and his own 
eed to hold his own against it, had posted a couple of 
heques to Lennie to hold for him. Save for this he too was 
leaned out. 
_The same little engine of the same little train of four 
rears ago shrieked her whistle. The North-West crowd 
rifted noisily out of the hotel and down the platform, pack- 
ng into the third class compartment, in such positions as 
appily to negotiate the spittoons. 

** Let’s go forward,”’ said Jack. ‘** We might as well have 

ushions, if we’re not smoking.”’ 
_And he drew Tom forward along the train. They were 
oing to get into another compartment, but seeing the looks 
{ terror on the face of the woman and little girl already 
here, they refrained and went farther. 

Aggressively they entered another smoking compartment. 
. couple of fat tradesmen and a clergyman glowered at 
hem. One of the tradesmen pulled out a handkerchief, 
hook it, and pretended to wipe his nose. There was per- 
ume in the air. 

© Oh, my aunt! ” said Tom, putting his hand on his 
tomach. ‘* Turns me right over.”’ 

‘¢ What? ’ asked Jack. 

‘¢ All this smell 0’ scent.” 

Jack grinned to himself. But he was back in civilization, 
nd he involuntarily stiffened. 

** Hello! There’s Sam Ellis! ’? Tom leaned out of the 
oor. ‘** Hello, Sam! How’s things, eh? ” 

The young fellow addressed looked. at Tom, grinned 
icklily, and turned away. He didn’t know Tom from 

dam, 

248 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

“© Let’s have another drink! ’’ said Tom, flabbergasted, 
getting out of the train. 

Jack followed, and they started down the platform, when 
the train jogged, jerked, and began to pull away. In- 
stantly they ran for it, caught the rail of the guard’s van, 
and swung themselves in. The interior was empty, so they 
sat down on the little boxes let in at the side. Then the 
two eyed each other self-consciously, uncomfortably. They 
felt uncomfortable and aware of themselves all at once. 

‘¢ Of all the ol’ sweeps!.”? said Tom. ‘* Tell you what, 
you look like a lumper, absolutely nothing but a lumper.”’ 

‘¢ And what do you think you look like, you distorted 
scavenger ! ”’ 

Tom grinned uncomfortably. 

They got out of the station at Perth without having paid 
any railway fare. 

The first place they went to was Mr. George’s office. 
Jack pushed Tom through the door, and stood himself in» 
the doorway fingering his greasy felt hat. Tom dropped - 
his, picked it up, hit it against his knee. | 

Mr. George, neat in pale grey suit and white waistcoat, 
glared at them briefly. ; 

‘* Now then, my men, what can I do f ye? ” 

** Why—’”’ began Tom, grinning sheepishly. | 

‘* Trouble about a mining right? Mate stolen half y’ gold 
dust? Want stake a claim on somebody else’s reserve? 
Come, out with it. What d’ you want me to do for ye, 
man? ” | 

‘* Why— * Tom began, more foolishly grinning than 
ever. Mr. George looked shrewdly at him, then at Jack. 
Then he sat back smiling. 

‘* Well, if you’re not a pair! ’? he said. * So it was 
mines for the last outfit? How’d it go? ” 

** About as slow as it could,”’ said Tom. | 

** So you’ve not come back millionaires? ”? said Mr. 
George, a little bit disappointed. | 

** Come to ask for a fiver,’? said Tom. 

* You outcast!’ said Mr. George. ‘* You had me, 
completely. But look here, lads, I’ll stand y’ a fiver apiece 
if y’ll stop around Perth like that all morning, an’ nobody 
spots ye.”’ 

‘* Kasy ! ”? said Tom. 

4 
‘ 
“a 

AFTER TWO YEARS 249 

** A bigger pair o’ blackguards I’ve seldom set eyes on. 
3ut you have dinner with me at the club to-night, Pll hear 
ll about y’ then. Six-thirty sharp. An’ then I'll take ye 
0 the Government House. Y’ can wear that evening suit 
n the closet at my house, Jack, that you’ve left there all 
his time. See you six-thirty then.” 

ili 

Dismissed, they bundled into the street. 

** Outcasts on the face value of us! ”’ said Jack. 

Tom stopped to roar with laughter, and bumped into a 
edestrian. 

** Hold hard! Keep a hand on the reins, can’t you? ” 
xclaimed the individual, pushing Tom off. 

Tom looked at him. It was Jimmie Short, another sort 
f cousin. 

‘* Stow it, Jimmie. Don’t y’ know me? ” 
Jimmie took him firmly by the coat lappels and pulled 
im into the gutter. 
-** °F course I know ye,” said Jimmie in a conciliatory 
one, as to a drunk. ‘‘ Meet me in half an hour at the 
[iners’ Refuge, eh? Three steps and a lurch and there y’ 
re! Come, matey ’”—this to Jack—* take hold of y’ pal’s 
rm. See ye later.” 

Tom was weak with laughter at Jimmie’s benevolent 
ttitude. They were not recognised at all, as they lurched 
cross the road. 

They had a drink, and strolled down the long principal 
treet of Perth, looking in at the windows of all the shops, 
nd in spite of the fact that they had no money, buying 
ach a silk handkerchief and a cake of scented soap. The 
xcitement of this over, they rolled away to the river-side, 
) the ferry. Then again back into the town. 

At the corner of the Freemason’s Hotel they saw Aunt 
fatilda and Mary; Aunt Matilda huge in a tight-fitting, 
iched dress of dark purple stuff, and Mary in a black-and- 
hite striped dress with a tight bodice and tight sleeves 
ith a little puff at the top, and a long skirt very full 
shind. She wore also a little black hat with a wing. And 
ack, with a wickedness brought with him out of the North 

250 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

West, would have liked to rip these stereotyped clothes and 
corsets off her, and make her walk down Hay Street in puris 
naturalibus. She went so trim and exact behind the huge 
Mrs. Watson. It would have been good to unsheathe her. 

‘‘ Hello! ’? cried Tom. ‘* There’s Aunt Matilda. We’ve 
struck it rich.” : 

The two young blackguards followed slowly after the two 
women, close behind them. Mary carried a book, and was 
evidently making for the little bookshop that had a lending 
library of newish books. 

‘* Well, Mary, while you go in there I’ll go and see if the 
chemist can’t give me something for my breathing, for it’s 
awful! ’? said Mrs Watson, standing and puffing before the 
book-shop. | 

‘¢ Shall I come for you or you for me? ”’ asked Mary. 

‘¢ [ll sit and wait for you in Mr Pusey’s,’’ panted Aunt 
Matilda, and she sailed forward again, after having glanced 
suspiciously backward at the two ne’er-do-wells who were 
hesitating a few yards away. 

Mary, with her black hair in a huge bun, her hat with a 
wing held on by steel pins, was gazing contemplatively 
into the window of the book-shop at the newest books. 
‘© The Book-lovers’ Latest! ’’ said a cardboard announce- 
ment. 

** Can you help a poor chap, Miss? *’ said Tom, dropping 
his head and edging near. 

Mary started, looked frightened, glanced at the first 
tramp and then at the second, in agitation, began to fumble 
for her purse, and dropped her book, spilling the loose 
leaves. 

Jack at once began to gather up the scattered pages of 
the book : an Anthony Trollope novel. Mary, with black 
kid-gloved fingers, was fumbling in her purse for a penny. 
Tom peeped into the purse. 

‘* Lend us the half a quid, Mary,” he said. 

She looked at his face, and a slow smile of amusement 
dawned in her eyes. 

“I should never have known you! ”? she said. 

Then as Jack rose, shoving the leaves together in th 
book, she looked into his blue eyes with her brown, quee! 
shining eyes. 

She held out her hand to him without saying a word 

AFTER TWO YEARS 251. 

only looked into his eyes with a look of shining meaning. 
Which made him grin sardonically inside himself. He shook 
1ands with her silently. 

** You look something like you did after you’d been 
ighting with Easu Ellis,”’ she said. ‘‘ When are you going 
0 Wandoo? ”? 

** To-morrow, I should think,’? said Tom. ‘ Everybody 
).K. down there? ”’ 

** Oh, I think so! ”? said Mary nervously. 

** What do you men want? ”’ came a loud, panting voice. 
\unt Matilda sailing up, purple in the face. 

*“*Lend us half a quid, Mary,’? murmured Tom, and 
lastily she handed it over. Jack had already commenced 
o beat a retreat. Tom sloped away as the large lady 
oomed near. 

** Beggars! ’? she panted. ‘* Are they begging? How 
nuch—how much did you give him? The disgraceful 1 

‘* He made me give him half-a-sovereign, Aunt.”’ 

Mrs Watson had to stagger into the shop for a chair. 

The boys had a drink, and set off to the warehouse to 
90k up Jack’s box, in which were his white shirts and 
ther forgotten garments. 

Back in town, Jack felt a slow, sinister sense of oppres- 
ion coming over him, a sort of fear, as if he were not really 
ree, as if something bad were going to happen to him. 

*‘ How am I going to get dressed to dine with Old George 
-night ? ’? grumbled the still careless Tom, who was again 
ecoming tipsy. ‘‘ Wherever am I goin’ to get a suit to 
port? ”? 

«© Oh, some of yer relations ’Il fix you up.” 

Jack had an undefinable, uncomfortable feeling that he 
light suddenly come upon Monica, and she might see him — 
1 this state. He wouldn’t like the way she’d look at him. 
(0, he wouldn’t be looked at like that, not for a hundred 
onies. 

They turned their backs on the beautiful river, with its 
fount Eliza headland and wide sweeps and curves twinkling 
_ the sun, and they walked up William Street looking for 
a adventure. 

A man whom they knew from the north, in filthy denins, 
yme out of a boot-shop and hailed them. 

‘‘ Come an’ stop one on me, maties.”’ 

252 THE? BOY TNH es US 

‘“‘ Richto! But where’s Lukey? He stood us one this 
morning.. Seen him? ”’ 

“Yes, I seen him—but, ’arf a mo’! ’ 

Scottie turned into the pawnbroker’s, auc the three 
balls, and the boys followed. 

“‘ If y’ sees what y’ didn’t oughta see, keep y’ mouth 
shut.”” 

“* As a dead crab,’’ assented Jack. 

‘“‘ Now, then, Uncle! What’ll y’ advance on that pair 
o’ bran new boots I’ve just bought? ”’ 

‘© Two bob.” 

“‘ Glory be. An’ I just give twenty for ’em. Ne’ mind, 
gimme th’ ticket.”* 

This transaction concluded, Jack wondered what he could 
pawn. He pulled out a front tooth, beautifully set in a 
gold plate. It had been a parting finish to his colonial 
outfit, the Sriginal tooth having been lost in a football 
scrum. 

‘* Father Abraham,” he said, holding up the tooth, 
‘© 1’m a gentleman whether I look it or not. So is my 
friend, this gentleman. He needs a dress suit for to-night, 
though you wouldn’t believe it. He needs a first-class, 
well-fitting dress suit for this evening.’ 

‘* T have first-class latest fashion gents’ clothes Up 
But a suit like that is worth five pound to me.”’ 

‘ Let me try the jacket on.’ 

Abraham was doubtful. But at length Tom was hustled 
shamefacedly into a rather large tail-coat. It looked awful, 
but Jack said it would do. The man wouldn’t take a cent 
less than two quid deposit, and ten bob for the loan of 
the suit. The boys said they would call later. 

** What’ll you give me on this tooth? ’? asked Jack. 
‘*There’s not a more expensive tooth in Western Australia.” 

** T’ll lend y’ five bob on that, pecos y’ amuth me.” 

** And we’ll come in later for the dress suit. Alright, 
Aaron. Hang on to that tooth, it’s irreplaceable. Treat 
it like a jewel. Give me the five bob and the ticket.” 

In the Miners’ Refuge Jack flung himself down on a bench 
beside an individual who looked tidy but smelt strongly of 
rum, and asked : 

** Say mate, where can y’ get a wash an’ a brush-up for 
two ?—local? ” 

AFTER TWO YEARS 253 

The fellow got up and lurched surlily to the counter, 
refusing to answer. 

Jack sat on, while Tom drank beer, and a heavy depres- 
sion crept over his spirit. He had been hobnobbing with 
riff-raff so long, it had almost become second nature. But 
now a sense of disgust and impending disaster came over 
him. He would soon have to make an angry effort, and 
get out. He was becoming angry with Tom, for sitting 
there so sloppily soaking beer, when he knew his head was 
weak. 

They began to eat sandwiches, hungrily standing at the 
bar. Another slipshod waster, eyeing the denin man as if 
he were a fish, sidled over to him and muttered. 

** Sorry,’’ said Scottie, with a mournful expression, pull- 
ng out the pawn-ticket, ‘‘ I’ve just had to pawn me boots. 
Can’t be done.”’ 

Jack grinned. The waster then came sloping over to 

*° 'Y’ axed me mate a civil question just now, lad, an’ 
’d ’ave answered it for ’im, but I just spotted a racin’ pal 
»” mine an’ was onter him ter get a tip he’d promised—a 
lead cert f? Belmont to-morrer. 

** Y’ might ha’ seen him lettin’ me inter th’ know,”’ he 
yreathed. ‘* Hev’ a drink, lad! ” 

“* Thanks! ’? said Jack. ‘* This is my mate. I'll take 
he shout, an’ one back, an’ then we must be off. Going 
ip country to-morrer morning.”’ 

This seemed to push the man’s mind on quicker. 

** Just from up North, aren’t ye? LHasy place to knock 
ip a cheque. How’d y’ like to double a fiver? ”” 

°° O.K.’’, said Tom. 

‘© Well, here’s a dead cert. Take it from me, and don’t 
et it past yer. I got it from a racin’ pal wots in the know. 
Jot straight for the punters, maybe—but straight as a die 
*y me ’n my pals. Double y’ money? Not ’arf! Multiply 
t by ten. ’S a dead cert.” 

Name? * 

** Not so quick. Not in ’ere. Come outside, ’n I'll 
yhisper it to y’.”’ 

Jack paid for the drinks, and winking warningly to Tom, 
ollowed the man outside. 

‘‘ The name o’ the ’oss,”’ the fellow said, ‘‘—but tell yer 

254 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

wot, I’ll put ye on the divvy with a book I know—or y’” 
e’n come wi’ me. He keeps a paper-shop in Hay Street.” 

‘* We don’t know the name of the horse yet.” 

‘‘ Comin’ from up North you don’t know the name 0” 
none of ’em, do yer? He’s a rank outsider. Y’ oughter 
get twenties on ’im.”’ 

‘‘ We’ve only got a quid atween us,”’ said Tom. 

‘¢ Well, that means a safe forty—after th’ race.” 

“‘ Bob on! ”? said Tom. ‘‘ Where’s the book-shop? ” 

‘‘ How can we go in an’ back a hoss without knowin’ 
his name? ” said Jack. 

“Oh, T’ll tip it y’ in ’ere.”’ 

They entered a small paper-shop, and the man said to 
the fellow behind the counter : 

‘¢ These two gents ’s pals o? mine. How much did y’ 
say y’d lay, mates? ” : 

‘© Out with the name o’ th’ hoss first,’? said Tom, con- 
fidentially. 

‘* This shop’s changed hands lately,’’ said the fat fellow 
behind the counter, ‘‘ I don’t make books. Got no licence.’ 

Didn’t that look straight? But the boys were no green- 
horns. They walked out of the shop again. ; 

In the road the stranger said : 

** The name o’ th’ ’oss is Double Bee. If y’ll give me 
th’ money I’ll run upstairs ’ere t? old Josh—everyone knows 
him for a sound book.’’ 3 

‘¢ The name o’ th’ hoss,”’ said Jack, ** is Boots-two-Bob. 
An’ a more cramblin’ set 0’ lies I never heard. Get outter 
this, or I’l] knock y’ head off.’’ 

The fellow went off with a yellow look. 

“Gosh! ”’ said Tom. ‘* We’re back home right enough, 
what? ”’ 

** Bon soir, as Frenchy used to say? ” 

Rolling a little drearily along, they saw Jimmie Short 
standing on the pavement watching them. 

“* Hello, mates! ’? he said. ‘* Still going strong? ” 

‘* Fireproof! ”? said Tom. 

*“ Remember barging into me this morning? And my 
best girl was just coming round the corner with her Ma! 
Had to mind my company, eh, boys? But come an’ have 
a drink now. I seem to have seen you before to-day, 
haven’t I? Where was it? ” 

99 

AFTER TWO YEARS 255 

** Don’t try and think,’”’ said Tom. ‘“ Y’ might do us 
out of a pony.”’ 

** Right-o! old gold dust! Step over on to the Bar- 
parlour mat.’’ 

*° I’m stepping,” said Tom. ‘* ’N I’m not drunk.’’ 

** No, he’s not,”’ said Jack. 

** You bet he’s not,”’ said Jimmy. He was eyeing them 
suriously, as if his memory pricked him. 

“* My name,”’ said Tom, ‘‘ is Ned Kelly. And if yours 
sn’t Jimmie Miller, what is it? ”’ 

** Why, it’s Short. Well, I give it up. I can’t seem to 
ay my finger on you, Kelly.”’ 

Tom roared with laughter. 

‘¢ What time is it? ’’ he asked. 

** Ten past twelve.”’ 

‘* We’ve won a pony off Old George! ”’ said the delighted 
Tom. ‘* I’m Tom Ellis and he’s Jack Grant. Now do you 
cnow us, Jimmie? ”’ ; 

Jack was glad to get washed and barbered and dressed. 
After all, he was sick of wasters and roughs. They were 
ttupider than respectable people, and much more offensive 
yhysically and morally. To hell with them all. He wouldn’t 
sare if some tyrant would up and extirpate the breed. 

Anyhow he stepped clean out of their company. 

CHAP: XVIII. THE GOVERNOR’S DANCE 

THREE gentlemen in evening dress passing along by the low 
brick wall skirting the Government House. One of the 
gentlemen portly and correct, two of the gentlemen young, 
with burnt brown faces that showed a little less tan below the 
shaving line, and limbs too strong and too rough to fit the 
evening clothes. Jack’s suit was on the small side, though 
he’d scarcely grown in height. But it showed a big piece 
of white shirt-cuff at the wrists, and seemed to reveal the 
muscles of his shoulders unduly. As for Tom’s quite good 
and quite expensive suit from the pawn-shop, it was a little 
large for him. If he hadn’t been so bursting with life it 
would have been sloppy. But the crude animal life came 
so forcibly through the black cloth, that you had to over- 
look the anomaly of the clothes. Both boys wore socks of 
fine scarlet wool, and the new handkerchiefs of magenta 
silk inside their waistcoats. The scarlet, magenta, and red- 
brown of their faces made a gallant pizzicato of colour 
against the black and white. Anyhow, they fancied them- 
selves, and walked conceitedly. : 

Jack’s face was a little amusing. It had the kind of 
innocence and half-smile you can see on the face of a young 
fox, which will snap holes in your hand if you touch it. 
He was annoyed by his father’s letter to him for his twenty- 
first birthday. The general had retired, and hadn’t saved 
a sou. How could he, given his happy, thriftless lady. So 
it was a case of ‘‘ My dear boy, I’m thankful you are at 
last twenty-one, because now you must look out for your- 
self. I have bled myself to send you this cheque for a 
hundred pounds, but I know you think I ought to send 
you something so take it, but don’t expect any more, for 
you won’t get it if you do.” 

This was not really the text of the General’s letter, but 
this was how Jack read it. As for his mother, she sent him 
six terrible neckties and awful silver-backed brushes which 
he hated the sight of, much love, a few tears, a bit of 
absurd fond counsel, and a general wind-up of tender doting 
which Jack felt was really meant, like the Harry Smith 
letter, “ for *appy Jack wot went up Cossack way.” 

256 

THE GOVERNOR’S DANCE _ 257 

He was annoyed, because he had expected some sort of 
real assistance in setting out like a gentleman on his life’s 
career, now he had attained his majority. But the hundred 
quid was a substantial sop. 

Mr George had done them proud at the Weld Club, and 
got them invitations to the ball from the Private Secretary. 
Oh, yes, he was proud of them, handsome upstanding young 
fellows. So they were proud of themselves. It was a fine, 
hot evening, and nearly everybody was walking to the 
function, showing off their splendour. For few people 
bossessed private carriages, and the town boasted very few 
cabs indeed. 

Mr George waited in the porch of the Government House 
or Aunt Matilda and Mary. They had not long to wait 
yefore they saw the ladies in their shawls, carrying 
ach a little holland bag with scarlet initials, containing 
heir dancing slippers, slowly and self-consciously mounting 
he steps. 

The boys braced themselves to face the introduction to 
he Representation. They were uneasy. Also they wanted 
o grin. In Jack’s mind a picture of Honeysuckle, that tin 
own in the heat, danced as on heat-waves, as he made his 
yows and his murmurs. He wanted to whisper to Tom: 
‘ Ain’t we in Honeysuckle? *”? But it would have been 
oo cruel. 

Clutching their programmes as drowning men clutch 
traw, they passed on. The primary ordeal was over. 

** Oh, Lord, I’m sweating already,’’ said Tom with a red- 
aced grin. ‘* I’m off to get me bill-head crammed.”’ 

** Take me with you, for the Lord’s sake,” said Jack. 

** 'Y’re such an owl of a dancer. An’ y’ have to do it 
roper here. You go to Mr George.”’ 

** Don’t desert me, you swine.”’ 

“© Goon! Want me to take you back to Auntie? Goon! 
’m goin’ to dance an’ sit out an’ hold their little white 
ands.’” 

Tom pulled a droll face as he took his place in the line 
f glove-buttoning youths who made a queue on the 
overnor’s left hand, where his daughter stood booking 

duty dances. Jack, galvanised by the advent of the 
.D.C., ducked through the crowd to Aunt Matilda’s side. 

He was always angry that he couldn’t dance. The fact 

I 

258 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

was, he would never learn. He could never bring himself 
to go hugging promiscuous girls round the waist and 
twiddling through dances with them. Underneath all his 
carelessness and his appearance of ‘* mixing,’”’ there was a 
savage physical reserve which prevented his mixing at all. 
He could not bear the least physical intimacy. Something 
inside him recoiled and stood savagely at a distance, even 
from the prettiest girl, the moment she seemed to be 
‘* coming on.”? To take the dear young things in his arms 
was repugnant to him, it offended a certain aloof pride and 
a subtle arrogance in him. Even with Tom, intimate 
though they were, he always kept a certain unpassable space 
around him, a definite noli me tangere distance which gave 
the limit to all approach. It would have been difficult to 
define this reserve. Jack seemed absolutely the most open 
and accessible individual in the world, a perfect child. He 
seemed to lay himself far too open to anybody’s approach. 
But those who knew him better, like Mrs Ellis or his mother, 
knew the cold inward reserve, the savage unwillingness to 
be touched, which was central in him, as in a wolf-cub. 
There was something reserved, fierce and untouched at the 
very centre of him. Something, at the centre of all his 
openness and his seeming softness, that was cold, over- 
bearing, and a little angry. This was the old overweening 
English blood in him, which would never really yield ta 
promiscuity, or to vulgar intimacy. He seemed to mix in 
with everybody at random, but, as a matter of fact, he had 
never finally mixed in with anybody, not even with his own 
father and mother, not even with Tom. And certainly not 
with any casual girl. Essentially, he kept himself a stranger 
to everybody. 
Aunt Matilda was in green satin with a tiara of diamonds. 
** The devil you know is better than the devil you don’t 
know,” was Jack’s inward comment as he approached her. 
Aloud he said : | 
** Would it be right if I asked you to let me have the 
pleasure of taking you in to supper later, Marm? ”? | 
** Oh, you dear boy!” simpered Aunt Matilda, ** Sc 
like y’ dear father. But, you see, I’m engaged on these 
occasions. We have to go in in order of rank and pre- 
cedence. But you can take Mary. She says she has ‘hurt 
her foot and can’t dance much.”’ 

THE GOVERNOR’S DANCE 259 

Mary took his arm, and they went out on to the terrace. 
There was clear moonlight, and trees against a shadowy, 
sreen-blue sky, and a dark perfume of tropical flowers. 
Jack felt the beauty of it and it moved him. He waited for 
his soul to melt. But his soul would never melt. It was 
hard and clear as the moon itself. 

** It is much better here,”’ he said, looking at the sky. 

** Oh, it’s beautiful! ’? said Mary. ‘* I wanted so much 
to sit quietly and talk to you. It seems so long, and you 
looked so wild and different this morning. I’ve been so 
tightened, reading so much about the natives murdering 
people.”? 

Mary was different, too, but Jack didn’t know wherein. 

** I don’t believe there’s much more danger in one place 
than in another,”’ he said. ‘* So long as you keep yourself 
n hand. Shall we sit down and have a real wongie? ”’ 

They found a seat under the overspreading tree, and sat 
istening to the night-insects. 

“© You’re not very glad to be back, are you? ”? asked 
Mary. 

** Yes I am,”’ he assented, without a great deal of vigour. 
* What has been happening to you all this time, Mary? ” 

** The little things that are nothing,’’ she said. ‘* The 
mly thing ’’—she hesitated—* is that they want me to 
marry. And I lie awake at night wondering about 
hd 

** Marry who? ”? asked Jack, his mind running at once 
0 Rackett. 

They were sitting under a magnolia tree. Jack could 
nake out the dark shape of a great flower against the moon, 
mong black leaves. And the perfume was magnolia 
lowers. 

** Do you want me to talk about it? ”’ she said. 

66 1 filo 

Jack was glancing rather fiercely down the slope of the 
ylack-and-white garden, that sloped its lawns to the river. 
lary sat very still beside him, in a cream lace dress. 

‘* It’s a Mr Boyd Blessington. He is a widower with five 
hildren, but he is an interesting man. He’s got a black 
yeard.”’ 

‘* Goodness! ” said Jack. ‘* Have you accepted him? ” 

SEN Oe NOt. yet,”’ 

260 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘© Why do you think of marrying him? Do you like 
him? ” 

‘‘ For some things. He is a good man, and he wants me 
in a good way. He has a beautiful library. And as he is 
a man of the world, there seems to be a big world round 
him. Yes, he is quite somebody. And Aunt Matilda says 
it is a wonderful opportunity for me. And I know it is.” 

Jack mused in silence. 

‘‘ It may be,”’ he said, “ but I hardly fancy you kissing 
a widower of fifty, with a black beard and five children. 
Lord ! ” 

‘* He’s only thirty-seven. And he’s a man.”’ 

Jack thought about Monica. He wanted Monica. But 
he also couldn’t bear to let Mary go. This arrogance in 
him made him silent for some moments. Then he turned to 
Mary, his head erect, and looked down sternly on her small, 
sinking figure in the pale lace dress. 

**Do you want him? ”’ he asked in a subtle tone of 
authority and passion. 

Mary was silent for some moments. 

** No-o! ”? she faltered. ‘* Not—not 2 

Her hands lay inert in her lap. They were small, soft, 
dusky hands. The flame went over him, over his will. By 
some curious destiny she really belonged to him. And 
Monica? He wanted Monica, too. He wanted Monica first. 
But Mary also was his. Hard and savage he accepted this 
fact. 

He took her two hands and lifted them to his lips, and 
kissed them with strange, blind passion. When the flame 
went over him, he was blind. Mary gave a little cry, but 
did not withdraw her hands. 

**T thought you cared for Rackett,”? he said suddenly, 
looking at her closely. She shook her head, and he saw 
she was crying. 

He put his arm round her and gathered her in her lace 
dress to his breast. She was small, but strangely heavy. 
Not like that whip-wire of a Monica. But he loved her 
heaviness, too. The heaviness of a dark magnetic stone. 
He wanted that, too. 

And in his mind he thought, ‘* Why can’t I have her, 
too? She is naturally mine.” 

His soul was hard and unbending. ‘“ She is naturally 

THE GOVERNOR’S DANCE 261 

mine!’ he said to himself. And he kissed her softly, 
softly, kissed her face and her tears. And all the while 
Mary knew about Monica. And he, his soul fierce, would 
not yield in either direction. He wanted to marry her, and 
he wanted to marry Monica. Something was in Mary that 
would never be appeased unless he married her. And some- 
thing in him would never be appeased unless he married 
Monica. His young, clear instinct saw both these facts. 
And the inward imperiousness of his nature rose to meet 
it. ‘© Why can’t I have both these women? ”’ he asked 
himself. And his soul, hard in its temper like a sword, 
answered him : ** You can if you will.”’ 

Yet he was wary enough to know he must go cautiously. 
Meanwhile, determined that one day he would marry 
Monica and Mary both, he held the girl soft and fast in 
his arms, kissing her, wanting her, but wanting her with 
the slow knowledge that he must wait and travel a long way 
before he could take her, yet take her he would. He wanted 
Monica first. But he also wanted Mary. The soft, slow 
weight of her as she lay silent and unmoving in his 
arms. 

They could hear the music inside. 

‘* IT must go in for the next dance,”’ she said in a muted 
tone. He kissed her mouth and released her. Then he 
escorted her back to the ball-room. She went across to 
Aunt Matilda, as the dance ended. And in her lace dress, 
the small, heavy, dusky Mary was like a lode-stone passing 
among flimsy people. She had a certain magnetic heavi- 
ness of her own, and a certain stubborn, almost ugly kind 
of beauty which in its heavy quietness, seemed like a 
dJarkish, perhaps bitter flower that rose from a very deep 
root. You were sensible of a deep root going down into 
the dark. 

A tall, thin, rather hollow-chested man in perfect even- 
mg suit and with orders on his breast, was speaking to her. 
He, too, had a faint air of proprietorship. He had a black 
yeard and eyeglasses. But his face was sensitive, and 
Jclicate in its desire. It was evident he loved her with a 
eal, though rather social, uneasy desirous love, as if he 
wanted all her answer. He was really a nice man, a bit frail 
and sad. Jack could see that. But he seemed to belong so 
sntirely to the same world as the general, Jack’s father. 

262 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

He belonged to the social world, and saw nothing really 
outside. 

Mary, too, belonged almost entirely to the social world, 
her instinct was strongly social. But there was a wild tang 
in her. And this Jack depended on. Somewhere deep in 
himself he hated his father’s social world. He stood in 
the doorway and watched her dancing with Blessington. 
And he knew that as Mrs Blessington, with a thoughtful 
husband and a good position in society, she would be well 
off. She would forfeit that bit of a wild tang. 

If Jack let her. And he wasn’t going to let her. He 
was hard and cool inside himself. He took his impetus from 
the wild sap that still flows in most men’s veins, though 
they mostly choose to act from the tame sap. He hated his 
father’s social sap. He wanted the wild nature in people, 
the unfathomed nature, to break into leaf again. The real 
rebel, not the mere reactionary. 

He hated the element of convention and slight smugness 
which showed in Mary’s movements as she danced with the 
tall, thin reed of a man. Anything can become a conven- 
tion, even an unconventiality, even the frenzied jazzing of 
the modern ballroom. And then the same element of smug- 
ness, very repulsive, is evident, evident even in the most 
scandalous jazzers. This is curious, that as soon as any 
movement becomes accepted in the public consciousness, 
it becomes ugly and smug, unless it be saved by a touch of 
the wild individuality. é 

And Mary dancing with Mr Blessington was almost smug. 
Only the downcast look on her face showed that she remem- 
bered Jack. Blessington himself danced like a man neatly 
and efficiently performing his duty. . 

The dance ended. Aunt Matilda was fluttering her fan 
at him like a ruffled cockatoo. There was a group : Mary, 
Blessington, Mr George, Mr James Watson, Aunt Matilda’s 
brother-in-law, and Aunt Matilda. Mr Blessington, with the 
quiet assurance of his class, managed to eclipse Mr George 
and Jim Watson entirely, though Jim Watson was a rich 
man. 

Jack went over and was introduced. Blessington and he 
bowed at one another. ‘“ Stay in your class, you monkey !?? 
thought Jack, with some of the sensual arrogance he had 
brought with him from the North-west. 

z 
4 
r' 
3 
~~ 
* 

THE GOVERNOR’S DANCE __ 268 

Mr Blessington introduced him to a thin, nervous girl, 
his daughter. She was evidently unhappy, and Jack was 
sorry for her. He took her out for refreshments, and was 
kind to her. She made dark-grey, startled round eyes at 
him, and looked at him as if he were an incalculable animal 
that might bite. And he, in manner, if not in actuality, 
laughed and caressed the frail young thing to cajole some 
life into her. 

Mary danced with Tom, and then with somebody else. 
Jack lounged about, watching with a set face that still 
looked innocent and amiable, keeping a corner of his eye 
on Mary, but chatting with various people. He wouldn’t 
make a fool of himself, trying to dance. 

When Mary was free again—complaining of her foot—he 
said to her : 

** Come outside a bit.”’ 

And obediently she came. They went and sat under the 
same magnolia tree. 

** He’s not a bad fellow, your Blessington,’ he said. 

** He’s not my Blessington,” she replied. ‘‘ Not yet, 
mnyhow. And he never would be really my Blessington.’’ 

** You never know. I suppose he’s quite rich.’’ 

** Don’t be horrid to me.”’ 

** Why not—I wish I was rich. I’d do as I liked. But 
you’ll never marry him.” 

e-Why shan’t IP ” 

s* You just won’t.”’ 

**T shall if Aunt Matilda makes me. I’m absolutely 
lependent on her—and do you think I don’t feel it? I want 
0 be free. I should be much freer if I married Mr Bless- 
ngton. I’m tired of being as I am.”’ 

‘¢ What would you really like to do? ” 

She was silent for a time. Then she answered : 

‘¢ T should like to live on a farm.” 

“‘ Marry Tom,” he said maliciously. 

«© Why are you so horrid? ”’ she said, in hurt surprise. 

He was silent for a time. 

‘© Anyhow, you won’t marry Boyd Blessington.”’ 

‘* Why are you so sure. Aunt Matilda is going to Eng- 
and in April. And I won’t travel with her. Travel with 
ver would be unspeakable. I want to stay in Australia,” 

** Marry Tom,” he said again, in malice, 

264 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘* Why,”’ she asked in amazement, ‘‘ do you say that 
to me? ” | 

But he didn’t know himself. 

‘* A farm ’’—he was beginning, when a figure sailed up 
in the moonlight. It was Aunt Matilda. The two young 
people rose to their feet. Jack was silent and rather angry. 
He wanted to curl his nose and say : ‘‘It isn’t done, Marm !”? 
But he said nothing. Aunt Matilda did the talking. 

** IT though it was your voices,’’ she said coldly. ‘* Why 
do you make yourself conspicuous, Mary? Mr Blessing- 
ton is looking for you in all the rooms.”’ 

Mary was led away. Jack followed. Aunt Matilda had 
no sooner seen Mary led out by Mr Blessington for the 
Lancers, than she came full sail upon Jack, as he stood 
lounging in the doorway. 

* Come for a little walk on the terrace, dear boy,’’ she 
said. 

“* Can’t I have the pleasure of piloting you through this 
set of Lancers, Marm? ”’ he retorted. 

She stood and smiled at him fixedly. 

“* I’ve heard of y’r dancing, dear boy,” she safd, * and 
your father was a beautiful dancer. This governor is very 
particular. He sent his A.D.C. to stop Jimmy Short 
reversing, right at the beginning of the evening.’’ She 
eyed him with a shrewd eye. 

** Surely worse form to hurt a gentleman’s feelings, than 
to reverse, Marm! ”’ retorted Jack. 

** It wasn’t bad form, it was bad temper. The Governor 
can’t reverse himself. Ha-ha-ha! Neither can I go through 
a set of Lancers with you. So come and take me out a 
minute.”’ 

They went in silence down the terrace. 

** Lovely evening! Not at all too hot,” he said. 

She burst into a sputter of laughter. 

“Lor! m’dear. You are amusin’! ” she said. “ But 
you won’t get out of it like that, young man. What have 
y’ t’say f? y’self, running off with Mary like that, twice! ”? 

** You told me I could take her, Marm.”? 

** I didn’t ask you to keep her out and get her talked 
about, m’dear. I’m not a fool, my dear boy, and I’m not 
going to let her lose the chance of a life-time. You want her 
y’self for one night! ’? She slapped her fan crossly. ** You 

THE GOVERNOR’S DANCE _ 265 

leave well alone, we don’t want another scandal in the 
family. Mr Blessington is a good man for Mary, a God- 
send. For she’s heavy, she’s heavy for any man to take 
up with.’? Aunt Matilda said this almost spitefully. ‘* Mr 
Blessington’s the very man for her, and a wonderful match. 
She’s got her family. She’s the granddaughter of Lord 
Haworth. And he has position. Besides, they’re suited 
for one another. It’s the very finger of Heaven. Don’t you 
dare make another scandal in the family.”’ 

She stopped under a lamp, and was leaning forward peer- 
ing at him. Her large person exhaled a scent of artificial 
perfume. Jack hated perfume, especially in the open air. 
And her face, with its powder and wrinkles, in the mingled 
light of the lamp and the moon, made him think of 
a lizard. 

** D’you want Mary yourself? *? she snapped, like a great 
lizard. ‘‘ It’s out of the question. You’ve got to make 
your way. She’d have to go on waiting for years. And 
you’d compromise her.’’ 

** God forbid ! ’’ said Jack ironically. 

** Then leave her alone,” she said. ‘* If you compromise 
her, I’/l do no more for her, mind that.”’ 

** Just exactly what do you mean, compromise her? ”? 
he asked. 

** Get her talked about—as you’re trying to do,’’ she 
snapped. 

He thought it over. He must, anyhow, appear to yield 
to circumstances. 

‘¢ All right,”? he said. ‘* I know what you mean.” 

** See you do,’’ she retorted. ‘‘ Now take me back to 
the ballroom.”’ 

They returned, in a silence that was safe, if not golden. 
He was inwardly more set than ever. His appearance, how- 
ever, was calm and innocent. She was much more ruffled. 
She wondered if she had said too much or too little, if he 
were merely stupid, or really dangerous. 

He politely steered a way back to the reception room, 
placed her in a chair and turned to disappear. One thing 
he could not stand, and that was her proximity. 

But as she sat down, she clutched his sleeve, cackling 
her unendurable laugh. 

** Sit down then,”’ she said. ‘* We’re friends now, aren’t 

266 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

we? And she tapped his tanned cheek, that still had a 
bit of the peach-look, with her feathery black fan. 

“‘ On the contrary, Marm,’’ he said, bowing but not 
taking a seat. 

‘‘ Lor’, but you are an amusin’ boy, m’dear! ”’ she said, 
and she let go his sleeve as she turned to survey the field. 

In that instant he slipped away from her disagreeable 
presence. 

He slipped behind a stout judge from Melbourne, then 
past a plumed woman, apparently of fashion, and was gone. 

What he had to do was to reconnoitre his own position. 
He wanted Monica first. That was his fixed determination. 
But he was not going to let go of Mary either. Not in 
spite of battalions of Aunt Matildas, or correct social 
individuals. It was a battle. 

But he had to gauge Mary’s disposition. He saw how 
much she was a social thing: how much, even, she was 
Lord Haworth’s grand-daughter. And how little she was 
that other thing. 3 

But it was a battle, a Jong, slow, subtle battle. And he 
loved a fight, even a long, invisible one. } 

In the ball-room the A.D.C. pounced on him. 

When he was free again, he looked round for Mary. It 
was the sixteenth dance, and she was being well nursed. 
When the dance was over, he went calmly and sat between 
her and Aunt Matilda, on a red gilt sofa. Things were a 
little stiff. Even Mary was stiff. 

He looked at her programme. The next dance was a 
polka, and she was not engaged. 7 

** You are free for this dance? ” he said. ; 

** Yes, because of my foot,”’ she said firmly. He could 
see she too was on Aunt Matilda’s side, for the moment. _ 

** T can dance a polka. Come and dance it with me,’ he 
said. 

** And my foot? ” ‘ 

He didn’t answer, merely looked her in the face. And 
she rose. 

They neither of them ever forgot that absurd, jogging 
little dance. 3 

**T must speak to you, Mary,’’ he said. 

*© What about? ” 

** Would you really like to live on a farm? ”? 

w atte 

? 

77 

ee So ee er a el 

THE GOVERNOR’S DANCE 267 

** 1 think I should.” 

The conversation was rather jerky and breathless. 

** In two years I can have a farm,”’ he said. 

She was silent for some time. Then she looked into his 
eyes, with her queer, black, humble-seeming eyes. She 
was thinking of all the grandeur of being Mrs. Boyd 
Blessington. It attracted her a great deal. At the same 
time, something in her soul fell prostrate, when Jack looked 
straight into her. Something fell prostrate, and she couldn’t 
help it. His eyes had a queer power in them. 

** In two years I can have a farm—a good one,”’ he said. 

She only gazed into his eyes with her queer, black, fas- 
cinated gaze. 

The dance was over. Aunt Matilda was tapping Jack’s 
wrist with her fan and saying : 

** Yes, Mr. Blessington, do be so good as to take Mary 
down to supper.”’ 

Supper was over. It was the twentieth dance. Jack had 
been introduced to a sporting girl in her late twenties. She 
treated him like a child, and talked quite amusingly. Tom 
called her a ‘** barrack hack.’’ 

Mr. Blessington went by with Mary on his arm. 

** Mary,’ said Jack, ** do you know Miss Brackley.”’ 

Mary stopped and was smilingly introduced. Miss 
Brackley at once pounced amusingly upon Mr. Blessington. 

** IT want to speak to you,”’ Jack said once more to Mary. 
‘‘ Behind the curtain of the third window.”’ 

He glanced at the red, ponderous plush curtain he meant. 
Mary looked frightened into his eyes, then glanced too. 
Mr Blessington, extricating himself, walked on with 
Mary. 

J os looked round for Tom. That young man was having 
a drink, at the supper extra. Jack left the Barrack Hack 
for a moment. 

‘*Tom,’’ he said. ‘* Will you stand by me in anything 
[ say or do? ”’ 

*6 J will,’’ said the glistening, scarlet-faced Tom, who was 
away on the gay high seas of exaltation. 

** Get up a rubber of whist for Aunt Matilda. I know 
she’d like one. Will you? ” “ 

‘6 Before you c’n say Wiggins,” replied Tom, laughing 
as he always did when the was tipsy. 

268 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘¢ And I say, Tom, you care for Mary, don’t you? Would 
you provide a home for her if she was wanting one? ”” 

‘‘ I’d marry Mary if she’d ’ave me ’n I hadn’t got a wife.” 

** Shut up! ” 

Tom broke into a laugh. 

* Don’t go back on me, Tom.” 

** Never, s’elp me bob.”’ 

‘¢ Get a move on then, and arrange that whist.” 

He sent him off with the Barrack Hack. And then he 
watched Mary. She still was walking with Mr. Blessington. 
They were not dancing. She knew Jack was watching her, 
and she was nervous. He watched her more closely. ; 

And at the third window she fluttered, staggered a little, 
left go Mr. Blessington’s arm, and turned round to gather 
up her skirt behind. She pretended she had torn a hem. 
She pretended she couldn’t move without a pin. She asked 
to be steered into the alcove. She sent Mr. Blessington 
away into the ladies’ dressing-room, for a pin. 

And when he came back with it, she was gone. 

Jack, outside in the night, was questioning her. 

‘* Has Mr. Blessington proposed to you yet? ”’ 

66 No.”? 

** Don’t let him. Would you really be happy on a farm? 
Even if it was rather hard work? ”’ 

He had to look down on her very steadfastly as he asked 
this. And she was slow in answering, and the tears came 
into her eyes before she murmured : 

6é Yes.” 

He was touched, and the same dominating dark desire 
came over him again. He held her fast in his arms, fast 
and silent. The desire was dark and powerful and per- 
manent in him. 

** Can you wait for me, even two years? ”’ he asked. 

‘* Yes,”’ she murmured faintly. 

His will was steady and black. He knew he could wait. 

** In two years I shall have a farm for you to live on,” 
he said. And he kissed her again, with the same dark, 
permanent passion. 

Then he sent her off again. | 

He went and found Mr. George, in the card room. There. 
was old Aunt Matilda, playing for her life, her diamonds 
twinkling but her fan laid aside. . 

THE GOVERNOR’S DANCE 269 

i ieee going to Wandoo to-morrow morning, sir,” said 
ack. 

** That’s right, lad,’? said Mr. George. 

** IT say, sir, won’t you do Tom a kindness? ”’ said Jack. 
** You’re coming down yourself one day this week, aren’t 
you? ” 

** Yes, I shall be down on Wednesday or Thursday.”? 

** Bring Mary down with you. Make her Aunt Matilda 
let her come. Tom’s awfully gone on her, and when he 
sees her with Boyd Blessington he straightway goes for a 
drink. I don’t think she’s suited for Mr. Blessington; do 
you, sir? He’s nearly old enough to be her father. And 
Tom’s the best fellow in the world, and Mary’s the one he 
cares for. If nothing puts him out and sends him wrong, 
there’s not a better fellow in the world.” 

Mr. George blew his nose, prrhed! and bahed! and was 
in a funk. He feared Aunt Matilda. He was very fond of 
Mary, might even have married her himself, but for the 
ridicule. He liked Tom Ellis. He didn’t care for men like 
Blessington. And he was an emotional old Ausvralian. 

**‘ That needs thinking about! That needs thought! ” 
he said. 

Not the next day, but the day following that, the boys 
drove away from Perth in a new sulky, with a horse bought 
from Jimmy Short. And Mr. George had promised to come 
on the coach the day after, with Mary. 

CHAP : XIX. THE WELCOME AT WANDOO 

‘¢ Tunes change,” said Jack, as he and Tom drove along 

in the sulky, “* and they never go back to what they were 

before.”’ : 

“* Seems like they don’t,’”’ said Tom uneasily. 

‘* And men change,’’ continued Jack. ‘‘ I have changed, 
and I shall never go back to what I was before.” 

‘‘ Oh, dry up,” said the nervous Tom. “* You’re just 
the blanky same.”’ 

Both boys felt a load on their spirits, now they were 
actually on the road home. They hated the load too. 

‘‘ We’re going to make some change at Wandoo,”’ said 
Tom. ‘I wish I could leave Ma on the place. But Mr. 
George says she absolutely refuses to stay, and he says I’ve 

not got to try an’ force her. He sortta winked at me, and © 
told me I should want to be settlin’? down myself. I won- 

. 
* 

. 
. 

t 

‘ 

dered what ’n hell he meant. Y’aven’t let on nothing about — 
that Honeysuckle trip, have y’? I don’t mean to insult — 

you by askin’, but it seemed kinder funny like.” 

** No,” said Jack. ‘‘ I’ve not breathed Honeysuckle to — 
a soul, and never will, You get it off your mind—it’s 

nothing.”* 

** ‘Well, then I dunno what he meant. I told him I hadn’t © 
made a bean anyhow. An’ I asked him what ’n hell Ma 
was goin’ ter live on. He seemed a bit down in the mouth — 
about ’er himself, old George did. Fair gave me the bally | 

hump. Wisht I was still up north; strike me lucky, I do. 
‘** We’ve been gone over two years, yet I feel I’ve never 

¥ 
“ 
( 
< 
. 
[ 
2 
3 
‘ 

a 

been away, an’ yet I feel the biggest stranger in th world, | 
comin’ back to what’s supposed to be me own house. I hate — 
havin’ ter come, because 0’ the bloomin’ circumstances. — 

Why ’n hell couldn’t Ma have had the place for while she 
lived, an’ me be comin’ back to her and the kids. Then I 

shouldn’t feel sortta sick about it. But as it is—it fair . 
gets me beat. Lennie’ll resent me, an’ Katie an’ Monica’ll — 
hate havin’ ter get inter a smaller house, an’ the twins an’ 
Harry an’ the little ones don’ matter so much, but I do 

worry over pore ol’ Ma.’’ 

There he was with a blank face, driving the pony home- 

270 

ton WELCOME AT WANDOO 271 

wards. He hadn’t worried over pore ol’ Ma till this very 
minute, on the principle ‘ out of sight, out of mind.? Now 
he was all strung up. 

**'Y’ know, Jack,’? he said, ‘‘I kinder don’ want 
Wandoo. I kinder don’ want to be like Dad, settlin? down 
with a heap o’ responsibilities an’ kids an’ all that. I kinder 
don’ want it.”’ 

** What do you want? ” said Jack. 

** Yd rather knock about with you for me mate, Jack; 
I’d a sight rather do that.’’ 

** You can’t knock about for ever,’’ said Jack. 

**I don’ know whether you can or you can’t. I only 
know I never knew my own mother. I only know she never 
lived at Wandoo. She never raised me there. I bet she 
lugged me through the bush. An’ when all comes to all, 
I’d rather do the same. I don’ want Dad’s property. I 
don’ want that Ellis property. Seems ter me bad luck. 
What d’ yer think? ”’ 

** IT should think it depends on you,”’ said Jack. 

**T should think it does. Anyhow, shall you stop on 
with me, an’ go shares in the blinkin’ thing? ”’ 

**T don’t know,’’ said Jack. 

He was thinking that soon he would see Monica. He was 
wondering how she would be. He was wondering if she 
was ready for him, or if she would have a thousand 
obstacles around her. He was wondering if she would want 
him to plead and play the humble and say he wasn’t good 
enough for her. Because he wouldn’t do it. Not if he 
never saw her again. All that flummery of love he would 
not subscribe to. He would not say he adored her, because 
he didn’t adore her. He was not the adoring sort. He 
would not make up to her, and play the humble to her, 
because it insulted his pride. He didn’t feel like that, 
und he never would feel like that, not towards any woman 
m earth. Even Mary, once he had declared himself, 
would fetch up her social tricks and try to bring him to his 
snees. And he was not going down on his knees, not for 
1alf a second, not to any woman on earth, nor to any man 
ither. Enough of this kneeling flummery. 

He stood fast and erect on his two feet, that had travelled 
nany wild miles. And fast and erect he would continue 
o stand. Almost he wished he could be clad in iron armour, 

22 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

inaccessible. Because the thought of women bringing him 
down and making him humble himself, before they would | 
give themselves to him, this turned his soul black. : 

Monica! He didn’t love her. He didn’t feel the slightest 
bit of sentimental weakening towards her. Rather when 
he thought of her his muscles went stiffer and his soul 
haughtier. It was not he who must bow the head. It was 
she. 

Because he wanted her. With a deep, arrowy desire, and 
a long, lasting dark desire, he wanted her. He wanted to 
take her apart from all the world, and put her under his_ 
own roof. 

But he didn’t want to plead with her, or weep before her, ~ 
or adore her, or humbly kiss her feet. The very thought of 
it made his blood curdle and go black. Something had — 
happened to him in the Never-Never. Before he went over 
the border, he might have been tricked into a surrender to” 
this soft and hideous thing they called love. But now, he 
would have love in his own way, haughtily, passionately, — 
and darkly, with dark, arrowy desire, and a strange, 
arrowily-submissive woman : either this, or he would not 
have love at all. 

He thought of Monica, and sometimes the thought of her 
sent him black with anger. And sometimes, as he thought — 
of her wild, delicate, reckless, lonely little profile, a hot 
tenderness swept over him, and he felt he would envelop 
her with a fierce and sheltering tenderness, like a scarlet 
mantle. 

So long as she would not fight against him, and strike 
back at him. Jeer at him, play with Easu in order to 
insult him. Not that, my God, not that. 

As for Mary, a certain hate of her burned in him. The 
queer heavy stupid conceit with which she had gone off to 
dance with Boyd Blessington, because he was an important 
social figure. Mary, wanting to live on a farm, but at the 
same time absolutely falling before the social glamour of a 
Blessington, and becoming conceited on the strength of it. 
Inside herself, Mary thought she was very important, 
thought that all sorts of eternal destinies depended on her 
choice and her actions. Even Jack was nothing more than 
an instrument of her divine importance. 

He had sensed this clearly enough. And it was this that 

THE WELCOME AT WANDOO 278 

nade Aunt Matilda a bit spiteful against her, when she said 
flary was ‘* heavy ’’ and wouldn’t easily get a man. 

But there was also the queer black look in Mary’s eyes, 
hat was outside her conceit and her social importance. The 
jueer, almost animal dark glisten, that was full of fear and 
vonder, and vulnerability. Like the look in the eyes of a 
aught wild animal. Or the look in the shining black eyes of 
ne of the aborigines, especially the black woman looking 
skance in a sort of terror at a white man, as if a white man 
yas a sort of devil that might possess her. 

Where had Mary got that queer aboriginal look, she the 
rand-daughter of an English earl? 

** 'Y’re real lively to-day, aintcher, Jack? Got a hundred 
uid for your birthday, and my, some talk !”” 

** Comes to that,’’ said Jack, rousing himself with diffi- 
ulty, “‘ we’ve come fifteen or twenty miles without you 
pening your mouth either.”’ 

Tom laughed shortly and relapsed into silence. 

*° Well,’ he said, ** let’s wake up now, there’s the out- 
ying paddock.’’ He pointed with his whip. ‘‘ And there’s 
he house through the dip in the valley.’? Then suddenly 
1 a queer tone: “* Say, matey, don’t it look lovely from 
ere, with all that afternoon sun falling over it like snow 

- - You think I’ve never seen snow : but I have, in my 
ream.” 

Jack’s heart contracted as he jumped down to open the 
rst gate. For him, too, the strange fulness of the yellow 
fternoon light was always unearthly, at Wandoo. But 
he day was still early, just after dinner-time, for they 
ad stayed the night half way. 

*¢ Looks in good trim, eh? ”’ said Jack. 

6° So it does! A.1.!’? replied Tom. ‘* Mr George says 
[a done wonders. Made it pay hand over fist. Y’remem- 
er that fellow, Pink-eye Percy, what came from Queens- 
nd and had studied agriculture an’ was supposed to be a 
ad egg an’ all that? At that ’roo hunt, you remember? 
Vell, he bought land next to Wandoo, off-side from the 
eds. An’ Ma sortta broke wi’ the Reds over something, 
n? went in wi’ him, and t’ seems they was able to do 
onders. Anyway, Old George says Ma’s been able to buy 
little place near her own old home in Beverley, to go to. 
ut seems to me—— ” 

014 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 5 

‘¢ What? ”” 

‘¢ Funny how little anyone tells you, Jack.” 

66 How? 99 

“I felt I couldn’t get to th’ bottom of what Old George 
was tellin’ me. I took no notice then. But it seems funny 
now. An’ I say id 

SSW hate x7, 

“* You’d ’a thought Monica or Katie might ha’ driven to 
the Cross Roads for us, like we used to in Dad’s days.” 

‘Yes. I thought one of them would have been there.’ 

The boys drove on, in tense silence, through the various 
gates. They could see the house ahead. 

‘* There’s Timothy,”’ said Tom. 

The old black was holding open the yard gate. He scent 
to have almost forgotten Jack, but the emotion in his black, 
glistening eyes was strange, as he stared with strange adoral 
tion at the young master. He caught Tom’s hand in his 
two wrinkled dark hands, as if clinging to life itself. 

The twins ran out, waved, and ran back. Katie appeared, 
looking bigger, heavier, more awkward than ever. Tom 
patted Timothy’s hands again, then went across and kissed 
Katie, who blushed with shyness. 

** Where’s Ma, Katie? ”? 

‘* In the parlour.” ; 

Tom broke away, leaving Katie blushing in front of 
Jack. Jack was thinking how queer and empty the house 
seemed. And he felt an outsider again. He stayed out- 
side, sat down on the bench. - 

A boy much bigger than Harry, but with the same blag 
eyes and curly hair, appeared chewing a haystalk, and 
squatted on a stone near by. Then Og and Magog, a bit 
taller, but no thinner, came and edged on to the seat. 
Then Ellie, a long-legged little girl, came running to his 
knees. And then what had been baby, but was now a fat, 
toddling little girl, came racing out, fearless and incon 
sequential as the twins had been. 

‘© Where’s Len? ”? said Jack. 

** He’s in the paddock seein’ to th’ sheep,” said Harry. 

There was a queer tense silence. The children seemed 
to cling round J ack for male protection. 

““ We're goin’ t’ live nearer in to th’ township now,” 
said Harry, “ in a little wee sortta house.”’ 

: 

item WheCOMH AL WANDOO 275 

He stared with bold, blue eyes, unwinking and yet not 
asy, straight into Jack’s eyes. 

a Well, Harry,” said Jack, ‘* you’ve grown quite a 
aan. 

**T hev so! ”’ said Harry, ‘‘ quite the tyke! I ken kill 
irds for Ma to put in th’ pot. I ken skin a kangaroo. I 
en. 28 

But Jack didn’t hear what else, because Tom was calling 
im from the doorway. He went slowly across. 

** Say, mate,”’ said Tom in a low tone, “ stand by me. 
‘hings is not all right.’? Aloud he said: ‘* Ma wants t’ 
ee ye, Jack.”’ 

Jack followed through the back premises, down the three 
teps into the parlour. It all seemed forlorn. 

Ma sat with her face buried in her hands. Jack knitted 
is brows. Tom put his hand on her shoulder. 

** What is it, Ma? What is it? I wouldn’t be anything 
ut good to yer, Ma, ye know that. Here’s Jack Grant.”’ 

** Ye were always a good boy, Tom. I’m real glad t’ see 
e back. And Jack,’’ said Ma, through her hands. 

Tom looked at Jack in dismay. Then he stooped and 
issed her hair. 

** You look to me,” he said. ‘* We’ll fix everything all 
ght, for Lennie, ’n everybody.”’ 

But Ma still kept her face between her hands. 

** There’s nothing t’ worry about, Ma, sure there isn’t,’’ 
ersisted the distracted Tom. ‘“‘ I want y’ t’ have every- 
ing you want, I do, you an’ Lennie an’ the kids.”’ 

Mrs Ellis took her hands from her face. She looked pale 
nd worn. She would not turn to the boys, but kept her 
ice averted. 

‘© I know you’re as good a boy as ever lived,”’ she faltered. 
hen she glanced quickly at Tom and Jack, the tears began 
y run down her face, and she threw her apron over her head. 

** God’s love! *’ gasped the bursting Tom, sinking on a 
1air. 

They all waited in silence. Mrs Ellis suddenly wiped her 
ce on her apron and turned with a wan smile to the boys. 

** I’ve saved enough to buy a little place near Beverley, 
hich is where I belong,’’ she said. ‘‘ So me and the 
nildren are all right. And I’ve got my eye, at least Lennie’s 
ot his on a good selection east of here, between this and 

276 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 3 

my little house, for Lennie. But we want cash for that, 
I’m afraid. Only it’s not that. That’s not it.” , 

‘ Lennie’s young yet to take up land, Ma!” Tom 
plunged in. ‘* Why won’t he stop here and go shares with 
me? ”? 

*‘ He wants to get married,’’ said the mother wanly. 

66 Get married! Len! Why, he’s only seventeen ! ” 

At this very natural exclamation, Ma threw her apron 
over her head, and began to ery once more. 

‘* He’s been so good,” she sobbed. ‘* He’s been so good! 
And his Ruth is old enough and sensible enough for two. 
Better anything ’’—with more sobbing—*‘ than another 
scandal in the family.”’ “ 

Tom rubbed his head. Gosh! it was no joke being the 
head of a family! : 

“© Well, Ma, if you wish it, what’s the odds. But I’m 
afraid it’ll have to wait a bit. Jack’ll tell you I haven’t 
any cash. Not a stiver, Ma! Blown out! It takes it 
outter yer up North. We never struck it rich.” P 

Mrs Ellis, under her apron, wept softly. ; 

6 Poor little Lennie! Poor little Lennie! He’s been so 
good, Tom, working day and night. And never spending a 
shilling. All his learning gone for nought, Tom, and him 
a little slave, at his years, old and wise enough to be his 
father, Tom. And he wants to get married. If we could 
start him out fair! The new place has only four rooms 
and an out-kitchen, and there’s not enough to keep him, 
much less a lady wife. She’s a lady earning her bread 
teaching. He could go to Grace’s. Alec Rice would have 
him. But ty | 

She had taken her apron off her face, and was staring 
averted at the door leading into Gran’s old room. 

The two boys listened mystified and a little annoyed. 
Why all this about Lennie? Jack was wondering where 
Monica was. Why didn’t she come? Why wasn’t she 
mentioned? And why was Ma so absolutely downcast, or 
ane afternoon of Tom’s home-coming? It wasn’t fair or 

om. 

** Where is Monica? ” asked Jack shyly at last. 

But Mrs Ellis only shook her head faintly and was mute 
staring across at Gran’s door. | 

‘Lennie married! ’? Tom was brooding. ‘* Ye’ll have 

j 

THE WELCOME AT WANDOO 277 

0 put it out of y’r mind for a bit, Ma. Why, it wouldn’t 
ardly be decent.”’ 

** Let him marry if he’s set on it—an’ the girl’s a good 
irl,”’ said Mrs Ellis, her eyes swamping with tears again 
nd her voice breaking as she rocked herself again. 

** Yes, if we could afford it,’? Tom hastily put in. And 
e raised his stunned eyes to Jack. Jack shrugged, and 
0ked in the empty fireplace, and thought of the little 
res Gran used to have. 

Money ! Money ! Money ! The moment you entered within 
Sur walls it was the word money, and your mouth full of 
shes. 

And then again something hardened in his soul. All his 
fe he had been slipping away from the bugbear of money. 
t was no good. You had to turn round and get a grip on 
ne miserable stuff. There was nothing else for it. Though 
1oney nauseated him, he now accepted the fact that he 
1ust have control over money, and not try just to slip by. 

He began to repent of having judged Gran. That little 
ld witch of a Gran, he had hated the way she had seemed 
» hoard money and gloat in the secret possession of it. But 
erhaps she knew, somebody must control it, somebody 
just keep a hand over it. Like a deadly weapon. Money! 
roperty! Gran fighting for them, to bequeath them to 
he man she loved. 

Perhaps she too had really hated money. She wouldn’t 
ake a will. Neither would Dad. Their secret repugnance 
9 money and possessions. But you had to have property, 
ise you were down and out. The men you loved had to 
ave property, or they were down and out. Like Lennie! 

Poor old plucky Gran, fighting for her men. It was all 

terrible muddle anyhow. But he began to understand 
er motive. 

Yes, if Lennie had got a girl into trouble and wanted to 
larry her, the best thing he could do would be to have 
joney and buy himself a little place. Otherwise, heaven 
nows what would happen to him. With their profound 
difference to the old values, these Australians seemed 
ther to exaggerate the brutal importance of money, or 
1ey wanted to waste money altogether, and themselves 
long with it. This was what Gran feared : that her best 
ale heirs would go and waste themselves, as Jacob had 

278 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

begun to waste himself. The generous ones would just 
waste themselves, because of their profound mistrust of 
the old values. 

Better rescue Lennie for the little while it was still 
possible to rescue him. Jack’s mind turned to his own 
money. And, then, looking at that inner door, he seemed 
to see Gran’s vehement figure, pointing almost viciously 
with her black stick. She had tried so hard to drive the 
wedge of her meaning into Jack’s consciousness. And she 
had failed. He had refused to take her meaning. 

But now with a sigh that was almost a groan, he took 
up the money burden. The “ stocking ’’ she had talked 
about, and which he had left in the realms of unreality, 
was an actuality. That witch Gran, with her uncanny, 
hateful second sight, had put by a stocking for Lennie, and 
entrusted the secret of it to Jack. And he had refused the 
secret. He hated those affairs. 

Now he must assume the mysterious responsibility for this 
money. He got up and went to the chimney, and peered 
into the black opening. Then he began to feel carefully 
along the side of the chimney stack inside, where there was 
a ledge. His hand went deep in soot and charcoal and grey 
ash. 

He took off his coat and rolled up his sleeve. 

‘Gone off y’r bloomin’ nut, Jack? ’’ asked Tom, 
mystified. | 

‘* Gran told me she had put a stocking for Len in here,”” 
said Jack. 

** Stocking be blowed! ”? said Tom testily. ‘* We’ve 
heard that barm-stick yarn before. Leave it alone, boy.” 

He was looking at Jack’s bare, brown, sinewy arm. It 
reminded him of the great North-West, and the heat, and 
the work, and the absolute carelessness. This money and 
stocking business was like a mill-stone round his neck. He 
felt he was gradually being drowned in soot, as Jack con- 
tinued to fumble up inside the chimney, and the soot 
poured down over the naked arm. 

** Oh, God’s love, leave it alone, Jack! ”? he cried. } 

** Let him try,” said Mrs Ellis quietly. ‘* If Gran told 
him, I wonder he didn’t speak before.’? . 

**T never really thought about it,’? said Jack, 

** Don’t think about it now! ”? shouted Tom. 

THE WELCOME AT WANDOO 279 

Jack could feel nothing in the chimney. He looked con- 
templatively at the fireplace. Something drew him to the 
place near Gran’s arm-chair. He began feeling, while the 
other two watched him in a state of nervous tension. Tom 
hated it. 

** She pointed here with her stick,’? said Jack. 

There was a piece of tin fastened over the side of the 
fire-place, and black-leaded. 

** Mind if we try behind this? ”’ he asked. 

** Leave it alone! *? cried Tom. 

But Jack pulled it out, and the ash and dirt and soot 
poured down over the hearth. Behind the sheet of thin 
iron was the naked stone of the chimney-piece. Various 
stones were loose : that was why Gran had had the tin sheet 
put over. 

He got out of the cavity behind the stones, where the 
loose mortar had all crumbled, a little square dusty box 
that had apparently been an old tea-caddy. It was very 
heavy for its size, and very dirty. He put it on the table 
m front of Mrs Ellis. Tom got up excitedly to look in. 
He opened the lid. It was full to the brim of coins, gold 
20ins and silver coins and dust and dirt, and a sort of spider 
ilament. He shook his head over it. 

¢ Isn’t that old Gran to a T! ”’ he exclaimed, and poured 
jut the dust and the money on the table. 

Ma began eagerly to pick out the gold from the silver, 
saying : 

*¢ T remember when she made Dad put that iron plate up. 
She said insects came out and worried her.”’ 

Ma only picked out the gold pieces, the sovereigns and 
1alf sovereigns. She left Tom to sort the silver crowns and 
1alf-crowns into little piles. Jack watched in silence. There 
vas a smell of soot and old fire-dust, and everybody’s hands 
were black. 

Mrs Ellis was putting the sovereigns in piles of ten. She 
1ad a queer sort of satisfaction, but her gloom did not really 
ift. Jack stayed to know how much it was. Mentally he 
ounted the piles of gold she made: the pale, washy gold 
yf Australia, most of it. She counted and counted again. 

‘‘ Two hundred and fourteen pounds! ” she said in a 
ow voice. 

6* And ten in silver,’’ said Tom. 

280 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘¢ Two hundred and twenty-four pounds,” she said. 

“6 It’s not the world,”’ said Tom, “* but it’s worth having. 
It’s a start, Ma. And you can’t say that isn’t 
Lennie’s.”’ 

Jack went out and left them. He listened in all the 
rooms downstairs. What he wanted to know about was 
Monica. He hated this family and family money business. 
it smelled to him of death. Where was Monica? Prob. 
ably, to add to the disappointment, she was away, staying 
with Grace. 

The house sounded silent. Upstairs all was silent. Ii 
felt as if nobody was there. 

He went out and across the yard to the stable. Lucy 
whinnied. Jack felt she knew him. The nice, natural ole 
thing : Tom would have to christen her afresh. At least 
this Lucy wouldn’t leave a stocking behind her when she 
was dead. She was much too clean. Ah, so much nicel 
than that other Lucy with her unpleasant perspiration, 
away in Honeysuckle. 

Jack stood a long while with the sensitive old horse 
Then he went round the out-buildings, looking for Lennie 
He drifted back to the house, where Harry was choppins 
something with a small hatchet. 

‘* Where’s Monica, Harry? ”’ he asked. 

‘6 She’s not home,”’ said Harry. 

‘* Where’s she gone? *? 

** Dunno.”’ 

And the resolute boy went on with his chopping. 

Tom came out, calling : * I’m going over to have a wore 
wi’ th’ Reds, Jack. Comin’ with me? ” 

Tom didn’t care for going anywhere alone, just now. 
Jack joined him. 

‘© Where’s Monica, Tom? ” he asked. 

** Ay, where is she? *? said Tom, looking round as if h 
expected her to appear from the thin air. 

** She’s not at home, anyhow,”’ said Jack. 

*“* She’s gone off to Grace’s, or to see somebody, | 
expect,” said Tom, as they walked across the yard. ** An¢ 
Len is out in the paddocks still. He don’t seem in no hurr} 
to come an’ meet us, neither. The little cuss! Fancy} 
that nipper wantin’ to be spliced! Gosh! TI’ll bet he’s olc 
for his age, the little old wallaby. An’ that bloomin’ teache: 

THE WELCOME AT WANDOO 281 

woman, Ruth, why, she’s older’n me. She oughtta be 
ashamed of herself, kidnappin’ that nipper.”’ 

The two went side by side across the pasture, almost as 
if they were free again. They came to a stile. 

** Gosh! *? said Tom. ‘* They’ve blocked up this gate, 
’n put a stile over, see! Think o’ that! ” 

They climbed the stile and continued their way. 

** God’s love, boy, didn’t we land in it over our heads! 
Ever see Ma like that? Inever. Good for you, Jack, lad, 
findin’ that tea-caddy. That’s how the Ellises are—ain’t 
it the devil! *Spect I take after my own mother, f’r I’m 
not in the tea-caddyin’ line. Ma’s cheered up a bit. She’ll 
be able to start Lennie in a bit of a way now, ’n the twins 
can wait for a bit, thank goodness! My, but ain’t families 
ively ! Here I come back to be boss of this bloomin’ place, 
an’ I feel as if I was goin’ to be shot. Say, boy, d’ye think 
[’m really spliced to that water-snake in Honeysuckle? 
Because I sll have to have somebody on this outfit. Alone 
[ will not face it. Say, matey, promise me you won’t leave 
me till I’m fixed up a bit. Give me your word you’ll stand 
oy me here for a time, anyhow.”’ 

*¢ 171) stay for a time,” said Jack. 

- * Right O! an’ then if I’m not copped by the Honey- 
suckle bird—’appen Mary might have me, what d’you 
hink? TI shall have to have somebody. I simply couldn’t 
stand this place all by my lonesome. What d’you think 
ybout Mary? D’you think she’d like it, here? ” 

‘* Ask her,” said Jack grimly. 

CHAP: XX. THE LAST OF EASU 
i 

TuEy knew that Easu was married, but they were hardly 
prepared for the dirty baby crawling on the verandah floor. 
Easu had seen them come through the gate, and was strid- 
ing across to meet them, after bawling something in his 
bullying way to someone inside the house: presumably 
his wife. 

Outwardly, he was not much altered. Yet there was an 
undefinable change for the worse. He was one of those 
men whom marriage seems to humiliate, and to make ugly. 
As if he despised himself for being married. 

Easu ignored the baby as if it were not there, striding past 
into the house, leading the newcomers “nto the parlour. It 
was darkened in there, to keep out the flies; but he pulled 
up the blind: “ t’see their blanky fisogs.”? And he called 
out to the missus to bring glasses. 

The parlour was like most parlours. Enlarged photo- 
graphs of Mr. and Mrs. Ellis, the Red parents, in large pine 
frames, on the wall. A handsome china clock under a glass 
case on the mantelpiece, with flanking vases to match, on 
fawn-and-red woollen crochet mats. An oval, rather curvy 
table in the middle of the room, with the family Bible, and 
the meat under a fly-proof wire cover. The parlour was the 
coolest place for the meat. 

Easu shifted the red obnoxity, wire cover and all, to the 
top of a cupboard where some cups and saucers were dis- 
played, and drew forth a demijohn of spirit from the back 
of the horsehair sofa, i in front of the window. 

Mrs. Easu came in with the glasses. She was a thin, 
pale-faced young woman with big dark eyes and her hair 
in huge curling pins, and a hostile bearing. She took no 
notice of the visitors : only let her big what-do-you-want 
eyes pass over them with distaste beneath her bald forehead. 
It was her fixed belief that whoever came to the house came 
to get something, if they could. And they were not going 
to get it out of her. She made an alliance with Easu so fare 

282 

= a 

THE LAST OF EASU 283 

But her rather protruding teeth and her vindictive mouth 
showed that Easu would get as many bites as kisses. 

She set the glasses from her hands on to the table and 
looked down at Easu under her pale lashes. 

** What else d’ye want? *’ she asked rudely. 

** Nothing. If I want anything I’ll holloa.” 

They seemed to be on terms of mutual rudeness. She had 
deen quite an heiress: brought Easu a thousand pounds. 
But the way she said it—a tharsand parnds—as if it was 
something absolutely you couldn’t get beyond, made even 
Hasu writhe. She was common, to put it commonly. She - 
spoke in a common way, she thought in a common way, and 
acted in a common way. But she had energy, and even a 
rulgar suffisance. She thought herself as good as any- 
jody, and a bit better, on the strength of the tharsand 
yarnds ! 

** *S not eddication as matters, it’s munney! ”’ she said 
ylatantly to Lennie. ‘* At your age y’ought t’ave somethink 
n th’ bank.”’ 

He of course hated the sight of her after that. She had 
ooked at him with a certain superciliousness and contempt 
n her conceited brown eyes, because he had no money and 
Was supposed to be clever. He never forgave her. 

But what did she care? She jerked up her sharp-toothed 
nouth, and sailed away. She wasn’t going to be put down 
yy any penniless snobs. The Ellises! Who were the 
llises? Yes, indeed! They thought themselves so 
uperior. Could they draw a tharsand parnd? Pah! 

She felt a particularly spiteful, almost vindictive scorn 
f Jack. He was somebody, was he? Ha! What was he 
vorth? That was the point. How much munney did he 
eckon he’d got? ‘* If yer want me ter think anythink of 
er, yer mun show me yer bank-book,”’ she said. 

Easu listened and grinned, and said nothing to all this. 
3ut she had a fiery temper of her own, and they went for 
me another like two devils. She wasn’t to be daunted, 
he wasn’t. She had her virtues too. She had no method, 
ut she was clean. The place was forever in a muddle, 
ut she was always cleaning it, almost vindictively, as if the 
hine on the door-knob reflected some of the tharsand parnd. 
iven the baby was turned out and viciously cleaned once a 
ay. But in the intervals it groped where it would. As 

284 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

for herself, she was a sight this morning, with her hair in 
huge iron waving-pins, and her forehead and her teeth both 
sticking out. She looked a sight to shudder at. But wait. 
Wait till she was dressed up and turning out in the buggy, 
in a coat and skirt of thick brown cord silk with orange 
and black braiding, and a hugely feathered hat, with huge 
floating ostrich feathers, an orange one and a brown one. 
And her teeth sticking out and a huge brooch of a lump 
of gold set with pearls and diamonds, and a great gold chain. 
And the baby, in a silk cape with pink ribbons, and a frilled 
silk bonnet of alternate pink and white ruches, mercilessly 
held against her chains and brooches! Wait! 

Therefore, when Jack glanced at her from a strange 
distance, she tossed her bald forehead with the curling 
irons, and thought to herself : ‘* You can look, Master Jack 
Nobody. And you can look again, next Sunday, when I’ve 
got my proper things on. Then you'll see who’s got the 
munney ! ” ; 

She seemed to think that her Sunday gorgeousnes:s 
absolutely obliterated the grimness of her week of curling 
pins. ‘* Six days shalt thou labour in thy curling irons.” 
She lived in them. They kept her hair out of the way and 
saved her having to do it up all the time. 

And it may be that Easu never really looked at her in 
her teeth and pins. That was not the real Sarah Ann. The 
real Sarah Ann swayed with ostrich feathers; brown silk. 
brown and orange feathers, reddish hair, brown eyes, pale 
skin, and a stiff, militant, vulgar bearing that wasn’t going 
to let anybody put it over her. ‘* They can’t put me down 
whoever they are! ”’ she asserted. ‘* I consider mysel: 
equal to the best, and perhaps a little better.’’ 

This Easu heard and saw with curious gratification. Thi: 
was his Sarah Ann. 

None the less, he was no fool. He saw the baffled, sur 
prised look Jack turned upon this grisly young woman it 
curlers and teeth, as if he could not quite enter her in th 
class of human beings. And Easu was enough of an Elli 
to know what that look meant. It was a silent ** Gooc 
God!” And no man, when his wife enters the room, care: 
to hear another man’s horrified ejaculation : “* Good God! ’ 
at the sight of her. 

Easu wanted his wife to be common. Nevertheless, witl 

THE LAST OF EASU 285 

he anomalousness of human beings, it humiliated him and 
ut acid in his blood. 

** Have a jorum! ”’ said Easu to Tom. 

**T s’d think you’re not goin’ to set down drinkin’ at 
his time of day,”’ she said, in her loud, common, inter- 
ering voice. 

** What’s the time of the day to you?” asked Easu 
cidly, as he filled Tom’s glass. 

** We can’t stop. Ma’ll be expecting us back,’ said Tom. 

EKasu silently filled Jack’s glass, and the wife went out, 
anging the door. Immediately she fell upon the baby and 
egan to vituperate the little animal for its dirt. The men 
ouldn’t hear themselves speak. 

But Easu lifted up his chin and poured the liquor down 
is throat. He had shaved his beard, and had only three 
lays of yellowish stubble. He smacked his lips as he set 
lown his glass, and looked at the two boys with a sarcastic, 
loating look. 

** Find a few changes, eh? ”’ he observed. 

** Just a few.” 

_** How’s the place look? ” 

** All right.” 

** Make a pile up North? ” 

66 No.”? 

Easu grinned slowly. 

‘¢ Thought you didn’t need to, eh ?’? he asked maliciously. 

** Didn’t worry myself,”’ said Tom. 

** Jack Grant come in for a fortune? ’? Easu asked, 
poking at Jack. 

** No,”’ said Jack coldly. There was something about 
1asu’s vulgar, taunting eyes, which he couldn’t stand. 

“© Oh, you ’aven’t! ’’ The pleased sneer was unbearable. 

** How’s Ma? ”’ asked Easu. 

*¢ All right,’’ said Tom, surprised. 

** Don’t see much of her now,”’ said Easu. 

** No, I saw the gate was blocked up,” said Tom. 

** Looks like she blocked the wrong gate up.”’ 

66 How? 99 

** How? Well, don’t you think she’d better have blocked 
p the gate over to Pink-eye Percy’s place? ’’ Easu was 
niling with thin, gloating lips. 

66 Why? 99 

286 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘Why? Don’t y’ know? ” 

‘© What? ”” 

‘¢ Don’t ye know about Monica? ”’ : 

Jack’s blood stood still for a moment, and death entered 
his soul again, to stay. 

**No. What? ” 

‘¢ Didn’t Old George say nothing to y’ in Perth? ” 

“No! ”’ said Tom, becoming sullen and dangerous. 

‘“‘ Well, that’s funny now! And Aunt Alice said 
nothing? ”” 

“No! What about? ” ‘ 

Easu was smiling gloatingly, in silence, as if he had some- 
thing very good. 

“* Well, that’s funny now! Think of your getting right 
here, and not having heard a thing! I shouldn’t have 
thought it possible.”’ . 

Tom was going white under his tan. 

‘* What’s amiss, Red? ”’ he said curtly. 

*¢ To think as you haven’t heard! Why it was the talk 
of the place. Ross heard all about it in Perth. Didn’t you 
come across him there? He’s been in the Force quite 4 
while now.”’ 

‘*No! What was it he heard about? ” 

** Why, about Monica.”’ 

** What about her? ” 

‘* D’y’ mean to say you don’t know? ” 

** T tell you I don’t know.”’ 

“Well! ”? and Easu smiled with a curious, poisonous 
satisfaction. ‘‘ I don’t know as I want to be the one t 
tell you.”’ 

There was a moment’s dead silence. The sun was setting. 

** What have you got to say? *? asked Tom, his face sel 
and blank, and his mouth taking on the lipless, Australiar 
look. | 

** Funny thing nobody has told you. Why, it happenec 
six or seven months since.”’ 

This was received in dead silence. 

pee went off with Perey when the baby was a mont 
old. 

Again there was nothing but dead silence. | 

** Mean she married Pink-eye Percy? ”? asked Tom, in ¢ 
muffled tone. | 

THE LAST OF EASU 287 

**¥ dunno about marryin’ him. They say he’s got a 
Wife or two already: legal and otherwise. All I know is 
hey cleared out a month after the baby was born, and 
vent down south.’’ 

Still dead silence from the other two. The room was full 
ff golden light. Jack was looking at the fly-dirts and the 
amp-black on the ceiling. He was sitting in a horse-hair 
rm-chair, and the broken springs were uncomfortable, and 
he horse-hair scratched his wrist. Otherwise he felt vacant, 
ind, in a deathly way, remote. 

** You’re minding what you’re saying? ’? came Tom’s 
mpty voice. 

** Minding what I’m saying! ’? echoed Easu cunningly. 
‘I didn’t want to tell you. It was you who asked me.” 

** Was the baby Percy’s baby? ”’ asked Jack. 

** T should say so,’’ Easu replied, stumbling. ‘* I never 
isked her, myself. They were all thick with Percy at that 
ime, and I was married with a family of my own. Why, 
’ve not been over to Wandoo for—for—for close on two 
rears, I should think.’’ 

** That’s what was wrong with Ma! ”’ Tom was saying, 
n a dull voice, to himself. 

** TY wonder Old George or Mary didn’t prepare ye,”’ said 
tasu. ‘* They both came down before the baby came. 
gut seemingly Old George couldn’t do nothing, Perey con- 
essing he was married, and trying to say he wasn’t to 
lame. However, he’s run off with Monica all right. Ma 
ad a letter from her from Albany, to say there was no need 
0 worry, Percy was playin’ the gentleman.” 

‘6 She never cared for him,’’ Jack cried. 

6‘ J dunno about that. Seems she’s been mad about him 
ll the time. Maybe she waited for you to come back. I 
lunno! I tell you, I’ve never been over to Wandoo for 
igh on two years.”’ 

Jack could not bear any more. The golden light had 
one out of the room, the sun was under that ridge— that 
idge— 

e Let’s get, Tom! ” said Jack rising to his feet. 

They stumbled out of the house, and went home in silence, 
hrough the dusk. Again the world had caved in, and they 
rere walking through the ruins. 

Ma was upstairs when they got home, but Katie had 

9288 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

got the tea on the table, and Lennie was in. He was 
tall, thin, silent, sensitive youth. 

‘* Hello, you two wanderin’ Jews! ”’ he said. 

‘6 Hello, Len! ” 

‘* Come an’ ’ave y’ teas.” _ 

Lennie was like the head of the house. They ate thei 
meal in silence. 

ii 

Tom and Jack and Lennie still slept in the cubby, but 
Og and Magog had moved indoors. The three of them lay 
in the dark, without sleeping. ; 

** Say, young Len,”’ said Tom at length, ‘‘ What was yot 
after, letting Monica get mixed up with that Pink-eyec 
Percy? 7 

‘“*Me? What was I after? How could I be after ’e1 
every minute. She snapped my ’ead off if I looked at ’er 
What for did you an’ Jack stop away all that time, an 
never write a word to nobody? Blame me, all right! Bui 
you go ’avin’ “igh jinks in the Never-Never, and nobody} 
says a word to you. Yow never did nothing wrong, dic 
you? An’ you kep’ an eye on the fam’ly, didn’t you! 
An’ it’s only me to blame. ’F course! *Iwould be! Bu 
what about yourselves? ”’ 

This outburst was received in silence. Then a queer 
sullen snake reared its head haughtily in Jack’s soul. | 

** T shouldn’t have thought she’d have cared for Percy,’ 
said he. 

‘* No more would nobody,”’ replied Len. ‘* You neve: 
know what women’s up to. Give me a steady woman 
Lord, I pray. Because for the last year Monica wasn’t righ 
in ’er mind, that’s what I say. It wasn’t Percy’s fault 
It was she made ’im. She made ’im as soft as grease abou 
’er. Percy’s not bad, he’s not. But women can make hin 
as soft as grease. An’ I knows what that means myself 
Hither there shouldn’t be no men an’ women, or they shoul 
be kept apart till they’re pitched into the same pen, t 
breed.”’ 

Tom, with Honeysuckle Lucy on his conscience, sai 
never a word. | 

** Is it true that Percy’s got a wife already out east? ’ 
asked Jack. 

THE LAST OF EASU 289 

** He says he has. But he wrote to find out if she was 
lead. At first he said he wasn’t to blame. Then he said 
1e was but he couldn’t marry her. An’ Monica like a wild 
at at us all. She would let nobody write an’ tell you. She 
vent over to Reds, but Easu had just got married, an’ 
sarah Ann threatened to lay her out. Then she turned on 
ercy. I tell you, she skeered me. The phosphorus came 
ut of her eyes like a wild cat’s. She’s bewitched or some- 
hing. Or else possessed of a devil. That’s what I think 
he is. Though I needn’t talk, for maybe I am myself. 
Yh, mates, leave me alone, I’m sick of it all. Lemme go 
o sleep.” 

** What did she go over to Easu’s for? ”? 

** God knows. She’d been nosing round with Easu, till 
fa got mad and put a stop to it. But that’s a good while 
ince. A good while afore Hasu married the lovely Sarah 
inn, with her rows o’ cartridges on her forehead. Oh, 
ripes, marriage! Leave m’alone, I tell you.” 

** Funny she should go to Easu’s, if she was struck on 
ercy,’’ said Jack. 

** Don’t make me think of it, sonny ! ’? came Len’s voice. 
‘ She went round like a cat who’s goin’ t’ have kittens, 
n’ nobody knew what was amiss with her. Oh, Jehosaphat ' 
‘alk about bein’ born in sin. I should think we are. But 
ay, Jack! Do you suppose the Lord gets awful upset, 
yhether Monica has a baby or not? I don’t believe He 
loes. An’ I don’t believe Jesus either turns a hair. I 
lon’t believe he turns half a hair. Yet we get into all this 
tew. Tell you what, makes a chap sick of bein’ a humin 
ein’. Wish I grew feathers, an’ was an emu.”’ 

** Don’t you bother,” said Jack. 

** Not me,’’ said Len. ‘I don’t bother! Anyhow, I 
now all about the parsley bed, ’n I don’t care, I’d rather 
now an’ have done with it. ’°S got to come some time. 
*m a collar horse, I am, like ol’ Rackett said. All right, 
2t me_be one. Let me be one, an’ pull me guts out. 
fight just as well do that, as be a sick outlaw like Rackett, 
r a softy like Percy. Leave m’alone! I’ve got the collar 
n, an’ the load behind, an’ I’ll pull it out if I pulls me 
uts out. That’s the past, present an’ future of Lennie.”’ 

‘* Where is Rackett? ”” 

‘* Hanged if I know. Don’t matter where he is. He 

Bs 

290 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

wanted to educate me an’ make a gentleman of me. Else 
I’d be nothing but a cart-’oss, he said. Well, I am nothing 
but a cart-’oss. But if I enjoys pullin’ me guts out, let me. 
I enjoys it all right.”’ 

Tom lay in silence in the dark, and felt seared. He hated 
having to face things. He hated taking a long view. Suf- 
ficient unto the day is the evil thereof, was his profound 
conviction. He hated even to look round the next corner. 

“* Say, Jack,”? came Lennie’s voice again. ‘‘ You always 
turns up like a silver lining. I got your cheques all right. 
Fifty-seven pound. That’s only a pair o’ socks, that is, 
compared to Gran’s store. I had to have a laugh over that 
stockin’, you’re the angel that stood in Jacob’s doorway 
an’ looked like a man, you are. I’d love it if you’d come 
an’ live with me an’ Ruthie.”’ 

But Jack was thinking his own thoughts. It had come 
over him that it was Easu who had betrayed Monica. The 
picture of her wandering across like a cat that is going to 
have kittens, to the Red’s place, and facing that fearful, 
common Sarah Ann, and Easu grinning and looking on, 
made his spirit turn to steel. Pink-eye Percy was not the 
father of that baby. Percy was as soft as wax. Monica 
would never have fallen for him. She had simply made 
use of him. The baby was Easu’s. 

** Was the baby a girl or a boy? ”’ he asked. 

StAcgirl.22 

** Did it look like Percy? ”’ 

** Not it. It didn’t have any of Percy’s goo-goo brown 
eyes or anything. Ma said it was the spitten image of 
Harry when he was born.” 

iii 

Jack decided what he would do. In the morning he 
would take the new horse and set off south, to Albany. 
ne would see Monica and ask her. Anyhow, he would see 

er: 
He was up at dawn, saddling his horse. He told Tom of 
his plan, and Tom merely remarked : 2 
** It’s up to you, mate.”’ : 
Tom was relapsing at once into the stiff-faced, rathet 
: 

4 

THE LAST OF EASU "291 

taciturn Australian he had been before. The settled life 
on the farm at once pulled him to earth, the various 
calamities had brought him down with a bump. 

So Jack rode off almost unnoticed, with a blanket 
strapped behind his saddle, and a flat water-bottle, a pistol 
in his belt, and a hatchet and a little bag of food tied to 
the front saddle strings. Something made him turn his 
horse past the place where he had fought Easu, and along 
the bush trail to the Reds’ place. 

The sun had come up hot out of a pink, dusty dawn. In 
an hour it would be blazing like a fiend out of the bare blue 
heavens. Meanwhile it was still cool, there was still a faint 
coolness on the parched dry earth, whose very grass was 
turning into yellowish dust. Jack jogged along slowly, at 
a slow morning jog-trot. He was glad to be in the saddle 
again. 

As he came down the track, he saw the blue smoke rising 
out of the chimneys of Easu’s house, and a dark movement 
away in one of the home paddocks. He got down for the 
gates, then rode on, over to the paddock fence, and sat 
there on his horse, watching Easu and Herbert and three 
blacks, sorting out some steers from a bunch of about thirty 
catile. They were running the steers through a gate to a 
smaller enclosure. 

There was a good deal of yelling and shouting and run- 
ning and confusion, as the bunch of young cattle, a mixed 
little mob of all colours, blacks and black-and-white and 
red and red-and-white, tossed and swayed, the young cows 
breaking away and running nimbly on light feet, excited by 
the deep, powerful lowing of the stock bull, which had 
wandered up to the outer corner of the fence under a group 
of ragged gum-trees, and there stood bellowing at the ex- 
citement that was going on in the next paddock. 

Jack kept an eye on the bull, as he sat on his uneasy 
horse outside the shut gate, watching. Near by, two more 
horses stood saddled and waiting. One of them was Easu’s 
big black mare with the two white forefeet. The other was 
a thin roan, probably Herbert’s horse. 

Herbert was quite a man now: tall and thin and broad, 
with a rather small red face and dull fairish hair that stood 
up straight from his brow. He was the only one of the 
brothers left with Easu. He was patient and didn’t pay any 

292 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

attention to that scorpion of a Sarah Ann. Sam and Ross 
had cleared out at the first sight of her. 

It was Herbert who did most of the running. Easu, who 
stood with his feet apart, did most of the bossing—he was 
never happy unless he was bossing, and finding fault with 
somebody—and the blacks did most of the holloaing. Easu 
didn’t move much. He seemed to have gone heavier, and 
where he stood, with his feet apart and his bare arm waving, 
he seemed stuck, as if he were inert. This was unlike him. 
He was always stiffish, but he used to be quick. Now he 
seemed slow and wooden in his movements, his body had 
gone inert, the life had gone out of it, and he could only 
shout and jeer. He used to have a certain flame of life, 
that made him handsome, even if you hated him. A cer- 
tain conceit and daring, inside all his bullying. Now the 
flame had gone, the conceit and daring had sunk, he was 
only ugly and defeated, common, and a little humiliated. 
He was getting fat, and it didn’t suit him at all. 

He had glanced round, when Jack rode up, and it was 
evident that he hated the intrusion. Herbert had waved his 
arm. Herbert still felt a certain gratitude—and the blacks 
had all stopped for a moment to stare. But Hasu shouted 
them on. 

At last the sorting out was done, and the bars put up. 
The bull went bellowing along the far fence. Herbert came 
striding to the gate, his smallish red face shining, and Jack 
got down to greet him. The two shook hands, and Herbert 
said : 

‘* Glad to see you back.”’ 

He was the first to say he was glad to see Jack back. 
Even Len had not said it. The two men stood exchanging 
awkward sentences beside the horse. 

Hasu, too, came through the gate. He looked grudgingly 
at Jack and at Jack’s horse. Jack thought how ugly he 
was, now his face had gone fatter and his mouth with its 
thin, jeering line looked mean. The alert bird-look had 
gone, he was heavy, and consumed with grudging. His 
very healthiness looked heavy, a bit dead. His light blue 
eyes stared and pretended to smile, but the smile was a 
grudging sneer. 

<* Where ’d you get y’ ’oss? ” : 

*¢ From Jimmy Short, in Perth.?? 

ae ee . 2 

THE LAST OF EASU 293 

** Bit long in the barrel. Making a trip, are y’? ” 

And Easu looked with his pale blue eyes straight and 
sneering into Jack’s eyes, and smiled with his grudging, 
mean mouth. 

Jack noticed that Easu had begun to belly, inside his 
slack black trousers. He was no longer the spruce, straight 
fellow. Easu saw the glance, and was again humiliated. 
He himself hated his growing bulk. He looked a second 
time, into Jack’s eyes, furtively, before he said : 

** Find out if it was right what I was tellin’ y’? ” 

Jack was ready for the insult, and did not answer. He 
turned to Herbert, asking about Joe Low, who had been a 
pal of Herbert’s. Joe Low also was married, and had gone 
down Busselton way. Jack asked for his directions, saying 
perhaps he might be able to call on him. 

** What, are y’ goin’ south? ”’ put in Easu. 

Jack looked at him. It was impossible not to see the 
slack look of defeat in Easu’s face. Something had defeated 
him, leaving him all sneering and acid and heavy. Again 
Jack did not answer. 

** What did you say?’ Kasu Der advancing a 
little insolently. 

** What about? *? 

** T asked if y’ was goin’ south.” 

** That’s my business, where I’m going.”’ 

** Of course it is,’? said Easu with a sneer and a grin. 
*© You don’t think anyone wants to get ahead of you, do 
you? ”? He stood with a faint, sneering smile on his face, 
malevolent with impotence. ‘* You’ll do Percy a lot 0’ 
hurt, ’ll bet. I wouldn’t like to be Percy when you turn 
up.’”? And he looked with a grin at Herbert. Herbert 
grinned faintly in echo. 

*©T should think, whatever Percy is, he wouldn’t want 
to be you,”’ said Jack, going white at the gills with anger, 
but speaking with calm superiority, because he knew that 
enraged Easu most. 

*¢ What’s that? ” cried Easu, the grin flying out of his 
face at once, and leaving it stiff and dangerous. 

**T should think Percy wouldn’t want to be you, let 
him be what he may in himself,’”’ said Jack, in the cold, 
clear, English voice which he knew infuriated Hasu unbear- 

ably. 

294 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Easu searched Jack’s face intently with his pale blue 
eyes. 

"ee How’s that? ’? he asked curtly. 

Jack stared at the red, heavy face with the smallish 
eyes and thought to himself : “‘ You pig! You intolerable 
white-fat pig! ’? But aloud he said nothing. 

Easu smiled a defeated grin, and strode away heavily to 
his horse. He unhitched, swung heavily into the saddle, 
and moved away, then at a little distance reined in to hear 
what Jack and Herbert were talking about. He couldn’t 
go. 
Herbert was giving Jack directions, how to find Joe Low 
down Busselton way. Then he sent various items of news 
to his old pal. But he asked Jack no questions, and was care- 
ful to avoid any kind of enquiry concerning Jack’s business. 

Easu sat on his black horse a little way off, listening. 
He had a rope and an axe tied to his saddle. Presumably 
he was going into the bush. Herbert was asking questions 
about the North-West, about the cattle stations and the 
new mines. He talked as if he would like to talk all day. 
And Jack answered freely, laughing easily and making a 
joke of everything. They spoke of Perth, and Jack told 
how Tom and he had been at the Governor’s ball a few 
night ago, and what a change it was from the North-West, 
and how Tom had enjoyed himself. Herbert listened, 
impressed. 

** Gosh! That’s something to rag old Tom about! ”? he 
said. 

** When you've done gassing there! *”? called Easu. 

Jack turned and looked at him. 

** You don’t have to wait,’’ he said easily, as if to a 
servant. 

There was really something about Easu now that sug- 
gested a servant. He went suddenly yellow with anger. 

** What’s that? ”’ he said, moving his horse a few paces 
forward. 

And Jack, also white at the gills, but affecting the same 
ease, repeated distinctly and easily, as if to a man servant : 

** We’re talking, you don’t have to wait.’? . 

There was no answer to this insult. Easu remained stock 
motionless on his horse for a few moments. Was he going 
to have to swallow it? . 

a 

j 

THE LAST OF EASU 295 

Jack turned laughing to Herbert, saying : 

““T’ve got several things to tell you about old 
Tom,.”’ 

But he glanced up quickly. Easu was kicking his horse, 
and it was dancing before it would take a direction. Her- 
bert gave a loud, inarticulate cry. Jack turned quickly 
to his own horse, to put his foot in the stirrup. Just as 
quickly he refrained, swung round, drew his pistol, and 
cocked it. Easu, once more a horseman, was kicking his 
restive horse forward, holding the small axe in his right 
hand, the reins in his left. His face was livid, and looked 
like the face of one returning from the dead. He came 
bearing down on Jack and Herbert, like Death returning 
from the dead, the axe held back at arm’s length, ready for 
the swing, half urging, half holding his horse, so that it 
danced strangely nearer. Jack stood with the pistol ready, 
his back to his own horse, that was tossing its head 
nervously. 

** Look out! ”? cried Herbert, suddenly. jumping at the 
bit of Jack’s horse, in terror, and making it start back, 
with a thudding of hoofs. 

But Jack did not move. He stood with his pistol ready, 
his eyes on Easu. Easu’s horse was snaffling and jerking, 
twisting, trying to get round, and EKasu was forcing it slowly 
forward. He had on his death face. He held the axe at 
arm’s length, backward, and with his pale-blue, fixed death 
eyes he watched Jack, who stood there on the ground. So 
he advanced, waiting for the moment to swing the axe, 
fixing part of his will on the curvetting horse, which he 
forced on. 

Jack, in a sort of trance, fixed Easu’s death-face in the 
middle of the forehead. But he was watching with every 
pore of his body. 

Suddenly he saw him begin to heave in the stirrups, and 
on that instant he fired at the mystic place in Hasu’s fore- 
head, under his old hat, at the same time springing back. 
And in that self-same instant he saw two things: part of 
Easu’s forehead seemed to shift mystically open, and the 
axe, followed by Hasu’s whole body, crashed at him as he 
sprang back. He went down in the universal crash, and 
‘or a moment his consciousness was dark and eternal. Then 
he wriggled to his feet, and ran, as Herbert was running, to 

296 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

the black horse, which was dancing in an agony of terror, 
Easu’s right foot having caught in the stirrup, the body roll- 
ing horribly on the ground. 

He caught the horse, which was shying off from Herbert, 
and raised his right hand to take the bridle. To his further 
horror and astonishment, he saw his hand all blood, and 
his fore finger gone. But he clutched the bridle of the horse 
with his maimed hand, then changed to his left hand, and 
stood looking in chagrin and horror at the bloody stump 
of his finger, which was just beginning, in a distant sort 
of way, to hurt. ; 

‘* My God, he’s dead! ”? came the high, hysterical yell 
from Herbert, on the other side of the horse, and Jack let go 
the bridle again, to look. 

It was too obvious. The big, ugly, inert bulk of Easu 
lay crumpled on the ground, part of the forehead shot away. 
Jack looked twice, then looked away again. A black had 
caught his horse, and tied it to the fence. Another black 
was running up. A dog came panting excitedly up, sniffing 
and licking the blood. Herbert, beside himself, stood help- 
less, repeating : ‘* He’s dead! He’s dead! My God, he’s 
dead! He is.” 

Then he gave a yell, and swooped at the dog, as it began 
to lick the blood. 

Jack, after once more looking round, walked away. He 
saw his pistol lying on the ground, so he picked it up and 
put it in his belt, although it was bloody, and had a cut 
where the axe had struck it. Then he walked across to his 
horse, and unhitched the bridle from the fence. But before 
he mounted, he took his handkerchief and tied it round his 
bleeding hand, which was beginning to hurt with a big 
aching hurt. He knew it, and yet he hardly heeded it. 
It was hardly noticeable. 

He got into the saddle, and rode calmly away, going on 
his journey southward just the same. The world about him 
seemed faint and unimportant. Inside himself was the 
eee and the assurance. Easu was dead. It was a good 
thing. 

He had one definite feeling. He felt as if there had been 
something damning life up, as a great clot of weeds will 
dam a stream and make the water spread marshily and 
dead over the surrounding land. He felt he had lifted this 

THE LAST OF EASU 297 

clod out of the stream, and the water was flowing on clear 
again. 

He felt he had done a good thing. Somewhere inside 
himself he felt he had done a supremely good thing. Life 
could flow on to something beyond. Why question further? 

He rode on, down the track. The sun was very hot, and 
his body was re-echoing with the pain from his hand. But 
he went on calmly, monotonously, his horse travelling in 
a sort of sleep, easy in its single-step. He didn’t think 
where he was going, or why; he was just going. 

CHAP: XXI. LOST 

Ar evening he was still riding. But his horse lagged, anc 
would not be spurred forward. Darkness came with swift 
persistence. He was looking anxiously for water, a burn 
ing thirst had made him empty his bottle. 

As if directed by God, he felt the horse rousing up anc 
pressing eagerly forward. In a few minutes it stopped 
Darkness had fallen. He found the horse nosing a timber. 
lined Government well. 

He got down and awkwardly drew water, for the wel 
was low. He drank and the horse drank. Then, with 
some difficulty, he unsaddled, tied the reins round a sapling 
and removed the bit. The horse snorted, nosed round, anc 
began to crop in the dark. Jack sat on the ground anc 
looked up at the stars. Then he drank more water, anc 
ate a piece of bread and dry cheese. 

Then he began to go to sleep. He saw Easu coming ai 
him with the axe. Ugh, how good it was Easu was dead 
Dead, to go in the earth to manure the soil. Hadn’t Ole 
George said it? The land wanted dead men dug into it 
to manure it. Men like Easu, dead and turned to manure 
And men like old Dad Ellis. Poor old Dad. ; 

Jack thought of Monica. Monica with her little flower. 
face. All messed up by that nasty dog of an Easu. He 
should be twice dead. Jack felt she was a little repulsive 
too. To let herself be pawed over and made sticky by tha’ 
heavy dog of an Easu! Jack felt he could never folloy 
where Easu had been messing. Monica was no good now 
She had taken on some of Easu’s repulsiveness. 

Aunt Matilda had said, ‘* Another scandal in th: 
family! ’? Well, the death of Easu should make a gooc 
scandal. 

How lonely it was in the bush! How big and weapon 
like the stars were. One great star very flashing. . 

** T have dipped my hand in blood ! ”’ he thought to him 
self. And looking at his own bloody, hurting hand, in th 
starlight, he didn’t realise whether it was Easu’s blood 0 
his own. ¢ 

298 

Prchint vd 

LOST 299 

‘© T have dipped my hand in blood! ” 

“© So be it. Let it be my testament.” 

And he lifted up his hand to the great flashing star, his 
wounded hand, saying aloud: 

‘“‘ Here! Here is my hand in blood! Take it, then. 
There is blood between us forever.’’ 

The blood was between him and his mysterious Lord, for 
ever. Like a sort of pledge, or baptism, or a sacrifice: a 
bond between them. He was speaking to his mysterious 
Lord. 

“‘ There is blood between us for ever,’’ he said to the 
star. 

But the sound of his own hoarse, rather deep voice, 
reminded him of his surroundings. He looked round. He 
heard his horse, and called to it. It nickered in the loneli- 
ness, still cropping. He started up to see if it was all right, 
to stroke it and speak to it. The bush was very lonely. 

‘* Hello, you! ” he said to it. ‘* In the midst of life we 
are in death. There’s death in the spaces between the stars. 
But somehow it seems all right. I like it. I like to be 
Lord of Death. Who do they call the Lords of Death. I 
am a Lord of Death.’ 

He patted the horse’s neck as he talked. 

66 I can’t bear to think of Monica messy with Easu,” 
he said. ‘ But I suppose it’s my destiny. I suppose it 
means I am a lord of death. I hope if I have any children 
they’ll have that look in their eyes, like soldiers from the 
dark kingdom. I don’t want children that aren’t warriors. 
I don’t want little love children for my children. When 
I beget children I want to sow dragon’s teeth, and warriors 
will spring up. Easu hadn’t one grain nor spark of a 
warrior in him. He was absolutely a groping civilian, a 
bully. That’s why he wanted to spoil Monica. She is the 
wife for a fighting man. So he wanted to spoil her. . 
Funny, my father isn’t a fighting man at all. He’s an 
absolute civilian. So he became a general. And I’m not 
a civilian. I know the spaces of death between the stars, 
like spaces in an Egyptian temple. And at the end of life 
I see the big black door of death, and the infinite black 
labyrinth beyond. I like to think of going in, and being 
at home and one of the masters in the black halls of death, 
when I am dead. I hope I die fighting, and go into the 

300 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

black halls of death as a master: not as a scavenger ser- 
vant, like Easu, or a sort of butler, like my father. I 
don’t want to be a servant in the black house of death. I 
want to be a master.” 

He sat down again, with his back to the tree, looking at 
the sharp stars, and the fume of stars, and the great black 
gulfs between the stars. His hand and arm were aching 
and paining a great deal. But he watched the gulfs between 
the stars. 

‘* IT suppose my Lord meant me to be like this,”” he said. 
‘‘ Think if I had to be tied up and a gentleman, like that 
Blessington. Or a lawyer like Old George. Or a politician. 
dropping his aitches, like that Mr Watson. Or empty and 
important like that A.D.C. Or anything that’s successful 
and goes to church and sings hymns and has supper after 
church on the best linen table-cloth! What Lord is it that 
likes these people? What God can it be that likes success 
and Sunday dinners. Oh, God! It must be a big, fat, 
reesty sort of God. 

** My God is dark and you can’t see him. You can’t 
even see his eyes, they are so dark. But he sits and bides 
his time and smiles, in the spaces between the stars. And 
he doesn’t know himself what he thinks. But there’s deep, 
powerful feelings inside him, and he’s only waiting his 
time to upset this pigsty full of white fat pigs. I like my 
Lord. I like his dark face, that I can’t see, and his dark 
eyes, that are so dark you can’t see them, and his dark 
hair, that is blacker than the night, on his forehead, and 
the dark feelings he has, which nobody will ever be able 
to explain. I like my Lord, my own Lord, who is not 
Lord of pigs.’’ 

He slept fitfully, feverishly, with dreams, and rose at 
daylight to drink water, and dip his head in water. His 
horse came, he tended it, and with great difficulty got the 
saddle on. Then he left it standing, and when he came 
again, it wasn’t where he had left it. 

He called, and it whinnied, so he went into the serub for 
it. But it wasn’t where the sound of whinnying came from. 
He went a few more steps forward, and called. The scrub 
wasn’t so very thick, either, yet you couldn’t see that horse. — 
He was sure it was only a couple of yards away. So he 
went forward, coaxing, calling. But nothing . . . Queer! 

LOST 801 

He looked round. The track wasn’t there. The well 
mt there. Only the silent, vindictive, scattered 

ush. 

He couldn’t be lost. That was impossible. The home- 
stead wasn’t more than twenty miles away—and the settle- 
ment. 

Yet, as he tramped on, through the brown, heath-like 
undergrowth, past the ghosi-like trunks of the scattered 
guin-trees, over the fallen, burnt-out trunks of charred trees, 
past the bushes of young gum-trees, he gradually realised 
he was lost. And yet it was impossible. He would come 
upon a cabin, or pick up the track of a wood cutter, or a 
*roo hunter. He was so near to everywhere. 

There is something mysterious about the Australian bush. 
It is so absolutely still. And yet, in the near distance, it 
seems alive. It seems alive, and as if it hovered round you 
to maze you and circumvent you. There is a strange feel- 
ing, as if invisible, hostile things were hovering round you 
and heading you off. 

Jack stood still and coo-eed! long and loud. He fancied 
he heard an answer, and he hurried forward. He felt light- 
headed. He wished he had eaten something. He remem- 
bered he had no water. And he was walking very fast, the 
sweat pouring down him. Silly this. He made himself go 
slower. Then he stood still and looked around. Then he 
coo-eed again, and was afraid of the ringing sound of his 
own cry. 

The changeless bush, with scattered, slender tree-trunks 
everywhere. You could see between them into the distance, 
to more open bush: a few brown rocks: two great dead 
trees as white as bone : burnt trees with their core charred 
out: and living trees hanging their motionless clusters of 
brown, dagger-like leaves. And the permanent soft blue 
of the sky overhead. 

Nothing was hidden. It was all open and fair. And yet 
it was haunted with a malevolent mystery. You felt your- 
self so small, so tiny, so absolutely insignificant, in the 
still, eternal glade. And this again is the malevolence of 
the bush, that it reduces you to your own absolute insigni- 
ficance, go where you will. 

Jack collected his wits and began to make a plan. 

‘¢ First Jook at the sky, and get your bearing.”” Then 

302 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

he would go somewhere straight west from the Reds. The 
sun had been in his eyes as he rode last evening. 

Or had he better go east, and get back? There were 
scores of empty miles, uninhabited, west. It was settled, 
he would go east. Perhaps someone would find his horse, 
and come to look for him. 

He walked with the sun straight bang in his eyes. It was 
very hot, and he was tired. He was thirsty, his arm hurt 
and throbbed. Why did he imagine he was hungry. He 
was only thirsty. And so hot! He took off his coat and 
threw it away. After a while his waistcoat followed. He 
felt a little lighter. But he was an intolerable burden to 
himself. 

He sat down under a bush and went fast asleep. How 
long he slept he did not know. But he woke with a jerk, 
to find himself lying on the ground in his shirt and trousers, 
the sun still hot in the heavens, and the mysterious bush all 
around. The sun had come round and was burning his legs. 

What was the matter? Fear, that was the first thing. 
The great, resounding fear. Then, a second, he was 
terribly thirsty. For a third, his arm was aching horribly. 
He took off his shirt and made a sling of it, to carry his 
arm in. 

For a fourth thing, he realised he had killed Easu, and 
something was gnawing at his soul. . 

He heard himself sob, and this surprised him very much. 
It even brought him to his senses. | 

** Well! ”? he thought. ‘*I have killed Easu.”? It 
seemed years and years ago. ‘* And the bush has got me, 
Australia has got me, and now it will take my life from 
me. Now I am going to die. Well, then so be it. I will 
go out and haunt the bush, like all the other lost dead. I 
shall wander in the bush throughout eternity, with my 
bloody hand. Well, then, so be it. I shall be a lord of 
death hovering in the bush, and let the people who come 
beware.”’ 

But suddenly he started to his feet in terror and horror. 
The face of death had really got him this time. It was as 
if a second wakening had come upon him, and his life, which 
had been sinking, suddenly flared up in a frenzy of struggle 
and fear. He coo-eed! again and again, and once more 
plunged forward in mad pursuit of an echo, 

LOST 808 

He might certainly run into a ’roo hunters’ camp any 
minute. The place was alive with them, great big boomers ! 
Their silly faces! Their silly complacency, almost asking 
to be shot. There were a lot of wallabies out here, too. 
You might make a fortune hunting skins. 

Christ! how one could want water. 

But no matter. On and on! His soul dropped to its 
own sullen level. If he was to die, die he would. But he 
would hold out through it all. 

On and on in a persistent dogged stupor. Why give in? 

Then suddenly he dropped on a log, in weariness. Sud- 
denly he had thought of Monica. Why had she betrayed 
him? Why had they all betrayed him, betrayed him and 
the thing he wanted from life? He leaned his head down 
on his arms and wept hoarsely and dryly, and went silent 
again even as he sat, realising the futility of weeping. His 
heart, the heart he wept from, went utterly dark. He had 
no more heart of torn sympathy. That was gone. Only 
a black, deep, male volition. And this was all there was 
left of him. He would carry the same into death. Young 
or old, death sooner or later, he would carry just this one 
thing into the further darkness, his deep, black, undying 
male volition. 

He must have slept. He was in great misery, his mouth 
like an open sepulchre, his consciousness dull. He was 
hardly aware that it was late afternoon, hot and motionless. 
The outside things were all so far away. And the blackness 
of death and misery was thick, but transparent, over his 
eyes. 

ite went on, still obstinately insisting that ahead there 
was something, perhaps even water, though hope was dead 
in him. It was not hope, it was heavy volition that insisted 
on water. 

The sling dragged on his neck, he threw it away, and 
walked with his hand against his breast. And his braces 
dragged on him. He didn’t want any burden at all, none 
at all. He stopped, took off his braces and threw them 
away, then his sweat-soaked under-vest. He didn’t want 
these things. He didn’t want them. He walked on a bit. 

He hesitated, then came for a moment to his senses. 
He was going to throw away his trousers, too. But it came 
to him ; ‘‘ Don’t be a fool, and throw away your clothes, 

804 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

man. You know men do it who are lost in the bush, and 
then they are found naked, dead.” 

He looked vaguely round for the vest and braces he had 
just thrown away. But it was half an hour since he had 
flung them down. His consciousness tricked him, obliter- 
ating the interval. He could not believe his eyes. They 
had ghostlily disappeared. 

So he rolled his trousers on his naked hips, and pressed 
his hurt hand on his naked breast, and set off again in a 
sort of fear. His hat had gone long ago. And all the time 
he had this strange desire to throw all his clothes away, 
even his boots, and be absolutely naked, as when he was 
born. And all the time something obstinate in him com- 
batted the desire. He wanted to throw everything away, 
and go absolutely naked over the border. And, at the same 
time, something in him deeper than himself obstinately 
withstood the desire. He wanted to go over the border. 
And something deeper even than his consciousness refused. 

So he went on, scarcely conscious at all. He himself was 
in the middle of a vacuum, and pressing round were visions 
and agonies. The vacuum was perhaps the greatest agony, 
like a death-tension. But the other agonies were pressing 
on its border : his dry, cardboard mouth, his aching body. 
And the visions pressed on the border, too. A great lake 
of ghostly white water, such as lies in the valleys where 
the dead are. But he walked to it, and it wasn’t there. 
The moon was shining whitely. 

And on the edge of the aching void of him, a wheel was 
spinning in his brain like a prayer-wheel. 

‘* Petition me no petitions, sir, to-day; 
Let other hours be set apart for business. 
To-day it is our pleasure to be drunk 
And this our queen . . .”’ 

Water! Water! Water! Was water only a visionary 
thing of memory, something only achingly, wearyingly, 
thought and thought and thought, and never substantiated P 

*s A Briton even in love should be 
A subject not a slave . . .” 

LOST 805 

The wheel of words went round, the wheel of his brain, 
on the edge of the vacuum. What did that mean? What 
was a Briton? 

** A Briton even in love should be 
A subject not a slave . . .” 

The words went round and round and were absolutely 
meaningless to him. 
And then out of the dark another wheel was pressing and 
turning. 
** How fast has brother followed brother 
From sunshine to the sunless land.”’ 

Away on the hard dark periphera of his consciousness 
the wheel of these words was turning and grinding. 

His mind was turning helplessly, but his feet walked on. 
He realised in a weird, mournful way that he was shut 
groping in a dark, unfathomable cave, and that the walls 
of the cave were his own aching body. And he was going 
on and on in the cave, looking for the fountain, the water. 
But his body was aching, ghastly, jutting walls of the 
eave. And it made this weary grind of words on the out- 
side. And he had need to struggle on and on. 

In little flickers he tried to associate his dark cave-con- 
sciousness with his grinding body. Was it night, was it 
day? 

But before he had decided that it was night, the two 
things had gone apart again, and he was groping and listen- 
ing to the grind. 

‘* But hushed be every thought that springs 
From out the bitterness of things. 
Those obstinate questionings 
Of sense and outward things 
Falling from us, vanishing.’ 

He was so weary of the outward grind of words. He was 
stumbling as he walked. And waiting for the walls of the 
cave to crash in and bury him altogether. And the spring 
of water did not exist. 

‘‘ Blank misgivings of a creator moving about in a world 
not realised.” 

306 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

This phrase almost united his two consciousnesses. He 
was going to crash into this creator who moved about un- 
realised. Other people had gone, and other things. Monica, 
Easu, Tom, Mary, Mother, Father, Lennie. They were all 
like papery, fallen leaves blowing about outside in some 
street. Inside here there were no people at all, none at all. 
Only the Creator moving around unrealised. His Lord. 

He stumbled and fell, and in the white flash of falling 
knew he hurt himself again, and that he was falling for 
ever. 

CHAP: XXII. THE FIND 

1 
Tue subconscious self woke first, roaring in distant wave- 
beats unintelligible, unmeaning, persistent, and growing 
in volume. It had something to do with birth. And not 
having died. ‘* I have not let my soul run like water out 
of my mouth.”’ 

And as the roaring and beating of the waves increased 
in volume, tiny little words emerged like flying-fish out of 
the black ocean of consciousness. ‘* Ye must be born 
again,’’ in little, silvery, twinkling spurts, like flying-fish 
which twinkle silver and spark into the utterly dark sea 
again. They were gone and forgotten before they were 
realised. They had merged deep in the sea again. And the 
roar of dark consciousness was the roar of death. The 
kingdom of death. And the lords of death. 

‘© Ye must be born again.”? But the twinkling words had 
disappeared into the lordly powerful darkness of death. 
And the baptism is the blackness of death between the 
eyes, that never lifts, forever, neither in life nor death. 
You may be born again. But when you emerge, this time 
you emerge with the darkness of death between your eyes, 
as a lord of death. 

The waves of dark consciousness surged in a huge billow, 
and broke. The boy’s eyes were wide open, and his voice 
was saying : 

*¢ Ts that you, Tom 

The sound of his voice paperily rustling these words, was 
so surprising to him that he instantly went dark again, 
He heard no answer. 

But those surging dark waves pressed him again and 
again, and again his eyes were open. They recognised 
nothing. Something was being done to him on the outside 
of him. His own throat was moving. And life started 
again with a sharp pain. 

«¢ What was it? ” 

The question sparked suddenly out of him. Someone was 
putting a metal rim to his lips, there was liquid in his mouth. 

3807 

} 2? 

308 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

He put it out. He didn’t want to come back. His soul 
sank again like a dark stone. 

And at the very bottom it took a command from the 
Lord of Death, and rose slowly again. 

Someone was tilting his head, and pouring a little water 
again. He swallowed with a crackling noise and a crack- 
ling pain. One had to come back. He recognised the com- 
mand from his own Lord. His Lord was the Lord of Death. 
And he, Jack, was dark-anointed and sent back. Returned 
with the dark unction between his brows. So be it. 

He saw green leaves hanging from a blue sky. It was 
still far off. And the dark was still better. But the dark 
green leaves were also like a triumphal banner. He tries to 
smile, but his face is stiff. The faintest irony of a smile 
sets in its stiffness. He is forced to swallow again, and 
know the pain and tearing. Ah! He suddenly realised 
the water was good. He had not realised it the other times. 
He gulped suddenly, everything forgotten. And his mind 
gave a sudden lurch towards consciousness. 

cols that. yousrLomty 

**'Yes. Feel better? ” 

He saw the red mistiness of Tom’s face near. Tom was 
faithful. And this time his soul swayed, as if it too had 
drunk of the water of faithfulness. 

He drank the water from the metal cup, because he knew 
it came from Tom’s faithfulness. 

Gradually Jack revived. But his burning bloodshot eyes 
were dilated with fever, and he could not keep hold of his 
consciousness. He realised that Tom was there, and Mary, 
and somebody he didn’t for a long time recognise as Lennie; 
and that there was a fire, and a smell of meat, and night 
was again falling. Yes, he was sure night was falling. Or 
was it his own consciousness going dark? He didn’t know. 
Perhaps it was the everlasting dark. 

‘© What time is it? ’’ he asked. 

** Sundown,” said Tom. ‘* Why? ” 

But he was gone again. It was no good trying to keep 
a hold on one’s consciousness. The ache, the nausea, the 
throbbing pain, the swollen mouth, the strange feeling of 
cracks in his flesh, made him let go. 

Tom was there and Mary. He would leave himself to 
Tom’s faithfulness and Mary’s tenderness, and Lennie’s 

THE FIND 809 

watchful intuition. The mystery of death was in that bit 
of deathless faithfulness which was in Tom. And Mary’s 
tenderness, and Lennie’s intuitive care, both had a touch of 
the mystery and stillness of the death that surrounds us 
darkly all the time. 

7 

They got Jack home, but he was very ill. His life would 
seem to come back. Then it would sink away again like a 
stone, and they would think he was going. The strange 
oscillation. Several times, Mary watched him almost die. 
Then, from the very brink of death, he would come back 
again, with a strange, haunted look in his blood-shot eyes. 

‘¢ What is it, Jack? ’? she would ask him. But the eyes 
only looked at her. 

And Lennie, standing there silently watching, said : 

*¢ He’s had about enough of life, that’s what it is.”’ 

Mary, blenched with fear, went to find Tom. 

‘“‘Tom,”? she said, ‘‘ he’s sinking again. Lennie says 
it’s because he doesn’t want to live.”’ 

Tom silently threw down his tool, and walked with her 
mto the house. It was obvious he was sinking again. 

«© Jack ! ’? said Tom in a queer voice, bending over him. 
‘ Mate! Mate! ’? He seemed to be calling him into camp. 

Jack’s expressionless, fever-dilated, blood-shot eyes 
ypened again. The whites were almost scarlet. 

‘¢ Y” aren’t desertin’ us, are y’? ’’ said Tom, in a gloomy, 
reproachful tone. ‘‘ Are y’ desertin’ us, Mate? ” 

Tt was the Australian, lost but unbroken on the edge of 
the wilderness, looking with grim mouth into the void, 
and calling to his mate not to leave him. Man for man, 
they were up against the great dilemma of white men, on 
the edge of the white man’s world, looking into the vaster, 
sien world of the undawned era, and unable to enter, un- 
able to leave their own. 

Jack looked at Tom and smiled faintly. In some subtle 
way, both men knew the mysterious responsibilities of living. 
Tom was almost fatalistic-reckless. Yet it was a reckless- 
ness which knew that the only thing to do was to go ahead, 
mect death that way. He could see nothing but meeting 

310 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

death ahead. But since he was a man, he would go ahead 
to meet it, he would not sit and wait. 

Jack smiled faintly, and the courage came back to him. 
He began-to rally. 

The next morning he turned to Mary and said : 

** J still want Monica.”’ 

Mary dropped her head and did not answer. She recog- 
nised it as one of the signs that he was going to live. And 
she recognised the unbending obstinacy in his voice. 

** T shall come for you, too, in time,”’ he said to her, look- 
ing at her with his terrible scarlet eyes. 

She did not answer, but her hand trembled as she went 
for his medicine. There was something prophetic and 
terrible in his sallow face and burning, blood-shot eyes. 

‘* Be still,””? she murmured to him. ‘* Only be still.” 

** T shan’t ever really drop you,” he said to her. ** But 
I want Monica first. That’s my way.”’ 

He seemed curiously victorious, making these assertions. 

or 

CHAP: XXIII. GOLD 

i 
Tue boy Jack never rose from that fever. It was a man 
who got up again. A man with all the boyishness cut away 
from him, all the childishness gone, and a certain unbending 
recklessness in its place. 

He was thin, and pale, and the cherubic look had left his 
face forever. His cheeks were longer, leaner, and when he 
got back his brown-faced strength again, he was handsome. 
But it was not the handsomeness, any more, that would 
make women like Aunt Matilda exclaim involuntarily : 
‘‘ Dear boy! ’? They would look at him twice, but with 
misgiving, and a slight recoil. 

It was his eyes that had changed most. From being the 
warm, emotional dark blue eyes of a boy, they had become 
impenetrable, and had a certain fixity. There was a touch 
of death in them, a little of the fixity and changelessness of 
death. And with this, a peculiar power. As if he had lost 
his softness in the other world of death, and brought back 
instead some of the relentless power that belongs there. 
And the inevitable touch of mockery. 

As soon as he began to walk about, he was aware of the 
change. He walked differently, he put his feet down dif- 
ferently, he carried himself differently. The old drifting, 
diffident careless bearing had left him. He felt his upright- 
ness hard, bony. Sometimes he was aware of the skeleton 
of himself. He was a hard skeleton, built upon the solid 
bony column of the back-bone, and pitched for balance on 
the great bones of the hips. But the plumb-weight was in 
the cage of his chest. A skeleton ! 

But not the dead skeleton. The living bone, the living 
man of bone, unyielding and imperishable. The bone of 
his forehead like iron against the world, and the blade of 
his breast like an iron wedge held forward. He was thin, 
and built of bone. 

’ And inside this living, rigid man of bone, the dark heart 
heavy with its wisdom and passions and emotions and its 
correspondences. It, too, was living, softly and intensely 
living. But heavy and dark, plumb to the earth’s centre. 

bli 

312 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

During his convalescence, he got used to this man of bone 
which he had become, and accepted his own inevitable. His 
bones, his skeleton was isolatedly itself. It had no contact. 
Except that it was forged in the kingdom of death, to be 
durable and effectual. Some strange Lord had forged his 
bones in the dark smithy where the dead and the unborn 
came and went. 

And this was his only permanent contact : the contact 
with the Lord who had forged his bones, and put a dark 
heart in the midst. 

But the other contacts, they were alive and quivering in” 
his flesh. His passive but enduring affection for Tom and 
Lennie, and the strange quiescent hold he held over Mary. 
Beyond these, the determined molten stirring of his desire 
for Monica. 

And the other desires. The desire in his heart for master- 
hood. Not mastery. He didn’t want to master anything. 
But to be the dark lord of his own folk : that was a desire 
in his heart. And the concurrent knowledge that, to achieve 
this, he must be master, too, of gold. Not gold for the 
having’s sake. Not for the spending’s sake. Nor for the 
sake of the power to hire services, which is the power of 
money. But the mastery of gold, so that gold should no 
longer be like a yellow star to which men hitched the wagon 
of their destinies. To be Master of Gold, in the name of 
the dark Lord who had forged his bones neither of gold 
nor silver nor iron, but of the white glisten of life. Master- 
hood, as a man forged by the Lord of Hosts, in the inner- © 
most fires of life and death. Because, just as a red fire 
burning on the hearth is a fusion of death into what was 
once live leaves, so the creation of man in the dark is a 
fusion of life into death, with the life dominant. 

The two are never separate, life and death. And in the 
vast dark kingdom of afterwards, the Lord of Death is Lord 
of Life, and the God of Life and creation is Lord of Death. 

But Jack knew his Lord as the Lord of Death. The rich, 
dark mystery of death, which lies ahead, and the dark 
sumptuousness of the halls of death. Unless Life moves on 
to the beauty of the darkness of death, there is no life, there 
is only automatism. Unless we see the dark splendour of 
death ahead, and travel to be lords of darkness at last, 
peers in the realms of death, our life is nothing but a petu- 

GOLD 813 

lant, pitiful backing, like a frightened horse, back, back to 
the stable, the manger, the cradle. But onward ahead is 
the great porch of the entry into death, with its columns of 
bone-ivory. And beyond the porch is the heart of darkness, 
where the lords of death arrive home out of the vulgarity of 
life, into their own dark and silent domains, lordly, ruling 
the incipience of life. 

ii 

At the trial Jack said, in absolute truth, he shot Easu 
in self-defence. He had not the faintest thought of shoot- 
ing him when he rode up to the paddock; nor of shooting 
anybody. He had called in passing, just to say good-day. 
And then he had fired at Easu because he knew the axe 
would come down in his skull if he didn’t. 

Herbert gave the same deposition. The shot was entirely 
in self-defence. 

So Jack was free again. There had been no further 
mention of Monica, after Jack had said he was riding south 
to see her, because he had always cared for her. No one 
hinted that Easu was the father of her child, though Mrs 
Ellis knew, and Old George knew. 

Afterwards, Jack wondered why he had called at the 
Reds’ place that morning. Why had he taken the trail 
past where he and Easu had fought? He had intended to 
see Easu, that was why. But for what unconscious pur- 
pose who shall say? The death was laid at the door of the 
old feud between Jack and Red. Only Old George knew 
the whole, and he, subtle and unafraid, pushed justice as 
it should go, according to his own sense of justice, like a 
real Australian. 

Meanwhile he had been corresponding with Monica and 
Percy. They were in Albany, and on the point of sailing 
to Melbourne, where Percy would enter some business or 
other, and the two would live as man and wife. Monica 
was expecting another child. At this news, Mr George 
wanted to let them go, and be damned to them. But he 
talked to Mary, and Mary said Jack would want Monica, 
no matter what happened. ; 

‘¢ When he wants a thing really, he can’t change,” said 
Mary gloomily. ‘‘ He is like that.” 

s* An obstinate young fool that’s never had enough lick- 

314 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

ings,” said Old George. ‘ Devil’s blood of his mother’s 
devil of an obstinate father. But very well then, let him 
have her, with a couple of babies for a dowry. Make him- 
self the laughing stock of the colony.” 

So he wrote to Monica: ‘‘ If you care about seeing Jack 
Grant again, you’d better stop in this colony. He sticks 
to it he wants to see you, being more of a fool than a knave, 
unlike many people in Western Australia.”’ 

She, being obstinate like the rest, stayed on in Albany, 
though Percy, angry and upset, sailed on to Melbourne. 
He said she could join him if she liked. He stayed till 
her baby was born, then went because he didn’t want to 
face Jack. 

Jack arrived by sea. He was still not strong enough to 
travel by land. He got a vessel going to Adelaide, that 
touched at Albany. 

Monica, thinner than ever, with a little baby in her arms, 
and her flower-face like a chilled flower, was on the dock 
to meet him. He saw her at once and his heart gave a queer 
lurch. 

. As he came forward to meet her, their eyes met. Her 

yellow eyes looked straight into his, with the same queer, 
panther-like scrutiny, and the eternal question. She was a 
question, and she had got to be answered. It made her 
fearless, almost shameless, whatever she did. 

But with Percy, the fear had nipped her, the fear that 
she should go forever unanswered, as if life had rejected her. 

This nipped and her strange yellow flare of question as 
she peered at him under her brows, like a panther, made 
Jack’s cheeks slowly darken, and the life-blood flow into 
him stronger, heavier. He knew his passion for her was 
the same. Thank God he met her at last. 

** You’re awfully thin,’ she said. 

** So are you,’’ he answered. 

And she laughed her quick, queer, breathless little laugh, 
showing her pointed teeth. She had seen the death-look in 
his eyes and it was her answer, a bitter answer enough. 
She stopped to put straight the tiny bonnet over her little 
baby’s face, with a delicate, remote movement. He watched. 
her in silence. 

** Where do you want to go? ’’ she asked him, without 
looking at him, ; | ) . 

GOLD 815 

** With you,” he said. 

Then she looked at him again, with the dry-eyed ques- 
tion. But she saw the unapproachable death-look there in 
his eyes, at the back of their dark-blue, dilated emotion and 
passion. And her heart gave up. She looked down the pier, 
as if to walk away. He carried his own bag. They set off 
side by side. 

She lived in a tiny slab cottage in a side lane. But she 
called first at a neighbour’s house, for her other child. It 
was a tiny, toddling thing with a defiant stare in its pale- 
blue eyes. Monica held her baby on one arm, and led this 
tottering child by the other. Jack walked at her side in 
silence. 

The cottage had just two rooms, poorly furnished. But 
it was clean, and had bright cotton curtains and sofa-bed, 
and a pale-blue convolvulus vine mingling with a passion 
vine over the window. 

She laid the baby down in its cradle, and began to take 
off the bonnet of the little girl. She had called it Jane. 

Jack watched the little Jane as if fascinated. The infant 
had curly reddish hair, of a lovely fine texture and a beauti- 
ful tint, something like raw silk with threads of red. Her 
eyes were round and bright blue, and rather defiant, and 
she had the delicate complexion of her kind. She fingered 
her mother’s brooch, like a little monkey touching a bit of 
glittering gold, as Monica stooped to her. 

‘© Daddy gone! ” she said in her chirping, bird-like, quite 
emotionless tone. 

“¢ Yes, Daddy gone! ”’ replied Monica, as emotionlessly. 

The child then glanced with unmoved curiosity at Jack. 
She kept on looking and looking at him, sideways. And he 
watched her just as sharply, her sharp pale-blue eyes. 

‘© Him more Daddy? ” she asked. 

‘¢ T don’t know,” replied Monica, who was suckling her 
baby. 

Yes,” said Jack in a rather hard tone, smiling with a 
touch of mockery. ‘‘ I’m your new father.”’ 

The child smiled back at him, a faint, mocking little grin, 
and put her finger in her mouth. 

The day passed slowly in the strange place, Monica busy 
all the time with the children and the house. Poor Monica, 
she was already a drudge. She was still careless and hasty 

316 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

in her methods, but clean, and uncomplaining. She kept 
herself to herself, and did what she had to do. And Jack 
watched, mostly silent. ’ 

At last the lamp was lighted, the children were both mm 
bed. Monica cooked a little supper over the fire. 

Before he came to the table, Jack asked : 

“‘ Ts Jane Easu’s child? ” 

** T thought you knew,”’ she said. 

** No one has told me. Is she? ” 

Monica turned and faced him, with the yellow flare in 
her eyes, as she looked into his eyes, challenging. 

** Yes,’’ she said. 

But his eyes did not change. The remoteness at the back 
of them did not come any nearer. 

‘* Shall you hate her? ”’ she asked, rather breathlessly. 

** T don’t know,”’ he said slowly. 

** Don’t! ’’ she pleaded, in the same breathlessness. 
** Because I rather hate her.’’ 

** She’s too little to hate,’’ said Jack. 

** IT know,”’ said Monica rather doubtfully. 

She put the food on the table. But she herself ate no- 
thing. 

** Aren’t you well? You don’t eat,’ he asked. 

*°T can’t eat just now,”’ she said. 

‘* If you have a child to suckle, you should,”’ he replied. 

But she only became more silent, and her hands hung 
dead in her lap. Then the baby began to cry, a thin, poor, 
frail noise, and she went to soothe it. 

When she came back, Jack had left the table and was 
sitting in Perey’s wooden arm-chair. 

i Percy’s child doesn’t seem to have much life in it,’? he 
said. 

** Not very much,” she replied. And her hands trembled 
as she cleared away the dishes. 

When she had finished, she moved about, afraid to sit 
down. He called her to him. 
** Monica ! ”’ he said, with a little jerk of his head, mean: 
ing she should come to him. 

She came rather slowly, her queer, pure-seeming face 
looking like a hurt. She stood with her thin hands hanging 
in front of her apron. 

** Monica! ” he said, rising and taking her hands. “ ] 

GOLD 317 

should still want you if you had a hundred children. So 
we won’t say any more about that. And you won’t oppose 
ne when there’s anything I want to do, will you? ” 

She shook her head. 

** No, I won’t oppose you,”’ she said, in a dead little 
voice. 

‘© Let me come to you, then,” he said. ‘* I should have 
0 come to you if you had gone to Melbourne or all round the 
world. And I should be glad to come,’’ he added whim- 
ically, with the warmth of his old smile coming into his 
syes; ‘* I suppose I should be glad to come, if it was in 
nell.”? 

** But it isn’t hell, is it? ’? she asked, wistfully and a 
ittle defiantly. 

** Not a bit,’’ he said. ‘* You’ve got too much pluck in 
you to spoil. You’re as good to me as you were the first 
ime I knew you. Only, Easu might have spoiled you.” 

*¢ And you killed him,” she said quickly, half in reproach. 

** Would you rather he’d killed me? ”’ he asked. 

She looked a long time into his eyes, with that watchful, 
searching look that used to hurt him. Now it hurt him no 
nore. 

She shook her head, saying : 

** I’m glad you killed him. I couldn’t bear to think of 
im living on, and sneering,—sneering.—I was always in 
ove with you, really.” 

‘© Ah, Monica! ”? he exclaimed softly, teasingly, with a 
ittle smile. And she flushed, and flashed with anger. 

‘* Tf you never knew, it was your own fault! ’’ she jerked 
yut. 

‘* Really,’ he said, quoting and echoing the word as she 
ad said it, and smiling with a touch of raillery at her, 
yefore he added : 

“© You always loved me really, but you loved the others 
is well, unreally.”” 

s* Yes,”? she said, baffled, defiant. 

‘* All right, that day is over. You’ve had your unreal 
oves. Now come and have your real one.”’ 

In the next room Easu’s child was sleeping in its odd 
ittle way, a sleep that was neither innocent nor not innocent, 
jueer and naively ‘‘ knowing,’ even in its sleep. Jack 
vatched it as he took off his things : this little inheritance 

318 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

he had.from Easu. An odd little thing. With an odd, 
loveless little spirit of its own, cut off and not daunted. 
He wouldn’t love it, because it wasn’t loveable. But its 
odd little dauntlessness and defiance amused him, he would 
see it had fair play. . 

And he took Monica in his arms, glad to get into grips 
with his own fate again. And it was good. It was better, 
perhaps, than his passionate desirings of earlier days had 
imagined. Because he didn’t lose and scatter himself. He 
gathered, like a reaper at harvest gathering. 

And Monica, who woke for her baby, looked at him as he 
slept soundly and she sat in bed suckling her child. She 
saw in him the eternal stranger. There he was, the eternal 
stranger, lying in her bed sleeping at her side. She rocked 
her baby slightly as she sat up in the night, still rocking 
in the last throes of rebellion. The eternal stranger, she 
must fear him, because she could never finally know him, 
and never entirely possess him. He would never belong 
to her. This had made her rebel so dangerously against 
the thought of him. Because she would have to belong to 
him. Now he had arrived again before her like a doom, 
a doom she still stiffened herself against, but could no longer 
withstand. Because the emptiness of the other men, Percy, 
Easu, all the men she knew, was worse than the doom of 
this man who would never give her his ultimate intimacy, 
but who would be able to hold her till the end of time. 
There was something enduring and changeless in him. But 
she would never hold him entirely. Never! She would 
have to resign herself to that. 

Well, so be it. At least it relieved her of the burden 
of responsibility for life. It took away from her her own 
strange, fascinating female power, which she couldn’t bear 
to part with. But at the same time she felt saved, because 
her own power frightened her, having brought her to a 
brink of nothingness that was like a madness. The nothing- 
ness that fronted her with Percy was worse than submitting 
to this man. After all, this man was magical. 

She put her child in its cradle, and returning waked the 
man. He put out his hand quickly for her, as if she were 
a new, blind discovery. She quivered and thrilled, and left 
it tohim. It was his mystery, since he would have it so. 

GOLD 819 

iti 

They were married in Albany, and stayed there another 
month waiting for a ship. Then they sailed away, all the 
family, away to the North West. They did not go to Perth; 
they did not go to Wandoo. Only Jack saw Mr. George 
in Fremantle, and waved to him good-bye as the ship pro- 
ceeded north. 

Then came two months of wandering, a pretty business 
with a baby and a toddling infant. The second month, 
Percy’s baby suddenly died in the heat, and Monica hardly 
mourned for it. As Jack looked at its pinched little dead 
face, he said: ** You are better dead.’? And that was 
true. 

The little Jane, however, showed no signs of dying. The 
knocking about seemed to suit her. Monica remained very 
thin. It was a sort of hell-life to her, this struggling from 
place to place in the heat and dust, no water to wash in, 
sleeping anywhere like a lost dog, eating the food that came. 
Because she loved to be clean and good-looking and in 
graceful surroundings. What fiend of hell had ordained 
that she must be a sort of tramp woman in the back of 
beyond? 

She did not know, so it was no good asking. Jack seemed 
to know what he wanted. And she was his woman, fated to 
him. There was no more to it. Through the purgatory of 
discomfort she had to go. And he was good to her, thought- 
ful for her, in material things. But at the centre of his 
soul he was not thoughtful for her. He just possessed her, 
mysteriously owned her, and went ahead with his own 
obsessions. 

Sometimes she tried to rebel. Sometimes she wanted to 
refuse to go any farther, to refuse to be a party to his will. 
But then he suddenly looked so angry, and so remote, 
looked at her with such far-off, cold, haughty eyes, that she 
was frightened. She was afraid he would abandon her, or 
ship her back to Perth, and put her out of his life forever. 

Above all things, she didn’t want to be shipped back to 
Perth. Here in the wild she could have taken up with 
another man. She knew that. But she knew that if she 
did, Jack would just put her out of his life altogether. 
There would be no return. His passion for her wouid just 

820 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

take the form of excluding her forever from his being. Be- 
cause passion can so reverse itself, and from being a great 
desire that draws the beloved towards itself, it can become 
an eternal revulsion, excluding the once-beloved forever 
from any contact at all. 

Monica knew this. And whenever she tried to oppose 
him, and the deathly anger rose in him, she was pierced 
with a fear so acute she had to hold on to some support, to 
prevent herself sinking to the ground. It was a strange fear, 
as if she were going to be cast out of the land of the living, 
among the unliving that slink like pariahs outside. 

Afterwards she was puzzled. Why had he got this power 
over her? Why couldn’t she be a free woman, to go where 
she chose, and be a complete thing in herself? 

She caught at the idea. But it was no good. When he 
went away prospecting for a week or more at a time, she 
would struggle to regain her woman’s freedom. And it 
would seem to her as if she had got it : she was free of him 
again. She was a free being, by herself. 

But then, when he came back, tired, sunburnt, ragged, 
and still unsuccessful: and when he looked at her with 
desire in his eyes, the living desire for her; she was so glad, 
suddenly, as if she had forgotten, or as if she had never 
known what his desire of her meant to her. She was so 
glad, she was weak with gladness instead of fear. And if, 
in perverseness, she still tried to oppose him, in the light 
of her supposedly regained freedom ; and she saw the strange 
glow of desire for her go out of his eyes, and the strange 
loveliness, to her, of his wanting to have her near, in the 
room, giving him his meal or sitting near him outside in 
the shade of the evening; then, when his face changed, and 
took on the curious look of aloofness, as if he glistened with 
anger looking down on her from a long way off; then, she 
felt all her own world turn to smoke, and her own will 
mysteriously evaporate, leaving her only wanting to be 
wanted again, back in his world. Her freedom was worth 
less than nothing. 

Still often, when he was gone, leaving her alone in the 
little cabin, she was glad. She was free to spread her own 
woman’s aura round her, she was free to delight in her own 
woman’s idleness and whimsicality, free to amuse herself, 
half-teasing, half-loving that little odd female of a Jane. 

GOLD B21 

And sometimes she would go to the cabins of other women, 
and gossip. And sometimes she would flirt with a young 
miner or prospector who seemed handsome. And she would 
get back her young, gay liveliness and freedom. 

But when the man she flirted with wanted to kiss her, or 
put his arm round her waist, she found it made her go cold 
and savagely hostile. It was not as in the old days, when 
it gave her a thrill to be seized and kissed, whether by Easu, 
by Percy or Jack or whatever man it was she was flirting 
with. Then, there had been a spark between her and many 
aman. But now, alas, the spark wouldn’t fly. The man 
might be never so good-looking and likeable, yet when he 
touched her, instead of the spark fiying from her to him, 
immediately all the spark went dead in her. And this left 
her so angry, she could kill herself, or so wretched, she 
souldn’t even cry. 

That little goggle-eyed imp of a Jane, in spite of her 
one solitary year of age, seemed somehow to divine what 
was happening inside her mother’s breast, and she seemed 
0 chuckle wickedly. Monica always felt that the brat knew, 
and that she took Jack’s side. 

Jane always wanted Jack to come back. When he was 
away, she would toddle about on her own little affairs, 
suriously complacent and impervious to outer influences. 
5ut if she heard a horse coming up to the hut, she was at 
he door in a flash. And Monica saw with a pang, how 
tteadily intent the brat was on the man’s return. Some- 
10w, from Jane, Monica knew that Jack would go with 
ytther women. Because of the spark that flashed to him 
rom that brat of a baby of Easu’s. 

And at evening, Jane hated going to bed if Jack hadn’t 
ome home. She would be a real little hell-monkey. It 
vas as if she felt the house wasn’t safe, wasn’t real, till he 
ad come in. 

Which annoyed Monica exceedingly. Why wasn’t the 
nother enough for the child? 

But she wasn’t. And when Jane was in bed, Monica 
vould take up the uneasiness of the manless house. She 
vould sit like a cat shut up in a strange room, unable to 
ettle, unable really to rest, and hating the night for having 
ome and surprised her in her empty loneliness. Her lone- 
ness might be really enjoyable during the day. But aiter 

Z 

322 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

nightfall it was empty, sterile, a mere oppression to her. 
She wished he would come home, if only so that she could 
hate him. 

And she felt a flash of joy when she heard his footstep 
on the stones outside, even if the flash served only to kindle 
a great resentment against him. And he would come in, 
with his burnt, half-seeing face, unsuccessful, worn, silent, 
yet not uncheerful. And he spoke his few rather low words, 
from his chest, asking her something. And she knew he had 
come back to her. But where from, and what from, she 
would never know entirely. 

She had always known where Percy had been, and what 
he had been doing. She felt she would always have known, 
with Easu. But with Jack she never knew. And sometimes 
this infuriated her. But it was no good. He would tel! 
her anything she asked. And then she felt there was some. 
thing she couldn’t ask about. 

The months went by. He staked his claim, and worked 
like anavvy. He was a navvy, nothing but anavvy. Anc 
she was a navvy’s wife, in a hut of one room, in a desert 0 
heat and sand and grey-coloured bush, sleeping on a piece 
of canvas stretched on a low trestle, eating on a tin plate 
eating sand by the mouthful when the wind blew. Percy’: 
baby was dead and buried in the sand : another sop to the 
avid country. And she herself was with child again, anc 
thin as arat. But it was his child this time, so she had ¢ 
certain savage satisfaction in it. 

He went on working at his claim. It was now more thar 
a year he had spent at this game of looking for gold, anc 
he had hardly found a cent’s worth. They were very poor 
in debt to the keeper of the store. But everybody had : 
queer respect for Jack. They dared not be very familia 
with him, but they didn’t resent him. He had a good aura 
The other men might jeer sometimes at his frank but un 
approachable aloofness, his subtle sort of delicacy, and hi 
simple sort of pride. Yet when he was spoken to, his answe 
was so much in the spirit of the question, so frank, tha 
you couldn’t resent him. In ordinary things he was ga‘ 
and completely one of themselves. The self that was beyont 
them he never let intrude. Hence their curious respect fo 
him. 

Because there was something unordinary in him. Th 

GOLD 823 

biggest part of himself he kept entirely to himself, and a 
curious sombre steadfastness inside him made shifty men 
uneasy with him. He could never completely mix in, in 
the vulgar way, with men. He would take a drink with 
the rest, and laugh and talk half an hour away. Even 
get a bit tipsy and talk rather brilliantly. But always, al- 
ways at the back of his eyes was this sombre aloofness, that 
could never come forward and meet and mingle, but held 
back, apart, waiting. 

They called him, after his father, the General. But 
never was a General with so small an army at his command. 
He was playing a lone hand. The mate he was working with 
suddenly chucked up the job and travelled away, and the 
General went on alone. He moved about the camp at his 
ease. When he sat in the bar drinking his beer with the 
other men, he was really alone, and they knew it. But he 
had a good aura, so they felt a certain real respect for his 
loneliness. And when he was there they talked and behaved 
as if in the aura of a certain blood-purity, although he was 
in rags, for Monica hated sewing and couldn’t bear, simply 
couldn’t bear to mend his old shirts and trousers. And 
there was no money to buy new. 

He held on. He did not get depressed or melancholy. 
When he got absolutely stumped, he went away and did 
hired work for a spell. Then he came back to the gold 
field. He was now nothing but a miner. The miner’s 
instinct had developed in him. He had to wait for his 
instinct to perfect itself. He knew that. He knew he was 
not a man to be favoured by blind luck. Whatever he 
won, he must win by mystic conquest. 

If he wanted gold he must master it in the veins of the 
earth. He knew this. And for this reason he gave way 
neither to melancholy nor to impatience. ‘* If I can’t 
win,’’ he said to himself, ‘‘ it’s because I’m not master of 
the thing I’m up against.” 

s¢ Tf I can’t win, I’ll die fighting,’’ he said to himself. 
‘¢ But in the end I will win.”’ 

There was nothing to do but to fight, and fight on. 
This was his creed. And a fighter has no use for melancholy 
and impatience. i 

He saw the fight his boyhood had been, against his aunts, 
and school and college. He didn’t want to be made quite 

324 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

tame, and they had wanted to tame him, like all the rest. 
His father was a good man and a good soldier : but a tame 
one. He himself was not a soldier, nor even a good man. 
But also he was not tame. Not a tame dog, like all the 
rest. 

For this reason he had come to Australia, away from the 
welter of vicious tameness. For tame dogs are far more 
vicious than wild ones. Only they can be brought to heel. 

In Australia, a new sort of fight. A fight with tame dogs 
that were playing wild. Easu was a tame dog, playing the 
wolf in a mongrel, back-biting way. Tame dogs escaped 
and became licentious. That was Australia. He knew that. 

But they were not all quite tame. Tom, the safe Tom, 
had salt of wild savour still in his blood. And Lennie had 
his wild streak. So had Monica. So, somewhere had the 
a terre Mary. Some odd freakish wildness of the splendid, 
powerful, wild, old English blood. 

Jack had escaped the tamers: they couldn’t touch him 
now. He had escaped the insidious tameness, the slight 
degeneracy, of Wandoo. He had learned the tricks of the 
escaped tame dogs who played at licentiousness. And he 
had mastered Monica, who had wanted to be a domestic 
bitch playing wild. He had captured her wildness, to mate 
his own wildness. 

It was no good playing wild. If he had any real wildness 
in him, it was dark, and wary, and collected, self-responsible. 
and of unbreakable steadfastness : like the wildness of 2 
wolf or a fox, that knows it will die if it is caught. 

If you had a tang of the old wildness in you, you ran witk 
the most intense wariness, knowing that the good tame 
dogs are really turning into licentious, vicious tame dogs. 
The vicious tame dogs, pretending to be wild, hate the rea 
clean wildness of an unbroken thing much more than dc 
the respectable tame people. | 

No, if you refuse to be tamed, you have to be most wary 
most subtle, on your guard all the time. You can’t affore 
to be licentious. If you are, you will die in the trap. Fo 
the world is a great trap set wide for the unwary. 

Jack had learned all these things. He refused to be 
tamed. He knew that the dark kingdom of death ahead hac 
no room for tame dogs. They merely were put into earth 
as carrion. Only the wild, untamed souls walked on afte 

GOLD 825 

death over the border into the porch of death, to be lords 
of death and masters of the next living. This he knew. 
The tame dogs were put into the earth as carrion, like 
Easu and Percy’s poor little baby, and Jacob Ellis. He 
often wondered if that courageous old witch-cat of a Gran 
had slipped into the halls of death, to be one of the ladies 
of the dark. The lords of death, and the ladies of the dark ! 
He would take his own Monica over the border when she 
died. She would sit unbroken, a quiet, fearless bride in the 
dark chambers of the dead, the dead who order the goings 
of the next living. 

That was the goal of the afterwards, that he had at the 
back of his eyes. But meanwhile here on earth he had to 
win. He had to make room again on earth for those who 
are not unbroken, those who are not tamed to carrion. 
Some place for those who know the dark mystery of being 
royal in death, so that they can enact the shadow of their 
own royalty on earth. Some place for the souls that are 
m themselves dark and have some of the sumptuousness 
of proud death, no matter what their fathers were. Jack’s 
father was tame, as kings and dukes to-day are almost 
nongrelly tame. But Jack was not tame. And Easu’s 
weird baby was not tame. She had some of the eternal 
earlessness of the aristocrat whose bones are pure. But 
1 weird sort of aristocrat. 

Jack wanted to make a place on earth for a few aristo- 
rats-to-the-bone. He wanted to conquer the world. 

And first he must conquer gold. As things are, only the 
ame go out and conquer gold, and make a lucrative tame- 
ess. The untamed forfeit their gold. 

** T must conquer gold! ”’ said Jack to himself. ‘* I must 
pen the veins of the earth and bleed the power of gold into 
ny own veins, for the fulfilling of the aristocrats of the 
one. I must bring the great stream of gold flowing in an- 
ther direction, away from the veins of the tame ones, into 
he veins of the lords of death. I must start the river of 
fealth of the world rolling in a new course, down the 
ombre, quiet, proud valleys of the lords of death and the 
dies of the dark, the aristocrats of the afterwards.”’ 

So he talked to himself, as he wandered alone in his 
earch, or sat on the bench with a pot of beer, or stepped 
ito Monica’s hot little hut. And when he failed he knew it 

826 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

was because he had not fought intensely enough, anc 
subtly enough. 

The bad food, the climate, the hard life gave him a sor 
of fever and an eczema. But it was no matter. That wa 
only the pulp of him paying the penalty. The powerfu 
skeleton he was was powerful as ever. The pulp of him 
his belly, his heart, his muscle seemed not to be able t 
affect his strength, or at least his power, for more than + 
short time. Sometimes he broke down. Then he woulc 
think what he could do with himself, do for himself, fo: 
his flesh and blood. And what he could do, he would do 
And when he could do no more, he would go and lie dowr 
in the mine, or hidden in some shade, lying on the earth 
alone, away from anything human. Till the earth itsel 
gave him back his power. Till the powerful living skeletoz 
of him resumed its sway and serenity and fierce power. 

He knew he was winning, winning slowly, even in hi 
fight with the earth, his fight for gold. It was on the card 
he might die before his victory. Then it would be death 
he would have to accept it. He would have to go int 
death, and leave Monica and Jane and the coming baby 
to fate. 

Meanwhile, he would fight, and fight on. The baby wa 
near, there was no money. He had to stay and watcl 
Monica. She, poor thing, went to bed with twins, two boys 
There was nothing hardly left of her. He had to give yy 
everything, even his thoughts, and bend his whole life t 
her, to help her through, and save her and the two quit 
healthy baby boys. For a month he was doctor and nurs: 
and housewife and husband, and he gave himself absolutel: 
to the work, without a moment’s failing. Poor Monica 
when she couldn’t bear herself, he held her hips togethe 
with his arm, and she clung to his neck for life. 

This time he almost gave up. He almost decided to g 
and hire himself out to steady work, to keep her and th 
babies in peace and safety. To be a hired workman fo 
the rest of his days. ) 

And as he sat with his eyes dark and unchanging, read: 
to accept this fate, since this his fate must be, came 
letter from Mr George with an enclosure from England an 
a cheque for fifty pounds, a legacy from one of the aunt 
who had so benevolently died at the right moment. H 

GOLD 827 

decided his dark Lord did not intend him to go and hire 
himself out for life, as a hired labourer. He decided Monica 
and the babies did not want the peace and safety of a hired 
labourer’s cottage. Perhaps better die and be buried in 
the sand and leave their skeletons like white messengers in 
the ground of this Australia. 

So lhe went back to his working. And three days later 
struck gold, so that there was gold on his pick-point. He 
was alone, and he refused at first to get excited. But his 
trained instinct knew that it was a rich lode. He worked 
along the vein, and felt the rich weight of the yellow- 
streaked stuff he fetched out. The light-coloured softish 
stuff. He sat looking at it in his hand, and the glint of it 
in the dark earth-rock of the mine, in the light of the 
lamp. And his bowels leaped in him, knowing that the 
white gods of tameness would wilt and perish as the pale 
vold flowed out of their veins. 

_ There would be a place on earth for the lords of death. 
His own Lord had at last spoken. 

Jack sent quickly for Lennie to come and work with him. 
For Lennie, with a wife and a child, was struggling very 
hard. 

Len and Tom both came. Jack had not expected Tom. 
But Tom lifted his brown eyes to Jack and said : 

“‘T sortta felt I couldn’t stand even Len being mates 
with you, an’ me not there. I was your first mate, Jack. 
[’’ve never been myself since I parted with you.” 

“All right,”? laughed Jack. ‘* You’re my first 
nate.” 

_* That’s what I am, General,’’ said Tom. 

Jack had showed Monica some of the ore, and told her 
he mine seemed to be turning out fairly. She was getting 
yack her own strength, that those two monstrous young 
wins had almost robbed from her entirely. Jack was very 
vareful of her. He wanted above all things that she shoulda 
yecome really strony again. 

And she, with her rare vitality, soon began to bloom once 
nore. And as her strength came back she was very much 
aken up with her babies. These were the first she had 
njoyed. The other two she had never really enjoyed. But 
with these she was as fussy as a young cat with her kittens. 
She almost forgot Jack entirely. Left him to be busy with 

828 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Tom and Lennie and his mine. Even the gold failed t 
excite her. 

And she had rather a triumph. She was able to b 
queenly again with Tom and Lennie. As a girl she ha 
always been a bit queenly with the rest of them at Wandoo 
And she couldn’t bear to be humiliated in their eyes. 

Now she needn’t. She had the General for her husband 
she had his twins. And he had gold in his mine. Hadn’ 
she a perfect right to be queenly with Tom and Lennie 
She even got into the habit, right at the beginning, o 
speaking of Jack as ‘* the General ’’ to them. 

‘© Where’s the General? Didn’t he come down wit! 
you? *” she would snap at them, in her old, sparky fashion 

**He’s reviewing his troops,’? Lennie  sarcasticall 
answered. 

Whereupon Jack appeared in the door, still in rags. Amt 
it was Lennie who mended his shirt for him, when it wa 
torn on the shoulder and showed the smooth man under 
neath. Monica still couldn’t bring herself to these fiddlin; 
jobs. 

CHAP: XXIV. THE OFFER TO MARY 
i 

THEY worked for months at the mine, and still it turned out 
richly. Though they kept as quiet as possible, the fame 
spread. They had a bonanza. They were all three going to 
be rich, and Jack was going to be very rich. In the light 
of his luck, he was ‘‘ the General ”’ to everybody. 

And in the midst of this flow of fortune, came another, 
rather comical windfall. Again the news was forwarded 

by Mr George, along with a word of congratulation from 
that gentleman. The forwarded letter read : 

‘* Dear Sir, 

This come hopping to find you well as it leaves 
me at prisent thanks be to almity God. Your dear uncle 
Passed Away peaceful on Satterday nite And though 
it be not my place to tell you of it i am Grateful to have 
the oppertunity to offer my umble Respecs before the lord 
and Perlice I take up my pen with pleashr to inform you 
that He passed without Pain and even Drafts as he aloud 
the umberrela to be put down and the Book read. 

‘¢ The 24 salm and i kep the ink and paper by to rite of 
his sudden dismiss but he lingered long years after the bote 
wint so was onable to Inform you before he desist the doctor 
rote a butiful certicket of death saying he did of sensible 
decay but I don no how he brote himself to rite it as the 
pore master was wite as driven snow and no blemish. And 
being his most umble and Dutiful servants we could not 
ave brout ourself to hever ave rote as he was sensible Pecos 
god knows the pore sole was not. be that as it may we 
burried him proud under the prisent arrangements of town 
council the clerk was prisent xpects the doctors will he mad 
up the nite you was hear in the cimetary and pending your 
Return Holds It In Bond as Being rite for us we are Yor 
Respectable servants to Oblige Hand Commend 

Emma and Amos LEwIs.” 

Jack and Tom roared with laughter over this epistle, that 
brought back so vividly the famous trip up north, 
829 

830 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘‘ Gloryanna, General, you’ve got your property at Cone; 
Hatch all right,’’ said Tom. 

There was a letter from Mr George saying that the defunc 
John Grant was the son of Jack’s mother’s elder sister 
that he had been liable all his life to bouts of temporary 
insanity, but that in a period of sanity he had signed th 
will drawn up by Dr. Rackett, when the two boy 
called at the place several years before, and that the wil 
had been approved. So that Jack, as legal heir and neares 
male relative, could now come down and take possesion 0 
the farm. 

“‘T don’t want that dismal place,’ said Jack. ‘* Let i 
go to the Crown. I’ve no need of it now.” 

** Don’t be a silly cuckoo! ”? said Tom. ‘* You saw it o 
a wet night with Ally Sloper in bed under a green cart 
umbrella. Go an’ look at it of a fine day. An’ then if you 
don’t want it, sell it or lease it, but don’t let the Crowt 
rake it in.”’ 

So in about a fortnight’s time Jack rather reluctantly 
left the mine, with its growing heaps of refuse, and departec 
from the mining settlement which had become a sort o 
voluntary prison for him, and went west to Perth. He wai 
already a rich man and notorious in the colony. He rod 
with two pistols in his belt, and that unchanging aloof look 
on his face. But he carried himself with pride, rode a gooc 
horse, wore well-made riding breeches and a fine bandanns 
handkerchief loose round his neck, and looked, with a silve 
studded band round his broad felt hat, a mixture of golc 
miner, a gentleman settler, and a bandit chief. Perhap: 
he felt a mixture of them all. 

Mr George received him with a great welcome. And Jacl 
was pleased to see the old man. But he refused absolutely 
to go to the club or to the Government House, or to mee 
any of the responsible people of the town. 

**T don’t want to see them, Mr George. I don’t wan 
to see them.”’ | 

And poor old George, his nose a bit out of joint, had t 
submit to leaving Jack alone. 

Jack had his old room in Mr George’s house. The Gooc 
Plain Cook was still going. And Aunt Matilda, rather older 
stouter, with more lines in her facce, came to tea with Mary 
and Miss Blessington, Mary had not married Mr Blessing 

THE OFFER TO MARY 831 

ton. But she had remained friends with the odd daughter, 
who was now a self-contained young woman, shy, thin, 
well-bred, and delicate. Mr Blessington had not married 
again. In Aunt Matilda’s opinion, he was still waiting for 
Mary. And Mary had refused Tom’s rather doubtful offer. 
om was still nervous about Honeysuckle. So there they all 
were. 

When Jack shook hands with Mary he had a slight shock. 
He had forgotten her. She had gone out of his conscious- 
ness. But when she looked up at him with her dark, clear, 
waiting eyes, as if she had been watching and waiting for 
him afar off, his heart gave a queer, dizzy lurch. He had 
forgotten her. They say the heart has a short memory. 
But now, as a dark hotness gathered in his heart, he realised 
that his blood had not forgotten her. He had only forgotten 
aer with his head. His blood, with its strange submissive- 
ness and its strange unawareness of time, had kept her just 
she same. 

The blood has an eternal memory. It neither forgets nor 

noves on ahead. But it is quiescent and submits to the 
nind’s oversway. 
_ He had a certain blood-connection with Mary. He had 
itterly forgotten it, in the stress and rage of other things. 
And now, the moment she lifted her eyes to him, and he saw 
ver dusky, quiet, heavy, permanent face, the dull heat 
tarted in his breast again, and he remembered how he had 
old her he would come for her again. 

Since his twins were born and he had been so busy with 
he mine, and he had Monica, he had not given any thought 
© women. But the moment he saw Mary and met her eyes, 
he dark thought struck home in him again: I want Mary 
or my other woman. He didn’t want to displace Monica. 
Monica was Monica. But he wanted this other woman, 
00. 

Aunt Matilda ‘‘ dear-boyed ’’ him more than ever. But 
10w he was not a dear boy, he didn’t feel a dear boy, and 
he was put out. 

** Dear boy! and how does Monica stand that trying 
imate? ”” 

*‘ She is quite well again, Marm.”’ 

*© Poor child! Poor child! I hope you will bring her 
nto a suitable home here in Perth, and have the children 

832 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

suitably brought up. It is so fortunate for you your mine 
is so successful. Now you can build a home here by the 
river, among us all, and be charming company for us, like 
you dear father.” 

Mary was watching him with black eyes, and Miss Bless- 
ington with her wide, quick, round, dark-grey eyes. There 
was a frail beauty about that odd young woman; frail, 
highly-bred, sensitive, with an uncanny intelligence. 

‘© No, Marm,”’ said Jack cheerfully. ‘* I shall not come 
and live in Perth.” 

‘* Dear boy, of course you will. You won’t forsake us 
and take your money and your family and your attractive 
self far away to England? No, don’t do that. It is just 
what your dear father did. Robbed us of one of our sweetest 
girls, and never came back.” — 

** No, I shan’t go to England, either,’’ smiled Jack. 

‘© Then what will you do? ” 

‘* Stay at the mine for the time being.” 

** Oh, but the mine won’t last for ever. And, dear boy, 
don’t waste your talents and your charm mining, when it is 
no longer necessary ! Oh, do come down to Perth, and bring 
your family. Mary is pining to see your twins: and deat 
Monica.. Of course we all are.”’ 

Jack smiled to himself. He would no longer give in s 
hair’s breadth to any of these dreary world-people. 

‘* A la bonne heure! ”’ he said, using one of his mother’s 
well-worn tags. But then his mother could rattle bad col- 
loquial French, and he couldn’t. 

Mary asked him many questions about the mine and 
Monica, and Hilda Blessington listened with lowered head 
only occasionally fixing him with queer, searching eyes 
like some odd creature not quite human. Jack was some. 
Hane of a hero. And he was pleased. He wanted to be ¢ 

ero. 

But he was no hero any more for Aunt Matilda. Nov 
that the cherub look had gone for ever, and the shy, blush 
ing, blurting boy had turned into a hard-boned, healthy 
young man with a half haughty aloofness and a little reck 
less smile that made you feel uncomfortable, she was driver 
to venting some venom on him. 

‘* That is the worst of the colonies,” she said from het 
bluish powdered face. ‘¢ Our most charming, culturec 

THE OFFER TO MARY 833 

young men go out to the back of beyond, and they come 
home quite—quite 27, 

** Quite what, Marm? ” 

** Why, I was going to say uncouth, but that’s perhaps 
a little strong.”’ 

** I should say not at all,’? he answered. He disliked the 
old lady, and enjoyed baiting her. Great stout old hen, 
she had played cock-o’-the-walk long enough. 

** How many children have you got out there? ”’ she 
suddenly asked, rudely. 

** We have only the twins of my own,”’ he answered. 
** But, of course, there is Jane.”’ 

** Jane! Jane! Which is Jane? ”’ 

*¢ Jane is Easu’s child. Monica’s first.” 

Everybody started. It was as if a bomb had been 
dropped in the room. Miss Blessington coloured to the 
roots of her fleecy brown hair. Mary studied her fingers, 
and Aunt Matilda sat in a Queen Victoria statue pose, 
outraged. 

‘‘ What is she like? ’? asked Mary softly, looking up. 

*‘ Who, Jane? She’s a funny little urchin. I’m fond of 
her. I believe she’d always stand by me.”’ 

Mary looked at him. It was a curious thing to say. 

‘‘ Is that how you think of people—whether they would 
always stand by you or not? ”’ she asked softly. 

‘<T suppose it is,’’ he laughed. ‘* Courage is the first 
quality in life, don’t you think? and fidelity the next.” 

‘* Fidelity? ’? asked Mary. 

«¢ Oh, I don’t mean automatic fidelity. I mean faithful 
to the living spark,’’ he replied a little hastily. 

‘¢ Don’t you try to be too much of a spark, young man,” 
snapped Aunt Matilda, arousing from her statuesque offence 
in order to let nothing pass by her. 

‘<I promise you I won’t try,”’ he laughed. 

Mary glanced at him quickly—then down at her fingers. 

‘‘ T think fidelity is a great problem,”’ she said softly. 

‘Pray why,’ bounced Aunt Matilda. ‘“ You give 
your word, and you stick to it.” 

<< Oh, it’s not just simple word-faithfulness, Mrs Watson,”’ 
said Jack. He had Mary in mind. 

<¢ Well, I suppose I have still to live and learn, 
Aunt Matilda 

? said 

334 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘‘ What’s that you have still to live and learn, Matilda? ” 
said Mr George, coming in again with papers. 

‘““ This young man is teaching me lessons about life. 
Courage is-the first quality in life, if you please.” 

“* Well, why not? ” said Old George amiably. ‘‘ I like 
spunk myself.” 

“* Courage to do the right thing! ”’ said Aunt Matilda. 

‘¢ And who’s going to decide which is the right thing? ” 
asked the old man, teasing her. 

‘* There’s no question of it,’’ said Aunt Matilda. 

‘* Well,’ said the old lawyer rubbing his head, “* there 
often is, my dear woman, a very big question ! ”’ 

‘* And fidelity is the second virtue,’”’ said Mary, looking 
up at him with trustful eyes, enquiringly. 

‘* A man’s no good unless he can keep faith,’”’ said the 
old man. 

** But what is it one must remain faithful to? ’’ came the 
quiet, cool voice of Hilda Blessington. 

** Do you know what old Gran Ellis said? ’’ asked Jack. 
‘* She said a man’s own true self is God in him. She was 
a queer old bird.”’ 

** His true self,’? said Aunt Matilda. ‘* His true self! 
And I should say old Mrs Ellis was a doubtful guide to 
young people, judging from her own family.”’ 

‘* She made a great impression on me, Marm,”’ said Jack 
politely. 

Mr George had brought the papers referring to the new 
property. Jack read various documents, rather absently. 
Then the title deeds. Then he studied a fascinating little 
green-and-red map, ‘* delineating and setting forth,’? with 
** easements and encumbrances,’’ whatever they were. 
There was a bank-book showing a balance of four hundred 
pounds nineteen shillings and sixpence, in the West 
Australian Bank. 

Jack told about his visit to Grant farm, and the man 
under the umbrella. They all laughed. 

“The poor fellow had a bad start,’? said Mr George. 
‘** But he was a good farmer and a good business man, in 
his right times. Oh, he knew who he was leaving the place 
to, when Rackett drew up that will.” __ 

** Gran Ellis told me about him,”’ said Jack. ‘* She told 
me about all the old people. She told me about my mother’s 

THE OFFER TO MARY 335 

old sister. And she told me about the father of this crazy 
man as well, but 2 

Mr George was looking at him coldly and fiercely. 

** The poor fellow’s father,’’ the old man said, ‘* was an 
Englishman who thought himself a swell, but wasn’t too 
much of a high-born gentleman to abandon a decent girl 
and go round to the east side and marry another woman, 
and flaunt round in society with women he hadn’t 
married.”’ 

Jack remembered. It was Mary’s father: seventh son 
of old Lord Haworth. What a mix up! How bitter old 
George sounded ! 

‘¢ It seems to have been a mighty mix-up out here, fifty 
years ago, sir,’’ he said mildly. 

‘© It was a mix-up then—and is a mix-up now.” 

‘TI suppose,” said Jack, “ if the villain of a gentleman 
had never abandoned my aunt—I can’t think of her as an 
aunt—he’d never have gone to Sydney, and his children 
that he had there would never have been born.”’ 

‘¢ T suppose not,’’ said Mr George drily. But he started 
a little and involuntarily looked at Mary. 

_ Do you think it would have been better if they had 
never been born? ”? Jack asked pertinently. 

‘¢ T don’t set up to judge,”’ said the old man. 

‘© Does Mrs Watson? ” 

‘JT certainly think it would be better,” said Mrs 
Watson, “‘ if that poor half-idiot cousin of yours had never 
been born.”’ 

‘I’ve got Gran Ellis on my mind,” said Jack. ‘* She 
was funny, what she condemned and what she didn’t. I 
used to think she was an old terror. But I can understand 
her better now. She was a wise woman, seems to me.” 

‘Indeed! ”? said Aunt Matilda. ‘* I never put her and 
wisdom together.” 

‘© Yes, she was wise. I can see now. She knew that 
sins are as vital a part of life as virtues, and she stuck up for 
the sins that are necessary to life.” 

‘© What’s the matter with you, Jack Grant, that you go 
and start moralising? ”’ said Old George. 

‘‘ Why, sir, it must be that my own sinful state is dawn- 
ing on my mind,”’ said Jack, ** and I’m wondering whether 
to take Mrs Watson’s advice and repent and weep, etc., etc, 

836 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Or whether to follow old Gran Ellis’ lead, and put a sinful 
feather in my cap.” 

“‘ Well,”? said Old George, smiling, ‘I don’t know. 
You talk about courage and fidelity. Sin usually means 
doing something rather cowardly, and breaking your faith 
in some direction.”’ 

“* Oh, I don’t know, sir. Tom and Lennie are faithful to 
me. But that doesn’t mean they are not free. They are 
free to do just what they like, so long as they are faithful 
to the spark that is between us. As I am faithful to them. 
It seems to me, sir, one is true to one’s word in business, 
in affairs. But in life one can only be true to the spark.” 

‘* I’m afraid there’s something amiss with you, son, that’s 
set you off arguing and splitting hairs.”’ 

** There is. Something is always amiss with most of us. 
Old Gran Ellis was a lesson to me, if I’?d known. Something 
is always wrong with the lot of us. And I believe in think- 
ing before I act.” 

** Let us hope so,’? said Mr George. ‘* But it sounds 
funny sort of thinking you do.”’ 

** But,”’ said Hilda Blessington, with wide, haunted eyes, 
** what is the spark that one must be faithful to? How 
are we to be sure of it? ”” 

** You just feel it. And then you act upon it. That’s 
courage. And then you always live up to the responsibility 
of your act. That’s faithfulness. You have to keep faith 
in all kinds of ways. I have to keep faith with Monica, 
and the babies, and young Jane, and Lennie, and Tom, and 
dead Gran Ellis : and—and more—yes, more.”’ 

He looked with clear, hard eyes at Mary, and at the 
young girl. They were both watching him, puzzled and 
perturbed. The two old people in the background were 
silent but hostile. 

** Do you know what I am faithful to? ”’ he said, still 
to the two young women, but letting the elders hear. * I 
am faithful to my own inside, when something stirs in me. 
Gran Ellis said that was God in me. I know there’s a God 
outside of me. But he tells me to go my own way, and 
never be frightened of people and the world, only be 
frightened of him. And if I felt I really wanted two wives, 
for example, I would have them and keep them both. If 
T really wanted them, it would mean it was the God outside 

THE OFFER TO MARY 837 

me bidding me, and it would be up to me to obey, world 
or no world.” 

‘© You describe exactly the devil driving you,”’ said Aunt 
Matilda. 

“‘ Doesn’t he! ”? laughed Mr George, who was oddly im- 
pressed. ‘I only hope there isn’t a streak of madness in 
the family.”’ 

*‘ No there’s not. The world is all so tame, it’s like an 
idiot to me, a dangerous idiot. So that if I do want two 
wives—or even three—well, I do. Why listen to the Idiot.” 

‘¢ Sounds like you’d gone cracked out there in that mining 
settlement,’’ said Mr George. 

‘‘ Tf I said I wanted two fortunes instead of one,’’ said 
Jack, with a malicious smile, ‘‘ you wouldn’t think it 
cracked.”’ 

‘‘ No, only greedy,’ said Old George. 

‘6 Not if I could use them. And the same if I can really 
value two wives, and use them—or even three ’’—Jack 
glanced with a queer, bright grin at Hilda Blessington— 
“‘ Well, three wives would be three fortunes for my blood 
and spirit.”’ 

‘‘ For your wickedness,” said Aunt Matilda. ‘* You are 
‘not allowed to say such things, even in joke.” 

‘* Surely I may say them in dead earnest,”’ persisted Jack 
mischievously. He was aware of Mary and Hilda Blessing- 
ton listening, and he wanted to throw a sort of lasso over 
them. 

‘‘ You'll merely find yourself in gaol for bigamy,”’ said 
Mr George. 

s¢ Oh,” said Jack, “ I wouldn’t risk that. It would really 
be a Scotch marriage. Monica is my legal wife. But what 
I pledged myself to, I’d stick to, as I stick to Monica. I’d 
stick to the others the same.” 

“I won’t hear any more of this nonsense,” said Aunt 
Matilda, rising. 

‘© Nonsense it is,”? said Old George testily. 

Jack laughed. Their being bothered amused him. He 
was a little surprised at himself breaking out in this way. 
But the sight of Mary, and the sense of a new, different 
responsibility, had struck it out of him. His nature was 
ethical, inclined to be emotionally mystical. Now, how- 
ever, the sense of foolish complacency, and empty assurance 

838 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

in Aunt Matilda, and in all the dead-certain people of thiss 
world struck out of him a hard, sharp, non-emotionall 
opposition. He felt hard and mischievous, confronting: 
them. Who were they, to judge and go on judging? Who: 
was Aunt Matilda, to judge the dead fantastic soul of the: 
fierce Gran? The Ellises, the Ellises they all had some of! 
Gran’s fierce pagan uneasiness about them, they were all a: 
bit uncanny. That was why he loved them so. 

And Mary ! Mary had another slow, heavy, mute mystery’ 
that waited and waited for ever, like a lode stone. And 
should he therefore abandon her, abandon her society and 
a sort of sterility? Not he. She was his to fertilise. His, 
and no other man’s. She knew it herself. He knew it. 
Then he would fight them all. Even the good old George. 
For the mystery that was his and Mary’s. 

Let it be an end of popular goodness. Let there be an- 
other deeper, fiercer, untamed sort of goodness, like in 
the days of Abraham and Samson and Saul. If Jack was 
to be good he would be good with these great old men, the 
heroic fathers, not with the saints. The christian goodness 
had gone bad, decayed almost into poison. It needed again 
the old heroic goodness of untamed men, with the wild 
great God who was for ever too unknown to be a paragon. 

Old George was a little afraid of Jack, uneasy about him. 
He thought him not normal. The boy had to be put in a 
category by himself, like a madman in a solitary cell. And 
at the same time, the old man was delighted. He was 
delighted with the young man’s physical presence.  Be- 
wildered by the careless, irrational things Jack would say, 
the old bachelor took off his spectacles and rubbed his tired 
eyes again and again, as if he were going blind, and as if 
he were losing his old dominant will. 

He had been a dominant character in the colony so long. 
And now this young fellow was laughing at him and stealing 
away his power of resistance. 

** Don’t make eyes at me, sir,”’ said Jack laughing. ‘I 
know better than you what life means.”’ 

** You do, do you? Oh, you do? ” said the old man. 
And he laughed too. Somehow it made him feel warm and 
easy. ‘* A fine crazy affair it would be if it were left to 
you,”? And he laughed loud at the absurdity. 

THE OFFER TO MARY 839 

i 

Jack persuaded Mary to go with Mr George and himself 
to look at Grant Farm. Mary and the old lawyer went in 
a buggy, Jack rode his own horse. And it seemed to him 
to be good to be out again in the bush and forest country. 
It was rainy season, and the smell of the earth was delicious 
in his nostrils. 

He decided soon to leave the mine. It was running thin. 
He could leave it in charge of Tom. And then he must 
make some plans for himself. Perhaps he would come and 
live on the Grant farm. It was not too far from Perth, or 
from Wandoo, it was in the hills, the climate was balmy and 
almost English, after the gold-fields, and there were trees. 
He really rejoiced again, riding through strong, living trees. 

Sometimes he would ride up beside Mary. She sat very 
still at Mr George’s side, talking to him in her quick, 
secret-seeming way. Mary always looked as if the things 
she was saying were secrets. 

And her upper lip with its down of fine dark hair, would 

lift and show her white teeth as she smiled with her mouth. 

She only smiled with her mouth : her eyes remained dark 
and glistening and unchanged. But she talked a great deal 
to Mr George, almost like lovers, they were so confidential 
and so much in tune with one another. It was as if Mary 
was happy with an old man’s love, that was fatherly, warm 
and sensuous, and wise and talkative, without being at all 
dangerous. 

When Jack rode up she seemed to snap the thread of 
her communication with Mr George, her ready volubility 
failed, and she was a little nervous. Her eyes, her dark 
eyes, were afraid of the young man. Yet they would give 
him odd, bright, corner-wise looks, almost inviting. So 
different from the full, confident way she looked at Mr 
George. So different from Monica’s queer yellow glare. 
Mary seemed almost to peep at him, while her dark face, 
like an animal’s muzzle with its slightly heavy mouth, 
remained quite expressionless. ; 

It amused him. He remembered how he had kissed her, 
and he wondered if she remembered. It was impossible, 
of course, to ask her. And when she talked, it was always 
so seriously. That again amused Jack. She was so voluble, 

840 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

especially with Mr George, on all kinds of deep and difficult: 
subjects. She was quite excited just now about authorit-- 
arianism.—She was being drawn by the Roman Catholic: 
Church. 

‘‘ Oh,”? she was saying, *‘ I am an authoritarian. Don’t: 
you think that the whole natural scheme is a scheme of 
authority, one rank having authority over another? ”” 

Mr George couldn’t quite see it. Yet it tickled his paternal 
male conceit of authority, so he didn’t contradict her. And 
Jack smiled to himself. ‘* She runs too much to talk,’’ he 
thought. ‘‘ She runs too much in her head.”? She seemed, 
indeed, to have forgotten quite how he kissed her. It 
seemed that ‘* questions of the day *’ quite absorbed her. 

They came through the trees in the soft afternoon sun- 
shine. Jack remembered the place well. He remembered 
the Jamboree, and that girl who had called him Dearie! 
His first woman! And insignificant enough : but not bad. 

_He thought kindly of her. She was a warm-hearted soul. 
But she didn’t belong to his life at all. He remembered, 
too, how he had kicked Tom. The faithful Tom! Mary 
would never marry Tom, that was a certainty. And it was 
equally certain Tom would never break his heart. 

Jack was thinking to himself that he would build a new 
house on this place, and ask Mary to live in the old house. 
That was a brilliant idea. 

But as he drove up he thought : ‘* The first money you 
spend on this place, my boy, will be on a brand new five- 
barred white gate.”’ 

Emma and Amos came out full of joy. They, too, were 
a faithful old pair. Jack handed Mary down. She wore a 
dark blue dress and white silk gloves. It was so like her to 
put on white silk gloves. But he liked the touch of them, as 
he handed her down. Her small, short, rather passive 
hands. 

He and she walked round the place, and she was very 
much interested. A new place, a new farm, a new under- 
taking always excited her, as if it was she who was making 
the new move. 

** Don’t you think that will be a good place for the 
new house? ”? he was saying to her. ‘ Down there, near 
that jolly bunch of old trees. And the garden south of the 
trees. If you dig in that fiat you’ll find water, sure to.’? 

THE OFFER TO MARY 341 

She inspected the place most carefully, and uttered her 
mature judgments. 

“© You'll have to help think it out,’’ he said. ‘* Monica’s 
as different as an opossum. Would you like to build your- 
self a house here, and tend to things? I’ll build you one 
if you like. Or give you the old one.” 

She looked at him with glowing eyes. 

‘¢ Wouldn’t that be splendid ! ’’ she said. ‘* Oh, wouldn’t 
that be splendid! If I had a house and a piece of land of 
my own! Oh, yes! ” 

. * Well, I can easily give it you,”? he said. ‘* Just what- 
ever you like.”’ 

*¢ Isn’t that lovely! ’? she exclaimed. 

But he could tell she was thinking merely of the house 
and the bit of land, and herself a sort of Auntie to his and 
Monica’s children. She was fairly jumping into old- 
maiddom, both feet first. Which was not what he intended. 
He didn’t want her as an Auntie for his children. 

They went back to the house, and inspected there. She 
liked it. It was a stone one-storey house with a great kitchen 
and three other rooms, all rather low and homely. The 
dead cousin had wanted his house to be exactly like the 
houses of the other respectable farmers. And he had not 
been prevented. 

The place was a bit tumble-down, but clean. Emma was 
baking scones, and the sweet smell of scorched flour filled 
the house. Mary lit the lamp in the little parlour, and set 
it on the highly-polished but rather ricketty rose-wood 
table, next the photograph album. The family Bible had 
been removed to the bed-room. But the old man had a 
photograph album, like any other respectable householder. 

Mary drew up one of the green-rep chairs, and opened the 
book. Jack, looking over her shoulder, started a little as 
he saw the first photograph : an elderly lady in lace cap and 
voluminous silken skirts was seated reading a book, while 
negligently leaning with one hand on her chair was a 
gentleman with long white trousers and old fashioned coat 
and side whiskers, obviously having his photograph taken. 

This was the identical photograph which held place of 
honour in Jack’s mother’s album; the photograph of her 

father and mother. | 
6 See! said Jack. ‘‘ That’s my grandfather and grand- 

B42 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

mother. And he must have been the man who took Gran: 
Ellis’ leg off. Goodness! ”’ 

Mary gazed at them closely. 

** He looks a domineering man! ”’ she said. ‘‘ I hope 
you’re not like him.’’ 

Jack didn’t feel at all like him. Mary turned over, and 
they beheld two young ladies of the Victorian period. Some- 
body had marked a cross, in ink, over the head of one of 
the young ladies. They must be his own aunts, both of 
them many years older than his own mother, who was a 
late arrival. 

* Do you think that was his mother? ’’ said Mary, look- 
ing up at Jack, who stood at her side. ‘‘ She was beautiful.” 

Jack studied the photograph of the young woman. She 
looked like nobody’s mother on earth, with her hair curiously 
rolled and curled, and a great dress flouncing round her. 
And her beauty was so photographic and abstract, he merely 
gazed seeking for it. 

But Mary, looking up at him, saw his silent face in the 
glow of the lamp, his rather grim mouth closed ironically 
under his moustache, his open nostrils, and the long, steady, 
self-contained look of his eyes under his lashes. He was 
not thinking of her at all, at the moment. But his calm, 
rather distant, unconsciously imperious face was something 
quite new and startling, and rather frightening to her. She 
became intensely aware of his thighs standing close against 
her, and her heart went faint. She was afraid of him. 

In agitation she was going to turn the leaf. But he put — 
his work-hardened hand on the page, and turned back to 
the first photograph. 

** Look! ’? he said. ‘“* He pointing to his grandfather 
—** disowned her ”’—turning to the aunt marked with a 
cross—‘* and she died an outcast, in misery, and her son 
burrowed here, half crazy. Yet their two faces are rather 
alike. Gran Ellis told me about them.” 

Mary studied them. 

** They are both a bit like yours,’’ she said, * their 
faces.’’ ‘ 

*““ Mine! ”? he exclaimed. Oh, no! i 
father’s family.” , een 

He could see no resemblance at all to himself in the 
handsome, hard-mouthed, large man, with the clean face 

THE OFFER TO MARY 843 

and the fringe of fair whiskers, and the black cravat, and 
the overbearing look. 

‘* Your eyes are set in the same way,”’ she said. ‘‘ And 
your brows are the same. But your mouth is not so tight.” 

*¢ T don’t like what I heard of him, anyhow,”’ said Jack. 
‘* A puritanical surgeon! Turn over.”’ 

She turned over and gave alow cry. There was a photo- 
graph of a young elegant with drooping black moustachios, 
and mutton-chop side whiskers, and large, languid, black 
eyes, leaning languidly and swinging a cane. Over the top 
was written, in a weird hand-writing : 

The Honourable George Rath, blasted father of oe 

This skull and cross-bones was repeated on the other sides 
of the photograph. 

“‘ Oh! ”? said Mary, covering her face with her hands. 

Jack’s face was a study. Mary had evidently recognised 
the photograph of her father as a young man. Yet Jack 
could not help smiling at the skull and cross-bones, in con- 
nection with the Bulwer Lytton young elegant, and the man 
under the green umbrella. 

‘6 My God! ” he thought to himself. °* All that happens 
in a generation ! From that sniffy young dude to that fellow 
here who made this farm, and Mary with her face in her 
hands ! ” 

He could not help smiling to himself. 

‘‘ Had you seen that photograph before? ’”’ he asked her. 

She, unable to answer, kept her face in her hands. 

‘‘ Don’t worry,” he said. ‘‘ We’re all more or less that 
way. We're none of us perfect.’ 

Still she did not answer. Then he went on, almost with- 
out thinking, as he studied the rather fetching young gentle- 
man with the long black hair and bold black eyes, and the 
impudent, handsome, languid lips : 

& Youre a bit like him, too. You're a bit like him in 
the look of your eyes. I bet he wasn’t tall either. I bet 
he was rather small.” 

Mary took her hands from her face and looked up fierce 
and angry. 

‘© You have no feeling,”’ she said. 

“‘ T have,” he replied, smiling slightly. ‘“ But life seems 
to me too rummy to get piqued about it. Think of him 

844 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

leaving a son like the fellow I saw under the umbrella! 
Think of it! Such adandy! And that his son! And then 
having you for a daughter when he was getting quite on in 
years. Do you remember him? ”’ 

‘* How can you talk to me like that? ”’ she said. 

** But why? It’s life. It’s how it was. Do you remem- 
ber your father? ” 

** Of course I do.” 

** Did he dye his whiskers? *? 

** T won’t answer you.”’ 

** Well, don’t then. But this man under the umbrella 
here—you should have seen him—was your half-brother 
and my cousin. It makes us almost related.”’ 

Mary left the room. In a few minutes Mr George came 
in. 

“* What’s wrong with Mary?’ he asked, suspiciously, 
angrily. 

Jack shrugged his shoulders, and pointed to the photo- 
graph. The old man bent over and stared at it: and 
laughed. Then he took the photograph out of the book, and 
put it in his pocket. 

** Well, I’m damned! ”? he said. ‘* Signs himself skull 
and cross-bones! Think of that, now! ”? 

“*'Was the Honourable George a smallish built man? ” 
asked Jack. 

“Eh? ” The old man started. Then startled, he began 
to remember back. ‘‘ Ay!” he said. ‘‘ He was. He was 
smallish built, and the biggest little dude you ever set eyes 
on. Something about his backside always reminded me of 
a woman. But all the women were wild about him. Ay, 
even when he was over fifty, Mary’s mother was wild in 
love with him. And he married her because she was going 
to be a big heiress. But she died a bit too soon, an’ he 
got nothing, nor Mary neither, because she was his 
daughter.”” The old man made an ironic grimace. “ He 
only died a few years back, in Sydney,” he added. “ But 
I say, that poor lass is fair cut up about it. We'd always 
kept it from her. I feel bad about her.”? 

“She may as well get used to it,”? said Jack, disliking 
the old man’s protective sentimentalism. 

rf ae Get used to it! Why? How can she get used — 
to it ae 

THE OFFER TO MARY 845 

** She’s got to live her own life some time.”? 

** How d’y’ mean, live her own life? She’s never going 
to live that sort of a life, as long as I can see to it.”? He 
was quite huffed. 
¢ Bere you going to leave her to be an old maid? ” said 

ack. 

a Eh? Old maid? No! She’ll marry when she wants 
to. 

** You bet,’? said Jack with a slow smile. 

** She’s a child yet,’’ said Mr George. 

** An elderly child—poor Mary !” 
ap Poor Mary! Poor Mary! Why poor Mary? Why 

** Just poor Mary,’’ said Jack slowly smiling. 

** IT don’t see it. Why is she poor? You’re growing into 
a real young devil, you are.’? And the old man glanced into 
the young man’s eyes in mistrust, and fear, and also in 
admiration. 

They went into the kitchen, the late tea was ready. It 
was evident that Mary was waiting for them to come in. 
She had recovered her composure, but was more serious 
than usual. Jack laughed at her, and teased her. 

** Ah, Mary,” he said, ‘* do you still believe in the Age 
of Innocence? ”* 

** T still believe in good feeling,’”’ she retorted. 

** So do I. And when good feeling’s comical, I believe 
in laughing at it,’’ he replied. 

** There’s something wrong with you,”’’ she replied. 

** Quoth Aunt Matilda,’’ he echoed. 

‘* Aunt Matilda is very often right,”’ she said. 

*¢ Never, in my opinion. Aunt Matilda is a wrong num- 
ber. She’s one of life’s false statements.” 

** Hark at him! ’’ laughed Old George. 

As soon as the meal was over, he rose, saying he would 
see to his horse. Mary looked up at him as he put his hat 
on his head and took the lantern. She didn’t want him to 

0. 
‘¢ How long will you be? ” she asked. 
‘¢ Why, not long,”? he answered, with a slight smile. 
Nevertheless he was glad to be out and with his horse. 
Somehow those others made a false atmosphere, Mary and 
Old George. They made Jack’s soul feel sarcastic. He 

346 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

lingered about the stable in the dim light of the lantern, | 
preparing himself a bed. There were only two bedrooms in 
the house. The old couple would sleep on the kitchen floor, 
or on the sofa. He preferred to sleep in the stable. He had 
grown so that he did not like to sleep inside their fixed, 
shut-in houses. He did not mind a mere hut, like his at 
the camp. But a shut-in house with fixed furniture made 
him feel sick. He was sick of the whole pretence of it. 

And he knew he would never come to live on this farm. 
He didn’t want to. He didn’t like the atmosphere of the 
place. He felt stifled. He wanted to go North, or West, 
or North-west once more. 

Suddenly he heard footsteps: Mary picking her way 
across. 

** Is your horse-all right? ’? she asked. ‘* I was afraid 
something was wrong with him. And he is so beautiful. 
Or is it a mare? ”’ 

** No,” he said. ‘ It is a horse. I don’t care for a mare, 
for riding.”’ 

66 Why? 99 

‘* She has so many whims of her own, and wants so much 
attention paid to her. And then ten to one you can’t trust 
her. I prefer a horse to ride.” 

She saw the rugs spread on the straw. 

‘* Who is going to sleep here? ”? she asked. 

6¢ ee, 

** Why—but—” 

He cut short her expostulations. 

** Oh, but do let me bring you sheets. Do let me make 
you a proper bed! ”’ she cried. 

But he only laughed at her. 

‘* What’s a proper bed? ” he said. ‘ Is this an improper 
one, then? ” 

** It’s not a comfortable one,’’ she said with dignity. 

“It is for me. I wasn’t going to ask you to sleep on it, 
too, was I now? ” 

She went out and stood looking at the Southern 
Cross. 

** Weren’t you coming indoors again? *”? she asked. 

* Don’t you think it’s nicer out here? Feels a bit tight 

in there. I say, Mary, I don’t think I shall ever come and 
live on this place.’? 

THE OFFER TO MARY 847 

‘© Why not? ” 

** I don’t like it.” 

** Why not? ” 

** It feels a bit heavy—and a bit tight to me.”’ 

*¢ What shall you do then? ”’ 

*¢ Oh, I don’t know. I’ll decide when I’m back at the 
camp. But I say, wouldn’t you like this place? I'll give 
it you if you would. You’re next of kin really. If you’ll 
have it, ll give it you.” 

Mary was silent for some time. 

‘© And what do you think you’ll do if you don’t live 
here? ’? she asked. ‘* Will you stay always on the gold 
fields? ”? 

“‘ Oh, dear no! I shall probably go up to the Never- 
Never, and raise cattle. Where there aren’t so many people, 
and photo-albums, and good Old Georges and Aunt Matildas 
and all that.” 

“© You’ll be yourself, wherever you are.” 

‘¢ Thank God for that, but it’s not quite true. I find 
I’m less myself down here, with all you people.” 

Again she was silent for a time. 

‘© Why? ”’ she asked. 

‘‘ Oh, that’s how it makes me feel, that’s all.” 

‘‘ Are you more yourself on the gold fields? ”? she asked 
rather contemptuously. 

pli, yes.” 

‘‘ When you are getting money, you mean? ” 

“No. But I’ve got so that Aunt Matilda-ism and Old 
George-ism don’t agree with me. They make me feel sar- 
castic! They make me feel out of sorts all Over.) 

‘‘ And I suppose you mean Mary-ism too,”’ she said 
acidly. 

‘‘ Yes, a certain sort of Mary-ism does it to me as well. 
But there’s a Mary without the ism that I said I’d come 
back for. Would you like this place? ”’ 

66 Why? 99 

‘‘ To cultivate your Mary-ism. Or would you like to come 
to the North-West? ” 

“© But why do you trouble about me? ” 

‘‘ [ve come back for you. I said I’d come back for you. 
I am here.”’ 

There was a moment of tense silence. 

848 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

*? said Mary, in a low’ 

** You have married Monica now, 
voice. 

** Of course I have. But the leopard doesn’t change his: 
spots when he goes into a cave with a she-leopard. I said: 
I’d come back for you as well, and I’ve come.”’ 

A dead silence. 

** But what about Monica? ’’ Mary asked, with a little 
curl of irony. 

** Monica? ’? he said. ‘* Yes, she’s my wife, I tell you. 
But she’s not my only wife. Why should she be? She will 
lose nothing.”’ 

** Did she say so? Did you tell her? ’”? Mary asked 
insidiously. 

Slowly an anger suffused thick in his chest, and then 
seemed to break in a kind of explosion. And the curious 
tension of his desire for Mary snapped with the explosion 
of his anger. 

** No,”’ he said. ‘*I didn’t tell her. I had to ask you 
first. Monica is thick with her babies now. She won’t care 
where I am. That’s how women are. They are more 
creatures than men are. They’re not separated out of the 
earth. They’re like black ore. The metal’s in them, but 
it’s still part of the earth. They’re all part of the matrix, 
women are, with their children clinging to them.” 

** And men are pure gold? *? said Mary, sarcastically. 

** Yes, in streaks. Men are the pure metal, in streaks. 
Women never are. For my part, I don’t want them to be. 
They are the mother-rock. They are the matrix. Leave 
them at that. That’s why I want more than one wife.?? 

** But why? ”? she asked. 

He realised that, in his clumsy fashion, he had taken the 
wrong tack. The one thing he should never have done, he 
had begun to do: explain and argue. Truly, Mary put up 
a permanent mental resistance. But he should have 
attacked elsewhere. He should have made love to her. 
Yet, since she had so much mental resistance, he had to 
make his position clear. Now he realised he was angry and 
tangled. 

“Shall we go in? ” he said abruptly. 

And she returned with him in silence back to the house. 
Mr George was in the parlour, looking over some papers. 
Jack and Mary went in to him. 

THE OFFER TO MARY 849 

** IT have been thinking, sir,’’ said Jack, ‘* that I shall 
never come and live on this place. I want to go up to the 
North-West, and raise cattle. That’ll suit me better than 
wheat and dairy. So I offer this place to Mary. She can 
do as she likes with it. Really, I feel the property is 
naturally hers.’’ 

Now old George had secretly cherished this thought for 
many years, and it had riled him a little when Jack calmly 
stepped into the inheritance. 

** Oh, you can’t be giving away a property like this,” 
he said. 

‘¢ Why not? I have all the money I want. I give the 
place to Mary. I’d much rather give it to her than sell it. 
But if she won’t have it, Ill ask you to sell it for me.”’ 

‘* Why! Why! ”’ said old George fussily, stirring quite 
delighted in his chair, and looking from one to the other of 
the young people, unable to understand their faces. Mary 
looked sulky and unhappy, Jack looked sarcastic. 

‘© JT won’t take it, anyhow,”’ exclaimed Mary. 

‘Eh? Why not, if the young millionaire wants to give 
it you? If he wants to throw it away: **said the old man 
ironically. 

“© T won’t! I won’t take it! ’? she repeated abruptly. 

‘© Why—what’s amiss? ” 

‘© Nothing! I won’t take it.” 

** Got a proud stomach from your aristocratic ancestors, 
have you? ” said old George. ‘* Well, you needn’t have, 
the place is your father’s son’s place, you needn’t be 
altogether so squeamish.” 

6‘ T wouldn’t take it if I was starving,’”’ she asserted. 

6‘ You’re in no danger of starving, so don’t talk,”’ said 
the old man testily. ‘‘ It’s a nice little place, I tell you. 
I should enjoy coming out here and spending a few months 
of the year myself. Should like nothing better.” 

66 But I won’t take it,’’ said Mary. 

Jack went grinning off to his stable. He was angry, but 
it was the kind of anger that made him feel sarcastic. 

Damn her! She was in love with him. She had a passion 
for him. What did she want? Did she want him to make 
love to her, and run away with her, and abandon Monica 
and Jane? And the babies? No doubt she would have 
listened close enough to this proposition. But he was never 

350 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

going to put it to her. He had married Monica, and he 
would stick to her. She was his first and chief wife, and. 
whatever happened, she should remain it. He detested and 
despised divorce: a shifty business. But it was nonsense 
to pretend that Monica was the beginning and end of his 
marriage with woman. Woman was the matrix, the red 
earth, and he wanted his roots in this earth. More than 
one root, to keep him steady and complete. Mary im- 
stinctively belonged to him. Then why not completely? 

Why not? And why not make a marriage with her, too? 
The legal marriage with Monica, his own marriage with 
Mary. It was a natural thing. The old heroes, the old 
fathers of red earth, like Abraham in the Bible, like David 
even, they took the wives they needed for their own com- 
pleteness, without this nasty chop-and-change business of 
divorce. Then why should he not do the same? 

He would have all the world against him. But what would 
it matter, if he were away in the Never-Never, where the 
world just faded out? Monica could have the chief house. 
But Mary should have another house, with garden and 
animals if she wanted them. And she should have her own 
children : his children. Why should she be only Auntie to 
Monica’s children? Mary, with her black, glistening eyes 
and her short, dark, secret body, she was asking for 
children. She was asking him for his children, really. He 
knew it, and secretly she knew it; and Aunt Matilda, and 
even Old George knew it, somewhere in themselves. And 
Old George was funny. He wouldn’t really have minded an 
affair between Jack and Mary, provided it had been kept 
dark. He would even have helped them to it, so long as 
they would let nothing be known. 

But Jack was too wilful and headstrong, and too proud, 
for an intrigue. An intrigue meant a certain cringing be- 
fore society, and this he would never do. If he took Mary, 
it was because he felt she instinctively belonged to him. 
Because, in spite of the show she kept up, her womb was 
asking for him. And he wanted her for himself. He wanted 
to have her and to answer her. And he would be judged 
by nobody. 

He rose quickly, returning to the house. Mary and the 
Perea were in the kitchen, getting their candles to ge 

o bed. 

THE OFFER TO MARY 851 

4 os Mary,” said Jack, ‘* come out and listen to the night- 
igs 

She started slightly, glanced at him, then at Mr 
George. 

** Go with him a minute, if you want to,’’ said the old 
man. 

Rather unwillingly she went out of the door with Jack. 
They crossed the yard in silence, towards the stable. She 
hesitated outside, in the thin moonlight. 

** Come and sleep in the stable with me,” he said, his 
heart beating thick, and his voice strange and low. 

“Oh, Jack!’ she cried, with a funny little lament; 
‘* you’re married to Monica! Ican’t! You’re Monica’s! ” 

** Am I?” he said. ‘* Monica’s mine, if you like, but 
why am I all her’s? She’s certainly not all mine. She 
belongs chiefly to her babies just now. Why shouldn’t she? 
She’s their red earth. But I’m not going to shut my eyes. 
Neither am I going to play the mild Saint Joseph. I don’t 
feel that way. At the present moment I’m not Monica’s 
any more than she is mine. So what’s the good of your tell- 
ng me? I shall love her again, when she is free. Every- 
thing in season, even wives. Now I love you again, after 
aaving never thought of it for a long while. But it was 
always slumbering inside me, just as Monica is asleep in- 
side me this minute. The sun goes, and the moon comes. 
A man isn’t made up of only one thread. What’s the good 
yf keeping your virginity! It’s really mine. Come and 
sleep with me in the stable, and then afterwards come and 
ive in the North-West, in one of my houses, and have your 
whildren there, and animals or whatever you want.’’ 

** Oh, God! ”’ cried Mary. ‘* You must really be mad. 
You don’t love me, you can’t, you must love Monica. Oh, 
x0d ! why do you torture me? ”’ 

**T don’t torture you. Come and sleep in the stable 
vith me. I love you, too.”’ 

** But you love Monica.”’ 

** T shall love Monica again, another time. Now, I love 
7ou. I don’t change. But sometimes it’s one, then the 
ther. Why not? ” 

** Tt can’t be! It can’t be! ” cried Mary. 

** Why not? Come into the stable with me, with me and 
he horses.”’ 

352 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

“¢ Oh, don’t torture me! I hate my animal nature. You 
want to make a slave of me,’ she cried blindly. 

This struck him silent. Hate her animal nature? Wha: 
did she mean? Did she mean the passion she had for him 
And make a slave of her? How? 

“‘ How make a slave of you? ’”’ he asked. ‘* What ar 
you now? You are a sad thing as you are. I don’t wan 
to leave you as you are. You are a slave now, to Aun 
Matilda and all the conventions. Come and sleep with m« 
in the stable? ” 

‘* Oh, you are cruel to me! You are wicked! I can’t 
You know I can’t.” 

‘Why can’t you? Youcan. I am not wicked. To me 
it doesn’t matter what the world is. You really want it 
The middle of you really wants me, and nothing but me 
It’s only the outside of you that’s afraid. There is nothing 
to be afraid of, now we have enough money. You will come 
with me to the North-West, and be my other wife, anc 
have my children, and I shall depend on you as a man ha: 
to depend on a woman.’ 

‘* How selfish you are! You are as selfish as my father 
who betrayed your mother’s sister and left this skull-and 
cross-bones son,”’ she cried. ** No, it’s dreadful, it’s horrible 
In this horrible place, too, proposing such a ‘thing to me 
It shows you have no feelings.”’ 

‘J don’t care about feelings. They’re what peopk 
have because they feel they ought to have them. Bu 
I know my own real feeling. I don’t care about yow 
feelings.”’ 

‘*I know you don’t,” she said. ‘* Good-night! *? Sh: 
turned abruptly and hurried away in the moonlight, escap 
’ ing to the house. 

Jack watched the empty night for some minutes. Ther 
he turned away into the stable. 

‘* That’s that! ’’ he said, seeing his little plans come t 
nought. 

He went into the stable and sat down on his bed, nea: 
the horses. How good it was to be with the horses! Hoy 
good animals were, with no *‘ feelings ”? and no ideas. They 
just straight felt what they felt, without lies and complica 
tions. 

Well, so be it! He was surprised. He had not expectec 

THE OFFER TO MARY 853 

Mary to funk the issue, since the issue was clear. What 
else was the right thing to do? Why, nothing else! 

It seemed to him so obvious. Mary obviously wanted him, 
even more, perhaps, than he wanted her. Because she was 
only a part thing, by herself. All women were only parts 
of some whole, when they were by themselves : let them be 
as clever as they might. They were creatures of earth, and 
fragments, all of them. All women were only fragments; 
fragments of matrix at that. 

No, he was not wrong, he was right. If the others didn’t 
agree, they didn’t, that was all. He still was right. He 
still hated the nauseous one-couple-in-one-cottage domesti- 
city. He hated domesticity altogether. He loathed the 
thought of being shut up with one woman and a bunch of 
kids in a house. Several women, several houses, several 
bunches of kids : it would then be like a perpetual travelling, 
acamp, nota home. He hated homes. He wanted a camp. 

He wanted to pitch his camp in the wilderness : with the 
faithful Tom, and Lennie, and his own wives. Wives, not 
wife. And the horses, and the come-an-go, and the element 
of wildness. Not to be tamed. His men, men by them- 
selves. And his women never to be tamed. And the 

wilderness still there. He wanted to go like Abraham under 
the wild sky, speaking to a fierce, wild Lord, and having 
angels stand in his doorway. 

Why not? Even if the whole world said No! Even 
then, why not? 

As for being ridiculous, what was more ridiculous than 
men wheeling perambulators and living among a mass of 
furniture in a tight house? 

Anyhow, it was no good talking to Mary at the moment. 
She wasn’t a piece of the matrix of red earth. She was a 
piece of the upholstered world. Damn the upholstered 
world! He would go back to the goldfields, to Tom and 
Lennie and Monica, back to camp, back to camp, away 
from the upholstery. 

No, he wasn’t a man who had finished when he had got 
one wife. : 

And that damned Mary, by the mystery of fate, was 
linked to him from her womb. 

And damn her, she preferred to break that link, and turn 
into an upholstered old maid. Of all the hells! 

M 

354 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Then let her marry Blessington and a houseful of furni-’ 
ture. Or else marry Old George, and gas to him while he 
could hear. She loved gassing. Talk, talk, talk, Jack 
hated a talking woman. But Mary would rather sit gassing 
with Old George than sleep with him, Jack, in the stable 
along with the horses. Of all the surprising hells ! 

At least Tom wasn’t like that. And Monica wasn’t. But 
Monica was wrapped up in her babies, she seemed to swim 
in a sea of babies, and Jack had to let her be. And she, 
too, had a hankering after furniture. He knew she’d be 
after it, if he didn’t prevent her. 

Well, it was no good preventing people, even from stuffed 
plush furniture and knick-knacks. But he’d keep the brake 
on. He would do that. 

CHAP: XXV. TROT, TROT, BACK AGAIN 

But as he rode back to Perth, with Mary rather stiff and 
silent, and Mr George absorbed in his own thoughts; and as 
they greeted people on the road, and passed by settle- 
ments, and as they saw far off the pale blue sea with a 
speck of a steamer smoking, and the dim fume of Perth 
down at sea-level : he thought to himself: * I had better 
be careful. I had better be wary. The world is cold and 
cautious, it has cold blood, like ants and centipedes. They, 
all the men in the world, they hardly want one wife, let 
alone two. And they would take any excuse to destroy me. 
They would like to destroy me, because I am not cold and 
like an ant, as they are. Mary would like me to be killed. 
Look at her face. She would feel a real deep satisfaction 
if my horse threw me against those stones and smashed my 
skull in. She would feel vindicated. And Old George 
would think it served me right. And practically everybody 
would be glad. Not Tom and Len. But practically every- 
body else. Even Monica, though she is my wife. Even 
she feels a judgment ought to descend upon me. Because 
I’m not what she wants me to be. Because I’m not as she 
thinks I ought to be. And because she can’t get beyond me. 
Because something inside her knows she can’t get past me. 
Therefore, in one corner of her she hates me, like a scorpion 
lurking. If I’m unaware, and put my hand unthinking in 
that corner, she’ll sting me and hope to kill me. How 
curious it is! And since I have found the gold it is more 
emphatic than before. As if they grudged me something. 
As if they grudged me my very being. Because I’m not 
one of them, and just like they are, they would like me 
destroyed. It has always been so ever since I was born. 
My aunts, my own father. And my mother didn’t want 
’ me destroyed as they secretly did, but even my mother 
would not have tried to prevent them from destroying me. 
Even when they like me, as Old George does, they grudge 
their own liking, they take it back whenever they can. 
He defended me over Easu because he thought I was defend- 
ing Monica, and going the good way of the world. Now 
855 

356 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

he scents that I am going my own way, he feels as if I were | 
a sort of snake that should be put out of existence. That’s 
how Mary feels, too: and Mary loves me, if loving counts 
for anything. Tom and Len don’t wish me destroyed. But 
if they saw the world destroying me they’d acquiesce. Their 
fondness for me is only passive, not active. I believe, if 1 
ransacked earth and heaven, there’s nobody would fight 
for me as I am, not a soul, except that little Jane of Hasu’s. 
The others would fight like cats and dogs for me as they 
want me to be. But for me as I am, they think I ought to 
be destroyed. 

And I, I am a fool, talking to them, giving myself away 
to them, as to Mary. Why, Mary ought to go down on her 
knees before the honour, if I want to take her. Instead of 
which she puffs herself up, and spits venom in my face like 
a cobra. 

Very well, very well. Soon I can go out of her sight 
again, for I loathe the sight of her. I can ride down Hay 
Street without yielding a hair’s breadth to any man or 
woman on earth. And I can ride out of Perth without leav- 
ing a vestige of myself behind, for them to work mischief on. 

God, but it’s a queer thing, to know that they all want 
to destroy me as I am, even out here in this far-off colony. 
I thought it was only my aunts, and my father because of 
his social position. But it is everybody. Even, passively, 
my mother, and Tom and Len. Because, inside my soul I 
don’t conform : can’t conform. They would all like to kill 
the non-conforming me. Which is me myself. 

And at the same time they all love me exceedingly the 
moment they think I am in line with them. The moment 
they think I am in line with them, they’re awfully fond 
of me. Monica, Mary, Old George, even Aunt Matilda, 
they’re almost all of them in love with me then, and they’d 
give me anything. If I asked Mary to sleep with me, as 
a sin, as something I shouldn’t, but I went down on my 
knees and begged her, because I couldn’t help myself, she’d 
give in to me like anything. And Monica, if I was willing 
to be forgiven, would forgive me with unction. 

But since I refuse the sin business, and I never go down 
on my knees, and since I say that my way is better than — 
theirs, and that I should have my two wives, and both 
of them know that it is an honour for them to be taken by 

TROT, TROT, BACK AGAIN _ 887 

ne, an honour for them to be put into my house and 
.cknowledged there, they would like to kill me. It is I who 
nust grovel, I who must submit to judgment. If I would 
ut submit to their judgment, I could do all the wicked 
hings I like, and they would only love me better. But 
ince I will never submit to them, they would like to destroy 
ne off the face of the earth, like a rattle-snake. 

They shall not do it. But I must be wary. I must not 
yut out my hand to ask them for anything, or they will 
trike my hand like vipers out of a hole. I must take great 
are to ask them for nothing, and to take nothing from 
hem. Absolutely I must have nothing from them, not so 
nuch as to let them carry the cup of tea for me, unpaid. 
must be very careful. I should not have let that brown 
nake of a Mary see I wanted her. As for Monica, I married 
er, so that makes them all allow me certain rights, as far 
is she is concerned. But she has her rights, too, and the 
noment she thinks I trespass on them, she will unsheath 
er fangs. 

As for me, I refuse their social rights, they can keep 
hem. If they will give me no rights, to the man I am, 
o me as I am, they shall give me nothing. 

God, what am I going to do? I feel like a man whom 
he snake-worshipping savages have thrown into one of 
heir snake pits. All snakes, and if I touch a single one 
f them, it will bite me. Man or woman, wife or friend, 
very one of them is ready for me since I am rich. Daniel 
n the den of lions was a comfortable man in comparison. 
‘hese are all silent, damp, creeping snakes, like that yellow- 
aced Mary there, and that little whip-snake of a Monica, 
yhom I have loved. ‘* Now they bite me where I most 
ave sinned,’? says old Don Rodrigo, when the snakes of 
he Inferno bite his genitals. So they shall not bite me. 
‘od in heaven, no, so they shall not bite me. Snakes they 
re, and the world is a snake pit into which one is thrown. 
gut still they shall not bite me. As sure as God is God, 
hey shall not bite me. But I will crush their heads 
ather. 

Why did I want that Mary? How unspeakably repulsive 
he is to me now! Why did I ever want Monica so badly? 
tod, I shall never want her again. They shall not bite my 
enitals as they bit Don Rodrigo, or Don Juan. My name 

858 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

is John, but I am no Don. God forbid that I should take 
a title from them. ; 

And the soft, good Tom and Lennie, they shall live theix 
lives, but not with my life. 

Am I not a fool! Am I not a pure crystal of a fool! 
I thought they would love me for what I am, for the man 
I am, and they only love me for the me as they want me 
to be. They only love me because they get themselves 
glorified out of me. 

I thought at least they would give me a certain reverence, 
because I am myself and because I am different, in the name 
of the Lord. But they have all got their fangs full and 
surcharged with insult, to vent it on me the moment I 
stretch out my hand. 

I thought they would know the Lord was with me, and a 
certain new thing with me on the face of the earth. But 
if they know the Lord is with me, it is only so that they 
can intensify and concentrate their poison, to drive Him 
out again. And if they guess a new thing in me, on the 
face of the earth, it only makes them churn their bile and 
secrete their malice into a poison that would corrode the 
face of the Lord. 

Lord! Lord! That I should ever have wanted them, 
or even wanted to touch them! That ever I should have 
wanted to come near them, or to let them come near me. 
Lord, as the only boon, the only blessedness, leave me 
intact, leave me utterly isolate and out of the reach of all 
men. 

That I should have wanted! That I should have wanted 
Monica so badly! Well, I got her, and she saves her fangs 
in silent readiness for me, for the me as I am, not the me 
that is hers. That I should have wanted this Mary, whom ] 
now despise. That I should have thought of a new littl 
world of my own ! 

What a fool! To think of Abraham, and the great mer 
in the early days. To think that I could take up land in the 
North, a big wild stretch of land, and build my house anc 
raise my cattle and live as Abraham lived, at the beginnin; 
of time, but myself at another, late beginning. With my 
wives and the children of my wives, and Tom and Lennie 
with their families, my right hand and my left hand, anc 
absolutely fearless. And the men I would have work fo: 

TROT, TROT, BACK AGAIN — 859 

me, because they were fearless and hated the world. Each 
one having his share of the cattle, and the horses, at the 
end of the year. Men ready to fight for me and with me, 
no matter against what. A little world of my own, in the 
North-West. And my children growing up like a new 
race on the face of the earth, with a new creed of courage 
and sensual pride, and the black wonder of the halls of 
death ahead, and the call to be lords of death, on earth. 
With my Lord, as dark as death and splendid with lustrous 
doom, a sort of spontaneous royalty, for the God of my 
little world. The spontaneous royalty of the other Over- 
lord, giving me earth-royalty, like Abraham or Saul, that 
can’t be quenched and that moves on to perfection in death, 
One’s last and perfect lordliness in the halls of death, when 
slaves have sunk as carrion, and only the serene in pride are 
left to judge, the unborn. 

A little world of my own! As if I could make it with 
the people that are on earth to-day! No, no, I can do 
nothing but stand alone. And, then, when I die, I shall 
not drop like carrion on the earth’s earth. I shall be a lord 
of death, and sway the destinies of the life to come. 

CHAP: XXVI. THE RIDER ON THE RED HORSE 

JACK was glad to get away from Perth, to ride out and leave 
no vestige of his soul behind, for them to work mischief 
on. He saddled his horse before dawn, and still before 
sun was up, he was trotting along beside the river. He 
loved the world, the early morning, the sense of newness. 
It was natural to him to like the world, the trees, the sky, 
the animals, and even, in a casual way, people. It was 
his nature to like the casual people he came across. And, 
casually, they all liked him. It was only when he approached 
nearer, into intimacy, that he had a revulsion. 

In the casual way of life he was good-humoured, and 
could get on with almost everybody. He took them all at 
their best, and they responded. For, on tne whole, people 
are glad to be taken at their best, on trust. 

But when he went further, the thing broke down. 
Casually, he could get on with anybody. Intimately, he 
could get on with nobody. In intimate life he was quiet 
and unyielding, often oppressivé. In the casual way he was 
most yielding and agreeable. Therefore it was his friends 
who suffered most from him. 

He knew this. He knew that Monica and Lennie suffered 
from his aloofness and a certain arrogance, in intimate life. 
So friendly with everybody, he was. And at the centre 
not really friendly even with his wife and his dearest friends. 
Withheld, unyielding, exacting even in his silence, he kept 
them in a sort of suspense. 

As he rode his bright bay stallion on the soft road, he 
became aware of this. Perhaps his horse was the only 
creature with which he had the right relation. He did not 
love it, but he harmonised with it. As if, between them, 
they made a sort of centaur. It was not love. It was a 
sort of understanding in power and mastery and crude life. 
A harmony even more than an understanding. As if he 
himself were the breast and arms and head of the ruddy, 
powerful horse, and it, the flanks and hoofs. Like a centaur. 
Ic had a real joy in riding away with him to the bush again. 
He knew by the uneven, springy dancing. And he had 

860 

THE RIDER ON THE RED HORSE 861 

perhaps a greater joy. The animal knew it in the curious 
pressure of his knees, and the soft rhythm of the bit. 
Between them, they moved in a sort of triumph. 

The red stallion was always glad when Jack rode alone. 
It did not like company, particularly human company. 
When Jack rode alone his horse had a curious bubbling, 
exultant movement. When he rode in company it went 
in a more suppressed way. And when he stopped to talk to 
people, in his affable, rather loving manner, the horse be- 
came irritable, chafing to go on. He had long ago realised 
that the bay could not bear it when he reined in and stayed 
chatting. His voice, in its amiable flow, seemed to irritate 
the animal. And it did not like Lennie. Lucy, the old 
mare, loved Lennie. Most horses liked him. But Jack’s 
stallion got a bit wicked, irritable with him. 

And when Jack had made a fool of himself, as with Mary, 
and felt tangled, he always craved to get on his horse Adam, 
to be put right. He would feel the warm flow of life from 
the horse mount up him and wash away in its flood the 
human entanglements in his nerves. And sometimes he 
would feel guilty towards his horse Adam, as if he had 
betrayed the natural passion of the horse, giving way to the 
human travesty. 

Now, in the morning before sunrise, with the red horse 
bubbling with exultance between his knees, his soul turned 
with a sudden jerk of realisation away from his fellow-men. 
He really didn’t want his fellow-men. He didn’t want that 
amiable casual association with them, which took up so large 
a part of his life. It was a habit and a bluff on his part. 
Also it was part of his nature. A certain real amiability in 
him, and a natural kindly disposition towards his fellow- 
men combatted inside him with a repudiation of the whole 
trend of modern human life, the emotional, spiritual, ethical, 
and intellectual trend. Deep inside himself, he fought like 
a wild-cat against the whole thing. And yet, because of a 
naturally amiably-disposed, even benevolent nature in him- 
self, he took any casual individual into his warmth, and was 
bosom friends for the moment. Until, inevitably, after a 
short time the individual betrayed himself a unit of the 
universal human trend, and then Jack recoiled in anger 
and revulsion again. 

This was a sort of dilemma. Monica, and Tom, and 

362 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

Lennie, who knew him intimately, knew the absoluteness 
of his repudiation of mankind and mankind’s direction in 
general. They knew it to their cost, having suffered from 
it. Therefore the anomaly of his casual intimacies and his 
casual bosom-friendships was considerably puzzling and 
annoying to them. He seemed to them false to himself, 
false to the other thing he was trying to put across. Above 
all, it seemed false to them, his real, old friends, towards 
whom he was so silently exacting and overbearing. 

This morning, after his fiasco with Mary, he vaguely 
realised himself. He vaguely realised that he had to make 
a change. The casual intimacies were really a self-betrayal.. 
But they made his life easy. It was the easiest way for him 
to encounter people. To suppress for the time being his 
deepest self, his thoughts, his feelings, his vital repudiation 
of the way of human life now, and to play at being really 
pleasant and ordinary. He liked to think that most people, 
casually and superficially, were nice. He hated having to 
withdraw. 

But now, after the fiasco with Mary, he realised again 
his necessity to withdraw. To pass people by. They were 
all going in the opposite direction to his own. Then he was 
wrong to rein up and pretend a bosom-friendship for half 
an hour. As he did so, he was only being borne 
downstream, in the old, deadly direction, against him- 
self. 

Even his horse knew it: even old Adam. He pressed 
the animal’s sides with his legs, and made a silent pact with 
him : not to make this compromise of amiability and casual 
friendship, not forever to be reining up and allowing him- 
self to be carried backwards in the weary flood of the old 
human direction. To forfeit the casual amiabilities, and go 
his way in silence. To have the courage to turn his face 
right away from mankind. His soul and his spirit had 
already turned away. Now he must turn away his face, 
and see them all no more. 

“IT never want to see their faces any more,’? he said 
aloud to himself. And his horse between his thighs danced 
and began to.canter, as the sun came sparkling up over the 
horizon. Jack looked into the sun, and knew that he must 
turn his own face aside for ever from the people of his world ; 
not look at them or communicate with them again, not 

THE RIDER ON THE RED HORSE _ 868 

any more. Cover his own face with shadow, and let the 
world pass on its way, unseen and unseeing. 

And he must know as he knew his horse, not face to face, 
never any more face to face, but communicating as he did 
with his stallion Adam, from a pressure of the thighs and 
knees. The arrows of the Archer, who is also a centaur. 

Vision is no good. It is no good seeing any more. And 
words are no good. It is useless to talk. We must com- 
municate with the arrows of sightless, wordless knowledge, 
as Jack communicated with his horse, by a pressure of the 
thighs and knees. 

The sun had risen gold above the far-off ridge of the bush. 
Jack drew up at an inn by the side of the road, to eat 
breakfast. He left his horse at the hitching-post near the 
door, and went into the bar parlour. There was a smell of 
_ mutton chops frying, and he was hungry. 

As he sat eating he heard his horse neighing fiercely. He 
pricked his ears. Again Adam’s powerful neigh, and far 
off a high answering call of a mare. He went out quickly 
to the door of the inn. Adam stood by the post, his feet 
_ apart, his ears erect, his head high up, looking with flashing 
eyes back down the road. How beautiful he was! in the 
newly-risen sun shining bright almost as fire, every fibre of 
him on the alert, tall and overweening. And down the 
road, a grey horse, cloud colour, running eagerly forwards, 
its rider, a young lady, flushing scarlet and trying to hold 
up her mare. It was no good. The mare’s shrill, wild 
neigh came answering the stallion’s, and the lady rider was 
powerless to hold her creature back. Strong, like bells in 
his deep chest, came the stallion’s call once more. And, 
lifting her head as she ran on swift, light feet, the mare 
sang back. 

The girl was Hilda Blessington. Jack took his horse and 
quickly ran him, rearing and flaming, round to the stable. 
There he shut him up, though his feet were thudding madly 
on the wooden floor, and his powerful neighing shook the 
place with a sound like fire. 

The grey mare came running straight to the stable, carry- 
ing its helpless, scarlet-flushing rider. Jack lifted the girl 
down, and held the mare. There was a terrific thudding 
from the stable. 

‘¢ J] put her in the paddock, shall I? ”’ said Jack. 

364 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

**T think you’d better,” she said. 

He looked uneasily at the stable, whence came a sound of 
something going smash. The shut-up stallion sounded like 
an enclosed thunder-storm. 

** Shall I put them both in the paddock? * said Jack. 
** It seems the simplest thing to do.’? 

“ Yes,’ she murmured in confusion. ‘* Perhaps you’d 
better.”’ 

She was rather frightened. The duet of neighing was 
terrific, like the bells of some wild cathedral going at full 
clash, The landlord of the inn came running up. Jack 
was just slipping the mare’s saddle off. 

“* Steady! Steady!” he said. Then to the landlord: 

“¢ Take her to the paddock and turn her loose. I’m going 
to turn the horse loose with her.?? 

The landlord dragged the frantic grey animal away, while 
she screamed and reared and pranced. 

Jack ran to the stable door, calling to his horse. He 
opened carefully. The first thing he saw was the blazing 
eyes of the stallion. The horse had broken the halter, and 
had his nose and his wild eyes at the door, prepared to 
charge. Jack called to him again, and managed to get in 
front of him and close the door behind him. The animal was 
listening to two things at once, thinking two things at once. 
He was quivering in every fibre, in a state almost of mad- 
ness. Yet he stood quite still while Jack slipped off the 
loosened saddle. 

Then again he began to jump. Already he had smashed 
in one side of the stall, and had a bleeding fetlock. Jack 
got hold of the broken halter, and opened the door. The 
horse, like a great ruddy thunderbolt, sprang out of the 
stable, jerking Jack with him. The man, with a flying 
jump, got on the bright, brilliant bare back of the stallion, 
and clung there as the creature, swerving on powerful 
haunches past the terrified Hilda, ran with a terrific, splen- 
did neighing towards the paddock, moving rhythmic and 
handsome. 

There was the grey mare at the gate, inside, neighing 
back, and the landlord keeping guard. The men had to be 
pers quick, the one to open the gate, the other to slip 

own. 

Jack left the broken halter-rope dangling from his horse’s 

THE RIDER ON THE RED HORSE 865 

Cae was broken quite short—and went back into the 
yar e 

** What a commotion! ’? he said, laughingly, to the 
flushed, deeply embarrassed girl. ‘* But you won’t mind 
if your grey mare gets a foal to my horse? ” 

** Oh, no,’’ she said. ‘* I shall like it.’’ 

s* Why not! ”’ said he. ‘* They’ll be all right. There’s 
the landlord and another fellow there with them. Will you 
come in? Have you had breakfast? Come and eat some- 
thing.”? 

She went with him into the bar parlour, where he sat 
down again to eat his half-cold mutton chops. She was 
silent and embarrassed, but not afraid. The colour still 
was high in her young, delicate cheeks, but her odd, bright, 
round, dark-grey eyes were fearless above her fear. She 
had really a great dread of everything, especially of the 
social world in which she had been brought up. But her 
dread had made her fearless. There was something slightly 
uncanny about her, her quick, rabbit-like alertness and 
her quick, open defiance, like some unyielding animal. She 
was more like a hare than a rabbit: like a she-hare that 
will fight all the cats that are after her young. And she 
had a great capacity for remaining silent and remote, like 
a quaint rabbit unmoving in a corner. 

** Were you riding this way by accident? ”’ he asked her. 

“6 No,”’ she said quickly. ‘‘ I hoped I might see you. 
Mary said you were leaving early in the morning.” 

‘‘ Why did you want to see me? ”’ he asked, amused. 

‘© T don’t know. But I did.” 

‘¢ Well, it was a bit of a hubbub,” he laughed. 

_ She glanced at him sharply, warily, on the defensive, 
and then laughed as well, with a funny little chuckle. 

‘¢ Why did you leave so suddenly? ”’ she asked. 

‘* No, it wasn’t sudden. I’d had enough.” 

** Enough of what? ” 

6 Everything.” 

** Even of Mary? ” 

‘© Chiefly of Mary.” _ 

She eyed him again sharply, wonderingly, searchingly, 
then again gave her odd little chuckle of a laugh. 

‘© Why ‘ chiefly of Mary ’? ’? she asked. ‘* I think she’s 
so nice. She’d make me such a good step-mother.”’ 

B66 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

‘Do you want one? ”’ he asked. at | 

‘‘ Yes, I do rather. Then my father would want to get 
rid of me. I should be in the way.’’ ; 

‘¢ And do you want to be got rid of? ” 

** Yes, I do, rather.”’ 

** What for? ” 

“‘T want to go right away.” 

** Back to England? ”’ 

‘© No. Not that. Never there again. Right away from 
Perth. Into the unoccupied country. Into the North- 
West.”’ 

** What for? ” 

‘To get away.” 

‘© What from? ” 

‘* Everything. . Just everything.”’ 

‘* But what would you find when you’d got away? ” 

**T don’t know. I want to try. I want to try.”’ 

She had such an odd, definite decisiveness and self-con- 
fidence, he was very much amused. She seemed the queerest, 
oddest, most isolated bird he had ever come across. Ex- 
ceedingly well-bred, with all the charm of pure breeding. 
By nature, timorous like a hare. But now, in her queer 
state of rebellion, like a hare that is perfectly fearless, and 
will go its own way in determined singleness. 

** ‘You must come and see Monica and me when we move 
to the North-West. Would you like to? ” 

** Very much. When will that be? ” 

** Soon. Before the year is out. Shall I tell Monica 
you’re coming? She’d be glad of another woman.”’ 

** Are you sure you want me? ” 

** Quite.”’ 

** Are you sure everybody will want me? I shan’t be in 
the way? Tell me quite frankly.” 

**T’m sure everybody will want you. And you can’t be 
in the way, you are much too wary.”’ 

**T only seem it.” 

** Do come, though.” 

‘* I should love to.” 

** Well, do. When could you come? ” 

“Any time. To-morrow if you wish. I am quite in: 
dependent. I have a certain amount of money, from my 
mother. Not much, but enough for all I want. And I am 

THE RIDER ON THE RED HORSE 867 

of age. I am quite free. And, I think, if I went, father 
would marry Mary. I wish he would.” 
- 66 Why? 99 

*¢ Then I should be free.”’ 

** But free what for? ” 

‘‘ Anything. Free to breathe. Free to live. Free not 
to marry. I know they want to get me married. They’ve 
got their minds fixed on it. And I’m afraid they’ll force 
me to do it, and I don’t want it.” 

*¢ Marry who? ” 

*¢ Oh, nobody in particular. Just somebody, don’t you 
know.”’ 

‘* And don’t you want to marry? ”’ asked Jack, amused. 

‘“No. No, I don’t. Not any of the people I meet. No! 
Not that sort of man. No. Never! ” 

He burst into a laugh, and she, glancing in surprise at 
his amusement, suddenly chuckled. 

‘* Don’t you like men? ” he asked, still laughing. 

‘No. I don’t. I dislike them very much.” 

Her quick, cool, alert manner of statement amused him 
more than anything. 

‘* Not any men at all? ” 

‘No. Not yet. And I dislike the idea of marriage. I 
just hate it. I don’t think I’d mind men so much, if it 
weren’t for marriage in the background. I can’t do with 
marriage.” 

‘‘ Might you like men without marriage? ”? he asked, 
laughing. 

‘© T don’t know,” she said, with her odd precision. ‘‘ So 
far it’s all just impossible. I can’t stand it. All that sort 
of thing is impossible to me. No, I don’t care for men at 
all.”’ 

‘‘ What sort of thing is just impossible? ”’ he asked. 

“Men! Particularly a man. Impossible! ” 

Jack roared with laughter at her. She seemed rather | 
to like being laughed at. And her odd, cool, precise in- 
tensity tickled him to death. 

‘* You want to be virgin in the virgin bush? ”’ he asked. 

She glanced at him quickly. 

‘* Something like that,’ she said, with her little chuckle. 
‘J think later on, not now, not now ’’—she shook her 
head—‘‘ I might like to be a man’s second or third wife : 

368 THE BOY IN THE BUSH 

if the other two were living. I would never be the firs’ 
Never. You remember you talked about it? ” 

She looked at him with her round, bright, odd eyes, lik 
an elf or some creature of the border-land, and as he roare 
with laughter, she smiled quickly and with an odd, mi: 
chievous response. _ 

‘¢ What you said the other night, when Aunt Matilda wa 
so angry, made me think of it. She hates you,’”’ sh 
added. 

** Who, Aunt Matilda? Good job.” 

** Yes, very good job! Don’t you think she’s terrible? ' 

** IT do,”? said Jack. 

‘** I’m glad you do. I can’t stand her. I like Mr George 
But I don’t care for it when he seems to like me.” 

Jack roared with laughter again, and again, from som 
odd corner of herself, she smiled. 

** Why do you laugh? ”? she said. But the infection o 
laughter made her give a little chuckle. 

** It’s all such a real joke,” he said. 

** It is,”? she answered. ‘* Rather a bad joke.” 

Slowly he formed a dim idea of her precise life, with | 
rather tyrannous father who was fond of her in the wron; 
way, and brothers who had bullied her and jeered at he 
for her odd ways and appearance, and her slight deafness 
The governess who had mis-educated her, the loneliness o 
the life in London, the aristocratic but rather vindictiv 
society in England, which had persecuted her in a smal 
way, because she was one of the odd border-line peopl 
who don’t, and can’t, really belong. She kept an odd 
bright, amusing spark of revenge twinkling in her all th 
time. She felt that with Jack she could kindle her sparl 
of revenge into a natural sun. And without any compune 
tion she came to tell him. 

He was tremendously amused. She was a new thing t 
him. She was one who knew the world, and society, bette 
than he did, and her hatred of it was purer, more twinkling 
more relentless in a quiet way. Her way was absolutel) 
relentless, and absolutely quiet. She had gone furthe 
along that line than himself. And her fearlessness was o 
a queer, uncanny quality, hardly human. She was a rea 
border-line being. 

** All right,” he said, making a pact with her. By 

THE RIDER ON THE RED HORSE 869 

Christmas we’ll ask you to come and see us in the North- 
West.”’ 

** By Christmas! It’s a settled thing? ” she said, hold- 
ing up her forefinger with an odd, warning, alert gesture. 

** It’s a settled thing,’ he replied. 

** Splendid! ”? she answered. ‘‘I believe you’ll keep 
your word.”’ 

** You’ll see I shall.” 

She rose. The horses, quieted down, were caught and 
saddled and brought round. She glanced from her blue-grey 
mare to his red stallion, and gave her odd, squirrel-like 
chuckle. 

‘* What a contretemps,”’ she said. ‘ It’s like the sun 
mating with the moon.’’ She gave him a quick, bright, odd 
glance : some of the coolness of a fairy. 

** Ts it ! ?? he exclaimed, as he lifted her into the saddle. 
She was slim and light, with an odd, remote reserve. 

He mounted his horse. 

‘© We go different ways for the moment,” she said. 

** Till Christmas,’? he answered. ‘* Then the moon will 
come to the sun, eh? Bring the mare with you. She’ll 
probably be in foal.” 

** IT certainly will. Good-bye, till Christmas. Don’t for- 
get. I shall expect you to keep your word.” 

**T will keep my word,” he said. ‘* Good-bye, till 
Christmas.”’ 

He rode away, laughing and chuckling to himself. If 
Mary had been a fiasco, this was a real joke. A real, un- 
expected joke. ; 

His horse travelled with quick, strong, rhythmic move- 
ment, inland, away from the sea. At the last ridge he 
turned and saw the pale blue ocean full of light. Then 
he rode over the crest and down the silent grey bush, in 
which he had once been lost. 

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY THE DUNEDIN PRESS, I1D., EDINBURGH,
