Assorted Articles (D. H. Lawrence, 1930)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1930 Martin Secker edition (https://archive.org/details/assortedarticles0000dhla)
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

LIBRARY OF 

2 

Prov. 3:12 

the generosity of 
William D. and Edna Robens Shilts, 

8 
Ss 
S 
S 
% 
= 
=S 
S 
8 

Presented through 

S 
aS 
= 
Sy 
bay 
% 
& 
7S 
8 
= 

getteth understanding. 

ASSORTED ARTICLES 

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 

https://archive.org/details/assortedarticlesO000dhla 

ASSORTED ARTICLES 

By 
D. H. LAWRENCE 

LONDON: 
MARTIN SECKER 
1930 

D. H. LAWRENCE 
Born September 11, 1885 
Died March 2, 1930 

LONDON: MARTIN SECKER LTD. 
NUMBER FIVE JOHN STREET ADELPHI 

\ 

46395 ¢ 

Most of these articles were written for news- 
papers and have appeared in newspapers, 
chiefly the Evening News and the Sunday 
Dispatch. One article appeared in Everyman, 
and one in T.P.’s Weekly. The longer essays 
have been printed in the Star Review, the 
Studio, the Architectural Review, and in the 
Adelphi. Occasionally the titles have been 

changed. Dinttely 
February, 1930. 

f 

a 

hake’ 
6 
i" 

CONTENTS 

Tue “ JEUNE FILLE”? Wants TO Know 
LAURA PHILIPPINE 

SEX VERSUS LOVELINEsS 

INSOUCIANCE 

Give HER A PATTERN 

Do WomEN CHANGE ? 

OwneERSHIP 

Master IN His Own House 
MATRIARCHY 

CocksuRE WoMEN AND HENsURE MEN 
Is ENGLAND STILL A Man’s Country ? 
DuLL LONDON 

Rep TROUSERS 

THe STATE OF FUNK 

Tue Ris—En Lorp 

ENSLAVED BY CIVILISATION 

Men must Work AND WoMEN As WELL 
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

Hymns IN A Man’s LIFE 

MAkinc PIcTURES 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

On Beinc A MAn 

On Human Destiny 

iS ii ie 
ii its 

ae 

*. 
ee ie 

dha : | 
aa sa Bei, Bia ii: 
*, ee | 
r) : 
bs ae 
izesae : 
, M ; | 
_ - ‘tes —- a 
i, oa) i 
ne 

; ve 
| his poy a 

THE “JEUNE FILLE” WANTS TO KNOW 

IF you are a writer, nothing is more confusing than 
the difference between the things you have to say 
and the things you are allowed to print. Talking 
to an intelligent girl, the famous “‘ jeune fille’? who is 
the excuse for the great Hush ! Hush ! in print, you 
find, not that you have to winnow your words and 
leave out all the essentials, but that she, the innocent 
girl in question, is flinging all sorts of fierce questions 
at your head, in all sorts of shameless language, 
demanding all sorts of impossible answers. You 
think to yourself: “‘ My heaven, this is the innocent 
young thing on whose behalf books are suppressed ! ” 
And you wonder ‘“ How on earth am I to answer 
meer’ 

You decide the only way to answer her is straight- 
forward. She smells an evasion in an instant, and 
despises you for it. She is no fool, this innocent 
maiden. Far from it. And she loathes an evasion. 
Talking to her father in the sanctum of his study, 
you have to winnow your words and watch your 
step, the old boy is so nervous, so tremulous lest 
anything be said that should hurt his feelings. But 
once away in the drawing-room or the garden, the 
innocent maiden looks at you anxiously, and it is 

9 B 

THE ‘‘ JEUNE FILLE”’ WANTS TO KNOW 

all you can do to prevent her saying crudely, “ Please 
don’t be annoyed with daddy. You see, he zs like 
that, and we have to put up with him ”—or else from 
blurting out, ‘‘ Daddy’s an old fool, but he zs a dear, 
isi hey" 

It is a queer reversal of the Victorian order. 
Father winces and bridles and trembles in his study 
or his library, and the innocent maiden knocks you 
flat with her outspokenness in the conservatory. 
And you have to admit that she is the man of the 
two; of the three, maybe. Especially when she 
says, rather sternly, ‘““I hope you didn’t let daddy 
see what you thought of him!” ‘“ But what do I 
think of him?” I gasp. ‘‘ Oh, it’s fairly obvious ! ”’ 
she replies coolly, and dismisses the point. 

I admit the young are a little younger than I am ; 
or a little older, which is it? I really haven’t spent 
my years cultivating prunes and prisms, yet, con- 
fronted with a young thing of twenty-two, I often 
find myself with a prune-stone in my mouth, and I 
don’t know what to do with it. 

*“ Why is daddy like that?’ she says, and there 
is genuine pain in the question. ‘“‘ Like what?” 
you ask. “Oh, you know what I mean! Like a 
baby ostrich with its head in the sand! It only 
makes his rear so much the more conspicuous. And 
it’s a pity, because he’s awfully intelligent in other 
ways.” 

10 

THE “‘ JEUNE FILLE’? WANTS TO KNOW 

Now, what is a man to answer? ‘‘ Why are they 
like that ?”’ she insists. ‘“‘ Who?” say I. ‘‘ Men!” 
she says; ‘“‘men like daddy!” “I suppose it’s 
a sort of funk,” say I. ‘‘ Exactly!” she pounces on 
me like a panther. ‘‘ But what is there to be in a 
funk about ?”’ 

I have to confess I don’t know. ‘“‘ Of course 
not!” she says. ‘“‘ There’s nothing at all to be in 
a funk about. So why can’t we make him see it?” 

When the younger generation, usually the feminine 
half of it in her early twenties, starts firing off Whys ? 
at me, I give in. Anything crosses her in the least 
—and she takes aim at it with the deadly little pistol 
of her inquiring spirit, and says “‘ Why?” She is a 
deadly shot: Billy the Kid is nothing to her; she 
hits the nail on the head every time. ‘‘ Now, why 
can’t I talk like a sensible human being to daddy ?”’ 
** I suppose he thinks it is a little early for you to be 
quite so sensible,’ say I mildly. ‘“‘ Cheek! What 
cheek of him to think he can measure out the amount 
of sense I ought to have!” she cries. “‘ Why does 
he think it?” 

Why indeed? But once you start whying, there’s 
no end to it. A hundred years ago, a few reformers 
piped up timorously, ‘‘Why is man so infinitely 
superior to woman?’’ And on the slow years came 
the whisper “He isn’t!’ Then the poor padded 
young of those days roused up. ‘‘ Why are fathers 

II 

THE ‘‘ JEUNE FILLE”? WANTS TO KNOW 

always in the right?’ And the end of the century 
confessed that they weren’t. Since then, the innocent 
maiden has ceased to be anemic ; all maidens were 
more or less anemic thirty years ago; and though 
she is no less innocent, but probably more so, than 
her stuffy grandmother or mother before her, there 
isn’t a thing she hasn’t shot her Why? at, or her 
Wherefore ?—the innocent maiden of to-day. And 
digging implements are called by their bare, their 
barest names. ‘“‘ Why should daddy put his foot 
down upon love? He’s been a prize muff at it 
himself, judging from mother.” 

It’s terrible, if all the sanctifications have to sit 
there like celluloid Aunt Sallies, while the young 
take pot shots at them. A real straight Why? 
aimed by sweet-and-twenty goes clean through them. 
Nothing but celluloid! and looking so important ! 
Really, why .. .? 

The answer seems to be, bogey! The elderly 
to-day seem to be ridden by a bogey, they grovel 
before the fetish of human wickedness. Every young 
man is out to “ruin”? every young maiden. Bogey ! 
The young maiden knows a thing or two about that. 
She’s not quite the raw egg she’s supposed to be, in 
the first place. And as for most young men, they’re 
only too nice, and it would grieve them bitterly to 
“ruin”? any young maid, even if they knew exactly 
how to set about it. Of which the young maiden 

12 

b 

THE “* JEUNE FILLE”? WANTS TO KNOW 

is perfectly aware, and ‘“‘ Why can’t daddy see it?” 
He can, really. But he is so wedded to his bogey, 
that once the young man’s back is turned, the old 
boy can see in the young boy nothing but a danger, 
a danger to my daughter! Wickedness in other 
people is an idée fixe of the elderly. ‘‘ Ah, my boy, 
you will find that in life every man’s hand is against 
you!” As a matter of fact, my boy finds nothing 
of the sort. Every man has to struggle for himself, 
true. But most people are willing to give a bit of 
help where they can. The world may really be a 
bogey. But that isn’t because individuals are wicked 
villains. At least ninety-nine per cent. of individuals 
in this country, and in any other country as far as 
we have ever seen, are perfectly decent people who 
have a certain amount of struggle to get along, 
but who don’t want to do anybody any harm, if 
they can help it. 

This seems to be the general experience of the 
young, and so they can’t appreciate the bogey of 
human wickedness which seems to dominate the 
minds of the old, in their relation to the succeeding 
generation. The young ask ‘‘ What, exactly, is this 
bogey, this wickedness we are to be shielded from ? ”’ 
And the old only reply, ‘‘ Of course, there is no 
danger to us. But to you, who are young and 
cmexperienced . ...!°° 
And the young, naturally, see nothing but pure 

t3 

b) 

THE ‘‘ JEUNE FILLE’? WANTS TO KNOW 

hypocrisy. They have no desire to be shielded. 
If the bogey exists, they would like to set eyes on 
him, to take the measure of this famous ‘‘ wickedness.” 
But since they never come across it, since they find 
meanness and emptiness the worst crimes, they decide 
that the bogey doesn’t and never did exist, that he 
is an invention of the elderly spirit, the last stupid 
stick with which the old can beat the young and 
feel self-justified. “‘ Of course, it’s perfectly hopeless 
with mother and daddy, one has to treat them like 
mental infants,’ say the young. But the mother 
sententiously reiterates, “‘I don’t mind, as far as I 
am concerned. But I have to protect my children.” 

Protect, that is, some artificial children that only 
exist in parental imagination, from a bogey that 
likewise has no existence outside that imagination, 
and thereby derive a great sense of parental authority, 
importance and justification. 

The danger for the young is that they will question 
everything out of existence, so that nothing is left. 
But that is no reason to stop questioning. The old 
lies must be questioned out of existence, even at a 
certain loss of things worth having. When everything 
is questioned out of existence, then the real fun will 
begin putting the right things back. But nothing is 
any good till the old lies are got rid of. 

14 

LAURA PHILIPPINE 

WHEN you find two almonds in one shell, that’s a 
Philippine. So when Philippa Homes had twins she 
called them Laura Philippine and Philip Joseph. 
And she went on calling them Laura Philippine and 
Philip Joseph till it fixed, and they are it to this day, 
and Laura Philippine is twenty. 

She is quite a lovely girl, tall and white-skinned, 
but except when she’s dancing, or driving a car, or 
riding a horse, she’s languid. Having had what is 
called a good education, she drawls in slang. She 
has rather wonderful blue eyes, asleep rather than 
sleepy, with the oddest red-gold lashes coming down 
over them; close, red-gold lashes. You notice the 
lashes because most of the daytime she doesn’t 
trouble to raise them. 

At about half-past eleven in the morning you 
suddenly come across her reclining on a lounge in 
the drawing-room, smoking a cigarette, showing 
several yards of good leg and turning over a periodical 
without looking at it. 

** Hello, Laura Philippine, just got up?” 

‘“* This minute.” 

“How are you?” 

** Same.” 

oF 

LAURA PHILIPPINE 

And she’s nothing more to say. She turns over 
the periodical without looking at it, lights another 
cigarette, and time, since it can’t help it, passes. 
At half-past twelve you find her in the hall in an 
elegant wrap, and a nut of a little blue hat, looking 
as if she might possibly be drifting out of doors to 
commit suicide in some half-delicious fashion. 

“Where are you going, Laura Philippine ? ” 

Ont? 

*“Where’s that?” 

**Oh, meet some of the boys 

** Well, lunch is half-past one a 

But she is gone, with a completeness that makes 
it seem impossible she will ever come back. Yet 
back she comes, about two, when we are peeling 
our apple. She is the image of freshness, in her bit 
of a putty-coloured frock, her reddish petals of hair 
clinging down over her ears, her cheeks pink by 
nature, till she almost powders them out of spite, 
her long white limbs almost too languid to move, 
and her queer fiery eyelashes down over her dark 
blue eyes. 

*“*T told her not to serve me soup till I came.” 

** And I told her to serve it when she served us. 
Lunch is half-past one.” 

Laura Philippine sits down in front of her soup, 
which Philippa always has for lunch, out of spite. 
The parlourmaid comes in again. 

16 

be) 

LAURA PHILIPPINE 

““T won’t have soup,” says Laura Philippine. 
“What else is there?’”’ And when she is told, she 
replies: “I won’t take that either. I'll just take 
salad, and will you find me something to eat with 
a ey 

The parlourmaid looks at Philippa, and Philippa 
Says : 

** I suppose you'd better bring the galantine.”’ 

So Laura Philippine, with pure indifference, eats 
galantine and salad, and drinks burgundy, which 
almost shows ruddy as it goes down her white throat. 

** Did you find the boys?” I ask. 

“Oh, quite.” 

** Did you drink cocktails ? ”’ 

* Not before lunch. Gin and bitters.” 

I got no more out of her. But we went out in 
the afternoon in the car. As we went through 
Windsor Park, I said : 

“Tt is rather lovely, isn’t it?” 

** Oh, quite !” 

“But you don’t look at it.” 

“What am I to look at it for?” 

** Pleasure.” 

** No pleasure to me.” 

She looked at nothing—unless it might be at a 
well-dressed woman. She was interested in nothing : 
unless it were the boys, just at meal-times. 

So she came with Philippa to Rome. 

17 

LAURA PHILIPPINE 

*‘ Doing the sights of Italy with your mother, are 
you ?” said I. 

‘“*Mother’ll have a swell time taking me to see 
sights.”” 

Mother did. Laura Philippine just smoked cigar- 
ettes and lowered her reddish-gold lashes over her 
dark blue eyes, and said languidly: Is that so? 
We drove down to Ostia over the Campagna. Oh, 
look, Laura Philippine, there are still a few buffaloes ! 
Laura Philippine knocked cigarette ash over the 
other side of the car in order not to look, and said 
yes! Look at the old fortifications of Ostia, Laura 
Philippine !—Yes, I’ve seen ’em !—We came to the 
sea, got out of the car and walked on to the shingle 
shore. Call that the sea? said Laura Philippine. 
I said I did: the. Mediterranean, at least: Is it 
always that way? Why, it must have something 
the matter with it !—And Laura Philippine reclined 
on the shingle, lit another cigarette, and was gone 
into a special void of her own, leaving the sea to 
take care of itself. Where shall we have tea, Laura 
Philippine ?—Oh, anywhere !—At the Castle of the 
Cesars ?—Suit me all right !—If one had said in the 
cemetery, she would have answered the same. 

She appeared at dinner looking very, very modern. 

‘Where are you going to-night, Laura Philippine ? ”’ 

‘*'There’s a dance at the Hotel de Russie.” 

‘But you’re not going alone.” 

18 

LAURA PHILIPPINE 

*“Oh, I shan’t be alone. I know a whole crowd 
of ’em.” 

** But does your mother let you go off like that ? ” 

‘““My mother! Imagine if she had to come 
along!” Laura Philippine was animated. Her red- 
gold lashes lifted, her dark blue eyes flashed. 

*“Do you Charleston?” she said. It was the day 
before yesterday, when people still said it. And she 
started wriggling in the middle of the drawing-room. 
She was flushed, animated, flashing, a weird sort of 
Bacchanal on the hills of Rome, wriggling there, and 
her white teeth showing in an odd little smile. 

She was gone for good again. But next day about 
lunch-time, there she was, lying down, faintly haunted 
by the last vestiges of life, otherwise quite passed out. 
—Have a good time ?—Yes !—What time did you 
get home ?—About four. Dance all night ?—Yes ! 
Isn’t it too much for you ?—Not a bit. If I could 
dance all day as well, I might keep going. It’s this 
leaving off that does me in.—And she lapsed out. 

One day Philippa said to her: “Show him your 
poems. Yes, let him see them. He won’t think 
you a fool.” 

They were really nice poems, like little sighs. 
They were poems to yellow leaves, then to a grey 
kitten, then to a certain boy. They were ghostly 
wisps of verse, somehow touching and wistful. You 
should care for somebody, Laura Philippine, said 

? 

LAURA PHILIPPINE 

I.—Oh, come! Not that old bait! she replied— 
But you’ve got to live, said I.—I know it! she said. 
Why mention it ?—But ‘you’re only twenty. Think 
of your future. The only single thing you care about 
is jazz—Exactly. But what are boys for, xcept to 
jazz with ?—Quite! But what about when you’re 
thirty, and forty ?—and fifty?—I suppose they'll 
invent new dances all the time, she said mildly. 
I see old birds trotting like old foxes, so why shouldn’t 
I, if ’'m ninety ?—But you'll wear out, said I.— 
Not if anybody’s a good dancer, and will wind me 
up, she said.—But are you happy ? said I.—Mother’s 
always saying that. Why should anybody on earth 
want to be happy? I say to mother: Show me 
somebody happy, then! And she shows me some 
guy, or some bright young thing, and gets mad when 
I say: See the pretty monkey! I’m not happy, 
thank God, because I’m not anything. Why should 
I be? 

20 

SEX VERSUS LOVELINESS 

Ir is a pity that sex is such an ugly little word. An 
ugly little word, and really almost incomprehensible. 
What ts sex, after all? The more we think about 
it the less we know. 
~ Science says it is an instinct; but what is an 
instinct? Apparently an instinct is an old, old 
habit that has become ingrained. But a_ habit, 
however old, has to have a beginning. And there 
is really no beginning to sex. Where life is, there 
it is. So sex is no “‘ habit”? that has been formed. 
Again, they talk of sex as an appetite, like hunger. 
An appetite ; but for what? An appetite for pro- 
pagation? It is rather absurd. They say a peacock 
puts on all his fine feathers to dazzle the peahen 
into letting him satisfy his appetite for propagation. 
But why should the peahen not put on fine feathers, 
to dazzle the peacock, and satisfy her desire for 
propagation? She has surely quite as great a desire 
for eggs and chickens as he has. We cannot believe 
that her sex-urge is so weak that she needs all that 
blue splendour of feathers to rouse her. Not at all. 
As for me, I never even saw a peahen so much as 
look at her lord’s bronze and blue glory. I don’t 
believe she ever sees it. I don’t believe for a moment 
QI 

SEX VERSUS LOVELINESS 

that she knows the difference between bronze, blue, 
brown or green. 

If I had ever seen a peahen gazing with rapt 
attention on her lord’s flamboyancy, I might believe 
that he had put on all those feathers just to 
‘attract’? her. But she never looks at him. Only 
she seems to get a little perky when he shudders all 
his quills at her, like a storm in the trees. Then she 
does seem to notice, just casually, his presence. 

These theories of sex are amazing. A peacock 
puts on his glory for the sake of a wall-eyed peahen 
who never looks at him. Imagine a scientist being 
so naive as to credit the peahen with a profound, 
dynamic appreciation of a peacock’s colour and 
pattern. Oh, highly esthetic peahen ! 

And a nightingale sings to attract his female. 
Which is mighty curious, seeing he sings his best 
when courtship and honeymoon are over and the 
female is no longer concerned with him at all, but 
with the young. Well, then, if he doesn’t sing to 
attract her, he must sing to distract her and amuse 
her while she’s sitting. 

How delightful, how naive theories are! But 
there is a hidden will behind them all. There is 
a hidden will behind all theories of sex, implacable. 
And that is the will to deny, to wipe out the mystery 
of beauty. 

Because beauty is a mystery. You can neither 

22 

SEX VERSUS LOVELINESS 

eat it nor make flannel out of it. Well, then, says 
science, it is just a trick to catch the female and 
induce her to propagate. How naive! As if the 
female needed inducing. She will propagate in the 
dark, even—so where, then, is the beauty trick? 

Science has a mysterious hatred of beauty, because 
it doesn’t fit in the cause-and-effect chain. And 
society has a mysterious hatred of sex, because it 
perpetually interferes with the nice money-making 
schemes of social man. So the two hatreds made 
a combine, and sex and beauty are mere propagation 
appetite. 

Now sex and beauty are one thing, like flame and 
fire. If you hate sex you hate beauty. If you love 
living beauty, you have a reverence for séx. Of 
course you can love old, dead beauty and hate sex. 
But to love living beauty you must have a reverence 
for sex. 

Sex and beauty are inseparable, like life and con- 
sciousness. And the intelligence which goes with 
sex and beauty, and arises out of sex and beauty, is 
intuition. The great disaster of our civilisation is 
the morbid hatred of sex. What, for example, could 
show a more poisoned hatred of sex than Freudian 
psycho-analysis ?—which carries with it a morbid 
fear of beauty, “alive’’ beauty, and which causes 
the atrophy of our intuitive faculty and our in- 
tuitive self. 

23 

SEX VERSUS LOVELINESS 

The deep psychic disease of modern men and 
women is the diseased, atrophied condition of the 
intuitive faculties. There is a whole world of life 
that we might know and enjoy by intuition, and by 
intuition alone. This is denied us, because we deny 
sex and beauty, the source of the intuitive life and 
of the insouciance which is so lovely in free animals 
and in plants. 

Sex is the root of which intuition is the foliage ana 
beauty the flower. Why is a woman lovely, if ever, 
in her twenties? It is the time when sex rises softly 
to her face, as a rose to the top of a rose bush. 

And the appeal is the appeal of beauty. We deny 
it wherever we can. We try to make the beauty as 
shallow and trashy as possible. But, first and fore- 
most, sex appeal is the appeal of beauty. 

Now beauty is a thing about which we are so 
uneducated we can hardly speak of it. We try to 
pretend it is a fixed arrangement: straight nose, 
large eyes, etc. We think a lovely woman must 
look like Lilian Gish, a handsome man must look 
like Rudolph Valentino. So we think. 

In actual life we behave quite differently. We say : 
*“*She’s quite beautiful, but I don’t care for her.” 
Which shows we are using the word beautiful all 
wrong. We should say: ‘‘ She has the stereotyped 
attributes of beauty, but she is not beautiful to me.” 

Beauty is an experience, nothing else. It is not a 

24 

SEX VERSUS LOVELINESS 

fixed pattern or an arrangement of features. It is 
something felt, a glow or a communicated sense of 
fineness. What ails us is that our sense of beauty 
is so bruised and blunted, we miss all the best. 

But to stick to the films—there is a greater essential 
beauty in Charlie Chaplin’s odd face than ever there 
was in Valentino’s. There is a bit of true beauty 
in Chaplin’s brows and eyes, a gleam of something 
pure. 

But our sense of beauty is so bruised and clumsy, 
we don’t see it, and don’t know it when we do see 
it. We can only see the blatantly obvious, like the 
so-called beauty of Rudolph Valentino, which only 
pleases because it satisfies some ready-made notion 
of handsomeness. 

But the plainest person can look beautiful, can be 
beautiful. It only needs the fire of sex to rise 
delicately to change an ugly face to a lovely one. 
That is really sex appeal: the communicating of a 
sense of beauty. 

And in the reverse way, no one can be quite so 
repellent as a really pretty woman. That is, since 
beauty is a question of experience, not of concrete 
form, no one can be as acutely ugly as a really pretty 
woman. When the sex-glow is missing, and she 
moves in ugly coldness, how hideous she seems, and 
ail the worse for her externals of prettiness. 

What sex is, we don’t know, but it must be some 

25 C 

SEX VERSUS LOVELINESS 

sort of fire. For it always communicates a sense of 
warmth, of glow. And when the glow becomes a 
pure shine, then we feel the sense of beauty. 

But the communicating of the warmth, the glow 
of sex, is true sex appeal. We all have the fire of 
sex slumbering or burning inside us. If we live to 
be ninety, it is still there. Or, if it dies, we become 
one of those ghastly living corpses which are un- 
fortunately becoming more numerous in the world. 

Nothing is more ugly than a human being in 
whom the fire of sex has gone out. You get a nasty 
clayey creature whom everybody wants to avoid. 

But while we are fully alive, the fire of sex smoulders 
or burns in us. In youth it flickers and shines ; 
in age it glows softer and stiller, but there it is. We 
have some control over it; but only partial control. 
That is why society hates it. 

While ever it lives, the fire of sex, which is the 
source of beauty and anger, burns in us beyond our 
understanding. Like actual fire, while it lives it will 
burn our fingers if we touch it carelessly. And so 
social man, who only wants to be “ safe,’’ hates the 
fire of sex. 

Luckily, not many men succeed in being merely 
social men. The fire of the old Adam smoulders. 
And one of the qualities of fire is that it calls to fire. 
Sex-fire here kindles sex-fire there. It may only 
rouse the smoulder into a soft glow. It may call 

26 

SEX VERSUS LOVELINESS 

up a sharp flicker. Or rouse a flame; and then 
flame leans to flame, and starts a blaze. 

Whenever the sex-fire glows through, it will kindle 
an answer somewhere or other. It may only kindle 
a sense of warmth and optimism. Then you say : 
“TI like that girl; she’s a real good sort.” It may 
kindle a glow that makes the world look kindlier, 
and life feel better. Then you say: ‘‘She’s an 
attractive woman. [I like her.” 

Or she may rouse a flame that lights up her own 
face first, before it lights up the universe. Then 
you say: ‘*She’s a lovely woman. She looks lovely 
to me.” 

It takes a rare woman to rouse a real sense of 
loveliness. It is not that a woman is born beautiful. 
We say that to escape our own poor, bruised, clumsy 
understanding of beauty. There have been thou- 
sands and thousands of women quite as good-looking 
as Diane de Poitiers, or Mrs. Langtry, or any of 
the famous ones. There are to-day thousands and 
thousands of superbly good-looking women. But oh, 
how few lovely women ! 

And why? Because of the failure of their sex 
appeal. A good-looking woman becomes lovely 
when the fire of sex rouses pure and fine in her and 
flickers through her face and touches the fire 
in me. 

Then she becomes a lovely woman to me, then she 

27 

SEX VERSUS LOVELINESS 

is in the living flesh a lovely woman: not a mere 
photograph of one. And how lovely a lovely woman ! 
But, alas! how rare! How bitterly rare in a 
world full of unusually handsome girls and 
women ! 

Handsome, good-looking, but not lovely, not beau- 
tiful. Handsome and good-looking women are the 
women with good features and the right hair. But 
a lovely woman is an experience. It is a question 
of communicated fire. It is a question of sex appeal 
in our poor, dilapidated modern phraseology. Sex 
appeal applied to Diane de Poitiers, or even, in the 
lovely hours, to one’s wife—why, it is a libel and a 
slander in itself. Nowadays, however, instead of the 
fire of loveliness, it is sex appeal. The two are 
the same thing, I suppose, but on vastly different 
levels. | 

The business man’s pretty and devoted secretary 
is still chiefly valuable because of her sex appeal. 
Which does not imply ‘immoral relations’ in the 
slightest. 

Even to-day a girl with a bit of generosity likes 
to feel she is helping a man if the man will take her 
help. And this desire that he shall take her help 
is her sex appeal. It is the genuine fire, if of a very 
mediocre heat. 

Still, it serves to keep the world of ‘‘ business ”’ 
alive. Probably, but for the introduction of the 

28 

SEX VERSUS LOVELINESS 

lady secretary into the business man’s office, the 
business man would have collapsed entirely by now. 
She calls up the sacred fire in her and she communi- 
cates it to her boss. He feels an added flow of energy 
and optimism, and—business flourishes. 

There is, of course, the other side of sex appeal. 
It can be the destruction of the one appealed to. 
When a woman starts using her sex appeal to her 
own advantage it is usually a bad moment for some 
poor devil. But this side of sex appeal has been 
overworked lately, so it is not nearly as dangerous 
as it was. 

The sex-appealing courtesans who ruined so many 
men in Balzac no longer find it smooth running. 
Men have grown canny. They fight shy even of 
the emotional vamp. In fact, men are inclined to 
think they smell a rat the moment they feel the 
touch of feminine sex appeal to-day. 

Which is a pity, for sex appeal is only a dirty 
name for a bit of life-flame. No man works so well 
and so successfully as when some woman has kindled 
a little fire in his veins. No woman does her house- 
work with real joy unless she is in love—and a 
woman may go on being quietly in love for fifty 
years almost without knowing it. 

If only our civilisation had taught us how to let 
sex appeal flow properly and subtly, how to keep 
the fire of sex clear and alive, flickering or glowing 

29 

SEX VERSUS LOVELINESS 

or blazing in all its varying degrees of strength and 
communication, we might, all of us, have lived all 
our lives in love, which,means we should be kindled 
and full of zest in all kinds of ways and for all kinds 
of things. . 

Whereas, what a lot of dead ash there is in life 
now. 

INSOUCIANCE 

My balcony is on the east side of the hotel, and my 
neighbours on the right are a Frenchman, white- 
haired, and his white-haired wife; my neighbours 
on the left are two little white-haired English ladies. 
And we are all mortally shy of one another. 

When I peep out of my room in the morning and 
see the matronly French lady in a purple silk wrapper, 
standing like the captain on the bridge surveying 
the morning, I pop in again before she can see me. 
And whenever I emerge during the day, I am aware 
of the two little white-haired ladies popping back 
like two white rabbits, so that literally I only see 
the whisk of their skirt-hems. 

This afternoon being hot and thundery, I woke 
up suddenly and went out on the balcony barefoot. 
There I sat serenely contemplating the world, and 
ignoring the two bundles of feet of the two little 
ladies which protruded from their open doorways, 
upon the end of the two chazses longues. A hot, still 
afternoon! the lake shining rather glassy away 
below, the mountains rather sulky, the greenness 
very green, all a little silent and lurid, and two 
mowers mowing with scythes, downhill just near : 
slush! slush! sound the scythe-strokes, 

31 

INSOUCIANCE 

The two little ladies become aware of my presence. 
I become aware of a certain agitation in the two 
bundles of feet wrapped in two discreet steamer rugs 
and protruding on the end of two chaises longues 
from the pair of doorways upon the balcony next 
me. One bundle of feet suddenly disappears; so 
does the other. Silence ! 

Then lo! with odd sliding suddenness a little 
white-haired lady in grey silk, with round blue eyes, 
emerges and looks straight at me, and remarks that 
it is pleasant now. A little cooler, say I, with false 
amiability. She quite agrees, and we speak of the 
men mowing ; how plainly one hears the long breaths 
of the scythes ! 

By now we are (éte-d-téte. We speak of cherries, 
strawberries, and the promise of the vine crop. This 
somehow leads to Italy, and to Signor Mussolini. 
Before I know where I am, the little white-haired 
lady has swept me off my balcony, away from the 
glassy lake, the veiled mountains, the two men 
mowing, and the cherry trees, away into the troubled 
ether of international politics. 

I am not allowed to sit like a dandelion on my 
own stem. The little lady in a breath blows me 
abroad. And I was so pleasantly musing over the 
two men mowing: the young one, with long legs 
in bright blue cotton trousers, and with bare black 
head, swinging so lightly downhill, and the other, 

32 

INSOUCIANCE 

in black trousers, rather stout in front, and wearing 
a new straw hat of the boater variety, coming rather 
stiffly after, crunching the end of his stroke with a 
certain violent effort. 

I was watching the curiously different motions of 
the two men, the young thin one in bright blue 
trousers, the elderly fat one in shabby black trousers 
that stick out in front, the different amount of effort 
in their mowing, the lack of grace in the elderly 
one, his jerky advance, the unpleasant effect of the 
new “ boater”’ on his head—and I tried to interest 
the little lady. 

But it meant nothing to her. The mowers, the 
mountains, the cherry trees, the lake, all the things 
that were actually there, she didn’t care about. ‘They 
even seemed to scare her off the balcony. But 
she held her ground, and instead of herself being 
scared away, she snatched me up like some 
ogress, and swept me off into the empty desert 
spaces of right and wrong, politics, Fascism and 
the rest. 

The worst ogress couldn’t have treated me more 
villainously. I don’t care about right and wrong, 
politics, Fascism, abstract liberty or anything else of 
the sort. I want to look at the mowers, and wonder 
why fatness, elderliness and black trousers should 
inevitably wear a new straw hat of the boater variety, 
move in stiff jerks, shove the end of the scythe-stroke 

33 

INSOUCIANCE 

with a certain violence, and win my hearty dis- 
approval, as contrasted with young long thinness, 
bright blue cotton trousers, a bare black head, and 
a pretty lifting movement at the end of the scythe- 
stroke. 

Why do modern people almost invariably ignore 
the things that are actually present to them? Why, 
having come out from England to find mountains, 
lakes, scythe-mowers and cherry trees, does the little 
blue-eyed lady resolutely close her blue eyes to them 
all, now she’s got them, and gaze away to Signor 
Mussolini, whom she hasn’t got, and to Fascism, 
which is invisible anyhow? Why isn’t she content 
to be where she is? ‘Why can’t she be happy with 
what she’s got? Why must she care? 

I see now why her round blue eyes are so round, 
so noticeably round. It is because she ‘“‘ cares.” 
She is haunted by that mysterious bugbear of “caring.”’ 
For everything on earth that doesn’t concern her she 
“‘cares.”” She cares terribly because far-off, invisible, 
hypothetical Italians wear black shirts, but she doesn’t 
care a rap that one elderly mower whose stroke she 
can hear, wears black trousers instead of bright blue 
cotton ones. Now if she would descend from the 
balcony and climb the grassy slope and say to the 
fat mower: “* Cher monsieur, pourquoi portez-vous les 
pantalons notrs? Why, oh, why do you wear black 
trousers ?’—then I should say: What an on-the- 

Se 

INSOUCIANCE 

spot little lady !—But since she only torments me 
with international politics, I can only remark : What 
a tiresome off-the-spot old woman ! 

They care! They simply are eaten up with 
caring. They are so busy caring about Fascism or 
Leagues of Nations or whether France is right or 
whether Marriage is threatened, that they never 
know where they are. They certainly never live 
on the spot where they are. They inhabit abstract 
space, the desert void of politics, principles, right 
and wrong, and so forth. They are doomed to be 
abstract. Talking to them is like trying to have a 
human relationship with the letter x in algebra. 

There simply is a deadly breach between actual 
living and this abstract caring. What is actual 
living? It is a question mostly of direct contact. 
There was a direct sensuous contact between me, 
the lake, mountains, cherry trees, mowers, and a 
certain invisible but noisy chaffinch in a clipped 
lime tree. All this was cut off by the fatal shears 
of that abstract word Fascism, and the little old lady 
next door was the Atropos who cut the thread of 
my actual life this afternoon. She beheaded me, and 
flung my head into abstract space. Then we are 
supposed to love our neighbours ! 

When it comes to living, we live through our 
instincts and our intuitions. Instinct makes me run 
from little over-earnest ladies; instinct makes me 

35 

INSOUCIANCE 

sniff the lime blossom and reach for the darkest 
cherry. But it is intuition which makes me feel the 
uncanny glassiness of the lake this afternoon, the 
sulkiness of the mountains, the vividness of near 
green in thunder-sun, the young man in bright blue 
trousers lightly tossing the grass from the scythe, the 
elderly man in a boater stiffly shoving his scythe- 
strokes, both of them sweating in the silence of the 
intense light. 

GIVE HER A PATTERN 

Tue real trouble about women is that they must 
always go on trying to adapt themselves to men’s 
theories of women, as they always have done. When 
a woman is thoroughly herself, she is being what 
her type of man wants her to be. When a woman is 
hysterical it’s because she doesn’t quite know what 
to be, which pattern to follow, which man’s picture 
of woman to live up to. 

For, of course, just as there are many men in the 
world, there are many masculine theories of what 
women should be. But men run to type, and it is 
the type, not the individual, that produces the theory, 
or ‘“‘ ideal’? of woman. Those very grasping gentry, 
the Romans, produced a theory or ideal of the 
matron, which fitted in very nicely with the Roman 
property lust. ‘‘ Cesar’s wife should be above sus- 
picion.”—So Cesar’s wife kindly proceeded to be 
above it, no matter how far below it the Cesar fell. 
Later gentlemen like Nero produced the “ fast” 
theory of woman, and later ladies were fast enough 
for everybody. Dante arrived with a chaste and 
untouched Beatrice, and chaste and untouched 
Beatrices began to march self-importantly through 
the centuries. The Renaissances discovered the 

oT 

GIVE HER A PATTERN 

learned woman, and learned women buzzed mildly 
into verse and prose. Dickens invented the child- 
wife, so child-wives have swarmed ever since. He 
also fished out his version of the chaste Beatrice, a 
chaste but marriageable Agnes. George Eliot imi- 
tated this pattern, and it became confirmed. The 
noble woman, the pure spouse, the devoted mother 
took the field, and was simply worked to death. Our 
own poor mothers were this sort. So we younger 
men, having been a bit frightened of our noble 
mothers, tended to revert to the child-wife. We 
weren’t very inventive. Only the child-wife must 
be a boyish little thing—that was the new touch 
we added. Because young men are definitely fright- 
ened of the real female. She’s too risky a quantity. 
She is too untidy, like David’s Dora. No, let her 
be a boyish little thing, it’s safer. So a boyish little 
thing she is. 

There are, of course, other types. Capable men 
produce the capable woman ideal. Doctors produce 
the capable nurse. Business men produce the capable 
secretary. And so you get all sorts. You can pro- 
duce the masculine sense of honour (whatever that 
highly mysterious quantity may be) in women, if 
you want to. 

There is, also, the eternal secret ideal of men—the 
prostitute. Lots of women live up to this idea: just 
because men want them to. 

38 

GIVE HER A PATTERN 

And so, poor woman, destiny makes away with 
her. It isn’t that she hasn’t got a mind—she has. 
She’s got everything that man has. The only differ- 
ence is that she asks for a pattern. Give me a pattern 
to follow! That will always be woman’s cry. Un- 
less of course she has already chosen her pattern 
quite young,\then she will declare she is herself 
absolutely, and no man’s idea of women has any 
influence over her. 

Now the real tragedy is not that women ask and 
must ask for a pattern of womanhood. The 
tragedy is not, even, that men give them such 
abominable patterns, child-wives, little-boy-baby-face 
girls, perfect secretaries, noble spouses, self-sacrificing 
mothers, pure women who bring forth children in 
virgin coldness, prostitutes who just make themselves 
low, to please the men; all the atrocious patterns 
of womanhood that men have supplied to woman ; 
patterns all perverted from any real natural fulness 
of a human being. Man is willing toaccept woman 
as an equal, as a man in skirts, as an angel, a devil, 
a baby-face, a machine, an instrument, a bosom, a 
womb, a pair of legs, a servant, an encyclopedia, 
_an ideal or an obscenity ; the one thing he won’t 
accept her as, is a human being, a real human being 
of the feminine sex. 

And, of course, women love living up to strange 
patterns, weird patterns—the more uncanny the 

oo 

GIVE HER A PATTERN 

better. What could be more uncanny than the 
present pattern of the Eton-boy girl with flower-like 
artificial complexion ? It is just weird. And for its 
very weirdness women like living up to it. What 
can be more gruesome than the little-boy-baby-face 
pattern? Yet the girls take it on with avidity. 

But even that isn’t the real root of the tragedy. 
The absurdity, and often, as in the Dante-Beatrice 
business, the inhuman nastiness of the pattern—for 
Beatrice had to go on being chaste and untouched 
all her life, according to Dante’s pattern, while 
Dante had a cosy wife and kids at home—even that 
isn’t the worst of it. The worst of it is, as soon as a 
woman has really lived up to the man’s pattern, the 
man dislikes her for it. There is intense secret dislike 
for the Eton-young-man girl, among the boys, now 
that she is actually produced. Of course, she’s very 
nice to show in public, absolutely the thing. But 
the very young men who have brought about her 
production detest her in private and in their private 
hearts are appalled by her. 

When it comes to marrying, the pattern goes all 
to pieces. The boy marries the Eton-boy girl, and 
instantly he hates the type. Instantly his mind begins 
to play hysterically with all the other types, noble 
Agneses, chaste Beatrices, clinging Doras and lurid 
filles de joie. He is in a wild welter of confusion. 
Whatever pattern the poor woman tries to live up 

40 

GIVE HER A PATTERN 

to, he’ll want another. And that’s the condition of 
modern marriage. 

Modern woman isn’t really a fool. But modern 
man is. That seems to me the only plain way of 
putting it. The modern man is a fool, and the 
modern young man a prize fool. He makes a greater 
mess of his women than men have ever made. 
Because he absolutely doesn’t know what he wants 
her to be. We shall see the changes in the woman- 
pattern follow one another fast and furious now, 
because the young men hysterically don’t know what 
they want. Two years hence women may be in 
crinolines—there was a pattern for you !—or a bead 
flap, like naked negresses in mid-Africa—or they 
may be wearing brass armour, or the uniform of the 
Horse Guards. They may be anything. Because 
the young men are off their heads, and don’t know 
what they want. 

The women aren’t fools, but they must live up 
to some pattern or other. They know the men 
are fools. They don’t really respect the pattern. 
Yet a pattern they must have, or they can’t 
exist. 

Women are not fools. They have their own logic, 
even if it’s not the masculine sort. Women have the 
logic of emotion, men have the logic of reason. The 
two are complementary and mostly in opposition. 
But the woman’s logic of emotion is no less real and 

4I D 

GIVE HER A PATTERN 

inexorable than the man’s logic of reason. It only 
works differently. 

And the woman never really loses it. She may 
spend years living up to a masculine pattern. But 
in the end, the strange and terrible logic of emotion 
will work out the smashing of that pattern, if it has 
not been emotionally satisfactory. This is the partial’ 
explanation of the astonishing changes in women. 
For years they go on being chaste Beatrices or child- 
wives. Then on a_ sudden—bash! The chaste 
Beatrice becomes something quite different, the child- 
wife becomes a roaring lioness! The pattern didn’t 
suffice, emotionally. 

Whereas men are fools. They are based on a 
logic of reason, or are supposed to be. And then 
they go and behave, especially with regard to women, 
in a more-than-feminine unreasonableness. ‘They 
spend years training up the little-boy-baby-face type, 
till they’ve got her perfect. Then the moment they 
marry her, they want something else. Oh, beware, 
young women, of the young men who adore you! 
The moment they’ve got you they'll want something 
utterly different. The moment they marry the little- 
boy-baby face, instantly they begin to pine for the 
noble Agnes, pure and majestic, or the infinite mother 
with deep bosom of consolation, or the perfect busi- 
ness woman, or the lurid prostitute on black silk 
sheets ; or, most idiotic of all, a combination of all 

42 

GIVE HER A PATTERN 

the lot of them at once. And that is the logic of 
reason! When it comes to women, modern men are 
idiots. They don’t know what they want, and so 
they never want, permanently, what they get. They 
want a cream cake that is at the same time ham and 
eggs and at the same time porridge. They are fools. 
If only women weren’t bound by fate to play up 
to them ! 

For the fact of life is that women must play up to 
man’s pattern. And she only gives her best to a 
man when he gives her a satisfactory pattern to play 
up to. But to-day, with a stock of ready-made, 
worn-out idiotic patterns to live up to, what can 
women give to men but the trashy side of their 
emotions? What could a woman possibly give to 
a man who wanted her to be a boy-baby face? 
What could she possibly give him but the dribblings 
of an idiot >—And, because women aren’t fools, and 
aren’t fooled even for very long at a time, she gives 
him some nasty cruel digs with her claws, and makes 
him cry for mother dear !—abruptly changing his 
pattern. 

Bah ! men are fools. If they want anything from 
women, let them give women a decent, satisfying 
idea of womanhood—not these trick patterns of 
washed-out idiots. 

DO WOMEN CHANGE? 

Tuey tell of all the things that are going to happen 
in the future—babies bred in bottle, all the love- 
nonsense cut out, women indistinguishable from men. 
But it seems to me bosh. We like to imagine we are 
something very new on the face of the earth. But 
it seems to me we flatter ourselves. Motor-cars and 
aeroplanes are something novel, if not something 
new—one could draw a distinction. But the people 
in them are merely people, and not many steps up, 
if any, it seems to me, from the people who went in 
litters or palanquins or chariots, or who walked on 
foot from Egypt to Jordan, in the days of Moses. 
Humanity seems to have an infinite capacity for 
remaining the same—that is, human. 

Of course, there are all kinds of ways of being 
human; but I expect almost every possible kind is 
alive and kicking to-day. There are little Cleopatras 
and Zenobias and Semiramises and Judiths and 
Ruths, and even Mother Eves, to-day just the same 
as in all the endless yesterdays. Circumstances 
make them little Cleopatras and little Semiramises 
instead of big ones, because our age goes in for 
quantity regardless of quality. But sophisticated 
people are sophisticated people, no matter whether 

44 

DO WOMEN CHANGE ? 

it is Egypt or Atlantis. And sophisticated people 
are pretty well all alike. All that varies is the 
proportion of ‘‘ modern’ people to all the other 
unmodern sorts, the sophisticated to the unsophisti- 
cated. And to-day there is a huge majority of 
sophisticated people. And they are probably very 
little different from all the other sophisticated people 
of all the other civilisations, since man was man. 
And women are just part of the human show. 
They aren’t something apart. They aren’t some- 
thing new on the face of the earth, like the logan- 
berry or artificial silk. Women are as sophisticated 
as men, anyhow, and they were never anything but 
women, and they are nothing but women to-day, 
whatever they may think of themselves. They say 
the modern woman is a new type. But is she? I 
expect, in fact I am sure, there have been lots of 
women like ours in the past, and if you’d been 
married to one of them, you wouldn’t have found 
her any different from your present wife. Women 
are women. They only have phases. In Rome, in 
Syracuse, in Athens, in Thebes, more than two or 
three thousand years ago, there was the bob-haired, 
painted, perfumed Miss and Mrs. of to-day, and she 
inspired almost exactly the feelings that our painted 
and perfumed Misses and Mrses. inspire in the men. 
I saw a joke in a German paper—a modern young 
man and a modern young woman leaning on an 

45 

DO WOMEN CHANGE ? 

hotel balcony at night, overlooking the sea. He: 
“See the stars sinking down over the dark restless 
ocean!” She: ‘Cut it out! My room number 
is 92 !* . 

That is supposed to be very modern: the very 
modern woman. But I believe women in Capri 
under Tiberias said ‘‘ Cut it out”? to their Roman 
and Campanian lovers in just the same way. And 
women in Alexandria in Cleopatras’s time. Certain 
phases of history are “‘ modern.’ As the wheel of 
history goes round women become “ modern,”’ then 
they become unmodern again. The Roman women 
of the late Empire were most decidedly ‘‘ modern ”’ 
—so were the women of Ptolemaic Egypt. ‘True 
modern cut-it-out women. Only the hotels were 
run differently. 

Modernity or modernism isn’t something we’ve 
just invented. It’s something that comes at the end 
of civilisations. Just as leaves in autumn are yellow, 
so the women at the end of every known civilisation 
—Roman, Greek, Egyptian, etc.—have been modern. 
They were smart, they were chic, they said cut-it- 
out, and they did as they jolly well pleased. 

And then, after all, how deep does modernness 
go? Even in a woman? You give her a run for 
her money ; and if you don’t give it her, she takes 
it. ‘The sign of modernness in a woman is that she 
says : Oh, cut it out, boy !—So the boy cuts it out— 

46 

DO WOMEN CHANGE ? 

all the stars and ocean stuff—My room number’s 
thirty-two !—Come to the point ! 

But the point, when you come to it, is a very bare 
little place, a very meagre little affair. It’s extra- 
ordinary how meagre the point is once you’ve come 
to it. It’s not much better than a full-stop. So 
the modern girl comes to the point brutally and 
repeatedly, to find that her life is a series of full- 
stops, then a mere string of dots. Cut it out, boy! 
. . . When she comes to dot number one thousand, 
she’s getting about tired of dots, and of the plain 
point she’s come to. The point is all too plain and 
too obvious. It is so pointed that it is pointless. 
Following the series of dots comes a blank—a dead 
blank. There’s nothing left to cut out. Blank-eye ! 

Then the thoroughly modern girl begins to moan : 
Oh, boy, do put something in again !—And the 
thoroughly modern boy, having cut it out so 
thoroughly that it will never grow again, tunes up 
with : I can’t give you anything but love, Baby !— 
And the thoroughly modern girl accepts it with 
unction. She knows it’s nothing but a most crest- 
fallen echo from the sentimental past. But when 
you’ve cut everything out so that it will never grow 
again, you are thankful even for echoes from a 
sentimental past. And so the game begins again. 
Having cut it out, and brought it down to brass 
tacks, you find brass tacks are the last thing you 

47 

DO WOMEN CHANGE ? 

want to lie down on.—Oh, boy, aren’t you going to 
do something about it?—And the boy, having cut 
it all out so that it won’t grow again, has no other 
bright inspiration but to turn the brass tacks round, 
when lo, they become the brass-headed nails that 
go around Victorian plush furniture. And _ there 
they are, the hyper-modern two. 

No, women don’t change. They only go through 
a rather regular series of phases. They are first the 
slave ; then the obedient helpmeet; then the re- 
spected spouse; then the noble matron; then the 
splendid woman and citizen ; then the independent 
female ; then the modern girl, oh, cut-it-out, boy ! 
And when the boy has cut it all out, the mills of 
God grind on, and having nothing else to grind, 
they grind the cut-it-out girl down, down, down— 
back to—we don’t know where—but probably to the 
slave once more, and the whole cycle starts afresh, 
on and on, till in the course of a thousand years or 
two we come once more to the really “‘ modern” 
girl. Oh, cut it out, boy! 

A lead-pencil has a point, an argument may have 
a point, remarks may be pointed, and a man who 
wants to borrow five pounds from you only comes 
to the point when he asks you for the fiver. Lots 
of things have points: especially weapons. But 
where is the point to life? Where is the point to 
love? Where, if it comes to the point, is the point 

48 

DO WOMEN CHANGE ? 

to a bunch of violets? There is no point. Life 
and love are life and love, a bunch of violets is a 
bunch of violets, and to drag in the idea of a point 
is to ruin everything. Live and let live, love and 
let love, flower and fade, and follow the natural 
curve, which flows on, pointless. 

Now women used to understand this better than 
men. Men, who were keen on weapons, which all 
have points, used to insist on putting points to life 
and love. But women used to know better. They 
used to know that life is a flow, a soft curving flow, 
a flowing together and a flowing apart and a flowing 
together again, in a long subtle motion that has no 
full-stops and no points, even if there are rough 
places. Women used to see themselves as a softly 
flowing stream of attraction and desire and beauty, 
soft quiet rivers of energy and peace. ‘Then suddenly 
the idea changes. They see themselves as isolated 
things, independent females, instruments, instruments 
for love, instruments for work, instruments for politics, 
instruments for pleasure, this, that and the other. 
And as instruments they become pointed and they 
want everything, even a small child, even love itself, 
to have a point. When women start coming to the 
point, they don’t hesitate. They pick a daisy, and 
they say: There must be a point to this daisy, and 
I’m going to get at it.—So they start pulling off the 
white petals, till there are none left. Then they 

49 

DO WOMEN CHANGE ? 

pull away the yellow bits of the centre, and come to 
a mere green part, still without having come to the 
point. Then in disgust they tear the green base of 
the flower across, and say: I call that a fool flower. 
It had no point to it! 

Life is not a question of points, but a question of 
flow. It’s the flow that matters. If you come to 
think of it, a daisy even is like a little river flowing, 
that never for an instant stops. From the time when 
the tiny knob of a bud appears down among the 
leaves, during the slow rising up a stem, the slow 
swelling and pushing out the white petal-tips from 
the green, to the full round daisy, white and gold 
and gay, that opens and shuts through a few dawns, 
a few nights, poised on the summit of her stem, then 
silently shrivels and mysteriously disappears,—there is 
no stop, no halt, it is a perpetual little streaming of 
a gay little life out into full radiance and delicate 
shrivelling, like a perfect little fountain that flows 
and flows, and shoots away at last into the invisible, 
even then without any stop. 

So it is with life, and especially with love. There 
is no point. There is nothing you can cut out, 
except falsity, which isn’t love or life. But the love 
itself is a flow, two little streams of feeling, one from 
the woman, one from the man, that flow and flow 
and never stop, and sometimes they twinkle with 
stars, sometimes they chafe, but still they flow on, 

50 

DO WOMEN CHANGE ? 

intermingling ; and if they rise to a floweriness like 
a daisy, that is part of the flow; and they will 
inevitably die down again, which is also part of a 
flow. And one relationship may produce many 
flowerinesses, as a daisy plant produces many daisies ; 
but they will all die down again as the summer 
passes, though the green plant itself need not die. 
If flowers didn’t fade they wouldn’t be flowers, they’d 
be artificial things. But there are roots to faded 
flowers and in the root the flow continues and con- 
tinues. And only the flow matters; live and let 
live, love and let love. There is no point to love. 

51 

OWNERSHIP 

Tue question of the possession of property, I read 
somewhere lately, has now become a religious ques- 
tion. On the other hand, the religious people assert 
that the possession of property can never be a 
religious question, because in his religious soul a 
man is indifferent to property either way. I only 
care about property, money, possessions of any sort, 
when I have no religion in me. As soon as real 
religion enters, out goes my interest in the things 
of this world. 

This, I consider, is hard lines on a man; since I 
must spend the best part of my day earning my 
living and acquiring a modicum of possession, I 
must acknowledge myself a religionless wretch most 
of my time: or else I must be a possessionless beggar 
and a parasite on industrious men. 

There is something wrong with the arrangement. 
Work is supposed to be sacred, wages are slightly 
contemptible and mundane, and a savings bank 
account is distinctly irreligious, as far as pure religion 
goes. Where are we, quite ? 

No getting away from it, there is something rather 
mean about saving money. But still more fatal is the 
disaster of having no money at all, when you need it. 

52 

OWNERSHIP 

The trouble about this property business, money, 
possessions, is that we are most of us exceedingly 
and excruciatingly bored by it. Our fathers got 
a great thrill out of making money, building their 
own houses, providing for their old age and laying 
by something for their children. Children inherit 
their father’s leavings; they never inherit their 
father’s and mother’s thrill; never more than the 
tail end of it: a point to which parents are con- 
sistently blind. If my father was thrilled by saving 
up, I shall be thrilled by blowing my last shilling. 
If my father gave all he had to the poor, I shall 
quite enjoy making things pleasant for my own little 
self. Ifmy father wasted, I shall probably economise. 
Unless, of course, my father was a jolly waster. 

But fathers for the last fifty years have been saving 
up, building their own houses, acquiring neat little 
properties, leaving small inheritances to their chil- 
dren, and preaching the sanctity of work. And they 
have pretty well worn it all out. The young don’t 
believe in the sanctity of work, they are bored by 
the thought of saving up for their children. If they 
do build themselves a little house, they are tired of 
it in ten minutes. They want a car to run around 
in, and money to spend ; but possessions, as posses- 
sions, are simply a bore to them. What’s the fun 
owning things, anyway, unless you can do some- 
thing with them ? 

53 

OWNERSHIP 

So that the young are approaching the religious 
indifference to property, out of sheer boredom. 

But being bored by property doesn’t solve the 
problem. Because, no matter how bored you may 
be, you’ve got to live, and to do so you have to earn 
a living, and you have to own a certain amount of 
property. Ifyou have wife and children, the earning 
and the property are a serious matter. So, many 
young men to-day drive themselves along in work 
and business, feeling a distinct inner boredom with 
it all, and bemoaning a thankless existence. 

What’s to be done about it? Why, nothing, all 
in a hurry. The thing to do is to face the situation. 
A young man to-day says to himself: I’m bored ! 
I’m bored by making money slowly and meagrely, 
I’m bored at the thought of owning my own little 
bit. Why haven’t I a maiden aunt who’ll die and 
leave me a thousand a year? Why can’t I marry 
a rich wife? Why doesn’t somebody set me up for 
lifes Wihyesezs.¢ 

This seems to be peculiarly the attitude of the 
young Englishman. He truly doesn’t want much, 
it’s not riches he’s after. All he wants, he says, is 
independence. By which he means, not real in- 
dependence at all, but freedom from the bore of 
having to make a living. 

To make a living was to our fathers and grand- 
fathers an adventure; to us it is no more an ad- 

54 

OWNERSHIP 

venture, it is a bore. And the situation is serious. 
Because, after all, it is change in feelings which makes 
changes in the world. 

When it says in The Times: The question of the 
possession of property has now become a religious 
question—it does not mean that the question whether 
I shall own my little six-roomed house or not has 
become a religious question. It is a vague hint at 
national ownership. It is becoming a religious ques- 
tion with us now, whether the nation or whether 
private individuals shall own the land and the in- 
dustries. This is what is hinted at. 

And perhaps national or private ownership is 
indeed becoming a religious question. But if so, 
like the question of a man and his own little house, 
it is becoming religious not because of our passionate 
interest in it, but because of our deadly indifference. 
Religion must be indifferent to the question of owner- 
ship, and we are, au fond, indifferent. Most men 
are inwardly utterly bored by the problem of in- 
dividual ownership or national ownership; and 
therefore, at this point, they are inwardly utterly 
religious. 

Ownership altogether has lost its point, its vitality. 
We are bored by ownership, public or private, 
national or individual. Even though we may hang 
on like grim death to what we’ve got, if somebody 
wants to snatch it—and the instinct is perfectly 

55 

OWNERSHIP 

normal and healthy—still, for all that, we are in- 
wardly bored by the whole business of ownership. 
And the sooner we realise it, the better. It saves 
us from the bogey of Bolshevism. 

If we could come to a fair unanimity on this 
point—the point that ownership is boring, making 
money is boring, earning a living is a bore—then 
we could wriggle out of a lot of the boredom. ‘Take 
the land, for example. Nobody really wants it, when 
it comes to the point. Neither does anybody really 
want the coal mines. Even the nation doesn’t want 
them. The men of the nation are fed stiff with 
mines and land and wages. 

Why not hand it all over to the women? To the 
women of Britain! The modern excessive need of 
money is a female need. Why not hand over to the 
women the means of making the money which they, 
the women, mostly need? Men must admit them- 
selves flummoxed. If we handed over to the women 
the means of making money, perhaps there might be 
a big drop in the feminine need of money. Which, 
after all, is the straight road to salvation. 

56 

MASTER IN HIS OWN HOUSE 

WE still are ruled too much by ready-made phrases. 
Take, for example: A man must be master in his 
own house. There’s a good old maxim; we all 
believe it in theory. Every little boy sees himself 
a future master in his own house. He grows up with 
the idea well fixed. So naturally, when his time 
comes and he finds, as he does pretty often, that he’s 
not master in his own house, his nose is conventionally 
out of joint. He says: These overbearing modern 
women, they insist on bossing the show, and they’re 
absolutely in the wrong. 

What we have to beware of is mass thinking. The 
idea that a man must be master in his own house is 
just a mass idea. No man really thinks it for him- 
self. He accepts it en bloc, as a member of the mass. 
He is born, so to speak, tightly swaddled up in it, 
like a lamb in its wool. In fact, we are born so 
woolly and swaddled up in mass ideas, that we hardly 
get a chance to move, to make a real move of our 
own. We just bleat foolishly out of a mass of woolly 
cloud, our mass-ideas, and we get no further. A 
man must be master in his own house. Feed the 
brute. An Englishman’s home is his castle. Two 
servants are better than one. Happy is the bride 

57 E 

MASTER IN HIS OWN HOUSE 

who has her own little car in her own little garage. 
It is the duty of a husband to give his wife what she 
wants. It is the duty of a wife to say ‘“‘ Yes, darling !” 
to her husband; all these are mass ideas, often 
contradicting one another, but always effective. If 
you want to silence a man, or a woman, effectively, 
trot out a mass idea. The poor sheep is at once mum. 

Now the thing to do with a mass idea is to in- 
dividualise it. Instead of massively asserting: A 
man must be master in his own house, the gentleman 
in question should particularise and say: I, Jim, 
must be master in my own house, The Rosebud, or 
The Doves’ Nest, over my wife, Julia——And as soon 
as you make it personal, and drag it to earth, you 
will feel a qualm about it. You can storm over the 
breakfast coffee: A man must be master in his own 
house! But it takes much more courage to say: 
My name’s Jim, and I must be master in this house, 
The Rosebud, over you, Julia, my spouse !—This is 
bringing things to an issue. And things are rarely 
so brought. The lord and master fumes with a mass 
idea, and the spouse and helpmeet fumes with a 
mass resentment, and their mingled fumings make 
a nice mess of The Rosebud. 

As a matter of fact, when Jim begins to look into 
his own heart, and also to look The Rosebud, which 
is his own house, firmly in the eye, he finds—O 
shattering discovery !—that he has very little desire 

58 

MASTER IN HIS OWN HOUSE 

to be master in The Rosebud. On the contrary, the 
idea rather nauseates him. And when he looks at 
Julia calmly pouring the coffee, he finds, if he’s the 
usual Jim, that his desire to be master over that 
young dame is curiously non-existent. 

And there’s the difference between a mass idea 
and real individual thinking. A man must be 
master in his own house. But Jim finds the idea of 
being master in The Rosebud rather feeble, and the 
idea of being master over the cool Julia somehow 
doesn’t inspire him. He doesn’t really care whether 
The Rosebud has pink bows on the curtains or not. 
And he doesn’t care really what Julia does with 
her day, while he’s away at his job. He wants her 
to amuse herself and not bother him.—That is, if 
he’s the ordinary Jim. 

So that man being master in his own house falls 
flat when the man is indifferent to his mastery. 
And that’s the worst of mass ideas: they remain, 
like fossils, when the life that animated them is dead. 
The problem of a man being master in his own house 
is to-day no problem, really, because the man is 
helplessly indifferent about it. He feels mere in- 
difference ; only now and then he may spout up 
the mass idea, and make an unreal fume which does 
a lot.of harm. 

We may take it for granted, that wherever woman 
bosses the show, it is because man doesn’t want to. 

ap) 

MASTER IN HIS OWN HOUSE 

It is not rapacity and pushing on the woman’s part. 
It is indifference on the man’s. Men don’t really 
care. Wherever they do care, there is no question 
of the intrusion of women. Men really care still 
about engineering and mechanical pursuits, so there 
is very little intrusion of women there. But men are 
sadly indifferent to clerking pursuits, and journalistic 
pursuits, and even to parliamentary pursuits. So 
women flood in to fill the vacuums. If we get a 
House of Commons filled with women Members, it 
will be purely and simply for the reason that men, 
energetic men, are indifferent ; they don’t care any 
more about being Members of Parliament and 
making laws. 

Indifference is a strange thing. It lies there under 
all the mass thinking and the mass activity, like a 
gap in the foundations. We still make a great fuss 
about Parliament—and underneath, most men are 
indifferent to Parliament. All the fuss about a home 
of your own and a wife of your own: and under- 
neath, the men are only too often indifferent to the 
house and the wife both. They are only too willing 
for the wife to do the bossing and the caring, so 
that they need neither care nor boss. 

Indifference is not the same as insouciance. In- 
souciance means not caring about things that don’t 
concern you; it also means not being pinched by 
anxiety. But indifference is inability to care; it is 

60 

MASTER IN HIS OWN HOUSE 

the result of a certain deadness or numbness. And 
it is nearly always accompanied by the pinch of 
anxiety. Men whocan’t care any more, feel anxious 
about it. They have no insouciance. They are 
thankful if the woman will care. And at the same 
time they resent the women’s caring and running 
the show. 

The trouble is not in the women’s bossiness, but 
in the men’s indifference. This indifference is the 
real malady of the day. It is a deadness, an inability 
to care about anything. And it is always pinched 
by anxiety. 

And whence does the indifference arise? It arises 
from having cared too much, from having cared 
about the wrong thing, in the immediate past. If 
there is a growing indifference to politics on the part 
of men, it is because men have cared far too much 
about politics. If Jim is really indifferent to his 
little home, The Rosebud, if he leaves it all to Julia, 
that is because his father and grandfather cared far 
too much about their little homes, made them a bit 
nauseating. If men don’t care very vitally about 
their jobs, nowadays, and leave them to women, it 
is because our fathers and grandfathers considered 
the job sacrosanct—which it isn’t—and so wore out 
the natural feeling for it, till it became repulsive. 

Men leave the field to women, when men become 
inwardly indifferent to the field. What the women 

61 

MASTER IN HIS OWN HOUSE 

take over is really an abandoned battle. They don’t 
pick up the tools and weapons of men till men let 
them drop. 

And then men, gnawed by the anxiety of their 
own very indifference, blame women and start re- 
iterating like parrots such mass ideas as: “* Man 
must be master in his own house.” 

62 

MATRIARCHY 

WHETHER they are aware of it or not, the men of 
to-day are a little afraid of the women of to-day ; 
and especially the younger men. They not only see 
themselves in the minority, overwhelmed by numbers, 
but they feel themselves swamped by the strange 
unloosed energy of the silk-legged hordes. Women, 
women everywhere, and all of them on the warpath ! 
The poor young male keeps up a jaunty front, but 
his masculine soul quakes. Women, women every- 
where, silk-legged hosts that are up and doing, and 
no gainsaying them. They settle like silky locusts 
on all the jobs, they occupy the offices and the playing- 
fields like immensely active ants, they buzz round 
the coloured lights of pleasure in amazing bare- 
armed swarms, and the rather dazed young male is, 
naturally, a bit scared. Tommy may not be scared 
of his own individual Elsie, but when he sees her 
with her scores of female “‘ pals,” let him bluff as 
he may, he is frightened. 

Being frightened, he begins to announce: Man 
must be master again !+-The must is all very well. 
- Tommy may be master of his own little Elsie in the 
stronghold of his own little home. But when she 
sets off in the morning to her job, and joins the 

63 

MATRIARCHY 

hosts of her petticoatless, silk-legged ‘‘ pals,’’ who is 
going to master her? Not Tommy ! 

It’s not a question of petticoat rule. Petticoats no 
longer exist. The unsheathed silky legs of the modern 
female are petticoatless, and the modern young 
woman is not going to spend her life managing some 
little husband. She is not interested. And as soon 
as a problem ceases to contain interest, it ceases to 
be a problem. So that petticoat rule, which was 
such a problem for our fathers and grandfathers, is 
for us nothing. Elsie is not interested. 

No, the modern young man is not afraid of being 
petticoat-ruled. His fear lies deeper. He is afraid 
of being swamped, turned into a mere accessory of 
bare-limbed, swooping woman; swamped by her 
numbers, swamped by her devouring energy. He 
talks rather bitterly about rule of women, monstrous 
regiment of women, and about matriarchy, and, 
rather feebly, about man being master again. He 
knows perfectly well that he will never be master 
again. John Knox could live to see the head of his 
monstrous regiment of women, the head of Mary of 
Scotland, just chopped off. But you can’t chop off 
the head of the modern woman. As leave try to 
chop the head off a swarm of locusts. Woman has 
emerged, and you can’t put her back again. And 
she’s not going back of her own accord, not if she 
knows it. 

64 

MATRIARCHY 

So we are in for the monstrous rule of women, and 
a matriarchy. A matriarchy! This seems the last 
word of horror to the shuddering male. What it 
means, exactly, is not defined. But it rings with the 
hollow sound of man’s subordination to woman. 
Woman cracks the whip, and the poor trained dog 
of a man jumps through the hoop. Nightmare ! 

Matriarchy, according to the dictionary, means 
mother-rule. The mother the head of the family. 
The children inherit the mother’s name. The pro- 
perty is bequeathed from mother to daughter, with 
a small allowance for the sons. The wife, no doubt, 
swears to love and cherish her husband, and the 
husband swears to honour and obey his spouse.—It 
doesn’t sound so very different from what already 
is: except that when Tommy Smith marries Elsie 
Jones, he becomes Mr. Jones ; quite right, too, nine 
cases out of ten. 

And this is the matriarchy we are drifting into. 
No good trying to stem the tide. Woman is in 
flood. 

But in this matter of matriarchy, let us not be 
abstract. Men and women will always be men and 
women. There is nothing new under the sun, not 
even matriarchy. Matriarchies have been and will 
be. And what about them, in living actuality ?—It 
is said that in the ancient dawn of history there was 
nothing but matriarchy : children took the mother’s 

65 

MATRIARCHY 

name, belonged to the mother’s clan, and the man 
was nameless. There is supposed to be a matriarchy 
to-day among the Berbers of the Sahara, and in 
Southern India, and one or two other rather dim 
places. 

Yet, if you look at photographs of Berbers, the 
men look most jaunty and cocky, with their spears, 
and the terrible matriarchal women look as if they 
did most of the work. It seems to have been so in 
the remote past. Under the matriarchal system that 
preceded the patriarchal system of Father Abraham, 
the men seem to have been lively sports, hunting and 
dancing and fighting, while the women did the 
drudgery and minded the brats. 

Courage! Perhaps a matriarchy isn’t so bad, after 
all. A woman deserves to possess her own children 
and have them called by her name. As for the 
household furniture and the bit of money in the 
bank, it seems naturally hers. 

Far from being a thing to dread, matriarchy is a 
solution to our weary social problem. Take the 
Pueblo Indians of the Arizona desert. They still 
have a sort of matriarchy. The man marries into 
the woman’s clan, and passes into her family house. 
His corn supply goes to her tribe. His children are 
the children of her tribe, and take her name, so to 
speak. Everything that comes into the house is hers, 
her property. The man has no claim on the house, 

66 

MATRIARCHY 

which belongs to her clan, nor to anything within 
the house. The Indian woman’s home is her castle. 

So! And what about the man, in this dread 
matriarchy ? Is he the slaveof the woman? By no 
means. Marriage, with him, is a secondary con- 
sideration, a minor event. His first duty is not to 
his wife and children—they belong to the clan. His 
first duty is to the tribe. The man is first and fore- 
most an active, religious member of the tribe. 
Secondarily, he is son or husband or father. 

The real life of the man is not spent in his own 
little home, daddy in the bosom of the family, wheeling 
the perambulator on Sundays. His life is passed 
mainly in the khiva, the great underground religious 
meeting-house where only the males assemble, where 
the sacred practices of the tribe are carried on ; then 
also he is away hunting, or performing the sacred 
rites on the mountains, or he works in the fields. 
But he spends only certain months of the year in 
his wife’s house, sleeping there. The rest he spends 
chiefly in the great khiva, where he sleeps and lives, 
along with the men, under the tuition of the old 
men of the tribe. 

The Indian is profoundly religious. To him, life 
itself is religion: whether planting corn or reaping 
it, scalping an enemy or begetting a child; even 
washing his long black hair is a religious act. And 
he believes that only by the whole united effort of 

67 

MATRIARCHY 

the tribe, day in, day out, year in, year out, in sheer 
religious attention and practice, can the tribe be kept 
vitally alive. Of course, the religion is pagan, savage, 
and to our idea unmoral. But religion it is, and it 
is his charge. 

Then the children. When the boys reach the age 
of twelve or thirteen, they are taken from the mother 
and given into the charge of the old men. They 
live now in the khiva, or they are taken to the sacred 
camps on the mountains, to be initiated into man- 
hood. Now their home is the khiva, the great 
sacred meeting-house underground. They may go 
and eat in their mother’s house, but they live and 
sleep with the men. 

And this is ancient matriarchy. And this is the 
instinctive form that society takes, even now. It 
seems to be a social instinct to send boys away to 
school at the age of thirteen, to be initiated into 
manhood. It is a social instinct in a man to leave 
his wife and children safe in the home, while he goes 
out and foregathers with other men, to fulfil his 
deeper social necessities. There is the club and the 
public-house, poor substitutes for the sacred khiva, 
no doubt, and yet absolutely necessary to most men. 
It is in the clubs and public-houses that men have 
really educated one another, by immediate contact, 
discussed politics and ideas, and made history. It 
is in the clubs and public-houses that men have tried 

68 

MATRIARCHY 

to satisfy their deeper social instincts and intuitions. 
To satisfy his deeper social instincts and intuitions, 
a man must be able to get away from his family, 
and from women altogether, and foregather in the 
communion of men. 

Of late years, however, the family has got hold of 
a man, and begun to destroy him. When a man is 
clutched by his family, his deeper social instincts 
and intuitions are all thwarted, he becomes a negative 
thing. Then the woman, perforce, becomes positive, 
and breaks loose into the world. 

Let us drift back to matriarchy. Let the woman 
take the children and give them her name—it’s a 
wise child that knows its own father. Let the woman 
take the property—what has a man to do with 
inheriting or bequeathing a grandfather’s clock! 
Let the women form themselves into a great clan, 
for the preservation of themselves and their children. 
It is nothing but just. 

And so, let men get free again, free from the tight 
littleness of family and family possessions. Give 
woman her full independence, and with it, the full 
responsibility of her independence. That is the only 
way to satisfy women once more: give them their 
full independence and full self-responsibility as mothers 
and heads of the family. When the children take 
the mother’s name, the mother will look after the 
name all right. 

69 

MATRIARCHY 

And give the men a new foregathering ground, 
where they can meet and satisfy their deep social 
needs, profound social cravings which can only be 
satisfied apart from women. It is absolutely neces- 
sary to find some way of satisfying these ultimate 
social cravings in men, which are deep as religion 
in a man. It is necessary for the life of society, to 
keep us organically vital, to save us from the mess 
of industrial chaos and industrial revolt. 

79 

COCKSURE WOMEN AND 
HENSURE MEN 

Ir seems to me there are two aspects to women. 
There is the demure and the dauntless. Men have 
loved to dwell, in fiction at least, on the demure 
maiden whose inevitable reply is: Oh, yes, if you 
please, kind sir! The demure maiden, the demure 
spouse, the demure mother—this is still the ideal. 
A few maidens, mistresses and mothers are demure. 
A few pretend to be. But the vast majority are not. 
And they don’t pretend to be. We don’t expect a girl 
skilfully driving her car to be demure, we expect her 
to be dauntless. What good would demure and 
maidenly Members of Parliament be, inevitably 
responding : Oh, yes, if you please, kind sir !—Though 
of course there are masculine members of that kidney. 
—And a demure telephone girl? Or even a demure 
stenographer? Demureness, to be sure, is outwardly 
becoming, it is an outward mark of femininity, like 
bobbed hair. But it goes with inward dauntlessness. 
The girl who has got to make her way in life has got 
to be dauntless, and if she has a pretty, demure 
manner with it, then lucky girl. She kills two birds 
with two stones. 

With the two kinds of femininity go two kinds of 

7h 

COCKSURE WOMEN AND HENSURE MEN 

confidence : there are the women who are cocksure, 
and the women who are hensure. A really up-to- 
date woman is a cocksure woman. She doesn’t have 
a doubt nor a qualm. She is the modern type. 
Whereas the old-fashioned demure woman was sure 
as a hen is sure, that is, without knowing anything 
about it. She went quietly and busily clucking 
around, laying the eggs and mothering the chickens 
in a kind of anxious dream that still was full of 
sureness. But not mental sureness. Her sureness was 
a physical condition, very soothing, but a condition 
out of which she could easily be startled or 
frightened. 

It is quite amusing to see the two kinds of sureness 
in chickens. The cockerel is, naturally, cocksure. 
He crows because he is certain it is day. Then the 
hen peeps out from under her wing. He marches 
to the door of the hen-house and pokes out his head 
assertively : Ah ha! daylight, of course, just as I said! 
—and he majestically steps down the chicken ladder 
towards terra firma, knowing that the hens will step 
cautiously after him, drawn by his confidence. So 
after him, cautiously, step the hens. He crows again : 
Ha-ha ! here we are !—It is indisputable, and the hens 
accept it entirely. He marches towards the house. 
From the house a person ought to appear, scattering 
corn. Why does the person not appear? The cock 
will see to it. He is cocksure. He gives a loud crow 

ea 

COCKSURE WOMEN AND HENSURE MEN 

in the doorway, and the person appears. The hens 
are suitably impressed, but immediately devote all 
their henny consciousness to the scattered corn, 
pecking absorbedly, while the cock runs and fusses, 
cocksure that he is responsible for it all. 

So the day goes on. The cock finds a tit-bit, and 
loudly calls the hens. They scuffle up in henny 
surety, and gobble the tit-bit. But when they find 
a juicy morsel for themselves, they devour it in 
silence, hensure. Unless, of course, there are little 
chicks, when they most anxiously call the brood. 
But in her own dim surety, the hen is really much 
surer than the cock, in a different way. She marches 
off to lay her egg, she secures obstinately the nest she 
wants, she lays her egg at last, then steps forth again 
with prancing confidence, and gives that most assured 
of all sounds, the hensure cackle of a bird who has 
laid her egg. The cock, who is never so sure about 
anything as the hen is about the egg she has laid, 
immediately starts to cackle like the female of his 
species. He is pining to be hensure, for hensure is 
so much surer than cocksure. 

Nevertheless, cocksure is boss. When the chicken- 
hawk appears in the sky, loud are the cockerel’s calls 
of alarm. Then the hens scuffle under the verandah, 
the cock ruffles his feathers on guard. ‘The hens are 
numb with fear, they say: Alas, there is no health 
in us! How wonderful to be a cock so bold !—And 

We F 

COCKSURE WOMEN AND HENSURE MEN 

they huddle, numbed. But their very numbness is 
hensurety. f 

Just as the cock can cackle, however, as if he had 
laid the egg, so can the hen bird crow. She can 
more or less assume his cocksureness. And yet she 
is never so easy, cocksure, as she used to be when 
she was hensure. Cocksure, she is cocksure, but 
uneasy. Hensure, she trembles, but is easy. 

It seems to me just the same in the vast human 
farmyard. Only nowadays all the cocks are cackling 
and pretending to lay eggs, and all the hens are 
crowing and pretending to call the sun out of bed. 
If women to-day are cocksure, men are hensure. 
Men are timid, tremulous, rather soft and sub- 
missive, easy in their very henlike tremulousness. 
They only want to be spoken to gently. So the 
women step forth with a good loud cock-a-doodle- 
do ! 

The tragedy about cocksure women is that they 
are more cocky, in their assurance, than the cock 
himself. They never realise that when the cock 
gives his loud crow in the morning, he listens acutely 
afterwards, to hear if some other wretch of a cock 
dare crow defiance, challenge. To the cock, there 
is always defiance, challenge, danger and death on 
the clear air ; or the possibility thereof. 

But alas, when the hen crows, she listens for no 
defiance or challenge. When she says cock-a-doodle-do ! 

th: 

COCKSURE WOMEN AND HENSURE MEN 

then it is unanswerable. The cock listens for an 
answer, alert. But the hen knows she is unanswer- 
able. Cock-a-doodle-do! and there it is, take it or 
leave it ! 

And it is this that makes the cocksureness of women 
so dangerous, so devastating. It is really out of 
scheme, it is not in relation to the rest of things. 
So we have the tragedy of cocksure women. They 
find, so often, that instead of having laid an egg, 
they have laid a vote, or an empty ink-bottle, or 
some other absolutely unhatchable object, which 
means nothing to them. 

It is the tragedy of the modern woman. She 
becomes cocksure, she puts all her passion and energy 
and years of her life into some effort or assertion, 
without ever listening for the denial which she ought 
to take into count. She is cocksure, but she is a 
hen all the time. Frightened of her own henny self, 
she rushes to mad lengths about votes, or welfare, 
or sports, or business : she is marvellous, out-manning 
the man. But alas, it is all fundamentally discon- 
nected. It is all an attitude, and one day the attitude 
will become a weird cramp, a pain, and then it will 
collapse. And when it has collapsed, and she looks 
at the eggs she has laid, votes, or miles of typewriting, 
years of business efficiency—suddenly, because she is 
a hen and not a cock, all she has done will turn 
into pure nothingness to her. Suddenly it all falls 

75 

COCKSURE WOMEN AND HENSURE MEN 

out of relation to her basic henny self, and she realises 
she has lost her life. The lovely henny surety, the 
hensureness which is the real bliss of every female, 
has been denied her: she had never had it. Having 
lived her life with such utmost strenuousness and 
cocksureness, she has missed her life altogether. 
Nothingness ! 

76 

IS ENGLAND STILL A MAN’S COUNTRY? 

TueEy, that is men, Englishmen, get up and ask if 
England is still a man’s country. The only answer 
is, it would be if there were any men in it. For 
what makes a man’s country, do you imagine? Is 
it the landscape or the number of pubs or the 
rate of wages or the size of boots? Is it the 
fact that the women say: I obey you, my lord? 
If the men of England feel that England is no 
longer a man’s country—for apparently it was 
so not long ago—then it isn’t. And if it isn’t 
a man’s country, then what in heaven’s name 
is it? 

The men will say, it’s a woman’s country. The 
women will immediately reply: I don’t think !— 
And so it’s nobody’s country. Poor England! The 
men say it’s no longer a man’s country, it has fallen 
into the hands of the women. The women give a 
shout of scorn, and say Not half/—and proceed to 
demonstrate that England would be a very different 
place if it were a woman’s country—my word, a 
changed shop altogether. And between the two of 
them, men and women, Old England rubs her eyes 
and says: Where am I? What am I? Am 
I at all? In short, do I exist?—And _ there’s 

77 

IS ENGLAND STILL A MAN’S COUNTRY ? 

never a man or a woman takes the trouble 
to answer, they’re all so busy blaming one an- 
other. . 

If England is not a man’s country, it isn’t a woman’s 
country either. That’s obvious. Women didn’t make 
England. And women don’t run England to-day, in 
spite of the fact that nine-tenths of the voices on the 
telephone are female voices. Women to-day, wherever 
they are, show up; and they pipe up. They are 
heard and they are seen. No denying it. And it 
seems to get on the men’s nerves. Quite! But that 
doesn’t prove that the women own England and run 
England. They don’t. They occupy, on the whole, 
rather inferior jobs, which they embellish with 
flowered voile and artificial silk stockings and a 
number of airs and graces, and they are apt to be 
a drain on a man’s cigarettes. What then? Is this 
the cormorant devouring England, gobbling it up 
under the eyes of the squeaking herring-gulls of 
men? Do the men envy the women these rather 
inferior jobs? Or do they envy them the flowered 
voile and the silk stockings which decorate the jobs ? 
Or is it the airs and graces they begrudge them, or 
the cigarettes ?—that England is no more a man’s 
country ! 

‘When my father and my mother forsake me, then 
the Lord will take me up.” I suppose that’s how 
poor old England feels to-day. The men have 

78 

IS ENGLAND STILL A MAN’S COUNTRY ? 

certainly forsaken her. They pretend the women 
have usurped the land, so the men need do no more 
about it. Which is very comfortable for the 
men. Very soft and nice and comfortable. Which 
is what the men of to-day want. No _ respon- 
sibility. 

Soft and nice and comfortable! Soft jobs, nice 
wives, comfortable homes—that is supposed to be 
England to-day. And Englishmen are quite startled 
if you suggest that it might require more to make 
a real England.—What more could England be, 
they say, than soft and nice and comfortable ?— 
And then they blame the women for being hard 
and unkind and uncomfortable, and usurping 
England. 

England, we are told, has always been a fighting 
country, though never a military country. That is 
a cliché. But it seems true. The Englishman hated 
being bossed or bullied. So he hated being a soldier 
or a marine, because as such he was bossed and 
bullied. And when he felt anything or anybody 
coming to boss or to bully him, he got up and 
prepared to place his fist in the eye of the boss 
and bully. Which is a real man’s spirit, and 
the only spirit that makes a country a man’s 
country. 

Nowadays, alas, a change has come over all that. 
The Englishman only wants to be soft and nice and 

79 

IS ENGLAND STILL A MAN’S COUNTRY ? 

comfortable, and to have no real responsibility, not 
even for his own freedom and independence. He’s 
got all the political freedom he can manage, and so 
he cares nothing about it. He even won’t mind if 
it’s taken from him again, after his forefathers fought 
so hard for it. He’s got political freedom, so he 
cares nothing about it; which is a bit despicable, 
after all. 

He’s got political freedom, but he hasn’t got 
economical freedom. There’s the rub. And the 
modern man feels it not right. He feels he ought to 
have an income. A man’s parents ought to leave 
him a sufficient independent income, and if they 
don’t, he bears them a lifelong grudge.—And worse 
still, he has to do a job. 

Now this is the disaster that has happened to 
almost every Englishman—he’s got to do a job. 
All day long and every day, all his life, he is con- 
demned to a job. There’s no getting away from it. 
Very few men can inherit a fortune or marry a 
fortune. A job !—That is the great inevitable. That 
is the boss and the bully. That is the treadmill. 
The job! Men secretly and silently hate the job 
to-day. They push it over to the women. Then 
they loudly and openly abuse the women for having 
taken it. And they ask: Is England a man’s 
country? Or is it nothing but a dog-gone women’s 
show ? 

80 

IS ENGLAND STILL A MAN’S COUNTRY ? 

The answer is obvious. When a man wants a 
plum off a plum tree, he climbs up and gets it. But 
if he won’t face the climb, and stands under the tree 
with his mouth open, waiting for the plum to fall 
into it; and if while he stands waiting, he sees a 
woman picking up a few plums that he wasn’t smart 
enough even to pick up; and if he then begins to 
yell that the women have snatched away all the 
plums from the impoverished men, then what are we 
to think of him? 

If men find they’ve got political freedom only to 
realise most disastrously their economic enslavement, 
they’d better do something about it. It’s no good 
despising their political freedom—that is ridiculous, 
for political freedom is a supremely valuable thing. 
And it’s no good blaming the women. Women, 
poor things, have to live, just as much as men do. 
It’s no good whining that England is no more a 
man’s country. 

It will be a man’s country the instant there are 
men in it. And men will be men the instant they 
tackle their insuperable difficulty. The insuperable 
difficulty, the unsolvable problem, are only insuper- 
able and unsolvable because men can’t make up their 
minds to tackle them. The insuperable difficulty to 
modern man is economic bondage. Slavery! Well, 
history is the long account of the abolishing of endless 
forms of slavery, none of which we ever want back 

81 

IS ENGLAND STILL A MAN’S COUNTRY ? 

again. Now we’ve got a new form of slavery. If 
every man who feels the burden of it determined 
ultimately to abolish it, using all his wits and 
powers and accepting no ready-made formula— 
then England would be a man’s country, sure as 

eggs. 

82 

DULL LONDON 

Ir begins the moment you set foot ashore, the 
moment you step off the boat’s gangway. The 
heart suddenly, yet vaguely, sinks. It is no lurch 
of fear. Quite the contrary. It is as if the life- 
urge failed, and the heart dimly sank. You trail 
past the benevolent policeman and the inoffensive 
passport officials, through the fussy and somehow 
foolish customs—we don’t really think it matters if 
somebody smuggles in two pairs of false-silk stockings 
—and we get into the poky but inoffensive train, 
with poky but utterly inoffensive people, and we 
have a cup of inoffensive tea from a nice inoffensive 
boy, and we run through small, poky but nice and 
inoffensive country, till we are landed in the big 
but unexciting station of Victoria, when an inoffen- 
sive porter puts us into an inoffensive taxi and we 
are driven through the crowded yet strangely dull 
streets of London to the cosy yet strangely poky 
and dull place where we are going to stay. And 
the first half-hour in London, after some years abroad, 
is really a plunge of misery. The strange, the grey 
and uncanny, almost deathly sense of dulness is over- 
whelming. Of course, you get over it after a while, 
and admit that you exaggerated. You get into the 
83 

DULL LONDON 

rhythm of London again, and you tell yourself that 
it is not dull. And yet you are haunted, all the time, 
sleeping or waking, with the uncanny feeling: It 
is dull! It is all dull! This life here is one vast 
complex of dulness! Iamdull! Iam being dulled ! 
My spirit is being dulled! My life is dulling down to 
London dulness. 

This is the nightmare that haunts you the first 
few weeks of London. No doubt if you stay longer 
you get over it, and find London as thrilling as 
Paris or Rome or New York. But the climate is 
against me. I cannot stay long enough. With 
pinched and wondering gaze, the morning of depar- 
ture, I look out of the taxi upon the strange dulness 
of London’s arousing ; a sort of death; and hope 
and life only return when I get my seat in the boat- 
train, and I hear all the Good-byes! Good-bye ! 
Good-bye ! Thank God to say Good-bye ! 

Now to feel like this about one’s native land is 
terrible. I am sure I am an exceptional, or at least 
an exaggerated case. Yet it seems to me most of 
my fellow-countrymen have the pinched, slightly 
pathetic look in their faces, the vague, wondering 
realisation : It is dull! It is always essentially dull ! 
My life is dull! 

Of course, England is the easiest country in the 
world, easy, easy and nice. Everybody is nice, and 
everybody is easy. The English people on the whole 

84 

DULL LONDON 

are surely the nicest people in the world, and every- 
body makes everything so easy for everybody else, 
that there is almost nothing to resist at all. But 
this very easiness and this very niceness become at 
last a nightmare. It is as if the whole air were 
impregnated with chloroform or some other per- 
vasive anesthetic, that makes everything easy and 
nice, and takes the edge off everything, whether 
nice or nasty. As you inhale the drug of easiness 
and niceness, your vitality begins to sink. Perhaps 
not your physical vitality, but something else: the 
vivid flame of your individual life. England can 
afford to be so free and individual because no in- 
dividual flame of life is sharp and vivid. It is just 
mildly warm and safe. You couldn’t burn your 
fingers at it. Nice, safe, easy: the whole ideal. 
And yet under all the easiness is a gnawing uneasiness, 
as in a drug-taker. 

It used not to be so. Twenty years ago London 
was to me thrilling, thrilling, thrilling, the vast and 
roaring heart of all adventure. It was not only the 
heart of the world, it was the heart of the world’s 
living adventure. How wonderful the Strand, the 
Bank, Charing Cross at night, Hyde Park in the 
morning ! 

True, I am now twenty years older. Yet I have 
not lost my sense of adventure. But now all the 
adventure seems to me crushed out of London. The 

85 

DULL LONDON 

traffic is too heavy! ' It used to be going somewhere, 
on an adventure. Now it only rolls massively and 
overwhelmingly, going nowhere, only dully and 
enormously going. There is no adventure at the 
end of the ’buses’ journey. The ’bus lapses into an 
inertia of dulness, then dully starts again. The 
traffic of London used to roar with the mystery of 
man’s adventure on the seas of life, like a vast sea- 
shell, murmuring a thrilling, half-comprehensible 
story. Now it booms like monotonous, far-off guns, 
in a monotony of crushing something, crushing the 
earth, crushing out life, crushing everything dead. 

And what does one do, in London? I, not having 
a job to attend to, lounge round and gaze in bleak 
wonder on the ceaseless dulness. Or I have luncheons 
and dinners with friends, and talk. Now my deepest 
private dread of London is my dread of this talk. 
I spend most of my days abroad, saying little, or 
with a bit of chatter and a silence again. But in 
London I feel like a spider whose thread has been 
caught by somebody, and is being drawn out of 
him, so he must spin, spin, spin, and all to no 
purpose. He is not even spinning his own web, 
for his own reasons. 

So it is in London, at luncheon, dinner or tea. 
I don’t want to talk. I don’t mean to talk. Yet 
the talk is drawn out of me, endlessly. And the 
others talk, endlessly also. It is ceaseless, it is 

86 

DULL LONDON 

intoxicating, it is the only real occupation of us who 
do not jazz. And it is purely futile. It is quite as 
bad as ever the Russians were: talk for talk’s sake, 
without the very faintest intention of a result in 
action. Utter inaction and storms of talk. That 
again is London to me. And the sense of abject 
futility in it all only deepens the sense of abject 
dulness, so all there is to do is to go away. 

87 

RED TROUSERS 

A MAN wrote to me, in answer to my article in which 
I complained of London dulness: ‘‘ Dear Sir,— 
Have you ever paused to consider that the cause of 
our dulness is the cigarette? This is the tubular 
white ant which is sapping our civilisation.” 

Now this man, at least, is not entirely dull. He is 
out on a crusade, a crusade against the “ tubular 
white ant,’ from which he wants to rescue our holy 
civilisation. And whatever else a crusader may be, 
he is not, to himself at least, dull. He is inspired 
with a mission, and on the march, which, perhaps, 
is better than sitting still and being inert. 

But, after all, a crusade may turn out ultimately 
dull, like the crusade of Votes for Women, or tee- 
totalism, or even the Salvation Army. When you’ve 
got the vote, it is dull. When people are merely 
teetotal, it is merely dull. When the Salvation 
Army has saved you, you may really feel duller than 
when you weren’t saved. Or, of course, you may not. 

So that there are two sides to a crusade. The 
good side is the activity. There was a thrill in the 
Votes for Women processions, even in the sight of 
suffragettes being marched off by stout and semi- 
indignant policemen. When I hear the tambourine 

88 

RED TROUSERS 

clashing, and see the poke bonnets of the Salvation 
Army lasses and the funny scarlet of the men, and 
hear the piercing music of “‘ Marching to Zion”? or 
“Throw Out the Lifeline,’ then I am invariably 
thrilled. Here is a crusade, of a sort, here is spunk ! 
And even in the denunciative “‘ tubular white ants ”’ 
of my correspondent there is a certain pep, a cer- 
tain “ go.” 

But the bad side of these crusades is the disillusion 
when the mission is fulfilled. Take the cigarette 
and dulness. Which causes which? Does dulness 
cause the cigarette, or the cigarette the dulness ? 
Apparently it is a vicious circle: each causes the 
other. But at the very beginning, dulness causes 
the cigarette, after which the cigarette may cause 
more dulness, or may not, as the case may be. 
Anyhow, that is not my crusade, because it isn’t 
really interesting. 

What is really the point is that a crusade is a 
sovereign remedy against dulness, but you’d better 
watch out that the end of the crusade isn’t a greater 
dulness still. Nothing is such fun as a crusade, it 
is the adventure of adventures. But it is no good 
setting out grandly to rescue some Zion from the 
clutch of the infidel, if you’re not going to care a 
button about the Zion when you’ve rescued it. 

That’s the trouble with most of our modern 
crusades, like Votes or Socialism or politics, freedom 

89 G 

RED TROUSERS 

of little nations, and the rest. In the flush of youth, 
I believed in Socialism, because I thought it would 
be thrilling and delightful. Now I no longer believe 
very deeply in Socialism, because I am afraid it 
might be dull, duller even than what we’ve got now. 
In the past, it seemed wildly thrilling to think of a 
free Poland, or a free Bohemia. Now we have a 
painful suspicion that free Czecho-Slovakia is possibly 
duller than when it was an Austrian province. 

What we want is life, first and foremost: to live, 
and to know that we are living. And you can’t 
have life without adventure of some sort. There 
are two sorts of adventure: the hairs-breadth escape 
sort, and the more inward sort. The hairs-breadth 
escape sort is nearly used up, though of course small 
boys still climb trees, and there is speeding on the 
roads, the traffic danger, aeroplanes, and the North 
Pole. But this is meagre, compared to the wild old 
days when the Turk held Jerusalem, and the world 
was flat. 

What remains is the vast field of social adventure. 
In the ancient recipe, the three antidotes for dulness 
or boredom are sleep, drink, and travel. It is rather 
feeble. From sleep you wake up, from drink you 
become sober, and from travel you come home again. 
And then where are you? No, the two sovereign 
remedies for dulness are love or a crusade. 

But love is a thing you can do nothing about. It’s 

gO 

RED TROUSERS 

like the weather. Whereas a crusade can be care- 
fully considered. When the Salvation Army march 
out with drum and brass to pitch a stand at the 
street corner, they are on a crusade, and full of 
adventure, though they run no risk except that of 
ridicule. Probably they get more out of life than 
those who ridicule them: and that’s the chief 
point. 

Yet, still, we can’t all join the Salvation Army ; 
there’d be nobody to save. And we sadly need a 
crusade. What are we going to do about it? 
Politics, Socialism, preaching of any sort: we feel 
there’s not much in it. It is going to make greater 
dulness in the end. There is money, that is an 
adventure to a certain degree. But it is an ad- 
venture within definite limits, very definite limits. 
Besides, it is for his leisure that man needs a 
crusade. 

Women, of course, are still thrilling in the last 
stages of their emancipation crusade. Votes, short 
skirts, unlimited leg, Eton crop, the cigarette, and 
see you damned first ; these are the citadels captured 
by women, along with endless “‘ jobs.” Women, for 
a little while longer, have enough to thrill them in 
the triumphs of the emancipation crusade. 

But the men, what are they going to do? The 
world of adventure is pretty well used up, especially 
for a man who has a wage to earn. He gets a little 

gI 

RED TROUSERS 

tired of being spoon-fed on wireless, cinema, and 
newspaper, sitting an inert lump while entertainment 
or information is poured into him. He wants to do 
something. 

And what is there to be done? Thousands of 
things—and nothing. Golf, jazz, motoring—hobbies. 
But what we want is a crusade. 

Find us a crusade. It is apparently impossible. 
There is no formula. 

The thing to do is to decide that there is no crusade 
or holy war feasible at this moment, and to treat 
life more as a joke, but a good joke, a jolly joke. 
That would freshen us up a lot. Our flippant world 
takes life with a stupid seriousness. Witness the 
serious mock-morality of the film and the wireless, 
the spurious earnestness poured out. What a bore ! 

It is time we treated life as a joke again, as they 
did in the really great periods like the Renaissance. 
Then the young men swaggered down the street 
with one leg bright red, one leg bright yellow, 
doublet of puce velvet and yellow feather in silk 
Cap. 

Now that is the line to take. Start with externals, 
and proceed to internals, and treat life as a good joke. 
If a dozen men would stroll down the Strand and 
Piccadilly to-morrow, wearing tight scarlet trousers 
fitting the leg, gay little orange-brown jackets and 
bright green hats, then the revolution against dulness 

92 

RED TROUSERS 

which we need so much would have begun. And, of 
course, those dozen men would be considerably 
braver, really, than Captain Nobile or the other 
arctic venturers. It is not particularly brave to do 
something the public wants you to do. But it takes 
a lot of courage to sail gaily, in brave feathers, right 
in the teeth of a dreary convention. 

93 

THE STATE OF FUNKE 

Wuar is the matter with the English, that they are 
so scared of everything? They are in a state of 
blue funk, and they behave like a lot of mice when 
somebody stamps on the floor. They are terrified 
about money, finance, about ships, about war, about 
work, about Labour, about Bolshevism, and funniest 
of all, they are scared stiff of the printed word. 
Now this is a very strange and humiliating state of 
mind, in a people which has always been so daunt- 
less. And, for the nation, it is a very dangerous 
state of mind. When a people falls into a state of 
funk, then God help it. Because mass funk leads 
some time or other to mass panic, and then—one 
can only repeat, God help us. 

There is, of course, a certain excuse for fear. The 
time of change is upon us. The need for change 
has taken hold of us. We are changing, we have 
got to change, and: we can no more help it than 
leaves can help going yellow and coming loose in 
autumn, or than bulbs can help shoving their little 
green spikes out of the ground in spring. We are 
changing, we are in the throes of change, and the 
change will be a great one. Instinctively, we feel 
it. Intuitively, we know it. And we are frightened. 

94 

THE STATE OF FUNK 

Because change hurts. And also, in the periods of 
serious transition, everything is uncertain, and living 
things are most vulnerable. 

But what of it? Granted all the pains and dangers 
and uncertainties, there is no excuse for falling into 
a state of funk. If we come to think of it, every 
child that is begotten and born is a seed of change, 
a danger to its mother, at childbirth a great pain, 
and after birth, a new responsibility, a new change. 
If we feel in a state of funk about it, we should 
cease having children altogether. Jf we fall into a 
state of funk, indeed, the best thing is to have no 
children. But why fall into a state of funk ? 

Why not look things in the face like men, and 
like women? A woman who is going to have a 
child says to herself: Yes, I feel uncomfortable, 
sometimes I feel wretched, and I have a time of 
pain and danger ahead of me. But I have a good 
chance of coming through all right, especially if I 
am intelligent, and I bring a new life into the world. 
Somewhere I feel hopeful, even happy. So I must 
take the sour with the sweet. There is no birth 
without birth-pangs. 

It is the business of men, of course, to take the 
same attitude towards the birth of new conditions, 
new ideas, new emotions. And sorry to say, most 
modern men don’t. They fall into a state of funk. 
We all of us know that ahead of us lies a great social 

95 

THE STATE OF-FUNK 

change, a great social readjustment. A few men 
look it in the face and try to realise what will be 
best. We none of us know what will be best. There 
is no ready-made solution. Ready-made solutions 
are almost the greatest danger of all. A change is 
a slow flux, which must happen bit by bit. And it 
must happen. You can’t drive it like a steam engine. 
But all the time you can be alert and intelligent 
about it, and watch for the next step, and watch 
for the direction of the main trend. Patience, alert- 
ness, intelligence, and a human goodwill and fear- 
lessness, that is what you want in a time of change. 
Not funk. 

Now England is on the brink of great changes, 
radical changes. Within the next fifty years the 
whole framework of our social life will be altered, 
will be greatly modified. The old world of our 
grandfathers is disappearing like thawing snow, and 
is as likely to cause a flood. What the world of our 
grandchildren will be, fifty years hence, we don’t 
know. But in its social form it will be very different 
from our world of to-day. We’ve got to change. 
And in our power to change, in our capacity to 
make new intelligent adaptation to new conditions, 
in our readiness to admit and fulfil new needs, to 
give expression to new desires and new feelings, lies 
our hope and our health. Courage is the great 
word. Funk spells sheer disaster. 

96 

THE STATE OF FUNK 

There is a great change coming, bound to come. 
The whole money arrangement will undergo a 
change : what, I don’t know. The whole industrial 
system will undergo a change. Work will be different 
and pay will be different. The owning of property 
will be different. Class will be different, and human 
relations will be modified and perhaps simplified. 
If we are intelligent, alert and undaunted, then life 
will be much better, more generous, more spon- 
taneous, more vital, less basely materialistic. If we 
fall into a state of funk, impotence and persecution, 
then things may be very much worse than they are 
now. It is up to us. It is up to men to be men. 
While men are courageous and willing to change, 
nothing terribly bad can happen. But once men 
fall into a state of funk, with the inevitable accom- 
paniment of bullying and repression, then only bad 
things can happen. To be firm is one thing. But 
bullying is another. And bullying of any sort what- 
soever can have nothing but disastrous results. And 
when the mass falls into a state of funk, and you have 
mass bullying, then catastrophe is near. 

Change in the whole social system is inevitable 
not merely because conditions change—though partly 
for that reason—but because people themselves change. 
We change, you and I, we change and change vitally, 
as the years go on. New feelings arise in us, old 
values depreciate, new values arise. Things we 

a7 

THE STATE OF FUNK 

thought we wanted most intensely we realise we 
don’t care about. The things we built our lives on 
crumble and disappear, and the process is painful. 
But it is not tragic. A tadpole that has so gaily 
waved its tail in the water must feel very sick when 
the tail begins to drop off and little legs begin to 
sprout. The tail was its dearest, gayest, most active 
member, all its little life was in its tail, And now 
the tail must go. It seems rough on the tadpole ; 
but the little green frog in the grass is a new gem, 
after all. 

As a novelist, I feel it is the change inside the 
individual which is my real concern. The great 
social change interests me and troubles me, but it 
is not my field. I know a change is coming—and 
I know we must have a more generous, more human 
system based on the life values and not on the money 
values. That I know. But what steps to take I 
don’t know. Other men know better. 

My field is to know the feelings inside a man, and 
to make new feelings conscious. What really torments 
civilised people is that they are full of feelings they 
know nothing about; they can’t realise them, they 
can’t fulfil them, they can’t live them. And so they 
are tortured. It is like having energy you can’t 
use—it destroys you. And feelings are a form of vital 
energy. 

I am convinced that the majority of people to-day 

98 

THE STATE OF FUNK 

have good, generous feelings which they can never 
know, never experience, because of some fear, some 
repression. I do not believe that people would be 
villains, thieves, murderers and sexual criminals if 
they were freed from legal restraint. On the con- 
trary, I think the vast majority would be much 
more generous, good-hearted and decent if they felt 
they dared be. I am convinced that people want 
to be more decent, more good-hearted than our social 
system of money and grab allows them to be. The 
awful fight for money, into which we are all forced, 
hurts our good nature more than we can bear. I 
am sure this is true of a vast number of people. 

And the same is true of our sexual feelings ; only 
worse. There, we start all wrong. Consciously, 
there is supposed to be no such thing as sex in the 
human being. As far as possible, we never speak 
of it, never mention it, never, if we can help it, even 
think of it. It is disturbing. It is—somehow— 
wrong. JO03976 0 

The whole trouble with sex is that we daren’t 
speak of it and think of it naturally. We are not 
secretly sexual villains. We are not secretly sexually 
depraved. We are just human beings with living 
sex. We are all right, if we had not this unaccount- 
able and disastrous fear of sex. I know, when I was 
a lad of eighteen, I used to remember with shame 
and rage in the morning the sexual thoughts and 

ay 

THE STATE OF FUNK 

desires I had had the night before. Shame, and 
rage, and terror lest anybody else should have to 
know. And I hated the self that I had been, the 
night before. 

Most boys are like that, and it is, of course, utterly 
wrong. The boy that had excited sexual thoughts 
and feelings was the living, warm-hearted, passionate 
me. The boy that in the morning remembered 
these feelings with such fear, shame and rage was 
the social mental me: perhaps a little priggish, and 
certainly in a state of funk. But the two were divided 
against one another. A boy divided against himself ; 
a girl divided against herself; a people divided 
against itself; it is a disastrous condition. 

And it was a long time before I was able to say to 
myself: I am not going to be ashamed of my sexual 
thoughts and desires, they are me myself, they are 
part of my life. I am going to accept myself sexually 
as I accept myself mentally and spiritually, and know 
that I am one time one thing, one time another, but 
I am always myself. My sex is me as my mind is 
me, and nobody will make me feel shame about it. 

It is long since I came to that decision. But I 
remember how much freer I felt, how much warmer 
and more sympathetic towards people. I had no 
longer anything to hide from them, no longer any- 
thing to be in a funk about, lest they should find it 
out. My sex was me, like my mind and my spirit. 

100 

THE STATE OF FUNK 

And the other man’s sex was him, as his mind was 
him, and his spirit was him. And the woman’s sex 
was her, as her mind and spirit were herself too. 
And once this quiet admission is made, it is wonderful 
how much deeper and more real the human sympathy 
flows. And it is wonderful how difficult the ad- 
mission is to make, for man or woman: the tacit, 
natural admission, that allows the natural warm flow 
of the blood-sympathy, without repression and holding 
back. 

I remember when I was a very young man I was 
enraged when with a woman, if I was reminded of 
her sexual actuality. I only wanted to be aware of 
her personality, her mind and spirit. The other had 
to be fiercely shut out. Some part of the natural 
sympathy for a woman had to be shut away, cut off. 
There was a mutilation in the relationship all 
the time. 

Now, in spite of the hostility of society, I have 
learned a little better. Now I know that a woman 
is her sexual self too, and I can feel the normal sex 
sympathy with her. And this silent sympathy is 
utterly different from desire or anything rampant or 
lurid. If I can really sympathise with a woman in 
her sexual self, it is just a form of warm-heartedness 
and compassionateness, the most natural life-flow in 
the world. And it may be a woman of seventy-five, 
or a child of two, it is the same. But our civilisation, 

IOI 

THE STATE OF FUNK 

with its horrible fear and funk and repression and 
bullying, has almost destroyed the natural flow of 
common sympathy between men and men, and men 
and women. 

And it is this that I want to restore into life: just 
the natural warm flow of common sympathy between 
man and man, man and woman. Many people hate 
it, of course. Many men hate it that one should 
tacitly take them for sexual, physical men instead 
of mere social and mental personalities. Many 
women hate it the same. Some, the worst, are in a 
state of rabid funk. The papers call me “lurid”? ; 
and a ‘“‘dirty-minded fellow.’”? One woman, evi- 
dently a woman of education and means, wrote to 
me out of the blue: “‘ You, who are a mixture of 
the missing-link and the chimpanzee, etc.’’—and told 
me my name stank in men’s nostrils: though, since 
she was Mrs. Something or other, she might have 
said women’s nostrils.-And these people think they 
are being perfectly well-bred and perfectly “ right.” 
They are safe inside the convention, which also 
agrees that we are sexless creatures and social beings 
merely, cold and bossy and assertive, cowards safe 
inside a convention. 

Now I am one of the least lurid mortals, and I 
don’t at all mind being likened to a chimpanzee. 
If there is one thing I don’t like it is cheap and 
promiscuous sex. If there is one thing I insist on 

102 

THE STATE OF FUNK 

it is that sex is a delicate, vulnerable, vital thing 
that you mustn’t fool with. If there is one thing I 
deplore it is heartless sex. Sex must be a real flow, 
a real flow of sympathy, generous and warm, and 
not a trick thing, or a moment’s excitation, or a 
mere bit of bullying. 

And if I write a book about the sex relations of 
a man and a woman, it is not because I want all 
men and women to begin having indiscriminate 
lovers and love affairs, off the reel. All this horrid 
scramble of love affairs and prostitution is only part 
of the funk, bravado and doing it on purpose. And 
bravado and doing it on purpose is just as unpleasant 
and hurtful as repression, just as much a sign of 
secret fear. 

What you have to do is to get out of the state of 
funk, sex funk. And to do so, you’ve got to be 
perfectly decent, and you have to accept sex fully 
in the consciousness. Accept sex in the conscious- 
ness, and let the normal physical awareness come 
back, between you and other people. Be tacitly 
and simply aware of the sexual being in every man 
and woman, child and animal ; and unless the man 
or woman is a bully, be sympathetically aware. It 
is the most important thing just now, this gentle 
physical awareness. It keeps us tender and alive at 
a moment when the great danger is to go brittle, 
hard, and in some way dead. 

103 

THE STATE OF FUNK 

Accept the sexual, physical being of yourself, and 
of every other creature. Don’t be afraid of it. 
Don’t be afraid of the physical functions. Don’t 
be afraid of the so-called obscene words. There is 
nothing wrong with the words. It is your fear that 
makes them bad, your needless fear. It is your fear 
which cuts you off physically even from your nearest 
and dearest. And when men and women are physi- 
cally cut off, they become at last dangerous, bullying, 
cruel. Conquer the fear of sex, and restore the 
natural flow. Restore even the so-called obscene 
words, which are part of the natural flow. If you 
don’t, if you don’t put back a bit of the old warmth 
into life, there is savage disaster ahead. 

104 

THE RISEN LORD 

‘** The risen lord, the risen lord 
has risen in the flesh, 
and treads the earth to feel the soil 
though his feet are still nesh.” 

The Churches loudly assert: We preach Christ 
crucified !—But in so doing, they preach only half 
of the Passion, and do only half their duty. The 
Creed says: “‘ Was crucified, dead, and buried .. . 
the third day He rose again from the dead.” And 
again, ‘‘ I believe in the resurrection of the body . . .” 
So that to preach Christ Crucified is to preach half 
the truth. It is the business of the Church to preach 
Christ born among men—which is Christmas ; 
Christ crucified, which is Good Friday; and 
Christ Risen, which is Easter. And after Easter, till 
November and All Saints, and till Annunciation, 
the year belongs to the Risen Lord: that is, 
all the full-flowering spring, all summer, and the 
autumn of wheat and fruit, all belong to Christ 
Risen. 

But the Churches insist on Christ Crucified, and 
rob us of the blossom and fruit of the year. The 
Catholic Church, which has given us our images, 

105 H 

THE RISEN LORD 

has given us the Christ-child, in the lap of woman, 
and again, Christ Crucified: then the Mass, the 
mystery of atonement through sacrifice. Yet all this 
is really preparatory, these are the preparatory 
stages of the real living religion. The Christ-child, 
enthroned in the lap of the Mother, is obviously 
only a preparatory image, to prepare us for Christ 
the Man. Yet a vast mass of Christians stick 
there. 

What we have to remember is that the great 
religious images are only images of our Own experi- 
ences, or of our own state of mind and soul. In the 
Catholic countries, where the Madonna-and-Child 
image overwhelms everything else, the man visions 
himself all the time as a child, a Christ-Child, 
standing on the lap of a virgin mother. Before the 
war, if an Italian hurt himself, or suddenly fell into 
distress, his immediate cry was: O mamma mia! 
mamma mia!—Oh, mother, mother!—The same was 
true of many Englishmen. And what does this 
mean? It means that the man sees himself as a 
child, the innocent saviour-child enthroned on the 
lap of the all-pitying virgin mother. He lives accord- 
ing to this image of himself—the image of the guileless 
“good”? child sheltered in the arms of an all- 
sheltering mother—until the image breaks in his 
heart. 

And during the war, this image broke in the hearts 

106 

THE RISEN LORD 

of most men, though not in the hearts of their women. 
During the war, the man who suffered most bitterly 
suffered beyond the help of wife or mother, and 
no wife nor mother nor sister nor any beloved could 
save him from the guns. This fact went home in 
his heart, and broke the image of mother and Christ- 
child, and left in its place the image of Christ 
crucified. 

It was not so, of course, for the woman. The 
image did not break for her. She visioned herself 
still as the all-pitying, all-sheltering Madonna, on 
whose lap the man was enthroned, as in the old 
pictures, like a Christ-child. And naturally the 
woman did not want to abandon this vision of herself. 
It gave her her greatest significance ; and the greatest 
power. Break the image, and her significance and 
her power were gone. But the men came back from 
the war and denied the image—for them it was 
broken. So she fought to maintain it, the great 
vision of man, the Christ-child, enthroned in the 
lap of the all-pitying virginal woman. And she 
fought in vain, though not without disastrous 
result. 

For the vision of the all-pitying and all-helpful 
Madonna was shattered in the hearts of men, during 
the war. The all-pitying and all-helpful Woman 
actually did not, whether she could or not, prevent 
the guns from blowing to pieces the men who called 

107 

THE RISEN LORD 

upon her. So her image collapsed, and with it the 
image of the Christ-child. For the man who 
went through the war the resultant image inevit- 
ably was Christ Crucified, Christ tortured on 
the Cross. And Christ Crucified is essentially woman- 
less. 

True, many of the elderly men who never went 
through the war still insist on the Christ-child 
business, and most of the elderly women insist on 
their benevolent Madonna supremacy. But it is in 
vain. The guns broke the image in the hearts of 
middle-aged men, and the young were born, or are 
come to real consciousness, after the image was 
already smashed. 

So there we are! We have three great image- 
divisions among men and women to-day. We have 
the old and the elderly, who never were exposed 
to the guns, still fatuously maintaining that man is 
the Christ-child and woman the infallible safeguard 
from all evil and all danger. It is fatuous, because 
it absolutely didn’t work. Then we have the men 
of middle age, who were all tortured and virtually 
put to death by the war. They accept Christ Cruci- 
fied as their image, are essentially womanless, and 
take the great cry : Consummatum est !—It 1s finished !— 
as their last word.—Thirdly, we have the young, who 
never went through the war. They have no illusions 
about it, however, and the death-cry of their 

108 

THE RISEN LORD 

elder generation: Jt ts finished! rings cold through 
their blood. They cannot answer. They cannot 
even scoff. It is no joke, and never will be a 
joke. 

And yet, neither of the great images is their image. 
They cannot accept the child-and-mother position 
which the old buffers still pose in. They cannot 
accept the Christ Crucified finality of the generations 
immediately ahead. For they, the young, came into 
the field of life after the death-cry Consummatum est ! 
had rung through the world, and while the body, so 
to speak, was being put into the tomb. By the 
time the young came on to the stage, Calvary was 
empty, the tombs were closed, the women had lost 
for ever the Christ-child and the virgin savour, and 
it was altogether the day after, cold, bleak, empty, 
blank, meaningless, almost silly. 

The young came into life, and found everything 
finished. Everywhere the empty crosses, everywhere 
the closed tombs, everywhere the manless, bitter or 
over-assertive woman, everywhere the closed grey 
disillusion of Christ Crucified, dead, and buried, 
those grey empty days between Good Friday and 
Easter. 

And the Churches, instead of preaching the Risen 
Lord, go on preaching the Christ-child and Christ 
Crucified. Now man cannot live without some 
vision of himself. But still less can he live with a 

109 

THE RISEN LORD 

vision that is not true to his inner experience and 
inner feeling. And the vision of Christ-Child and 
Christ Crucified are both untrue to the inner ex- 
perience and feeling of the young. They don’t feel 
that way. They show the greatest forbearance and 
tolerance of their elders, for whom the two images 
are livingly true. But for the post-war young, 
neither the Christ-child nor Christ Crucified means 
much. 

I doubt whether the Protestant Churches, which 
supported the war, will ever have the faith and the 
power of life to take the great step onwards, and 
preach Christ Risen. The Catholic Church might. 
In the countries of the Mediterranean, Easter has 
always been the greatest of the holy days, the 
gladdest and holiest, not Christmas, the birth of the 
Child. Easter, Christ Risen, the Risen Lord, this, 
to the old faith, is still the first day in the year. 
The Easter festivities are the most joyful, the Easter 
processions the finest, the Easter ceremonies the most 
splendid. In Sicily the women take into church 
the saucers of growing corn, the green blades rising 
tender and slim like green light, in little pools, filling 
round the altar. It is Adonis. It is the re-born 
year. It is Christ Risen. It is the Risen Lord. 
And in the warm south still a great joy floods the 
hearts of the people on Easter Sunday. They feel 
it, they feel it everywhere. The Lord is risen. The 

IIo 

THE RISEN LORD 

Lord of the rising wheat and the plum blossoms 
is warm and kind upon earth again, after having 
been done to death by the evil and the jealous 
ones. 

The Roman Catholic Church may still unfold 
this part of the Passion fully, and make men happy 
again. For Resurrection is indeed the consumma- 
tion of all the passion. Not even Atonement, the 
being at one with Christ through partaking in His 
sacrifice, consummates the Passion finally. For even 
after Atonement men still must live, and must go 
forward with the vision. After we share in the body 
of Christ, we rise with Him in the body. And that 
is the final vision that has been blurred to all the 
Churches. 

Christ risen in the flesh! We must accept the 
image complete, if we accept it at all. We must 
take the mystery in its fulness and in fact. It is 
only the image of our own experience. Christ rises, 
when He rises from the dead, in the flesh, not merely 
as spirit. He rises with hands and feet, as Thomas 
knew for certain: and if with hands and feet, then 
with lips and stomach and genitals of a man. Christ 
risen, and risen in the whole of His flesh, not with 
some left out. 

Christ risen in the full flesh! What for? It is 
here the gospels are all vague and faltering, and the 
Churches leave us in the lurch. Christ risen in the 

pa 

THE RISEN LORD 

| / 
flesh in order to lurk obscurely for six weeks on earth, | 

then be taken vaguely up into heaven in a cloud?) 
Flesh, solid flesh, feet and bowels and teeth and eyes 
of a man, taken up into heaven in a cloud, and never 
put down again ? 

It is the only part of the great mystery which is 
all wrong. The virgin birth, the baptism, the 
temptation, the teaching, Gethsemane, the betrayal, 
the crucifixion, the burial and the resurrection, 
these are all true according to our inward experience. 
They are what men and women go through, in their 
different ways. But floated up into heaven as flesh- 
and-blood, and never set down again—this nothing 
in all our experience will ever confirm. If aeroplanes 
take us up, they bring us down, or let us down. Flesh 
and blood belong to the earth, and only to the earth. 
We know it. 

And Jesus was risen flesh-and-blood. He rose a 
man on earth to live on earth. The greatest test 
was still before Him: His life as a man on earth. 
Hitherto He had been a sacred child, a teacher, a 
messiah, but never a full man. Now, risen from the 
dead, . He. rises. to: -be:- a man° “om earth, wang 
live His life of the flesh, the great life, among 
other men. This is the image of our inward state 
to-day. 

This is the image of the young: the Risen Lord. 
The teaching is over, the crucifixion is over, the 

112 

| 
/ 

THE RISEN LORD 

sacrifice is made, the salvation is accomplished. Now 
comes the true life, man living his full life on earth, 
as flowers live their full life, without rhyme or reason 
except the magnificence of coming forth into fulness. 

If Jesus rose from the dead in triumph, a man on 
earth triumphant in renewed flesh, triumphant over 
the mechanical anti-life convention of Jewish priests, 
Roman despotism, and universal money-lust ;_ tri- 
umphant above all over His own self-absorption, 
self-consciousness, self-importance ; triumphant and 
free as a man in full flesh and full, final experience, 
even the accomplished acceptance of His own death ; 
a man at last full and free in flesh and soul, a man at 
one with death: then He rose to become at one 
with life, to live the great life of the flesh and the 
soul together, as peonies or foxes do, in their lesser 
way. If jesus rose as a full man, in full flesh and 
soul, then He rose to take a woman to Himself, to 
live with her, and to know the tenderness and 
blossoming of the twoness with her ; He who had 
been hitherto so limited to His oneness, or His 
universality, which is the same thing. If Jesus rose 
in the full flesh, He rose to know the tenderness of 
a woman, and the great pleasure of her, and to have 
children by her. He rose to know the responsibility 
and the peculiar delight of children, and also the 
exasperation and nuisance of them. If Jesus rose as 
a full man, in the flesh, He rose to have friends, to 

113 

THE RISEN LORD 

have a man-friend whom He would hold sometimes 
to His breast, in strong affection, and who would be 
dearer to Him than a brother, just out of the sheer 
mystery of sympathy. And how much more won- 
derful, this, than having disciples! If Jesus rose a 
full man in the flesh, He rose to do His share in the 
world’s work, something He really liked doing. And 
if He remembered His first life, it would neither be 
teaching nor preaching, but probably carpentering 
again, with joy, among the shavings. If Jesus rose 
a full man in the flesh, He rose to continue His fight 
with the hard-boiled conventionalists like Roman 
judges and Jewish priests and money-makers of every 
sort. But this time, it would no longer be the fight 
of self-sacrifice that would end in crucifixion. This 
time it would be a freed man fighting to shelter the 
rose of life from being trampled on by the pigs. This 
time, if Satan attempted temptation in the wilderness, 
the Risen Lord would answer: Satan, your silly 
temptations no longer tempt me. Luckily, I have 
died to that sort of self-importance and self-conceit. 
But let me tell you something, old man! Your 
name’s Satan, isn’t it? And your name is Mammon ? 
You are the selfish hog that’s got hold of all the world, 
aren't you? Well, look here, my boy, I’m going to 
take it all from you, so don’t worry. The world 
and the power and the riches thereof, I’m going to 
take them all from you, Satan or Mammon or what- 

114 

THE RISEN LORD 

ever your name is. Because you don’t know how to 
use them. The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness 
thereof, and it’s going to be. Men have risen from 
the dead and learned not to be so greedy and self- 
important. We left most of that behind in the late 
tomb. Men have risen beyond you, Mammon, they 
are your risen lords. And so, you hook-nosed, glisten- 
eyed, ugly, money-smelling anachronism, you’ve got 
to get out. Men have not died and risen again for 
nothing. Whom do you think the earth belongs to, 
you stale old rat? The earth is the Lord’s and is 
given to the men who have died and had the power 
to rise again. The earth is given to the men who 
have risen from the dead, risen, you old grabber, 
and when did you ever rise? Never! So go you 
down to oblivion, and give your place to the risen 
men, and the women of the risen men. For man 
has been dispossessed of the full earth and the earth’s 
fulness long enough. And the poor women, they 
have been shoved about manless and meaningless 
long enough. The earth is the Lord’s and the 
fulness thereof, and I, the Risen Lord, am here to 
take possession. For now I am fully a man, and 
free above all from my own self-importance. I want 
iife, and the pure contact with life. What are riches, 
and glory, and honour, and might, and power, to 
me who have died and lost my self-importance ? 
That’s why I am going to take them all from you, 

115 

THE RISEN LORD 

Mammon, because I care nothing about them. I 
am going to destroy all your values, Mammon ; all 
your money values and conceit values, I am going 
to destroy them all. 

Because only life is lovely, and you, Mammon, 
prevent life. I love to see a squirrel peep round a 
tree ; and left to you, Mammon, there will soon be 
no squirrels to peep. I love to hear a man singing 
a song to himself, and if it is an old, improper song, 
about the fun between lads and girls, I like it all the 
better. But you, beastly mealy-mouthed Mammon, 
you would arrest any lad that sings a gay song. I 
love the movement of life, and the beauty of life, 
O Mammon, since I am risen, I love the beauty of 
life intensely ; columbine flowers, for example, the 
way they dangle, or the delicate way a young girl 
sits and wonders, or the rage with which a man 
turns and kicks a fool dog that suddenly attacks 
him—beautiful that, the swift fierce turn and lunge 
of a kick, then the quivering pause for the next 
attack ; or even the slightly silly glow that comes 
over some men as they are getting tipsy—it still is a 
glow, beautiful ; or the swift look a woman fetches 
me, when she would really like me to go off with 
her, but she is troubled ; or the real compassion I 
saw a woman express for a man who slipped and 
wrenched his foot: life, the beauty, the beauty of 
life! But that which is anti-life, Mammon, like you, 

116 

THE RISEN LORD 

and money, and machines, and prostitution, and all 
that tangled mass of self-importance and _ greedi- 
ness and self-conscious conceit which adds up to 
Mammon, I hate it. I hate it, Mammon, I 
hate you and am going to push you off the face 
of the earth, Mammon, you great mob-thing, fatal 
to men, 

117 

ENSLAVED BY CIVILISATION 

Tue one thing men have not learned to do is to stick 
up for their own instinctive feelings, against the 
things they are taught. The trouble is, we are all 
caught young. Little boys are trundled off to school 
at the age of five, and immediately the game begins, 
the game of enslaving the small chap. He is de- 
livered over into the hands of schoolmistresses, young 
maids, middle-aged maids, and old maids, and they 
pounce on him, and with absolute confidence in 
their own powers, their own rightness, and their own 
superiority, they begin to “form” the poor little 
devil. Nobody questions for a moment the powers 
of these women to mould the life of a young man. 
The Jesuits say : Give me a child till he is seven, and 
I will answer for him for the rest of his life ——Well, 
schoolmistresses are not as clever as Jesuits, and 
certainly not as clear as to what they are about, but 
they do the trick, nevertheless) They make the 
little boy into an incipient man, the man of to-day. 
Now I ask you, do you really think that school- 
mistresses are qualified to form the foundations of 
a man? ‘They are almost all excellent women, and 
filled with the best of motives. And they have all 
passed some little exam. or other. But what, in the 
118 

ENSLAVED BY CIVILISATION 

name of heaven, qualifies them to be the makers 
ofmen? They are all maids : young maids, middling 
maids, or old maids. They none of them know any- 
thing about men: that is to say, they are not 
supposed to know anything about men. What know- 
ledge they have must be surreptitious. They certainly 
know nothing about manhood. Manhood, in the 
eyes of the schoolmistress, and especially the elderly 
schoolmistress, is something uncalled-for and un- 
pleasant. Men, in the pleasant opinions of school- 
mistresses, are mostly grown-up babies. Haven’t the 
babies all been through the mistress’s hands, and 
aren’t the men almost identically the same? 

Well, it may beso! It may be that men nowadays 
are all grown-up babies. But if they are, it is because 
they were delivered over in their tenderest years, poor 
little devils, to absolute petticoat rule ; mothers first, 
then schoolmistresses. But the mother very quickly 
yields to the schoolmistress. It is amazing what 
reverence ordinary women have for the excellent 
old-maid mistress of the infants’ school. What the 
mistress says is gospel. Kings are no more kings by 
divine right, but queens are queens and mistresses 
mistresses straight from God. It is amazing. It is 
fetish-worship. And the fetish is goodness. 

“Oh, but Miss Teacher is so good, she’s awfully 
good,” say the approving mothers, in luscious voices. 
** Now, Johnny, you must mind what Miss Teacher 

119 

ENSLAVED BY CIVILISATION 

says, she knows what is best for you. You must 
always listen to her !”’ 

Poor Johnny, poor little devil! On the very first 
day it is: ‘‘ Now, Johnny dear, you must sit like a 
good little boy, like all the other good little boys.” 
And when he can’t stand it, it is: “Oh, Johnny 
dear, I wouldn’t cry if I were you. Look at all the 
other good little boys, they don’t cry, do they, dear ? 
Be a good little boy, and teacher will give you a 
teddy-bear to play with. Would Johnny like a teddy- 
bear to play with? There, don’t cry! Look at all 
the other good little boys. They are learning to 
write—to write! Wouldn’t Johnny like to be a good 
little boy, and learn to write ?”’ 

As a matter of fact, Johnny wouldn’t. At the 
bottom of his heart, he doesn’t in the least want 
to be a good little boy and learn to write. But she 
comes it over him. Dear teacher, she starts him off 
in the way he must go, poor little slave. And once 
started, he goes on wheels, being a good little boy 
like all the other good little boys. School is a very 
elaborate railway system where good little boys are 
taught to run upon good lines till they are shunted 
off into life, at the age of fourteen, sixteen, or what- 
ever it is. And by that age the running-on-lines 
habit it absolutely fixed. The good big boy merely 
turns off one set of rails on to another. And it is 
so easy, running on rails; he never realises that 

120 

ENSLAVED BY CIVILISATION 

he is a slave to the rails he runs on. Good 
boy ! 

Now the funny thing is that nobody, not even the 
most conscientious father, ever questions the absolute 
rightness of these school-marms. It is all for dear 
little Johnny’s own good. And these school-marms 
know absolutely what Johnny’s own good is. It is 
being a good little boy like all the other good 
little boys. 

But to be a good little boy like all the other good 
little boys is to be at last a slave, or at least an 
automaton, running on wheels. It means that dear 
little Johnny is going to have all his own individual 
manhood nipped out of him, carefully plucked out, 
every time it shows a little peep. Nothing is more 
insidiously clever than an old maid’s fingers at 
picking off the little shoots of manhood as they 
sprout out from a growing boy, and turning him into 
that neutral object, a good little boy. It is a subtle, 
loving form of mutilation, and mothers absolutely 
believe in it. ‘Oh, but I want him to be a good 
boy!” She fails to remember how bored she gets 
with her good-boy husband. Good boys are very 
nice to mothers and schoolmistresses. But as men, 
they make a wishy-washy nation. 

Of course, nobody wants Johnny to be a bad little 
boy. One would like him to be just a boy, with no 
adjective at all. But that is impossible. At the 

121 I 

ENSLAVED BY CIVILISATION 

very best schools, where there is most “‘ freedom,” 
the subtle, silent compulsion towards goodness is per- 
haps strongest. Children are all silently, steadily, 
relentlessly bullied into being good. They grow up 
good. And then they are no good. 

For what does goodness mean? It means, in the 
end, being like everybody else, and not having a 
soul to call your own. Certainly you mustn’t have 
a feeling to call your own. You must be good, and 
feel exactly what. is expected of you, which is just 
what other people feel. Which means that in the 
end you feel nothing at all, all your feeling has been 
killed out of you. And all that is left is the artificial 
stock emotion which comes out with the morning 
papers. 

I think I belong to the first generation of English- 
men that was really broken in. My father’s genera- 
tion, at least among the miners where I was brought 
up, was still wild. But then my father had never 
been to anything more serious than a dame’s school, 
and the dame, Miss Hight, had never succeeded in 
making him a good little boy. She had barely 
succeeded in making him able to write his name. 
As for his feelings, they had escaped her clutches 
entirely : as they escaped the clutches of his mother. 
The country was still open. He fled away from the 
women and rackapelted with his own gang. And 
to the end of his days his idea of life was to escape 

122 

ENSLAVED BY CIVILISATION 

over the fringe of virtue and drink beer and perhaps 
poach an occasional rabbit. 

But the boys of my generation were caught in time. 
We were sent at the ripe age of five to Board-schools, 
British schools, national schools, and though there 
was far less of the Johnny dear business, and no 
teddy-bear, we were forced to knuckle under. We 
were forced on to the rails. I went to the Board- 
school. Most of us, practically all, were miners’ 
sons. The bulk were going to be miners themselves. 
And we all hated school. 

I shall never forget the anguish with which I wept, 
the first day. I was captured. I was roped in. 
The other boys felt the same. They hated school 
because they felt captives there. They hated the 
masters because they felt them as jailers. They 
hated even learning to read and write. The endless 
refrain was: “‘ When I go down pit you'll see what 
sums I'll do.” That was what they waited 
for: to go down pit, to escape, to be men. To 
escape into the wild warrens of the pit, to get off the 
narrow lines of school. 

The schoolmaster was an excellent, irascible old 
man with a white beard. My mother had the 
greatest respect for him. I remember he flew into 
a rage with me because I did not want to admit my 
first name, which is David. ‘‘ David! David!’ he 
raved. ‘David is the name of a great and good 

123 

ENSLAVED BY CIVILISATION 

man. You don’t like the name of David? You 
don’t like the name of David!” He was purple 
with indignation. But I had an unreasonable dis- 
like of the name David, and still have, and he 
couldn’t force me into liking it. But he wanted to. 

And there it was. David was the name of a great 
and good man, so I was to be forced to like it. If 
my first name had been Ananias or Ahab, I should 
have been excused. But David! no! My father, 
luckily, didn’t know the difference between David 
and Davy of the safety-lamp. 

But the old schoolmaster gradually got us under. 
There were occasional violent thrashings. But what 
really did the trick was not the thrashing, but the 
steady, persistent pressure of: Honest, decent lads 
behave in my way, and no other.—And he got the 
lads under. Because he was so absolutely sure he 
was right, and because mothers and fathers all agreed 
he was right, he managed pretty well to tame the 
uncouth colliery lads during the six or seven years 
he was responsible for them. They were the first 
generation to be really tamed. 

With what result? They went down pit, but even 
pit was no more the happy subterranean warren it 
used to be. Down pit everything was made to run 
on lines, too, new lines, up-to-date lines; and the 
men became ever less men, more mere instruments. 
They married, and they made what the women of 

124 

ENSLAVED BY CIVILISATION 

my mother’s generation always prayed for, good 
husbands. But as soon as the men were good hus- 
bands, the women were a tiresome, difficult, unsatis- 
fied lot of wives, so there you are! Without knowing 
it, they missed the old wildness, and were bored. 

The last time I was back in the Midlands was 
during the great coal strike. The men of my age, 
the men just over forty, were there, standing derelict, 
pale, silent, with nothing to say, nothing to do, 
nothing to feel, and great hideous policemen from 
God-knows-where waiting in gangs to keep them on 
the lines. Alas, there was no need. The men of 
my generation were broken in; they'll stay on the 
lines and rust there. For wives, schoolmasters and 
employers of labour it is perhaps very nice to have 
men well broken in. But for a nation, for England, 
it is a disaster. 

125 

MEN MUST WORK AND 
WOMEN AS WELL 

SupposinG that circumstances go on pretty much in 
the same way they’re going on in now, then men and 
women will go on pretty much in the same way they 
are now going on in. There is always an element 
of change, we know. But change is of two sorts: 
the next step, or a jump in another direction. The 
next step is called progress. If our society continues 
its course of gay progress along the given lines, then 
men and women will do the same: always along 
the given lines. 

So what is important in that case is not so much 
men and women, but the given lines. The railway 
train doesn’t matter particularly in itself. What 
matters is where it is going to. If I want to go to 
Crewe, then a train to Bedford is supremely unin- 
teresting to me, no matter how full it may be. It 
will only arouse a secondary and temporal interest 
if it happens to have an accident. 

And there you are with men and women to-day. 
They are not particularly interesting, and they are 
not, in themselves, particularly important. All] the 
thousands and millions of bowler hats and neat 
handbags that go bobbing to business every day 

126 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

may represent so many immortal souls, but somehow 
we feel that is not for us to say. The clergyman is 
paid to tickle our vanity in these matters. What all 
the bowler hats and neat handbags represent to you 
and me and to each other is business, my dear, and 
a job. 

So that, granted the present stream of progress 
towards better business and better jobs continues, 
the point is, not to consider the men and women 
bobbing in the stream, any more than you consider 
the drops of water in the Thames—but where the 
stream is flowing. Where is the stream flowing, 
indeed, the stream of progress? Everybody hopes, 
of course, it is flowing towards bigger business and 
better jobs. And what does that mean, again, to 
the man under the bowler hat and the woman who 
clutches the satchel ? 

It means, of course, more money, more congenial 
labours, and fewer hours. It means freedom from 
all irksome tasks. It means, apart from the few 
necessary hours of highly paid and congenial labour, 
that men and women shall have nothing to do 
except enjoy themselves. No beastly housework for 
the women, no beastly homework for the men. 
Free! free to enjoy themselves. More films, more 
motor-cars, more dances, more golf, more tennis and 
more getting completely away from yourself. And 
the goal of life is enjoyment. 

127 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

Now if men and women want these things with 
sufficient intensity, they may really get them, and 
go on getting them. While the game is worth the 
candle, men and women will go on playing the game. 
And it seems to-day as if the motor-car, the film, 
the radio and the jazz were worth the candle. This 
being so, progress will continue from business to 
bigger business, and from job to better job. This 
is, in very simple terms, the plan of the universe laid 
down by the great magnates of industry like Mr. 
Ford. And they know what they are talking 
about. 

But—and the “‘ but”? is a very big one—it is not 
easy to turn business into bigger business, and it is 
sometimes impossible to turn uncongenial jobs into 
congenial ones. This is where science really leaves 
us in the lurch, and calculation collapses. Perhaps 
in Mr. Ford’s super-factory of motor-cars all jobs 
may be made abstract and congenial. But the 
woman whose cook falls foul of the kitchen range, 
heated with coal, every day, hates that coal range 
herself even more darkly than the cook hates it. 
Yet many housewives can’t afford electric cooking. 
And if everyone could, it still doesn’t make house- 
work entirely congenial. All the inventions of modern 
science fail to make housework anything but un- 
congenial to the modern woman, be she mistress or 
servant-maid. Now the only decent way to get 

128 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

something done is to get it done by somebody who 
quite likes doing it. In the past, cooks really enjoyed 
cooking and housemaids enjoyed scrubbing. Those 
days are over ; like master, like man, and still more 
so, like mistress, like maid. Mistress loathes scrub- 
bing; in two generations, maid loathes scrubbing. 
But scrubbing must be done. At what price ?— 
raise the price. The price is raised, the scrubbing 
goes a little better. But after a while, the loathing 
of scrubbing becomes again paramount in the kitchen- 
maid’s breast, and then ensues a general state of 
tension, and a general outcry: Is it worth it? Is it 
really worth it ? 

What applies to scrubbing applies to all labour 
that cannot be mechanised or abstracted. A girl 
will slave over shorthand and typing for a pittance 
because it is not muscular work. A girl will not do 
housework well, not for a good wage. Why? Be- 
cause, for some mysterious or obvious reason, the 
modern woman and the modern man hate physical 
work. Ask your husband to peel the potatoes, and 
earn his deep resentment. Ask your wife to wash 
your socks, and earn the same. There is still a 
certain thrill about “‘ mental”’ and purely mechanical 
work like attending a machine. But actual labour 
has become to us, with our education, abhorrent. 

And it is here that science has not kept pace with 
human demand. It is here that progress is fatally 

129 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

threatened. There is an enormous, insistent demand 
on the part of the human being that mere labour, 
such as scrubbing, hewing and loading coal, navvying, 
the crude work that is the basis of all labour, shall 
be done away with. Even washing dishes. Science 
hasn’t even learned how to wash dishes for us yet. 
The mistress who feels so intensely bitter about her 
maid who will not wash the dishes properly does 
so because she herself so loathes washing them. 
Science has rather left us in the lurch in these humble 
but basic matters. Before babies are conveniently 
bred in bottles, let the scientist find a hey presto / 
trick for turning dirty teacups into clean ones ; since 
it is upon science we depend for our continued 
progress. 

Progress, then, which proceeds so smoothly, and 
depends on science, does not proceed as rapidly as 
human feelings change. Beef-steaks are beef-steaks 
still, though all except the eating is horrible to us. 
A great deal must be done about a beef-steak besides 
the eating of it. And this great deal is done, we 
have to face the fact, unwillingly. When the mistress 
loathes trimming and grilling a beef-steak, or paring 
potatoes, or wringing the washing, the maid will 
likewise loathe these things, and do them at last 
unwillingly, and with a certain amount of resent- 
ment. 

The one thing we don’t sufficiently consider, in 

130 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

considering the march of human progress, is also the 
very dangerous march of human feeling that goes 
on at the same time, and not always parallel. The 
change in human feeling! And one of the greatest 
changes that has ever taken place in man and woman 
is this revulsion from physical effort, physical labour 
and physical contact, which has taken place within 
the last thirty years. This change hits woman even 
harder than man, for she has always had to keep 
the immediate physical side going. And now it is 
repellent to her—just as nearly all physical activity 
is repellent to modern man. The film, the radio, 
the gramophone were all invented because physical 
effort and physical contact have become repulsive to 
man and woman alike. The aim is to abstract as 
far as possible. And science is our only help. 
And science still can’t wash the dinner-things 
or darn socks, or even mend the fire. Electric 
heaters or central heating, of course! But that’s 
not all. 

What, then, is the result? In the abstract we sail 
ahead to bigger business and better jobs and babies 
bred in bottles and food in tabloid form. But mean- 
while science hasn’t rescued us from beef-steaks and 
dish-washing, heavy labour and howling babies. 
There is a great hitch. And owing to the great 
hitch, a great menace to progress. Because every 
day mankind hates the business of beef-steaks and 

131 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

dish-washing, heavy labour and howling babies more 
bitterly. 

The housewife is full of resentment—she can’t help 
it. The young husband is full of resentment—he 
can’t help it, when he has to plant potatoes to eke 
out the family income. The housemaid is full of 
resentment, the navvy is full of resentment, the collier 
is full of resentment, and the collier’s wife is full of 
resentment, because her man can’t earn a proper 
wage. Resentment grows as the strange fastidious- 
ness of modern men and women increases. Resent- 
ment, resentment, resentment—because the basis of 
life is still brutally physical, and that has become 
repulsive to us. Mr. Ford, being in his own way a 
genius, has realised that what the modern workman 
wants, just like the modern gentleman, is abstraction. 
The modern workman doesn’t want to be “ inter- 
ested ’ in his job. He wants to be as little interested, 
as nearly perfectly mechanical as possible. This is 
the great will of the people, and there is no gainsaying 
it. It is precisely the same in woman as in man. 
Woman demands an electric cooker because it makes 
no call on her attention or her “interest” at all. 
It is almost a pure abstraction, a few switches, and 
no physical contact, no dirt, which is the inevitable 
result of physical contact, at all. If only we could 
make housework a real abstraction, a matter of 
turning switches and guiding a machine, the house- 

132 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

wife would again be more or less content. But it 
can’t quite be done, even in America. 

And the resentment is enormous. The resentment 
against eating, in the breast of modern woman who 
has to prepare food, is profound. Why all this work 
and bother about mere eating? Why, indeed? Be- 
cause neither science nor evolution has kept up with 
the change in human feeling, and beef-steaks are 
beef-steaks still, no matter how detestable they may 
have become to the people who have to prepare 
them. The loathsome fuss of food continues, and 
will continue, in spite of all talk about tabloids. 
The loathsome digging of coal out of the earth, by 
half-naked men, continues, deep underneath Mr. 
Ford’s super-factories. There it is, and there it will 
be, and you can’t get away from it. While men 
quite enjoyed hewing coal, which they did, and 
while women really enjoyed cooking, even with a 
coal range, which they did—then all was well. But 
suppose society en bloc comes to hate the thought of 
sweating cooking over a hot range, or sweating 
hacking at a coal-seam, then what are you to do? 
You have to ask, or to demand that a large section 
of society shall do something they have come to hate 
doing, and which you would hate to do yourself. 
What then? Resentment and ill-feeling ! 

Social life means all classes of people living more 
or less harmoniously together. And private life 

133 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

means men and women, man and woman living 
together more or less congenially. If there is serious 
discord between the social classes, then society is 
threatened with confusion. If there is serious discord 
between man and woman, then the individual, and 
that means practically everybody, is threatened with 
internal confusion and unhappiness. 

Now it is quite easy to keep the working classes in 
harmonious working order, so long as you don’t ask 
them to do work they simply do not want to do. 
The board-schools, however, did the fatal deed. 
They said to the boys: Work is noble, but what you 
want is to get on, you don’t want to stick down a 
coal-mine all your life. Rise up, and do clean work ! 
become a school teacher or a clerk, not a common 
collier. 

This is sound board-school education, and is in 
keeping with all the noblest social ideals of the last 
century. Unfortunately it entirely overlooks the 
unpleasant effect of such teaching on those who 
cannot get on, and who must perforce stick down a 
coal-mine all their lives. And these, in the board- 
school of a mining district, are at least 90 per cent. 
of the boys ; it must be so. So that go per cent. of 
these board-school scholars are deliberately taught, 
at school, to be malcontents, taught to despise them- 
selves for not having “‘ got on,” for not having “ got 
out of the pit,” for sticking down all their lives doing 

134 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

“dirty work’? and being ‘‘common  colliers.”’ 
Naturally, every collier, doomed himself, wants to 
get his boys out of the pit, to be gentlemen. And 
since this again is impossible in go per cent. of the 
cases, the number of “gentlemen,” or clerks and 
school teachers, being strictly proportionate to the 
number of colliers, there comes again the sour dis- 
illusion. So that by the third generation you 
have exactly what you’ve got to-day, the young 
malcontent collier. He has been deliberately pro- 
duced by modern education coupled with modern 
conditions, and is logically, inevitably and naturally 
what he is: a malcontent collier. According 
to all the accepted teaching, he ought to have 
risen and bettered himself: equal opportunity, 
you know. And he hasn’t risen and bettered him- 
self. Therefore he is more or less a failure in his 
own eyes even. He is doomed to do dirty work. 
He is a malcontent. Now even Mr. Ford can’t make 
coal-mines clean and shiny and abstract. Coal won’t 
be abstracted. Even a Soviet can’t do it. A coal- 
mine remains a hole in the black earth, where 
blackened men hew and shovel and sweat. You 
can’t abstract it, or make it an affair of pulling levers, 
and, what is even worse, you can’t abandon it, you 
can’t do away with it. There it is, and it has got 
to be. Mr. Ford forgets that his clean and pure and 
harmonious super-factory, where men only pull 

135 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

shining levers or turn bright handles, has all had to 
be grossly mined and smelted before it could come 
into existence. Mr. Ford’s is one of the various 
heavens of industry. But these heavens rest on 
various hells of labour, always did and always will. 
Science rather leaves us in the lurch in these matters. 
Science is supposed to remove these hells for us. 
And—it doesn’t. Not at all! 

If you had never taught the blackened men down 
in the various hells that they were in hell, and made 
them despise themselves for being there—a common 
collier, a Jow labourer—the mischief could never have 
developed so rapidly. But now we have it, all society 
resting on a labour basis of smouldering resentment. 
And the collier’s question: How would you like to 
be a collier >—is unanswerable. We know perfectly 
well we should dislike it intensely—At the same 
time, my father, who never went to a Board-school, 
quite liked it. But he has been improved on. 
Progress! Human feeling has changed, changed 
rapidly and radically. And science has not changed 
conditions to fit. 

What is to be done? We all loathe brute physical 
labour. We all think it is horrible to have to do it. 
We consider those that actually do it low and vile, 
and we have told them so, for fifty years, urging them 
to get away from it and “‘ better themselves,’’ which 
would be very nice, if everybody could get on, and 

136 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

brute labour could be abandoned, as, scientifically, 
it ought to be. But actually, not at all. We are 
forced to go on forcing a very large proportion of 
society to remain “‘ unbettered,” “‘ low and common,” 
*“common colliers, common labourers,” since a very 
large portion of humanity must still spend its life 
labouring, now and in the future, science having let 
us down in this respect. You can’t teach mankind 
to “better himself”? unless you’ll better the gross 
earth to fit him. And the gross earth remains what 
it was, and man its slave. For neither science nor 
evolution shows any signs of saving us from our gross 
necessities. The labouring masses are and will be, 
even if all else is swept away : because they must be. 
They represent the gross necessity of man, which 
science has failed to save us from. 

So then, what? The only thing that remains to 
be done is to make labour as likeable as possible, 
and try to teach the labouring masses to like it: 
which, given the trend of modern feeling, not only 
sounds, but is, fatuous. Mankind en bloc gets more 
fastidious and more “nice” every day. Every day 
it loathes dirty work more deeply. And every day 
the whole pressure of social consciousness works 
towards making everybody more fastidious, more 
** nice,’ more refined, and more unfit for dirty work. 
Before you make all humanity unfit for dirty work, 
you should first remove the necessity for dirty work. 

137 K 

, 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

But such being the condition of men and women 
with regard to work—a condition of repulsion in the 
breasts of men and women for the work that has 
got to be done—what about private life, the rela- 
tion between man and woman? How does the 
new fastidiousness and nicety of mankind affect 
this ? 

Profoundly ! The revulsion from physical labour, 
physical effort, physical contact has struck a death- 
blow at marriage and home-life. In the great trend 
of the times, a woman cannot save herself from the 
universal dislike of housework, housekeeping, rearing 
children and keeping a home going. Women make 
the most unselfish efforts in this direction, because 
it is generally expected of them. But this cannot 
remove the instinctive dislike of preparing meals and 
scouring saucepans, cleaning baby’s bottles or darning 
the man’s underwear, which a large majority of 
women feel to-day. It is something which there is 
no denying, a real physical dislike of doing these 
things. Many women school themselves and are 
excellent housewives, physically disliking it all the 
time. And this, though admirable, is wearing. It is 
an exhaustive process, with many ill results. 

Can it be possible that women actually ever did 
like scouring saucepans and cleaning the range ?—I 
believe some few women still do. I believe that 
twenty years ago, even, the majority of women 

138 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

enjoyed it. But what, then, has happened? Can 
human instincts really change ? 

They can, and in the most amazing fashion. And 
this is the great problem for the sociologist : the 
violent change in human instinct, especially in 
women. Woman’s instinct used to be all for home, 
shelter, the protection of the man, and the happiness 
of running her own house. Now it is all against. 
Woman thinks she wants a lovely little home of her 
own, but her instinct is all against it, when it means 
matrimony. She thinks she wants a man of her own, 
but her instinct is dead against having him around 
all the time. She would like him on a long string, 
that she can let out or pull in, as she feels inclined. 
But she just doesn’t want Him inevitably and in- 
sidiously there all the time—not even every evening— 
not even for week-ends, if it’s got to be a fixture. 
She wants him to be merely intermittent in her land- 
scape, even if he is always present in her soul, and 
she writes him the most intimate letters every day. 
All well and good! But her instinet is against him, 
against his permanent and perpetual physical presence. 
She doesn’t want to feel his presence as something 
material, unavoidable and permanent. It goes dead 
against her grain, it upsets her instinct. She loves 
him, she loves, even, being faithful to him. But she 
doesn’t want him substantially around. She doesn’t 
want his actual physical presence—except in snatches. 

139 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

What she really loves is the thought of him, the idea 
of him, the distant communion with him—varied with 
snatches of actually being together, like little festivals, 
which we are more or less glad when they are 
over. 

Now a great many modern girls feel like this, even 
when they force themselves to behave in the con- 
ventional side-by-side fashion. And a great many 
men feel the same—though perhaps not so acutely 
as the women. Young couples may force themselves 
to be conventional husbands and wives, but the 
strain is often cruel, and the result often disastrous. 

Now then we see the trend of our civilisation, in 
terms of human feeling and human relation. It is, 
and there is no denying it, towards a greater and 
greater abstraction from the physical, towards a 
further and further physical separateness between 
men and women, and between individual and in- 
dividual. Young men and women to-day are to- 
gether all the time, it will be argued. Yes, but they 
are together as good sports, good chaps, in strange 
independence of one another, intimate one moment, 
strangers the next, hands-off! all the time, and as 
little connected as the bits in a kaleidoscope. 

The young have the fastidiousness, the nicety, the 
revulsion from the physical, intensified. To the girl 
of to-day, a man whose physical presence she is 
aware of, especially a bit heavily aware of, is or 

140 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

becomes really abhorrent. She wants to fly away 
from him to the uttermost ends of the earth. And 
as soon as women or girls get a bit female physical, 
young men’s nerves go all to pieces. The sexes can’t 
stand one another. They adore one another as 
spiritual or personal creatures, all talk and wit and 
back-chat, or jazz and motor-cars and machines, or 
tennis and swimming—even sitting in bathing-suits 
all day on a beach. But this is all peculiarly non- 
physical, a flaunting of the body in its non-physical, 
merely optical aspect. So much nudity, fifty years 
ago, would have made man and woman quiver 
through and through. Now, not at all! People 
flaunt their bodies to show how unphysical they are. 
The more the girls are not desired, the more they 
uncover themselves. 

And this means, when we analyse it out, repulsion. 
The young are, in a subtle way, physically repulsive 
to one another, the girl to the man and the man to 
the girl. And they rather enjoy the feeling of re- 
pulsion, it is a sort of contest. It is as if the young 
girl said to the young man to-day : I rather like you, 
you know. You are so thrillingly repulsive to me.— 
And as if the young man replied: Same here !— 
There may be, of course, an intense bodiless sort of 
affection between young men and women. But as 
soon as either becomes a positive physical presence 
to the other, immediately there is repulsion. 

Iq 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

And marriages based on the thrill of physical 
repulsion, as so many are to-day, even when coupled 
with mental ‘‘ adoring” or real wistful, bodiless 
affection, are in the long run—not so very long, 
either—catastrophic. There you have it, the great 
‘* spirituality,” the great “betterment’’ or refine- 
ment; the great fastidiousness; the great “ nice- 
ness’ of feeling ; when a girl must be a flat, thin, 
bodiless stick, and a boy a correct mannequin, each 
of them abstracted towards real caricature. What 
does it all amount to? What is its motive force? 

What it amounts to, really, is physical repulsion. 
The great spirituality of our age means that we are 
all physically repulsive to one another. The great 
advance in refinement of feeling and squeamish 
fastidiousness means that we hate the physical existence 
of anybody and everybody, even ourselves. The 
amazing move into abstraction on the part of the 
whole of humanity—the film, the radio, the gramo- 
phone—means that we loathe the physical element 
in our amusements, we don’t want the physical 
contact, we want to get away from it. We don’t 
want to look at flesh and blood people—we want to 
watch their shadows on a screen. We don’t want 
to hear their actual voices : only transmitted through 
a machine. We must get away from the physical. 

The vast mass of the lower classes—and this is 
most extraordinary—are even more grossly abstracted, 

142 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

if we may use the term, than the educated classes. 
The uglier sort of working man to-day truly has no 
body and no real feelings at all. He eats the most 
wretched food, because taste has left him, he only 
sees his meal, he never really eats it. He drinks his 
beer by idea, he no longer tastes it at all. This 
must be so, or the food and beer could not be as 
bad as they are. And as for his relation to his 
women—his poor women—they are pegs to hang 
clothes on, and there’s an end of them. It is a 
horrible state of feelingless depravity, atrophy of 
the senses. 

But under it all, as ever, as everywhere, vibrates 
the one great impulse of our civilisation, physical 
recoil from every other being and from every form 
of physical existence. Recoil, recoil, recoil. Re- 
vulsion, revulsion, revulsion. Repulsion, repulsion, 
repulsion. This is the rhythm that underlies our 
social activity, everywhere, with regard to physical 
existence. 

Now we are all basically and permanently physical. 
So is the earth, so even is the air. What then is 
going to be the result of all this recoil and repul- 
sion, which our civilisation has _ deliberately 
fostered ? 

The result is really only one and the same: some 
form of collective social madness. Russia, being a 
very physical country, was in a frantic state of 

143 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

physical recoil and “ spirituality’? twenty years ago. 
We can look on the revolution, really, as nothing 
but a great outburst of anti-physical insanity ; we 
can look on Soviet Russia as nothing but a logical 
state of society established in anti-physical insanity. 
—Physical and material are, of course, not the same ; 
in fact, they are subtly opposite. The machine is 
absolutely material, and absolutely anti-physical— 
as even our fingers know. And the Soviet is estab- 
lished on the image of the machine, “ pure” 
materialism. The Soviet hates the real physical 
body far more deeply than it hates Capital. It 
mixes it up with the bourgeois. But it sees very 
little danger in it, since all western civilisation is 
now mechanised, materialised and ready for an 
outburst of insanity which shall throw us all into 
some purely machine-driven unity of lunatics. 

What about it, then? What about it, men and 
women? ‘The only thing to do is to get your bodies 
back, men and women. A great part of society is 
irreparably lost: abstracted into non-physical, 
mechanical entities whose motive power is still 
recoil, revulsion, repulsion, hate, and, ultimately, 
blind destruction. The driving force underneath our 
society remains the same: recoil, revulsion, hate. 
And let this force once run out of hand, and we know 
what to expect. It is not only in the working class. 
The well-to-do classes are just as full of the driving 

144 

MEN MUST WORK AND WOMEN AS WELL 

force of recoil, revulsion, which ultimately becomes 
hate. The force is universal in our spiritual civilisa- 
tion. Let it once run out of hand, and then—— 

It only remains for some men and women, in- 
dividuals, to try to get back their bodies and preserve 
the other flow of warmth, affection and physical 
unison. There is nothing else to do. 

145 

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

Tury ask me: “ Did you find it very hard to get on 
and to become a success?’’ And I have to admit 
that if I can be said to have got on, and if I 
can be called a success, then I did not find it 
hard. 

I never starved in a garret, nor waited in anguish 
for the post to bring me an answer from editor or 
publisher, nor did I struggle in sweat and blood to 
bring forth mighty works, nor did I ever wake up 
and find myself famous. 

I was a poor boy. I ought to have wrestled in the 
fell clutch of circumstance, and undergone the 
bludgeonings of chance before I became a writer 
with a very modest income and a very questionable 
reputation. But I didn’t, It all happened by itself 
and without any groans from me. 

It seems a pity. Because 1 was undoubtedly a 
poor boy of the working classes, with no apparent 
future in front of me. But after all, what amt 
now ? 

I was born among the working classes and brought - 
up among them. My father was a collier, and only 
a collier, nothing praiseworthy about him. He 
wasn’t even respectable, in so far as he got drunk 

146 

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

rather frequently, never went near a chapel, and was 
usually rather rude to his little immediate bosses at 
the pit. 

He practically never had a good stall, all the time 
he was a butty, because he was always saying tire- 
some and foolish things about the men just above 
him in control at the mine. He offended them all, 
almost on purpose, so how could he expect them 
to favour him? Yet he grumbled when they 
didn’t. 

My mother was, I suppose, superior. She 
came from town, and belonged really to the 
lower bourgeoisie. She spoke King’s English, 
without an accent, and never in her life could 
even imitate a sentence of the dialect which my 
father spoke, and which we children spoke out of 
doors. 

She wrote a fine Italian hand, and a clever and 
amusing letter when she felt like it. And as she grew 
older she read novels again, and got terribly im- 
patient with “ Diana of the Crossways ”’ and terribly 
thrilled by “ East Lynne.” 

But she was a working man’s wife, and nothing 
else, in her shabby little black bonnet and her shrewd, 
clear, “‘ different’? face. And she was very much 
respected, just as my father was not respected. Her 
nature was quick and sensitive, and perhaps really 
superior. But she was down, right down in the 

147 

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

working class, among the mass of poorer colliers’ 
wives. 

I was a delicate pale brat with a snuffy nose, whom 
most people treated quite gently as just an ordinary 
delicate little lad. When I was twelve I got a county 
council scholarship, twelve pounds a year, and went | 
to Nottingham High School. 

After leaving school I was a clerk for three months, 
then had a very serious pneumonia illness, in 
my seventeenth year, that damaged my health for 
life. 

A year later I became a school teacher, and 
after three years’ savage teaching of collier lads I 
went to take the “‘ normal” course in Nottingham 
University. 

As I was glad to leave school, I was glad to leave 
college. It had meant mere disillusion, instead of 
the living contact of men. From college I went 
down to Croydon, near London, to teach in a 
new elementary school at a hundred pounds a 
year. 

It was while I was at Croydon, when I was twenty- 
three, that the girl who had been the chief friend 
of my youth, and who was herself a school teacher 
in a mining village at home, copied out some of 
my poems, and without telling me, sent them to the 
English Review, which had just had a glorious re-birth 
under Ford Madox Hueffer. 

148 

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

Hueffer was most kind. He printed the poems, 
and asked me to come and see him. The girl had 
launched me, so easily, on my literary career, like 
a princess cutting a thread, launching a ship. 

I had been tussling away for four years, getting out 
“The White Peacock” in inchoate bits, from the 
underground of my consciousness. I must have 
written most of it five or six times, but only in 
intervals, never as a task or a divine labour, or in 
the groans of parturition. 

I would dash at it, do a bit, show it to the girl ; 
she always admired it; then realise afterwards it 
wasn’t what I wanted, and have another dash. But 
at Croydon I had worked at it fairly steadily, in the 
evenings after school. 

Anyhow, it was done, after four or five years’ 
spasmodic effort. Hueffer asked at once to see the 
manuscript. He read it immediately, with the 
greatest cheery sort of kindness and bluff. And in 
his queer voice, when we were in an omnibus in 
London, he shouted in my ear: “It’s got every 
fault that the English novel can have.” 

Just then the English novel was supposed to 
have so many faults, in comparison with the 
French, that it was hardly allowed to exist at all. 
** But,” shouted Hueffer in the *bus, “‘ you’ve got 
GENIUS.” 

This made me want to laugh, it sounded so comical. 
149 

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

In the early days they were always telling me I had 
got genius, as if to console me for not having their 
own incomparable advantages. 

But Hueffer didn’t mean that. I always thought 
he had a bit of genfus himself. Anyhow, he sent 
the MS. of ‘‘ The White Peacock”? to William 
Heinemann, who accepted it at once, and made 
me alter only four little lines whose omission would 
now make anybody smile. I was to have £50 when 
the book was published. 

Meanwhile Hueffer printed more poems and some 
stories of mine in the English Review, and people 
read them and told me so, to my embarrassment 
and anger. I hated being an author, in people’s 
eyes. Especially as I was a teacher. 

When I was twenty-five my mother died, and two 
months later “‘The White Peacock’? was _ pub- 
lished, but it meant nothing to me. I went on 
teaching for another year, and then again a bad 
pneumonia illness intervened. When I got better I 
did not go back to school. I lived henceforward on 
my scanty literary earnings. 

It is seventeen years since I gave up teaching and 
started to live an independent life of the pen. I 
have never starved, and never even felt poor, though 
my income for the first ten years was no better, and 
often worse, than it would have been if I had re- 
mained an elementary school teacher. 

150 

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

But when one has been born poor a very little 
money can be enough. Now my father would think 
I am rich, if nobody else does. And my mother 
would think I have risen in the world, even if I 
don’t think so. 

But something is wrong, either with me or with 
the world, or with both of us. I have gone far and 
met many people, of all sorts and all conditions, 
and many whom I have genuinely liked and 
esteemed. 

People, personally, have nearly always been 
friendly. Of critics we will not speak, they are 
different fauna from people. And I have wanted 
to feel truly friendly with some, at least, of my 
fellow-men. 

Yet I have never quite succeeded. Whether I get 
on zm the world is a question ; but I certainly don’t 
get on very well with the world. And whether I 
am a worldly success or not I really don’t know. 
But I feel, somehow, not much of a human 
suCCESS. 

By which I mean that I don’t feel there is any 
very cordial or fundamental contact between me 
and society, or me and other people. There is a 
breach. And my contact is with something that is 
non-human, non-vocal. 

I used to think it had something to do with the 
oldness and the worn-outness of Europe. Having 

151 

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

tried other places, I know that is not so. Europe is, 
perhaps, the least worn-out of the continents, because 
it is the most lived in. A place that is lived in 
lives. 

It is since coming back from America that I ask 
myself seriously: Why is there so little contact 
between myself and the people whom I know? 
Why has the contact no vital meaning ? 

And if I write the question down, and try to 
write the answer down, it is because I feel it is a 
question that troubles many men. 

The answer, as far as I can see, has something to 
do with class. Class makes a gulf, across which all 
the best human flow is lost. It is not exactly the 
triumph of the middle classes that has made the 
deadness, but the triumph of the middle-class 
thing. 

As a man from the working class, I feel that the 
middle class cut off some of my vital vibration when 
I am with them. I admit them charming and 
educated and good people often enough. But they 
just stop some part of me from working. Some part has 
to be left out. 

Then why don’t I live with my working people ? 
Because their vibration is limited in another direction. 
They are narrow, but still fairly deep and passionate, 
whereas the middle class is broad and shallow and 
passionless. Quite passionless. At the best they 

152 

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

substitute affection, which is the great middle-class 
positive emotion. 

But the working class is narrow in outlook, in 
prejudice, and narrow in intelligence. This again 
makes a prison. One can belong absolutely to 
no Class. | 

Yet I find, here in Italy, for example, that I live 
in a certain silent contact with the peasants who work 
the land of this villa. I am not intimate with them, 
hardly speak to them save to say good day. And 
they are not working for me; I am not their 
padrone. 

Yet it is they, really, who form my ambiente, and 
it is from them that the human flow comes to me. 
I don’t want to live with them in their cottages ; 
that would be a sort of prison. But I want them 
to be there, about the place, their lives going on 
along with mine, and in relation to mine. I don’t 
idealise them. Enough of that folly! It is worse 
than setting school-children to express themselves in 
self-conscious twaddle. I don’t expect them to 
make any millennium here on earth, neither now 
nor in the future. But I want to live near them, 
because their life still flows. 

And now I know, more or less, why I cannot 
follow in the footsteps even of Barrie or of Wells, 
who both came from the common people also and 
are both such a success. Now I know why I cannot 

153 L 

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

rise in the world and become even a little popular 
and rich. 

I cannot make the: transfer from my own class 
into the middle class. I cannot, not for anything 
in the world, forfeit my passional consciousness and 
my old blood-affinity with my fellow-men and the 
animals and the land, for that other thin, spurious 
mental conceit which is all that is left of the mental 
consciousness once it has made itself exclusive. 

154 

HYMNS IN A MAN’S LIFE 

NOTHING is more difficult than to determine what a 
child takes in, and does not take in, of its environ- 
ment and its teaching. This fact is brought home 
to me by the hymns which I learned as a child, 
and never forgot. They mean to me almost more 
than the finest poetry, and they have for me a more 
permanent value, somehow or other. 

It is almost shameful to confess that the poems 
which have meant most to me, like Wordsworth’s 
**Ode to Immortality’ and Keats’ Odes, and pieces 
of “‘ Macbeth”? or “As You Like It” or “ Mid- 
summer Night’s Dream,’ and Goethe’s lyrics, such 
as “ Uber allen Gipfeln ist Ruh,” and Verlaine’s 
‘** Ayant poussé la porte qui chancelle ’—all these 
lovely poems which after all give the ultimate shape 
to one’s life; all these lovely poems woven deep 
into a man’s consciousness, are still not woven so 
deep in me as the rather banal Nonconformist hymns 
that penetrated through and through my childhood. 

‘“ Each gentle dove 
And sighing bough 
That makes the eve 
So fair to me 

155 

HYMNS IN A MAN’S LIFE 

Has something far 

Diviner now 

To draw me back 

To Galilee. 

O Galilee, sweet Galilee, 

Where Jesus loved so much to be, 
O Galilee, sweet Galilee, 

Come sing thy songs again to me!” 

To me the word Galilee has a wonderful sound. 
The Lake of Galilee! I don’t want to know where 
it is. I never want to go to Palestine. Galilee is 
one of those lovely, glamorous worlds, not places, 
that exist in the golden haze of a child’s half-formed 
imagination. And in my man’s imagination it is 
just the same. It has been left untouched. With 
regard to the hymns which had such a profound 
influence on my childish consciousness, there has 
been no crystallising out, no dwindling into actuality, 
no hardening into the commonplace. They are the 
same to my man’s experience as they were to me 
nearly forty years ago. 

The moon, perhaps, has shrunken a little. One 
has been forced to learn about orbits, eclipses, relative 
distances, dead worlds, craters of the moon, and so 
on. The crescent at evening still startles the soul 
with its delicate flashing. But the mind works auto- 
matically and says: ‘‘Ah, she is in her first 

156 

HYMNS IN A MAN’S LIFE 

quarter. She is all there, in spite of the fact that 
we see only this slim blade. The earth’s shadow 
is over her.”’ And, willy-nilly, the intrusion of the 
mental processes dims the brilliance, the magic of 
the first apperception. 

It is the same with all things. The sheer delight 
of a child’s apperception is based on wonder; and 
deny it as we may, knowledge and wonder counteract 
one another. So that as knowledge increases wonder 
decreases. We say again: Familiarity breeds con- 
tempt. So that as we grow older, and become more 
familiar with phenomena, we become more con- 
temptuous of them. But that is only partly true. 
It has taken some races of men thousands of years 
to become contemptuous of the moon, and to the 
Hindu the cow is still wondrous. It is not familiarity 
that breeds contempt : it is the assumption of know- 
ledge. Anybody who looks at the moon and says, 
**T know all about that poor orb,” is, of course, 
bored by the moon. 

Now the great and fatal fruit of our civilisation, 
which is a civilisation based on knowledge, and 
hostile to experience, is boredom. All our wonderful 
education and learning is producing a grand sum- 
total of boredom. Modern people are inwardly 
thoroughly bored. Do as they may, they are bored. 

They are bored because they experience nothing. 
And they experience nothing because the wonder has 

157 

HYMNS IN A MAN’S LIFE 

gone out of them. And when the wonder has gone 
out of a man he is dead. He is henceforth only 
an insect. 

When all comes to all, the most precious element 
in life is wonder. Love is a great emotion, and 
power is power. But both love and power are based 
on wonder. Love without wonder is a sensational 
affair, and power without wonder is mere force and 
compulsion. The one universal element in con- 
sciousness which is fundamental to life is the element 
of wonder. You cannot help feeling it in a bean as 
it starts to grow and pulls itself out of its jacket. 
You cannot help feeling it in the glisten of the nucleus 
of the amceba. You recognise it, willy-nilly, in an 
ant busily tugging at a straw ; in a rook, as it walks 
the frosty grass. 

They all have their own obstinate will. But also 
they all live with a sense of wonder. Plant con- 
sciousness, insect consciousness, fish consciousness, 
animal consciousness, all are related by one per- 
manent element, which we may call the religious 
element inherent in all life, even in a flea: the sense 
of wonder. That is our sixth sense. And it is the 
natural religious sense. 

Somebody says that mystery is nothing, because 
mystery is something you don’t know, and what 
you don’t know is nothing to you. But there is more 
than one way of knowing. 

158 

HYMNS IN A MAN’S LIFE 

Even the real scientist works in the sense of wonder. 
The pity is, when he comes out of his laboratory he 
puts aside his wonder along with his apparatus, and 
tries to make it all perfectly didactic. Science in 
its true condition of wonder is as religious as any 
religion. But didactic science is as dead and boring 
as dogmatic religion. Both are wonderless and pro- 
ductive of boredom, endless boredom. 

Now we come back to the hymns. They live and 
glisten in the depths of the man’s consciousness in 
undimmed wonder, because they have not been 
subjected to any criticism or analysis. By the time 
I was sixteen I had criticised and got over the 
Christian dogma. 

It was quite easy for me ; my immediate forebears 
had already done it for me. Salvation, heaven, 
Virgin birth, miracles, even the Christian dogmas of 
right and wrong—one soon got them adjusted. I 
never could really worry about them. Heaven is one 
of the instinctive dreams. Right and wrong is some- 
thing you can’t dogmatise about ; it’s not so easy. 
As for my soul, I simply don’t and never did under- 
stand how I could “‘save”’ it. One can save one’s 
pennies. But how can one save one’s soul? One 
can only live one’s soul. The business is to live, 
really alive. And this needs wonder. 

So that the miracle of the loaves and fishes is just 
as good to me now as when I was a child. I don’t 

159 

HYMNS IN A MAN’S LIFE 

care whether it is historically a fact or not. What 
does it matter? It is part of the genuine wonder. 
The same with all the religious teaching I had as a 
child, apart from the didacticism and sentimentalism. 
I am eternally grateful for the wonder with which 
it filled my childhood. 

** Sun of my soul, thou Saviour dear, 
It is not night if Thou be near—”’ 

That was the last hymn at the board school. It 
did not mean to me any Christian dogma or any 
salvation. Just the words, ‘‘Sun of my soul, thou 
Saviour dear,’ penetrated me with wonder and the 
mystery of twilight. At another time the last hymn 
was : 

‘* Fair waved the golden corn 
In Canaan’s pleasant land—” 

And again I loved “‘ Canaan’s pleasant land.” The 
wonder of *‘ Canaan,” which could never be localised. 

I think it was good to be brought up a Protestant : 
and among Protestants, a Nonconformist, and among 
Nonconformists, a Congregationalist. Which sounds 
pharisaic. But I should have missed bitterly a direct 
knowledge of the Bible, and a direct relation to 
Galilee and Canaan, Moab and Kedron, those places 
that never existed on earth. And in the Church of 

160 

HYMNS IN A MAN’S LIFE 

England one would hardly have escaped those 
snobbish hierarchies of class, which spoil so much 
for a child. And the Primitive Methodists, when I 
was a boy, were always having “‘ revivals’ and being 
“saved,” and I always had a horror of being saved. 

So, altogether, I am grateful to my ‘“ Congre- 
gational’’ upbringing. The Congregationalists are 
the oldest Nonconformists, descendants of the Oliver 
Cromwell Independents. They still had the Puritan 
tradition of no ritual. But they avoided the personal 
emotionalism which one found among the Methodists 
when I was a boy. 

I liked our chapel, which was tall and full of light, 
and yet still; and colour-washed pale green and 
blue, with a bit of lotus pattern. And over the 
organ-loft, ““O worship the Lord in the beauty of 
holiness,’’ in big letters. 

That was a favourite hymn, too: 

‘“*O worship the Lord, in the beauty of holiness, 

Bow down before Him, His glory proclaim ; 

With gold of obedience and incense of lowliness 
Kneel and adore Him, the Lord is His name.” 

I don’t know what the ‘‘ beauty of holiness”? is, 
exactly. It easily becomes cant, or nonsense. But 
if you don’t think about it—and why should you ?— 
it has a magic. The same with the whole verse. 

161 

HYMNS IN A MAN’S LIFE 

It is rather bad, really, “‘ gold of obedience”’ and 
‘*incense of lowliness.”?. But in me, to the music, it 
still produces a sense of splendour. 

I am always glad we had the Bristol hymn-book, 
not Moody and Sankey. And I am glad our Scotch 
minister on the whole avoided sentimental messes 
such as ‘“‘ Lead, Kindly Light,’ or even “ Abide 
With Me.” He had a healthy preference for healthy 
hymns. 

** At even, ere the sun was set, 
The sick, O Lord, around Thee lay. 
Oh, in what divers pains they met ! 
Oh, in what joy they went away !” 

And often we had “ Fight the good fight with all 
thy might.” 

In Sunday School I am eternally grateful to old 
Mr. Remington, with his round white beard and his 
ferocity. He made us sing! And he loved the 
martial hymns : 

** Sound the battle-cry, 
See, the foe is nigh. 
Raise the standard high 
For the Lord.” 

The ghastly sentimentalism that came like a leprosy 
over religion had not yet got hold of our colliery 
162 

HYMNS IN A MAN’S LIFE 

village. I remember when I was in Class II in the 
Sunday School, when I was about seven, a woman 
teacher trying to harrow us about the Crucifixion. 
And she kept saying: ‘‘ And aren’t you sorry for 
Jesus? Aren’t you sorry?’ And most of ‘the chil- 
dren wept. I believe I shed a crocodile tear or two, 
but very vivid is my memory of saying to myself: 
“IT don’t really care a bit.’ And I could never go 
back on it. I never cared about the Crucifixion, 
one way or another. Yet the wonder of it penetrated 
very deep in me. 

Thirty-six years ago men, even Sunday School 
teachers, still believed in the fight for life and the 
fun of it. ‘“‘ Hold the fort, for I am coming.” It 
was far, far from any militarism or gun-fighting. 
But it was the battle-cry of a stout soul, and a fine 
thing too. 

** Stand up, stand up for Jesus, 
Ye soldiers of the Lord.” 

Here is the clue to the ordinary Englishman—in 
the Nonconformist hymns. 

MAKING PICTURES 

One has to eat one’s own words. I remember I 
used to assert, perhaps I even wrote it: Everything 
that can possibly be painted has been painted, 
every brush-stroke that can possibly be laid on 
canvas has been laid on. The visual arts are 
at a dead end. _Then suddenly, at the age 
of forty, I begin painting myself and am fasci- 
nated. 

Still, going through the Paris picture shops this 
year of grace, and seeing the Dufrys and Chiricos, etc., 
and the Japanese Ito with his wish-wash nudes with 
pearl-button eyes, the same weariness comes over 
one. They are all so would-be, they make such 
efforts. They at least have nothing to paint. In 
the midst of them a graceful Fricsz flower-piece, or a 
blotting-paper Laurencin, seems a masterpiece. At 
least here is a bit of natural expression in paint. 
Trivial enough, when compared to the big painters, 
but still, as far as they go, real. 

What about myself, then! What am I doing, 
bursting into paint? I am a writer, I ought to 
stick to ink. I have found my medium of expres- 
sion; why, at the age of forty, should I suddenly 
want to try another ? 

164 

MAKING PICTURES 

Things happen, and we have no choice. If Maria 
Huxley hadn’t come rolling up to our house near 
Florence with four rather large canvases, one of which 
she had busted, and presented them to me because 
they had been abandoned in her house, I might 
never have started in on a real picture in my life. 
But those nice stretched canvases were too tempting. 
We had been painting doors and window-frames in 
the house, so there was a little stock of oil, turps 
and colour in powder, such as one buys from an 
Italian drogheria. There were several brushes for 
house-painting. There was a canvas on which the 
unknown owner had made a start—mud-grey, with 
the beginnings of a red-haired man. It was a grimy 
and ugly beginning, and the young man who had 
made it had wisely gone no further. He certainly 
had had no inner compulsion: nothing in him, as 
far as paint was concerned, or if there was anything 
in him, it had stayed in, and only a bit of the mud- 
grey “‘ group” had come out. 

So for the sheer fun of covering a surface and 
obliterating that mud-grey, I sat on the floor with 
the canvas propped against a chair—and with my 
house-paint brushes and colours in little casseroles. 
I disappeared into that canvas. It is to me the 
most exciting moment—when you have a blank 
canvas and a big brush full of wet colour, and you 
plunge. It is just like diving into a pond—then you 

165 

MAKING PICTURES 

start frantically to swim. So far as I am concerned, 
it is like swimming in a baffling current and being 
rather frightened and very thrilled, gasping and 
striking out for all you’re worth. The knowing eye 
watches sharp as a needle; but the picture comes 
clean out of instinct, intuition and sheer physical 
action. Once the instinct and intuition gets into 
the brush-tip, the picture happens, if it is to be a picture 
at all. 

At least, so my first picture happened—the one | 
have called “‘ A Holy Family.” In a couple of hours 
there it all was, man, woman, child, blue shirt, red 
shawl, pale room—all in the rough, but, as far as 
I am concerned, a picture. The struggling comes 
later. But the picture itself comes in the first rush, 
or not at all. It is only when the picture has come 
into being that one can struggle and make it grow 
to completion. 

Ours is an excessively conscious age. We know so 
much, we feel so little. I have lived enough among 
painters and around studios to have had all the 
theories—and how contradictory they are—rammed 
down my throat. A man has to have a gizzard like 
an ostrich to digest all the brass-tacks and wire 
nails of modern art theories. Perhaps all the theories, 
the utterly indisgestible theories, like nails in an 
ostrich’s gizzard, do indeed help to grind small and 
make digestible all the emotional and esthetic 

166 

MAKING PICTURES 

pabulum that lies in an artist’s soul. But they can 
serve no other purpose. Not even corrective. The 
modern theories of art make real pictures impossible. 
You only get these expositions, critical ventures in 
paint, and fantastic negations. And the bit of 
fantasy that may lie in the negation—as in a Dufry 
or a Chirico—is just the bit that has escaped theory 
and perhaps saves the picture. Theorise, theorise 
all you like—but when you start to paint, shut your 
theoretic eyes and go for it with instinct and 
intuition. 

Myself, I have always loved pictures, the pictorial 
art. I never went to an art school, I have had only 
one real lesson in painting in all my life. But of 
course I was thoroughly drilled in “ drawing,” the 
solid-geometry sort, and the plaster-cast sort, and 
the pin-wire sort. I think the solid-geometry sort, 
with all the elementary laws of perspective, was 
valuable. But the pin-wire sort and the plaster-cast 
light-and-shade sort was harmful. Plaster-casts and 
pin-wire outlines were always so repulsive to me, 
I quite early decided I “‘ couldn’t draw.” I couldn’t 
draw, so I could never do anything on my own. 
When I did paint jugs of flowers or bread and 
potatoes, or cottages in a lane, copying from Nature, 
the result wasn’t very thrilling. Nature was more 
or less of a plaster-cast to me—those plaster-cast 
heads of Minerva or figures of Dying Gladiators 

167 

MAKING PICTURES 

which so unnerved me as a youth. The “ object,” 
be it what it might, was always slightly repulsive to 
me once I sat down in front of it, to paint it. So, 
of course, I decided I couldn’t really paint. Perhaps 
I can’t. But I verily believe I can make pictures, 
which is to me all that matters in this respect. The 
art of painting consists in making pictures—and so 
many artists accomplish canvases without coming 
within miles of painting a picture. 

I learnt to paint from copying other pictures— 
usually reproductions, sometimes even photographs. 
When I was a boy, how I concentrated over it! 
Copying some perfectly worthless scene reproduction 
in some magazine. I worked with almost dry water- 
colour, stroke by stroke, covering half a square-inch 
at a time, each square-inch perfect and completed, 
proceeding in a kind of mosaic advance, with no 
idea at all of laying on a broad wash. Hours and 
hours of intense concentration, inch by inch progress, 
in a method entirely wrong—and yet those copies 
of mine managed, when they were finished, to have 
a certain something that delighted me: a certain 
glow of life, which was beauty to me. A picture 
lives with the life you put into it. If you put no 
life into it—no thrill, no concentration of delight or 
exaltation of visual discovery—then the picture is 
dead, like so many canvases, no matter how much 
thorough and scientific work is put into it. Even 

168 

MAKING PICTURES 

if you only copy a purely banal reproduction of an 
old bridge, some sort of keen, delighted awareness 
of the old bridge or of its atmosphere, or the image 
it has kindled inside you, can go over on to the paper 
and give a certain touch of life to a banal conception. 

It needs a certain purity of spirit to be an artist, 
of any sort. The motto which should be written over 
every School of Art is: ‘Blessed are the pure in 
spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.” But by 
** pure in spirit’? we mean pure in spirit. An artist 
may be a profligate and, from the social point of 
view, a scoundrel. But if he can paint a nude 
woman, or a couple of apples, so that they are a living 
image, then he was pure in spirit, and, for the time 
being, his was the kingdom of heaven. This 
is the beginning of all art, visual or literary or 
musical: be pure in spirit. It isn’t the same 
as goodness. It is much more difficult and nearer 
the divine. The divine isn’t only good, it is all 
things. 

One may see the divine in natural objects ; I saw 
it to-day, in the frail, lovely little camellia flowers 
on long stems, here on the bushy and splendid 
flower-stalls of the Ramblas in Barcelona. They 
were different from the usual fat camellias, more like 
gardenias, poised delicately, and I saw them like a 
vision. So now, I could paint them. But if I had 
bought a handful, and started in to paint them “ from 

169 M 

_ MAKING PICTURES 

nature,” then I should have lost them. By staring 
at them I should have lost them. I have learnt by 
experience. It is personal experience only. Some 
men can only get at a vision by staring themselves 
blind, as it’ were: like~ Cézanne; but “stamme 
kills my vision. That’s why I could never “ draw ” 
at school. One was supposed to draw what one 
stared at. 

The only thing one can look into, stare into, and 
see only vision, is the vision itself: the visionary 
image. That is why I am glad I never had any 
training but the self-imposed training of copying 
other men’s pictures. As I grew more ambitious, I 
copied Leader’s landscapes, and Frank Brangwyn’s 
cartoon-like pictures, then Peter de Wint and Girtin 
water-colours. I can never be sufficiently grateful 
for the series of English water-colour painters, pub- 
lished by the Studio in eight parts, when I was a 
youth. I had only six of the eight parts, but they 
were invaluable to me. I copied them with the 
greatest joy, and found some of them extremely 
difficult. Surely I put as much labour into copying 
from those water-colour reproductions as most modern 
art students put into all their years of study. And 
I had enormous profit from it. I not only acquired 
a considerable technical skill in handling water- 
colour—let any man try copying the English water- 
colour artists, from Paul Sandby and Peter de Wint 

170 

MAKING PICTURES 

and Girtin, up to Frank Brangwyn and the impres- 
sionists like Brabazon, and he will see how much 
skill he requires—but also I developed my visionary 
awareness. And I believe one can only develop 
one’s visionary awareness by close contact with the 
vision itself: that is, by knowing pictures, real 
vision pictures, and by dwelling on them, and really 
dwelling in them. It is a great delight, to dwell in 
a picture. But it needs a purity of spirit, a sloughing 
of vulgar sensation and vulgar interest, and above 
all, vulgar contact, that few people know how to 
perform. Oh, if art schools only taught that! If, 
instead of saying: This drawing is wrong, incorrect, 
badly drawn, etc., they would say: Isn’t this in 
bad taste? isn’t it insensitive? isn’t that an in- 
sentient curve with none of the delicate awareness 
of life in it ?—But art is treated all wrong. It is 
treated as if it were a science, which it is not. Art 
is a form of religion, minus the Ten Commandment 
business, which is sociological. Art is a form of 
supremely delicate awareness and atonement—mean- 
ing at-oneness, the state of being at one with the 
object. But is the great atonement in delight ?— 
for I can never look on art save as a form of 
delight. 

All my life I have from time to time gone back 
to paint, because it gave me a form of delight that 
words can never give. Perhaps the joy in words 

171 

MAKING PICTURES 

goes deeper and is for that reason more unconscious. 
The conscious delight is certainly stronger in paint. 
I have gone back to paint for real pleasure—and 
by paint I mean copying, copying either in oils or 
waters. I think the greatest pleasure I ever got 
came from copying Fra Angelico’s “ Flight into 
Egypt’ and Lorenzetti’s big picture of the Thebaid, 
in each case working from photographs and putting 
in my own colour ; or perhaps even more a Carpaccio 
picture in Venice. Then I really learned what lie, 
what powerful life has been put into every curve, 
every motion of a great picture. Purity of spirit, 
sensitive awareness, intense eagerness to portray an 
inward vision, how it all comes. The English water- 
colours are frail in comparison—and the French and 
the Flemings are shallow. The great Rembrandt I 
never tried to copy, though I loved him intensely, 
even more than I do now; and Rubens I never 
tried, though I always liked him so much, only he 
seemed so spread out. But I have copied Peter de 
Hooch, and Vandyck, and others that I forget. Yet 
none of them gave me the deep thrill of the Italians, 
Carpaccio, or the lovely “‘ Death of Procris”’ in the 
National Gallery, or that ‘‘ Wedding ”’ with the scarlet 
legs, in the Uffizi, or a Giotto from Padua. I must 
have made many copies in my day, and got endless 
joy out of them. 

Then suddenly, by having a blank canvas, I dis- 

172 

MAKING PICTURES 

’ 
covered I could make a picture myself. That is the 
point, to make a picture on a blank canvas. And 
I was forty before I had the real courage to try. 
Then it became an orgy, making pictures. 

I have learnt now not to work from objects, not 
to have models, not to have a technique. Some- 
times, for a water-colour, I have worked direct from 
a model. But it always spoils the picture. I can 
only use a model when the picture is already made ; 
then I can look at the model to get some detail 
which the vision failed me with, or to modify some- 
thing which I feel is unsatisfactory and I don’t know 
why. Then a model may give a suggestion. But 
at the beginning, a model only spoils the picture. 
The picture must all come out of the artist’s inside, 
awareness of forms and figures. We can call it 
memory, but it is more than memory. It is the 
image as it lives in the consciousness, alive like a 
vision, but unknown. I believe many people have, in 
their consciousness, living images that would give 
them the greatest joy to bring out. But they don’t 
know how to go about it. And teaching only hinders 
them. 

To me, a picture has delight in it, or it isn’t a 
picture. The saddest pictures of Piero della Francesca 
or Sodoma or Goya, have still that indescribable 
delight that goes with the real picture. Modern 
critics talk a lot about ugliness, but I never saw a 

173 

MAKING PICTURES 

real picture that. seemed to me ugly. The theme 
may be ugly, there may be a terrifying, distressing, 
almost repulsive quality, as in El Greco. Yet it is 
all, in some strange way, swept up in the delight of 
a picture. No artist, even the gloomiest, ever painted 
a picture without the curious delight in image- 
making. 

174 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

WHETHER wall pictures are or are not an essential 
part of interior decoration in the home seems to be 
considered debatable. Yet since there is scarcely 
one house in a thousand which doesn’t have them, 
we may easily conclude that they are, in spite of 
the snobbism which pretends to prefer blank walls. 
The human race loves pictures. Barbarians or civil- 
ised, we are all alike, we straightway go to look at 
a picture if there is a picture to look at. And there 
are very few of us who wouldn’t love to have a 
perfectly fascinating work hanging in our room, that 
we could go on looking at, if we could afford it. 
Instead, unfortunately, as a rule we have only some 
mediocre thing left over from the past, that hangs 
on the wall just because we’ve got it, and it must 
go somewhere. If only people would be firm about 
it, and rigorously burn all insignificant pictures, 
frames as well, how much more freely we should 
breathe indoors. If only people would go round 
their walls every ten years and say, Now, what about 
that oil-painting, what about that reproduction, 
what about that photograph? What do they mean ? 
What do we get from them? Have they any point ? 
Are they worth keeping ?—the answer would almost 

L795 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

invariably be No. And then what? Shall we say, 
Oh, let them stay! ‘They’ve been there ten years, 
we might as well leave them !—But that is sheer 
inertia and death to any freshness in the home. A 
woman might as well say: IT’ve worn this hat for 
a year, so I may as well go on wearing it for a few 
more years.—A house, a home, is only a greater 
garment, and just as we feel we must renew our 
clothes and have fresh ones, so we should renew our 
homes and make them in keeping. Spring cleaning 
isn’t enough. Why do fashions in clothes change ? 
Because, really, we ourselves change, in the slow 
metamorphosis of time. If we imagine ourselves now 
in the clothes we wore six years ago, we shall see 
that it is impossible. We are, in some way, different 
persons now, and our clothes express our different 
personality. 

And so should the home. It should change with 
us, as we change. Not so quickly as our clothes 
change, because it is not so close in contact. More 
slowly, but just as inevitably, the home should change 
around us. And the change should be more rapid 
in the more decorative scheme of the room : pictures, 
curtains, cushions ; and slower in the solid furniture. 
Some furniture may satisfy us for a lifetime. Some 
may be quite unsuitable after ten years. But certain 
it is that the cushions and curtains and pictures will 
begin to be stale after a couple of years. And stale- 

ety (2) 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

ness in the home is stifling and oppressive to the 
spirit. It is a woman’s business to see to it. In 
England especially we live so much indoors that our 
interiors must live, must change, must have their 
seasons of fading and renewing, must come alive to 
fit the new moods, the new sensations, the new ~ 
selves that come to pass in us with the changing 
years. Dead and dull permanency in the home, 
dreary sameness, is a form of inertia, and very 
harmful to the modern nature, which is in a state 
of flux, sensitive to its surroundings far more than 
we really know. 

And, do as we may, the pictures in a room are in 
some way the key to the atmosphere of a room. 
Put up grey photogravures, and a certain greyness 
will dominate in the air, no matter if your cushions 
be daffodils. Put up Baxter prints, and for a time 
you will have charm, after that, a certain stuffiness 
will ensue. Pictures are strange things. Most of 
them die as sure as flowers die, and, once dead, 
they hang on the wall as stale as brown withered 
bouquets. The reason lies in ourselves. When we 
buy a picture because we like it, then the picture 
responds fresh to some living feeling in us. But 
feelings change: quicker or slower. If our feeling 
for the picture was superficial, it wears away quickly 
—and quickly the picture is nothing but a dead rag 
hanging on the wall. On the other hand, if we 

sf il 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

can see a little deeper, we shall buy a picture that 
will at least last us a year or two, and give a certain 
fresh joy all the time, like a living flower. We may 
even find something that will last us a lifetime. If 
we found a masterpiece, it would last many lifetimes. 
But there are not many masterpieces of any sort in 
this world. 

The fact remains there are pictures of every sort, 
and people of every sort to be pleased by them; 
and there is, perhaps, a limit to the length of time 
that even a masterpiece will please mankind. Raphael 
now occasionally bores us, after several centuries, 
and Michael Angelo begins to. 

But we needn’t bother about Raphael or Michael 
Angelo, who keep up their fresh interest for centuries. 
Our concern is rather with pictures that may be dead 
rags in six months, all the fresh feeling for them gone. 
If we think of Landseer, or Alma Tadema, we see 
how even traditional connoisseurs like Dukes of 
Devonshire paid large sums for momentary master- 
pieces that now hang on the ducal walls as dead 
and ridiculous rags. Only a very uneducated person 
nowadays would want to put those two Landseer 
dogs, ‘ Dignity and Impudence,” on the drawing- 
room wall. Yet they pleased immensely in their day. 
And the interest was sustained, perhaps, for twenty 
years. But after twenty years it has become a humili- 
ation to keep them hanging on the walls of Chatsworth 

178 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

or wherever they hang. They should be burnt, of 
course. They only make an intolerable stuffiness 
wherever they are, and remind us of the shallowness 
of our taste. 

And if this is true of ‘‘ Dignity and Impudence ”’ 
or Millais’ ‘‘ Bubbles,’’ which have a great deal of 
technical skill in them, how much more true is it 
of cheap photogravures, which have none. Famili- 
arity wears a picture out. Since Whistler’s portrait 
of his mother was used for advertisement, it has lost 
most of its appeal, and become for most people a 
worn-out picture, a dead rag. And once a picture 
has been really popular, and then died into staleness, 
it never revives again. It is dead for ever. The 
only thing is to burn it. 

Which applies very forcibly to photogravures and 
other such machine pictures. They may have fasci- 
nated the young bride twenty years ago. They may 
even have gone on fascinating her for six months or 
two years. But at the end of that time they are 
almost certainly dead, and the bride’s pleasure in 
them can only be a reminiscent sentimental pleasure, 
or that rather vulgar satisfaction in them as pieces 
of property. It is fatal to look on pictures as pieces 
of property. Pictures are like flowers, that fade 
away sooner or later, and die, and must be thrown 
in the dustbin and burnt. It is true of all pictures. 
Even the beloved Giorgione will one day die to 

179 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

human interest—but he is still very lovely, after 
almost five centuries, still a fresh flower. But when 
at last he is dead, as so many pictures are that hang 
on honoured walls, let us hope he will be burnt. 
Let us hope he won’t still be regarded as a piece of 
valuable property, worth huge sums, like lots of 
dead-as-doornails canvases to-day. 

If only we could get rid of the idea of “* property ” 
in the arts! The arts exist to give us pleasure or 
joy. A yellow cushion gives us pleasure. The 
moment it ceases to do so, take it away, have done 
with it, give us another.—Which we do, and so 
cushions remain fresh and interesting, and the manu- 
facturers manufacture continually new, fresh, fasci- 
nating fabrics. ‘The natural demand causes a healthy 
supply. 

In pictures it is just the opposite. A picture, 
instead of being regarded, like a flower or a cushion, 
as something that must be fresh and fragrant with 
attraction, is looked on as solid property. We may 
spend ten shillings on a bunch of roses, and throw 
away the dead stalks without thinking we have 
thrown away ten shillings) We may spend two 
guineas on the cover of a lovely cushion, and strip 
it off and discard it the moment it is stale, without 
for a moment lamenting the two guineas. We know 
where we are. We paid for esthetic pleasure, and 
we have had it. Lucky for us that money can buy 

180 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

roses or lovely embroidery.—Yet if we pay two pounds 
for some picture, and are tired of it after a year, 
we can no more burn that picture than we can set 
the house on fire. It is uneducated folly on our 
part. We ought to burn the picture, so that we can 
have real fresh pleasure in a different one, as in 
fresh flowers and fresh cushions. In every school it 
is taught: Never leave stale flowers in a vase. 
Throw them away !—So it should be taught : Never 
leave stale pictures on the wall. Burn them! The 
value of a picture lies in the esthetic emotion it 
brings, exactly as if it were a flower. The esthetic 
emotion dead, the picture is a piece of ugly 
litter. 

Which belies the tedious dictum that a picture 
should be part of the architectual whole, built into 
the room, as it were. This is fallacy. A picture is 
decoration, not architecture. The room exists to 
shelter us and house us, the picture exists only to 
please us, to give us certain emotions. Of course, 
there can be harmony or disharmony between the 
pictures and the whole ensemble of a room. But in 
any room in the world you could carry out dozens 
of different schemes of decoration, at different times, 
and to harmonise with each scheme of decoration 
there are hundreds of different pictures. The built- 
in theory is all wrong. A picture in a room is the 
gardenia in my buttonhole. If the tailor “ built” 

181 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

a permanent and irremovable gardenia in my morning 
coat buttonhole, I should be done in. 

Then there is the young school which thinks 
pictures should be kept in stacks like books in a 
library, and looked at for half an hour or so at a 
time, as we turn over the leaves of a book of repro- 
ductions. But this again entirely disregards the real 
psychology of pictures. It is true the great trashy 
mass of pictures are exhausted in half an hour. 
But then why keep them in a stack, why keep them 
at all? On the other hand, if I had a Renoir nude, 
or a good Fricsz flower-study, or even a Brabazon 
water-colour, I should want to keep it at least a 
year or two, and hang it up in a chosen place, to 
live with it and get all the fragrance out of it. And 
if I had the Titian ‘‘ Adam and Eve,”’ from the Prado, 
I should want to have it hanging in my room all 
my life, to look at: because I know it would give 
me a subtle rejoicing all my life, and would make 
my life delightful. And if I had some Picassos I 
should want to keep them about six months, and 
some Braques I should like to have for about a 
year: then, probably, I should be through with 
them. But I would not want a Romney even for a 
day. 

And so it varies, with the individual and with the 
picture, and so it should be allowed to vary. But at 
present it is not allowed to vary. We all have to 

182 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

stare at the dead rags our fathers and mothers hung 
on the walls, just because they are property. 

But let us change it. Let us refuse to have our 
vision filled with dust and nullity of dead pictures 
in the home. Let there be a grand conflagration of 
dead “art,” immolation of canvas and paper, oil- 
colours, water-colours, photographs and all, a grand 
clearance. 

Then what? Then ask Harrods about it. Don’t 
for heaven’s sake go and spend twenty guineas on 
another picture that will have to hang on the wall 
till the end of time just because it cost twenty guineas. 
Go to Harrods and ask them what about their 
Circulating Picture scheme. They have a circulating 
library—or other people have—huge circulating 
libraries. People hire books till they have assimilated 
their content. Why not the same with pictures ? 

Why should not Harrods have a great “ library ” 
of pictures? Why not have a great “ pictuary,”’ 
where we can go and choose a picture? There 
would be men in charge who knew about pictures, 
just as librarians know about books. We subscribe, 
we pay a certain deposit, and our pictures are sent 
home to us, to keep for one year, for two, for ten, 
as we wish: at any rate, till we have got all the 
joy out of them, and want a change. 

In the pictuary you can have everything except 
machine-made rubbish that is not worth having. 

183 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

You can have big supplies of modern art, fresh from 
the artists, etchings, engravings, drawings, paintings ; 
you can have the lovely new colour reproductions 
that most of us can’t afford to buy ; you can have 
frames to suit. And here you can choose, choose 
what will give you real joy and will suit your home 
for the time being. 

There are few, very few great artists in any age. 
But there are hundreds and hundreds of men and 
women with genuine artistic talent and beautiful 
artistic feeling, who produce quite lovely works that 
are never seen. They are lovely works—not im- 
mortal, not masterpieces, not “‘ great”’ ; yet they are 
lovely, and will keep their loveliness a certain number 
of years; after which they will die, and the time 
will have come to destroy them. 

Now it is a tragedy that all these pictures with 
their temporary loveliness should be condemned to 
a premature dust-heap. For that is what they are. 
Contemporary art belongs to contemporary society. 
Society at large needs the pictures of its contemporaries, 
just as it needs the books. Modern people read 
modern books. But they hang up pictures that 
belong to no age whatever, and have no life, and 
have no meaning, but are mere blotches of deadness 
on the walls. 

The living moment is everything. And in pictures 
we never experience it. It is useless asking the 

184. 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

public to “see ’’ Matisse or Picasso or Braque. They 
will never see more than an odd horrific canvas, 
anyhow. But does the modern public read James 
Joyce or Marcel Proust? It does not. It reads the 
great host of more congenial and more intelligible 
contemporary writers. And so the modern public 
is more or less up-to-date and on the spot about the 
general run of modern books. It is conscious of 
the literature of its day, moderately awake and 
intelligent in that respect. 

But of the pictures and drawings of its day it is 
blankly unaware. The general public feels itself a 
hopeless ignoramus when confronted with modern 
works of art. It has no clue to the whole unnatural 
business of modern art, and is just hostile. Even 
those who are tentatively attracted are uneasy, and 
they dare never buy. Prices are comparatively high, 
and you may so easily be let in for a dud. So the 
whole thing is a deadlock. 

Now the only way to keep the public in touch 
with art is to let it get hold of works of art. It was 
just the same with books. In the old five-guinea and 
two-guinea days there was no public for literature, 
except the squire class. The great reading public 
came into being with the lending library. And the 
great picture-loving public would come into being 
with the lending pictuary. The public wants pictures 
hard enough. But it simply can’t get them. 

185 N 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

And this will continue so long as a picture is 
regarded as a piece of property, and not as a source 
of esthetic emotion, of sheer pleasure, as a flower is. 
The great public was utterly deprived of books till 
books ceased to be looked on as lumps of real estate, 
and came to be regarded as something belonging to 
the mind and consciousness, a spiritual instead of 
a gross material property. To-day, if I say: 
“* Doughty’s ‘ Arabia Deserta’ is a favourite book of 
mine,” then the man I say it to won’t reply: “ Yes, 
I own a copy,” he will say: “ Yes, I have read it.” 
In the eighteenth century he would probably have 
replied: “I have a fine example in folio in my 
library,’ and the sense of ‘‘ property ’’ would have 
overwhelmed any sense of literary delight. 

The cheapening of books freed them from the 
gross property valuation and released their true 
spiritual value. Something of the same must happen 
for pictures. The public wants and needs badly all 
the real esthetic stimulus it can get. And it knows 
it. When books were made available, the vast 
reading public sprang into being almost at once. 
And a vast picture-loving public would arise, once 
the public could get at the pictures, personally. 

There are thousands of quite lovely pictures, not 
masterpieces, of course, but with real beauty, which 
belong to to-day, and which remain stacked dustily 
and hopelessly in corners of artists’ studios, going 

186 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

stale. It is a great shame. The public wants them, 
but it never sees them; and if it does sees an 
occasional few, it daren’t buy, especially as “‘ art ”’ 
is high-priced, for it feels incompetent to judge. At 
the same time, the unhappy, work-glutted artists of 
to-day want above all things to let the public have 
their works. And these works are, we insist, an 
essential part of the education and emotional ex- 
perience of the modern mind. It is necessary that 
adults should know them, as they know modern books. 
It is necessary that children should be familiar with 
them, in the constant stream of creation. Our 
esthetic education is become immensely important, 
since it is so immensely neglected. 

And there we are, the pictures going to dust, for 
they don’t keep their freshness, any more than books 
or flowers or silks, beyond a certain time ; yet their 
freshness now is the breath of life to us, since it means 
hours and days of delight. And the public is pining 
for the pictures, but daren’t buy, because of the 
money-property complex. And the artist is pining 
to let the public have them, but daren’t make him- 
self cheap. And so the thing is an impasse, simple 
state of frustration. 

Now for Messrs. Harrods and their lending library 
—or pictuary—of modern works of art. Or, better 
still, an Artists’ Co-operative Society, to supply 
pictures on loan or purchase, to the great public. 

187 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

To-day nobody buys pictures, except as a speculation. 
If a man pays a hundred pounds for a canvas, he 
does it in the secret belief that that canvas will be 
worth a thousand pounds in a few years’ time. 

The whole attitude is disgusting. The reading 
public only asks of a book that it shall be enter- 
taining, it doesn’t give a hang as to whether the 
book will be considered a great book five years hence. 
The great public wants to be entertained and, some- 
times, delighted, and literature exists to supply the 
demand. Now there is a great deal of delight in 
even a very minor picture, produced by an artist 
who has delicate artistic feeling and some skill, even 
if he be not wildly original. There are hundreds 
and hundreds of perfectly obscure pictures stuck away 
in corners of studios, which would, I know, give me 
a real delight if they were hung in my room for a 
year. After a while they would go stale; but not 
nearly as quickly as a bunch of lilac, which yet I 
love and set with pleasure on the table. As a tree 
puts beauty into a flower that will fade, so all the 
hosts of minor artists, one way and another, put 
beauty and delight into their pictures, that likewise 
will not last beyond their rhythmic season. But it 
is a wicked shame and waste that nearly all these 
pictures, with their modicum of beauty and their 
power of giving delight, should just be taken from 
the easel to be laid on the dust-heap, while a beauty- 

188 

PICTURES ON THE WALLS 

starved public doesn’t even get a look at them. It 
is all very well saying the public should buy. A 
picture is cheap at twenty pounds, and very cheap 
at ten pounds, and “given away” at five pounds. 
And the public is not only shy, it has a complex 
about buying any picture that hasn’t at least the 
chance of turning out a masterpiece of ultimate 
extraordinary value. 

It is all nonsensical and futile. The only way 
now is for the hosts of small artists to club together 
and form an Artists’ Co-operative Society, with 
proper business intelligence and business energy, to 
supply the public with pictures on the public’s own 
terms. Or for the shrewd business men of the world 
to take the matter up and make a profitable concern 
of it, as publishers have made a profitable concern 
of publishing books. 

189 

ON BEING A MAN 

Man is a thought-adventurer. 

Which isn’t the same as saying that man has 
intellect. In intellect there is skill, and tricks. To 
the intellect the terms are given, as the chessmen 
and rules of the game are given in chess. Real 
thought is an experience. It begins as a change in 
the blood, a slow convulsion and revolution in the 
body itself. It ends as a new piece of awareness, a 
new reality in mental consciousness. 

On this account, thought is an adventure, and not 
a practice. In order to think, man must risk himself. 
He must risk himself doubly. First, he must go 
forth and meet life in the body. ‘Then he must face 
the result in his mind. 

It is bad enough going out like a little David to 
meet the giant of life bodily. Take the war as an 
example of that. It is still harder, and _ bitterer, 
after a great encounter with life, to sit down and 
face out the result. Take the war again. Many 
men went out and faced the fight. Who dared to 
face his own self afterwards ? 

The risk is double, because man is double. Each 
of us has two selves. First is this body which is 
vulnerable and never quite within our control. The 

190 

ON BEING A MAN 

body with its irrational sympathies and desires and 
passions, its peculiar direct communication, defying 
the mind. And second is the conscious ego, the self 
I KNOW I am. 

The self that lives in my body I can never finally 
know. It has such strange attractions, and revulsions, 
and it lets me in for so much irrational suffering, 
real torment, and occasional frightening delight. 
The me that is in my body is a strange animal to me, 
and often a very trying one. My body is like a 
jungle in which dwells an unseen me, like a black 
panther in the night, whose two eyes glare green 
through my dreams, and, if a shadow falls, through 
my waking day. 

Then there is this other me, that is fair-faced and 
reasonable and sensible and complex and full of 
good intentions. The known me, which can be 
seen and appreciated. I say of myself: “ Yes, I 
know I am impatient and rather intolerant in ideas. 
But in the ordinary way of life I am quite easy and 
really rather kindly. My kindliness makes me some- 
times a bit false. But then I don’t believe in 
mechanical honesty. There is an honesty of the 
feelings, of the sensibilities, as well as of the mind. 
If a man is lying to me, and I know it, it is a matter 
of choice whether I tell him so or not. If it would 
only damage his real feelings, and my own, then it 
would be emotionally dishonest to call him a liar to 

1g! 

ON BEING A MAN 

his face. I would rather be a bit mentally dishonest, 
and pretend to swallow the lie.” 

This is the known me, having a talk with itself. 
It sees a reason for everything it does and feels. It 
has a certain unchanging belief in its own good 
intentions. It tries to steer a sensible and harmless 
course among all the other people and “ person- 
alities ’’ around itself. 

To this known me, everything exists as a term of 
knowledge. A man is what I know he is. England 
is what I know it to be. I am what I know I am. 
And Bishop Berkeley is absolutely right: things 
only exist in our own consciousness. To the known 
me, nothing exists beyond what I know. ‘True, I 
am always adding to the things I know. But this 
is because, In my opinion, knowledge begets know- 
ledge. Not because anything has entered from the 
outside. There 7s no outside. There is only more 
knowledge to be added. 

If I sit in the train and a man enters my compart- 
ment, he is already, in a great measure, known to 
me. He is, in the first place, A Man, and I know 
what that is. Then, he is old. And Old, I 
know what that means. Then he is English and 
middle class, and so on, and so on. And I know 
it all. 

There remains a tiny bit that is not known to me. 
He is a stranger. As a personality I don’t yet know 

192 

ON BEING A MAN 

him. I glance at him quickly. It is a very small 
adventure, still an adventure in knowledge, a com- 
bination of certain qualities grouped in a certain 
way. At a glance I know as much about him as I 
want to know. It is finished, the adventure is 
over. 

This is the adventure of knowing. People go to 
Spain, and “know” Spain. People study ento- 
mology, and “‘ know”? insects. People meet Lenin 
and “know” Lenin. Lots of people ‘“‘ know” 
me. 

And this is how we live. We proceed from what 
we know already to what we know next. If we 
don’t know the Shah of Persia, we think we have 
only to call at the palace in Teheran to accomplish 
the feat. If we don’t know much about the moon, 
we have only to get the latest book on that orb, and 
we shall be au courant. 

We know we know all about it, really. Connu / 
Connu! Remains only the fascinating little game of 
understanding, putting two and two together and being 
real little gods in the machine. 

All this is the adventure of knowing and under- 
standing. But it isn’t the thought-adventure. 

The thought-adventure starts in the blood, not in 
the mind. If an Arab or a negro or even a Jew 
sits down next to me in the train, I cannot proceed 
so glibly with my knowing. It is not enough for 

193 

ON BEING A MAN 

me to glance at a black face and say: He is a negro. 
As he sits next to me, there is a faint uneasy move- 
ment in my blood. A strange vibration comes from 
him, which causes a slight disturbance in my own 
vibration. There is a slight odour in my nostrils. 
And above all, even if I shut my eyes, there is a 
strange presence in contact with me. 

I now can no longer proceed from what I am and 
what I know I am, to what I know him to be. I 
am not a nigger and so I can’t quite know a nigger, 
and I can never fully “‘ understand’ him. 

What then? It’s an impasse. 

Then, I have three courses open. I can just plank 
down the word Nigger, and having labelled him, 
finish with him! Or I can try to track him 
down in terms of my own knowledge. That 
is, understand him as I understand any other 
individual. 

Or I can do a third thing. I can admit that my 
blood is disturbed, that something comes from him 
and interferes with my normal vibration. Admitting 
so much, I can either put up a resistance and insulate 
myself. Or I can allow the disturbance to continue, 
because, after all, there is some peculiar alien sym- 
pathy between us. 

In almost every case, of course, the nigger among 
white men will insulate himself, and not let his 
black aura reach the white neighbours. If I find 

194 

ON BEING A MAN 

myself in a train full of niggers, I shall no doubt 
do the same. 

But apart from this, I shall admit a certain strange 
and incalculable reaction between me and _ him. 
This reaction causes a slight but unmistakable change 
in the vibration of my blood and nerves. This slight 
change in my blood develops in dreams and uncon- 
sciousness till, if I allow it, it struggles forward into 
light as a new bit of realisation, a new term of 
consciousness. 

Take the much commoner case of men and women. 
A man, proceeding from his known self, likes a 
woman because she is in sympathy with what he 
knows. He feels that he and she know one another. 
They marry. And then the fun begins. In so far 
as they know one another they can proceed from 
their known selves, they are as right as ninepence. 
Loving couple, etc. But the moment there is real 
blood contact, as likely as not a strange discord enters 
in. She is not what he thought her. He is not 
what she thought him. It is the other, primary 
or bodily self—appearing, very often like a black 
demon, out of the fair creature who was erst the 
beloved. 

The man who before marriage seemed everything 
that is delightful, after marriage begins to come out 
in his true colours, a son of the old and rather hateful 
Adam. And she, who was an angel of loveliness 

199 

ON BEING A MAN 

and desirability, gradually emerges as an almost 
fiendlike daughter of the snake-frequenting Eve. 

What has. happened ? 

It is the invariable crucifixion. ‘The Cross, as we 
know, stands for the body, for the dark self which 
lives in the body. And on the Cross of this bodily 
self is crucified the self which I know I am, my 
so-called real self. The Cross, as an ancient symbol, 
has an inevitable phallic reference. But it is far 
deeper than sex. It is the self which darkly inhabits 
our blood and bone, and for which the ithyphallus 
is but a symbol. This self which lives darkly in my 
blood and bone is my alter ego, my other self, the 
homunculus, the second one of the Kabiri, the second 
of the Twins, the Gemini. And the sacred black 
stone at Mecca stands for this: the dark self that 
dwells in the blood of a man and of a woman. 
Phallic if you like. But much more than phallic. 
And on this cross of division in the whole self is 
crucified the Christ. We are all crucified on it. 

Marriage is the great puzzle of our day. It is our 
sphinx-riddle. Solve it, or to be torn to bits, is 
the decree. 

We marry from the known self, taking the woman 
as an extension of our knowledge—an extension of 
our known self. And then, almost invariably, comes 
the jolt and the crucifixion. The woman of the 
known self is fair and lovely. But the woman of the 

196 

ON BEING A MAN 

dark blood looks, to man, most malignant and 
horrific. In the same way, the fair daytime man 
of courtship days leaves nothing to be desired. But 
the husband, horrified by the serpent-advised Eve 
of the blood, obtuse and arrogant in his Adam 
obstinacy, is an enemy pure and simple. 

Solve the puzzle. The quickest way is for the wife 
to smother the serpent-advised Eve which is in her, 
and for the man to talk himself out of his old arrogant 
Adam. Then they make a fair and above-board 
combination, called a successful marriage. 

But Nemesis is on our track. The husband forfeits 
his arrogance, the wife has her children and her way 
to herself. But lo, the son of one woman is husband 
to the woman of the next generation! And oh, 
women, beware the mother’s boy! Or else the wife 
forfeits the old serpent-advised Eve from her nature 
and becomes the instrument of the man. And then, 
oh, young husband of the next generation, prepare 
for the daughter’s revenge. 

What’s to be done? 

The thought-adventure! We’ve got to take our- 
selves as we are, not as we know ourselves to be. 
I am the son of the old red-earth Adam, with a 
black touchstone at the centre of me. And all the 
fair words in the world won’t alter it. Woman is 
the strange serpent-communing Eve, inalterable. We 
are a strange pair, who meet, but never mingle. I 

197 

ON BEING A MAN 

came, in the bath of birth, out of a mother. But 
I arose the old Adam, with the black old stone at 
the core of me. She had a father who begot her, 
but the column of her is pure enigmatic Eve. 

In spite of all the things I know about her, in 
spite of my knowing her so well, the serpent knows 
her better still. And in spite of my fair words, and 
my goodly pretences, she runs up against the black 
stone of Adam which is in the middle of me. 

Know thyself means knowing at last that you can’t 
know yourself. I can’t know the Adam of red-earth 
which is me. It will always do things to me, beyond 
my knowledge. Neither can I know the serpent- 
listening Eve which is the woman, beneath all her 
modern glibness. I have to take her at that. And 
we have to meet as I meet a jaguar between the 
trees in the mountains, and advance, and touch, and 
risk it. When man and woman actually meet, there 
is always terrible risk to both of them. Risk for her, 
lest her womanhood be damaged by the hard dark 
stone which is unchangeable in his soul. Risk for 
him, lest the serpent drag him down, coiled round 
his neck, and kissing him with poison. 

There is always risk, for him and for her. Take 
the risk, make the adventure. Suffer and enjoy the 
change in the blood. And, if you are a man, slowly, 
slowly make the great experience of realising. The 
final adventure and experience of realisation, if you 

198 

ON BEING A MAN 

are man. Fully conscious realisation. If you are a 
woman, the strange, slumbrous serpentine realisation, 
which knows without thinking. 

But with man, it is a thought-adventure. He risks 
his body and blood. He withdraws and touches the 
black stone of his inner conscience. And in a new 
adventure he dares take thought. He dares take 
thought for what he has done and what has happened 
to him. And daring to take thought, he ventures 
on, and realises at last. 

To be aman! To risk your body and your blood 
first, and then to risk your mind. All the time, to 
risk your known self, and become once more a self 
you could never have known or expected. 

To be a man, instead of being a mere personality. 
To-day men don’t risk their blood and bone. They 
go forth, panoplied in their own idea of themselves. 
Whatever they do, they perform it all in the full 
armour of their own idea of themselves. Their 
unknown bodily self is never for one moment un- 
sheathed. All the time, the only protagonist is the 
known ego, the self-conscious ego. And the dark self 
in the mysterious labyrinth of the body is cased in 
a tight armour of cowardly repression. 

Men marry and commit all their adulteries from 
the head. All that happens to them, all their re- 
actions, all their experiences, happen only in the 
head. To the unknown man in them nothing 

199 

® Geass 
= 3 

ON BEING A MAN 

happens. He remains shut up in armour, lest he 
might be hurt and give pain. And inside the armour 
he goes quite deranged. 

All the suffering to-day is psychic: it happens in 
the mind. The red Adam only suffers the slow 
torture of compression and derangement. A man’s 
wife is a mental thing, a known thing to him. The 
old Adam in him never sees her. She is just a thing 
of his own conscious ego. And not for one moment 
does he risk himself under the strange snake-infested 
bushes of her extraordinary Paradise. He is afraid. 

He becomes extraordinarily clever and agile in his 
self-conscious panoply. With his mind he can dart 
about among the emotions as if he really felt some- 
thing. It is all a lie, he feels nothing. He is just 
tricking you. He becomes extraordinarily acute at 
recognising real feelings from false ones, knowing 
for certain the falsity of his own. He has always the 
touchstone of his own conscious falseness against 
which to test the reality or the falseness of others. 
And he is always exposing falseness in others. But 
not for the sake of liberating the real Adam and 
Eve. On the contrary. He is more terrified even 
than the ordinary frightened man in the street, of 
the real Adam and Eve. He is a greater coward 
still. But his greater cowardice makes him strive to 
appear a greater man. He denounces falsity in 
order to triumph in his own greater falsity. He 

200 

ON BEING A MAN 

praises the real thing in order to establish his own 
superiority even to the real thing. He must, must, 
must be superior. Because he knows himself abso- 
lutely and unspeakably and irremediably false. His 
spurious emotions are more like the real thing than 
genuine emotions, and they have, for a time, greater 
effect. But all the time, somewhere, he knows they 
are false. 

And this is his one point of power. Instead of 
having inside him, like the Adam of red earth, that 
heavy and immutable black stone which is the eternal 
touchstone of false and true, good and evil, he has 
this awful little tombstone of the knowledge of his 
own falsity. And in this ghastly little white tomb- 
stone which he erects to himself lies his peculiar 
infallibility among a false and mental people. 

That’s the widdishins way of being a man. To 
know so absolutely that you are not a man, that you 
dare almost anything on the strength of it. You 
dare anything, except being a man. So intense and 
final is the modern white man’s conviction, his 
internal conviction, that he is mot a man, that he 
dares anything on earth except be a man. There 
his courage drops to its grave. He daren’t be a 
man: the old Adam of red earth, with the black 
touchstone at the middle of him. 

He knows he’s not a man. Hence his creed of 
harmlessness. He knows he is not a man of living 

201 O 

ON BEING A MAN 

red earth, to live onward through strange weather 
into new springtime. He knows there is extinction 
ahead: for nothing but extinction lies in wait for 
the conscious ego. Hence his creed of harmlessness, 
of relentless kindness. A little less than kin, and 
more than kind. There should be no danger in life 
at all, even no friction. This he asserts, while all the 
time he is slowly, malignantly undermining the tree 
of life. 

202 

ON HUMAN DESTINY 

Man is a domesticated animal that must think. His 
thinking makes him a little lower than the angels. 
And his domestication makes him, at times, a little 
lower than the monkey. 

It is no use retorting that most men don’t think. 
It is quite true, most men don’t have any original 
thoughts. Most men, perhaps, are incapable of 
original thought, or original thinking. This doesn’t 
alter the fact that they are all the time, all men, 
all the time, thinking. Man cannot even sleep with 
a blank mind. The mind refuses to be blank. The 
millstones of the brain grind on while the stream of 
life runs. And they grind on the grist of whatever 
ideas the mind contains. 

The ideas may be old and ground to powder 
already. No matter. The mill of the mind grinds 
on, grinds the old grist over and over and over again. 
The blackest savage in Africa is the same, in this 
respect, as the whitest Member of Parliament in 
Westminster. His risk of death, his woman, his 
hunger, his chieftain, his lust, his immeasurable fear, 
all these are fixed ideas in the mind of the black 
African savage. They are ideas based on certain 
sensual reactions in the black breast and bowels, that 

203 

ON HUMAN DESTINY 

is true. They are none the less ideas, however 
“* primitive.” And the difference between a primi- 
tive idea and a civilised one is not very great. It 
is remarkable how little change there is in man’s 
rudimentary ideas. 

Nowadays we like to talk about spontaneity, 
spontaneous feeling, spontaneous passion, spontaneous 
emotion. But our very spontaneity is just an idea. 
All our modern spontaneity is fathered in the mind, 
gestated in self-consciousness. 

Since man became a domesticated, thinking animal, 
long, long ago, a little lower than the angels, he 
long, long ago left off being a wild instinctive animal. 
If he ever was such, which I don’t believe. In my 
opinion, the most prognathous cave-man was an 
ideal beast. He ground on his crude, obstinate ideas. 
He was no more like the wild deer or the jaguar 
among the mountains than we are. He ground his 
ideas in the slow ponderous mill of his heavy cranium. 

Man is never spontaneous, as we imagine the 
thrushes or the sparrow-hawk, for example, to be 
spontaneous. No matter how wild, how savage, how 
apparently untamed the savage may be, Dyak or 
Hottentot, you may be sure he is grinding upon his 
own fixed, peculiar ideas, and he’s no more spon- 
taneous than a London ’bus conductor: probably 
not as much. 

The simple innocent child of nature does not 

204. 

ON HUMAN DESTINY 

exist. If there be an occasional violet by a mossy 
stone in the human sense, a Wordsworthian Lucy, 
it is because her vitality is rather low, and her simple 
nature is very near a simpleton’s. You may, like 
Yeats, admire the simpleton, and call him God’s 
Fool. But for me the village idiot is a cold egg. 

No, no, let man be as primitive as primitive can 
be, he still has a mind. Give him at the same time 
a certain passion in his nature, and between his 
passion and his mind he’ll beget himself ideas, ideas 
more or less good, more or less monstrous, but 
whether good or monstrous, absolute. 

The savage grinds on his fetish or totem or taboo 
ideas even more fixedly and fatally than we on our 
love and salvation and making-good ideas. 

Let us dismiss the innocent child of nature. He 
does not exist, never did, never will, and never could. 
No matter at what level man may be, he still has 
a mind, he has also passions. And the mind and 
the passions between them beget the scorpion brood 
of ideas. Or, if you like, call it the angelic hosts of 
the ideal. 

Let us accept our own destiny. Man can’t live by 
instinct, because he’s got a mind. The serpent, with 
a crushed head, learned to brood along his spine, 
and take poison in his mouth. He has a strange 
sapience. But even he doesn’t have ideas. Man 
has a mind, and ideas, so it is just puerile to sigh 

205 

ON HUMAN DESTINY 

for innocence and naive spontancity. Man is never 
spontaneous. Even children aren’t spontaneous ; not 
at all. It is only that their few and very dominant 
young ideas don’t make logical associations. A 
child’s ideas are ideas hard enough, but they hang 
together in a comical way, and the emotion that 
rises jumbles them ludicrously. 

Ideas are born from a marriage between mind and 
emotion. But surely, you will say, it is possible for 
emotions to run free, without the dead hand of the 
ideal mind upon them. 

It is impossible. Because, since man ate the apple 
and became endowed with mind, or mental con- 
sciousness, the human emotions are like a wedded 
wife ; lacking a husband she is only a partial thing. 
The emotions cannot be “free.” You can let your 
emotions run loose, if you like. You can let them 
run absolutely “ wild.’? But their wildness and their 
looseness are a very shoddy affair. They leave 
nothing but boredom afterwards. 

Emotions by themselves become just a nuisance. 
The mind by itself becomes just a sterile thing, 
making everything sterile. So what’s to be done ? 

You’ve got to marry the pair of them. Apart, 
they are no good. The emotions that have not the 
approval and inspiration of the mind are just 
hysterics. —The mind without the approval and 
inspiration of the emotions is just a dry stick, a dead 

206 

ON HUMAN DESTINY 

tree, no good for anything unless to make a rod to 
beat and bully somebody with. 

So, taking the human psyche, we have this simple 
trinity: the emotions, the mind, and then the 
children of this venerable pair, ideas. Man is con- 
trolled by his own ideas: there’s no doubt about 
that. 

Let us argue it once more. A pair of emancipated 
lovers are going to get away from the abhorred 
old ideal suasion. They’re just going to fulfil their 
lives. That’s all there is to it. They’re just going 
to live their lives. 

And then look at them! They do all the things 
that they know people do, when they are “living 
their own lives.”” They play up to their own ideas 
of being naughty instead of their ideas of good. And 
then what? It’s the same old treadmill. They are 
just enacting the same set of ideas, only in the 
widdishins direction, being naughty instead of being 
good, treading the old circle in the opposite direction, 
and going round in the same old mill, even if in a 
reversed direction. 

A man goes to a cocotte. And what of it? He 
does the same thing he does with his wife, but in 
the reverse direction. He just does everything 
naughtily instead of from his good self. It’s a terrible 
relief perhaps, at first, to get away from his good 
self. But after a little while he realises, rather 

207 

ON HUMAN DESTINY 

drearily, that he’s only going round in the same old 
treadmill, in the reversed direction. The Prince 
Consort turned us giddy with goodness, plodding 
round and round in the earnest mill. King Edward 
drove us giddy with naughtiness, trotting round and 
round in the same mill, in the opposite direction. 
So that the Georgian era finds us flummoxed, because 
we know the whole cycle back and forth. 

At the centre is the same emotional idea. You 
fall in love with a woman, you marry her, you have 
bliss, you have children, you devote yourself to your 
family and to the service of mankind, and you live. 
a happy life. Or, same idea but in the widdishins 
direction, you fall in love with a woman, you don’t 
marry her, you live with her under the rose and 
enjoy yourself in spite of society ; you leave your wife 
to swallow her tears or spleen, as the case may be; 
you spend the dowry of your daughters, you waste 
your substance, and you squander as much of man- 
kind’s heaped-up corn as you can. 

The ass goes one way, and threshes out the corn 
from the chaff. The ass goes the other way and 
kicks the corn into the mud. At the centre is the 
same idea: love, service, self-sacrifice, productivity. 
It just depends upon which way round you run. 

So there you are, poor man! All you can do is 
to run round like an ass, either in one direction or 
another, round the fixed pole of a certain central 

208 

ON HUMAN DESTINY 

idea, in the track of a number of smaller, peripheral 
ideas. This idea of love, these peripheral ideals of 
service, marriage, increase, etc. 

Even the vulgarest self-seeker trots in the same 
tracks and gets the same reactions, minus the thrill 
of the centralised passion. 

What’s to be done? What is being done? 

The ring is being tightened. Russia was a com- 
plication of mixed ideas, old barbaric ideas of divine 
kingship, of irresponsible power, of sacred servility, 
conflicting with modern ideas of equality, serviceable- 
ness, productivity, etc. This complication had to be 
cleaned up. Russia was a great and bewildering but 
at the same time fascinating circus, with her splen- 
dours and miseries and brutalities and mystery. Jl 
faut changer tout cela. So modern men have changed 
it. And the bewildering, fascinating circus of human 
anomalies is to be turned into a productive threshing- 
floor, an ideal treadmill. The treadmill of the one 
accomplished idea. 

What’s to be done? Man is an ideal animal: an 
idea-making animal. In spite of all his ideas, he 
remains an animal, often a little lower than the 
monkey. And in spite of all his animal nature, he 
can only act in fulfilment of disembodied ideas. 
What’s to be done ? 

That too is quite simple. Man is not pot-bound 
in his ideas. Then let him burst the pot that contains 

209 

ON HUMAN DESTINY 

him. Ideally he is pot-bound. His roots are choked, 
squeezed, and the life is leaving him, like a plant 
that is pot-bound and i is gradually going sapless. 

Break the pot, then. 

But it’s no good waiting for the slow accumulation 
of circumstance to break the pot. That’s what men 
are doing to-day. They know the pot’s got to break. - 
They know our civilisation has got to smash, sooner 
or later. So‘they say: ‘‘ Let it! But let me-live 
my life first !”’ 

Which is all very well, but it’s a coward’s attitude. 
They say glibly: “ Oh, well, every civilisation must 
fall at last. Look at Rome!” Very good, look at 
Rome. And what do you see? A mass of “ civil- 
ised ’’ so-called Romans, airing their laissez-faire and 
laissez-aller sentiments. And a number of barbarians, 
Huns, etc., coming down to wipe them out, and 
expending themselves in the effort. 

What of it, the Dark Ages? What about the 
Dark Ages, when the fields of Italy ran wild as the 
wild wastes of the undiscovered world, and wolves 
and bears roamed in the streets of the grey city 
of Lyons ? 

Very nice! But what else? Look at the other 
tiny bit of a truth. Rome was pot-bound, the pot 
was smashed to atoms, and the highly developed 
Roman tree of life lay on its side and died. But 
not before a new young seed had germinated. There 

210 

ON HUMAN DESTINY 

in the spilt soil, small, humble, almost indiscernible, 
was the little tree of Christianity. In the howling 
wilderness of slaughter and debacle, tiny monasteries 
of monks, too obscure and poor to plunder, kept the 
eternal light of man’s undying effort at consciousness 
alive. A few poor bishops wandering through the 
chaos, linking up the courage of these men of thought 
and prayer. A scattered, tiny minority of men who 
had found a new way to God, to the life-source, 
glad to get again into touch with the Great God, 
glad to know the way and to keep the knowledge 
burningly alive. 

That is the essential history of the Dark Ages, when 
Rome fell. We talk as if the flame of human courage 
and perspicacity had, in this time, gone out entirely, 
and that it miraculously popped into life again, out 
of nowhere, later on. Fusion of races, new barbaric 
blood, etc. Blarney! The fact of the matter is, the 
exquisite courage of brave men goes on in an un- 
broken continuity, even if sometimes the thread of 
flame becomes very thin. The exquisite delicate 
light of ever-renewed human consciousness is never 
blown out. The lights of great cities go out, and 
there is howling darkness to all appearance. But 
always, since men began, the light of the pure, 
God-knowing human consciousness has kept alight ; 
sometimes, as in the Dark Ages, tiny but perfect 
flames of purest God-knowledge here and _ there ; 

Q11 

ON HUMAN DESTINY 

sometimes, as in our precious Victorian era, a huge 
and rather ghastly glare of human “ understanding.” 
But the light never goes out. 

And that’s the human destiny. The light shall 
never go out till the last day. The light of the 
human adventure into consciousness, which is, essen- 
tially, the light of human God-knowledge. 

And human God-knowledge waxes and wanes, fed, 
as it were, from different oil. Man is a strange 
vessel. He has a thousand different essential oils 
in him, to keep the light of consciousness fed. Yet, 
apparently, he can only draw on one source at a 
time. And when the source he has been drawing 
on dries up, he has a bad time sinking a new well 
of oil, or guttering to extinction. 

So it was in Roman times. The great old 
pagan fire of knowledge gradually died, its sources 
dried up. Then Jesus started a new, strange little 
flicker. 

To-day, the long light of Christianity is guttering 
to go out and we have to get at new resources 
in ourselves. 

It is no use waiting for the debacle. It’s no use 
saying: ‘‘ Well, I didn’t make the world, so it isn’t 
up to me to mend it. Time and the event must do 
the business.’’—Time and the event will do nothing. 
Men are worse after a great debacle than before. 
The Russians who have “ escaped” from the horrors 

Q12 

ON HUMAN DESTINY 

of the revolution are most of them extinguished as 
human beings. The real manly dignity has gone, 
all that remains is a collapsed human creature saying 
to himself: ‘‘ Look at me! I am alive. I can 
actually eat more sausage.” 

Debacles don’t save men. In nearly every case, 
during the horrors of a catastrophe the light of 
integrity and human pride is extinguished in the 
soul of the man or the woman involved, and there 
is left a painful, unmanned creature, a thing of 
shame, incapable any more. It is the great 
danger of debacles, especially in times of unbelief 
like these. Men lack the faith and courage to 
keep their souls alert, kindled and _ unbroken. 
Afterwards there is a great smouldering of shamed 
life. 

Man, poor, conscious, forever-animal man, has a 
very stern destiny, from which he is never allowed 
to escape. It is his destiny that he must move on 
and on, in the thought-adventure. He is a thought- 
adventurer, and adventure he must. The moment 
he builds himself a house and begins to think he 
can sit still in his knowledge, his soul becomes 
deranged, and he begins to pull down the house over 
his own head. 

Man is now house-bound. Human consciousness 
to-day is too small, too tight to let us live and act 
naturally. Our dominant idea, instead of being a 

213 

ON HUMAN DESTINY 

pole-star, is a millstone round our necks, strangling 
us. Old tablets of stone. 

That is part of our destiny. As a thinking being, 
man is destined to seek God and to form some con- 
ception of Life. And since the invisible God cannot 
be conceived, and since Life is always more than 
any idea, behold, from the human conception of God 
and of Life, a great deal of necessity is left out. And 
this God whom we have left out and this Life that 
we have shut out from our living, must in the 
end turn against us and rend us. It is our 
destiny. 

Nothing will alter it. When the Unknown God 
whom we ignore turns savagely to rend us, from the 
darkness of oblivion, and when the Life that we 
exclude from our living turns to poison and madness 
in our veins, then there is only one thing left to do. 
We have to struggle down to the heart of things, 
where the everlasting flame is, and kindle ourselves 
another beam of light. In short, we have to make 
another bitter adventure in pulsating thought, far, 
far to the one central pole of energy. We have to 
germinate inside us, between our undaunted mind 
and our reckless, genuine passions, a new germ. 
The germ of a new idea. A new germ of 
God-knowledge, or Life-knowledge. But a new 
germ. 

And this germ will expand and grow, and flourish 

214 

ON HUMAN DESTINY 

to a great tree, maybe. And in the end die again. 
Die like all the other human trees of knowledge. 

But what does that matter? We walk in strides, 
we live by days and nights. A tree slowly rises to 
a great height, and quickly falls to dust. There is 
a long life-day for the individual. Then a very dark, 
spacious death-room—— 

I live and I die. I ask no other. Whatever 
proceeds from me lives and dies. I am glad, too. 
God is eternal, but my idea of Him is my own, and 
perishable. Everything human, human knowledge, 
human faith, human emotions, all perishes. And 
that is very good ; if it were not so, everything would 
turn to cast-iron. There is too much of this cast- 
iron of permanence to-day. 

Because I know the tree will ultimately die, shall 
I therefore refrain from planting a seed? Bah! it 
would be conceited cowardice on my part. I love 
the little sprout and the weak little seedling. I love 
the thin sapling, and the first fruit, and the falling 
of the first fruit. I love the great tree in its splendour. 
And I am glad that at last, at the very last, the great 
tree will go hollow, and fall on its side with a crash, 
and the little ants will run through it, and it will 
disappear like a ghost back into the humus. 

It is the cycle of all things created, thank God. 
Because, given courage, it saves even eternity from 
staleness. 

215 

ON HUMAN DESTINY 

Man fights for a new conception of life and God, 
as he fights to plant seeds in the spring: because he 
knows that is the only way to harvest. If after 
harvest there is winter again, what does it matter ? 
It is just seasonable. 

But you have to fight even to plant seed. To plant 
seed you’ve got to kill a great deal of weeds and 
break much ground. 

Made and Printed in Great Britain by 
The Botolph Printing Works, Gate Street, Kingsway, W.C.2. 

; i, a ve 
ee Pd fe rae Vik’ ah 
aad eae 

#0 fl) A Fa aM en 
J 7 i Te my i‘ , eT 
an wa Sree oe Pe tere, 2 Oa 

DATE DUE 

< 
@ 
2 
< 
a] 
wo 
& 
= 
« 
e 
fe] 
4 
| 1 oO 
ad 
> 
< 
oO 

| 

AAC GATT Tm 
N LIBRARY 
LAI 

crs
