Source note (Tower of Babel staging): Layamon's Brut, or Chronicle of Britain, ed. Frederic Madden (London: Society of Antiquaries, 1847), Vol. I (with Madden's literal English translation). Text from Internet Archive item 10747256bsb (Bavarian State Library scan, OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

- Ae f ns 199 ees Koy atuce 


<36640490990014 


<36640490990014 


Bayer. Staatsbibliothek 


LAZAMONS BRUT, , 


OR 


CHRONICLE OF BRITAIN; 


A POETICAL SEMI-SAXON PARAPHRASE 
OF 


THE BRUT OF WACE, 


NOW FIRST PUBLISHED FROM THE 
COTTONIAN MANUSCRIPTS IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM; } 


ACCOMPANIED BY 


A LITERAL TRANSLATION, NOTES, AND A GRAMMATICAL GLOSSARY. 


By SIR FREDERIC MADDEN, K.H., 


KEEPER OF THE MSS. IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM. 


LONDON: 


PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY OF ANTIQUARIES OF LONDON. 
1847. 


a 
PRINTED BY 


pis 


atcadep nS tonx E. ae 
RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET. 


‘ e ~ on o- 
IT will be readily admitted cba hveinreninelle a 
the history of the English language, that the most obscure, 
and yet in many respects, the most interesting period of — 
its progress, is that during which the Anglo-Saxon lan- 
guage, already from the time of Edward the Confessor pre- 
disposed to change, was at length broken up, and clothed 
- with those new characteristics, in which the germs of our 
modern tongue are found. That this important change was 
occasioned solely, or even in a large proportion, by the 
influence of the | orman i aders, is a proposition specious 
indeed, but inet unte ; and it has been argued with 
_ every appearance of probability, that the same effects would 
have been produced, had William and his followers re- 
mained on their native soil': Assuming this to be true, 
it will necessarily follow, that such an organic change in 


au y See Prices Preface to Wartons Hist. English Poetry, p. 110. ed. 1824, 
who supports his argument by the fact, that every branch of the Low 
‘German stock, from whence the Anglo-Saxon sprang, displays the same 
‘simplification in its grammar. ‘This view of the question is confirmed also 
by Professor Latham, who adds, that compared with the Icelandic, the 
Danish = Swedish do the same. The English Language, p. 61. 8°. 1841. 


a 2 


: + 
_* a 
«< 


-- 


: oe and effected by certain and determinate laws, so that to 


i aia * it iA 


ee Pike "7 
pis structure ofa language must have been very Peaval’ ce 


attempt to fix the exact date of the commencement of | ae . 
“English,” is, from the nature of circumstances, quite im- eo 
practicable. At the same time, it may fairly be inferred, $ 
that since within limited data this progressive change be- | 
comes more and more apparent, it will be possible by a 
comparison of the literary monuments still existing, to ‘ 
form conclusions not very wide of the truth, as to the e 
periods when the features of our language in various stages — 
became more distinctly marked. A recent and sound 


critic has obse hat “ the stage of language is not to — 
be measured by its , but by its structure,” and. that 
~ Anglo-Saxon would e ‘glia Semi-Saxon _ begin, ** not at 


any given year, but at that date when certain grammatical 

inflections disappear, and certain characters of a more ad- | __ 

vanced stage are introduced*.”’ It is important, moreover, 

to remark, that the preponderance of these, and not the — 

occasional occurrence of them, will constitute the difference 

of the language. . . 4 
The materials for tracing the progress of English from 

Anglo-Saxon subsequently to the year 1100 are to be found 

in sufficient abundance, to enable us, were they all ac- 

cessible in print, to mark the ession of these changes ° 

with tolerable accuracy ; for although during the twelfth 

century original literary compositions (especially in poetry) 


' Campbell in the Essay prefixed to his edition of the British Poets, in 
1819, has already confuted the hypothesis of Ellis (in Specimens of Early 
English Poetry, 8°. 1801, and copied by Todd, in his edition of Johnsons 
Dictionary, 1818.) who would fix the complete formation of English be- 
tween the years 1180 and 1216, both of which dates are assumed on purely 
imaginary grounds. ‘The adoption of such an arbitrary definition, or the 
notion of any sudden change, is justly repudiated by Campbell in the Essay 
referred to. . 

2 Latham, The English Language, p. 63. 


. 
7 


* 


- 


al 


_ the former’®. 


Ys e onevillle . v 


are mely rare, yet numerous transcripts and transla- ,". 


ns from Anglo-Saxon and Latin works were made at $2 
pe and are still preserved in manuscript, by which 


ws grammatical and verbal alterations then gaining ground 

ily to be distinguished’. The author of the ‘ In- 
see ion to the Literature of Europe,” has remarked with 
justice, that ‘‘ when we compare the earliest English of the 
thi 


enth century with the Anglo-Saxon of the twelfth, it 
hard to pronounce, why it should pass for a separate 
age, rather than a modification or simplification of 
*? The same denominati nm, we know, was 
anciently applied to both, for the language was always 
called English by those who wrote in it, in every century — 
downwards, from the earliest period of Anglo-Saxon lite- 
rature to the time of Dunbar and Lyndsay’. It was, in | 


' Among the works here referred to may be mentioned a volume con- 
taining A¢lfrics Homilies and Genesis, with some Lives of Saints, in a MS. 
in the Pub. Lib. Cambr. Ii. 1. 33; another copy of part of the same, in 
MS. Cott. Jul. E. VII.; copies of the Gospels in MS, Reg. 1. A. XIV. and 
~ MS. Hatton, 65. Bodl. Libr.; a Gloss on the Psalter, in Salisbury Cathe- 
dral ; some volumes of Homilies in MS. Cott. Otho A. XIII. Vesp. A. XXII. 
Bodl. 343. Lamb. 487. Trin. Coll. Cambr. B. 14. 52; and a Semi-Saxon 
Herbal in MS. Harl. 6258.B. To these might be added many other 
volumes of rather later date, such as the Ormulum; the Rule of Nuns, in 

S. Cott. Cleop. C. VI., Nero A. XIV. Tit. D. XVIII. C.C. Coll. Cambr. S. 
15; the Lives of Saints, MSS. Reg. 17 A. XXVII. Bodl. 34, ete. See some 
remarks on this subject in a valuable paper by Mr. J. M. Kemble, inserted 
in vol. ii. of the Cambridge Philological Museum. 8°. 1833. The same 
writer in another place held out the promise of a work on the History of , 
the English Language from the eleventh to the fourteenth centuries, and it 
is earnestly to be hoped that he may yet fulfil the task. 

® yol. i. p: 42. edit. 1843. 

3 «Se pe awent of Ledene on Englisc, wfre he sceal gefadian hit swa 
 Englisc hebbe his agene wisan.” Aélfrici Prol. ad Hept. p. 4.—* i pe 
mone®d } on ure ledene is Ald Englisch esterlid inempnet, Julius o Latin.” 
Legend of St. Margaret, MS. Reg.17 A. XXVII.f. 53. So also in Orm, 
Robert of Gloucester, Mannyng, Chaucer, Trevisa, Lydgate, etc., ete. See 
for the Scottish writers, Chalmers’s edition of Lyndsays Works, vol. i. 
p. 136. 8°. 1806. . 


=" =. oe 


“ vi PREFACE. 2 

_ fact, substantially the same throughout, but at different: 

_ periods more or less affected by the changes in its gram- 

matical inflections and orthography, as well as by the 

omission of certain words and phrases, and the introduc- 

tion of others derived from foreign sources. But as in 

2 architecture it has been found advisable to adopt terms to 
designate particular periods of style, so in regard to the 
English language various terms have been used to discri- 
minate the periods during which it existed in a more or 
less advanced stage. It is unnecessary to notice the 
discrepancies of different writers on the relative duration 
of these periods, but as a matter of convenience, perhaps 

the following divisions may be suggested :— 


Semi-Saxon' from a.p. 1100 to a.p. 1230. 


Early English 1230 1330. 
Middle English —— 1330 1500. 
Later English —— 1500 1600. 


It is to the first of these periods that the poem of Lajamon 
(or Layamon) belongs, and the preceding remarks have 
been made with a view to point out the value and import- 
ance of a poetical composition of such great length, (now 
for the first time published,) to assist us in forming a 
better notion of the stat of our language at the end of the» 
twelfth and beginning of the thirteenth centuries, than 
could be obtained from the short and scattered specimens 
already in print’. 


+ 


' Those who object to the term Semi-Sazon, merge the whole of this 
period in Karly English; but there seems to be as good reason for distin- 
guishing between the language of Lajamon and the poems of the end of 
Edward the Firsts reign, as between the latter and the period of Hampole 
and Chaucer. 

* The chief of these may be briefly stated to be,—the latter part of the 
Sazon Chronicle, as it exists in the Laud MS, (no part of which could have 
been written earlier than 1121); the Homily of St. Edmund, in Thorpes 
Analecta ; the Bestiary and Proverbs of Alfred, printed in the Reliquiea An- 


~~ 


> 


PREFACE. vii 
x 


By the publication also of both the texts preserved of 
Lajamons work, additional light is thrown on the subject ; 
for as the second text was undoubtedly composed many 
years after the former, and immediately founded on it, we 
are enabled to perceive at once the still further change the 
language had undergone during that interval, and note to 
what extent the diction and forms of the earlier text had 
become obsolete or unintelligible. 

That this work of our English Ennius’ should not earlier 
have received the attention it would seem to claim, can 
scarcely be wondered at, when we recollect at how recent 
a period the structure of our language has been critically 
studied or understood; and the extraordinary errors of 
Johnson, Warton, and other popular writers, can be ex- 
cused only on similar grounds. Archbishop Usher appears 
to have been the first, who refers to the manuscript of 
La3amon, and he does so merely for the orthography of 
the names of the Bishops sent over to King Lucius’. 
Slight as this notice is, it was sufficient to obtain the poet, 
after the interval of nearly a century, a longer notice in 
Nicolsons Historical Library*, but coupled with the erro- 
neous statement, (borrowed from Wanley,) that the author 


tique ; the curious Poem called Address of the Soul to the Body, privately 
printed by Sir Thomas Phillipps, in 1838, and reprinted by Mr. Singer in 
1845; and the Legend of St. Katherine; edited by Mr. Morton for the Ab- 
botsford Club, in 1841. The Ormulum is said to be nearly ready for pub- 
lication, and the Rule of Nuns is in the press. 

' Hitherto this name has been generally applied to Robert of Gloucester, 
but he has inferior claims to it, since his work was not finished till after 
1297, as I have shown elsewhere. See Introduction to Havelok, p. lii. 
Mr. Hallam has availed himself of my correction of the erroneous date 
of 1278 given by Ellis, Mitford, Turner, and others, but I regret that the 
same error has been recently repeated by Bosworth, Guest, D’Israeli, and 
Lappenberg. 

2 Britannicarum Eccles. Antiquitates, 4to. 1639. p. 54. 

* Second edit. fol. 1714. p. 37. 


. + 


‘<2, 
viii PREFACE. ey a 


merely translated the Latin work of Geoffrey of Monmouth 
into ‘‘ Norman-English.” We next meet with him in Tan- 
ners Bibliotheca Britannica, in 1748, but the account there 
given is copied from the faulty note prefixed by James to 
the Cottonian MS. Caligula, A. [X.; and although many 
writers of later date, as Tyrwhitt, Ellis, Ritson, Mitford, 
Campbell, Turner, and Conybeare, have severally com- 
mented on or quoted from La3amons poem, yet its peculiar 
value in a philological point of view appears to have re- 
mained but little known up to the period when the Society 
of Antiquaries determined on its publication’. 

Having premised thus much, it is requisite to turn to 
the work itself, and inquire, as far as we are able, 1. who 
was the author,—2. from what sources his work was com- 
piled,—3. the period of its composition,—and lastly, the 
style and metrical structure of the poem, as well as the 
dialect in which it is written, and grammatical forms. 

1. Of the author we possess unfortunately only the scanty 
information given us by himself in the prefatory lines to 
his poem. In these he tells us, that his name was La3amon 
(in the later text broadened in sound to Laweman), and 
the name of his father Leovenath* (Leuca, in the later text); 


' It ought not to be forgotten, that to Mr. B. Thorpe the credit is due of 
having first attempted to revive in England the long-neglected literature of 
our Anglo-Saxon forefathers. Having communicated his plan to a few 
friends, a prospectus was issued in 1830, containing proposals for publish- 
ing by subscription all the works in Anglo-Saxon and Early English deem- 
ed worthy of being printed, and Cedmon, Layamon, and the Ormulum were 
the first three works proposed to be published, and to be edited by Mr. 
‘Thorpe, Mr. F. Madden, and Mr. Price. Soon after this, a prospectus was 
issaed also by Messrs. Black and Young, booksellers, proposing a similar 
undertaking, under the superintendence of the Rev. N. F. S. Grundtvig of 
Copenhagen. The Society of Antiquaries, however, having liberally re- 
solved in 1831 to take upon themselves the execution of the measure, as 
first proposed, the scheme of Messrs. Black and Co. fell to the ground. 

* Traces of these names may be found in documents of the beginning of 


. ee PREFACE. ix 


that he was a priest’, and dwelt (wonede) at Ernleze, at a 
church® on the banks of the Severn, near Radstone, where 
he ‘‘ read books.” Several writers have inferred from this 
passage, that Ernley or Redstone was the place of his 
birth*®, but there seems no ground whatever for such a 
supposition. His profession as a priest, and his residence 
at the church of Ernley, are both explained by the line 
which follows, ‘‘ ther he bock radde,” i.e. where he was 
accustomed to read the services of the church ; and unless 
we so interpret it*, there will appear no apparent connec- 
tion between his occupation and the place of his abode. 
From the mention of Redstone, it might perhaps be in- 
ferred, that the church alluded to was the ancient chapel 


the thirteenth century. Lagemann occurs in the Fines, 8 Joh. co. Cambr. 
vol. i. p. 319. and Roger, son of Levenoth, or Levenethe, is mentioned in the 
Pipe Roll, 3 Joh. co, Essex et Hert. p. 155, and in the Fine Roll, 6 Joh. 
co. Essex. 

' In the initial letter of the Cotton MS. Cal. A. IX. there is a small 
miniature representing the author writing his book, in the habit of a black 
monk, with a shaven crown. 

® * at adelen are chirechen.” In the Latin version given by Nash, in his 
Worcestershire, vol. i. p. 41. this line is rendered “in patrimonio suo erat 
minister ecclesie,” and Mr. Wright, in his Biographia Britannica, Anglo- 
Norman period, p. 440. translates it “in the domain of a church.” I can- 
not agree to either of these interpretations, nor indeed will the grammatical 
construction of the line admit of them, since edelen is an adjective here. 
Cf. vv. 42, 159, 18531, 21132, 23010, 2444, 25474. I can as little assent 
to the sense assigned by Wright to the line, “‘ and fiede on boc-felle,” a little 
lower, which he renders, “and fell zealously on the book.” Whatever 
sense we may assign to the weak verb fiede, the boc-felle certainly signifies 
the parchment La3amon wrote on. See Notes, p. 438. 

8 Smith, Catalogus Lib. Manuscr. Bibl. Cotton. fol. Oxon. 1696. p. 34. 
Nicolson, Hist Libr. p. 37. Nash, Hist. of Wore. vol. i. p. 40. Warton, 
Hist. E. P. vyol.i. p. 63. n. edit. 1774. Wright, Biogr. Brit. A. N. p. 439. 

4 Mr. Guest paraphrases the passage, there ‘‘ he read a book, which in- 
spired the happy thought of writing a British history.” Hist. of English 
Rhythms, vol. ii. p. 407. 


x PREFACE. a 
attached to the hermitage overhanging the western bank 
of the Severn at Redstone Ferry, just at the point where 
the parishes of Lower Arley and Astley join, and which, 
as appears from the Habingdon MS. quoted by Nash, was 
formerly a spot of considerable note’. But after an atten- 
tive consideration of the passage, it would seem clear, that 
the words ‘‘ near Redstone” were inserted expressly to 
distinguish the Ernley here mentioned, (Lower Arley, other- 
wise Arley Regis, 34 miles south-east from Bewdley, in 
Worcestershire,) from another Ernley, not many miles di- 
stant, on the other side of the Severn, in Staffordshire, now 
called Over or Upper Arley. 

Of thé church of Lower Arley at this early period we 
know as little as of its priest, and all that is to be learnt 
of its history is, that it was inseparably annexed to the 
benefice of Martley, in the same county, whose rectors 
were the patrons of the living’. No presentation, how- 
ever, is on record earlier than the reign of Edward the 
First, nor is there any information as to the date of the 
erection of the church at Lower Arley; but from Laja- 


' Nash, ubi supr. A similar chapel, study, and other apartments, were 
anciently attached to a hermitage existing higher up the Severn at Black- 
stone rock, near Bewdley, of which a plan is given by Stukeley, in his Jtin. 
Curios. fol. 1724. pl. 14. 

2 Nash, vol. i. p. 37. The Lords of Martley were also the Lords of 
Arley, but the advowson of Martley formed part of the possessions of the 
Abbey of Cormeilles, in the diocese of Lisieux. In a suit between the Abbot 
and Hugh le Despencer, Lord of Martley, in 19 Edw. I. [1291] reference 
is made to a presentation by previous abbots of Cormeilles to the church of 
Martley, as early as the reign of John. See the Cartulary of Newent, 
MS. Add. 15,668. fol. 3. The earliest notice of a proprietor of Martley 
occurs in the Close Roll, 7 Joh. [1205] in which the sheriff of Worcester- 
shire is ordered to give seisin of Martele to William de Fruges (probably 
a Norman), which had previously belonged to his brother Wales’. Rot. Claus. 
p. 58. In the 8 Rich. I. the villate of Marteley belonged to the King, and 
paid a tallage of 40s. Madox, Hist. Excheg. vol. i. p. 704. 


4 PREFACE. xi 
mons own testimony it may be presumed to have existed 
previous to the year 1200. 

Before quitting this branch of the inquiry, it must be 
observed, that the later text of the poem omits all mention 
of the church, and substitutes the reading, ‘‘ he dwelt at 
Ernley, with the good knight, upon Severn.” This reading 
has been adopted by Mr. Guest’, but it would seem to be 
altogether a false interpretation, or a mere invention of the 
compiler of the later text; at all events it is not of suffi- 
cient authority to supersede the statement in the earlier 
copy. | 

2. The sources from which La3amon compiled his work 
are stated by himself to be three in number; namely, a 
book in English, made by Saint Bede; another in Latin, 
made by Saint Albin, and Austin; and a third made by a 
French clerk named Wace, who presented it to Queen 
Eleanor* (consort of Henry the Second). These three’ 
books, he tells us, he obtained by travelling himself in 
search of them ‘‘ wide over the land,” and having suc- 
ceeded in getting them together, he proceeded to incorpo- 
rate the three into his own work. The first of the authori- 
ties here mentioned is generally understood to be the 
Anglo-Saxon translation of Bedes Ecclesiastical History, 
attributed to Alfred; but so far from making it form an 
integral portion of his own poem, or even occupy a pro- 
minent place in it, he seems to have taken nothing from 
it except the story of Pope Gregory and the Anglo-Saxon 


' vol. ii. p. 408. 

® This fact, which is of interest in the biography of Wace, is due entirely 
to Lazamon, and is not mentioned by the French writer himself. 

3 It is very remarkable, that the author of the later text of the poem 
should have here departed designedly from his original, and ascribed the 
second book to Albin, and the third to Austin; thus omitting all mention 
whatever of Wace. Did this pruceed from a desire to conceal the real 
source of Lazjamons work, or from a dislike to Norman writers ? 


xii PREFACE. 


captives at Rome’. Indeed in several instances he is quite 
at variance with Bede, even when not translating from 
Wace*. The second work, ascribed to St. Albin and Aus- 
tin, is more difficult to identify, nor is it easy to understand 
how St. Austin, who died in the year 604, and Albinus’, 
Abbot of St. Austins at Canterbury, who died in 732, 
should be conjoined in the same work. All that is recorded 
of the literary undertakings of Albinus,—‘‘ vir per omnia 
doctissimus,” as he is styled by Bede,—is the large share 
he had in contributing materials for the Historia Ecclesi- 
astica Gentis Anglorum*. Either therefore by some mental 
confusion Lajamon has made two persons out of one, or,— 
what is more probable,—he has not distinguished between 
the contributor’ and the writer, and having first erroneously 
given the Anglo-Saxon version of the work to_Bede, he 
proceeds next to assign to Albinus and Austin (whose Jn- 
terrogatories inserted in the first book seem to favor this 
notion) the Latin text of the Ecclesiastical History. If 
this supposition be correct, (and errors of equal magnitude 
committed by Lajamon are pointed out in the Notes*,) we 
are simply to understand, that the first two books procured 
by him, to write the history he contemplated, were copies 
of the Latin and Anglo-Saxon texts of Bede. The third 
authority named, is the Anglo-Norman metrical chronicle 
of the Brut, translated from the well-known Historia Brito- 


' vol. iii. p. 100. 2 See vol. iii. p. 276. and note. 

3 Albinus was never canonised, therefore the epithet of Saint given to 
him by La3amon simply means Holy, or else he has confounded him with 
his namesake the Bishop of Angers, who lived in the sixth century, and 
who has a place in the ancient English calendars, on the 1st March. 

+ See Stevensons Introduction to Bedes Hist. Eccles. Gentis Anglorum, 
pp. xxiii—xxxi. and the work itself, p. 2; also the Monasticon, vol. i. 
p, 120. new ed. 

5 Albinus is called by Bede “ Auctor ante omnes atque adjutor opusculi.” 

® See vol. iii. pp. 345, 348, 351, 367, 425, 433. 


PREPACE. xiii 


num of Geoffrey of Monmouth by Wace', and completed 
in the year 1155, which embraces the history of Britain, 
fabulous or true, from the destruction of Troy, and sub- 
sequent arrival of Brutus, to the death of king Cadwala- 
der, in a.p. 689. This is the work to which Laj3amon is 
mainly indebted, and upon which his own is founded 
throughout, although he has exercised more than the usual 
license of amplifying and adding to his original. The ex- 
tent of such additions may be readily understood from the 
fact, that Waces Brut is comprised in 15,300 lines’, whilst 
the poem of the English versifier extends to nearly 32,250, 
or more than double. These additions and amplifications, 
as well as the more direct variations from the original, are 
all pointed out in the Notes to the present edition, but 
their general character, as well as some of the more re- 
markable instances, may be properly noticed here. In the 
earlier part of the work they consist principally of the 
speeches placed in the mouths of different personages, 
which are often given with quite a dramatic effect. The 
dream of Arthur, as related by himself to his companions 
in arms’, is the creation of a mind of a higher order than 
is apparent in the creeping rhymes of more recent chro- 


' This name was misread Wate by James, Wanley, Tanner, and Nicol- 
son, and erroneously supposed to refer to Walter Mapes, Archdeacon of 
Oxford. The error was corrected by Warton and Tyrwhitt, and subse- 
quently by the Abbé de la Rue, in the Archeologia, vol. xii. where an ac- 
count of Waces writings was first given at length. Fuller information may 
be found in the Essais sur les Bardes, par l’ Abbé de la Rue, tom. ii. 1834, 
and Hist. Litt. de la France, tom. xvii. p. 615. 

2 Le Roman de Brut, par Wace, avec un Commentaire et des Notes par 
Le Roux de Lincy. 2 tom, 8°. Rouen, 1836-1838. It is to be regretted that 
the editor has not constructed amore correct text. A good edition of Wace 
is still a desideratum, and the evidence of Lazamon is especially valuable 
in fixing the correct reading of his original. 

3 vol. iii. pp. 118-121. 72) 


xiv PREFACE. 


niclers, and has a title, as Turner remarks, to be considered 
really poetry, because entirely a fiction of the imagination’. 
The text of Wace is enlarged throughout*, and in many 
passages to such an extent, particularly after the birth of 
Arthur, that one line is dilated into twenty; names of 
persons and localities are constantly supplied, and not un- 
frequently interpolations occur of entirely new matter, to 
the extent of more than an hundred lines. Lajzamon often 
embellishes and improves on his copy’; and the meagre 
narrative of the French poet is heightened by graphic 
touches and details, which give him a just claim to be con- 
sidered, not as a mere translator, but as an original writer. 

Among the more remarkable additions of Lajamon may 
be pointed out:—the episode of Hirelgas and Evelin*;—the 
legend respecting the birth of Gloi and foundation of Glou- 
cester’;—the narrative of the settlement of the Picts in 
Caithness, and introduction of the Irish language among 
them’;—the building of Coningsburgh’;—the statement re- 
lative to Conans expedition to Britanny*, and the account 
of the voyage and disastrous fate of Oriene (the Ursula of 
the Cologne legend) and her eleven thousand companions’ ; 
—the curious story of the rebellion of the churls of East An- 
glia, headed by the twin-brothers Ethelbald and Aélfwald, 

| History of England during the Middle Ages, vol. v. p. 216. 

* In some few instances La3amon has purposely omitted passages of the 
French original, but in general they are very short and insignificant. The 
most striking are—the notice of the death of Labienus, vol. i. p. 323; a 
string of nautical terms, vol. iii. p. 32; the account of King Ritons mantle, 
trimmed with the beards of vanquished monarchs, vol. iii. p- 37; and the 
legend respecting the disposition of Cadwalans corpse within a brazen 
figure, vol. iii. p. 277. 

8 Now and then he is found tripping in his explanation of Waces text ; 
the chief instances of which are pointed out in the Notes on vol. i. pp. 15, 
213; vol. ii. pp. 155, 241, 582; vol. iii. p. 256. 

»-* vol. i. pp. 347-350. - © vol. i. pp. 425-429. 8 vol. ii. p. 71. 

> ib. p. 409. 7 vol: ii. p. 61. ® ib. pp. 76-80. 


o a, 


PREFACE. xv 


against Gratian';—the amplified account-of Constans, the 
king-monk*;—the long and singular detail respecting Row- 
enas treason against Vortimer’;—the division of England by 
Hengest among his followers*;—the narrative about Appas, 
and his stratagem to kill king Aurelius’;—the amusing and 
dramatic passages relative to the Irish, and their conflict 
with the Britons®;—the conference of Uther with Ulfin, 
and search of the latter after Merlin’;—the highly curious 
passage regarding the fairy elves at Arthurs birth, and his 
transportation by them after death in a boat to Avalon, 
the abode of Argante, their queen*;—the mission sent to 
Britanny after Arthur, and his election as sovereign’;—the 
spirited details of the combat between Arthur and Col- 
grim ; the counsel of Maurin to Arthur, how to surprise 
Baldolf ; and the notice of Childrics castle in Lincolnshire, 
and his flight to the forest of Caledon *;—the highly poetical 
description of a fox-chase, and narrative of Childrics sub- 
mission to Arthur'';—the cruelties committed by the Danes 
in Lincolnshire, and their threats to make a bridge of Ar- 
thurs bones, joined together with ‘‘ golden ties’*;’””—the de- 
scription of Arthurs armour,—his burny made by the 
elvish smith Wygar, his helm Goswiht, and his spear 
forged by Griffin, the wright of Carmaerthen;—the long 
and truly poetical narrative relating to Childrics flight over 
the Avon, and Arthurs combat with Colgrim ; as also the 
stratagem of Cador, practised by the Britons, with the 
defeat and death of Childric'*;—the submission of Gillomar, 


' vol. ii. pp. 86-90. $ vol. ii. p. 384; vol. iii. p. 144, 
2 4b, p. 222. ® vol. ii. pp. 408-412. 

3 ib, pp. 199-204. 10 ib, pp. 419, 426, 444. 

4 ib. p. 219. 't ib. pp. 446-454. 

> ib. p. 317-324. 12 ib. p. 456. 

© ib. pp. 332-336. '9 ib. pp. 463, 576. 

7 ib. pp. 362-369. 4" ib. pp. 469-485. 


ye ™ 
we a: : / 
- 
xvi PREFACE. 


king of Ireland, and Alcus, king of Iceland, toArthur';the 
curious particulars relative to the foundation of the Round 
Table*;—the long and interesting narrative of the combat of 
Arthur with Frolle, king of France’;—the details of Arthurs 
combat with the giant, on Mount St. Michel; his subse- 
quent battle with the Emperor Lucius, and fatal issue of 
the conflict with Modred*;—the stratagem of Gurmund to 
get possession of Cirencester’;—the story at length of 
Brian, his interview with his sister Galarne, under the dis- 
guise of a pilgrim, and death of Pelluz, the astrologer’;— 
the insertion concerning the submission of Penda to Cad- 
walan, and marriage of the latter to Pendas sister Helen’; 
—the death of Oswald, the battle of Oswy and Penda, and ~§ 
death of the former*;—the tradition as to the cause of Cad- 
walans death, and account of Inas visit to Rome, and the 
establishment of the Romescot or Peters-pence’;—with 
numerous other passages of minor importance. 

That Lajamon was indebted for some of these legends 
to Welsh traditions not recorded in Geoffrey of Monmouth 
or Wace, is scarcely to be questioned, and they supply an 
additional argument in support of the opinion, that the 
former was not a mere inventor. Many circumstances 
incidentally mentioned by La3amon, are to he traced to a 
British origin, as for instance, the notice of Queen Judons 
death”; the mention of Taliesin, and his conference with 
Kinbelin"'; the traditionary legends relative to Arthur"; the 
allusions to several prophecies of Merlin”; and the names 
of various personages, which do not appear in the Latin 


' vol. ii. pp. 515-520. 7 vol. ii. pp. 246-252. 
£ ib. pp. 531-542. & ib. pp. 260, 276. 

3 ib. pp. 571-580. ® ib. pp. 277, 285. 

4 vol. iii. pp. 34, 103, 142. ¥ 1 vol. i. p.172. 

5 ib. p. 170. +. ' ib. p. 387. 

6 vol. ii. pp. 231-237. 12 vol. ii, p. 144. 


13 vol. ii. p. 246; vol. iii. pp. 79, 137, 146, 291. 


PREFACE. XVii 


or French writers. References are occasionally made to 

works extant in the time of Laz3amon, but which are not 
now to be recognised. Thus in his account of the reign of 
Dunwallo Molmutius, he alludes to many marvellous things 
told of him in ‘‘ books'.” So also in the notice of the origin 
of the name Wall-brook, in London, the ‘*English Book” 
is cited as an authority for it*. We should naturally sup- 
pose this to mean the Anglo-Saxon Bede, or the Saxon- 
Chronicle, but no mention of the story occurs in either. 
Again, in describing the altered state of Caerleon, Lajamon 
writes, ‘‘ Some books say truly, that the burgh was be- 
witched, and that is well seen, that it be sooth’.”’ In an- 
other place, speaking of the British King Carric, he tells 
us, that men threw contempt and derision on him, and 
called him Kenric, and ‘‘in many books” his name was still 
so written’. From these and other passages, it may be 
reasonable to conclude, that the author of the poem had a 
mind richly stored with legendary lore, and had availed 
himself, to a considerable extent, of the information to be 
derived from written sources, We know that he under- 
stood both French and Latin, and when we consider that 
these varied branches of knowledge were combined in the 

_ person of a humble priest of a small church in one of the 
midland counties, it would seem to be no unfair inference, 
that the body of the clergy, and, perhaps, the upper classes 
of the laity, were not in so low a state of ignorance, at the 
period when Lajamon wrote, as some writers have repre- 
sented. 

3. The date of the composition of La3amons poem is of 
great interest, but unhappily, is not free from the obscurity 
which seems to attend all early remains in a vernacular 
language. It would appear at first almost impossible, for 


» | vol. i. p. 181. * vol. ii. p. 27. 
3 vol. ii. p. 597. ’ * vol. iii. p. 155. 
VOL. I. b 


“a. > a a be - 
* . ‘s ) 
XViii PREFACE. ’ 


an historical composition of more than 30,000 lines to 
have been written, without some incidental allusion being 
made to personages living at the time; and it would seem 
that the author had purposely abstained from giving us this 
desirable information. A single line might have sufficed 
to tell us all we want to know; but after the most careful 
scrutiny of the work, it must be acknowledged, that it is only 
by inference we can assume the period when the author 
lived. By the general stream of writers from the time of 
Wanley, Lajamon has been usually assigned to the reign of 
Henry the Second, or the close of the twelfth century ; and 
the more precise date of 1180 is assumed by Ellis for the 
completion of the work, yet on grounds quite unsatisfactory’. * 
If we look into the poem itself, the only passages that 
can be gleaned, which bear any allusion to contemporary 
events, are few in number, and not sufficiently precise. The 
lines on the ruined state of the city of Leicester*, no doubt . 
refer to its destruction by the forces of Henry II. under the 
Justiciary Richard de Lucy, in the year 1173°. Another 
passage mentions the change in the pronunciation of the 
name of York, made by the northern men, which is stated 
to have taken place ‘‘ not long before*.”” A third passage 
contains an account of the establishment of the Rome-feoh » 
1 In the second edition of Ellis’s Specimens of Early English Poets, 1801, 
the date was conjectured to be 1185, on the absurd supposition, that Laza- 
mon was occupied thirty years in composing his poem, reckoning from the 
year in which Wace finished the Brut; and this date was repeated by Mit- 
ford, Harmony of Language, 8°. 1804. In the third edition, 1811, Ellis re- ‘ 
duced the thirty years to twenty-five, and hence the date of 1180. Yet Cony- 
beare, D’Israeli, and others have not scrupled to repeat this date, without 
examination! Campbell, on the contrary, would place him only ten or 
fifteen years after the middle of the twelfth century. 
~ 2 vol. i, p. 124. 
3 Rog. Wendover, Flores Hist. vol. ii. p. 373. ed. Coxe. Leland, Collec- 
tanea, vol. ii. pp. 207, 330. 
s * “nawiht 3eare,” vol. i. p. 113. See Notes, vol. iii. p. 315. 


oa 


: 


PREFACE, a = xix 
» 
or Peter-pence, and a doubt is expressed by the writer as 
to the continuance of the payment’. This will correspond 
extremely well with the date of 1205, at which time, it 
appears, that King John and his nobles resisted the Popes 
mandate for its collection*. Now if we turn to the pre- 
fatory lines at the commencement of the poem, we shall 
find that this date is, to a certain degree, corroborated. 
Lazamon tells us, that Wace presented his book when 
finished ‘‘ to the noble Eleanor, who was Henrys queen, 
the mighty king.” It would appear quite certain, that 
such an expression could not have been used, had Henry 
then been living, and this will bring us to the year 1189°. 
vol. iii, p. 286. 

. * See the passuge from Robert of Gloucester, quoted in the Notes, vol. iii. 
p. 434. This fact is confirmed by the letters addressed by King John, in May 
1206, to the clergy convened at St. Albans, forbidding them to take any mea- 
sures under the Popes authority, towards the payment of the Romescot, which 
he states to be “ non sulum in laicorum gravem perniciem, sed etiam in totius 
regni nostri intolerabile dispendium.”” Foedera, vol. i. pt. i. p. 94. Wilkins, 
Concilia, vol. i. p. 514. It may perhaps be objected, that these lines of 
Lajamon may equally well apply to Henry the Seconds reign, since in 1164 
the king ordered the payment of Peter-pence to be discontinued, and again 
in 1169, when strictinjunctions were issued to the same effect. See Lyt- 

, Hist. Hen. II. vol. ii. pp. 401, 528, Hist. Litt. de la Fr. tom. xiv. 


a: 541. But these dates would seem too early for the composition of the 


poem, according to the judgment of the best-informed Anglo-Saxon scho- 
lars, and, moreover, are at variance with the date of 1189, established from 
Lajzamons preface. _ 

3 Ritson comes the nearest to this date, but wholly by accident. In 
his preface to the Ancient English Metrical Romances, 1802, p. xxiv, he 
assumes the year 1188, as a date at which “the work of Lazjamon may be 
thought to have been finished,” but in p. lxx he assigns the author to 
the reign of Henry II., and in p. Ixxxiii to “about the time of Henry II. 
or Richard I.” Mr. Wright, in discussing the passage mentioned in the 
text, is inclined to infer from it, that Laz3amon wrote either at the end of 
Henry the Seconds reign, or no long time after his death. Biogr. Brit. 
A.-Norm. Period, p.439. Yet in another place, he speaks of the “age of 
Layamon, in the earlier half of the thirteenth century.”” Biogr. Brit. A.-Saz. 
Period, p. 106. 

+ b2 


ae 


we 
: me 
XX - PREFACE. 


But we may perhaps advance a step further, and fairly 
presume, that Eleanor herself was then dead ; and as her 
decease took place at an advanced age in 1204, the date 

will correspond very accurately with ‘the time when the 
Rome-feoh was forbidden. It was not till the accession of 

John that the Queen- mother retired to her own territories 

of Aquitaine, and it would seem improbable, that La3amon 

would mention her in such brief terms, had she been living 

at the time in England, with the powers of sovereignty in- 

trusted to her charge. After all, it must be admitted, that 

the passage is not perfectly conclusive ; but joined to other 
circumstances, and the internal evidence afforded by the 
language of Lajamons poem, it would appear most pro- > 
bable, that it was written or completed at the beginning of 

the thirteenth century. In forming this opinion it is satis- 

factory to be able to adduce the authority of some recent 
writers, who have come to the same conclusion from 
different premises. Mr. Sharon Turner writes, ‘‘ We must - 
place Lajamon after 1155; and as Normandy was not 

severed from England till after 1200, I would not date the 

rise of English composition before that period, hehe 
Great, whose encouragement has been the chief producing 
cause of our literature, were not previously interested to ~ 
reward any other than the Anglo-Norman, in which they 
had been studiously educated’.” In a note he subjoins, in 


—_-  ——— 7 


1 Hist. Engl. M. A. vol. v. p. 216. ed. 1830. This argumentis of consider- 
able weight, for we can hardly suppose that Lazamon translated his poem 
for the sake of the same class of ‘‘lewed men,” to whom a century later 
Robert Mannyng addressed his Chronicle. Bishop Percy has remarked, that 
at more than a century after the Conquest, both the Norman and English 
languages would be heard in the houses of the Great; and refers to the 
English verses quoted by Lambard and Camden. Reliques, p. xxxii. ed. 
1794. Ritson would postpone this intercourse of the two tongues to the 
end of the fourteenth century, but without sufficient reason. Anc.L.M. Rom, 
Diss. p. xx. 


ae ps 


mis eae 
-. - 
. 4 — ’ 


PREFACE. ¥ xxi 


regard to the date of Lazamons work, ‘I would postpone 
it till after 1200.” So also Mr. Guest, in his work on 
English Rhythms, says, that although La3jamons poem 
may have been written before 1200, yet that he would 
rather fix it a few years after that date’; his opinion being 
influenced, apparently, by the use of mixed rhime, of which 
he refers to Lazjamons work as containing the earliest 
English example. By Dr. Lappenberg likewise, and Dr. 
Grundtvig, La3amon is placed in the thirteenth century*. 
4. The style and metrical arrangement of the poem, 
together with its dialect and grammatical structure, remain 
to be considered. It is admitted by all, that however ques- 
tionable the influence of the Norman conquest on the 
Anglo-Saxon language may have been, yet that no doubt 
can exist as to the effect produced by it on the vernacular 
poetry. The patronage afforded by the nobles to the Anglo- 
Norman minstrels, and the banishment of the Anglo-Saxon 
tongue from the vicinity of the court for upwards of a cen- 
tury, must inevitably have caused that comparative dearth 


of original compositions during the close of the eleventh | 


and the greater part of the following century, which is now 
pparent. A more direct proof of the predominance of 


__ the Anglo-Norman literature is this, that when we again 


meet with the efforts of the native Muse to raise herself 
from the oblivion into which she had been cast, we no 
longer find in them the same characteristics as before, but 
a simpler style has in great measure usurped the place 
of those highly figurative forms and frequent inversions, 
which distinguish the Anglo-Saxon poems of an earlier 
period. It is considered by Turner as a fortunate circum- 
stance, that such a change should have taken place, and 


' vol. ii. p. 282. ef. vol. i. p. 190. 
® Hist. of England, Introd. p. xxxi. translated by Thorpe, 8°. 1845. 
Grundtvig, Prospectus, p. 12. 


as 


xxii " 4 PREFACE. 


he attributes it mainly to the introduction of rhime by the 
Normans, which was gradually adopted into the vernacular 
poetry’. It is, however, too much to assume with Tyr- 
whitt*, that English poetry was wholly indebted to the 
Normans for this prevalent feature in its structure ; for it 
is certain, that rhime was known and practised to some 
extent before the Conquest’, although it is probable, that 
it was seldom or never used in compositions of a higher 
or graver cast. 

The fact itself of a translation of Waces poem by a priest 
of one of the midland counties, is sufficient evidence how 
widely the knowledge of the writings of the trouvéres was di- 
spersed, and it would appear a natural consequence, that not 
only the outward form of the Anglo-Norman versification, 
but also that many of the terms used in the original would 
be borrowed. This, however, is but true in a very trifling 
degree, compared with the extent of the work; for if we 
number the words derived from the French (even including 
some that may have come directly from the Latin), we do 
not find in the earlier text of Lajamons poem so many as 
fifty‘, several of which were in usage, as appears by the 
Saxon Chronicle, previous to the middle of the twelfth 
century. Of this number the later text retains about 
thirty, and adds to them rather more than forty’, which 


Hist. Engl. M. A. vol. iv. pp. 309, 318. 

2 Essay on the Lang. of Chaucer, etc. p, 41. ed. 1822. Compare Camp- 
bells Essay, p. 23. ed. 1819. 

8 See the Rhiming Poem in the Exeter MS. p. 352. ed. Thorpe, and the 
remarks of Guest, Hist. Engl. Rhythms, vol. i. p. 119; vol. ii. p. 94. 

4 The principal of these are, admirail, appostolie, astronomie, barun, 
bunnen, canele, cheisil, coriun, corune, duc, eastresse, Salsie, flum, ginne, 
haleweie, hune, ire, latinier, machunes, mahun, male, mantel, montaine, nap, 
paradis, pouere, processioun, scar, scurmen, senaht, servise, sire, sot, talie, 
timpe, etc. 

> Among them are the following, abbey, anued, atyr, changede, chapel, 


PREFACE. Xxiil 


are not found in the earlier version; so that if we reckon 
ninety words of French origin in both texts, containing 
together more than 56,800 lines, we shall be able to form 
a tolerably correct estimate how little the English language 
was really affected by foreign converse, even as late as the 
middle of the thirteenth century. 

It is a remarkable circumstance, that we find preserved 
in many passages of La3amons poem the spirit and style 
of the earlier Anglo-Saxon writers. No one can read his 
descriptions of battles and scenes of strife, without being 
reminded of the Ode on A®thelstans victory at Brunan- 
burh’, The ancient mythological genders of the sun and 
moon are still unchanged*; the memory of the witena-gemot 
‘has not yet become extinct’, and the neigh of the hengest 
still seems to resound in our ears*. Very many phrases 
are purely Anglo-Saxon’, and with slight change, might 
have been used in Cedmon or Atlfric. A foreign scholar 
and poet, versed both in Anglo-Saxon and Scandinavian 
literature, has declared, that tolerably well read as he is in 
the rhyming chronicles of his own country and of others, 
he has found La3amons beyond comparison the most lofty 


chevetaine, conseil, contre, cri, delaie, eyr, failede, fol, folie, gile, gisarme, 
grace, granti, guyse, harsun, honure, hostage, manere, nonnerie, paide, pais, 
paisi, parc, passi, pensiles, prisune, route, sarevi, seine, tavel, tresur, truage, 


tumbe, etc. 
1 See Taylors note on Warton, Hist. E. P. p. Ixxxi. ed. 1840. 
2 See the Glossary. 3 vol. ii. p. 57. * vol. i. p. 151. 


5 It has been remarked, that but few similes occur in Anglo-Saxon 
poetry. In Lazamon also they are not numerous, and chiefly borrowed 
from field-sports or natural objects, such as the wild-boar, wild-crane, the 
fox, the goat, hail, etc. The lion is frequently alluded to, as alsoin Wace. 
Another feature worth notice, consists in the numerous synonyms applied 
(as in A.-Saxon) to a man or warrior; and also the number of terms used 
to express motion. Thus we have in the later text to represent the verb 
liSen, the terms come, go, glide, passi, ride, sie, saily, wende, and wonie, ve- 
sides the forms /ipi and Jipe. 


=x a 


XXiv PREFACE. 


and animated in its style, at every moment reminding the 
reader of the splendid phraseology of Anglo-Saxon verse’. 
It may also be added, that the colloquial character of 
much of the work renders it peculiarly valuable as a mo- 
nument of language, since it serves to convey to us, in all 
probability, the current speech of the writers time as it 
passed from mouth to mouth. 

The structure of Lajamons poem consists partly of 
lines in which the alliterative system of the Anglo-Saxons 
is preserved, and partly of couplets of unequal length 
rhiming together. Many couplets indeed occur, which 
have both of these forms, whilst others are often met 
with which possess neither. The latter therefore must 
have depended wholly on accentuation, or have been 
corrupted in transcription. The relative proportion of 
each of these forms is not to be ascertained without 
extreme difficulty, since the author uses them every- 
where intermixed, and slides from alliteration to rhime 
or from rhime to alliteration in a manner perfectly arbi- 
trary. The alliterative portion, however, predominates 
on the whole greatly over the lines rhiming together, even 
including the imperfect or assonant terminations, which 
are very frequent*. In the structure of La3amons rhime 

' Grundtvig, Prospectus, p. 13. 

? This license may have been partly borrowed from the French, by whom 
it was used from the commencement of the twelfth century, both in the 
poetry of the northern and southern provinces. See a paper by Raynouard, 
in the Journal des Savans, Juillet, 1833. Thus in Lazamon we meet with 
such rhimes as sungen and kinge,—londe and uunde—rede and neode,— 
gold and hond,—mare and dure,—clubbe and rugge,—crafte and leofte,— 
‘fure and fore, with many others of a similar kind. Of another class are 
such assonances as sode and oder,—imaked and for-saken,—ibursted and 
purste,—atter and hatte,—vareS and scare,—Glochestre and feste,—rided 
and abide,—water and feht, in all of which cases the final syllable of one 


line seems to become quiescent, or to be slurred over in recitation. The 
same usage in later poems of the thirteenth century is noticed hy Guest, 


™ 


PREFACE, XXV 


Tyrwhitt thought he could perceive occasionally an imita- 
tion of the octosyllabic measure of the French original, 
whilst Mitford finds in it the identical triple measure 
of Piers Ploughman. The subject however has been dis- 
cussed more fully, and with greater learning, by Mr. Guest, 
in his History of English Rhythms, in which he shews, that 
the rhiming couplets of Lajamon are founded on the models 
of accentuated Anglo-Saxon rhythms of four, five, six, or 
seven accents. A long specimen is given by him, in vol. ii. 
pp. 114—124, with the accents marked, both of the allitera- 
tive and rhiming couplets, by which it is seen, that those 
of six and five accents are used most frequently, but that 
the poet changes at will from the shortest to the longest 
measure, without the adoption of any consecutive principle. 
In the later text, as might be expected, both the allitera- 
tion and the rhime are often neglected, but these faults 
may probably be often attributed to the errors of the 
scribe. 

With respect to the dialect in which La3amons work is 
‘written, we can have little difficulty in assuming it to be 
that of North Worcestershire, the locality in which he 
lived’. But as both the texts of the poem in their present 
state exhibit the forms of a strong western idiom, the 
following interesting question immediately arises, how 


vol. i. p. 316. The more obvious liberties in the rhime of La3amon are 
to elide the final n of any rhiming syllable, and to rhime together syllables 
in nd and ng. 

' Lajamon has been assigned by Mr. Stevenson to “ Erneleghe upon 
the Severn, in Gloucestershire.” Introd.'to Hule and Niztengale, p. vi. 
This seems to have misled Mr. Guest, who calls the dialect of Lazamon, 

_ that “spoken in South Gloucestershire,” vol. ii. p. 111, and even when a 
reference to Nash had enabled him to correct this error, he still suggests 
that “‘ Lajamon may have brought his peculiarities from Gloucestershire,” 
vol. ii. p. 408. There is no evidence whatever that he came from Glou- 
cestershire, or ever was resident there. 


Ss bad 
Xxvi PREFACE. 


such a dialect should have been current in one of the chief 
counties of the kingdom of Mercia? The origin of this 
kingdom, as Sir Francis Palgrave has remarked’, is very 
obscure, but there is reason to believe that a mixed race 
of people contributed to form and occupy it. We may 
therefore conclude, either that the Hwiccas were of Saxon 
rather than Angle origin, or that subsequent to the union 
of Mercia with the kingdom of Wessex, the western dialect 
gradually extended itself from the south of the Thames as 
far as the courses of the Severn, the Wye, the Tame, and 
the Avon, and more or less pervaded the counties of Glou- 
cestershire, Worcestershire, Herefordshire, Warwickshire, 
and Oxfordshire. 

That this western dialect extended throughout the Chan- 
nel counties from east to west, and was really the same as 
the southern, appears from a remarkable passage in Giral- 
dus Cambrensis® (written in 1204), in which he says, ‘‘ As 
in the southern parts of England, and chiefly about Devon- 
shire, the language now appears more unpolished (incom- 
posita), yet in a far greater degree savoring of antiquity, 
—the northern parts of the island being much corrupted 
by the frequent incursions of the Danes and Norwegians, 
—so it observes more the propriety of the original tongue, 
and the ancient mode of speaking. Of this you have not 
only an argument, but a certainty, from the circumstance, 
that all the English books of Bede, Rabanus’, king Alfred, 


! Rise and Progr. of the Engl. Comm. vol. i. pp. 430, 571. 

® Cambrie@ Descriptio, lib. i. c. 6. p. 886. ed. 1602. In 1340 the dialect 
of Kent possessed most of the forms which are found in Robert of Gloucester. 
See MS. Arundel, No. 57. Even as late as the seventeenth century, the 
marks of the southern dialect, as pointed out by Gil, im his Logonomia 
Anglica, 1619, p. 16, namely, v for f, z for s, etc., are precisely those of 
the west of England. 

$ Rabanus Maurus is claimed by some writers as a native of Ireland, 
but by others as a German. He was a disciple of Alcuin, and became 


$e 
> 
PREFACE. XXVil 


or any others, will be found written in the forms proper to 
this idiom.” It is difficult at present to understand how 
far Giraldus meant to assimilate together the spoken lan- 
guage of Devonshire and the written works of Alfred and 
others, but in all probability the chief difference must have 
consisted in pronunciation, and in the disregard of certain 
grammatical forms, which would not of themselves consti- 
tute a separate dialect. There can be no doubt, that the 
written language previous to the Conquest was more stable 
in its character, and more observant of orthographical and 
grammatical accuracy than the spoken ; but it is impossible 
to collate together Anglo-Saxon manuscripts, without 
being struck with the occasional use of anomalous forms, 
which are termed by grammarians—rather too arbitrarily 
perhaps—corruptions'. Without therefore going so far as 
Ritson (whose opinion of itself was little worth), that “‘ the 
vulgar English of the period was essentially different from 
the Saxon used in the charters of the Conqueror*;” or Sir 
Francis Palgrave, who thinks, ‘‘ that a colloquial language 
approaching nearly to modern English, seems to have existed 
concurrently with the more cultivated language, which we 
call Anglo-Saxon’,”’ there are many reasons to induce us 
to believe, that the spoken language in the reign of Edward 
the Confessor did not materially differ from that which is 
found in manuscripts a century later. 


Abbot of Fulda, Bishop of Metz. He died in 856. None out of the nume- 
rous works written by him are known to exist in Anglo-Saxon at present. 
See Fabricius, and Hist. Litt. de la Fr. tom. v. p. 151. 

! See Professor Hulbertsmas remarks on the orthographical changes in 
Anglo-Saxon and Friesic, and on the passage from Ceedmon found in Bede, 
ap. Bosworth, Dict. Pref. pp. xxxvi, lviii. 

2 Diss. on Romance, p. Ixvi. n. 

8 Hist. of Engl. p. 174. He refers to the Hatton MS. as containing a 
version of the New Testament in this colloquial language, whereas it is 
really written in the Semi-Saxon of the twelfth century. See ante, p. v. 


= < 
- 


an 


XXVill PREFACE. 


That the dialects of the western, southern and midland 
counties contributed together to form the language of the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and consequently to lay 
the foundation of modern English, seems unquestionable, 
and it is remarkable, that the same period is pointed out 
by philologists for the origin of Italian from the ancient 
and varied dialects of that country’. 

The language of Lajamon belongs to that transition 
period in which the groundwork of Anglo-Saxon phraseo- 
logy and grammar still existed, although gradually yield- 
ing to the influertce of the popular forms of speech. We 
find in it, as in the later portion of the Saxon Chronicle, 

: marked indications of a tendency to adopt those termina- 
tions and sounds which characterise a language in a state 
of change, and which are apparent also in some other 
branches of the Teutonic tongue. The use of a as an 
article ;—the change of the Anglo-Saxon terminations a 
and an into e and en, as well as the disregard of inflections 
and genders ;—the masculine forms given to neuter nouns 
in the plural ;—the neglect of the feminine terminations 
of adjectives and pronouns, and confusion between the 
definite and indefinite declensions ;—the introduction of 
the preposition to before infinitives, and occasional use of 
weak preterites of verbs and participles instead of strong ; 
—the constant occurrence of en for on in the plurals of 
verbs, and frequent elision of the final ¢ ;—together with 
the uncertainty in the rule for the government of preposi- 
tions,—all these variations, more or less visible in the two 
texts of Lazjamon*, combined with the vowel-changes, 
(which are numerous, although not altogether arbitrary’,) 

' See Hist. des Sciences Math. en Italie, 8°. Paris, 1838, by M. Libri, 
tom. i. pp. 175, 179. 

? 2 A more lengthened analysis of the grammatical forms used in La3amon 
will be subjoined to the present Preface. 

$ See Kembles paper in the Philological Museum, vol. ii. p: 383, 


é 


* . 
£ o — 


PREFACE. Xxix 


will shew at once the progress made in the course of two 
centuries, in departing from the ancient and purer gram- 
matical forms, as found in Anglo-Saxon manuscripts. 
One of the most striking peculiarities in the earlier text 
of Lajamon, is what has been termed nunnation', consist- 
ing of the addition of a final n to certain cases of nouns 
and adjectives, to some tenses of verbs, and to several 
other parts of speech. The occurrence of these forms is 
by no means uniform or constant, and in numerous in- 
stances of final rhyme, might have been used for the sake 
of euphony ; but there still remain so many examples of 
this final n, not authorised by the rules of Anglo Saxon 
grammar, as to render it probable, that its use was re- 
stricted to the dialect in which the poem is written. In re- 
gard to nouns, its usage is chiefly noticeable in the dative 
singular of masculines and neuters of the complex orders, 
and in the nominative singular of feminines; as also in 
the nominative singular and nominative and accusative 
plural of adjectives of the indefinite declension ; and it 
would seem, that this anomaly was occasioned by the ten- 
dency of the dialect to adopt the weak declensions in pre- 
ference to the strong. The same peculiarity is met with 
in some adjectival pronouns ; in the genitive plural heoren, 
their; in many adverbs, and even in numerals and inter- 
jections*. In verbs, the final n appears generally in the 
first person singular of the present tense, and third person 
singular of the preterite, but is occasionally found in the 
first and second persons of the past tense ; the second and 
third persons singular of the present subjunctive ; and the 
second person singular of the imperative mood. The former 
of these anomalies is accounted for by the ancient Teutonic 


' See Guests Hist. Engl. Rh. vol. ii. p. 111. 
* In respect to prepositions, it is remarkable that the final » is almost 
always found in Anglo-Saxon. 


Xxx PREFACE. 


form on, an, en, in the first person present tense, but with 
respect to the other tenses, particularly the preterites, 
it would be desirable to gain more information than we at 
present possess. In the later text, the n final is generally 
elided, even in regular forms, and therefore we should 
hardly expect to find in it any instances of nunnation, yet 
there are a few words, which, if not mere errors of the 
scribe, appear to retain the anomaly in question’. It must 
be observed also, that there are many passages in the 
earlier text, in which this pleonastic n has been struck out 
or erased by a second hand, and sometimes by the first, so 
that it is manifest, that some doubt must have existed as 
to the propriety of its usage. The instances referred to 
are collected in a note subjoined*. 

It has been already remarked, that both texts of La3a- 
mon (especially the earlier) exhibit strong marks of a 
western dialect, which is perceptible in the termination of 
the present tense plural in th, and infinitives in i, ie, or 
y; the forms of the plural personal pronouns, heo, heore, 
heom ; the frequent occurrence of the prefix i before past 
participles ; the use of v forf; and prevalence of the vowel 
u for i ory, in such words as dude, hudde, hulle, putte, hure, 
etc. But on comparing the two texts carefully together, 


' These words are, —cupen (i. 75); fulden (ii. 202); letten (i. 88); weren 
(i. 265, 433. ii. 383); wolden (i. 63); eren (i. 78); bliuen (ii. 331); and 
nejen (iii. 28, 149). In regard to the euphonic forms of ton, son, bin, see 
the Notes, vol. iii. p. 475. 

* In nouns, sunen (i. 170), hepen (i. 250), dazen and 3eren (ii. 610), 
folken (ii, 613), liven (iii. 216); in adjectives, ueien (iii. 110), iguemen 
(iii, 210); in verbs, 1 p. pr. 3ifwen (ii. 478), wullen (iii. 113), halsin (iii. 
294); 2 p. p. weoren (i. 313. ii. 329, 337), drozen and of-slozen (ii. 268); 
3 p. p. therden (i. 138), graiteden (i. 392), funden (i. 415), hehten (iii. 17), 
sturten (iii. 34), pohten (iii. 156), fuleden (iii. 221), bihoueden (iii. 242); 
3 p. pr. sb. biden (i. 147), weoren (ii. 123, 375, 460); in adverbs, westen 
(iii. 61), swipen (i. 215). 


PREFACE. XXXxi 


some remarkable variations are apparent in the later, which 
seem to arise, not from its having been composed at a more 
recent period, but from the infusion of an Anglian or North- 
ern element into the dialect. Thus, for the initial sc of the 
first text, we almost always find in the later a simple s, in 
such words as sal, solde, sollen, same, sar, sende, seren, silde, 
sip, sonde, sop, srud, sufte, fresipe, etc. When sc occurs, 
it may be considered as the exception to the rule, and 
sometimes both forms are then met with’. It has been 
asserted by a competent authority, that the presence of 
such forms may be considered as an unequivocal indication 
of the Anglian or Northumbrian dialect*; and that they are 
still universally prevalent in North Anglian, as they formerly 
were in Middle Anglian. It would not therefore seem im- 
probable, that the later text of Lajamon may have been 
composed or transcribed in one of the counties contermi- 
nous to the Anglian border, and perhaps we might fix on 
the eastern side of Leicestershire as the locality. 

Some further peculiarities may be noticed in the later 
text, which are interesting in the history of our vernacular 
forms of speech. For the feminine pronoun heo, she, of the 
earlier text, it invariably reads 3e0 or 3e’; and in the plural 


1 The only cases of sc in the later text are,—scapie, scecky, sceald (but 
also seald), scene, sceote, sceap (also seep), scere, scoldre (also soldre), and 
sceop, scopte (also sop, sipte), iscrud, scuke and scuttes. Two instances also 
occur in the later text of the third person present tense singular in es, 
namely, comes (i. 171), and sendes (iii. 19), which would denote a Northern 
influence. 

® In the latter part of Robert of Gloucester, printed by Hearne from the 
Cotton MS. Cal. A. x1., he has most unwarrantably altered ssalde, ssolde, 
and similar forms, into sal and solde. The double initial ss, which, no doubt, 
was pronounced sh, is found also in the Kentish dialect of the Ayenbite of 
Inwyt, in 1340, MS. Arund. 57. 

5 In the Saxon Chronicle, a°. 1140 (written by a monk of Peterborough); 
sce first occurs, and often afterwards. Scho and sche are both used in 
Havelok, and scho in the Chronicle of Robert Mannyng, in the fourteenth 


x 


XXxXii PREFACE. 


hi or hit is constantly written for heo', and 3am or ham 
generally for the dat. and acc. heom. The dual form of 
the pronoun’ is never found in the later text, and the un- 
usual plural forms paie or paye are occasionally met with, 
which betray also an Anglian origin*. The disuse of n in 
infinitives, preterites and past participles is likewise de- 
serving notice, but this feature is found also in Robert of 
Gloucester, which proves that the western dialect from an 
early period was less tenacious than the Mercian in re- 
taining these terminations. 

The orthography of both the manuscripts of La3amons 
work is occasionally corrupt and variable, but may doubt- 
less be attributed in great measure to the negligence of 
the transcribers, or variation of handwriting. The chief 
characteristic of the later text in regard to vowel-sounds, 
is the substitution of o for a*, and still more extensively 
for u, as may be seen in the Glossary. Sometimes an 
Anglian preference for the slender vowels is shown in such 


century, whilst in the recent edition of Piers Ploughman (1842), she seems 
universal. In the Ormulum we find 3ho, which approaches nearer to 3¢0. 
The western and Mercian form of feo is still preserved as hoo in S. Staf- 
fordshire, S. Lancashire and Cheshire. 

' In the older MS. of Robert of Gloucester (written shortly after 1300, 
and therefore contemporary with the author) the plural pronoun is always 
hii, but in the later copy, MS. Harl. 201, we find heo. In the Ayenbite of 
Inwyt, we have hi or hy, and dat. ham. In the same curious work, Ai is 
used for the feminine pronoun. 

® It is retained in the Ormulum, in the Hule and Ni3ztengale, MS. Cott. 
Cal. A. 1x., andin Havelok, v. 1832. 

3 In the Ormulum we have pegg and pegge, they, their, which have been 
supposed to be the earliest examples of these forms. But in the later Anglo- 
Saxon version of the New Testament, we find pege, Joh. xii. 20. xiv. 12. 
Robert Mannyng invariably has pei or pai. 

+ Sometimes, but not often, the contrary takes place, as man, mani, fram, 
wanene, panene, nam, langede, weap, etc., in all which cases the earlier text 
has o. The interchange between these vowels, even in Anglo-Saxon times, 
must have been very extensive. 


——_— . ? t 


PREFACE. XXXiil 


instances as gildene, kichene, pinche, sipte, etc. pilk occurs 
once only, and never in the earlier text. In the later, ea 
is frequently employed for e or @; also a for e, and ou for 
u. In both texts eo interchanges with e, and in the later, 
with a, ea, and even with i, 0 andu. Words beginning 
with qu in the earlier text take cw in the later, which ap- 
proaches more nearly to the Anglo-Saxon usage. The 
aspirate h is often added improperly in both texts, but 
more frequently in the second. As a final, it takes the 
place of c, in ah for ac’; it also stands for ht, and, in both 
texts, for 3°. 

In respect to consonants, c and d are sometimes elided 
after 1, n, r, in both texts, as is also g final after n, and in 
the middle of words; a peculiarity still preserved in the 
dialect of the west. We find in the first text d often used 
for 6, both medial and final. 4ird-e, or eard-e, for earth, 
is peculiar to it, and is never found in the later text. In 
the latter p is often met with at the end of a word, in the 
place of h*. Other peculiarities, such as the occurrence 
of f and s for h, and sw for sc, are pointed out in the 
Glossarial Remarks appended to the third volume. 

Besides the above, there are some variations of greater 
moment in the second text of Lajamon, which shew a change 
to have taken place in the language, in the course of half 
a century, to a far greater extent than a mere difference 
in orthography or pronunciation. There are many pass- 
ages or words in the earlier text, which appear to have 
become unintelligible or obsolete to the compiler of the 
later ; and these are uniformly omitted, or others supplied 
in their place. Several words also of the former, which do 


1 So also in Old High German. Cf. Graaf, Althochd. Sprachschaiz, in 
v. oh. 

® See Glossar. Remarks, vol. iii. pp. 445, 496. 

$ ib. vol. iii. p. 442. 
VOL. I. c 


bas 
_ 


XXX1V PREFACE. 


not present any apparent difficulty, are never used by the 
more recent writer, such as bern, a child, bache, a valley, 
fri8, peace, hewares, spies, here-to3e, a leader, freinien, to 
ask, freoien, to set free, herzien, to ravage, quecchen, to 
move, to-somne, together, and others. In numerous in- 
stances throughout the poem equivalents are introduced, 
as heuele for feie-siSe, harme for balewe, dead for feie, smot 
for at-ran, wile for stound, wilde for rimie, bold for steap, 
etc. On the other hand, we meet with some few words in 
the later text which are not in the earlier, as staleworpe, 
brave, mainliche, strongly, manede, manhood, clopi, to 
clothe, drese, to fall down, glissenede, glistened, and some 
others, but chiefly of Norman origin. 

The remaining peculiarities of dialect or orthography in 
both texts may be readily learnt from the Glossary, or are 
pointed out in the Glossarial Remarks. 


Having thus discussed, as far as seems requisite, the 
more material subjects of inquiry, it only remains to give 
some description of the manuscripts from which La3amons 
poem is published, and of the plan adopted in editing it. 

The Cotton MS. Caligula A. rx. is a small quarto, writ- 
ten on vellum, containing 259 leaves, on the first of which 
is the autograph of Sir Robert Cotton. The volume con- 
sists of two portions, originally distinct, the former of 
which is occupied by the poem of La3amon, written on 
192 leaves’, in the early part of the thirteenth century. 
On the fly-leaf at the beginning is a notice of the contents 
of the volume, in the handwriting of Richard James, Sir 
Robert Cottons librarian, but not very accurately drawn 
up*. The writing is in double columns, containing gene- 


1 As numbered, only 191, but fol. 129 is double. 
* Lazamons poem is described thus, ‘ Historia Brytonum vetusté An- 


PREFACE. XXXV 


rally thirty-four lines in each, and two hands are clearly 
apparent in it. The character at the commencement of 
the poem is in a neat uniform upright letter, and may be 
judged of by the annexed fac-simile, together with the 
ornamental initial letter (the only one in the manuscript), 
representing the author composing his work. This hand 
continues for several leaves, but at fol. 16°, in the story 
of King Lear, a larger hand commences, which is more 
irregular and negligent. At fol. 86 the original hand is 
resumed, but only for two pages and a half, and the larger 
hand then continues to the end, and increases in irregu- 
larity as it proceeds. Both hands are coeval, as proved 
not only by their interchanging, but also by the rubricator 
having at the same time marked the initial letters of each 
line throughout, and added the marginal names in red. 
Previous also to the rubricators task, the text seems to 
have undergone a revision, as indicated by the plummet- 
marks in the margin, and by the corrections and erasures'. 
In some few instances a third and later hand has noted 
errors, and supplied words. ‘Towards the latter part of 
the work marginal notes in Latin occur, which in some 
instances have been mutilated by the binder. The re- 
maining portion of the volume was written at a later 
period, probably at the close of Henry the Thirds reign, 
and also by two different hands. It contains, i. The Life 
of St. Josaphaz, in French verse, by Chardry, a writer of 


glicana, per quendam Laghamonem nomine, qui vixerit apud Ernleghe 
super Sabrinam post tempora Walteri Mapis, aut circa ea tempora, cum 
illius meminerit in prefatione.” Smith in his Catalogue of the Cotton 
library, published in 1696, repeats nearly these words. Planta, in 1802, 
enlarges the notice, borrowing from Wanley, Lingg. Sept. Thesaur. vol. ii. 
p. 228, and De la Rue, Archeologia, vol. xii. 

1 At fol. 29%, c, 2. floc is on an erasure, yet the f has been touched by 
the rubricator. Other instances may be seen at ff. 25, c. 2, 33. ¢. 1, 37°, 
c. %, and 49%. c, 1. 

c2 


T's 


XXXV1 PREFACE. 


the thirteenth century', f. 192; ii. La Vie des Sept Dor- 
manz, by the same, f. 213°; iii. A short Chronicle, in 
French prose, from the arrival of the Saxons to the reign 
of Henry III.*, f. 226”; iv. The curious English poem of 
the Hule and Ni3ztengale, ascribed to John de Guldevorde’, 
f. 230; v. Several short English poems, chiefly of a reli- 
gious or moral character‘, f. 243 ; vi. Le Petit Plet, a moral 
dialogue in French verse between an old man and a young 
one, also by Chardry, f. 247°. 

The second manuscript of Lajamon, which must be re- 
garded as an abbreviated recension of his work, exists also 
in the Cottonian collection, marked Otho C. x111., and is 
described by Smith in 1696, as ‘‘ Historia Britonum, a 
Bruto ad A®thelstanum, veteri lingua Anglicana.” In the 
MS. Report on the Cotton library made in 1703°, it is 
entered as ‘‘ Codex membranaceus in 4to, constans foliis 
154.” In 1705 Wanley notices it more at length’, and 


' For some account of Chardrys writings, see De la Rue, Essais sur les 
Bardes, etc., tom. iii. p. 127. 

® The last words are, ‘‘ Apres la mort cestu rei Johan, si regna su fiz 
Henri.” 

8 Edited by Stevenson for the Roxburghe Club, in 1838, and again by 
Wright for the Percy Society, in 1843. Some difficulties attend the date 
of this poem, but it is quite impossible, in its present form, to assign the 
composition anterior to the thirteenth century. 

* All printed in Mr. Wrights volume, last referred to. It is worthy 
notice, that the first stanza of one of these poems, commencing ‘‘ Non mai 
longe liues wene,” is quoted in the Ayenbite of Inwyt, MS. Arund. 57. f. 39>. 
The Saxon p is retained in these poems, which never occurs in La3amon. 

5 See a more detailed description of the latter part of this manuscript 
in M. Francisque Michels Rapport au Ministre de l’instruction publique, 1839, 
p. 186. : 

® Preserved in the Department of MSS. British Museum. In a manuscript 
schedule of the MSS. drawn up in 1718 by Dr. R. Bentley, then Keeper of 
the Cotton library, this volume is said to contain 155 leaves, but, no doubt, 
a fly-leaf was included in this number, as in some other instances. 

7 Ap. Hickes, Lingg. Sept. Thes. vol. ii. p. 237. 


4 


2 


PREFACE. XXXVii 


ascribes it to the reign of Henry III. He prints from it the 
introductory lines or preface, and remarks, that one leaf was 
wanting at the end. This volume was one of those that 
suffered damage in the disastrous fire, which took place 
at Ashburnham House on the 23rd October, 1731, and 
was supposed for a long time to have utterly perished. It 
is stated to be wanting by Casley, in 1734', and again by 
Planta, in 1802. On such authority, it is not surprising 
to find it spoken of by Tyrwhitt in 1774, as “‘ destroyed 
by the fire,” which is re-echoed by Ritson, who laments its 
loss. The fragments, however, were collected and partially 
restored, under the superintendence of the Rev. J. Forshall, 
then Keeper of the MSS., about the year 1827, and sub- 
sequently it was first mentioned in print by Mr. Thorpe, 
in his “‘ Analecta,” who calls it ‘“‘ only a bundle of frag- 
ments,” but who prints from it the story of King Lear and 
his daughters. 

The remains of this manuscript, which must originally 
have formed a good-sized quarto, or small folio, have since 
been inlaid and bound, by my direction, and now consist of 
145 leaves, more or less imperfect. The first leaf, contain- 
ing the preface and commencement of the poem, is, unfor- 
tunately, lost?, as also the folios 137, 138, 141, 145, 148, 
150, and all after 151. The first fifty leaves are much in- 
jured and contracted, but the manuscript then becomes 
tolerably fair to read, as far as fol. 110, where the injuries 
again commence, and increase so greatly, that large por- 
tions are often wanting, and at length mere fragments are 


' Catalogue of the MSS. of the Kings Library, etc., 1734. His Report 
was drawn up on 29 January, 173}, and the original draft is still preserved 
in the Museum, 

2 In the present edition this loss is supplied from Wanley, as far as he 
has printed. 


+ 


“-, 


Pa 


XXXViil PREFACE. 


left'. The writing is in the same hand throughout, in a 
neat open letter, in double columns, each containing 38 
lines ; and initial letters of red, blue and gold are pre- 
fixed to each section of the poem. A favorable specimen, 
selected from the best-preserved portion of the volume, 
may be seen in the fac-simile annexed. In the present 
edition the deficiencies of the manuscript are indicated 
by dots. The sense may generally be supplied from the 
earlier text, except when several lines in succession are 
wanting. As to the quantity lost, on a rough calculation 
the poem when complete consisted of about 26,960 lines, 
of which about 2370 are wholly lost, and about 1000 more 
are in an injured state. The punctuation is very incor- 
rect (as is the case also not unfrequently in the earlier 
text), but this has been remedied by adopting an uniform 
punctuation throughout-the poem. It would appear also, 
from some passages, that this copy must have been par- 
tially written from recitation*. 

In editing the present work, the principal aim of the 
Editor has been to furnish the reader with as correct a 
representation of the text of the manuscripts as possible,, 
and for this purpose the originals have been collated over 
carefully several times. As it was thought desirable also 
to preserve the character of the writing as nearly as letter- 
type would admit, the abbreviations have been preserved 
throughout, but they are few in number, and present no 


1 Many of the leaves are so contracted and blackened, that the only 
means of reading them was to hold the leaf up to the light of a powerful’ 
lamp. From the tender state also of the vellum, many letters, and even 
words, have perished since the text was printed in the present work. ~ 

® So in vol. iii. p. 110, for pa ueie per feollen of the early text, we have 
the reading pa weyes weren folle. This is confirmed also by the final syl- 
lable having occasionally been changed into a pronoun, as blisse he tile 
blisse, i. 292, and dude he for dude, i. 295. 


dome: fou \b as dre 
“and al fo 


ne louede- par 


Fucsimile of ALS Call Othe € Ail. fol. ye 


' 

J os 
\ m 
7 
. ,' 


4 eh 


“h -e oy nee 
ue oN ST? 
Dg 4 one . 


Rag crn 
warren art 


dts ai 


| wal 


PREFACE. XXXIX 


particular difficulty'. An exception has been.made in re- 
gard to the marginal notes in Latin, which are printed at 
length. The alterations by the second hand are invariably 
pointed out, and the errors of the original scribe corrected 
by conjectural readings at the foot of the page. In those 
cases, however, where a letter or more are certainly erro- 
neous, and have been marked as such, by expunction, by 
the first hand, no notice is taken of them, except when 
anything may be learnt by the correction. In the trans- 
lation, which was a secondary object, but which from its 
difficulty has occasioned considerable labor, it was judged 
best to adhere as literally as possible to the text, even in 
cases where a paraphrase would have been more easy, and, 
perhaps, less obscure. A few obsolete words are retained, 
on the authority of the writers of the sixteenth century, 
and some others, which in modern acceptation have a dif- 
ferent meaning. In order to combine the two texts, the 
readings of the second are included within brackets, so as 
readily to shew the variations, without disturbing the nar- 
rative. 

To illustrate the work, much pains have been taken. 
Not only has the text of Lajamon been compared care- 
fully throughout with the printed edition of Waces Brut, 
but also with the two MSS. in the British Museum, 
Cott. Vitell. A. x. and Reg. 13 A. xx1.*_ These have been 


' These abbreviations are,—d’, de, é, en, or ne, h, he, h, ht, k, ke, 1, le, 
i, men, ii, ne, p, pro, q*, qua, q', qui, F, r’, re, uw, ver, 9, us, p’, pe, y, per, 
p, pat. 

® The Cottonian MS. isa fair and accurate copy written in the thirteenth 
century, but towards the latter end becomes somewhat abridged. The 
Royal MS. is the * in point of date, but presents a mixed text. For 
the first 52 lines it agrees with Wace, and then a totally different and ab- 
breviated version of Geoffrey is introduced, which is continued as far as 
the birth of Arthur, when the text of Wace is resumed, and continues to 
the end. This anonymous version was evidently composed by a native of 
England, as appears from ff. 70°, 74. There is a third copy of Wace in 


* | * 


xl PREFACE. 


further collated with the Latin text of Geoffrey, in the 
Heidelberg edition of 1587, corrected by a fine MS. of the 
twelfth century, which formerly belonged to Margam 
Abbey, in Glamorganshire’, With these, in addition, have 
been compared the Welsh translation of Geoffrey, falsely 
ascribed to Tysilio, translated by the Rev. Peter Roberts, 
in 1811, and the metrical versions of Geoffrey and Wace 
by Robert of Gloucester and Robert Mannyng*. Bede 
having been cited by Lajamon as one of his authorities, 
the Ecclesiastical History of that writer has been consulted 
throughout, both in Anglo-Saxon and Latin. Several other 
works have been referred to, which exist only in manu- 
script, among which may be mentioned the French anony- 
mous metrical version of Geoffrey, of the thirteenth cen- 
tury, preserved in MS. Harl. 1605; the Latin metrical 
version of the same period, dedicated to Cadioc, Bishop of 
Vannes, in Britanny, who died in 1254°; and another Latin 
version in hexameter verse, addressed to Hugh Pudsey, 
Bishop of Durham, who held the see from 1153 to 1194*. 
It was the Editors original intention to have formed a 
Glossary on the plan of those added to the Old German 
Romances of Iwein* and Wigalois, by Benecke, which 


MS. Harl. 6508, but it is written in the fourteenth century, and is a faulty 
text, although occasionally preserving a better reading. 

1 MS. Reg. 13 D. II. 

® The latter part of Mannyngs Chronicle was printed by Hearne, but 


‘the former portion still remains inedited. MS. Inner Temple Library, 


No. 511. 7. Another copy, but much abbreviated and imperfect, is in the 
Lambeth library, No. 131. 

3 MS. Cott. Julius D. x1. This copy is not perfect, but another is de- 
scribed in the Bulletin du Bibliophile, No. 16. 2° ser. 1837, p. 495, from 
which we learn the name of the person to whom it i ssed. The au- 
thor in the Catalogue of Cottonian MSS. is falsely ar to have been 
Gildas, but in the other copy it is assigned to Alexander Neckham. 

‘ MS. Cott. Vesp. A. x.; not quite perfect. 

’ The Romance of Jwein was published in 1827, but the Glossary did 
not appear till 1833. 


“> 


PREFACE. xli 


would have had the advantage of shewing the comparative 
frequency of certain forms; but after writing near 50,000 
slips, it was found impracticable to carry the design into 
execution, unless a separate volume were allotted to the 
Glossary. The comparatively easy task of a mere Verbal 
Index would not have furnished the information it was the 
Editors wish to afford, and a Glossary on a grammatical 
basis has therefore been substituted, which although it only 
contains a limited number of references, will be sufficient, 
it is hoped, to enable the meaning and structure of each 
word to be in general satisfactorily ascertained. 

It is with much regret, that the completion of the work 
has been from unavoidable and painful causes so long pro- 
tracted, but the delay has in some respects been of advan- 
tage. In the Glossarial Remarks the text throughout has 
been subjected to a careful consideration, and several 
errors in the translation corrected, to which the attention 
of the critic is invited. That some inaccuracies still re- 
main, may with justice be ascribed to the difficulties of the 
language, which all who have hitherto attempted to grapple 
with, have occasionally failed to interpret. These inaccu- 
racies, however, the Editor trusts are neither very nume- 
rous, nor so important as to impugn the general fidelity of 
his translation. He has devoted the leisure hours of many 
years of toil and anxiety to the work, and would feel a real 
satisfaction, if it should prove acceptable to those whose 
judgment is of value. 


British Museum, — 
23rd December, 1846. 


ge 


STi : rh 
O00,0¢ 1h’ iiiw 1% ; -eimrur ome : 
, (zt : fen} ef enw. $i equa 
fn nroriexns 


rom offs ocuiaedh 
: scion xdhal 
tte “er debe. Aonba 
yoit.esdetaed 

aa eniuiae> 

te jou aii 


it wh. od new 


ii) oi uietis. 
z Pi 
ins ak 20 
ras8 anise 
; ! Vay iis} aN Ps38 ial 
gate) 7 ; sh Hetaitqudo Sreckedsi vw 


-oritie Fu ** 7otliien i 7 ; A 7 er 799 OOM BSS 


to-giliobo mee oni rghit CF ee 3 jail C8, TOip ,BVOT 
i citelane ds eisd 
brre {to? to BESSY 

wiz 3-te jaortostalina 

lie Tae tashtabyy 


arti Je 


" ee | 
‘ 


tee avert 
sha hl ees 


w Meerce 


Grammatical Analysis of the Language. 


m2 


THE articles used by Lazamon are two; an or a, (replaced generally in the later 
text by on,) and pe. 

a is only the contracted form of an, and is prefixed to singular nouns and ad- 
jectives beginning with a consonant, in all cases and genders. In the phrases 
a lut 3eren (i. 211) and a lute wifmen (ii. 65), as well as, in the later text, ane 
Seue wifmen and one feuze winter (i. 86), the nouns are in the genitive case plural, 
according to the rule of Anglo-Saxon grammar. A similar construction takes 
place in a pusend (ii. 612), an hundrad pund (ii. $16); and this serves to explain a 
difficulty, that has perplexed many modern writers on grammar. 

an or on is also the numeral one, and equivalent both to an and sum in Anglo- 
Saxon, like the former of which it is declined. It retains in the early text the 
forms of the gen. m. or n., the gen. and dat. f. and ace. m., but in the later the 
feminine forms are never used, and the others often neglected. 

The definite article be is declined nearly as in Anglo-Saxon, and the vowel in 
the oblique cases is much varied, as is the case in the more recent Anglo-Saxon 
manuscripts. The fem. forms beo' or ba are not found in the later text, which 
also frequently neglects the gen. and dat. f. and expresses the gen. m. or n. often 
by pis*. In the earlier text a distinction is generally, but not always, observed 
between the dat. m. and n. bon or ban and the acc. m. bene, but occasionally bane 
used for both cases, as it is invariably in the second text for the accusative®, 
Only one instance of the gen. pl. bare is found in the later text (i. 142). In both 
texts an indeclinable be is often used before all cases and genders, as in Anglo- 
Saxon ; and owing to the gradual increase of its use in the fourteenth century, the 
earlier changes of termination became quite obsolete. The modern usage is clearly 
apparent in the later text of Lazamon, which reads pe kinges borle (iii. 20) and be 
cwene cun (i. 15), for bes kinges birle and bere quene cun of the earlier text. 

Occasionally we find the form of baie or pai used for the definite article before 
plural nouns, which would seem to be an error, arising from some confusion be- 
tween the article and the pronoun. 


1 See Glossar. Rem. val ti p. 441. 

2 Some obscurity is occasioned sometimes by this form, as it is the same with the gen. 
of the pronoun demonstrative pis. See the Glossary. 

3 pane is also found in the Saxon Chron, a®. 1127, and the Hule and Nistengale, but 
pene in Kyng Horn and Robert of Gloucester. 


_* 


xliv GRAMMATICAL ANALYSIS. 


The masculine nouns of the first or simple declension are few in number’, and 
end in the nom. in e, gen. en, dat. and acc. e or en; pl. nom. acc. en or e, gen. en 
or ene, and dat. en, which is sufficiently close to the Anglo-Saxon model ; the vowel 
a haying been changed to e*, and d. pl. um into en*, which regularly obtains in 
nouns and adjectives. Sometimes, but rarely, the nom. takes 2, as iueren (i. 101), 
swiken (ii. 131). In the later text this declension is uniformly found with e in the 
singular, and in the plural es or e; a proof of the tendency of the language to con- 
vert the simple forms to complex. 

The masculine nouns of the second or complex declension are declined with 
much regularity in the early text, ending in the nom. and acc. sing. in a consonant, 
or e, and forming the gen. in es, dat. e, nom. acc. pl. es or en, or e, or sometimes 
in all three‘, (but generally in es,) gen. en or ene, dat. in en or es, or both®. The 
chief variations are, that occasionally the dat. sing. takes n°, and the nom. gen. ace. 
pl. end in e. The later text sometimes omits the gen. termination, and in the dat. 
sing. never takes n; in the plural it always has es or e’, but in the dat. usually 
the former. Both texts occasionally have the gen. pl. in e or es, and omit the dat. 
sing. termination in e, as is sometimes the case even in Anglo-Saxon. The re- 
maining masculine nouns may be considered irregular, as in Anglo-Saxon. In the 
early text they exhibit often the ancient indeclinable form, in both numbers, but 
also partake in the plural of the forms of the second declension. Instances of this 
may be found in the Glossary, under broSer, fader, sune, fot, feond, freond, winter, 
ete.® 

Feminine nouns both of the simple and complex order are much alike in their 
terminations. All the cases in the singular end in e, but in the earlier text take » 


1 Instances are, steorre, nome, time, licame, swike, teone, draca, uiere. Wille in the nom. 
and acc, partakes (as in Anglo-Saxon) of the second or complex declension. 

2 Traces of the primitive vowel still remain in some of the simple nouns. 

3 Even in Anglo-Saxon manuscripts on and an are frequently found for um. The latter 
form became the regular Semi-Saxon en. 

4 As bendes, benden, bende, cludes, cluden, clude, custes, custen, custe, etc. In the Saxon 
Chronicle, a°. 1123, both forms of es and en are common. The same usage obtains some- 
times in modern Dutch, as zoons or zoonen, sons. 

5 As axen, axes, clereken, clarkes, cnihten, cnihtes, etc. 

6 In aluen, aden, buren, enihten, eorlen, Goden, kingen, onwalden, stanen, etc. In these 
cases there is much difficulty in determining the singular and plural, since the forms are 
the same, both of the noun and article. There is one instance of the nom. in n, and an- 
other of the acc., namely studen (iii. 261) and siSen (i. 186). 

7 Only one exception has been noted, ealdrene (iii.194). It is remarkable, that in the 
early text this noun does not form its pl. in es (as in Anglo-Saxon), but in ren, rne, or re. 

8 wude is declined regularly, and in Anglo-Saxon, although it is assigned to the third 
declension by grammarians, yet we find it forming its gen. s. and nom. pl. according to 
the second. This is another proof, that the irregularities i ‘lo-Saxon grammar be- 
came subsequently the established forms. Man is also irregular, but differs from the 
Anglo-Saxon declension, by having dat. s. in nne or nnen, as well as mon, man, and in the 
gen. pl. monnen-e and monnes as Well as monne. This class of nouns is peculiarly instruc- 
tive in tracing the gradual alteration of words to their present forms. 


GRAMMATICAL ANALYSIS. xlv 


in the dative and accusative’, especially the former, which, as Rask has remarked, 
affords the true origin of the termination in en of certain feminine nouns in Ger- 
man?, In the plural, the nom. ace. and dat. end in en or e, and the gen. in ene. 
In the later text the plural termination nom. ace. is in es, instead of en. Several 
feminines are irregular, and have belonged to more than one order. Thus dohter 
and suster are partly undeclined, like the masculine Anglo-Saxon nouns of the third 
declension. So also hond often takes (as in Anglo-Saxon) no inflection in the dat. 
sing., but in the dat. pl. has in the earlier text the double form of en and es, like 
the masculines of the second declension. A few nouns have es in the gen. sing., 
as woruldes, welles, chirches, and the first of these is found in Anglo-Saxon. Other 
instances of irregulars, chiefly monosyllables, as boc, burh, niht, etc., may be found 
in the Glossary. 

There are but few neuter nouns in Anglo-Saxon of the simple declension, and 
in Lajamon a@jene, pl. seems to be the only example, the dative of which is not 
only @3en, een, as equivalent to the Anglo-Saxon eagum, but also a@3ene-n, exene-n, 
by an additional syllable, and this form appears, improperly, in some other words*. 
The neuters of the complex order are numerous, and generally end in a consonant. 
They are declined like the masculine nouns, with the exception of forming the 
nom. and ace. sing. and pl. alike, as in Anglo-Saxon. Sometimes the acc. sing. 
takes an e, and, in a few instances, n‘. The plural also has sometimes, in addition, 
the terminations of es, en and e’°, in the earlier text, but in the later only es or e. 

The genders of the nouns in the earlier text generally follow those in Anglo- 
Saxon, but in some cases seem at variance with them’, In the later text there is 
less conformity, and often the gender is wholly neglected, particularly of feminine 
nouns. Several instances oceur in which a noun appears to be of two genders, of 
which some examples are pointed out in the note below’. Occasionally also the 


1 Occasionally an n is also assumed in the nom., as doten, dujeSen, eorSen, feren, ferden, 
lajen, Leinten (as in Anglo-Saxon), reoden, seolSen, isunden ; and it is remarkable, that of 
these instances only one (eorSen) is of the simple declension. A few fem. nouns also end 
in a consonant in the nominative, as weorld, hond. 

2 Anglo-Saxon Grammar, p.31. 

3 As monenen (ii. 158), 3ifuenen (i. 158), baluwenen (ii.301), ete. 

4 Examples are, lihten (ii. 488), Zuden (2) (ii.440), uuelen (iii. 64). 

5 Instances are, lond, londes, londe, scip, scipes, scipen, wif, wifues, wifen, spelles, spellen, 
sweord, sweordes, binges, bing, etc. In Anglo-Saxon cild forms cilde and cildra in the 
plural, but in La3amon we have children, childre and childere, and in the later text, chil- 
derne, childrene and childres. Mr. Guest considers this the earliest instance of the plural 
ending in eren, which in Dutch is so common. Hist. E. R. ii. 116. 

6 Anwolde is feminine (ii. 620), as in German and Dutch, whilst in Anglo-Saxon it is 
masculine. Nouns in scipe are always masculine in Anglo-Saxon, but in Lajamon appear 
sometimes to be feminine. Weolene is feminine in Lajamon, as in Dutch and German, 
but in Anglo-Saxon it is neuter. 

7 Thus del, deal is neuter (i. 125, 127), but feminine (ii. 401), whilst in Anglo-Saxon 
it is masculine; nih¢t is neuter (iii. 133), but in the same page and elsewhere feminine, 
as in Anglo-Saxon; wifmon is often feminine, but sometimes masculine, as in Anglo- 
Saxon, and once neuter (i. 147); fur is masculine (i. 341), as in Anglo-Saxon, but femi- 


Py 


= 
xvi GRAMMATICAL ANALYSIS. 


later text differs from the earlier in regard to gender, and sometimes on grounds 
above those of a purely arbitrary character’. 

Proper names generally follow the forms of masculine nouns. The only pecu- 
liarities worthy notice are, that the genitive in es is generally expressed in the later 
text by the pronoun /is*; and that the dative singular often takes 2 in the earlier 
text. In names of Latin origin, the original form is sometimes admitted, as 
Eneam, Brutum, Pandrasum, Petreium, and at other times are undeclined, or take 
es in the genitive, as Claudiuses, Tennantiuses. 

In compounds, the first word is usually undeclined, as in Anglo-Saxon, but 
occasionally the rule is not observed. 

Adjectives of the indefinite declension follow nearly the Anglo-Saxon form, like 
the indefinite article, and retain in both texts the fem. gen. and dat. and mase. 
acc., but in the second text more rarely met with®. In the dat. m. and n. a final 
n is often taken in the earlier text‘, and sometimes in the nom. sing.’ and nom. 
and ace. plural. The regular dat. pl. is in en®, but m is sometimes elided. When 
used definitely, after the definite article, a personal pronoun, or connected with 
the genitive case, an indeclinable e is taken, which is, in both texts, often neglected. 
Occasionally the definite form has the final n, as bas @Selen (ii. 464); bare eSelen 
(i. 3); and pene elden (i. 38). The definite form is also sometimes found, where 
the ordinary rule would require the indefinite. 

Comparatives and superlatives take e when used definitely, and in the plural ; 
as in Anglo-Saxon they govern the noun following in the genitive case, a rule 
which continued throughout the period of Middle English. 

The personal pronouns are the same as in Anglo-Saxon, but the use of the gen. 
sing. appears to have become obsolete, except in the possessive form. In a few 


nine (i. 332); peode is generally feminine, as in Anglo-Saxon, but sometimes masculine 
(i. 109, 138, 306); sorhze and heuene are generally feminine, but sometimes neuter (i. 316; 
ii. 75, 407); wil, wille is both feminine and masculine (ii. 405, 406, 408), and in Anglo- 
Saxon this noun is declined as of both genders. Some of these instances may, perhaps, 
be attributed to the errors of the scribe. 

1 Thus gurdel (i. 56) and stronde (i. 401) are feminine in the later text, as in Icelandic 
and Swedish, whilst they are masculine in the first text, as in Anglo-Saxon and German. 
The instances of richedom (i. 255) and wifwe (ii. 114) considered as feminines, would ap- 
pear corruptions. 

2 See Glossar. Rem. vol. iii. p. 451. This form rarely occurs in the earlier text, but is 
in i. 175, 279. It must be observed also, that this mode of expressing the genitive is used 
in the later text sometimes with common nouns, as hem his, i. 375; dich his, ii. 241; 
king his, iii. 214. 

3 The vowel often varies. Thus in vol. i. p. 241, the acc. m. sing. of nan, none, is found 
in the earlier text as nonne, nan, nenne and nenne, and elsewhere we have nanne and non. 

4 Sometimes ne is found, as aldene (ii. 160); godene (i. 261); lewene (i. 151); but these 
appear errors, which occur also in the Gat. pl., as godene (i.29). 

5 The instances are, beteren (ii. 377); bliSen (ii. 430); claenen (i. 419); henden (iii. 
256); lassen (iii. 202); mesten (i. 336); milden (ii. 258); unueren (ii. 37); and ulemesten 
fii. 37). 

6 Still preserved in the Kentish dialect, in 1340. MS. Arund. 57. 


on 


oe ™ 


_  s . 
GRAMMATICAL ANALYSIS. xvii 


instances a or ha is found for he, heo, as in Robert of Gloucester, and the modern 
Western dialect. The gradual change from the Anglo-Saxon ace. hine to him is 
very perceptible in the later text, and is to be traced even in the Saxon Chronicle, 
ann. 1115, 1140. The plural forms of heo and heore! in the early text, are in the 
second hii and hire®. The fem. heo, she, is in the later text 3e0 or 3e, which ap- 
proaches more nearly to the old Teutonic form si, sie, still preserved in German 
and Dutch. In the first text heo is often used in the accusative, for which the 
second text substitutes Aire, as in modern usage. The dat. and acc. plural heom 
(rarely hem) become ham or 3am in the later text, which occasionally, however, has 
the older form. Ham occurs only once in the first text (i. 142), and hem only once 
in the second (i. 24). 

The dual form of the pronoun is preserved sari ceelnnrtenta Si tr Bape 
Saxon, but no trace of it occurs in the later*. 

In the nom. plural of the second personal pronoun, both texts have 3e, ye, but 
the second sometimes 3e0, by error. The gen. is singularly varied, but the pre- 
vailing forms are eower, couwer, in the first, and 3oure or jure in the second text. 
So also in the dat., eow becomes 30x, but with several variations; and in acc. eou, 
eow (once only 3e0w, i. 232) becomes 30u, ou, which forms are never found in the 
earlier text. 

The peculiar use of the dative pronoun after verbs of motion has been pointed 
out in the Glossarial Remarks, vol. iii. p. 445. 

The possessives min, mi, and pin, pi, are declined as in Anglo-Saxon, and are used 
indifferently before consonants or vowels, but in the later text, the gen. m. and f., 
the dat. f. and gen. pl. are never met with, and their use must have become obso- 
lete. In the dat. sing. and pl. the Anglo-Saxon um becomes e, but a final n once 
occurs in the early text (i. 125), as in the Germ. meinen, 

The demonstrative bes or beos, bas, bis, also follows the Anglo-Saxon model 
closely in regard to genders, although the forms are much varied and confounded. 
The later text generally avoids the gen. sing. in es, and the dat. fem.‘, but even 
in Anglo-Saxon pisse was used in both these cases. The ancient termination in 
um becomes, as usual, en, but in the later text this is disregarded, and often the 
neuter undeclined bis substituted, as in modern English. The acc. m. is preserved 
in both texts, as it isto a later period, since we meet with it in Robert of Glou- 


2 The gen. sometimes takes an n (i. 178; iii. 102). 

2 In a few instances Ai is found in the earlier text. In the Cottonian MS. of the Saxon 
Chronicle, Tib. B. I, and in Ingrams printed text, we have Ai or hie, but in the Laud MS. 
written at a later period, heo. Yet heo or hio occurs in Anglo-Saxon charters as early as 
the years 743 and 821. ap. Kemble, Cod. Diplomat. A.-Sax. vol. i. pp. 114, 222. 

3 In modern German, Danish and Swedish is no dual, but in the ancient German and 
Norse, and in the present Icelandic the form is found. See Latham, The Engl. Language, 
p- 205, who remarks, that it is evidently one of those changes when a language becomes 
modern. 

* Yet in pissen peoden (i. 306) the later text reads, more correctly, pissere, which 
proves the uncertainty in the use of this case. 


xlviii GRAMMATICAL ANALYSIS. 


cester, and even in the Ayenbite of Inwyt, in the fourteenth century. The gen. pl. 
bissere occasionally also occurs in both texts’. 

The relative ba, be (sometimes beo) and pat, is used indifferently for who, which, 
that, and is generally followed by the subjunctive mood, as in Anglo-Saxon. 

The pronouns they or those are expressed in the earlier text by peo?, both in the 
nom. and ace., which in the later becomes paie or baye. 

While or wule, of the first text, takes the form of woche in the second, which is 
undeclined, except in one instance, where the ace. termination wochne is found. 
The other pronominal adjectives follow the same rule as the indefinite declension 
of adjectives. 

Seolf, self, sulf, the self, or same, is also inflected as in Anglo-Saxon*, and when 
united to a personal pronoun, the latter is often put in the dative‘, and in such 
instances the nominative to the verb is always understood, and sometimes ex- 

5 

Iike is used with the definite article to express the modern demonstrative that, 
and when pat is singly used before a noun, it is invariably the neuter article. 

The numerals adhere closely to the Anglo-Saxon forms. An or on has been 
already noticed as an article, declined like the indefinite adjectives. The distine- 
tion between the n. and f. twa, ba, and m. tweien, beien, is still observed, but the 
latter sometimes takes a final e, and also sometimes elides the n. The gen. and 
dat. cases of twa, the gen. of ba, and dat. of breo are found in the earlier text, but 
not in the later. The compound ba-twa occurs likewise as ba-tueie, but in Anglo- 
Saxon is indeclinable. The numbers from four to twelve are usually undeclined, 
but also take e, and sometimes en, as uiuen, ehten. Others elide the n, as seoue, 
nize, elleowe. The Anglo-Saxon termination tig becomes ¢i, and is undeclined, yet 
we have prittie in the dative. Hund is also undeclined, but hundred and pousend, 
like the neuter nouns, take es ande. The peculiar use of half after an ordinal 
number is still apparent, as oSer half hundred, one hundred and fifty. Ordinal 


' In the Saxon Chron. a°. 1118. bisra is probably the gen. pl. although rendered by 
Ingram as dat. sing. f. 

2 Once by pi (i. 285). In the Semi-Saxon Legend of St. Katherine, it is boa, p. 130. 
In Middle English this form became po. : 

3 It takes n in the dat. sing. and pl., as in Anglo-Saxon we find sylfon, and in Germ. 
selben. The later text has only seolue or silue to express all the oblique cases. Nearly 
similar forms, however, as in the earlier text, existed certainly till the time of Chaucer. 
Cf. Grimm, Deutsche Gramm., th. iii. p. 5. 

4 See Rask, Anglo-Saxon Grammar, p. 54, 

§ Thus him self hafde (iii. 225), where he is understood; him seolf he eneoulede (iii. 
189), where it is expressed. Sometimes a difference is found between the texts, as he 
seolf wende (ii. 170), where the later has him seolf'; and heo seolf ne cunne (ii. 101), where 
heorn seolf is in the later. Hence may be explained the modern usage of such phrases as 
himself did it, he came himself, etc., which have puzzled the grammarians. 

® See Glossar. Rem., vol. iii. p. 450. Inthe doubtful line bet is bere quene scip (i. 194), 
the sentence may be resolved bet seip is bere quene, the ship is the queens (ship). 


io 


GRAMMATICAL ANALYSIS. xlix 


numbers, like the definite adjectives, take a final e, except oSer, which follows the 
indefinite declension. As in Anglo-Saxon, the higher numerals require a genitive 
case after them. 

The verbs in Lazamon are conjugated as in Anglo-Saxon, with the usual vowel 
changes. The preposition ¢o is commonly used before the simple infinitive, but the 
future participle or gerund in anne or ne, is also preserved, although confounded 
with the participial termination in nde'. In the later text the final x of the in- 
finitive is generally omitted, as it is also sometimes in the earlier text. Occasion- 
ally the infinitive is governed by the verb which precedes, without a preposition, 
and, in the second text, as in Middle English, for is sometimes used for for to 
(i. 187, ii. 128). 

In the present tense, the first person, as in Francic, often ends in n, the usage 
of which is still found in the Germ., Dutch and Friesic bin, I am*. The second 
person, both of the present and past tense, sometimes drops the final ¢°, a form 
which is prevalent in Old Saxon, and is pointed out also by Thorpe as a peculiarity 
in the Exeter book. The plural of both texts regularly ends in eS‘, except in the 
first and second persons, when followed immediately by a pronoun, when it ends 
in e, according to the Anglo-Saxon rule of grammar‘. 

In the past tense, the chief peculiarity is the frequent occurrence of a final » in 
the third person singular, both in strong and weak verbs, but chiefly the latter, as 


1 See Glossar. Rem. p. 452. This is more apparent in the second than the first text 
(i. 273), but also in both (i. 237, ii. 49), and similar instances are found in Anglo-Saxon, 
as to-sawenne, Mark, iv. 3, where the Rushworth Gloss reads sawende. See Taylors Note 
on Div. of Purley, p. xxviii. In Anglo-Saxon also the future inf. is sometimes found in 
ene (Rask, p. 126), which was occasionally written as the simple form, as ¢o secan, Cod. 
Exon. p. 217. So in Sax. Chron. wealden, a°. 1123. halden, a°. 1140; wunien, Grave Song, 
p- 142. ap. Thorpe. There can be no doubt, but that this practice gradually superseded 
the regular form of the fut. inf. and became the common form as at present used. 

2 The instances are, a3euen (ii. 285); beon (i. 168); ibiden (i. 141, ii. 560 et alib.); 
bilafuen (iii. 126) ; cumen (?) (ii. 314) ; demen (ii. 282); habben (i. 136 et alib.) ; haten 
(ii. 285); Aalsin (iii. 294), but corrected by a second hand; hatten (ii. 528); ileuen (i. 186) ; 
wullen (i. 374, et sep.), but corrected once ; 3ifuen (i. 406, ii, 478), but once corrected. 

3 bi-hehtes (i. 420) ; bi-lafdes (i. 362) ; bi-swikes (i. 145) ; cumes (i. 187) ; haues (i. 141); 
hattes (i. 354) ; mihtes (ii. 48, 363); woldes (i. 131). 

4 A few exceptions occur in ¢ (i. 42, 140, 143), which seem attributable to the scribe. 
The third person singular of strong verbs also sometimes ends, as in Anglo-Saxon, in ¢ 
for 8, as bifalt (iii. 64); bi-tachet (i. 143); glit (ii. 502); hawet (i. 140); halt (i. 140) ; 
walt (iii. 289). The form /uue%Se (i. 141) is a blunder, as is ¢reoweSe, 3 p. pl. (i. 145). 

5 This e sometimes, but rarely, takes a final n, as fusen we (ii. 465) ; leten we (ii. 347); 
lokien we (ii. 33); biden 3e (ii. 387) ; nabben 3e (iii. 266). In the instances of diwinnen 
(i. 219), feollen, fallen (iii. 101), haten (ii.59), and wenden (iii.91), the pronoun is understood, 
and it may be a question, if these are not infinitives, governed by an auxiliary verb not 
expressed. These forms are by no means to be confounded with the present subjunctive. 
The auxiliary shall has the double termination of eS and en in the plural, as have also 
occasionally the verbs, will and have (i. 142). Any other instances of en may be referred 
to the subjunctive or infinitive. 

VOL, I. d 


; | =" 


ee we Ky le ee, 


. 
1 GRAMMATICAL ANALYSIS. 


also, but rarely, in the first and second persons singular’. In strong verbs the 
vowel is much varied, and the third person singular sometimes takes e, but these 
are exceptions to the general rule. In the plural, the final x of both orders of 
verbs is generally omitted in the later text, and occasionally in the first?. Certain 
verbs in the earlier text occasionally take i (for ge) as a prefix, as ismat, ihitte, inom®, 
where it is rarely or never so found in Anglo-Saxon. 

Strong verbs of the third conjugation change, as in Anglo-Saxon, the vowel i of 
the infinitive and present tense into a or @ (0 in later text) in the singular of the 
past, but resume # in the plural, as arisen, p. aras, pl. arisen ; biten, p. bat, pl. biten; 
gliden, p. glad, pl. gliden, ete. In some instances the strong form of a verb has 
become weak, or both forms are used, as beh and bo3ede ; ferde and for ; for-verde, 
pl. for-foren ; for-les, pl. for-leoseden ; to-res, pl. to-resden ; les and losede ; liSden 
and lien; scop and scupte. Sometimes the weak form is found only in the later 
text, as walkede for weolken; iclemde for iclumben ; and in a few instances the con- 
trary takes place, as soch for sohte; and rongen for ringeden. 

Several instances of a contracted form of the past tense of weak verbs occur in 
both texts, but chiefly in the first. These have been noticed in the Glossarial 
Remarks*. 

In the imperative, both the second person sing. and pl. occasionally have a final 
n in the earlier text®. The same anomaly occurs in the second and third persons 
of the present tense subjunctive. It may be a question, however, whether some 
of these instances may not be an elliptical mode of speech, in which the infinitive 
is employed, with the auxiliary verbs let, may or should understood®. In the ex- 
amples of wunien (ii. 103), beon (iii. 145), nimen and scriuen (ii. $47), afo and lunie 
(ii. 186), for-do (i. 350), the verb certainly seems to be in the infinitive mood, 
although in the sense of the subjunctive, and such may perhaps be the case with 
the phrases pat pu bileuen (ii. 185); bat pu cumen (iii. 124); bat bu leten (ii. 24); 
pat pu lien (iii. 25); buten pu raden (ii. 327), and often elsewhere. At the same 
time, it is searcely to be denied, that in Anglo-Saxon the present indicative and 
subjunctive are clearly distinguished, and so they are often in La3amon, particu- 
larly in the plural, as ind. here’ (i. 404), sb. heren (ii. 2057). 


1 In the first person, ferden (i. 199); nusten (i. 152); seiden (i. 152); and wuden for 
wuneden (i. 145). In the second person, drojen (ii. 268); weren (i. 214, et alid.), but 
twice corrected ; 9f-slo3en (ii. 248); and ¢ugen (ii. 248), 

2 liht 3 p. pl. (iii. 172) seems an error for lihten. 

3 Occasionally the reverse, as iswor (i. 146) where the first text has swor. The iin 
inom is also erased in the early text no less than five times. 

4 vol. iii. p. 454. 

5 Instances are, sing. hafuen (iii. 30) ; leaden (i. 186); leten (iii. 274); lien (ii. 476) ; 
seien (iii. 23); siten (ii. 327). In the plur. bidden (ii. 105) ; fusen (ii. 314); senden (ii. 
205). 

® This is the theory of Webster (Diss. iv. pp. 252, 262, ed. 1789), and is confirmed by 
the view taken of the conditional form by Crombie, Harris, and others. The instances 
of beren (iii. 228) and ibiden (i. 141, ii. 560) must be referred to the same idiom, or else 
be the first person of the pr. sb. with the pleonastic n. 

7 The forms ajen (i. 262); beon (ii. 348); ibiden (ii. 97); witen (i. 239, ii. 206) are 


* 
o # 


GRAMMATICAL ANALYSIS. li 


Occasionally the past tense of the subjunctive! in one text is expressed in the 
other in the mode above mentioned, as leouede (i. 148); griSede (iii. 247), where 
the second text reads love wolde and gribie wolde ; and sculden leosen (iii. 16), where 
the first text has losede. 

The conjugation in i is still clearly to be distinguished, as also the prevalence 
of the infinitive in i, ie, or y (by the elision of 2), still retained in the western and 
southern dialects. In the later text no fewer than sixty-five verbs form the infi- 
nitive thus, of which number eleven are found likewise in the early text. 

In Lajamon, as in Anglo-Saxon, certain transitive or weak verbs occur, formed 
from the preterites of strong neuter verbs, and the conjugations in general are 
kept distinct, although in some instances confounded’. Such are ernen and eornen; 
bernen and beornen; feollen and fallen ; leggen and liggen; benchen and bunchen, ete. 

The paradigms of the auxiliary or anomalous verbs be, have, can, may, shall, 
will and must, may be seen in the Glossary, and many of the preceding remarks 
will apply to them, particularly in regard to the use of the final 2 in the present 
and past tenses. 

The use of the participle present is very limited, and only thirty-three instances 
are found in both texts, of which two-thirds are supplied by the earlier. The 
usual termination in the first text is in ende or inde, but three participles have the 
double ending ende and inge, and is once in inge alone. In the later text both ter- 
minations are also found, but the proportion of those in inge is nearly half*. Occa- 
sionally the later has ende, where the earlier reads inge. 

Past participles of weak verbs, ending in d or ¢, take e in the plural, and in d 
often double the consonant, as adradde, amadde, awedde, ibredde, ihudde, iladde, 
ete., but in the later text the e or de is sometimes omitted. Participles of the 
strong conjugations, ending in en, take e or ne in the plural, and e in the singular, 
after a definite article. In the later text the final » is generally omitted, and not 
unfrequently in the earlier. As in the preterites, instances are found of the past 
participle in both forms of ed and en, as ajonged and a3eongen; bihonged and bi- 
hongen; ilad and iledden ; ilimped and ilimpen; ileosed and iloren. 

Adverbs, as in Anglo-Saxon, are variously formed, and reducible to the same 
classification. Very many, compounded of a preposition and a noun in the dative 
case, retain in the first text the final x, but sometimes omit it in the second. The 
presence of this is often found, where it is not countenanced by Anglo-Saxon 


all to be referred to the pres. subjunctive, rather than the indicative, as entered in the 
Glossary. 

1 There is so much similarity in the use of the past tense ind. and sb. that in the Glos- 
sary they are entered together. 

2 See the Phil. Mus. vol. ii. p. 386; Rask, p. 113, and Latham, p. 261; also the Glossar. 
Rem, vol. iii. p. 470. 

3 The instances in nge are, in the first text, berninge or barninge (ii. 605, iii. 115); 
Fraininge (ii. 595); singinge (iii. 72); and waldinge (i. 131); in the second text, abidinge 
(i. 367) ; aaxinge (ii. 595); biddinge (ii. 278); goinge, gohinge (ii. 270, 331, iii. 140); Zeo- 
pinge (iii. 90); ridingge (i. 67); sechinge (i. 59); wandrenge (i. 309); and wepinge (ii. 
337). See Taylors Notes on the Diversions of Purley, pp. xli.—xlvi. 

d2 


5 : — 
li GRAMMATICAL ANALYSIS. 


of, 

usage, as > hezen, ilomen, maren, inozen, reSen, sonen, swidSen, to- 
gederen, to-somnen, bennen, ber-foren, bar-bin, whennen, wellen, 3eornen, etc.', and it 
would seem that in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, this usage was very 
prevalent’. Even in adverbs formed from adjectives the same anomaly is found, 
as bisilichen (i. 191), mildelichen (i. 217), sikerlichen (i. 336). Instances of the geni- 
tival adverbs are seen in enes, @ies weies, alles, awewardes, bi-halues, bilifes, bi- 
sides, forS-rihtes, in-langes, nohtes, nihtes, rihtes, to-gaderes, to-mittes, unSankes, 
ete.’; whilst derived from the dative, we have dizelen, lim-mele, preoien, and 
whilen, 

The prepositions are the same as in Anglo-Saxon, with the addition of a few 
forms which take a final n, as aneosten, bi-siden, bi-haluen, feorren, nazen, on-longen, 
ete. The rule of government also is in general conformable to the Anglo-Saxon 
grammar, but occasionally variable and neglected, especially in the later text*. In 
some instances there seems to be a departure from Anglo-Saxon usage, as an-long, 
on-longen, which governs the dative in Lazamon, whereas in Anglo-Saxon the geni- 
tive is always found after it. So also burh, 3eond and umbe govern both the dative 
and accusative, whilst in Anglo-Saxon they require the accusative only. There 
are a few exceptions to the general practice, as of bene (iii. 291); of heoren (i. 178); 
to pines lifes (iii. 144), but the first may be an error, and in Anglo-Saxon of and 
to sometimes have a genitive. The preposition is occasionally placed after its case, 
as he clupede him an (i. 198), separated from it by the intervention of other 
words. 

Respecting the other parts of speech, it need only be noticed, that the con- 
junction buten (i. 30), and interjection wallan (i. 147), occur with a final. With 
regard to an, used for if, the Glossarial Remarks may be consulted, vol. iii. 
p- 478. 

The syntax in the earlier text closely resembles that of the Anglo-Saxon, but is 
not everywhere constant, and requires only brief remark. The use of the double 
dative is frequent, as leoden to harme (i. 109); frenden to blisse (i. 165); andin such 
phrases itis difficult to distinguish between the noun and the infinitive. Nouns of 
multitude are used with a verb in the plural, and mon or me occurs with the third 
person singular, as in the German, Dutch and French languages. Nouns of time 
used absolutely are in the accusative, as bene dai longe (i. 241). 

Comparatives and superlatives require a genitive case after them, as also the 
higher numerals. A few adjectives govern the genitive, as unimake (ii. 39, iii. 85); 
unimete (ii. 326); or dative, as iliche (ii. 296); and some both genitive and dative, 
as unilic (ii. 6, 116, 300). 


1 The Anglo-Saxon hwanon and pbanon, whence, thence, occur as whennenen (ii. 154), 
and penenen, beonnenen (i. 310, ii. 286).’ 

2 In the English metrical translation of the romances of the Seynt Graal, Merlin, etc., 
of the fifteenth century, in MS. C.C.C.C. No. uxxx. bere-offen occurs throughout. 

3 See Glossar. Rem, vol. iii. p. 460. Grimm, D. G. th. iii. p. 136. 

4 The substitution of a preposition instead of the termination to denote a case, is per- 
ceptible often in the later text, as in Dutch. Thus for jeua custi (i. 174) it reads of 
3eftes custi; and for bere ealdere suster (i. 162) it has of be eldre sostre. 


GRAMMATICAL ANALYSIS. : liii 


Some verbs require also a genitive, as abiden, aswike, bruken, fainen, ipolien, 
wilnien, 3emen, etc., and some a dative, as ahnien, bidden (iii. 204), bi-delen, bi- 
hehten, bi-nimen, bi-techen, fulien, heren (i. 327), ileuen, iquemen, setten, trukien, 
peinen, 3etten, and several more, as also neuters and impersonals. After the auxili- 
aries would and should a verb of motion is often understood; and sometimes after 
a pronoun (ii. 463, iii.91). The verbs cumen, iwitan, and some others, are fre- 
quently used also with a verb of motion in the infinitive, to express an action past. 
After certain prepositions, as pat, leste, bute, forte, 3if, the verb is found in the sub- 
junctive, but not always. 

It must be observed, in conclusion, that in regard to all these rules, the later 
text is seldom uniform, but exhibits everywhere the effects of a gradual desuetude 
of the original structure of the Anglo-Saxon forms of grammar. 


mate deornedienns 


giden yobs. oid» oe wapn edre: Molds 
whiied akeie an cou » queen Hee Late nels. pede 
arr ene JTC 1 eww att eobeatdld sends ype 
met nsbiegre jal lor etm ie eels ery leer jee eins 
te lerGeoehen mile Ww pede Yo Gave o bautdeers Kove 
: oes es ot a trees hoe od T- 1@ 44 Ate Wi cerduiwt a 
‘Sn Ge voy 4 ening curt oo forte lo chert © dover ole tee giahaah 
lee Gey wilt Oly ARB Ae) the Ae oe crt ote 
Jom lene Rey Gee See 
Watabad? wean wets Ma th In: er 6) ele. weatdng ca Jonaedee) calpaly 
Piet rhs donee 2 '00 eet gtt on! orp dk net orahas len 2 aes 
ecaty by si nh Otero gak a) lose tttphe oe Wa 


ut 


. - a 


a oo me iv Be et ‘ Cage 
TE Ail nade ye Ae 8 8 Ome , wer ee £ 


Dee eet Fn Hem we hm > Neen sy 


LAZ3AMONS BRUT, 


OR 


CHRONIE€LE OF BRITAIN. 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xtt. 


Lio. 5 Incipit hystoria Brutonum.  Incipit prologus libri Bruton. 


N preoft wes on leoden / preft was in londe? 

“A. Lajzamon wes ihoten. Laweman was hote', 
he wes Leouena®es fone ¥ he was Leucais fone ¥ 
lide him beo drihté. lef him beo drifte*. 
he wonede at Ernle3e ? he wonede at Ernleie 
at #Selen are chirechen. wid pan gode cnipte. 
vppen Seuarne ftape ¢ uppen Seuarne 
sel par him puhte. merie per him pohte. 
on feft Radeftone ? faftebi Radiftone ¥ 
per he bock radde. 10 per heo® bokes radde. 
Hit com him on mode’ Hit com him on mode 
& on his mern ponke. & on hif ponke. 


There was a priest on earth, (or in the land,) who was named Lazamon; 
he was son of ‘Leovenath [Leuca],—may the Lord be gracious to him !— 
he dwelt at Ernley, ‘at a noble church [with the good knight] upon ‘Severns 
bank [Severn],—‘good [pleasant] é¢ there seemed to him—near Radestone, 
where he books read. It came to him in mind, and in his ‘ chief’ thought, 


1 jhote? 2 drihte? 3 he? 
VOL, I. B 


2 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


pet he wolde of Engle ’ 

pa edelen tellen. 

wat heo ihoten weoren 

& wonene heo comen. 

pa Englene londe 

zreft ahten. 

efter pan flode / 

‘pe fron drihtene com, 

pe al her a-quelde / — 

quic pat he funde. 10 
buten Noe & Sem ’ 

Japhet & Cham. 

& heore four wiues 

pe mid heom weren on archen. 
Lajzamé gon liden 

wide 30nd paf leode. 

& bi-won pa xela boc ¥ 

pa he to bifne nom. 

He nom pa Englifea boe 


pa makede seint Beda. 20 


an oper he nom on Latin 
pe makede seinte Albin. 

& pe feire Auftin / 

pe fulluht broute hider in. 


that he would tell the ‘noble deeds [history] of ‘the English [England] ;what = 
‘they [the men] werenamed, and whence they came, whofirst ‘possessed(had] 


(v. 13—36.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


pat he wolde of Engelond ¥ 
pe riftneffe' telle. 

wat pe men hi-hote weren / 
and wancne® hi comen. 

pe Englene lond’ 

ereft afden. 

after pan flode ¥ 

pat fram god com. 

pat al ere acwelde ’ 

cwic pat hit funde. 

bote Noe and Sem : 
Japhet and Cam. 

and hire four wifef:. 

pat mid ham pere weren. 
Lowemaii® gan wende ¥ 

fo wide fo waf pat londe. 


and nom pe Engliffe boc? 
pat makede seint Bede. 
anoper he nom of Latin ?. 
pat makede seint Albin. — 
boc he nom pan pridde ¥ 
an leide par amidde. 


the English land, after the flood that came from ‘the Lord [God] ; that de- 
stroyed here all that it found alive, except Noah and Sem, Japhet and Cham, 
and their four wives, who were with them‘in the ark [there]. Lazamon began 


to journey ‘wide over this [as wide as was the) land, and ‘ procured the noble 


(or good) hooks which he took for pattern (authority). He’ took the English 
book thatSaint Bepg made; another he took ‘in [of] Latin, that Saint Aven 
made, ‘and the fair Ausriy, who brought baptism in hither’; the third book 


1 rihtneffe ? 


2 R. wanene. 


* R. Laweman. 


[v. 37—59.]} 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
boc he nom pe pridde 
leide per amidden. 
pa makede a Frenchis clerc ‘ 
Wace wes ihoten. 
pe wel coupe writen 


& he hoe 3ef pare «Selen. 
Ailienor pe wes Henries quene : 
pes he3es kinges. 

Lajamon leide peos boc ¥ 

& pa leaf wende. 10 


he heom leofliche bi-heold ” 
lipe him beo drihten. _—_[c.2.] 
feperen he nom mid fingren ¢ 
& fiede on boc-felle. 

& pa foPe word Y 

fette to-gadere. 

& pa pre boc 

prumde to are. 

Nu bidded*? La3amow: 


-alene zSele mon. 20 


for pene almité godd y 
pet peof boc rede. 
& leornia peos runan 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 3 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1. 


pat makede Auftin : 
pat folloft brofte’ hider in. 


Laweman pes bokes bieolde 
an pe leues tornde. 

he ham loueliche bi-helde ¥ 
fulfte god pe miptie. 

fepere he nom mid fingres : 
and wrot mid hif honde. 
and pe fope word 

fette togedere. 

and pane hilke boc: 

tock us to bifne. 

Nu biddep Laweman ? 
echne godne mon. 

for pe miftie® godef loue y 
pat pes boc redep. — 


he took, [and] laid there in the midst, [that Austin made, who brought 
baptism in hither.] ‘ that a French clerk made, who was named Wace, who 
well could write; and he gave it to the noble Eleanor, who was the high 
King Henrys queen’. Lajamon ‘laid before him [viewed] these books, and 
‘turned over the leaves; lovingly he beheld them,—may the Lord be mer- 
ciful to him [may God the mighty aid him] !—pen he took with fingers, 
and wrote ‘on book-skin [with his hand], and the true words set together, 
and the ‘three books compressed into one [same book gave us for pattern]. 
‘Now prayeth Lajamon, for [love of] the ‘Almighty [mighty] God, each 
good man that shall read this book ‘ and learn this counsel’, that he say 

‘ folloht brohte ? 


2 bidded ? 3 mihtie? 


B2 


4 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 60—80.] 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
f he peos fodfefte word / pat he pis fopfaft word 
segge to sumne. fegge togadere. 
for his fader faule / and bidde for pe faule ¥ 
pa hine ford! brouhte. 
& for his moder faule / 
pa hine to monne iber. pat hine to manne ftrende. 
& for his awene faule ’ and for hif owene foule* ¥ 
pat hire pe felre beo. pat hire pe bet bifalle. 
. Amen. Amen. 
V feid mid loft fonge ? V feide® mid louefange ” 
pe wes on leoden preoft. 10 pat was pan londef* preft. 
al fwa pe boc fpeke’ as pe bokes fpeke Y 
pe he to bifne inom, pat he to bifne nom. 
Pa Grickef hefdé Troye ? * i ” * 
mid teone bi-woné. * * * : 
& } lond iweft y * * * * — 
& pa leoden of-flawen. * * * 
& for pe wrake-dome “ * * * 
of Menelauf q®ne. * * * 
and® Elene waf ihoten ’ * * * * 
alSeodise wif. 20 * * * 
Poris. —_pa Paris Alixandre ¢ * * * * 


together these soothfast words, ‘for his fathers [and pray for the] soul, 
‘who brought him forth, and for his mothers soul,’ ‘who bore [that begat] 
him to de man, and for his own soul, that ‘it be’ the better [befall to it]. 
Amen! 

Now saith with lofty song he who was priest on earth (or in the land) - 
‘all’ as the books speak that he took for pattern. The Greeks had with | 
mischief conquered ‘Troy, and laid waste the land, and slain the people ; 
and for the revenge of Menelaus queen, who was named Helen, a foreign 


} ford? ? saule? 3 seiSe? 4 londe? or in londe? 5 pa? 


— 


, 


a! eS 


/ [v.81—106.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 5 


r Sok MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xi. 
mid pret wrenche bi-won. * * * 


_ for hire weoren on ane dae ¥ = * * * 
aa a bund poufunt deade. . * * 
of pan fehte ¥ * * * * 
waf feondliche ftor. * * * 
Y ed a * 2 Eneas du(x.) 
dé at-wond. * *® * , 
e he boten anne fune Y * * * * 
: ‘mid him ifund. * * * 
_ Asscaniuf waf ihoten Y 10 * * * * Afate, 56 
vy _ nefede he bern no ma. * * * ‘i 
ed duc mid hif drihte / x * * * | 
e fe him droh. * * * 
ine & of folke ier ity bole : 
e pan duke. * * * 
e & of ahte Y * * * * F 
) pare fe brouhte * * * : 
tuenti gode feipen y * * . * 
—D Sliche fulde. (6 1% c.1.] x * * 
pa feipen forenwideyY 2» # * * * } 
| pare wintrede fe. * + * 
mid wolenen & mid wedere ¥ * * * * 
ae heo poleden wen- fides. * * a 
_ ant mid muchelure care ¥ * * * * 
__ heo to londe bicomen. * * * é 


Or aches comen tolondey «* * * * 


r m “Paris Alexander with wily stratagem obtained; for her in 
dre ‘thousand were dead ! Out of the fight, that was ex- a! 


diy peasian es Wes nasaed; he had notheee eile , Pi 
his retinue drew him to the sea, and of kin and of folk at 
, of men and of goods that he to the sea brought, 
he ‘goodly filled. And the ships fared wide over the 
ntry sea; from storms and from weather they suffered injuries, and = 
post ditto they came to land In Italy they came to land, where 


— 


Latinus rex. 


6 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 107—130.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 

par Rome nou on ftonde®. * * * 

fele 3er under funnan ¥ * * * * 

nas 3et Rome bi-wonné. * * * 

& heuede Eneaf pe duc ¥ * ~ s * 

mid hif driht folcke. * * * 

widen iwalken ¥ - * * * 

3end p* wide water. * * x 

moni lond umbe-rowen * # « * 

redef him trokeden. * * * 

On Italize he com on lond? 10 * * % 

pat him waf iqueme. * * #* 

a pon londe he fund mete?’ * « * * 

& he hine mid monfcipe biwon. *% ® * 

& mid golde & mid gerfume * * * * 

& he gridliche fpac. + * * 

I pere Tyure he eode alond ¥ x * * * 

per pa sea wafced } fond. ® % * 

ful neh pan ilke ftude * * * 

par Rome nou ftonde®. * 

Pe king was ihoten Latin’ 2% + * * * 

pe on pan londe wes. * * 

hey! wes and riche ¥ * * * * 

& he wes redefful. * . * 

mid wintre he wes bi-weaued ¥ » * * 


Rome now on standeth, but Rome was not yet inhabited, for the interval 
of many years under ¢he sun. And Eneas the duke with his good people 
had walked (voyaged) far over the wide water; many lands had rowed 
around; counsels failed him. In Italy he came ashore; that was to him 
pleasing; in the land he found food, and he obtained it with honor, and with 
gold, and with gift, and he spake peaceably. In the Tiber he landed, where 
the sea washeth the sand, full nigh the same place where Rome now stand- 
eth. The king who was in the land was named Latin; noble he was and 
rich, and he was full of wisdom, but with winters (years) he was oppressed; 


1 hey he? 


[v. 131—156.] LA3AMONS BRUT. y 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1. 


fwo hit wolde godd. * * . 
Par com Eneas % # * * 
& grette pen alde king. * * * 

& he hine feire on-feng * * * *o¢ 
mid allen his folke. . * * 
Muche lond he him 3ef % ie cs C 
& mare hi biheyte. * * * 

an long pare fea? * + * * 
fiden & widen. * * * 
Pare quene hit of-pouhte’ 10 * * * * 
nopeles heo hit polede. * * * 

Pe king heuede ane douter ¥ * . * * 
pe him was fwipe deore. * * * 
Eneam he heo biheyte * * * * 
to habben to wife. * * * 

& after his daye / * * * * 
al his drihliche lond. * * * 
for he nefde nenne fune ¥ . « * * 
pe farure waf his heorte. a * * 

p* maiden wes ihoten Lauiney 20 = * * * * 
fepen heo wes leodena quene. [c. 2.] * * * 
feier wes pe wimmon ? * * * * 
& wunfum hire monnen. * * #* 

Ah Turnuf waf ihoten » . * * 
p' wes of Tufkanne duc ? * * % 

pet lufede pet maidé ¥ * * * * 


so God would it! There came Eneas, and greeted the old king, and he 
received him courteously, with all his people. Much land he gave him, 
and more promised him, along the sea, far and wide. It displeased the 
queen, nevertheless she suffered it. The king had a daughter, who was 
most dear to him; he promised her to Eneas, to have for wife, and, after 
his day (death), all his lordly land (kingdom); for he had no son,—the 
sorer was his heart! The maiden was named Lavine; afterwards she was 
queen of the people; fair was the woman, and winsome to her men. But 
Turnus was one named, who was duke of Tuscany, who loved the maiden, 


Eneam. 


Turnus. 


Eneas., 


8 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 157—180.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xirt. 
& hire monscipe bed. * * * 
he heo wolde habben * * * 
to heizen are quene. * * * 
Pa com } word to him? i * * * 
} waf widene cud. #* * 
pe king Latin *\ ie %* * 
3ef Lauine his douter. % * * 
Eneam to are brude ¥ = * * * 
for heo wes his deore bearn. * * * 
Pa wes Turnuf fari ’ . 10 % ey | * 
& foruful on his mode. * * * 
for he heo heuede fwipe ilofed'’ = « * * * 
& luf-ping hire biheite. * * * 
Weorre makede Turnuf * * * * 
mid teonen he wes idrefed?. * * * 
wid Eneam he nom an feiht * * * a 
‘} wes feondliche ftrong. * * ~ 
hond wid honde * * % * 
fuhté pa he3ze mé. * % * 
teone wes on compe Y 20 * & * * 
par Turnuf feol. * * * 
mid mechen to-heawen ‘ % * * & 
his monfcipe wes pe laffe. % * * 
Eneas nom Lauine % + * * 


and offered her honor, that he would have her for a noble queen. Then 
came the word (report) to him, that was widely known, that the king Latin 
gave Lavine his daughter for a bride to Eneas; because she was his dear 
child. Then was Turnus sorry, and sorrowful in his mood, for he had loved 
her exceedingly, and pledged her love-thing. Turnus made war; with 
anger he was disturbed; against Eneas he took (engaged in) a fight that 
was exceeding strong; hand against hand fought the warriors; strife was 
in the conflict; there Turnus fell, with swords hewed to pieces ;—his 
honor was the less! Eneas took Lavine lovingly to wife. He was king, 


? R. ilofed. 2 R. idrefed. 


a eS 


‘[v. 181—205 ] LA3AMONS BRUT. 9 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 
leofliche to wife. %* * * 
he wes king & heo quen % * * Ps 
& kine-lond heo welden. * * 
inne gride & inne fride * x x * 
& freoliche loueden, = [men/ * * * 
Seopen Eneaf Lauine heuede ino- x * * # 
& pa leodene bi-wnnen. * * * 
he makede enne ftronge caftel? a * * 
mid ftarke {ton walle. * % * 
Lauine hehte hisleuemon’ 10 *% * * * 
pene caftel he clepede Lauinion. * * * 
} wes for hire worS{cipe ¢ * * * 
wel pat he hire upe. * * * 
Feour winter he heuede } wif? * * * % 
mid wrdfcipe to welden. * * * 
after pafeourSer' 3ere he wafdeadY * * . * 
his freonden hit of-puhten. * * * 
Heuede Lauine pa quene ¢ * * * * 
kine-bearn on wombe. * * * 
pa quen per efter fone’ [f£2.c.1.] 20 * * « 
zenne fune hefde to froure. * * * 
Siluiuf Eneaf? % * * * 
for edelen® he wes ihoten. * * * 
Afcaniuf his broper ¥ %* * * * 
pe mid hif fader com from Troie. <) . * 


and she queen, and the kingdom they governed in peace and in concord, 
and freely loved. After Eneas had wedded Lavine, and obtained the 
country, he made a strong castle with massive stone walls. His mistress 
was named Lavine, therefore he called the castle Lavinion; that was for 
her worship, that he well granted to her. Four winters he had the lady, 
with worship to enjoy; after the fourth year he died; his friends lamented 
it. Lavine, the queen, had a royal infant in her womb; soon thereafter 
the queen had a son for her comfort; Silvius Eneas for nobleness he was 
named. Ascanius, his brother, who came with his father from Troy, 
1 feourde? 2 R. edelen. 


Siluius 
Eneas. 


Creusa. 


Affeanius. 


10 


MS. Cott. Calig. A, 1x. 


mid muchele worfcipe ¥ 
pis kine-bearn bi-wifte. 


Affcaniuf wes pes childes broper ? 
ah heo nefden noht ane moder. 
His moder wes ihoten Creufa y 


Priames kinges dohter. 

pe Eneas his fader 

in Troie for-leas. 

inne pane fehte ¢ 

his feon heo him binomen. 10 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 206—229.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xi11. 


* * * * 


* * * ¥ 
* * * 


cetate er was i-hote Creun.. [f.1.c.1.] 
-ing Priames his doh ..r. 

pat Eneaf his fader 

-n Troye for-les. 

-n pan ftore fihte / 

his h.....es' hire neome. 


Affcaniuf heold pif drihlichelond? Afchanius held pis kine-lond ¥ 
daies and 3eref. 

and he makede one e3e bor; y 
Albe Lingwe ihote. 

Pe bor3 was wel izarket 

i.e lutel time. 

.- hine 3ef hi. ft.. moder? 
for loue of h.. «1... 

and Lauinon pan ca.... 

.-- mochel lond par to. 

pat hif fader hafde imaked 
wile he was on liue. 

pis londe he hire lende ¥ 

to hire liues ende. 


daizes & 3eres. 

& he makede ane he3e burh Y 
Albe Lingoe wes ilfaten. 

Pa burh wes wel izarwed ¥ 
binnen lut 3earen. 

he 3ef heo his ftepmoder ¥ 
for pon lofe of his broper. 

& Lauinion pene caftel 

& muchel lond par to. 20 
pe his fader hefde imaked 
pe wile pe he on liue wes. 
pis lond he hire lende 

pat come hir lifef ende. 


with much, worship took charge of this royal babe. Ascanius was bro- 
ther of the child, but they had not one (the same) mother, His mother 
was named Creusa, daughter of king Priam, whom Eneas, his father, lost 
at Troy; his enemies took her from him in the [strong] fight. Ascanius 
held this kingdom days and years, and he made a noble burgh; Alba 
Longa it ‘was’ named. The burgh was well prepared ‘within few years 
[in little time] ; he gave it to his stepmother, for ‘the’ love of his bro- 
ther, and Lavinion, the castle, that his father had made, ‘ the’ while ‘ that’ 
he was alive, and much land thereto; this land he granted her, ‘until [to] 


1 honwines ? 


72” aaa 


[v. 230—253.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


Ah heo' nom pene mahum ” 
pe heo toldé for godd. 

pe Eneaf mid hif ferde ¥ 
brohte from Troie. 

in Albe Lingue he hine fette / 
ah fone he ponene iuatte. 

ford a3ein mid pan winde 

pe feond hine ferede. 
Affcaniuf pe kene y 

pe wes i kingef ftude ¢ 10 
four & pritti winter - 

he heold pat lond 

& pa leoden mid bliffen. 

pa com his lifef ende ¥ 

laS pah him were. 

Siluium his broper ‘ 

pe wes Lauine fune. 

he bitahte al pat lond?’ = [[c.2.] 


LA3AMONS BRUT. Il 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


Ah he nom pane mahun 
pat Eneas fram T°ye brohte. 


in Albe Lingue hine fette ¢ 

ah fone panene he wéde. 

azen mid pan winde ¥ 

pe feond hine verede. 
fchanius pe kene ¥ 

pat was in kinges ftude. 

four and pritti winter 

he held pat lond ¥ 

ad pat folke mid bliffe. 

po com his liues hende ¥ 

lop peh him were. 

Siluid his brop ¥ 

pat was Lauines fone. 

he bitahte al pat lond 


 Eneaf heore fader hefde on hond. pat Eneas hire fader afde an hond. 
Enne fune heuede Affcaniufy 20. One fone afde Afchani®/ 


pe wes ihaten Siluius. 


pat waf ihote Silui?. 


pis child hefde his eamef nome: pis child afde his hemes name 


ah lut 3er he leouede. 
for hif ahne fune feopen ¥ 


ac lutele wile he liuede. 
for his owene fone 


her lifes end ‘should come’. But he took the idol, ‘that they accounted 


for God’, that Eneas ‘with his army’ brought from Troy; in Alba Longa 
‘he’ set it, but soon it thence went; ‘forth’ back with the wind the Fiend 
conveyed it. Ascanius the keen, who was in kings stead, he held the land 
and the people with bliss four and thirty winters; then came his lifes end, 
though it were loath to him. To Silvius his brother, who was Lavines 
son, he delivered all the land that Eneas their father had in hand. Asea- 
nius had a son, who was named Silvius. This child had his uncles name; 
but ‘few years [little while] he lived, for his own son ‘subsequently’ shot 


1 he? 


12 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 254—277.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
hine fceat to deape. hine fet to depe. 
Pa pif child waf feir muche ’ Po pis child was mochel 
pa luuede he a maide. po louede he a mayde. [c.2.] 
peo waf Lauine mawe pat was Lauinef moje. 
mid darnfcipe he heo luuede. _—_deorneliche fwipe. 
Hit iwer’ pere ? Hit iwarp pare ¥ 
fwa hit ded wel iwere. so hit dop wel iware. 
 peos 3unge wiman / pat pis 3onge mayde ¥ 
iwerd' hire mid childe. iwarp hire mid childe. 


Affeatnius}. pe 3et leouede Affcani?? 10 
pe on pan londe was duc. 
Vnder-3etene weren pe pinges. Wnder-3eté were pe pinges ¥ 
pat peo wimon waf mid childe. pat pe mayde was wid* childe. 


Pa fende Affcani? ¥ 

pe wes lauerd & dux. 

after heom 3end pat lond ¢ po sende he ouer al pat lond ¥ 
pe cupen dweomerlakes fong. —_ after wittie an wise. 

wité he wolde for wite Afchaniuf wolde ¥ 
purh pa wiper-craftes. porp hire wife craftes. 

wat ping hit were / 2% wat pinges hit were 


} peo wimd hefde on wombe. pat pe womman bere. 
Heo wrpen heore leoten ? 

pe feucke wes bi-tweonen. 

heo funden on pen crefte Hii funde in hire craftes ‘ 


him to death. When this child was ‘grown’ big, then loved he a maid, 
who was Lavines niece; ‘with secrecy he loved her [very secretly]. It 
there came to pass, as it does well nigh everywhere, that this young 
‘woman [maid] became with child, ‘while Ascanius yet lived, who was 
duke of the land’. The things were discovered, that the ‘woman [maid] 
was with child. Then sent ‘Ascanius [he] ‘who was lord and duke’, over 
(all) the land, after ‘them who knew songs of magic art [witty and wise 
persons] ; ‘he [for Ascanius] would learn, through ‘the evil [their wise] 
crafts, what thing it were that the woman ‘had in her womb [bare]. 
‘ They cast their lots, the Devil was among them’; they found by ‘the craft 


1 R. iwerd. 2 mid? wid? 


Hl 


[v. 278—300.] LA3AMONS BRUT, 13 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

carefule leodes. carfulle pinges. 

| pet peo wimon waf mid ane fune Y pat 3e mid one fone waf? 

* pat wes a felcud bearn. wonderfol to telle. 

} boa feulde fallen ” for bope he folde fle ¥ 

fader & his moder. his fader and his moder. 

| porh him heo fculden deizen —_porh him hii folde deie/ 
& pene dea’ polien. and pane dep polie. 
& purh his ealdren ded / and porh hire tweire . ep? 
idreuen out of londe. he idreue of londe. 
& umben longne firft ’ 10 


mid wr®fcipe comen liSen. 
Po leoten weren iworpen ’ 


& fwa hit al iweard. 
Pa pe time com? Po pe time icome waf? 
} pe cnaue wes iboren. pat pe childe hi-bore weas. 


in pere burhe ” 

pa brude deade iwear’, [f.2*.c.1.] pe moder porh him iwarp dead 
pe child wes iboren ifund / alfe ibore was pe child. 

to baluen his moder. 

Pat child waf ihaten BrutufY 2 Hit was ihote Brut? ¥ 


Brutus. 
pat bearn naf nowit feie. h ..' nas noht feie. 
4 pif child leuede & wel ipei? pis child leued and wel ipeh ¥ 
& peweas hit luuede. and peuwes he louede. 


[their crafts] sorrowful ‘spells [things] ; that‘the woman [she] was preg- 
nant with a son, ‘who was a marvellous child [wonderful to tell], ‘that [for 
he] should slay both [his] father and his mother; through him they should 
die, and suffer the death ; and through ‘his parents [both of their] death 
[he] should be driven ‘ out’ of the land, ‘ and after a long period with honor 
arrive. The lots were cast, and so it allhappened.’ When thetime‘came [was 
come], that the ‘boy [child] was born ‘in the burgh’, the ‘lady died, but the 
child was born safe, to his mothers bale [mother died through him, as (at the 
time that) the child was born]. ‘The child [It] was named Brutus; ‘the 
infant [it] was not dead. This child lived, and throve well, and virtues 


? hit? 


14 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 301—324.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
He waf fiftene 3er ald Po he was fiftene 3er 
pa he to wode ferde. to pe wode he verde. 
& hif fader mid him ’ and his fader mid him’ 
& feie-sid makede. to his heuele. 
Heo funden ane heorde Hii funde ane hierde 
of heorten fwiSe g*ate. of heortes fwipe grete. 
pe fader heo' bi-eode Y pe fader ham bi-eode ¥ 
to hif a3re unneode. to his owene on-neode. 
To hif fune he heo! draf? To his fone h. ham draf ’ 
him feolfue to balewe. 10 hi silue to ha..e%, 
Brutuf fette on hif flo’ Brut? fette on his flon Y 
» mid ftregpe he..... vt gon. 
hewende to fceoten pat hea‘ der? he wend .. fceote . an deor ? 
& ihitte hif azene fader. and hitte his owe fader. 
purh ut pere brofte ¥ porh vt pe breofte biuore? [f.1".c.1.] 
wao wes Brutuf per fore. wo was Brutus per. fore. 
wa wes him on liue? wo was him a-liue? 
pa pe fader wes on deade. po his fader fez deize. 
Pa # iherde hif kun’ Po ihorde pis his cun 
pe he of icumen wes. 2 pat he of icome was. 
pat he pe flo heuede idrawen ¥ 
& hif fader of-flawen. pad® he his fader adde ifla3e. 
heo hine flemden hii flemde hine of londe. 


out of pane londe. 


‘it [he] loved. "When he was fifteen years ‘old’, he went to [the] wood ; 
and his father with him, ‘and died [to his own injury]. They found 
a herd of harts most great; the father approached them to his own 
misfortune. ‘Towards his son he drove them, to the harm of himself. 
Brutus set on his arrow [with strength he /et it out go]; he thought to shoot 
the ‘tall’ deer, and hit his own father throughout the breast [before]. 
Woe was Brutus therefore! woe was he alive, when ‘the [his] father ‘was 
dead [he saw die]! When his kindred, of whom he was come, heard ‘that 
[this], that he had ‘ drawn the arrow, and’ slain his father, they banished 


1heom? ?harme? A line is wanting here. ‘4 heah? 5 A&. pat. 


» 


d 
[v. 325—348.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


& he iwende forhful / 

ouer fea ftreamef. 

into Griclonde Y 

per he hif cun funde. 

of pan folck of Trove” 

pe mid teonen wef to-drefed. 
pere q*ne' cun Heleine? 
pes kinges fune Priami. 

& muchel fole of hif peoden 
ah al heo weren peowe. 

& of hif azne kunne 

moni kineborene mon. 
Moni 3er waf agan ?’ 
feod%en? his cun hider com. 
pa wepmen weren iwexan ? 
pa wimen wel ipowene. 

& heore nutene / 

neotfume weren. 

Nes Brutuf i pon londe ‘ 
bute lutel ane wile. 

} alle monnen he wes leof ¥ 


10 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


and he wende forhfol vt / 
ouer féé ftremes. 

in to Greclonde ? 

pere he his cun funde. 

of pan folk of Trove / 

pat mid teone weren to-dreued. 
pe cwene cun Eleyne 

pe kinges dopter Priami. 
and manie of pan peode 
ac alle hii were peue. 

and of his owene cunne ¥ 
moni hep bore man. 

Mani 3er weren aron ¥ 
fuppe his cun pider com. 
pe wepmen weren iwoxen ¥ 
pe w.mmen ipo3en. 


Nas Brutus in pat lond’ 
bote lutel one wile. 
pat alle méne he was lef 


& muchele monfcipe biwon. [c.2.] and moche manfipe bi-won. 


for cniht he waf fwipe god ¢ 
pan folke to queme. 
he waf mete-cufti ¥ 


for cnipt he waf fwipe g.d/ 
pan folke to cweme. 
he was mete-cufti ¢ 


him ‘out’ of ‘the’ land, and he departed [out] sorrowful over the sea- 
streams into Greece, where he found his kin of the folk of Troy, that with 
sorrow ‘was [were] dispersed; kindred of the queen Helen, ‘son [daugh- 
ter] of the king Priam, and ‘much folk [many] of ‘his [the] nation,—but 
they all were slaves,—and of his own kin many a man nobly born. Many 
‘a year was [years were] passed since his kindred ‘hither [thither] came. 
The men were waxen numerous, the women ‘well’ thriven, ‘and their 
cattle were abundant’. Brutus had not been in the land but a little while, 
before that he became dear to all men, and obtained much honor, for he 
was a man most good to please the people ; he was bountiful, ‘which is 


1 See Notes. 2 feod®en? 


16 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


is monfcipe fteor. 

Alle monnen he waf leof ” 

pe him lokeden on. 

heo him 3euen gerfume 

& feire hine gretten. 

heo feiden him mid rede 

& mid ftilliche runen. 

3if he were {wa prifte ” 

& he hit don durfte. 

he heom wolde leaden? —_10 
out of pane leoden. 

out of peowedome Y 

freo pat heo weoren. 

heo hine wolden maken duc? 
& deme ofer hif folke. 

We habbe® feoue pufund’ / 
of gode cnihten. 

wid outen wifmen / 

pe noht ne cunnen of wepnen. 
children & hinen? 20 
pa ure nete feulen 3emen. 

for muchel we wlle® drizen 
& habben care of ure life. 

zr we nulled mid frefcipe ¥ 
faren fro ure feonden. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


ed 
[v. 349—373.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


to edeuche manne. 

Alle men he was lef 

pat him on lokede. 

hii him 3eue 3eftes 

and faire hine grette. 

hii feide him mid redes 

and mid ftille roning. 

pat 3ef he were prifte / 

and he hit don dorfte. 

pat he 3am wolde le ...? 

vt of pan lode. 

vt of peue.. me” 

freo pat hi were. 

hi hine wolde makie du . ? 

and deme oue.... fol. e. 

We abbep seue puf. nd ¥ 

of wel gode cnittes. 
..kete wimmen ¥ 

pat n.....conne of wepne. 

childrene ... hine ? 

pat ...niete folle 3. me. 

for ..... we follen dre3en ? 

ine piffe ..ue. 

here we n . llep mid freofipe ¥ 

faren vt of londe. 


{c. 2.] 


great honor [to every man]. By all men he was beloved who looked on 
him; they gave him gifts, and greeted him courteously; they said to 
him with counsel and with secret communing, [that] if he were ‘so’ bold 
and he it durst do, that he would lead them out of the country, out of 
slavery, so that they were free, they would make him Duke and Ruler 
over his people. ‘‘ We have,” said they, “‘ seven thousand of [well] good 
knights, exclusive of women, who know nought of weapons; children and 
hinds, who shall take care of our cattle. For much we ‘will [shall] suffer, 
and have sorrow ‘of our [in this] life, ere we desire not with freedom to 


1 pufund ? 


[v. 374—397.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 17 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
Alle pe weren at piffe reade’ = Alle pat weren at piffe read ¥ 
biluuede peof runen. bi-lefde in piffe roune. 
Inne Griclonde waf a 3ung mon: FEN . reclonde was a 3.ng md 
of priti 3eren. of . rittie 3ere. 
Affaracuf ihaten Af...acufih... Affaracus. 
of fwite' heie kunne. of he3ere ciine. 


his fader ..s a riche cnipt? [miht. 
ah him feolf was fwipe ftrong .f 
hif fader wes a Gric ikoren? [ren. his fader was a Greck i-core ¥ 


J ah hif moder wef of Troien ibo- ac his moder was of Troye ibore. 
& heo wes a cheuefe u 
hire cheap wef pe wrfe. 
Nopelaf hit ilomp ‘ Hit bi-falle per after Y 
inne lut 3ere. ine feue 3ere. 
pat pe fader wes dead : pat pe fader was dead y 
hif duzeSe he bi-lefde. his do3epe he bilefde. 
He 3ef Affaracum hif fune : He 3af Affarachuf his fone 
fele preo caftles. feli pre caftles. 
& al pat ligginde lond and al pat ligginde lond 
pe per abuten lei. 2 pe per abute lay. 
A Affaracuf heuede enne broper:’ Affarachus hafde one broper 7 
pe wes under wedlac iboren. pat vnder wedlac was ibore. 
after pen heSene tidende? [£3.c.1.] after pan hepene lawe ¥ 
pe wef in pan londe. pat ftot in pan ilke dawe. 


go from our enemies [out of the land].”’ All that were present at this counsel, 
approved this communing. In Greece was a young man of thirty years 
of age, named Assaracus, of ‘exceeding’ high parentage. [His father 
was a rich knight, but he himself was very strong of might.] His father 
was a noble Greek, but his mother was born of “Trojan race [Troy], ‘and 
she was a concubine,—her value was the worse’! ‘Nevertheless’ it befell 
[thereafter] within few years, that the father died; his people he quitted. 
He gave Assaracus, his son, three good castles, and all the adjacent land 
that thereabout lay. Assaracus had a brother, who was born in wedlock, 
after the heathen ‘usage [law] that ‘was in the land [stood in that day]. 


1 fwide, second hand, by erasure. 
Cc 


Afjaracus. 


Blr]utus 
dux, 


18 LA3AMONS BRUT. (v. 398—420.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
pPef cniht hefde hif fader londY pis cnipt hafde his fader londe ¥ 


& lod! him wes his broper. and lop him was his broper. 
for he heold pe ftronge caftlesY for he held pe ftrdge caftles ¥ 
purh ftaSele hif fader 3efe. porh ftapele his fader 3iftes. 


Hif broper heo® him wolde bini- His broper him 3am wolde bi- 
ah he ne mihte fpeden. [men? ah he ne mipte fpede. [(nime? 
par arof wale & win par aros wale and wind®y 

& wider-heppes feola. and wiper-happes fale. 

Affaracuf wes god cniht ¥ Affarachus was god cnipt ? 

wid Grickes he heold moni fiht. 10 wid* Greckes he helde moni fiht. 
ah he hefde muchele ftrengpe: ah he hafde mochel ftregpe ¥ 


of meren hif cunne. of hif moder cunne. 

of pan Troyfcé monnen ye eats . (£2e1.] 
pe weren his moder ifib. pat 3am . 

for pare fibe-la3e ¥ 

luue hem wes bi-tweonen. 

Affarac? hit reddey = is ee eee hus hit . edde y 
mid dizenliche runen. EN) te Te 
} pat Troynifce fole PipeT. was 

mid hif fulle fultume. 2 mid hif....oltome. 
nomen pene cniht Brutii ’ - + . enipt Brutun’ 
& makeden hine to duke. . . «+ ne to ducke. 


& he heora monredne Y and hire mo... dene’ 


This knight had his fathers land, and his brother was loath to him, because 
he held the strong castles, through his fathers stedfast gifts. His brother 
would take them from him, but he might not speed ; there arose slaughter 
and strife, and many calamities! Assaracus was a good knight; against 
the Greeks he held many a fight, but he had much strength of his ‘pow- 
erful [mothers] kindred, of the Trojan men, who were his mothers rela- 
tives; ‘by reason of the law of affinity love was between them.’ Assaracus 
advised it with secret communing, that the Trojan folk, with his full as- 
sistance, took the knight Brutus, and made him Duke, and ‘he’ their homage 


1 lod, man, sec. ? heom? 3 win? 4 mid? wid? 


[= 


| 


[v. 421—445.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
mid monfcipe on-feng. 
He fende hif fonde 
wide 3end pane londe. 
he heihte his fole fumunen ¥ 
& cumen to him feoluen. 
wapmen & wifmen ? 
pa weolezen & pa weadlen. 
alle he heom fumunde 
& to wode fende. 
bote feoue pufend kempen 10 
pa he in to pane caftlen dude. 
Pa lette he riden 
vnirimed folc. 
bi-3eoten wepnen & mete ¥ 
muchel wes pa neode. 
& al pat fmale mo-kun y 
he dude 3eond pea muntes. 
& him felf mid hif ferde ¥ 
bi-foré & bi-hinden. 
Seopen he nom to redey =. 
& to fom runen. [e.2.] 
pat he an wriht makede ? 
al mid wifdome. 


LAZAMONS BRUT. 19 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xi11. 


mid manfipe solde 0... nge. 
He f.... his fonde? 

W 8 seOnbrecies' nde. 

he hehte pat folck ..... en?’ 
and ...en to him. 

-...en and wimmé ? 

fe VO . Ide. 
alle he 3am . 

.nd to wode fende. 
bote feue pufend kempes 

pe he into caftle dede. 

Po lette he riden 

wide and fide. 

bi-3ete wepne and mete 
mochel wef pe neode. 

and al pat {male monkun ’ 
he dude 3eond pe motef 

and him seolf mid his ferde ¥ 
bi-fore and bi-hinde. 

Seoppe he nam to reade * 

an to som roune. 

pat a writ makede y 

al mid wifdome. 


Pandrafum pene king he grette/ and grete Pandrafum pane king? Pandra/um. 


mid greiSlicre fpeche. 


mid gripliche fpeche. 


‘received [should receive] with honour. He sent his messengers wide 
over the land; he commanded ‘his [the] people to assemble, and come 
to himself; men and women, the rich and the poor, all he them sum- 
moned, “and sent to the wood, except seven thousand warriors, whom 
he placed in ‘the’ castles. Then caused he to ride ‘innumerable folk 
{far and wide] to obtain weapons and provisions ;—great was the need 
of them!—and all the inferior sort of people he placed on the moun- 
tains, and himself with his army before and behind. Afterwards he took 
to counsel, and to some communing, so that ‘he’ made a letter all with 
wisdom; [and] Pandrasus the king ‘he’ greeted with peaceful speech, 


c2 


20 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


& } wriht he him fende 

& peos word feaide. 

For pan weorldes feome ¥ 

& for pan muchele grome. 

pat Dardanife kun : 
pe we beo’ of icomene. 

wone?® in piffe londe ¥ 

leode to fconde. 

inne peowe-dome 

prel werkes do’. 10 
heo beo’ to gadere icumene 
kudief me3ef. 

al fwa  ilke folc ¥ 

pe freofcipe wole bi-winne. 
Heo habbed!' idemed 

pat ich am duc ofer heom. 

Ich abbe i min caftlen ¥ 

feoue pufend kempen. 

ich habbe in pane munten ¥ 
monie pufund. 20 
Leouere heom hif to libben ¥ 
bi pan wode-roten. 

al fwa pat wilde fwin ¥ 
 wroted 3eond pan grouen. 


{v. 446—469.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
and pat writ him fende ¢ 
pat peos worde fegge. 
For pane worles fame ? 
and for pane mochele grame. 
pat Dardaniffe cun. 
pat we beop oue icomen. 
wonep in piffe londe ¥ 
folke to fonde. 
in peudome ¥ 
pralle workes dop. 
hii beop to gadere icome 
cupie meyes. 
alfe pat ilke folk ‘ 
pat pi frefipe wole bi-winne. 
Hi habbep imaked 
pat ich ham duck ouer ham. 
Ich habbe in mine caftles?  [c.2.] 
feue pufend kempes. 
and eke in pan mountef 
mani pufendes. 
Leuere 3am his to libbe ¥ 
bi pan wode-rote. 
al fo pe wilde fwin Y 
pe wrotep in pan groue? 


and the letter ‘he’ sent to him, ‘and [that] said these words: ‘ For the 
worlds (worldly) shame, and for the great dishonor, that the Grecian 
race,—from which we are descended,—dwelleth in this land to disgrace 
of the people, and in slavery doth thral-works, they are together come, 
—worthy men!—as that folk that will obtain [thy (of thee)] freedom. 
They have ‘ordained [made] that I am Duke over them. I have in 
my castles seven thousand warriors; ‘I have [and also] in the mountains 
many thousands. Liefer is it to them to live on the wood-roots, like the 


1 habbed, man. sec. 


7 


[v. 470—490.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 21 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
pane heo pine peowedomes pane hi pine peudomes, 
lengre ipolien. lengere polie. 


3if heo wile! frefcipe bi-winnen y 
ne wndre pou nawiht per fore. 
heo biddeS* pe mid freonfcipe 


pat pu heom ifreoie. 

Pes word he® fendeS* Y pis word he® forp fendep 
al fwa pe wriht pe feid. al fo pat writ fpeket. 

pat heo moten woénien pat hii mote wonie ¥ 

wer fwa heo wolled. 10 ware fo i® wollep. 

inne gride & in friSe ¥ in pais and in gripe 


& heo wlle3’ pe freonfcipe don. and hii wollep pe fronfipe don. 
3if pou pif nult® ipolien y 3if pou pis nelt polie ¥ 

pe feal beon® pa wrfe. pou falt beo pe worfe. 

pe king nom pat writ on hond? {| pe king nam pat writ an honde 
& he hit wroSliche"’ bi-heold. _ and he hit wropliche bi-heold. 


seolcud! him puhte selcup him pohte. 
{wulcere fpeche. folchere fpeche. 
Pa he alles fpac ¢ Po he alles fpac ¥ 
mid preete he fpilede. so mid prete he feide. 


To wroper heore hele?’ (£3. c.1.) To wropere-hele 


wild swine that grubbeth ‘through [in] the groves, than that they longer 
endure thy slavery. _ If they will (wish to) obtain freedom, wonder thou 
not therefore ;—they pray thee with friendship that thou set them free.’ 
These words they send [forth] all as the letter ‘saith [speaketh] ‘to thee’, 
that they may dwell wheresoever they will, in peace and in amity, and they 
will keep friendship with thee. If thou wilt not suffer this, the worse 
‘shall it be to thee [thou shalt be]!"" The king took the letter in hand, 
and he wrathly beheld it; strange such speech seemed to him! Then 
he spake without reserve; with threats he said: “To ‘their’ destruction 


- 1 wile, m. sec. 2 bidde, m. sec. 5 heo? 

» 4 sende, m. sec. Shi? 6 R. hi. 

~ 7 wile, m. sec. 8 By second hand, on erasure. ® be, m. sec. 
_ © wrodliche, m. sec. ” seoleud, m. sec. 


a LA3AMONS BRUT. [v.491—515.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
habbe’ heo fuch werc idon. habbep hii foch worck idon. 
Mine pralles i mire peode y Mine pralles and mi folk. 
me fuluen pretia®. mi-feolue pretep. 

Wide he fende 3eond pat lond: Wide he fende ouer al pat lond ¥ 
for he wes leoden king. for he was leoden king. 

} come to hirede y pat comen to him feolue 
riche men & wedlen. riche and hene. 

al } wapmon-cun ¢ al pat ilke monkun 

pa mihte beren wapen. pat mihte bere wepne. 
vppen lif & uppen leomen? 10 vppe lif and uppe lime? 

al pes londef folc. al pat londef folk. 

An horfen & an foté An horfe and a-fote ? 

ford heo ifuften. forp hi fufde. 

Pe king preeted Brutun : Pe king pretete Brutun y 
fwa he dude Affaraci. fo he dude Assarachii. 

pat he heom wolde biliggen’ pat he 3am wolde biliggen?’ 
mid laden heora feonden. mid lope hire freondes. 

3if he heom mihte bi-winnen? 3.f he ham mihte bi-winne? 
mid his wored ftrencée. mid heni cunnes ginne. 
alle heo feulden hongien? . alle hi folde hongie? 

on heje treowen. vppe e3e troues. 

Brutuf iherde feggé ¥ Brut? hi-herde fegge 

al fwa hit fod weef. al fo hit fop was. 

pat Pandrafus pe king ? pat Pandrafus pe king ? 
him towardes com. him towardef com. 


have they such work done! My slaves ‘in [and] my ‘kingdom [people) 
threaten myself!” Wide he sent over [all] the land,—for he was king of 
the country,—that rich ‘men’ and poor should come to ‘assembly [himself]; 
all ‘the [that] male-kind that might bear weapon, upon pain of life and upon 
limb, all ‘the folk of the land (the lands folk]. On horse and on foot forth they 
marched. The king threatened Brutus, so he did Assaracus, that he would 
surround them with their loath ‘enemies [friends] ; and if he might conquer 
them with ‘strength of his army [any kind of stratagem], they all should 
hang ‘on [upon] high trees. Brutus heard say, all as it true was, that Pan- 
drasus the king came towards him with a mighty army ;—but some they 


= 


[v. 516—539.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


mid muchelere ferde. 

ah heo weren fumme faie. 
Brutuf nom to reade y 

pat him best waf. 

He nom hif kene mé / 

pa to compe weren gode. 

he ferde to pan wode 

to pan wilderne. 

to pan ilke weie 

pe he ful 3eare wufte. = 10 
pat pe king mid hif ferde ¢ 
ford feulde iwenden. 

Brutuf hefede gode 

cnihtef to neode. 

pre pufund mid him 

ilead to pere pruppe. 

Pe king him com riden : 

mid riche hif folke. 

Brut? heom fmat on :’ 

mid hif grime fmite. 20 
ifowte he pe Grickes ¥ 

mid hif grim refen. 

pa Grickes neoren noht warre 
of heore wenfide. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 23 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


mid mochelere ferde / 

ah hii weren fomme veie. [f2°.c.1.] 
Brut? nom to rede 

pat him beft was. 

He nam his kene men Y 

pat kempes weren gode. 

he verde to pan wode ¥ 

to pan wilderne. 

to pan ilke wei?’ 

pat he wel wifte. 

ware pe king mid his ferde: . 
forp solde wéde. 

Brut? hafde gode ¥ 

cniptes to neode. 

pre pufend mid him / 

he ladde to gadere. 

Pe king hi com ride 

mid riche hif folk ’ 

Brut? him fmot any 

mid hif grim refes. 

fopte he pis Grickes 

mid ftelene egges. 

Pe Greckes neore noft® warey » 
of hire mochele harme. 


were fated to death! Brutus took to counsel what was best forhim. He 
took his brave men that ‘in battle [warriors] were good; and he marched 
to the wood, to the wilderness, to that way, which he ‘full’ well knew, 
‘that [where] the king with his host should forth pass. Brutus had good 
men at need; three thousand [he] led with him ‘to the passage [toge- 
ther]. The king came riding towards him, with his noble folk; Brutus 
smote on them with his grim ‘blows [onsets]; he sought ‘the [these] 
Greeks with ‘his fierce onsets [steel weapons]. The Greeks were not 
aware of their ‘destruction [great harm]; the backs [they] turned ‘to him’; 


1 R, noht. 


Achalon, 


24 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 540—563.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 


wendé him peo rugges wendé hii pe ruggef. 
flowen ha3e men. floze pe eze mé. 

Achalon heihte an flum Afcalon hepte an water ¢ 
pe nef noht feor from heom.[c.2.) pat naf noht for ham fram. 
pider in iwenden pid’ in wende 

moni pusunde. mani pufend. 

Brutuf heom com efter? Brutus ham com after? 

& wfer he heom leide on. and euere he on leide. 

mid fweord & mid fpere ¥ mid fwerde and mid fpere ? 


al he to-drof pes kinges here. 10 al he to-drof pe kingef here. 

a londe & a watere ¥ a londe and a watere’ 

he heom adun leaide. he hem a-dun leide. 

& pe king him felf fleh Y and pe king fwipe flep'¥ 

he ifeih hif frend fallen. po he his men fe3e falle. 
Muchel folc per waf of-fclawen y Mochel folk per was of-slawe ¥ 


on moni are wifen. in mani ane wife. _ 

Pe king hefde enne bro’er’ —_ pe king hafde on broper? 
neafde he nenne oer. nafde he non oper. 
Antigonuf wes ihoaten Antigon? was ihote ¥ 

inne Griclonde he wes heh. 20 in Greclonde he was he3. 
Ifeih? hif broSer ferden H® feh ou his broper verde ¥ 
hu heo iuaren weren. alle iuaren weren. 

a wetere & a londe? a watere and a londe’ 


fwa heom leSeft wes. afe him lopeft was. 


[the] noble men fled. Achalon hight a ‘river [water], that was not far 
from them; thither in went many thousands! Brutus came after them, 
and ever he laid on ‘them’; with sword and with spear he utterly dispersed 
the kings army; on land and in the water he felled them down; and the 
king ‘himself’ fled [fast, when] he saw his ‘friends [men] fall. Mickle 
folk there was slain, in many a wise! The king had a brother,—he had 
no other,—Antigonus he was named; in Greece he was noble. [He] 
saw his brothers forces, how ‘they’ had fared in the water and on land, 
as was most loath to them. Antigonus with his weapons and with his 


} fley? ? he seih? > he? 


as 


[v. 564—589.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 25 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
Antigonuf mid hif weapnen? — Antigon®? mid his wepne Antigonus. 
& mid his wel-kempen ; and mid his gode cniptes 
iwenden toward Brutun / wende touward Brutun. 
to his bale-fide. to's ecrortiarstdeicta 1fos] 
Heo comen to gadere y oo. own uh oe, eb ginderes 
é' mid greatere heorte. oa tees fate 
id Par he mihte bi-halden / per he . 
pe bi halues were. .. - - halues. 
moni wenfiSes / oe eee 
wiper-happes feollen. eet, 4s. “Lei taghde ta-Fiey 
moni heaued moni hond ¥ - . ~ ued mani hond?’ 
fallen to foten. ook the Saree 
monie par fuhten ‘ oe oe per fohte's:' . 
monie flem makeden. mani ...m makeden. 
monie par feollen 
§ purh heora feon-Sewes. 
res Pa Troyffe men flo3en ¢ pa ....ffe .en floh3en 


al pa Grickef pea heo neih comen. alle pe Greckes pa . ¢ 
| Per Brutuf nom Antigonun’ Pere Brut? nam Antigo... 
pes kinges broper Pandrafum. 2 pe kingef broper Pandrafum. 


mid him he hine ledde ... him he hine ladde y 

for leof he him wes to-habben. for leof he ..ne was to habb.. 
He hine leatte wel witen Y a. ofc Pihewdlawitio 2 
mid wnder ftronge benden. ine.g « + .¢ :sae eendes. 

& al fwa hif iferen ‘ and al fo his . ‘ 

pe mid him ifunden weren. -- mid him inomen weren. ~ 


hs ‘warriors [good knights] advanced towards Brutus, to his own destruction. 
They came together with great courage. There he might behold, who 
besides had been, many harms, frequent mishaps;—many a head, many a 
hand fell to the feet; many there fought; many took flight; ‘ many there 
fell through their evil conduct’! The Trojan men slew all the Greeks 
that they came nigh. There Brutus took Antigonus, brother of the king 
Pandrasus; with him he him led, for glad he was to have him. He 
caused him to be well secured with very strong bonds, and also his 


Pandrasus. 


Antigonus. 


Castellum 
Sparatin, 


26 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 590—612.] 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
Pat iherde pe king Pandrafus? Pat iherde Pandrafus pe king 


hit neaf him noht iqueme. pat naf him noht icweme. 
pat Antigonuf hif broper ? [f4.c.1.) pat Antigonuf his broper ¥ 
wes in armliche benden. was in ftronge bendes. 

Pe king fende fwa wide y Pe king fo wide fende ’ 
{wa ilefte hif riche. fo was his kine-riche. 

& heihte! eulne mon y and heht euereine man 
pe mihte riden oper gan. pat mipt ride oper gon. 
pat heo comen mid him ? pat hii comen mid him 


to pane caftle of Sparatin. 10 to pan caftle of Sonatin®. 
Nes caftel nan fwa ftrong : Nas caftel non fo ftrég ¥ 


i pon londe of Griclond. in pan ende of Greclonde. 

He wende hit to fope He wende hit to fope 

fod peh hit neore. peh hit fop nere. 

pat Brutuf hefde pa men pat Brut? hafde pe men y 

pe he mid fihte biwo. pat mid fihte he hafde awonne. 
idon into pan caftle ¥ idon in pan caftle / 

& pear heom quic heolde. and per ham ewik helde. 


& him feolf per for’ mide and him seolf heke 

for pere muchele bizete. 2 for pare mochele bi-3eate. 

Ah Brut? dude betere read ¥ Ah Brut? dude betere red 
& him pa beth ilomp. par fore him pe bette bi-fulle. 
In pon caftle he dude hende? _In pan caftle he dude hende? 


companions, that with him were ‘found [taken]. The king Pandrasus that 
heard,— ‘it [that] was not to him pleasing !—that Antigonus, his brother, 
was in ‘grievous [strong] bonds. The king sent as wide as his kingdom 
‘extended [was], and commanded every man that might ride or go, that 
they should come with him to the castle of Sparatin. No castle was so 
strong in the ‘land [end] of Greece. He thought it sooth,—sooth though 
it was not,—that Brutus had put the men, whom he [had] won with fight, 
into the castle, and there held them alive; and himself ‘there together 
with them [also], on account of the great booty. But Brutus did better 
counsel, ‘and [therefore] the better befell to him. In the castle he placed 


1 The last two letters of heihte are interlined. 2 Sparatin? 


[v. 613—636.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
six hundred of his cnihten. 
him felf mid hif fenge ¥ 
he to wode ferde. 

Pe king to pan caftle 


- ford mid hif ferde. 


per he lei abuten 

par inne weren his lade feodd!. 
Hif ferde he fette 

on elchere fiden. 

ofte heo refden 10 
& remden to gadere. 

mid ftelene orde ¥ 

& mid ftarka biten. 

mid ftocken & mid ftanen 
ftal fiht heo makeden. 

mid Grickifce fure 

feollen pe feie. 

par waf muchel blod-gute 
baluwe per wes riue. 

Pa cnihtes of pan caftley 2% 
quicliche heom wid-ftoden. 
paet ne mihte pes kinges folc ¥ 
of heom fael makien. 

ah pe king of his monnen ¥ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 27 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


fix hundred of hif cniptef. 
him seolf mid his ftrengpe ¢ 
to pan wode eode. 

Pe king to pan caftle 
forp mid ........ 

par he lai aboute ? 

wale nl ne weren his fon. 
His ....e he fette?’ 

on echere fide. 

...e hi refdenY 

and remden to gadere. 
mid ftelene hordes ” 
and mid bitere fmites. 
mid ftocke and mid stone y 
ftalfiht mak . de. 


[£3.¢.1.] 


par was mochel blod-gote ¢ 
balu par was riue. 

Pe cnihtef of pan caftle 
ftarcli..e wid-ftode*. 

pat ne mihte pis kinges folk 
of ham Ane haremi. 

ac pe king of his men 


six hundred of his good knights; himself ‘he’ went with his ‘spoil 
[strength] to [the] wood. The king marched to the castle with his army ; 
there he about lay; therein were his ‘hateful’ enemies. His host he set 
on each side; oft they made assault, and rushed together; with steel 
weapons, and with ‘strong [bitter] strokes, with stocks and with stones 
they made fierce conflict ; ‘ with Greekish fire the fated fell!’ There was 
much blood-shed ; woe there was rife! The knights of the castle ‘sharply 
[strongly] withstood them, so that the people of the king might not ‘make 

(harm one] of them; but the king lost many thousands of his 


1 Written at first fredd. Cf. v. 507. 2 wid-stode? 


28 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


monie pufend les. 

Pe king wes on mode far? 

pat wes for his monne lure. [c.2.]. 
He tah hine a3ein ane prowe ¥ 
& preated pene caftel. 

& pat fole per inne ¥ 

penne he hit hefde bi-wnnen. 
} he heom wolde quellen 
oper quic al for-brenné. 

He lette makien enne dic? 10 
pe wes wnderliche deop. 
abouten hif ferde ¥ 

& feiede heo mid pornen. 

& leai per abuten ¥ 

& abat his bale-si¥es. 

Pe king wes {wide wrad 

& fwar muchelne oad. 

} nolde he ponne faré ¥ 

ar hif feoden? feie weore. 


{v. 637—660.) 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


mani pufend les. 

Pe king was for in mode 
for his ma lure. 

He ternde him ajein ¢ 

and prettede pan caftle. 
and pat folk wid' ine? 
wane he hit mihte awinne. 
panne wolde he 3a ewelle 
oper cwic for-berne. 

He lette makie one dich? 
pat was fwipe deap. 

abute his ferde ? 


and feide mid worde. 
pat nolde he panne fare ¥ 
are hii dead were. 


I pon caftle weoren monie men? 20 In pa caftle were mani men? 


& muchel mete per bihofede. 
pe mete ford iwat ? 

for per fengen feole to. 

Heo nomé enne erendrake 


and mochele mete heote. 
pe mete forp eode 

for par feng manie to. 

Hii neme anne herindrak Y 


men. The king was sorrowful in mood,—‘that was’ for loss of his 
men. He ‘drew [turned] him back ‘a while’, and threatened the castle, 
and the folk ‘therein [within], when he ‘had won [might win] it, ‘that 
{then} he would kill them, or ‘all’ burn them alive. He caused a ditch 
to be made, that was exceeding deep, about his army, ‘and strengthened it 
with thorns, and lay there-about, and repaired his damages. The king was 
exceeding wrath’, and ‘swore mickle oath [said with words], that he would 
not thence fare, ere ‘his enemies [they] were dead. In the castle were 
many men, and much meat ‘there’ behoved them; the meat forth went (di- 


1 wid? 2 R. feonden. 


— Se 


[v. 661—683.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


pe «Bele wes to neode. 

heo fenden to heore leuerde ¥ 
pa leof heom wes on heorten. 
Heo hine gretten 

mid godene heore worden. 

heo beden hine come to helpe 
mid allen his ftrengse. 

pe wile pe heo weren ifunde 
pe weren hif fele men. 

Brutuf hine bi-pohte ? 10 
of fwlchere neode. 

& paf word feide ’ 

mid fopere heorte. 

{ He ded him felua freomay’ * 
pa helped hif freondene. 

fwa ich wlle mine? 

bi mine quicke liue. 

Pa wes pere a wel ibore mon? 
Anacletuf wes ihaten. [taken / 
mid pes kinges broSer he waf i- 
& per lei inne benden. 21 
Brut? him remde to ¥ 

mid grimmen his rafen. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 29 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


pat god was to neode. 

and fende to hire louerd ? 
pat leof 3am was on heorte. 
Hii hene’ grette / 

mid hire gode wordes. 

& bede hine come to helpe ¥ 
mid alle his ftregpe. 

wile pe hii weren ifund 

his hopte cniptes. 

Brut? hine bi-pohte ¥ 

of folchere neode. 

and peof word feide 

mid fopere heorte. 

He dop him seolue manfipe 7 
pat helpep hif frende. 

so ich wole mine 

bi mine ewike liue. 

Po was pare a wel ibore many 
Anacletuf ihote. 

mid pif kinges brop he waf itake / 
and per lai in bende. 

Brut? him remde toy 

mid bitere his refes. 


Anacletus, 


minished), for many partook thereof. They took a messenger, who was 
good at need, [and] ‘they’ sent to their lord, who was dear to them in 
heart. They greeted him with their good words, [and] ‘they’ bade him 
come to help them with all his strength, ‘the’ while that they were in 
safety, ‘who were’ his ‘good men [brave knights]. Brutus bethought him 
of such necessity, and said with true heart these words: ‘‘He doth himself 
‘service [honor] who helpeth his friend ; so will I mine, by my quick life!” 
Then was there a well-born man, who ‘was’ named Anacletus; with the 
brother of the king he was taken, and there lay in bonds. Brutus rushed 
to him with his ‘grim [bitter] onset; by the head he seized him, as if he 


} hine? 


30 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
bi pone toppe he hine nom ¥ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 684—707.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xm. ~ 


bi pe coppe he him nam ¥ 


al fwa he hine walde of-flean. alfo he hine wolde slean. 


& hif nakede fweord? _[f£.4".c.1.] and his nakede fwerd ¥ 
leide on hif necke. leide on his necke. 
& paf word faide / and peof word feide 


Brut? pe fele. 

Nipinc pou art dead 

bote pou do mine read. 

and pi louerd al fo ¥ 

bote pou mine lore do. 

ac 3if pou wolt pou miht? 
wel helpe 30u feolue. 

Louerd cwap Anacletuf? 

don ich wole pin lore. 

helpe mine louerd and me? 

mid alle mine mipte. 

Do fo ewap Brut? ¥ 

and pe bet 30u fel worpe. 

3e sollen habben lif and lime 

and beo me wel deore. 

Brut? him fwor an hop? 

holde pat he wolde. 

Po feide Brut? ¥ 

cnipt mid pe befte. 


Brutuf pe fele. 

Niding pou ert al dead ¥ 

buté pou do mine read. 

& pi leuerd al fway 

bote pu min lare do. 10 
ah 3if pu wit pu miht wel 
helpen inc feluen. 

Lauerd qua® Anacletuf? 

don ic wille pine lare. 

help mine lauerd & me? 

mid alle mire mihten. 

Do fwa quad' Brut? ¥ 

& pe fcal beon pe bet. 

3e feulen habben lif & leomen 
& beon mine leofe fréond. 20 
Brutus him fwar an #% 
breken pat he hit nzlde. 

puf feide Brutuf / 

pe wes cniht mid pane befte. 


would slay him, and laid his naked sword on his neck; and these words 
said Brutus the good: ‘‘Wretch! thou art ‘all’-dead, unless thou dost 
my counsel; and thy lord also, unless thou dost my bidding; but, if 
thou wilt, thou mayest well help yourselves.” ‘‘ Lord,” quoth Anacletus, 
I will do thy bidding, and help my lord and myself with all my might.” 
“Do so,” quoth Brutus, “and the better it shall be for ‘thee [you]; ye 
shall have life and limb, and be ‘my dear friend [to me well dear].”” Brutus 
swore an oath to him, that he ‘would not break it [would hold]. ‘Thus 
(Then) said Brutus,—‘who was’ knight with the best,—‘‘Anacletus, dear 


» quad? 


—— eet 


[v. 708—731.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 31 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 
Anacletuf leofe freond ¢ Anaclet? leoue freond ¥ 
to niht pu fealt faren. to nipt pou falt faren. 
a peon time bid beft ¥ in pan time wan hit his beft ¥ 
ponne men ga® to bedde. wane men gop to bedde. 
pu fealt fors wéden pou falt forp wende 
to paf kinges ferde. to pis kinges ferde. 
wonne pu comeft to pon cnihten * wane pou comeft to pe eniptes ¥ 
pat pene king bi-wited pe pane king bi-witiep. 
per pu findest feouen houndred ¥ pat bep feue hundred ¥ 
pa hzleSes beod kene. 10 pat beop {wipe kene. 
& pu heom clepe to’ clepe pou ham to? 
& cu%Sliche wid heom fpec. and cupliche fpec. 
Ich am Anaclet® Ich ham Anacletus ¢ 
ich am mid erm%en abroken. 
vt of pon benden i brok vt of bendef. 


pe Brut? me heuede on idon. 

& 3et ich ou figge on oper: and 3et ich owfeggean oper [£.3°.c.1.] 
ibrout ich habbe pes kinges broper. ibropt ich habbe pes kinges broper. 
vt of pon quarcerne vt of pan quarcerne ? 

of pan le-hufe. 2 of pan cwal-hufe. 

per Brutuf hin’ hefde idon par Brut? hine hafde idon ¥ 

for to-marewene he hine wolde and to-mor3e hine wolde an-hon. 
& ich hine habbe idon ¢ [an-hon. and ich hine habbe idon 

i piffe pude? derne. in piffe wilderne. 


friend, to night thou shalt go, at the time [when it] is best, when men go 
to bed, thou shalt proceed forth to the army of the king, and when thou 
comest to the knights who guard the king, ‘there thou shalt find [that 
are in number] seven hundred ‘ warriors’, that are [most] keen; ‘and’ 
call thou to them, and speak familiarly ‘with them’ thus: ‘‘I am Anacletus; 
‘I have with difficulty’ broken out of ‘the’ bonds ‘that Brutus had put on 
me’; and yet I say to you another thing, I have brought ¢he brother of the 
king out of the prison, out of the slaughter-house, where Brutus had placed 
him ; ‘for [and] tomorrow he would hang him; and I have put him in this 


1 hine? 2? Sic pr. m. vude m, sec. Read wude. 


32 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


Cnihtes fufeS me mid? 

leted flaepen pene king. 

& fare we on fele’ 

riht al fwo ftille. {c.2.] 
ftelen fwa we wolden ? 

& ich eou wlle leden 

ford to mine lauerde. 

i pon wode rime? 

per he vnder rife li®. 

3if 3e hine mawen bringen?’ 10 
bi-foren ure kinge. 

wel bid him pere bringe 

oeu bid pe bed! per fore. 

& for he if his bro®er 

for naf& he nenne oper. 

Cud he wes pen cnihten / 

& heo hine icneowen. 

heo wenden pat his fawen ’ 
fode weren. 

ah alle heo weren leafe ‘ 20 
for he wes his leodene fwike. 
Nis nawer nan fo wif mon’ 
pat me ne mai bi-fwiken. 
Anacletuf ferde bi-foren ? 


[v. 732—755.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


Cniptes comep mid me 
let pane king flepe. 
an fare we al fo ftille ¥ 


fo we ftele wolde. 
and ich ou wole ledeY 
to mine o3ene louerd. 


3if 3e ma3en him bringe 
bi-foren oure king. 

pane mage boldeliche : 
gladi oure louerd. 


Cup he was peos cniptes ‘’ 
and hii hene® icnewe. 

hii wende pat his fawes y 
alle fope were. 

ac alle hii weren lefinge ? 
for he was leod-fwike. 
Nis nohware fo wifman 
pat me ne may bi-fwike. 
Anaclet? eode bi-fore ¥ 


‘wood [wilderness] ‘concealed’. Knights, come with me! Let the king 
sleep, and go we ‘with good fortune, right’ all as still as if we would steal, 
and I will lead you forth to ‘my [mine own] lord ‘at the woods edge, 
where he lies under bough’. If ye may bring him before our king, ‘glad 
will he be of the offering, and to you it will be the better therefore [then 
may our lord boldly be glad]; ‘because he is his brother,—for he hath 
none other’.”” Known he was to the knights, and they him recognised ; 
they weened that his speeches were [all] true, but they all were leasings, 
for he was the betrayer of ‘his’ people. There is nowhere a man so wise, 


1 bet? 2 hine? 


do ium 


~~ 


[ 
| 
ly 
| 


| 
i 
I 


[v.756—778.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 33 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
pe cnihtes him fuleden. peos cnihtes him fol3zede. 
ferde zfter ane bache ‘ in one wei he verde? 
al fwa Brutus him hefde itaiht. afe Brut? hine lerede. 
Brutuf heefde hif fole ¥ Brutus hafde his folk bi-fore ’ 
bi-foren & bi-hinden. and eke bi-hinde. 
wes pe wei holh & long’ was pe wei holp and long 
pa lude! weré ftronge. pe cleues weren ft°nge. 
Brutuf heom refde to ¥ Brut? him? refede to 
mid richere ftreng%e. mid riche his ftrengpe. 
alle to gadere he heom nom? 10 alle he 3am nom? 
nane he ne lafde. nanne he ne lefde. 
fime he floh fime he bond’ _—fomme he flop fomme he bond? 
pa befte quike he at-heold. pe befte he cwic at-heold. 
& alle he heom bi-wutfte ¢ and alle hii® beft bi-wiste 
fwa him beft puhte. pare him beft pohte. 
Brutuf nom his ferde ¥ Brut® nom his ferde / 
on feowre he heo* to-delde. and a foure 3am to-delde. 
& he hehte alle hismen’ § _and he hepte alle his men? 
monfcipe biwinnen. monfipe bi-winne. 
3a° 3unge & pa alde’ 2 pe 3onge and pe holde ? 
eSela iwurden. pe ftrdge and pe bolde. 


wihte wal-kempen 
on heora wider-winnan. 


that one may not deceive him! Anacletus went before, ‘the [these] knights 
followed him; [he] went ‘along [in] a ‘valley [way], as Brutus ‘had’ taught 
him. Brutus had his people before and [eke] behind; the way was hollow 
and long, the cliffs were steep. Brutus rushed towards them with [his] 
great strength; all ‘together’ he took them, none he left! Some he slew, 
some he bound, the best he retained alive ; and he disposed ‘of them’ all 
‘as [where] it seemed best to him. Brutus took his army, [and] in four 
the’ divided them; and he commanded all his men to win honor, the young 
and the old, [the strong and the bold,] ‘good men to be, brave warriors 
against their enemies’ ; ‘and to advance in haste’[that they should advance in 


1 clude? 2 ham? 3 he? * heom? 5 pa? 
D 


34 LA3AMONS BRUT. (v. 779—802.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
& an hihinga' pat hi folde anh..... {c.2.] 
faren to pan kinge. faren to pan kinge. 
& ich for-beode {f.5.c1.] And...... beode alle 
heolde mine peiné. mine men deor.. 
vppe pere muchele lufe ¥ .- pe pe mochele loue y 
pe uf bi-tueizen lid. pat hu. his bitwixte. 
pat nan ne beo fo wilde pat non be’ fo wilde 
nan fwa unwitti. ne fo vnwitti. 
pat word talie y pat heni word talie : 
ne talkie mid fpeche. 10 ne talki mid fpeche. 
er he ihere minne horn are he mine horn? 
mid greete hiue blowen. hi-here blowe. 
For mi felf ich wlle teo to-foren * For mi feolf ich wole go bi-fore ¥ 
to telde pas kinges. to pis kinges teldes*. 
anan fwa ich lihte of blonken? an fo ich lipteY 
fwa ich wlle blawen. of mine horfe. 
anan swa 3e hic® ihere®d ich wole min horn blowe ? 
hende mine kempen. pat 3e hit folle hi-heren. 
ohtliche heom fle® ony pan ahliche leggep 3am an? 
& wecched hed of flepa. 20 and wecchep 3am of slepe. 
leted pa Grickifca / letep pe Greckes 
glidé to grunde. glide to grunde. 
fallen pa feie ¥ 


for heo be’ vre fulle fan. 


haste] towards the king. “And I forbid [all] my ‘faithful thanes [dear men], 
by the great love that ‘lieth between [is betwixt] us, that none be so wild, 
‘none [nor] so void of wit, that he [any] word utter, nor talk with speech, 
before he hear my horn blown ‘with great sound’. For I myself will go 
before to the tent of the king, and anon as I alight from [my] horse, ‘so 
[then] will I blow [my horn]; ‘anon as ye it hear [so that ye shall hear it], 
‘my good knights’, [then] boldly ‘strike on them [lay on them], and wake 
them from sleep; let the Greeks glide to ground, ‘the fated fall; for 
they are our full foes’!” All the knights did as Brutus taught them, and 


1 hihinge? 2 telde? > R. hit. 


r 


: 
x 


[v.803-—827.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


Duden alle pa cnihtes ¥ 

fwa Brutuf heom taute. 

& he him feolf teih bi-foren 
to telde pes kinges. 

of hif horfe he preou? 

hif horn he vaftliche bleu. 
Therden hit Troynifce ¥ 

& tuhten to pon Gricken. 

heo heom aweihten 

mid heora weles igrure. 10 
Par fluwen haueden on felde / 
fide per feollen. 

moni hond moni fot 

pe hep wes pe wrfe. 

Moni puféd per flowen 
permes heo dro3en. 

& Brutuf mid hif cnihten ¥ 
pene king ifeng. 

Al ihal & al ifund ¥ 

heihliche he cleopede. 20 
Ich habbe piffes folkes king ¥ 
felled his leoden. 

ne lete 3e nenne quick ¢ 
quecchen to holte. 

& iche wlle pefne king ¢ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 35 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


Duden alle pe cniptes / 

afe Brut? 3am tehte. 

and he him seolf eode bi-fore ¥ 
to pis kinges telde. 

of his horfe he apreu ¥ 

and his his’ horn mainliche bleu. 
pat hi-horde Troyniffe ¥ 
and to3e to pan Grickef. 

hii 3am awehten 

mid hire bitere duntes. 
Flowen hefdes on felde ¥ 
volle pe feie. 

mani fot mani hond ” 

pe heap was pe worse. 
Mani pufend per flozen ¥ 
hire parmes idrowen?. 

and Brut? mid his eniptes ¥ 
pane king vnderfeng. 

Alle ihol and ifond ‘ 
hepliche he clipede. 

Ich abbe pif folkes kinge - 
falled his leode. 

ne lete 3e nanne cwicke ¢ 
feapie to felde. 

ich wole pifne king ¥ 


he himself went before to the tent of the king; from his horse he leaped, 
[and] his horn he blew violently. The Trojans heard ‘it [that], and ad- 
vanced to the Greeks; they awakened them with their ‘terrible slaughter 
[bitter strokes]. ‘There’ flew heads on the field, ‘there’ fell the fated ; 
many hand, many foot,—the hap was the worse! Many thousands there 
fled, [their] entrails they drew along, and Brutus with his knights cap- 
tured the king. All whole and ‘all’ sound loudly he called, ‘1 have the 
king of this folk! Fell down his people! Let ye none alive escape to the 


1 Redundant. ? hi drowen? 


D2 


36 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


leden mid me feolfan. 
Par Brutuf bi-feng 
al pat him bi-foren wes. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
leode mid mi feolue. 
Per Brut? bifenge 
al pat him bifore was. 


Sparatin he aredde’’ [c.2.] Soratin' he a-redde ’ 

heh an his caftel. his e3e caftle. 

A marewen pa hit dai wes Amorwe po hit dai was ’ 

& pa niht to-delde. Ie delde. —[f.-4.¢.1.] 
Brutus. | Brutuf fumun%* his fole ¥ Brutuf...... folk 

heo weren his fulle freond®. hii loue .. os e%sts e* 

he heihte® for his lufe 10 and hepte....... 

al his leode ferde. -lhis gode fer...... 

p heo nomen f per’ ....6--, men pe deade ¥ 

&welhit biburiede. = ...... n in eorpe 

inne deope feaden ¥ 

fetten pa deade. 

& hit wes fone idon ¥ pit see do? 

for monie pufend per to fengen. for mani pu..... venge to. 


Al pa bizetene ehte Y Al pat hii bizete 

he delde his cnihten. adealde’ among his cniptes. 
& alle his leoue men’ 2% and alle his lene mé? 

he mid monfcipe grette. mid gode he grette. 


Pa al pis wes idon / 


Po al pif was idon y 


[v. 828—849.] 


‘holt [field], and I will lead this king with myself.” There Brutus took 
possession of all that was before him; and Sparatin, his ‘one’ noble castle, 
he delivered. On the morrow, when it was day, and the night departed, 
Brutus summoned his people—they ‘were his full friends [loved him much]; 
‘he [and] commanded for his love all his [good] host, that they should take 
the slain [dead bodies] and bury ‘it (them) well [in earth]; ‘in deep graves 
should set the dead’; and soon ‘it [this] was done, for many thousands ‘there’to 
helped. All ‘the won booty [that they won] ‘he’ divided [among] his 
knights, and all his dear men he rewarded with ‘honor [goods]. When all 


1 Sparatin? 2 R. fumunde. 

3 R. freonde. * loueden him {wite? 
5 The two last letters of heihte are interlined. Cf. v. 596. 

® ver man. sec. 7 he dealde? 


~ a 


, 
~ 


[v. 850—874.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


pa dude he on oper. 
he lette an heh climben 
& lude clepian. 


pat on pane daze amarwen ? 


come his drihtliche fole. 
& alle his he3e men Y 
comen to huftinge. 

& heo fwa dudéy 

bliffe wes on daie. 

Pat fole com togadere ¥ 
gudliche cnihtes. 

& heora lauerd fpac ? 

& pus heom wi fpelede 
LufteS mine cnihtes 
lufteS mine leofe men. 
Sugge3d me to rununY 
red } eou punche. 


Ich habbe pefne leod king ? 


ileid in mine benden. 

& his bro®Ser al fwa?’ 
hit is pe bet mid uf. 

& his leoden of-flawen Y 
ihc am him pa la®Sere. 

& alle his ahte Y 

izeuen mine e%elinge. 


10 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


po dude he anop”. 

he lette clemben an hep? 
and {wipe loude clepie. 
pat pane ilke mortwe 
come al his gode folke. 
and al his he3e men / 

to pan huftincge. 

and fo duden alle 
bliffe was a pan daie. 
Pat folk com to gadere ¥ 
cuppie meyes. 

and hire louerd fpac ? 
and pus to 3am feide. 
Lustep mine cniptes / 
luftep mine leoue men. 
Seggep to me filue / 
read pat ou pinchep. 

Ich habbe pifne leod king 
ileid in mine bendes. 
and his broper al fo / 
pat his vs icweme. 

and hif folk of-flawe 
ich ham him pe lopere. 
and alle his heaptes / 
izeue mine frendes. 


37 


this was done, then did he another thing; he caused persons to mount on 
high, and to proclaim [very] loud, that ‘in the day in the morrow [the 
same morrow], should come [all] his good people, and all his noble men 
‘should come’ to the hustings; and ‘they [all] so did—joy was in the day! 
The folk came together—goodly knights! [worthy brethren !]—and their 
lord spake, and thus to them said: ‘Listen, my knights, listen, my dear 
men; say to me ‘in communing’ the counsel that seemeth to you good. I 
have laid in my bonds the king of this land, and also his brother—‘it is 
the better with us! [that is to us pleasing!]—and his people have slain 
—I am to him the loather!—and all his possessions have given to my 


—— 


38 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
Zif 3e hit raeded 
3e beod! mine riche mé. 
ich wulle mid fwerde ¥ 
his heue®? of fwippen. 
& 3if 3e hit willed’ / 
ich hine wlle fpillen. 
& 3if 3e me readed Y 
ich hine wille freoien. 


3if he me 3efed gerfume ¥ 
gold & feoluer. 10 
alle hif maSmaf? [f.5>.c.1.] 


wid pon pa he mote libben. 
Pa anfuereden ¥ 

z%ela cnihtes. 

Siimen hit weora iqueme 

 heo hine feulden quellen. 
him feolf habben pat lond 


& beon pere leodene king. 
Sime quesen elles 

& puf pa quides eoden. 20 
3eue uf pe king & al his gold ¥ 
& pa madmes of his lond, 


3ef us peal 3eue uf hors ¥ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v.875—897.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C, xr11. 
3if 3e hit redep? 
pat beop mine riche men. 
ich wolle mid fwerde ? 
his heued of swippe. 
and 3if 3e hit wollep ¢ 


ich hine wole gripie. 

3if he vs 3iue wolle ¥ 

gold and garifom. 

and alle his godes ¥ 

wid‘ pan pe he mote libbe. 
Po anfwerede 

alle pe cniptes. 

Some hit was icweme 
pat he hine folde acwelle. 
him seolf habbe pat lond’ 
and beo king icrouned. 
Somme feiden elles ¢ 

mani manere fpelles. 

3if vs pe king and® his gold 
his godees® and his lond. 

3ef vf pal 3if vs horfy 


[c-2.] 


‘nobles [friends]. If ye it advise—ye [that] are my brave men—I will 
with sword his head off smite; and if ye it will, ‘I will him slay, and if 
ye so advise me’, I will set him free, if he will give ‘me [us] ‘treasure’, 
gold and ‘silver, [treasure, and] all his ‘riches [goods], on condition that 
he may live.” Then answered ‘noble [all the] knights. ‘Some were 
agreeable to it [To some it was agreeable], that ‘they [he] should kill 
him, and himself have the land, and be king ‘of the country [crowned] ; 
some said otherwise; ‘and thus the speeches went [many manner of 
speeches]: ‘“ Give us the king ‘all’ his gold, ‘and the treasures of [his 
goods and] his land; give us robes, give us horses, give us rich clothing; 


1 R. beo’. 
4 wid? 


2 R. heued, 
5 Redundant? 


5 R, willed. 
5 R. godes. a 


[v. 898—921.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 39 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
3eue uf haihe fcrud. 3if vs he3e ferud. 


3eue uf enne ende’ 
of his kine-londe. 


3eue uf 3iflef per toy 3if vs lond par to? 

& pis mei bed wel idon. pis vs pinchep wel idon. 
Per wes moni riche m6 Pare was mani riche man ¥ 
pe cuSe lutel reden. pat lutel cupe of reades. 
weder heom weore wnfumrey — waper him! were betere pannefare? 
to faren pe*® to wonien. op” pare wonie. 

Pa wile pe heo tweoneden pus. 10 pe wile pat hii fpeke puf? 
clepede Membricius. clepede Membricius. 

pet wes a riche mon? pat was a riche man? 

pe wes {wide wel idon. fwipe wel idon. 

wys & witful ” wis and witfol ¥ 

wel he hit cudde. wel he hit cudde. 

Wet fpeke 3e cnihtes Wat fpeke 3e cniptes ¥ 
wet {peke 3e kempen. -wat {peke 3e kempes. 
vnSer® eou alle ¥ vnder 30u alle? 

nif par nan fwa god. nif par read godne. 

pa 3et habbe ifteid 2 pat 3e 3it habbep ifeid 

} us is feleft to don. wat vs if beft to done. 

3if 3e hit luften wlle 3if hit lufte wole 

Brutuf mi lauard. Brut? mi louerd. 

& 3e alle biluuien ¥ and 3e alle biliue*? 


‘ give us one end of his kingdom’; give us ‘hostages [land] thereto; ‘and’ 
this ‘may be [seemeth to us] well done.” There was many a noble man 
that knew little [of] counsel; whether it were better for ‘them [him] to 
fare [thence] ‘than [or] to dwell [there]. The while that they ‘debated 
[spoke] thus, Membricius, who was a nobleman,—‘ who was’ exceeding 
prudent, wise, and sagacious; well he understood,—called out: ‘* What 
speak ye, knights? What speak ye, warriors, among you all? There is 
‘none so good [not good counsel] that [ye] yet have said, what is best for 
us to do; but if ‘ye’ will it list, Brutus my lord, and ye all approve my 


tham? ? These three words are onanerasure. * 2. vnder.  ‘ bilauie? 


Membricius. 


40 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 922—945.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
gode mine lare. . mine gode lore. . 
ich eou wile feggen ich ou wolle fegge ? 
felaft reeden. feleft alre reade. 
& pa anfuerede al pat fole ? Po anfwerede al pat folk ¢ 
faihn we wllen hit iheren. vain we hit wollep. 
Pa qua’ Membrici® ’ , Po fpac Membrici? ¢ 
ludere ftefne. ludere ftemne. 
3irne we to pane kinge’ 3erne we of pan kinge ? 
3euen fuiSe gode. © 3iftef gode. 
} if alreforwarde ¥ 10 
pat heo! uf ifreoie. 
sone par after ? and fone per after? 
3urne we his dohter. 3erne we hif dopter. 
} he heo 3eue ure lauerde ? pat he 3ife hire vre louerd ¥ 


B"tun to his bedde. [chel ¢ [c.2.] Brutii to hif bedde. 
of his corne he uf 3eue fwa mu- of his corn fo moche vs 3iue 


we beon iquemed. fo we wollep habbe. 

gold & garfume ? 

& his gode hors. 

& al his befte mate cunY 2 and pe befte tun? 

pe his men habbed. pat his men habbep. 

& alle pa lidinde feipen ’ and alle pe gode fipes ¥ 

pe on his londe beo®. pat in his londe liggep. 

& alle pat bi-houe’ / and al pat bi-houep? —[£4.c.1.] 


good instruction, I will say to you the best [of all] counsels.” ‘And’ then 
answered all the people, “ Fain we will it ‘hear’.””. Then spake Membri- 
cius with loud voice: ‘‘ Demand we of the king gifts ‘most’ good, ‘ that is, 
first of all, that he set us free’; [and] soon thereafter, demand we his 
daughter, that he give her to our lord Brutus, for his bed; that ‘he’ give 
us of his corn so much, ‘that we be contented [as we will have]; ‘gold and 
treasure, and his good steeds’; and ‘all’ ‘his [the] best kind of provision 
that his men have ; and all the sailing [good] ships, that in his land ‘are [lie], 
and all that behoveth the ships [for] to drive, of men and of weapons; 


1 Sic pr. m. he sec. m. by erasure. 


[v. 946—969.] LA3AMONS BRUT. Al 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11 
pa fcipen to driuen. pe fipe. for to driue. 
of monnen & of wapnen ? of man and of wepne 
; pat we mawen wel faren. pat we mawe wel fare. 
fare uor ouer fie / forp ouer féé ftrem ? 
fel Pat we wren. par vs beft pinchep. 
& liden fwa longe and feili fo long 
we to londe comen. pat we lond finde. 
varen wide 3eond pat lond ¢ faren ouer al pat lond / 
& fondia peo! leoden. and fondien pe leode. 
wer uf beo iqueme ? 10 war vf be icweme 
king pat we makien. king pat we pe makie. 
~ of Brute ure lauerde / 
pe is beft of us. pat hert pe befte of vs’ 
and Ignoien*? to quen ? and Ignogen cwene. Tgnogen. 
pe is pis kinges dohter. 
For 3if we hit 3eorne’ / For 3if we here 3ernep ¢ 
to wonien her mid Gricken. wonie mid Greckes. 
heo beo’ ure fulle feond hii beop vre fulle ivon 


for we beo% ifead wid® heom. _ for we beop i-veipet mid ham. 
for heora kun we habbet iflazen / hure cun we habbet of-flawe ? 


in eordse heo fleoped. a and idon of lif daie. 
we beod heom loa%e / we beop heom lope 

| for heora muchele lure. for hure mochele leore. 
heo wlle® uf biwizelien hii wollep vs bi-cheorre ¥ 


that we may well fare, ‘pass’ forth over the sea [stream], well that we be 
[where it to us best seemeth], and sail on so long, till we ‘to land come 
[land find}; journey wide over [all] the land, and seek the country, where 
it shall be agreeable to us, that we make [thee} a king ‘ of Brutus our lord 
*who is [that art the] best of us, and Ignogen queen, ‘ who is this kings daugh- 
ter’. For if we ‘it’ ask, to dwell here with the Greeks, they will be our 
full-foes, for we are at enmity with them, ‘ for’ their kindred we have slain, ‘in 
earth they sleep [and bereft of life] ; we are to them hateful, on account of 
their great injury ; they will beguile us through their ‘wicked [wise] crafts, 


} fondien pe? 2 Written at first Ignoken. 3 wid? mid? 


42 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 970—993.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

purh heora wiSere craftes. porh hire wife craftef. 

a {wa hed beod! iwrd ¥ and fe worfe vs his ¥ 

fwa us wrfe bid. hii beop pe gladdere. 

for mid ure wepnen heora kun? for mid oure wepne? 

we aqueald habbed. hire cun acweld we abbep. * 


mid ure héden ¥ 
monie pufunde. 
3if we fceoteS to heora meSey if we triftep to hire mepe 


pat bid ure imone dead, vf feolue we bi-cheorrep. 
3if we heom ilefed / 10 3if we 3am ileuep ? 
pat bid ure muchele lure. pat his oure owene lure. 


3if heo wel wexit 
heo wlled wonien us. 


Wel ich hit mai fuggen Wel ich hit mai fegge 
to fope ich hit wene. _[£6.c.1.]_ to fope ich hit wene. 

nif par nan fwa heih ¥ nis par non fo hep? 

nif par nan {wa laih, nis par non fo loh. 

} we nabbet his freond pat we nabbep hif frende 
ifelled to grunde. ivalled to grunde. 

For pon 3if hit eow bi-loued y 20 For pan 3if 3e hit redep?’ 
pe wife beod on ponke, pat wife beop on ponke. 
fare we from piffe londe ¥ fare we fram piffe londe ’’ 
pa leodene uf beod lape. pes folk vs beop lope. 


Al heora god we feulé nimen? Al hire god we follen nime 


and as the worse is to us, ‘so’ shall ‘to them be the better [they be the 
gladder], for with our weapons we have slain their kindred, ‘many thou- 
sands with our hands’! If we trust to their power, ‘that will be our com- 
mon death [we shall injure ourselves]; if we place confidence in them, 
that will be our ‘great [own] destruction; for ‘if they much increase in 
numbers, they will destroy us’. Well may I say it, sooth I it ween, there 
is none so high, there is none so low, that we haye not felled his friend to 
the ground. ‘Therefore if ye it ‘approye [advise] who are wise in thought, 
go we from this land; ‘the [this] people are loath (hostile) tous. All their 


1 and swa heom bet? Cf. vy. 744. 1360. 


[v. 994—1017.] LA3AMONS BRUT, 43 
MS, Cott. Calig. A. rx, MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

& lutel hem Jeuen. and lutel heom bi-leue. 

wonien heo feulen un-balde?’ —_wonie hii follen on-bolde ¥ 

for hora muchela burften. for hire mochele arme. 

& we mewen faren riche ¥ and we ma3e faren riche / 

3if we red luuied. 3if we read louiep. 

for al pat god of piffe londe’ _ for al pat god of pis londe?’ 

we fculé leden mid us. Wie verealt’s | dSpwededarsy fea) 

& heo bi-leuen wrecches / and hii bi. . ‘ 

& welde heom fecal fulien. . . hire! lif time. 


for pe riche haued muchel rum ¢ 10 
to refen biforen pan wrecchan. 


Paf word weoren iquedene o 0 + coy o ROR ifaide ? 
peo quides weoren leoue. Pp. - - leofe. 
Pa he mihte ihere po he m. : 
pe bihalues were. . . bi halues wer. 
muchel dom muchel dune / - oe (et pene Minam y 
muchel folkes dream. mochel du. ‘ 
& alle heo clepedé puf and alle hi clepede pus ¥ 
fod feiS Membrici?. . «+ feip Membrici®. 

_ & alle hit bi-luueden ¥ 2 and alle hit bi-lefde / 
gode weren his lere. gode his lore. 
Pa letten bringen pene king? _po lette hi bringe pane king’ 
vt of quarcerne. vt of prifune. 
& his broder mid him and his broper mid him’ 


goods we shall take, and little them leave; they shall dwell dispirited by 
reason of their great harms, and we may depart rich, if we counsel approve ; 
for all the goods of this land we shall carry with us, and they will remain 
destitute, ‘and affliction shall follow them [all their life-time]; ‘ for the rich 
have much room to press before (take place of) thewretched’.” These words 
were ‘spoken [said], the sayings were approved. Then might he hear who 
besides had been, great sentence, great din, much clamour of people, and 
they all cried thus, ‘‘Sooth saith Membricius!” And all it approved, that 
good ‘were’ his precepts. Then caused [they] the king to be brought 


1 al hire? 


— i aT 


iene hacen 


44 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 1018—1040.] 
“MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xin. 

beine to gadere. beine to gaderef. 

mid yrene benden ¥ mid hyrene bendes ? 

bi-foren Brutone. bi-fore Brutune. 

Heo him to clepeden ¥ He’ him to clepede ? 

& lad® fpel him cudden. an lope wordes faide. 


heo feiden pat) he fculde beon an- he folde e3e hangi ¥ 

an one he3e treowe. - [hongen? vp on grete trouwes. 

oper mid horfen to-drawen ? oper mid horfe beon to-drawe ? 
mid droflicen vita. ouer al ... londe. 

buten heo heom lette freo? 10 

ta® faren of hif londe. [c.2.] 


3eue heom al his a3teY Bote pou vs wolle 3iue ’ 
pe he bizeten mahte. alle pine heapte. 

& alle his feipen gode and alle pine fipes gode 
pa floten bi fie flode. pat fleotep in éé flode. 

& his dohter Ignogen and pine dopter Ignogé 
heore duc to quene. oure king to cwene. 

pe king hine bi-poute / Pe king hine bi-pohte Y 
wat he don mahte. wat he do mihte. 

sari he waf on liue 20 sori he was on liue? 

pef tidende hi weren le®e. peos tidinge him were lope. 
of dea he hefde care? of depe he hafde care? 
drof he wes on mode. drof he was on mode. 


out of prison, and his brother with him, both together in iron bonds before 
Brutus. They called to him, and loath words ‘to him’ said; ‘they said 
that’ he should ‘be hung [hang high] ‘on a high tree [upon great trees], 
or with horses [be] drawn to pieces, ‘with grievous torments [over all the 
land], ‘except he suffered them to depart free from his land’, ‘give them 
all his goods, that he might obtain, [‘‘except thou wilt give us all thy goods, ] 
and all ‘his [thy] good ships that float in the sea-flood, and ‘his [thy] 
daughter Ignogen, for a queen to ‘their duke [our king”]. The king be- 
thought him what he might do; sorrowful he was alive! These tidings 
were loath to him, of death he had care, disturbed he was in mind. 


1 hi? 2 R. lad. 5 R, to. 


| 
| 


[v. 1041—1064.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 45 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

Pandrafus anfwerede ¥ andrafus anfwerede ¥ 

mid feorhfulle wordé. mid forie heorte. 

3e bidded mine dohter fwa hende? 3e biddep mine dohter pe hende ¥ 

& halded me inne bende. and habbep me in bende. 

& Antigonun mine bro®er and Antinogum! mi broper 

mid ermliche witen. in 3oure bendhufe. 

& mine men 3e habbe® ifclawen ? and mine men 3e habbep of-flawe? 

& 3eorned mine maSmas. and 3ernep mine godes. 

& mine leoue dohter and mine dohter leoue 

to fwa laSe mannef bihoue. 10 to fo lope mannes bi-hofe. 

Ah heo? mot nede beien Ac he mot neode ’ 

pe mon pe ibunden bi’. pe man pat his in bende. 

Eouer axe ich eou leue SO. chad na Git erelee eda 

la& peh hit me were. lop poh ; 

& 3if 3e bi-leuen wolden ‘ es - wolde ? 

inne mire peoden. Sr ac. Sh he A 

al priddé dale mi lond pat pr. . . .lond? 

ich wolde fetten Brutan onhond. ich. . . . . . .anhond. 

& freoien al his fole ¥ és beings 

& freonfcipe makien. 2 and. oat 

& Ignogen mine dohter ” + OL Oe eee eee 

3euen eowre duke. -euen 30. . . «ke. 


& fwa we feulden bi-leaué / 
leouie me3es. 


Pandrasus answered with sorrowful ‘words [heart]: “‘ Ye ask my daughter 
‘so [the] fair, and ‘hold [have] me in bonds, and Antigonus my brother, 
‘with grievous torments [in your bond-house], [and] my men ye have 
slain ; and now ye demand my “treasures [goods], and my beloved daughter, 
to so hateful a mans bihoof! But he needs must ‘bow’, the man that 
is ‘bounden [in bonds]. Your asking I you grant, loath though it be to 
me; and if ye would remain in my country, ‘all’ [the] third part of my 
land I would set in Brutus hand, and free all his people, and make 
friendship; and Ignogen, my daughter, give to your duke, ‘and so we 


1 R. Antigonum. 2 he? 


Pandrafus. 


46 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


vre lif leaden ¥ 

& lipé to fumne. 

Pa enfwerede Brutus ’ 

pe wes borene duke. 

Nulle we noht pis on-fon ¥ 

ah we faren wlled. 

& pu fwide hiendliche ¥ 

feild pe wid dee. 

3ef us pat we wilniad y 

3if pou libben wit. 10 
Pe king fende his fonde ¢ 
3eond al Griclonde. —_[£.6".c.1.] 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 1065—1089.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


pat was louerd and dux. 
Nolle we nopt pis vnder-fon ¥ 
ac we faren woldep. 

and pou fwipe hizenliche ¥ 
fild pe fram deape. 

3if vs pat we wilnep 

3if pou wolt libbe. 

Pe king fende his fonde ’ 
ouer al Greclonde. 


pat me hit him to brohte / pat me to him bropte 

alle his aihte. alle hif hepte 

& greidede hif fcipen gode ¥ and greipede his fipes gode ¥ 
bi pan fe flode. bi pan {éé flode. 

& al pat per to bi-houede ¥ and al pat par to bi-hofde ¥ 
hahliche ifunden. he3eliche iftide. 

al {wa heo wolden heora lauerd ? alfe hi wolden hire louerd ¢ 
from loSen alefen. 2% fram deape a-readde. 

Al his men duden? 

fwa pe king hehte. 

Pa feipen weoren igrepedey pe fipmé weren igreiped ¥ 
mid gode grund fulled. mid gode pe fipef ifulled. 


pe king 3ef Brutun hif dohter 


pe king 3eaf Brutun / 


should dwell as affectionate brethren, lead and pass our lives together’.” 
Then answered Brutus, who was ‘born [lord and] duke: ‘‘ We will not 
this accept, but we will depart, and thou most speedily shield thee from 
death! Give us that we will, if thou wish to live!” The king sent his 
messengers over all Greece, that men should ‘it’ bring to him, all his 
possessions, and should prepare his good ships by the sea-flood, and all 
that thereto behoved, nobly supplied, as they would save their lord from 
death. ‘All his men did as the king ordered’. The ‘ships [ship-men] 
were made ready, and with goods (the ships] ‘well’ filled. The king gave 
his daughter, who was ‘his dear child [to him dear], to Brutus, and all the 


ES 


ee ee eee ee Se 


# 


[v. 1090—1112.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
pe wes his bearn deora. 
& al pat forward wes ileft ¥ 
Pa fufden pa ferde. 
wendé riht to pare fe’ 
fela' pa peines. 
muchel wes pa bliffe / 
pa Brut? hafde mid him. 
Brut? nom Ignogen ¥ 
& into fcipe ledde. 
Heo rihté heora rapes ? 10 
heo rerden heora maftes. 
heo wunden up feiles ¥ 


* wind fton? an willen. 


sixtene fide tuéti fcipen ¥ 
tuhté from hauene. 

& feower fcipen greate 

pe weren grund ladene. 

mid pat befte wepnen 

pa Brutuf hauede. 

Heo fufdem® from ftronde? 2 
vt of Griclonde. 

heo wenden vt i wide fe 

pa wilde wurten itemede. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 47 


MS. Cott. Otho, C, x111. 


his dohter pe him was deore, 
and al pe forward waf ilaft ¥ 
Po fufde pe ferde. 

wendé ript to pare féé ? 

felie cniptes. 

mochel was pe bliffe ¥ 

pat Brut? mid him hafde. 
Brutus nam Ignogen 

and to fipe ladde. 

Hii rihte hire ropis ¥ 

hii rerden hire maftes. 

hii wenden vp feyles. 

wind ftot at wille. 

fixtene fipe twenti fipes 
wéden vt of hauene. 

and four fipes gode 

pat weren grund lade. 

mid pe befte wepne ¥ 

pat . rutuf hafde. [c.2.] 
Hii fufden fram ftronde ¥ 

vt of Greclonde. 

hii wenden vt in wilde* {éé ¥ 
pat pe wilde temiep. 


compact was observed. Then departed the host, ‘the’ good ‘thanes 
({knights] went right to the sea; great was the joy that Brutus had with 
him! Brutus took Ignogen, and. ‘into [to] the ship led. ‘They righted 
their ropes, they reared their masts, they wound up sails, the wind stood 
at their will; sixteen times twenty ships went ‘from [out of] the haven, 
and four great ships, that were full laden with the best weapons that Brutus 
had. ‘They proceeded from the strand, out of Greece; they went out in 
the ‘wide [wild] sea,—‘the wild waves were stilled; two days and two 
nights on the [wild] sea they were; the ‘second [third] day they came ‘in 


1 sele? 
* R. fusden. 


2 For stond, which is used for stod. 
4 wide? 


48 LA3AMONS BRUT. {v. 1113—1137.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

Tweize dawes & tua niht? Twei daies and two nipt 

inne fie weré. in wille! fee iweren®. 

pen oer dai heo comen liSen pane pridde dai hii come ¥ 

on euen to londe. lipe to londe. 


Logice hatte pat eit-lond ’ Leogice hepte pat lond 

leode nere par nane. men neore par none. 

ne wapmen ne wifmen ’ ne wepmen ne wimmen ? 

buté weftize paedes*. bote wefte papes. 

vtlazen hefden i-reeued pat lond:’ ytlawes hafde irefed pat lond ¥ 

& alle pa leodé of-fla3en. 10 and pe folk of-slawe. 

& fwa hit wes al weft’ 

& wnnen bi-reued. {c.2.] 

Ah fwa monie par waren wilde Ac fo manie pere were wilde deor ¥ 
pat wnder heom puhte. ([deor: pat wonder heom pohte. 


& pa Troinifce men ¥ and pe Troyniffe men 
tuhten to pon deoren. fulle to pan deore. 

& duden of pan wilden ¢ and duden of pan wilde 
al heora iwilla. al hire wille. 

to pan fcipen welden Y to pe fipes ladden 


2 fo moche fo iwolden*. 
Heo funden i pon eit-londe?’ Hii funde in pan ilond 
ane burh fwide fironge. anne caftel fwipe ftrong. 
to-helde weoren pe walles ’ to-haled were pe walles 
wefte weren hallen. afalle weren pe halles. 
Temple heo funden par ane’ § Temple hii funde par one 


the even’ to land. Logice hight that ‘island [land] ; ‘people [men] were 
there none, neither men nor women; only desert paths. Outlaws had 
ravaged the land, and slain ‘all’ the people, ‘and so was it all wasted, and 
bireft of inhabitants’. But so many there were wild deer, that wonder it 
seemed to them; and the Trojan men drew towards the deer, and did of 
the wild creatures all their will; to the ships they carried [as much as they 
would]. They found in the island a ‘burgh [castle] most strong; the walls 
were prostrate, ‘waste [fallen] were [the] halls. A temple there they found 


1 wilde? 2 hi weren? 3 R, pees. 4 hi wolden? 


— 


a 


[v. 1138—1161.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


imaked of marme ftene. 
muchel & mere ¥ 

pe wrfe hit hafde to welden. 
Per inne was an onlicneffe ¥ 
a wifmonnes liche. 

feier hit wes & fwiSe heih ¢ 
an are heitneffe nome. 
Diana wes ihaten Y 

pe deouel heo luuede. 

Heo dude wnder craftes’ 10 
pe feucke hire fulfte. 

heo wes quen of alle wodes 
pe weoxen! on eorden. 

a pon heSene lawen ¢ 

me heold heo for hehne godd. 
To hire weoré iwoned ? 

pa wnder creftie men. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 49 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 


imaked of marbre ftone. 
mochel and mere 

pe worfe hit hafde to welde. 
Par ine was on anlicne Y 

of wimman. iliche. 

fair hit was and fwipe hep’ 
on hire heiniffe name. 
Diane 3e waf hi-hote / 

pe deouel hire louede. 

3eo dude wonder craftes 
pe feond hire fulfte. 

3eo was cwene of alle wodes ? 
pat weren on eorpe. 

in pan hepene lawe ¥ 

me held hire for e3e god. 
To hire weren iwoned 
wonder craftie men. 

iwiten of pan pincge’ 


Diana. 


of pa kingen? pa weré to kumen pat weren to comende. 


heo heom wolde cu%en. 20 
mid tacnen & mid fwefnen ? 
ponne heo weren on flepe. 

Pe wile peo on pan eit-londe 
wes fole woniende. 


3eo ha wolde cupe 

mid tockne and fuefene 
wan iweren® a-flepe. 

Pp. wile pe in pan ylond 
weren men libbende. 


[£5>.¢.1.] 


made of marble stone, lofty and spacious, the Worse (Devil) had it to wield! 
Therein was an image of womans form; fair it was and very noble, by ‘a 


[her] heathen name [she] was called Diana ; the Devil loved her! 


She did 


wonder-crafts (magic); the Fiend assisted her! she was queen of all woods 
that ‘grew [were] on earth; by the heathen laws men held (accounted) her for 
ahigh god. To her resorted ‘the’ wonder-crafty men, [to know] of the things 
that were to come, [which] she would make known to them, by tokens and 
‘by’ dreams, when they were asleep. The while that in the island ‘folk 
was [men were] living, they worshiped the image; the Fiend it received ! 


1 weoren? 


2 R. pingen. 
E 


3 R. hi weren. 


Gerion. 


50 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 1162—1185.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 

heo wurSeden  anlicnef :’ hii worpede pan anlicniffe ¥ 

pe feucke hit on-feng. pe feond hit vnder-feg'. 

Brutuf hit herde figgen ? Brut? hit ihorde / 

purh his fee-monnen. porp his féé-manen. 

pe er weoren on pan londe pe er weren in pat lond 

& pa lawen wufté. and pe lawes wifte. 

Brutuf nam twelf witizen ¥ Brutuf nom twelf wittie ’ 

pe weren his wifefte men. pat wifeft men were. 


& ennepreoft of hiflawen. {(f7.c.1.] and anne prest of pe laze 7 
pa weren on pan heSen dawen. 10 pat ftod on hepene dawe. 
Gerion hehte pe preoft ¢ Gerion was ihote ¥ 

he waf an hirede heh. pat was on folke hep. 

he ferde to pere ftowe. he verde to pare stouwe 
par Diane inne ftod. pare Dyane ine ftod. 
Brutuf ferde in to pere temple: Brut? to pan temple 

& pa twelfe mid him. and pe twelfe mid him. 


& lette al hif fole Y and lette his folke 
bilzeuen per vte. bleuen pare hute. 

Ana? fcale he bear an hondey Ane fcole he bar an hondeY 
al of reade golde. 2 al of rede golde. 

mile wes i pere feale mile was in pe fcole? 

& win fume dale. and win fomdel. 


pa milc wees of are wite hinde’ pe mile was of one wite hinde’’ 
pe Brut? fceat mid hif honde. _ pe Brut? fet mid his honde. 


Brutus so heard it ‘say’ by his seamen, who were before in the land, al 
knew the laws. Brutus took twelve sages, who were ‘his’ wisest men, 
and a priest of ‘his [the] laws, that ‘were [stood] in ‘the’ heathen days; 
—Gerion ‘hight the priest [he was named], ‘he [who] was high among the 
people;—and he proceeded to the place wherein Diana stood. Brutus 
‘ went in’to the temple, and the twelve with him, and let ‘all’ his peo- 
ple remain without. A vessel he bare in Ais hand, all of red gold; milk 
was in the vessel, and wine some part; the milk was of a white hind, that 
Brutus shot with his hand. He made by the altar a ‘most’ winsome fire ; 


1 ynder-feng? > Ane? 


* 


(v. 1186—1209.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 51 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
He makede bi pon weofede’ = He makede bi pan wefed ¥ 
a fwidSe wunft fur. a wonfom fur. 
nizen fiden he bi-eode nizefipe he hit bi-eode 
pat weofed for his neode. pat wefd for his neode. 


He clepede to pere leuedi / He clepede to pan leafdi 
heo wes him on heorten leof. _ pat leof him was on heorte. 


mid milden his worden ’ mid milde his wordes ? 

he 3irnde hire mihté. he here3ede hire mihte. 
Ofte he custe pat weofed ¥ Ofte he cufte pat wefd 
mid wnfume lates. ‘10 in euereche fide. 

he halde pa mile i pat fur ¥ he held pe mile in pan fur ¥ 
mid milden his wordé. mid milde his wordes. 


Leafdi Diana? leoue Diana’ = Leafdi Dyane y he3e Dyane ¥ Diana. 
he3e Diana. help me to neode. _ helpe to neode. 


wife mi! & witere?? wife me and witte me 
purh pine wihtful® craft. porh pine wife crafte. 
whuder ich mei lidan ¥ woder ich may wende 
& ledan mine leoden. and mine ferde lede. 

to ane wnfume londe to one wonfom londe y 
per ich mihte wunien. 2 par hii mihte ine wonie. 


& 3if ich pat lond mai bi-z3eten And 3if ich pat londemawebi-3ete? 
& mi folc hit purh-gengen. and mi folk hit porh-genge. 
makian ich wlle on pine nome? makieic........ me Y [c.2.] 
meeren ane ftowe. on. 


| 
| 


nine times he went around [it] the altar, for his need. He called to the ~ 
lady, ‘she [who] was to him beloved in heart ; with his mild words he 
‘entreated [lauded] her might. Oft he kissed the altar ‘with winsome 
looks [on every side]; he poured the milk on the fire, with his mild words : 
“Lady Diana! ‘loved Diana’! high Diana, help ‘me’ in need! Teach me, 
and counsel [me] through thy wise craft, whither I may go and lead my 
I¢ ‘people [host], to a winsome land, where ‘I [they] might [in] dwell. And 
if I may obtain the land, and my people go over it, I will make in thy 
name a spacious dwelling, and I will honor thee with high worship!” Thus 


1 me? 2 wite me? 3 witful? 
E 2 


52 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


[v. 1210—1234.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xir. 


& ich pe wulle huren . ich pe . 

mid wrhfcipe he3an. - liche e3 . 

puf fpec Brutus ¥ - feide . 

feodden he na pe hude ¥ 0 8 6 Ae ee 

pa wees of pare hinde. [oxy .. - Rew re See ee 
bi-foren panwefedeheheofpraddey. . . . . . . . « fpra.. 
fwlc he leie on bedde. oe ouee titer erat ie 


he cnelede par ufenan ¥ .- cneolede . 
& feoSSen he adun lei. 

swa he gon flomné ’ 

& per efter to flepen. 

Pa puhte him on hif fwefne ¥ 
par he on flepe lei. 

‘ his lauedi Diana’ 

hine leofliche biheolde. 

mid wnfume leahtren Y 

wel heo him bi-hihte. 

& hendiliche hire hond ’ and hédeliche hire hond ” 
on his heued leide. leide on his heued. 

& puf him to feide ¥ 2 and pus him to feideY 
per he on flepe lai. par he lai and flepte. 


baie adun lai. 

1 fohe. .nnappi’ 
par after to flepe. 
Po pohte him on fweuene 


pat peos fulfe (?) leafdi’ 
hine leofliche bi-heold. 


and wel him bihepte. 


Bi-3ende France i pet weft‘ 
pu fealt finden a wunfum lond. 


Bi-wéde France in pat weft ¥ 
and pou falt lond finde. 


pat lond if bi-urnan mid pere fe ¥pat lond his bi-vrne ? 


par on pu fealt wrpan fel. 


mid pare {éé narue. 4 


spake Brutus; then he took the hide that was of the ‘hind [deer]; before 
the altar he spread it, as if he should lie in bed; he kneeled thereupon, and 
afterwards he lay down; so he gan to ‘slumber [nap], ‘and’ soon after tosleep. . 
Then seemed it to him in ‘his’ dream, ‘ where he asleep lay,’ that ‘his [this 
same(?)] lady ‘ Diana’ beheld him lovingly ‘ with winsome smiles,’ [and] 
well ‘she’ him promised, and courteously laid her hand on his head, and 
thus to him said, where ‘he asleep lay [lay and slept]: ‘“‘Beyond [Pass 
by] France, in the west, [and] thou shalt find ‘a winsome’ land; the | 
land is by the [narrow] sea surrounded ; ‘thereon thou shalt prosper.’ 


[v. 1235—1258.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 53 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
par if fu3el par is fife ’ par his fis par his fowel 
per wunia® feire deor. per woniep faire deor. 
par is wode par is water par hif wode par his water ¢ 
par is wilderne muchel. par his wilderne mochel. 
pet lond if fwipe wunfum / pat lond hif fwipe wonfom ’ 
weallen per beod feire. welles par beop faire. 
wunia® i pon londeY woniep in pan londe 
eotantes {wide ftrige. eatantef ftronge. 

Albion hatte pat lond ’ Albion hatte pat lond ¥ 

ah leode ne! beoS par nane. 10 ac men ne beop par none. 
Per to pu fealt teman / Par to pou falt wéde ¥ 

& ane neowe Troye par makian. and one Troye makie. 

per fcal of pine cunne par fal of pine cunne 
kine-bearn arifen. kinebern a-rife. 

& feal pin mere kun and folle porh hire mihte 
welden pus? londes. wel pat lond witie. 

3eond pa weorld beon ihe3zed? —_ouer alle londes hi-he3ed ¥ 
& pu beo hel & ifund. and pou hol and fund. 

Pe awoc Brutuf? Po awoe Brut? 

wel wes hi on life. 20 wel was him on life. 

He poute of his fwefne ¥ He pohte on his sweuene ’’ 
& hou pe lefdi him feide. and wat pe leafdi faide. 
mid muchelere lufe y [£7%.c.1.] mid mochelere . 

he feide hit his leoden. . .toleue... folk. [f£.6.¢.1.] 


There is fowl, there is fish; there dwell fair deer; there is wood, there is 
water; there is much desert; the land is most winsome; springs there are 
fair; giants most strong dwell in the land; Albion is the land named, but 
men are there none. Thereto thou shalt proceed, and a ‘ New’ Troy ‘ there’ 
make; there of thy kin shall royal progeny arise, and ‘thy powerful kin 
[through their might] shall [well] rule ‘this [the] land; over ‘the world [all 
lands] they shall ‘ be’ celebrated, and thou ‘ be’ whole and sound.”—Then 
awoke Brutus; well was he alive! He thought ‘of [on] his dream, and ‘how 
({what] the lady said to ‘him’; with much love he told it to his [dear] people, 


1 ne is interlined. 2 pas? 


54 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
hu him imette Y 
& pa lefdi hine igrette. 
He ponkede hire 3eorne. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


<) «) syheraae 
and pe leafdi hine ... ette. 
. . nkede 3erne ’ 


[v. 1259—1282.] 


mid liSfulle wordé. mid .. folle wordes. 
/ he bi-heihte hire bihefte ¢ he be-hehte .... bi-hefte ? 
& he hit wel lafte. and he hit wel ..... 
pat to hire he wolde teman . at hire wolde he louie’ | 
& wrchen hire ane téple. .. d wirche hire one temple. 
& on licneffe of rede golde ¥ . nd on anlieneffe ¢ 


whéne he come to londe. 10 al of rede golde. | 
& & to his liueY wane he come to pe londe ¥ | 
hire willen idrizen. pat 3e him bi-hepte. | 
At hire heo nomen leeue ¥ Of hire he nam leue?’ 
& to feipe lidSen'. and to fipe wéde. 
heohefden wind heo hefden water he bafde wind he hafde weder y 
pe heom wel ferede. after his wille. 
pritti dawes & pritti niht ¥ pritti dawes and pritti nipt ’ 
heo ferden efer ford riht. hii verden efre forp riht. 
Africa.  bi-fore Affrike heo ferden ford: bi-fore Affrike hii eode forp ’ 
& eeuer heo drowen weft & nor’. and euere hii drowe weft and norp. 
ouer pen lac of Siluiuf? a ouer pe lake of Siluius ¢ 
& ouer pen lac of Philifteus. and ouer pan lake of Philesteus. 
Rujeikadan. bi Rufcikadan heo nomen pa fe ? bi Rufcicadan hii neome pe f¢é'Y 
& bi pe montaine of Azare. and bi pe contre of Affare. 


how he had dreamt, and the lady greeted him. He thanked her earnestly | 
with gracious words; he promised her a promise, and well he observed it; ; 
that ‘to’ her he would ‘apply [praise], and work her a temple, and [an] | 


image [all] of red gold, when he came to [the] land [which she promised 
him], ‘ and ever in his life comply with her will.’ ‘At [Of] her ‘they [he] took 
leave, and to ship went; ‘they [he] had wind, ‘they [he] had weather, ‘that 
conveyed them well [after his will] ; thirty days and thirty nights they went 
ever forth right; before Africa they went forth, and ever they drew west and ; 
north ; over the lake of Silvius, and over the lake of Philisteus; by Ruscika- r 
dan they took the sea, and by the ‘mountain [country] of Azare. In the * 


} liSden? 7 7 


[v. 1283—1305.] LA3ZAMONS BRUT. 55 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


In peere fee heo funden vtlawen ‘ In pan féé ifunde' vtlawes ¥ 
pakennefte paweoren o pondawen.pe ftrengeft pe weren in pilke daies. 


P 


’ fifti feipen fulle / fifti fipes fulle ¥ 
per weore feondef to feole. per were peuis to fale. 
Wid Bruten® heo fuhten Wid® Brutus hi fopten 
& fealden of his monnen. and flowen of his manen. 


ah Brutuf hefde pa ouere hond: ac Brut? hafde pe ouere hondy — Brutus. 
pa fie he floh pe quike he bond.manie he slop manie he bond. 


el ie.) ee 


Par bi-won Brutuf? Per bi-won Brut? / 
feole kunnan wunnan. 10 mani kine pinges. 
muchel garfi & mete Y mochel garifom and mete ‘ 


hif monfcipe wes pa mere. [man? his manfipe was pe more. [man ‘ 

Nefde Brut? nenne fwa wreche Nadde Brutus nanne so wrecche 
, pat gold & pal ne dude him on. pat gold and pal ne dude him an. 
| Peonene he? ferdé ford ¥ Panene he verde forp ? 

wel feole dawen 3ong. [c.2.) wel fale dagef. [longe ¥ 

ouer Maluan eeneflum fuide longyouer Maluan pane flom feilede 

i Mauritane heo comen a lond. in Mauritanie hii come alond. 

Heo lidSen® 3eond pat ilke lond? Hii wende ouer al pat lond ¥ 

& pa leoden heo flowen. —.20_— pat folk hii of-slowe. 

pene drinc & pene mete .. ne drinke and pane mete? [c.2.] 

pe heo par funden. pat hii pare funde. 

to heora fcipe heo hit fufden? to hire fipes hii ladde ¢ 


sea they found outlaws, the ‘keenest [strongest] that were in those days, 
fifty ships full;—there were ‘enemies [thieves] toomany! With Brutus they 
fought, and ‘felled [slew] some of his men; but Brutus had the over-hand ; 
‘the fated [many] he slew, ‘the living [many] he bound. There won Brutus 
many kind of ‘goods [things] ; much treasure and meat;—his honor was the 
greater! Brutus had no man so poor, that put not on gold and pall. Thence 
‘they [he] proceeded forth, ‘a voyage of’ full many days; over Malva, ‘a 
[the] river ‘most long [sailed along]; in Mauritania they came to land. 
They went over [all] that ‘same’ land, ‘and’ the people they slew; the 
drink and the meat, that they there found, to their ships they ‘it’ carried ; 

1 hi funde? ? Brutun? 3 wid? 

4 heo? ® li¥den? 


56 ' LAZAMONS BRUT. [v. 1306—1329.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
feireft pat heom pohte. faireft pat hii funde. 
heo nomen of pan londe ¥ hii nomem! of pan londe Y 
al pat heo wolden. al pat hii wolde. 
Pa ferden heo for’ / Po ferde hii forp ’ 
heora fierS wes on fele. ~ hire fare was on fele. 


muchelahte heo hefden biwunnen?mochel deal of heapten ¥ 
hii hafden bi-wonne. 
Pa comen heo to pan bunnen. _ Po comen hi to pan wonigge ? 


pa Hercules makede ’ pat Herculef makede. 

mid muchelé his ftrengde. —_10 

pat weoren poftles longe ¥ pat weren poftes longe 

of marmon ftane ftroge. of marbre ftones ftronge. 
taken makede Hercules ¥ Pe tockne makede Hercules 
 lond pe per abuten wes. pe lond pe per abute wes. 
swide brod & fwide long?’ swipe brod and swipe long 
al hit ftond an hif hond. al hit ftod on his hond. 


Per heo funden pe merminnen? Pare he funde pe mereminnes 
 beo’d deor of muchele ginnen. pat beop beftes of mochele ginne. 
wifmen hit paichet fuliwif? [fife. wimmen hit pinchep foliwis ’ 
bi-neoSe pon gurdle hit punched be-nipe pare gurdel hit his fif. 
Peos habbe’d fwa murie fong? 21 Peos habbep so muri fong 


ne beo pa dai na fwa long. ne beo pe dai noft? fo long. 
ne bid na man weri’ nis no man weri? 
heora fonges to heren. hire fonges to hure. 


‘what ever seemed fairest to them [the fairest that they found]; they took 
of the land all that they would. Then fared they forth, their voyage was 
prosperous; ‘much [a great deal of ] booty they had gained. Then came 
they to the ‘bounds [habitations] that Hercules made ‘ with his great 
strength,’ which were tall posts of strong marble stone. Hercules made 
the memorial; the land that was there about, very broad and very long, 
it all stood in his hand. There they found the mer-men, which are beasts 
of great deceit; women it seemeth full truly; beneath the girdle it ‘seemeth 
[is] fish. These have song so merry, that be the day ever so long, no 


1 R. nomen. ? noht? 


[v. 1330—1351.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
Hit is half mon & half fife ¥ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


57 


MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 


Elf his wimman elf fis ¥ 


hit haf pes wurfe také fuliwis. hit hauep pis worles tockne foliwis. 
for his werkes beod' fwa fwete ’ for hire workes beop so swete ¢ 
 feolan men heo* ne majen for- pat fale men for-ledep. 


Brutuf iherde figgen 
purh hif fe-monnen. 
of pan ufele ginnen? — [f.8.¢.1.] 
pe cuSen pa mereminnen. 

He hihte hondlien kablen ? 
teon feiles to toppa. 10 
leten laden pene wind y 

liSem* mid pan uden. 


{leten. Brutus iheorde fegge 


of his fipmané. 

of pan vuele ginne’ 

pat cupe pe mereminne. 
He hepte handli cables ” 
feyles drawe to toppe. 
leten lade pane wind 
paffi oul bieres. 


Pamereminnenheomtofvommen? Pe mereminne 3am fwomme to ¥ 


on alchare fidan. 
swida* heo heom letten / 


on euereche fide. 
swipe hii 3am lette ¥ 


mid ludere heora craften. mid lup hire craftes. 
NeSelas Brutuf at-brec Nopeles Brutuf at-brac / 
al buten burfta. al boute harme. 

& ferde riht on his wei? and ferde ript on his way 


hif feipé runden fwise. 2 pe fipef hurnen fwipe. 
A fteores-man ha’ talde wil-fpel ? A fterefmon him tolde ’ 


} he Spaine ifzih. pat he ifep Spaine. [£.6>. e.1.] Hifpannia, 


man is weary their songs to hear! ‘It is half man and [Half is woman] 
half fish; it hath this ‘worse [worlds] token full surely, for ‘its [their] 
works are so sweet, that many men ‘are not able to quit them [they 
lead astray]. Brutus heard say ‘by [of] his ‘seamen [ship-men], of the 
evil deceits that the mer-men practised. He ordered the cables to be 
handled, the sails to be drawn to the top mast; to let the wind lead, 
and ‘sail with [pass over] ‘the’ waves. The mer-men swam to them on 
‘each [every] side; greatly they impeded ‘them’ with their wicked crafts; 
nevertheless Brutus escaped all without harm, and proceeded right on his 
way; his ships ran quickly. A steersman told him ‘joyful tidings,’ that 


1 R. beo’. 
4 swide? 


2 heom? 3 R, liten. 


5 him? 


Atenor. 


Corineus. 


58 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


Heo drowen toward hauene ? 
haleSes weoren blide. 

To pan londe heo ferden 
per heo leof fole funden. 
feouwer prum ferden 

per weoré feola pufend. 

gode knihtes ¥ 

pa gode weoren to fihten. 
Peos weoré heora fibbe men 
hit wes pa beth mid heom. 10 
Peos feower ferden 

from Troye weoren iflemed. 
Atenor heom ledde y 

pe wes leode elder. 

& he mid pan folke ¥ 

fleh ut of Troye. 

pa Grickes hit bi-wnnan y 
mid heora wel flahte. 
Corineuf wes heora duc 
feSSen Atenor wafdeaS!. — 20 
Corineuf wes a {trong m6 Y 

& he heuede muchele ban. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


... drowen toward hauene y 
folk {wipe blipe. 

To pan lond hii verden / 
pare hii leof folk fiiden. 
fouruald ferde 

par weré fale pufend. 

wel gode cniptes ? 

pat kene were to fipte. 
Peos weren hire sibmen 
hit waf pe bet mid hem. 
Peof four ferdes 

fram Troye weren iflemid. 
Atenor 3am ladde ¥ 
wiffede and radde. 

and he mid pat folke y 

flep vt of Trove. 

po Greckes hit bi-wonne ? 
mid hire bitere flahtes. 
Corine” was hire duk ¥ 

po Athenor was dead. 
Corineus was a ftrong man’ 
and hadde mochele mihte. 


[v. 1352—1375.] 


he wes fwakene he wes fwa {trong : he was fo kene? and fo ftrong ? 
{wile hit weore an eotand. alfe he were an eatande. 


he saw Spain. They drew towards haven, the men ‘were [most] blithe! 
To the land they went; there they found good people; a four-fold host; 
there were many thousand [well] good knights, that were ‘good [keen] 
in fight. These were their kinsmen; it was the better with them! These 
four hosts were driven from Troy; Atenor led them, ‘who was their chief 
{ruled and counselled], and he with the folk fled out of Troy, when the 
Greeks won it with their ‘battle [bitter] slaughter. ‘After [When] Athe- 
nor was dead Corineus was their duke. Corineus was a strong man, and 
he had great might; he was so keen, he was so strong, as if ‘it [he] were 


1 R, dead, 


q 
{ 
j 


[v. 1376—1398.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 59 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

Pa tid3ind com to Corineum? _ pe tiding com to Corineum 

pat Brutuf wes pider icomen. _ pat Brutus was pider icome. 

wel wes him on liue wel was him aliue 
| nef he neuer er fwa blide. nas he neuere fo blipe. 
| Heo comen to gadere ‘ Hii comen to gadere ’ 

& ofte heo cuften. {e.2.] and ofte hii cufte. 
h Brutuf him feide tiSinde ¥ Brut? him tolde tidinge y 

pat an lond he ferde fechinde. _ pat a lond a! verde fechinge. 

per he mihte purh-wunian ? ware he mihte wonie 

mid hif wnfolke®. 10 mid his gode folke. 

Corineus him anfwerede Y Corineus anfwerede ¥ 

& ich pe wulle mid fare. and ich pe wolle fiwi. 

mid mine driht folke / mid mine gode folke 

& habben dale mid pe. and habbe deal mid pe. 

& halden pe for herre / and holde pe for herre ¥ 

& here pe for lauerd. & herie pe for louerd. 
I Pis feoreward waf imaked y Peos forewarde was imaked ” 
heo ferden to fomne. and wel hii hit helde. 
Heo ferden from Spaine ? Hi verde fram Spaine 
riht toward Brutaine. so riht toward Britayne. 
Armoriche heihte } lond Armoriche hehte pat londe ¥ Armoriche. 
per Brutainef noma nu on ftond. pare Britayne nou ftondep. 
| Peytou heo letten on riht hondy Peyto. ..leten...... [c.2.] Peytou. 


agiant! The tidings came to Corineus, that Brutus was thither come ; 
—well was he alive! never ‘ere’ was he so blithe! They came together, 
and oft they kissed. Brutus told him tidings, that he fared seeking a land 
where he might dwell with his ‘dear [good] people. Corineus thus him 
answered: “And I will ‘go with [follow] thee, with my good folk, and 
have part with thee; and hold thee for chief, and obey thee for lord.” This 
_ covenant was made; ‘they proceeded together [and well they it held]. They 
went from Spain, right towards Britain. Armorica hight the land, where 
‘Britains name [Britain] now ‘on’ standeth. Poitou they left on the right 
hand, as they came to the land, ‘in a most fair river, where the Loire falleth 


1 he? 2 win-folke? 


Goffar. 


Numbert. 


60 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
{wa heo comen a pet lond. 
in are {wide feire x 
per Leire falle’ i pa fe. 
Seoue niht & enne dei 
Brutuf i pare hauene lei’ 
& he fende 3eond pat lond 
& fcawede pa leoden. 
Goffar pan king of Peyters 
nef hit noht iqueme. 
pat he ifeh fwlche fonden? 10 
faren 3eond his londe. 
Pe king heihte his wife men 
pe wel cuden a fpeche. 
pat heo to pare fie ferden y 
par pa ferde lei. 
& iwuften at pon cnihten ¥ 
wet heo per fohten. 


[v. 1399—1422.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


so heom comen. . . . lon.. 


Seoue niptand...... iz 
Br .... in pe auene lai. 

and he w..... ‘in pat lond 
and fewede. . . . . de. 
Goffare pe king of... .. 
naf hit noht icweme. 

pat h. ifep foch fonde ¥ 

faren ouer al . . londe. 

pe king hehte his wife men ¥ 
pat wel cupe of speche. 

pat hii to pare séé verde 
pare lai pe ferde. 

and iwiten of pa cniptes / 
wat hii pare fohten. 


wheper heo walden helden grid ¥ waper hii wolden holde grip y 


& greten pes londes king. 
pe heo wolden mid wiSere? 2 
pan kinge wid-stondé. 


Numbert hehte pe alder mon  - 


pe fculde paf ernde don. 
Corine? wes ifaren to wode 


oper pane king fihte wip. 


Numberd hepte pe man 
pe folde pe erende don. 
Corineus was to wode ivare ? 


in the sea.’ Seven nights and one day Brutus in the haven lay, and he 
‘sent over (dwelt in] the land, and viewed the people. To Goffar, the king 
of Poitou, it was not pleasing that he saw such messengers go over ‘his 
{all the] land. The king ordered his wise men, who were skilful of speech, 
that they should go to the sea, where the host lay, and learn ‘at [of] the 
knights what they there sought; whether they would hold peace, ‘and greet 
the king of the land,’ or whether they would ‘with hostility the king with- 
stand [fight with the king]. Numbert hight the ‘alderman [man] who 
should do ‘this [the] errand. Corineus was gone to the wood, ‘and drove 


1 wonede? 


~~. 2s ee 


[v. 1423—1445.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 61 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx, MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
& draf per pa wilde deor. [£8°.c.1.] for hunti deor wilde. 
mid hornen & mid hunden Y mid horne and mid hundes / 
& mid fif hundred cnihten. mid fif vndred cnihtes. 


Imetten heo faren Numbert? Hii métte wid! Numbert 
pes kinges fonde of pat eard. peos kinges fonde of pan erp. 


Numbert heom to clepede ? Numberd ham to clepede ¥ Numbert. 
mid ludere ftefne. loudere ftemne. 

Whonene beo 3e cnihtes Wanene beo 3e0 cniptes 

3e fared *® mid unrihte. pat farep mid onripte. 

3e huntieS i pes kinges friSe:’ 10 3e hontep in pis kinges pare ¥ 

per fore 3e fculen beon feie. par fore 3e folle deze. 


3e dod pan kinge muchel fcome  3e doh*® pa kinge mochel fame 
per fore 3e fculen han grome. __ par fore 3e solle habbe grame. 
forboden he haue®’ hif deor fri’ ¥ forbodé his deor frip ? 

per fore 3e fculen liggen ftif. par fore 3e follen ligge ftif. 


Corineuf iwerd him wrod Corineus him iwarp wrop ? Corineus. 
& wende him to-3eines. and wende him to-3einef. 

& faide pas ilke word and feide peos ilk word 

mid muchelere wredSe*. ==—s mid mochelere wrappe. 

Cniht pu ert muchel fot? 2% Cnipt pou art mochel fol?’ 

pat pu fwa moteft. pat pou fo moteft. 


3if pe king hit haue®’ forboden’ 3if pi king hit hauep forbode 
ne fcal him neuer beo pa bet. _ ne fal him nopt pe bet. 


there [for to hunt] the wild deer, with horns and with hounds, ‘and’ 
with five hundred knights. They met [with] Numbert ‘journeying,’ 
messenger of the king of the land. Numbert called to them with loud 
voice, “‘ Whence be ye, knights? ‘ye [that] act with un-right; ye hunt in 
the ‘frith [park] of the king, therefore ye shall ‘be dead [die]! Ye do the 
king much shame, therefore ye shall have anger. Forbidden ‘he hath’ 
his deer-frith, therefore ye shall lie stiff.” Corineus became wrath with 
him, and went towards him, and said these words with great wrath: 
“Knight, thou art a great ‘sot [fool], that thou so speakest; if ‘the [thy] 
king hath it forbidden, it shall ‘never [not] ‘ be’ the better for him, nor will 


2 


1 wid? 2 R. fare’. 3 dop? 4 R. wredSe. 


Numbert. 


62 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


ne nawit for his forbode ” 
nulle ich hit bileuen. 


& al pa deor pat ich finde. 

Pa iwredSede? Numbert ” 

pa kinges ftiward of pat eard. 
he leadde an hif hide y 

enne bowe ftronge. 

& he pene ftreng up braid ¥ 
balu com on uefte. 10 
On he fette ane fla 

& he feondliche droh. 

& pa fla lette gliden Y 

bi Corineuf fiden. 

Corineuf bleinte ¥ 

& pene feute bi-berh. 

& towardes Numbert he leop ¥ 
fwile hit an leon weora’. 

& pene bowe igreap ¥ 

mid muchele ftrengSe. [c.2.] 20 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 
ne nowift! for his forbode 


nole. %\<iyi's"! bits Fee 
to nimé his heortes & hishindes’. . . . . 


. de. 
a OWE: <i 
. n his hond Y 


and pane ..... up breid ¥ 

to his owe .. rme. 

On he fette a flo’ 

. . d ftrengpe he hit let vt g. 
and pe flo gan glide? 

bi Corineus his fide. 
Corineus bleinte / 

and him seolf werede. 

and touward Numbert he leop ” 
afe hit a lion were. 

& pane bo3e igrop ¢ 

mid mochelere maine. 


He fmot Numbert mid ponbowe? He fmot Nibert mid pane bo3e 


pat his hefd-bon to-brec. 
pat his blod & his brain 
ba weoren to-dafcte. 


pat his heued-bon barft. 
pat his blod? and his brazen 7 
bope vt prafte. 


[v. 1446—1469.] 


I any-whit desist, for his prohibition, to take his harts and his hinds, and 
all the deer that I find.” Then Numbert grew wrath,—the kings steward 


» of the land ;—he carried in his hand a strong bow, and the string ‘he’ 


updrew; ‘mischief came soon [to his own harm]! He set an arrow on, 
‘and he strongly drew [with strength he let it out go]; and the arrow ‘let 
{gan to] glide by Corineus [his] side. Corineus blenched, and ‘the shot 
warded off [guarded himself]; and towards Numbert he leaped, as if 
it were a lion, and grasped the bow with great strength. He smote 
Numbert with the bow, so that his head-bone ‘broke asunder [burst], that 
2 R. iwred¥ede. 


2 nowiht 3 weore? 


[v. 1470—1492.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
Fluzen his iferen Y 
feondliche fwide'. 
to pon kinge Goffar ’ 


& faiden hine tiSende fre. 


pet iflawen wes Numbert 
he wes his awene ftiward. 
Pe king wes fwiSe feeri ? 
& feorhful on mode. 
& fende his fonde ¥ 
3eond hif kine-londe. 
gaderede hif ferde. 
per weoren men feie. 
Pa ferde wes ifumned 
| & heo ford fufden. 
toward fele Brutun ? 
per he bi fee wonede. 
Brutuf wes {wide war. 
F for wifdome him fulede. 
} haures he fende 
to hirede pes kinges. 
to witen of his farcoft 
wher he wolde feihten. 
| Pa hawres ferden y 


10 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 63 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


Flo3en his iveres / 
feondeliche swipe. 

to pan kinge Goffare 
and tolde him tidinge fore. 
pat iflaze was Numbert 
pat was kinges ftiward. 
Pe king was {wipe fori 
and fohfolle? on heorte. 
and fende his fonde y 
ouer al his kine-londe. 
gaderede ferde 

pare were men veie. 

Pe ferde was ifomned / 
and hii forp fufde. 
touward pan feli Bruti? 
par he lai bi {¢é ftronge*. 
Brut? was swipe war 
for wifdom him folzede. 
fpiares he fende 7 

to pis kingef ferde. . 

to witen of his farecoftes ¥ 
ware he wolden‘ fihte. 
Peof {piares verden Y 


Gofar. 


his blood and his brains both ‘were’ ‘dashed out [out thrust]. His 


companions fled very quickly to the king Goffar, and ‘said [told] to him 
sore tidings, that Numbert was slain,— he [who] was ‘his own [the kings] 
steward. The king was very sorry, and sorrowful in ‘mood [heart], 
and sent his messengers over [all] his kingdom; and gathered his host,— 
there were men fated! The army was assembled, and they marched forth 
towards [the] good Brutus, where he ‘dwelt [lay] by the sea [strand?]. 
Brutus was very wary, for wisdom accompanied him; spies he sent 
to the army of the king, to learn of his journeyings, where he would 
fight. ‘The [These] spies went, and soon returned, and came to their 
> ftronde? 4 wolde? 


1 R. fwide. 2 forhfolle? 


64 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


& fone a3ein comen. 

& comé to heora leuarda y 
per he lai bi hauene. 

& peos word him feide / 

al fwa hit fum iwars. 

Hal beo pu Brutuf 

pu ert pe hexfte of uf. 

Nu haf Goffar pe king ? 
igadered hif ferde. 

muchel ferd & riche ¥ 

& he3ze word he fpeke®. 
alle heo' wullet quellen 
quic pat heo! finde’. 

& pa fcipen to-dra3en ¥ 

& pa wif drenchen. 

Nulled heo leaue ¥ 

nenne of ous a-liue. 
Brutuf nom al hif 3unge fole ¢ 
& hem to fcipe fufede 


& alle his ehte y [£.9. c.1.] 


hif fole bitahte. 
& to heom feide ‘ 


’ Brutuf pe fele. 


3e beod mine leofe men’ 


21 


[v. 1493—1516.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


and fone a3ein come. 

and comen to hire louerd?’  [c.2.] 
par he lai in auene. 

and peos word faide 

afe hit fop iwarp. 

Hail beo pu Brut? / 

pou hart pe hexte ouer vs. 

Nou haueth Goffare pe king 
igadered his ferde. 


and penchep alle a-cwelle ¥ 
cwic pat he findep. 

and pe fipes to-dra3e 

pe wimmen adrenche. 
Nellep hii lefuen / 

none of vs aliue. 

Brut? nom al his 3onge folk ¥ 
an to fipe fufde. 

and al his hehte 

pat fole bi-tehte. 

And po fpac Brut? / 

to his men lefue. 


lord, where he lay ‘by [in] ¢he haven, and these words ‘ to him’ said, ‘all’ 
as it [truth] was: ‘‘ Hail be thou, Brutus! thou art the highest ‘of [over] 
us. Now hath Goffar the king gathered his army, ‘a great host and 
powerful, and high words he speaketh,’ ‘that all he will [and thinketh all 
to] slay that he shall find alive; and the ships destroy, and the women 
drown. ‘They will leave none of us alive.” Brutus took all his young folk, 
and dispatched ‘them’ to the ships, and delivered all his goods to ‘his [the] 
people ; and ‘said to them Brutus the good [then spake Brutus to his dear 
men]: “‘ Ye are my loyed men, hearken my counsel.’ Come ye never 


1 he? 


[v. 1517—1540.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 65 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
hereniad mine lare. {bord {bord ¥ 
Ne cume 3e neauer wid! vté fcipes Ne come 3e neuere wid! hute fipef 
zr ich ou fende futel word. hare ich fende 30u fotel word. 
wheter ich maje pe ufere hond: waper ich mawe pan ouere hond Y 
habben of pan kinge. habbe of pan kinge. 

Brutuf nom hif cnihtes / Brut? nom his eniptefY 
& iwende ford rihtes. and wend forp rihtes. 

to pon ilke weie to pa ilke weie? 

per him iwifed wes. pat him iwifed was. 

per pe king walde ford ¥ wo par pe king wollde forp y 
mid muchelere hif ferde. mid mochele his ferde. 
To gadere heo comen ¥ To gadere hii comen? 
hardliche heo on-slo3en. hardeliche an-hewen. 

per wes fwive ftrong feht ¥ par was fwipe ftrong fipt Y 
feollen pe feie. folle pe veie. 

per wes moni fteap mon par was many bold man 
mid ftele to-fwngen. mid ftele to-hewe. 

longe a-dai lefte pat feht ¥ long ilafte pat fipt 

per feol moni god cniht. par fulle mani god enipt. 
Corineuf com quecchen?’ 2 Corineus com feecky ¥ 

& to him feolfe ques. and feide to him seolue. 
A-wei Corineuf Awac Corineus 

nere pu icoren kempa. nere pou icore kempe. 
cud nu pine ftrengSa ¥ cup nou pine ftrengpe 


without the ships board, ere I send you plain word, whether I may have 
the upper hand of the king.” Brutus took his knights, and went forth 
right to that way ‘where [that] to him was advised, where the king 
would forth pass, with his great host. Together they came; fiercely ‘ they’ 
on-smote (fought); there was most strong fight; the fated fell! there was 
many a ‘tall [bold] man with steel hewed in pieces; long ‘ a-day’ lasted the 
fight, there fell many a good knight! Corineus advanced, and to himself said; 
*«‘Away [Awake], Corineus! art thou not chosen knight? Shew now thy 
strength, and thy great might, and fell ‘this’ Poitou folk to the ground!” 


1 wid? 
F 


66 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 1541—1564.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

& pina! ftepa main. and pine mochele mihte. 

& piffe Peytifce fole ¥ and Peyteffe folk ” 

fal to pe grunde. ful to pan griide. 

Corineuf heom rafde to Corineus him? refde to 

fwa pe rimie wulf. afe pe wilde wolf. 

pane he wule on fcheapen wane he wole amag® {éép 

fcaSe were wrchen. eni harm wirche. [[& 7%. ¢.1.] 


Breid he mid fwiSeren hid Breid he mid his wipere* hond 
a fweord muchel & fwide’® ftrong. a mochel fwerd and fwipe ftrong. 
al pat he per mid hitte ¥ 10 al pat he mid hutte y 


al hit a-dun healde. al adun fulle. 

Neora® pa bearn nea fwa ftrong * Nere pe man nopt fo ftrong 
pah he hefde brunie on. peh he bere yre an. 

3if he hine mid fweorde at-ran? 3if he hine mid fwerde fmot / 
nea raf he neuer mare. na rof he neuere more. 

Pa he hefde twa hundred ¥ Po he afde two hundred? 
mid fweorde to-hewen. mid fwerde to-ewe. 

pa brac pat fweord in hif hond?’ po brac pat fwerd in his hond / 
riht bi pere hilte. {c.2.] ript bi pan heolte. 

Pa wes wrod Corineufy 20 Po was wrop Corineus 

& paf word cleopede. and peos word faide. 

Wa wre auer pene fmid ¢ Wo worpe pe smip 

pa pe mid honden fmeod%ede’. pat pe mid hond fmipede. 
Corineuf abuten bi-heold y Corineuf aboute bi-heolde 


Corineus rushed towards them, as the ‘howling [wild] wolf, when among 
sheep he will ‘scathe-work [any harm] work, He drew with [his] right hand 
a great sword ‘and’ most strong; all that he therewith hit, all ‘it’ down fell. 
Were the man ever so strong, though he ‘had cuirass [bore iron] on, if 
he smote him with sword, he arose never more! When he had hewed 
to pieces two hundred with his sword, then brake the sword in his hand, 
right by the hilt. Then was Corineus wrath, and these words said: “‘‘Ever 
woe worth the smith, that forged thee with hand!” Corineus looked 


1 pine? 2 ham? % amang? 4 fwipere? 
5 R. fwide. ® Neore? 7 {fmeodSede? 


[v. 1565—1587.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 67 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
for pe bearn was abol3en. he was fwipe abolje. 
& igrap of onnef monnef honde ¥ and igrop of one mannes hond y 
ana! wiex {wiSe ftronge. one gifarme fwibe ftrang. 
al pat he neh com Y al pat he nep com? 
per mid he hit aquelde. par mid he acwelde. 
Pe king fette to fleonne Pe kinge fette to flende Y 
& al pa ferde eafter. and al pe ferde after. 
& Corineuf heom eafter com: and Corineus him? after com ¥ 
kenliche fwite. kenliche fwide. 
& heom to clepede ¥ 10 and he heom to clepede ¥ 
pe unimete kempa. pe onimete kempe. 
Goffar mid pire ferde Goffare mid pine ferde ? 
wi wolt pu fleam makian. wi wolt pu flen® makie. 
Ne miht pu na wiht fo fleon’ Ne mipt pou noht fo fare’ 
3if pu uf wit heonne fleman. 3if pou hus wolt fleme. 
pu moft fwiper fehten / pou moft fwipere fihte 
er we heonne iwenden. hare we hinnef wende. 
Ne ganninde ne ridinde ‘ Ne goinde ne ridigge ¥ 


nedurfte him nan abiden. [heard ¢ ne dorfte him no man abide. 
Pe king hefde enne pein* fwipe Pekinghafde one man fwipe hard ¥ 


he was i-haten Suard. 2. he was ihote Siward. 
he bi-heold Corineum ¢ he bi-heold Corineum Y 
pe heom after com. pat him® hafter com. 


about,—'for the knight was [he was most] enraged,—and seized from a mans 
hand a ‘war-axe [gisarm] most strong; all that he came nigh, therewith 
he ‘it’ slew! The king began to flee, and all the host after; and Corineus 
came after them very keenly, and [he] called to them the furious knight: 
** Goffar, with thy forces, why wilt thou make flight?) Thou shouldest 
‘no-whit [not] so ‘flee [act] if thou wilt drive us ‘ hence’; thou must harder 
fight ere we hence d !” Neither going nor riding durst ‘none [no man} 
abide him. The king had a ‘thane [man] most hardy; he was named 
Suard; he beheld Corineus, who came after them. Suard had three 


1 ane? ? ham? 5 R. flem. 
4 By second hand, on erasure. 5 ham? 
F2 


Suard. 


68 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 1588—1611.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

Suard hefde to iferen / Siward adde to ivere 

preo hundred ridearen. preo hidred rideres. 

he wende on 3ean fone he wende ajein fone 

& he ohtliche feaht. and hapliche fapt. 

Nes hit noht longe Nas hit noht longe 

pat Suard mihte ftonde. pat Siward..... [c.2.] 

for Corineuf him geinde to ¢ eer wert) 


mid hif gu® ftrenc®e. 


he gurde Suard on pat hefdY he......... 

pat he grund fohte. 0, spatche. . 2. 0s 
& he hine for-fmat a-midden? .. .hine for-fm...... 
atwariht biponribben.  ...... bi pan ribbef. 
Nes per nan fwafteSeliYy ....... mipti ? 
pat lengore mihte ftonden. [c.1.] pat leggere'..... .... de. 


Corineuf heom to-brutte; [f9°. Corineuf ham to-brut.. 
ban & heora ribbes. {draf: bones an hire ribbes. 
& peond? pat lond he heom to- and ouer al pat lond he drof heom?’ 


moni pufend par abad. par abod many pufend. 
pat fole pat flei Corineum Pat folk pat flep Corinei ’ 
pat com to Brutun. 20 pat com to Brutun. 
& alle heo flowen Y and alle hi flo3en ? 
pat heo neih comen. pat hii nep comen. 

Gogar. Pe kig Goffar ifeih his burft’ pe king Goffare ifeh his lure ¥ 
& un-#%e hi feolf at-breac. and vnnepe afcapede. 


hundred riders for companions; he turned back soon, and ‘he’ fought 
courageously. It was not long that Suard might stand, for Corineus 
approached to him with his good strength; he struck Suard on the head, 
so that he sought the ground, and he severed him in the middle, in two, right 
by the ribs. There was none so mighty, that longer might stand. Corineus 
cut them in pieces, their bones and ribs, and over [all] the land he drove 
them; many thousands there dead remained! The folk that fled from 
Corineus came to Brutus; and they slew all that they nigh came. The 
king Goffar saw his loss, and with difficulty ‘himself’ escaped. He fled 


} lenggere? 2 R. 3eond. 


[v. 1619—1635. LA3AMONS BRUT. 69 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
he fleih ut of hif londe ¥ he fle3 vt of his londe 
& bi-lefde his leode. and bi-lefde his leode. 
In to France he ferde In to F“nce he verde 
per he freond funde. pare he frendes funde. 
to po kaifere / to pane kaifere ¥ 
& to his tueolf iferen. and hif twelue iueres. 
and tolde heom of pan balwe? and tolde him of pan harme ¥ 
pe Brut? him hefde idon. pat Brutus him do hafde. 
Inne Franfe weré italde In F“nce weren itold ? 
twelfe iferan. [pers ¥ twelue iveres. 


4 


pa Freinfce heo' cleopeden dufze pe Frence ham clepede doffeperes. Du ze pers. 
pa weré drihtliche men. 12 

kinges heo weoré icleopede / 

pat heo ofte cudSen*®. —_[kinge / 

Heo bi-heihten Goffaren pen Hii bi-hehte Goffare pane king ¥ 

| pat heo hine wreken wolden. __ pat hii him wolde helpe. 

wreken hine of his unwines’ — wreken him of his onwines Y 


} him pe at weorra®. pat him pe epere were. 
Heo fenden 3eond al France? —_ Hii fenden ouer al F“nce ¥ 
& buden heora ferda. 2% and gaderede ferde. 
fulle feouen nihte fulle feuenipte 
heo fomenede cnihtes. hii fomnede cniptes. 
& Brutus ladde his ferde And Brutus ladde his ferde ¥ 
in Armorichen earde. in Armoriches erpe. 


out of his land, and left his people. Into France he went, there he friends 
found; to the emperor, and ‘to’ his twelve Companions; and told ‘them 
[him] of the harm that Brutus had done him. In France were reckoned 
twelve Companions, the French called them duszepers, ‘who were noble 
men; kings they were called;—that they oft made known’! They pro- 
mised Goffar the king, that they would ‘avenge [help] him, wreak him of 
his enemies, that he should be the easier. They sent over all France, and 
‘summoned [gathered] ‘their’ forces, a seven-night full they summoned 
soldiers. And Brutus led his army into the land of Armorica, and he was 


1 heom? 2 cuSden? 3 weore? 


70 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v.1636—1659.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

& he wes fwiSe blide ¥ & he was swipe blipe ¢ 

for his muchele bizate. for pare grete bi-3ete. 

3e6d pat lond he gon ernen Ouer al pat lond hi! gon erne?’ 

& pa tunes for-bearnen. and tounes for-bearne. 

& her3ede pat lond ¥ and awan pat ilke lond Y 

& teh hit to his a3re hond. to his owene hond. 


al pat lond he wifte ¢ 
& al he hit awalde. 


Swa he ferde mid his here So he verde mid his here 

pat he on enne hul bi-com. w pat he com on an hulle. [f8. ¢.1.) 
he wes feir & heih y he was fair & swipe heh? 

& he hine fwive bi-heold. and he hine fwipe bi-heold. 

He nom red et hif miné ” He nam read of his manne Y 


' he wolde par caftel makian. __ pare arere catftel. 
pa pe caftel vp-ftod {c-2.] po pe ..ftel vt-ftod ¢ 
he wes ftrong & {wide god. he was ftr... and fwipe god. 


Nef hit buten lutel wile ” Nas hit. . .a lutel wile? 

pat Goffar king com him lisen. pat Goffare pe king com lipe. 
mid vnimete ferde y mid onimete ferde ¥ 

of Fréchifce folke. 2% of Francene folke. 

& of alle pon londen y & of alle pan londen Y 

pa lezen into France. pat leien in to F“nce. 

Pa Goffar pe king’ po Goffare pe king ¥ 

pene caftel kennede pane caftel of-kende. 


exceeding blithe, for ‘his [the] great booty. Over [all] the land he gan 
to run, and ‘ the’ towns to burn down, and ‘harried the [won that] land, 
‘and took it’ in his own hand; ‘ all the land he ruled, and all he it wielded’. 
So he proceeded with his host, that he arrived on a hill, which was fair 
and [most] high, and he diligently beheld it. He took counsel ‘at [of ] his 
men, ‘that he would make [to arear] there a castle;—when the castle was 
erected, it was strong and most good. It was but [a] little while, that 
({the] king Goffar approached ‘him’ with an immense army of French 
folk, and from all the lands that lay by France. When Goffar the king 
perceived the castle, so much he was grieved, that ‘all’ his ‘wit he lost 


1 he? 


7 


{v. 1660—1682.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 71 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
swa {wide wa him was so {wipe wo him was 
pat al hif wit he for-les. pat his lif him for-léés. 
Swite he fufde pider ward ¢ Swipe fufde piderward 
kene his ferde. his kene ferde. 
heo to-delden heom atweolfay hii to-delde 3am atwelue 
& to on alchere! halue. and to in eche alue. 

& pa Troynifce men and pe Troyniffe men 
hed comen a3ein. comen heom to-3eines. 


& anan leiden to pan grunden? and a-non leide to pan grunde 
of pane Freinfce preo pufende. 10 of pan folke preo poufend. 

pa Freinfce weoren ifturmede? Pe Frenfe weren iwrapped ¥ 

& noSelaf heo ftal makeden. and ftif {tal makede. 

& heo bi nidinges beard* and al mid nipinges beorde ¢ 


driué hed on 3einwerd. driuen ham a3zeward. 
Brutun and hif képan / Brut? and his kempes ¢ 
heo driuen in to pan caftle. hii driue in to pan cattle. 
& in pera® ilke uore ¥ and in pan ilke fore ¥ 
heo felden of hif iueren. hii fude* of hire veres. 
& eldai heo remden & alle dai hii remden 
& refden to pan caftle. 2 and refden to pan caftle. 
pat com to pere nihte ’ fort him® com pe nipte 
pat lengre heo ne mihté. pat lengere hii ne mipte. 


I pon caftle wes muchel dred? In pan caftle was mochel drede 


[life left him]. Quickly ‘he’ advanced his keen army thitherward; they 
divided themselves into twelve parties, and drew on each side; and the 
Trojan men came against them, and anon laid to the ground three thousand 
of the ‘French [folk]. The French were enraged, and ‘nevertheless they’ 
made [stiff] conflict, and ‘they by [all with] nithings gesture (?) drive them 
againward. Brutus and his warriors they drive into the castle, and in the 
same onset they felled many of ‘his [their] companions ; and all day they 
attacked and assaulted the castle, until ‘it came to the night [the night 
came to them], that longer they might not. In the castle was great dread, 


1 First written alcere. 2 See Notes. 5 pere? 
4 R. fulde. ®* ham? 


72 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 1683—1705.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

a pa mid niht heo nomen read. at pe midnipt inomen' to rede. 

} heo wolden Corineum pat hii wolde Corinei ¥ 

to pon wode fenden. to pan wode fende. 

mid alle pon folke ’ mid alle pe folke 

} he hefde on his ferde. pat he badde on ferde. 

& ferden vt fwa ftille ¥ and verde vt fo ftille ¢ 

fwa heo ftelen woldé. alfe he? ftele wolden. 

in to ane picke wode ¢ in to one picke wode ¥ 

pa per on ueft wes. pat pare was anewieft. 

Brutuf wes i pon caftle ¥ 10 Brutus was in pan caftleY — [c.2.] 

& hine wel wufte. and wel hine wifte. 

A marwé po hit dawede A morwe po hit da3ede / 

& dai com to folke. and dai com to folke. 

Brutuf wef on-bolzen Brutus was abolje / 


fwa bid pa wilde ber. [£10.c.1.] alfe pe wilde bor. 
wenne hundes hine biftondeS wane hundes hine bi-ftondep / 


i pon wode-londe. in pan wode-londe. 

Brutuf hehte® his beornes ¢ Brutus hehte his cniptes ” 

don on heora burnan. don an hire brunies. 

& heora weepne gode* y 20 and hire wepne gode 

for heo to feht® feulden. for hii to fipte folde. 

Vp heo duden heora caftles 3aten Y Vp hii dude hire caftles 3eate 
& cofliche vt wenden. and cofliche yt wende. 


‘in [at] the midnight ‘ they’ took counsel, that they would send Corineus 
to the wood, with all the folk that he had in ‘his’ host; and they 
marched out as still, as if they would steal, into a thick wood that there 
was near. Brutus was in the castle, and well took charge of it. On 
the morrow, when it dawned, and day came to the folk, Brutus was 
enraged, as the wild boar ‘is,’ when hounds surround him in the wood- 
land. Brutus commanded his soldiers to put on their cuirasses and their good 
weapons, for they should go forth to battle. Up they did their castles 
gates, and boldly out went; they advanced to the French, and they 


2 hi nomen? ? hi? % The last two letters of hehte are interlined. 
‘4 First written goda. § By second hand, on erasure. 


=. 


[v. 1706—1731.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


fufden to pa Freinfcan : 

& heo hem to 3an fengen. 
per wes feiht fwiSe ftrong ’ 
on alche halue hit wes ftor. 
per wes monies kunnes folc ¥ 
& moni cniht feie. 

Per hefde Brut? ¥ 

enne mei haihte Turnuf. 

{wa wod he waf to fehte ’ 
pat he feie iwer®. 10 
He feolde pa Frenfca / 

on feole kunne wifen. 

mid his a3ene honden y 

he falde monie hundred. 

ah he f’de to feor Y 

ut from his iueren. 

& heo him to lidden 

on elchere fiden. 

mid wepnen hine wundeden 
& feodSen hine flowen. 20 
Brutuf hine funde dead 

& into pane caftle dude. 

& per inne bi-buri3zede ¥ 

bi ane ftan walle. 

Puru pan ilka T*nuf? 

Turs wes ihaten. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 73 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


fufden to pan Frenfe / 

and hii 34 on-fenge. 

Par was fipt {wipe ftrong ¥ 
in euereche halue. 

par was mani kinnes folk ’ 
and many cniptes veie. 
Par hafde Brut? ¥ 

one mey pe hehte Turnus. Turnus. 
so wod he was to fipte 
pat he dead was. 

He fulde pe Frenfe / 

in many cunnef wife. 

mid his owene honde 

he fulde mani hundred. 

ac he verde to for? 

vt fram his iveres. 

and hii to him leide ’ 

on eueche fide. 

mid wepne hine wédede ¥ 
and fuppen hine of-sloje. 
Brut? hine dead funde ¥ 
and ladde hine to pan caftle. 
and pare hine burede 

bi one fton walle. 

Porh pan ilke Turnus ¥ 
Turs hit was ihote. 


them attacked. There was fight most strong, on each side ‘it was 
sturdy’; there was folk of many kind and many knights slain! There 
had Brutus a relation, [who was] named Turnus. So furious he was 
in fight, that he was killed. He felled the French in many kind of wise; 
with his own hands he felled many hundreds; but he advanced too far out 
from his companions, and they approached him on ‘each [every] side, with 
weapons wounded him, and afterwards slew him. Brutus found him dead, 
and conveyed [him] ‘in’to the castle, and there‘in’ buried [him], by a 
stone wall, Through the same Turnus was [it] named Tours, and all 


Turuine. 


74 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 17391755.) 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


Turuine al pat lond / 

purh Turnuf dea%Se. 

Brutuf ferde ut ¥ 

& fufde to fihte. 

wreken he wolde hif teonen 7 
& Turnuf his wine leoue. 

To gadere heo comen ¥ 

& grundliche on-flowen. 

per wes bil ibeat Y 

per wes balu muchel. 10 
& feht unimete 

feeie per feollen. 

Pat feht wes wnder ftrong 
pa Corine? of wode com. [c.2.] 
mid michelene ferde y 

Brutun to fulfte. 

Brut? wes on ane half 
Corineuf an oer. 

Heo letten to gliden 

gares {wipe fcarpe. 20 
heo qualden pa Frenfce ? 

alle pa heo funden. 

pus heo weften pat lond 

& flowen pa leoden. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11t. 


Turuine al pat lond? 

porh Turnius deape. 
Brutus vt verde / 

and fufde to fipt. 

wreke he wolde his teone * 
of Turn® his deape. 

To gadere hi comen? 

and hardeliche an-slo3en. 
par was many dunt izeue / 


and fipt honimete. [£8 c.1.] 


po Corineus of wode com? 
mid mochele his ferde. 


Brutus waf in one half y 
Corineus in pe oper. 
Hii lette po glide’ 
gares {wipe farpe. 

hii cwelden pe Frenfe ¥ 
alle pat hii funden. 

pus iwonne! pat lond 
and flo3e pe leode. 


the land Touraine, through Turnus death. Brutus went out, and advanced 
to the fight; avenge he would his injury, ‘and Turnus, his loved friend [of 
Turnus his death]. Together they came, and desperately fought; there 
was ‘clash of falchion [many a stroke given], ‘ there was mickle bale,’ and 
immoderate fight; ‘ there fell the fated! The battle was wondrous strong,’ 
when Corineus came from the wood, with [his] powerful host ‘to succour 
Brutus’, Brutus was on one half, Corineus on [the] other. They let 
[then] glide darts most sharp; they killed the French, all that they found. 
Thus they ‘wasted [won] the land, and slew the people. The man was 


1 hi wonne? 


(v. 1756 —1779.]} 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


Nes neuer pa mon iboren ¥ 

ne fwa wis mon icoren. 

pe cude i pon daze y 

tellen of pan deade. 

hu monie pufende 

per weoren ileid to grunde. 

Pa bleou Brutuf 

& bonnede his ferde. 

& fpeken to gadere ? 

of feole wifdomes. 10 
& funden on rede ¥ 

pat heo faren wolden. 

Heo letten lude clepian 

& cuSen 3eond pat ferde. 

pat Brutuf pe fele / 

to pare fe wolde. 

Swa heo ferden to heora fcipa / 
_ mid allen heora uenge. 

& mid feoluere & mid golde y 
pa wes Goffares kinges. 

& pere Freinfce monnen 

pe i pon feht for-worSen. 
Heo ferden ut of hauene / 
pa heleSes weren bli¥e. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


75 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


Naf neuere pe man ibore / 
ne fo wis man icore. 

pat cupen! in pat daze 
tellen of pan deade. 

ou many poufendes 

par were to-hewe. 

Po bleu Brutus 

and bannede his ferde. 
and fpeke to gadere ? 

of fale wifdomes. 

and funden on reade 

pat hii faren wolde. 

Hii lette loude clepie / 
and cupi pe ferde. 

pat Brutus pe fele ¥ 

to pare féé wolde. 

So i verde® to hire fipes ¢ 
mid al hire bi-3etes. 

and mid feoluer and goldes® ¢ 
of Goffare pe kinges. 

and of pe Frenfe mennene ¥ 
pat weren in pan fipte. 
He‘ verde vt of hauene 
pe cniptes weren blipe. 


never born, nor man so wise esteemed, that could in the day tell how 
many thousands of the dead were there ‘laid to ground [hewed in pieces]. 
Then blew Brutus his horn, and assembled his forces, and they spake to- 
gether of many wise plans, and found in counsel (resolved), that they would 
thence depart. They caused it to be loud proclaimed, and to be made known 
‘through’ the army, that Brutus the good would march to the sea. So 
‘they’ proceeded to their ships with all their booty, and with silver, and 
‘with’ gold, ‘that was of Goffar [the] king, and [of] the Frenchmen, 
who in the fight ‘perished [were]. They went out of haven, the ‘warriors 
[knights] were blithe; the wind stood at will (favorably), the wild ‘fish ’ 


1 cupe? ? hi verde? 5 golde? * Hi? 


>) om 


76 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 1780—1803.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
wind ftod on willen ” wind stod on wille ¥ 
plozede pe wilde! fife. pleyde pe wilde. 
pet wat? wes fwide god y 
gumen weoren blide. 
LidSen? pa leoden ¥ Lipede pe leode 
pat heo on londe comen. pat hii a lod come. 
ngewe zt Dertemu%e i Totenes ? at Dertemupe in Totenas 
‘ottene| s }. 
wel wes Brutuf pes. wel was Brut? pas. 


pa fcipen biten on pat fond? _ pe fipes fmiten o pan ftrond ’ 
& al pat fole eode an lond. 10 pat folk wende a pat lond. 


Pa hefde Brutuf pa 3eue ¢ Po hafde Brutuf pe 3eft / 
pat Diana hi bi-heihte pat Dyane him bi-hehte. 
i Logice pan eit-londe Y in Leogyce pat eytlond ¢ . 


per heo weoren at-ftonden. [f 10°. pare hi weren at-ftonde. 
Muchel wes pa muré’e? —[c1.] Mochel was pe murhpe? 


pe pat fole makode. pe pat folk makede. 

& heo godd thonkeden Y and he® god ponkede ¥ 

mid peu-fulle worden. mid witfolle wordes. 

pat heo heora wil-da3es ¥ 

welden weoren. 20 

Heo funden i pon londe ¥ He® funde in pat lond ¥ [e. 2] 

twenti eotades ftronge. twenti eatantes. [telle 
Heoranomé ne herdi neuer tellen?Heore names ne herde ich neuere ! 
a leoda‘ ne a fpella. in bok no in fpelle. | 


played; ‘the water was most calm, the men were blithe’! The people 
voyaged, until they to land came, at Dartmouth in Totnes;—glad was 
Brutus of this! The ships ‘bite [smite] on the sand, ‘and all’ the folk 
went on [the] land. Then had Brutus the gift that Diana promised him, . 
in Logice the island, where they were arrived. Great was the mirth that 
the folk made, and they thanked God with ‘humble [prudent] words, 
‘that they their wished-for days enjoyed.’ They found in the land 
twenty ‘strong’ giants. Their names I heard never tell, ‘in song [in books] 
nor in speech, except the name of the one who was their chief lord, hight 


1 First written wile. 2 liSden? 3 hi? 4 leoSa? 


| 
| 
| 
a 


[v. 1804—1828.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


boten pes anes name Y 

pa heore alre lauerd wes. 
Geomagog ihaten / 

pat waf pe heihfte. 

Godes wiSer-faka ¢ 

pe wrfe hine luuede. 
Brutuf & his gode folc 
under-3eten peos feondes. 
& heora ftelane flon ¥ 
fufden to pon fedden. 10 
Pa flan heom weoren la®e ¥ 
& heo liéden to pon munté. 
& ipon wilderne 

an hudlefe wuneden. 

Hit ilomp on ane daje 
pat Brutuf & hif du3ede. 
makeden halineffe ’ 

mid wrfcipen he3en. 

mid mete & mid drinché ¢ 


& mid murie gleo-dreme. 20 


mid feoluer & mid golde ¥ 
pe elche bar an honde. 

mid horfen & mid fcruden ¥ 
bliffe wes on hirede. 

wes al pat folc fwa blide’ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


77 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xy11. 


bote pes ones name 
pat hire alre louerd was. 
- emagog ihote ¥ 
pat was .. ..htefte'. 
Godes wiper-fake 
pe wrfe ine® louede. 
Brut? and his gode folk 
vnder-3ede pes feondes. 
and hire ftelene flon 
fufden to ham. 
pe flon ham weren lope 
hii wende to pan hulles. 
and in pane wilderne 
hudlef i wonede®. 
It bi-ful in one daize 
pat Brutus and his do3epe. 
makede holyniffe ¥ 
mid worfipe he3e. 
mid mete and mid drinke : 
and mid murie gle-dremes. 
mid feold and mid golde¥ 
pat ech bar an honde. 


[ Ge]oma- 
88 


was al pat folk so blipe ’ 


Geomagog, who was the most powerful;—Gods adversary! the Worse 
loved him! Brutus and his good folk perceived these fiends, and dis- 
charged their steel arrows at ‘the fiends [them]. ‘The arrows were griev- 
ous to them, ‘and’ they withdrew to the hills, and in the wilderness ‘in’ 


caverns dwelt. 


It befell on a day, that Brutus and his people made holy 


rites with high worship ; with meat, and with drink, and with merry glee- 
sounds; with silver, and with gold, that each bare in hand; ‘ with horse, 


and with vestment ;—joy was among the people’! 


1 wihteste? 


2 hine? 


All the folk was so 


3 hi wonede? 


78 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 1829—1852.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

fwa heo neoren nauer er on liue. fo hi neren neuere her on liue. 

Pa comen pere twenti ?’ Po comen per twéti / 

teon of pan munten. teon fram pe hulles. 

eotendes longe ¥ eatates longe 

muchele & ftronge. mochele and ftrdge. 

Heo tujen alle to gadere Hii drowen alle to gaderes 7 

treon {wide muchele. treon {wipe mochele. 

heo leopen to Brutuf folke ¥ hii leopen to pan folke y’ 

per heo hurtes duden. and harmef hi wropte. 

In are lutle ftundeY {[c.2.] 1 Ina lutel wile’ 

heo flowen fif hundred. hii flo3ze fif hundred. 

mid ftocken & mid ftanen / mid ftockef an ftonef? 

{tal feht heo makeden. ftrang fiht hii makede. 

& pa Troynifce men And pe Troyniffe mé 


mid ftrengSe wenden a3ein. mid ftrengpe turden! a-3ein.. 
heo letten gliden heora flan’ _ hii letten gliden hire flon? 


& pa eatendes fluzen. and pe eatantes flowen. 

& heo letten heom to and hii lette gares glide 

geres liden. bi heore fide. 

Pa heo beft wende to fleonne ¥ 20 Po weren hii fwipe veie? 

pa weoren heo faie. pe eren® we... bolde. = [f.9. 1.) 
Pa nizentene heo flowen ¢ Pe ne3étene hi flozen 7 
Geomagog heo nomen. Gemagog hii nomen. 

& he quic wes ibroht and ewic ibropt was ¥ 


blithe as they never were before in life! Then came there twenty tall 
giants descending from the hills, mighty and strong! They carried all to- 
gether trees (clubs) most great; they leaped to ‘Brutus [the] folk, ‘there 
[and] harm they wrought. In a little while they slew five hundred; with 
stocks and ‘ with ’ stones strong fight they made. And the Trojan men with 
strength turned again; they let fly their arrows, and made the giants flee, 
and they let their darts glide ‘at them [by their side]. ‘Then they deemed it 
best to flee’; then were they [soon] destined-to-die, [who erst were bold! ] 
The nineteen theyslew; Geomagog they captured, and alive‘ he’ was brought 


 turnden? > ere? 


_ 


[v. 1853—1876.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


bi-foren Brutone. 

Brutuf hine lette witen 

wel mid pan befte. 

for to leten fondien ? 

of his main ftroge. 

to wreaftlene bi-foren Brutuf 
Geomagog and Corineuf. 
Brutuf hit demde 

uppen ere dune. 

vppen pere fie cliua ’ 10 
pat fole c6 to fonne'. 

For’ com Corineus 

& fufde hine fulfne. 

& pe eotend al fwa? 

pat alle hit bi-heolden. 

Per wes moni wepmon 

per wes moni wifmon. 

per wes muchel fole ¥ 

at pere wraftlinge. 

Heo 3eokeden heora earmes? 20 
& 3arweden heom feoluan. 
breofte wid breofte ¥ 

banes per crakeden. 

Heo fcuten heora fconké 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
bi-fore Brutune. 


and Brutuf hine lette witie / 


wel mid pa befte. 

fort lete fondien 

of his main ftronge. 

to wraxli to vore Brutus ¥ 
Gemagog and Corineuf. 
Brutuf hit demde 
vppen one doune. 

vppe par fé cleue ¥ 

pat folk was igadered, 
Forp com Corineus 
and fufde him feolue. 
and pe eatant al fo ¢ 

pat alle hit bi-heolde. 
par was mani wepman ‘ 
par was many wimmd. 
par was mochel folk : 

at pare wraxlinge. 

Hii 30gede hire harmes 
and greipede ham seolue. 
breoft wip breoft / 

bones par crakede. 

Hii foté hire legges ¢ 


before Brutus. Brutus caused him to be secured in the best manner, in order 
to make trial of his great strength; to wrestle before Brutus, Geomagog and 
Corineus. Brutus it judged upon a down, upon the sea-cliff the folk ‘came 
together [was gathered]. Forth came Corineus, and advanced himself, 
and the giant also, that all beheld it. There was many a man, there 
was many a woman, there was mickle folk at the wrestling! They yoked 
their arms, and made themselves ready; breast against breast—bones there 
cracked! They thrust out their ‘shanks [legs], the heroes were strong ! 


1 fomne ? 


80. LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


pa fealkas weoren ftronge. 
heo hurten heora hafden ’ 
heledes bi-heolden. 

Ofte heo luten a-di’ 

alfe heo wolden liggen. 
ofte heo up lupan ? 

alfe heo fleon wolden. 
laSliche leeches ” 


heo leiteSen! mid ezan. [f. 11. ¢.1.] 


al was heora griftbatinge? 10 
al fwa wilde bares e3e. 

Whil heo weoren blake 

& ladliche* iburfte. 

whil heo weoren riede ? 

& hehliche wenden. 

heora eiper wilnada® ¥ 

oSer to welden. 

mid wizeleden mid wrenchen ? 
mid wunderliche ftrengSen. 
Geomagog hine bi-pouhte? 20 


& pudde Corineum. 
frommard‘ his breofte ? 
& breid eft on 3ein. 


[v. 1877—1900.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


pe kempes weren ftronge. 


Ofte hi fulle a-dun / 
alfe poh hii wolde ligge. 
ofte hii vp leopen ? 

alfe poh hii flen wolde. 


Wile hii were blake / 
an lopliche of ewe. 
wile hi weren rede ¥ 
and he3eliche iwrappid. 
aiper wilnede oper? 
brigge to deape. 


Gemagog hine bi-pohte ” 
wat he don mihte. 

and prafte Corineum 
framward his breofte. 


‘ they dashed together their heads, the people beheld!’ Oft they fell down 
as [though] they would lie, oft they up leaped as [though] they would fly; 
‘loathly glances they flashed with their eyes! Their gnashing-of-teeth 
was all as the wild boars rage’! A while they were black, and loathly 
‘swollen [of hue], a while they were red, and highly enraged, either of 
them willed (endeavoured) the other fo ‘conquer [bring to death], ‘ with 
wiles, with stratagems; with wondrous strength’! Geomagog bethought 
him [what he might do], and thrust Corineus from off his breast, ‘and eft 
drew him back,’ [and] broke him by the back four of his ribs; evilly he 
5 wilnade? ‘ fromward? 


1 leiteden? 2 R. ladliche. 


[v. 1901—1924.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
brac hi bi pon rugge 
feower of hif ribben. 
vfele he hine merde 


ah na wiht he hit ne mende. 


Ful lutel per wees wone ? 
pat Corine® naf ouer-come. 
Neopelas he hine bi-poute ‘ 
wat he don mahte. 

nod him heorte to 

& ftreahte hif ermes. 

& breid Geomagog ‘ 

pat hi pe rug for-berft. 
igrap hine bi pon gurdle ¥ 
& him grimliche heaf. 
Wes pa clude fwide heh’ 
per heo acliue fuhten. 
Corineuf hine felde 

& hine fufde mid meine. 
aduneward pa clude y 

pat his ban to-cluuen. 

pat al pe feond to-barft ¥ 
zr he to folde come. 

& pus pe he3e fcade y 
ferde to helle. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


81 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


and brac him bi pan rugge?’ 
four of his ribbes. 

vuele he hine a-morde ? 

ac noht hine! ne mende. 
Fol lutel par was wone 
pat Corineus nas ouercome. 
Nopeles he hine bi-pohte: [c.2.] 
don wat he mihte. 

nam him heorte to 7 

and ftrengpede his harmes. 
and breid Gemagog ¢ 

pat his rugge a two barft. 
igrop hine bi pan gurdle ¥ 
and hine mainliche heof. 
Was pe cleue fwipe heh ¥ 
ware anoppe hii fohte. 
Corineus hine a-fulde ¢ 
and fufde mid maine. 

and cafte hine 

adun mid pe cleue. 

pat al he to-barft ” 

here he to grunde come, 


him marred, but ‘no whit [nought] he ‘it’ minded. There was full little 
wanting, that Corineus was not overcome. Nevertheless he bethought him 
what he might do; took to him heart, and ‘stretched out [strengthened] 
his arms, and hugged Geomagog so that ‘the [his] back ‘to him’ broke 
{in two]; grasped him by the girdle, and ‘grimly [forcibly] heaved him up. 
The ‘rock [cliff ] was most high, where ‘on the cliff [above] they fought. 
Corineus him felled, and hurled ‘ him’ with strength ‘downward the rock 
{and cast him down from the cliff], ‘so that his bones cleaved asunder,’ 
that ‘the fiend [he] all broke in pieces ere he to the ground came; ‘and 
thus the mighty wretch went to hell!’ Now and evermore hath the cliff 


1 he? 
G 


Albion. 


82 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 1925—1949.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1. 
Nu & euer mare? Nou and euere more 
haue® pat clif pare. hauep pat clef pare. 
nome on elche leode ¥ name of pan hif i-cleped Y 
pat } weos Geomagoges lupe. _ pis his Gemagog his leope. 
& mid fwilce rede and mid soche reade / 
paf eotentes weoren deade. peos eatantes weren deade. 
Nu wes al pis lond’ Nou was al pis lond ’ 
iahned a Brutuf hond. hi-fette Brutus an hond. 
Pa hefde pa Troinisce men ? [c.2.] Po hafde pe Troyniffe men / 
ouer-comen heora teoné. 10 ouercome hire teone. 
pa weoren heo bliée ¥ po weren hii blipe 
on heora breoft-ponke. ine piffe liue. 
pa makeden heo hus ¥ po makeden hii hus? 
& heledes! fikere. and weren {wipe fikere. 
Heo makeden tunes ? Hii makede tounes ” 
heo tileden on eorden. an tylede pe erpe. 
cornes heo feowen ? cornes ifewen® ¥ 
medewen heo meowen. medewes hii mewen. 
al heo tileden 
afe heo to pohten®. 20 
for al hit wes heora ajen ’ for al hit was hir owene / 
pat heo ouer fezen. pat hii ouer fezen. 
pif lond was ihaten Albion ¥ Pis lond was ihote Albion ’ 
pa Brutuf cum her on. po Brutus hereft here com. 
pa nolde Brutuf na mare ’ po nolde Brutuf na more ” 


there a name ‘in each people [of whom if is called], ‘that that was Geoma- 
goges [this is Gemagog his] Leap; and with such counsel these giants were 
dead. Now was all this land ‘possessed [set] in Brutus hand. When the 
Trojan men had overcome their sufferings, then were they blithe in ‘their 
breast-thought [this life]; then made they houses, and ‘the warriors (?) were 
[were most] secure. They made towns, ‘they [and] tilled ‘in [the] earth; 
corn ‘they’ sowed, meadows they mowed; ‘all they tilled, as to them seemed 
good’; for it was all their own, that they looked over. This land was named 
Albion, when Brutus [first] came here‘on’; then would Brutus, that it 


 heleSes weoren? ? hi fewen? 3 heom to pohte? 


[v. 1950—1972.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


pat hit fwa ihaten weore. 

ah feupte him nome ¥ 

efter him feluan. 

He wes ihaten Brutuf? 

pif lond he clepede Brutaine. 
& pa Troinifce men ¥ 

pa temden hine to herre. 
zefter Brutone ? 

Brutunf heom cleopede. 

& 3e5! pe nome lefted y’ 


& a fumme ftude cleouied? fafte. 


Brutuf 3ef Corineum 

pe wes his kempa denra*. 
ana dala of his londay 

& fette hit him an honda. 
Pe lauerd hehte Corineus ? 
& pat lond Corinee. 
SeodSen® purh pa leoden ¥ 
pe ipon londa weoren. 

heo clepeden hit Cornwaile ¥ 
purh heora fotliche cure. 
Heora ajeine fpeke Troinifce 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


pat hit ihote were. 

ac fipte him name? 
after him seolue. 

He was Brutus ihote 
pat lond Brutaine. 

and pe Troyniffe men 
pat makede hine loud. 
after Brutun 

Brutuns heom cleopede. 


Brutai{ne). 


10 and 3et pe name ileftep? [f.9%.c.1.] 


“ 


and etle more ftandep. 

rutus 3ef Corineum Y 

pat was his kempe deore. 

one deal of his londe 
and fettet* on his honde. 
Pe louerd hehte Corineus ¥ 
and pat lond Corinee. 
Seoppen porh pe leoden ‘ 
pe in pan léde weren. 
hi hit cleopede Cornwale 
and pus turne® pe name. 
Hire o3ene fpeche Troyiniffe ¥ 


Corinee. 


&7 feoSSen heo hit cleopeden feoppe hii cleopede Bruttiffe. 


Brutunife. 


were no more ‘so’ called, but shaped to it a name after himself. He was 
named Brutus, ‘this [the] land ‘he called’ Britain; and the Trojan men, 
that ‘appointed [made] him ‘for’ lord, after Brutus called themselves 
Britons; and yet the name lasteth, and ‘in some stead cleaveth fast 
{evermore standeth]. Brutus gave Corineus, who was his dear warrior, 
one part of his land, and set it ‘to him in [in his} hand. The lord 
hight Corineus, and the land Corinee. Afterwards through (by means 
of) the people who were in the land, they called it Cornwall, ‘through 
their foolish choice [and thus turneth the name]. Their own Trojan 


3 deora? 
7 Redundant? 


2 R. cleouie’d. 
® turnep? 


1 Sic pr. m. 3ed sec. m. by erasure. F. jet. 
‘ fette hit? 5 R, seodSen. 
G2 


84 LA3AMONS BRUT. {v. 1973—1995.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xi. 


ahEnglifcemen hithabbed' awend ‘ac Engliffemen hithabbep iwende/ 
seodden Gurmund com in pif lond. seoppe Gormund com to piffe lond. 


Gurmun{@}. Gurmund draf out pe Brutunf? Gormund drof vt pe Brutiis Y 


Angles. 


Englifce. 


& his fole wes ihaten Sexunf. —_and cleopede his men Saxuns. 

of ane ende of Alemaine ? of hd hende of Alemayne 
Angles wes ihaten. —_[f.11*c.1.) Engles was ihoten. 

of Angles comen Englifce men ? of Engle com Engleffemen ? 

& Engle-lond heo hit clepeden. and Engelond hit cleopede. 
paEnglifce ouer-comé pe Brutunf:pe Engles ouer-come pe Brutuns ¥ 
& brouhten heom per neoSere. 10 and brohte heom vnder fote. 

pat neofer feodSen heo ne arifen y pat neuere seoppe hii na refé / 


ne herreden funden. ne redef ne funde. 
Brutaine hefde Brutufy Brutayne hafde Brutus / 
& Cornwaile Corineus. and Cornwale Corineus. 
Brutus nom alle his freond Brutus nom alle his freondes ” 
pe comen in his ferde. pat come in his ferde. 
neh him he heom lende nep him he 3am lende 
for heo him leofe weoren. for hii him leof were. 
Corineuf him cleopede toy Corine® him cleopede to ¥ 
alle his icorene. 20 al his icorene. 

alle he heom lende Y and alle he ham lende’ 
per heom wes alre leofeft. par ham lieueft weren. 


Weox pet folk & wel ipaih Wex pat folk an wel ipeh ? 


speech afterwards they called ‘it’ British; but English men have it 

, after Gurmund came ‘in [to] this land. Gurmund drove out the 
Britons, and ‘his folk was named [called his men] Saxons, from one end 
of Alemaine (Germany), that Angles was named; from Angles came En- 
glish men, and England ‘they’ it called. The English overcame the 
Britons, and brought them ‘there beneath [under foot], so that never since 
they arose, nor counsels found. Brutus had Britain, and Corineus Corn- 
wall. Brutus took all his friends, who came in his army; nigh him he 
stationed them, for they were dear to him. Corineus called to him all his 
chosen men; [and] he placed them all where to them it was most 
desirable. The people increased, and throve well, for each had his will; 


4 R. habbet. 


[v. 1996—2019.] 


MS. Cott. Calig: A. rx. 


for ele hefde his iwillen. 

inne lut 3eren firfte ” 

wes } folc fwa muchel. 

pat per naf nan ende 

of folke {wipe hende. 

Brut? hine bi-pohte y 

& pis fole bi-heold. 

bi-heold he pa muntes 

feire & muchele. 

bi-heold he pa medewan? 10 
} weoren {wide mere. 

bi-heold he pa wateres ¥ 

& pa wilde deor. 

bi-heold he pa fifches 

bi-heold he pa fu3eles. 

bi-heold he pa lefwa? pay. 
& pene leofliche wode. [bleou’ 
bi-heold he pene wode hu he 
bi-heold he } corn hu hit greu ¥ 
al he ifeih on leodé ’ 20 
pat him leof waf on heorten. 

Pa bi-pohte he on Troy3en ¥ 

per his cun teone poleden. 

and he lidSe* 3eond pis lond ¢ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 85 


MS. Cott. Otho, C; x111. 


for ecche hadde his wille. 
in leitel forfte ¥ 

was pat folk so mochel ¥ 
pat ner! nas non hende. 


Brutus bi-heolde pis muntef? 
faire pat weren. [c.2.] 
bi-heolde he pe medewes 

pat weren fwipe fwete. 
bi-heold heo? pe wateres ¥ 


bi-heold he pe fifcis. 
bi-heold he pe foweles ? 
bi-held he pe lefewes. 
and pane leofliche wode 
bi-heold ou he bloude. 


al pat he of feeh Y 

leof him was on heorte. 

po bi-pohte ke on Troye / 

par his cun teone polede. 

and he wende ouer al pis lond / 


in ‘few years [little] time the folk was so mickle, that there was no end 
‘of people most good. Brutus bethought him, and this folk beheld’; ‘he 
[Brutus] beheld ‘the [these] mountains, [that were] fair ‘and lofty’; he 
beheld the meadows, that were most ‘spacious [sweet]; he beheld the 
waters, ‘and the wild deer’; he beheld the fishes; he beheld the fowls; he 
beheld the leasowes, and the lovely wood; ‘ he’ beheld ‘ the wood,’ how it 
blowed ; ‘ he beheld the corn, how it grew’ ;—all [that] he viewed ‘in the 
country, that’ was dear to him in heart. Then bethought he on Troy, 
where his kindred suffered evil, and he journeyed over [all] this land, 
and viewed the country. He found a winsome spot, upon (adjacent to) 


1 per? 2 he? 3 liSde? 


st 


Lud king. 


86 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 2020—2043.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
and fewede pe leode. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
& feewede pea leoden. 


He funde wunfi ane ftude Y He funde wonfom one ftude 
vppen ane watere. vppe one watere. 

per he gon areren y [c.-2.] par gan arerey 

riche ane burhe. one borh riche. 

mid bouren & mid hallen Y mid boures and halles ; 

mid he3e ftan walle. mid gode fton walles. 

Pa pe burh wes i-maked Po pe borh was imakid y 


pa wes he fwiSe mare. heo was fwipe deore. 
Pa burh wes {wide wel idon? 10 Pe borh was {wipe wel idon y 


& he hire fette name on. and he hire fette name on. 
he 3ef hire to hire t?fulne! name y he 3af hire dereworpe name ¥ 
Troye pe Newe. Troye pe Neouwe. 

to munien his ikunde ¥ to mini3i® his cunde 


whone he icomen weore. wanene he hi-comen were. 
SodSen pa leodene Seoppen pe leodfolk ¥ 
longe per after. fone par after. 

leidé adun pene noma? leiden adun pane name ’ 


& Trinouant heo nemneden. and Trineavant hine hehte. 
Binnen feola witre : 2 Bi one feu3e winter y 

hit iwerd feod%en®. hit iwarp suppe. 

pat ares of Brutuf kunne pat aros of Brutus cun / 
pat wes an heh king. a fwipe riche king. 

Lud wes ihaten Lud was ihote 


a water; there ‘he’ began to rear a rich burgh, with bowers, and ‘ with’ 
halls, with ‘high [good] stone walls. When the burgh was made, ‘then’ 
was it most ‘spacious [dear]. The burgh was exceeding well made, 
and he set a name to it; he gave it ‘for its’ ‘glorious [a precious] name, 
Troy the New; to commemorate his lineage, whence he was come (de- 
rived). Subsequently the people ‘long [soon] thereafter laid down (dis- 
continued) the name, and Trinovant ‘they’ named [it]. ‘Within (in the 
interval of) many [By a few] winters afterwards it happened, that one arose 
of Brutus kin, ‘ who was’ a [most] ‘noble [powerful] king; he was named 


1 The first syllable ter is interlined by a second hand. ? munizie? * R, feoSten. 


——s 


[v. 2044—2067.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 87 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
pas burh he luuede fwide. pes borh he louede fwipe. 
pe king ipere burh wonede ’ 
{wide feola wintre. 
He lette heo' lude clepian Heo? lette loude cleopie ‘’ 
30nd his leod folke. ouer al his folke. 
hehte heo nénen Kaerlud hehte nény hine Kairlud 
efter pone kinge. after him seolue. 
SeodSen® com oper tir ¥ Suppe com oper tyr? 
& neowe tidinde. and niwe tidinge. 
pat men heo clepeden Lundin? pat men hit cleopede Lunden 
ouer al pas leode. 1 ouer al pe peode. 
Seodsen comen Englifce men? Seoppen come Engliffe men ’ 
& cleopedé heo Lundene. and cleopedehit Londene., [f.10.c.1.] 


SedSen* comen pa Frenfca par after come pe Frenfe ¥ 
pa mid fehte heo bi-wonnen. 
mid heora leodSeawe ¥ 


& Lundres heo hehten. and Lundres hit hehte. 

Puf if paf burh i-uaren Pus his pis borh ivare 

fedSen* heo ereft wes arered. feoppe he waf forft arered. Trinouant. 
pus is pis eit-lond ¥ 20 pus his pis eitlond/ Kairlud. 
i-gon from honde to hond. hi-go ..am honde to hond. Lundin. 
pet alle pa burh3es / pat alle .. ... ewes Y Lundene. 
pe Brutuf iwrohte. pat Brutus ....... Lundres. 
& heora noma gode and hire names .... 


Lud. This burgh he loved much; ‘the king dwelt in the burgh very many 
winters. He caused ‘it’ loudly to be proclaimed over [all] his people, 
ordered it to be named Kaerlud, after ‘the king [himself]. Afterwards came 
other dominion, and new customs, so that men called it ‘Lundin [Lunden], 
over all ‘this [the] country. Subsequently came English men, and called it 
‘Lundene [Londene]. ‘Afterwards [Thereafter] came the French,— who 
conquered it with fight,—with their country-manners, and Lundres it named. 
Thus has this burgh fared, since it first was reared; thus has this island 
passed from hand to hand, so that all the burghs that Brutus wrought, and 
their good names, that in Brutus day stood, are greatly destroyed, through 


1 hit? 2 he? 3 R, seodsSen, 4 R, sedSen. 


88 LA3AMONS BRUT, [v. 2068—2090.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


pa on Brut? dei ftode. 
beod {wide afelled 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


..t in Brutuf daize ftode. 
. -op swipe a-valled y 


purh warf of pon folke. [£12.c.1.] porh.... of pan folke. 

Pa Brutuf hefde imaked pa heh3e Po Brutu. ...de imaked pe he3e 
pa NeoweT°ie' was ihaten. [burh? pat Neou Troye was ihote. [bo.. 
&? he lette fufen par to ¢ he letten® fufen par to 
muchel of his folke. moche of his folke. 

He heom bi-tahte pa burh He bi-tahte 3am pe borh ’ 
& izearwed mid pan befte. igreiped mid pan befte. 

& he heom onleide ¢ 10 he fette par to lawes / 

pat weoren lawen gode. pat weren swipe gode. 

He hehte pat luue feolde He hehte pat lofe ¥ 

liSen* heom bi-tweonen. solde beo ham bi-twine. 

zlc halden oSren riht ” ech holde oper ript ¥ 

ba bi daie & bi nith. bope bi daize and bi nipt. 

& wea fwa nolde Y and wo fo nolde ¥ 

he fculde beon iwite. he folde hit ifrede. 

& fwa vfele he mihte don and fo vuele he mipte don / 
pat he fculde beon ihon. pat he folde beon an-on. 
For fwulchen eize gode 2 For soche bitere hefte ¥ 

heo hefden muchele drede. hii hafde. mochele drede. 

& bi-comen riht-wife men? and bi-comé ript-wife men ’ 
& redes heo luueden. and reades hii louede. 


change of the people! When Brutus had made the noble burgh, that was 
named New Troy, he caused much of his folk to proceed thereto. He com- 
mitted the burgh to them, ‘and’ prepared with the best; and he ‘laid on 
them [set thereto] laws, that were [most] good. He commanded that love 
should ‘pass [be] between them ; that each should hold others right, both by 
day and by night; and whoso would not, he should ‘be punished [feel it]; 
and so evilly he might act, that he should be hung. For (on account of ) 
such ‘good threats [sharp commands] they had much dread, and became just 
men, and counsel they loved. [Brutus] had this land four and twenty 


1 Added by second hand. * Redundant ? 
5 lette? * li¥em pr. man. 


[v. 2091—2115.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
Heefde pis lond / ({hond. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 89 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xm. 


H AfdeBrutus pislond?[hond. 


fourandtwenti winteronhis 
and bi Ignogen his ewene ¥ 
he hafde preo fones fcene. 
Po hire fader was dead ¢ 
alle hii neomen anne read. 
and hine burede 
ine pe Neuwe Troye. 
pat hire fader hafdeimakid [c.2.] 
mid mochelere bliffe. 
Seoppe pe preo bropers 7 
alle to gadere comen. 
mid fehte and mid lofe ” 
peos londef to-dealde. 
Pe eldeft broper 
Locrin was ihote. 
he was wis and war? 


fower and twenti winter on his 
& of Ignogen his quene 

he hefde preo funen feene. 

Pa heora fader wes dead 

alle heo nomé enne read. 

& hine bi-burien 

in Newe Troye pere burhje. 
 heora fader hefde imaked / 
mid muchelere bliffe. 10 
SedSen pa preo broveré ¥ 

hi to gadere comen. 

zl mid feahte & al mid luue ¥ 
pas leode to-deeldé. 

Pe eldefte broser ¢ 

Locrin wes ihaten. 

pe wes pe wifefte / 

pe wes pe warrefte. 


pe wes pe ftrengefte and ftrengeft of alle. 

ftif he wes on ponke. 20 

He heefde to dele pat fud lond ? He hafde to deale on his hond 
al to gadere pat sup lod. 


pat eefter him Locres wes icleped. pat after him seolue ? 
Locris was ihote. 


& Cambert hehte pe oder’ And Camber hehte pe oper 


winters in his hand, and ‘of [by] Ignogen, his queen, he had three fair 
sons. When their father was dead, they all took one counsel, and buried 
him in the ‘ burgh’ New Troy, that their father, with much joy, had made. 
Afterwards the three brethren, ‘they [all] together came; ‘all’ with con- 
cord and ‘all’ with love ‘this country [these lands] they divided. The 
eldest brother was named Locrin, ‘who was the wisest, who was the most 
prudent, who was the strongest [he was wise and wary, and strongest of 
all]; ‘ stiff (resolute) he was in thought’. He had for his share the south 
land [all together in his hand], that after him[self] was called Locres. 
And Camber hight the second, who was the middle brother; to him the 


Locrin, 


Camber. 


~ 


Galoes. 


Albanac. 


90 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 2116—2138.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

pat wes pe midlefte broSer. pat was pe middil broper. 

him pat lond to dale com him com pat londe to deale ¥ 

pat Cambrie wes ihaten. [c.2.] pat Combrop was ihote. 

pat is pat wilde lond ’ pat his pat wilde lond 

pat Welfce men luuied. pat Walfe men louiep. 

Sed%en! hit is icleped Wales: Seoppe hit was icleoped Wales : 

for pere quen Galoes. for pare cwene Galoes. 

& for pan duke Gualun / and for pe duk Walun 


Welsce men me heom hated. Walfe mé me heom hotep. 
Pe pridde broSer hehte Albanac? Pe pridde broper hehte Albanac 
feodsen Humber hine bi-fwac. 1: Humbert king hine bi-fwac. 


Albanac nom his lid? Albanac nam his deal Y 
i pon nor® ende. in pan norp hende. 

pat nu ure leodene ? pat pe men nou? 
Scot-lond clepia’. Scotlid cleopiep. 

ah Albanac on his daze y ac Albanac in his dai3ze / 


Albanie hit clepede. {ford Albanie hit hehte. 
Locrines mer eode fud & eaft Locrin his mer eode sup forp? 


Albanac hefde al pat nor®. and Locrin hafde alle pat norp. 
Camber hefde al him fulf’ 2 Camber hafde al him seolf 
bi westen Szeuarne. ; bi wefte Seuarne. 


Popa pre breSeren hefden pif lond ‘pus hi helde pis lond ’ 
pa luueden heom peos leoden. in hire owene hdd. 


land came for portion, that‘Cambrie [Combroth] was named, that is the wild 
land that Welsh men love. Afterwards it ‘is [was] called Wales, for (on 
account of) the queen Galoes; and for (on account of) the duke Gualun men 
call them (they are called) Welshmen. The third brother hight Albanac,: 
—‘ subsequently’ [king] Humber destroyed him. Albanac took his ‘land 
[share] in the north end, that now ‘our people [the men] call Scotland, but 
Albanac in his day called it Albanie. Locrines boundary went forth south 
‘and east’; ‘Albanac [and Locrin] had all the north; Camber had him- 
self all westward of Severn, ‘When the three brethren had [Thus they 
held] this land, ‘then loved them this people [in their own hand], with 


4 R. sed®en, 


[v. 2139—2162.] 


MS. Cott. Calig: A. 1x. 


mid fibben & mid fahten 
feouentene winter. 

4Efter feouentene 3ere Y 

fone per efter. 

cum liden to londe 

} wes an leodife king. 
Humber waf ihaten ’ 

king of Hunuze. 

vuele weoren his pewes 

his peines weoren kene. 10 
He hefde moni lond a-weft 
& leodene bi-fwikene. 

& moni hiidred eit-londe 

pa weoren bi fe ftronde. 
meften dal alle 

heonne to Alamaine. 

Humber king & al his fleote / 
& his muchele feip ferde. 
comen on Albanacles! londe ? 
& fuhten wid his leoden. 20 
mid fure & mid here 

mid feole kunne herme. 
Albanac him fufde to? 

mid muclan his ferde. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


mid fibbe and mid fehte 
fouentene wynter. 

After fouétene 3er ? 

fone par after. 

cé lipi to londe ¥ 

on leodene king. 

Humber was ihote 

king of Humbrie. 

vuele were his peuwes ¥ 

his men weren kene. 

He hafde mani lond a-woine y 
vnder pare fine. 

mani hundred eitlond ” 

pat weren bi fee ftrond. 
meftendel alle 

hinene to Alemaine. 
Humber king and his flote 
and his mochele ferde. 
comé on Albanac his lond ¥ 
and flozen peo leoden. 

mid fure and mid here’ 
and mid fale harmes. 
Albanac him fufde to’ 

mid mochele his ferde. 


91 


Humber. 


[f. 10% c.1.] 


peace and with amity, seventeen winters. After seventeen years, soon 
thereafter arrived in the land ‘ one that was’ a king of people (monarch) ; 
Humber fe was named, king of ‘Huns [Humbrie] ;—evil were his customs ; 
his ‘thanes [men] were keeu. ‘He had ‘wasted [conquered] many lands, 
‘and destroyed peoples [under the sun], ‘and’ many hundred islands, that 
were by the sea-strand; all the greatest part, from hence to Alamaine (Ger- 
many). King Humber and ‘all’ his fleet and his mickle ‘ship’-army 
came into Albanacs land, and ‘fought with his people [put the people to 
* flight), with fire, and with ravage, [and] with many ‘kind of’ harms. 
Albanac advanced towards him with his mickle army, and they came to- 


1 Albanakes? 


Humber. 


92 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 2163—2186.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xm. 
& heo to gadere comen ? [f12%.c.1.] and hii to gadere comen Y 
kempen per feollen. cniptes p” follen. 
Al Albanakes folc Al Albanackes folk 
folden i-fcohten. folle to grunde. 
buten while pat per at-wond:? —_bote woch him hudde? 
purh wode bur3e. in wode oper in borewe. 
& per was Albanac him feolf? and par was Albanac iflae ¥ 
i-flawen in pon fehte. in pan fibte. 


& fwlene herm in pon londe? and foch harm in pat londe y 
dude Humber pe ftronge. 10 dude Hibert pe ftronge. 
} fole pe on pan fehte at-wond Pat folk pe fcapie mihte’ 


fluzen of pan londe. flep vt of pan fihte. 

into Brut londe ¥ in to Brutlonde 

to Locrine pon ftronge. to Locrin pan ftronge. 
Heo feiden him to foe / Hii tolden him to fope ¥ 
forhfulle fpelles. forfolle fpelles. 


pat dead wes his broSer Albanac :/pat dead was his broper Albanac ? 
& hu Humber hine bi-fwac. and houhis broper' hine bi-fwoch. 


To gedere comé mid foe ¢ To gadere come mid fope ¥ 
} weoré pa tweiene broSeren. 20 pat weren pe twei broperes. 
Locrin & Camber / Locrin and Camber ? 

& al heora leoden. mid alle hire folke. 

mid alle pon kniten ’ and mid alle pe cniptes 
pe heo bizeten mihten. pat hii bi-3eten mihte. 


gether (encountered in battle) ;—warriors there fell! All Albanacs folk 
sought the [fell to] ground, except ‘those that there escaped through 
[those which hid themselves in] the wood, [or in] covert; and there was 
Albanac ‘himself’ slain in the fight; and such harm in the land did 
Humber the strong! The folk that ‘in the fight escaped [might escape], 
fled ‘from [out of] the land into Britain, to Locrine the strong. They 
‘said [told] to him in sooth sorrowful speeches; that dead was his brother 
Albanac, and how Humber destroyed him. Together came with truth 
(truly) the two brethren that were, Locrin and Camber, ‘and [with] all their 
people, [and] with all the knights that they might procure. They marched 


1 Evidently a blunder of the scribe. 


[v. 2187—2209.} LA3AMONS BRUT. | 93 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS, Cott. Otho, C. xu 
Heo ferden toward Humber? Hii verde toward Humbert ’ 
mid haere ftrengSe. mid e3ere ftrengpe. 


& Humber wes fwa fwide wod? and Humbert was so fwipe wod / 
for al pat lond on him ftod. for pat lond on his hond ftod. 


he ferde ouer Scotte water? he verde ouer pat water 

mid alle his welkempan. mid alle his cniptef. 

& mid bifie ifihte / mid bufie fipte ? 

Brut lond heo wolden iwinnen. Brutlond wolde a-winne. [c.2.] 
Locrin & Camber Locin and Camber ? 

comen heom to-3eines. 10 comen him to-3eines. 

heo ftureden heora wepnany _hii ftoreden hire wepne y 

wane wes on folke. for hii were abolwe. 

per Humber ferde to balue: — par Hibert ferde to balue ’ 

& Bruttuf weoren blive. and Bruttef weren blipe. 

Al his fole he lofede per Alh.. folk he lofede per? 

purh Locri! & Camber. | Oran n and Camber. 

& him feolf mid wene ANG Be steno onnepe ¥ 

ferde into ane watere. flehinto..... 

per inne he adronc ’ par ine he a-dreint ’ 

& mid him muchel fole. 2 and moche of his folke. 

For Humber kinges deaSe. =... mbert kinges deape 7 
Humbre was ihaten. [[e-2] ....re hit hatte. [1] umber. 


Haber wid? fwide mucle an here Y 


towards Humber with mighty strength; and Humber was so exceeding wrath, 
because ‘all’ the land ‘in (under) him [in his hand] stood, that he passed 
over ‘Scotte [the] water (the Scottish sea), with all his ‘warriors [knights], 
‘and with busy fight Britain ‘they’ would conquer. Locrin and Camber 
came against ‘them [him]; they stirred their weapons, ‘destruction was 
among the people! [for they were incensed]. There Humber went to bale, 
and Britons were blithe. All his folk he lost there, through Locrin and 
Camber, and himself with difficulty ‘went [fled] into a water, wherein he was 
drowned; and with him much [of his] folk. For king Humbers death, 
Humber ‘was it called [it hight]. ‘Humber with a most mighty army had 


1 R. Locrin. 2 R. wid. 


94 _ LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 2210—2232.} 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 


in Alemaine hefde iher3ed. 
& hefde pat lond {wide aweft 
& pat fole {wide awemmed. 


He nom of pan mokunne Y Humbert bro .. mid him 
preo fwiSe feire mzidene. preo faire mayden. 

peo an wes ihaten Aftrild ¥ pe on was ihote Eftrild ¥ 
anes hah3es kinges dohter. one e3e kingef dopter. 

pa alre feirefte wifmon pe alre faireft wimman 

pe pa wunede on folke. pat po wonede on folke. 

Pas meidenes weora i pan fcipé ¥ Peos maydenes weren ine fipe ¥ 
mid Humbres monnen. n mid Humbert his mé. 

pe wufte Humberef fei? pat wifte Humbert his feo 
pe whilen he wende to fehten. _ pe wile he eode to fihte. 

Pa Hiber waf dead’ po Hibert was dead’ 

in Humbre adrunken. ine Humbrie adronke. 
Locrin & Camber Locrin and Camber 

to pon fcipé comen. to pan fipes come. 

for to habben al pa ehte for habbe alle pe heahte Y 

pe Humber king aute. pat Humbert king ahte. 
Imong pon fcipmonnen?’ 2% Among pe prenge of fipmen ¥ 
i! funden pa preo maidenes. hii funde peos maydenes. 
Locrin ifeh per A®ftrild Y Locrin ifeh Eftrild ¥ 


& he heo leofliche bi-heold. and he hire leofliche bi-heold. 


made war in Alemaine, and had grievously wasted the land, and the people 
greatly injured’. ‘He took of the inhabitants [Humbert brought with him] 
three ‘ most’ fair maidens; the one was named Astrild, a noble kings daugh- 
ter; the all-fairest woman that then dwelt on earth. These maidens were in 
‘the’ ships with ‘Humbers [Humbert his] men, who took charge of ‘Humbers 
{Humbert his] treasure, the while he went to battle. When Humber was 
dead, in the river Humber drowned, Locrin and Camber came to the ships, 
for to have all the goods that king Humber possessed. Among the (throng 
of] shipmen [they] found ‘the three [these] maidens. Locrin ‘there’ saw 
€strild, and he beheld her lovingly, and he took her with arms (embraced 


1 heo? 


[v. 2233—2256.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


& he heo mid armen inom / 
ed him wes on heorten. 

& he hire to feide’ 

fel pe fcal iwurSen ¥ 

wifmon pu eart hende 

& ic pe wile habben. 

mid wurdfcipen he3e ¥ 

to richen are quene. 

pa while pe ic libbe¥ 

oder nulle ic habben. 10 
for pe ic am fwa blidey 

fwa nes i neuer er on liue. 
Pa 3et leouede Corineuf 

pe in Cornwaile wes dux. 
nefde he bute ene dohter ? 

ah heo wes him {wide deore. 
Locrin him hefde on foreward ¥ 
habben pat he heo wolde. 

& he heo hefde i hond feft! 
at-foren his hired monnen. 20 
ah for Aiftrilde luuey [£13.c.1.] 
he heo wolde bi-leuen. 

pis iherde Corineuf 

pe wes in Cornwaile dux. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 95 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xrrt. 


and he hire mid harmes nam 
glad he was on heorte. 
He to hire feyde 

wel pe fal bi-tyde. 
woman pou hart hende 
and ich pe wolle habbe. 
mid worfipe e3e 

to mine o3ene cwene. 
pe wile pat ich libbe :’ 
oper nele ich habbe. 

for pe ich ham fo blipey 
fo nas ich neve on liue. 

E 3et lieuede Corineus? [f11.c.1.] 
~ pe ine Cornwale was dux. 
nafde he bote one dohter 
ac 3e0 was him {wipe deore. 
Locrin was on foreward 
hire habbe to wife. 
and he hire hafde treoupe i-plipt ¢ 
bi-fore alle alle* his monnen. 
ac for Eftrildes loue 
he hire wolde bi leue. 
pis i-herde Corineus ¥ 
pat was in Cornwale dux. 


her) ; ‘joy was to him [glad he was] in heart ; ‘and’ he said to her: ‘Good 
shall come to [Well shall betide] thee; woman thou art comely; and I will 
have thee with high honor for ‘a noble [mine own] queen; the while that I 
live other will I not have; for thee (on thy account) I am so blithe, as I 
never was before in life!”” Corineus then yet lived, who in Cornwall was 
duke; he had but one daughter, but she was most dear to him. Locrin 
‘had him [was] in covenant, ‘that he would have her [to have her for 
wife], and he had her ‘in hand-fast [troth plighted], before [all] his ‘ house- 
hold’ men; but for A®strildes love he would her desert. Corineus heard 
this,—who was duke in Cornwall,—that his loved daughter was hateful to 


1 See Notes. 2 Sic. 


= 


96 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


pet his leoue dohter ¥ 

wes Locrin at-laded. 
Corineus wes un-ede ? 

& wa on his mode. 

he ferde to piffe londe 
pat he com to Locrine. 
he leedde on his exle?’ 4, 
ane muchele wi-eax. 

He ftod bi-foren Locrine ‘’ 
& laSelich him lokede on. 
& pas word him iqued 
Corineuf pe kempa. 

Seie me Locrin 

saie me leSe mon. 

saie me pu ebure fot? 
seorwe pe beod geuese. 

ne fcal pe nan man feilden ¥ 
wid fcondliche dease. 

pu haueft mine dohter 
pat if mi bearn deore 

& me feolfan ifcéd 

per fore pu fealt ferinkin. 
Ic liSde mid pine fader ? 
& ledde his ferde. 


[v. 2257—2280.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


pat his leofe dopter 
was Locrin a-loped. 
Corineus was anued 
and wo on his mode. 

he verde to piffe londe ’ 
toward Locrine. 

he ladde bi his harfun ¥ 
one gifarme ftronge. 

He ftod bi-fore Locrin ? 
and lopliche him lokede an. 
and pes word feide ?’ 
Corineus pe kempe. 

Sei me Locrin 

sei me lope man. 

sei me ebare fol ¥ 

forwe pe his 3eue. 

ne fal pe no man fildey 
fram findliche deape. 
Pou haueft mine dopter ?’ 
pat his me leof! deore. 
and mi feolue ifend ” 
par fore pou falt de3e. 
Ich was mid pine fader ? 
and ladde his ferde. 


Locrin, Corineus was uneasy, and sorrowful in his mood; he proceeded 


to this land, ‘until he came to [towards] Locrin; he carried ‘on his 
shoulder [by his saddle-bow] a ‘mickle battle-axe [strong gisarm]. He 
stood before Locrin, and loathly looked on him, and these words to 
him ‘quoth [said] the champion Corineus: ‘Say me, Locrin, say me, 
hateful man, say me, ‘thou’ manifest fool,—sorrow shall be given to 
thee!—no man shall shield thee from a shameful death! Thou hast my 
daughter, that is ‘my dear child [dear to me], and myself insulted, there- 
fore thou shalt die! I ‘journeyed [was] with thy father, and led his 


? Redundant ? 


[v. 2281—2304.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 97 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x, MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

moni fwine moni fwet : moni fwine mani fwot ¥ 

monine' feorhfulne plei3e. 

moni grimne reas ¥ mani grim refes. 

moni greatne dunt. 

moni ane wnde moni ane wonde : 

moni wnderlic feht. mani ane grete fiht. 

polede ich on folde polede ich in velde ¥ 

bi-foren Brutone. bi-fore Brutone. 

pe wes mi deore wine ¥ pat was mi louerd deore. 

mi drihliche lauerd. 10 

Per fore pu fealt beon feie ¥ Par fore pou falt dea3e ¥ 

for nes he neuer pi fader. for he nas neuere pi fader. 

for 3if pu were Brut? fune ¥ for 3if pou were Brutus hif fone 

ne deodeft pu me nane feeome. ne dudeft pou neve me pe fame. [c.2.] 

For his luue moni eotend ¥ For his loue many eatant 

ic leide dead a pene grid. ich leide dead in pane grunde. 

an pu mi muchele fwine ¢ and pou mi mochele fwinch 

mid fare for3eldeft. mid harme wolt 3elde. 

bi-leafest feier & fceone ‘ bi-leuest fair and fcene ¥ 

mine dohter Guendoleine. 20 mine dohter Gwendoleine. 

for alpeodife meiden for one aluif maide ¥ 

4Estrild ihate. Eftrild ihote. 


pu naft of whulche londe 
heo com héder liden. [c.2.] 


army; many swink, many sweat, ‘many sorrowful-play (combat),’ many 
grim onset, ‘ many mighty blow,’ many a wound, many ‘wondrous [a great] 
fight, I endured in the field before Brutus, who was my dear ‘friend, my 
noble’ lord. Therefore thou shalt die, for he was never thy father; for if 
thou were Brutus [his] son, thou wouldst [never] do to me ‘no [the] shame. 
For his love many giant I laid dead on the ground, and thou wouldst repay 
my great labor with injury; wouldst desert my fair and beauteous daugh- 
ter Guendoleine for [a] foreign maiden, named Aéstrild! Thou knowest not 
‘from what land she arrived hither,’ ‘nor what king [who] is her father, 


? monnie? moni ane? 


2 


98 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 2305—2328.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 

ne whulc king if hire fader y Pou noft wo his hire fader ? 

ne whule quen hire moder. ne wo hif hire moder. 

Ah pu fealt habben for hire luue ? Ac pou falt habbe for hire loue ¥ 

pat pe is alre la®eft. pat pe his alre lopeft. 

pat al pu fealt to-feene pat al pou falt to-fene ¥ 

mid fcearpe mire eaxe. mid mine gifarme. 

Corineuf up ahof ¥ Corineuf vp heof? 

& his eax adi floh. his dunt fwipe heh. 


and fmat in enne muchele ftane ?and fmot in one ftone 
per Locrin ftod vuenan. 10 par Locrin ftod vuena. 


pe ftan al to-fceande ¥ pat pe fton al to-brac 

& Locrin at-fturte. and Locrin a-ftorte. 

Alle heo! hizeden to ¥ Alle hizede to y 

an elcher halfe. on euereche halue. 

& to-deleden heom atwa? and to-dealde heom a two 
teona wes on hirde. teone was on folke. 

per wes moni hah word. 

& pa alre felefte / 

eoden to fumne. Pe men to gaderef eode 
hulden muchel hufting ¥ 2 an eolde confeil grete. 

pa hehfte of pan hirde. pe hehtefte*® of pan londe ¥ 
pat heo nolden ipolian ¥ 

for alpeodene gold. 

pat peos laSSe weore ’ pat par lop were. - 


nor ‘what queen [who is] her mother. But thou shalt have for her love 
what is to thee most loathful; that thou shalt be hewn all to pieces with my 
‘sharp axe [gisarm]!” Corineus heaved up, ‘and his axe swung down [his 
blow most high], and smote ona ‘ mickle’ stone, whereupon Locrin stood ; 
[so that] the stone brake all to pieces, and Locrin started back. All hastened 
towards ‘them’ on ‘each [every] side, and parted them in two (from each 
other)—strife was among the people; ‘there was many high word’! And the 
‘best of all [The men] assembled, [and] held a great ‘husting [council], the 
highest of the ‘people [land]; ‘that they would not suffer for foreign gold,’ 


1 heom? 2 hehefte? 


[v. 2329—2351.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


bi-tuxe Corineo & Locrine. 
Ah we willed reden / 

& we willed runan. 

pat weo nimen Wendoleine 
Locrine to are quene. 

& halden alle vre aes : 
bi-twux Corineo & Locrine. 

& halden hiredes luue ’ 

mid foSfaften huize. 

& fenden Mstrilde / 10 
vt of piffen londe. 

& Locrin pif biluuede 

for hit wes his leodene read. 
He nom Guendoleine ’ 

& hefde heo to wiueY 

& he hit feide Y 

fod peih hit nere. 

he wolde A&strilde ¥ 

fenden vt of londe. 

Ah ne dude he nawiht fwoy 20 
for fwiken he pohte. 

ah he nom his enne hired mon Y 
pe he wel trowede on. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 99 


MS, Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


bi-twixte Corineus ? and Locrine. 
Ac we wollep reade ¥ 

and we wollep rouni. 

pat we nime Gwendoleine 
Locrin to cwene. 

and holde alle hure opes ¥ 
bi-twixte Locrin and Corines. 


and Estrilde fende 

vt of piffe londe. 

Locrin ipaid was ¥ 

for wife men radde. 

He nam Gwédoleyne 
to ezere cwene. 

and he feide ¥ 

fop poh hit neare. 

pat he wolde Eftrilde 
driué vt of londe. 

Ac he ne dude noht so” 
for fwike he pohte. 

ac he namonehired man Y [f.11°.¢.1.] 
pat wel he trefte con!. 


that ‘for this [there] should be enmity between Corineus and Locrin. “But 
we will counsel, and we will consult, that we take Gwendoleine for ‘a’ queen 
to Locrin, and hold all our oaths betwixt Corineus and Locrin, ‘ and hold the 
peoples love with soothfast pledge,’ and send A®strild out of this land.” 
‘And’ Locrin ‘approved this [was contented], for ‘it was his peoples counsel 


[wise men counselled]. He took Gwendoleine, ‘and had her for wife [for @ 


noble queen], and he ‘it’ said,—sooth though it were not,—that he would 
‘send [drive] Aéstrild out of the land. But he did‘no whit [not] so, for he 
thought to deceive; but he took a domestic ‘of his’ that he well ‘trust- 
ed on, and ordered him most still (secretly) to steal out of the ‘court 


1 on? 
H 2 


100 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 2352—2376.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


& hehte hine {wide ftille ’ 
fteolen vt of hirede. [[£13°.c.1.] 
& hehte hine faré to pon tune?’ 
pe Trinouant wes ihaten. 

pe wes on vre leoden ? . 
Lundene ihaten. 

& par an hizinge? 

purh ut alle pinges. 

makian an eord-huf? 

eadi & feier. 10 
pe walles of ftone ? 

pe duren of whales bone. 

& pat inne fwiSe feire ftude ¢ 
from focne pes folkes. 

& dude per inne muchel col ¥ 
& clades inowe. 

pelles & purpras ¥ 

& guldene ponewees. 

muchel win muchel wex ? 
muchel wunfum ping. 20 
& feodS8é ford rihtes ¥ 

wende al bi nihte. 

& mid ftilliche ginne ¥ 

brohte Aést'ld per inne. 

Pus dude pes riche mon ¥ 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1. 


and hehte him fwipe ftille ¥ 
ftelé vt of halle. 

and to pan toune wende ¥ 
pat Trinouand waf inemdid'. 
pat his in oure leode ¥ 
Londene ihote. 


and maki on erphus ¥ 
eadi and riche. 

pe walles of ftone ? 

pe dores of wales bone. 


and do par ine mochel col ¥ 
and clopes inowe. 
palles and purpres ¥ 

and guldene panewes. 
mochel win mochel wex ¥ 
manie richedomes. 

and fuppe forp rihtef¥ 
wend al bi nipte. 

mid ftillige gynne ? 

and brig Eftrild par ine. 
pus dude pis riche man 


[hall]; and ‘ bade him’ go to the town that Trinovant was named, that ‘was 
[is] in our language called London, and ‘there in haste throughout all 
things’ make an earth-house, beautiful and ‘fair [noble]; the walls of 
stone, the doors of whales-bone; ‘and that in a most fair place, out of the 
search of the people’; and place therein much coal, and clothes enow 
(plenty); palls and purples, and golden pennies(?) ; much wine, much wax, 
‘much winsome thing [many rich things]; and afterwards forth-right go 
all by night, ‘and’ with secret craft, [and] bring strild therein. Thus 


1 inemnid? 


<a 


[v. 2377—2399.] 


MS. Cott. Calig., A. rx. 
{wa Locrin hine hefde ihaten. 
for euer ule god mon / 
ah his lauerdes hefte to don. 
Seouen 3er wes Aftrild / 


i piffen eord-hufe. [dore ¥ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 101 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
afe he was ihote. 
for euerech god mon ¥ 
mot his louerdes his’ don. 
Seue 3er was Atftrild Y 
in piffe erphufe. [dore ¥ 


pat neuer ne ferde heo wid uten pat neve ne verde 3e hut at pe 


ne na mon heo per nufte. 
buten pe king Locrin ¥ 

& his iueré mid him. 10 
Ponne he to Trinouant wéde ¥ 
penne feide he to Wendoleine. 


ne no ma hire pare nufte.. 
bote pe kig Locrin ¥ 

and his derne cnipt mid him. 
Wane to Trinouat wende ’ 
to Gwendoleine he feide. 


pat he wolde beon feoueniht pre ¥ pat he wolde feouenipt / 


& his godd hure. 

inne dizelneffe / 

& elles he ne durfte. 

pat ei mon wufte ¥ 

whet he per fohte. 
Guendoleine him ilefede ¥ 
ludSere weren his craftes. 20 
Pus ferde Locrin pe wilde ¥ 
pat Aitrild wes mid childe. 

& Guendoleine al fwa’ 

mid childe heo weren ba twa. 


par his god herie. 

ine dizelniffe / 

and elles he ne dorfte. 

pat heni man wifte ’ 

wat he pare fohte. 
Gwendoleine i-lefde 

alle his craftes. 

puf ferde Locrin pe wilde ’ 
pat Eftrild was mid childe. 
and Gwendoleine al fo” 
mid childe hii weren bope two. 


did this noble man, as ‘Locrin him had [he was] ordered ;—for every good 
man his lords hest ‘ought to [must] do. Seven years was Astrild in this 
earth-house, so that she never went ‘without [out at the] door, nor any 
man knew her ¢o be there, except the king Locrin, and his ‘companions 
[privy knight] with him. When ‘he’ to Trinovant went, ‘then’ said 
he to Gwendoleine, that he would ‘be’ there seven nights ‘and’ wor- 
ship his god in secrecy; and else (otherwise) he durst not, that any man 
wist what he there sought. Gwendoleine believed ‘him; wicked were [all] 
his crafts! So acted Locrin the wild, that Astrild was with child, and 
Gwendoleine also; with child they were both two. A daughter had 


1 heste? 


Madan. 


102 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 2400—2423.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


Ane dohter hefde Alftrild One doht” hafde EftrildY — [c.2.] 
inne pon eorS-hufe. {lawen y in pan erphufe. 

pe king heo lette fulwen efter pon i-folled 3e was in pan laze ¥ 

pe ftoden a pon ilke dawen. [c.2.] pat ftode bi pe ilke daize. 

heo wes ihaten Abren 3e was ihote Abren 

nes feirure child nan. nas fairere child non. 

& Guendoleine hefde enne fune * And Gwendoleine anne fone ¥ 
an heorte hire wes pa bet. pe gladdere 3e was on heorte. 
Madan he waf ihaten ’ Madan he was ihote ¥ 

heh fune pes kinges. 10 e3e fone peos kinges. 

Pis child weox & wel ipei / pis child wex and wel ipeh ? 
& al folk hit wes leof. and alle men hit was leof. 

Pa he cu’e gan & fpeken! Po he cupe gon? 


& fpeken wid folke. and fpeke wid? pan folke. 
pe king Locrin hine né pe king Locrin nam / 

hif feire fune Madan. his faire fone Madan. 

& to Corinee hine fende and to Corineus him fende y 
in to his londe. in to hif londe. 

pat he hine fculde wel i-teon? pat he hine folde witie ¥ 

& tuhlen him teachen. 20 and manfcipe teche. 

& fwa he dude mid meine ’ and fo he dude mid maine 


pa while pe he mihte. 
Pa com pe time gliden ‘ 
pa ele monne abide’. 


pe wile pat he mihte. 


po com pe tyme glide ¥ 
pat ech man mot abide. 


Estrild, in the earth-house; ‘the king caused her to be [she was] bap- 
tised ‘after [in] the laws that stood in those days; she was named 
Abren; fairer child was none! And Gwendoleine ‘ had’ a son,—in heart 
she was the ‘better [gladder]! Madan he was named, noble son of the king! 
This child waxed, and well throve, and it was loved by all men. When he 
could walk, and speak with [the] folk, the king Locrin took ‘him,’ his 
fair son Madan, and sent him to Corineus, into his land; that he should 
‘well’ instruct him, and teach ‘him’ ‘manners [worship]; and so he did 


strenuously the while that he =] Then came the time to glide, that - 


1 Sic. 2 wid? 


| 
| 
i 


[v. 2424—2447.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
 Corineuf pe ftronge ’ 
makede his liues ende. 

Pet iherde pe king y 

hit wes him fwide queme. 

Pa he wufte to fode / 

pat Corineuf was dead. 

he nom of hif hirde 

tweolf hende men. 

& Guendoleine he fende ¥ 

into hire fader londe. 10 
into Cornwaile 

into hire cudde. 

Pa wes Guendoleine at hame ? 
& hire fune Madan. 

& fwiSe heo hit mende 

to alle ménen. 

pe hire fader wolde*® ¥ 

pe while he wes on liue, 

Heo geederede to fine / 

alle hire fibbe freond. 20 
& alle pa knites / 

pe heo bizeten mihte. 

& alle pat cuSe folk 

pat hire fredd weoren. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 103 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


pat Corines pe ftronge 
makede his lifef hende. 
Pat iherde pe king ¥ 

hit was him wel icweme. 
Po he to fope wifte 

pat Corineus dead was. 
he nam of his folke ¢ 
twelue men hende. 

and Gwendoleine fende y 
to hire fader londe. 

in to Cornwale 

to hire owene cuppe. 

Po was Gwendoleine atom! ¥ 
and hire fone Madan. 
and fwipe 3e0 mende ¥ 

to alle hire frendes. 

pat hire fader welde 
wile he was on liue. 

3eo fomnede to gadere ‘ 
alle hire frendes / 


Guendolein. 


each man ‘abideth [must abide], that Corineus the strong made his lifes 
end. The king heard that; it was to him ‘most pleasing! When he 
knew for sooth that Corineus was dead, he took twelve good men of his 
people, and ‘he’ sent Gwendoleine ‘in’to her fathers land, into Corn- 
wall, ‘in’to her [own] country. Then was Gwendoleine at home, and her 
son Madan, and much she complained ‘of it’ to all ‘men [her friends], 
that her father possessed, ‘the’ while he was alive. She gathered together 
all her ‘kindred’ friends, ‘ and all the knights that she might procure, and 
all the country people that were her friends’; and all the ‘foreigners [foreign 


1 at hom? 


2 welde? 


Locrin. 


Mistrild. 


Stoure. 


104 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


& alle pa vncuSe ? 

to hire comen. 

of wel feola londe ¥ 

for feoluere & for golde. 

& heo rumliche hit 3ef ? 

gode pon kempan. (f. 14. ¢.1.] 


& beed hed for heora wurSfeipe 


wreken hire teonan. 

Hefde Locrin pe king Y 
inomen to him Aistrild. 10 
heo wes him iqueme? 

& he heo heefde to quene, 
vnder piffere bliffe ” 

per comen muchele burftes. 
Me cudde Locrine 

pe wes piffe leodene king. 
pat Guendoleine mid ferde ¥ 
fufde to piffe londe. 

to wreken hire teona ¥ 

of pon kinge & of per quene. 
Pe king mid hif folke 
fufde hire to-3eines. 

& heo to gadere comé ¥ 
vppen ane watere. 

pat water hatte Stoure ’ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 2448—2472.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


and alle pe huncupe folk 
pat to hire come. 

of wel fale londe ? 

for seoluer and for golde. 
and 3eo0 rumliche 3ef ¥ 
gode hire cniptes. 

and bad heom for hure loue? 
wreken heore! teone. 

Adde Locrin pe king ¥ 
inome Eftrild to him. 

3eo was him icweme 

and he hire makede cwene. 
vnder pane bliffe ¥ 

pare come manie harmes. 
Me cudde Locrine ? 

pat was piffere leod king. 

pat Gwendoleine mid ferde : 
fufde to his londe. 

to wreken . ire teone ¥ 


[f£.12. c.1.] 


2 of pan kinge and pane cwene. 


pe king mid his folke ¥ 
foufde hire to-3enes. 

and hii to gadere comen ? 
vppen one watere. 

pat hatte Steure 


folk that] came to her from well many lands, for silver and for gold; 
and she gave ‘it’ liberally to ‘the [her] good knights, and bade them for 
‘their worship [her love] revenge her injury. Locrin the king had taken 
to him (wedded) /Estrild; she was to him agreeable; and he ‘had [made] 


her ‘ for’ queen. 


Amidst this bliss there came ‘great evils [many harms]! 


Men told Locrin, who was king of this country, that Gwendoleine with 


an army marched to ‘this [his] land, to revenge her wrongs on the king and 
The king with his folk advanced against her, and they 


‘on’ the queen. 


came together (engaged in battle) by a water (river); ‘the water [that] 


) hire? 


{v. 2473—2497.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 105 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 

pat feiht waf fwiSe ft*ne. pat fiht was fwipe fturne. 

inne Deorfete / ine Dorfete ¥ 

Locrin dea’ polede. Locrin deap polede. 

on arwe him com to heorte on arewe him com to heorte ” 

pat he adun helde. pat he adun ful. 

per he wes feie / pare he deaide 

& muchel of his ferde. and moche of his folke. 

& pa quike men at-flowen y and pe cwik awei flowe 

& muchel fleam makeden. and mochel fleom makede. 


Gendoleine hzfde pa vfere hondyGwédoleine hafde pe ouere hond ¥ 
& iahnede hire al pis lond. 11 and hop3enede hire al pis lond. 


& heo ferde to pan caftle Y and 3e0 ferde to pan caftle 
per A&ftrild wes inne. par Eftrild was ine. 

heo nom AXftrild & Abren / 3eo nam Eftrild and Abren 
& lette heom ibinden. and lette heom binde. 

& lette heom worpen and lette heom werpe ¥ 

in ane deope watere. in one grete watere. 

per heo adronken par hii adronke 

& per heo dea’ poleden. and pane deap polede. 

Pa wes Guendoleine / 2 Po was Gwendoleine leofdi ’ 
leodene lefdi. 

pa hehte heo ane hefte ¢ po het 3e0 one hefte. 


mid haizere witte. 
pat me fculde pat ilke wat? Y pat me folde pat ilk water’ 
per Abren wes adrunken. par Abren waf a-dronke. 


hight Stoure—the fight was most stern—in Dorset. Locrin suffered death; 
an arrow came to his heart, so that he fell down; there ‘was he dead [he 
died], and much of his ‘army [folk], and the quick ‘men’ (those that re- 
mained alive) fled away, and great flight made. Gwendoleine had the 
upper-hand, and she obtained all this land; and she went to the castle 
wherein A&strild was; she took A®strild and Abren, and caused them to 
be bound, and caused them to be cast into a ‘deep [great] water; there 
were they drowned, and ‘there they’ suffered [the] death. Then was 
Gwendoleine lady ‘of the people’ (queen) ; then commanded she a com- 
mand, ‘with deep wit,’ that men should the same water, where Abren was 
drowned, call it Auren, for (on account of) the maiden Abren, ‘and for 


Auren. 


Cristes 
cherche. 


106 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 2498—2522.]} 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

clepien hit Auren cleopie hit Auren [c. 2.] 

for pane mezidene Abren. for pan maide Abré. 

& for Locrines lufe y 

pe wes hire kine louerd. 

pe ftreonede Abren ’ [c.2.] 

vppen Astrild. 


Pa hefde heo ifclawen pene king? 

& pa neowe quene & heora child. 

& Auren hatte 3et pafe ? [pare fe. 

at Criftes chirche heo falled i 

Guendoleine wes fwide ftrong 7 11 Gwendoleine was fwipe ftrong ¥ 
for al Brutenne wes on hire hond.for al Brutlond was in hire hond. 
& heo was fwa {wie wel bi-pouht:and 3e0 was so wel idipt Y 

pat elche monne heo dude riht. pat eche mane 3eo0 dude ript. 
alch mon mihte faren 3end hireech man mihte fare porh hire 
paih he bere red gold. _[lond s’poh he biere gold an hond. [londe? 
Ten 3er heo wes mid Locrine?’ Ten 3er 3e0 was mid Locrin ? 
ofte heo hefde feorwe & pine. and hofte hadde forewe. 

fiftene 3er and nizen dawees ? fiftene 3er and nize dazes 7 
seoS8en Locrin wes dead. .% after Loc'n his forpfare. 


al Brutaine heo wufte ’ al Brutaine 3e0 wifte 
wel mid pon befte. wel mid pe befte. | 
inne gride & in fridey in gripe and paife y | 
wun wes on folke. wel was pan folke. 


Seod%en heo 3ef Madan an hond ¢Suppe 3eo 3ef Madan an hond ’ 


‘ 
Locrines love, who was her royal lord, who begat Abren upon Aéstrild. . 
Then had she slain the king, and the new queen, and their child; and , 
this stream is yet called Auren; at Christchurch it falleth in the sea.” . jemi 
Gwendoleine was most strong, for all Britain was in her hand; and she 
was so ‘exceeding’ well disposed, that to each man she did right; each 
man might pass through her land, though he bore ‘red’ gold [in hand]. 
Ten years she was with Locrin; [and] oft ‘she’ had sorrow ‘and pine’; 
fifteen years and nine days after Locrin ‘was dead [his departure] all Bri- 
tain she governed, well with the best, in concord and ‘in’ peace; ‘joy 
was among [glad was] the people! Afterwards she gave Madan in hand 


[v. 2523—2545.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 107 
MS. Cott, Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xin. 

al his fader kine-lond. al hif fader kinelond. 

to Cornwaile he! ferde azein:’ — to Cornwale 3eo eode a3ein 

pe hire fader ahte. pe hire fader hahte. 


& per heo wonede in pon londe y and pare 3e0 wonede in pat lond 
pa leoden weoren pe blidre. pe leoden were pe gladdere. 
Madan hire fune nom a wif?’ Maden hire fone nam a wif? 


pe wes fwiSe hende. pat was swipe hende. 

bi hire he hefde twein funen? bi hire he hadde twei fones ¥ 

ah beine heo weoren unfeli. ac bei hii weren onfeli. 

Menbriz haihte pe aldre’ 10 Mébriz hehte pe on? Meabr[iz]. 
Malin pe 3ungre. (dan ? Malui pe oper. Malin, 


Ah fourti wintre heore fader Ma-Ac fourti winter Madan y 
mid menfca heold his riche. mid manfipe held hif riche. 


& pa his liues ende com? and po his liues hende com 

he wende fwiSe wel to don. he wende fwipe wel to don. 

his tuzin funan he fette on hond?his twei fones he fette an hond y 
al his riche kine-lond. al riche kinelond. 


Ah pa heora fader wes ded? — Ac po hire fader was dead ¥ 
pefunen dudenvuelnereed.[£14°.c.1.]pe fones dude vuele read. 
bi-tweonen heom ares wale & bi-twix ham a-ros bale*and wind*? 
wider heo weoren beien. [win wipere hii weren beie. 

flezht & muchel feorway’ 2 flept and mochele forewe ¥ 

al for heora unifelde. al for hire onfelpe. [£.12%.c.1.] 


all his fathers kingdom; to Cornwall she went again, that her father pos- 
sessed, and there she dwelt in the land—the people were the ‘blither 
(gladder]! Madan, her son, took a wife, who was most fair; by her he had 
two sons, but they both were wicked. Membriz hight the ‘elder [one], 

Malin the ‘younger [other]. But ‘ their father’ Madan with honor held his 
kingdom forty years, and when his lifes end came, he thought most well to 


‘do; he set all ‘his’ rich kingdom in ¢he hand of his two sons. But when 


their father was dead, the sons did evil counsel; between them arose 
conflict and strife,—adversaries they were both,—slaughter, and much 
sorrow; all for their wickedness! But Membriz acted basely;—he was 


1 R. heo. 2? wale? Cf. v. 404. ® win? 


108 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


Ah Menbriz dude vnwrefte ¥ 
he wes fwike mid pan mefte. 


[v. 2546—2567.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 


Ac Membriz dude onwreft 
he was swike mid pan befte. [dai ‘ 


wid Malin hif broder he nom gri$:wid' Malui his broper he nom a 
& bi-hahte to halden fri. 

& fwa he nom enne dai’ pat hi comen folde to gadere. 
pat come heore drihtliche folc. alle pe hexte of hire men? 

to makian faht & fome for makie lofe bi-twixte heom. 
bi-tuxen him & his broder®. 

A pon daie } wes ifet ¥ In pan da3e pat was ifet’’ 

pa comen heo to fumne. 10 po comen hii to gadere. 
Membriz hefde inomen pat grid *Mébriz hafde pane dai inome y 
ah fone he makede unfri®. and in pan dai he dude hif wone. 
he dude per ferwe inoh ¥ he dude pare forwe inoh ? 

for per he his broSer of-floh. his owene broper he a-floh. 

& puf he iwon al pis lond’ and pus he won al pis lond 

pat hit ftod on his awene honde. pat hit ftod in hif owene hond. 
Membriz hatede al hif cun / Membriz hatede al his cun 

for non nef him iqueme. for non naf him icweme. 

pa riche he makede wrecchas? pe riche he makede wrecches ¥ 
pa hene hine awarieden. 20 pe poure hine awarede. 

3if par was fwa hah mon? 3if par was eni he3 man? 

pat he ne durfte fordon. pat he ne dorfte for-don, 


traitor with the ‘most [best]!—with Malin his brother ‘he made peace, and 
promised to hold amity; and so’ he appointed a day, that ‘their good peo- 
ple [they] should come [together, all the highest of their men, for] to 
make ‘amity and concord [love] betwixt ‘him and his brother [them]. 
On the day that was set then came they together. Membriz had ‘ac- 
cepted the peace, but soon he made war [appointed the day, and on the 
day he did his wont]; he did there sorrow enow, ‘for there’ he slew his 
{own] brother; and thus he won all this land, so that it stood in his 
own hand. Membriz hated all his kin; for none was pleasing to him; 
the rich he made wretches; the poor cursed him! If there was [any] 
man ‘so’ high, that he durst not kill openly, ‘with poison he drenched 


1 wid? ? broer? 


[v. 2568—2591.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 109 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xi. 
mid attere he hine adrengte: _ hatter he let him 3eue 
'} he fone deed wes. pat he folde de3e. 


A wif he nom fwiSe hende A wif he nam fwipe hende 

enne fune on hire he f{treonede. on hure anne fone he ftrenede. 

Ebrauc he wes i-cleped Ebrac was ihote ¥ Ebrauc. 
3eond al he wes cud. ouer al pa peode. 

Menbriz dude an vuel weorc ? 

& him ec pa wrfe ilomp. 

vuel ping hi wes iqueme Membriz for-owede his cwene ¥ 

he for-heowede al his quene. 10 and vuel wore him was icweme. 

his hired men he nom to bedde Y hired mé he nam to bedde 


& wifmen he al bilafde. and wimmen he for-hedde. 
Twenti 3er he heold pis lond? Twenti 3er he held pif lond ” 
pa leoden al to herme. leode to harme. 


& feoSSen him a time com? [c.2.] and fuppe him com a time 
mid teonen he wes i-funden. 


pat he to wode wende pat he to wode wende 

to wundre him feoluan. to wondri him feolue. 

to huntien after deoren ? to honti after deores 

werfore he ded polede. 2 par fore he deap polede. 

In pon wode he funde ¢ In pan wode he fond ¥ 

feier ane hinde. wonder one hinde. 

pa hunten wenden efter? pe huntes wende after ¥ [c.2.] 
mid muchelen heora lude. mid mochelere loude. 


him [poison he caused to be given to him], so that he ‘soon was dead 
{should die]. A wife most fair he took; on her a son he begat; Ebrauc 
‘he’ was called, over all ‘he was renowned [the land]. ‘Membriz did 
an evil work, and eke the worse happened to him’; ‘evil thing was pleasing 
to him, he all-despised his queen [Membriz despised his queen, and evil 
work was pleasing to him]; ‘his’ domestics he took to bed, and women 
he ‘all abandoned [abstained from]. Twenty years he held this land, 
‘all’ to harm of ‘the’ people, and afterwards a time came to him, that 
“with harm he was caught,’ in that he went to the wood to wander by him- 
self, to hunt after deer; ‘wherefore [therefore] he suffered death! In the 
wood he found a ‘fair [wondrous] hind; the hunters went after it with 


Ebrauc. 


110 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


Swa {wide heo lidSeden ford ¥ 
pat pe king heom for-leas. 
 nefde he nefer enne ? 

of alle his monnen. 

He bi-com in a bech?’ 

per he bale funde. 

vppen ane weorede 

of wlfan awedde. 

Heo him to lupen 

on alchere halue. 10 
& to-luken pene kig * 

& his leomen to-drowen. 

& his hors al fwa? 

pat deade heo weoren bo twa. 
& puf ferde Membriz 

pe his broSer bi-fwac Malin. 
Enne fune he hafde y 

bi feoluan his quene. 

pe waf ihaten Ebrauc ¥ 
eseleft alre kingen. 20 
pe euer feulde haldé lond 
oper bi-witen leode. 

Al his cun he wurSede 
richen & wrecché. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 2592—2615.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 
So fwipe iferde! pus 
pat pe king heom for-léés. 
pat nadde neuere anne ? 
of alle his manne. 
He bi-com in one flade / 
par he balu funde. 
vppen one route ? 
of wolues awedde. 
Hii leopen heom? to 
in euereche fide. 
and to-foke* pane king ¥ 
and al his leomes to-drowen. 
and his hors alfo / 
pat dead iweren‘ bop. two. 
and pus ferd Membriz 
pat bi-swoc his broper Maluis. 

Ne fone adde Membriz ¥ 
bi his gode cwene. 

pat was ihate Eubrac 
feleft alre kinge. 
pat euere folde holde lond ¥ 
oper bi-3ete leode. 
Al his cun he worpede 
riche and wrecches. 


‘their’ great clamour. So quickly they passed ‘onwards [thus] that the king 
lost them, so that ‘he’ had never one ofallhis men. He arrived ina valley, 
where he found Ais destruction from a herd of raging wolves; they leaped 
towards him on ‘each [every] side, and lacerated the king, and [all] his 
limbs tore in pieces, and his horse also; so that they both two were dead, 
And thus fared Membriz, who betrayed his brother Malin! A son ‘he 
[Membriz] had by his ‘same [good] queen, who was named Ebrauc; 
‘noblest [best] of all kings that ever should hold land, or ‘govern [ac- 
quire] people! All his kindred he enriched, the wealthy and needy; the 

1 hi ferde? 2 him? 


3 to-loke? 4 hi weren? 


[v. 2616—2639.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


pa richen he lette beon ftille ¥ 
pa wrecchen hefden heore wille. 
pat lond heo! lette tilien ’ 

him tuwen hired men to. 

bliffe wes on londe y 

a feole kiine pinge. 

Heo! heold fwide god grid? 

ne breac na man his fri. 
Cnihtef he hefde gode y 
ftronge & wode. 10 
heo wilneden after worre y 

for heom wes heora drihten wrod. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. lll 


MS, Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


pe riche he lette be ftille ¥ 
pe wrecchef adde hire wille. 
pat lond he lette tilie 

al folk him louede. 

bliffe was mid pan kinge 
of fale kunnes pinge. 


Cniptes he hadde gode 
ftrong and eke wode. 

hi welnede after werre 
ware fore god ham hatede. 


Pe king hit wel wufte y Pe king hit wel wifte ¥ 
peh he hit fuggen ne durfte. poh he fegge ne dorfte. 
He lette bi fe flodey [£15.c.1.] Héé? lette bi fé¢ flode 
3earkien fcipen gode. 3arkes® fipef gode. 
vmben ane ftunde / vppen one ftiide ¥ 

pa fcipen 3aru weoren. pe fipes i-maked were. 
& he dude per inne And he forp rihtes ¥ 

hif drihtliche cnites. 2 dude par ine his eniptes. 


and fende ham in to France 
mid mochelere ferde. 

ad hii wonne F“nceY —_[£.13. c.1.] 
and for pare bi-3eonde. 


& fende hed in to France 
mid muchelere ferde. 

& heo her3eden France 
& feor per bi-3eonden. 


rich he caused to be still, the poor had their will; the land he caused to be 
tilled; ‘the people drew to him [all folk loved him]; joy was ‘in the land [with 
the king] of many kind of thing. ‘He maintained peace most good; no 
man broke his frith.’ Knights he had good, strong and [eke] fierce; they 
longed after war; ‘for them was their Lord wrath [wherefore God hated 
them]! The king knew it well, though he durst not say ‘it’. He caused by 
the sea-flood good ships to be prepared; after a time the ships were ‘ready 
[made]. And he placed (forth-right] therein his ‘noble’ knights, and sent 
them into France, with a great army; and they conquered France, and 


1 he? 2 R. he, % 3arke? 


Kaer 
Ebrauc. 


112 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
& alle pa londes 
pa perto lezen. 
Muchel wes pa gerfume 
pe heo hefden inome. 
& comen eft hider ham ’ 
al ifund & ihal. 
Pes wes pe erefte king 
pe ferde vt to reuing. 
pat ouer fie wende 
vt of piffe londe. 10 
Swide longe per after :’ 
wef al pis leodife fole. 
vnimete riche ¥ 
of pere reuinge. 
Pa com hit to mode 
Ebrauc pon gode. 
pat he wolde bulden 
twa burh ftronge. 
He nom his fole & ferde ford ¥ 
& droh him ritef nor’. 20 
a Sas half Scotlonde 
per he wolde at-ftonde. 
fEreft he makede ane burh Y 
& Kaer Ebrauc heo clepede. 
pa oer on are dune ‘ 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xt. 


and alle pe londes ¥ 

pe par to leize. 

Mochel was pe garifome : 
pat hii adden inome. 

and comé eft hider hom 
al hol and ifond. 

pis wes pe erefte king? 
pet 3et vt to reuing. 

pat ot {66 wende y 

vt of piffe londe. 

Swipe longe par hafter ‘ 
was al pif folk. 

vnimete riche 


Po com hit to mode 

Eubrac pan kinge. 

pat he wolde makie ¢ 

twei borewes ftronge. 

He nam his folk and eode forp / 
an drop him in to pat norp. 

a peos alf Scotlond 

par he wolde a-ftonde. 

Ereft he makede anne borh ’ 
and Kayr Eub‘c hine cleopede. 
pe oper on ane doune ¥ 


[v. 2640—2664.] 


far there beyond, and all the lands that thereto lay. Great was the trea- 
sure that they had taken; and they eft came hither home, all whole and 
sound. This was the first king that went out a robbing, who passed over 
sea, out of this land. Very long thereafter was all this ‘land’-folk im- 
measurably rich ‘from the plunder’. Then came it in mind to Ebrauc the 
‘good [king], that he would ‘build [make] two strong burghs. He took 
his folk, and marched forth, and drew him ‘right [into the] north, on this 
half (side) of Scotland; there he would abide. First he made a burgh, 
and Kaer Ebrauc called it; the other he made on a down, [and] Adud 


[v. 2665—2686.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 113 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 
Adud he heo hahte. and Aldut hine hehte. 
Pa heo wes icleped Kaer Ebrauc ? Ppopir Kair Eub‘e / 
sedSen wes icleped Eborac. and par after Eborac. 
SeodSsen comen vncuse men? Suppe come vneupe men? 


& Eoverwic heo hahten. and Euerwick hine heote. 

& pa norperne men ? and norperne men? 

nif hit nawiht 3eare. nif hit noht 3are. 

purh ane unpewe porh on onpeue 

3eorc heo ihehten. 3orc hine cleope. 

Pa ferde pe king norSur maz’ 10 Po ferde he norp ¥ 

& ane neowe burh makede. and one neuwe borh makede. 
vppen Angnetes munte Y vppen Agnetes hulle ¥ 
merliche feier. woderliche fair. 


Maidene caftel he wes icleoped * Maydene caftel he was ihote. 
nat ich for wan hit waf fwa idon. [c.2.] 

Ebrauc leofede fwiSe longe ¢ Eubrac leuede fwipe longe ¥ 

& lond heold mid menfce. folke to bliffe. 

sixti winter he wes king sixti witer' he was king” 

i gri’e he heold his kine-lond. and in paife heold his kineriche. 
Ah he heefde moni wif” 2 Ac he hafde many wimmé 

pe his cun of a-wachede. hi-hafd to his bedde. 

he hefde on liue tuenti funen? bi woche he hadde on? 


‘he’ named it. “Then it was called [The other] Kaer Ebrauc; ‘afterwards 
it was called [and thereafter] Eborac. Subsequently came foreign men, 
and named it Eoverwic, and ‘the’ Northern men, it is not long since, 
through an ill-practice ‘they’ ‘named [call] it 3eore. Then fared the 
king ‘more’ north, and made a new burgh upon Agnetes ‘mount [hill], 
‘exceedingly [wonderfully] fair; Maiden-Castle it was called ;—I know 
not for what cause it was so done.’ Ebrauc lived very long, ‘and held the 
land with honor [to the joy of his people]. Sixty winters he was king, 
[and] in peace ‘he’ held his kingdom. But he had [had] many ‘wives 
{women to his bed], ‘of whom his progeny arose’; [by which] he had 
alive twenty [blithe] sons, and ‘each [every one] had a different mother ; 


1 R. winter. ? on liue? 


114 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 2687—2709.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


twenti fones blipe. [c.2.] 
and ale hefde findri moder. and eu ech had findri moder. 
he wes pritti dohtrenne fader? he was pritti dohterne fader 
peo wifmen weoren feire. pat wimmé weren faire. 

Of his funen hercne pa nomen? Of his fones herene pe names 
& ich heo! pe wulle nénen. and ich 3ou telle. 

Brutuf Uert Efcut. Margadud? Brutus Vertefcu. Margadud ¥ 
Sifiluiuf. Regin. Bladud. Sullius. Regyn. Bladud. 
Moruit. Lagon. Ebedloan Morewip. Lagon. Ebedloan 
Ricar. Spaden. Gaul. Pardan. 10 Ricard. Spaden. Gaul. Pardan. 
ffildad. Gangu. Kerin. Luor’ Eldad. Gangu. Kerin. Luor / 
Ruc. Affarac. Buel. Hector. Rut. Affarac. Buel. Hector. 
Peos weoren Ebraukes funen: eos weren Eub‘e kingef fonef? 
pes adeles kinges. 

His dohter nomen hercna nu; Of his dohtref herene pe names. 
pa he3e weoré iborene. 

pa eldefte was ihaten Gloigin / 

Ocidas. Ourar. Ignogen. Gleoudy. Otidas. Omar. Ignogen. 
Guardid. Radan. Guendlian’ | Gaurdit. Radan. Gwenlian 
Angarad. Guenboden. MeSelan. Agaret. Gwenloden. Mepelan. 
Malure. Ecub. Zanguftel’ 2 Malure. Ecuh. Tangwiftel 
Scadud. Kambreda. Methahel. Stadud. Kambreda. Methahel. 
Gaz. Echem. Neft. Gorgon? | Gaz. Echem. Neft. Gorgen? 


he was father of thirty daughters, who were fair women. Of his sons 
hearken the names, and I ‘ will’ ‘name [tell] them to ‘thee [you]: Brutus 
Vert-escut, Margadud, ‘Sisilvius [Sullius], Regin, Bladud, ‘Moruit [More- 
with], Lagon, Ebedloan, Ricar, Spaden, Gaul, Pardan, A®ldad, Gangu, 
Kerin, ‘Luor [Ivor], Ruc, Assarac, Buel, Hector. These were sons of Ebrauc 
‘the noble’ king. [Of] his daughters [the] names ‘now’ hearken, ‘who were 
nobly born. The eldest was named’ ‘Gloigin [Gleoudy], Ocidas, ‘Ourar 
[Omar], Ignogen, Guardid, Radan, ‘Guendlian, Angarad, ‘Guenboden 
[Gwenloden], Methelan, Malure, ‘Ecub [Ecuh], ‘Zangustel [Tangwistel], 
Scadud, Kambreda, Methahel, Gaz, Echem, Nest, Gorgon, Wladus, 


? heom? 


[v. 2710—2732.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 115 


, 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1. 


Wladus. Ebreen. Blangru. Egron.Wladus. Ebren. Blagru. Egron. 
Bedra. Aballac. Eangnes Bedra. Aballac. Agnes 


Andor. Scadiald. Galoes. Aitnor. Scadiold. Galoes. 
Efter piffere Galoes ¥ After pes Galoes 
Wales wes inemned. Wales was i-nemnid. 
Galoes wes feireft ¥ Galoes waf faireft 

of alle pan oSren. of alle pe opere. 


leoueft pone kinge? [[f15%.c1.] leueft pan kinge ? 
of pan fuftren & of pon breoSen'.of alle pe softrene. 
& Anoper wes alre beft itowen * and Annore was beft itowe ¥ 
hire tuhtlen weren gode. n__ hire dedes weren gode. 
Gloigin hehte pa alre eldufte’ Gleoudy hehte pe heldefte 
peo wes purh alle ping pa eSelefte.3e was porh alle pinge ¥ 
| pe wifeft to neode. 
alle heo weren wel i-ferud 
alle heo weoren wel bi-hedda®. alle heo weren wel ihedde. 
pe king of Lumbardie Siluius. Pe king of Lombardies lond ¥ [Sil]uius. 
he wes heora nexta cunnef-mon. was hire nexte kinefman. 
richeliche he nom his fondey _richeliche he fende his fonde ¥ 
& fende to Ebrauke kinge of piffe toward piffe lond. 
He bad hine fenden him y [londe.He bad hine fende him ¥ 
alle his his® dohtren. s2 alle his dohtren. [f£.13%.¢.1.] 
& he heom wolde 3eué ? and heo* 3am wolde 3eue ¥ 


Ebren, Blangru, Egron, Bedra, Aballac, Eangnes, ‘Andor [Aitnor], 

Scadiald, Galoes. After this Galoes was Wales named. Guloes was the 
| fairest ; of all the others most beloved by the king, of [all] the sisters ‘ and 
] of the brothers’; and ‘Another [Annore] was ‘of all’ the best instructed ; 

her ‘manners [deeds] were good. Gloigin hight the eldest ‘of all’; she 
was through all things the ‘noblest [wisest at need]. [They were all well 
clothed;] they were all well beseen (fair of aspect). The king of ‘Lum- 
bardy, Silvius, [Lombardys land] ‘he’ was their next (nearest) kinsman ; 
richly he ‘took [sent] his messenger, ‘and sent to Ebrauc, king of [towards] 
this land. He bade him send him all his daughters, and he would give 


1 breoSeren? 2 bi-hedde? 3 Sic. 4 he? 
12 


116 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 2733—2754.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
richen hif monnen. to his riche mannef. 
swide riche cnihten _ to fwipe riche cniptes / 
of Troinifce cunne. of Troyniffe cunne. 
pa weoren in Lumbardie of heore pat beop in Lombardie 

ftrund ” of hire owene ftreone. 


pah ftreemes heom to-deleden. 
& pa wifmen of Lumbardie”Y |= Wimmen of Lombardie? 


weoren heom fwi%e lade. beop heom fwipe lope. 
for pi pe king fende after piffe for pi pe king fend after peos 
maidenen Y maidenes 


to 3euen his riche monnen. 10 to 3iuen hed alley 
to his riche manne. 
swa he dude & puf hit wes ¥ so he dude and pus hit was’ 
wa wes Lumbardifce folc pes. | wo was Lombardies folk pas. 
Pa hefde pe king Siluiuf his wille: Po hafde pe king Siluiuf? 
& Lumbardie he walde. his wille of Lombardie. 
& al his Troinifce cun / 
tuhten to him feoluan. [funé? 
Sime pa breoderen' Ebraukes Somme of Eubrac his fones * 
comen pider mid heora fuftren. wende mid hire softres. 
Heo bizeten wepnen heo bizeten Hii bi-3eten wepne hii bi-zeten 


fcipen Y 20 fipes. 
heo biz3eten men pe heom cu%en hii bi-3eten men? pe heom coupe 
witen. witie. 


heo fenden ouer al pan erde?’ _ hii fende ouer al pan erpe / 


them to his rich men, [to] the most noble knights of Trojan kin that were 
in Lumbardy, of their [own] race, ‘though streams divided them. And 
the’ women of Lumbardy were most odious to them, therefore the king 
sent after these maidens, to give [them all] to his rich men; so he did, 
and thus it was; woe was the Lumbard folk for this! Then had the king 
Silvius his will [of Lombardy], ‘and Lumbardy he ruled, and all his Trojan 
kin drew to himself.’ Some of ‘ the brothers,’ ‘Ebraucs [Eubrac his] sons, 
‘came [went] ‘thither’ with their sisters. They procured weapons, they 
procured ships; they procured men that could advise them; they sent 


1 breoSeren ? 


[v. 2755—2772.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 117 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


to bizéten muchele ferde. to bi-3eten ferde. 

Pa comen pas cnihtes ut of Bru- Po come peos eniptes vt of Lom- 
taine y bardie and of Brytaine / 

ferden of Lumbardieto Alamaigne.and verde to Alemaine. 

Affaracpecom ut of piffen eard?(c.2.]on pat hehte Affarac ¥ [4/Varac. 

hif brodren hine cleopeden heora was imakid hire alre louerd. 
lauerd. 

Heo ferden mid 3eapfeipe & mid Hii verde mid wifdome 
wifdome ¥ [comen. 

fwa longe pat heo to Alamaine fo longe pat hii to Alemaine come. 

Muchele caftles heo bigunnen'? Many caftles hii bi-wonne ¥ 

heo flowen heo barnden: & pat flowe and barnde & pat lond 
lond bi-wunnen. awonne. 

Ebrauc heorafader heold pis lond?Eubrac hire fader held pif lond ? 

sixti winter he wes heore king. 1 sixti wynter in his hond. 

He hefde her his eldefte fune?’ He hadde her his heldefte fone 

iholden mid him feoluan. iholde mid hire? feolue. 

his nome was wel wide cud? his name was wide cup? 

he hehte Brutuf Uert Efcud. he hehte Brut® Vertefcu. 

Tueolf 3er he heold pif kine-lond:Twelf 3er he held pis kine-lond. 

feodéen his fader hit bilefde. —_ after his fader daize. 

Enne fune he hefde ihaten Leir®/Ane fone he hadde ¥ 


over all the country to collect ‘a great’ army. Then came these knights 
out of [Lombardy and of] Britain, [and] marched ‘from Lumbardy’ to 
Alamaine. ‘Assarac, that came out of this land, his brothers named him 
their lord [One that was named Assarac was made their chief] ; they pro- 
ceeded with ‘prudence and with’ wisdom so long until they came to 
Alamaine ; ‘great [many] castles they won; ‘they’ slew, ‘they [and] 
burnt, and conquered the land. Ebrauc, their father, held this land; sixty 
winters ‘he was their king [in his hand]. He had retained his eldest son 
here with himself; his name was ‘well’ wide known; he was named 
Brutus Vert-Escu. Twelve years he held this kingdom, after his ‘father 
left it [fathers day]. A son he had, [who was] named Leir; he held this 


1 biwunnen? 2 him? 2 R. Leil. 


Kaer Leil. 


118 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 2773—2796.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
he heold pis kine-lond after him. Leil was ihote. ([e-2.] 
fulle fif & twenti 3er ¥ pis lond twenti 3er and fiue he 
efter his fad? daie. after his fader daize. {heold 
He makede ane he3e burh / He makede one! 
feier & hende. fair and {wipe hende. 
to imonien Leir? pene king? — to munien Leil pane king ¥ 
& Kaer Leil heo clepede. and Kair Leil hine cleopede. 
In alle pon nord ende ¥ In al pe norp londe? 
nes nan burh fwa hende. nis borh non fo hende. 
Leir® pe king heold wel pis lond y Le.1 pe king wel held pis lond/ 
& lawen he hafde ftronge. 1 and lawes he adde ftronge. 
ah toward his lifes ende ¥ ac toward his liues hende? 
hi ilomp wel luSere. him ful {wipe lupre. 
pat alle his riche eorles ¥ pat alle his riche eorles ¥ 
& alle hif he3e beornes. and his riche beornes. 


makeden muchel unfrié: [griS. nolde for pa kingef bode ¥ 
& for pon kinge heo nolden holden noping . .* reche. 
Nefden heo of heore kinge ¢ Nafde* hi of hire kinge 


buten heora fezrninge. bote feornige. 

& euer elec wilde mon? 20 

hefde al his wil to don. 

Pa iwer® pe kig fec / Po iwarp pe king fick ¢ 


purh hefe3ere feorwe. 
& fone per after com pe dai? [f.16. c.1.] 


‘kingdom [land] ‘after him, full’ five andtwenty years after his fathers 
day. He made a noble burgh, fair and [most] comely, in remembrance of 
Leil the king; and called it Kaer Leil. In all the north‘end [land] is there 
no burgh so fair! Leil the king held well this land, and laws he had 
strong; but towards his lifes end, a full evil thing befell him, that all his 
rich earls, and ‘all’ his noble barons ‘made great contention, and for the 
king they would not hold peace [would reck nothing for the kings com- 
mand]. They had not of their king but ‘their’ scorning, ‘ and every wild 
(wilful) man had all his will to do.’ Then became the king sick « through 
heavy sorrow,’ and ‘soon’ thereafter ‘came the day that the king’ dead 


1 Sic. 2 R, Leil. 3 ne? 4 BR. Nafde? 


{v. 2797—2820.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 119 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x, MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11, 

pat pe king dead lai. and par hafter dead lai. 

Pes king hefde enne fune He hadde one fone ¥ 

pe wes fwiSe god mon. pat was {wipe god man. 

he wes {wide god knit / he was fwipe god cnipt ¢ 

Ruhhudibras ihaten. Rudibras ihoten. 

Pe cniht nom peef riche ¥ pe cnipt nam pes riche 

& pene kinedom eke. & pane kinedom eke. 

& nizen’ & pritti winter Y nizene and pritti winter ¥ 

he heold pes leoden. he welde pe riche. 

efter leuen hif fader 10 

pe Leil was ihaten. 


He fette pif lond Y 

he fahtneffe wrohte. 

he fette ftronge lawen / 

he wes fturne pon dufien. 

he luuede peo leoden ” 

pe his lawen heolden. 

uer alene godne mon ¥ 

he aSelede mid gode. 

he hehte heeldé grid & frid¥ 2 


vppe leome & vppe lif. 
He makede ane riche burh ¥ He makede anne riche borh ’ 
& hehte heo Wincheftre. and hehtene! Wincheftre. 


swle werc him puhte fwidSe muri:soch worch him poht fwipe muri ” 


lay. ‘This king [He] had a son, who was a very good man; he was a 
very good knight, named Ruhhudibras. The knight took this govern- 
ment and the kingdom also; and nine and thirty winters he ‘held this 
country [wielded the sceptre], ‘after the life of his father, who was named 
Leil. He settled this land; he established concord; he set strong laws ; 
he was stern to the foolish; he loved the people who held his laws ; every 
good man he honored with goods (wealth) ; he commanded peace and 
quietness to be held, upon pain of limb and life.’ He made a noble burgh, and 
called it Winchester—such work seemed to him most pleasant—and after- 


1 hehte hine? 


Ruhhudi- 
bras. 


Winchestre. 


Cantwa- 
reburi. 


Bladud. 


120 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 2821—2843.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


& feoSSen he makede Cantware- and fuppe he makede Cantelburi. 


& Ceftefburi caftel / 

an Waladunes dune. 

Ne com nauer feod®en 
na {wa feolcud ping. 

pat an muchel ern fpec / 
a pon caftle per he fet. 
pet Ruhhudibras pe king 
him feolf hit iherde. 

& alle hif enihtes ¢ 10 
pe mide him weoren. 

Pes fuzel tacnede 

faie-fiS pes kinges. 


|buri. and Ceftefburi caftel ¥ 


vppe Waledures doune. 

Ne com ne com! feoppe neuere ¥ 
ping felcupere pane wat® Y 

vppé pan walle on erne fpac ¢ 


pat Rudibras pe king / 
him seolf hit hi-herde. 
and alle his cniptef? 
pe mid weren. 

Pes fowel tocknede y 
Rudibras his deape. 


Ruhhudibraf waf fone dead ¥ 

wa wes hif duhpen. 

Hif fune hehte Bladud His fone hehte Bladud 

he wes a fwide bifi mon. pat was a bufi man. 

he wes ftrong & fwide muchel? he was ftrog and fwipe mochel 
riche he wes & mehti. riche he was and mihti. [f 14. ¢.1.] 
he cuSe pene vuele craft? 2 he .upe pa vuele craft? 

pat he wid pene wurfe fpec. [c.2.] pat he wip pan feonde fpac. 

& al pat euer he wolde ’ and al pat euere he wolde 

pe wurfe him talde. pe worfe him tolde. 


wards he made Canterbury, and Cestesbury castle, ‘on Waladunes [upon 
Waledures] down. Never came since ‘so strange a thing, that [a thing 
stranger than that] a ‘great’ eagle spake ‘on the castle [upon the wall], 
‘where he sate’; so that Ruhhudibras the king himself heard it, and all 
his knights, who were with him’. This fowl betokened ‘the death of the 
king [Rudibras his death]. ‘ Ruhhudibras was soon dead ;—woe was his 
people!’ His son hight Bladud; ‘he [that] was a ‘most’ busy man; he 
was strong, and very huge (of great stature), rich he was and mighty; he 
knew the evil craft, so that he spake with the ‘Worse [Fiend], and all that 
ever he would the Worse to him told. This same king Bladud [he] 


1 Sic. 2 pat? 


SSS 


a) 


[v. 2844—2867.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 121 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
Pes ilke king Bladud Pes ilke king Bladut ’ 
ba%en iwrohte. bape he wroh.. Baten. 
purh fwitSe muchele ginne / porh fwipe mochele gin.. 
mid ane ftzn cunne. ... one fton.s cunne. 
al fwa great fwa a beam abt. . sue fo a bien’? 


pe he leide in ane walle ftream. pat he ....e ina ..lles ftrem, 
Pe ilke maked pat water hot’ pe ilke ....) pat water hot 

& pan fole halwende. _— {bade and pan ...c helep. [..pe? 
He makede an temple onfeft pe He makede ane tépl. aneweft pare 


an ere hehtneffe nome. 10 in one hepniffe name. 

pe hire nome wul iherem? .o fe wole hure ’ 

Minerue heo was ihaten. Minerue 3e0 was ihote. Miner(ue]. 
to hire he hefde loue in hire he bi-lefde. 

& lefdi heo hehte. 

in pere téple he lette beornen ¥ 

enne blafe of fure. 


pe neuer ne abeoftrede ¥ 

wintres ne fumeres. 

ah euer me pat fur bette / 

fwa pe king haihte. 20 

to wrSfcipe his lefdi/ 

pe leof him wes on heorten. 

puf dude Bladud pe king pus dude Bladud / 
pat hit wes wide cud. 


wrought baths through very great contrivance, with a kind of stone, as 
great as a beam, that he laid in a well-stream (spring). ‘The same maketh 
the water hot, and the folk ‘healing [healeth]. He made a temple near 
the baths, in a heathenish Deitys name ;—who(so] ‘her name’ will here, 
Minerva she was called ;—'to her he had love [in her he believed], ‘and 
Lady called her. In the temple he caused to burn a blaze of fire, that never 
was extinguished, winter nor summer, but ever the fire was tended, as the 
king commanded, to the worship of his lady, who was dear to him in heart.’ 
Thus did Bladud ‘the king, so that it was wide known. When he had 


1 bem? 2 R, iheren. 


122 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 2868—2891.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

pa he hefde puf idon ¥ 

pz pohte he on o®er. and po a! pohte anoper. 

He 3ealp pat he wolde fleon’ He 3alp pat he wolde fleon ? 

on fuzeles leche. in foweles liche. 

pat al his fole mihte ifeon ¥ pat al his folk solde ifeé / 

& his fluhtes bi-halden. and his fliptes bi-holde. 

He makede his federhome ” He makede his feper-hames 

& paruore he heefde muchel feome.and par fore he hadde fame. 

To Lunden he ferde ¥ To Londene he verde 

mid muchelen hif folke. 10 mid mochele his folke. 

his feSer-home he dude him on? his feper-hames he dude him an? 

& he his fuht* per bigon. and he his flipt par bi-gan. 

Mid wizeful hif fluhte Mid his ftronge fihte*? 

teih him to pon lufte. he droh him to pan Jufte. 

he ferde {wide heh3e ¥ he verde fwipe heh’ 


pere weolcne he wes fwide nih. pare wolkne {wipe neh. 
Pe wind him com on wiSere’ pe wind him com on wipere 7 


weoseleden hif fluhtes. [[¢ 16°.c. !.Jwipeleode hif fliptef. : 
brecon pa ftrenges / breken pe ftrenges ¥ 

pe he mid ftrahte. 20 pe he mide ftrepte. 

& he feol to folde and he ful to grunde ¥ 


pe king wes feie. 
vppen are ftouwe y 
pe i Lundene ftod. 


done thus,’ [and] then thought he another ¢hing ; he boasted that he would 
fly in likeness of a fowl, so that all his people ‘might [should] see, and his 
flights behold. He made his wings, and therefore he had much shame! 
To London he went with much of his folk; his wings he put him on, and 
he his flight there began; with his ‘cunning [strong] flight [he] drew him 
to the sky; he went very high, to the welkin ‘he was’ very nigh. The 
wind came adverse to him; his flights became weak; the strings, that 
he stretched with, broke, and he fell to the ground— the king was dead— 
upon a place that in London stood,’ [upon] Apollins temple, ‘who was 


1 he? 2 R, fluht. 3 R. flihte. 


[v. 2892—2916.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 123 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C, xu. 
Appollones temple vppe Appolines temple. 
pe wes pe tirfulle feond. 
pe king feol on pene rof ¥ 
pat he al to-draf. 
Puf wes pas kineriche ¥ pus wes pis kineriche ¥ 
of heora kinge bi-reued. of hire king bi-reued. 
Tuenti winter hafde Bladud? — Twenti winter adde Bladud 
paf kine-lond an hond. pis kinedom an honde. 


efter his fader Ruhhudibrasy after his fader Rudibrasy —_[c.2.] 
pe Leil fune pes riche kinges wes.pat riche king here was. 
Bladud hafde enne fune. 11 Bladud hadde one fone Y 


Leir wes ihaten. Leir was ihote. ‘(Leir. 
efter his fader daie after his fader he held pif lond ¥ 

he heold pis drihliche lond. in his owene hond. 

somed an his liue / ilafte his lifda3es 7 

sixti winter. fixti winter. 

He makede ane riche burh ¥ He makede on riche borh ¢ 

purh radfulle hif crafte. porh wife méne reade. 

& he heo lette nemnen y and hine lette nemni ¥ 

efter hi feoluan. 2% after him feolue. 

Kaer Leir hehte pe burh Kair Leir hehte pe borh ¥ [Ka]erLeir. 
leof heo wes pan kinge. leof he was pan king. 

pa we an ure leod-quide pe we on vre fpeche ? 

Leircheftre clepia’. Leycetre cleopiep. iad aa 
3eare a pan holde dawen In pan eolde daize ¥ 


the mighty fiend ; the king fell on the roof, so that he was dashed in pieces.’ 
Thus was this kingdom of their king bereaved. Twenty winters had Bladud 
this kingdom in hand after his father Ruhhudibras, ‘who was son of the 
noble king Leil [who was a noble king here]. Bladud had a son, who 
was named Leir ; after his ‘fathers day [father] he held this ‘lordly ’ land 
{in his own hand], ‘together in (the whole of) his life, [his life-days lasted] 
sixty winters. He made a noble burgh, through his ‘prudent craft [wise- 
mens counsel], and ‘he’ caused it to be named after himself. Kaer Leir 
hight the burgh,—beloved it was by the king,—that we in our ‘country’. 
speech call ‘Leirchestre [Leycetre]. ‘Yore’ in the old days it was [a] 


[Gor ]noille. 


124 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 2917—2941.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 
heo wes {wide adel burh. hit waf a borh riche. 
& feoS&en per feh toward and fuppe par foh to ?’ 
{wide muchel feorwe. {wipe moche forwe. 


pat heo wes al for-faren ¥ 
purh pere leodene uel. 


Sixti winter hefde Leir ’ Sixti winter hadde Leir Y 
pis lond al to welden. pif lond to welden. 

Pe king hefde preo dohtren: —_ pe king hadde preo dohtref? 
bi his drihliche quen. bi his 03e cwene. 

nefde he nenne fune 10 ac he nadde nanne fone’ 
per fore he war® fari. par fore he was fori. a 
hif manfcipe to halden his kinedom to heolde 
buten pa preo dohtren. bote his preo dohtref. 
Pazldeftedohter haihte Gornoille: pe eldefte hehte Gornoylle ¥ 
pa oSer Ragau. pe oper Regau. 

pa pridde Cordoille. [c.2.] pe pridde Gordoylle. 

Heo wes pa 3ungefte fuster ¥ 3e0 was pe 3eongefte ¥ 

a wliten alre vaireft. of peues alre hendeft. 

heo wes hire fader al fwa leof 3e0 was hire fader al fo leof ? 
fwa his ajene lif. 20 so his owene lif. 

Pa eldede pe king ¥ Po holdede pe king ? 

& wakede an a®Selan. and failede hif mihte. 

& he hine bi-pohte and he hine bi-pohte / 

wet he don mahte. wat he don mihte. 

of hif kineriche ¥ of his kineriche 


burgh ‘ most’ noble, and afterwards there fell towards it very much sorrow, 
‘so that it was all destroyed, through slaughter of the people’. Sixty 
winters had Leir this land ‘ all’ to govern. ‘The king had three daughters 
by his ‘noble [own] queen; [but] he had no son,—therefore he was sorry,— 
his ‘honor [kingdom] to hold, except ‘the [his] three daughters. The 
eldest daughter hight Gornoille, the second Ragau, the third Cordoille. 
She was the youngest ‘sister,’ of ‘beauty fairest [manners most courteous] 
of all; she was to her father as dear as his own life! Then the king grew 
old, and ‘weakened in strength [his might failed], and he bethought him 
what he might do with his kingdom, after his day. He said to himself 


[v. 2942—2965.] LA3AMONS BRUT.- : 125 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
efter hif deie. after his daize. 
He feide to hifuluen He feide to him feolue y 
pat pat vuel wes. pat pe vuel was. 
Ic wlle mine riche to-don ? Ich wolle mine riche Y 
&! allé minen dohtren. 3iue mine dohtres. 


& 3euen hem mine kine-peode 

& twemen mine bearnen. 

Ac erft ic wille fondien Ac ereft ich wolle fondi ‘ 
whulchere beo mi befte freond. woch me meft louie. 

and heo feal habbe pat befte del ‘and 3e0 fal habbe pat befte deal ¥ 


of mine drihlichen lon?. i of mine kine-londe. 

puf pe king pohte puf pe king poh*? [f. 14%. ¢, 1.] 
& per efter he worhte. and par after a wroh‘, 

He clepede Gornoille ¥ He cleopede Gornoille ¥ Gornoille. 
hef® gufulle dohter. his dohter pat was deore. 

vt of hire bure ? vt of hire bure ¥ 

to hire fader deore. to hire fader deore. 

& peuf fpac pe alde king Y and pus fpac pe holde king ¢ 

per he on eelen feat. to Gornoille his dohtes®. — 

Sei me Gornoille ? 2 Sei me Gornoille ¥ 

foSere worden, fopere wordes. 

swide dure peo eart me fwipe deore pou art me? 

hu leof em ich pe. ou lef ham hich pe. 


hu mochel wor; lefte pu me’ — hu mochel worp holdift pou me 


that that was evil: ‘‘I will ‘divide [give] my realm to ‘all’ my daughters, 
‘and give them my kingdom, and share among my children’; but first I 
will prove which is my best friend [loves me most], and she shall have the 
best part of my ‘lordly land [kingdom].” Thus the king thought, and there- 
after he wrought. He called Gornoille, his ‘goodly daughter [daughter 
that was dear], out of her chamber to her father dear; and thus spake 
the old king, ‘where he sat in state [to Gornoille his daughter]: ‘Say me, 
Gornoille, true words; most dear thou art to me, how dear am I to thee? 
How much worth ‘esteemest [holdest] thou me to wield sovereignty? 


1 Redundant? ? lond? 3 poht? 
* he wroht? 5 R. hif. * R. dohter. 


126 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 2966—2988.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. ~ MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
to waldé kineriche. to welde kineriche. 
Gornoille waf fwide weer ’ Gornoille was wel war Y 
fwa beod wifmen wel ihwer. fo beop wimmen wel iwar. 
& feide ane lefinge ¥ and feide one lefig ¥ 
heore feedere pon king. to hire fader pe king. 
Leofe feeder dure ? Leoue fader deore y 
swa bide ich godef are. so bide ich godes ore. 


swa helpe me Apollin ¥ 

for min ilefe if al on him. 

pat leuere peo ert me ene? 10 leuere pou hart me one? 

pane pif! world al clane. pan al pis worle clene. 

& 3et ic pewllefpeken wit ?[f 17. c.1.Jand 3et ich pe wolle fpeke wid? 
peou ert leouere pene mi lif. —_ pou hart me leouere pan mi lif. 
& pif ich fuege® pe to feoSe —_and pis ich fegge pe to fope ¥ 


pu mith me wel ileue. pou miht me wel ilefue. 
Leir pe king ’ Leir pe king ¥ 

ilefde his dofter* leifinge. ilefde his dohter lefinge. 
& paf enfware® 3ef / and pus anfwerede ? 

} waef pe olde king. pe king to his doht?. 


Ich pe Gornoille feuge ¥ 20 

leoue dohter dure. 

god fcal bed pi meda’ God fal beo pi mede 
for pira® gretinge. for pine wel-dede. 


Gornoille was most wary,—as women are everywhere,—and said a leasing 
to her father the king : ‘‘ Loved father dear, so expect 1 Gods mercy, ‘so help 
me Apollin !—for my trust is all on him,’—that dearer thou art to me alone 
than all this world clean; and yet (more) I will speak with thee, thou art 
dearer [to me] than my life; and this I say thee in sooth, thou mayest 
me well believe!”’ Leir the king believed his daughters leasing, and ‘this 
answer gave the old king that was [thus answered the king to his daugh- 
ter]: ‘‘‘I say to thee, Gornoille, loved daughter dear,’ good shall be thy 
meed for thy ‘greeting [good deed]. I am for my old age much enfeebled, 


1 Originally written winne pif, but winne is struck out. 2 wid? 
3 Written at first feucge, but e is expuncted. 4 dohter? 
First written endfware. ° Or pina. The MS. is ambiguous. 


[v. 2989—3011.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 127 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 

Ic eam for mire eldde' ¥ Ich ham for min heolde ¥ 

swpe vnbalded. mochel onbolded. 

& pou me leuofte fwhe & pou me loueft {wipe 

mar pan if on liue. more pan alle pat his a-liue. 

Ich wille mi dirhliche® lod ‘ Ich wole mi dripliche lond 

a proe® al to-dalen. a preo al to-deale. 

pin if } befte deal ¥ pin fal beo pat befte deal :’ 

pu ert mi dohter deore’. pou hart me fwipe deore. 

& fealt habben to lauerd and pou falt habbe to louerd ¥ 

min alre befte pei. 10 min alre befte man. 

peo ich mai uinden ? pat ich mawe ifinde ¢ 

in mine kinne-londe. in mine kine-londe. 

4Efter fpac pe olde kinge ¥ Eft fpac pe holde king ’ 

wit hif dohter. wid® his oper dohter. 

Leoue dohter Regau Leoue dohter Regau / Regau. 

waet feift tu me to ride. wat ..ift pou me to reade. — [c.2.] 


Seie pu bi-fore mire du3den®? Sei bi-fore mine men y 

heo dure ich am pe an herten. _ou deore ich pe ham. 

Paanfweerde mid retfulle worden; Po anfwerede 3eo mid worde ¢ 
20 and noht mid heorte. 


Al pat if on liue ? Al pat his on liue ¥ 
nif nig’ fwa dure. nis me alf fo deore. 
fwa me if pi an lime® Y fo m. his pin one li. e. 


and thou me lovest greatly, more than [all that] is in life! I will divide 
all my lordly land in three; thine ‘is [shall be] the best share; thou 
art ‘my daughter dear [to me most dear], and [thou] shalt have for lord 
my all-best ‘thane [man] that I may find in my kingdom,” Afterwards 
spake the old king with his [second] daughter: ‘‘ Loved daughter Regau, 
what sayest thou me to counsel? Say ‘thou’ before my people how dear 
I am to thee ‘in heart’.’’ Then answered [she] with ‘prudent’ words 
{and not with heart]: ‘‘ All that is in life is not [half] so dear to me as is to 


) Written at first eldade, and the a subsequently expuncted. 2 R. drihliche. 
3 preo? * deore is added by a second hand. 5 wid? 
® du;sen? 7 me? 5 limene sec.'m. by interlineation of ne. 


128 LA3ZAMONS BRUT. [v. 3012—3035.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
forse min ahjene lif. 
Ah heo ne feide naping feS? Ac 3e0.. ... de nopt fop y 
no more penne hiire fufte’. _ namorep.. .... «+s. 
alle hire lefinge al hire lef.... 
hire uader ilefede; 6) 6 sees weldee ilefde. 
Pa anfwarede pe king ¥ Po anfw....... king 
hiif do3ter him icwéde. his dohter him icwe... 
Pea pridde del of mine londe: _ pe pridden deal of mine ... 
ich bi-take pe an honde. ich bi-take pe an hond. 
pu fealt nime louerd 10 andp...... nime louerd ¥ 
per pe if alre leowoft. par pe his a... leueft. 


Pa 3et nolde pe leod-king ¥ pe 3et nolde pe king? 
hif fothfcipe bi-leuen. {c.2.] his folie bleue. 
he hehte cumen him bi-foren. be hehte come him bi-fore ¥ 


| 
Gordoille. hif dohter Gordoille. his dohter Gordoille. 
Heo waf alre 3ungeft / 3eo was alre 3eongeft ¥ 
| of foSe 3r witeleft. of worde alre fopeft. 
& pe king heo louede more and pe king hire louede Y 
panne ba tueie pe oSre. more pan pe tweie oper. 


Cordoille iherde pa lafinge. 20 Gordoille iherde pe lefig ‘ 

pe hire? fuftren feiden pon kinge Y pat hire foftres feide pan kige. 
nom hire leaf-fulne huie ’ nam hire lapfolne op 

pat heo lizen nolden. pat 3e leze nolde. 

hire fader heo wolde fuge feod hire fader 3e0 wolde fegge fop ? 


me thy sole limbs, ‘before mine own life’!’” But she said nothing sooth, } 
no more than her sister;—all her leasing her father believed. Then 
answered the king—his daughter pleased him—‘ The third part of my 7 
land I give to thee in hand; [and] thou shalt take a lord (husband) where } 
to thee is most agreeable.” Yet would not the king his folly leave ; he bade 
his daughter Cordoille come before him. She was youngest of all, of ‘truth 
most studious [words truest of all], and the king loved her more than 
‘both’ the other two. Cordoille heard the leasings that her sisters said to 
the king. She took her ‘credible [lawful] oath, that she would not lie, but 


? fufter? 2 Written at first hiire, but the second i is expuncted. 


i ee ee, 


[v. 3036—3057.] LA3AMONS BRUT, 129 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
were him lef were him la®. were him leof? were him lop. 
Peo ged! pe alde king Y Po cwap pe holde king 
vnraS* him fulede. onread him folwede. 

Theré ich wlle ¥ Ich wolle ihiren of pe’ 

of pe Cordoille. Gordoille mi dohter. 

fua pe helpe Appolin ¥ so pe help Appolin ’ 

hu deore pe beo lif min. ou deore pe his lif min. 

Pa anfwarede Cordoille ¥ Po anfwerede Gordoille ¥ 
lude & no wiht ftille. loude and noht ftille. 

mid gomene & mid lehtre?’ 10 mid game and mid lihtre 
to hire fader leue. to hire fader leoue. 

Peo art me leof al fo mi feeder? Pou harte me afe min fader ¥ 
& ich pe al fo pi dohter. and ich afe pin dohter. 


Ich habbe to pe fohfafte loue 
for we buo®d fwipe ifibbe. 


& fwa ich ibide are and fo ich abide ore ¥ 

ich wille pe fuge mare. ich wolle fegge pe more. 

al fwa muchel pu bift woruh al fo mochel pou hart worp?’ [f.15.c.1.] 
fwa pu velden® ert. afe pou hart weldende. 

& al fwa muchel fwa pu haueft: and wile ... pou* hopt a feft / 

men pe wilet luuien. 2 men pe wollep louie. 

for fone heo bid ilazed3°Y for fone hi beop lope ¥ 


to her father she would say sooth, were it to him lief, were it to him loath! 
Then quoth the old king—mis-counsel followed him—‘ Hear I will of 
thee, Cordoille [my daughter], so help thee Apollin! how dear is my life 
to thee?”’ Then answered Cordoille, loud and ‘no whit [not] still, with 
game and with laughter, to her loved father: ‘‘ Thou art ‘dear’ to me as 
my father, and I ‘to thee’ as thy daughter. ‘I have to thee soothfast love, 
for we are most near in affinity,’ and as I expect mercy, I will say to thee 
more ; thou art worth as much as thou art master of, and ‘as much as thou 
hast [while thou hast a feast], men will love thee; for soon ‘is he [are 


' q in ged is by a second hand, on an erasure. 2 vnreed ? 
5 The first letter v is by a second hand, on erasure, which has also interlined in, 
instead of en, for the last syllable. * pat pou? 5 jlazed? 


K 


130 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 3058—3080.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 
pe mon pe lutel ah. pe men pe lutel o3ep. 
Pus feide pe meiden Cordoille Pus feide pat maide Gordoille ? 
& feoS&en fet! fwhe ftille. and fippe fat ftille. 
Pa iwarde pe king werd?? Po iwarp pe king wrop? 
for he nef peo noht iquemed. -or he nas nopt icw. . . 
& wende on if ponke he wende on his pon.. 
paht® hit weren for vnSeawe. _—. . t hit were for onpeue. 
} he hire weore fwa unwourd; pat he..... fo onworp?’ 
pat heo hine nolde iwur%i. p.-3e0 hin. ..:.. louie. 


fwa hire twa fuftren Y [f17°.c.1.] 10 

pe ba fomed lefinge fpeken. ({wrop 
Pe king Leir iwerde fwa blac’ His euhe torne and was was‘ 
fwlch hit a blac cloS weoren. __ bi-com alfe a blac clop. 

iweerd hif hude & hif heowe 

for he waf fupe ihermed. 

mid pere wre ddehe wef ifweued:mid pare wreppe he was igremid ? 


pat he feol ifwowen. pat he fulle hi-fwo3e, 

Late peo he up fufde / Late po vp fufde ” 

} meiden wef afeared. pat maide was afered. 

pa hit alles up brac ? 2 po hit alles vp brac? . 

hit wef vuel pat he fpac. hit was vuel pat he fpac. 
Herne Cordoille / Hercne Gordoille ¥ 

ich pe telle wlle mine wille. ich wolle fegge pe mine wille. 


they] loathed, the ‘man [men] who ‘possesses [possess] little!’”” Thus said 
the ‘maiden [maid] Cordoille, and afterwards sate ‘ most’ still. Then be- 
came the king wrath, for he was not ‘then’ pleased, ‘and [he] weened 
in his thought that it were for contempt that he to her were so unworthy, 
that she would not ‘estimate [love] him ‘as her two sisters, who both 
together spake leasings.’ ‘The king Leir turned as black as if it were a 
black cloth, his skin and his hue turned, [His hue turned, and he was wrath, 
he became as a black cloth,] ‘for he was exceedingly grieved;’ with the 
wrath he was ‘stupified [angered], so that he fell in swoon. Then slowly 
he up-rose—the maiden was afraid—then it wholly brake forth—it was 
evil that he spake—* Hearken, Cordoille! I will ‘tell thee [say to thee] my 


) fet is interlined by second hand, 2 wred? 3 pat? 4 Sic. 


[v. 3081—3104.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 131 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
Of mine dohtren pu were me du- Of mine dohtres pou were me leo- 
nu pu eert mearle leSef'. [reft / nou pou hart me alre lopeft. [ueft? 
Ne fcalt pu neuer halden ¥ Ne falt pou neuere holde 


dale of mine lande. deal of mine londe. 

ah mine dohtren y ac mine two dohtre 

ich wlle delen mine riche. folle habbe mine riche. 

& pu fealt worSen warchen*; —_and pou falt wonie wreeche ¥ 
& wonien in wanfide. and wonie ine wowe. 

For nauef ich ne wende For neuere ich ne wende ? 


} pu me woldef puf feanden. 10 pat pou me woldeft pus fende. 
par fore pu fealt beon ded ich par fore pou falt deize ich wene ’ 
fliz ut of min ewh-fene. [wene?’ fleo vt of mine ehfcene. 

pine fuftren feulen habben mi pine foftres fulle habbe mi lond ¥ 
& pif me if iqueme. [kinelond ’ and pis me his icweme. 


Pe duc of Cornwaile Pe duk of Cornwale 

fecal habbe Gornoille. fal habbe Gornoille. © 

& pe Scottene king y and pe Scottene king : 

Regau  fcone. Regau pe fcene. 

& ic hem 3eue al pa winne ? and ich 3am 3iue alle pe winne? 
pe ich em waldinge ouer.. 2% pat ich ham ouer waldenne. [c.2.] 
& al pe alde king dude’ And pe holde king dude 

fwa he hafuede idemed. afe he hadde idemid. 

Of® wef pen meidene wa? Ofte was pane maide wo? 

& neure worf penne pa. and neuere worfe pane po. 


will; of my daughters thou wert to me dearest, now thou art to me of all 
most hateful! Never shalt thou hold part of my land, but ‘to’ my [two] 
daughters ‘I will divide [shall have] my realm, and thou shalt be wretched 
and live in misery! For never did I ween that thou wouldest thus shame 
me; therefore thou shalt ‘be dead [die], I ween; fly out of my eye-sight! 
Thy sisters shall have my ‘kingdom [land] ; and this is to me pleasing (ny 
will). The duke of Cornwall shall have Gornoille, and the Scottish king 
Regau the fair; and I give them all the possessions that I am ruler over!” 
And ‘all’ the old king did as he had declared. Oft was the ‘maiden [maid] 
woe, and never worse than then! Woe she was in mind, for her fathers 


1 R. alre le¥eft. 2 wrecchen? 5 ofte? 
K 2 


Aganippus. 


132 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


pa hire wef on mode Y 

for hire fader werpe'. 
Heo uéde into hire boure 
par heo ofte fette fare. 
for heo nolde lizen ¥ 
hire fadder leoue. 

Pat maide wef fwden fwomefeft ’ 
for hire fader heo feunede. 
& dude pene befte red / 

in hire bure heo abed. 

& polede pene mod-kare 
& mornede fwhe. 

& pus ane ftonde Y 

hit ftod « Son ilka. 

In France wes a king 
riche & fwide kene. 
Aganippef wef ihaten 


[c. 2.] 


10 


-heleden he wef eldere. 


he wef a 3ége king ¢ 

ah quene nauede he nane. 
He fende hiif fande 

into piffe lande. 


20 


to Leir pan kinge 


& leofliche hine gret. 
he beed hine dé if iwille ¥ 


wrath. She went into ‘her’ chamber, ‘where she oft sate sorry [and oft 
sighed sore], because she would not lie to her loved father. ‘The maid was 
most shamefast, ‘for [and] her father ‘she’ shunned, and did the best 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


7" 


{v. 3105—3129.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


wo hire was on mode 

for hire fader wreppe. 

3eo eode in to bure 

and ofte fipte fore. 

for 3e0 nolde le3e ¥ 

hire fader leue. 

Pat maide was fwipe famuatft ¥ 
and hire fader fonede. 

and dude pane befte read ¥ 
and in hire bure abod. 

and polede pane mod-care 
and mornede fwipe. 

and pus one ftiide ’ 

hit ftod a pa ilke. 

N France was a king Y 
| riche and {wipe kene. 
Aganippus was ihote ’ 
folke he was eldere. 
he was a 30ng king? 
ac ewene nafde he none. 
He fende his fonde ¥ 
in to piffe londe. 
to Leir pane king ¥ 
and faire him grette. 
bad hine don his wille ? 


ee 


counsel, [and] in her chamber ‘she’ abode, and suffered the mind-care, 


and mourned much. And thus it stood a while in the same wise. 
France was a king, rich and most keen, Aganippus he was named; he 


was chief of the people; he was a 


He sent his message into this land, to Leir the king, and ‘lovingly [fairly] 


In 


young king, but queen had he none. ' 


him greeted. ‘He’ prayed him to do his will; to give him Cordoille, and 


1 wrepe? 


[v. 3130—3153.] LA3ZAMONS BRUT. 133 ° 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xuit. 
3euen him Gordoille. 3efe him Gordoille. 
& he heo wolde habben and he hire wolde habbe ” 
heeze to are quene. he3ze to cwene. 
& efter hire don ereft ¥ and don alre ereft / 
pat hire were alre leofuft. pat hire were alre faireft. 
Feor hauedé lisende men ¥ For hafde fope men ¢ 
ifpeken of pan meidene. ifpeke of pa maiden. 
feizerneffe & freofcipe ’ bi-fore pan Frence king ~ 


at-foren pan Frenfce kinge. of hire pe inde. 
of hire mucla feira wlitaY 10 of hire mochele fairfipe / 


of hire muchela monfchipe. of hire mochele manfipe. 

hu heo wef polemod ou 3e0 was polemod 

of fire hire perewen. of faire hire peues. 

pat nef on Leir kinges lond? _ pat nas in Leir kinges lond 
nan wifman al fwa hende. womman half so hende. 

& pe king Aganippuf? And king Aganippus ’ 
igrette Leir kin! puf. igrette Leir pe king pus. [£15%. c.1.] 
Leir kin! hine bipohte / Leir king hine bi-poht / 
wat he don mohte. wat he don mihte. 

he letten writen a writ? 2 he lette writen a writ? 

& wel hit lette dihten. wel mid pan befte. 

& fende hit bi hif fode / an fende bi his fonde ¥ 

in Frauncene londe. into France londe. 

puf fpec pes kingef writ pus fpac peos kingef writ ¢ 


he would her have for ‘a’ noble queen; and do ‘for her’ first [of all] 
what to her were ‘most desired [all-fairest]. For ‘travelling [true] men 
had spoken of the maiden, [of her) ‘fairness and affability [the fame (?)], 
before the French king; of her great beauty, of her great honor; how 
patient she was; of her fair manners; that no woman [half] so courteous 
was in king Leirs land. And ‘the’ king Aganippus thus greeted [the] 
king Leir. King Leir bethought him what he ‘might do; he caused a writ 
to be written, ‘and caused it to be well indited [well with the best], and 
sent ‘it’ by his messengers into the land of France. Thus spake the 


) king? 


Leir king. 


134 LA3AMONS BRUT. {v. 3154—3176.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xt. 
hit wef widé icud. hit was wide cup. 
Pe kinge of Bruttaine ¢ Pe king of Britaine 
pe Leir if haten. (f£18.c.1.] pat Leir his..... ‘ 
greted Aganippuf y gretep Aganippus ¥ 
p’ne aldere of Fraunce’. p.... . king of F*nce. 
wor®fchepe haue pu worfipe haue pou? 
pire wel-deda. for pine wilnige. 
& pire feire fonde and pine faire fonde : 
pat grete pu me woldeft. pat grete pou me woldeft. 
Ac ich do pe wel to witene: 10 Ac ic do pe wel to witez 
her bi mine writ rich. her ript bi mine write. 
pat mi drihliche lod ¥ pat mi drihtliche lond ¥ 
atwa ich habbe ideled. atwo ich habbe idealed. 
izeuen hit mine twam? dohtren ? i-z3euet® mine two doptren 
pe me beoh fwiSe deore. pat beop me {wipe deore. 


Dohter ich habbe pa priddayY = Dohter ich habbe pe pridde? 
ac ne recche ich wer heo libbe. ac ne rech ich ware 3e libbe. 


for heo me for-hufce ? for 3e0 me for-ho3ede 
& heo hold me for hene. and held me for wrecche. 
& for mire halde Y 20 


heo me unalelede‘*. 
heo make me fwa {wipe wraS? and wrappede me {wipe 
pe worfe hire fcal i-wurden. pe worfe hire fal worpe. 


writ of the king—wide it was known—“ The king of Britain, who is named 
Leir, greeteth Aganippus, the ‘chief [king] of France. Worship have thou 
for thy ‘good deeds [desire], and thy fair message, that thou wouldest 
me greet; but I do thee well to wit, here right by my writ, that my 
kingdom I have divided in two, and given it to my two daughters, that are 
to me most dear. Daughter I have the third, but I reck not where she 
lives, for she me despised ; and ‘ she’ held me for a wretch, ‘ and on account 
of my old age she incensed me’; ‘she made me so greatly wrath [and 
angered me greatly]—the worse shall it be to her!—([so that] of all my 


1 pe Fraunce man. pr., bud struck out man. sec. ? twain? 
* izeue hit? * unelede? 


[v.3177—3199.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 135 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. .Cott. Otho, C, x111. 
of alle mine londe pat of alle mine lode / 
ne of alle mine leode. ne of alle mine leode. 
pe ich auere bizeat / pat ich euere bi-3et / 
oder bi-3ete meie. oper bi-3ete mawe. 
ich pe fucge fod riht / ich pe fegge fop riht ” 
na fcal heo habbe nawiht. ne fal 3e0 habbe no wipt. 
Ac 3ef pu heo wult habben ¢ Ac 3if pou hire wold habbe / 
for meide heo if hende. maide 3e0 his hende. 
ich heo wulle pe biwiten ¥ ich pe wole hire bi-wete / 
& fenden ha' pe in ane fcipe. 10 and fende hire in one fipe. 
mid feoluen hire claden ¥ mid feolue hire cloping / 
of me nafé heo na more. of me 3e0 nafep na more. 
3if pu heo wult und’efon y 3if pou hire wolt vnder-fon ¥ 
al pis ilka ich wulle don. al pis ich wolle don, 
ifeid ich habbe pene grund y ifeid ich habbe pane grid / 
& pu feolf wurd al hifund. and pou pi feolf far hol and funde. 
pis writ com to Fraunce / Pis writ com to Francey _[c.2.] 
to pan freo kinge. to p....eo kinge. 
he hit lette raden / he hit lette rede / 
leof him weré pa runen. 2 eof him were pe roune. 
Pa wéde pe kinge’ Po we.de pe welde-king ¢ 
hit were for vuele?. pat hit were for gyle. 


pat Leir kinge® hire feeder ¢ pat Leir king hire fader ? 


land, nor of all my people, that I ever obtained, or may obtain, I say to thee 
right sooth, she shall have naught. But if thou wilt have her,—‘ for’ maid 
she is fair,—I will deliver her to thee, and send her ‘ thee’ in a ship, with her 
sole ‘clothes [clothing], of me she shall have no more! If thou wilt receive 
her, all this ‘same’ I will do. I have said the ground (cause), and thou 
[thy]self ‘be all sound [fare whole and sound]!” This writ came to 
France, to the noble king; he caused it to be read,—dear were the letters 
to him! Then weened the [powerful] king, that it were for evil [guile], 


1 heo? 

2 The first two letters of vuele are by a second hand, on erasure, as is @ in wende, 
line above. 

* kin man. pr., but ge interlined man. sec. 


136 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 3200—3222.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
heo him wold’ atleden. nolde hire him lene. 


& he mochul a pa wodeloker? and he moche pe wodlokere ? 
wilnede peof meidenef. [c.2.] wilnede ..t mayde. 


& feide to if bornen ’ and feide to his fol... 

wef pe bifie king. -ing Aganippus. 

Ich ea riche mon inoh Ich ha. -..he .an inop ? 

pat na mare ich ne recthe’. 1) eee . ich ne recche. 

ne fcal neuere Leir king né fal’... Leir pe king ¥ 
pat mzidé me attlede. pat maide me at-lede. 

ac ich heo wulle habben? 10 ac ich hire wolle habbe? 

to heen3éne* are quene. to e3e cwene. 

Habben ® heore fader al if lond? Habbe hire fader al his lond 
al huf* feoluer ad is gold. and his feoluer and his gold. 
ne bidde ich nanne madmef? _ne bid ich no pig of his? 

me feolf ich habben® ino3e. i-noh ich habbe mi seolue. 
bute pat meiden Cordoille y bote pat maide Gordoille ¥ 
pene hebbe ich mine wille. pan ich habbe mine wille. 
Mid writ & mid worde ¥ Mid writ and mid worde 

he fende eft to piffe londe. he fend eft to piffe londe. 

& bad Leir king him fede? 2% and bad Leir king him fendey 
hif dohter pe weef hende. his dohter pat was hende. 


& he wolde wel don? [uder-fon®. and he hire wolde vnderfon ¥ 
mid muchele worde-fcipe heo and moche manfipe hire don. 


that king Leir, her father, ‘would withhold her from him [would not 
give her to him], and he much the madder desired the maiden; and said 
to his ‘barons the busy king that was [folk king Aganippus] : ‘‘ I am rich 
man enough, ‘so that [of] no more I reck. Never shall Leir [the] king 
withhold the maiden from me; but I will have her for ‘a’ noble queen. 
Have her father all his land, ‘all [and] his silver and his gold! I ask 
“no treasures [nothing of his], myself I have enow, except the maiden 
(maid) Cordoille; then should I have my will!” With writ and with 
words he sent eft to this land, and bade king Leir send to him his daughter 
that was fair, and he would ‘well do, [receive her, and] ‘ with’ much honor 


1 recche? 2 hejene? 3 habbe? 
* hiif? 5 FR. under-fon. 


[v. 3223—3245.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
Pa nom pa olde king ¢ 
eSele his meiden. 
mid feoluen hire claSes 
& lette heo fose! liden. 
ofer pa ftremef 
hire fader hire wes fturne. 
Aganippuf pe Frennfce king ¥ 
vnder-feng pif meiden child. 
al hiif fole hit wef iqueme ¥ 
& makedé heo to quene. 10 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


137 
MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

Po nam pe holde king ¥ 

Gordoille pat maide. 

mid feolue hire cloping : 

and lette hire forp wende. 

ouer fee ftremes 

hire fader was fterne. 

Aganippus pe Frence king ? 

pis maide faire vnderfeng. 

and al his folk hit was icweme ? 

pat 3e0 were cwene. 


& puf heo per bi-lefde ¥ and pus 3eo pare bi-leofde ¢ 

leof heo wef pon leoden. leof 3e0 was pan folke. 

& Leir king hire feeder ¢ And Leir king hire fader ¥ 
luuede iviffe londe. liuede in piffe londe. [f.16.c.1.] 
& hadde izeuen if twain dohtren “and hadde his two d...... 

al hif drihlich leand. al his kinedome. 

He 3ef Gornoille / He 3af Gornoille ? 

Scotlondef kinge. to Scottene king. 

he hahte Maglaunuf / he hehte Magland? ¥ 

hif mzhte weren ftore. 20 his mihtes weren ftore. 
Cornwaillef duke / and to Cornwales duke ¥ 

Regau if dohter. Regau his . . hter. Regau. 


Pa ilomp hit feoSSe? [£18%.c.1.] Po bifulle ... . eppe? 


‘receive her [do to her]. Then took the old king ‘his noble maiden [Gor- 
doille the maid], with her sole ‘clothes [clothing], and let her forth pass 
over ‘the’ [sea] streams ;—her father was stern ‘to her’! Aganippus, the 
French king, received [fairly] this ‘maiden [maid] ‘ child,’ [and] to all his 
folk it was pleasing, ‘and they made her queen [that she were queen]; and 
thus she there remained; dear she was to the people. And king Leir, her 
father, lived in this land, and had ‘ given’ his two daughters all his king- 
dom ; he gave Gornoille to ‘Scotlands [the Scottish] king—he hight Mag- 
launus, his powers were great—[and] to Cornwalls duke he gave Regau, his 
daughter. Then befell it subsequently, soon thereafter, that the Scottish 


1 forde? 


138 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 3246—3268.] 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
fone par efter. . one par hafter. 
pat pe Scottene king ’ & pe duk y pat pe Scottene king and pe duk ¢ 
fpeken to gaSere. speké to gadere. 
mid heore ftil rune ¥ mid hire ftille rouning ¢ 
nom hem to reda. nemen heom to reade. 
pat heo wolden al pis lond ¥ pat hii wolde al pis lond / 
habben on heora hond. habbe to hire owene hond. 
& fedé Leir pane king and feode Leir pane king ¥ 
pe while pe he leouede. wile pat he leofede. 
deies & nihtef? 10 ©daizes and niptes / 
mid feowerti hired cinhtef'. mid fourti cniptes. 
& heo him wolden finden And we him wollep finde / 
hauekef & hundef. hauekes and hundes. 
pat he mihte riden Y pat he mai ride / 
3edd alle panne peoden. ouer al pe peode. 
& libben on liffe ’ and libbe ine bliffe / 
pe while pe he leouede. pe wile pat he libbep. 
puf heo pa ifpeken Pus i® po fpeken? 
& eft hit to-breken. and eft hit to-breken. 
& Leir king hit iherde*? = 2% and Leir king was wel ipaid 
& eft hi* wef pe worffe. and eft onlikede. 
& Leir kan® lide? And Leir king wende ’ 
to Scottene leoda. to Scottene kinge. 


king and the duke spake together with their secret communing, and took 
them to counsel, that they would have all this land ‘in [to] their [own] 
hand, and feed Leir the king, ‘the’ while that he lived, days and nights, 
with fourty ‘household’ knights; ‘and they would [“ And we will] find 
him hawks and hounds, that he ‘might [may] ride over all the country, 
and live in bliss, the while that he ‘lived [liveth”], Thus they then spake, 
and eft it brake. And king Leir ‘heard it [was well contented], and eft 
‘it was the worse to him [disliked i#]. And king Leir went to the Scottish 


1 So here and elsewhere for cnihtes ? 2 hi? 

5 jhirden man. pr. * hit man. pr. 

5 Sic pr. m. for king, but altered by second hand to gan, which would require us 
to read lid®en. 


[v. 3269—3291.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


mid Maglaune hif adume 
& mid pere eldre dohtre. 

Me vnder-feng pene king ¢ 
mid mochele feirnuffe. 

& wel me hi dihte ¥ 

mid feowerti hire cinhdtes*. 
mid horfen & mid hundes ¥ 
mid al pet him bi-heovede. 
Pa hi-loinp® hit feoSSen 
feone per after. 10 
pe Gornoille bi-pohte y 

whet heo don mihte. 

Heore puhte fwipe eille ¢ 

of «Selene hire feedere. 

& heo hit bi-gan to mainen y 
to Maglaune hire loude. 

and feide him ibedde ¥ 

per heo leiin iueore®. 

Seie me mi lauerd ” 

monne pu ert me leoueft. — 20 
me punche® pat mi feeder ¥ 
nif no whit felle. 

no he wurh-fcipe ne can’ 


LA3AMONS BROT. 


139 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


to Maglande his opom 
and to hif heldefte dohter. 
Me vnder-feng pane! / 


mid his fourti eniptes. 

and hire hors and hire atyr 7 
and al pat ham bi-houede. 
Po bi-fullet* feppe ¥ 

fone par after. 

pat Gornoille bi-pohte / 
wat 3eo don mihte. 

Hire pohte fwipe eil ¥ 

of hire fader cnihtes. 

And 3e0 bi-gan to mene? 
to Maglande hire louerd. 
and feide hit in bedde / 
par pat leien. 

Sei me mi louerd / 

manne me leofutt. 

me ponchep pat mi fader” 
his nopt fele. 

no worfipe he ne can 7 


{c.2.] 


nation [king], ‘with [to] Maglaune, his son-in-law, and ‘with the elder 
(to his eldest] daughter. The ‘king’ was received with much fairness, 
and he was well served with [his] forty ‘household’ knights ; with [their] 
horses and ‘with hounds, with [their attire, and] all that ‘him [them] 
behoved. Then befell it subsequently, soon thereafter, that Gornoille 
bethought what she might do. It seemed to her most ill of her fathers 
‘state [knights], and she began to complain ‘of it’ to her lord Maglaune, 
and said ‘to him [it] in bed, where [that] ‘they’ lay ‘together’: “Say 
to me, my lord,—man thou art to me dearest !—me thinketh that my 


1 Sic. ? hired cnihtes? 3 hi-lomp? 
5 The first three letters of iueore are by second hand, on erasure. 


* bi-fulle hit? 


140 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 3292—3314.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 


hif wit he hauet bileued. his wit he hafep bi-leued. 
me punched! pe alde mon? [c.2.] 

wole dotie nou nan. 

He lalt® here fauwerti cinhtes : He halt here fourti cniptes ¢ 
daies and nihtef. daizes and niptes. 

he haueht her paf peinef he halt here his fweynes 
and alle heore fwainef. 

hides and hauekef 

per uore we habbet harmes. par fore we habbep harmes. 
Andd nowher heo ne fpedet? 10 

and auere heo fpened®. 

& al pat goud pat we hem dod? Al pat god pe we heom dop? 
heo hit bluSeliche vnder-fod. —_ hii hit blopeliche vnderfop. 


and cunné uf yndoc* ? and ne come vs bote vnpong 
for ure wel-dede. for hure wel-deade. 

Heo do’ muchel bifemere ? Hii dop hus mochel bifmare ? 
ure men hi to-betet. hure men hi to-betep. 

mi fader hauet to monie mi fader hauep to manie 

of idele manne. of idele men. 

Ale pa feorde dale ¥ 20 Al pat feorpe deal ? 

lete we for® fufe. lete we forp fufe. 


inoh he hauet on pirti®/ 
to pirngen’ to borde®. 


father is ‘no whit [not] sane; no worship he knows, his ‘wit’ he hath 
lost; ‘me thinketh the old man will dote now anon.’ He holds here 
fourty knights, days and nights; he ‘hath [holds] here ‘these thanes [his 
swains], ‘and all their swains,’ hounds and hawks,—therefore we have 
harms ; ‘and no where they speed, and eyer they spend, and’ all the good 
that we do to them, they blithely receive it, and ‘un-thank [only] comes to 
us for our benefits. They do [us] great disgrace, our men they beat; my 
father hath too many of idle men! All the fourth part let us forth thrust, 


1 punched? 2 R. halt. 5 {pened ? 
4 vn®dc? Two letters before this word have been erased. 5 fors? 
® wirtti pr. m. 7 The first letter of pirngen is on an erasure. 


® The letters or of this word are by second hand, on erasure. 


[v. 3315—3337.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 14] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
vs selve we habbet cokef! hus seolf we habbep cocus ¥ 
to quecchen to cuchene. to cwecche to kichene. 
vf fulue we habbet bermen Y hus seolf we habbep bermen ¥ 
& birlef inowe. and borles inowe. 
Lete we fum pif mochele fole? Lete we fom pis mochele folk / 
fare wher ha! wulled. fare woder iwollep*. 
fwa ich euere ibiden are‘ so ich euere ibide ore‘ 
iSolien nulle ich hit mare. ich hit nele polie more. 
pif iherde Maglaunuf? pis i-herde Maglanduf / 
pat if quene fpilede puf. 10 pat pe ewene fpac pus. 
& he hire andfwarede ¢ and hire anfwerede ? 
mid aSelere fpiche. mid his gode fpeche. 
Leiuedi pu hauef mochel wouh? Leafdi pou haueft wop 
naueft pu riche-dom inoh. naueft pou richedom i-nop. 


ah hald pine feder on liffe / ac hold pin fader in bliffe ’ 
ne luueSe he no wiht longe. ne liuep he nopt lange. 


For 3ef ferrene kigef / For 3ef honcupe kinges 
hiherde pa tidinde. hii herep foche pinges. 
pe we fwa takede him on’ pat we fo take him on 
heo uf wolden telen. 2 hit hus wollep finde. 

Ah late we hine welden ¥ Ac lete we him habbe ’ 
hif fole on hif willé. his folk at his wille. 


and pif min aje red is ¥ [£19.c.1.] and pis his min owene read ¥ 


*enow he hath in thirty to serve at board;’ ourselves we have cooks to 
go to the kitchen, ourselves we have porters and cup-bearers enow. 
Let we some of this huge folk fare where they will: as I ever expect 
mercy, I will not bear it more (longer)!” This heard Maglaunus, that 
‘his [the] queen spake thus, and ‘he’ her answered with [his] ‘noble 
{good] speech : ‘‘ Lady, thou hast (art) ‘much’ wrong—hast thou not trea- 
sure enow ?—but keep thy father in bliss, he will live ‘no whit [not] long. 
For if foreign kings ‘should hear the tidings [they hear such things], that 
we so took on (acted towards) him, ‘they would reproach us [it would dis- 
grace us]. But let we him ‘possess [have] his folk at his will, and this is mine 


* heo? 2 hi wollep? 


142 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 3338—3360.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


for fone her efter he bed dead. _for fone her after he worp dead. 
& ac we habbé in ure hond? _and eke we habbep in hure hond? 


al half if kine-lond. haluendel his kineléd. 

Pa feide Gornoille ” Po feide Gornoille ¥ 

lauerd beo pen ftille. louerd beo pou ftille. 

let me al iwurpen ? let me al iwor... 

& ich ham wulle atwailden. and ich ham wolle awilde. [f. 16%... 1.] 
Heo fende mid hire ginne ¥ 3eo fende al mid ginne Y 

to pare cinhtene inne. 9 to pare cnipten hinne. 


heo hahte hem faren hire! wei? and hehte 3am faren hire wai / 
for heonolden hem nomore feden*.na more we nollep 30u feode. 
moni of pen peinen ¥ 

monie of pen fwennen. 

pe pider weren icumene 

mid Leir panne kinge. 

pif iherde Leir king ¥ pis ihorde Leir pe king / 

par fore he wef fwupe wrah. and wrappede him fwipe. 

pai 3edede pe king / 

mid 3emeliche worden. 


and puf feide pe kinge ¥ 2 and feide peof wordes ” 
forhful on mode. for3fulle on mode. 
Wa worse pan monne ? Wo worpe pane man? 


pe lond hauede mid menfke. pat lond hauep to wille. 


own counsel; for soon hereafter he will be dead, and eke we have in our hand 
the ‘whole half [half part] of his kingdom.”’ Then said Gornoille, “ Lord, 
be thou still, let me all be (leave me to manage), and I will dismiss them.” 
She sent [all] with ‘her’ stratagem to the knights inn; ‘she [and] bad 
them go their way, ‘for’ ‘they would no more feed them [‘‘no more we 
will you feed’”’}; ‘many of the thanes, many of the swains, that thither 
were come with Leir the king.’ Leir [the] king heard this; ‘therefore 
he was most wrath [and wrathed him greatly]. ‘Then spake the king 
with plaintive words,’ and ‘thus said the king [and said these words] 
sorrowful in mood ; ‘‘ Woe worth the man that hath land ‘with honor [at 


1 here man. sec. ? First written fedem, but the last stroke expuncted. 


[v. 3361 —3383.)} 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


and bi-tachet hit if childe 

pe while pe he mai hit walden. 
for ofte hit ilimp® 

pat eft hit him of-pinche’. 

Nu ich wulle hunne faren 
ford rihte to Cornwalen. 
3ernen ich wulle radef? 

to Regau mire dohter. 

pe hauede Hemeri pe duc? 

& mi drihliche lond. 10 
Forhd' pe king wende ¥ 

in to pan fud ende. 

to Regau if dochter ? 

for reedef him t"keden. 

Pa he to Cornwale com ’ 

he wef feire per vnder-fon. 
swa al pet halue 3er ? 

mid al hif hirede he wef per. 
pa faide Regau ’ 

to hire duc Hmeri?. 20 
Lauerd herne pu me 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


143 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


and takep hit his child 
pe wile pe hit mai holde. 
for hofte hit bi-fallep ’ 
pat eft hit him apinchep. 
Nou ich wolle hinne fare / 
ript into Cornwale. 

3ern ich wolle reades / 
of Regau mine dohter. 
pat auep Amari pe duk ¥ 
and half min kineriche. 
Forp pe king wende Y 
into pan sup ende. 

to Regau his dohter ¥ 
for reades him trokede. 
Po he to Cornwale com ‘ 
he was faire vnderfon. 
so pat al pat alue jer’ 
mid alle his cnihtes he wonede per. 
Po feide Regau 

to Armari® hire louerd. 
Herene loud to me ¢ 


Hemeri. 


to fulle fope ich fuege hit pe. [c.2-]to folle fope ich fegge pe. 


We habbet idon unwifdom / 


we habbep idon onwifdé ? 


will], and delivereth it to his child, the while that ‘he’ may ‘enjoy [hold] 
it; for oft it befalleth, that eft it repenteth him! Now I will fare hence 
‘forth’ right ‘to [into] Cornwall ; I will yearn counsels of Regau my daugh- 
ter, whom ‘Hemeri [Amari] the duke ‘had [hath], and [half] my kingdom. 
Forth went the king into the south end, to Regau his daughter; for coun- 
sels failed him. When he came to Cornwall, he was ‘there’ fairly 
received, so [that] all the half year he ‘was [dwelt] there, with all his 
‘retinue [knights]. Then said Regau to ‘her duke Hemeri [Amari, her 
lord]: ‘‘ Lord, hearken ‘thou’ to me,—I say ‘it’ thee in full sooth,—we 
have done un-wisdom (unwisely), in that we have received my father with 

? Ford? 


2 R. Hemeri. 3 R. Amari. 


144 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 3384—3406.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 

pat we mine fader habbet vnderfon.pat we mine faderhabbepvnderfon. 

mid wirtti' cinhten ’ mid pus manie cniptes ¥ 

hit nis me noht iqueme. hit nis me noht icweme. 

Do we awai pane twenti’ Do we awei alle? 

a® tene beod inohje. bote ten beop inowe. 

for al heo dringket and etep? _ for alle hii dringep and hetep’ 

& na god heo ne bi-3eted. and no god hii ne bi-3etep. 

Pa feide Hemeri pe duc’ Po ..ide Ameri pe duk ’ 

pe hif alde fader bi-fwake. pat hif halde fader ....0c.  [c.2.] 

Swa ich ezuere beo on liue?’ 10 So ich euere beoo. .... 


ne fcal he habben beote fiue. ne fal he habbe bote cn. .tes fiue. 
for per he hauet hird’* hinoh? for par on he hab.ep inoh’ 


for he nauyt* no dos. for he noping ne dop. 

& 3ef he wille héne faren and 3if he wollep hinne fare ¥ 
fufe we hine fone. fufe we hine .. .pe. 

Al heo ifpedden / Alh. ..ede ind.. 

afe heo ifpeken hafden. afe he fpeke adde. 
bi-nomen him if dozeSe bi-nomen him his cniptes ¥ 
and al hif drihliche fole. and al hire sweines. 
nolden heo him bi-leafuen? 2 nolden hi him bi-lefue / 
cinhtef beoten fiue. cniptef bote viue. 

pis ifeh pe Leir® king pif ifeh Leir pe king’ 

wa wef him on liue. wo was him a-liue. 


‘thirty [thus many] knights. It is not pleasing tome. Do we away ‘the 
twenty, and be ten [all but ten, be ¢hey] enow, for all they drink and eat, 
and no good they beget.” Then said ‘Hemeri [Amari] the duke—who be- 
trayed his old father—“ So be I ever alive (may I live), he shall not have 
but [knights] five, for ‘there [therein] he hath ‘ retinue’ enow, for ‘naught 
{nothing} he doth; and if he will hence fare, dismiss we him ‘soon [now] !” 
All ‘they [he] performed as ‘they [he] had spoken; took away from him 
his ‘people [knights], and all ‘his noble folk [their swains]; they would not 
leave him but five knights! Leir the king saw this; woe was he alive! 


1 pirtti? ? and? § herd’ pr. man. 
4 The last two letters of naust are by second hand, on erasure. * Leir pe? 


[v. 3407—3429.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
hif mod him gon mengé 
he mor3nede fwide. 
and paf worde feide Y 
mid feorhfulle laichen. 
Wela. weolla. wella ? 
hu pu bi-fwikeft monine mon. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
his mod him ga mengi? 
he mornede fwipe. 
and peof word feide Y 
mid forfol fpeche. 
Wele wele wele wele 
ou pou bi-fwikeft mani man. 


penne he’ pe treowede* alre beft wan hii pe trouep alre beft / 
penne bi-fwikef tu’ heom. (on? pan pou heom bi-fwikeft. 


Nif hit nowit 3are ¢ 

noht fulle twa 3ere. 10 
pat ich* waf a riche kig / 

and held mine cinhtef. 

Nu ich habben® ibiden ¥ 

pat ich bare fitte. 

wunnen bireued? 

wa if me on liue. 

Ich wes at Gornoille / 

mire god-fulle dohter. 

wuden’ on hire leoden ¥ 

mid pritti cinhtes. 20 
pe 3et ich mihte libben ’ 


Nif noht 3are? 

noht fulle two 3ere. 

pat ich was a riche king ¥ 
and welde mine cniptes. 
Nou ich habbe ibede pane dai ¥ 
pat ich bar fitte. 

of gode bi-reued ¥ 

wo his me a-liue. 

Ich was mid Gornolle ’ 
mine leofue dohter. 

ich wonede on hire londe ¥ 
mid prittie cnihtes. 

pe 3et ich mipte libbe ” 

a fommere wife. 


ah penne igonne® liden. [£19°.c.1.] ac ich wende bet habbe idon ¥ 


his mood began to be troubled in him; he mourned greatly, and these 
words said with sorrowful ‘countenance [speech] : ‘‘ Weal! weal! weal!. 
[weal!] how thou deceivest many man! When they trust ‘on’ thee best 
of all, then thou deceivest them! It is ‘no whit [not] yore,—not full two 
years—that I was a rich king, and ‘held [enjoyed] my knights; now I 
have abode [the day], that I sit bare, of ‘possessions [goods] bereaved ! 
Woe is me alive! I was ‘at [with] Gornoille, my ‘goodly [beloved] 
daughter; [I] dwelt in her land with thirty knights, so that I yet might 
[in some wise] liye; ‘but thence I departed, I weened most well to do, 


1 heo? ? treoweden pr. m. 
* Interlined above pat, by second hand. 
® bireued? 7 wunede? 


~ 3 tuo pr. m., but o erased. 
5 habbe? 
§ ich gonne? 

L 


146 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 3430—3452.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


ich wende {wide wel to don? and gan panne wende. 
ac wurfe ich habbe vnder-fon. ac worfe ich habbe onder-fon ¥ 


Agen ich wulle to Scotte! ‘ Ajein ich wole to Scotland. 

to fcone mire docter. and feché mine dohter ¥ 

3ernen hira milcea ad bidde hire milfe. 

pat heo me nele wurdea’. 

bidden heo me vnder-fon ¥ bid hire me onder-f6 ? 

mid mine fif cinhten. mid mine fif cnihtef. 

per ich wulle wunie pare ich wolle woniey 

and polie peof wenen. 10 and polie ... wowe. (£17.c.1.] 
ane lutele ftunde ¥ ane lutle ftu...? 

for ne libbe ich no wiht longe. ... ne libbe ich nopt longe. 
Leir pe king wende forh ? . . .ing verde forp’ 

to if doht?? wunede nor’. to hif doh... pat wonede norp. 
fulle pre nihtes ? [cinhtef. folle 3ree niptes ¥ 

heo herabarewude hine and if 3e0 herbor3ede him and hiseniptes. 
heo {wor a pane ferpe dei / 3e0 ifwor a pan feorp dai ’ 

bi al heuéliche main. bi al heu.nliche maine. 

pat ne feulde he habben mare Y pat ne folde he habbe more 
bute enne kicte pere. 2 bote one cnipt pare. 

and 3ef he pet noldey and 3ef he pat nolde 

ferde wuder he wolde. fare woder fo wolde. 

Wel oft wef Leir way Wel ofte was Leir wo’ 


[but I weened to have done better, and thence departed,] but worse I have 


received! Again (back) I will to Scotland, ‘to my fair {and seek my] 


daughter ; ‘to solicit [and ask] her pity, ‘in that she will not respect me’ ; 
pray her to receive me with my five knights; there will I dwell, and suffer 
this harm a little while, for I shall not live long!” Leir the king went 
forth to his daughter [that] dwelt in the north; full three nights she lodged 
him and his knights; on the fourth day she swore by the all-heavenly 
Power, that he should not have more than one knight there; and if he 
would (liked) that’not, he might go whither he would. Well oft was Leir 


a Scottelonde? ; 2 wurdea? 
3 Written at first doht?e, but e is expuncted. 


_— =~ ee | 


(v.3453—3473.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 147 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS, Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
and neuef wurf panne pa'. ac neuere worfe pane po, 
Pa feide pe alde king ’ Po feide Leir pe king / 
zeruu ewaf? on herten. wo him was on heorte. 
Wallan de® wela dead ¥ Wo la deap wola deap ¥ 
pat pu me nelt for-demen. pat pou me nelt for-deme. 
Seo% feide Cordoille ? Sop feide Gordoille ’ 
for cu% hit if me noupe. for cup hit his me noupe. 
mi 3engeftte dohter ? mi 3eongefte dohter / 
heo waf me wel dure. pat was me wile deore. 


seodsen heo me wef leadeft** 10 seoppe 3e0 was me lopeft z 
for heo me feiden* alre fohuft. for 3e0 me feide fopest. 
pat he bide® vnword & lah. pat he his onworp and lop’ 


pe mon pe litul ah / pe man pat lutel o3ep. 
and ihe naf na wurdra® / and ich nas no worperey - 
penne ich nef? weldinde. pon ich was god habben®. 


Ouer fohfeiden‘ pat zunge vifm6°Sop feide pe 3o0ng wimmon ’ 

hire folwed mochel wifdom. hire folwep moche wifds. 

pa wilepeich heuedemi kinelond:’Pe wile ich hadde min kinelond ¥ 
luueden me mine leoden.  [[c.2.] louede me mi leode. 

for mine londe & for mine feo ¥ 20 for mi lond and mi feo / 

mine eorlef fulle to mine cneo. eorles fulle to mi cneo. 


woe, ‘and [but] never worse than then! Then said‘the old [Leir the] king 
—vexed [woe] he was in heart—* Alas death! alas death! that thou 
wilt not destroy me! Sooth said Cordoille—for now it is manifest to me 
—my youngest daughter,—'she [that] was to me ‘full [a while] dear, 
but afterwards she was most hateful to me—for she said to me most truly, 
that the man who possesses little is Aeld unworthy and odious, and that I 
was no worthier than in proportion to what I was possessor of. ‘ Over’-sooth 
said the young woman—much wisdom followeth her! The while ‘that’ 
I had my kingdom, my people loved me; for my land and ‘for’ my fee 
‘my’ earls fell to my knee. Now I am a poor man, therefore no man loveth 


) Struck out by second hand, but without cause. ? he waf? 5 leaSeft ? 
4 feide? 5 Originally written hee bi¥en, but two letters afterwards erased. 
® wurdra? 7 Interlined by second hand, § habbend? - 
° The three first letters of this word are by second hand, on erasure. 

L 2 


148 LA3AMONS BRUT. (v. 3474—3497.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


Nu ich 2m a wrecche mon’ Nou ich ham a wrecche ma’ 
ne leouet me no mon for pan. ne louep me no man for pa. 
Ah mi dohter me feide feohY Ac mi dohter me feide fop? 


for nou ich hire ileue inoh. for ich hire ileue inop. 

& ba twa hire fufteren ‘ bope two hire foftref? 
lafinge me feiden. lefing me feide. 

pat ich ham wes fwa leof pat ich ham was fo leof 
leuere penne hire ae lif. afe hire o3en lif. [c.2.] 
& Cordoille mi dohter ’ and mi 3onge dohter ¥ 
doh3epe' me feide. 10 Gordoille me feide. 

pat heo me leouede fwa feire: pat 3e0 me loue wolde. 

fwa monnef® fader fcolde. fo man his fader folde. 

wet wold ich bidde mare’ wat wolde ich bidde more’ 
of mire dohter dure. of mine dohter deore. 

Nu ich wullen faren feord ¥ Nou ich wolle faren forp? 
& ouer fie fufen. and ouer féé fufi. 

ihiré of Cordoille ¥ hi-hire of Gordoille / 

wat beon hire wille. —[grame? wat beo hire wille. 


Hire feohSe word ich nam to Hire fop word ich nam to grame 
par fore ich habbe nu muchele parforeich habbe nou mochel fame. 
for nu ich mot bi-fecchen? [fcame.for nou ich mot bi-feche ¥ 

pat ping pat ich er for-howede. pat ich her for-ojede. 

nule heo me do na wurfey 9% nele 3e0 me no worfe?’ 

panne hire lond forwurnen. pane hire lond werne. 


me! But my daughter said sooth to me, for ‘now’ I believe her enow, 
‘and’ both her two sisters said leasing to me, that I was so dear to them, 
‘dearer than [as] their own life; and my [young] daughter Cordoille said 
‘sooth’ (?) to me, that she ‘loved me as fairly [would love me] as one should 
love his father, What would I ask more of my daughter dear? Now will 
I go forth, and pass over sea, to hear of Cordoille what her will is. Her 
true words I took in anger, therefore I have now much shame; for now I 
must beseech ‘the thing’ that I erst despised! She will not ‘do’ worse to 
me than forbid me her land!” Leir went to the sea, with a single swain 


1 feohSe ? ? mon his? 


[v. 3498—3520.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 149 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
Leir ferde to pere fe ¥ Leir ferde to pare {éé ¥ 
mid ane alpie fwein. mid on alpi fweine. 
in to ane fchipe he bi-com in to one fipe he bi-com y 
ne icnwo hine no mon. ne cnew hine no man. 
ouer fea icomen! / ouer féé hii comé Y 
hauene fone anomen?. and hauene hi nomen. 
For’ wende pe king Leir Forp wende pe king Leir ? 
nauede he® bute éne fwein. nadde he bote one fweine. 
hi axeden pa quene hii axede after pe cwene ¥ 


pat heo comen hire a newefte. 10 pat hii a neweft come. 
tahten hed leode / 

wer wef pes londes quene. 

Leir king wende on ane feld? _Leir king wende on an feld’ 


& refte hine on folden. and refte his weri bones. 
and if fwien he ford fende ¥ and hif fweyn he forp fende ¥ 
pe wef iradmon hende. pat was hiredman hende. 

to pere quene Cordoille ” to pare cwene Gordoille / 
and feide hire wel ftille. [£20.c.1.] and feide hire wel ftille. 

Hail wur% pu feire quene / Hayl worpou cwene 


ich eam pinef fader fweine. 20 pi fader pe grette. 

and pi uader if hider kimen*y and he his hider to pe icome / 
for al if lond is him bi-nomen. for al his lond his him binome. 
beope® ba pine fuftren beop bope pine foftres 


(servant) ; into a ship he entered ; no man knew him. Over sea they came, 
{and] haven ‘soon’ they reached. Forth went the king Leir—he had but 
one swain—they asked [after] the queen, that they might come nigh ‘ to 
her’; ‘people directed them where the queen of the land was’. King Leir 
went in a field, and rested ‘him on the ground [his weary bones], and his 
swain, who was a trusty domestic, he sent forth to the queen Cordoille, and 
said to her full secretly : ‘‘ Hail be thou, ‘fair’ queen! ‘I am thy fathers 
swain, and thy father [Thy father greets thee, and he] is hither come [to 
thee], because all his land is taken from him. Both thy sisters are forsworn 


1 hi comen? . 2 hi nomen? 


3° Originally written heo, but the last letter is erased. 
4 kumen? 5 beod man. sec. 


150 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 3521—3543.} 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xi. 

touward him for-fworene. toward him for-fworene. 

He cumed for neode ’ He his icome for neode? 

in to piffe leode. in to pine peode. 


and help him nu for pu mihtY help him nou an pou miht ? 

he is pi fader alfe hit if riht. he his pi fader and hit his riht. [£17°.c.1-] 
Pe quene Cordoille ¥ Pe ewene Gordoille ¥ 

fet longe {whe ftille. lang fat ftille. 

heo iward! reod eon * hire benche ¥ 

f{wilche hit were of wine feéche. 

and pe fwain feet at hire fait: 10 

fone per after him wes pe bet. 


Pa allef vppe abrec po hit halles vp b*c/ 

hit wef god pet heo fpec. hit was god pat 3e0 fpac. 
Appollin mi lauer® ich pankie pe 

pat mi feeder if icumme to me. 

tidinge ic ihire leoue Tiding ich ihire lefue ¥ 
mi fader on liue ify pat mi fader his a-liue. 

of me he habbé fcal goudne reed+of me he fal habbe godne read / 
bute ich beo pe raSer ded. bote ich pe raper be dead. 
Seie me nupe leo‘ fwein / 20 

& harne mine laf. 

ich pe wulle bi-tache ¥ Ich pe wolle bi-take / 

a male riche. one male riche. 


towards him. He ‘cometh [is come] through necessity into ‘this [thy] 
country, ‘and’ now help him, ‘for [if] thou mayest; he is thy father, ‘as 
[and] it is right.”—The queen Cordoille sate long ‘most’ still; ‘she waxed 
red on her bench, as if it were from wine-draught, and the swain sate at 
her feet ;—soon thereafter it was the better for him!’ Then [it] wholly 
brake forth, it was good that she spake : “ ‘ Apollin, my lord! I thank thee, 
that my father is come to me.’ Grateful tidings I hear, that my father is 
alive. Of me he shall have good counsel, unless I first be dead! ‘Say me 
now, good swain, and hearken my instructions.’ I will give to thee a rich 
mail (coffer), pennies are ‘there [therein] safe, in certainty a hundred pound. 


t iward? 2 reode on? 3 lauerd? 4 leof? 


“oe Se 


[v. 3544—3568.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


penizes per buod! an funda? 

to iwiffe an hundrad punda. 
Ich bi-teeche pe anne hengeft 
godna & ftrongna. 

to leden pif garifume 

to leuene mine fadere. 

and feie him pat ich hine gret ’ 
godere gretinge. 

& hatine® fare fwipe ? 

to hare feire bur3e. 10 
and rumen him herberia / 
i fime riche burie. 

& bugge him alf erruft / 
pat him wef alre leou’t. 
metef & drinches ¥ 

& hende cla%es. 

hides & hauekef? 

& durewur%e horfes. 
halke® in if heofe ’ 
feuwerti hired cinhtef. 20 
he3e and riche 

bi-hongé mid rue. 

makie him god baid ’ 

& ofte hine ba%ie. 

& him blod lete ¥ 


[c.2.] 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


151 


MS. Cott. Otho, C, xrur. 
par beop par ine ifunde ’ 
to iwiffe an hundred pound. 


Led pou pis garifom 

to lefue mine fader. 

and fei pat ich hine grette ¥ 
godes gretinge. 

and hoten fare fwipe ¥ 

to fomme he3e borwe. 

and nimen him on in? 
riches of alle. 

and bigge him allre ereft y 
pat him his alre leueft. 
metes and dringes ¥ 

and riche clopes. 

hiides and hauekes / 

and hors mid pe befte. 
holde in his houfe ¢ 

fourti cnihtef. 


makie hine god bed 
and ofte hine bapie. 
and him blod lete 


‘I give thee a steed, good and strong,’ ‘to carry [Carry thou] this treasure 
to my dear father ; and say ‘to him’ that I greet him with good greeting ; 
and bid him go quickly to ‘a fair [some noble] burgh, and take him ‘lodging 
in some rich town [an inn, richest of all]; and buy him first of all what to 
him ‘was [is] most of all desired, meats and drinks, and ‘fair [rich] clothes, 
hounds and hawks, and ‘valuable horses [horses with the best] ; maintain 
in his house forty ‘household’ knights, ‘clothed in garments noble and 
rich’; make him good ‘bath [bed], and oft himse/f bathe, and let himself 
5 halde? habbe? 


1 buo’? 2 hat hine? 


152 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 3569—3594.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

lutlen and ofte. lutel and ofte. 

Wenne pu wult more fuluer? = Wan pou wolt mor feoluer 

feeche hit at me fuluen. feche hit mi feolue. 

& ich him wulle fenden and ich wolle fende ? 

inoh of piffe ende. inoh of piffe hende. 

fwa neuer he ne cuSe? so pat neuere he ne cupe 

of hif alde cud8e. of his hol cuppe. 


cnihte ne fweine ? 
ne nauer nanne peine. 
Penne feowerti dawef beo’d agan ‘Are fourti daizes beo a-gon ¥ 


penne cu%e he anan. 11_panne cupe he hit a-non. 
to leue mine lauerd Y to leofue mine loud Y 

pat Leir if an if londe. pat Leir his in londe. 
icume ouer fe ftreme / i-comen ouer féé ftrem 
to ifen if eaftreffe. to fpeken wid his dohter. 
& ich hit wulle fwa nimen Y and ich hit wole fo nime 
alfe ich hine nuften. afe ich noht nufte. 


lisen him to-3enef Y 
mid mine lauerde. 


fainen minef lauerdef 20 

& if feirliche cume. 

Nute hit neuere nane gumey _—Nute hit ..n gomey’ [c.2.] 
buté he beo neowene icume. bote. . . .ne icome. 

& puf hit writen fende / and push... . . fende? 

to mine lauerd kinge. to mine lau... . 

& pu paf ehte on-fo . . pou pis feoluer. . . 


blood, little and oft. When thou wilt more silver, ‘seek [fetch] it ‘at’ 
myself, and I will ‘him ’ send enow from this end (land), so [that] he never 
shall make known of his old country ¢o knight nor swain, nor never ¢o any 
thane. ‘When [Ere] forty days are gone, then make he [it] known anon to 
my dear lord, that Leir is in ‘his’ land, come over sea-stream ‘to see his 
territories [to speak with his daughter]; and I will so take it, as if I knew 
‘it’ not; ‘proceed towards him with my lord, and rejoice at his and my. 
lords unexpected meeting!’ No man ‘ever’ may know it, except he be 
newly arrived; and thus send it written to my lord king; and thou this 


{v. 3595—3617.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 153 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
and loca pat pu wel do. and lok pat pou wel do. 
and 3ef pu heo puf daleft ¢ 
to godere pire hele. 

& pe fwein on-feng paf ahte’ —_ pes fwein an hi3inge ¢ 


& to is louer' ferde. wende to his louerd. 

to Leir pon kinge ¥ to Leir pane king ¢ 

& feide paf tidinge. and feide h.m peof tiding. 
per he lei on felde ¥ par he lai on felde 


and refte hine on folde. [f.20".c.1.] and refte him for wowe. 
Sone werd pe alde king’ —10 


wunliche ieSeled. 

& paf wuord feide ¥ Po he horde peos tiding ‘ 
mid foSere ftefuene. po feide Leir pe king. 
After vuele cume’ god ¥ After vuel comep god? 


wel if him pe hit habbe mot. wel his him pe hit bide mot. 
Heo ferden to hare #3ene burh: Hii verde to one borwe 


afe pe quene hehte. alfe pe cwene hehte. 
& al heo iduden and al hii duden 
efter hire lare. after hire lore. 

pe® ford wuren agan ¥ 2% Po forp weren ago? 
feuwerti da3ene. fourtie daizes. 

pon nom Leir pe king. po nam Leir pe king ¥ 
if leoufte cnihtef. his leofefte cnihtef. 


‘money [silver] receive, and look that thou do well; ‘and if thou thus it 
dealest, it shall be to thy good heal.’”” ‘And the [This] swain ‘received 
the money [in haste], ‘and’ went to his lord, to Leir the king, and said [to 
him] these tidings, where he lay in the field, and rested him ‘on the earth 
[for grief]. ‘Soon became the old king joyfully comforted,’ ‘and these 
words said with sooth voice [When he heard these tidings, then said Leir the 
king], “After evil cometh good; well is he that may ‘have [abide] it!” They 
went to a ‘noble’ burgh, as the queen commanded, and they did all after 
her bidding. When forty days were gone forth, then Leir the king took 
his dearest knights, and greeted Aganippus, ‘ who was’ his ‘dear [dearest] 


? Jouerd ? 2 pa? 


154 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
& gret Aganippum ? 
pat waf hif leue adum. 
& feide him bi hif fond ¥ 
pet icume he wes to if londe. 
to fpeken wit hif dohter 
pe wes him fwu%e dure. 
Aganippuf wef blipe ’ 
pet Leir wes cumen liden. 


LAJAMONS BRUT. 


[v. 3618—3639.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
and grette Aganippii ? 
his leueft opom. 
and fende! bi his fonde 
pat icome he was to his londe. 
to fpeken wip his dohter / 
pat him was fwipe deore. 
Aganippus was blipe 


pat Leir was icomen lipe. 


ferde him to-3enes ¥ ferde him to-3eines ¥ 


mid alle hif peinef. 10 mid alle his cniptes. 
and pa quene Cordoille and pe cwene Gordoille ¥ 
pa hauede Leir if wille. po hadde Leir his wille. 


Heo comen to gadere ¥ 

& ofte heo cuften. 

heo uenden to bur3e ¥ 

bliffe wef an hifde. 

Per wef bemene fong ¥ 

pere peden® pipen among. 

al weren pe hallen 

bi-hongen mid pellen. 20 
alle pai? mete-burdes 
ibrufted mid golde. 


Hii comen to gadere ¥ 
and wel ofte cufte. 

hii verde to borwe ? 
par bliffes were riue. 


Alle were pe halles ’ - 
bi-honge mid palles. 
alle pe mete-bordes 
ibruftled mid golde. 


son-in-law, and said ‘to him’ by his messengers, that he was come into 
his land, to speak with his daughter, who was most dear to him. Aga- 
nippus was blithe that Leir was arrived; he proceeded towards him with 
all his ‘thanes [knights], and the queen Cordoille,—then had Leir his will! 
They came together, and [well] oft ‘ they’ kissed ; they went to the burgh,— 
‘joy was in the household! [there blisses were rife!] ‘There was song of 
trumpets, there were pipes among;’ all the halls were be-hung with 
palls; all the meat-boards were bristled (studded) with gold; [rings of 


1 seide? 

? Or veden, man. sec. on erasure, but apparently geden man. pr.: we probably 
should read weren. The same line occurs at fol. 28>. c. 1. 

5 pa? 


[v. 3640—3662.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 155 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
ringes of golde ? 
ele mon hafte 6 honde. ech man hadde an honde. 
mid fipelen and mid harpen:? _ mid fipele and mid harpef? 
hele%ef per fungen. sha Roa bene [£18.c.1.] 
Lette pe king gan awal / . pe.... gon on wal? 
& lude clepien ouer al. and loude. . . «al. 
and feide pat Leir kin' / pat Leir king / 
icume wef to londen. (eR hw sasrsites to piffe londe. 
Nu hated Aganippus ¢ 
pe if pe he3eft ouer uf. 10 
pat 3e Leir king / 
alle wurSe lide. 
& feal bed eouwer lauerd / 
inne piffere leoden. 
alifwa fele sereit9 pio.t sba728 Lote.) 4 ween er? 
fwa he wonien wulle here. afe wonie he ,.....r. 
& Aganippus ure king / and Aganippus hour king ” 
fwal? beon if ynderling. wole beo his vnderling. 
Wha fwa wulle libba’ Wo fo wole libbe ’ 
alde paf fibba. 2 holde pus fibbe. 
& 3ef o man hit wille breké? —_ and 3if eni man hit wole breke ¥ 
on uefte it bide® iwreken. pe king him wole wel a-wreke. 


& wite alle he* if mon’ 


gold] each man had on Ais hand; with fiddles and with harps men there 
sung. The king caused persons to go on the wall, and loudly proclaim 
over all ; and they said that Leir the king was come to [this] land: —‘‘ ‘Now 
biddeth Aganippus—who is the highest over us—that ye all be obedient to 
Leir the king, and he shall be your lord in this kingdom,’ as many years 
as he here will dwell, and Aganippus, our king, ‘shall [will] be his under- 

- Whoso will live, hold he this peace, and if any man will break it, 
‘soon it shall be avenged [the king will well avenge him]; ‘ and he charges 


1 king? 2 feal? 
3 First written bide’, but the & struck out: probably we should read bite. 
* he alle? 


156 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


‘} he here haldet on. 

Pa anfwareda pa dujepa. 

don we hit wullet. ° 

lude and ftille ¥ 

al pes kinges wille. 

PpurS out al pat ulke 3er 

heo duden al puf per’. 

mid muchelere fibba / 

mid mochelee? feahte. 

pat? peof 3er wef a-gi 10 
pa wold Leir king fare ham. 
to piffe londe liden y 

and 3ernde® peof kingef leue. 
pe king Aganippuf/ 
anfwerede him pus. 

Ne fcalt pu neuere pider faré ¥ 
bute mochelere ferde. 

ah ich pe wulle lanen 

of mine leode-fole. 

fif hundred fchipes 20 
ifulled mid cnihten. _ 

& al pat heom bihoue’ 

to habben on fore. 

and pine dohter Cordoille ¢ 

pa if piffe londef quene. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 3663—3687.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xi11. 


Po anfwerede pat folk y 
don we hit wollep. 
lude and ftille ” 

al pe kinges wille. 
Porp vt al pat ilke 3er : 
hii dude al pus per. 


Po pat 3ier was a-gon 
po wolde Leir king faren hom. 


pe king Aganippus ? 
anfwerede Leir pus. 

Ne falt pou neve pider fare y 
bute mochel ferde. 

ac ich pe wolle lene? 

of mine gode cniptef. 

fif hundred fipes Y 

ifulled mid pan befte. 

and al pat heom bi-houep 
to habbe on vore. 

and pine dohter Gordoille ¢ 
pat his pis londes cwene. 


all his men, that they hereon observe it.’”. Then answered the people, 


«We will it do, loud and still, all the kings will!” 


Throughout all that 


same year they did all thus there, ‘ with much amity, with much concord’. 
When ‘this [the] year was passed, then would Leir the king go home, 


and asked the kings leave to come to this land’. 


The king Aganippus 


answered ‘him [Leir] thus: “Thou shalt never go thither without a great 
army ; but I will lend thee some of my ‘people [good knights], five hundred 
ships filled with ‘knights [the best], and all that behoveth them to have in 


her man. pr. 


2 pa? 


5 3erde man. pr. 


[v.3688—3709.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 


157 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
heo feall mid mochelere ferde ? 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 
3e0 fal fare mid pee’ 


farnen' mid pe. mid mochere ferde. 

An lipen to pé londen And wendep to pa lond ‘’ 
per pu were leode®-king. pare pou-king were. 

and 3ef pu miht zine finden: —_ and 3if pou miht eni finde ¢ 


pe pe wulle az3en-ftonde. [f.21.c.1.] pat pe wole wid-ftonde. 
binimen pe pine rihte ¥ bi-nime pine rihte 

& pine kine-riche. and pine riche. 

&® pu ahliche ueht ¥ ewikliche anon riht / 

& fel heo* to grunde. 10 leie heom to grunde. 

& irum al pat lond and iwin al pat lond Y 

and fete hit Cordoille an hond. and fete hit Gordoille an hond. 


pat heo hit al habbe pat 3eo hit alle habbe Y [c. 2.] 
efter pime® daie. after pine daize. 

Paf wordef feide Aganippuf? — peos word feide Aganippus 

& Leir king dude puf. and Leir pe .... . ude pus. 

and al he iworhte and al he ...... e? 


{wa hif freond him tahte. afe his frend him tahte. 


To piffe londen® he com lisen 
mid leoue hif dohter. 20 
he higreSeSe? mid pane befte ¢ 


To piffe londe he com ¥ 
mid his leofue dohter. 
he gripede mid pan befte ¥ 


pe him buwen wolden. pat bouwe him wolde, 


the expedition. And thy daughter Cordoille, who is queen of this land, she 
shall fare with thee, with a powerful host. And go to the land, where thou 
wert king, and if thou mayest find any that will withstand thee, to take away 
‘from thee’ thy right, and thy kingdom, ‘boldly fight thou, and fell (quickly 
anon right lay] them to the ground, and conquer all the land, and set it in 
Cordoilles hand, that she have it all after thy day.” These words said 
Aganippus, and thus did Leir [the] king, and all he wrought as his friend 
him taught. To this land he came with his loved daughter. He made peace 
with the best with those that would submit to him, and he felled all ‘ them’ 


} faren? 
+ heom? 
7 igreSede? 


? leodene man. sec. 
5 R. pine. 


3 Redundant. 
® londe? 


158 


MS, Cott, Calig. A. rx. 


& alle he ham fulde y 

pe him wit feohten. 

and he al pif kine-lond ¢ 
biwon to hif a3ere hande. 
& 3ef hit Cordoille’ 

pe wef Francene quene. 
and hit ane ftunde 

ftod a piffene ilke. 

Leir king one leoden ¥ 
preo 3er leouede. 10 
pe com hif ende dei’ 
pat pe king ded lei. 
Inne Leircheftre ¥ 

hif dohter hine leide. 
inne Janief temple 

al fwa pe bac tellet. 


And Cordoille heold pif lond 
mid haere ftrende. 

fulle fif 3ere 

quene heo wes here. 20 


pa while Fracene king ¢ 
feifise makede. 

and Cordoille com pat wourd ’ 
pat heo waf iworSen widewe. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 3710—3733.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
and alle he gripede' ¥ 
pat hi wid-ftode. 
and al pis kine-lond ¥ 
bi-wan to his owe hond. 
and 3ef hit Gordoille ¥ 
F“ncene cwene. 


And Leir lifuede ? 

preo 3er par after. 

po com his lifues hende 

pat no man ne mai at-wéde. 
Hine Leyceftre / 

his dohter hine leide. 

in Jaines his temple’ 

afe pe bock tellep. 

And Gordoille heold pis lond ” 
mid godere ftrégpe. 

fulle fif 3er Y 

cwene 3e0 waf here. 

pe wile F“ncene king 

veifip makede. . 
and Gordoille com pat word ¥ 
pat 3e0 waf widewe iworpe. 


that ‘fought against [withstood] him; and all this kingdom ‘he’ won 
in his own hand, and gave it to Cordoille, ‘who was’ queen of France ; 
‘and in this same wise it stood a while.’ [And] ‘King’ Leir lived three 
years ‘on earth [thereafter]; then came his ‘end-day [lifes end], that 
‘the king dead lay. [no man may escape!] In Leicester his daughter laid 
him, in Janus [his] temple, as the book telleth. And Cordoille held this 
land with ‘high [good] strength; full five years she was queen here; the 
while the French king died, and the word came to Cordoille, that she 
was become a widow. ‘When’ the tidings came to Scotlands king, 


1 Sic. 


[v. 3734—3756.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 159 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. ix. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
Pa come pe tidéde ¥ Come pe tidinge ¥ 
to Scottlondef kinge. to Scotlondes kige. 
pat Agaippuf waf dead Y pat Aganippus was dead 
Leir king ideied. Gordoilles lauerd. 
he fende purh Brittaine he fende porh Britaine 
into Cornwaille. into Cornwale. 
& hehte pane duc ftronge ‘ and hehte pane duk ftronge 
herizen' in fu londe. werri in fup londe. 
and he wolde bi noréen ° and he wolde bi norpe ¥ 
iahnien pa londa®. {{¢.2.] an pat lond a-winne. 
For hit waf fwupe mouchel feome:’For hit was fwipe mochel fame 
& ec fwipe muchel grame. and eke hit was mochel grame. 
pat fcholde a quene ’ pat a ewene folde ¥ 
beon king in pisfe londe. be king in piffe londe. —_[£.18*.c.1.] 
& heora funen beon buté / and hire fones beo boute 
pa weren hire bet”en. pat beop hire betere. 


of pan aldre fuftren 
pa pa eSelen fulden habben. 
Nule we hit na more ipolien? Nolle we na more hit ipo.... 
al pat lond we wulled habben. 20 .. wollep habbe pat lon. ¥ 

... take hit pe children hond. 
Heo bi-gunnen werre ? Hii bi-gonne werri? 
pane® com on weft. to mochele roupe. 


that Aganippus was dead, ‘and king Leir had died (Cordoilles lord], he 
sent through Britain into Cornwall, and commanded the strong duke to 
war in the south territory, and he would by the north [and] conquer 
the land. For it was very great shame, and eke [it was] ‘very’ great 
grief, that a queen should be king in this land, and their sons be without 
(deprived of it), who were better than she, ‘of the elder sisters, who the 
dignity should (ought to) have. —‘‘ We will no more bear it; ‘all,’ the 
land we will have” [and give it to the children in hand]. They began to 
war ;—mischief came quickly [to great pity] !—and [the two] sisters sons 


) First written hernijen, but n expuncted. 
2 A second hand has struck out the n in londa, but without reason. 3 wane? 


160 LA3AMONS BRUT. {v. 3757—3778.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. M&. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
& pere quene fuft? funen y and pe twei foftrene fones 
fumneden ferde. fomnede verde. 
Heo! nomen weren ihaten puf? Hire names weren icleoped pus 
Morgan & Cunedagiuf. Morgan and Cunadegif. 
Ofte heo ledden ferde / Oft hi ladde ferde 
ofte heo fuhten. ofte hii fuhte. 
ofte heo weré buuenne ? ofte hii were bofe / 
and ofte bi-noSen. and ofte hii weren bi-neope. 
pat com at pan lafte Po com at pan lafte ” 
pat heo® wef alf leofuft. 10 pat 3am was leueft. 
pe Bruttef heo flo3zen ¥ pat Brut? hii flozen ¥ 
Cordoille heo nomen. and Gordoille hii nemen. 


Heo duden heo in quarterne 
in ane quale-hufe. 
heo werSede® heore moddri’ — Hii wreppede hire moddri 


mare pene heo fulden. more pane hii folde. 

pat peo* wiman waf {wa wrod’ pat pe womman waf fo wropy 
pat hire feuluen heo waf lad. pat hire feolue 3e0 was lop. 
heo nom enne longne cnif 3eo nam anne longe cnif/ 


& bi-nom® hire feoluen pat lif. 20 bi-nam hire owene lif. 
Pat wes an uuel reed’ 
pat hire fuluen makede dead. 


‘ of the queen’ assembled an army. Their names were thus called, Morgan 
and Cunedagius. Oft they led forces, oft they fought, oft they were above, 
and oft [they were] beneath, ‘until [then] at the last happened what to 
them was ‘of all’ most desired, that they slew the Britons, [and] they 
captured Cordoille. ‘They put her in prison, in a torture-house;’ they 
incensed their aunt more they should (ought), so that the woman was so 
wrath, that she was hateful to herself; she took a long knife, ‘and’ ‘de- 
prived herself of the [took away her own] life. ‘That was an evil coun- 
sel, that she herself should kill!’ Then was all this kingdom in Morgan 


1 heore? ? heom? 3 wredede? 
* So by first hand: the second has erased peo, and substituted pe. 
5 Originally bi-inom, but the second i is erased. 


(v. 3779—3799.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 161 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xm. 
Peo wef al pif kine-lond y Po was al pis kine-lond 
an Morgan & Cunedagief hedd. in Morgan and Cunagef' his hond. 
heo fengen to piffen lond ¥ i? fenge to piffe londe y 


and mid fuhten hit bi-wunnen. and mid fihte hit bi-wonne. 
Pat® delden pat broperan ¥ Po dealde pe meies ” 

al pif drihtliche lond. pis lond 3am bi-twine. 
Cunedagiuf bi pare Humbre? = Cunadegis adde al pat weft 7 
hauede al peS* weft? —[[£21%.c.1.] 

Morgan hauede nord & eft. and Morgan norp and eft. Margan. 
& fwa heo beolden al pif lond 10 and fo hii heolde pat lond? 

ale pe twa 3ere on heore heond. folle two 3ere in hire hond. 

Pa pe twa 3er weren agon Po two 3er weren a-go?’ 

pa twinedé here ponkef. po changede hire ponkes. 

Morgan wes in Scottlond ” Morgan hadde Scotlond ¥ 

pene nord ende he hauede ane al in his owene hond. 


Cunedagi 
[us]. 


honde. 

inne Cornwale. Cunedagief fune® in Cornwale Cunadegis [c.2.] 
londef 

he hauede moni god huf. hadde mani riche hus. 

Morgan hafte on hirede ¥ Morga hadde mid him ? 

fwide monie cnihtef.§ = .....- nie cniptef. 

peo ne luuede noht paf leoden ? 2 pat ...... noht pif folk 

ah laid heo hem weoren. ROA Tes ham were. 


and Cunedagius [his] hand; they took possession of this land, and with 
battle conquered it. Then the brothers divided all this ‘noble’ land [be- 
tween them]; Cunedagius had all the west ‘by the Humber,’ [and] 
Morgan ‘had’ the north and east ; and so they held ‘all’ ‘this [the] land, 
‘all the [full] two years in their hand. When ‘the’ two years were gone, 
then changed their thoughts (they quarrelled). Morgan ‘was in [had] 
Scotland, ‘the north end he had in [all in his own] hand; in Cornwall 
Cunedagius ‘he’ had many a ‘good [rich] house. Morgan had ‘in his 
household [with him] very many knights who loved not this people, but 


? Cunadegis? 7 hi? 3 pa? 
4 pet? 5 There is some error here of the scribe. 
M 


162 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 3800—3821.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xtir. 
He! taleden wid Morgan Hii fpe...... Morgan 
& if cnihtfcipe telden. 
and puf him to feiden and pus to . im feide / 
pa vnfelie mon. 
Lauer* Morgan whi nult pu faren?Louerd wi nelt pou wende 
& fufen pie ferden. ouer al Brutlandef erpe. 
and faren 3end al Brutlond and fette al pe kine-lond ’’ 
& nimen hit to pire hedde. in pin owene hond. 
per of we habbe®d fceome / par of we habbep fame?’ 
& at oure herte muche grame. 10 and vre heorte grame. 
pat pu daleft pif lond pat pou dealeft pat lond ¥ 
pe fculde bed o pire hond. pat folde beo in pine hond. 


Pu eert a fwa hende gome Pou hart on ftaleworpe gome :’ 
and pere eeldre fufter fone. and of pe eldre fofter icome. 
deleft pine lond wid pine mei’ and dealeft pin lond wip pin mey ¥ 


pi monfcipe if pa laffe. pi manfipe his pe laffe. 
puf fpeken peos swiken ? Pus feide peos fwikes ¥ 
and fpileden mid worde. and fpeke peos wordef. 
fwa long heo hine lerde ¥ so lang hii hine lerede ” 
pat he heom ileuede. 20 pat he 3am ilefde. 

He gadere ferde ? He gaderede ferde 

pe wef feddliche ftor. onfeli grete. 


they were loath to them. They spake with Morgan, ‘and blamed his man- 
hood,’ and thus to him ‘the bad men’ said: “ Lord ‘ Morgan’! why wilt 
thou not go, ‘and march thine army, and pass over all Britain, and take it 
to thine hand? [over all Britains land, and set all the kingdom in thine 
own hand?] Thereof (for that cause) we have shame, and ‘ at’ oure heart 
‘much’ anger, that thou sharest ‘this [the] land, that ad/ should be in thine 
hand. Thou art ‘so brave a [a stalwart) man, and ‘son [born] of the elder 
sister; [and] sharest thy land with thy cousin—thy honor is the less!” 
Thus ‘spake [said] these traitors, and ‘talked with [spake these] words; so 
long they counselled him, that he believed them. He gathered an army 
‘that was’ exceeding ‘strong [great]; he passed over ‘the’ Humber, and 


1 heo? 2 lauerd? 


[v. 3822—3844.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


he ferde ouer pe Hibre 
and hermef he worhte. 
he her3ede he brande ¥ 
fole he ameerde. 

heo floz3en heo nomen ¥ 
al } heo aneh comen. 
Pat word com fone fud 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


he verde ouer Vmbre 
and harmef he wropte. 
he floh he barnde ¥ 

folk he a-morde. 

hii flozen hii nomen 
al pat hii neh comen. 
Pat word com fone fup 


163 


for hit wef widé cud. {{c-2.] for hit was wide coup. 

pet Morgan ledde muchele here? pat Morgan mochele harmes ¢ 
& hermes dude paf leoden. 10 dude in piffe londe. 

Pa ihurde Cunedagiuf 

pat Morgan if mei ferde puf. 
pa iwer® he fwipe wrad ¥ 

& paf word feide. 


Po iwarp Cunadegif wrop ’ 

and pef word faide. 

3et fucge' a wurpe pe way 3itfinge euere worpe? wo? 
monie mon pu bi-cherreft. mani man pou bi-chorreft. 

purh pe haued Morgan mi mei? porh pe hauep Morgan mi mey ‘ 


if mofchipe afallet. his man ....... (£19. ¢.1.] 
ah he feall hit abuggen 0 Re" Croat Bipods SINE ite 
3if ich mot libben. 2 .... . mote libbe. 


. . unadegif / 
and fen.. -uer al his londe. 
and gade.ede moche folk ¥ 


pa nom Kunedagiuf? 
& fend 3e6d hif cuwd%e. 
& gadere muchel fole ¥ 


harms he wrought; he ‘harried [slew], he burnt, the folk he destroyed. 
They slew and they captured all that they came nigh. The word (tidings) 
soon came south, for wide it was known, that Morgan ‘led a great army, 
and’ did [great] injuries ‘to this people [in thisland]. ‘ When Cunedagius 
heard that Morgan, his cousin, thus acted,’ then became ‘he [Cunadegis] 
‘exceeding’ wrath, and said these words: ‘ [Ever] be thou accursed, 
Covetousness! Many a man thou harmest; through thee hath Morgan, 
my cousin, lowered his honor ;—but he shall buy it dear, if I may live!” 
Then Cunedagius took and sent over [all] his land, and gathered much 
folk, and made ready his army. He marched forth with ‘honor [might] 


? 3etfinge? 2 worpe fe? 


Margan. 


164 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


and 3eerwede hif ferde. 

he fufede mid monfchipe ¥ 

to ward Margane hif mie. 

Pa heo feulden fehten 

pa fleh Morgan awaie. 

fron' londe to londe 

& he him after lidde. 

In to Walef he fleh 

he him after frdde*. 

per he of-toc Morgan 10 
mid muchele ftrengSe. 

& floh he him of pat hued” 
hif hap wef pa wurfe. 

& al hif men flowen 

pat heo neh comen. 

buté wuhle wrecche fwa ewie ¥ 
cuahte® to holde. 

Heo nomen‘ Morganuf liche Y 
& leide hit on vrpen®. 

wel heo hine buriden / 20 
pe wes pef Walef® lauerd. 
Wef pet lond purh Morgan 
Margan iheté. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 3845—3867.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1. 
a.. 3ar.ede his ferde. 
he fufde mid mihte 7 
to Mo. gan his meye. 
3000" olden fihte 
po fleh Morgan. 
fram londe to londe ? 
and Cunadegis after. 
In to ....s he fleh? 
and he .im wende after. 
pare he of-tok Morgan ¥ 
mid mochelere ftrengpe. 
and fwipte him of pat hefd 
his heppe was pe worfe. 
and alle his men flo3en y 
pat hii neh comé. 


Hii nomen Morganes lich 
and leide hit on erpe. 

wel hine burede / 

Wales his louerd. 

Was pat lond porh Morgan ¥ 
Margan ihote. 


towards Morgan, his cousin, but when they should fight, then fled Morgan 
‘away,’ from land to land, and ‘he [Cunedagis] after ‘him pursued’. Into 
Wales he fied, [and] he went after him; there he overtook Morgan, with 
great strength, and ‘he’ smote off him the head—his hap was the worse ! 
—and slew all his men, that they came nigh; ‘except such wretches as 
escaped alive to hold’ (place of refuge). They took Morgans body, and 
laid it in earth; well ‘they’ him buried, ‘who was of Wales [Wales his] 
‘the’ lord. The land was through Morgan named Margan ; [now and 


1 R. from. ? ferde? 3 cnihte pr. man. 
4 Written at first inomen, but the i is expuncted, and subsequently erased. 
5 erpen? ® Originally Wailes, but i is erased, 


{v. 3868—3891.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 165 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 
nou and euere more ¥ 
fo hit hatte pare. 
Cunedagiuf heuede al pif 16d | Cunadegis was louerd ¥ 
per of he wef lauerd. of al pis riche. 
pro' and pritti wintere / preo and pritti winter / 
he welde paf riche. he was riche king her. 
inne gride & in fripe y 
hif frenden to bliffe. 
A Cunedagiuf dawe ? Bi peos kinges daize / 
pe king wes on leode. 10 pat Cunadegis was ihote. 
Remuf & Romulufy — [£22.c.1.] Remus and Romulus Y 
Rome iwrohten. Rome hi-makede. 
beine iweren? ibroSeren ¥ bei hii weren bropers / 
ah pe an floh pene oSren. ac pe on sloh pan oper. 
After pritti wintere com pe dei: After pritti 3er com pe dai / 
pat Cunedagi? deed lei. pat Cunadegis dead lai / 
He hefte ane fune rehne He hadde one fone ’ 
. Riwald wef ihaten. Riwald ihote. 
he wef wif he wes feir / _ he was wis and war? 
he welde pat riche her. 2 he welde pes riche. 
al hit hine luuede ¥ al hit hine louede / 
pat liuede in lode. pat liuede on londe. 
An pan ilke time pan ilke time [c.2.] 
her com a felked taken. her com a felcoup tockne. 


evermore so it there is called.} | Cunedagius ‘had all this land, thereof he 
was lord [was lord of all this realm]; three and thirty winters he ‘ruled 
this realm [was noble king here], ‘in peace and in concord, to the joy of 
his friends.’ In ‘Cunedagius [this kings] days, who was king of the people 
(who was named Cunadegis], Remus and Romulus made Rome; both they 
were brethren, but the one slew the other. After thirty ‘winters [years] 
came the day, that Cunedagius lay dead. He had one ‘bold’ son, ‘who 
was’ named Riwald; he was wise, ‘he was fair [and wary], he governed 
‘the realm here [this realm]; all thing that lived in land, it loved him. In 


} preo? 2 heo weren? 


Remus § 
Romulus. 


Riwald. 


Riwald. 
Gurgustius. 


166 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 3892—3913.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
fulche hare nere' eer ne com? soch neuere ne com? 
ne neuer feoSdé* hider to. [flod’ neue. . ..ppe hider to. 
from heouene her com a fulcud fram he.......m_a felcup flody 


pre de3es hit rinde blod. preo daizes hit reinede blod. 
preo deies and preo niht ¥ preo daizes and preo nipt ¥ 
pat weef fwupe mochel pliht. pat was a wel wonder fiht. 
Pa pe rein wef agan / Po pe rein was a-gon Y 

her com hider® také a man‘. her com oper tockne anon, 
her comen blake fiezen her come blake fleie ¥ 


and flu3en in mone ezene. 10 and floze in men e3ene. 

in here mu% in heore neofe in hire moup in hire nofe ¥ 
heore lif heom eode al to leofe. pat hire lif 34 eode to lofe. 
fwulc fare of fleozen her waf’ — soch fare of fleien her was 
pat heo freté pet corn & pat greef. pat hii het corn and gras. 


wo wef al pé folke wo was al pat folk:’ 

pe wuneden an folden. pat wonede in lond. 

Per after com fwulke mon-qualm? Par hafter com foch man-cwalmy 
} lute her cwike lefden. pat lute ewic lefde. 


SeoSden® her com a {trong red 7 Seoppe her com a ftrdg read ¥ 
pat Riwald kige iwerd dea3®. 20 pat Riwald i-warp dead. 

Riwald king hafuede anne fune ’ Iwald king hadde one fone ¥ 
Gurguftius ihaten. Gurgutftius ihote. 


the same time here came a strange token, such as ‘before’ never came, 
‘nor’ never hitherto since. From heaven ‘ here’ came a marvellous flood, 
three days it rained blood, three days and three nights; that was exceed- 
ing great harm [a well wonderful sight]! When the rain was gone, here 
came another token anon. Here came black flies, and flew in mens eyes ; 
in their mouth, in their nose, [so that] their lives went all to destruction ; 
such multitude of flies here was, that they ate ‘the’ corn and ‘the’ grass. 
Woe was all the folk, that dwelt in the land! Thereafter came such a 
mortality, that few ‘here’ remained alive. Afterwards here came an evil 
hap, that ‘king’ Riwald died. King Riwald had a son, named Gurgustius ; 


1 manere pr. m., but ma is struck out by the second hand. 2 R. feodve. 
3 oper? + a-nan? 5 R, seod¥en ; den is interlined. 
5 R, dead. 


[v. 3914—3936.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 167 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
hif lond he huld half 3er / pis lond he heold half 3er ” 
and fud%en he adun halde. 

Per efter com Sifilliuf/ Sullius com after 

he wes fone her deed. ac he was fone dead her. 
Sudden! com Lago ¥ Seoppe com Lago’ 

pa zhte wike liuede. pat ehte wike lifuede. 

SuoSen com king Marke ¥ Par after com Kinemarck Y 
he wes pritti wiken king. [c.2.] pat pritti daizes was king. 
Peo com Gorbodiago Po com Gorbodiago 

he wef fif 3ere god king. 10 fif 3er he liuede. 

Pe kig hauede tweie funen ¥ pe king hadde twei fones 
beiene vnifelie. beine onifeli. 

pe eldere he3te Freuf? pe eldre hehte Ferreus ? 

pe 3engere hehte Poreuf. pe 3eongre Porreus. 

Paf brepré weren fwa wodeyY —__ Peof weren fo wode 

and fwa wiper-warde. and fo wiperward. 

pat al heo weren vn-fahte ‘’ 

& a® heo weren vn-fome. 

& eiper hateden oper? pat aiper hatede oper ’ 

fwa ne fuld’ na wiht breoper. 2 afe ne folde none bropers. 
and beien mid onde? and beine in nipe and honde 
heo weoren in piffe londe. wonede in piffe londe. _ [[£19%.c.1.] 


 Gorbidiag® heore fader ¢ pat Gorbodiagus hire fader 


‘his [this] land he held half @ year, ‘and then he down dropt’ (died). 
Sisillius came ‘there’after, [but] he was soon here dead. Then came 
Lago, who lived eight weeks. ‘Next [Thereafter] came ‘king Marke 
[Kinemarck], ‘he [who] was king thirty ‘weeks [days]. Then came Gorbo- 
diago, he ‘was a good king [lived] five years. The king had two sons, 
both were wicked. The elder hight Fereus, the younger ‘hight’ Poreus. 
These ‘ brethren’ were so mad, and so adverse to each other, ‘that they 
were all at enmity, and they were all at variance ;’ ‘and [that] either hated 
the other as ‘no wight [none] should brother, and both ‘with [in] hatred 
{and strife] ‘they’ ‘were [lived] in this land, so that Gorbidiagus, their 


1 R. sudden, 2 al? 


Siluius. 


Lago. 


King 
Marke. 


Gorbodi- 
(ago. ] 


Fereuf § 
[ Poreus. | 


168 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 3937—3958.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
of his sunen wes a-fered. of heom was afered. 
for ofte bi-foren him fulueny _for ofte bi-for. . . . .ue? 
heo bi-gunnen to fuhten. hi bi-gonne....... 


Pe aldre feide pat al piflond? pe eldre feide pat al pis lond:’ 

he wolde halden on if azere hond. he wolde habbe in his hond. 

pe 3engere him 3ef fwuh enfwere :'pe 3eongere 3eaf foch anfwere ? 
4Er ich pe fle mid mine fpere. Rapir ich wolle pe slean mid mine 
ar pu hit fule a3é / [fpere. 
pa! while ich beon on liue. 9 

Poreufhauedepe heorte fwaluper:pPe 3eongere hadde heorte luper : 
an fwa lod? him wef hif broper. ad® lop him was his broper. 


pat fwiken he him wolde ’ for fwiken him apohte* 

a fames kinnes wifen. in fomme kine wife. 

Fereus hit iherde fuggen / Ferreus ihorde fegge 7 

porh fodfafte worden. porh fope menne moupe ? 

pat hif brader hine wolde fleny pat Porreus hine wolde slean ? 
per fore he wef ful fari. par fore he was fori. 

He ferde awi® ouer fe ¥ He verde a-wei ouer {éé 

pat hi puhte feleft. 4 pat him pohte his befte. 


he funde inne Fr“ncene ezrd : 20 he funde ine F“nce on king ¥ 
pene king pe hehte Sward. pat Siward was i-hote. 
he bad him herdfumneffe / he bad him pat he mofte ? 


father, was afraid of ‘his sons [them], for oft before himself they began to 
fight. The elder ‘said,’ that he would ‘hold [have] all this land in his 
‘own’ hand; the younger gave ‘ him’ such answer: “I would rather slay 
thee with my spear, ‘ere thou should obtain it, the while I am alive!’ ” 
‘Poreus [The younger] had ‘the’ heart ‘so’ wicked, and ‘so’ hateful his 
_brother was to him, ‘that [for] destroy him he ‘would [thought], in some 
kind of wise. Fereus heard ‘it’ say through ‘soothfast words [true mens 
mouth], that ‘his brother [Porreus] would slay him ;—therefore he was 
‘full’ sorry ! He went away over sea ;—that to him seemed [his] best ;—he 
found in ‘French land the [France a] king, that ‘hight [was named] Siward ; 
he ‘offered him obedience, that he would him serve [prayed him that he 


? Originally pat, but t erased. ? Originally lou’, but u struck out. 
* R, and, ‘ he pohte? * awei? 


[v. 3959—3981.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 169 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. "MS. Cott: Otho, C. x11. 

heren pat he him wolde. farui him a wile. 

beon him for hold cniht / beon him for hold cnipt’ 


ba bi deie and bi niht. [[f22.c.1.Jbope bi daize and bi nipt. 

Pe king wef gled for hif kime': pe king was glade for his come? 
& forpencnihtefpetcomemidhine.and for pan cniptes pat mid him 
& heold hine on erde? ¥ and held hine on flocke’ [come. 
& hehliche hine clepede. deoreworpift cnipte. 

Ful foue 3ere ? 

mid pon kinge he wunede pere. 

pat king he hauede iquemed 10 

& al fwa pere quene. 

Pa feoue 3er weoren alideney — po foue 3er were a-gon/ 

pa bad he leue. po bad he leue wende hom. 
feerren pat he wolde / 

into piffe londe. 

Pe king him lende ane ferdY pe king him lende ferde / 


of hif kenneft folke. of his kennefte folke. 

him feolf he fende fonde / him seolf he fende fonde ’ 
wide 3en® pat londe. ouer al pat ilke londe. 
after alle pen cnihten / 2 after alle pe cniptefy 

pe he bi-3ete mihte. pat he bi-3eten mihte. 
And he to-clipede* ¥ And he to fipe fufde ¥ 
muchelen hif ferde. mid mochele his ferde. 


might serve him a while], be to him as faithful knight, both by day and 
by night. ‘The king was glad for his coming, and for the knights that 
came with him, and held him in Ais household, ‘and highly esteemed him 
{most worthy knight]. ‘Full seven years with the king he dwelt there ; 
the king he had pleased, and also the queen.’ When seven years were 
passed, then asked he leave ‘that he might fare into this land [to go home]. 
The king lent him ‘an’ army of his keenest folk; himself he sent mes- 
sengers ‘wide over the [over all that] land, after all the knights that he 
might procure. And he ‘summoned [went to ship (embarked) with] his 
powerful host, and all with safety came to this land. Anon ‘they [he] 


1 kume? 2 hirde? 5 Send? 4 clipe fufde pr. man. 


170 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


& al mid ifunde ’ 

come to piffe londe. 

A-nan heo bigiine fuhte / 

& falde paf leoden. 

& if broder Fereufy 

ferde him to-3enef. 

mid pon ftronge fehte 
Poreuf he felden'. 

and alle hif ferde 

he leiden® to folde. 10 
Judon hehte here moder 

pe riche was and on-mere. 
swide heo waf fari¥ 

for forehfulle pan flehte. 

pat heore fune* 3eogere® ¥ 
floh pene eldere. 

Pa deede heore wees leouere 
pe quike here wes leoSere. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


{v. 3982—4003.] . 


MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
and al mid ifo.... 


-non he bi-g...... 
++ floze pe leode. 


[e. 2.] ' 


and his ...per par he flop? 
ad? feolde alle his ferde. 


Jud.. hehte he.. moder’ 
pat .... was and miht. 
3e. .as {wipe fori’ 

for pan ilke flepte. 

pat hire fone 3eongere Y 
hadde i-flaze pe eldre. 

Pp. .eade 3e0 louede more ¥ 
pan 3e0 dud. pilke a-lifue. 


pe quike hire wef fwa fwipe leodzpe cwike hire was fo fwipe lop®/ 
pat bi-nimen heo him pohte hif lif.pat bi-nimen him 3eo pohte his lif.” 
Poreuf lai on bure ¥ 21 Porreus lai in bedde? 

per him muchel plihte ilomp. 


began battle, and ‘felled this [slew the] people, and his brother Fereus 
marched against him; ‘with the strong fight Poreus he felled [and his 
brother there he slew], and all his forces he ‘laid on the earth [felled]. 
Judon hight their mother, who was noble and mighty; she was exceeding 
sorry for ‘the sorrowful [that] slaughter, that her younger son ‘slew [had 
slain] the elder. The dead one ‘was dearer to her, the one alive was more 
odious to her [she loved more than she did that one alive]. The one alive 
was so exceeding hateful to her, that she thought to deprive him of his 
life. Poreus lay in ‘chamber [bed],—‘there much danger befell him, where 


§ leide? 
5 3eongere? 


1 felde? ? R. and. 
4 funen pr. man., but the last n erased. 
5 First written wrop, but expuncted. 


[v. 4004—4027.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


per he lei fofte / 

& he fiker flepte. 

Com if moder liden? 
mid leoSlichen' crezften. 
mid oper fwic® wiuen 
mid fix longe cniuen. 
Peo unifeli moder Y 

puf hire fune murdde. 
heo ceerf him pene fwure atwa? 
a wurpe hire wa. 10 
pe unifelie moder 

mid fexe hine to-fnede. 

& al to-delde 

li from opere. 

Pa wes pe muchele fpeche 
3end pat kineriche. 

of Judon pere quene ? 

pa heore fone acualde®. 

& of pare feoreze 7 

pe ifize wes to lond’. 20 
Pa weaf deed Fereuf? 

al fwa wes Pore®. | 

bi-numen wef pere moder 
monfchipe on leode. 


[c.2.] 


he soft lay,’—and he slept securely. 
craft [most secretly], with six other women, [and] with six long knives, 
‘The wicked mother thus her son murdered’; she cut his throat in two 
—ever woe worth her!—‘the wicked mother with weapon cut him in 
pieces,’ and all separated [his] limbs from each other. 
great speech over [all] ‘the [this] kingdom, of Judon the queen, who 
killed her son, and of the sorrow that was come to the land. [For] when 
Fereus was dead, ‘also [when] was Poreus [dead], from the mother was 


? leof lichen pr. man. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 


and fikerliche he flepte. 
Comes his moder ftrike 
ftilliche fwipe. 

mid oper fix wiues ¥ 

and mid fix longe cnifes. 


3eo carf him pane fwere a-two 
euere worpe hire wo. 


and hine al to-dealde / 
lime fram oper. 

Po was mochel fpeche ? 
ouer al peos kineriche. 
of Juden pare cwene ¥ 
pat hire fone acwelde. 
and of pan forewe? 

pat icome waf to londe. 
For po was dead Ferreus y 
po was dead Porreus. 
bi-nome was pan moder ¥ 
hire deal of londe. 


His mother approached ‘with hateful 


2 fix? 


3 The letters cual are by a second hand, on erasure. 


171 


Then was ‘the’ 


Judon re- 
gina. 


172 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v, 4028—4049.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


pa nes per noht of pen kuie? po nas par noht of pan cunne? 
pe mihte pif kine-lond waldé. — pat mihte pis kinedom habbe. 


wep-mon ne wif-mon Y wepmen ne wimmon 

bute pa feorhne-fulle! Judon. —_ bote peof fori Juden. 

gumen heom igaderen me nom hire al ifund ¥ 

& wurpen heo to fa grunde. and caste hire in pan fee grund. 


Pa areefte here vnfride y 
ouer al me brac pene grid. 
sterce weren pe rezemes ¥ 


mid ftronge raflake. 10 

ele mon reuede over pe ech man nam... 

peah hit weren hif broSer. 

wrake wef on londeY we. me 2 HOlOndelafe20c.19 
wa wef pone vnft°nge. ee ite TT TI ahead 

Her wes hunger & hete ¥ oS alate errant 

her wef alre hzermene? meft. Cs Ti 


her wes muchel mon-qualm? —.er was mo........ cwalmy 
pat lut her quike bi-lefden. pat lut. .c blefde®. 


Feowere here weren riche ? Bowes seo Nisciches’ 
pe haueden ferden muchele. 2 pat haueden mochel ferde. 
peo neddé al px oSere pat ma... .lle pe oper? 
& heom nedSer fietten. mid ftrengp. 3am a-bouwe. 


taken ‘honor among the people [her share of the land]; then was there 
nought (none) of the kindred that might this kingdom ‘wield [have], 
man nor woman, except the ‘sorrowful [sorry] Judon;—men assembled 
themselves [took her all sound], and cast her in [the] depths of the sea. 
‘Then arose here strife; over all men brake the peace; stark were the 
contests,’ with strong rapine; each man robbed other though it were his 
brother; mischief was in the land, woe was to the unstrong! Here was 
hunger and hatred ; here was of all harms most; here was great destruc- 
tion of men, so that few here remained alive! Here were four rich men, 
who had a great host; ‘they oppressed all the others, and set them be- 


1 fulle is written on an erasure by a second hand, which has also struck out the 
letters rh in feorhne: perhaps we should read feorhfulle. 
? hi€rene pr. m. 5 bi-lefde? 


[v. 4050—4072.] . LA3AMONS BRUT. 173 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 
& fpeken heom to gadere y 
& fpeledé pa he3e. 
pat heo wuolden al piflond?’ — Hii feide hii wolde al pis lond ¥ 
dzlen heom bi-twenen. deale 3am bi-twine. 
puf heo hit idemden Y pus i fpeke! ¥ 
& per efter fwa dudé. and dude hit in dede. Reges. 


In Scot-lond wef king Stater N Scotlond was king Stater? Stater. 
i Logref wef king Piner. iT in Logres was king Piner. 

Cloten hafte Cornwale ?’ [[£23.c.1.Jand Gloden hafde Cornwale / 

Rudzeuc hauede Norh Walef. 10 Rudac hafde Norp Wales. 

Ah Cloten hefde meft riht ¥ Ac Gloten hafde meft riht ” Cloten. 


to a3en paf riche. to habbe alle pe riche. 

ah pa oSere weoren rehere ? ac pe oper weren re3ere ¥ 
& eke heo weoren richere. and eke hii weren richere. 
of golde & of garifume ¥ of gold and of garifom ‘ 


and of gode londe. and of gode londe. 
Cloten heo o-fcuneden Y 

& hif feeredene? for-howede. 

Cloten hauede Cornwale 

pat he heold wel one gride. — 20 

Cloten hauede enne fune ’ Gloden hafde anne fone: 
pe fel wes on eorde. pat bold waf in londe. 

he wes feir he wes muchchelY he was fair he waf mochel :’ 


neath [made with strength all the others bow to them]. ‘And the high men 
(They] ‘spake them together, and’ said, that they-would divide between 
them all this land. Thus they ‘it deemed [spake], and ‘thereafter so 
did [did it indeed]. In Scotland was king Stater; in Logres was king 
Piner; [and] Cloten had Cornwall; Rudauc had North Wales. But 
Cloten had most right to ‘possess this [have all the] realm, but the others 
were stronger, and eke they were richer, of gold and of treasure, and of 
good land. ‘Cloten they hated, and despised his forces. Cloten had 
Cornwall, that he held well in peace.’ Cloten had a son, who was ‘good 
{bold} on ‘earth [land]; he was fair, he was tall, ‘in fight he was 


1 hi ifpeke ? 2 feerdene pr. m, 


Donwallo 
Molinuf. 


174 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 4073—4095.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 


to feahté he wef mere. 
cniht he wef kene ’ 


& he wes 3eua cufti. he was of 3eftes cufti. 

monie pewes gode ¥ mani peues gode 

he haueda on hif moda. he hadde on his mode. 

Hif none! wef ihote pus ¥ His name was icleoped pus ¥ 
Donwallo Molinuf. Dunwale Molnious. 

pif wef pe feirufte mon pis waf pe fayreft man 


pe euere ehte er pusne kinedom.pat euere adde pifne kinedom. 
Pa he mihte beren wepnen? 10 Po he mihte wepne bere? 


& hif horf wel awilden, and his hors mune;i. 

he lid8e 3eon? peof leoden ¥ he wende ouer al peos londe ¥ 
fulch hit an liun were. afe hit a lion were. 

He floh Piner pene king ¥ He flop Piner pane king ¥ 

hif fole he al aqualde. and his folck a-cwelde. [c. 2.] 
pa him wih-ftoden / 

he felde hed to hif foten. 

& al Logref pat lod’ and al Leogris his lond / 

he w3enede to hif e3ere hond. _hopnode to his owe.. hond. 
Sud%en he turnde hif fare’ 2 Suppe he torne....... ey 

& ferd feorh riht to Wales. an. ... de toward ..... 

per he funde Rudac king ¢ par he funde Rudac king 

pe reht® wes to fehte. pat bold was to fihte. 


powerful; knight he was keen, and’ he was liberal of gifts; many 
good virtues he had in his mind. His name was called thus, Donwallo 
Molinus ;—this was the fairest man that ever ‘ere’ had this kingdom. 
When he might bear weapon, and his horse ‘well’ manage, he went 
over [all] this land as if it were a lion! He slew Piner the king, [and] 
his folk he ‘all’ killed; ‘he felled them who withstood him to his feet;’ and 
all Logres ‘the [his] land he obtained to his own hand. Afterwards he 
turned his course, and fared forth right ‘to [toward] Wales. There he 
found king Rudauc, who bold was in fight; against him he found there 


1 R, nome. 2 lidde 3eond? 
3 riht pr. man.; we should probably correct it reh or reeh. 


[v. 4096—4118.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
to-3einef him he fide per 
Scotlondef king Stater. 

Heo fpeken per to fehte ¥ 

to fibbe and to fome. 

aides heo fworen ” 

fwiken pat heo nolden. 

puf heo makedé heore fere / 
a-3en ferde Dunwale. 

& hif mochele ferde / 9 
to Cornwale his ewrde. _[¢,2-] 
Pa iherde Stater ’ 

pat Dunwale wef fwiSe fer. 
mid muchele Scot ferde ’ 

he fera% to piffe lode. 

Rudauc mid hif Welfcen : 

pat weel wef pe more. 

In to piffe lide heo comen 

pif floc heo her flowe'. 

wide heo efde 


tuonef heo for-bafrden. 20 


mochel? dal heo iweften 
mid harmen pan meften. 
Pat word com to Dunwale ’ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


to-3eines him he funde par / 
pane king of Scotlond Stater. 
Hii fpeken per of fehte / 

of sibbe and of fome. 

opes hi fworen ? 

fwike pat hii nolden. 

Pus hi makede hire fare ¥ 
a3ein wende Dunwale. 

mid his mochele ferde ¥ 

to Cornwales erpe. 

Po hi-horde Stater 

pat Dunwale was {wipe for. 
mid mochele Scot ferde 
he com to piffe londe. 
Rudac mid his Walfe 

pe heap was pe more. 

In to piffe londe hi comen 
and pat folk of-flozen. 


moche lond iwefte® ¥ 
mid harme pan mefte. 
Pat word com to Dunwale ? 


175 


‘Scotlands king [the king of Scotland], Stater. They spake there of 
concord, of amity and of peace; oaths they swore, that they would not 
deceive. Thus they made their proceeding ;—back went Dunwale, ‘and 
{with] his great force, to ‘Cornwall his [Cornwalls] country. When 
Stater heard that Dunwale was very far (at a distance), with a great 
Scotch army he came to this land, and Rudauc with his Welsh—the heap 
was the more! Into this land they came, ‘this people they harried [and 
the folk slew] ; ‘wide they ran, towns they burnt’; ‘a great part [much 
land] they laid waste, with the most harm. The word (tidings) came to 


} herd....gen pr. man. corrected by second hand as above, on erasure. 
2 mochul pr. man. * hi iweste? 


176 


“MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


per he wef i Corwale. 

wet Ruwak! king dude her ¥ 
and pe king Stater. 

Pa feide Diiwale 

pat waf pe du3ende mon. 

Nu heo be’ for-fworne ’ 
mid heore fwike-dome. 

bi Appollinef ef 

ne ileue ich hem neuere maf. 
Nu pe? feulle reemen ¥ 10 
and reifen to gadere. 

vnder piffen luften ¥ 

leté riht fcuften. 

SenSdSe* mine* fonden 

3end alle mine londe. 

and biddeh alne godne mon ¥ 
pe gri8 wulle halden. 

& alle pe me of haldeh 
cumen er fone. 

& fendSe® lipinde men’ 20 
zfter opere leoden. 

to folien me in mine londe ¥ 
for feoluer & for golde. 

& ich wulle mine rihte ’ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v.4119—4142.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1. 


par he was in Cornwale. 

wat Rudac him dude her? 
and pe king Stater. 

Po feide Dunwale 

pat was a dopti man. 

Nou hii beop for-fworene ? 
mid hire fwike-domes. 

bi Appolines ore ¥ 

ich nelle 3am lifue more. 
Nou we follen remen ¥ 

and refen to gaderef. 

vnder piffe lufte ¥ 

lette riht fufte. 

Sendep mine fonde 

ouer al mine londe. [f. 20°, c.1.] 
and biddep echne gode man / 
pat grip wolle halden. 


and fend.. ..fo? 
af....... leode. 

to folz3é me in ......nde? 
f.. seoluer and for golde. 
and ich wolle mid fihte ? 


Dunwale, where he was in Cornwall, what ‘king’ Rudauc did [to him] 
here, and the king Stater. Then said Dunwale—who was ‘the brave [a 
doughty] man: ‘‘ Now are they forsworn with their treacheries! By 
Apollins grace I will believe them never more! Now we shall encounter, 
and rush together; under this heaven let right prevail! Send my mes- 
sengers over all my land, and bid each good man, who peace will hold, 
and ‘all that of me hold, to come here soon’; and send ‘travelling-men 
[also] after other people,’ to follow me in my land, for silver and for gold. 


? R. Rudauc. 
3 SndSen pr. m. for Sended? 


2 Sic pr. m., ve sec. m. by erasure : read we. 
* minen pr, m. 5 {nde pr. m. for fended? 


[v. 4143—4166.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 177 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. 1x, MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


faren to ftal fehte. awinne mine rihte. 
to-gene pene {werd broperen: — to-3eines pes broperef / 

pe beiene beoh for-fwofne. pat bei beop for-fworen. 
For wel often he beo’ awald ¥ 

pe ftonded! 0 pé wo3e. 

ne mai neuere mon {ware Ne mai neuere for-fwore man ? 
mon-fcipe longe a3é. manfipe leng o3e. 

Pe Dunewale hauede ifeed Po Dunwale hafde ifeid 
al hif fole luuede pene red. 9 alle hi louede pane read. 
He fomenede ferd? [[£23".c.1.) H* fomnede ferde ’ 

fwulc nes neuere ewr on erde. foch nas neve her on erpe. 
fwodden wes pa time ¢ fuppe pe ilke time ? 

pe Bruttef come her liden. pat Brutus com her lipe. 
Heo fulde hif ferde ¥ 

& for a mucla cofta, 

to-3enes pan twam kingen to-3eines pe twei kinges / 
per he hem fide on walde. he ladde pilke ferde. 


Heo heolden to geedere ¢ Hii fmite to gaderes 

& hard’liche fuhten. and hardeliche fohte. 
feollen pe feie ¥ 2 fulle pe veiey 

falewede nebbes. falewede nebbes. 

Weoren al pa feldes ¥ Weren alle pe feldes ¢ 
ifawed® mid blode. i-vowet mid blode, 

per wes moni har* gume Y par was mani herd gome 


And I will ‘for my right march to strong fight [with fight win my right], 
against ‘the perjured [these] brethren, that both are forsworn. ‘For well 
often he is confounded, who standeth in the wrong’; never may a perjured 
man long possess honor!” When Dunwale had spoken, all ‘his folk [they] 
approved the counsel. He summoned an army, such as was never before on 
earth, since ‘the [that] time ‘ was’ that Brutus arrived here. ‘He completed 
his forces, and marched in great state’ against the two kings, ‘where he 
found them on the weald [he led that army]. They engaged together, and 
bravely fought ;—the fated fell!—faces waxed wan; all the fields were 
dyed with blood ;—there was many @ hardy man with sword hewed to 


1 ftonde’ ? 2 he? 3 ifayed sec. m. by erasure. 4 hard? 
N 


178 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


mid fworde to-hewen. 
Dunwal i pan fehte / 

wes feondliche kene. 

pat feeht wes fwu%Se ftrong ’ 
& fwu%e fter & fwuse longe. 
Dunwal i pa fahte 

hauede fwuSe gode cnihtes. 
wife and were 

monie heo afelden. 

Dunwale him bi-pohte ~ 10 
wat he don mihte. 

he nom! of hif ferde 

fix hundred cnihtes. 

of pan aldre hexten / 

to wide alre hardeft. 

& puf heo* heom feide ” 

on hif fom runan. 

Nime we pif wepnen ? 

pe bi piffe walle ligged®. 

& halden bi-foren breften? 20 
fceldef pa brade. 

& fare we bi-halues Y 

alfe we of heoren weoren. 

pe wille fullen ore ferden ’ 
feehté biliue. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 4167—4191.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


mid fwerde to-hewe. 
Dunwale in pan fihte Y 
was {wipe kene. 

pat fiht was fwipe ftrong 
fwipe ftare and fwipe lang. 
Dunwale in pan fihte ¥ 


hadde gode cniptes. 


Dunwale him bi-pohte ¥ 
wat he don mihte. 
he nom of his ferde ¥ 
fix hundred cniptes. 
of alle pe kennefte ? 
and of pan hardiefte. 
and pus he heom feide / 
ftilliche mid roune. 
Nime we pes wepne ¥ 
pat in pis felde liggep. 
of hure fulle ifon ¢ 

[c.2.] 


pieces! Dunwale in the fight was exceeding keen; the battle was very 
strong, ‘and’ very stark, and very long. Dunwale in the fight had knights 
‘most’ good, ‘ wise and wary,—many they felled down’! Dunwale be- 
thought him what he might do; he took of his army six hundred knights, 
‘of the highest of all, in combat most hardy [of all the keenest, and of 
the hardiest] ; and thus he said to them ‘in some his communing ([stilly 
with communing]: ‘‘ Take we these weapons that ‘by this weald [in this 
field] lie, [of our full foes,} and hold before our breasts the broad shields ; 
and go we aside, as if we were of their party, the while our forces shall 


1 inom pr. m., but i erased. 2 he? 3 walde ligged? 


[v. 4192—4213.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 179 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
Penne Stateref floc / f eC eee 
ifeod ore feire feuldef. eh eat ae 
fumé! on fefte / + 3 + «ot Mi Saues 
hit buh heom wel iqueme. Bley ha shtudid 
for pan wepnen heo wullet wenen?for pan. ......-.. 
pat peo* beon heore i-feré. p ove Wer bee: 350 dhand os 
We fcullen ouf bi-redié / . . . we to pan kinge? 
and flen® Rudauc pane king. Ruda... kene. 
and feorh rihtef pre? {c.2.] and flean hi........ 
flen pane kig Statere. 10 and pe king ...... 


Mid ftrengSe we fwulled* wenden? Mid ftrégpe we follep heom falle ¥ 
purh ure wiper-iwinnen. 
& fellen oure® feondes 


for alle heo buh fei. fo. alle hi beop veie. 
Pus fpac Dunwale / 

pat waf pe du3enede mon. 

& al he iworhte And al pus iwropt® 
fwa hif word tahte. afe Dunwale 3am tahte. 
Heo nomen pa feeldes / Hii nomen pe fealdef 
pa leien in pa feldes. 20 pat leie in pe feldes. 
brade and gode brode and gode ¥ 
ihelede mid golde. ileired mid golde. 


quickly (vigorously) fight. When Staters flock (host) shall see our fair 
shields come near, it will be to them well pleasing; they will ween for 
(on account of) the weapons, that we are their comrades. ‘ We shall make 
us ready,’ ‘and slay Rudauc the king, and forth-right there slay the king 
Stater [. .. we to the king, Rudac the keen, and slay him right there, and 
the king Stater]. With strength we shall ‘ pass through our adversaries, 
and’ ‘fell our enemies [fell them], for all they shall be dead!” ‘ Thus spake 
Dunwale, who was the doughty man,’ and all ‘he [thus they] wrought, as 
‘his words taught [Dunwale taught them]. They took the shields that lay 
in the fields, broad and good, covered with gold; they went to the kings, 


? cumen ? * we? 

3 At first written fcelen, but ce expuncted. 

* fwulle’? corrected fullen by second hand. 

5 The first letter of oure has been erased. ® hi wropt? 


N 2 


180 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 4214—4936.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 

heo wendé to_pan kingen ¢ hii wende to pan kinge ¥ 

per heo weré on kompen. pare hii weren on fihte. 

Pe kingges weré blide ¥ Pe kinge weren blipeY 


heo wenden bi pan bordden. for pan fiht 3am likede. 

heo wenden bi pen fceldé ? hii wende bi pa fealdes ¥ 

pat hit heore fealkes weoren. __ pa hit hire men were. 

Sone fo Dunwale heom neh com?Sone fo Dunwale heom neh com? 


swa he hehte flen heom. he hehte legge 3am on. 
Sled heom mid fweorde ¥ Sleop ham mid fwerde y 

for alle heo beo®’ for-fworne. 10 for alle hii beop for-fworene. 
Rudac heo flowen Rudac hii flowen Y 

& Stater heo nom. and Stater hii nomé. 

& al hene! to-lideden and al hine to-limekede 
lim from pen o8ere. leme fram oper. 


heore fceaftes weoré ftrake?Y hire faftef weren ftarke Y 
of hif flefcef heo? makeden here of his fleffe hii makede marke. 


Anan heo ferden ¥ {marce. Anon hii verde? 
toweerd heore iueré. touward hire iveref. 

pa heo to gad’en comen ‘ po hii to gadere come 
fomed heo on-flo3en. 2 hii fohte hii flo3e. 

Pa kingges weoren dewdde : Po kinges weren deade Y 
heore du3eSe to-dealde. hire folk to-dealde. 


twinfeden cnihtef’ 


where they were in the ‘combat [fight]. The kings were blithe, ‘they 
weened by the bucklers [for the sight pleased them], they weened by 
the shields, that it were their men. So soon as Dunwale came near 
them, ‘so’ he ordered ‘them to be slain [to lay on them]: “Slay ye 
them with sword, for all they are forsworn!” Rudauc they slew, and 
Stater they took, and all him dismembered, one limb from ‘the’ other; 
their ‘shafts (spears) were strong, of his flesh they made their mark. : 
Anon they proceeded toward their companions; when they came together, 
‘united they on-smote [they fought, they slew]. The kings were dead; 
their people were scattered ; ‘knights retreated (?)—their honor was fallen 


) hine? ? f{trange man. pr. : read ftarke. 
> heo hed man. pr., but hed struck out by second hand. 


[v. 4237 —4259.] LA3AMONS BRUT, 18! 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
here tir wes at-fallen. 
Dunwales mé flo3é! ¥ 
al pat heo aneh comen, 


al pa ferde Alle paie pat aftode / 
heo falden to grunde. hii fulde to grunde. 
buten fwulc for-wonde many —bote woch. ..... [f.21.c. 1.) 


pe mid forwe at-wand®. [£241]. . 2. 2. 2 6 2 ew 
Pa hauede Diiwale pif lond / oe 6 Vie tnd aa 


al bi-3eten to his hond. gre arena 

sudsen he wesheh king’ tw... ... : 
cod hit wes wide of him. patwas..... 

peoo on beokeireemay, Vig cee se itellep bokes 
yedle feld Difnens) 9 Pe 5. oS hie ondres. 

Pet wes pa ewrafte mon ? and ... waf pe forfte man ¥ 
pe guldene crune dude him on. pe goldene croune dude him on. — 
here inne Bruttaine her ine Brutaine 

feoSden Bruttes hit ieode. seoppe Brutus hit hadde. 
He makede fwule grid 

he makede fwulc fri. 

monien la3en gode ¥ 2 He makede lawef gode / 
pe lond® fwuSsen‘ ftode. pat lange feoppe ftode. 

heo makeden® ane fetneffe ” he makede one fehneffe ¥ 
and mid a3e heo femde. and mid ope hit feide. 


low! Dunwales men slew all that they came nigh;’ all ‘the host [those 
that resisted] they felled to the ground, except such wounded men ‘ that 
with sorrow escaped. Then had Dunwale obtained all this land to his 
hand; afterwards he was a noble king, wide it was known of him’ (his fame 
spread wide) ; ‘manifold examples are in books [books tell of him many 
wonders}! ‘That [And that] was the first man here in Britain who put 
on him the golden crown, since ‘Britons came to it [Brutus had it]. He 
made ‘such peace, he made such quietness; many’ good laws that long 
afterwards stood; he made a decree, and with oath ‘confirmed [said] it, 


2 floze man. pr. ? & mid wand man. pr. 5 long? 
* foudven man. sec. 5 makede? 


182 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 4260—4281.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


pe ele cheorl ext hif fulche? — pat ech man hat his solp Y 
hefde grid al fwa pe king fulf. hadde grip alfe he him seolf. 
Alken farinde mé Ech ma pat mihte a-fteorte / 
3ef flaht! oper heefde peofSe? idon.in to one borewe. 

and he et-fturte in to are burje? poh he hadde man ifla3e / 


pat heo weren ibor3en. me folde hine borwe. 
péne and auere mare pan and euere more ? 
heo fwuldé habben are. he folde habbe ore. 
to hufe® into hame ’ 

& habben hif ehte. 10 


and 3ef zi m6 him lisere dude 

he fculde dom polien. 

& puf elkene forme gult 

pe king fuf* hine for-3ef. 

Pe kig makede monie lazen’ — Pe king makede mani lawes / 
pa 3et beod on londe. pat 3et beop in londe. 

& alle lajen gode ? 

bi hif dazen ftode. 

Feowertiwitre hewalde pes leode  Fourti 3er he held pis lond? 
a bliffe hit ftod on hif hand. 2 ine bliffe in his hond. 
seodsen deide pe king seoppe deide pe king 

pa® wes hif du3eSe. wo was his leode. 


that each ‘churl [man] at his plough should have peace as ‘the king [he 
him]self. ‘Each journeying man, if he had done slaughter or theft, and 
he escaped into a burgh, that they should be borowed (allowed to go 
free, on finding sureties) [Each person that might escape into a burgh, 
though he had slain a man, men should borow him]; then and evermore 
‘they [he] should have mercy; ‘to go (?) to his home, and have his goods ; 
and if any man did him injury, he should suffer doom (punishment). And 
thus each former guilt the king himself him forgave.’ The king made many 
laws, that yet are in the land, ‘and all good laws stood in his days.’ Forty 
‘winters [years] he ‘governed [held] this land, in bliss ‘it stood’ in his 
hand; afterwards the king died—woe was his people! Together came his 


1 fwiht man. pr. ? peof®e hefde? 5 fufe? * fulf? 
5 Sic man pr., but the tail of the p erased man. sec.: read wa. 


[v. 4282—4306.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. tx. 
To gadere come hif eorles ¢ 
& brohten hine to eorSe. 
inne Lundene burh / 
feire hine leidé. 
in are riche temple 
mid golde heo hine bi-tunden. 
pe king hauede bi hif wiue / 
twene fonen on liue. 
pe eldre hehte Belin 
pe 3eonggere Brenne. 10 


Pafbredreniwurden heomf{wahtePeos bropers weren fehte / 


pur! fele mdne rede. 

Belin 3ef hif leue broper ¥ 
anne dal of hif londe. 

bi-3ende pere Humbre Y 

mid mofcipe to halden. 

nors in to pare fe 7 

fel pat heo® iworSe. 

per fore hif mon he bicom / 

& herdfumneffe him folde don. 
Belin heol pif fudlond y 2 
& Cornwale on hif hond. 

& Wales per ford* mid? 

and faire hit dihte. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 183 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
To gadere come his eorles ¥ 
and leide hine on erpe. 
ine Lundene ¥ 
faire hine leide. 


{fc-2.] in one riche temple ’ 


of golde hine bi-tunde. _ [wife ? 
ing Dunwale hadde bi hif 
twei fones alifue, 
pe heldre hehte Belyn ’ Reges. 


pe 30ngere hehte Brenne. pred } 
porh wife menne lore. 

Belin 3ef his broper ? [c.2.] 

one deal of his londe. 

bi-3eonde par Humbre ¥ 


mid manfipe to..... 


par f... his man.....om/ 
and ...fomneffe him folde don. 
Belyn held piff fuplond / 

and Cornwale in his hond. 

and Wales par forp mede*? 
and faire hit dihte. 


Fif 3er heo heolden puf pif lond ¢ Fif 3er hii leuede pus / 


earls, and ‘brought [laid] him ‘to [in] earth; in London ‘ burgh’ fairly laid 
him, in a rich temple ‘with [of] gold ‘they ’ him inclosed. “The king (King 
Dunwale] had by his wife two sons alive ; the elder hight Belin, the younger 
{hight] Brennes. These ‘brethren [brothers] ‘became [were] reconciled 
through ‘good [wise] mens counsel. Belin gave his ‘loved’ brother a part 
of his land beyond the Humber, with honor to hold, ‘ north toward the sea, 
that he should well be; therefore his man he became, and homage should 
do him. Belin held this south-land and Cornwall in his hand, and Wales 
there together, and fairly it ruled. Five years they ‘held [lived] thus ‘ this 


1 purh? 2 he? 5 fo¥e, man. pr. * mid? 


184 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v.4307—4330.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


& leoue heom wes bi-twune. and loue ham was bi-twixte. 
pet euere eiper oder ¥ 


luuede alfe if broper. 

Ah Brennes hauede vuele men? Ac Brenne hafde luper men? 
hif z2Selene heo amerden. pat hine miflerede. 

peo alche deie hine larden 

luSere craftes. 

pat he fculde wih hif broSer? —_ pat he folde wid hif broper  - 
forewad! breken. breke forewarde. 


Anne hird-eniht he hauedeY 10 One cnipt he hadde ’ 
pe aht wes on pen weorede. 


pe pane balew meinde 

and puf fpec wih Brenne. pat puf to him faide. 

Seie me mi lauerd ¥ Sei me mi louerd 

leouft alre monne. leofueft alre manne. 

whi poleft pu pat Belin ’ wi poleft pou pat Brenne*® ?’ 
pe is pin azene broder. pat his pin owe broper. 
hauet fwa mochel of piffe lande? hauep fo mochel of pis lond ¥ 
and pu haueft fwa lutel. and pou haueft so lutel. 
Nefde 3e ba enne fader?’ 2 Nadde 3e0 bope one fader y’ 
and beie enne moder. and beine one moder. 
beiene of ane cunne? [f.24°.c.1.] beine of one cunne? 

cud hit if on folke. cup hit his on folke. 


Nu ftond al pif muchele lid?’ = Nou fteond al pis mochele lond’ 


land,’ and love was ‘between [betwixt] them, ‘so that ever-either loved 
the other as his brother.’ But Brennes had ‘evil [wicked] men, ‘his dig- 
nity they marred [who miscounselled him]; ‘they taught him each day 
wicked crafts,’ that he should with his brother break covenant. A ‘ house- 
hold-’knight he had, ‘ who was active in the party that the mischief medi- 
tated,’ ‘and thus he spake with Brennes [that thus to him said]: ‘‘ Say 
me, my lord, dearest of all men, why sufferest thou, that Belin, who is 
thine own brother, hath so much of this land, and thou hast so little? Had 
ye not both one (the same) father, and both one mother, both of one kin? 
—known it is among all people. Now standeth all this vast land in 


* forewarde? 2 R. Belyn, 


[v.4331—4352.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 185 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1. 


a Bailenef! azere hond. in Belynes owene hond. 
& pu eret hif mon and if cniht Y and pou herthis man andhis cnipt? 
pat if woh & na wiht riht. pat his wop and noht ribt. 


Eert pu penne cheues-boren’ Hert pou pus cheuif-bore 

pat pu wult beon for-loren. pat pou wolt beo for-lore. 

oper pu erat fwa ezrzh*® cniht’ oper pou hart cnipt ’ 

pat of londe ne rehcheft na wiht. pat of londe ne reccheft no wipt. 

oper pu pencheft beo ra%e dead: oper pou pencheft beo fone dead? 

& pine du3e%en al bi-laiuen. 9 and pine men bi-lefue. 
Bi-leafpetreuwepebi-lef* pene 25 Bi-lef pan treupe bi-lef pane op / 

for al pif fole if {wide wrad. for al pif folk his fwipe wrop. [£21 ¢.1.] 


herene* pine herdes red herkne pine menne read ¢ 

& heo pe wullet helpen. and hii pe wollep helpe. 

Hit uf pichet wunder Y Wonder hus pinchep’ 

3ef pu hine nelt awalden. 3if pou hine n.... ...Ide. 

pu eert muchele betere cniht?’ po. .art moch. ..tere cnipt / 
to halden comp & ifiht. to holde werre and eke fiht. 

& pu eer muchele ahtere and pou har mochele hardiere 
& ec mare herdere. and pi seolf of mochele mihte. 
Cheflon pu ouer-cée / 20 Ceflond pou ouer-come [C]heflon, 
and Scotlond him bi-nome. and Scotlond pou nome. 

of Muraine he wes king ¢ of Morayne he was king ¥ 


Belins own hand, and thou art his man and his knight ;—that is wrong, 
and ‘no whit [not] right! Art thou ‘then [thus] born of a concubine, 
that thou wilt be destroyed? Either thou art knight ‘so mean-spirited’ 
that of land thou reckest no whit, either thou thinkest soon to be dead, 
and uit ‘all’ thy men. Believe the truth,—believe the oath,—for all this 
folk is exceeding wrath! Hearken to thy ‘domestics [mens] counsel, and 
they will help thee. Wonder ‘it’ seems to us, if thou wilt not subdue 
him (Belin) ; thou art much better knight to hold ‘combat [war], and [eke] 
fight, and thou art much ‘braver [hardier], and ‘eke more hardy [thyself 
of great might]. ‘Cheflon [Ceslond] thou overcamest, and Scotland [thou] 
tookest ‘from him’; of Muraine (Murray) he was king, ‘and he with 


1 R. Belines. 2 exrje man. pr. 3 bi-pef man. pr. 
4 The last two letiers of hercne are by second hand, on er . 


186 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 4353—4376.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


and he wiht pe ohtliche faht. 
eerft pu hine ouer-come ? 
and feoSSen pu hine flowe. hine pou aflowe. 


and al hif ferde and al his ferde 

pe he brohte to pan ezerde. pat he brohte to pif erpe. 
Ah wel ich hit ileuen Ac wel ich hit ileue ’ 

pat we pe funden lede’. pat we pe beo lope. 

} pu pi panc al for-hele ’ pat pou pi poht hele y 

wih pine hired-monnen. wid pine kniptes. 

Ah for nauer nare teonen? 10 Ac for neuere none teone 
nulle we pe trukien. nole we pe bileue. 

neuer ane fiSen 7 neuere on fipe ¥ 

bi ure quike liué. bi houre ewike liue. 

And fer bi ure raden / And nou far bi houre reade / 
& mid pe pu leden and mid pe pou leade. 
tweolue of pine witizn® / twelf of pine wittie 

of pine wifufte monné. 

& feer forh nu to niht / and wende nou to niht Y 
in to Norewaie3e forh riht. [c.2.] into Norpwaie forp riht. 
to Alfinge kinge 20 to Alfing pan king 

pu bift him cume deore. him his pin comes deore. 
& gret pu londef king * 

and al hif leode. 


pe king haue’ ane dohter ¥ Pe king auep one dohter ¥ 


thee boldly fought, before thou him overcamest; and afterwards’ him 
thou slewest, and all his army that he brought to ‘the [this] land. But 
well I it believe, that we are odious to thee, in that thou concealest”‘ all’. 
thy thoughts from thy ‘household-men [knights]. But never for no injury 
will we ‘fail (desert] thee, never one time (once), by our quick lives! And 
[now] act by our counsel, and with thee lead thou twelve of thy sages, 
* of thy wisest men,’ and go ‘forth’ now tonight into Norway forth-right, to 
Alfing [the] king,—'thou wilt be to him welcome [thy coming will be to 
him dear]—‘ and greet thou the land-king, and all his people.’ The king 
hath a daughter, ‘who is to him very dear [whom he loveth exceedingly] ; 


1 loSe? leoSe? ? witizen? 


[v. 4377—4399.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 187 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
pe him is fwude dure. pat he louep fwipe. 
bide heo to pire bi-houe ¥ bid hire to pine biofpe 
to habben to are quene. for habbe to cwiene. 
penne he fid! pe? fwa hende cniht?alfe fone fo he pe fiht / 
he pe® 3eued pe ford riht. he wole pe hire 3ifue forp riht. 
Seodsen 3ern to pan kinge / Suppen 3eorn of pan kinge / 
} he pe lene ferde. pat he pe aleone ferde. 
to lede to pine lod’ ¥ to leden to pine londe ? 
to balden pine leoden. for boldi pine leode. 
Bide auer elcne cniht ¥ 10 Bede euerechne cnipt ¥ 
pet pu per bi-3eté mih. pat pu pare bi-zete miht. 
for feluere ad for gold for seoluer oper for golde ¥ 
cume mid pe to piffe londe. come mid pe to londe. 
& we feullen* pe wile ¢ 
bi-witen pine riche. 
Deriiliche pu fealt don / Deorneliche pou falt don ” 
peos ilka deda. pes... ¢: nonmele abe yeyyi led) 
pat hit nute Beli? o. he) on coh olaeppererial odens 
pe if pin azene broser. o- & °F NERS Ree Sipaal eaprie 
ah fer fwide & cum rade’ 9. 6 2 + + os ee 
for pus we pe raded’. © Tehowendhawe Gehl ‘eanis 
Penne pu cumef faren ham / oo 6 DE POU 6 oe erenclenp'e 
we fwulled® beon al fufe. .+ follen beon al,... 


ask her for thy behoof, to have for ‘a’ queen. “When [As soon as] he seeth 
thee ‘ knight so fair,’ he will give her to thee forth-right. Afterwards ask of 
the king, that he lend thee an army, to lead to thy land, to embolden thy 
people. Bid every knight, that thou there mayst get, for silver ‘and [or] 
for gold, come with thee to ‘this’ land, ‘and we shall the while take charge 
of thy kingdom.” Secretly thou shalt do this same deed, that Belin may not 
know it, who is thine own brother. But go quickly, and come speedily, for 
thus we thee counsel. When thou comest home, we shall be all ready with 


1 At first written fei, but the e expuncted. 

2 Two letters are erased after pe; the corrector has also added nd in hende, and 
the word cniht in lieu of something erased. 

5 heo? 4 fullen man, sec. by erasure. 5 raded? © fwulled? 


Malgod. 


188 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 4400—4423.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu11. 


mid mochelé ure ferdeY == wwe ee eee le houre ferde 
to feeren 3eon panevrde. =. . we ees ral pan erpe 

to o-wreken pe uppon Beline ’ 

pe pe bifmar haued! idon. 

Puf fpec Malgod / p-s fp.. ... god y 


swike he wes ful god. 

pe odere him raddé al fwa? 
per fore hem wrope* wide wa. 
Pa Brennes hauede ihirde Y 


pat was fwike god. 

p. opere him radde alfo 
pare fore worpe 3am wide wo. 
Po Brennes hadde ihorde ¥ 


hif hirde-manne lare. 10 his cniptene lore. 
pa gladede if mod’ po gladede his mod Y 
pe rad him puhte fwiSe god. pe read him pohte fwipe god. 


& feide hem pis anfware y 

after eore rade ich wulle feren. 
He greitede hif cnihtes ¥ 

& feorh feerde bi nihttes. 

swa longe pat he bi-com 


and feide peos anfwere 

after 30ure reade ich wolle fare. 
He greipede his cniptes ¥ 

and wende forp bi nipte. 

so long pat he bi-com Y 


to Ailfinge kinge. to Alfing pan king. 

Ponne king heo® igrette ¥ Pane kig he grette ¥ 

& his gumen alle. 20 and his gomes alle. 

and pe king him anfwerede? _and pe king him anfwerede? 
swiveliche feire. [f£.25.c.1.] fwipeliche faire. 

Pa fpec Brennes Po fpac Brennes 

& his ernde abed. and his herende bed pus. 


our great host to march over [all] the country, to avenge thee upon Belin, 
‘who hath done thee disgrace.”’ Thus spake Malgod,—traitor ‘he [who] 
was ‘full’ good! The others counselled him all so (in like manner),— 
therefore woe worth them wide! When Brennes had heard his ‘household- 
mens [knights] advice, then rejoiced his mind; the counsel seemed to him 
most good; and he said ‘to them’ this answer: ‘After your counsel I will 
act.” He made ready his knights, and went forth by night, so long, that 
he came to ‘the’ king Alfing. The king he greeted, and all his men, 
and the king him answered exceedingly fair. Then spake Brennes, and 

1 haued? 


2 worpe? 8 he? 


[v. 4494—4446.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
he 3irnde peos kinges dohter ¥ 
to habben to are quene. 
& pe king him 3ette ? 
al pat he 3irnde. 
gold & gerfume ’ 
feoh & ferde. 
Pa wes Brennef fwiSe bald ¥ 
on heorte he wes blive. 
pat meiden he weddede / 
& nom heo to hif bedde. 10 
Seoueniht he wes pere 
hit putte him feoue 3ere. 
zr he azen come? 
to fehten wih hif bro®er. 
Of witten heo weoren amadde 
he! hi fwa redden. 
Brennef wes in Norweye ? 
Belin in piffe londe. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


189 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xru. 
King ich 3eorne pine dohter ¥ 
for habbe to ewene. 

And anon he him 3eaf 

al pat he 3eornde. 

gold and garifome 7 

feo and ferde. 

po was Brennes {wipe bold 
and heorte hadde blipe. 

pat mayde he weddede Y 

and nom hire to his bedde. 
Souenipt he was pare / 

hit pohte him foue 3ere. 

are he 3ein come 

to fihte wid his broper. 

Of witte hii weren awed 
pat him puf radde. 

Brennef was in Norweye ’ 
[f.22. c.1.] Belin, 


Brennes. 


Beli iherde fugge ¥ het Phe 


purh® fume feg treowe. 20:18 5% rfrerst Auster Spelial Pets 
of hif broSer wifSinge ¥ ee eS tiie Sips ge 
and for wulche pinge. 

& for wulchere neode Ste) Teer a eee gs 


his errand ‘thus’ begged; ‘he asked this kings [‘‘King, I ask thy] 
daughter, to have for ‘a’ queen; and ‘the king [he anon] him granted all 
that he yearned, gold and treasure, goods and forces. Then was Brennes 
exceeding bold; ‘in [and] heart ‘he was [had] blithe; the maiden he 
wedded, and took her to his bed. Seven nights he was there ;—it seemed 
to him seven years, ere he came back to fight with his brother. They 
were mad of wit, who him ‘so [thus] counselled! Brennes was in Norway, 
Belin in this land. Belin heard say through some true saying (report), 
of his brothers marriage, and for what thing, and for what cause he went 


1 R. pe. 
? The last letter h is by second hand, on erasure ; apparently pur3 man. pr. 


190 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 4447—4470.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
he to Norweize ferde. -. o gltoh Aree S 
Belin hine bi-pohte / Co nF CY 
of fwulchere dede. S we oP OF. tomes 
& paf worde feidév"1o% or fo i. we word ..... 
pe feeg wes itreouwe. . . . is moup treuwe. 
Wa wurse a pon broserY ...... e brop.. 
pe bi-fwiked pene oSer. pat bi-f..... pan oper. 
Whzeer beo 3e mine enihtes ¥ Ware beo 3e0 ...e enip..s7 
whar beo 3e mine kempen. ware beo 3e0 mine kempes. 
wahr beo 3e mine leoue men? 10 ware be 3e0 mine 1. .e men? 
nu we fcullen liéen. nou we follé wende. 
Heo ferden to Humber londe’ Hii verde to Humberlonde 
per weoren caftlef ftronge. par were caftles ftreng. 
pe caftlef heo nomé alle ’ pe caftles hii nomen alle ” 
& ftrangede pe wallef. and ftrongede pe walles. 
He lette blauwen bemen ? He lette bloue beomes ¥ 
and nam al pa burhwes. and nomen alle pe borewes. 
pa weoren on hif broSer londe Y pat weren raper ¥ 
pe he hafde an heonde. in his broper honde. 
He dude per inne mete inoh'Y He dude par ine? 
& wepmen and® unifoh. 21 mete to mani manne. 
pat me mihte heom walden / [c.2.] pat me mipte 3am witie’ 
wih Brennes an-walde. wid Brennes on walle. 


Hif cnihtes mid hi? feoluen’ — His cniptes mid him seolue ’ 


to Norway. Belin bethought him of such deed, and said these words—the 
saying was true! [with his true mouth])—‘‘ Woe worth ever the brother 
who betrayeth the other! Where be ye my knights, where be ye my warriors, 
where be ye my dear men,—now we shall forth march!” They advanced to 
North Humberland, where were castles strong; the castles they all took, and 
strengthened the walls. He caused trumpets to be blown, and took all 
the burghs, that were [before] in his brothers ‘land, that he had in” hand. 
He placed therein meat ‘enow, and numerous soldiers [for many men], that 
men might defend them against Brennes ‘power [on the wall]. His 


1 The letter h is by second hand, on erasure, which has also added & in the next line, 
2 Redundant ? 3 Inserted man, sec. 


[v. 4471—4494.] LA3AMONS BRUT, 191 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
to pare fee feerden. to pare [séé] verde. 
par laien bi pan brimme Y par hii leien bi pan brimme ¥ 
and bifilichen hit wiften. and bufiliche hit wifte. 
Brennef wes in Norwe;3e ? Brennes was in Norweie ’ 
and noht herof nufte. and noht her of nufte. 
he wende pat hif broSer he wende pat his broper ¢ 
nufte noht of hif fere. nufte of his fare. 
Leaf he nom at A#lfing ? Leue he nom of Alfing ¥ 
pe wes Norweine king. pat was Norweyes king. 
& he hi 3ef afwere 10 and he him 3eaf anfwere? 
A mote pu wel feren. Nou mote pou wel fare. 
& Delgan mi dohter ¥ and Delgan mi dohter ¢ 
pe me if fwpe deore. pat me his {wipe deore. 
pif under-ftod pe zeonge quene? Pis ifeh pe cwene? 
faren pat heo feolde. fare pat 3eo folde. 


heo hauede enne leoue-mon? —3e0 hadde on lemmon? 
pa heo fwupe ileoued heefde. pat 3e0 loue more pan him. [e.2.] 


pene king of Denemark ” pane king of Denemarche 
pe leof hire weis on mode. pat leof hire was on heorte. 
he wes fwiSe god cnihtY 2 he waf {wipe god cnipt 
Godlec he hahte. Gutlac he hehte. 

Pa fede Dalgan pa quene Po fende Delgan ? 

in to Denentrke. in to Denemarche. 

& gudde' Godlacke / and cupede Gutlac ¥ 


knights with himself marched to the sea, where they lay by the shore, and 
busily it guarded. Brennes was in Norway, and nought hereof knew; he 
weened that his brother knew nought of his proceeding. He took leave ‘at 
[of] Alfing, who was Norways king, and he him gave answer, “ ‘Ever [Now] 
mayst thou well fare! and Delgan, my daughter, who is to me most dear!” 
The ‘ young’ queen ‘understood [saw] this, that she should depart; she 
had a lover, whom she ‘had loved greatly [loved more than him],—the 
king of Denmark, who was dear to her in ‘mind [heart]. He was exceed- 
ing good knight, ‘Godlac [Gutlac] he hight. Then sent Delgan ‘the queen’ 
into Denmark, and made known to Godlac, ‘who was her dear man [whom 


1 cudde? 


Elfing r[ex]. 


Delgan. 


Gudlec 
re[x}. 


— 


192 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 4495—4518.] 
MS. Cott, Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

pa wes hire gome deore. pat heo louede fwipe. 

stille boc runé Y one deorne lettre” 

heo fenden' him to raeden. 3eo fende him to reade. 

& feiden® him pat Brennef? and feide him pat Brennes / 

a king of Britaine. a king of Britayne. 

hauede heo biwedded ? hadde hire i-wedded 

& ihaued heo to bedde. and i-hafd to his bedde. 

al hire vnSonkes al hire onpoukes Y 

per fore hire wes unede. par fore 3eo was fori. 

and heo he wolden® leiden? 10 and he hire wolde lede 

toward hif leoden. toward his londe. 

nuede heo bute preo nihte feorft?/nafde 3e0 bote preo nipt forft ’ 

faren pat heo feolde. faren pat 3e0 folde. 

Sone hit mai ilimpen So‘ hit mai bi-falle ¥ 

panne ihe hunné live. pat ich hinne wende. 


pah pu habben bliffe and grid’ and habbe wele and grip’ 
ne {peke ich pe nauere more wiS°.pe ne fpeke ich neuere wid. 
andihcfende pe gretinges[[£25*.c.1.Jand ich fende pe gretinge y 


of mine gold ringe. of mine gold ringe. 

pa® Godlac ifeh pif? 2 Po Gutlac ifeh pis’ 

wa him wes ful iwif. wo him was foliwis. 
stille he wes ifwo3en ftille he was ifwo3e / 

on hif kine-ftole. on his kine-ftole, 

me warp on hif nebbe me warp on his nebbe 


she loved much]; ‘secret letters [a private letter] she sent him to read, 
and said to him that Brennes, a king of Britain, had wedded her, and had 
‘her’ to [his] bed, all against her will; therefore she was ‘uneasy [sorry] ; 
and that he would her lead toward his land; she had but three nights 
space, before that she should depart.—“ Soon it (the time) may befall, ‘when 
[that] I hence go ;—yet [and] have ‘thou’ ‘bliss [weal] and peace, —never 
‘more’ may I speak with thee; and greeting I send thee by my gold ring.” 
When Godlac saw this, woe was he full certainly; still he was in swoon 
on his throne; men threw on his face cold well water. When the king 


1 fende? 2 feide? 3 wolde? 4 sone? 
5 The letter & is by second hand, on erasure. 5 4 man. pr. 


_————— oe 


[v. 4519—4542.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 193 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
cold welle watere. cold welles water. 
Pa pe king wes a-waht ’ Po pe king was a-webt’ 
_ he wes fwupe idraht. he was {wipe a-drept. 
he feide ford rihtef ? he feide forp rihtef’ 
Whar beo’ mine cnihtes. © Ware beo 3eo mine-eniptes. 
fare we {wide to pare fe ¥ fare fwipe to pare féé : 
fele mine dranches. fele mine kempes. 
Godlac kig on uefte / Gutlac king vafte ¥ 
mid gudfulle folke. 
to pere fee wenden / 10 to pare {éé wende. 
f{cipen per heo funden. 
makede muchul fé-flot ” he makede pare mochel flote ¢ 
and ferden' mid ftreme. and ferde mid ftreme. 
to-3enes pare hauene to-3eines paie fipes ¥ 
per Brennes from halde. par Brennes was ine. 
pa Brennes com i wide fe : po Brennes was in wide féé ¥ 
he i-mette hif wider-iwinne. he mette his wiper-iwennes. [£.22".c.1.] 
fcip zrne to-3en feip y sip orn to-3ein fip ¥ 
pa hit al to-wéde to fcifren. pat hit al to-feéde. 
horn a3en horne ¥ 20 
halde pe wacre. 
Per wes moni breofte ¥ Pare was mani breofte 
mid brade fpere i-purlud. mid brode fpere iporled. 
helmef pe? gullen helmes par 3ollen ¥ 


was aroused, he was exceedingly afflicted; he said forth-right: “‘ Where 
be [ye] my knights? Go ‘we’ quickly to the sea, my good warriors!” 
Godlac the king soon ‘ with goodly folk’ to the sea went ; ‘ there they found 
ships.’ [He] made [there] a great ‘sea-’fleet, and went with ¢he stream 
toward the ‘haven [ships], ‘wherefrom Brennes held his course [wherein 
Brennes was]. When Brennes ‘came [was] in wide sea, he met his ad- 
versaries ; ship ran against ship, so that it all ‘went to shivers [broke in 
pieces! ] ;—‘ beak against beak,—the weaker heeled (sunk)!’ There was 
many breast with broad spear pierced,—helms there resounded,—knights 


1 ferde? ‘ ? per? 


194 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 4543—4566.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xrir. 


beornes per fullen. cniptes par fullen. 
balluw per wes riue Y balu par was rive? 
Brennef fizh bliue. Brennes fieh bliue. 


& Godlac held efter ¢ and Gutlac held hafter? 
monie feipen he per cahte. mani fipes he par cahte. 
He ifeh a feip par hit lad ¥ He ifeh a fip par hit lap’ 
fulkene wes pat feil-cla®. of folke was pat feil-clop. 
he clupede to his dringes ? he cleopede to his dringes ¥ 


Nu forh nu nidinges. Nou forp nipinges. 

pet if pere quene feip ¢ 10 pat his pare ewene fip? 
pe uf! bi-foren quecched. pat vs bi-fore ewechep. 
halded? alle per to? holdep alle pare to? 


and 3if 3e hit mawen ifon. and 3if 3e0 hit maze vnderfo. 
zuere mare ich eu leouie ¥ 

pa wile pa ich leouie®. [pen y 

Mid ftreng%e heo halden to fchi- Mid ftrengpe hi heoldeto panfipe 


& pa quene heo igripen. _[c.2.] and pe cwene vt grepe. 


Godlac floh pa fcip-gumen 
& alle heo* nom pat garfume. 


Gutlac floh pe fipmen ’ 
and nam al pe garifom. 


ad ladde pa quene Delgan? 2 and ladde pe cwene Delgan?’ 
toward Denemarke anan. touward Denemarche. 

he podte heo to habben he pohte hire habbe ¢ 

to hif awere bihoue. to hif owe bi-ofpe. 

& oder weif hit feeht / ac oper weief hit fat ¥ 


there fell,—woe there was rife! Brennes fled quickly, and Godlac pur- 
sued after him’; many ships he there captured. He saw a ship where 
it passed, ‘silken [of silk] was the sail-cloth; he called to his warriors, 
‘‘ Now forth, ‘now’ nithings! That is the queens ship, that before us 
moveth. Go ye all thereto, and if ye may it take, ‘ evermore I will love 
you, the while that I live.” With strength they proceeded to [the] ship, 
and the queen ‘they [out] took. Godlac slew the shipmen, and ‘he’ took 
all the treasure, and led the queen Delgan toward Denmark ‘anon’. He 
thought to have her to his own behoof, ‘and [but] otherwise it happened 


1 These two words are by second hand, on erasure. 2 halded? 
5 liouie man. sec. 4 he? 


@ Sides a” ee 


(v.4567—4589.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 195 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
fone par after. 

Godlac forh geinde ¢ Gutlac forp geinde 
glad he wes on heorte. glad he waf on heorte. 
he pohte to habben Delgan? — he pohte habbe Delgan 
to quene of Denemarke. cwene of Denemarche. 
ah him com muchel letting? | ac him com mochel lette 
fwa him wes alre laSeft. afe him was alre lopeft. 
AEft araf a ladlich weder Bi efte aros a lopliche weder 
peoftrede pa wolene. puftrede pe wolkne. 
pe wind com on weSere? 10 += pe wind com on wipere ¥ 
and pa fre he wraSede. and pe {éé wreppede. 


vden per urnen ? 
al fe cunes! per burnen. 


rapes per braken pat pe ropes breke ¥ 

bulu*® wes fulle riue®. and wowe par was riue. 

Scipen‘ per faiken 7° Sipef pare ..... [c.2.] 
per preo & fifti feipen outs ie teemohetinitng sere 
feollen to grunde. 

in pa teonfulle fe ¥ « LOR iees. Bisa 
torneden® fieiles. aoens, “Sperd ‘ , 

Godlac hauede a god fcip ¥ oe MRC Core 6 atp 

ne gomede him no wiht. NO gs ys reise cere 

he hine bi-BohteY® 0 we wee bi-po... 


[soon thereafter]. Godlac forth voyaged—glad he was in heart !—he 
thought to have Delgan ‘for the’ queen of Denmark, but mickle hindrance 
came to him, as to him was most hateful. [By] east arose a loathly storm, 
the welkin darkened, the wind came adverse, and the sea ‘it’ became 
wrath; ‘there ran the waves as if houses (?) there were burning (i. e. the 
waves rolled on high like flames of fire), [so that the] ropes ‘there’ brake, 
{and] woe was [there] full rife! The ships there sunk; there three and 
fifty ships fell to ground (went down) ; in the raging sea turned the sails! 
Godlac had a good ship,—he gamed him (was merry) no whit ;—he be- 


1 tunes? Nearly the same line occurs at f.68. c. 1. ? balu? 
5 bliue man. pr. 4 fcupen man. pr. _—* A line, apparently, is here wanting. 
® The first five letters of this word are on an erasure. 

02 


196 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


weht he don mihté'. 

He igrap ane wi-#xe 
muchele and fwide feerpe. 
he for-heow penne meeft ? 
a-two riht amidden. 

he lette feil and pane meeft ¥ 
liden mid vden. 

puf feide Godlac ? 

feere him gromede. 

Auer ele ehte mi? 

help pat we libben. 

p we comen to londe “ 

ne recche we on fwulche leoden. 
Heo ferdé mid pon wedere ¥ 
n°ten heo nauere whudere. 
vnder fif dawene 3eong ¥ 

heo comen to piffe londe. 
Comen pes kinges cnihtes ¥ 

pe pe fee wufté. [[4.26.c.1.] 
and nomen Godlac pene king ? 


& Delga pe quene. 21 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v.4590—4614.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
He igrop on ax.’ 
. . » maft and pane feil 
.... mid pe bieres. 
..8 fa... Gutlac? 
fore him gramede. 
Euer ech aht man? 
helpi pat we libbe. 
pat we come to londe ? 
ne recche we ware. 
Hii verden mid pan wedere ? 
nuften hii neuere woder. 
bi fif daizene 3ong ? 
hii come to piffe londe. 
Comé pis kinges cniptes ? 
pat pe {éé witede. 
and nomen Gutlac pane king ‘ 
and Delgan pe cwene. 


heo feiden heom enneftrdgne reed zhi feideto heomanneftrongneread? 


Nu 3e beon alle dead. 
ah 3ef 3e wullen uf feuggen 
3et 3e mawen libben. 


thought him what he might do. 


Nou 3¢0 beop alle dead. 
ac 3if 3e0 vs wollep fegge ? 
3et 3e0 mage libbe. 


He grasped a ‘battle-’axe, ‘mickle and 


very sharp’; he severed the mast in two, right in the middle ; he let the sail 
and the mast go with the waves. Thus said Godlac—sore it angered him ! 
« Help, every brave man, that we live—that we come to land—we reck not 
‘in what country [where]! They fared with the weather, they knew 
never whither; after five days voyage they came to this land. The kings 


knights came, who guarded the sea, 


and captured Godlac the king, and 


Delgan the queen; they said to them an evil speech: “ Now ye are all 
dead! But if you will say to us whence ye are come, and what ye here 


1 mihte? 


[v. 4615 —4638.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 197 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
whonene 3e bed icumene ¥ wanene 3e beop icome / 
& whet 3e her fohté. and wat 3e0 here fechep. 
Godlac anfwerede ? Gutlac anfwerede 
mid godlichen worden. mid godliche wordes. 
We beoh fe-werie men y We beop féé-weri men? 
and we wullet fod fucgen. and fop we wollep fegge. 


ah nuté neuere pes gumen? _ac ne cnowe non of pis gomes ¥ 
in to whuche lode heo beo’ icume.ne! in woche londe we beop icome. 
ne paf ftrond we ne cnowed? _ne pif ftronde we ne cnowep? 


pe we ifoht habbed. 10 pat we ifoht habbep. 

pif lon? ne paf leoden ¥ 

ne wha her lauerd is. 

ne we nuten na pe ma? ne we neote no pe mo’ 

pat we ne fpeken wit ure ifen. pohwefpekewidhoure....[f23.¢.1.] 
Ah ich eow bidde leoue menY Ac ich 30u bidde gode man 
ledde’ uf to pen kinge. ledep vs to pon kinge. 

& ich him wulle fuggé / and ich him wolle feg. . 

of bliffen and of forwen. .- bliffe and of f.... 

And pa cnihtes hed ledden ¥ --» pe cniiptes h....2.. 

to heore leod-kinge. 2 .. hire kinge. 


Godlac & to® quene ? 

heore zhte & hif iferen. 

& feidé him pat he wes i Brutaine? 
i Belin kinges londe. 


‘sought [seek], yet ye may live.” Godlac answered with goodly words : 
«We are sea-weary men, and sooth we will say; but ‘none of’ these men 
know ‘never’ in‘to’ what land ‘they [we] are come, nor this strand do we 
know, that we have sought, ‘this land, nor this people, nor who is their 
lord ;’ nor know we the more, ‘that [though] we speak ‘not’ with our 
foes. But I pray you, ‘dear [good] men, lead us to the king, and I will 
to him say of bliss and of sorrow.” And the knights led them to their 
‘sovereign [king], ‘ Godlac and the queen, their goods, and his companions, 
and said to him, that he was in Britain, in king Belins land.’ So soon as he 


1 Redundant ? 2 lond? 3 pa? 


) 


SS UEItaeeiemmtne iia oie 


198 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 4639—4662.} 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
Sone fwa he to paking comy ....... to pane king com? 
wifliche he clupede hi an. ..-liche he cleopede him on. 
Hail wurh pu Belin king? Hayl beo pou Belyn king / 
Brénes if pi broSer. Brenne his pi broper. 

& ich hatte Godlac and ich hote Gutlac 
gumenen ich wes lauerd. of londe ich was .ouerd. 


Denemarkene king 
peof wifman hatte Delcan. 


Brennes com to Norhweie Brenne com to Norweye ? 

to Allfinge kinge. 10 to Alfing pan king. 

pe king him 3ef Delcan and he him 3ef pes womman y 
pe 3are wes mi leoue-mon. pat raper was mi lemman. 


Sonden commen bi-twenen Sonde com bi-twine 
pe foSe word me feiden. [[c.2.] pat fop word me feide. 
whennen Brernes! wolde listen? pat Brenne wolde wende? 


& mine leoue-mon ledé. and mi leofman me at-leade. 
To-3enes ich him® ferde / To-3eines him ich verde ¥ 
mid feowerti fcipen gode. mid fourti fipes gode. 


and mid al fwa fele cnihtes ? and al fo fale eniptef? 

fwa pa fcipen beré mihten. 20 so pe fipes beren mihte. 

&ich wulle fuggen pe an wider? and ich wolle fegge pe a wider ¢ 
he haueden® fcipen feoué hundred.he hadde fipes foue hundred. 
And ich bigon ftrong feeht ? And ich bi-gan ftrong filte / 
and Brennes to flenne. and Brennef gon to fleonde. 


to the king came, wisely he called to him: ‘‘ Hail be thou, king Belin! 
Brennes is thy brother, and_I hight Godlac; of ‘people [land] I was lord, 
‘king of Denmark ;—this woman hight Delgan.’ Brennes came to Norway, 
to Alfing [the] king, [and] ‘the king [he] gave him ‘Delgan [the woman], 
that previously was my mistress. Messengers came between, who said me 
sooth word, ‘when [that] Brennes would depart, and ‘lead [carry from me] 
my mistress. Towards him I fared with forty good ships, and ‘ with’ as 
many knights as the ships might bear. And I will say thee a wonder,— 
he had ships seven hundred! And I began strong fight, and Brennes 


1 R. Brennes. ? him ich? 3 hauede? 


[v. 4663—4683.] 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


hif men ich awelde ¥ 

& monie ich aquelde. 

and per ich nom Delga'. 

pe er wes mi leoue-mon. 

& ich fugge pe to foSe ¥ 

pat 3et leoued pi broSer. 

for he hald to pen londe 

& wel com to hauene. 

And ich ifeh pare quene fcip / 
quecchen mid véen. 10 
& ich ferden® per efter 
and bi-wan hit mid fehte, 
pa wes ich blide 

on mine quike liue. 

Pat? ich wes i wide fe 
wiSer com to-3enes. 

pet weder* wes fwa wilde 
& pa fee wraedde®. 

and draf me to piffe londe 
in to pif leode. 

a® me do pine milce ? 


LA3AMONS BRUT, 


199 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


his men ich a-welde ? 
and manie ich a-cwelde. 
and par ich nam Delgan ’ 
pat her was mi leomman. 
And ich fegge pe to fope y 
pat 3et leuep pi broper. 
for he heold to hauene ? 
and wel com to londe. 
And ich ifeh pe cwene fip ¥ 
seily bliue. 

and ich verde par after 
and won hit mid fihte. 

po was ich blipe / 

in mine cwike lifue. 

Po ich was in wide féé 
wiper com to-3eines me. 
pat weder was so wilde ’ 
and pe {éé wrappede. 

and drof me in to piffe londe ¥ 
ni to pine leode. 

and nou do pine wille ¥ 

for pou hart mihti ouer me. 


[c. 2.] 


for pu eart mihti ouer me. 


pe king heom lette halden ¥ Pe king heom lette holde ” 
[gan] to flee; his men I conquered, and many I killed; and there I took 
Delgan, who ere was my mistress. And I say thee in sooth, that thy 
brother yet liveth, for he held his course to ‘the land [haven], and came 
well to ‘haven [land]. And I saw the queens ship ‘move with the waves 
[sail quickly], and I went thereafter, and won it with fight; then was I 
blithe in my quick life! When I was in the wide sea, adverse wind came 
against [me]; the weather was so wild, and the sea became wrath, and 
drove me to this land, into thy country. And [now] do ‘to me’ thy ‘mercy 
{will], for thou art mighty over me!” The king caused them to be held in 
1 R. Delgan. ? ferde? 3 pa? 
* weder is written twice man. pr., but struck out by a plummet-line, 
5 wredede? ® and? 


200 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


in {wide feir’ benden. 

in ane ftronge caftle ¥ 

per he heom wel bi-wifte. 
Nes hit buten feower wiken ¢ 
pat pas kinge ifaren weoren. 
cam Brennes riden ? 

in to Scotte-londe. 

mid feower hundred fchipen 
fole per wes feie. 

He fende hif boden? - 10 
to Belin hif bro¥er. 

& bad! hine qicliche ¢ 

azeuen him hif quene. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 4686—4708.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


in wel faire bendes. 

in one ftrongne caftel / 
pare me heom wel wufte. 
Nas hit bote four wike / 
pat pis ping i-vare were. 
com Brénes ride 

in to Scotlonde: 

mid four hundred fipes ¥ 
par was folk feie. 


‘He fende his fonde¥ 


to Belyn his broper. 
and bad hine ewicliche? 


fende him his ewene. 


& pane kinge Gudlac*? [¢, 26°. c.1.] and pane king Gutlac ? 


pe hif gumé hauede a-falled. 

& 3ef he hit nolle ’ 

him fal beon pa wurfe. 

in hif loden ich wulle gon? 

& flen al pat ich finde. 

mid fehte & mid fur’ - . 2 
pif feoreward ich him halde. 
bute he me wullen® 3euen 
pat ich him to-3eurne. 


pat his men-a-fulde. » 

And 3if he hit nolle ? 

him feolf fal beo pe worfe. 
in his londe ich wolle gon’ 


‘and flean pat ich finde. 


mid fiht mid fure ¥ 


‘and mid oper harmes. 


bote ich mawe habbe Y 
pat pe ich 3eorne. 


‘most [well] sure bonds, i in a strong castle—there ‘he [men] well guarded 


them. 


It was but four weeks that (after) these things were passed, that 


Brennes arrived i in Scotland with four hundred ships ;—there was folk 


fated! 


He sent his messenger to Belin his brother, and bade him quickly 


‘give [send] him his queen, and the king Godlac, who “had’ felled his 
men. “And if he will it not, to him[self] shall be the worse ! In his land I 
will go, and slay ‘all’ that I find, with fight ‘and’ with fire; ‘this con- 
dition I will him hold [and with other harms], unless ‘he will me give what 


1 badd man. pr. 


2 Originally written Gudlac kinge, but marked to be transposed. The marks of 
transposition have subsequently been, without reason, erased. 


5 wulle? 


[v. 4709—4731.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


& mi londe rie 

& fare to hif riche. 

and a3eue me mine bur3es ¥ 
'& mine buri gode. 

caftles and toures 

pe he me halt a teonen. 
Ford ferde paf fode ¥ 

to Belin king. 

& feide him peos ibeod ¥ 
from Brenne hif broSer. 

& Belin him warde! / 

al pat he 3erde. 

ne sulde he nauere ibiden Y 
pe while pe he mihte riden. 
Pe? azan ferde ¥ 

& feide hit Brenne. 
Brenne wes {wiSe wrad Y 
& bannede if® ferde. 
scheldede hif fcalken ¥ 

al fe heo to wi3e* foldé. 
folkede hif cnihtes. 

al fa heo fcolden fehten. 
Belin an halue ’ 


10 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


201 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xii. 
and mi Jond rume ? 
and fare to his riche. 
and 3iue me mine borewes 
and mine gode caftles. 


Forp verde pe fonde ¥ 
to Belyn pan kinge. 


and feide him pef bode ? 


fram Brenne his broper. 

and Belyn him wornede? [£.23°.c.1.} 
al pat he 3eornde. 

pat ne folde he hit neuere ibide 
pe wile he mihte ride. 

Pe fonde a3ein verde 

and tolde hit to Brenne. 

Bréne was {wipe wrop 

and bonnede his ferde. 


flockede his cnihtes 
alfe hii folde to fihte. 
Belym® on his half / 


[I may have that that] I ask ‘of him’, and my land he vacate, and go to 


his kingdom, and give me my burghs, and my good ‘buries [castles], ‘ castles 
and towers, that he holds from me in injury.’” Forth went ‘this [the] 
messenger to Belin [the] king, and said to him this command from Brennes 
his brother; and Belin denied him all that he asked, that he should never 
[it] abide, the while ‘that’ he might ride. The messenger went back, 
and ‘said [told] it to Brennes. Brennes was very wrath, and summoned 
his forces; ‘armed his soldiers as if they should to battle,’ assembled 
his knights, as if they should [to] fight. Belin on [his] side ‘hastened 


1 warnde? 
4 wite man, sec, 


2 pe fonde? 


® banne hif man. pr. 
5 R. Belyn. F 


4 


[Kala}tere. 


202 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


haeizede him to-3eines. 
muchel zie wes pere 
vnder pan wude of Kalatere. 
per heo heom imetten ? 

& vuele hem igretten. 
To-gadere heo comen 

heo granedé fone. 
feondliche heo feohten ¥ 

bi peofende heo fellen. 
Swite faht Belin king Y 

fwa duden hif Bruttes. 

heo weoren {wide ohte men 
pat 2Sel heo bi-wunnen. 
Brennes heom from beh 
and mid hif folke he fleh. 
al toward pare fee 

mid muchele ynfeldSe. 

& Belin heom efter ? 

& heo* adun leide. 

fixti pufende? 

he leide to pen gronde. 
A {chip funde Brénes ¥ 
bi pon brimme ftondé. 

he bi-com per inne’ 

mid hif twelf monnen. 


10 


[c. 2.] 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


(v.4732—4756.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu11. 


com him to-3eines. 

mochel eaye was par y 
onder pan wode of Kalater. 
par hii heom hii-mette! 
and huuele heom igrette. 
To-gadere hi comen ? 


ad® fulle bi pufend. 

{wipe faht Belym® king / 
fo dude his Bruttus. 

hii weré fwipe hahte men 
pane feld hii a-wonne, 
Brennes heom fram beoh 
and mid his folke he flep. 
al touward pare féé 7 

mid mochel ynfelpe. 

and Belyn him after / 

and adun leide, 

sixti pufend / 

he leide to pan grunde. 

A fip funde Brenne ¥ 
ftonde bi pan brime. 

he bi-com par hinne ? 

mid his twelf manne. 


[came] against him; much anger was there, by the wood of Kalatere, 
where they them (each other) met, and eyilly them greeted. Together they 
came, ‘they soon approached together (?); fiercely they fought,’ [and] by 
thousands ‘they ’ fell! Well fought king Belin—so did his Britons—they 
were most valiant men, the field they won! Brennes retreated from them, 
and with his folk he fled, all toward the sea, with much misfortune; and 
Belin pursued after them, and laid ‘them’ adown ;—sixty thousand he laid 
to the ground! Brennes found a ship standing by the shore; he entered 


1 i-mette ? > and? 


5 FR. Beljyn. 4 heom? 


{v. 4757—4780.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


ne ledde he na ma ifunde Y 
of alle his monnen, 

Ouer fie he ferden!? - 

in toward Friace. 

and peo for-wundede men / 
wende into holte. 

Pa al pif wes ifarren Y 

& Brennes wes aweei iflozen. 
Belin in Euerewic ¥ 

huld eorlene hufting. 10 
he bed pat his riche men 
rihtne read raddé. 

whet him weore to dine y 

bi pon ilke monne. 

& bi Godlac kinge ? 

pe huold i bende. 

For Gudlac him fende word / 
bi ane wife monne. 

pat if he him wold leo®ien ” 
of lade his benden. 20 
pat he wolde hif mon beon ? 
mid alle his mon-ueorde. 


LA3ZAMONS BRUT. 


203 


MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 


ne ladde he na more ? 
of alle his folke. 

ouer féé he verde? 

in touward F“nce. 


Po Belin in Euerwick 
heold eorlene hufting. 

he bad pat his wife men ¥ 
rihtne read him radde. 

wat him were to donde? 

of one foche mane. 

pat Gutlac his ihote 

pat ich habbe in bende. 

For Gutlac him fende word / 
bi one wife manne [c.2.] 
pat 3if .. him wolde gripie / 
of his lope bendes. 

he wolde his man ... 

... «lle his mihte. 


& he him wolde 3euen al pat goldYa.... ... wolde 3ifue al... .... 


pe he haueden* i Denemark lond. pat he haddeinDe. .marches lond. 


therein with his twelve men ;—no more he led ‘ safe’ of all his ‘men [folk] ! 
Over sea he fared, in toward France ; ‘and the wounded men went into the 
wood. When all this was passed, and Brennes was fled away,’ [Then] Belin 
held a husting of earls, in York. He commanded that his ‘rich [wise] men 
should advise [him] right counsel, what were him best to do ‘with the same 
man, and with Godlac the king [of one such man that Gutlac is named], 
that [I] ‘hold [have] in bonds. For Godlac sent him word by a wise man, 
that if he would him free from his hateful bonds, ‘that’ he would be his 
man, with all his ‘people [might], and he would give him all the gold that 


1 ferde ? ? hauede? 


204 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


~ & eleche 3ere him fenden 
preo pufund pundé. 

her to him wolden! finden 
3ifet of his gilde. 

wih*pon pe he lette fckere 
hine & hif ifere. 

& hif leoue-mon fwa deore 

to Denemark leoden. 

Belin king him 3ette 

forward pat he 3erde*. 10 
and freoliche hine lette faren ¥ 
and alle his iueren. _ [f- 27. c.1.] 
Belin hauede peo gefeles* / 

& pa 3euen gode. 

& his monreidene ? 

mid monfchipe biwinen®. 

& Gudlac ledde forh ” 

pa wifmon fwite feire. 

& he heo bohte fwiSe deore 
bruken he heo pohte. 20 
Belin huld paf riche ” 

wel feole 3ere. 

& he fwiSe freolic 

al hif fole he ladde. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


and eche 3ere him fende 
preo pufend punde. 

Her to ich wolle him 3ilde 
hoftages of mine childe. 
wip pan pat he lete fcere / 
me an. nine? fere. 

an mi lemman ? 

to Denemarche lede. 

Belyn king g“ntede 

al pat he 3ornde. 

and freliche hine lette vare ¥ 
and al his i-veres. 

Belyn hafde pe hoftages / 
and pe 3eftes gode. 

and hif manradene nam / 
mid mafipe pan mefte. 

and Gutlac forp ladde 

pis womman pat was hende. 
he hire deore bohte 

for brouke hire he pohte. 
Beljn heold pes riche ¥ 

fale 3er in bliffe. 


[v. 4781—4804.] 


he had in Denmarks land, and each year him send three thousand pounds ; 
hereto ‘would him find [I will him yield] hostages ‘for his tribute [of his 
children], on condition that he let ‘him [me] and ‘his [my] companions 
depart, and ‘his [my] mistress ‘so dear’ to Denmark lead. King Belin 
granted ‘him’ ‘the covenant [all] that he asked, and freely let him go, and 
all his companions. Belin had the hostages, and the good gifts, and [took] 
his homage, with honor ‘acquired [the most]; and Godlac led forth ‘the 
[this] woman ‘most [that was] fair, ‘and’ he bought her ‘ very’ dear, [for] 
to enjoy her he thought! Belin held this realm ‘well’ many years [in 
3 3ernde ? * 3eueles man. pr. "5 biwiine ? 


1 wolde? 2 mine? 


[v. 4805—4828.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


he makede fwiSe god grid 
his gumen hit wel heoldé. 
pa weoren i piffere leode ¢ 
lazen {wide gode. 
& al leouede peone king 
pe quic wes an londe. 

Pa hauede Belin an heond ¥ 
al Brutteinef lond. 

he ferde 3eond al 

& lawen fette. 

He feawede pa wuodes 
& pa wildernes. 

meduwen and mores 

& pa he3e muntes. 
burwes and tunes 

& al hit 3eorne bi-hold. 
Pe king hine bi-®ohte ” 
whet he don mihte. 

He bigon ane ftreete ? 
muchele & fwiSe grete. 
feizer & {wide long ¥ 
purhut al pis kinelond. 

& pe king and hif fole / 
Foffe heo clupedé. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


205 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


po weren in piffe londe ¢ 
lawef {wipe gode. 

and alle louede pane king?’ . 
put ewick was in londe. 
Po hadde Belyn an hond ’ 
al Brutaynes lond. 

he verde ouer al Y 

and pe lawes fette. 

He fewede pe wode ¢ 

and pe wildernes. 
medewes and pe mores 


. and pe faire wateres. 


borewes and tounes ” 
and al 3eorne bi-heold. 
Pp! king hine bi-pohte ’ 


wat he [f. 24. ¢.1.] 


eee wee 


and pe k... and his ...cy 
Foffe hine cleopede. 


bliss], ‘and he very freely all his folk ruled; he made peace most good— 
his men well it held!’ Then were in this land laws exceeding good, and 
all thing loved the king, that was alive in the land. Then had Belin in hand 
all Britains land; he went over all the country, and established [the] laws. 
He viewed the woods and the wilderness, ‘he meadows and [the] moors, and 
the ‘high mountains [fair waters], the boroughs and towns; and all he 
beheld it attentively. The king bethought him what he might do. He 
began a street, mickle and very great, fair and very long, throughout all 
this kingdom; and the king and his folk called it Fosse, It lies out of 


1 pe? 


Belin. 


206 LA3AMONS BRUT. (v. 4829—4850.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
Heo lid hut of Toteneis Y He .. . ut of Totenas Y 
a pet cume to Catenes. forte come .. . atenas. 


Toteneis is in Cornwale 

Cateneis in Scot-dale. 

An over stret he makede fwiSe .n oper he ma...e hendi? 
hendi? 

from Su3-hamtone to Seit Deuwi.fram Supham..ne to Seint Dauy. 

Seod%e' he makede pe pridde’ Suppe .. makede pe pridde 

pe kerf pis lond amidde. pat carf pat lond a-midde. 

Pa peos ftreet weoren idonY 9 Po pes ftredes weren idon? 

pa leide pa king heom lagen on. po leide pe king lawes on. 

pat wha fwa i pen ftreten breken? pat wo. in pan ftredes breke grip / 
grid 7 [c. 2.] 

pe king him wolde bi-nimen his lif.pe king him wolde bi-nime his lif. 

ah wha swa oSerne imette per? ac wofe operne imette ’ 


feire hine ig“zette. faire hine grette. 

pis weoren peos kinges ftrette’ Pif weren pe kinges ftredes ¢ 

pe ich i-kenned habbe. pat ich habbe i-nemnid. 

I Frence wes Brennes ¥ N F“nce was Brennes ¢ 

pe wes peos kingef broSer. 18 pat was peos kinges broper. 


on hif heorte he hauede grome? on his heorte he hadde grame ¥ 
on his mode muchele fede. [lond 7 on his mode mochel fame. 

pat he heuede i-loren hif kine- pat he hadde his londe ilore ¥ 
and his quene pe he leouede. and his cwene deore. 


Totnes until i# comes to Caithnes. ‘Totnes is in Cornwall, Caithnes in 
Scot-dale.’ Another ‘street’ he made ‘ very’ handy, from South-Hampton 
to Saint Davids. Afterwards he made the third, that divided ‘this [the] 
land in the midst. When these streets were made, then laid the king 
laws on ‘them’; that whosoever should break the peace on the streets, the 
king would deprive him of his life; but whoso should meet other ‘ there,’ 
fair he should greet him. These were ‘this [the] kings streets that I 
have ‘made known a eae was in France—who was this kings 
brother—in his heart he had anger, in his mind much shame, that he had 


1 Seodve? 2 breke? 


[v. 4851—4873.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 207 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
& him {wide feomede 
pat he fwa i-feend wes. 


He wunede inne France He wonede in France y 

mid hif tweolfe iferen. mid his twealf veres. 

he herde pon king? he faruede pan kinge ? 

& wel him iquéde. mid halle his mihte. 

& al pa Frenfce leodé ¢ pat he and al his leode ¥ 

{wide heo louedé! Brenne. lofuede hine fwipe. 

For Brennef bi-3et muchel feoh ” For Brenne bi-3et mochel feo ¥ 
& feire hit delde. 10 and faire hit dealde. 


nes he noht 3lpinde 

ah he wes geue-cufti. 

he wes per swide oht mon ¥ he was par oht man Y 

& wxdele weore his deden. and gode were his dedes. 
& him per ofte wel ilomp ’ 

per fore he wes pe leofef. 


Pa he wes pere wel cud Po he was pare wel cup’ 

& ouer al i-cnawen. and oueral icnowe. 

& pe king hine leouede ¥ and pe king hine lofuede y 

& al hif leoden. 2 and alle hif leode. 

pa nom he his iferé ¥ 

& bi-fohte peos folkef kig. po bad he pan kinge ? (c.2.] 
pat he him feulde fulfte ¥ 


lost his ‘kingdom [land], and his queen ‘that he loved [dear]; ‘and 
greatly it shamed him, that he was so disgraced’. He dwelt in France 
with his twelve companions ; he served the king ‘and pleased him well [with 
all his might], ‘and all the French [so that he and all his] people loved 
‘Brennes [him] exceedingly. For Brennes obtained much wealth, and 
distributed it fair; ‘covetous he was not, but he was liberal of gift’; he 
was there a ‘most’ brave man, and ‘noble [good] were his deeds, ‘and 
there it often happened well to him—therefore he was the liefer!’ When 
he was there well famous, and known over all, and the king loved him, 
and all his people,—then ‘took he his companions, and’ ‘besought the 
king of this people, that he should assist him [prayed he the king for 


1 Jouedé is added in the margin by a later second hand. 


Seguinus 
d{ux). 


208 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v.4874—4897.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
mid hif gode folke. 
hif lond to bi3etene ¥ healp his lond to winne. 
of Belin hif breoSer. 
Pe king him bi-hette Pe king him bi-hehte 
and wel hit him 3ette. and wel hit ilafte. 
Pa bead he leaue ¢ oo eee .e leue? 
& he furder Jad. and forpere wend.. 
to Seguine duc ¥ to pan duk Segwyne ? 


pe lauerd wes of Burguine. 9 louerd of Borgoyne. 
& of pen Brutlonde? = [£27.c.1.] and of pan Brutlonde / 


pe if bi-z3eonde fe ftronde. pat his bi-3eonde fee ftronde. 
Feire he igrette peone duc? Fair he grette pane duk / 

pa he hif gri8 fohte. po he his grip fohte. 

he feide pat he him wolden' heeren:/he feide awolde® him fareuy ¥ 
and halden hine for herra. and habbe for herre. 


leofliche him buwen 
& halden hine for lauerd. 


Pe duc per fore fain wef?’ pe duk par fore glad was’ 
& hine feire on-feng. and onderfeng him deore. 
Brennes wes fwide hende’ 2 Brennes was fwipe hende 
hif hap wef pe betere. par fore he was pe leouere. 
Brennes cue on hundef? Brennes cupe of hundes : 
Brennes cu%e an hauekes. Brennes coupe of hauekes. 
he cude mid hif honden ’ he coupe mid his honde ¥ 


help] ‘ with his good folk,’ to ‘obtain [win] his land ‘ of Belin his brother’. 
The king promised it him, and well it ‘him granted [fulfilled]. ‘Then took 
he leave, and ‘he’ proceeded further, to Seguin [the] duke, ‘ who was’ 
lord of Burgundy, and of the Britain that is beyond the sea-strand. Fair 
he greeted the duke, when he sought his protection. He said that he would 
him serve, and ‘hold him [have] for master, ‘lovingly bow to him, and 
hold him for lord’. The duke was therefore glad, and received him favorably. 
Brennes was very accomplished—his hap was the better [therefore he was 
the liefer]!_ Brennes knew of hounds, Brennes knew of hawks; he knew 


1 wolde? 2 he wolde? 


[v. 4898—4920.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
hanlie pa harpe. 
purh hif heende craftef’ 
hifd-men hine leouede. 
& hif lauerd alfe wilcume ? 
swa he weoren! hif azene fune. 
Pe duc hauede ene dohter ” 
pe him wes fwipe deore. 
ah he neuede nenne fune ¥ 
per fore he wes fari. 
Pe duc bi-feeh a Brenne?’ 10 
pe hauede bodi hende. 
& him to feide ¥ 
mid fohfefte huje. 
Brennes pu zrt hende ’ 
& pu ert heh iboren. 
& pu eert cniht {wide god’ 
& pu eert me iqueme. 
pu come ouer ftreme / 
pu eart kinges iftreonne. 
pu ezrt me {wide ilise ¢ 20 
& ich pe leouie fwive. 
Al pat ich p’ bi-hate Y 
ich hit pe wulle halden. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


209 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xt, 
handeli pe hearpe. 
porh his hendi craftes / 
alle men hine lofuede. 
and mid his loud alfe wilcome 
alfe his ozene fone. 
Pe duk adde one doht? 
pat he louede fwipe. 
ac he nadde nanne fone 
par fore he was fori. 
Pe duk bi-held Brenne 
pat was a bodi hende. 
and thus to him faide ’ 
mid fopfaft ope. 
Brennes pou art hende y 
and of he3e cunne. 
and pou art cniht fwipe god 7 
pou hart me icweme. 


pou hart me {wipe lipe ¥ 
and ich pe lofuie fwipe. 
Al pat ich pe bi-hote? 
ich hit wolle holde. 


with his hands to handle the harp; through his handicrafts ‘the courtiers 
{all men] loved him, and [with] his lord he was as welcome as if ‘ he were’ 
his own son. The duke had a daughter, ‘who was to him very dear [whom 
he loved greatly], but he had no son,—therefore he was sorry! The duke 
‘looked on [beheld] Brennes, who ‘had [was in} body fair, and [thus] to him 
said with soothfast oath: “‘Brennes, thou art fair, ‘and thou art high (nobly) 
born [and of high kin], and thou art knight most good, ‘and’ thou art to 
me pleasing. ‘Thou camest over sea-stream, thou art kings progeny,’ thou 
art to me very obedient, and I love thee greatly! All that I promised thee I 
will well hold it ‘to thee’; I will give thee my daughter, who is tome most 


1 weore? 
P 


210 LA3AMONS BRUT. (v.4921—4944.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
ich wulle 3euen pe mine doht?Y ich wolle 3ifue pe mine dohter Y 
pa me is fwipe deore. pat his me {wipe deore. 
& efter mine deie ’ and after mine daize ¢ 
al mi drihliche lond. al mi lond riche. 
for wel hit luuied Y for wel hit likep [f£.24>.c.1.] 
alle mine burnes. alle mine beornes. 


pat hit puf beo idon y 
and } pu pif vnder-fon. —_[c.2.] 


Pa anfwerede Brennes Po anfwerede....... 

mid beienliche wordé. 10 mid mildeliche wo.des. 

Ich hit pankie pe ¥ Ich hit ponkie pe 

& alle pine peode. and alle pine cnihtes. 

for eouwer muchele wurhchipe ? for 3oure mochele worfipe ¥ 

wel pat! 3e me vnné, pe god pat 3e me wollep. 

Al pis wes idon Al pis was idemde 

alfe pe duc demde. alfe pe duk feide. 

bliffe was on hifde ¥ 

peo Brennes pif mide nom. Brenne pis mayde nam ‘ 

mid muchelere wurhfchipe mid worfipe mochele. 

he wunede mid pan ducke. . and he wonede mid pan duke ¥ 
half pat ilke 3ere. 

Pa pat forme 3er Pa pe 3er was al agonY 

whard ford igan. 

pa wef pe duc dead ¥ po was pe duk dead. 


dear, and, after my day, all my ‘noble [rich] land. For all my barons 
‘approve [like] it well, ‘that it thus be done, and that thou this receive.’”’ 
Then answered Brennes with ‘humble [mild] words: “I thank thee for it, 
and all thy ‘people [knights], for your great worship, ‘that ye well grant 
to me [the good that ye will to me].” All this was ‘done [deemed] 
as the duke ‘deemed [said],—‘ bliss was in the court!’ Brennes ‘then’ 
took (wedded) this maid with much honor, [and] he dwelt with the duke 
{half the same year]. When the ‘first’ year was ‘forth [all] passed, then 
was the duke dead, and Brennes ‘had his dominions; [took the kingdom in 


1 pa pr. m. 


ee ide 4 


[v. 4945—4969.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 211 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


and Brennes hauede his duwe%e. and Brennes nam pe cunde ¥ 
to his owene honde. 

al pon folk he wes leof? and al pat folk he was lef 

afe heore a3ene lif. alfe hire owene lif. 

for he heold fwipe god grid? 

& glad wes wid his monnen. 

He hauede fwiSe mucchel lond? He hafde fwipe mochel lond ” 

pat al ftod an hif hond. pat al ftod on his owene hond. 

and he heefde a fwiSe god wif’ and he hadde a wel god wif? 

& he heo leouede alfe hif lif. 10 and hire louede alfe his lif. 


Wid iné a lut 3eren Bi one ftunde 
Brennes hine bi-®Sohte. Brennes hine bi-pohte. 
an hif broSer Belin Y hou his brop’ Belyn ¥ 
pe hif lod bi-nom him. his lond hadde bi-nome him. 
He fende hif fonde ¥ He fende his fonde 
3eond Burguine londe. oueral Borgoynes londe. 
and wide and fide 
he fomnede ferde. 
pe ferde wef fwa muchel ¢ Po pe ferde was so mochel. 
pat heo wes vnimete. 2 pat 3e0 was onimete. 
in to Normandie he com ¥ in to Normandie he com ¥ 
and per he pa fee nom. and par he pe fee nom. 
& he ferde mid funde Y and he verde mid ifunde ¥ 
in to piffe londe. in to piffe londe. 


Brennes beeh a } lond ¥ 


his own hand, and] to all the folk he was dear as their own life, ‘for he 
maintained peace most good, and was mild with his men.’ He had very 
much land, that all stood in his [own] hand, and he had a ‘very [well] 
good wife, and ‘he’ loved her as his life, ‘Within a few years [After a 
time] Brennes bethought him ‘of [how] his brother Belin, ‘who [had] de- 
prived him of hisland. He sent his messengers over [all] Burgundys land, 
{and far and wide he assembled forces. When] the army was so great, 
that it was innumerable, into Normandy he came, and there he took the 
sea (embarked), and he proceeded with safety into this land. ‘Brennes 
descended on the land with his forces. Messengers came to Belin, who 
P2 


Tonuena 
Regina. 


212 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 4970—4991.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xt. 
mid hif leode-ferde. 
Sonde cé to Belin'¥ Sonde com to Belyn ’ 
pa him fod feide. pat him fop faide. 
pat Brennef his broSer pat Brénes his broper ¥ 
hefde ifoht his riche. hadde ifoht hif riche. 
mid vnimete ferde Y mid onimete ferde ¢ [c.2.] 
icommen to hif ezrde. icome! ned ot. 
Belin lette beodé Y Belyn fende ........ 
3eond al hif londe. ouera. ... kine-lond. 


and beed al pa kempen 10 .nd bad a. his kem... 
pe wid inne fee wuneden.[[f28.c.1.Jpat in pa .. wonede. 


pat heo comen to hif neode ... hii comen ..... neodey 
to driuen vt pa vnleoden. to driuen vt pan . .leode. 
3ewrwe wes pat ferde y 3aru was pe ferd. 

& ford war® ifufede. and hii forp w.rd fufde. 

heo comen fwa neehi +. par 3am bi-tw..ey 

pere twa ferden ®. bote ... mile. 

Pa 3et leouede pa alde quene: —_Ppe® leued hire mod.. 

a wifmon wis and kene. pat was a womman ke. . 
heo wes ihaten Tonuenne? 20 3e0 was ihote Towenne y 
ho‘ iber Belin. 3eo bar Belyn and Brenne. 


Peos olde cwene was fo wif? 


said to him sooth, that Brennes, his brother, had sought his realm, with 
innumerable host had arrived in his land. Belin ‘caused men to be sum- 
moned [sent his messengers] over all his ‘land [kingdom] ; and bade all ‘the 
[his] warriors that ‘within sea [in the /and] dwelt, that they should come 
to his need, to drive out the strangers. Ready was the army, and forward 
(they] marched; ‘they came so nigh the two hosts [there was between 
them but a mile]. Then yet lived ‘the old queen, [her mother, who was] 
a woman ‘ wise and’ keen; she was named Tonuenne ; she bare Belin [and 
Brennes. This old queen was so (very) wise] ‘and’ that she well shewed; 


1 Written at first Breline, but two letters expuncted. 
2 Two lines are probably here wanting to make the sense complete. 
3 pe 3et? 4 heo? 


[v.4992—5014.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 213 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
and pat heo wel cudde’. pat 3e0 wel cudde. 
heo nom hire on anne curtelY —_3e0 nam hire an on cuertel ? 
pe wef {wiSe to-toren. pat was al to-tore. 
hire hem heo up i-teh / pane hem 3e0 vp teh? 
hire cneon he wes {wide nehi. to hire cneon wel neh. 
heo eode on hire bare foté ? 3e0 eode on hire bare fot ? 
al heo hit dude for gode. alle 3e0 dude for god. 
Heo com to pere ferde ? 3eo com to pare ferde ? 


pe icumen wes to piffere ewrde. pat icome was to piffe erpe. 
heo exede efter Brenne’ 10 3e0 axede after Brenne 


per he wes bi ferde. ware he were ine. 

per he hine wepnede ¥ Me hire tehte ware him wepnede? 
alfe he to fihte peohte. alfe he to fihte folde. 

& alle hif burnes and alle his cnihtes 

duden on heore burnen. dude an hure burnes. 


swa leonge me hine? tahte / 
pat heo him to com. 
Vfenen heo him orny [nom*. To him pe ewene orn’ —_[nom. 
bi-twixen hire ermes heo hine bi-twixte hire harmes 3e0 hine 
ofte heo hine clupte ” 2 ofte 3e0 hine clupte 
& ofte heo hine cufte. and ofte 3eo hine cufte. 

and peos word feide ¥ 

to hire fone leofue. 


she took on her a kirtle that was ‘much [all] tattered; ‘her [the] hem she 
up drew, to her knees ‘it was’ ‘very [well] nigh; she walked on her bare 
feet—she did ‘it’ all for good. She came to the host that was come to 
this land, she asked after Brennes, where ‘by the army [in] he was; [men 
directed her] where ‘he’ weaponed him, as if he ‘thought fo [should] go 
to battle; and all his knights put on their cuirasses. ‘So long men directed 
her, that she came to him’. Towards him ‘she [the queen] ran, ‘between 
[betwixt] her arms she took him, oft she embraced him, and oft she kissed 
him, (and these words said to her beloved son]: ‘‘Ah! what wilt thou, 


1 A line again is here deficient, as is apparent from the context and the punctuation. 
? hire? § inom pr. man., but i erased. 


214 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


A whet wult pu Brenne 
whet wult pu balwe menge. 

3if pu fealft' pine broSer 

ne biftz? pu neuer o®er. 

ne beon 3it bute tweien ? 

mine funé 3it beod beien. 
Bivsenc o Sire mofchipe 
bi-Snc* o Sire moder. 

bi-Senc a mire lare ? 

pu ert mi bern deore. 10 
Loka her pa tittefy 

‘} pu fuke mid pine lippef. 

lou* war hire pa wifmon 

pa pe a Saf weoreld iber.  [c.2.] 
leo wer heF pa wombe 

pe pu leie inne fwa longe. 

leo war here pa ilke likae 

ne do pu me neve pane fcome. 
pat ich for pine pinge y 

mid fexe me of-ftinge. 20 
Nu hit if vmbe feoue 3ere 

pat pu weren® here. 

and al forewarde pu breke y 


[v. 5015—5037.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xs. 


A wat wolt pou Brenne ¥ 
wolt pou fake mége. 
3if pou fleaft pine broper? 
ne bideft pou neuere oper. 
ne be 3e bote tweie ? 
mine fones 3e0 beop beye. 
Bi-pench in pine manfipe 
bi-pench ...ne moder. —[£.25.c.1.] 
bi-pench in mine lare ?’ 
pou hart mi fo...... 
Loke here pe tittef? 

. -ou foke mid pine lippef. 


.. -ar her pe wombe ? 

pat ... leye ine longe. 

lo war ... .. lyeame 

ne do pou me ....re pane fame. 
pat ich ... pine pinge’ 

mid c.ife me... 

Nou hit his feoue 3er 

-at pou nexft were her. 

and forewarde pou breke ? 


Brennes? ‘ What’ ‘mischief [strife] wilt thou mingle? If thou slayest thy 
brother, never mayst thou expect another; ye are but twain, my sons ye 
are both. Think of thine honor,—think of thy mother,—think on my 
counsel,—thou art my ‘dear’ ‘child [son]. Look (behold) here the teats 
that thou suckedst with thy lips; ‘lo! where here the woman that bore thee 
info this world’; lo! where here the womb that thou layest in ‘so’ long; 
lo! where here the same body,—do thou never to me the shame, that I 
for thy conduct with weapon slay myself! Now is it ‘about’ seven years, 
that (since) thou [last] wert here, and ‘all’ covenant thou brakest toward 


1 fleaft? 2 This word is by the second hand, sup. ras. 3 R. bi-Nenc. 
* A letter has been erased after lou, apparently k. 5 were? 


[v. 5038—5060.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


toward pine breoSer. 
pu weore his mon bi-cumen ? 


and he pe leouede al fo hif fone. 


adef pu him fwore ? 

{wiken pat pu noldeft. 

pu haueft woh & haued! riht ” 
pat if pe fwipe? muchel pliht. 
& ouer fe pu lide Y 

al buten leue. 

to Alfinge kinge ¥ 10 
& nome hif doht? zedge. 

Swa pu woldeft mid ferde ¥ 
faren to piffen ezrde. 

and don pe feoluen bifemar ? 
fehten wit pine broder. 

3if Denemarkene kig 
idrecched pe neuede. 

& fuSSen pu come 

and herm her iuore *. 

& ef* wendeft ouer fe 20 
& nu pu ert fel icumen. 

Nu pu eert londes weldent ¥ 

& uf feal® beon pe wurfe. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


215 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


touward pine broper. 

Pou were his man bi-come 
and he pe lofuede alfe his fone. 
opes pou him fwore ¥ 

fwike pat pou him noldeft. 

pou aueft wop and he auep riht ¥ 
pat his to pe a lodlich fiht. 
And ouer féé pou wendeft ” 

al wip houte his lefue. 

to Alfing pan kinge / 

and neme his dohter 3enge. 

So pou pohteft mid ferde ¥ 
come to piffe erpe. 

and do pi filue bifmare ’ 

fihte wip pine broper. 

3if Denemarchene king 
idrecched pe nadde. 

and fuppe pou come 

and harm onderfonge. 

and eft wendeft ouer féé ¥ 

and noupe hart icomen a3eo. 
Nou pou hart louerd of londe ¥ 
and hus fal beo pe worfe. 


thy brother. Thou wert become his man, and he loved thee as his son ; 
oaths thou sworest to him, that thou wouldest not deceive [him]. Thou 
hast wrong, and [he] hath right ; that is to thee ‘very great harm [a loathly 
sight]. And over sea thou wentest, all without [his] leave, to Alfing [the] 
king, and took (married) his young daughter. So thou ‘wouldest [thought- 
est) with az army ‘fare [come] to this land, and do thyself disgrace, to 
fight with thy brother, if Denmarks king had thee not distressed; and after- 
wards thou camest, and harm ‘here’ received, and eft wentest over sea ;— 
and now ‘thou’ art ‘prosperously [again] come. Now thou art lord of the 
land, and to us shall be the worse ; with foreign ‘men [folk] thou wilt kill 


1 he haued? 
4 eft? 


2 fwipen pr. man. 
5 By second hand, sup. ras. 


3 juonge? 


216 - LAZAMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


mid uncuSe mannen 

pu wilt pi cun quelle. 

Ne fculde na cniht heer3ien ¢ 
peer he hauede haines iwald. 
no ef! on his cuhSe ¥ 
qued-{fchipe wurché. 

Ah leoue fune Brennes ¥ 

bei pi ftarke ponc. 

leie a-dun pin here ferud ¢ 

& pine rede fceld. 10 
and pi fper longe ¥ 

& pi fwerd ftronge. 

and ilef pire moder?  [f28".c.1.] 
& leoue pinne broSer. 

Vrnen ire? teares ? 

ouer hires? leores. 

Brennes pat ifeeh Y 

& forzeden® on hif heorte. 

let cliden* hif gare ? 

pat hit grund fohte. 20 
he fewt hif riche fceld ¥ 

feor ut in pene feld. 

awei he warp hif gode breond 
& of mid pere burne. 


[v. 5061—5084.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


mid oncoupe folke ¥ 
pou wolt pi cunne a-cwelle. 


Ne folde no man in his cuppe? 
ewedfipe werche. 

Ac leofue fone Brenne Y 

do mine lore. [c.2.] 


ley adun pi fpere long ¥ 

and pi fweord pat his fo ftrong. 
-and ile. . ine moder? 

and loue pine breoper. 
Vrnen hire teres ? 

al ouer hire leores. 

Brennes pat ifeh ¥ 

and forewede an heorte. 
lette glide his gar’ 

pat hit grunde fohte. 

he cafte his riche feald / 
for vt in pane felde. 

away warp his gode brond? 
for vt of his hond. 


thy kindred! ‘But no man should commit devastation, where he hath 
subdued the humble, nor eft [should any man] work evil in his country. 
But, loved son Brennes, ‘bend thy stern thoughts [do my counsel] ; 
lay down ‘thy war-clothing, and thy red shield, and’ thy long spear, 
and thy sword [that is so] strong, and believe thy mother, and love thy 
brother.” Her tears ran [all] over her cheeks. Brennes saw that, and 
sorrowed in ‘his’ heart; he let his spear glide, so that it sought the 
ground; he cast his rich shield far out in the field; away ‘he’ threw his 
good brand, ‘and off with the coat-of-mail [far out of his hand]. ‘Brennes 


1 weft? ? hire? 


5 forjede? 4 gliden ? 


‘ 
' 


[v. 5085—5108.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


Brennes and hif moder 
mildelichen ferden. 

in enne bradne feld / 
and Belin him to-3ennes. 
pa weop pe breo®er 

al fwa dede' pe* oder. 

Pa fpec pe moder 

milde mid mu%e. 

3it bud mine leoue funen ” 
lided to-fomne. 

& iwurded fehte Y 

and euer on bliffe. 
cuffede® and cluppede* 
cudie meies. 

cnihtes 3it beod bode kene ¥ 
while ich wes quene. 

nif hit noht un-huhtlic / 
incker mod? inc hate’. 
Per heo hom® cuften 

pe weré kinges bearn. 
bi-feoré pa twam ferden / 
freond-fcipe makeden. 
bemen per bleowen ¢ 
bliffe wes on folke. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


And he and his moder Y 
mildeliche 3eode. 

in to one brode felde ¥ 
and Belyn heom to-3eines. 
par wep pe broper ? 

alfo dude pe oper. 

Po fpac pe moder 

milde mid mupe. 

3eo beop mine leofue fones 
wendep to-gaderef. 

and hii-worpep fahte 

and woniep in bliffe. 
cuffep and cluppep 

alfe treuwe bropers. 


nis hit noht on-riht ¥ 
3oure moder 30u hotep. 
Pare hii cuften 


bi-vore pe twei ferden. 


bemes par bleuwen ? 
bliffe was on folke. 


[And he] and his mother proceeded mildly into a broad field (plain), and 
Belin came towards ‘him [them] ; ‘then [there] wept the brother, as did 
the other! Then spake the mother with mild mouth: ‘‘ Ye are my: be- 
loved sons, go ye together, and be reconciled, and ‘ ever’ [dwell] in bliss!” 
Kiss ye and clip ye [as] ‘worthy relatives [true brothers]; ‘knights ye both 
are keen; a while I was queen’; it is not ‘unfitting [un-right] that your 
mother you biddeth.” There they ‘them’ kissed, ‘ that were kings children,’ 
before the two armies ‘made friendship.’ Trumpets there blew,—bliss 
was among the people !—there ‘were songs [was song] of gleemen, there 


' dede is inserted by a second hand. 
+ cuffed ? * cluppe’? 


2 pen pr. man. 
5 heom? 


218 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 5109—5132.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
per weore fegge fonge ¥ par was gleomenne fonge Y 
per were pipen imagge’. par was piping among. 


per wes fwa muchel murehSe? par was fo mochel murhpe 
pat ne mihte heo beon na mare. pat ne mihte beo na more. 


pus iwerad Brénes / par iwarp Brennes 

seht whit his broSer. ifehte wip his broper. 

Pa makeden heo ane ladunge’ Po makede he one lapinge 

of heore leoue folke. of his gode folke. 

pat al comé to Lundene?’ pat alle come to Londene 

uppe wite of feowerti punden. 10 vppe wit of fourti punde. [f. 25. ¢.1.] 
to pan huftingge® ’ to one fpeche ? 

bi-foren Belin kinge. {e2.) bi-fore Belym® kinge. 

Pa weoren al paf leoden / Po al pis fol. .f londe Y 

at Lundene ifomed. to-gadere was ifomned. 


Per was Belin pe kig 
and al his kineriche. 


Bruttef & Scottes / Scottes and Bruttes / 

& moni feone pein. and manie oper peines. 

per wes pe duc of Burgoine*? par was pe Duk of Borgoyne 
Brennes ihaté. 20 Brennes ihote. 

Weoren pa broserne ¢ Po weré pe bropers ¥ 

bliSe on here mode. blipe on hire mode. 

& al pa twa f?den ¥ 


of moni ane eerde. 


‘were pipes [was piping] among; there was so much mirth, that no more 
(greater) might ‘it’ be! Thus became Brennes reconciled with his brother. 
Then ‘they [he] made a meeting of ‘their dear [his good] folk, that all 
should come to London, upon penalty of forty pounds, to ‘the husting 
{a conference] before Belin the king. Then ‘were [was] all ‘these people at 
London [this folk of land together] assembled. ‘There was Belin the king, 
and all his kingdom,’ Britons and Scots, and many ‘a fair thane [other 
thanes]; there was the duke of Burgundy, named Brennes. [Then] were 
the brothers blithe in their, mood, ‘and all the two hosts of many a land.’ 


) imangge? ? guftingge pr. man. 3 R. Belyrn. 
‘ The letters go in Burgoine are by second hand, sup. ras. 


ns ee es 


(v. 5133—5156.) 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


Pe kingges nomen to rede ? 
at riche heore monnen. 

pat heo wolden mid ferde ” 
faren in to France. 

In Frace weore lewen’ 
fulkude a pan dawen. 

& felcude tidende 

for per were feower kinges. 
Belin feide to Brenne Y 

fare we bliue. 

in touwarde France ? 

& mid fehte hit biwinnen. 
Heo bleuwen heore bemen ” 
& buden here ferde. 

and to pere fee wendé ¥ 

& wel ouer cdmen. 

mid nihen hundred feipene / 
heo commen in to hauene. 


heo commen in to pen lond ¥ 


mid® neoSerien pa leoden. 
Com pa tidSinde ” 

to pan feouwer kiggen. 

pat Belin king wes icumen 
& pe duc Brenne. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


Hii neomen to reade 

of hisre! riche cnihtes. 
pat hii wolde mid ferde ” 
faren in to France. 

Ine France weren lawes ” 
felcup a pilke dawes. 

and wonder tidingef 

for par were four kinges. 
Belyn feide to Brenne ¥ 
vare we {wipe hinne. 

in toward France ” 

and mid fihte hit bi-winne. 
Hii bleuwen hire beomes ¥ 
and bannede hire ferde. 
and to pare {¢é wende Y 
and wel ouer comen. 

mid nize hundred fipes ¢ 
hii comé into hauene. 


Com pe tidinge ” 

to par four kinges. 

pat Belyn king was icome / 
and his broper Brenne. 


‘The kings [They] took to counsel ‘at [of] their rich ‘men [knights], that 
they would go with an army into France. In France were strange laws in 
those days, and strange customs, for there were four kings. Belin 
said to Brennes, ‘‘Go we quickly [hence] in toward France, and win it 
with fight!” They blew their trumpets, and assembled their forces, and 
went to the sea, and came over well; with nine hundred ships they came into 
haven. ‘They came into the land, and oppressed the people.’ The tidings 
came to the four kings, that king Belin was come, and ‘the duke [his 
brother] Brennes, with innumerable host to conquer France. Together ‘the 


1 hire? 2 R. and. 


France. 


220 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 5157—5180.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
mid unimete ferde / mid onimete ferde ” 
to bi-winne Frace. to bi-winne F“nce. 
To-gadere pe kingef come ¥ To-gaderes icomen! ¥ 
& exes heo fweoren. and opes hii fworen. 
pat heo wold’ libben ‘ pat hii wolden libbe 
to-gadere o%er linggen®. to-gaderes oper ligge. 
& euer ele oder and euerech oper ¥ 
haldé for broder. holde for broper. 
mid aden heo hit bi-heté ? mid opes hii hit {wore 


and ful wel hit heolden. [[29.c.1.Jand wel hit heolde. 
Heo fOmenedé heore ferdeY 1 Hi fomnede hire ferde ¢ 


pe wes feondliche ftor. pat was fwipe mochele. 
& heo ferden bliue / and hii verden bliue Y 
towar® Beline. touward Belyne. 


Brennes mid hif ferde 

wef bi-foren Beline. 

To-gedere com peof kingef’ | To-gadere i* comen? [2] 
mid heore here-®ringef. 

ferde whit ferde 


fedliche feudten®. 2 feondeliche hi....... 
Scottes & Bruttefy Scottes and Bruttes : 
beiden to-gaderes. dro3ze. to-gaderes. 
Belin here leuerd Belyn . ‘ 
heom biforen wende. him ® bi-vore wende. 


kings [they] came, and oaths they swore, that they would live or lie to- 
gether, and every one hold other for brother. With oaths they it ‘promised 
({swore], and ‘full’ well it held. They assembled their army, that was 
‘exceeding strong [very great], and they marched quickly toward Belin. 
‘Brennes with his army was before (in advance of) Belin.’ Together ‘these 
kings [they] came ‘ with their warriors, host against host’ fiercely [they] 
fought, Scots and Britons ‘both [engaged] together! Belin their lord went 
before them, Brennes apart, with his folk of Burgundy. They smite to- 


) hi comen? ? liggen? * toward? 
4 hi? 5 fuhten? ® ham? 


ee 


[v. 5181—5204.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


Brennes bif ides ¥ 

mid hif folke of Burguine. 

Heo fmiten to-gedere ¥ 

helmes pere gullen. 

breké brade fperren 

bordes per fezndé. 

redde blod feede! ¥ 

rinkaf feollen. 

per wes muchel griftbat ? 

per wes cumene feel. 10 
weoren pa hulles and pa deles ¥ 
iwrizen mid } deden. 
Belin ibreid up hif helm 
& clipede to Brennes. 

Ne ifihft pu leoue broder / 
heou breoSed pa Frenfce. 
& pa ferde of unker londe ¥ 
ifund 3et ftondet. 

Greie we uf feoluen ” 

mid grimme oure refen. 
& heom om leggé* 

mid orde and mid egge. 
Brennes wes {wide bald’ 
& pif wel bi-leouede. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


221 
MS. Cott. Otho, C. xrit. 
bi-fides / 

mid his folk of . . . ne. 

Hii fmete to-gaderes 

par 3o0lle helmes. 

bres Wud te fperes ¥ 

fceldes to-fcend. 

blod. .ar fadde ¥ 

mani m.. per fulle. 


al weren pe hul... and pe dalesy 
iwro3e mid pan deade. 

Belyn breid vp his helm?’ 

and cleopede to Brenne. 

Ne fehte® leofue broper ¥ 

hou brepip pis Frence. 

and pe ferde of oncupe® londe ¥ 
3et ifund ftondep. 

Grenne we hus seolue 

mid hure gram refes. 

and on ham legge 

mid horde and mid hegge. 
Brenne was fwipe bold ¥ 

and peos wordes ihorde. 


gether—there resounded helms—break the ‘broad [great] spears—shields 
there shivered—red [there] blood flowed—'warriors [many men there] 
fell—‘ there was much gnashing-of-teeth—there was destruction present !’ 
The hills and the dales were [all] covered with the dead. Belin raised up his 
helm, and called to Brennes: “ Seest ‘thou’ not, loved brother, how ‘the 
[these] French are broken, and the force of our land yet standeth whole ? 
Approach (?) we ourselves with our grim onsets, and lay on them with 
point and with edge!” Brennes was very bold, and ‘well this approved 
(heard these words] ; all they ‘them’ slew that they came nigh, and these 


1 Written at first {celde, but | expuncted. 


3 onker? 


? fehfte? 
4 on ilegge? 


222 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


al heo heom flowen 

pe heo aneh comen. 

and paf feower kinges ? 

heo leiden to pan grunde. 
Whulc riche mon per at-fieh ” 
in to caftle he abeh. 

& heo him after ferden ¥ 

mid fpere & mi! fwerde. 

nes per nan o®er lid ¥ 

3if heo nalden 3ernen grid. 10 
pene caftel heo nomen? [c.2.] 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 5205—5228.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
alle hii flozen Y 
pat hii neh comen. 
and peos four kinges 
hii leide to pan grunde. 
bote wo pat par fleh Y 
and into caftele beh. 
and hii 3am hafter ferde 
mid fpere and mid fwerde. 


and pe caftles i? nemen 


hine feulfne and hif folke flo3en. and pat folk flowen. 


Ppuf heo purh-eoden 
Francene peode. 

In pa ilca 3ere Y 

wes Belin kaifere. 

and Brennes hif broSer 
beiene to-gaderef. 

for heo hauede France ? 
mid fehte bi-wunnen. 20 
and alle pa fre londes 

pe leien in to France. 

Pa hauede heo muche riche. 
irumed to honde. 


Pus hii porh-3eode ? 
Francene peode. 

In pan ilke 3ere ¥ 

was Belyn kayfere. 

and Brenne his broper 
beine to-gaderes. 

for hii hadde F“nce ¥ 
mid fihte bi-wonne. 

and alle pe freo londes ¢ 
pat leien into F“nce. 

Po hadden hii mochele riche 
inome to ham feolue. 


four kings they laid to the ground. ‘What rich man [except who that] 
there ‘escaped, [fled, and] into castle ‘he’ retreated; and they went after 
‘him [them] with spear and with sword ; ‘ no other respite was there, if they 
would not yearn for peace,’ [and] the ‘castle [castles] they took, [and] ‘him- 
self and his [the] folk slew. Thus they took possession of the French country. 
In the same year was Belin emperor, and Brennes his brother, both to- 
gether, for they had won France with fight, and all the free lands that lay 


nigh to France. 


When they had ‘gained in hand [taken to themselves] 


much territory, then spake they together the good brothers, and said that 


1 R, mid. 


2 hi? 


[v. 5229—5251.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 223 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11t. 
peo fpeken heo to-gadere po fpeken hii ....derey [f.26.c.1.] 
pa fele ibroSeren. pe feli bropers. 
and feide pat heo wolden ¢ and feide pat iwolde! 
halden huftinge. holde huftinge. 
of allen pat londen? ¥ of alle pan folke 
pe heore leewen leoueden. pat hire lawes leuede. 

& of al pan londé. 

pe ftoden on heore heonden. 

and purh heore alre dome ? and porh hire alre dome 
heo woldé fere to Rome. 10 .. wolde varen to Rome. 
to wreken o pon folke? we ane en o pan folke / 
Remuf pene feire. Rem? pan faire. 

pe Romuluf hif bro%er ¥ pat Romulus hif broper 
in Rome of-floh. flop ine Rome. 

per bi-foren fele 3ere ¥ pare bi-vore fale 3ere / 
for al pat mon-kun wef pa 3et pere.for al pat folk was 3et per. 
Al pa kingef puf dudé ¢ And al pe kinges pus dude ¥ 
{wa hed felf demmeden. alfe hii ham feolue demde. 
heo gadere heore ferde ¥ hii gaderede hire ferde ’ 

i Francene ezerde. 20 ine Francene erpe. 

Pa pat fole wes icumen ¥ Po pat folk was icome / 
fone heo fufden. fone hii wende. 


for per wef {wa mochel foleY par was fo mochel folk / 


they would hold a husting of all the ‘people [folk] that obeyed their laws, 
‘and of all the ‘lands that stood in their hands,’ and by the resolution 
of them all, they would go to Rome, to avenge on the folk Remus the 
fair, whom Romulus, his brother, slew in Rome many years therebefore ;— 
for all the ‘multitude [folk] yet was there. [And] the kings did all thus 
as [they] themselves deemed; they gathered their forces in the French 
land. When the folk was arrived, soon they marched, ‘for’ there was 
folk so mickle and so innumerable, that never in one realm might it all 


) hi wolde? 
2 The letters on of londen are on an erasure, and the correction requires us to read 
pan for pat. No doubt leoden was the original and correct reading. 


224 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 5252—5272.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1ir. 
& fwa vnimete. and fo onimete. 
pat a neuere nané walde ¢ pat a neuere none wolde ? 
ne mihte hit al halde. ne mihte hit al wonie. 
Heo ferden ouer Miigiu’ Hii verde ouer Montagu 
mid muchelen here ferden. mid al hire ferde. 
seodSen' heo ferden ful iwif’ — suppe hii ferde foliwis ¥ 
per me clips Munt Senif. par me cleopeop Munt Seneyf. 


heo nomen al Taurinf and Iuorie? hii nemen al Taurins and Yuorie 

& alle pe burzewes of Lun-and alle pe borewes of Lom- 
bardie. [[#.29°. c.1.] bardie. 

Verfeeuf and Pauie? & Cremuinne?Verfanye and Pauie. Cremoyne ? 

Melan . Pleucence & Buluine. 1 Melane . Placence Boloyne. 

pet weter heo ouer ferden of pat water hii ouer 3eode of Tau- 
Taurim rum ? 

&feod%en! heoferden ouer Bardun.and fuppe hii 3eode ouer Bardum. 

Tufcan heo habbed? al bi-wunnen?Tofkane hii al a-wonne 

i Salome heo {lowe monie pufend in Salome hii flowe mani poufend 
monnen. manne. 

Swa heo nehlehte toward Rome? So hii nehlepte toward Rome 

to late heom pufte*® are heo per to late heom pohte pat hii pider 

& pat Romeanifce floct? [comen. and pat Romaniffe folk: [come. 


{wide wef of-fered. fore was a-fered. 
for heom comen ftrong tidige :’ 20to heom come ftrong tidinge ¥ 
from Belin pon kinge. from Belyn . an kinge. 


‘be held (dwell]. They passed over ‘Mungiu [Montagu], with [all] their 
‘great’ army; afterwards they proceeded full truly where men call the 
place Mount Senis; they took all Taurin and Ivorie, and all the burghs of 
Lumbardy ; Verseeus, and Pavie, ‘and’ Cremoyne, Milan, Placence, and 
Bologne; they crossed over the water of Taurim, and afterwards they pro- 
ceeded over Bardun; Tuscany they ‘had’ all conquered, in Salome they 
slew many thousand men. So they nighed toward Rome, too late it 
seemed to them ‘ere [that] they ‘there [thither] came! And the Romanish 
folk was ‘exceedingly [sore] afraid, ‘for’ evil tidings came to them from 


1 seoSen? 2 habbe®d ? 3 puhte? 4 floc is by second hand, sup. ras. 


[v. 5273—5295.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


Haueden al pa reuen Y 

pe punede' in Rome. 

and alle pa riche gumen ¥ 
pa Rome burwe walden. 
iloked tweiene eorles / 

i pon ilka 3ere. 

pe fculden witen pat lond 
& wiffien pa leoden. 

& leden here ferde ¥ 
wher hit neod weore. 

for heore beire nome 
ich pe wulle telle. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


225 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xirt. 


Hadde alle pe reues / 
pat wonede ine Rome. 


[c. 2.] 


iloked twey eorles ¢ 

in pan ilke 3ere. 

pat folde witie pat lond / 
and wiffi pe leode. 

and leoden hire ferde 
ware hit were neode. 

for hire beire name ¥ 
ich 30u wolle telle. 


pe on hehte Gabius ¥ 
pe oper Profenna. 
Peos ilke eorles weren {wipe kene ¥ 


pe an hehte Gabiuf’ 

pe oder Pfena. 

Peof ilke eorles weren kene 
ohte men and wel idone. 


and al pat Romanifce fole Y and al pat Romaniffe folk ¥ 
ferde bi heore rede. ferde bi hire reade. 

Peof eorles comen to Rée Y Peos eorles come to Rome ¥ 
to pan red-fulle monen. 2 to pe readfulle folke. 


axede ham reades Y 
of solchere neodes. 
waper hii bede ferde ? 


axeden heom reeddes ” 
of fwulchere neode. 
wheder heo boden ferde ’ 


Belin the king. All the magistrates that dwelt in Rome, ‘and all the rich 
men that governed the burgh of Rome,’ had selected two earls, in that same 
year, who should guard the land, and govern the people, and lead their 
army where ever it were need. For I will tell ‘thee [you] both their 
names; the one hight Gabius, the other Prosenna. These same earls were 
[very] keen, ‘ brave men and excellent,’ and all the Romanish folk acted 
by their counsel. These carls came to Rome, to the ‘men [folk] of counsel 
(the Senate); they asked them counsels of such necessity, whether they 
should summon forces to fight with Belin, or speak (hold conference) with 


1 Sic pr. m.; the second hand has erased p, and inserted an o after the u: read 
wunede. 


Q 


226 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 5296—5319.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A, rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
whit Beline to fehten. wip Belin to fihte. 
pe heo fpeké hi wit oper him fpeke wid ¢ 
& feodSe axeden hif grid. and 3ornde his grip. 
Pa weoren in Rome ¥ Po weren in Rome? 
wife men on dome. wife men of domes. 
and Sohté bi-pechen Belin ¥ and pohte bi-peche Belyn : 
mid -heore pret wrenché. mid hire felle wrenches. 
Heo nomen heom to rede ? Hii nemen heom to reade 
and to fom rune. and to fomme roune. 
pat noht heo nolden fehten ? [c.2.] pat hii nolde noht fiht ” 
no heore ferd leate'. 1 noper hire ferde leade. 


Ah we wullet gan a leode/ Ac we wollep gon’ 
and leoue we wulled® wurchen. and fronfipe makie. 
we wulled® fetten heom an hond we wollep fette heom an hond Y 


al pif Romanifce lond. al pis Romaniffe lond. 
& wurdien® heom in leodé and worpi heom in londe ¥ 
al fwa mon lauerd fcal. alfe man fal his louerd. 


3euen heom feluer ad gold / 3ifuen heom feoluer and gold ¥ 
and bi-techen heom al pis lond. and pe louerdfipe of pif londe. 


3euen heom garifum 2 3ifue ham fo mochel garifom ¢ 
swa heo wulled® kepe. fo hii wollep habbe. 

vre childre to 3ifle ” hure children to hoftage ¥ 

3ef heo fwa wulled. 3ef i* fo wollep. 

wlcches barunes fune ¥ eche barunes fone ? 


him, and ‘afterwards’ entreat his peace. In Rome were then men wise 
of judgement, and they thought to deceive Belin with their ‘wily [fell] 
stratagems. They betook them to counsel, and to some communing, that 
they would not fight, ‘nor [neither] their army lead forth.—* But we will 
go in peace (amicably), and ‘love we will work [friendship make] ; we will 
set them in hand all this Romanish land, and honor them in land, as 
man shall [his] lord; give them silver and gold, and ‘deliver to them all 
(the lordship of] this land; give them [as much] treasure, as they will 
‘keep [have], and our children for hostages, if so they will; each barons 


1 leade? leaden? ? wulled? 3 wurvdien? ‘hi? 


2 
[v. 5520—5343.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


pe i piffere burh wuned. 

peo fcullen! beon icorne ? 
and fwiSe wel iborne. 
childre fwide hendi 

3ifles feor and twenti. 

& elche 3er of golde 

ten hundred punde. 

Pa kiggef buh ftronge ¥ 

and of ferrene lond. 

heo habbed fwa much foley 10 
swa nes neuer eer on ferde. 
pe kinges beod 3unge / 

of ehte 3iffinge. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. - 


227 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11, 
pe in piffe borh woniep. 
pe follen beo icore ? 
and {wipe wel iboren. 
children {wipe hendi ’ 
3ifles four and twenti. 
and eche 3er of golde ? 
ten hundred punde. 

Pe kinges beop ftronge ’ 
and of forne londe. 

hii habbep fo mochel folk ¥ 
fo nas neuere ivere. 

Pe kinges beop 3onge ¥ 
and of he3e heorte. 


[£.26>.c.1.] 


Belin & 
Brennes. 


sonefwaheoihurdenfwulchworde?al fo fone fo hi herep pis ’ 


don heo hit wulle®. 

for heo ne mawen bidde mare ’ 
buten pat we 3erné heore ere. 
& 3if we mawen fwa wel don ’ 
pat heo pif wullé vnd?fon. 

& bi-leuen oure leodé ¢ 20 
and faré to heore londe. 
seodden we fculled bi-gunen 
to don ure wille. 

for betere if pat we leofé / 


don hii hit wollep. 

for hii ne mawe bidde more y 
bote pat we bidde hire ore. 
And we mawe fo wel don 
pat hii wolle piffe onderfon. 
and bi-leue hure leode ‘ 

and fare to hire londe. 
suppen we folle bi-ginne ’ 

to don houre wille. 

for betere pat we lefe ¥ 


son that in this burgh dwelleth; they shall be select, and most well 
born, children most fair, hostages four and twenty; and each year of 
gold ten hundred pounds. The kings are strong, and of distant land; 
they have so mickle folk as was never ‘ere in army [in company]. The 
kings are young, [and] of ‘bold desire [high heart]; so soon [as] they hear 
‘such words [this], do it they will; for they may not ask more, but that 
we entreat theirmercy. And ‘if’ we may so well do, that they will receive 
this, and leave our country, and go to their land, we shall afterwards begin 
to do our will; for better it is that we lose our dear children, than that we 


} The letters cu of {cullen are by second hand, sup. ras. 


a2 


Teruagant. 


228 . LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 5344—5366.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


leoue oure children. houre leofue children. 

pane we nimen fwulne red ¢ pane we nime fochne read / 
pat we allen beo dead’. pat we alle be dead. 

and al Rome burh ’ oper al Rome borh ? 

mid fure for-berned?. [f.30.c.1.] mid fure beo for-berned. 

& al pat liggende lond an al pat liggende lond? 


pat li8 in to Rome. pat lip into Rome. 
beo al bi-reiued beo al bi-reued ’ 
pe nu ftonded® riche. pat nou ftend {wipe riche. 


For 3if hit wulled* Teruagant :’ 10 For 3if hit wole Teruagant 
pe uf® oure god of® piffe lond. pat his god of pis lond. 
her mid we fculled’ hed bi-charrenzher mid we folle heom cheorre ¥ 


& feodSen*® heom amarré. and fuppe heom amorre. 
pat ne feulled’ heo nauere ifunde?pat hii ne folle ifunde’ 
cumen to heore londe. come to hire londe. 

Pa feiden heo in halle? Po faiden hii in halle’ 
pifne read halde we alle. pifne read we louiep alle. 
Peos eorles heom gefdé Peo eorles 3am 3arkede ? 
mid godliche feruden. mid fwipe riche ferude. 


& nomé mid heon® cnihtes? 20 

fwa feole {wa heom puhte. 

ha'® leopen on heore feire horf? hii leopen on hire hors 
bi-wrizen mid feire palle. bi-wre3e mid riche palles. —_[c.2.] 


take such counsel, that we all be dead, ‘and [or] all Rome burgh with fire 
{be] consumed, and all the adjacent land that lies near Rome be all devas- 
tated, that now stands [most] rich. For if Tervagant it will, who is ‘ our’ 
god of this land, herewith (hereby) we shall deceive them, and afterwards 
destroy them, so that they ‘never’ shall in safety come to their land.” 
Then said they in hall, “This counsel we all ‘hold [approve]!” These 
earls made them ready, with ‘goodly [most rich] clothing, ‘ and took with 
them as many knights as seemed good to them.’ They leapt on their ‘ fair’ 
horses, covered with ‘fair [rich] palls; each man took in hand a vessel 


1 dead? ? for-berned? 5 ftonde’? * wulle’ 2 
5 if? ® The words god of are by second hand, sup, ras. 
7 feulled. 8 feoS®en? ® R. heom. © heo? 


| 


[v. 5367—5390.] LA3JAMONS BRUT. 229 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 
zlc mon nom an honde ‘ . ++ man nam an ho.... 
ane fcale of rede golde. one fcele of reade golde. 
Feouwer daies fulle / Four daizes fulle ¥ 
forS ward heo wendé. hii forpwardef wende. 


pat heo comen to pon eerde? _ fort hii come to pan erpe 
per Beli wes mid hif ferde. par Belyn lay mid his ferde. 


& Brennef his broder ¥ and Brennes ... broper ¥ 
beiene to-fomne. beine to-gade... 

Heo axeden adelinges ... axede pe cnihtes ¥ 

wer leye pa kinges. 10 ware ley pe kinges. 

me heon! tahte pa feldes ¥ me heom tahte in woche feldes ¢ 
per weoren pare kingene telddes. weren pis kinges teldes. 
Heo ferden bi-liue? ? Hii verden bi-liue ¥ 

pat pid? heo comen lie. pat pider hii come lipe. 
heom puhte muchel ferlich ” 3am pohte mochel ferlich 
of al peon folke. of alle pan folke. 

wher hit al i-numen weore ? ware hit alle inome were 
pat heo ifeizen pere. pat hii ifehe pere. 

Heo ifeizen Beli king ¥ Hii ifeh3e Belyn king ’ 
buen ut of telde. 2 bou3en vt of telde. 

& heo lihten adun ¥ and hii lihten a-dun ’ 

& leofliche onden®. and fullen a cnowe. 

forn at pan kinge ¥ at pan kinges fote 

heo fullen to folde. hii folle to grunde. 


of red gold. Full four days forward ‘they’ went, until they came to the 
land where Belin ‘was [lay] with his host, and Brennes, his brother, both 
together. They asked [the] ‘nobles [knights] where the kings lay; men 
taught them ‘the [in which] fields ‘ where’ ‘the [these] kings tents were. 
They proceeded quickly, until they arrived thither; it seemed to them 
great wonder of all the folk, where (whence) it were all taken that they 
saw there! They saw Belin the king come out of his tent, and they alight- 
ed down, and ‘lovingly on knee ; before the king [fell on knee, at the 
kings foot] they fell to the ground, [and these words said with much wis- 


1 R. heom? 2 bi leoue pr. m. > on cneon? 


Dagon. 


230 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


Leuerd pine ere? 

for pu ert leodene king. 
we pe ajeued Rome / 

& al pa riche. 

& al pa londes? 

pe ligged? in to Rome. 
& alle pe madmes ¥ 

pat we on horde habbed®. —_10 
& fwa muchel garfumme ” 

swa pine gumen kepe®. 

& edes we fulled* pe fwerié / 
pat we pe nulled® swiken. 
uppen ure godd wel idon ¢ 

pe if icliped Dagon. 

We fwullen pine mé bi-comen 
& pine mon-fcipe heien. 

mid allen oure mihten ¥ 

daies and nihtes. 20 
and we pe wulled® bi-techen 
ut of piffere riche. 

feur and twenti 3unge 

riche monne childere. 


[c. 2.] 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 5391—5414.) 


MS. Cott. Otho, C, x111. 


and peos word faide y 

mid mochele wifdome. 

Louerd pin ore ¥ < 
nou and euere more. 

we pe a-3iuef! Rome? 

and alle pe riche. 

and alle pe londef? 

pat liggep into Rome. 


and al fo mochel garifom 7 

fo pou wolt habbe. 

and opes we follep pe fwerie ¥ 
pat we pe fwike nollep. aa 
vppen houre god wel idon ¥ 
pat his icleopid Dagon. 

We follen pine men bi-come ” 
and pine manfipe he3e. 

mid al houre mihte 

dai3es and nihtes. 

and we pe wollep bi-teche 

vt of piffe riche. 

four and twenti 3onge 

riche menne children. 


dom :] “Lord, thy mercy! ‘for thou art sovereign. [now and evermore! ] 
We yield to thee Rome, and all the realm, and all the lands that lie near 
Rome, ‘and all the riches that we have in hoard,’ and as much treasure as 
‘thy men will keep [thou wilt have]. And oaths we shall thee swear, that 


we will not deceive thee, by our mighty god that is called Dagon. 


We 


shall become thy men, and thy honor exalt with all our might, by day and 
night. And we will deliver to thee out of this realm four and twenty young 
rich mens children, who shall all be chosen, and ‘most high [of high kin] 


” aziuep? 
* fulled? 


? ligged ? 
* nulle’ 


* habbe’? 
§ wulled? 


[v. 5415—5438.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 231 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
pe fcullen beon alle icorne ? .. follen beo alle..... = [f27.c.1.] 
and fwiSe heize iborne. . -d of heze cunne ibore. 
We {cullen of piffere peode ¥ We solle of piffe peode ¥ 
cumen to pire neode. come to pine neod. 
and whuder pu hateft . 
for pu ert ure herre. 

& to fwulche forward ” and for foche pinge ‘ 

we beod hidere ifende. we beop ifende to pe kinge. 
& we bidde®d pine wre ¥ and biddep pin ore? 

nu & auere mare. 10 «+++. euere more. 

Pe king wes ftille’ pe king w....... ftille: 
& pa fwiken fpeken ille. and fwikes fpeken ille. 

he weonden' pat hit weoren* fod “he wende pat hit were fop ’ 
# heo ifeid haueden. pat hii i-faid hadde. * 

ah al heo pohten oBer ¢ ac al hii pohte oper? - 

to flen Belin king & his broSer. to flean Belyn and his broper. 
Peo hit up bree Po hit halles vp brac / 

hit wes god pat he fpec. hit was god pat he fpac. 
Wel 3e me bi-hatet / Wel 3e me bi-hotep ” 

halde 3eif 3e wulled. 2% lefte 3if 3e0 wollep. 

eow {wal beon pe betere® / 

to fwuche forewarde to pif forewarde ? 

fon ich hit wulle. vnderfang ich 30u wolle. 


& 3e feullen of me halden / and 3e0 folle of me holde ¥ 


born. We shall from this country come to thy need, ‘and whither thou 
commandest, for thou art our lord.’ And for such ‘covenant [thing] we 
are hither sent [to the king]; and ‘we’ pray thy mercy, now and ever- 
more!” The king was [most] still, and ‘the’ traitors spake ill. He weened 
that it were sooth that they had said; but all they thought otherwise, to slay 
king Belin and his brother. Then it [wholly] forth brake, it was good that he 
spake :—* Well ye me promise ; if ye it will ‘hold [perform], ‘it shall be 
for you the better.’ On ‘such [this] covenant I will ‘it [you] receive, and 
ye shall hold of me, and have me for lord, and ‘have [hold] freely your land, 


1 weonde ? ? weore? 8 A line apparently is here wanting. 


232 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 5439-*5462.} 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xi. 


and habben me for harre. and habbe me for louerd. 

& habben freoliche eoure lond’ and holde freoliche 3oure lond ¥ 
& we freond iwurSen. [[£30%<.1.] and freondes iworpe. 

To daie a feouen nihte / To dai a fouenihte ’ 

bringed me her rihte. briggep! me her riht. 

gold & gerfume / gold an garifome ? 

3eoue and eower gifles. 3ift and 3oure children. 

& cumen her on fore / and come her bi-fore 

pe hexete of Rome. pe hehtefte of Rome. 

& fwerie me «es / 10 and fwerie me opes? 


p ed heom fcel iwurden. 
& bi-cumé nu mine men / 
& mine monfcipe heien. 


pe bet ham fal bi-valle. 
and bi-come mine men ” 
and mine manfipe hei. 


& 3if 3e pis nulled*? / 
alle ich 3eow aquelle. al ich 30u a-cwelle. 

Ah swive ha rided Ac fwipe hinne ridep 

leou wer here ich eow abide. lo war ich 30u abide. 

3if 3e fpeke® mid rihte / 3if 3e0 fpekep mid rihte ¥ 
come to dei a feouen nihte. | comep to dai a feouenihte. 
and 3if 3e fpeked wowe ? 2 and 3if 3e0 fpekep mid wop? 
bi-leuet ine Rome. bleuep in Rome. 

& ich® eou wullen‘ to faren: —_ and ich ou wolle to fare? 

& bringen eou forwen an kare. and ..inge 30u teon and care. 
Peos fwiken gunnen ride . .8 fwikes gonne ride? 


and 3if 3eo pif nolle / 


and ‘ we’ become friends. On to day se’nnight bring me right here gold and 
treasure, gifts, and your ‘hostages [children]. And come here before me the 
highest of Rome, and swear to me oaths—the ‘easier [better] it shall ‘be 
[befall] to them—and become ‘ now’ my men, and my honor exalt. And 
if ye will not do this, I will you all kill! But quickly ride ye ‘home [hence], 
—lo! where ‘here’ I await you. If ye speak with right, come ye on to 
day se’nnight; and if ye speak [with] wrong, remain in Rome; and I 
will to you come, and bring you sorrow and care!” These traitors 


gan to ride home into Rome, and made ready their gifts, and all their 


1 bringgep? =? wulleS pr.m. — 9 _Interlined by second hand. 4 wulle? 


a 


[v. 5463—5487.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


ham into Rome. 

& 3arekeden heore 3eoué ” 

& alle heore 3ifles. 

& to heore dzie brohten 

to Beline kinge. 

& he heom faire vnder-feng 
and freond-fcipe bi-hehte. 
3ifles heo hi 3eoue fone Y 

& his men bi-come. 

and he mid pan ilke foreward 
fufde eft a3éward. 10 
& pa fwiken fone / 

ferden to Rome. 

Belin & Bréne ? 

beie to-fone*. 

nomen hed to rede ¥ 

& to fom rune. 

pat heo wolden liSen / 

purh out Lumbardie. 

and faren to AlemainneY — 20 
& pa aSelene bi-winnen. 

Pa Almainnifce men weoren 
of here cume warre. 

& heo gadere heom to-3eines? 
ftrongliche ferden. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


233 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


hom in to Rome. 

and 3arkede hire 3iftes ¢ 
and alle hire childres. 

and to hire daze brohte ? 
to Belym! pan kinge. 

and he 3am faire vnderfeng ¢ 
and fronfipe bi-hehte. 
Hoftages him bi-toke ” 
and his men bi-come. 

and he mid pan foreward ¥ 
wende eft azenward. 

and pe fwikes fone ’ 

verde to Rome. 

Belyn and Brenne 

beine to-gadere. 

nomen heom to reade 
and to fom roune. 

pat hii wolden wende y 
porh vt Lombardie. 

and faren to Alemayne ¥ 
and pat folk awinne. 

pe Alemaniffe men ? 

of hire comen weren war. 
and hii gadere heom to-3eines ” 
{wipe herde ferde. 


[c. 2.] 


‘hostages [children], and at their day (the day fixed) brought them to king 
Belin; and he received them fairly, and promised friendship. Hostages 
‘they soon’ ‘gave [delivered] him, and became his men, and he with ‘that 
[the] covenant marched eft againward (back) ; and the traitors soon pro- 
ceeded to Rome. Belin and Brennes both together betook them to counsel, 
and to some communing, that they would go throughout Lumbardy, and 
pass to Alemaine (Germany), and the ‘country [folk] conquer. ‘The 
Alemanish men were aware of their coming, and they gathered against 


1 R. Belyn. 2 R. fomne. 


234 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


of alle ped londe ¥ [e. 2.] 
pon keifer hefde an honde. 

& pa Romanifce men 

ful 3zre hit ifezen. 

pat Belin & Brénef? 

beiene weoren ifarenne. 

Heo 3rkeden reh®%en ¥ 

twa pufend rideref. 

and swisée an hizende? 

fenden heom efter. 10 
Heo letten ford bi-fiden ¢ 

an oper fole riden. 

ten pufend kempen 

alle icudde. 

} heo bi-foren comé ¥ 

pan kaifer to helpe. 

pe wolde a3en king Belin 
feht ihalden. 

& pat Romanifce floc / 

riden heom bi-hinden. 20 
Heo pohté heom beon on feft ¥ 
per pe hullef weore meft. 

& fenden heom arewen 

i pon weie narewe. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 5488—5511.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


of alle pan londe 

pat pan kayfer ftod an honde. 
and pe Romaniffe men? 

ful rape hit wufte. 

pat Belyn and Brenne ? 

weren i-varen panne. 

Hii 3arkede re3e Y 

two hundred ridares. 

and {wipe an hizinge ? 

fende 3am after. 

Hii lette par bi-fide 

an oper folk ride. 

ten poufend cnihtef? 

al icud. 

pat hii bi-fore come ? 

pane kayfere to helpe. 

pat wollde a-3ein Belyn king ? 
fihte and holde. 

and pat Romaniffe folke / 
reoden heom bi-hinde. 

Hii pohte beon him! a-neweft ¥ 
par pe hulles weren meft. [f£.27°.c.1.] 
and fenden heom arewe ’ 
in pan weie narewe. 


them a ‘strong [most hardy] host, of all the land, [that] ‘the emperor had 
[stood to the emperor] in hand. And the Romanish men full quickly it 
‘saw [knew], that Belin and Brennes were ‘both’ departed [thence]. 
They made ready two hundred bold riders, and speedily in haste sent after 
them. They caused ‘forth [there] apart another force to ride, ten thou- 
sand knights ‘all’ renowned, that they should come before to help the 
emperor, who would against king Belin ‘maintain fight [fight and hold] ; 
and the Romanish ‘troop [folk] rode behind them. They thought to be them 
nearest, where the hills were most (greatest), and sent them in rank into the 


1 ham? 


[v. 5512—5533.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
fcaln' heore lauerd Belin Y 
& hif broSer mid him. 
Heo for3eten here 3ifles ¢ 
& pat grid pat heo zurden®, 
wes and pa treupen 
per fore heo hauede teonen. 
Belin & hif broSer / 
beien weoren warre. 
of pon fwike-dome ¢ 
pe heom com of Rome. 10 
pa haueden heo pa mere eie Y 
of pan Alemainnifce kaifere. 
Pa fpeken heo mid rede / 
for heo haueden neode. 
pat Brennef & hif ferde®s 
azen faré fculde. 
fehten wih pat Romanifce folc / 
& fellen 3ef heo mihten. 
& Belin beh ot mut5 y 
mid muclen hif ftrengde. 20 
to feahten wid pon keifere ¢ 
& wih pon Alemainifce here. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


235 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


slean hire louerd Belyn ¢ 
and his broper mid him. 
Hii for-3eten hire children ¥ 
and pat grip pat hii 3eornden. 
opes and pe treupe ’ 

par fore hii hadde teone. 
Belyn and his broper 7 
beyne wer iwar. 

of pan fwikedome 

pat 3am com fram Rome. 
po hadden hi pe more eye’ 
of pan Almaniffe kaifere. 
Hii fpeken mid reade ¥ 

for hii hadden neode. 

pat Brennes and his ferde ¥ 
a3é folde wende. 

wip Romains fihte / 

and falli 3es a mihte*. 


and Belyn folde to pan kayfer ¥ 
and fihte wip Almaniffe here. 


narrow way, to slay their lord Belin, and his brother with him. They 
forgot their ‘hostages [children], and the peace that they yearned,—their 
oaths, and the covenant,—therefore they had sorrow! Belin and his brother 
were both aware of the treachery that came to them from Rome; then had 
they the more dread of the Alemanish emperor. ‘Then’ spake they with 
counsel—for they had need—that Brennes and his army should march back, 
to fight with ‘the Romanish folk [Romans], and fell them if they might, 
and Belin ‘pass over the mountains with his great strength, to fight 
with [should march to] the emperor, and ‘engage in battle [fight] with 
‘the’ Alemanish host, ‘if he might overcome him’; and whether ‘of 


? flean ? ? 3urnden? 
3 The last two letters of ferde are added by second hand. 
4 3ef hi mihte? 5 munt? 


236 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 5534—5557.]) 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1. 


fondien on fehte ([@81.¢.1.] 

3if he hine ouer-cumen mehte. 

& whe®er heore of pen broSeren and waper of pan bropers 
pe erht! hif feht ouer-come. _ pat ereft his fiht adde idon. 


come on-3ean fonen come a-3eon fone 

to helpen pon oper. to helpe pan oper. 

pe fole of Burguie Pat folk of Borgoyne ? 
ferde a3an mid Brenne. ferde a3ein mid Brenne. 
of France and Peitou ¥ of F“nce and of Peyto? 
fworen him & plicten. 10 fworen him and plihte. 

of pan Maine & of pan Turuine: of Mayn and of Turuine? 
treuliche him herden. treuliche him louede. 

of Normaundie & of Flaundref? of Normandie and Flandres’ 
freoliche him fulften. freliche him fulfte. 

& of Loherenne and of Loherenne ? 

heo lide to mid ftrengSe. hii wende to mid ftrengpe. 
& pat fole of Cafcuine® ¥ and pat folk of Gafcoyne ¥ 
pe noht nelden gri®ien. pat noht nolde gripie. 

& fole of fele leode and folk of many londe 
pe lise forS mid Brennen. 2 wende a3ein mid Brenne. 
to pan Romanifce men ¥ to pan Romaniffe men / 
pe heom efter uoren. pat 3am hafter come. 


Brenne and hif fole 
heom to comen. 


them’ (whichever) of the brothers, that erst his fight ‘overcame [had 
done], should come again soon to help the other. The folk of Burgundy 
marched back with Brennes; of France and [of] Poitou they swore to him 
and plighted; of ‘the’ Maine and of ‘the’ Touraine they truly him 
‘served [loved] ; of Normandy and ‘of’ Flanders they freely him aided ; 
and of Loraine they accompanied fim with strength; and the folk of Gas- 
cony, that would not make peace; and folk of many lands, ‘that’ went 
‘forth [back] with Brennes, towards the Romanish men who came after 
them. ‘ Brennes and his folk came up to them. Anon as they saw Brennes 


1 erft? 2 R. Gafcuine. 


[v. 5558—5581.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 237 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


Anan fwa heo ifeizen Brennes / 
buze heon! to-3ennes. 

swa pat Romainnifce fole / 
fohte to fleinde. 

& heo heom efter foren ¥ 

and monie per fullen. 

& swiSe mdie per fluwen 

& ferden to Rome. 

& Brennes pe riche? 

fofte hed beh efter. 10 
mid ftarkere fore ¥ 

ferde toward Rome. 

And Belin pe adel king Y 

wes in Alemainne. 

ferde he hauede inoh ¥ 

muchel and vynifeie. 

Bruttef & Wailfce / 

Scottef & Denfce. 

per wes Godlac pe king / 

pe god wes to neode. 20 
Pa iherden tellen ? 

pe ten pufend cnihtef. 

pe weoren icumen of Rome’ 
pan keifere to fulften. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


Aeriavbicas ees fehe Brennes?’ [c.2.] 
comen heom to-3eines. 

al pat Romaniffe folke Y 

fette to fleonde. 

and hii 3am ..tery 

and many pare fulde. 

Ac wel manie per flo3zen 

to pe borh of Rome. 

and Brennes pe r.... 

. ste wende after. 


And ....... bolde king 
was in Alem. .ne. 

ferde he hadde inowe 
mochele and onimete. 
Bruttes and Walfe Y 
Scottes and Deneniffe. 
par was Gutlac pe king 
pat god was to neode. 

Po ihorden telle / 

pe ten pufend cnihtef. 

pat weren icome fram Rome / 
pan kaifer to fulfte. 


advance against them, ‘so [all] the Romanish folk ‘sought [set] to flee, 
and they ‘ pursued’ after them, and many there felled, ‘and very [but well] 
many there fled, ‘and proceeded to [to the burgh of] Rome. And Brennes 
the rich followed soft (gradually) after them ; ‘ with strong force he marched 
toward Rome.’ And Belin the ‘noble [bold] king was in Alemaine; host he 
had enow, great and beyond measure, Britons and Welsh, Scots and Danes; 
—there was Godlac the king, who was good at need. When the ten thou- 
sand knights, who were come from Rome to succour the emperor, heard tell, 


1 R. heom. 


238 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


pat Brennes pe riche?’ 
ferde touward Rome. 


an! fumme heore men i-fle3ene 


& fumme to-driuene. 

nomen heom rede ¥ 

pat peonene® heo wolden riden. 
riht touward Rome Y 

eere Brennef pider come. 

Pat word come to Belinney 

of Brennef hif broSer. 10 
heo he hauede itaken on Y 

& al whet he haueden? idon. 
And?° o%er fonde per com ‘ 

pe fone him talde. 

pat tweie pufend cnihtef? 


LA3AMONS. BRUT. 


[v. 5582—5603.] 


MS. Cott, Otho, C, x1r1. 
pat Brennes pe riche ? 


{[c.2.] verde touward Rome. 


and hadde of hire enihtes ¥ 
manye hii-do* to deape. 
nomen heom to reade ¥ 
pat panene hii wolden ride. 
riht touward Rome 

ere Brennes pider come. 
Pat word com to Belyn? 
of Brenne his broper. 

hou he hadde itaken ony 
and al hou he hadde idon. 
An oper fonde par com 
pat fopliche him tolde. 

pat pe ten pufend enihtes 


pe werré i Son Alemainnefce fehte.pat weren in pan Alemaniffe fihte. 1 


woldé a3é fone’ 
faren in to Rome. 


wolden a3en fone Y 
faren touward Rome. 


& al makeden heore faren 

alfe ha® wolden a pare niht faren. 

Beli wes {wide wis 2 Belyn was swipe wif? 

& warfcipe him folweden’. and warfipe him folwede. 


that Brennes the powerful marched toward Rome, and ‘had slain some of 
their men, and some dispersed [had many of their knights done to death], 
they took them [to] counsel, that thence they would ride, right toward 
Rome, ere Brennes came thither. The word (tidings) came to Belin, of 
Brennes his brother, how he had taken on (speeded), and all ‘what [how] 
he had done. Another messenger there came, who ‘soon [soothly] him told, 
that ‘two [the ten] thousand knights, that were in the Alemanish fight, 
would soon again fare ‘into [toward] Rome, ‘and made all their proceed- 
ing, as if they would march in the night.’ Belin was very wise, and pru- 
dence him followed; he had many Alemains with edge hewed in pieces, 


1 pan pr. m., but p erased. 2, an or and. 2 j-do? 
8 Originally written peo nime, ‘ hauede? 5 An? 
® heo? 7 folwede? 


[v. 5604—5627.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 239 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11z. 
he hauede monie Alemainf he hadde many Alemains 
mid agge to-heowé. mid hegge to-hewe. 
and monie he ledde ifundey and monye he ladde ibunde 
mid hi ibunden. in bende alle ifunde. 
He hauede tweine wiffe men’ He haddetw..... = [f£28.c1.] 
i pon fuhte bi-wunnen. ee 


peo cude pes londen lawen eee Cr 
and fpeken whit pon leoden. of oy 0), oi NMR 


Belin king heom to fpec oo ous) © Seadoabedyd fpaed 
& pus heom wi’ fpilede. IOAN» oo o sled atvaile de: 
There 3e cnihtes ” Hi-here. «: <ispie ysysire 
whet ich eow wulle cuSen. -at ich 30u wolle .... 
Ic inc habbe beiene ’ ... ou habbe beine 
aninne mine bendé& j= = 3 ....26.4 onge bendes. 
3if 3et wulled' after rede fareny . . . .llep do bi reade 
ich hit? wulle freoizen. 89» «ses olle grepie. 
mid gode reue bi-hon Y mid... clo.... clopi? 
and makien ine riche. and maki 3ou riche. 
faren mid me fuluen / varen mid mi feolfue ” 
& ich inckere freond wurSe. 2 and frendes iworpe. 

3if 3it me wulled laden 3ef 3e me wollep leade ¢ 
pe cunne paf leoden. pat conne peos leode. 
riht to pan weie ? [£.31%c.1.] riht to pane weie? 

pe 3it witen ful wel. pat we wite wel. 


and many he led safe with him ‘bound [in bonds]. He had captured in the 
fight two wise men, who knew the laws of the land, and could speak with 
the people, King Belin spake to them, and thus with them discoursed : 
“Hear ye, knights, what I will make known to you. I have you both 
in my [strong] bonds; if ye will act by my counsel, I will set you free, 
with good ‘garments behung [clothing clothe you], and make you rich ; go 
with myself, and ‘I become your friend [be friends],—if ye, who know 
this country, will lead me right to the way that ‘ye [we] know ‘full’ well, 


1 wulled? 2 inc? 3it? 


240 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 5628—5650.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
par pif Romanifce folc ¥ ware pis Romaniffe folk ? 
ford wulled riden. forp wollep ride. 
and we hed fculled fon on and we follen wende? 

& heom wid? fahten. and wip ham fihten. 
feollen oure feondes / slean houre onfrendes ¥ 

& faren after Brenne. and wenden after Brenne. 
& li8é mid rede and don al bivreade? 

and Rome bi-liggen. and Rome bi-ligge. 

and pis inc® bi-feche ? and pis ich 30u bi-feche ¥ 
pat al we wurden fele. 10 for houre bope neode. 

Pa cnihtef weoren wife Pe cnihtes weré wife ¥ 

& ful 3ere witele. and grantede fwipe. 


& al ham iwurdé* 
pe Belin heom to-3eFde. 


and heom markede ford ¥ hii nome riht hire way’ 
touward Munt-giu heo ferden. touward Muntageu. 
in to ane mucele beche ¥ in one mochele felade ¥ 


pa munte bi-haluef. 
per heo ford feulden cumen? _ par folde peos oper wende. 
pa weoren pa gumen feie. = 


Belin wes bi hullen ¥ Belyn was bi pes hulle? 
fwideliche ftille. {wipeliche ftille. 
pa comen liden ¥ po comen lipe ? 


where this Romanish folk forth will ride. And we shall ‘surprise them 
{march], and with them fight ; fell our enemies, and proceed after Brennes, 
and ‘fare with [do all by] counsel, and Rome besiege: and this I beseech you, 
‘that we all be well [for need of us both].” The knights were wise, and 
‘exceeding prudent [granted it soon], ‘and agreed to all that Belin of them 
required,’ ‘and directed them forth; [they took their way right] toward 
‘Muntgiu [Muntagu,] ‘ they went,’ into a great valley ‘ beside the moun- 
tain,’ where ‘they (the enemy) forth should come [these others should pass], 
who were the men fated! Belin was by [this] hill, exceeding still ; then ap- 
proached ‘the’ Roman people that were. Belin leapt on them, before and 


1 wid? 2 ich inc? % iwurSen? 


| 


_. ——o 


[v. 5651—5673.) 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
pa weore pa Rom-leoden. 
Belin heom to leop ¢ 
bi-foren & bi-hiden. 
peo cnihtes weoren vnwepned 
pa pe weene hed wes 3euese. 
heo wenden to beon fikere ¥ 
peo Belin heom on fohte. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 241 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
pat weren Romleode. 
Bely! 3am leop to 
bi-fore and bi-hinde. 
pe cnihtes weren on-wepned ¥ 
po hii folde fihte. 
hii wende to beon . .kere ? 
po Belyn king 3am .. ...te. 


Ne nomen heo nonne cniht quic /Ne nemen hii ewie nanne?’ [c.2.] 


ah alle heo heom aqualden. 


ac alle h.. acwelde. 


for nauede Belin nan enihtey 10 for nadde Belin nanne cniht ? 


pet he nef pere god kimppe. 
ne neave nenne herd-fwein ¥ 
pat he ne fahte alfe pein. 

ne neuer nenne hird-cnaue ¥ 
pat he naf wod on hif laze. 

Pat faht bi-gon at mid-niht ¥ 
& pat hit wes dei liht. 

& fwa pene dwilonge? —[c.2.] 
heo wenden feodSen*® pa mitef. 
and qualden alle pailke’ 2 
pe aniht weoren atcropene. 
Belin a Sene mer3en 

letten® blawen hif bemen. 


pat he nas pare kempe. 
ne neuere nanne fweyn ne cnaue 


pat he nas wod in his lawe. 
Pat fiht bi-ga at mid-niht ¥ 
and lafte forte dai liht. 

and fo pane day longe ¥ 

hii wende oueral pan hulles. 
and cwelden alle pe ilke ¥ 
pat weren awei crope. 
Belyn a morwe / 

lette blouwe bemes. 


behind ; the knights were un-weaponed, when ‘the harm to them was given 
[they should fight] ; they weened to be secure when [king] Belin attacked 
them. They took ‘no knight [none] alive, but all they them killed; for 
Belin had no knight, that he was not (who did not prove) there ‘ good’ 
warrior, nor ever any ‘domestic swain (swain or knave}, ‘that he fought 
not as a thane, nor ever any domestic knave,’ that he was not mad in his 
law (fought not outrageously)! The battle began at midnight, and [lasted] 
until ‘it was’ daylight. And so all the day long they proceeded over [all] 
the ‘mountains [hills], and killed all those that ‘in the night [away] were 
(had) crept. Belin on ‘the’ morrow caused ‘his’ trumpets to be blown, 
5 lette? 


? R. Beljn. 2 feodSten? Query if an error for jeond? 


242 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 5674—5696.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
& beonnede hif ferde ? 
hahte ford rihtef. 
ridé penne ilke wei? hii ride po pane wai 
pe for’ into Rée lei. pat in to Rome lay. 
efter Brenne hif broder ¥ after Brennes his broper? 
pe heom bi-foren wes. pat him bi-fore 3eode. 
Brennef hit hirde fuggen Brennes hit ihorde ¥ 
& hif broSer a-bad. and his broper abod. 
ford heo bi3en beiene forp iwende’ beizene ¥ 
 heo come to Rome buri. 10 forte hii come to Rome. 
pa burh heo bi-leien ? pe borh hii bi-leye ? 
mid heore leod-ferden. mid hire ftronge ferde. 
Pet folc per wid innen Pat folk par wip ine’ 
hed ohtliche wid fehten. hahtliche fohte. 
Belin & Bréne ’ Belyn and Brenne 
heo® bileien al abeoten. 3am bi-leie aboute. 
and pa oSere hem feuten toy’ —_ and pe oper 3am fote toy’ 
{ceerpe garef. gares i-nowe. 


Ofte heo letten grund-hat led? Ofte lette hot leod ¥ 
gliden hed® an heore hwefd. 2 glide on hire heued. 
stockes & ftanef ftockes and ftones? . 

& ftrales hate. and fwipe hote ftremes. 
and fwiSe wel heom4 wereden? and riht wel iwereden® ¥ 


‘and assembled his host; he ordered them forth-right’ ‘to ride the same 
way [They ride then the way] that ‘forth’ towards Rome lay, after 
Brennes his brother, who before ‘them was [him marched]. Brennes heard 
it ‘say,’ and abode (waited for) his brother. Forth they both proceeded, 


until they came to Rome-‘bury’; the burgh they besieged with their’ 


[strong] forces. The folk there within fought bravely ‘against them’; 
Belin and Brennes besieged them ‘all’ about, and the others shot on 
them ‘sharp darts [darts enow]. Oft they let ‘ boiling-’ hot lead glide on 
their heads, stocks and stones, and ‘showers [streams most] hot; and right 
well they defended the walls of Rome; so that for all the crafts that they 


’ hi wende? * heom? > heon pr. m. 4 heo? 5 hi wereden ? 


[v. 5697 —5719.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 243 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
pa wallef of Rome. pe walles of Rome. 
per fore’ alle pan creften / pat for alle pan craftes / 
pe heo uten cuS%en. pat hii wid houte coupe. 
ne for alle pen fuhte ¢ ne for alle pan fihte ¥ 
pe heore ferde makede. pat hire ferde makede. 
ne mihten heo Rome-wal ? ne mihte hii of Rome-wal / 
nawiht onwalden. noping awelde. 
ah heo lofeden monie pufend? ac hii lofede many poufend 
godere monnen. of hire gode manne. _[[f.28°.c.1.] 
& tuwé heom fram pan walle 10 and hii torden? .. am pe walles ¥ 
wa wes heore herten. wo was 3am on heorte. 
Pe king him® bi-Sohten ¥ pe kinges 3am bi-pohte ” 
whet heo don mihten. wat idon* mihte. 
and feiden heom bi-twenen? —_ and feide 34 bitwine / 
Leted comen fonen. Letep come fone. 


pa feouwer and twéti children? pe four and twenti childré / 
pe we habbed to 3iflen. [f52. c.1.] pat we habbep in bende. 
and do’ up and® waritreo / and dop vp a wer-itreo ¥ 


per on heo feullen winden. pat an hii folle hongy. 

& wreken pan fiSes / 2 and wreken pe falfe deades 
and® ure wiSer-iwinnen. of houre wiper-iwinnes. 

for 3et we feullen hed to liSen? and 3et we follen heom to go? 
fwa heom bid elre leeft®, wanne heom beop alre lopest. 


[with]out knew, nor for all the fight that their army made, might they 
[of} Rome-walls ‘no whit [nothing] win; but they lost many thousands 
[of their] good men, and [they] ‘drew [turned] ‘them’ from the walls,— 
woe ‘were their hearts [they were in heart]! The kings bethought them 
what they might do, and said them between: ‘“ Let come (bring ye) soon 
the four and twenty children, that we have ‘as hostages [in bonds], and 
do ye up (erect) a gallows; thereon they shall hang, and avenge the 
‘mishaps [false deeds] ‘on [of] our enemies; ‘for [and] yet we shall go 
to (attack) them, ‘as [when] shall be to them most loath!” The gallows 


1 pet for? ? tornden? 3 kinges heom ? 


4 hi don? 5 an? ® ledeft ? 
R2 


244 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


pe furken weoren arered ? 
heo teuwen up pa 3ifles. 
and heom per hengen 
bi-foren heore eldré. 

wa wes heore fad?en 


MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
Pe forkes weren vp ifet / 
pe childerne weren an-honge. 
pat hire faderes 3am ifehe ¥ 
mid hire owene e3e. 


[gen. wo was heom on heorte ¥ 


peo heo i-feizen heore beern han- po hii feht i-feh3e. 


Mid muéen heo feiden ¥ 

mid aden heo hit fworen. 

per fore hit feulden' iwuréen / 
muchele pa wurfe. 

fwa pat for dease ne for lif / 


- 


0 


nalden heo nauere makien gri®. 


For pat weoren pa richchefte ’ 
& pa alre hehgefte. 

& pa rad-fullefte / 

pe wuneden in Rome. 

pat bi-foren heore ezenen Y 
bi-hulden and i-fe3é. 

pat heore bern me on-heng ’ 
on he3e trouwen. 

Pa orles? weorne iwende’ 
{wide for peonne. 

pe heom wite foldé 


were ‘areared, [up set], ‘they drew up the hostages, and hung them there, 
before their parents;—woe were their fathers, when they beheld their 
children hang [the children were up-hung, so that their fathers saw them 
with their own eyes,—woe they were in heart, when they that sight beheld]! 
With mouth they [it] said, with ‘oaths [heart] they it swore, [that] there- 
fore it should be much the worse, so that for death nor for life would they 
never make peace! For they were the richest, and the noblest of all, and 
the wisest that dwelt in Rome, who before their eyes beheld and saw 
that men ‘up’-hung their children on high trees. The earls were ‘very’ far 
off, ‘who should them defend,’ Gabius and Prosenna, into Lumbardy [they] 


\ feulde? 2 porles man. pr., but the first letter erased. R. eorles: 


5 iwedde man, pr. 


Mid moubpe hii hit faide 
mid heorte hii hit fwore. 
pat par fore hit folde beon % 
mochele pe worfe. 

so pat for deape ne for lifY 
nolden hii neuere maken grip. 
For pat weren pe richefte ¥ 
and pe allere hehefte. 

and pe readfullefte / 

pat wonede ine Rome. 

pat bi-fore hire e3zen ¢ 
bi-helde and i-feh3zen. 

pat me hire childrene ¥ 


2 heong on-e3e trouwes. 


Pe eorles weren for panne y 
Gabius and Profenna. 


[v. 5720—5742.] 


({v. 5743—5763.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


245 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xtit. 


Gabiuf and 2fenna into Lumbar- in to Lombardie hii weren iwend / 


die!. 


in to pd leode efter monkunne? after mancunne. 


pe heom mihten® feulden. 
to helpene heore monne 
azen Belinne and Brenne. 
Pa com per a mon irné ¥ 
from pan twam eorlen. 
pe brohte writ-runen ? 
in to pere burh of Rome. 
pat feide heom to fose / 10 
} pa eorles comen. 
in per ilke nihte / 
‘mid ten pufend enihten. 
& mid ferde vnimete / 
of mdnen on foten. [c.2.] 
pe feulden cumé bi-haluef’ 
& Belin king aqllen. 
and Brennes hif broSer / 
beiene to-gadere. 
3if 3e me wulled® ileuen’ 2% 
a-nan fwa hit beo® auen. 


pat mid 3am folde fihte 
aj3einft Belynes: . . [e.2.] 


to ipe mi.) veatage.4 
... faide ham to.... 
Ristotere eorles come . 
. nihte. 


v0 6 028. 


POP 
mid ten ...... 
and mid fe. . 
of folke a fote. 

p.....- come bi-halues / 
Rieremarnrs .. king a-cwel.. 
-nd B..... his broper’ 
beizene to-gadere.. 

3if 3e0 me wollep ilefue ¢ 
anon fo hit his heue. 


were gone, ‘ into the country,’ after forces that ‘should enable them to help 
their men [with them should fight] against Belin and Brennes. Then there 
came a man running from the two earls, who brought letters into the burgh 
of Rome, that said them in sooth, that the earls would come in the same 
night, with ten thousand knights, and with an immense host of ‘men [folk] 
on foot, who should come apart, and kill king Belin, and Brennes, his 
brother, both together.—“ If ye will believe me, anon as it is evening, send 


) The order of the verses seems confused. We should probably read them thus: 
Pa eorles weoren fwite for ponne y pe heom wite folden. Gabiuf and Profenna 
in to Lumbardie heo weoren iwende. 

? The second hand has expuncted mihten, but perhaps without cause. 
rection is required, we may read {culden fulften. Cf. v. 4873. 

3 wulled? 


If any cor- 


246 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 5764—5786.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xm1. 

sende®d ut cnihtef? sendep vt cnihtes ¥ 

& bi-gine® to fihten. and bi-ginnep to fihte. 

zr hit beo mid-niht ¥ and hare hit beo midniht / 

ich fugge eow hit fo% riht, ich fegge 30u forp riht. 

comed! mid heore mannen comep mid hire manne? 

Gabiuf and Profenna. Gabius and Profenna, 

pe fculled eow wurSliche wreken pat wollep 30u worpliche a-wreke? 

on eorwer per-iwinnen®. of 30ure wiper-iwinne. 

A-nan fwa pe dei wef a-gany A-non fo pe dai was agon? 

{wa heo 3eten openedé, 10 pe 3eates hii hopenede. 

letten ut cnihtef/ leten vt cnihtes 

bigunné muchele fibtef. and bi-gonne to fihte. 

{wa heo fehten al niht ” so hii fohten alle niht 

pat hit wes dei liht. pat hit was dai liht. 

Pa com per fufen / Po com par fufe 

vnimete ferde. onimete ferde. 

Gabius an Profenna y Gabius and Profenna y 

mid muchele mokinne. mid mochele mancine, 

ut of Lumbardie ? vt of Lombardie 

and lidé touward Brenne. . for fihte wip Brenne. 

& heom® faht wid / And Brennes 3am faht wip’ 

feondliche fwide. ftarcliche fwipe. 

& Belin him refde to? and Belyn rééfde 


out knights, and begin to fight, [and] ere it be midnight, I say it you ‘right 
sooth [forth-right], Gabius and Prosenna will come with their men, who 
‘shall [will] worthily avenge you ‘on [of] your adversaries.” Anon as the 
day was gone, ‘so’ they opened [the] gates; let out knights, [and] began 
‘great [to] fight; so they fought all night, until it was daylight. Then 
there approached az innumerable host, Gabius and Prosenna, with mickle 
forces out of Lumbardy ; ‘and marched toward [for to fight with] Brennes. 
And Brennes fought with them most strongly, and Belin rushed to the 


1 come’? 

? R. eowre wiper-iwinnen. A correction has been imperfectly made by two suc- 
cessive hands, on an erasure. 

® Brennes heom? 


[v. 5787—5809.] LA3AMONS BRUT, 247 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
to pan Romanifce folke. to pan Romaniffe. 
& heo fufden fwide ” and fohten {wipe ¥ 
pe faht wes unimete. pe falle was onimete. 
per wef ballu riue ? par was wo pat folle 
Bruttef per fullé. Bruttes par fulle. 
Belin and Brennes Belyn and B,..ne? 
burftef pare hefden. harm pare vnderf. . 
& pa Romanifce mé / a's -maniffeY  [£29.¢.1.] 
réden heom uuenen. - remden..... -n. 
Whet wolde 3e her nithinges 7 10 Wat wolde.........- 
mid pe Bruttifce kinge. and peli. sce tate % 
wende 3e mid ginné Y wende .. mid fiht / 
Romen bi-winnen. to fallen hour. leode. 
wendé 3e mid fehté ¥ wende 3e mid .inne ¥ 
to fellen uré leoden. Rome bi-winne. 
& beon eow feluen riche ” and ....., feolf riche ¥ 
and welden al Rome. _ [[f.32*.c.l.Jand..... .. Rome. 
3e fcullen driken eowre blod? eo follen...... -re blod’ 
balu eow if z3eueSe. and ..e h.. lutel god. 
3e beod ure bernenne bone? 20 
per fore 3e fculled breoSen. 


fallen and' ure leoden Y 
swa eow bid alre leduft. 


Romanish ‘folk,’ and ‘they’ fought fiercely; the ‘battle [slaughter] was 
immoderate,—there was ‘sorrow rife [woe that fell]! Britons there fell, 
Belin and Brennes harms there ‘had [received], and the Romanish men 
shouted upon them,—‘‘ What would ye here, nithings, ‘with the [and 
these] British kings? Weened ye with stratagems to win Rome, weened 
ye with fight to fell our people, and be yourselves rich, and possess all 
Rome? Ye shall drink your own blood—'sorrow shall be given you! [and 
have here little good”.] ‘Ye are the bane of our children, therefore ye 
shall be cut in pieces, and our people fell you, as shall be to you most 
loath!’” Belin and Brennes ‘withdrew them [went] from the fight, within 


1 and fallen? 


248 LA3AMONS BRUT. {v. 5810—8832.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
Belin & Brénef? Belyn and Brennes ¥ 
bu3en heom fram pan fuhte. wende fram pan fihte. 
wih innen are muchele dic ? wid ine one mochel dich? 
pe heo heefden ilet delfen. pat hii idolue hadde. 

} heore fole mihten {wide wel? pat hire folk mihte wel? 
wunien wid innen. wonie par ine. 

Per innen heo fpeken Y Par ine hii fpeken ” 

per inne heo runden. par ine hii rouneden. 
ane lutle while ” one lutel wile’ 

ne leafte hit na wiht ane mile. 10 ne lafte hit noht a mile. 
and puf heom! feidé ’ and faiden pus b twine? ? 
heom bi-twune. . Here we habbep teone. 
3if we hénen fared pufy 3if we hinne varep pus % 
alle heo wulled efter uf. alle hii wollep hafter vs. 
and 3if hit fwa ilipped / and 3if hit fo bi-vallep 
} we ham cumen iden. pat we hom wende. 
heorté we haueden fare ¥ heortef we habbep fore ¥ 


and ure cun edwit auere mare. und fame worp euere more. 
Ah ga we hed on mid fweorde? Ac go we to wip fweorde? 
for al heo beo’ for{lor}ne. 2 for alle hii beop for-loren. 


& urekene® wreke we mid manfipe ¥ 
ure wine-meief. houre gode cnihtes. 
for leouere us if here / for leuere vs his here ¥ 


a great ditch, that they had ‘caused to be’ dug, that their folk might 
‘most’ well dwell ‘within [therein]. Therein they spake, therein they 
communed a little while—it lasted ‘no whit [not] a mile—and thus ‘they’ 
said ‘them’ between: ‘‘ [Here we have sorrow,]—if we hence, fare thus, 
they all will pursue after us; and if it so befalleth, that we ‘arrive [go] 
home, we shall have sore hearts, and ‘our kin reproach [shame will be] ever- 
more. But go we‘on [to] ‘them’ with sword, for all they shall be destroyed, 
and wreak we [with honor] our ‘kindred [good knights]! For liefer it is to 


1 heo? ? bi-twine? 
’ The words for[lor]ne & urekene are added in the margin by a second hand, but 
the line is still incomplete, unless we read & wrekene we mid manscipe. 


[v. 5833—5855.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
mid manfcipe to fallen. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


249 
MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1r1. 
mid manfipe falle. 


panne we heonne i-funde farren / pane we mid ifund fare / 


ure frenden to fcare. 

Pe while pe heo puf fpeken ’ 
and fpileden mid wordé. 
wende pa peodifce men? 

pat Belin wolden' penne. 
and feiden heom bi-twenen Y 
in pere burh of Rome. 

Nu heo wulled heonneny 10 
nulled heo na mare fehten. 
ah Belin and hif broder Y 

al heo Sodten? oSer. 

Heo féden ut of Rome’ 
cnihtef wel idone. 


feowerti hidred [c.2.] 
to he3en ane caftele. 
to kepen Belin king / 
ad hif broder Brennes®. 

20 
and baldeliche whid fehten. 


and pa oSere of Rome 
riden heom bi-hinden. 


houre cun to fonde. 

Pe wile pat hi pus faide / 
and fpeke mid wordes. 
wen.. pe Romaniffe ’ 

pat Belyn ....e wende. 
and faide heom bi-t. .ne y 
in pare borh .f Rome. 
Nou hii wollep hine ’ 
nollep hii na more fihte. 
ac Belyn and his broper 
al hii pohte an oper. 

Hii fende vt of Rome y 
cnihites wel idone. 

fourti hundred ¥ 

to one he3e caftle. 

to kepe Belyn king 

and Brenne his broper. 
pat folde heom bi-fore beon ¥ 
and hardeliche fihte. 

and pe oper of Rome?’ 

ride heom bi-hinde. 


[c.2.] 


us to fall here with honor, than ¢hat we hence go in safety, to the disgrace of 
our ‘friends [kin].” The while that they thus ‘spake [said], and ‘discoursed 
[spake] with words, the ‘people of the country [Romanish folk] weened 
that Belin would go ‘ thence’ [depart], and said them between, in the burgh 
of Rome: ‘“ Now they will go hence, they will no more fight !””—but Belin 
and his brother all another thing they thought. They sent out of Rome 
forty hundred brave knights, to a noble castle, to watch king Belin, and 
his brother Brennes [who should be before them], and ‘boldly [hardily] 
‘with them’ fight; and the others of Rome should ride behind them, and 


1 wolde? 3 A line is here wanting. 


2 podten? 


250 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


and flen' heom bi-twenen 
and wreké ore tounen. 

Pe cnihtef weoren on fore ¥ 

fer ut of Rome. 

pa hehte Belin’ 

& Brennes hif broder. 

Lihted of eowre blanken ; 

and ftonded on eowre fconken. 
and kerue®’ eowre fpere longe? 
& makiet heom feorte & ftronge. 
{cradied eower feeldef u 
al of pe fmal endé. 

and we eow wulle® bi-foren ’ 
libben o%er liggen. 

& auer alec god mon? 

harde hine fulue. 

for her feullen pe weedlen ¥ 
alle i-wuréen riche. 
Blawen? ore bemé 

and banned ore ferde. 

and maké we of ure ueren? 
fihtie® ferden. 

and on auer alche hepe* 


slay [all] between them, and avenge their wrongs. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 5856—5878.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


and flean heom alle bi-twine / 
and wreken houre teone. 

Pe cnihtes weren on fore? 
for vt of Rome. 

po hehte Belyn king 

and Brennes his broper. 

Of 3oure hors a-liptep ? 

and vp 3oure feot ftondep. 
and keruep 3oure fperes lang y 
and makep heom to3e an ftrang. 
and we 30u wollep fwerie ? 
vppen houre fwerdes. 

pat we wollep 30u bi-fore + 
libbe oper ligge. 

and euerech god man 

hardi him feolue. 

for her folle pe wel donde 
euere worpe riche. 

Blouwep 3oure bumes 
flockep 3oure ferdes. 

and make we of houre feres ? 
fifti ferdes. 

and ouer eche ferde ¥ 


The knights were on 


their march far out of Rome; then ordered [king] Belin and Brennes his 
brother,—* Alight from your horses, and stand [up]on your ‘legs [feet], and 
carve your long spears, and make them ‘short [tough] and strong; ‘cut 


your shields all off the small end, and [and we. will you swear upon our 


swords, that] we will before you live or lie! And Jet every good man 
hardy himself, for here shall the ‘poor all become [well-doing ever be] 
rich! Blow your trumpets, ‘and’ assemble your forces, and make we of 
our comrades fifty troops, and ‘in every [over each] troop [one] ‘ brave’ 


' flendan man. pr. 
* Originally hepen, but the last letter 


? Blawep? 
expuncted, 


3 fiftie? 


[v. 5879—5902.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 251 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
herto3e fteepne. anne cheueteine. 
pa heom makie balde ¥ pat 3am makie bolde 
and to-gadere halde. and to-gaderes holde. 
& wenden to pen walle ¥ an wenden to pan walle 
on euer alchere halue. on euereche halue. 
hizedliche' fo we on? hizendliche go we on? 
for alle we fcullen wel don. for alle we follen wel don. 


Peo blewen heo here bemen? __ Po blewen hii hir. bumes ? (£29. c. 1.] 
pat heo of Rome hitfculden iheren.pat hii of Rome ihorde. 


and heo ut iwenden 10 and hii vt wende? 
ohte kempen. {wipe ohte kempef. 

* Pa i-fezen heo of Rome ’ Po ifeh3en hii of Rome 
Belin & his brod’e. Belyn and his broper. 
pa clupeden® heo lude ¥ po cleopede hi looude / 
3e6d pare leodé. oueral Romleode. 
Nu fied-ure ifan ? Nou fleop houre men® 
nu we fculled heom to gan. nou we folde to heom gon, 
Mid p’ forwarde monnen: [f.33. ¢.1.] Mid pan forme manne 
ut wenden* Profenna. vt wende Profenna. 
Gabiuf him com eft? ¥ 2 Gabius him com after ? 
mid fifti hundred enihtef. mid fifti hundred enihtef. 
mid alle heore wepnen mid al hire wepne ¥ 
pe weoren vniwelde. pat 3am bi-ofde. 
Pa oSere weoré {wifte ¥ Pe oper weren fwihte y 


chieftain, who shall make them bold, and together hold. And go we to the 
walls on every side; quickly ‘fall [go] we on, for we all shall do well!” 
Then blew they their trumps, so that they of Rome should hear ‘it,’ and 
they out marched, knights [most] brave! When they of Rome beheld Belin 
and his brother, then called they loud over [all] ‘the people [Rome-folk] : 
“Now shall our foes flee, now we shall go to them!”’ With the foremost 
men Prosenna went out; Gabius came after him, with fifty hundred 
knights, with all their weapons, that ‘were unwieldy [them behoved]). 
The others were swift, their weapons were light; they laid together 


1 hijendliche ? 2 Above the u in clupeden is written io, but unnecessarily. 
3 fon? * wende? 


252 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


heore wepnen weoren lihte. 
heo leiden to-gadere 

& fedliche' fuhten. 

Weoren heo of Rome ¥ 

alle ridinde. 

pa odere? a foten 

and fengen heom to-3#inenes®. 
and flowen alle heore horfy 
here hep wes pe lettere. 
Gabiuf heo flowe ¥” 10 
Profenna heo nomen. 

heo duden heore wille ¥ 

of pan Rom-monen. 

alle heo flowen 

pat heom a3en-ftoden. 

Heo breken pa Rom-walles 
on auer ache halue. 

and binnen heo i-wenden Y 
and pa burh awelden. 
Biwunnen heo Rome ’ 20 
pe riche burh wel idone. 

per heo funden nuchel* gold 
& gerfume unimete. 

Heo unbunde pa locun 


[v. 5903—5926.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11, 


hire wepnen were lihte. 
hii leiden to-gadere ¥ 

ad lopliche fohte. 

Weren hii of Rome / 

alle ridende. 

pe opre a fote ¥ 

fet heom to-3einef. 

and flo3en alle hire hors ¥ 
pat hii wer alle a fote. 
Gabius hii flozen / 
Profenna hii nomen. 

hii dude hire wille / 

of alle pan opere. 

alle hii slowen ? 

pat hii neh comen. 

Hii breken Rome-walles / 
in euereche halue. 

and wip ine wende 

and pe borh nome. 

pus hii bi-wonne Rome 
pe riche borh wel idone. 
pare hii fide mochel gold 
and garifome onimete. 
Hii to-borfte pe lokes ¥ 


(engaged), and fought with animosity. They of Rome were all riding 
(horsemen), the others were on foot, ‘and’ set against them, and slew 
all their horses,—their hap was the worse! [so that they were all on 
foot.] Gabius they slew, and Prosenna they captured; of the men of 
Rome [all the others] they did their will, all they slew that them ‘with- 
stood [came nigh]. They brake ‘the’ Rome-walls on every side, and 
within ‘ they’ went, and the burgh ‘conquered [took]. [Thus] they won 
Rome, the rich burgh and strong; there they found much gold, and 
measureless treasure. They ‘unbound [burst open] the locks, [and] drew 


1 The first three letters of fedliche are on erasure. 2 oWere? 
3 R. to-3eines. * R. muchel. 


[v. 5927—5949.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
drowen ut pa baizef. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111, 


and drowe vt pe porfes. 


253 


pa pallef & pa purpres ¥ pe palles pe purpres ¥ 
pe iworht weor’ in Puille. pat wroht weren in boure. 
alle pa maSmef/ 


pe weoren monie kunnef. 
Per wef moni wrehche Y 
fone iworsen riche. 

al pa feouen nihte / 

hif iwil par hefde zle cniht. 


Par was mani wrecche 

fone iworpe riche. 

alle pe feoueniht ¥ 

hif wille hadde ech eniht. —_[¢.2.] 


of feoluere and of goldey 1 of....... golde 
inoh of pon londe. hi-noh 

: Letten pa kingef? Leten pe...... 

Gon feiré Pingdfinic oll had... ee pinges. 
timbrié pa hallen ¢ Wert ore > shertars 


beten pa wallef. rihte pe wa. .es. 
| pe per! weoré to-brokene ? [c. 2.] pat we .... to-broke / 
mid peon balu fehte. in pan mochele fihte. 
Letten heo? climbé on heh? —_ Hii leten clembin on heh? 
cleopien to pon folke. and cleopie to pan .... 
} pe kinges heom fpeken wi% / 20 pat pe kinges wolde f{peke wi. 


& per fetten heore gri8. = = ..... . pare hire gri.. 
} ne wurde na ma fwa wod -.ne...pe no man fo wod? 
of opere falle hif blod. pat of oper makie blod. 


out the jewels [purses], the palls ‘and’ the purples, that were wrought 
in ‘Puille (Apulia) [bower]; ‘all the riches, that were of many kinds.’ 
There was many a poor man soon became rich; all the se’nnight had each 
knight ‘there ’ his will, of silver and of gold, enow of the land! The kings 
caused fair things to be done; the halls to be built, the walls to be repaired, 
that ‘there’ were broken to pieces, ‘with [in] the ‘dire [mickle] fight. 
They caused men to climb on high, [and] proclaim to the folk, that the 
kings would speak with them, and there establish their peace; that no man 
should be so mad, that Ae should of another ‘shed his [make] blood, nor 


1 er man. sec. by erasure. 
? Apparently heom man. pr.: two letters have been erased and o substituted. 


254 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 

ne of hif ehte zerne / 

buté he hit 3euen him wulle. 

And alle pe flemen 

pe iflowe bu’ of Rome. 

pe azan wulled cumen 

pes kingef gri8 wilnien. 

ad! bi-cumen pes kingef mon 

alfe we hit er cudden. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 5950—5972.) 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


no hehte ne wepne? 

bote he hit 3iue wolde. 

And alle pe fleomes / 

pat hi-flowe weren. 

pat azein wolde come? 

pis kingef grip 3erne. 

and bi-cume pis kinges man ¥ 


alfe 3e hierep greade. 


comen alle mid fibbe ? 

and her hire lif libbe. 

and habben pe ilke lawes ¥ 
pat ftode bi hire eldrene dawes. 
And Belyn houre he3e king? 
hit bi-takep Brenne. 

pat ful bleuen here” 

and beo 3oure kaifere. 

and him seolf wole wende 
and 3oure leue habbe. 

and hinene he wole bouwe / 


cumen al mid fibben? 

and her heore lif libben. 10 
and habben pa ilke lezen ¥ 

pe ftoden bi heore eldre dewen. 
And Belin ure he3e kig ” 

hit bi-teched Brenne. 

pe fczel bi-leuen here / 

and beon eower keifere. 

and him feolf wule lidé/ 

and eower lwue habben. 

and hednen he wule bu3en 


in to Brutteine. 2 into Brytaine. 
Welle muchel wes pa wop ? Mochel was par wepinge ” 
pe Belin peonne wende. po Belyn panne wende. 


ah heo weoren ifrounerd? fone?’ ac alle hii weren ifreuered fone ” 


‘require aught of his goods [ask for weapon], unless he would it ‘him’ 
give.—‘And all the fugitives that ‘are [were] fled ‘from Rome,’ that 
back would come, these kings peace to yearn, and become these kings 
men, as ‘we ere made it known [ye hear it proclaimed], come they all 
with friendship, and here their life live, and have the same laws that 
stood by their elders days. And Belin, our noble king, delivereth it 
(Rome) to Brennes, who shall dwell here, and be your emperor, and 
he himself will go, and have (take) leave of you, and hence he will 
depart into Britain.” ‘Well’ great was the weeping, when Belin thence 
departed ; but they were all soon comforted, for (on account of) the 


1 Ry ad. ? ifrouuerd? 


[v. 5973—5996.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 255 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
for pan riche-dom of Rome. for pare richedom of Rome. 
Brennes per bo3ede ¥ Brennes par abod / 
king of Lumbardie. king of Lombardie. 
and Belin gon wenden ? and Belyn gan wende Y 
in to pisfe londe. into piffe londe. 

Lette he 3eond hif caftles ... oueral hif caftles / 
makie kine-wurée werkef. mak.. kine-wor.. ..... [f.30. ¢.1.] 
rihten alle pe hallen’ = 8 .....4.. pe wal... 

& ftréginen pe walles. Shee.) o URTEMST 

bulden pa buref/ 10> Dal, 5 shoe e 

heien patoures; © we ee torues. 

and fwa pis wunliche lond and fo p...++-- londe ? 
mid wurdfcipe welden'. [£33°.c.1.)mid worfipe he welde. 

& Brennef walde Rome And Brennes welde Rome ¥ 
fulle fiftene 3ere. fiften. .ere. 

pa endede Brénef? po hendede Brennes ? 


wel wes Romanifce fole peef. wel was Romleode pas. 
Heo? feolf nomen heore lid’ Heom ...lf nomen hire lond’ 


and heolden on heore hond. and ...ld hit on hire owene hond. 
burh & heore bliffee / 2 borh and hire bliffe ’ 

seodden Brennes wes deed, after pat Brenne dead was. 

& Belin i Biffe londe And Belyn in piffe londe 
makede le3en ftronge. makede lawes ftronge. 

& lazé {wide gode and lawes {wipe gode ¢ 


wealth of Rome. Brennes there ‘dwelt [abode], king of Lumbardy, and 
Belin proceeded into this land. He caused royal works to be made over 
[all] his castles; ‘all the halls to be righted (repaired), and the walls to 
be strengthened,’ the chambers to be built, the towers to be erected, and 
so this fair land with worship he governed. And Brennes governed Rome 
‘full’ fifteen years; then ended (died) Brennes,—glad was the ‘Romanish 
[Roman] folk of this! They took themselves their land, and held [it] in their 
{own] hand, the burgh, and their bliss, after that Brennes was dead. And 
Belin in this land made strong laws, and laws most good, that in his ‘life 


1 he welde? ? Heom? 


Kairu/e. 


256 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 5997—6018.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
pe bi hif liue ftoden. pat bi his dawes ftode. 
Belin ferde to Walef? Belyn ferde to Wales? 

& anne burh makede. and one borh makede. 
he heo makeda ed®ele! ¥ vppen pan watere / 
uppen Ufke pan weetere. pat Vfke was i-hote. 
Of pon ilke flode y Of pan ilke flode 

pe king hire nome funde. pe king his name funde. 
pan king heo wes deore ? pe king hine lofuede 


Keir-Ufch heo nemde. [Lion? and Kair-Ufke hine cleopede. 
and feodéen heo wes iheten Kair- and fuppe he was i-hote Kairlyony 
ich wullen? feggen pe for wan. 11 ich pe fegge porh pan. 
Vmmbe feole 3ere Bi feue 3er par 
efter Belinnes ford-fare®. after Belynes forp-fare. 

hii horden pe men of Rome? 

of Belyn his deape. 
and feiden heom bi-twenen and fayde pus bi-twine ¥ 


While he dude uf tuone. Wile he dude vs teone. 
nu if pe kig iburied nou his pe king ibured ¥ 
wrake we uf on Bruttef. wreke 3e 30u of Bruttus. 


& in to pan londen we fullé faré Yin to pan londe we folle fare 
bringen per forwen & kare. 21 and bringen forpe and mochel care. 
Hider heo gunnen fenden / Hider hii gonne fende ¥ 


({days] stood. Belin went to Wales, and made there a burgh; ‘he made it 
noble’ upon ‘Usk’ the water [that was named Usk]. From the same flood 
the king found (invented) its name; ‘to the king it was dear [the king it 
loved], and Kair-Uske ‘named [called] it. And afterwards it was named 
Kair-Lion—I will say thee for what cause. ‘About many [After seven] 
years [there-Jafter Belins decease, [the men of Rome heard of Belin his 
death], and said ‘them’ [thus] between: ‘‘ Whilom he did us grief! 
Now is the king buried, wreak ‘we us [ye you] on the Britons, ‘and’ into 
the land we shall go, [and] bring ‘there’ sorrow and [much] care!” 
Hither they gan to send of the Romanish country four companies, that 


1 ebd8ele? ? wulle? 
% There is evidently an omission here, by neglect of the scribe, 


[v. 6019 — 6043.) 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


of Romanifce ende. 

feower ferredene 

pa we clipied ferden. 

pe weoren on pan ilke da3en ¥ 
legiunf ihaten. 

werren on alche legiun ¥ 

puf feole leod-kempé. 

six pufend & fix hiidred ¥ 

& fixti iferen. 

Peof comen bi wateré ?’ 10 
of weorren heo weoren wife. 
heo duden i piffe londe ? 
alle leod’ forwen. 

and auer o pon ende Y 

hed feoluen weoren ifunde. 
& au’ alche wintre ¥ 

inne Wales heo wuneden. 


[c. 2.] 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


of Romaniffes hende. 

four verkedene! ¥ 

pat we cleopiep ferdene. 

pat weren in pan ilke daize / 
legions i-hote. 

weren in eche legii ” 

pus fale kempes. 


.. . pufend and fix hundred ” 
Brees ti i-vere. 
Peos comé...... re? 


of werre hii were. wife. 
hii .ude in piffe londe 
mochel harm fwipe. 
and euere a pan ende? 
hii weren i-funde. 

and euereche wynter y 
in Wales hii wonede. 


Heo iwunne pe burh Kair-Ufke?Hii bi-wonne pane borh ¥ 

. pat Kair-Vfke was ihote. 

20 par ine hii wonede 
wintres and fomeres. 


and per inne heo wuneden. 


a pat her com liten ¢ 

ma of heore leoden. 

For ilke* legiunf/ {un’. For peos ilke legiiis ¥ 

heo clupedé Kair-Ufc. Kaer-Li- hii hit cleopede Kairliuns. 


Kaerliun. 


we call ferden, that were in those days named legions ; in each legion were 
thus many watriors, six thousand and six hundred and sixty comrades. 
These came by water, of war they were wise (experienced); they did 
in this land ‘sorrow to all the people [much harm soon], and ever in the 
end ‘themselves [they] were safe, and every winter in Wales they dwelt. 
They won the burgh [that was named] Kair-Uske, ‘and’ therein they 
remained [winter and summer], ‘ until here arrived more of their country- 
men.’ For (on account of) these same legions they called ‘Kaer-Uske 


1 verredene? 2 peos ilke? 


* Kaer-Legiun? 


258 LA3AMONS BRUT, [v. 6044—6065.] 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


seodéen! her com oSer mon-cun 
pe heo cleopeden Kaerliun. 
Nu ich pe habben® ifeid’ hu hit Nou ich pe habbe i-fed hou hit his 


if igan ¢ agon y 
of Kaerliii bi Glom-margan. —_ of Kairliun in Glommorgan. 
fo we 3et to Beline? go we 3et to Belyn? 
to pan bliffulle kinge. to pan bliffolle kyinge. 
Pa he heuede imaked paf burhy Po he hadde imaked pes borh Y 
& heo inemned Kaer-Ufe. and hit cleopede Kair-Ufke. 


pa pe burh wef ftrong and hende?/po pe borh was {trong and hende?’ 
peo gon he ponnen wenden. 10 po gan he panne wende. 
he wende riht to Lundene ? riht to Londene Y 


pe burh he leoue fwiSe. pe borh he fwipe louede. 

He bigon per ane ture ?’ He bi-gan per ane tur Y 

pe ftrengefte of al pe tune. pe ftrengefte of alle pan tune. 
and mid muchele ginne ’ and mid mochele ginne ? . 
a 3t per vnder makede. a 3et par hunder makede. 

peo clupede men hit po me hit cleopede 

Be3ef-3ate*. Belynefyat. 

nu and auere mare ¥ nou and euere more ¥ 

pe nome ftonded* pare. 2 pe name ftondep pare. 

Leouede Belin pe king ” Leuede Belyn pe king / 

in alre bliffe. in allere bliffe. 


Kaer-Legiun [it Kaer-Liuns]. ‘Afterwards here came other people, 
that called it Kaer-Liun.’ Now I have said to thee how it is transacted 
in respect of Kaer-Liun in Glamorgan; go we yet (again) to Belin, to the 
blissful king. When he had made this burgh, and ‘named [called] it Kair- “ 
Uske, when the burgh was strong and fair, then gan he thence fare; ‘he ‘ 

proceeded’ right to London, the burgh he loved greatly. He began there 

a tower, the strongest of all the town, and with much art a gate thereunder 
made. Then men called it Belins-gate (Billingsgate) ; now and ever more i 
the name standeth there. Belin the king lived in all bliss, and all his 


1 seod¥en? 2 habbe? | 
3 Belzef-zate man. sec. : read Belinef-jate. * ftonde’. ; 


[vi 6066—6088.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 259 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
and alle hif leoden and alle his leode Y 
leoueden hine fwide. lofde hine fwipe. 
An hifdeief wef fwamochelmete?In his dazes was fo mochel mete 
pat hit wes vnimete. pat hit was onimete. 
pat fole purh heore drunken / 
moni pufend fwulten. 
Pe king leouede longe ¥ pe king leuede lange’ 


pat hit com touward hif ende. pat hit com touward his hende. 
pat i Lundene he wes ded? patin L..denehew...... [£30%.1.] 


sari wef hif dudede!. sori was his leod.. 
wa wes heom 6 liue’ 100 Nir. heom on liue / 
for pes kinges de®e. for pas ..<205 deape. 


Heo ferden to hif horde ¢ [f.34.c.1.JHii nomen of ...s garifom 
and nome per muche deal goldef. mochel deal of golde. 


heo makeden ane tunne hii makede one tiibe Y 

of golde and of 3imme. of golde and of gimef. 

pene king heo duden per inne’ pane kinge hii dude par ine? 
pat wef here louer® Belin. hire louerd Belyne. 

vp heo hine duden he3e/ and leide hine mid honure 
an ufenmefte pan turre. he3e in pan toure. 

pat me mihte hine bi-halden Y 20 pat me mihte hine bi-holde ? 
wide 3eon ped londe. oueral pan londe. 


pat heo duden for muchelef luue ¥ 


people loved him exceedingly. In his days was so much meat, that it was 
without measure! ‘The folk through their drink (drunkenness) by many 
thousands perished!’ The king lived long, until it came toward his ending, 
that in London he was dead. Sorry was his people, woe was to them in 
life for the kings death! They ‘went to his hoard, and took there [took 
of his treasure] a great deal of gold; they made a ‘tun [tomb] of gold and 
of gems ; the king they placed therein, ‘ who was’ their lord, Belin; ‘they 
raised him up high on the upmost part of [and laid him with honor high 
in] the tower, so that men might him behold ‘wide over [over all] the 
land. ‘That they did for (out of) great love, for he was their dear lord.’ 


1 duje¥e? ? louerd? 
s2 


260 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


for he wes here dure lewd. 
Puf i-uor al Belin king Y 


(v. 6089—6111.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


Pus ferde forp Belyn kinge ¢ 


seodSen!' com hif fune Gurguint. fuppe com his fone Gorgwind. 
Gurguint Bercruc® heh® hif funeyGorgwind Bertrich hehte hif fone? 


wellen eBdele wes pe gume. 
welle wiper* wef per a mon?’ 


pat was a god gome. 
pis was a witti ma? 


and wifliche heold hif cune-dom.and wifliche held his kinedom. 


Sehte and fibbe he luuede / 
unftronge monnen he leoSede. 
grid he heolde alfe hif feeder ’ 
god mid pon bezfte. 10 


Septe and pais he lofuede 
onfelp he fonede. 

grip he heold alfe his fader? 
god mid pan befte. 


bute pat pa Denfce men? 
dunrih at-foken. 

pat heo to Brut-londe / 
nolden maren fenden. 
gold ne garfume / 

ne gauel of pon léde. 
Gurguint hine bi-pohte 
what he don mehte. wat he don mihte. 

he feonde hif {ode ” he fende his fonde 
wide 3en hif londe. 20 wide oueral his londe. 
he bednede hif fole / he bannede folk 

& 3erekede® ferde. he 3arkede ferde. 


bote pat Denfe men ¥ 

his riht afoken. 

pat hii to Brutlond / 
nolde more fende. 

gold no garifome 

ne gauel of pat londe. 
Gorgwind hine bi-pohte / 


Thus ‘all’ departed Belin the king ;—afterwards ‘came’ his son Gurguint. 
‘Gurguint Bertruc (Gorgwind Bertrich] hight his son, ‘well noble was the 
[who was a good] man! [This] was a ‘well’ prudent man ‘there,’ and 
wisely he held his kingdom; concord and peace he loved, ‘bad men 
{wickedness] he ‘loathed [shunned]; peace he maintained as his father, 
good with the best, but (except) ‘that’ the Danish men ‘downright [his 
right] denied, that they to Britain would no more send gold or treasure, 
or tribute of the land. Gurguint bethought him what he might do. He 
sent his messengers wide over [all] his land, he summoned ‘his’ folk, ‘and 


1 seod®en? ? R. Bertruc. 3 hehte? 
* witer? 5 Written at first 3ereke, but de interlined. 


{v. 6112—6136.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 261 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
muchele and grete mochel and grete 
mid monnen vnimete. mid folk onimete. 
He to fcipe wende/ Hii to fipe wende / 
& fram pan londe helde. and to londe heolde. 
ofer pae faltne ftrem ouer pane falte ftreme ” 
fel hit him puhte. has 3am fel pohte. 
A pene oSerne dei? In pan operne ... (e. 2.) 
he com to Denemarke. ....++--. marche. 
he iwende uppe pat lond? a 0) 3 Raa rae 
efter hif iwille. io” aivers)*,! Ses 
he axede gauel of pan londe? [c.2.)...... auil of p...... 
pe hif fader hauede an honde. _ pat his fader hadde an hond. 
pe Gudlac kig him 3af/ pat Gutlac king him 3ef/ 
mid godene iwille. mid gode his wille. 
Pa feide Gudlakes fune ” Po faide Gutlac his fone / 
mid gromiende fpeche. mid gram fpeche. 
3if mi feeder dude hif wille / 3if mi fader dude his wille/ 
nulle ich hit naht iwurden. -lfe ich wolle mine.. 
ah fare he ut of mine londey _—_ far pou o.. .. ..ne londe? 
3if he wulle libbe. 2 3if pou wolt libbe. 
Pat word com to Gurguint ” Po was wrop Gorgwind ” 
pe wes Brut-londef king. pat was Bruttene king. 
Wehr beo’ mine peinef / Ware beo 3e0 mine cnihtes ¥ 
wher beo’ mine fweinef. 
wher beod mine kempes 7 ware beo 3e0 mine kempes. 


[he] made ready an army, mickle and great, with innumerable ‘men [folk]. 
‘He [They] went to ship (embarked), and held ‘from the [to] land, over the 
salt stream, [as] ‘it’ seemed good to ‘him [them]. On the second day he 
came to Denmark; he went upon the land, after his will; he asked 
tribute of the land, that his father had in hand, that king Godlac him gave, 
with [his] good will. Then said ‘Godlacs [Gutlac his] son, with angry 
speech: “If my father did his will, ‘I will it not to be [so will I mine],— 
‘but’ go ‘he [thou] out of my land, if ‘he will [thou wilt] live!” ‘The 
word came to [Then was wrath] Gurguint, who was Britains king :— 
‘Where be [ye,] my ‘thanes [knights], ‘where be ye, my swains,’ where 


262 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 6137—6160.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
and mine kene men. 
eorned and ezrne / wendep and hernep 
and al pif lond bearne’. and his léd for-beornep. 
and alle pa men fled and alle pe men fleap? 
pe 3e cume®d neh. pat 3e comep aneh. 
and heore children and heore wifyand hire children and hire wif” 
werpe®d in to pe wet?ren. werpep in watere. 
and breke® heore walles ¥ and brekep hire walles 
& berned' heore halles. and bernep hire halles. 
fezlled* heore tures ¥ 10 


& fwaled heore buref. 

& fwa heo feulden under-ftondé Y and fo hii folle hunder-ftonde / 
pat ich am king of Brut-londe. pat ich ham louerd of piffe londe. 
and pat heo a3en me to 3elden? and hii pat hahte 3elden 


alfe heo duden Belin kige. to me alfe to Belyn king. 
For’ i-wende pat hired / Forp wende pe ferde ¥ 
fwa pe king hehte. alfe pe king hehte. 

heo dude per muchele hermes? hii dude mochel harmef / 
mid hehzere ftrengse. mid he3ere ftrengpe. 

Pe king of pan londe 2 Pe king of pan londe 
mid muchelere genge. mid mochelere genge. 
com to-3einef Gurguint ¥ com to-3eines Gorgwind ? 
mid godliche ftrengse. mid hee his ftrengpe. 


pe king of pa lode®. 


be [ye,] my warriors, ‘and my keen men?’ ‘Ride [Go] ye and run, and 
‘all’ ‘this [his] land burn up, and slay all the men that ye come nigh, 
and their children and their wives cast ye in‘to the’ water! And break ye 
their walls, and burn their halls, ‘ assail (?) their towers, and scorch their 
chambers,’ and so they shall understand that I am ‘king [lord] of ‘Britain 
(this land], and that they ought to yield to me as ‘they did’ to king 
Belin!” Forth went the host, as the king bade; they did ‘there’ much 
harm with great strength. The king of the land with a powerful force 


} berne’ ? 2 ferelle’ ? 
3 This line is superfluous, and a careless repetition by the scribe of the one above. 


[v. 6161—6182.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 263 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


heo fuhten wunderliche inoh? _ hii fohten wonderliche i-noh Y 
and Gurguint Denemarkene king and Gorgwind Denemarches king 


of-floh. [£ 34% c.1.] of-floh. 
& hif Denfce ferde and his Denfe ferde ¥ 
he felden' to pan grunde. he fulde to pan grunde. 


He ferden® to pan bur3en ” Hii verden to pan borewe ¢ 
and him alle on-bu3en. 


and alle he aweldeY and al hii acwelden ¥ 

betere and wurfe. pe betere and pe worfe. [£ 31. c.1.j 
His men heo bi-comé ¥ His men i® bi-come / 

and #%ef hi fworen. 10 and opes him fwore. 

& efter cure heo him 3euen? _and al fo him 3eue? 

preo hundred 3ifles. preo hundred hoftages. 

and al fwa muchel gerfume?’ and al fo mochel garifom ¢ 
fwa Gudlac king bi-hehte. fo Gutlac king bi-hehte. 

pa Beli inne‘ freode ¢ po Belyn hine freuerede 
and alle his iueré. and alle his iueres. 

And Gurguint pa iuende ? And Gorgw..d a3e wende ¢ 
a3een in to piffe londe. into piffe ...de. 

afe he ferd@® on hif wei / alfe he verde on his way ” 
bi pan ende of Orcanai. 2 bi on hende of Organeye ? 
pa fonde he i fee flod ¥ he feh ine féé flode 

pritti fcipe gode. pritti fipes gode. 


came against Gurguint, with ‘goodly [his great] strength. They fought 

desperately enow, and Gurguint slew ‘the Danish [Denmarks] king, and 
his Danish army he felled to the ground. ‘He [They] marched to the 
burgh, ‘and all to him submitted’, and all ‘he conquered [they killed, 
the] better and [the] worse. His men they became, and oaths swore to 
him; and ‘after his choice they [also] gave him three hundred hostages, 
and as much treasure as king Godlac promised, when Belin him ‘reed 
[consoled], and all his companions. And Gurguint ‘then’ went back into 
this land. As he fared on his way by ‘the [one] end of Orkney, ‘then 


1 felde? '? ferde? % hii? 
4 hine? . 5 ferde? 


264 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 6183—6204.] 


. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
of wapmen and of wifmen? of wepne and of wepmen? 
pe fchipe wel a-fulled!. al grund-lade. 

mid? fele cunne wepnen 

{wide ibone. 

Puhte Gurguint pon kige Pohte Gorgwind pane king?’ 
her of {wide feellic ping. her of {wipe fellich ping. 
whet pat® fcipen weoren ? wat pes sipes weren 

pe he ifunde pere. pat hii* ifeh pare. 


He fende ane fonde him’ toy —_He fende his fonde 

and hehte heom fuggen. 10 and hehte him® fegge. 

wannen heo weoren ? wanene hii weren ? 

and whet heo per fohten. [wih? and wat hii pa’ pare fohte. 

and 3if heo wolden fpeken him and 3if hii wolden fpeke him wip? 
and 3ernen pes kinges grid. and 3erne his grip. 


Pa enfwerede ? Po fpac hire alre louerd ¥ 
heore alre lauerd. 

We wiulled fpeken him wid / 

and 3eornen hif grid. Grip of him we 3ernep. 
heo to-gaderen come ? hii to-gadere comen 
and grid heo nomé fe. 2 and grip hii nomen fone. 
Pa que®d Pantolauf? Po faide Pantilaus / 


wid Gurguint he® fpeke puf. and to Gorgwind he fpac pus. 


found he [he saw] in the sea-flood thirty good ships; with ‘men [weapons] 
and with ‘women [men] ‘the ships well filled [all deeply loaded], ‘ with 
many kind of weapons most excellent.’ Hereof it seemed to Gurguint the 
king, a thing very strange, what ‘the [these] ships were, that he ‘found 
{saw] there. He sent ‘a [his] messenger, and bade them say, whence they 
were, and what.they there sought; and if they would speak with him, and 
yearn ‘the kings [his] peace. Then ‘answered [spake] their Chief: “ ‘We 
would speak with him, and’ ‘ask his peace [Peace of him we ask].”” They 
came together, and peace they soon made. Then ‘quoth [said] Pantolaus, 
{and] ‘with [to] Gurguint he spake thus: ‘“ We are sea-weary men, with 


1 a-fulled? ? mid? 3 pa? paf? 4 he? 5 heom? 
6 ham? 7 Redundant ? * heo pr. m., but 0 expuncted. 


[v.6205—6228.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 265 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
We beod fie-werie men We beop féé-weri men ? 
mid wedere bi-driuene. _[c.2.]_ mid wedere al for-dreuen. 
Ich hehte Pantolaus Ich hote Pantilaus / 
and pu art leuerd oue! uf. and pou hart louerd ouer vs. 
we beo% a pine londe bi-cumé? we beop in pine lond i-come ¥ 
pine lazen we bi-luuied?. pine lawes we louiep. 
and uf alle pu miht walden ? and vs alle pou miht welden / 
eft’e pie iwille. after pine wille. 


Of Spaine ich wef ut idriuen’ Of Spaine ich was vt idreue? 
and al mi drihtliche fole. 10 and al mi drihliche folk. 


fwiSe muchel we habbeo’ ifoht Y fwipe mochel we habbep ifoht? [c.2.] 


bi piffe fe rime. bi pis fee rime. 

a lond pe uf were lide / a lond pe vs weren® icweme ¢ 
pe we mihté on libben. an for to libbe. 

ne maze we hit ifindé Y ne maze we hit ifinde Y 

for neuer nene pinge. for neuere none ping. 


lond to ure leoden ? 

per we majen to lidé. 

We habbed ihaued moni burft:?’) We habbep ihaued many burft / 
moni hunger & moni purft. 2 mochel hunger and porft. 

moni wale moni wind* 

bi wilde piffe watere. 

Nu we bidde® pin ere ¢ Nou we biddep pin ore / 

ne maze we drien hit na mare. na mawe?® hit dre3e more. 


weather [all] driven about. I hight Pantolaus, and thou art lord over us; 
we are arrived in thy land, thy laws we approve, and us all thou mayst 
rule after thy will. From Spain I was out driven, and all my noble folk ; 
very much we have sought by this sea shore a land that should be to us 
agreeable, ‘that we might on live [on for to live] ;—we may it not find, 
for never any thing, ‘a land for our people, whereto we may apply.’ We 
have had many harms, ‘many [much] hunger and ‘many’ thirst, ‘many 
conflict, many strife, on this wild water.’ Now we pray thy favor; we 
may bear it ‘no’ more (longer) ; and if it were thy will, and thou wouldest 


1 over? 2 bi-luuie’d? 3 were? 
‘ win? Cf. vv. 404. 2542, 5 mawe we? 


266 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 6229—6252.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
and 3if hit weoren' pin iwille’ and 3if hit were pin wille? 
aud pu hit don woldeft. and pou hit don woldeft. 
to 3ifuen uf an ende? to 3iuen vs on hende? 
i pine kine-londe. of pine kine-léde. 
we wulled pine men beon we wolde pine men beon ¥ 
pine mon-fcipe herien. pine mahpe he3en. 
& pe leofuen wid’ and we po* lofuie wollep’ 
a to ure liue. euere to houre liue. 
Pa enfweerde Gurguint ’ Po anfwerede Gorgwind ¥ 
wes Brut-londef king. 10 pat was Bruttene king. 
Nulle ich na fo don Nelle ich noht fo don’ [fon. 
ah eower monradene ic wulle fon.aczoure maradene ich wolle vnder- 
and ich eow wulle fenden and 30u ich wolle fende? 
in to ane londe. in to one londe. 


for ich nat whet 3e beod 
ne whanné 3e icume beod. 
Ah 3e feullé habben ledes-men ? And follep habbe lodes-men ? 


and ford 3e feullen lisen. forp 30u to lede. 

& ich eow wullen® lanen and ich 30u woll* wolle leone / 
of mine leod-folke®. 2 of mine folke. 

fouwerti® hundred cnihtef?{[¢. 35.c.1.]four hundred cnihtes / 

pe gode beo’ on fihte. pe gode beop and wihte. 

heo fculled eow } lond bi-také ? hii follen 30u pat lond bi-teche / 
per 3e fculled libbé. par 3e follen libbe. 


it do, to give us an end ‘in [of] thy kingdom, we ‘will [would] be thy 
men; thy dignity exalt, and ‘live with thee [we will thee love], ever in 
our lives.” Then answered Gurguint, who was Britains king: ‘I will 
not so do, but your homage I will receive, and you I will send into a 
land, ‘for I wot not what ye be, nor whence ye are come.’ But ‘ye’ shall 
have steersmen, ‘and forth ye shall proceed [forth you to lead] ; and I will 
lend you of my folk four hundred knights, that good are ‘in fight [and 
brave]. They shall deliver you the land, where ye shall live, ‘and your 


1 weore? 2 pe? 3 wulle? 4 Redundant ? 
5 The last two letters of folke are on erasure. © feower? 


[v. 6253—6276.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
and eower la3en fetten y 
to rihten eore leoden. 
Gurguint hed fende / 
in to Irlonde. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 267 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xi. 


Gorgwind heom fende ? 
in to Yrlonde. Irlond. 


par naf nauer nan man? _[gan. par nas neuere her no man? [gon. 
seodden Noes flod hit hauede ouer suppe Noe his flod hit hadde ouer 


& Gurguint ford wende / 
into piffe londe. 


And Gorgwind forp wende 
into piffe londe. 


and Pantolauf per 3edde wunde y and Pantelaus in to Yrlonde¥ 


wel mid pon befte. 10 
and lette hine clepie king / 

& hif wif quene. 

And he fette ftoge' lawen 

to fteowien hif folke. 

for heo haueden inne fe ? 
seorwen ibidene. 

fulle feouen 3ere ? 

heo mifliche foren. 

Heore claSes weoré iwerede® ? 
and vuele heo weoren igerede. 
nakede heo weoren Y 21 
and na®ing ne rohté. 

wha heore leom® fe3e / 

alle pe on heom weoren. 


and par him king makede. 


And lawes he fette ftronge / 
his folk for to ftewe. _—[f.31%.¢.1.] 
for hii hadde in pan féé 7 
mochel wowe ifoffred. 

fulle feoue 3ere ¥ 

hii mifferde pere. 

Hire clopes weren iwered 
and vuele hii weren igered, 
nakid hii were / 

and noping ne rohte. 

poh‘ hire lemman fehe 


al pat were bi peje. 


laws set, to govern your people.” Gurguint sent them into Ireland, where 
no man ever was since ‘Noahs [Noah his] flood had gone over it. And 
Gurguint forth went into this land, and Pantolaus ‘there over dwelt [into 
Ireland], ‘ well with the best,’ and ‘caused himself to be proclaimed [there 
made him] king, ‘and his wife queen.’ And he established strong laws 
[for] to administer justice to his folk, for they had in [the] sea [much] 
sorrow suffered; full seven years they wandered [there]. Their clothes 
were damaged, and evilly they were clad; naked they were, and nothing 
cared who their limbs saw, all that ‘on them [by the thigh] were! ‘And’ 


1 R, ftroge. ? iwereden pr. m. 3 lem pr. m. 4 who? 


Guencelin. 


Marcie. 


268 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


(v. 6277—6299.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


& puf heo ladden' heore laz3en: pus hii ladde hire la3es ¥ 


and longe heo ileften. 

& Gurguint i piffe londe ¥ 
leouede mid bliffe. 

& he huld god grid 

pe while pe i-laft hif lif. 

in Kaer-Liun he wes dead?’ 
seorhful wes hif du3zeSe. 


and pus hit lafte lange. 

And Gorgwind in piffe londe ? 
leuede in bliffe. 

and he heolde god grip? 

pe wile pat lafte his lif. 

in Kayrliun he was dead? 
fori was his do3epe. 


Anne fune he hauede?y aht m6 Ane fone he hadde? 


Guncelin ihaten. 10 


Gwenceljn ihote. 


he walde pif léd and paf dudeSe*? he heold pis kine-lond ¢ 


efter hif fader dzie. 

Pes wef purS ut alle ping / 
cleene mon and god king. 
he ledde fwi®e feir lify’ 

& he hefde a god wif. 
Marcie men heo clupede 
pat if 3et widene cu®. 

nu and auef mare 

if taken of here heare. 20 
Peo quene leornede ane craft ¥ 


[c. 2.] 


after his fader daize. 

Peos was porh vt alle ping / 
cleane man and god king. 

he ladde {wipe god lif / 

and he hadde a god wif. 
Marcie pe cwene ? 

me hire cleopede. 

nou and euere more ¥ 

his tockne of hire here. 

Pe cwene lofuede anne craft / 


heo wef a boken wel itaht. 
heo leornede hire lere ’ 


3e0 was in boke wel itaht. 
3eo lofuede hire lore ? 


thus they led their laws, and ‘long they continued [thus it lasted long]. 
And Gurguint in this land lived ‘with [in] bliss, and he held good peace, 
the while that his life lasted ;—in Kaer-Liun he was dead (died) ; ‘sorrowful 
[sorry] was his people! A son he had, ‘ brave man,’ named Guencelin; he 
‘ruled [held] this ‘land [kingdom] ‘ and this people’ after his fathers day. 
This was throughout all thing clean man and good king ; he led a life most 
‘fair [good], and he had a good wife, Marcie [the queen] men her called ;— 
‘that is yet widely known’ ;—now and evermore is token of her here. The 
queen ‘learned [loved] a craft, she was in book well taught; she ‘learned 

1 The first d of ladden is by second hand, sup. ras. 2 dead? 
> Sic pr. m.: due sec. m. for duje¥e. 


bl ee 


[v. 6300—6322.) LA3AMONS BRUT. 269 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x111. 
leofliche on heorté. leofliche on heorte. 
of hire wifdome of hire wifdome 
fprong pat word wide. fprang pat word wide. 
pat heo wef fwite wif? pat 3e0 was {wipe wis? 
of wordliche dome. of worliche domes. 
Pa makede heo ane leje / po makede 3e0 one la3e/ 
and leide 3eon pat leode. and fette amang pan folk. 
peof laze wes al iworhte' ¥ po pe laze was i-wroht ¥ 


hin writ to londe he was i-broht. 
Bruttes nemnedé pa lajen’ 10 Bruttus cleopede pe la3e ¥ 


efter paf lafuedi. after hire leafdi. 

to foSen wihuten wene / to fope wip ute wene ¥ [c.2.] 

pe laze hehte Marciane. pe laze hatte Marciene. 

Seod%en® per efter’ Seoppen per after? © 

monie hundred wintre. mani hiidred winter. 

com Alfred pe king? com Alfret pe king” Alfred. 
Englelondef deorlig. Engelondes deorling. 


and wrat pa lazen on Englis? 18 and worpte pe laze an Englis / 

afe heo wes er on Bruttife. [de3e/alfe he was raper on Bruttus. 

and wherfde hire nome on hif and tornde pe name in his daize 

and cleopede heo Mercene laze. and hehte hire Marchene la3.. peat pS 

Ah pet i® pe fugge purh alle pig ?’.c ich pe fegge porh alle p. .g/ 

ne makede heo noh erft 4Zlured ne makede hire nokt Alfret pe 
king. king. 


[loved] her lore lovingly in heart; of her wisdom sprang the word wide, 
that she was exceeding wise of worldly dooms. Then made shea law, and 
‘laid over [set among] the folk. [When] ‘this [the] law was ‘all’ wrought 
[in writing to land it was brought]; Britons ‘named [called] the law 
after ‘the [their] lady; in sooth without doubt the law hight Marciane. 
Subsequently thereafter many hundred winters, came Alfred the king, 
Englands darling, and ‘wrote [wrought] the law in English, as it was 
before in British, and ‘changed its [turned the] name in his day, and called 
it Mercene-law. But ‘that’ I say to thee through all thing, made it not ‘first’ 
Alfred the king, but the queen made it, whom men called Marcie, and 


1 A line is here deficient. 3 Seodven? * R, ich. 


Silliuf: 


Sillius. 


270 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 6323—6347.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

ah heo makede pa quene ?’ ac hire makede pe cwene ? 

pe me Mercie cleopede. pat me Marcie cleopede. 

and lured heo feide' on EnglifeYand Alfrit hire makede an Englif? 

pif if feod ful iwif. pat his pat fope foliwis. 

Hefde paf wife quene ’ Hadde pes wife cwene ? 

bi hire weoreld kinge. bi hire worliche kinge ” 

zenne lutelne fune one lutelne fone / 

Silliuf ihaten. Sullius i-hote. 

nefde heo children na ma? nafde he children na mo / 

per foren wes pere quene wa. 10 par fore was pe cwene wo. 

Nefde pis child Silliuf? Nadde pis child Sullius ¥ 

buten seouen 3eera. bote feoue 3ere. 

pa hif fader wes ded’ po his fader was dead ¥ 

and hif du3ze%e bi-lewfde. and his men blefde. 

Hif moder nom paf riche ¥ His moder nam to hire hond 

and mid rede heo walde. [£ 35°.c.1.Jal pifne kinedom. 

& wifte wel hire fone ’ and hire fone wifte / 

a mid hire feolue. wel mid hire seolue. 

Pa pe fune wef fwa ald’ Po pe fone was fo hold’ 


pat he wes an horfe bald. 20 _~— pat he was on horfe bold. 
pa makede heo hine king *’ po makede 3eo hine king ” 


hif folke hit wef iqueme. pan folk hit was i-eweme. 
He wef a wel god mon’ He was a wel god man? 
& fofte he wolde libben. and fofte wolde libbe. 


ne leouede he noht half hif lif’ ne liuede he noht half his lif’ 


Alfred ‘said [made] it in English ;—'this [that] is [the] sooth full certainly. 
This wise queen had by her worldly king a little son, named Sillius ; ‘she 
[he] had children no more, therefore was the queen woe! This child Sillius 
had but seven years of age, when his father was dead, and his men quitted. 
His mother took [all] this kingdom [in her hand], ‘and with counsel go- 
verned it,’ and brought up her son well ‘ ever’ with herself. When the son 
was so old, that he was on horse bold, then made she him king, to ‘his [the] 
folk it was pleasing. He was a well good man, and softly (peaceably) ‘ he’ 
would live, but he lived not half his life, before his death-time ‘came to him 


1 Or leide ; the MS, is doubtful. 


[v. 6348—6369.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 271 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. .Cott. Otho, C. x111. 

pat hi ne com hif deed-fih. pat he ne makede his deap-fip. 

He bi-lefde tweie funen’ Hee blefde here twei fones ” 


pa tuwen pef fader peuwef. after his daize. 
pe aldre hehte Rummaruf? pe eldre hehte Rummarus 


pe 3ungere hehte Damuf. pe 3eongere Damus. 

Rummaruf wes ane while king?’ Rumaruswes ereft king? Le, 

and seoddé Damuf hit onfége. and suppen Damus hit afeng. [¢.32. c.1.] 

Pes Damus on hif deie Peos Damus in his daize / [Da]mus. 

ane chiuefe him ichef. hadde a lemman hende. 

he hauede bi pare wimman’ 10 he hadde bi pare wimman ? 

enne fwide wandliche fune. one fwipe ohte man. 

Morpid? ihaten Morbidus ihote. =e 
- monnene ftrengeft'. ftrengeft of all. m..cunne. 

of maine and of peauwe ? 

of alle piffere peode. 

Pes bizet pefne* kinedom ¢ Morbidus pif. .... 

purh kenfchipe muchele. ... to his owe.....- 

cniht he wes fwi%e ftrong ’ ooo ot Remenes teciieus 


kene and cufti muchel and long. 


of alle pigen heo® weore god?’ 20 


3if* heo® neore to wamed. [mon bote he was to... .. 
A-nan fe he wes wrad wid® eni Wane he were wr..... eni man? 


{he made]. He left [here] two sons, ‘who followed the fathers customs 
{after his day]. The elder hight Rummarus; the younger ‘hight’ Damus. 
Rummarus was ‘a while [first] king, and afterwards Damus received it 
(the sovereignty). This Damus in his day ‘chose to him [had] a ‘concubine 
[fair mistress]; he had by the woman a‘son [man] most ‘unstable [brave], 
named Morpidus, strongest of ‘men [all man-kind], ‘ of main and of thews, 
of all this land’. “This man [Morbidus] obtained this kingdom ‘through great 
authority [in his own hand]; knight he was most strong, ‘ keen, and liberal, 
huge in stature, and tall; in all things he would have been good,’ ‘if he 
had not been [but he was] too cruel. ‘Anon so [When] he was wrath 


1 The last two letters of {trengeft are by second hand, sup. ras. 
2 bejen penne pr. m. 5 he? 4 R3if. 5 wid? 


272 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. tx. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 6370—6393.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


i pan ftude he hine wolde fleen. a-non he wolde hine flean. 


nere he na {wa riche cniht Y 
pat he hine ne floh fors riht. 
weore hit rih weore hit woh? 
i pon ftude he hine floh. 


nere he noht fo riche eniht ’ 
pat he ne folde deaize riht. 
were hit riht were hit woh? 
in pe ftude he hine floh. 


& fone fwa he iwrad! glad ¢ [c.2.] and fo fone fo he were glad’ 


he dude al pat me hine bad. 
Ah hit wef muchel herme? 

of ane mon fwa hende. 

pat purh hif wradée 10 
hif wif? wes awemmed. 

A %on ilke time ’ 

com pe duc of Moraine. 

in to piffe londe 

leode to herme. 

ferde bi pere fa brime ‘ 

and monie burftef dude. 

he makede muchel reeflac 
reh he wes on fihte. 

AE fter fae he forh lad Y 20 
to NordShumberlonde. 

per he go bulde’ 

caftel fwide ftrongne. 

al abuten hi® } londe? 


he dude al pat me hine bad. 
Ac hit was mochel harm ¢ 
of one manne hende. 

pat porh his wrappe 

his wit was i-wemmid. 

In pan ilke time 

com pe duck of Morayne. 
in to piffe londe / 

folke to harme. 

ferde bi pan féé brimme ¥ 
and mani harmes wrohte. 


Hafter {éé he wende ’ 
to Norphumberlonde. 
pare he gan bulde’’ 
caftel {wipe ftronge. 
al aboute pat lond 


with any man, ‘on the spot [anon] he would him slay; no knight was he 
so powerful, that he ‘would not slay him forth-right [should not die right]; 
were it right, were it wrong, on the spot he him slew; and yet so soon as 
he became calm, he did all that men bade him. But it was great: harm of 
a man ‘so’ fair, that through his passion his wit was corrupted! In the 
same time came the duke of Moraine (Moray) into this land, to the harm 
of the folk; he fared by the sea-coast, and many harms ‘did [wrought] ; 
‘he made (committed) much rapine; cruel he was in fight.’ Along the sea 
he ‘forth’ proceeded to Northumberland ; there he gan to build a castle 

1 jward ? 


2 R, wit. 3 i? him? 


[v.6394—6417.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


he nom to hif a3ere hond. 
Morpiduf pe balde 

iweerd him abolwen. 

and fende 3eond pef wrde ¥ 

& fomede ferde. 

and com to pon duke 

al bi lihte die. 

Per wes moni god Brut'? 
and moni bifi kempen. 

peo fihten wid pone duke? 10 
al pene dai longe. 

pa hit wes muchel uppe non 
pe king pene duc ouer-com. 
he turnde to fleme 

and he efter him ferde. 

Per he floh pene duc’ 

and al hif du3zeSe. 

zr pe dai weoren® agon y 
deed heo weoren alle. 

mid fwiSe ftronge fih*? 20 
pet wes mid rihte. 

and alle pa he funde 

a marwe in po lode. 


LA3AMONS BRUIT. 


273 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


he nam to his owene hond. 
Morbidus pe bolde 

warp pan a-bolwe. 

and fende oueral his erpe ’ 
and fomnede ferde. 

and com to pan ducke 

al bi lipte of daie. 

Par was mani bold Brut 
and mani cnihtes wrope. 
pane duck hii fohten? wip 


[c. 2.] 


and fone hine ouer-come. 
he tornde to flendeY 

and hii him after wende. 
Pare he floh pane duck ¥ 
and al his leode. 


mid {wipe ftronge fihte ? 
so pat was mid ribte. 
and alle pe he funde 
amor3e in pan londe. 


oder mid fure he lette hom flen Yoper mid fure he lette heom flean? 


very strong; the land all about he took in his own hand. Morpidus the bold 
became [then] enraged, and sent over [all] ‘this [his] land, and assembled 
forces, and came to the duke all by light of day. There was many ‘good 
[bold] Briton, and many ‘busy [wrath] knights. They fought with the duke 
‘all the day long; when it was much upon (near) noon’ ‘the king the duke 
{and soon him] overcame ; he turned to flee, and ‘he [they] after him pur- 
sued. There he slew the duke, and all his people ; ‘ ere the day was passed 
dead they were all,’ with fight most strong,—[so] that was with right! And 
all that he found on the morrow in the land, either with fire he caused them 
2 R. fohten. ‘ fihte? 
T 


} Brute pr. m., but e erased. 5 weore? 


274 LA3AMONS BRUT. (v. 6418—6441.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
oSer he heom lette quic flan. oper cwick he lette heom flean. 
Mid mute heo hit feiden ¥ Me hit feide mid muhpe’ 
peo pat hit ifezen. paie pat hit ifehe. 
pat Morpiduf mid hif honden: pat Morbidus mid his honde ? 
purh hehz3ere ftrengde. and mid his e3e ftrengpe. 
seoue hundred of-floh? [£36.c.1.] feoue hundred he floh? 
and fwéde mid! wepnen. fo wod he was in fihte. 
He lette makien ane dich’ He lette makie one dich‘ 


pe wes long and fwiSe deop. {wipe wid and fwipe deap. 
and he lette al pat wel ¥ 10 and he lette al pat wal’ 


weorpen per an innen. wearpe par ine. 
Pa huld he ane ftunde? Po held he one ftunde ¥ 
hif lond mid ifunde. pis londe mid i-funde. 


inn griSe and inne fride’ 
and freoliche on folke. 
Wnder pon heer cé tidinde Onder pan come tidinge * 


falcuS to londe. felcup to londe. 

and hit wef fone icu% y and hit was sone hi-cudde ¥ 
Morpidi pan kig. to Morbidus pan kinge. 

pat wef icumen of pare fe’ 2 pat was icome of pare fee ? 
a deor {wise fellich. a deor {wipe fullich. 
frommard Irlonde ¥ framward Yrlonde ¢ 

com hider liden. hider com lipe. 

and bi pon fe rime ? and mochel wo hit dude’ 


to be slain, or alive he caused them to be flayed. “They [Men] said it 
with mouth, they who saw it, that Morpidus with his hand, ‘through 
{and with his] great strength, [he] slew seven hundred, ‘and smote with 
weapon [so furious he was in fight]! He caused a ditch to be made, ‘that 
was long [very wide] and yery deep, and he caused all the corpses to be 
cast therein. Then held he a time ‘his [this] land in safety, ‘in peace and 
in quietness, and freely among the folk.’ In the mean time came ‘here’ 
strange tidings to land, and soon it was made known to Morpidus the king, 
that out of the sea was come a beast most wonderful, from Ireland-ward 
hither arrived, and ‘by the sea-shore assaulted the [much woe it did to the 


1 mid? 


[v. 6442—6465.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 275 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. ° MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 
rafde to pon folke. to pan poure folke. 
Oft an one deie / Ofte in one daie y 
hit makede an hundred feie. an hundred hit a-fulde. 
and weft to pare fe wende ¥ and eft hit wende 
pe weeld-fcxSe luSere. to hif owene denne. 


penne hit eft wende a3an ¢ 
werde! hit heom grette. 
Puf hit to londe beh 
and w’ede peos leodé. 


pat fole hit agafte® ¥ 10 

tunef hit awefte. 

pat fole awi® hald ¥ pat folck a-wei flepY — [£.32.c.1.] 
an aulchere halue. on euereche halue. 

pe king hit harde feggen ¢ Pe king pif ihorde 
and fri wes an hurten‘*. and fori was on heorte. 
pidSerward® wende pe king ¢ piderward he wende ¥ 
him feolue to weeine. him feolue to harme. 
to-ward pon deore ¥ toward pan deore y 

per he de® fehte. pare he deap featte. 

Pa he com fud fwa feory 2 Po he com so for? 

per pe feond wunede. par deor wonede. 

pa hahte he al hif hird-folc y po hete he al his folk Y 
faren to are bur3e. X fare to one borewe. 


and hehte heom per abideny —_ and bad 3am par abide ¢ 


poor) folk. Oft in one day a hundred it ‘made dead [felled], and eft ‘the 
murderous monster [it] went to ‘the sea [its own den]; ‘ when it eft came 
again, wrath it greeted them. Thus it came to land, and worried this people; 
the folk it terrified, towns it ravaged’; the folk away fled on ‘each [every] 
side. The king heard ‘it say [this], and was sorry in heart; thitherward 
‘the king [he] proceeded, himself to (to his own) harm, toward the beast, 
—there he death procured! When he came so far ‘south,’ where ‘the’ 
‘fiend [beast] dwelt, then ordered he all his ‘household’-folk to go to a 


1 wrede? 
? The letters ga of agafte are by second hand, on an erasure of four letters. 
5 hit awi pr. m., but hit struck out sec.m. ‘ heorten? ° wiSerward pr. m, 


r?2 


276 LA3AMONS BRUT. {v. 6466—6489.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

and ane he gon ridé. and he wolde one ride. 

Pa he ford wende : Forp he gon wende Y 

wapnen he ladde. and wepne mid him ladde. 


pat wes a kene fweord ¥ 

and éne koker fulne flan. 

enne bo3e {wide ftrong? [c.2.] one bo3e fwipe ftronge 
and a fpere {wide long. fwerd and fpere fwipe longe. 
zt his fadele an ex’ 

and zt pe oder helue an hond-fex. 

and ford he gon wenden? 10 forp he gan wendey 


to-warde pan ende. touward pane ende. 

per he herde fuggen par he horde fegge ¥ 

pat pe feond wonede. pat pe beft wonede. 

Swa longe he ferde ¥ So longe he verde 

pat he hit ifunde. pat he hit funde. 

and he lette fufe him to and he lette him fufe to’ 
flan fwuse kene. flon fwipe kene. 

and alle him to fende ¥ an alle him to fende ¢ 
and feoddé' him neor wende. —_and fuppe him forp wéde. 
he ferde on hif ftede 2 he verde vpon his ftede ¥ 
fulc he walde awede. alfe he wolde a-wede. 


Pa hif flan weoren ifcoté ‘ 
pe iwerd® his bo3e to-broken. 
he igrap hif fpere ftronge ¥ He grop his fpere ftronge y 


burgh, and bade them there abide, and alone he ‘gan [would] ride. ‘Then’ 
forth he went, [and] weapons [with him] ‘he’ carried ; ‘ that was, a keen 
sword, and a quiver full of arrows,’ a bow most strong, [a sword,] and ‘a’ 
spear most long, ‘at his saddle an axe, and at the other side a hand-knife. 
And’ forth he gan proceed toward the end (spot), where he heard say that 
the ‘fiend [beast] dwelt. So long he fared that he it found, and he let fly 
arrows most keen to it, and sent (discharged) them all at it; and afterwards 
went ‘near [forth] to it,—he rode on his steed, as if he would go mad! 
‘ When his arrows were shot, then became his bow broken in pieces ;’ he 


1 feosse? 2 iwerd? 


ed) 


[v. 6490—6512.) 


MS. Cott, Calig. A. 1x. 


per he pihte hit o pon londe. 
and he erde! to pon deore? 
and fwat? hit a pan fweore. 
pat pe deor feol abac Y 

and pe fceft al to-brac. 

And pat deor up aftod ¥ 

and reefde o pene ftede. 

and for-bat him pa brefte 
ban and pa fenuwen. 

pat pa lihte and pa liuere 
feollen on eorden. 

And pe king droh hif fweord ¥ 
pe him wes itafe. 

and pet deor he fmat a-nan ¥ 
uppe pat heued-been. 

p pet fweord in deef? 

and pa hilt on hif hand bree. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


par hit was ipiht in londe. 
and he hernde to pan deor 
and fmot hit on pan fweor. 
pat hit fone fulle a-bac / 
and pe fcaft a two brac. 
And pat deor vp aftod ¥ 

and refde to pan ftede. 

hand for-bot him pe breoft ¥ 


10 pat pe longene and pe liure 


folle to pan grunde. 

And pe king droh his fwerd Y 

pat he louede fwipe. {c.2.] 
and p.. deor he fmat a-non 
ouend pe hefd-bon. 

pat pe fwerd in held Y 

and to-brac a midde. 


And pat deor to-dede hif cheefles And pat deor vndude hif choules / 


and to pan kig’ weoSede. 


and for-bat hine amiddé a twa’ and for-bot pane king a midde. 


pat wes pat fiht idon. 


’ Puf ferde pe king ¥ 
for he wes to kene. 


pa... pe fihte .don. 


grasped his strong spear, where ‘he it [it was] pitched in the land, and 
he rode to the beast, and smote it on the neck, so that ‘the brute [it] fell 
_ back [soon], and the shaft ‘all’ brake ‘in pieces [in two]. And the beast 
up arose, and rushed ‘on [to] the steed, and bit him through the breast, 
‘the bones and the sinews,’ so that the ‘lights [lungs] and the liver fell ‘on 
earth [to the ground]. And the king drew his sword, that ‘to him was ready, 
[he loved greatly], and the beast he smote anon upon the head-bone, so 
that the sword in sunk, and ‘the hilt in his hand brake [brake in the 
middle]. And the beast undid (opened) his jaws, ‘and to the king drove’; 
and bit ‘him [the king] in the middle, ‘in two,’ so that the fight was done. 


1 ernde? 3 fmat? 


278 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
for pe mon if muchel fot’ 
pe nime®’ to him feoluen. 
mare ponne he ma3en! waldé ¥ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 6513—6534.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


pat nimep......... ue. 
more pan he ma.. don? 


he fel® halden pe ra®er. [f.36°.c.1.]for par after he ... 


for vnred if fwide reh / 

hif lauerd he let reofen. 

and auer vmbe ftunde 
felled hine to pe grunde. 

pet fole wef {wide feri ¥ 

for forwen pes kinges. 10 
and hit wes blive 

for dedSen of pon deore. 

Pe king hefden® fif funen 
bi feire hif quene. 

pe aldeft hehte Gorboinan‘ 
welle «Sel wes pere a mon. 


Pis folk was {wipe fori / 

for pes kinges wowe. 

and eke hii weren blipe? 
for deape of pan deore. 

pe king hadde fif fones / 

bi his hozene ewene. 

pe eldeft hehte Gorboniam / 
pat was a bold man. 


Argal hehte pe oer ? Argal hehte pe oper’ 


a benian. be wes Gorbonianes brover. pat was Gorbonia‘ his bro®er. 

Elidur. pe pridde hehte Elidur’ —=—'9_— pe pridde hehte Elidur? 

+ pe feorSeJugenes . pe fifte Peredur.pe ferpe Ingenes. pe fifpe,Peredur. 
eredur. 


Pe eldefte broder Gorbodian*? pe eldeft Gorbonia? 
he iweerd king in piffe londe. _iwarp king in piffe lond. 


(concluded). » Thus fared the king, because he was too keen ; for ‘the [that] 
man is mickle ‘sot [fool], that taketh to himself more. than he may ‘wield 
[do]; ‘he shall hold the worst [for thereafter he shall speed]! ‘For folly 
is most bold (rash), its lord it lets rush forward, and ever after ua time, 
felleth him to the ground!’ “The [This] folk was exceeding sorry for the 
kings calamity, and ‘it was [eke they were] blithe for the death of the 
beast. The king had five sons by his ‘fair [own] queen. The eldest hight 
Gorbonian, [who] was ‘there’ a well noble [bold] man ; Argal hight the 
second, who was ‘Gorbonians [Gorbonian his] brother. The third hight 
Elidur, the fourth Jugenes, the fifth Peredur; the eldest ‘ brother’ Gorbo- 
nian, ‘he’ became king in this land; ‘he [King Gorboniam] was ‘ most’ 
5 hafde? 4 R. Gorbonian, Gorbonia. 


maze? —? fell pr. m. for fcal? 


[v. 6535—6559.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 279 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
he wes {wide foSfeft / ing Gorboniam waf fohfaft? 
and fwidSe wel idewed. and {wipe wel i-peuwed. 
radful and rihtwis redful an riht-wis ¥ ; 
and a mete rii-hende. and of mete hende. 
He heold pif lond ftille ¥ He heold pis lond ftille / 
al efter hif iwille. al after his wille. 
mid treoufcipe gode / mid treufipe gode ¥ 
pe while his tir lefte. pe wile hit ilafte. 
and puf he hine huld an hefne / 
pat com hif liuef ende. 10 po he dead was 
inne Lundeii he lid? in Londene me hine leide. 
fri weoren hif leode. 
Per wfter com pe oder ¥ Par after com pe oper ¥ 
Argal hif broSer. pat was Argales broper. Argal. 


pe wes next him iboren ? 
feodden he wes king icorn. 
pif wes pe for-cudSefte mon? pis was forcoupeft man ¥ 


pe efre hedde kinedom. pat euere hadde kinedom. 

vnriht him wef leof / onriht him was lef? [f. 33.¢.1.] 
and rihtyvifneffe him wes la3. 20 and alle riht him was lop. 

what fe heefde richedom wofe hadde richedom 

he hine makede wreecche mon. he hine makede wrecche. 

his gode men he hatede his gode men he hatede ? 

pa uuele he heh3ede. pe lupere he louede. 

al hif motinge ¥ al his moting ’ 


soothfast, and most well mannered, prudent and just, and ‘in [of] modera- 
tion ‘most’ fair. He held this land still, all after his will, with good faith, 
the while ‘his authority [it] lasted; ‘and thus he held him evenly’ ‘until 
his lifes end; [when he was dead,] in London ‘he lieth [men laid him.]— 
‘sorry were his people!’ Thereafter came the other, [that was] Argal his 
brother, ‘that was next to him born, subsequently he was chosen king.’ 
This was ‘the’ wickedest man that ever had kingdom! un-right was dear 
to him, and ‘justice [all right] was hateful to him; whosoever had wealth, 
he made him a ‘wretched man [wretch] ; his good men he hated, the eyil 


Elidur. 


280 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 6560—6582.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
waf ful of 3itfinge. [c.2.] was of foche pinge. 


He fomnede to-gedere 

gerfumme muckele. 

& guere he pohte embe uuel ¥ 

and fwulche weoren hif dede. 

puf ladde Argal hif lif? pus ladde Argal his lif? 

fram 3u3eSe to his ded-fid. forte com his deap-fip. 
To-gadere commen pariche men:"To-gadere come pe riche men? 


pe aze weoren & mehti. 10 pat heze weren and mihti. 
& makeden heore huftinge Y and makede hire fpeche ” 
mid heehere wrad%e!. mid mochelere wreppe. 
plihten mid honden plihtem? mid hondé 

pat heo wel hulden. pat hi alle wollde. 

purh alle ping’ Argal hire king Y 

flemen Argal heore king. driuen vt of londe. 


And ut heo hine flemden ” 
feor of pisfé earde. 


and nomen.pene oSer and nimen pan oper? 

Elidur hif broser. 2 Elidur his broper. 

pif wef pe pridde Y Pis was pe pridde ’ 

heo afengen*hine mid fibbe. hii onder-fonge hine mid fibbe. 
& makeden hine to king? and maki® hine to kinge Y 

pe cniht wes fwide kene*. pat his a cniht kene. 


he ‘raised up [loved]; all his discourse was ‘full’ of ‘covetousness [such 
thing]! ‘He gathered together much treasure, and ever he thought about 
evil, and such were his deeds.’ Thus led Argal his life, ‘from youth to 
{until came] his death-time. Together came the rich men, that were noble 
and mighty, and made their ‘husting [conference] with high [much] wrath. 
They plighted with hand,—that they ‘well held—through all thing to banish 
{all would drive out of land] Argal their king. ‘And out they him 
banished far from this land, and took the other, Elidur his brother. This 
was the third; they received him with peace, and made him king. ‘The 
knight was most [that is a knight] keen, [and] he was moderate in his 


1 wradbde? ? R, plihten. > makede? * ikene pr. m. 


- 


{v. 6583—6606.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 281 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
he wes of hif fpeche ¢ and he was of his fpeche ¥ 
zlche mone imete. to eche man imete. 
wid pa godé he wef duhti’ wip gode he was dohti ’ 
and fturne wid pa dufie. and fterne wip pan dufie. 
Argal pe wes idriuen ut?’ Argal was idriuen vt? 
drof hi wes on heorte. and fori was on heorte. 
he ferde feor 3e6d moni lon'Y he verde in to mani lond ¥ 
and fondede pan leoden. and fordede® pe leode. 
he bi-foSte moni enne king? _he bi-fohte mani king / 
and moni enne keifer. 10 and mani kaifere. 


moni enne richene pein ? 
moni enne baldne fwein. 


he bi-fohte al pat fole ’ he bi-fohte al pat folk / 
per he ford® ferde. par he forp eode. 

pat heo him folde helpé ¥ pat hii him holpe / 

to muchelere neode. to his mochele neode. 


mid ftrengde oder mid ginne:’ mid ftrengpe oper mid ginne / 

hif lond to bi-winne. __ [[£37.c.1.] his lond to bi-winne. 

Ne mihte he neuere findé mon? »Ne mihte he neuere finde man? _[c.2.] 
pe him wolde 3ette* beon. 

pe him olit wolde fulften ¥ pat him wolde helpe. 

he hider fore. 

ne nading him bi-heten ’ 

pat heo him wolden helpen. 


speech to each man; with ‘the’ good he was doughty, and stern with the 
foolish. Argal, ‘who’ was driven out, ‘grief was to him [and sorry was] 
in heart; he went ‘far over [into] many lands, and tried the people; he 
besought many ‘a’ king, and many ‘a’ kaiser, ‘many a rich thane, many 
a bold swain’; he besought all the folk where he forth passed, that they 
him should help in his great need, with strength or with stratagem to 
obtain his land. Might he never find any man ‘that would be to him 
good,’ that him would ‘assist aught [help], ‘ that he hither might fare, nor 
promise him anything, that they would him help.’ “Then [woe] was 


? lond? ? fondede? 5 ford? 
4 Above jette is written god by a second hand, as if to be substituted for it. 


282 LA3AMONS BRUT. (v. 6607—6630.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

Pa wes Argal pe king ’ wo was Argal pe king’ 

zerm on his mode. and fori on mode. 

seorhful on heorte sorhful on heorte 

for hif muchele burfte. for his mochele harmef. 

Argal hine bi-®ohte ¢ Argal hine bi-pohte 

whet he don mihte. wat he don mihte. 

pat he wolde a3é fat ¥ pat he wolde ajein fare ¥ 

and fondien hif bro’er. and fondi his broper. 

and war he mihte of hif monnen yand ware he mihte of his men 

wie milce ifinden. 10 eni g“ce finde. 

Hit wes vmbe fif winter Hit was fif winter’ 

feodSe he heonne ferde. pat he was vt fleme. 


seodsen he paf feor3e ¥ 
him feolfen hefde itimbred. 


pa lette he hine atlichen / he in wonder wife ” 
and wende to piffé londe. com to piffe londe. 
wid hif a3ene kit wip his owene cun? 
he hine vncuS makede. he hine oncup makede. 


ne icneow hine nauere na ma? ne cnew hine no man? 

pe hine er ifezen hefdé. 2 pat hine héér hi-feh3e hadde. 
He freinede pif leod-fole ¥ He axede pat folk’ ~ 
efter heore kineleouerde. after hire kinelouerd. 

& heo him pene kig tahten ’ and hii pane king tahte / 
per he hundede' on comelan. _— war he was an hontinge. 


Argal the king, [and] ‘wretched [sorry] in his mood; sorrowful in 
heart for his great harms. Argal bethought him what he might do; 
that he would fare again (return), and try his brother, and-whether he 
might of his men any grace find. It was ‘about’ five winters ‘after that 


he hence went [that he was out driven], ‘after he this sorrrow had built . 


for himself ;’ ‘then he caused himse/f to be disguised, and [in strange wise 
he] came to this land; with his own kin he made him a stranger; no man 
‘ever’ knew him, that ere had him seen. He asked ‘this [the] folk after their 
sovereign, and they directed him to the king, where he ‘hunted [was a- 
hunting] ‘in a valley’ with his ‘courtiers [companions] in the wood of 


 huntede? 


™ 


[v. 6631—6653.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 283 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
wid his hird-iferen 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


mid his ivere 


i pd wude of Kalatere. in pan wode of Kaletere. 
Peone king he imette Pane king he i-mette ¥ 
and mildeliche hine igreette. and faire hine grette. 
Leuerd king quad Argal Louerd king ewap Argal ¥ 
heil wurd pu an ifunde. hol be pou and i-funde. 


pu ert mi broder Elidur’ 
exedi beo pu uere. 

ne der ich noht kénen 
for piffes londes mdné. 10 
pat ich her king weore ¥ 
lefte heo me icneowen. 
ah ich bidde piii ere ¥ 
nu and euere mare. 

Pa qua’ Elidur pe king ’ 


pou hart mi brop” Elidur / 
edi worpou euere.. 

ne der ich noht hit kenne 
for peos londes menne. 

pat ich euere king were’ 
lefte hii me enewe. 

ac ich bidde pin ore ¥ 

nou and euere more. 

[c-2.] Po ewap Elidur pe king ¥ 


pi cume me if iqueme. 


pi come his me icweme. 


To hif broder he com’ To his broper he {com 7} 

and leofliche hine cufte. and loueliche hine cufte. 

per Elidur pe king? fo pat Elidur pe king 

weop mid his e3enen. 20 wep mid his e3ene. 

and mid muchelé edmeden / 

edelede hif broSer. 

and lette hine leden He lette his broperleode? [£ 33°. c.1.] 
leofliche and ftille. lofueliche and ftille. 


in to ane caftle in to one caftle ” 


Kalatere. He met the king, and ‘mildly [fair] him greeted: ‘Lord king,” 
quoth Argal, “hale be thou and sound! Thou art my brother Elidur—ever 
be thou prosperous! J dare not make [it] known, for the men of this land, 
that I ‘ere [ever] were king, lest they should me know, but I ‘ask’ thy 
mercy, now and evermore!” Then quoth Elidur the king : “ Thy coming is 
to me pleasing.” To his brother he came, and lovingly him kissed ; ‘there 
{so that] Elidur the king wept with his eyes, ‘and with much kindness 
comforted his brother,’ ‘and [He] caused ‘him [his brother] to be led 
lovingly and still into a castle that was named Clud, and caused him to be 


1 broder? 


284 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


Clud wef ihaten. 

and lette hine baSien ? 
and beddien feire. 

and dueliche hine biwitten ” 
and hif namen dernen. 

What iherden' auere fuggen ¥ 
a fe3é oder a fpelle. 

pat euere zni broder*® ¥ 

dude puf for oder. 

pat Elidur pe king ¢ 10 
dude for Argale. 

Pe king hine b*eid fec / 

alfe peah hit feod weore. 

pe king lei on bure ¥ 

feriliche on beadde. 

he fende hif fonde ¢ 

3eond his kinelonde. 

lette ladien him to ’ 

al his leod-peines. 

Mid wurdé and mid writé? 20 
pe® dude heom wel to witen. 
pat ne mihte he no lengere ’ 
libben on eerde. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 6656—6679 J 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


Clud was ihote. 

and lette hine bapie ’ 

and beddie vaire. f 
and dizenliche hine bi-witie ” ’ 
and his name deorne. 

Wo ihorde euere fegge ¢ 

a faze op’ fpelle. 

pat euer eni broper ¥ 

dude pus bi oper. 

afe Elidur pe king 

dude for Argale. 

pe king hine breid feac? 

afe hit fop were. 


and fende his fonde ’ 

oueral his kine-lond. 

and lette lapien him to’ 

alle his cnihtes. 

Mid worde and mid write / 
he dude 3am alle to wite. 
pat ne mihte he no lengere ¥ 


[read ¥ libben an erpe. 


ah of heom pe king wolde habbé ac of 3am he wolde habbe read 


bathed, and fair to be bedded, and privily caused him to be kept, and his name 
to be concealed. Who ever heard say in saw or ‘in’ story, that ever any 
brother did thus ‘for [by] other, ‘that [as] Elidur the king did for Argal! The 
king feigned him sick, as ‘though’ it were sooth; ‘the king lay in chamber 
sorely in bed.’ ‘He [and] sent his messengers over [all] his kingdom, [and] 
caused all his ‘thanes [knights] to come to him. With words and with 
writ he did them ‘well [all] to wit, that he might no longer live on earth, 
but of them ‘the king [he] would have counsel, for speedily he should be 


1 jherde? 


2 bro®Ser? 


3 he? 


{v. 6680—6701.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 285 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
for hizenliche he weoren' ded. for hidenliche a* worp dead. 
and heo him redden ? and pi® him radde 
wher hif lich mihte bezft* leggé. ware he mihte libbe®. 

Pet word wef cud’ 

3eond pif lond. 

and come peos cnihtes y Come peos cnihtes / 
to bth pif kinges. to pis kinges borewes®. 
to muchelen huftinge? ¥ and pare to-gadere ¥ 


hii helde gret fpeche. 
Pe king and hif broSer¥ 10 ©Pe king and his broper 
weoré in ane bure. [[f.37°.c.1.] weren in hire boure. 
pezr heo heefden wel izeten?’ _ par hii hadden wel iheote ’ 


and feodSé idriiken. and par hafter idronke. 

Pe king eoden® to bedde ’ Pe king 3eode to bedde Y 

& hif broSer hune® hudde. and his broper hudde. 

and mid him hif leouefte men? and mid him pe leofueft men 
pe he wufte on liue. pat he hadde on lifue. 
feowerti gode cnihtef y fourti gode cnihtes / 

mid burnen wil idihten. mid brunie wel idiht. 

mid fweorden & mid fcheldé ¥ 20 mid fwerde and mid fealde / 
alfe heo to fehte feulden. afe hii to fihte folde. 

Pe kig lei in hif bedde ’ Pe king lai in his bedde 


dead, and they him might advise, where ‘his body [he] might ‘best’ lie. 
‘The word was known over this land, and’ these knights came to this 
kings burgh, ‘to a great husting [and there together they held great 
speech]. The king and his brother were in ‘a [their] chamber; there 
they had well eaten, and ‘afterwards [thereafter] drunken. The king went 
to bed, and his brother ‘him’ hid, and with him ‘his [the] dearest men 
that he ‘knew [had] alive ; forty good knights, with burnies well dight, 
with sword and with shield, as if they should go to fight. The king lay in 
his bed, as ‘though’ he might not live; in[to] the burgh he sent word by 


1 weore? ? hijenliche he? 3 hii? 
4 The letter z is on erasure, by second hand. 5 ligge? 
® A line is here, apparently, deficient. 7 borewe? 


® eode? * hine? 


286 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 6702—6725.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


alfe peh he ne mihte libbé. afe he ne mihte libbe. 

in pere burh he fende word? _ in to pare borh he fende word / 
bi hif befte wikeneren. bi one of his enihtes. [eo 2.] 
and hehten!' hif drihliche fole? and hehte hif folk Y 

ftilleluker dremen. ftillokere talie. 

for his? hehued oc fee fweden*? for his heued hock fo fwipe ¥ 
pat he ne mihte idrizen. pat he ne miht hit polie. 

to iheren pene muche drem 

of fwa feole manné. 

Pe king lette witen hif durren ‘ 10 He lette witie his dores ¥ 

pat ne mofte per na mon in cumen.pat no man ne folde in come. 
ne wid inne pon caftel-buri ¥ 

na quic mon ibori. 

bute pe king mid hif feondéy —_ bote pe king mid his fonde?’ 


efter* him fende. after him fende. 

Pe king araf of bedde ¢ pe king arof of bedde 

and burne he warp on rigge. and one brunie caft on rug. . 
and nam onne hif honde? and nam on his honde? 

ane wi-exe ftronge. one wepne ftronge. 

and cluppede in to bure? 20 and cleopede to boure 
Argal hif broSer. Argal his broper. 

And nomen heore fonde ” And nemen hire fonde 

and in to pere burh féden. and after on eorl fende. 
efter pon hehfte pringe ¥ pat he an hizenge / 


‘his best attendants [one of his knights], and ordered his ‘noble’ folk stillier 
to talk, for his head aked so exceedingly, that he might not [it] endure, 
‘to hear the great noise of so many men.” “The king [He] caused his 
doors to be guarded, that no man ‘might therein [should in] come, ‘ nor 
within the castle-bury no man born alive,’ except the king by his messen- 
gers after him sent. The king arose from bed, and [a] burny he cast on 
his back, and took in his hand a “battle-axe [weapon] strong, and called 
‘in’to the chamber Argal his brother. And they took their messengers, 
and sent ‘into the burgh,’ after ‘the highest thane [an earl], that he 


1 hehte? ? Interlined by a second hand. 
3 fwide? * efter pr. m., but the first letter erased. 


ey 


[v. 6726—6749.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 287 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

pat he comen! to pen kinge. come to pan kinge. 

Seone fwa he to bure com So fone fo he to boure com ? 

and® pe kig hine inom. pe kig him feolf hine nom. 

and he him wre® to’ and him leop to: 

afe he hine wolde anho. alfe he hine wolde for-do. 

& hi abuté urnen Y and him a-boute vrne x 

cnihtes fwide fturne. [e.2.] cnihtes fwipe fterne. 

al fe heo wolden mid heonden? alfe hii wolde mid honde ¥ 

al hine to-heowen. al hine to-hewe. 

puf feiden® Elidur pe king’ 10 Pus feide Elidur pe king ¥ 

Nu ich pe wulle quellen. Nou ich pe wolle ewelle. 

bute pu beo ftille ¥ bote pou beo ftille ’ 

and don al mine wille. and do al mine wille. 

puf andfwerde pe pein Po anfwerede pe cniht ’’ 

Ich hit wulle don fein. Ich wolle don alle riht. 

Bi-cum her mines broder mon? Bi-com her panne mi broper man 

3if pu pi lif wult habbe. 3if pou wolt pi lif habbe. 

pif if Argal pe kig / pis Argal pe king his? 

pe of ezerde wef iflemed. pat of lond waf i-flemid. 

pe is nu hider icumen 2 pat his noupe a-3ein icome ? 

and eower king feal iwurdSen. _ his kinedd to habbe. 

Pe pein fwi®e ftille / Peof eorl fwipe ftille ” 


dude al pes kingef wille. [don dude al pe kinges wille. [f.34. 1.) 
and feoden* pe king hii lette and fuppe pe king hine lette don? 


[in haste] should come to the king. So soon as he came to the chamber, 
the king [himself] took him, and he him leaped towards, as if he would 
‘hang [destroy] him; and about him ran knights most stern, as if they 
would with hands hew him all to pieces. Thus said Elidur the king: 
“ Now I will thee kill, unless thou be still, and do all my will.” ‘Thus 
[Then] answered the ‘thane [knight]: ‘Iwill do ‘it fain [right all].”— 
«Become here [then] my brothers man, if thou thy life wilt have. This 
is Argal, the king, who from land was banished, who is now ‘hither’ 
[back] come, ‘and your king shall be [his kingdom to have].” ‘The 
thane [This earl] most still did all the kings will, and afterwards the king 


1 come? 2 Redundant ? 3 feide? 4 feoSSen? 


288 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


in to ane derne bure. 

& lette enne eniht Y 

eerne after an oSer eorle. 

and fwa he per agon ¥ 

afe pe oSer hefde idon. 

Pus dude Elidur pe king Y 

bi allen peos eorlen. 

bi ane and bi ane?’ 

pat he heom heefde al clane. 
Pa dude he an oder? 10 
nom he hif broder. 

mid muchelere bliffe ” 

to Eowrwik hine brohte. 

per weoré peof leoden ? 
ilisenned to-gadere. 

At-foren al hif folke ” 

he hif kinehelm on-feng. 

& fette hi on his broSer hefd ? 
& heef hine to kinge. 

Buer feodSen'! iward Argal? 20 
adeleft erle? kingé. 

pat vuel he al for-lette ¢ 

pat gode he imette. 

iwerd he fwide milde ¥ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 6750—6773.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 


in one deorne boure. 

and one cniht erne 

after on oper eorle. 

and al fo he par a-gan ? 
afe pe oper hadde idon. 
pus dude Elidur pe king 
bi alle his eorles. 


Po dude he an oper ? 

nam he his broper. 

mid mochelere bliffe ‘ 

to borhwe hine brohte. 

par weren alle his cnihtes 
i-fomned to-gadere. 

To-fore al pa folke ’ 

pe croune he nam an honde. 
and fette on his broper heued Y 
and hafde hine to kinge. 


Pat vuel he al for-lette / 
pat gode he hi-mette. 
he i-warp fwipe milde ¢ 


caused him to be put into a secret chamber, and ‘caused’ a knight to run after 
another earl, and so he there acted as the other had done. Thus did Elidur 
the king by all ‘these [his] earls, ‘ by one and by one, so that he had them 
all clean.’ Then did he another thing ; he took his brother, and with much 
joy to ‘York [a burgh] him brought, where all ‘these people [his knights] 
were assembled together. Before all ‘his [the] folk he took ‘his [the] 
crown [in hand], and set ‘it’ on his brothers head, and raised him to be 
king. ‘Ever afterwards was Argal noblest of all kings;’ the evil he all 
relinquished, the good he sought; he became most mild to ‘the’ young 


1 feoSSen? 2 elre? 


[v. 6774—6797.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
pan 3unge and pan aldé. 
& wi® alle monnen ful iwis ¥ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


to 3onge and to holde. 
and in alle pinge foliwis ¥ 


iwer®d pe king riht-wif. [£38.c.1.) he i-warp riht-wis. 


pif lond wes iftaSeled 
& ftod i po ilke. 

fulle ten 3ere ? 

pa iwer®d pe king vn-fere. 
Swa pe king seoc lei’ 
preo wiken & enne dei. 


pus he leuede ten 3er y 
and fuppe bi-com on-ver. 
So pe king feac lay 
preo wike and on dai. 


ne mihte he per of beon hel? 10 ne mihte he par of beo hol? 


ah ded wes pe king Argal. 
Pa comen al peos leodé ¥ 
lisen to-fone. 

and nomen eft Elidur ’ 

& duden hine to hif adSelen'. 
heuen hine to kinge ¥ 

mid haere bliffe. 

and hit ane ftunde / 

ftod on him feolue. 

& Elidur wes eSeleft ¥ 

of alle hif mon- cunne. 
Juienef and Perred'? ¥ 
ifezen pat Elidur. 

wef eft iwurSen leod-king ¥ 


ac dead i-warp Argal. 

Po comen al peos leode ¥ 
to fpeche to-gadere. 

and nemen Elidur to king / 


mid he3ere bliffe. 
| Ngenes and Peridur ¥ 


ifezen pat Elidur. 
was eft king iworpe / 


289 


and to ‘the’ old, and ‘with all men [in all things) full certainly ‘the king 
[he] became just. “This land was settled, and stood in the same full 
[Thus he lived] ten years; ‘then [and afterwards] became ‘the king’ ill ; 
the king so sick lay three weeks and a day, he might not thereof be whole 
(cured), but dead was ‘the king’ Argal. Then came all this people [in 
speech] together, and took ‘eft’ Elidur, ‘and restored him to his dignity ; 
raised him’ to be king, with great bliss; ‘and a time it stood on himself, 
and Elidur was the noblest of all his people.’ Jugenes and Peredur saw 
that Elidur was eft become ‘sovereign [king] ‘over this land’. They 


1 abdSelen? ? Peredu' pr. m., but u erased. 


Elidur. 


290 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


ouer piffe londe. 
Heo fomneden muchel folke 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 6798—6821.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


Hii somnede moche folk 


of feole cunne monné. of many kinnes manne. —_—_—[e.2.] 
and ledden here ferde ’ and ladde hire ferde ¥ 
wide 3eond piffé erde. oueral pis erpe. 
To-gedeF¥ cd Elidur ? To-gadere com Elydur? 
Jugenes & Pedur. Ingenes ad Peridur. 
seerliche heo feohte ¥ ftarcliche hii fohten ’ 
& feeldé heof cnihtes. and flo3e hire enihtef. 
Pa fette i pon fuhte ’ 10 po fette in pan fihte ¥ 
Elidur to flenne. Elidur to flende. 
and hif broSeren him efter’ —_ and his bropers after ‘ 
mid alle here mehte. mid al hire mihte. 
Jugenes & Perred' ¥ Ingenes and Peridur 
nomen pene king Elidur. neme pan king Elydur. 
heo hine ledde to Lundene ¥ and ladde hine to Londene 
feeri weoren hif leoden. fori on heorte. 
In are {wide ftronge tur ¥ In one fwipe ftronge tour 
heo duden pene king Elidur. hii dude pan king Elydur. 
moni 3er and moni dei’ 20 mani 3er and mani dai? 
pe king in peere ture lei. pe king in pane tur lay. 
and his broSen' gunné lidé Y and his twei broperes ? 
wide 3eond peos leoden. [c.2.] pis lond bi-twine 3am dealde. 
Juienes hefde half piflonde’ —Ingenes hadde half pis lond ¥ 
assembled much folk, of many kind of men, and led their army ‘wide over 
{over all] this land. Together came Elidur, Jugenes and Peredur; ‘sorely 
[strongly] they fought, and ‘felled [slew] their knights. Then in the fight 
began Elidur to flee, and his brothers ‘him’ after with all their might. 
Jugenes and Peredur took the king Elidur; ‘they [and] led him to London, 
—sorry ‘were his people [in heart]! In a tower most strong they 
placed the king Elidur; many year and many day the king in the tower 
lay, and his [two] brothers ‘journeyed wide over this country [divided this 
land between them]. Jugenes had half this land, right by the Humber, 
? broSeren ? 
swt 


[v..6822—6844.] ’ LA3AMONS BRUT. 291 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


riht bi pere Humbre. riht bi pare Vmbre. 

al pefne fu ende ? al pane fup hende ” 

he heold an hif heonde. he held in his honde. 

& Pefdur hefde nord ? and Peredur bi norpe 

al bi pere Habre for’. al to his honde. 

& feod&en per efter? and fone par after ¥ 

al to-geederen he hit ahte. al to-gadere. 

for Jugenes ne leouede ¥ for Ingenes ne lefuede 
buten feouen 3eren. bote foue 3ere. 

Pat! nom Peredur al pis lond ¥ 10 Peredor nam to his hond ¥ 
and fette an his a3ere had. al piffe kinelond. 

& he iward him fwuSe luder? and he i-warp fwipe luper / 
& leh al hif folke. and lop alle his folke. 

Pz com pe ferliche ded? Po com pe feorliche deap / 
& falde hine to grunde. and fulde hine to grunde. 


fwa vuele he luuede hif lif? 
pat pe fcucke hine i-fenge. 
Pz fomnede al pif leod-folc’ Po comen alle peos cnihtes ¥ 


in to Liidene ferden. to Londene forp rihtes. 
& nomen ut Elid" Y 20 and nemen Elidur? 
per he lei in are tur. par he lay in pe tour. 


and dudé per a felcu® ping ¥ and dude per a felcup ping ¥ 
makeden hine pridde cheerre king.3et makede hine king. 


all the south end he held in his hand; and Peredur ‘had [by] north, all 
‘by the Humber forth [in his hand]; and ‘subsequently [soon] thereafter, 
altogether ‘he possessed it,’ for Jugenes lived but seven years. ‘Then’ 
Peredur took all this ‘land [kingdom], ‘and set’ in his ‘own’ hand; and 
he became most wicked, and hateful to all his folk. Then came the sudden 
death, and felled him to the ground ; ‘so evil he lived his life, that the Devil 
him seized.’ Then ‘assembled all this people, and went into London [came 
all these knights to London forth-right], and took ‘ out’ Elidur, where he 
lay in ‘a [the] tower, and did there a strange thing, made him ‘a third time 
[yet again] king! Then became he as doughty as the day is ‘fair [bright]; 


1 pa? 
vu 2 


292 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


Pa! iward he fwa duhti? 
fwa pe dei feire. 

alle fole he dude riht ’ 
wel wes piffe londe idiht. 
inne bliffe? leouede 

hif leode to murh’e. 


& pa he feulde of liue wende 


he heefde feiren ende. 

Pa com hif broSer fune ” 
Gorbonianes. 

pe wes pe formefte 

of pen fif broSeré. 

pe cniht wes ihaten Lador 
he wes piffe londef king. 
ah Lador ne luuede ¥ 
buten ane lutle wile. 
/Efter him com Morgan’ 
sune Argalef. 


{v. 6845—6867.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xut. 
Po i-warp he fo dohtiyY [£34%.c.1.] 
fo pe dai brihte. 
alle folke he dude riht ” 
wel was pis lond i-diht. 
ine bliffe he lifuede ? 
his folke to murpe. 
and po he folde of lifue wende ¢ 
he hadde fair ende. 
Po com his broper fone ¥ 
Gorbonianef. 
pat was pe formefte ¥ 
of pan fif bropers. 
pat was ihote Lador Y 
king he was imaked, 
and Lador ne lefde ¥ 
bote lutel wile. 
After him com Morgan / 
Argal pe kinges fone. 


a 3er he hulde pas leoden’ 19 a 3er he heol pis kinelond ¥ 

and feodéen he dun lei. {c.1.] and fuppe he deazede. 
Leen Enmaunuf hehte pe oSer Y [£38*. Annaurus hehte poper / 

pe wes Morganuf broder. pat was Morganes broper. 

peos weoren mannes*funes’ — peos weren Argales fones ¥ 


to all folk he did right, well was this land ruled; in bliss [he] lived, to 
the mirth of his people, and when he should from life depart, he had a 
fair end. Then came his brother Gorbonians son, who was the foremost 
(eldest) of the five brothers; ‘the knight [who] was named Lador, he was 
‘this lands [made] king. But Lador lived but ‘a’ little while. After him 
came Morgan, ‘Argals [Argal the kings] son; a year he held this kingdom, 
and then he ‘down lay [died]. ‘Enmaunus [Annaurus] hight the other, that 
was Morgans brother. These were Argals sons, these ‘ here’ were kings. 


1 paand the first letter of iwar’, are on an erasure. 2 bliffe he? 
3 On erasure; perhaps for anes mannes? but no doubt originally written, Ar- 


gales. ‘ 


Ee 


| 


[v. 6868—6890.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 293 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xi11. 
peos er' weoren kinges. pes weren kinges. 
Pes ilke Enmaunuf? Peos Annaurus heold pif lond? — Enmaunus. 
heold hif kinelond puf. folke to harme. 


pat naf na pein in piffen londe ¥ 
pat nalde hine feein fle mid his 
honden. 
and al hif fole he hatede ’ 
and al he hit hende. 
wid al fole he wes widerward? wip alle men he was wiperward 


pe wurfe hine leouede. pe feond hine lofuede. 
and his a3ene heredmen? 10 and his owene priuemen 
hine to deaSe hateden. he hatede to deape. 
NeoSeles on ende Nopeles a pan ende 


pat fole of piffé londen. 
fufden hie and flemden 
feor of piffen erde. 

for he wes swa wiSerward 


heo driuen hine of pif er*®. of his londe hi hine flemde. 
mid feorwen and mid feore mid forewe and mid fore ¥ 

ne co he her nauer mare. ne com he her na more. 
To-gad’e comen pe hehfte? 2 To-gadere come pe hehtefte : 
eorles of piffé londe. eorles of pis londe. 

and curen heom enne king and chofen Ingenef fone ¥ 


of ane cnihte pe wef kene. 


This ‘same’ Enmaunus held ‘his kingdom thus [this land to harm of the 
folk]; ‘that no thane was in this land, that would not fain slay him with his 
hand, and all his folk he hated, and all he it impoverished;’ to all men he 
was hostile,—theW orse [Fiend] him loved!—and his own ‘courtiers [privy- 
men] ‘hated him [he hated] to death. Nevertheless in [the] end, ‘the 
folk of this land drove him and banished far from this country; because 
he was so odious’ they drove him from ‘this [his] land, with sorrow and 
with sore ; he came here ‘never [no] more. ‘Together came the highest 
earls of this land, and chose ‘ them a king, of a knight that was keen, he 


1 her? 2 werde? 


id 


294 LA3AMONS BRUT, [v. 6891—6913.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
he wes Juienes fune ’ 
of Peredures kunne icume. of Peredur his kunne i-come. 
(reall Twallo hehte pe king y Iwallo hehte pe king 
he wes god purh alle ping. he was god porh alle ping. 
wel he bid on deade wel he dude in deade ¥ [c.2.] 
efter hif alderen. after his heldre. 
of alre godneffe of alle gode peues ? 
pe gume wes ilered. of alle godniffe. 
he hefde gode pewes 
hif peode wes pe betere. 10 
At! hit wes ladlich burft ’ Ac hit was a deolful ping 
pat he ne mofte libben. pat he ne mofte leng beo king, 
na leng’e pene feouen 3ere ? no lengere pane feoue 3er 7 
ne moften® he luuien here. ne mofte he libbe her. 
deed wes Iwallo pe king? _[c.2.] dead was Iwallo pe king Y 
his du3eSe he bilefde. fori waf his leode. 
SeoSSen her rixlede aking?’ = Suppe was Rim king? 
Rime. Rime wes ihaten. 
he wes Peredures befFn ¥ Peredures deorling. 
he wes Eliduref bro®¥er. 20 
Goronces. SeodSen com Goronces Suppe com Gorontes Y 
sune Elidures. fone Elydures. 
Catulus. SeoSSen wes Catulus / Suppe waf Catillus / 


was’ Jugenes son, come of ‘Peredurs [Peredur his] kin. Iwallo hight the 
king, he was good through all thing; well he ‘resembled [did] in deeds 
after his elders; in all ‘goodness the man was versed [good virtues, in 
all goodness]; ‘he had good virtues,—his people was therefore the 
better!’ But it was [a] ‘hateful misfortune [doleful thing], that he might 
not ‘live [long be king]; no longer than seven years might he here live ;— 
dead was Iwallo the king, his people ‘he quitted [was sorry]. Next 
‘reigned here [was] ‘a’ king ‘who was named’ Rime, ‘he was’ Peredurs 
‘bairn [darling], ‘he was Elidurs brother.’ Afterwards came Gorontes, 
Elidurs son; then was Catulus, his father ‘hight [was] Gorontes; next 


1 Ac? 2 mofte? 


[v. 6914A—6936. | 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
hif feeder hehte Goronciuf. 
SeodSen cd Coillus ¢ 
hif broSer hehte Catul?. 
Seodsen com Porex king ¥ 
he wef of peon kunne. 
SeodSen cd Cheri? 
he wes Porexus cun. 
Ah Cherin leouede longe 
inne piffe londe. 
ah pa oer fix kinges ¢ 10 
pe zr weoren on londe. 
ne leouede na here ? 
fulle wehte 3ere. 
ah longe leouede here Cherin / 


muchel he dronk mede and win. 


weoren al hif du3eSen ' ? 
bilefed oppe dréche?. 

and al he leaf hif wurSfeipe / 
for pon win-fcenche. 

ne dude® nauer oder godY —.20 
ne greiSe on hif peode. 

Ah felliche piges*? 

weoré of piffé kinge. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


295 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
his fader was Gorontes. 
Sup com Coillus / 
his broper was Catulus. 
Suppen com Porex an Keryn 


Coilluf: 
Porrex. 


Cherin. 
pat were of pan ilke cun. 
Ac Keryn lefde lange 
ine piffe londe. 
pe oper fix kinges ¥ 
pat her weren in londe. 
ne lefde non here / 
fulle feoue 3ere. 
ac lange lifde Keryn / 
mochel he drong mep and win. 


pat al he leof his worfipe / 
porh his mochele dringe. 


Sulliche pinges 
weren of pes kinge. 


came Coillus, his brother ‘hight [was] Catulus; after that came ‘king’ 


Porex, ‘he was of the same kin;’ 


{and] ‘afterwards came’ Cherin, ‘he 


was of Porexes [who were of the same] kin. But Cherin lived long in 
this land, ‘ but’ the other six kings, that ere were in land, lived none here 
full ‘eight [seven] years. But long lived ‘here’ Cherin, much he drank 
mead and wine; ‘all his powers were consumed in drinking,’ ‘and [so that] 
he lost all his honor ‘for the wine-draught [through his mickle drinking]; 
‘he did never good to other, nor benefit to his country. But’ strange things 
were (happened) of this king, ‘for so he lived here well many years,’ 


1 3u3eNen? See Notes, 


3 dude he? 


? The letters ch are on an erasure, 
‘ pinges? 


Fulgenius. 
Aldust. 
Andragus. 


Vrian. 


296 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


fwa he leoueden' here ¥ 

wel feole 3ere. 

{wa neuere vuleoden 

pif lond ne ifeoSten. 

ah pif lond? wes on gride? 
and ifulled mid gode. 

Pa com pe ilke dei ” 

pat pe king deed lei. 

pa heefde he preo funen ¥ 

bi he3ere his quene. 10 
pe aldefte hehte Fulgeniuf? 
Alduft® Andraguf. 

Ah ful lutle wile? 

liuede paf ilke. 

ele of heom an ftunde ’ 
wes king in piffen londe. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 6937—6960.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


pat neuere onleode ’ | 
ne fohte hif riche. 

ac pis lond was in paife ¢ 
ifulled mid gode. 

Po com pe ilke dai? 

pat pe king dead lay. 

po hadde he preo fones 
bi his he3e cwene. 

pe eldeft hehte Fulgenius ¥ 
Aldus and Androgus. 
Ac fol lutele wile’ 
lifuede peos ilke. 

ech [of] 3am one ftunde 
was king in piffe londe. 


[£.35.¢.1.] 


at* wid inne feouwer 3ere ?[f.39.c.1.Jac wip ine four 3er 


alle heo weoren dede her. 

Pe 3ungefte of pan brederen Y 
pe wes pe bezfte. 20 
Andraguf he hehte 

enne fune he hehde’®. 

Urrian hehte pat childe 

pe iwer® piffe leodef king. 


alle hii weren deade. 


After 3am Vrian 
king was in piffe lond. 
he was Androg® fone ¥ 
wisdom he louede. 


that foreigners never sought ‘this land [his realm], but this land was in 


peace, ‘and’ filled with good! 


Then came that day, that the king dead 


lay. Then had he three sons by his noble queen; the eldest hight 
Fulgenius,—Aldus [and] Andragus. But full little while lived these same ; 
each of them was king a time in this land, but within four years they all 


were here dead. 


‘The youngest of the brethren, who was the best, he 


hight Andragus; ason he had.’ ‘Urian hight the child [After them Urian], 
‘who’ ‘became [was] king ‘of [in] this land; [he was Androgeus son, wis- 


1 Jeouede? 


2? londe pr. m. 


8 Aldus &? * ac? 


5 Written at first hehte, but then altered by the same hand. 


[v. 6961—6984.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 297 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
a 3er he leouede Y on 3er he lifuede ¥ 
and feodden! he ded polede. _and fup.. .. deap polede. 
/Efter pon kinge Vrian After king Vrian y 
wef Eliud his kunnes-mon. was Elyud his kinefmam®. Eliud. 
Pa com Cledauf? Po com . ledaus Y Cledaus. 
Doten & Gurguinciuf. Doten and Gurguftius. Doten. 
Peos ilka preo kinges Pes preo kinges Gurgucius, 
heoldé paf peode. heolde peos peode. 


-a efter ane? 
peet deed heo weoren alle. —_10 
ah nawiht heo her ne duden? _ac no god hii here ne dude? 


nouvser god ne ufel. pe wile pe hii were a lifue. 
Seod%en’ com Merian After heom com Merian ¥ Merian. 
pes wes a {wide hende mon. he was a {wipe fair man. 


hundes and hauekes / 

he heeuede vnimete. 

pat wuere elch dei’ 

he pleuwede mid his deoren. 


Ah he was {wa feir mon ¥ pat wimmen hine louede ¢ 
pat wifmen hine luueden. 2% vt of hire witte. 

per of he nom 3emen ¥ par of he nam 3eme 

ah hit nef* hi noht iqueme. hit nas him noht i-cweme. 
ah he luuede his quene / ac he loue his cwene? 
euere bi hif liue. efre bi hif lifue. 


dom he loved;] a year he lived, and then he suffered death. After ‘ the’ 
king Urian was Eliud, his kinsman. Then came Cledaus, Doten, and 
‘Gurguincius [Gurgustius]. These ‘same’ three kings held this land ‘ one 
by one, until they all were dead;’ but ‘nought [no good] they did here, 
‘neither good nor evil [the while that they were alive]. ‘Afterwards [After 
them] came Merian; ‘this [he] was a man most fair; ‘ hounds and hawks 
he had without number, so that every day he played with his deer. But he 
was so fair a man,’ that women him loved [out of their wits]; thereof he 
took heed, ‘ but’ it was not to him pleasing, but he loved his queen ever in 


1 feod®en ? ? R, kinefman. 3 wef pr. m. 


Bledo. 


Cappe. 
Oein. 


Sillius. 


Blagab- 
[reat]. 


298 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 6985—7006.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
SeodSen wes Bledon hiffuney After him com hif foney 
and bled-feft king. Bledo i-hote. 


he hefde inoh god ¥ 

and hit his gumé delde. 

nes neuer feodden! nz king 

swa cufti purh alle pige. 

Seodden wes hif fune kig Suppe was Cap. and Opeyn y 
Cap wes iheten. 

/Efter Cap Oein ¢ 

for elchen vuele he wef fein. 10 

Seodsen com SilliufY 

pe wes Owines sune. 

SeodSe fon efter pet Y [c. 2.] 

com a king Ble®Sgabreat. Blapgabarat and Sullium. 
seodsen peos worle wef aftolled ¥ Blapgabarat was king i-hote y 
ne cude na mon fwa muchel of of alle manere note. 

of harpe & of falteriuny _[fong. 

of fiSele & of coriun. 

of timpe & of lire? 

gleomen him weoren deore. 20 

he cuSen? al peos fonges he cupe alle pe fonges 

& pat gleo of ileche londe. of alle kunne londes. 


his life. ‘Afterwards was Bledon his son [After him came his son, named 
Bledon], and glorious king ; ‘he had enow of wealth, and distributed it to 
his men; never was since a king so liberal through all things!’ Next was 
‘his son king, who was named’ Cap; ‘after Cap, Oein [and Otheyn], ‘ for 
each evil he was fain.’ “Then came Sillius, who was Oeins son; then, 
soon after that, came a king Blethgabreat [Blathgabarat and Sullius]. 
‘Since that this world was established, no man knew so much of song 
{Blathgabarat was named king; Ae knew of all manner of notes], ‘ of harp 
and of saltery, of fiddle and of corn-pipe, of tympan and of lyre; gleemen 
were dear to him ;’ he knew all ‘these [the] songs, ‘ and the glee (music)’ 
of ‘each [all kind of] land. Of him was much speech over [all] the worlds 


1 feodsen? 2 cude? 


[v. 7007—7029.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 299 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

Of him wes muchel fpeche ” Of him was mochel fpeche ” 

3eond paf woruld riche. oueral pe worle riche. 

fwa pat al pif mon-cun y so pat al pat mankun 

pat of him iherden tellen. pat of him horde telle. 

feiden } he wes god? seide pat he was king y 

of alle gleo-creften, of alle craftes. 

Euer wes pe king glad Y Euere was pe [king] glad? [e.2.] 

& suef he gomen luueden'. and euere he game louede. 

& puf he ledde hif lif’ and pus he ladde his lif ¢ 

pe while pe hit ilefte. 10 wile pat he lifuede. 

SeodSen wes his broSer king’ Suppe was his broper king 

Arkinauf iheten. Archinaus i-hote, 

he? hit heolde feouen 3eore ¥ he hit heold feoue 3er ¢ 

i gride he wunede here. ine bliffe he wone her. 

Seodsen wes his sune king’ | Suppen was his fone king / 

pe vnifeliche luuede. pat onfelliche lifuede. 

/Eldolf men cleopeden pene king /Deldol was i-hote ” 

his deden weoren for-cu%e. hif deades weren coupe®. 

Nes nan fwa god wif’ Nas par non fo god wif 

i pon londe pe he walde. 2 par pe he lifde his lif. 

3if heo wes a wiht* hende y 3if 3e0 were fair and fore ¥ 

he ne makede hore. pat he ne makede hire hore. 


peh hit weoren® an eorles wif’ 


kingdom !—so that all ‘this [the] people that of him heard tell, said that 
he was ‘god [king] of all ‘ glee’-crafts, Ever was the king glad, and ever 
he loved game; and thus he led his life ‘the’ while that ‘it lasted [he 
lived]. Afterwards was his brother king, named Arkinaus; he held it 
seven years, in ‘peace [bliss] he here dwelt. Next was his son king, who 
lived wickedly ; ‘men called the king A®ldolf [Deldol he was named], his 
deeds were evil. Was [there] no woman so good ‘in the land that 
he ruled [where that he lived his life], that he made [her] not whore, 
if she ‘was [were] ‘a wight’ fair [and good], ‘though it were an earls 


1 Juuede? 2 heo pr. m., but o erased. 5 for-coupe? 
4 Or awiht, ought. 5 weore? 


Arkin{ aus}. 


Aldolf. 


[Re ]ddare. 


[Fa}mul- 
pe[ni cel. 


[Pi)r. 


[Cap jor. 


300 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 7030—7051.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


he bi-nom hire al hire z%elen. 
pe zunge wifmé & pe elde? pe 30ng and pe holde ¥ 


he makeden! to fedde. he makede to fconde. 
For piffe uniweifte® laze 7 For piffe onwrefte ? 
hif leode hine hateden. al men him hatede. 


in to pan bare deSe? 
nalde he for pon hit bi-lezfue. 


SeoSSen com Redid ” After him com Redion 7 
& redden? piffen peoden. [£39*.c.1.Jand heold pifne kinedom. 
half 3er & feouen niht 10 


pa wes he deed forh riht. 


Seodsen Redert hif broSer’ | Suppe hadde hit [his] broper? 
laffe while penne pe o®er. laffe wile pane pe oper. 
SeodBé com an pe leouede wel? Suppe com on pat lifde wel ¥ 
he heehte Famul-penicel. pat hehte Samupenfel. 

on hif liue he wef fwa riche? __ in his lifue he was fo riche? 
alle pon oSere vniliche. alle oper oniliche. 


SeoSSen com a king pe hehte Pir’Suppe com Caper. and Pir’ 
hif heS* wes fwulc fwa beo’ gold pat [hadde] heer fo gold wir. 
pet al fole wundreden on? [wir. 

whedene com fwa feir mon. 21 

ABfter him com Capor ? 


wife, he deprived her of all her honor’; the young ‘women’ and the old 
he made to be disgraced. For this ‘wicked custom his people [wickedness 
all men] hated him ‘to the bare death !—he would not for that leave it.’ 
‘Afterwards [After him] came Redion, and ‘governed [held] this kingdom, 
‘half a year and seven nights; then was he dead forth-right.’ Next 
‘Redeit [had it] his brother, less while than the other. Then came 
one that lived well, ‘he [that] hight ‘Famul-Penicel [Samupensel] ; in his 
life he was so powerful, he was all ‘ the’ others unlike! After that came ‘a 
king that hight Pir [Caper and Pir]; ‘his head was such [that had hair] as 
‘is’ gold wire; ‘so that all folk wondered whence came man so fair! After 
him came Capor, who was king of the land. After him came Eligille, who 


1 makede ? 2 uniwrefte ? 3 redde? * head? 


[v. 7052—7074.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
pe king wes on peode. 
/Efter him com Eligille ¥ 
pe heold pif lond ful ftille. 
pes wes a fwide wif! mon 
& of alle pinge wel idon. 
mid bliffe he luuede here 
fif & twenti 3ere. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xm. 


Seodv%en wef king his fune Heli? Suppe Caper his fone Hely ¥ 


3eref fulle feouwerti. 
oder wile he heold griS¥ —10 


& oder while me feht him wi%. 


He wef a {wide eht gume’ 


& he ftreonde preo fnelle funen. 


Lud wes ihaten pe an’ 

he wef a {wide eht mon. 

pe midleft Cafibellaunus 

pe 3iigefte hehte Nenni?. 
fEfter Heli kig ehte pif lond ’ 
Lud hif fune wel longe. 

pes wes swide oht king’ —.20 
and vnimete kene. 

and he wes {wie riche / 

for reedes he luuede. 


held this land full still. This was a man most wise, and in all things ex- 
cellent ; with bliss he lived here five and twenty years.’ Afterwards ‘was 
king [Caper] his son Heli, ‘years full forty [held it four and twenty 
years]; one while he maintained peace, and other while men fought with 
him. He was a man ‘most brave [strong], and he begat three ‘active’ 
sons; Lud was named the one,—he was ‘a’ man most brave,—the middle 
one, Cassibelaunus, the youngest ‘hight’ Nennius. After king Heli Lud 
his son ‘possessed [had] this land ‘well [very] long. This was a king 
most ‘brave [strong], and immoderately keen, and he was exceedingly 
powerful, for counsels he loved. He fared over all ‘this [his] kingdom, 


hit heold 3eores four an twenti. 
op’ wile he heold grip: 

oper wile me faht him wip. 

He was a ftrong gome 

and he ftreonede preo fones. 
Lud was i-hote pe on / 

he was {wipe hoht man. 

pe midlefte Caffibilanus / 

pe 3eongefte Nennius. 


After Hely king hadde pis lond ’ 
Lud his fone fwipe long. [£35*.c.1.] 


pes was fwipe ftrong king 
and onimete kene. 

and he was {wipe riche / 
for reades he louede. 


1 This word is on an erasure. 


301 


[ Eli]gitle. 


[ Cafi}bel- 
laune. 


[Ne ]nnius. 


Trinouant. 


302 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 7075—7096.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


He ferde 3e6d al pif kine-lond? He verde oueral his kinelond ¥ 
and elche burh he makede ftrdg. and makede ech borh ftrong. 
caftles makede Lud pe king’ —_caftles makede Lud pe kig’ 

& Lundune he luuede purh alle ac Londene he louede porh alle 


ping. [c. 2.] ping. 
Pe 3eht pe Lud king ahte pif lond ¥ pe 3et pat Lud king hadde piflond. 
hehte Lundene Trinouat. Londene hehte Trinauant. 


and of caftles ner per na ping Y and of caftles nas par noping 
bute pat tur pe makede Belin king.bote pe tur pat makede Belyn king. 
al fwa pes boc her telle’ bi-uore ¢ alfe pes bock tellep’ 

a piffen fpelle. 10 bi-fore in his spelle. 

Lud kig lette legge pane wal? Lud king makede pane wal? 
abuten pe burh of Lundene al. aboute Londene oueral. 

pe auere 3et haue® ilaft Y pat euere suppe hauep i-laft / 
& fwa he wule 3et wel longe. and fo he wole longe. 

He letten' buldé pe hallen / He lette bulde pe halles ¥ 
{wide muchele mid alle. {wipe wel mid alle. 

he hehte ilchene riche mon ¢ he hehte echne riche man / 

he delde hif ehte atwam. pat he his heahte dealde atwo. 
& nom pa heluen dale’ and neme pat halfendele ¥ 

and heh bold hi makede. 2% and god woning him makede: 
and alle pe vnftronge men and alle pe onftrong men ? 
pere burh he duden® wid uten. pane borh he dude wip houte. 


and each burgh ‘he’ made strong; castles made Lud the king, ‘and 
[but] London he loved through all things. The yet (while) that king Lud 
‘possessed [had] this land, London hight Trinovant, and of castles was 
there nothing but the tower that king Belin made, as this book ‘here’ 
telleth before in ‘his [this] history. King Lud ‘caused the wall to be laid 
{made the wall] ‘all’ about ‘ the burgh of’ London [over all], that ever ‘yet 
[since] hath lasted, and so it will ‘yet well’ long. He caused the halls 
to be built, most ‘great [well] withall; he ordered each rich man, that he 
should divide his possessions in two, and take the half-part and good 
dwelling make to him, And all the bad men he put without the burgh, 


1 lette ? 2 dude? 


[v.7097—7119.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 303 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
& he3zede pe burh 
and makede heo {wide hende. 
He leide a-dun pere burhze nome? He leide adun pane name / 
and nénede hire efter him feolué.andnemnedehine after him seolue. 


& hehten' heo Ker-Lud / and cleopede hine Kay[r]lud’ = Keer-Lud. 
and ouer al hit let cuSen. and oueral he lette cupi. 
Pat he duden? al for pon? Pat he dude al for pan’ 


pat fcudSen® feulden moni mon. pat par after folde mani man. 
pennen pe king weoren* ded: wan pe king were dead ¥ 


demen of hif weorken. 1 fpeken of his workes. 

SeoSSen her com vneud® fole? Suppe par com oncup folk / 

faren in peffere peode. faren to piffe erpe. [c.2.] 

& nemnedé pa burh Lundin’ — and nemnede peos borh Londen ? Lundin. 

&® heore leode-wifen. in hire leod-wife. 

SeodSen comen Sexifce menY par after come Saxiffe men 

& Lundene heo cleopeden. and Lundene hit cleopede. Lundene. 
pe nome ilefte longe ¥ pe ilke name ilafte lange 

inne piffe londe. ine piffe londe. 

SeodSen comé Normanf? Par after come Normains ’ 

mid heore ni crafté. 20 mid hire nip craftes. 

and nemneden heo Lundres? —_and hehte hit Lundres Lundres. 
peof leodef heo amerden. [£.40.c.1.]folke .. ... me. 

Swa is al pif lond’ iuaren pus his al pis lond ifare ¥ 


‘and honored the burgh, and made it very fair,’ He laid adown the 
‘burghs’ name, and named it after himself, and called it Kaer-Lud, and 
over all [he] let ‘it’ be known. He did that all for this reason, that ‘after- 
wards [thereafter] many a man, when the king were dead, should ‘judge 
{speak] of his works. Subsequently ‘here [there] arrived foreign folk in this 
realm, and named ‘the [this] burgh ‘Lundin [Londen], in their country- 
wise. ‘Afterwards [Thereafter] came Saxon men, and called it Lundene ; 
the [same] name long lasted in this land. ‘Afterwards [Thereafter] came 
Normans with their evil crafts, and named it Lundres; ‘this people they 
destroyed [to harm of the folk]. ‘So [Thus] has all this land fared, ‘for 


1 hehte? ? dude? 3 feosyen ? 4 weore? 
5 yneud ? ® ft. an. 7 londe pr. m. 


Port-Lud. 


Ludes-3at. 


304 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


for uncue leoden. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 7120—7142.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
porh oncoup folke. 


peo pif londe habbe® bi-wunnen pat pis lond habbep iw..ne 


and ef! beod idriué hennene. 
And eft hit bi-3etten oSere 
pe uncude weoren. 

& falden pene elden nomen? 
efter heore wille. 

of gode pe bur3en ¥ 

& wenden heore nomen. 

fwa pat nif her burh nan? 10 
i piffere Bruttene. 

pat habbe hire nome eld ¥ 
pe me erft hir’ on-ftalde. 


and eft idriuen h..ne. 

An eft bi-3ete hit oper ” 
oncoupe leode. 

and aleide pe olde names 7 


of pis he3e borewes. 


so pat nis her borh non? 
in piffere Brutayne. 

pat hire names holdep? 
pat me ereft fette. 


a gon pif lond wéden us gan pif lond wéde? 
8 8 


pat com pif kingef ende. pat com peos kinge ende. 
Lud king iward deed / é vd pe king iwarp dead ¥ 
in Lundene me hine leide. in Londene me hine leide. 


per weoren eorles {wide whete? par weré eorles {wipe wate ? 

and leiden pene king bi ane 3ate. and leide hine hat Ludes gate. 

} 3et me cleoped? ful iwis’ 2 pat me cleopep 3iet iwis?’ 
Port-Lud a Bruttifce. [wel° waht *Porp-Lud in Bruttif. 

SeoSSen comen AEnglifce men SuppencomeEngliffe mé welwatey 
and cleupeden hit Ludes-3ate. and cleopede [hit] Loudefgate. 


[through] foreign people, that this land hath conquered, and eft ‘ were’ 
driven hence. And eft obtained it ‘others that were foreigners [other 
foreign people] ; and ‘after their will’ put down the old names of ‘the 
good [these noble) burghs, ‘and changed their names,’ so that there is no 
burgh here in this Britain, that hath ‘its [their] ‘old’ names, that men 
erst ‘to it’ ‘fixed [set]. Thus fared this land until this kings end came. 
Lud [the] king died ; in London men laid him ;—there were earls most bold, 
and they laid ‘the king by a gate [him at Ludes-gate], that yet men call ‘ full’ 
surely Port-Lud in British. Afterwards came English men well bold, 
and called ‘it’ ‘Ludes-gate [Loudesgate], and so it hath ‘well’ long in 
3 This word is on an erasure. 


1 eft? ? cleopes? 


—_— 


[v. 7143—7165.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 305 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
and fwa hit haue’ wel longe?’ —_and fo hit hauep longe ¢ 
o pon nome iftonde. in pane name at-ftonde. 
Pa weoren per twa children: — Po weren par two children ¥ 
Ludes funen kingef. Ludef fones pes kinges. 
pe eldre hehte Androgeus pe eldre hehte Androgius 
pe op" Temelcin?'. pe z3eongere Teunancius. [f.36.c.1.] Tennan- 
Paf children uueré lutle ¥ Pes childrene were lutle ’ 
pa here fader de3zede. po hire fader-de3zeade. 
pa com heore fader broSer ? po com hire fader broper ¥ 


Caffibelaunus. 10 ©Caffibilane. 
and iwer®d him fulf to kinge’ — and i-warp him feolf king / 
and biwufte paf children. and peos childrene wel bi-wifte. 


and leofliche heom fedde 
for luue of his bro®er. 


pef Caffibellaunuf ¥ Peos Caffibilane was god king ¥ 
wes piffes lodes king. 

p’ leodef hine luueden ¥ and wel bi-loued porh alle ping. 
for hif lazen weoren gode. [c.2.] 

he fette feire peauwes y he fette faire peues ¢ 

in piffen peoden. 2 ine pif londe. 


and he wes fwiSe god king? 
& god eniht purh alle ping. 
Peof children weoxen an hond? peos children wox an hond ¥ 


the same name stood. Then were there two children, sons of Lud [the] 
king; the elder hight Androgeus, the ‘other [younger] Tennancius. These 
children were little when their father died ; then came their fathers brother 
Cassibelaunus, and made himself king, and [well] took charge of these 
children, ‘and lovingly them fed, for love of his brother.’ This Cassibelaunus 
was ‘king of this land [a good king]; ‘the people loved him [and well 
beloved through all things], ‘for his laws were good;’ he established fair 
customs in this land, ‘and he was king most good, and good knight 
through all things.’ These children waxed in hand, so that they might 


1 This line is added in the margin by a later hand, which has also interlined wueré 
in the next line. For Temelcinus we shou'd read Tennancius. 


x 


7 


306 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 7166—7188.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

pat heo mihten haldé lond. pat hii mihte . .lde londe. 

pe king heom 3ef gode pe king heom ... gode? 

tweien eorl-domes. tweie eorldomes. 

Androge® him wes leouef Androgius him was leofere ¥ 

and he him Lundene 3ef. ...fore Londene he him 3ef. 

& per mid he 3ef him al Kent? ... al Kent par forp mede! / 

for he him wolde iquemen. him for to cweme. 

& he hehte Ténanciuf/ and Teunancium he hehte ? 

to Cornwale temen. to Cornwale wende. 

and freoliche paf twein broderne:and freoliche peos twei bropers 

heolden paf eorldomes. n__holde pai eorldomes. 

buten pat heo icneowen ‘ bote pat hii folde pane king ¥ 

pene kig for heore herre. for loud icnowe. 


for he wes heore lauerd ¢ 

and al piffere leodene. 

Pa wile pa heo weoren fehte: Wile hii weren pus seahte ¥ 
& heore men on fome. 

pif lond ferde fwide wel pis lond wel verde. 

mid fibbe heo hulden. 

ah seodSen heo iwerSen werdSeyand po i? worpe wrope ¥ 


& hit iwerd pa weorfe. 21 hit was fone pe worfe. 
swa pat Romleode so pat Romleode 
comen to piffen peoden. com to piffere peode. 


(were able to) hold land; the king gave them two good earldoms. An- 
drogeus was liefer to him, ‘and [therefore] he gave him London, and ‘there- 
with [there together] ‘he gave him’ all Kent, ‘for he would him [him 
for to] please; and he bade Tennancius go to Cornwall, and these two 
brothers freely to hold these earldoms, except that they should acknowledge 
the king for ‘ their’ ‘master [lord] ;—‘ for he was their lord, and of all this 
realm. The’ while ‘that’ they were [thus] in amity, ‘and their men 
together,’ this land fared ‘ most’ well, ‘ with peace they held it,’ ‘but after- 
wards [and then] they became wrath (quarrelled), ‘and’ it ‘became [soon 
was] the worse, so that Rome-people came to this country, and set tribute 


A mid? but cf. v. 4304. > hii? 


[v. 7189—7212.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 307 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
and fette 3eld a piffe londe and fetten truage in piffe lond ¥ 
wider feluer & gold. bope feoluer and gold. 
pe neuer ever on liue :’ pe neuere her on lifue / 
ne durfté hider iden. ne dorfte hii hider lipe. 
axien king of piffen londe ¥ ne axi king of piffe londe 


pat he 3efue 3eld in to Rome. _3ield in to Rome. 
Pa wes hit ilumpen o pan da3en /Po was hit bi-valle in pat daize ¥ 


afe we fod fuggen majen. alfe ich foh fegge may. : 
pat Juliuf Scezar wes iuaren’ pat Julius Cefar was iwend ?’ Cctear). 
mid ynimete ferde. 10 mid onimete ferde. 

from Rome into France fram Rome into France? [e.2-] 

pe fedd wes iwradBed. he was {wipe iwrahped. 

al pa londef he bi-won ’ [£.40°.c.1.] alle pe Jondes he bi-wan 

pe he mid ezene lokede on. pat he mid e3ene lokede an. 

he pohte to bi-winnen ¥ he pohte to bi-winne 

mid ftrengden & mid ginnen. —_ mid ftrengpe and mid ginne. 

al middel-ezerdef lond al pe middelerpes lond 

and halde pat worlde in hif hond.to his owene hond. 

Ah he ne mihte hit don?’ Ac he ne mihte hit don ¢ 

al paf worlde under fote'. 2 al pe worle onderfon. 

ah pa preo dale he bi-won? ac pe pridden deal he awan 

of piffere worlde riche. of piffe worle riche. 


fif & fifti kine-lond ¥ 
he bi-won to hif a3ere hond. 


in this land, ‘either [both] silver and gold, that never ere in life durst 
[they] hither come, ‘to ask [nor ask] a king of this land; ‘that he should 
give’ tribute to Rome. Then was it befallen in those days [that day], 
as ‘we [I] sooth may say, that Julius Cesar was come with innumerable 
host from Rome into France ;—the enemy [he] was [greatly] enraged. 
He conquered all the lands that he looked on with eyes, he thought to 
obtain with strength and with stratagem all [the] middle-earths land, ‘ and 
hold the world’ in his [own] hand! But he might it not do, all the 
world subject, yet the third part he conquered of this worlds dominion, 
‘five and fifty kingdoms he won in his own hand, without his realm 


1 under-fon ? 
x2 


308 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


wid uten hif riche ¥ 

pe wer lei to Rome. 

Cniht he wes kene ¥ 

3eond al middel-zrde cu®. 

he wef pe wiffefte mon? 

of al pe worulde riche. 

he makede pane kalend? ¥ 

pe dihted pane mone’d & pe jer. 
he dihte feole domes ‘ 

pe 3et {tdded ii Rome. 10 

wale pat exuere ei fucche mon ? 


[v-.7213—7235.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


He makede pane kalender ¥ 
bi wa geop al pe 3er. 

he fette fale domes ¥ 

pat 3et beop in Rome. 

awei pat euere foch man ¥ 


in to eelde feulde gan. 
Julius wende of Rome 
mid folke wel idone. mid folke wel idone. 

he ferde ouer Lumbardie ” he verde ouer Lombardie ¥ 

fwa he dude ouer Munt-giwe. fo he dude ouer Montagu. 

hi bipon’ Loherne he awan Lorenne and Boloyne?— 
& Gafcunne [&] Peytou. France Aluerne and Gafcoyne. 
Normandie & BrittaineY | 19 Peyto Normandie and Britayne / 
& Luueine & Alemaine. [cunne zand Loueine and Alemaine. 
SeoBSen he hafde iwunnen Gaf- 
he charde a3en in to Burgunne. 
into Flandres he ferde ‘ 


in to helle [folde] gon. 
Julius wende of Rome’ 


in to Flandref he verde? 


that ere lay in Rome. Knight he was keen, over all middle-earth 
renowned; he was the wisest man of all the worlds empire!’ He made 
the kalendar, ‘that denotes the months and [by which goeth all] the 
year; he set many laws that yet ‘stand [are] in Rome.—Alas! that ever 
‘any’ such man should go into hell! Julius departed from Rome with 
brave folk; he fared over Lumbardy, so he did over ‘Muntgiu [Montagu] ; 
he conquered Loraine, [and Bologne, France, Alverne] and Gascony, and 
Poitou, Normandy and Bretagne, and Lovain and Alemaine (Germany). 
‘After that he had won Gascony, he turned again into Burgundy,’ into 
Flanders he proceeded, and made his fleet. ‘It was on a time, that’ 


1 bi-won? 


[v. 7236—7257.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 309 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
and makede his fchip-ferde. and makede his fip-ferde. 
» Hit wes an ane time!’ 
‘ pat pe deei wef liht ¥ Pe dai was wel bript ’ 
and pe funne wes fwiSe briht. and pe fonne 3af hire lipt. 
- and Cezar rad 3eod* Flaundre lond?andCefar wende in Flandres lond? 


» an fcewede peere fe ftrond. wandrenge bi féé ftrond. 
‘} weder wes {wide lide? pat weder was {wipe lipe / 
and he pif lon® ikende. —_[c.2.]_ and he pis lond a-kende. 
Pa freinede Juliuf? Po faide Julius / Julinf: 
& wid* pon folke he fpec pus. 10 and wip pan folke he fpac pus. 
Wat hif } ilke eit-lond / Wat his pat ilke lond ” 
} ich ic® mid e#3en ifeo. pat ich i-fe mid ezene. 
feor ouer fee ftra ? for ouer fee ftrem Y 
feir hit me punched. fair hit me pinchep. 
A wif mo puf quad A wif man par was ¢ [£.36%.c.1.] 
and mid pene keifere fpec. pat to pan king faide. 
Peet if a muchel e#it-lod / Pat his on illond ¥ 
of alche gode hit if ftrong. of alle gode hit his ftrong. 
pet Bruttef ereft ifeng ¥ pat Brutus ereft a-wan 


2 after pan flode. 
par his fis par fowel ¥ 
per beod duhtie men. par beop men kene. 


the day was ‘light [well bright], and the sun ‘was most bright [gave her 
light]; and Cesar ‘rode over [went on] Flanders land, ‘and viewed the 
{wandering by] sea strand. The weather was exceeding mild, and he 
descried this land. Then ‘inquired [said] Julius, and with the folk he spake 
thus: ‘‘ What is that same ‘island [land], that I see with eyes, far over 
sea-stream ; fair it seemeth to me?” A wise man ‘quoth thus, and with 
the emperor spake [there was, who to the king said]: ‘‘ That is a ‘ great’ 
island, of ‘each [all] good thing it is strong (stored), that Brutus first won 
[after the flood. There is fish, there is fowl]; there are ‘doughty [keen] 


' A line is probably here deficient. 2 3eond? 3 lond? 
4 wid? 5 Redundant. 


Julius. 


Belin. 


310 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
Brutaine hit hatte Y 
pat lond pe pu bi-haldeft. 
Pa {pee Juliuf Cezar’ 
he wes wis and {wide iwar. 


[v. 7258—7280 ] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
Brutayne hit hatte ¥ 
pat lod pat pou bi-holdeft. 
Po fpac Julius Cefar ? 
he was fwipe wis and war. 


Welich hit wet what Br“ ttif wes/Wel ich wot wat Brutus was ” 


for mine bec hit me fugged. 
alle we comé of ane kiine’ 
alfe pe bee hit uf cudsed. 
Vre aldren weoren i Troie ? 
per heo teone poleden. 10 
zt pon muchele fehte ” 
moni peofend per weoré fie. 
Pa heo weoren ouer-cumen ? 
pe quahten heo wide. 

and ferde fichinde lond 
per heo mihten on libben. 
per Bruttuf bi-com 


for mine bokes feggep. 
alle we come of one cunne? 
alfe ich in boke finde. 
Vre eldre were in Troye ¥ 
par hii teone polede. 

in pan mochele fihte ¥ 
mani pufend par folle. 

Po i' weren ouercome ? 
po wéden hii wide. 

for to finde fom lond ¥ 
ware hii mihte libbe. 

par on Brutus bicom / 


and to hif liue he wunede per an Yand al his lif he wonede par on. 


Peonnené? come pa kinges ¥ 
pe weoren wunder kene. 
Belin and Brénef 

pe Rome bi-wunnen. 

Heo for-ferde Rome 


Panene come pe kinges 


20 pat were wonder kene. 


Belyn and Brenne ¥ 
pat Rome bi-wonne. 
Hii foruerde Rome 


men. Britain it hight, the land that thou beholdest.” Then spake Julius 


Cesar,—he was [most] wise and ‘most’ wary,—‘‘ Well I ‘it’ wot what 
Brutus was, for my books say ‘it to me’; we all come of one kin, as ‘the 
books shew it us [I find in books]. Our elders were in Troy, there 
they suffered harm, in the mickle fight many thousands there ‘were slain 
[fell]. When they were overcome, then roamed they wide, ‘and fared 
seeking [for to find some] land, where‘ on’ they might live. There[on] 
Brutus arrived, and ‘in [all] his life he dwelt thereon. Thence came the 
kings that were wondrous keen, Belin and Brennes, who conquered Rome. 
They destroyed Rome, the noble burgh; they took of ‘Romanish [the] 


1 hii? > peonnene? 


7 


[v. 7281—7303.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 311 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1. 
pa burh wel idone. pe borh wel idone. 
heo nomen of Romanifce londe? hii neme of pan londe ’ 
muchel feoluer & gold. richedomes ftronge. 


heore 3ifles heo letten an-hon 

heore folc heo letten fordon. 

pet dude Belin and hif broSer? Pis dude Belyn and his broper ¥ 
ah nou per if an o8er. ac nou par his an oper. 

Ich hahte Juliuf Cezar ~ Ich hatte Julius Cefar / 

per fore if min herte fer. [f.41.c.1.Jherfore his min heorte for. 

pet me mine eldre dude feome ? pat hii min eldre ¢ 


ser ich weore mon ibore. un dude fochne fame. 

Ah nu ich wulle fende Ac nou ich wolle fende 

in to pon lond. in to pan londe ¥ 

to iwiten at pd bezfte y to witen of pan hehtfte / 

3if heo me wulled bu3en. 3if hii me wollep bouwe. 

and 3if heo me wulled fendéy —_and 3if hii me wollep fende ¢ (c.2.] 
gauel of heore londe. gauil of hire londe. 


for 3if heo wulleS 3irne grid? —_ for 3if hii wollep 3eorne grip? 
nulle ich noht heom fehté wid. nelle ich 3am fihte wip. 
finded me tweien wife men? 2 Lokep me tweie wife men / 


pe wel cunnen a fpeche. pat wel conne of fpeche. 
He bi-tehten' heom ford riht? and bi-techep heom pis writ / 
a writ pe wes al idiht. pat his fol wel idiht. 


land ‘much silver and gold [great treasures]; ‘ their hostages they caused to 
be hung, their folk they caused to perish.’ “That [This] did Belin arid his 
brother, but now there is another thing. I hight Julius Cesar !—therefore 
[herefore] is my heart sore, that [they] mine ancestors did [such] shame 
‘to me, ere I was born man.’ But now I will send into the land, to know 
‘at [of] the ‘best [highest], if they will bow to me, and if they will send 
me tribute of their land ; for if they will yearn peace, I will not fight with 
them ; ‘find [Look] me two wise men, who well can of speech (can dis- 
course).” ‘He delivered [‘‘and deliver] them ‘ forth-right’ ‘a [this] writ, 
that ‘was all [is full well] indited, and ‘greeted [greet well] Cassibe- 


1 bi-tehte? 


312 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 7304—7328.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
and greette Caffibellaune / and grete wel Caffibilane ¥ 
pene king of Bruttaine. pane king of Britayne. 
puf feide pat writ ” Pus fpac pat writ ¥ 
pe wel bar pe ernde. pat hii bere on honde. 

Ich em Juli? Scefar Y Ich ham Julius Cef. . 

pe of Rome em icumé her. pat of Rome ham ico.. her. 
3if pu wult 3irne grid / 3if pu wolt 3eorne grip? 

nile ic pe noht fehten wid. nelle ich pe noh. ...te wip. 
and hizendliche me fende and hizenliche .. ...de¥ 
gauel of pine londe. 10 gauil of pine londe. 

pu fulf mi mon bicumen and pou pi feolf mi man bi-come? 
and for kaifere me halden. and for kayfere me holde. 

for al hit is min a3zen for al hit his min owene 

pat ic i-feo mid min #3en. pat ich i-fe mid ezene. 
Caffibellane i-feh $ writ Caffibilane pis writ bi-heold ” 
per fore he wef abol3é. and warp hit to his fote. 

he wes wunderliche wrah he was wonderliche wrop 
for pes tidende him wes led. —_ for pes tidinge him waf lop. 

a writ he lette makien a writ he lette makie ¥ 

mid muchere wradée. 2 mid mochelere wreppe. 

al wid ute grietinge ¥ al wip houte gretinge ? 

fende hit Cefar pd kinge. fende Cefar pane kinge. 


Pat writ to pon keifere com? — Pat writ to pan kayfer com? 
peos wordes weoren per on idon. and pif was par an idon. 
Sillich uf punched Cezar / Seollich vs pinchep Cefar Y 


laune, the king of Britain. Thus ‘said [spake] the writ, that ‘well bare 

the errand [they bare in hand]: ‘‘I am Julius Cesar, who from Rome am 
come here. If thou wilt yearn peace, I will not fight with thee; and 
speedily send me tribute of thy land, [and] thou [thy]self become my man, 
and for emperor hold me; for all it is mine own, that I see with ‘mine’ 
eyes.” Cassibelaune ‘saw the [beheld this] writ, ‘therefore he was en- 
raged [und cast it to his feet]; he was wondrously wrath, for this tiding wes 
hateful to him. A writ he caused to be made with much anger ; all without 
greeting sent ‘it’ to Cesar the king. The writ to the emperor came, [and] 
‘these words were [this was] thereon done (written) : ‘‘ Strange i¢ seemeth 


(v. 7329—7350.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


pu ert fwa wif and fwa war. 
pat pu pencheft to beon ¥ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


313 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


of pe pat hart fo wis and war. 
pat pou pencheft beon / 


keifere of alle quike monne. [c. 2.] kayfere of alle cwike mane. [f.37.c.1.] 


Pu ert icumen of Rome’ 

pine word beo’ fwiSe ftore. 

of ure londe pu axeft 3eld 7 

and ne fcelt. pu per fore 3lpen. 
pu fulf ert fwiSe gripel ? 

pine gumen funden 3efere. 


Pou hart icome of Rome / 
pine wordes beop ftore. 

vs pou hoft 3elde ” 

ac ne falt pou par fore 3elpe. 
pi feolf hart fwipe gripel ’ 
pine cniptef beop 3ifre. 


pu pencheft to fetten o pin hond “pou pencheft to fette in pine hond ? 


al middel-zerdef lond. 

We beod in ane eit-londe / 
at pere worldef ende at-ftonde. 
pe Bruttef biwiine 

and pe? wunie®’ per on. 

& freoliche we hit halded / 

wid alle weoruld kingen. 

& pe nulle we neeuere fende / 
gauel of ure londe. 

for 3if pu weore® al fwa wis? 20 
fwa ich wende } pu weore. 
penne woldeft pu vnder-ftonde 


ll 


al pe middilerpe long’. 

We beop in on illond 

in pe worle hende at-ftonde. 

pat Brutus ..wan y 

and we woniep par on. 

and freoliche we hit holdep 
wip alle worle kin... 

And we nollep pe neuere fende ¥ 
gauel of vre londe. 

for 3if pou were fo wis? 

fo ich wende pat pou were. 
panne woldeft pou honderftonde 


to us, Cesar, ‘thou [of thee that] art so wise and ‘ so’ wary, that thou think- 
est to be emperor of all men alive! Thou art come from Rome,—thy words 
are ‘very’ strong,— of our land [us] thou askest tribute, ‘and [but] thou 
shalt not therefore boast. ‘Thou [Thy]self art most covetous; thy ‘men 
[knights] are greedy ; thou thinkest to set in thine hand all [the] middle- 
earths land! We are in an island stationed ‘at [in] the worlds end, that 
Brutus won, and we dwell thereon, and freely we will hold it against all the 
kings of the world. And we will never thee send tribute of our land ; for if 
thou were as wise as I weened that thou wert, then wouldest thou under- 


1 ond? Cf. v. 7205. 


2 Sic pr. m., but the tail of the p erased; read we. 
° A letter is erased after weore. 


314 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


pet! we beod in ure londe. 
freo and fwa feone ?’ 
{wa pi fole if of Rome. 


[v. 7351—7373.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


pat we beop in vre londe. 
freo and al fo cleone ¥ 
fo pi folk of Rome. 


for ure eldere ut of Troye flu3en for vre eldre of Troye flozen ¥ 
and of anne kunne we beo®’ icumé.of one cunne we beop icome. 
pine aldren and ure’ pin eldre and vre 

at Troye wuren ifeire. at Troye weren iuere. 

3if pu me wult ileiuen ¥ Nou pou me miht ilefue ? 
boten pu uf wullen® bilziuen. —_ bote pou vs bi-leue. 

pu fealt of Brutten ’ 10 pou falt of Bruttes ¢ 

muchel balu habben. mochel care habbe. 

pu and pine iferen 

3if pu auere cumeft here. 

For ure aldren weoré kinges : 
inne piffe londe. 

Belin & Brenne 

beiene to-fome*. 

heo bi-3eten Rome ¥ 

mid richere ftrégde. 

and hit if ore irihte ? 20 
pat pu an rixleft. [f.41>.c. 1.) 
& fordSi pu ahteft me to 3ulden?’ For pi pou hahteft me 3elde 
3auel of pine lode. truage of pilke londe. 


for vre eldre a-wonne Rome ? 
pat pou an wonieft. 


stand, that we are in our land free, and as ‘sheen [clean], as thy folk ‘is’ of 
Rome. For our elders ‘ out’ of Troy fled, ‘ and’ of one kin we are come (de- 
scended), thine ancestors and ours at Troy were companions. ‘If thou wilt 
[Now mayest thou] believe me,—except thou us ‘ wilt’ believe, thou shalt 
of the Britons have mickle ‘sorrow [care], ‘thou and thy comrades, if thou 
ever comest here.’ For our elders ‘were kings in this land, Belin and 
Brennes, both together; they’ conquered Rome ‘with powerful strength 
{that thou inhabitest], ‘and it is our right the Jand that thou in reignest. 


1 The first letter of pet has been erased in making a correction (pr. m.), and 
omitted to be again inserted. 
? wulle? 5 to-fone? 


™ 


[v. 7374—7396.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


and pu hit halft on unriht ¥ 
per fore pu fealt habbé pliht. 
for pu waldeft beon min her? 
& pu me feuldeft bu3en. 

Cezar ifeh pif writ ? 

and he hit wraSliche bi-heold. 
abolzen he wes on mode ¥ 

he weorp hit to hif foten. 
Wer beo 3e mine cnihtes ¥ 

pe gode beo® to fihte. 10 
leted 3arkni mine fcipen / 

for nu we feullen wende. 

and ford we fcullen bu3en ¥ 

in to Bruttaine. 

and ninen! per pif londef kig 
and quic hine for-bernen. 

& bi-3utten al pat lond Y 

to ure a3eF hond. 

Sixti fcipen heo makeden 
vnimete muchele. 20 
peos weoré al neowe 

ftronge & wel itreowe. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


315 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


for pou hit holdeft mid onriht ¥ 
pat nis noht wel idiht. 


Cefar ifeh pis writ ¥ 
and warp him a-bol3e. 


and cleopede his cnihtes ” 
pat gode weren to fihte. 
Letep 3arki mine fipes / 
nou we fo... wende. 


[c. 2.] 


and nimen par pis londes king / 
and ewic hine for-berne. 

and bi-3ete al pat lond / 

to vre owene hond. 

Sixti fipes hi makede ? 
onimete grete. 

peos weren alle newe Y 

ftrong and wel trewe. 


of laffe fcipen par weoren {wa fele¥of laffe fipes par were fo fale ¥ 


And’ therefore thou oughtest to yield to me tribute of ‘thy [that] land, ‘and 
[for] thou holdest it with unright, ‘therefore thou shalt have harm [that is 
not well done], ‘ for thou wouldest be my master, and thou to me shouldest 
bow.’ ”—Ceesar saw this writ, and ‘he it wrathly beheld [became enraged]; 
‘incensed he was in mood, he threw it to his feet :'—*‘‘Where be ye, my 
[and called his] knights, that ‘are [were] good in fight? Let my ships be 
made ready, ‘for’ now we shall embark, ‘and forth we shall pass into 
Britain,’ and take there this lands king, and burn him alive, and obtain 
all the land in our own hand!” Sixty ships they made, immensely large ; 
these were all new, strong and well true; of lesser ships there were so 


1 R, nimen, 


316 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
pat nufte na man pe tale. 
Peo com heom a wedere 
wunderliche feire. 
Julius wero heo ferdé frd ftronde 


C i- : 
mus Ruma. touward piffe londe. 


norum Brit- heo turnden to hauene ¥ 
bello lafee/- inne par Temefe. 
Siuit, lx. 
annis ante per pa Temefe and pa fee ¥ 
incarnaci- heom feoleuen! imette’. 
Anno ab, Sone come pa tidende ¢ 10 
guingente- to piffe londef kinge. 
Jin & he hit letten? cuSen wide y 
weg 3eonde piffere peode. 
pat Cezar wes hider icomé / 
and wrad he hafde pif lon® i- 
{numen. 
Caffibellaune pe king 
wes war purh alle pig. [c.2.] 
he wufte wel of heore cume 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 7397—7417.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 
pat nufte no man pe tale. 


Hii verde fram pan ftronde 
into piffe londe. 

hii comen to hauene ¥ 

in pare Temefe. 


Sone come pe tidinge ¥ 

to piffe londes kinge. 

and he hit lette coupe ¥ 

oueral his londe. 

pat Cefar was hider icome ¥ 

and ware he hadde pe hauene 
inome. 

Caffibilanes pe king? 

was war porh alle ping. 

he wifte wel of hire come 7 


pat hauen of Douere he hauede pe hauene of Douere he hadde i- 


per lai mid hif ferde’ [inumen. 


pe king of piffen earde. 2 


many, that no man knew the number! 


par lay mid his ferde y 
pe king of piffe erpe. 


(nome. 


‘Then came to them a weather 


wonderfully fair ;’ they sailed from [the] strand ‘toward [into] this land, 
they ‘turned [came] to haven in the Thames, ‘where the Thames and 


the sea meet themselves.’ 


Soon came the tidings to this lands king, 


and he let it be known ‘wide’ over [all] ‘this [his] land, that Cesar 
was hither arriyed, and where he had taken ‘this land [the haven]. Cassi- 
belaune the king was wary through all things; he wist well of their 


coming, the haven of Dover he had taken (occupied). 


There lay with his 


host the king of this country; thither came tiding that was sore ‘to him,’ 


1 febleuen pr. m., but the top of the b erased. 


3 wer he hafde pif lond? 


2 lette? 


[v. 7418—7440.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 317 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx.” MS..Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


pider com tidende pathim weef feer:pider com tidinge pat was for ¥ 
pat icumen wes Juliuf Cezar. _ pat hi-come waf Julius Cefar. 


Moni wes pe kempe Mani was pe kempe ’ 

pe wes mid Caffebellaune pe king.pat was mid Caffibilane. 

& he hefde ete ftiwarde / and he hadde one ftiward ¥ 
pene wiffefte mon of al pif erde. pe wifefte man of pan erp. 
Belan he wes ihaten ? Belan he was ihote 
bee3es he delde. cniht mid pe befte. 

he wes cniht fwiSe reh ¥ 

to reden ane kinge. 10 


vnd? pé kinge he heolde pif lond y 
and paf leoden him hereden. 
pe kig hehden!' hif broSer fune: Pe king hadde his broper fones ¢ 


beiene to-fone. beine to-gadere. 

pe aldre hehte Androgeuf pat was Androgius ? 

pe 3ungere Teiantius. and his broper Teunanci?. 

peos weoren beien him bi-foré? ...s weren beie him bi-fore [f37°.c.1.] 
eorles {wide balde. eorles {wipe bolde. 

Nennius wes peos kinges broSer *Nemnius was peos kinges broper ¥ 
nefde he nenne o®er. 2 nadde he non oper. 

he ferde ut of Cantuarie burieY he verde vt of Cantilburi 

mid balden his ferden. mid bolde his ferde. 

Androge® of Lundene ¥ Androgius of Londene ? 


that arrived was Julius Cesar. Many was the warrior that was with 
Cassibelaune ‘the king,’ and he had a steward, the wisest man of ‘all this 
[the] earth; Belan he was named, ‘riches he distributed [knight with the 
best]. ‘He was knight most brave to counsel a king; under the king he 
held this land, and this people him obeyed.’ The king had his brothers 
sons, both together ; ‘the elder hight [that was] Androgeus, ‘the younger 
{and his brother] Tennancius,—these were both before him; earls most 
bold! Nennius was this .kings:brother,—he had no other,—he marched out 
of Canterbury with his bold forces; Androgeus, out of London, with the 


1 hehde? 


318 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


mid Kentifce leoden. 
Tennanti? of Cornwale ¥ 

hif kempen weore kene. 
fEridiuf pe kig ¥ 

hif Scottes he ledde. 

and Britael cd to neode ? 
Nord Walene king. 

& Guertaet pe mode’ 

mid pd Sus Walfcen. 

Con! of Galweie 10 
fEffel pe gode. 

com of Muriene 

moni fpere kene. 

of alle piffé peoden ?’ 

come to pere neode. 

to Caffibellaune [f. 42. ¢.1.] 
kinge of piffen londe, 

& pene king lerde 

al pas leod-cnihtes. 

pat he hif freo-fcipe 20 
mid fehte biwunne. 

& he hed an hond falde ¢ 

fwa pat he wolde. 


[v. 7441—7464.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


mid Kentiffe folke. 
Teunancius of Cornwale ¥ 
hif kempes weren kene. 
4Eridius pe king Y 

his Scottef he ladde. 

and Britahel cd to neode 
king of Norp Wales. 

and Guertacet pe modie 
mid his Sup Walfe. 

Com of Galeweye 7 

Effil pe gode. 

and of Moraine ? 

mani fperes kene. 

of alle piffe peode y 

come to pilke neode. 

to Caffibilane 

king of piffe londe. 

And pane king lerede ?’ 
alle peos kniptes. 

pat he his freofipe ’ 

mid fihte bi-wonne. 

and he faide riht par’ 


pat fehten he wolde wid Cezar ’ fihte he wolde mid Cefar. 


Kentish folk ; Tennancius, out of Cornwall,—his warriors were keen! The 
king A®ridius his Scots he led, and Britael came in need, king of North 
Wales, and Guertazt the moody, with ‘the [his] South Welsh. Came from 
Galway Aéssel the good; ‘came [and] from Moray many keen spears ; from 
all this realm came to ‘the [that] need, to Cassibelaune, king of this land. 
And all these knights advised the king, that he his freedom with fight 
should obtain; and he ‘gave (pledged) them in hand [said right there], 
‘that he so would, that’ he would fight with Cesar, ‘who asked land- 


. R. Com. 


[v. 7465—7488.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


pe axede lon-3auel her. 
Fordward heo wenden 
& hif folke fufde. 

to pere fee heo wenden Y 
and Cezar per funden, 
Of heore! 


he cleopede on hif cnihtef? 
3arewied eow to fihte. 

for nu if mid ferde icumen? 10 
Caffibellaun?. 

Heo lidede to-gadere ¥ 

mid heore fperen longe. 
mid axen mid fweorden 
mid fezrpe fperes orde. 
hardliche heo heowen 
helmes per gollen. 
feonliche heo feohté. 
hafdes per feollen ? 

And Cesar pe keifere / 

wes vnimete kene. 

his longe fweord he adroh ¥ 
and moni mon per mide aflo%. 
he fwone i pon fehte / 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


319 


MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 


Forpward he verde ? 

and his folk fufde. 

to pare féé hii wende ” 

and Cefar pare funde. 

Of hire come was war 
Julius Cefar. 

he cleopede to his cnihtes ” 
greipeh ow to fihte. 

for nou his mid ferde icome 
Caff ibilane. 

Hii fmiten to-gadere ¥ 

mid hire fperes longe. 

mid axes mid fwerdes Y 
mid kene fperes ordes. 
hardeliche hii hewen ” 
helmes par 3ollen. 
feondeliche hii fopte / 
cnihtes par folle. 

And Cefar pe kayfer ? 

was onimete kene. 

his longe fwerd he yt drop’ 
and mani man par mid floh. 
he fwang in pan fihte / 


[c. 2.] 


tribute here.’ Forward ‘they [he] went, and his folk marched; to the sea 
they proceeded, and Cesar there found. Of their [arrival was aware Julius 
Cesar]; he called ‘on [to] his knights, ‘‘ Make you ready to battle; for 
now is Cassibelaunus come with an army!” They engaged together with 
their long spears, with axes, with swords, with ‘sharp [keen] spears point ; 
hardily they hew,—helms there resound,—fiercely they fought— heads 
[knights] there fell! And Cesar the emperor was keen beyond measure ; 
his long sword he [out] drew, and many man therewith slew; he labored 


1 A line and half are here wanting by negligence of the scribe. 


320 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 7489—7511.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
pat al he lauede afweote. pat he leperede a fwote. 
He floh pa him neh weoren’ He floh pat him neh were 
alle buté iferen. al boute vere. } 
he dude per muchelne wundre'!Y he dude par moche wo. deve : 
he floh per an hundred. him seolf floh an hu.dred. 


of ahtere mdnen 
pe feond mid his mache. 


pat ifeh Androgeuf? pat ifeh Androgi. . 

and cleopede hif fader Nenniuf. and cleopede his heant Nénius ? 
and beiene pa eorles ¥ 10 and beine pe eorles ¥ 

bu3en he6 to-gaderes. wende to-gaderes. 

mid fwise muchele folke ” mid {wipe mochele folke / 
to-gederen ftoden fafte. to-gadere ftode fafte. 
I-fezen® heo Juliuf Cefar / Hii fezen hou Julius Cefar 
feehté® al fwa a wilde bar. [c.2.] faht alfe wilde bor. 

and heo hi to fufden ” and hii him to wende ? 

mid ladliche fehte. mid ftarliche fihte. 

& monie of heore feonden ? and manie of his cnihtes ? 
heo felden to pon griide. hii fulde to pan grunde. 

Pa ifeh Nenniuf? 2 Po ifeh Nemni® Y 

wer feht Cefar Juliuf. war feht Cefar Julius. 

and he him to rafde / and he to him refde ? 

mid raehem his fweorde. mid his kene fwerde. 


in the fight so that ‘all’ he ‘was bathed [lathered] in sweat. He slew all 
that were nigh him, all without companions (singly); he did there a great 
wonder, ‘he [himself] slew ‘there’ an hundred ‘of brave men,—the enemy 
with his weapon!’ Androgeus that saw, and called his father [uncle] 
Nennius, and both the earls advanced ‘them’ together; with numerous 
folk together stood fast. They saw how Julius Cesar fought as a wild 
boar; and they approached to him with ‘hostile [strong] fight, and 
many of ‘their enemies [his knights] they felled to the ground. Then 
saw Nennius where Julius Cesar fought, and he to him rushed with his 
keen sword; upon the helm he him smote, so that the sword in bit. Sur- 


2 wunde pr. m, ? Heo fejen? 5 fehte? 


[v. 7512—7534,] LA3AMONS BRUT. 321 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
vppen pene helm he hine fmatY vppen pan helm he hine fmot 
pat pet fweord in bat. pat pe fwerd in bot. 

Selku® hit pute / Selcup hit pohte 
moni cnihte. maniane cnihte. 


pat he durfte cumen him neh? pat he dorfte comé him neh 
for pan pa pe keifere wes fwa heeh. for pe kaifer was so heh. 
Juliuf Cefar ne qued nan wordy Julius Cefar ne fpac no word ¥ 


ah he braid ut hif fweord. ac he breid vt his fwerd. 

and Nennium he fmat pa? and Nemni® he fmot po 

uppen pene helm fwa. 10 yvppen pan helme fo. 

pat pe helm to-heelde ¥ pat hit in wende’ 

& pat hefde bledde. and pat heued bledde. —_[f.38. ¢.1.] 
ah he ne blakede no ac he ne fpac word non ¥ 

for he wef cniht wel ido. for he was cniht wel idon. 

& Juliuf noht ne na brad! + And Julius mid pe feolue brep ” 
ah hif brond he up aheef. his gode fweord vp heof. 

and Nenniuf heef vp hif fceld: | and Nemnius pulte vp hif fcelde ¥ 
fcilde? hine fulue. and fette bi-twine. 

Juliuf adi fmat an. Julius a-doun fmot 

& pat fweord a Bene feelde bat. ..... t fweord in pe feeald ... 
Juliuf hit wrafte ¥ a2 ..lius hit wrefte 

& pat fweord ftike fefte. = 8 ..... t fweord ftekede fafte. 
Juliuf } fweord heold ¥ Julius pat fweord heold ¥ 


prising it seemed to many [a] knight, that he durst come him nigh, be- 
cause ‘that’ the emperor was so noble! Julius Cesar spake no word, 
but he drew out his sword, and Nennius then he smote so upon the 
helm, that ‘the helm [it] gave way, and the head bled; but he ‘blenched 
not [spake no word], for he was brave knight. And Julius ‘breathed 
nought, [with the same breath] ‘but’ his ‘brand [good sword] ‘he’ hove 
up, and Nennius ‘hove [put] up his shield, ‘to shield himself [and set 
between]; [and] Julius down smote, and the sword bit in the shield. 
Julius it wrested, and the sword stuck fast. Julius held the sword, and 


1 The last two letters of bre® are on erasure. ? f{calde pr. m. 
Y 


322 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


and Nennius pene fceld. 

& puf heo hit longe bi-tu3en ¢ 
ne mihte he pat fweord ut drajen. 
Pat ifeeh Androgeuf? 

hu uerden Cesar & Néniuf. 

& heo® hem to fufde ’ 
monie® to fulfte. 

Pa ifeeh Cefar Y 

tidéd pat him wef fer. 

he for-lette pene brand 

pa nefde he noht on hif hond. 
& he pa feondliche 

turnde to flame. [f£.42".c.1.] 
Nennius wende ipane felde 
and he turnde hif feelde. 

droh ut pene brande ’ 

pa wes pe eorl fwiSe bald. 
Monie Romanifce men ? 

mid pon fweorde he leide adun. 
he wes moniénes monnef bone? 


10 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 7535—7557.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1. 


and Nemnius pane fceald. 

and longe pus i! to3ede ¥ 

pat fwerd ne mihte he habbe. 
pis i-feh Androgiuf? 

hou ferde Cefar and Nem...s. 
and he to wende’ 

. -mnius to fulfte. 

Po ifeh Cefar 

tidinge pat was for. 

he for-lette pane brond ¥ 

po nadde he noht on his hond. 
and he po fwipe?’ 

tornde to flende. 

Nemnius wende in pane feld ¥ 
and he tornde his fceld. 

and droh vt pane brond ’ 

po was he fwipe bold. 

Mani Romaniffe mon 

mid pane fweord he leide a-dun. 
he was mani mannes bane ¥ 


& moniane he dude feome. 21 and manie he dude fame. 
al pat he mid pan fweorde fmat’ al pat he mid pan fweorde fmot ¥ 
per riht hit i-wat. par riht hit abod. 


Nennius the shield, and long thus they ‘it’ tugged, but he (Cesar) might 
not the sword ‘out draw [have]. Androgeus ‘that [this] saw, how Cesar 
and Nennius fared, and he advanced towards them, to the help of Nennius. 
When Cesar saw the tiding that was sore ‘to him,’ he relinquished the 
brand; then had he nought in his hand, and he then speedily turned to ‘flight 
[flee]. Nennius went in the field, and he turned his shield, [and] drew 
out the brand. Then was ‘the earl [he] most bold; many Romanish men 
with the sword he laid adown; he was many ‘a’ mans bane, and to many 
‘one’ he did shame, All that he smote with the sword, there right it 

1 hii? 


2 he? 3 Nennius? 


[v. 7558—7581.] 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


al pat he per mid at-ran ¥ 
weore hit flaf weore hit ban. 
purh peos fweordes wunde 
heo fullen to pon grunde. 

Alle deei wes pat fehti! 

a pet com pe peftere niht. 
Juliuf pe kaifere ¥ 

mid alle pan Romanifce here, 
dalden from pan fihte ? 

al bi pufteF nihte. 10 
to herber3e heo wenden 
uppen pare fie ftronde. 

heo bi-lefdé bi-zften / 

twenti hundred cnihté. 

peo leien under fcelden ¥ 
i-fle3zen 3eond pon felden. 
Cesar iwende to his bedde ¥ 
hif men weoren of-dredde. 
inne? biwakeden in pef nihte y 
pritti hundred cnihten. 20 
mid helmen & mid burné ? 

& mid ftelene fweorden, 
Juliuf Cesar ? 


he wes 3ep and fwuSe i-wer. 


LA3AMONS BRUT, 


323 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


porh pes swerdes wonde y 
hii folle to pan grunde. 
Alle dai was pat fiht ’ 
forte hit were dorcke nipt. 
Julius pe kaifere ¥ 

mid al pan Romaniffe here. 
wende fram pa fihte ¥ 

al bi pufter nihte. 

to herbor3e hii wende ¥ 
vppe par fee ftronde. 

hii bi-lefde ligge / 

twenti hundred cnihtes. 


[c.2.] 


Cefar wende to his bedde y 
his men weren adradde. 
hine bi-wakede pare niht ¥ 
twéti hundred cnihtes. 


Julius Cefar ¥ 


‘departed (died) [abode]; ‘all that he therewith touched, were it flesh were 
it bone,’ through this swords wound they fell to the ground! All day was 
the fight, until ‘the’ dark night ‘came [it were]. Julius the emperor with 
all the Romanish host departed from the fight, all by dark night; to 
camp they went upon the sea strand; they left ‘behind [lying] twenty 
hundred knights, ‘that lay under shields, slain over the fields.’ Czasar 
went to his bed, his men were adread; him awoke in the night ‘thirty 
[twenty] hundred knights, ‘ with helms and with burnies, and with steel 
swords.’ Julius Cesar, ‘he was cunning and most wary, he’ saw his great 

» fihte? ? hine? 
¥ 2 


324 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


he ifteh his muchele luf / 
& of mere he hefde kare. 
he araf to pan mid-nihte ¥ 


and bannede hif cnihtes. [reny 


[v. 7582—7604.] 
MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


ifeh his mochele lure. 


he aros to pare midniht ¥ 
and bannede his cnihtes. 


and feide hed pat heo wolden! fa- and feide pat he wolde ¥ 


and fied of piffen londe. 
faren into Flandre / 
and beo per wuniende. 


faren fram pis londe. 


[c2] in to Flandres he wolde? 


and pare he wolde abide. 


a } he ifezen® hif time ¥ forte he ifeh3ze his time 
pat he mihten® eft cumen 1i%é. 10 pat he mihte eft come lipe. 
Heo ferden forh rihte ¥ Hii verde forp riht ? 

to fcipe al bi nihte. to fipe al bi nihte. 

heo hefden fwiSe fair weder’ hii hadde fwipe fair weder ’ 
& wenden into Flandre. and wende in to France. 

A mar3en pa hit dei wes ” A morwe po hit dai was 
pe king mid his du3eSe. pe king mid his folke. 
3arekede hif ferde ¥ zarekede his ferde / 

& wende to pan fihte. and wende habbe ifohte. 
Peo was Romanifce fole / Po was pat Romaniffe folk 
iuaren from here fonde‘. 20 hi-wende fram hire londe. 
pat ne fundé heo nauer enne? __ pat ne funde hii neuer anne’ 
of Cefares monen. of Cefares mane. 

Pa weoren Bruttes Po weren Bruttus 


loss, ‘and of more he had care’ (i. e. he feared a greater loss) ; he arose in 
the midnight, and summoned his knights, and said ‘ to them’ that he would 
depart ‘and flee’ from this land, ‘ go” into Flanders [he would], and there 
‘be dwelling [he would abide], until he»saw his time, that he might eft 
return. They went forth-right to ship, all by night ; they had weather most 
fair, and proceeded into ‘Flanders [France]. On the morrow, when it was 
day, the king with his folk made ready his host, and ‘marched to the fight 
{weened to have fought]. Then was [the] Romanish folk departed from their 
land, so that they found never one of Cxsars men. Then were the Britons 


1 he wolde? > ifeze? 3 mihte? 4-londe? 


[v. 7605—7628.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 325 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 
bliSe an heore mode. blipe in hire mode. 
muchel wes pa bliffe / mochel was pe bliffe / 
pat heo makedé mid iwiffe. pat hii makede mid i-wiffe. 
and fone per efter ac fone par after? 
feri heo wurden. fori hii were. 
& Caffibellaune pe king / And Caffibilane pe king ‘ 
iward feri purh alle ping. was sori. porh alle ping. 
for Nenniuf hif bro®er for Nemnius his broper ¥ 
ne mihte finden bote. ne mihte finde bote. 
of hif hafued wunde ” 10 of his heued wondey _ [f.38".c.1.] 


pe Julius fmat mid honde. 
ne purh nenne leche-creefte’ ne porh none lechecraft / 


ne mihte he lif habbé. ne mihte he lif habbe. 
Nes per nan oer red? Nas par non oper read ? 
buten Nenniuf iward de®!. bote Nemnius iwarp dead. 
& Nenni? waf ileid Y and he was ileid ¢ 


at pon nord 3ete i Lundene. ine Londene. 

pe king neem enne marmeftan / 

& lette hine mid golde bi-gon. 

mid golde and mid 3imme? 20 

his broer he leide per inne. 

mid riche-dome pa Bruttef ¥ mid mochele richedome ; 
Nennium bi-burden. Bruttus hine burede. 

Nu pu miht iheren fulked® word ¥Nou pou miht ihire fellich word 


blithe in their mood ; much was the joy that they made, for certainty, ‘and 
[but] soon thereafter sorry they ‘became [were]! And Cassibelaune the 
king was sorry through all things, for Nennius his brother might not find 
cure of his head-wound, ‘that Julius smote with hand,’ nor through no 
leechcraft might he life have. Other remedy was there none, but that 
Nennius were dead, and ‘Nennius [he] was laid ‘at the north gate’ in 
London. ‘The king took a marble stone, and caused it to be inlaid 
with gold, with gold and with gems; his brother he laid therein’; with 
{much] magnificence the Britons buried ‘Nennius [him]. Now thou may- 


1 dead? 7 fulked? 


Crocea 


morf: 


326 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
pe king nom pat ilke fweorde. 


[v. 7629—7651.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1. 
pe king nam pat ilke fwerd. 


pat Néniuf hif broSer? [[f.43.c.1.] 
biwan of Juliuf Cefare. 


and leide hit bi his broSer and leide hit bi his broper ? 


' hit his bone weore. porh wan his bane he hadde. 
Wes pe ftelene brond ” Was pe ftelene brond ’ 
{wide brad & fwide long. {wipe brod and {wipe long. 


per on weoren igraué 7 

feole cunne boc-ftauen. 

we Sere hilte wes igrauen?? 10 
pat pa fweord wes i-cleoped Y 
inne Rome Crocia Mors. 

fwa } fweord hehte 

for hit hauede muchele mahte. 
Per mide pe keifere ¥ 

preetede zlches londes here. 
for naf neuere pe ilke bern 
pe auere iboren weoren®. pat euere ibore were. 
pat of pé ilke fweorde ? pat of pan ilke fwerde ? 
enne {wipe hefde. 2 one {wip hadde. 

pat he of hif likame ” fo pat of his licame 
lette enne drope blod. one blodes drope fadde. 
pat he nes fone died ? pat he nere fone dead 


hit was icleopid in Rome pus ¥ 
pat his Crocea Mors. 


Par mid pe kayfere 
pretede eche londef here. 
for nas neuere pe ilke man / 


est hear marvellous word; the king took the same sword ‘that Nennius, 
his brother won of Julius Cesar,’ and laid it by his brother, ‘though it 
{through which] his death ‘were [he had]. The steel brand was very 
broad and very long, ‘thereon were engraven many kind of letters, on the 
hilt was engraven that’ ‘the sword [it] was called in Rome [thus, that is,] 
Crocea Mors; ‘so the sword hight, because it had much might.’ There- 
with the emperor threatened each land here; for that man was never, that 
ever was born, that if of the same sword one stroke he had, [so] that ‘he’ 
of his body ‘let [shed] one drop of blood, that he was not soon dead, were 


) pah? 2 A line is apparently wanting here. 5 weore? 


[v. 7652—7673.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 327 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


neore he noht fwa dohti. nere he noht fo dohti. 
Juliuf mid hif ferde 
lei inne Flandre. 


pat word com to Frice ¥ Pat word com to France ? 
heou he iuaren hefde. hou Julius ifare hadde. 

& hu he wees mid his feerde'? and hou he was mid his ferde 
i-flemde of piffen earde. i-floze fram pis erpe. 


Pat? weoren pa Frenfce men? Po weren pe Frence men? 
per fore fwipe*® ueine. [grome? par of glade. 

for toward Juliuf heo hzfden 10 

& for pi weoré fein of his feome. 

“Llc Frenfe mon pe* wes aht ’ 

hef8° hine feolfne bi-poht. 


and feide to hif iuere ¥ and ech feide to oper ? 

Ne wur%e he nauere ifele. Ne worpe he neuere fele. 

pe nu and auere mare 7 pat nou oper euere more ¥ 

bu3e [to] Cefare. [Le.2-] bouwe to Cefare. [comey 
pe Bruttes habbed ouer-cumen ¥ pe Bruttus hine® habbep ouer- 
& of heof londe idriuen. and of hire londe idriue. 


nulle we him nauere heren’ 2 nolle we him na more bouwe ’ 
ne helde for ure herre. — [feipey 
at? wih him we fcullen ure freo- 


he nought so doughty! ‘ Julius with his army lay in Flanders.’ The word 
(tidings) came to France, how ‘he [Julius] had fared, and how he was with 
his host driven from this land. Then were the Frenchmen ‘therefore most 
fain [thereof glad], ‘ for toward Julius they had anger, and on that account 
were fain of his shame. Each Frenchman that was brave had bethought 
himself,’ and [each] said to ‘his comrade [other]: ‘‘ May he never be 
prosperous, who now ‘and [or] evermore shall bow to Cesar, whom Britons 
have overcome, and from their land driven! We will ‘never [no more 
to] him ‘obey [bow], ‘nor hold for our lord, but we shall with him 


1 In the MS. this line is, through carelessness, repeated thus ; & hu he was mid 
hif ferde, but has been struck out with a plummet. 

2 pa? 3 The last two letters of {wipe are added. + pes pr. m. 

5 hef&e pr. m., but e erased; read hefd. ® Redundant ? 7 ac? 


. 


328 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 7674—7696.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. ax. . MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

mid fehte bi-tellen. 

for ne funde we na bliSere ¥ 

penne beo’ pa Bruttef. pane dude Bruttus. 

pe hine habbeo’ ut idriuen ¥ pat habbep hine vt idriue? — [c.2.] 

& hif cnihtes ifle3en. and if leze his cnihtes. 


pif iherden' fegge Juliuf/ pis ihorde Julius ¥ 
pat pa Frenfcen fpeken puf. pat pe Frence fpeken pus. 
& pat heo fpeken of praette and pat hii fpeke of prete? 


& of prute ibeote. and of prude eke. 

He wende into France ¥ 10 He wende ine France ?’ 
mid muchelen hif ferde. mid mochele his ferde. 
alfe heo® noht ne cude / alfe he noht nufte ? 

‘} heo him vuel waldé. pat .. him vuel wolde. 

& fende 3eond al France y he fend. . . sj pat lond 
after his freo monnen. to pan .siss)s aestes, 

pat heo comen him to? pat hii come h.... 

alfwa heo fculdétoheore herredon.fo cniht folde his louerd do. 
Alle heo comen him to®y Alle hii comen 

& alle hine cuften. pane kaifer cufte. 

& alle hine gretten 20 and alle hine grette ¥ 

& heore grame dernden. in hire grame deorne. 
Juliuf wes swide wis? Julius was fwipe wis 
and war on his ponke. and war on his ponke. 


our freedom win with fight; for we are no cowardlier’ than ‘are [did] 
‘the’ Britons, who have him driven out, and slain his knights.” Julius 
heard this ‘say,’ that the French spake thus, and that they spake in 
threat, and in ‘proud boast [pride eke]. He went into France with his 
great host, as if he knew nought that they would to him evil; and sent 
over all ‘France {the land],‘after his [to the] free ‘men [knights], that they 
should to him come, as ‘they [knight] should to ‘their master [his lord] do. 
They all came ‘to him, and all’ ‘him [the emperor] kissed, and all greeted 
him, ‘and their anger concealed [in their secret anger]. Julius was most 
wise, and wary in his thought; he caused to be brought [before him] ‘much 


} jherde? 2 he? 3 to is interlined. 


(v. 7697—7719.] LA3AMONS BRUT, 329 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
he lette bringen muchel gold? he lette bringen him bi-fore ¢ 
and gerfume ftore. garifome wel i-chofe. 
erft he 3«f pen hehfte par of he 3af pe hehifte / 
pe eodé him nexte. pat were him nexfte. 
3efuen fwiSe riche 3iftes {wipe riche ¥ 
of reden hif golde. of reode:his golde. 


auerelcne cnihte 7 

he 3ef 3eoue brihte. 

mid pere 3eue he heom ouer-com?mid pare 3ift he heom odcom ¥ 
pat was pa } bezfte iwa'. 0 alfe him pohte beft don. 

& freoliche him bi-hehte 

habben } heo fcolden. 

Pa weoren heo hif freond ” Po weren hii his frendes ? 

pe er weoren his fulle fon. pat her him lutel lofuede. 
wherd? if pe ike mon ?’ [(£ 43.c.1.]ware his nou pe ilke man ¥ 
patme ne mai mid mede ouer-gan.patne maymid medebeo ouer-come. 


purh pa luue of pa feo ¥ 

feond-fcipe aleggen. 

makié feolle ifreond ¥ of mannef fo maki frend ¥ 
peh heo weoren iuziede. 20 +~wip lutelle 3iftef. 

Nu fpac Juliuf Cefar ” Nou fpac Julius Cefar ¥ 

he wes wis and {wiSe iwar. he wes fwipe wif and war. 
IhereS mine Frenfce men Hercnep mine Frence men y 


gold, and’ treasure ‘abundant [well chosen]; ‘first [thereof] he gave to 
the noblest that ‘went [were] next him, gifts very rich of his red gold; 
‘to every knight he gave a gift bright’; with the gifts he overcame them, 
‘so that the best was then gained [as best seemed to him to do}, ‘and freely 
promised him what they should have. Then were they his friends, that 
ere ‘were his full foes [loved him little]! Where is [now] that man, that 
‘men’ may not with meed [be] overcome ; ‘ through the love of the riches 
lay aside enmity’; ‘make many friends, though they were at enmity [of 
mans foe make friends with little gifts]? Now spake Julius Casar—he 
was wise and most wary :— ‘Hear [Hearken] ye, my French men, my free 


) Written at first iwad, but d expuncted. 2 wher? 


SS eae 


SS eg = - 


330 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 7720—7744.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1. 
mine freo cnihtes. mine freo cnihtes. 
ich wulle fede to Rome’ ich wolle fende to Rome? 
to mine monnen wel idone. to alle mine cnihtes. 
 heo me fende ford rihtef? pat hii hizenliche / 
fif hundred enihtes. come to mi feolue. 
for 3et ich wulle wenden for 3et ich wolle wende? [f.39. el.) 
in to Brut-londe. into Brutlonde. 
& 3e me feullen ueren mid / 
mid muchelere ftrége. 


& pat lond ich wulle biwinnen ? 10 
& pa bet eow fcel iwurSen. 

for eowre muchele wurd-fcipe ¥ 
weole 3e fcullen habben. 

Alle eowre flemede men ? 
midmif freondfcipen cumen a3en. 
for 3ifuen ich wulle witen Y 

& p’ wrecchen makien richen. 
freo 3e fcullen iwurden 

& mine freond-feipe habben. 


Pa anfware } hired ? 20 Po anfwerede alle ? 

mid heh3ere ftefne. pe enihtef of France. 

Mid pe we wulled libben Mid pe we wollep libbe ” 

& mid pe we wulled liggé. and mid pe we wollep ligge. 
and wur®’-fcipe pe bi-winnen Y } 

mid ftrengSe and mid ginné. 


knights; I will send to Rome, to ‘my brave men [all my knights], that 
they ‘send me forth-right five hundred knights [speedily come to my- 
self]; for yet I will go into Britain, ‘and ye shall fare with me, with great 
strength, and the Jand I will conquer, and the better i¢ shall be for you; 
wealth ye shall have for your mickle worship. All your banished men 
with my friendship shall come again; for gifts I will decree, and the poor 
make rich; free ye shall become, and my friendship have.”” Then answered 
‘the assemblage [all the knights of France] ‘ with loud voice :’ “‘ With thee 
we will live, and with thee we will lie, ‘and honor for thee win, with 
strength and with stratagem; and’ we will march with thee ‘with bold 


lv. 7745—7768.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 331 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
& mid pe we wulled bujé 
mid baldere ftrengSe. 
ouer fe to Brutlonde 
to Caffibellaune pa kinge. to Caffibilane. 
& wid him we feullé fihten?’ [c.2.] and wip him we follen fihte / 
& weerken' pine cnihtes. and wreken. pine cnihtes. 
& iwinen al pat lond and a-winne al pat lod?’ 
and fetten hit in pire hond. and fe... ... in vre o3e hond. 
& per mofte mare to’ --r mofte more toy 
ser pif weoren® al idon. 10 ar al pis were ido. 
for al heo weoren feeri ? for alle hii weren fori? 
zr hit fo weore. are hit fop were. 
Pa Cefar hefde pif idon ¥ Po Cefar hadde pus idon ¥ 
& hif gerfume ideled*. 
& ec hefde freond-feipe ¥ 
mid his feo biwunnen. 


MS, Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


mid pe we wollep wende 


pa ferde he into Buluine / 
per him bezft pu%te. 
He hehte wurchen ane tur’ 


to Boloyne he wende. 


He lette makie anne tour 


wunderliche fier. 2 wonderliche hende. 
pe tur wes muchel and heh? __he was fwipe fair and heh? 
& pere fee heo ftod wel neh. pe £6é he ftod fwipe neh. 


pe keifere hire 3f nome? 


pe kayfer hine let cleopie ’ 
& OSeres heo cleopede. 


Odres pe heh3e. 


strength over sea to Britain,’ to Cassibelaune ‘ the king,’ and with him we 
shall fight, and avenge thy knights, and conquer all the land, and set it in 
‘thine [our own] hand:”—but thereto must more, ere [all] this were 
done, for all they were sorry ere it were sooth! When Cesar had done 
this, ‘and his treasure distributed, and eke had gained friendship with his 
riches, then’ went he ‘in ’to Boulogne, ‘ where it best seemed to him.’ He 
‘ordered [caused] a tower to be ‘worked [made] wonderfully fair ; ‘the tower 
[it] was ‘mickle [very fair] and high, ‘and’ to the sea it stood ‘well [very] 
nigh. The emperor ‘gave it a name, and called it Otheres [caused it to be 
3 ideled ? 


1 wreken ? 2 weore ? 


332. LA3AMONS BRUT. {v. 7769—7792.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xitr. 
in pare tur ftronge 
pe keifere wunede longe. 
preottene mon%es ? 
wunede Juliuf in OSeres. 
and pider he lette alcumen? _pider let pe kayfer come ¥ 
gold and hif gerfume. his gold and his garefome. 
Nef neve na tur? 
pe {wa weore itimbred. 
mid crafte fwa gode 


fwa pa tur of OSef?. 10 

per mihten fitten in po grunde? In pangrunde of pe turmihte fitte? 
cnihtef fixti hundred: fixti hundred cnihtef. 

& pa turres cop mitte weoré*? and pe toppe mihte wreie’ 

a cniht mid his capen. on cniht mid his cope. 


Pa pe tur wes al 3aru / 

pa heefde Cefar pe laffe kare. 
in to France he wende ¥ 

& fette hif wike. 

3eond al he fette reuwen 
ftronge & he3en, 20 
po® fengen pa lond-gauel ¥ 

& mid pan feo feulden faren. 
euer alene 3ere ¥ 

to Odref peon ture. 


called Odres the noble] ; ‘in the strong tower the emperor long dwelt ; 
thirteen months remained Julius in Otheres, and’ thither ‘he [the emperor] 
caused ‘all’ [his] gold and his treasure to come. ‘Never was there any 
tower that was so built, with craft so good as the tower of Otheres! 
Sixty hundred knights might sit ‘ there’ in the bottom [of the tower], and- 
the ‘towers’ top a knight might cover with his mantle! ‘When the tower 
was all ready, then had Cesar the less care; into France he went, and 
established his cities ; over all he set reves, strong and noble, who should 
take the land-tax, and with the money should go every year to Otheres 


> OSeref? ? mihte wreoié or wrijen? 3 pe? peo? 


{v. 7793—7815.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


Pa lette he wurché ¥ 
wunderliche muchele. [f. 44. c. 1.} 
fix hundred fcipen Y 

& fette heo! to hauene. 

Pa pat were wef idony 

& al pat per bihouede to. 

pa feide pe keifere ¥ 

pat to Brutlonde he wolde faren. 
ford bi hif® q'ke liue / 

nalde he heom fwa bi-leuen. 10 
Six hundred feipe gode ” 

he fufde i fee flode. 

& nufte na mon pat itel ” 

of pan fcipen } feileden after. 

& ford riht heo wenden y 

in to pere Temefe. 

Nu pohte Juliuf Cezar ? 

ah per he wes to ynwar. 

he pohte fwa ford teon ¥ 

efter pere Temefe. 20 
rouwen {wa loge. 

he come to Londé. 

& per heo wolden® up faren 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 333 


MS.. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
Po lette he wirche 
fipes fwipe gode. 
fix hundred ¥ 
and fette heom in flode.. 
Po pat wore was idony 
and al pat bi-houede par tou. 
po feide pe kaifer ¥ 
pat to Brutlond he wolde fare. 
for bi his ewike lifue ¥ 
nolde he 3am fo bi-leue. (en 2-] 
Six hundred fipes gode ? 
fufde in pe flode. 
and nufte no ma pe tale y 
of oper fipes fmale. 
forp riht hii wende 
into pare Temefe. . 
Nou pohte Julius Cefar ¥ 3 
ac par he was to onwar. : 


he pohte rowe fo longe ¥ 
forte he come to Londene. 
and pare he wolde vp fare 7 


the tower.’ Then caused he to be made six hundred ships ‘wonderfully 
great [most good], and set them in ‘haven [flood]. When the work was 
done, and all that behoved thereto, then said the emperor, that to Britain he 
would ‘ forth’ fare, [for] by his quick life, would he not leave them so! Six 
hundred good ships ‘he’ launched in ‘sea [the] flood, and knew no man the 
number of ‘the ships that sailed after [other ships small]!—‘ and’ forth- 
right they proceeded into the Thames. Now thought Julius Casar—but 
there he was too unwary—he thought ‘so to advance forwards up the 
Thames,’ so long to row, until he came to London, and there he would 


1 heom? ? There has been a correction here, on an erasure. 
3 he wolde? 


— 


334 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 7816—7838.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
& fehten wid Bruttes. and fihte wip Bruttus. 
& iwinnen al pis lond and iwinne al pif lond ¥ 
to hif azere hond. to his owene hond. 
Ah naf hit noht {wa iloten ac naf hit noht fo ilote 
for lettige com on uefte. for him com mochel lette. 


for fee liSende men ? 

seiden pon Brutten. 

pat pe kaifere Juliuf 

wolde i Temefe cume puf. 
faren ford to Lunden 10 
& fehté wid! pa leoden. 

& pa Bruttef iwurSen war ’ 

& wifdom bi-podté. 


& nomen longen reftres / Bruttus nemen refteres ? 
ftroge & rihte. {feod ” longe and rihte. 

mid ftronge irene heo weoren i- mid hyre wel ibunde y 

& fetté hed i Temefe flod. and hi-fote in pan grunde. 


per weoren fifti hundred 

fafte i pon grunde. 

& pa herre endef? 20 
ihodede mid irene bendes. [c.2-] 
to-3enes heom heolden 

inne pere hauene. 


disembark, and fight with the Britons, and win all this land in his own hand. 
But it was not so allotted, for [much] hindrance came ‘speedily [to him], 
‘for sea-faring men said to the Britons, that the emperor Julius would 
come thus in the Thames, proceed forth to London, and fight with the 
people. And the’ Britons ‘became wary, and wisdom bethought, and 
took ‘long’ rafters, ‘strong [long] and straight, with ‘strong’ iron ‘they 
were shod [well bound], and ‘set them in Thames flood [shot in the 
ground]; ‘ there were fifty hundred fast in the ground, and the higher ends 
hooded with iron bands, to hold against them in the haven’; and ‘so’ 


1 wid ? 


[v. 7839—7861.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 335 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
& fwa heo per ftoden and peos reftres ftode ¥ 
biwrizen mid pon flode. hi-hud in pan flode. 
Pa com Juliuf Cesar Po com Julius Cefar / 
& her ef nes na wiht war. and her of nas noht war. 
pet weder heom ftrongliche drof pat weder 3am ftragliche' drof ¥ 
ftermen per fungé. pat mani fip al to-rof. 


weder heom ftod on wille ¥ 

heo wenden wal? to fpeden. 

heo urnen touward hauene ¥ 

fcipen gunnen helden. 10 

bofmes per rédden 

wat? in wende. 

feiles per helfden 

adeles adrunken. 

& pa Rom-leoden 

rameden 3e6d upen. 

pa fcipen wenden to widre pare weand® to wondre ¢ 
oder half hundred. fipes two hundred. 

Per after com Juliuf Cefar ¥ Po com Julius Cefar ¥ 
on hif hurte* him wes fer. 2 pat in his heorte was for. 


heo fcuuen ut heore lof? hii fouen vt hire lof” 
& leiden to pon londe. and leide to pan londe. 
& peo per efter comen and paie pat after come ? 


‘they there [these rafters] stood, ‘covered with [hid in] the flood. Then 
came Julius Cesar, and hereof was ‘no whit [not] aware; the weather 
drove them strongly, [so that many ships all went to pieces ;] ‘ the steers- 
men there sung, weather stood them at will, they weened well to speed. 
They run toward haven, the ships began to heel,—the holds there are rent, 
—water in went,—sails there are torn asunder,—men are drowned,—and 
the Rome-folk are hurried over the waves’;—'the ships [there] went to de- 
struction ‘a hundred and fifty [ships two hundred]! ‘Thereafter [Then] came 
Julius Cesar, [who] in his heart ‘he’ was sore; they shove out their luff, 
and laid to the land; and [they] that ‘there ’after came were soon ‘aware 


1 {trangliche? 2 wel? 3 wende? 4 heorte? 


Se 


336 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


weoren war fone. 

and heom felliche i-lop ” 

pet meften del com a lond. 
Heo flo3en heoren teldes 
wide 3eond pa feldes. 

& feere menden heoren wines Y 
pe adrunken weoré. 

Pa wees pe king war?’ 

Caff ibellaunes. 

p Julius pe keiferF ’ 10 
wes a Lundene mid his here. 
pa 3eddede pe king 
Caffibellaune. 

Welle broSer Nenni® ¥ 

pat ich pe quic nabbe. 

& pat fweord crocea mors 

pe pu biwunne a compe. 

& pe bi mire fide’ 

ifund fe3ze riden. [£.44%c.1.] 
an oder half Androchiufy — 20 
& his broder Tennanciuf. 
fikerlichen we fculdé uaren 
& fehten wid pon keifere. 

& ford we feulen liden / 

& fellen his leoden. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xt. 


weren pare fone. 


Hii flo3é hire teldes 

oferal pe feldef. 

and menden hire cnihtef? 

pat a-dronke weren. 

Po was pe king war? 
Caffibilane. 

pat a londe was pe kaifere ¥ 
mid alle his here. 

po feide pe king ? [f.39%.c.1.) 
Caffibilane. 

Wola broper Nemni? / 

pat ich pe ewic nabbe. — 

and pat fweord Crocea mors ¥ 
pat pou a-wonne in fihte. 


sikerliche mihte ich fare ¥ 
and fihte wip pan kayfere. 
and 3et we follen wende ’ 
and fallen his leode. 


[v. 7862—7886.] 


[there], ‘and fortunately i¢ happened to them, that the most part came to 
land.’ They pitched their tents ‘wide over [over all] the fields, and ‘ sorely’ 
lamented their ‘friends [knights], that were drowned. Then was the king 
aware, Cassibelaune, that ‘Julius’ the emperor was ‘at London [ashore], 
with[all] his forces. Then said the king Cassibelaune: ‘Alas brother 
Nennius! that I have thee not alive, and the sword Crocea Mors, that thou 
didst win in ‘combat [fight], ‘and see thee by my side in safety ride, and 
on the other side Androgeus, and his brother Tennancius,’ then securely 
‘we should [might I] march, and fight with the emperor !—and [yet] ‘ forth ’ 
we shall wend, and fell his people!’’ ‘Cassibelaune, king of tie Britons, 


[v.7887—7910.] LAJAMONS BRUT. 337 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. . MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


Cuffibellaiie Bruttene king / 
wes god cnih' purh alle ping. 


he fomnede vnimete here He fomnede onimete here ¥ 
& ferde touward pon keifere. | and wende to pan kayfere. 
& puf {pec wid hif folke / and pus fpac to his folke / 
& luueliche fpilede. and lofueliche faide. 


Bi-denched eow ohte cnihtes / 
to bi-tellen eoweore rihtef. 
bi-penched a Belin pone king? Bi-penchep on Belyn pane king ¥ 


& Brennes his bro®er. 10 and Brenne his broper. 
hu heo bizeten Rome? hou hii bi-3ete Rome 
mid riche here ferde. mid hire riche ferde. 


& biwunnen al pa richen 
pe leien in to Rome. 


& fwa heo hit walden and pare ine wonede ? 

wel feole wintre. wel fale wintres. 

& fwa heo per bo3zedé 7 

pe wile pe heo luueden. 

& ich hit fugge eow cnihtes’ And ich hou® fegge cnihtes 

Rome if eowre irihte. 20 Rome his oure rihtes. 

nu hit halt Juliuf Cefar ” pat nou halt Julius Cefar 
"pe if tweien icumen her. pat twie his icome her. 


& halt per eower icunde 
& her eow wule driuen of londe. 


was good knight through all things’; he assembled an innumerable host, 
and marched toward the emperor, and thus spake ‘with [to] his folk, and 
lovingly said: ‘‘‘ Bethink you, bold knights, to win your rights’; think 
on Belin the king, and Brennes his brother, how they obtained Rome with 
their powerful army, ‘and conquered all the realms that lay near Rome,’ 
and ‘so they it governed [therein dwelt] well many winters, ‘and so they 
there abode the while that they lived.’’ And I say it you, knights, Rome 
is ‘your [our] right; [that] now holds ‘it’ Julius Cesar, who twice is come 
here, ‘and holds there your territory, and here will drive you from land,’ 


1 cniht? ; 2 30u? 


Sa 


338 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 7911—7933.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

& hateS eow fwa {wide ¥ and hatep ou fo fwipe ? 

pat awei he wule eow driue. pat awei apenchep' ou driue. 

3if 3e leofed pif lond 3if 3e lefep pis lond ’ 

ouer al 3e wurded?® laSe. oueral 3e worpeh lope. 

Ah beo 3e fwiSe bifie Y Ac beop nou {wipe kene ¥ 

for we beod ohte Bruttef. 30u feolue to helpe. 


Cefar is in ure londe 

& lid her bi fee ftronde. 
ohliche lide we hi to” [c.2.] 
swa him alre ladeft beo. 10 


& awalde we pe keifere and awelde we pane kayfere ¢ 
& al hif Romanifce here. and al his Romaniffe here. 

& areddé ure lond and aredde we oure lond ’ 

of pan Rom-leodene. of pan Romleode. 

Pat® andf{wereden pa ferde Po anfwerede alle ” 

varen we biliue. wende we fnelle. 

for Juliuf if feeie 


mid al hif Rom-folke. 
For’ heo ifufden 


& ferden biliue. 20 

pat heo pidir comen ” Hii wende forte icome‘? 
per lei pat folk of Rome. par lay pat folk of Rome. 
& heo heom to refden ’ and hii him to refde / 


and biddeth you so soon, that away he ‘will [thinketh] you drive. If ye lose 
this land, over all (everywhere) ye will become loath. But be ‘ye [now] 
most ‘busy [keen], ‘for we are bold Britons! [yourselves to help.] ‘Cesar 
is in our land, and lieth here by sea strand; bravely advance we to him, 
as those who are to him most hostile,’ and conquer we the emperor, and all 
his Romanish army, and rid [we] our land of the Rome-folk! Then an- 
swered ‘the host [all], “March we quickly !—‘ for Julius is fated, with all 
his Rome-folk! Forth they pushed, and advanced quickly,’ ‘until they 
thither came [They proceeded until they came] where the folk of Rome lay; 
and they rushed on them with powerful strength. Fiercely they fought, 


1 he benchep? 2 wurSed? 3 pa? 4 hii come? 5 ham? 


(v. 7934—7957.) 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


mid rehere ftrengSe. 
Ladliche heo feohten ’ 

& Rom-ware feollen. 

per Cefar folk 

folden ifohten. 

noht bi tene no bi tene / 

ah bi twenti puféde. 

{wa heo fehten al dei?’ 
monie per weoren feie. 

pet hit com to pere nihteY 10 
ne mihte Cefar na mare fihte. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


339 


MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
mid he3ere ftrengpe. 
Lopliche hii fohte 
and Romaniffe fulden. 
par Cefares folk ¥ 
pane grunde fohte. 
noht bi ten and twenti 
ac bi mani poufendes. 
so i! fohte alle day’ 
mani dead weren. 
Po hit com to pare nihte 
ne mihte Cefar na more fihte. © 


[e.2.] 


Cefar was fwipe wo? 

and bi-pohte hine po. 

pat he wolde in pilke nihtes ¥ 
fleon ..ei mid his cnihtes. 


Cefar was fwa fwide wa’ 
& bi-Sohte hine pa. 

pat he wolde a pere nihte ¥ 
fleon awei mid his cnihten. 


Juliuf Cezar’ .. 8: Cefary 

of hif lure wes per war. of his lure was war. 

he lette blawen hif bemen lette blowe his beumes ” 
& banné his ferden. and banni his ferde. 


and lette loude cleopie ; 
and oueral cupi. 


& lette leode cleopien ¥ 20 
& ouer al cuSen. 

pat heo comé to heore innes ¥ 
& 3arekeden heore ginnes. 


& fe3zeden heoren wepnen pat he wolde a morwe Y 


and ‘Rome-men [the Romanish] felled; there Caesars folk sought the 
ground, not by ten ‘nor by ten [and twenty], but by ‘twenty [many] 
thousands! So they fought all day,—many ‘there’ were dead,—'that 
[When] it came to the night, Cesar might no more fight. Czesar was ex- 
ceeding woe, and bethought him then, that he would in ‘the [that] night 
flee away with his knights. Julius Cesar of his loss was ‘there’ aware; 
‘he’ let his trumps blow, and summon his forces, and let loud be proclaimed, 
and over all made known, ‘ that they should come to their tents, and prepare 
their stratagems, and burnish their weapons;’ on the morrow ‘they should 


1 hii? 
Zz 2 


- 340 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 7958—7980.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
a marwen heo fufden! to fehte. wip Bruttuf fihte. 
pif iherden pa bifie’ pis ihorde on Brut ¥ 
pe weoren per bi-helues. pat was par bi-fide. 
ford riht heo comen ¥ and a-non riht com? 
to Caffibellaune. to Caffibilane. 
& feidé hi } Cefar ¥ and feide pat Cefar ¥ 


wulde pe 3et wunnié par. [f.45.c.1.]wolde 3et wonie par. 

& amarwe he weolde fehten’ and a morwe he wolde fihte ¢ 
mid alle his cnihten. mid alle his cnihtes. 

& fallen pa Bruttes ¥ 10 

oder him fulf beo feie. 

for pus heo letten® cleopien ¥ 

& cuSen 3eond his ferde. 

Ah wala wa & wala wa’ Ac wolawo wolawo 

pat Caffibellaune ner iwar. pat Caffibilane ner war po. 
pa he wende fwide wel don 

ah ne dude he hit no. 


he droh in ane helue Y he droh to on ope® half? 
& toc pa herberwe. and tock to herbore3e. 

& alle pa nihte / 2 and pilke nihtes ¥ 
greideden his cnihtes. a-redi were his cnihtes. 


heore fceftes & heore fceldef/ 
pa fcelkes weoren bifcherred. 


march to fight [that he would fight with the Britons]. This heard ‘the busy 
who were [a Briton who was] there beside; ‘forth-right they [and anon 
right] came to Cassibelaune, and said ‘ to him’ that Cesar would ‘ the’ yet 
dwell there, and on the morrow he would fight with all his knights, ‘ and fell 
the Britons or himself be slain ;—for thus he caused to be proclaimed and 
made known over his army.’ But alas! ‘and’ alas! that Cassibelaune 
were not [then] wary, ‘ when he weened most well to do, but he did it not!’ 
He drew ‘on one [to another] side, and took [to] ‘the’ camp, and ‘all the 
[the same] night his knights ‘made [were] ready ‘their shafts and their 
shields, —the men were deceived.’ ‘For [And] Julius Cesar of his harm was 


1 The letters uf of fufden are sup. ras., perhaps originally f{culden. 
? he lette? 3 oper? 


= 


[v. 7981—8004.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 341 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 
For Juliuf Cesar Ad Julius Cefar / 
of his herme wef wer. of his harme was war. 
a-buten mid-nihte / and to pare midnihte / 


he warnede alle his cnihtes. fleh mid his cnihtef. 
& to! feipen ferden ¥ 
& fufden an vefte. 
Heo hafden fwide god weder ¥ 
_ & wenden mid vden. 

heo ledden in heore fcipen ¥ and ladde in hire fipes / 
wider deade men and quiken. 10 bope pe deade and pe ewike. 
moni forhfulne seg ? mani ftaleworpe cniht / 
fare iwunded. bitere iwonded. 
monienne deadne cniht ? 
of Cefares duh3eSe. 
Swa heo wenden mid pon flode? So iwende*® mid pan flode ” 
to pon tur of OSres. to par tour of Odres. 
per wes Juliuf Cezar’ par was Julius Cefar? — [f.40.¢.1.] 
an heorte he hafde for3e & far. in his heorte he hadde care. 
Amar3en pa hit wes dei liht:’) Amorwe po hit was dai liht / 


hit wes cud ford riht. 2 hit was cup forpriht. 

& ec ifeid pon kinge / and eke ifeid pan kinge ¢ 
Caffibellaune. Caff ibilane. 

hu Juliuf pe keifere ’ hou Julius pe kaifere / 

wef fro piffen londe ifaren. was fram piffe londe i-fare. 


aware; [and] ‘about [in the] midnight he ‘warned all [fled with] his 
knights, ‘and to ship went, and quickly departed. They had weather most 
fair, and sailed with the waves’; ‘they [and] conveyed in their ships both 
[the] dead ‘men’ and [the] quick; many a ‘sorrowful man, sorely [stal- 
worth knight, bitterly] wounded, ‘many a dead knight of Czsars people.’ 
So they fared with the flood to the tower of Otheres; there was Julius 
Czesar,—in [his] heart he had ‘sorrow and’ care! On the morrow when 
it was day-light, it was made known forth-right and eke said to the king 
Cassibelaune, how Julius the emperor was gone from this land, ‘and all 


1 & to are by second hand, sup. ras. ? hii wende? 


342 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8005—8028.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C, xt. 

& al hu he fufde ¥ 

& fleh mid pon vden. 

} nes per bileeued ” [c.2.] pat nas par bi-lefued:’ 

nan of Rom-leoden. non of . .mleode. 

Pa wes pon kinge way Po was pe king .. 

& puf 3eddede pa. and pus he feide po. 
“Wale wale vnred Wo worpe onread ” 

mani cniht pu makeft deed. for mani cniht pou makeft dead. 
welle' pat ich nas er war? wei pat ich nadde bi war. 
pat Juliuf wolde wenden. 10 pat Juliuf wolde wende. 
Ful soh feide pe feg ¥ Sop faide pe man / 

pe peos faze talde. pat pes faze tolde. 

3if pu ileueft zelene mon’ 3if pou ileueft ech man 
selde pu felt wel don. felde falt pou wel don. 
Swa ic wende wel? pat pe fwe3e 7 So ich wende pat pe faize y 
foS weoren®. riht fop were. 

pe me wes to niht itald Y pat me was to niht i-told / 
an corl fwicful & bald. an eorl fwicfol and onbold. 
pat Cefar wolde nu to dei? pat Cefar wolde nou to dai? 
B"tlond biwinnen. 20 Brutlonde winne. 

over her mid fweorde oper here mid fwerde ¢ 
liggen to-fwungen. ligge to-hewe. 

and al hif iuere Y and alle his i-veref/ 

pe mid him comen here. pat mid him comen here. 


how he departed, and fled on the waves,’ so that there was left none 
of the Rome-folk. Then was the king woe, and thus [he] then said: 
‘“Alas! alas! [Woe worth] mis-counsel! [for] many a knight thou 
makest dead. Alas! that I ‘was not ere [had not been] aware, that Julius 
would depart! ‘Full’ sooth said the man, that this saw told—If thou 
believest each man, seldom shalt thou do well! So I weened ‘ well’ that 
the speech were [right] sooth, that was told to me to-night by a man 
traitorous and ‘bold [timid], that Cesar would now to-day conquer Britain, 
or here lie with sword hewed in pieces, and all his companions that with 


1 wale? 2 Written at first wel don, but don expuncted. 3 weore? 


[v. 8029—8051.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 343 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. rx. . MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11, 
Nu wes pif ilke ifeid Nou was pis ilke i-feid / 
me to bi-swiken. me to bi-fwike. 
weila wei weila wei / weilawei weilawei / 
p he if puf i-faren awei. pat he his pus ifaren awei. 
& na peles ich em blide’ And nopeles ich ham blipe ¥ 
for auere to ure liue. for euere to oure to oure' lifue. 
we m3en? ouer-fitten pif lond’ we mawe ouer-fitte pis lond ’ 
rer he uf eft ifechen®, are hii vs efte feche. 
for euere more he mai imunné? for euere he may imune / 
‘ he him her imunten‘. 10 pat we him here a-fende. 
for her ligge® to-3ere ? for liggep her to-3ere ¥ 
ten pufend of his iferen. ten pufend of his iuere. 
wid uten his drihtliche fcipen’ wip houte his gode fipes? 
pe i fe idrunken. pat ine féé adrongke. 


Ah wel ich ponkie mine gode’ Ware fore ich ponki god?  [c.2.] 
for wurSfcipe ich habbe ibiden. of his mochele worfipe. 

& twien® iflemed pene keifeF?’ pat twie ich habbe pane kaifere 
mid alle his Romanifce leode®. _iflemid mid al his here. 

& nu ich wulle to Lundene / And nou ich wolle to Londene / 
pa burh ich luuie fwuse. 20 pane borh ich lofuie fwipe. 

&per ich wulle halineffe? [f.45°.c.1.Jand par ich wolle holiniffe ¥ 

to mine goden haldé. to mine god holde. 

& fwidSe heom wurden / 


him here came. Now was this same said to deceive me. Alas! alas! 
that he is thus gone away! And nevertheless I am blithe, for ever in our 
lives we may inhabit this land, ere he eft us seek; for ever ‘more’ he may 
remember what ‘he [we] to him here ‘resolved [sent]; for here lie at present 
ten thousand of his companions, without (exclusive of) his good ships, that 
in the sea sunk. ‘But well [Wherefore] I thank ‘ my’ ‘gods [god], for ‘the 
worship I have gained, and [his great worship, that] twice [I have] driven 
out the emperor, with all his ‘Romanish people [host]! And now I will to 
London, the burgh I love greatly, and there I will hold holy rites to my 
‘gods [god.”’], ‘and honor them exceedingly for their benefits.” ’ The king 


1 Sic. ? majen? 5 ifeche ? 
4 imunte? 5 The i in twien is sup. ras. ® sup. ras. 


| 


——— 


SE SS 


344 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8052—8075.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xii. 
for heore wel-dede. 
Pe king lette blawé ’ Pe king lette blowen 
& bonnien hif ferden. and banni his ferde. 


& hehten' heom alle faren heom / and hehte heom alle varen hom / 
& hired-men beon blise. 
& feien heore fteden Y 


and greiden heore iweden. and greipi hire wedes. 

& paf deies en preom wikéY —_ and pane dai a preo wike ¥ 
wenden to Lundene. beon alle azein at Londene. 
mid wif & mid bernen ? 10 

bliffe to makien. 

eorles & peines Y eorles and peines ? 

cnihtes & fweines. cnihtes and fweines. 

& al pat freoliche fole And al pat freoliche folk 
of Brutlondef erde. of Brutlondes erpe. 

pene daie heo vnd?-nomen pane dai onder-nime ¥ 

& to Lundene heo comé. and to Londene come. 
mid fwulche riche-dome ¥ mid foche riche-dome 
&® fwa hit weoren® i Rome. alfe he were at Rome. 

Pe king bi-gon feruife ’ 2 pe king bi-gan feruife / 
on elchef cunnef wife. in eche kinnes wife. 

efter pan hedene lazen ¥ hafter pane lawe Y 

pe ftoden oSen ilke da3en. pat ftod in pan ilke dawe. 


Per ftodé in pere temple ” Par weren in pan temple 


caused his trumpets to be blown, and his army to assemble, and bade them 
all fare home, ‘and household-men be blithe, and curry their steeds,’ and 
make ready their weeds, and in three weeks from the day ‘come to [be all 
again at] London, ‘ with wives and with children, bliss to make,’ earls and 
thanes, knights and swains. And all the goodly folk of Britains land the 
day ‘they’ understood, and to London ‘they’ came, with such magnifi- 
cence as if it were ‘in [at] Rome. The king began the service in each 
kind of wise, after the ‘heathen’ laws that stood in the same (those) days.- 
There ‘stood [were] in the temple ten thousand men, ‘that was the best 


1 hehte ? 2 al? 3 weore? 


[v. 8076—8099.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 345 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x1. 


ten pufend monen. ten poufend manne. 
pet wes pe bezfte cure ’ 

of al Brut-londe. 

bi-foren heore mahun ¥ 

pe heom puhte mere. 

Apolin wes ihaten 

heo heolden hine for hehne godd. 

4Ele beorn hefde on heonde’ and ech bar an honde? 
ane pechene beerninde. ane tapere bernende. 
wes ele bald beorn ? 10 

iboned! mi8? golde. 

pe king hafde his kine-helm? —_ and pe king hadde his kine-helm 


heehliche on heefde. hehliche on his heued. 
Wes at-foren pan weefde ? Bi-fore pan wefde 
imaked an wunlic fur. a fur was imaked. 

pe kig warp richef per in pe king warp 3iftes par in’ 


& alle hif hahfte men mid him. and fuppe pe hehtefte*® mid him. 
seoSvsé heo per offreden ? 

adseles madmes. 19 

& ponkede A ppollin hisgodey [c.2.Jand ponkede his god Appolin ¥ 
pe pa muchele wurd-fcipe usen‘* pe mochele worfipe pat he 3af him. 
Pa pe feruuinge wes idon [him.Po pe feruife was idon’ 

pat hit to pe mete com. pat hit to pe mele com. 

per of ich wulle pe tellen ¥ par of ich wolle pe telle ? [£ 40°.c.1.] 


choice of all Britain, before their idol that seemed to them mighty ; Apollin 
he was named, they held him for chief god.’ ‘Each man had [and each bare] 
in hand a ‘torch [taper] burning; ‘each bold fellow was clothed with 
gold’; [and] the king had his crown high on [his] head. Before the altar 
was made a ‘winsome’ fire; the king cast ‘riches [gifts] therein, and 
{afterwards] all ‘his [the] highest ‘men’ with him. ‘Afterwards they 
there offered noble treasures,’ and thanked Apollin, his god, ‘who [for] the 
great honor [that he] ‘granted [gave] to him. When the service was 
done, that it came to the ‘meat [meal] ; thereof I will thee tell marvellous 


1 Written originally ibonned, bud the first n expuncted. 2 mid? 
3 hehefte ? 4 upe? 


346 LA3AMONS BRUT. {v. 8100—8123.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

felcude fpellef. felcupe fpelles. 

Weoren in peos kingef cuchene Were in pis kinges kichene ¥ 

twa hundred cokes. two hundred cokes. 

& ne mei na man tellen? and ne mai no man telle? 

for alle pa bermannen. alle pare ber-manne. 

iflazene weoren to pon mele? __ ifla3en were to pan mele? 

twelf pufend ruderen fele. twealf pufend ropere. 

& pritti hundred hertes ” and pritti hundred heortes ? 

& al fwa feole hinden. and alfe fale hindes. 

of pa foh3zel cunne y 10 of pan fozel cunne Y 

ne mai hit na m6 kennen. ne mai no man telle. 

& al pat wel & al pat gold’ 


pe wes 3eond al peos kinges lond. 

hit wes al ifomned 

&! pere fereuunge. 

Nes hit nau mid fod itald Y Nas hit neuere mid fope itold / 
seodSven peof weoruld wes a-ftald.fuppe pif worle was a-ftalde. 


pat weore on ane ftude . pat weore an one ftude 

{wulc 3ifueSe iftured. fo moche god togadere. 

ne of alche pinge fwulcriche-dom? no of alle pinge foch richedom ¥ 
iziuen & under-fon. 21 i3efne ne onder-fon. 

Muri wes pe dei & lihty Muri was pe dai and liht ’ 


& pa fonne wes swiSe briht. and pe fonne {wipe briht. 
weoren pa bernes * 


stories. Two hundred cooks were in this kings kitchen, and no man 
may tell ‘for’ all the waiters. Were slain for the meal twelve thousand 
‘good’ oxen, and thirty hundred harts, and as many hinds; of the fowl- 
kind may no man ‘it’ ‘ken [tell]! ‘And all the wealth and all the 
gold that was over all this kings land, it was all assembled at the service.’ 
Never was it told with sooth since this world was made, that such ‘store 
of gifts [so much good together] were in ‘one spot, nor such abundance 
of ‘each thing [all things] given and received! Merry was the day, 
and light, and the sun ‘was’ most bright; ‘the men were drenched 


la?at? 


[v. 8124—8146.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 347 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xi. 
i-feeengte mid beore. _ 
& pa drihliche gumen ¢ weren alle pe gomes 
weoren win drunken, dronge of wine. 


Heo ferden 3eond pa feldes ” and pleoiden in pa feldes 
mid fceftes & mid feeldes. mid fceaftes and mid fcealdes. 
summe heo gunnen ernen ¥ Somme gonne herne / 

& fomme heo gunnen eornen. fomme gonne érne. 

& fiime heo giinen pleien ? 

pliht com on uefte. 9 

summen pleoden on teuelbrede Y sbme pleoide mid tauel ¥ 

& fummen ernden heore ftede. fomme cafte pane fton wel. 


Pa }! weoren per tweiene ¥ Po weren par tweien ? 

prute heo weoren beien. [£46.c.1.] proute hii weren beiene. 

Herigal hehte pe an? Ergal hehte pe on Herigal. 
Mueling pe oSer. Euilyn pe oper. . Euelin. 


Herigal wes pes kinges mei?’ Ergal was pe kinges may 
pet wes herm a pé ilke dei. pat was harm pat ilke day. 


ahte cniht wes Auelin ¥ ftrong cniht was Euelyn / 
Androgeus wes is® hem. Androgius was his hem. 

peos tweien cnihtes bi-gunnen? Peos twei cnihtes bi-gonnen ? 
mid fceldes to feurmen. 2 to fceremigge. 

erft heo pleoweden ? ereft hii pleoiden ” 


and seodSe pliht makeden. and fuppe hii wreppeden. 


with beer, and’ [all] the ‘noble persons [men] were drunk with wine. 
‘They fared over (and played in] the fields with shafts (spears) and with 
shields ; some they began to ride, ‘and’ some ‘they’ began to run, ‘and 
some they began to play,—mischief came quickly!’ Some played ‘on 
{with] table-‘ board, and’ some ‘urged their steeds [cast the stone well]. 
Then were there twain,—proud they were both,—'Herigal [Ergal] hight 
the one, Evelin the other. Herigal was the kings relative,—that was harm 
‘in the [that] same day !—'bold [strong] knight was Evelin,—Androgeus 
was his uncle. These two knights began ‘ with shields’ to skirmish ; first 
they played, and afterwards ‘made strife [they quarrelled]; there Herigal 


1 Redundant ? 2 Interlined by a second hand, 


348 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


per Herigal fmat AZuelin 
swide vuele a pane chin. 

Heo bigunnen to chiden / 
cnihtes come riden. 

Eueli wes fwidSe wra’d / 

& mid pan fteue to-draf. 

and fmat Herigal a pon ribben ? 
‘} pe ftef to-brec amiddé. 

Pa que’ pe cniht Herigal 
Eueli pat if swide far. 10 
pu me fmite bi pon rugge 

ah fare pu hit flat® a-buggen. 
for nu pi fteef if to-broken ¥ 


[v. 8147—8169.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xi. 


par Ergar' fmot Euelin 
{wipe fore a pane chin. 

Hii bi-gonne to chide ¥ 
cnihtes come ride. 

Euelyn was fwipe wropy —_[c.2.] 
and al hif ftaf to-drof. 

vppe Ergales ribbe 7 

pat he to-brac amidde. 

Po feide Ergal ” 

Euelin pat his {wipe for. 
pou fmete me bi pan rugge 
pou falt hit fore abugge. 

for nou pi ftaf his to-broke / 


balu pe scal bed 3ifuede. 

Euielin wes swive fari’ 

pat him wes swa ilumpen. 

pe oder wolde him habben deed’ 
hit puhte him swiSe herd raed. 
& he hine bi-pohte 

weet he don mihte. 

nefde he noht on his hond 
bute enne luttelne feeld. 
I-feh he enne hendlicne mon? Ifah he one man: 


pou falt deap polie. 
Euelyn was ... fori? 
pat him was fo bi-v.... 


and hine bi-pohte 
20 wat he... mihte. 


smote Evelin most ‘evil [sorely] on the chin. They began to chide; knights 
came riding ; Evelin was exceeding wrath, and ‘with the [his] staff ‘struck 
(drove all in pieces], ‘and smote’ ‘Herigal on the [upon Ergals] ribs. Then 
‘quoth [said] ‘the knight’ Herigal :—‘ Evelin, that is very sore! Thou 
smotest me on the back, ‘ but’ sorely thou shalt it buy, for now thy staff 
is broken in pieces, ‘sorrow shall be given to thee [thou shalt suffer death]!”’ 
Evelin was very sorry, that to him it was so befallen,—‘ the other would 
have him dead, it seemed to him case most hard,’—and ‘ he’ him bethought 
what he might do ;—‘he had nought in his hand but a little shield.” He 
saw a ‘gentle ’man, ‘who stood [stand] there beside, who was thither come 


1 R, Ergal. 2 falt? 


[v. 8170—8192.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
pe per ftod bi-halué. 
pe wes pudere icumen 
for to i-fed pare cnihte gomen. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


349 


MS. Cott. Otho, C, xu. 
ftonde bi par halue. 
pat was pider icome ‘’ 
for to fe pis cnihtes game. 


pe 3unge mon heold on hif hond “eof heold in his hond ” 


enne ftelene brond. 

Euielin pene b°nd igrap ¥ 

mid grimliche lechen. 

& braid hine of pere fcxSe / 

pa wes his hurte Se. 

He refde to Herigale? [c.2.] 10 
& fmat hine swide! fare. 

} his neb & his neofe 
nider ba heolden. 

zeft he him to fweinde ¥ 

& pa hond him of-swipte. 
dit he him 3ef pane pridde Y 
& for-fmat hine amidde. 
Swa endede pe pleowe 

} Herigal lei of-flozen. 
and Euelin ponene wende ¥ 
hif sweord he bar on honde. 


one ftelene brond. 

Euelyn pane ftaf grop ‘ 
mid grampene ftrengpe. 
and breid vt of pan fepe’ 
po waf he pe epere. 

He refde to Ergal / 

and {mot hine fwipe for. 

pe nofe mid pe lippe 
bope awei cutte. 

eft to him fweinde ‘ 

and pe hond of-fwipte. 
dunt he 3ef pe pridde ? 

and for-carf hine amidde. 
Pus endede pe pleoi’ 

po Ergal was of-fleie. 

and Euelin panene wende / 
his fweord he bar an hond. 


ne funde he nonne swa kene m6é//ne funde he neuere nanne man Y 
} hond him durfte leggen on. _ pat dorfte him homd? legge an. 


for to see ‘the [this] knights game; ‘the young man [this man] held 
in his hand a steel brand. Evelin grasped the ‘brand [staff] with furious 
‘looks [strength], and drew ‘it’ [out] of the sheath ;—then was ‘his hurt 
easy [he the easier]! He rushed to Herigal, and smote him very sore, ‘so 
that his neb and his nose both fell down [the nose with the lips both away 
he cut}; ‘he’ eft at him struck, and the hand from ‘him’ smote ; blow he 
gave ‘him’ the third, and severed him in the middle. ‘So [Thus] ended 
the play, ‘that [when] Herigal ‘lay [was] slain. And Evelin thence went, 
his sword he bare in hand; he found ‘no [never any] man ‘so keen,’ that 
durst lay hand on him; ‘all the folk he passed by,’ to Androgeus ‘mansion 


1 {wite? 2 R, hond. 


350 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 


al pat fole he bi-bieh 

to Androchies inne he fleh. 
pet iherde pe kig 

icud he’ wes him fone. 

hu hit al wes ifaren? 

& hu Herigal lei of-flewen. 
Pe king nom preo aldere men 
and fende to Androgeum. 

and hehte hine bringé / 

his mzi to pon kinge. 10 
to polie pes kinges dom Y 

for pa flehte pe® hafde idon. 
and 3if he swa nolde 

he hine fleme wolde. 

Pa anfwerede Androge® 


[v. 8193—8215.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


to Androgiuf he com 

pat was his neize kinefma, 

pis ihorde pe king ¥ 

for hit was coup fone. 

ou hit al was ivare? 

and ou Ergal was of-slawe. 

pe king nam preo holde men’ 
and fende to Androgium. [f 41.c.1.] 
and hehte him his mey bringe’ 


to polie his domes. 
and hif so ...dey 


he hine fleme wolde. 
.. anfwerede Androgius 


and toward pan kinge he fpec pus.. .d to pes cnihtes faide puf. 


Nulle ich hine bringé ’ 

for nauer nane pige. 

pat me Euelin for-do 

noper fle ne na a-ho. 20 
ah ich habbe freo lond ” 

} freoliche ftont a mire honde. 
& ich habbe min® 


.++-e ich hine bringe Y 

for ...re none pinge. 

pat me .. 03% for-do ¥ 

noper flean no. . a-ho. 

ac ich habbe freo .... 

pat freoliche fteond in mine hond. 


he fled [he came, who was his nigh kinsman]. ‘That [This] heard the 


king, ‘made known it was to him [for it was known] soon, how it was all 
transacted, and how Herigal ‘lay [was] slain. The king took three ‘elder 
{old] men, and sent to Androgeus, and ordered him to bring his relation 
‘to the king,’ to suffer ‘the kings [his] doom, ‘for the slaughter that 
he had done,’ and if he so would not (refused), he him would banish. 
Then answered Androgeus, and ‘toward the king [to these knights] ‘he’ 
‘spake [said] thus: ‘I will not him bring, for never any thing, that men 
destroy Evelin, neither slay nor up-hang! But I have free land, that freely 
stands in my hand, ‘ and Lhave my husting chief under the king.’ If here is 


1 hit? 2 pe he? 3 Sic; perhaps we may read min husting. 


[v. 8216—8239.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 351 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
heh vnder pon kige. 
3if her if zni cnihtY 3if here his eni cnihit Y 
pe of Eueline axe® riht. pat of Euelyn axi riht. 
come to mine herede ’ come to mine londe Y 
& per he hit feal habbé. and par hit fal habbe. 


& ich fugge eow to fode? 
nif per reed nan oper. [f. 46°. c.1.] 


pif wes fone icud / pis was fone icud’ 

to Caffibellaune. to Caffibelane. 

pe king iward him swide wrad pe king iwarp fo wrop? 
swulc he weore of witte. un alfe he were of witte. 

& peos ilkze word him feide’ and peos word faide ’ 
Caffibellaune. Caffibilane. 

Ut of min eh fenen? Vt of min hehfeht 
Androge® & hif iueren. Androgius and his iveres. 


& 3if ich hine mai eower ifon? and 3if ihe hine mai ohwa fon’ 
in pon ftude he be® for-don. in pare ftude he worp fordon. 


Androge® ford rihtes ¥ Androgius forprihtef? 

nom alle his cnihtes. nam alle his cnihtes. 

& anan gon liSen 2 and anon gan wende? 

ut of Lundéne. vt of Londone. 

& iwenden! in to Kent? and in to Kent wende? 

to his ane caftle. to his owe caftle. . 
& hine ftrdgede wel and hine ftraggep* wel’ 


any knight who of Evelin asketh right, come he to my ‘court [land], and 
there ‘he’ shall have it; ‘and I say you in sooth, there is no other counsel.’ ” 
This was soon made known to Cassibelaune. The king became ‘exceeding 
[so] wrath, as if he were out of his wits, and these ‘same’ words said ‘to 
him’ Cassibelaune: ‘‘Out of mine eye-sight Androgeus and his com- 
panions! And if I may him anywhere take, on the spot he shall be put 
to death!” Androgeus forth-right took all his knights, and anon departed 
out of London, and went into Kent, to ‘a castle of his [his own castle], and 
strengthened it well with meat and with weapons. And the king took 


1 iwende? ? ftranggep ? 


352 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8240—8262.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 
mid mete & mid wepnen. mid mete and mid wepne. [lond? 
&peking nom Lundene& pat lond?/And pe king nam Londene and pat 
to his a3ere hond. to his owene hond. 
& feoSSen fufde in to Kent?’ and fuppe fufde in to Kent? 
mid muchelere ferde. miochele! his ferde. 
mid hef and mid fure ? mid fehte and mid fure ? 
pat lond for-ferde swi®e. pat lond for-ferde fwipe. 
Androge® no tweie cnihtes’ | Androgius nam twei cnihtes ‘ 
& fende to pon kinge. and fende to pan kinge. 


& pus pe enihtes him fpweké wi’ :/pe cnihtes pan king {peke wip? [c. 2.] 
King Androge® 3eorne’ pi gri8. Androgiuf 3eornep pi grip. 
Androgeuf is pin azene mon? 12 Androgiuf his pin owe man y 

al pine wille he wule don. al pin wille he wole don, 

wid pon pe pu hi 3eue grid 

& late hine fehtne pe wid. 

and leten® bi-leué pine brvme ’ 

his lond pe pu for-berneft. {fone ?’ 
I-pench pat he wes LuSes fune? Bi-pench pat he was Lud kingef 
of pine broser he if icumé. of pine broper icome. 

& his fader ahte al pat lond? 2 and his fader hadde al pat lond Y 
nu ftonde’ a pire hond. pat nou fteond in pine hond. 

And al hit punc® hi wel idon?’ [c.2.JAnd al hit pinchep him wel idon / 
3if pwhis feehtneffe wult vnder-fon.3if pou his fahneffe wolt onderfon. 


London and the land in his own hand, and afterwards marched into Kent, 
with [his] powerful army; with ‘host [fight] and with fire the land he 
quickly destroyed. Androgeus took two knights, and sent to the king, ‘and 
thus’ the knights spake with ‘him [the king]: ‘‘ ‘ King,’ Androgeus yearn- 
eth thy peace. Androgeus is thine own man, all thy will he will do, ‘on 
condition that thou give him peace, and let him be reconciled with thee, and 
let thy burning cease, by which thou consumest his land.’ Bethink that he 
was ‘Luds [Lud the kings] son; of thy brother ‘he is’ come, and his father 
‘possessed [had] all the land that now standeth in thine hand. And all it 
shall seem to him well done, if thou his reconciliation wilt receive. But he 


1 mid mochele ? 2 lete? 


[v. $263—8286.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 353 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
bute nele he pe nauere Euelin’ bote nele he neuere Evelyn? 
mid srh®e bi-techen. mid heize pe bi-take. 


pat pu him fculle oder don? 
oder flen oSer a-hon. 


Pa pe king iherde pis ¥ Po pe king hi-horde pis ’ 
pa wes he wre® ful iwif. po was he wropere foliwis. 
and pus feide pe king / po feide pe king Y 
Caffebellaune. Caffibilane. 

1 Ware be 3e mine cnihtes Y 
Whar beo 3e mine kemppen. 10 ware beo 3e0 mine kempes. 
mine drihtliche men mine dohtie men 

wreked me of Androgei. wrekep me of Androgium. 
his lond ich wulle for-bernen? his lond ich wolle for-bearne / 
& his bone iwurSen. and hif bane worpe. 

pif iherdé? fuggen Androgeus? pif ihorde Androgius 

& he answerede pus. and he anfwerede pus. 
Whilen hit wes ifeid ? Wile hit was ifeid 

inne fod fpelle. in fop fpelle. 

pat moni mon de’ muchel vuel:’ pat mani man dop vuel ¥ 

al hif yndankes. 2 al his onponkef. 

Swa ich moht nu neode ¥ So ich nou mot 


for muchere neode. _[for-don: for mine mochele neode. [don? 
pe mon pe poled } me hine wule pe man pat polep pat me him for- 
pat ich telle vnwifdom. pat ich telle onwifdom. 


will never with fear deliver Evelin to thee, ‘ that thou shouldest to him either 
do, or slay or up-hang.’”” When the king heard this, then was he ‘wrath 
({wrather] full surely, ‘and thus [then] said the king Cassibelaune : “ [Where 
be ye, my knights ?] Where be ye, my warriors, my ‘noble [doughty] men? 
Wreak me of Androgeus! His land I will burn up, and become his bane!” 
This heard ‘ say’ Androgeus, and he answered thus: ‘‘ Whilom it was said 
in sooth speech, that many aman doth ‘ much’ evil all against his will. So 
‘needs’ must I now, for [my] great necessity. The man that suffereth that 
men ‘should’ destroy him (himself to be destroyed), that I account fool- 


1 A line, apparently, is here deficient. ? iherde? 
2A 


ee a. SS eae 


854 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8287—8310.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


pe while he mei purh zni creeft ¥ alle pe wile pat he may? 

i compe hine werié. mid eni craft him werie. 

Ele cniht ah an uuel to don’ 

zr he wurfe vnder-fon. [fpere / 

and swa ich euere bere fceld and Soicheuere bere fceald oper fperey 
sende ich wulle to pon keifere. fenden ich wolle to pan kaifere. 


& greten Juliuf CefaF y and grete Julius Cefar ’ 

& menen to him mi far. and mene to him mi for. 

& bedden pat he me rede’. and bidde pat he me reade ¢ 
for nu ich habbe neode. 10 for nou ich habbe neode. 
Andgeuf pe riche cnihte ¥ Androgius periche eniht? [f 41°. c.1.] 
makede a writ wel idiht. makede a writ wel idiht. 

& nom erendrake godne ? and nam one meffagere god ¥ 
& fende him to Odref. and fende to Odres, 

to Juliuf pon keifere Y [£47.c.1.] to Julius pan kaifere y 

mid al his Romanifce here. mid al his Romaniffe here. 

& pus wes } writ idiht / and pus was pat writ idilt y 
& puf hit {pec fors riht. and pus hit fpac fop riht. 
Hail beo pu mid pine here Hayl beo pou Cefar ? 

Juliuf pe keifere. 20 

pu hattef Juliuf Cezar 

to pe ich meene mi fer. to pe ich mene mi for. 
Androge® pin azene mo? Androgius pin owe mon? 

pis nis na fwike-dom. wip houte eni fwikedom. 


ishness, [all] the while [that] he may ‘through [with] any craft ‘in battle’ 
defend himse/f. ‘Each man may do an evil action, ere he himself worse 
receive ; and’ so I ever bear shield ‘and [or] spear, I will send to the 
emperor, and greet Julius Cesar, and complain to him of my injury, and 
pray that he counsel me, for now I have need.” Androgeus the rich knight 
made a writ (letter) well indited, and took [a] messenger good, and 
sent ‘him’ to Otheres, to Julius the emperor, with all his Romanish army; 
and thus was the writ indited: ‘‘ Hail be thou ‘ with thine host,’ ‘Julius 
the emperor [Cesar]! ‘Thou hightest Julius Cesar’; to thee I complain 
of my injury,—Androgeus, thine own man,—'this is no [without any] 
treachery, for the word that I send thee by my life I will maintain ‘it’! And 


[v. 8311—8334.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 355 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
for pat weord pat ich pe fende? for pat word pat ich pe fende 
bi mine liue ich hit halde. bi mine lifue ich wolle holde. 
&! pu hit nult ileuen ” 
beoten hit leffigge beo. 


ich hit wulle troufien / and ich hit wolle fopi’ 
purh mine tirfulne godd. bi mine god treuwe. 

purh mine lauerd Appollin mi louerd Appolin ” 

pe leof me if on heorte. pat leof me his on heorte. 
For ofte hit if ilumpé ” For hofte hit his b valle® ” 
inne feole leoden. 10 in wel fale leode. 

pet wfter muchele hatinge ¥ pat after hate Y 

heh3e mé heom luuede. comep loue. 

& wfter muchel weorld-fcome’ and after worliche fame ¥ 
wur6-fcipe wurhten. [men y worfipe hi-lome. 


Twien pu hafueft ibeon ouer-cum-Twi pou haueft beon ouer-come 
& pinemenwe habbed iflen& inom.and pine men we habbep inome. 
& idriuen pe® of Brutlonde? and idriue pe of Brutlonde 


mid feht* swide ftronge. mid fihte fwipe ftronge. 

mid uf pu heefueft bi-leued ¥ mid vs pou haueft bi-leued 
moni peofend kempen. 2 mani poufend kempes. 

nes noht purh ure kinge ’ Pat nas noht vre king? 
Caffibellaune. Caffibilane. 

ah hit wes purh me feolfne ac hit was porh mi feolue / 
& purh fele mine folke. and mine gode cnihtef. 


‘if thou wilt not believe but it be leasing,’ I will ratify it ‘through [by] my 
‘mighty [true] god, ‘through’ my lord Apollin, who is dear to me in heart. 
For oft it is befallen, in [well] many countries, that after ‘much’ ‘hating 
noble men them (each other) love [hate’cometh love], and after ‘much’ 
‘world-shame {worldly shame] ‘make [often] worship. Twice thou hast 
been overcome, and thy men we have ‘slain, and’ captured,’ and driven 
thee from Britain with fight most strong; with us thou hast left many 
thousand warriors! That was not ‘through’ our king Cassibelaune, but 
it was through myself, and ‘through’ my good ‘folk [knights]. For I led 


1 & 3if? 2 R. bi-valle. 3 ut pr. m, * Sup. ras, 
2a2 


356 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v.8335—8357.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

for ich ledde mid me? ° for ich ladde mid me?’ 

Lundene uerde. Londene ferde. 


& ich' al pa Kent-werre ¢ 

pe kempen weoren gode. 

& per wid ute monienne Brut ” 

pe bald wes to fehten. [c.2.] 

seodéen we pe hafdenouer-comen? 

& pi folke i-flazen an inomen. 

Nu if Caffibellaune & hif men? Nou hif Caffibilane ¥ 


swa modi iwurSen. 10 so modi iworpe. 
patmid fehte heo wulled mefende pat mid fihte he wole ? 
ut of Brut-londe. of Brutlonde me driue. 


fleme me from leoden 
feor from londe. 
Milond heo habbeo’ me al i-weft?Mi lond he hauep al aweft ? 


& Lundene me bireued. and Londene me bi-reued. 
& me fulfne heo penche’® quellé? and penchep mi feolue ewelle ? 
ad alle mine kempen. and alle mine cnihtef. 


3if pu pis writ iheren wult ? 

hit wule pe fuggen minne gult. 20 
Pa pu weoren? from uf ilide 

at pa latere cherre. 

pa wes pa king fwa blide ’ 


with me the London host, ‘and eke all the Kentish men, that warriors 
were good, and there-without (in addition) many a Briton, that bold was 
in battle. Afterwards we have thee overcome, and thy folk slain and cap- 
tured.’ Now is Cassibelaune ‘and his men’ so moody become, that with 
fight ‘they [he] will me ‘send out of (drive from] Britain, ‘ banish me from 
the country, far from land.’ My land ‘they have [he hath] all wasted ‘ to me,’ 
and bereaved me of London, and myself ‘they think [thinketh] to kill, and 
all my ‘warriors [knights]. ‘ If thou wilt hear this writ, it will say to thee 
my guilt. When thou wert from us departed at the latter time, then was 
the king so blithe as he was never ere in his life; and on the other side 


1 eke? 2 weore? 


i 


[v. 8358—8382.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, xurt. 


{wa he nas nauer ere on his liue. — 
& on oSer halue he heefde kare / 
for he nuften' pat pu woldeft faren. 
nopeles he feide ¢ 

at-foren al his du3eSe. 

Nu if Juliuf awei iflozen ¥ 
tweien he if aflemed. 

tweien he com to Bruttene ¥ 

per hi wef balu 3eueSe. 

ne purfe we nu nauer mare? 10 
ifeon hine cumen here. 

for her beo®’ hif bezfte cihtes / 
iflezen in ure fehte. 

& nu we sulled for heore beone ? 
blise iwurSen. 

Scullen alle mie Bruttes / 

mid baldere prute. 

lien to Lundene ¥ 

& per lof makien. 

vre lauerde Appollin ¥ 20. 
& alle ure goden mid him. 

for pere muchele wurSe-fcipe ” 
pe ich nu walde. [f.47%.c.1.] 
Pus li8Sen? to Lundene Y 

alle Brut-leoden. 


357 


he had care, because he knew not that thou wouldest go. Nevertheless he 
said, before all his people: ‘‘ Now is Julius away fled; twice is he driven 


out; twice he came to Britain; there to him was sorrow given! 


We 


need now never more see him come here; for here are his best knights 
slain in our fight, and now we shall for their death become joyful! All 
my Britons shall come to London with bold pride, and there make praise 
to our lord Apollin, and all our gods with him, for the great worship that 
I now enjoy. Thus went to London all the Britons; knights and thanes, 


1 nufte? ? liSden? 


358 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8383—8407.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


cnihtef & Singes! 

mid wifue & mid children. 

& mid alle pe wur®-fcipe 

pe heo weoren weeldinde ouer. 
Pa we puf comen to Lundene ’ 
we gunnen lof makien. 

ure lauerd Apollin 

& alle ure godé mid him. 
SeoSSen peos weorld wes aftalled? 
nes hit nowher itald. 10 
pat weore nowhar fwa muchel 
iuordSed to ane mele. [mete? 
ne fwa muchel god drige ¥ 
folke ideled. 

Muchel wef pa glad-fcipe ” 

pa gunnen heo to pleié. 

fume mid foten 

ueire igerede. 

fumme an heorfe 

hehliche ifcrudde. 20 
Pa weoren par tweien fealkes 
& ifengé here fceldes. 

scriden under bordes 

& fkirmden mid meine. 

2be oSer wes mire fufter fune 


with wives and with children, and with all the worship that they were 
possessors over, When we thus came to London, we began to make praise 
to our lord Apollin, and all our gods with him. Since this world was 
made was it nowhere told, that anywhere were so much meat provided 
for a meal (feast), nor so much good drink doled to the folk. Great was 
the mirth ;—then began they to play; some on foot, fairly arrayed, some 
on horse, nobly clad. ‘Then were there two men, and they took their shields, 
approached under bucklers, and skirmished with main; the one was my 


) Sringes? 
? This and the two following lines are on an erasure, but by the original scribe. 


[v. 8408—8431.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 359 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


Euelin hehte pe gume. 

pe oder Herigal ” 

heh he wes on hirede. 

of pes kig kunne icomen ‘ 

he wes his helue fufter sune. 
he wes pon kinge arle’ deoreft ¥ 
of alle his driht folke. 

Herigal fmat Euelin ’ 

swide vfele ipene chin. 

& Euelin iward him wrad- 10 
& werede hine fulue. 

a pere fide he fmat Herigal ” 
pat pe diit him puhte far. [c.2.] 
Herigal pa feide ¥ 

& mid muée hit fweor. 
 Euelin i Son dei’ 

deed feulde polien. 

Euelin wes fwiSe of-dred / 

for me him dead bi-hehte. 

& fmat on Herigales feeld? 20 
} hif fteef atwaie wond. 

Ofte wes Eueli wa? 

& neuere wurf pene pa. 

fcilde him mid his feelde 


sisters son,—Evelin hight the man ;—the other, Herigal, high he was in the 
court, of the kings kin come (born); he was his half-sisters son, he was 
to the king most dear, of all his good folk. Herigal smote Evelin very 
evil on the chin, and Evelin became wrath with him, and defended himself ; 
on the side he smote Herigal, so that the blow seemed to him sore. Herigal 
then said, and with mouth it swore, that Evelin in the day should suffer 
death! Evelin was greatly adread, for the death that was vowed to him, 
and smote on Herigals shield, so that his staff broke intwo. Oft was Evelin 
woe, and never worse than then! He shielded himself with his shield,— 


1 alre? 


360 / LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8432—8456.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
nefde he elles noht an honde. 
& Herigal him fodte on? 
mid hehe? ftrégSe. 
Euelin i-feh enne gume? 
3ungen him bi-halfues. 
& bar an his riht hond ¥ 
znne ftelene brond. 
Euelin him refde to? 
& hine rehliche grep. 
&' hizinge he pat fweord adroh ? 10 
& Herigal of-floh. 
Pat iherde pe king 
Caffibellaune. 
pat Herigal wes of-fla3en / 
and Euelin aweei iflozen. 
to me he fende his feonde 
wid uté gretinge. 
hehte me bringe to him’ 
mine mei Euelin. 
{wide bringe hine him to’ 20 
to polien his hirdes dom. 
for an of pon he weolden® him don? 
over flan oSer an-ho, 
& 3if ich $ nalde / 
ich fcolde fleon of his on-walde. 


he had nought else in hand,—and Herigal pressed on him with great 
strength. Evelin saw a man pass beside him, and He bare in his right hand 
a steel brand. Evelin rushed towards him, and sternly grasped it; in 
haste he drew the sword, and Herigal slew. That heard the king Cassi- 
belaune, that Herigal was slain, and Evelin away flown; to me he sent 
his message, without greeting ; bade me bring to him my relative Evelin, 
quickly bring him to him (the king), to suffer his courts doom ; for one of 
these he would do to him, either slay or up-hang; and if I would not do 


1 an? 2 weolde? 


¥ 


[v. 8457—8479.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 361 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
& 3if he mihte me feoluen ifon % 
he me walden! f len oSer an-hon. 
Ich 3irnde pes kinges gid? ¥ 
& walde fehtnen him wi®. [£48.c.1.] 
& riht him don i mine hirde / 
for ich wes hif eorl pe hehfte. 
ah nolde ich hi neuere Euelin ¥ 
to erm%é him bi-tache. 
& he me a-filemde ¥ 
fone from hirede. 10 
Lundene he hefued me bi-nome Y 
& mine cnihtes of lazen*. 
Nadeles ich habbe an hirede” Ac 3etichhabbeon hepe? [f 41°.c.2.] 


twa and fifti hundred. two and fifti hundred. 

& 3et ich habbe an honde and 3et ich habbe an honde ¥ 
twenti caftles ftroge. twenti caftles ftronge. 

& mi feolf ich wunie inne Kent‘ and mi feolf ic ..nie in Kent ¥ 
mid kene mine beornnen. mid kene .... kempes. 

& pe king me fehted wid y and pe king m. fihtep wip? 


& nule me 3euen na grid. = 20 _~— and nele 3i.. me no grip. 

Nu pu haueft iherd mi feer / Nou pou h..... hi-hord mi for ¥ 
lauerd Juliuf Cefar. louerd J..... Cefar. 

al mid foSe wordé / al mid fope word.. 


that, I should flee from his realm, and if he might myself take, he would me 
slay or up-hang! I yearned the kings peace, and would be reconciled with 
him, and do him right in my court, because I was his earl the highest ; 
but I would never deliver up Evelin to him, to destruction. And he banished 
me soon from fis court; London he hath taken from me, and slain my 
knights.’ “Nevertheless [And yet] I have in retinue two and fifty hundred, 
and yet I have in hand twenty strong castles, and myself I dwell in Kent, 
with my keen warriors, and the king fighteth with me, and will grant me 
no peace. Now thou hast heard my sore, lord Julius Cesar, all with sooth 
words, as ‘this [the] writ thee telleth. In this writ I have put, that I ‘will 


1 walde? 2 R. grid. 3 of-flajen ? 


362 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8480—8504.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 

alfe pis writ pe telled. alfe pat writ pe tell.p. 

A piffe write ich habbe idon’ __. . .ne writ ich habbe idon’ 

} ich wulle bi-cumen pi mon. __ pat ich ham bi-come pi mon. 

& halden pe for herre and holde pe wolle ¥ 

for hehne mine lauerd. for min owe louerd. 

wid pan pe pu me helpe wip pat pou me helpe 

ah! he3ere neode. at piffe mochele neode. 

& aredde me of pon kinge and aredde me of pan kinge 

Caffibellaune. Caffibilane. 


Se ee 


Pas weord ich wulle pe treofien?’ 10 

purh mine tirfulne god. 

pat ich hit wulle fodien ¥ 

afe ich hit bi write suggen?®. 

& cum hizendliche to Britteine * And com hi3endliche / 


pat lond ich pe bi-teche. pat lond ich pe bi-take. 

purh me pu hit bi-lefdes ¥ porp me pou hit bi-lefuedeft Y 
& purh me pu hit fealt habben. and porh me pou hit falt habbe. 
Pis writ iherde Julius ” pis writ ihorde Julius 

pe him hafde i-fend And°geuf.{c. 2.Jpat him fende Androgius. 

pa enfwerede ¥ 20 anfwere 3ef pe kaifere / 
Juliuf pe keifere. 

Nulle ich him ileué ’ nelle ich hine ilefue. 

pur® alle leodene a®. 

bute he me fende anan bote he me fende a-non? 

his feire fune Cenan. hif faire fone Madan. 


{am] become thy man, and [will] hold thee for ‘master, for’ my ‘chief 
[own] lord, on condition that thou help me at [this] great need, and rid me 
of the king Cassibelaune. ‘This word I will ratify to thee by my mighty 
god, that I will prove it true, as I say it by writ.’ And come speedily ‘ to 
Britain’; the land I deliver to thee; through me thou leftest it, and through 
me thou shalt it have.” Julius heard this writ, that Androgeus ‘had’ sent 
to him ; ‘then answered Julius [answer gave] the emperor: “I will not be- 
lieve him, ‘ by the oath of all people,’ unless he send to me anon his fair son 


1 an?vat? ? sugge? 3 purh? 


[v. 8505—8528.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 363 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 

& pritti oSere 3ifles 7 and pritti oper children 7 

to Odres me fende. to Odres me fende. 

peo beon alle icornne ? pat beo alle icoren ¥ 

& hee iboriie. and rih! wel iboren. 

3if he pif wule don 3if he pis wole don ¥ 

hif bod ic wulle a-fon. his bode ich wole onderfon. 

& cumen him to helpe and comé him to helpe 

mid hiezere ftrengSe. mid al mine ftrengpe. 

Pas word fende Juliuf pis word fende Julius / 

mid write to Androge?. 10 mid write to Androgi®. 

Androge® for’ riht anan Androgius forp riht a-non ¥ 

fende his sune Cenan. fende his fone Madan. 

& pritti zifles? oBere Y and pritti children opere / 

he fende him to O®eres. to pan tour of Odres. 

And Juli? pe fele ’ And Julius pe fele / [f 42.¢.1.] 

to pere fa iwende. to pare féé wende. 

mid alle his folke / mid alle his folke ’ 

fufde touward Burttene*. fufde to Bruttes. 

anan swa hit dajede a-non fo hit da3zede / 

he com up at Douere. 20 he com vp at Douere. 

p word him herde Androge® —_ Pat word ihord Androgius ¢ 

& fone pider wende. and fone pider wende. 

& pas wordes feide Androgeus? and peof word feide Androgius 


Wulcume ert pu Juliuf. 


Welcome hart pou Julius. 


‘Cenan [Madan], and thirty other ‘hostages [children] send me to Otheres, 
that are all chosen, and ‘highly [right well] born. If he will do this, his 
prayer I will receive, and come him to help with ‘great [all my] strength. 
This word sent Julius with writ to Androgeus. Androgeus forth-right 
anon sent his son ‘Cenan [Madan], and thirty other ‘hostages [children] ‘he 
sent him to [to the tower of ] Otheres. And Julius the good to the sea 
went, with all his folk sailed to‘ ward’ ‘Britain [the Britons]; anon as it 
dawned, he came up at Dover. The word (tidings) heard Androgeus, and 
soon thither went, and these words said Androgeus: ‘‘ Welcome art thou, 

1 riht? 


? R, gifles. > Bruttene? 


% 


364 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8529—8554.] . 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 
{wide leof pu ert me ¥ {wip. ..» pou hart me? 
pis lond ich pe bitche. pif lond’..... 2.8 ke pe. 
Heo fpeken to-fomne Hii fpeken ..... eres ¥ 
& fpileden mid fehte. and worpe ifahte. 

Peo while hefuede pe king -e wile adde pe king ¥ 
Caff ibellaune. Caffibilane. 

3eond al hif kinelod ¢ oueral his kine-lond 
ifomned ferde ftronge. hii-fomned ferde ftrdg. 
to Liidene he wolde liden ¢ to Londene he wolde? 

& enne caftel bi-liggen. 10 and pane caftel bi-ligge. 
pe Androgeuf pe ftronge ¥ pat Androgius pe ftronge 
hafde pa 3et an hode. hadde 3et an honde. 

Pa pe ferde wes al igadered: —_— Po pe ferde was igadered y 
pa com an gume ernen. po com par a man erne. 
& ana he pus cleopede ?’ [f.48°.c.1.Jand anon pus faide / 

to Caffibellaune. to Caffibilane. 

Hal feo pu ure king ¥ Hail beo pou hore kinge 
ich pe bringe tidende. ich pe bringe tidinge. 

of pon R6-leoden ¥ of pan Romleode 

pe lade pe beod an heorté. 20 pat lop pe his on heorte. 
alle heo beo’ i Doure ¥ alle hii beop in Douere y 
pine deedliche iuan. pine onfrendes. 

& per is Androgeus y and pare his Androgius ¢ 
to fpeken wid Juli’. to fpeke wip Julius. 

peos word beod fodey peos wordes beop fope ¥ 
pe ich her fugge ?’ pat ich pe here fegge. 


Julius! Most dear thou art to me, this land I deliver to thee.” They 
spake together, and ‘discoursed with amity [became friends]. The while 
had the king Cassibelaune over all his kingdom assembled a strong army ; 
to London he would ‘ march,’ and ‘a [the] castle besiege, that Androgeus 
the strong had ‘the’ yet in hand. When the army was ‘all’ gathered, 
then come [there] a man running, and anon ‘he’ thus ‘called [said] to 
Cassibelaune ; ‘‘ Hail be thou, our king! I bring thee tidings of the Rome- 
folk, that is hateful to thee in heart. They are all in Dover, thy ‘deadly’ 
foes, and there is Androgeus to speak with Julius, —These words are sooth; 


[v. 8555—8578.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 365 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x1. 


and pench mid wulche’ dedenY and pinche mid woche dede / 
pu miht® werien pine leoden. —_— pou miht witie pine leode. 


Pa wef seri pe king ¢ Po was fori pe king ¥ 
Caffibellaune. Caffibilane. 

& lette bi-liue and lette blouwe bliue / 
blawen his bem. al. . his bumes. 

cuden his kempen and coupie .is cnihtes ¢ 
pa tid3ende neow cumene. pes neuwe tidinges. 

p Juli? pe keifere y hou Julius pe kaifere ¥ 
mid hif Romanifce here. 10 mid al his Romaniffe here. 

_ wes per riht icumen was par riht icome [c.2.] 
and pa hauene at Doure hafde and pe hauene of Douere hadde 
pa freide pe king {inomen. Po feide pe king ’ {inome. 
Caff ibellaune. Caffibilane. 

Lundene we mote bi-leuen’ — Londene we mote bi-lefue ¥ 
& to Doure iden. and to Douere lipe. 

bonied ure ferde banniep vre ferde ¥ 

& fare we bi-liue. and wende fwipe. 

Ford ferde pe king ? Forp wende pe kig 

mid vnimete folke. 20 mid onimete folke. 

riht towarde Doure ’ riht touward Douere 

to his muchelé vnbihoue. to his onbiof pe. 

p iherde Juli? Cefar / Pat ihorde Julius Cefar ¥ 
he wes wis and {wie iwar. he was wis and {wipe war. 


and think with what deeds thou mayest defend thy people.”” Then was 
sorry the king Cassibelaune, and caused quickly [all] his trumpets to be 
blown, [and] ‘the [these] tidings new ‘come’ to be made known to his 
knights, ‘that [how] Julius the emperor with [all] his Romanish host 
‘was there right arrived, and the haven ‘at [of] Dover had taken. Then 
said the king Cassibelaune: ‘‘ London we must leave, and to Dover 
march; assemble your forces, and go ‘we’ quickly.” Forth went the 
king with innumerable folk, right toward Dover, to his great disad- 
vantage! That heard Julius Casar,—he was wise and most wary,—that 


1 fwule pr. m. 2 mid pr. m. 


366 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8579—8602.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11r. 

pat puderward com on uefte’ —_ pat piderward com? 

Caffibellaune. Caffibilane. 

Pa wes Julius blide ? Po was Julius blipe / 

for pe tidende leofue. for pe tidinges him were lefue. 

he ferde ut of Doure ¥ he verde vt of Douere ¥ 

bi pe fe oure. bi pare féé ofre. 

in to ane muchele f lede ’ into one mochele f lade’ 

& flahliche! his fole hudde. and his folk hudde. 

And Androgeus wende And Androgius wende y 

in to ane oSere ende. 10 in to an oper ende. 

to ane wilderne ?’ in to one wilderne ? 

in to ane wude muchele. [c.2.] to one wode grete. 

& pus* fpec Androge® Po faide Androgius 


& wid hif folke fpilede pus. and to his folke fpac pus. 
Ne wurée nan cniht fwa wody Ne worpe no cniht fo wod ’ 


ne kempe fwa wilde. no kempe fo fterne. 

pat he zuere fpeke worde’ pat euere fpeke a word Y 
furder pene his fperes ord. forpere pane his fperes hord. 
ne from his ifere ride ¥ ne fram his fere ride / 

for to-fomnen we feullen gliden. for fone we folle glide. 

fafte to-gadere ? 2 wende to-gadere / 

& ure ifan fellen. and houre fon falle. 

& 3if here if ei heredrig And 3if her his eni heredring ? 


pe mazen® nimen pene king. pat mawe nime pane king. 


thitherward came ‘speedily’ Cassibelaune. Then was Julius blithe, for 
the tidings [were to him] dear; he marched out of Dover by the sea shore, 
into a mickle slade, and ‘slily’ hid his folk. And Androgeus went into 
another end, [in]to a wilderness, ‘in’to a great wood. ‘And’ then 
‘spake [said] Androgeus, and ‘with [to] his folk ‘discoursed [spake] thus : 
“Be no knight so mad, nor warrior so ‘wild [stern], that ‘he’ ever speak 
{a] word farther than his spears point, nor from his comrades ride; for 
‘united [soon] we shall glide, ‘fast [advance] together, and our foes fell. 
And if here is any warrior that may take the king, capture he him in safety, 


1 The letters la of flahlice are by second hand, sup. ras. 2 pa? > maje? 


{v. 8603—8625.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 367 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS, Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
nime hine mid ifunde nime hine mid ifunde 
& ne 3efue him nane wunde. vppe his gode mede. 
for he is mi lauer' & mi cum*? for he his mi louerd and mi cun’ 


nulle ich hine quellen. nelle ich hine acwelle. 
{ah we feullen*} al his folk ac we folle al his folk Y 
feollen to griide. | falle to grunde. 

& 3emen pes fehtes 

& nawiht pes fenges. 


fellen pa rieze ¥ 
& leten pa ref‘ liggen. lo 


& al fwa lerde Jude*?’ And al pus leorede Julius Y 

leoue his cnihtes. his gode cnihtes. 

Julius hefde to ineren / Julius hadde to ivereY — [f.42%.c.1.] 
pritti hundred riderne. pritti hondred rideres. 


cnihtes icorene® ¥ 

kene-wurd kempen. 

& Androgeus hefde to iuereny and pe eorl Androgii / 
ten pufend rideré. hadde ten pufend. 

Al fwa heo pus leien ftille : Alfe hii pus lezen ftille Y 
& bi-diemdé heore wille’ 2 abidinge hire wille. 


per com pe king riden par com pe king ridey - 
Caffibellaune. Caffibilaune. 
mid ynimete ferde mid onimete ferde 


‘and give him no wound [upon pain of his good reward]; for he is my 
lord and my kinsman, I will not him kill. [But we shall] fell all his folk 
to the ground, ‘and heed the fight, and no whit the booty ; fell the stern, 
and let the spoil lie.’ ””—And all ‘so [thus] Julius instructed his ‘dear [good] 
knights. Julius had for companions thirty hundred riders,—‘ chosen knights, 
valiant warriors ! ’—and [the earl] Androgeus had ‘for companions’ ten 
thousand ‘riders.’ As they thus lay still, ‘and declared [abiding] their 
will, there came the king riding, Cassibelaune, with immense army, with 


1 Jauerd? 2 R. cun. 
5 Part of the line is here deficient by negligence of the scribe. 
* red pr. m. § Julius? ® and corenen pr. m. 


368 
. MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 

mid vnimete folke. 

| & com heom bi-tweonen 
per heo poleden teonen. 

Julius him wes bi-foren ¥ 
Androge® bi hindé. 
ah Androge® er awoc ? 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 8626—8651.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


mid onimete folke. 

pe ferdes he was bi-twine Y 
par he polede teone. 

Julius him was bi-vore? 
Androgius bi-hinde. 

ac Androgius her awoc ? 
and yt of pe wode foch. 


& al } fole pe he leedde ¢ [£.49.c.1.] and al pat folk pat he ladde’ 


| & ut of wude wende. 
\ 


lude hit greedde. 

bleowen here bemen ’ 
belden heore beornes. 

& heom toward wenden ? 
on euere elchen ende. 
pis iherde pe king ?. 

Caff ibelaune. 


& pene dune muchelne. 
he feide ford rihtes 
wepned eow cnihtes. 


he wende hit weore Cefar. 
ah Cefar mid his ginne 
bi-uoren wes ful ftille. 

and iherde pane dram wel’ 
of Androgeuf folke. 

& Julius wes al redi’ 


loude hit gradde. 

bleuwen hire hornes 
boldede hire Bruttef. 

and heom touward wende. 
on euereche hende. 

Pis ihorde pe king 
Caffibilane. 


ih’ede he pene muchelne dram‘ ihorde pane drem ¢ 


and pane mochele dune. 
he faide forp rihtes ” 
wepnep ou cnihtes. 


Pes kinges heorte wes ful fer Y 20 Pe kinges heorte wes wel for ¥ 


he wende hit were Cefar. 
ac Cefar al wip ginne? 
bi-vore lai wel ftille. 

and ihorde wel pane drem? 
of Androgius hif folke. 

and Julius was al readi’ 


numerous folk, ‘and came them [the hosts he was] between ;—there ‘they 
[he] suffered harm! Julius was before him, Androgeus behind, but An- 
drogeus first stirred, and out of [the] wood marched, and all the folk that 
he led, loud it shouted. They blew their trumps, encouraged their ‘men 
[Britons], and advanced toward them on every side. This heard the king 
Cassibelaune ; ‘he’ heard the ‘great’ noise, and the mickle din; he said 
forth-right : ‘‘Arm you, knights!” The kings heart was ‘full [well] sore, 
he weened ‘ that’ it were Cesar; but Cvsar ‘with his [all with] stratagem 
‘was full [lay well] still before (in advance), and heard well the shouts of 


[v. 8652—8674.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


alfe he to wolde reefen. 

& Caffibellaune pe king Y 
nufte her of na ping. 

ah he wepnede his cnihtes’ ~ 
and 3arewede heom to fehten. 
“Er heo weoren helf 3aru / 

per com Androge® faren. 

and he fufde heom to” 

mid feddliche ftrengSe. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


369 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11, 


alfe he wolde to refe. 

and Caffibilane pe king y 
nufte her of no ping. 

ac armede his cnihtes / 
redi to fihte. 

Here hii weren half 3are “ 
par cd Androgius fare. 
and he refede heom to ¢ 
mid fwipe gode ftrengpe. 


Pe cnihtes pe weoren igarede y 10 Pe cnihtef pat redi were ? 


bi-gunné to fehten. 

& Androge® heom to! 
mid a®elere ftregSe*. 
zt pon frum reefen 

he feolde of pon folke. 
feowerti hundred ¥ 

pat folke was pe leffe. 
Pa wolde } folke fleo / 
per com Juli? teon. 
forn a3eien heore heued? — 20 
& heom to heolde. 

of pon folke he floh 
muchel & unifoh. 


bi-gonne to fihte. 

ac Androgius heom imette ? 
and vuele heom igrette. [c. 2.] 
he fulde at pe forfte ¥ 

forti hiidred. 


Po wolde pat folk fleon ¥ 
po com Julius teon. 
azein hire heued 

and on heom leide. 

of pane folke he floh y 
mochel folk* and onifoh. 


Androgeus [his] folk ; and Julius was all ready, as if he would rush forth. 
And Cassibelaune the king hereof knew nothing, but ‘he weaponed [armed] 
his knights, ‘and prepared them [ready] to the fight. Ere they were half 
ready, there approached Androgeus, and he ‘marched [rushed] towards 
them with ‘fiendish [most good] strength. The knights that were ‘arrayed 
[ready], began to fight, and Androgeus encountered them ‘with powerful 
strength [and evilly them greeted]; he felled at the first ‘onset’ forty 
hundred ‘of the folk ;—the folk was the less!’ Then would the folk 
flee ;— there [then] advanced Julius against their head (front), and ‘at- 
tacked [laid on] them; of the folk he slew much and innumerable! Then 
* Redundant ? 


1 resde to? fusde to? * ftreng®e? 


28 


370 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
Pa fieh Bruttene king 


[v. 8675—8698.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
po fiep Bruttene king ¢ 


Caffibellaune. Caffibilane. 

wel ofte him wes wa’ wel ofte him was wor 
neuer wurfe pene pa. {c.2.] meuer w.... pan po. 
Juliuf him wes bi-foren ” Julius him ..... vore : 


Androge® him beften. 
& on elche fide ¥ 
fizen to his herme. 

Pe king hine bi-pohte ” 
Caffibellaune. 

ifeeh him bi-helues 


Androgius bi-hi... 

.. euereche fide 

fizen him to harme. 

pe king hine bi-pohte ’ 
wat he don mihte. 

ifeh he bi-halues 


znne holt’ hehne. on hul he3e. 
bi ennes wudes ende Y bi one wodes ende? 
pider he gon wenden. pider he gan wende. 


and muchel of his folke ” 
flozen mid pon kinge. 

& a-ftizen uppe pen hul 
mid muchele mod-for3e. 
napeles per up purgé Y 


and mochel of his folke / 
flozen mid pan kinge. 
and afte3e pane hul? 
mid mochelere forewe. 


nopeles par vp pronge 


fiftene pufunde. 2 nizentene pufend. 
Wes pe mut? fwide heh Was pe hul fwipe heh ¥ 
hafles per greowe. afeles par growe. 


pat fwipe picke in euereche fide ¢ 


swide wes pe hul bi-clufed pe hulle was bi-closed / 


fled Britains king Cassibelaune ; well oft he was woe, but never worse than 
then! Julius was before him, Androgeus behind ‘him, and’ on ‘each 
[every] side they followed to hisharm. The king ‘Cassibelaune ’ bethought 
him [what he might do; he] saw beside ‘him’ a high hill, by a woods 
end; thither he retreated; and much of his folk fled with the king, and 
ascended ‘ upon’ the hill with mickle ‘ mood’-sorrow ;—nevertheless there 
up crowded ‘fifteen [nineteen] thousand. The ‘mount [hill] was very 
high; hasels there grew; [that] the hill was thickly inclosed ‘with rocks 


1 hul? ? munt? 


[v. 8699—8721.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 371 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
mid cludes of ftane. mid cludef of ftone. 
Heo bi-giinen pene wude feollen? Hi bi-gonne pane wode ¢ 
& heo' bi-foren leggen. falle to grunde. 
mid ftocké & mid ftanen ? 
& mid ftelene orden. 
heo gunnen heom to werienY _ par iwolde* heom werie ’ 
wid heore wiSer-iwinen. wip hire wiper-iwinne. 
Pene hul makede pe kig ’ O pan hul he makede 
to ftrongge enne caftle. one ftronge caftel. 
an af nihte firfte Y to and in one nihte? 
pat wore wef iforSed. pat worch was ihended. 
for per worhten fweines / for pare wrohte peines 
per wordten peines. pare wrohte fweines. 


& pe king mid his honden Y and pe king mid his honde’ 
Caffibellaune. 


wurhte ful fwiSe Y wrohte wel fwipe. 

to bur3en his liue. 

Pa pet work wes up ifet ’ Pat wore po hit was vp ifet / 
heom wes alles pa bet. lute him-wa. pe bet. 

& Julius Cefar ¢ 2% for Julius Cefar ? 

bi-lai heom abute per. bi-lay him aboute. 

A pen hulle wes pe king Pare lay pe king’ [£.43.¢.1.] 
Caffibellaune. Caffibilane. 


of stone [on every side]. They began to fell the wood [to the ground], 
‘and lay before them; with stocks and with stones, and with steel 
weapons’; [there] they ‘began to defend [would defend] themselves against 
their enemies. “The king [He] made [on] the hill ‘as’ a strong castle, 
{and] in one ‘nights space [night] the work was ‘completed [ended], for 
there wrought ‘swains [thanes], there wrought ‘thanes [swains], and the 
king with his hands, ‘Cassibelaune,’ wrought ‘full [well] hard, ‘to save 
his life.’ When the work [it] was up set, ‘they were ‘all [little he was] 
the better, ‘and [for] Julius Cesar belay ‘them [him] about ‘there.’ ‘On 
the hill was [There lay] the king Cassibelaune, there he suffered much 


1 heom? ? hii wolde? 
282 


372 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8722—8744.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


per he polede muchelne burft’ par he polede mochel porft Y 
nes per neouper win ne mutt. [c.2.] naf par noper mep ne moft. 


preo da3zes & preo niht ¥ preo dawes and preo niht ¥ 
ne et per neuer na cniht. -+++ par neuere no cniht. 
Heo weoren fwiSe uuele iled?’ .. weren vuele bi-lad’ 

for pe king hed hauede al for-rad'.for . . king heom for-rad. 
pe nold fehtneffe afon? pat ..lde paif onder-fon ” 
at his meie Androgeum, mid... ... Androgium. 
perfore he lei on hulle? 

hunger him derfde. 10 ‘ 

Nearew® wes pe king iled’ Par ... nufte he nanne read?’ 
nufte he nenne red. . + was narewe bi-ladde. 

for nufte he a nare halue Y for he nufte in none halue 
helpen } him mahte. help pat him pohte. 

i-feeh alle dei bi-foren i-feeh alle dai bi-fore ¥ 

his fulle iuan alle icoren. hif fon folle icore. 

Julium pene keifere ¥ Julia pane kaifere 


mid alle pan Romanifce here. mid al pan Romaniffe here. 
mid alle pa Rom-leoden ? 


to pes kinges unneoden. 20 

& alle dei pus cleopeden and alle pus faide ’ 
to Caffibellaune. to Caffibilane. 

Nu pu fealt adreden Nou pou falt adrede ? 


‘harm [thirst], was there neither wine nor must; three days and three 
nights ate ‘there’ never any knight. They were ‘very’ evilly circum- 
stanced, for the king ‘had’ them ‘all’ misled, that he would not accept 
‘reconciliation [peace] with his kinsman Androgeus,—‘ therefore he lay 
on the hill; hunger him distressed.’ ‘The king [He] was narrowly be- 
stad, [there] he knew no counsel, for he knew not on any side what 
might help him. He saw all day before him his ‘full’ foes, ‘all [full] 
chosen, Julius the emperor, with all the Romanish forces, ‘with all the 
Rome-folk,—to the kings harm; ’—and all ‘ day’ they ‘called [said] thus to 
Cassibelaune: ‘‘ Now thou shalt dread for thy former deeds; ‘it liked thee 


? for-lad pr. m. 2 Neorew pr. m. 


[v. 8745—8768.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


for pine zr deeden.. 

hit pe likede wel ? 

pat pu uf adun leideft. 

mid pine fehte! / 

& ure kun feldeft. _ 

nu is icumen pi wa-dei ¥ 
for de® pu fealt polien. 
mid hungere & mid hete / 
& mid feeome muchele. 

Pa wes wa peon kinge ¥ 10 
Caffibellaune. 

& nom him enne red 

for him wes muchel neod. 
He nom enne wifné cniht ? 
& féde hine forSriht. 

vt to pon folke ¥ 

per weoren his iuan. 

& grette Androgeum Y 

mid griSfulle worden. 


bed hine cu%en Y 20 


he his cun weoren?. 
& pa bet et pare neode? [c.2.] 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


373 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


for pine erdede. 
pat pou houre cun Y 
to pan grunde leideft. 


nou his icome pe dai?’ 
pat pou falt deap polie. 


Po was wo pan kinge ’ 
Caffibilane. 

and nam him anne read ¢ 
for him was mochel neod. 
He nam one wife cniht ¢ 
and fende hine forp riht. 
a-dun to pan folke 

pat lutel him lofuede. 
and grette Androgium 
mid gripfolle wordes. 
bad hine coupi?’ 

pat he his cun were. 


for he wes his broder fune. [idon? 
For nabbe ich pe noht fwa uuele For nabbe ich penoht fo vuel idon 


well,’ that thou ‘us down [our kin to the ground] laidest ‘ with thy fight, 
and our kin felledest’;—now is ‘thy woe-day [the day] come, ‘for [that] 
death thou shalt suffer, ‘with hunger and with hatred, and with much 
shame!’”’ Then was the king Cassibelaune woe, and took him a counsel,— 
for to him was great need. He took a wise knight, and sent him forth- 
right ‘out [down] to the folk, ‘where his foes were [that loved him little], 
and greeted Androgeus with peaceful words; bade him to know, that he 
were his kinsman, ‘and the better at the need, for he was his brothers son.’ 


1 This line, and part of the next, are on an erasure, but by the first hend, 
? weore? 


374 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8769—8790.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
pat feulde per foren deed d-fon. pat ich deap fal onder-fon. 
for pat is muchel un-riht? for pat his mochel onriht / 
3if zeuere wi god cniht, 3if euere eni god cniht. 
wule his godliche cun ? wole his wonliche cun ? 
bute gulte aquellen. wip houte gult a-cwelle. 
ZEt hezere neode ¥ At he3ere neode Y [c.2.] 
nu pu muft me reden. pou moft me nou reade. 


sehtnien me wid pene keifere: fehtne me wip pan kaifere? 

& wid pon Romanifce here. [wid:and wip pan Romaniffe here. 

& seo8Sen ich wullen' pe fpeken and fuppe ich wolle pe fpeke wip? 
& makien efter pine wille gri8. 11. and maki after pine wille grip. 
to-gaderen wit feullen libben’ to-gadere we follen libbe? 
to-gadere wit feullen liggen. to-gadere we follen ligge. 


Penc of mire neode ’ Penche of mine neode Y 

& fehtne me wid Rom-lede. and paife me wip Romleode. 
for 3if ihe her for-wurde* / for 3if ich here for-worpi? 
auerft pe beoS pa wurfe. par after pou miht apenche. 
for 3et heo wurdsed pe lade? _for 3et hii worpeh pe lope? 
pe me fulfted nu to dede. pat fulftep nou me to deape. 


Pa anfwerede Androgeuf? 2% Po anfwerede Androgius 
& wid pene cnihte he fpec puf. and wip pane cnihte he {pac pus. 
Heu 3are wes hit iwurden Ou 3ar waf hit iworpe? 


—‘ For I have not done to thee so evilly, that [I] should therefore receive 
death ; for that is great injustice, if ever any good knight will his goodly 
kin without guilt kill. At my great need now thou must me counsel, re- 
concile me with the emperor, and with the Romanish host ; and afterwards 
I will speak with thee, and make peace after thy will; together we shall 
live, together we shall lie. Think of my necessity, and ‘reconcile [make 
peace for] me with the Rome-folk; for if I here die, ‘speedily will be to 
thee the worse [thereafter thou mayest repent], for yet they will become 
to thee odious, who help me now to death.”” Then answered Androgeus, 
and with the knight he spake thus: ‘ How long since has it happened, in 


? wulle? ? for-wurde? 


[v. 8791—8813.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 375 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
ine worlde riche. 
pat mines eames muchele mod ¥ 
swa milde if iwuréen. 
& fwa swide reh' mon’ 
rihtef? icnawen. 
3et ne beod fif deizes ¥ 
allunge iuerede. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


in piffe worle riche. 
pat min hem his mochele mod / 
his fo milde iworpe. 


3et ne beop noht fif dawes 
ibroht to pan ende. 

pat he me nolde vt driuen pat he wolde me vt driue / 
bi-nimen me et pan liue. and refe me of pan lifue. 
per to he duden® al his mahte ? 10 

he bi-reuede mie ehte. 
& al } me wes leof/ and al pat me was leof/ 

him wes wunderliche le®. him was wonderliche lop. 

Pe king dude vnwis-dom Pe king dude onwifdom / 

pat he fwule mod him droh on. pat he foch mod him nam on. 
for he feeht wid Cefare / peh he pe kaifere ¥ 

pan Romanifce keifere. 

&he hinetwien ouer-com: [f.50.c.1.]twi drof of londe. 

and his fole floh and nom, 

Ne dude hit noht pe king ane: 20 Ne dude he hit noht one’ 


ah we alle clane, 
per ich wes o pon fihte ’ 
mid alle mine cnihten. 


ac dude we alle clene. 
par ich waf in pan fihte ’ 
mid alle mine cnihtes. 


(this] worlds realm, that mine ‘uncles [uncle his] mickle mood (anger) so 
mild is become, ‘ and so very stern a man has acknowledged what is right’? 
Five days are not yet ‘wholly passed [brought to the end], that he would 
me out drive, [and] deprive me of the life. ‘Thereto he did all his might ; 
he bereaved my goods,’ and all that to me was dear, to him was wonder- 
fully odious, The king did un-wisdom, that he such mood ‘drew [took] 
him on, ‘because he fought with Cesar, the Roman emperor, and he twice 
overcame him, and his folk slew and captured [though he twice drove the 
emperor from land]. ‘The king [He] alone did it not, but we [did it] all 
_ clean (wholly); there was I in the fight, with all my knights, hard pressed 
* dude? 


) reht pr. m., but t erased. ? riht if pr. m. 


376 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8814—8836.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
herde bi-Srungen Y herde bi-prongen ? 
i wel feole ftundé. in wel mani ftunde. 
Ah ich mi feolf neore ¥ Ac 3if ich mi seolf neore / 
& mine gode cnihtes. and mine gode cnihtes. 
i-numen weoren! ure king inome hadde ibeo pe king ” 
& his Bruttef alle aqualde. and his men acwelled. 
ah we bi-foren pon kinge? ac we bi-fore pan kinge ¥ 
fuhte ful fwide. fofte? wel fwipe. 
& driuen ut® pene keifere ¥ and driuen vt pe kaifere ?’ [f. 43°... 1.] 
mid his Romanifce here. 10 mid his Romaniffe here. 


ne dude hit noht pe king ane’ 

ah duden we alle clene. 

Pa we hafden fwa idon / Po we fo hadde idon 

& muchele wurfcipe an-fon. an moche worfipe vnderfon, 
pa iward pe king 6 mode prut? he iwarp par fore fo prout ” 

ah ne draf he hine noht ane ut. alfe poh he hine adde idriue vt. 
Seodvsen it his nu her to ibroht ? Wane hit his nou fo ibroht / 


nu is min eam wel bi-Soht. nou his min héém wel bi-poht. 
mid mildliche worden ¥ mid mildeliche wordes / 

he 3erned mine milce. - 20 he 3eornep mine milce. 

for itemed if pe wode ¥ for i-temed his pe wode ¥ 

nu beod his word gode. nou beop his wordes gode. 


Nu ich wulle wende mi mod: Nou ich wolle wende mi mod’ 


in well many astound. But [if] I had not been there myself, and my 
good knights, ‘our [the] king had been taken, and his ‘Britons [men] ‘all’ 
slain; but we before the king fought ‘full [well] vigorously, and drove 
out the emperor with his Romanish army. ‘The king alone did it not, 
but we did it all clean.’ When we had so done, and much worship gained, 
‘then became the king proud in mood,—but he alone drove him not out 
[he became therefore so proud, as though he had driven him out].—'Since 
[When] it is now ‘hereto [so] brought, now is mine uncle well bethought ; 
with mild words he yearneth my favor, for tamed is the wild; now are 
his words good! Now will I change my mood; against [his] evil I will 


1 weore? 2 fohte? 3 Writlen at first out, but o expuncted. 


[v. 8837—8859.) LA3AMONS BRUT. 377 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
azenes uuel ich wulle don god. _a3ein his yuel ich wole do god. 
& lutlien ich wulle his kare’ —_alafki him of care’ 

& fehtnien him wid Cefare. and paifi wip Cefare. 
zr cumen! pe ende of piffe dei: her come pe ende of pis dai ¥ 


helpen him 3if ich mai. helpe him 3if ich may. 
Androge® wes fwa god Androgius was fo god ¥ 
sone he dude hine bar-fot. he dude him fone bareuot. 
& alle his bezfte cnihtefy and alle his befte cnihtes / 


pe mid him weoré an fuhte. pat mid him were in fihte. 
& eodé to pon kaifere / ‘10 and eoden to pan kaifere ¥ 
per he wes ipon here. par he was a-midde pe here. 
& feollen to his foten ’ he ful to hif fote Y 

& folden & ifohten. 

mildeliche fpzc pus ¥ [c.2.] and peof word faide. 


pe treowe cniht Androgeus. 

Lauerd Julius pin are / Louerd Julius pin ore 
nu & euer mere. nou and euere more. 
lett me fpeken pe wid lett me fpeke pe wip? 


ich 3erne mildce and pi grid. nou ich 3eorne pi grip. 

Pu haueft ouer-cumen mine em * Pou haueft ouer-come min heem 
inne pine fehte he nam flem. 21 in pine fihte he nam fleom. 

i piffen hulle he lid ¥ in piffe hulle he lip’ 

& 3eorned pe lif grid, ~ and 3ernep pe grip. 


do good, and ‘lessen I will his [release him from] care, and ‘reconcile him 
{make peace] with Cesar; ere the end of this day come, help him if I 
may.” Androgeus was so good, he made him soon bare-footed, and all 
his best knights that with him were in the fight; and they went to the em- 
peror where he was ‘in [amidst] the army, ‘and [he] fell to his feet, ‘and 
embraced, and besought’; ‘mildly spake thus [and these words said] 
‘the true knight Androgeus’: ‘‘ Lord Cesar, thy favor, now and ever- 
more! Let me speak with thee, [now] I ask ‘for grace and’ thy grith. 
Thou hast overcome mine uncle, in the fight he took flight ; in this hill he 
lieth, and yearneth of thee ‘life’-grith ; for thou hast all overcome Cassi- 


1 cume? 


378 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8860—8882.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
for al pu haueft ouer-cumen? _for al pou haueft ouer-come ¥ 
Caffibellaune. Caffibilane. 
& muchel of his folke 
iualled to grunde. 
& pene kige & and! al his lond? and him and al his londey 
bi-3iten to pire azere hond. bi-3ete to pin owene hond. 
3if him nu lifues grid / 3if him nou lifues grip? 
& let hine fpeken pe wid. and let hine fpeke pe wip. 
zr he wes freo king* er he was freo king 

10 ~=lethine beonou pinvnderling. [c. 2.) 

nu pu ert iwreken him on’ nou pou hert iwreken him on ¥ 
let hine bi-cumen pin a3ene mon. let hine bi-come pi man. 
and elche 3er pe fende ¢ and eche’3er pe fende ¥ 
p® gauel of Brutt-londe. gauel of his londe. 


madmes and muchel feoh ” 
pe monfcipe is pin a3é. 


pif iherde Cefar ’ pis ihorde C.... 

of piffere fpecche he wes wer. he was fwipe war. 

a-weiward he halde? a-weiward his heued heold ” 
& nolde hit iheren. 2% ...nolde hit ibere. 

makede hinefwulc he weore wrad /makede ... he were wrop? 
for po wurde pe he iherde. for pe w..des hine were lop. 
Androge® wes wis and wary = An....... was wis and war? 


belaune, ‘ and much of his folk felled to ground,’ and ‘the king [him] and 
all his land obtained in thine own hand. Give him now grace of life, and 
let him speak with thee. Ere this he was a free king, [let him now be 
thine underling]; now thou art wreaken on him, let him become ‘thine own 
{thy] man, and each year send thee ‘the’ tribute of ‘Britain [his land]; 
‘treasures and much wealth,—the honor is thine own.’ ”—This heard Cesar, 
‘of this speech he was aware [he was most wary]; awayward ‘he’ held 
[his head], and would it not hear; made ‘him’ as if he were wrath, for 
the words ‘that he heard [to him were loath]. Androgeus was wise and 


? Redundant. * A line is here wanting. 
® Written at first ye, but e expuncted, 


[v. 8883—8904,] LA3AMONS BRUT. 379 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xin. 
pene keifere he eode neor. | ee fere he eode ner. 
and! graeten worden ¥ and mid grettere wordes / 
pene keifere igreette. pane kaifer he grette. 
and pus qued Androgeus and pus faide Androgius ” 
Hercne* hiderward Juli?. Hercne hiderward Julius. 


wid me ne beo punoht widerward ‘wip mene beo pounoht wiperward? 
ileeft ich habbe pe mi foreward. ilaft ich habbe pin foreward. 

& al } ich pe bi-hehte 

bi-foren vnkere cnihten. 

Ich bi-hehte pe al Brut-lond ? 10 Ich bi-hehte pe al Brutlond / 

to fetté a pire azere hond. [£50>.c.1.]to pin owene hond. 

& fwa ich habben® nu idon and fo ich habbe nou idon ? 

& pu hit haueft al under-fon. —_ and pou haueft onder-fon. 

ahne biheehte ich pe nauere toflen/ac ne bi-hehte ich neuere to flean? 
Caffibellaune mine em. [for-don /Caffibilane min hem. 

mid nane rihte ne mai ich hine mid none rihte ne mihte ich don? 
for ich eam his meiand his mon.he his mi louerd and ich his mon. 
ne fcal he neuere ded polien? ne fal he neuere deap polie ¥ 

pe while pe ich mai him freoien, wile ich hine mai werie. 

Ah 3if mine eame lifuef grid‘? 20 Ac 3if him lifef grip ¥ 

& let hine fehtnie pe wid. and let hine fehni pe wip. 

pi mon he fel bi-cumen / pi man he fal bi-come ¥ 


wary ; the emperor he went near, and with greater words (loftier terms) 
the emperor [he] greeted; and thus ‘quoth [said] Androgeus :—‘‘ Hearken 
hitherward, Julius,—with me be thou not hostile,—fulfilled I have ‘to 
thee’ ‘my [thy] covenant, ‘and all that I to thee promised, before our 
knights.’ I promised thee all Britain ‘to set’ in thine own hand, and so 
I have now done, and thou hast ‘it all’ received; but I promised thee 
_ never to slay Cassibelaune, mine uncle; with no right ‘may I destroy him 
{might I do i#], ‘for I am his relative, and [he is my lord, and I am] his 
man; he never shall suffer death, ‘the’ while ‘that’ I may him ‘free 
(defend]. But give ‘mine uncle [him] grace of life, and let him be recon- 
ciled with thee; thy man he shall become, for hostage deliver thee his son, 


? and mid? ? The last two letters of hercne are by second hand, sup. ras, 
* habbe? « grit? 


380 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8905—8928.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
to 3ifle biteche pe his fune. to hoftage bi-take pe his fone. 
& elche 3ere fenden / and eche 3er pe fende ¥ 
preo pufend punden. preo pufend punde. 
& pat ich pe wullen' fwerien’ and pat ich wolle pe fwerie? - 
uppen mine fweorden. vppe mine fweorde. 
3if pu pis nult® iwurdé Y 3if pou pif nelt don ¥ 
pe wurf peo fcelt iwursen. pou falt dé worfe. (£44. ¢.1.] 
ne fcalt pu nauere mid pine here? ne falt pou neuere mid pine here / 
iftid of Brut-londe faren. ifund of Brutldd vare. 
Pa wes a-drad pe keifereY 10 Po was adrad pe kaifere ’ 
mid his Romanifce here. and al his Romaniffe here. 


leouere him weore panealhis londsleuere him were pan al pis lond 
penealhif feoluer? panealhis gold.poh hit were in his hond. 


pat he weore in OSeres pat [he] were in Odre? 

in his caftel gode. in his caftel gode. 

for pa hefde fwiSe muchel care? ... he hadde mochel care ¥ 
Juli? pon keifere. 8 = sass -efare. 

pe® wende pat Androgeus / he wende... .... ogius ¥ 
fwiken hine wolde. bi-traie hi. . . .lde. 

Juli? wes wis and war 20 Julius was wis and war? 
pat he wel cudde per. pat he wel cudde par. 

pus feide pa Juli?’ pus feide po Juliuf? 

to pan eorle Androge?. to pan eorl Androgius. 
Androge® mi leofue mon y Androgius mi leofue man Y 


and each year send [thee] three thousand pounds; and that I will swear 
to thee upon my sword. If thou wilt not ‘agree to [do] this, ‘the’ worse 
thou shalt ‘be [do]; thou never shalt with thine army go from Britain in 
safety.”” Then was the emperor afraid, ‘with [and all] his Romanish host ; 
it were liefer to him than all ‘his [this] land, ‘than all his silver, than all his 
gold [though it were in his hand], that he were in Otheres, in his good 
castle; for ‘then [he] had very much care Julius ‘the emperor [Cesar],—he 
weened that Androgius would betray him. Julius was wise and wary,—that 
he well shewed there. Thus said Julius then to the earl Androgeus: 


2 wulle? > 2 wult pr. m. 3 he? 


[v. 8929—8952.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


al pine wille ic wulle don. 
don ich wulle pin red ¥ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


381 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


al pine wille ich wolle don. 
don ich wolle pine read ¥ 


for pu me hulpe pa me wes neod. for pou holpe me to piffe neod. 
for ne fide ichnaueretreouremon/ne funde ich neuere treuere man? 
bi-tweonen pis & Lat*n. — [[c.2.] bi-twine pis and Latran. 

Pis wes fone icud Y Pis was fone ibropt / 

to Caffibellaune. to Caffibilane. 

pa wes he fwa blide / po was he fo blipe Y 

swa he nef! neuere on his liue. fo he nas neuere her on liue. 


vt wende pe king / 10 vt wende pe king? 
Caffibellaune. Caffibilane. 

adun of pan hulle a-dun of pan hulle 

blide on his mode. blipe on his mode. 

Ah per Juli? dude wel ¥ And par Julius dude wel ¥ 


& wurd-fcipen muchele. 
he hine lette ueden Y 

he hine lette feruden. 

he hine lette ba¥ien ¥ 

zr he him bi-uoren come. 


and worfipe mochele. 
he hine lette vede / 

he hine lette ferude. 

he hine lette bapie 

are he him bi-fore come. 


Pa hit wes al igreiped / 2 Po pis was al idoy 
pa comé heo to-gaderes. po comen hii gadere*. 
grid per heo aftalleden ¥ grip hii pare makede 
& wel hit wes ihalden. and hit wel helde. 


heo makeden heore foreward Y 


Androgeus, my dear man, all thy will I will do; do I will thy counsel, for 
thou helpedst me, ‘when to me was [in this] need; for never found I truer 
man, between this and Lateran!” This was soon ‘made known [brought] 
to Cassibelaune ; then was he so blithe as he was never [ere] in ‘his’ life. 
Out went the king Cassibelaune, down from the hill, blithe in his mood. 
‘But [And] there Julius did well, and much worship; he caused him to be 
fed, he caused him to be clad, he caused him to be bathed, ere he came before 
him. When ‘it [this] was all done, then came they together; peace there 
they ‘established [made], and well it ‘was holden [held]; ‘they made their 


1 Sup. ras. . 2 R. to-gadere. 


382 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 8953—8975.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xr. 
biforen heore du3e%e. 
Caffibellaune bi-com ’ Caffibilane bi-com ? 
Juli? azene mon. Julius his owene man. 
& elche 3ere him fende? and eche 3er him fende ? 
preo pufend piden. preo pufend punde. 
E%Ses per weoren ifworene ? Opes hii fworen? 


& neoré heo nauere forlorne. 

for treowe men heom aftalden 

& al fwa heo gunnen heom halden.and wel hit heolden. [c.2.] 
Neo’eles Juli? wes pe erfte md? Julius was pe first man Y 

pe dude pis lond inne leowdom’. pat dude pis lond in peudom. 
seodden Noe & his funen? 12 suppe Noc and his fones? 

of pere arche weoren icumen. of pare arche weren icome. 


Peo al pis wesiuaren’ Po al pis was ivare 
pa to-delde pa verden. po to-delde pe ferde. 
& pe keifere & his iueren’ and pe kaifer mid his veres ¢ 


al } winter heo® wuneden here. al pon winter wonede here. 
mid fehte and mid fibbe/ 


mid felcuSe ni'3epe. 

Touward pan fum?e/ 2% Touward pan fomere / 

heo® ouer fee wende. he ouer féé verde. 

& leedde mid him AndrogeiY and ladde mid hi Androgium ¢ 
pe wes his deorefte mo. pat was his deoreworpefte man. 


compact before their people.’ Cassibelaune became Julius [his] own man, 
and each year should send him three thousand pounds. Oaths ‘there were 
sworn [they swore], ‘and never were they forsworn, for true men made 
them,’ and ‘so they gan hold (observed) them [well it held]. ‘ Nevertheless’ 
Julius was the first man that put this land in subjection, since Noah and 
his sons were come out of the ark. When all this was done, then separated 
the hosts; and the emperor ‘and [with] his companions all the winter 
‘they’ dwelt here, ‘with amity and with peace, with marvellous mirth,” 
Towards the summer he went over sea, and led with him Androgeus 


1 peowdom? 
2 Interlined by second hand, as are the letters ne in wuneden, * he? 


[v. 8976—8998.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
& Androge® walde 
al pat he wolde. 
heonene in to Rome ¥ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


383 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xim. 
and Androgius welde ¢ 
al pat he wolde. 
hinene to Rome? 


hit ftod on Androge*dome.{£51.c.1.Jhit was at his dome. 


Ne com he nauere mare heF/ 
ne nan of hif iuere. 
ne leouede he! neuer feoSden Y 


Ne com he neuere here 
ne non of his veref. 
ne liuede he! pere ¥ 


buten feouen 3ere. bote foue 3ere. 
Caffibellaune ¥ And Caffibilane ¥ 
pe wes piffe londef kig. 10 
pa his ende deie com’ 
in Eouerwicke heo® deide. in Euerwike deaide. 

her pe king were dead ¢ 

Shis quene. deaide pe cwene. 

pe king wes al bern-les/ pe king eyr nadde non? 
Bruttes weoren fieri. par fore was mani fori man. 
pif iherde Tennanci? ¥ Pis ihorde Teunancius ¥ Tape onnteine 
pe i Cornwale wes dux. pat ine Cornwale was dux. 
pat his eam wes ideied / pat his heam was dead 
& his a¥elene #t-fallen. 20 
and his broSer Androgeus ¥ and his broper Androgius eck. 


iuaren uord mid Juli®. 
& nuchel* of his cunne?Y 


who was his dearest man; and Androgeus ruled all that he would; 
hence ‘in’to Rome it ‘stood in Androgeus [was at his] doom. Never 
more came he hither, nor any of his companions; he lived ‘never after- 
wards [there] but seven years. [And] Cassibelaune, ‘ who was king of 
this land;—when his end-day came’, in York ‘he’ died. (Ere the king 
were dead, died] ‘his [the] queen; the king ‘was all childless, the Britons 
were sorry [had no heir, therefore was many a man sorry]! This heard 
Tennancius, who in Cornwall was duke, that his uncle was dead, ‘ and his 
dignity departed,’ and [eke] his brother Androgeus ‘ gone forth with Julius, 


2? he? 
4 R. muchel. 


? See Notes. 
5 A line and half have here been omitted by negligence of the scribe. 


384 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


quehten* mid him feolue. 
Tennanci> hine bi-Sodte / 

hu he faren mihte. 

& hu he mihte gan on’ 

pat he hafde pifne kinedom. 

pe Lud king his fader ¥ 

walde wel loge. 

Tennanci? nom his sonde y 

& fende in to Brutlonde. 

bad hed bu3en hi to” 10 
pa bet heom feulde iwurden. 
hebben hine to kinge 

al buten cope. 

bi-tachen hi al } lond’ 

pe Lud his fader hafde an hond 
& he heom wolde luuien 

pa while } he luuede. 

& 3if heo pif wolde ¥ 

habben he hit wolde. 

over he wolde mid fehte? —_ 20 
fallen heom to grunde, 


Bruttes ferden heom to Lundene ? 


to muchele huftinge. 


[v. 8999—9021.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


Teunancius hine bi-pohte ¥ 
wat he don mihte. 
and hou he mihte gon an 
pat he hadde pifne kinedom. 
pat Lud king his fader 
welde wel lange. 
Teunancius nam his fonde / 
an fende to Brutlonde. 
bad heom bowe him to’ 
pe bet hou fal iworpe. 
makie me to kinge ¥ 
al boute fihte. 
bi-take me al pat lond ” 
. pat Lud mi fader hadde an hond. 
and he 3am wolde lofuie ? [£.44°.c.1.] 
pe wile pat ich leuie. 


oper ich wolle mid fihte ” 

mine cunde awinne. 

Ruttes to Londene wéde / 
and heolde grete fpeche. 


and much of his kindred departed with himself.’ Tennancius bethought him 
how [what] he might ‘act [do]; and how he might go on (proceed), so 
that he should have this kingdom, that king Lud, his father, possessed well 
long. Tennancius took his messengers, and sent ‘in’to Britain; bade 
them bow (submit) to him,—the better it ‘should [shall] be for ‘them 
[you],—raise him [make me] to be king, all without ‘contest [fight], 
deliver ‘him [me] all the land that Lud, ‘his [my] father, had in hand; and 
he them would love, the while that ‘he lived [I live]; ‘and if they this 
would (consented), he it would have,’ otherwise ‘he would [I will] with 
fight ‘fell them to ground [win my kingdom”]. The Britons went to 


) The letters ueh of quehten are by a second hand sup. ras, 


[v. 9022—9044.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 385 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
} heom puhte pe bezfte red’. pat heom pohte pe befte read ¥ 
to don } Tennanti®? heom bed. do pat Teunacius bead. 
After him heo fenden’  {[c.2.] After him ifende! / 


& heouen hine to kinge. and houen hine to kinge. 
pa weoren ine Bruttene ? po weren in Brutene Y 
bliffen i-nouwe. bliffef i-nowe. 

tou and twenti wintre ‘ two an twenti winter / 

pis lond he iwalde. pif lond he heold in bliffe. 
seodsen com pe ilke dei? po com pe ilke dai ¥ 

pat pe king deed lei. 10 pat pe king dead lai. 

inne Lundene he li / hine Londene he lip” 

feeri weoren his leoden. sori was his leode. 

peof kige hefde enne fune : Peos king hadde ane fone ’ 
Kinbelin ihaten. Kinbelyn ihote. 

he wes iuaren mid his eme’ he was ivare mid his heam 
ford into Rome. forp in to Rome. 


AuguftusCefar hine makede cniht/Auguftus Cefar hinemakede cniht? 
pat wes swidSe muchel riht. pat waf wel riht. 
for seodden Juli? wes deed / for fuppe Julius was dead ¥ 


& duzeSen bi-lefden*. 2 and his folk bi-lefde. 

ne bileefde he neuer nenne? __ ne bi-lefde he neuere anne 
of Androgeuf ciine. of Androgius his cine. 

pat heold feht and iwin pat heold fiht and win? 


London, ‘to a mickle husting [and held a great conference]; that seemed 
to them the best counsel, to do what Tennancius bade ‘them.’ After him 
they sent, and raised him to be king; then were in Britain joys enow! 
Two and twenty winters this land he ‘governed [held in bliss]; then came 
that day, that the king dead lay; in London he lieth,—sorry ‘were [was] his 
people! This king had ason, named Kinbelin ; he was (had) gone with his 
uncle forth unto Rome. Augustus Cesar made him knight,—that was ‘very 
great [well] right,—for since Julius was dead, and [his] folk had quitted, 
he left never one of Androgeus [his] kin, that maintained fight and conflict 
as Kinbelin did, and so defended the Rome-folk against foreign nations. 


1 hii fende? 2 bi-lrefde? 
26 


Kinbe[lin.] 


386 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 9045—9067.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS..Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

fwa dude Kinbelin. fo dude Kinbelyn. 

& weorede Rome-peode and werede Rompeode 

wid vncuse leode. wip oncoupe peode. 

Pis iherde Bruttes ’ Pis ihorde Brutt? 

pe weoré fwide' bifie. pat were fwipe bufie. 

pat Kinbeli pe kene ¥ pat Kinbelyn pe kene / 

wunede inne Rome. wonede ine Rome. 

pe wes Tennanti°ses fone ¥ pat was Teunanciuf his fone’ 

& of Lud kinge icume. 9 of Lud kinges cun icome. 

Tweié cnihtes heo nomen fone? Tweie cnihtes hii nome’ 

& senden to Rome. and fende to Rome. 

& peo cudden Kinbeline and feide Kinbelyn ¥ 

pat hif fader wes of liue. pat his fader was of liue. 

& beden hine ftilleliche ” and bede hine stilliche Y 

uaren of pere riche. come to his owene riche. 

Nes hit noht lige ¥ Nas hit noht longe / [c. 2.] 

pat he ne com hider fone. pat he ne com 3onge. 


and Bruttes hine on-fengen? 1s and Bruttus him onfenge ? 
& heouen hine to kinge. es and makede hine to kinge. 
2 N Kinbelines deie ¥ *¢.1.] Jf N Kinbelynes daize 7 
pe king wes inne Bruttene. § pat king was in Brutaine. 
com a piffen middel zrde / com a piffe middilherpe / 
anes maidenes sune. hone maidenef fune. 


This heard the Britons, who were most busy, that Kinbelin the keen dwelt 
in Rome, who was “Tennanciuses [Teunancius his] son, ‘ and’ of Lud the 
‘king [kings kin] descended. Two knights they took ‘soon,’ and sent to 
Rome, and ‘they made known [said] to Kinbelin, that his father was dead ; 
and bade him secretly ‘depart from the [come to his own] realm. It was 
not long, before that he ‘came hither soon [arrived]; and the Britons 
received him, and ‘raised [made] him to be king. 

In Kinbelins days, who was king in Britain, came on this middle-eartha 
maidens son; born [he] was in Bethlehem, of ‘the best of all maidens [a sweet 


1 fwite? 
2 The rubricator here and below has omitted to insert the capital letters, for which 
a space has been left. 


[v. 9068—9093.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


iboren wes in BeSleem / 
of bezfte alre burden. 
He if ihaten Jhu Crift Y 
purh pene halie goft. 
alre worulde wunne Y 
walden englenne. 
feeder he is on heuenen Y 
froure moncunnes. 
sune he is on eorden Y 
of fele pd meidene. 10 
& pene halie goft / 
halded mid him feoluen. 
pene gaft he wel daled ? 
to pan pe him beod leoue. 
al fwa he dude Peture 
pe wes a wreche fifcere. 
pe makede hine an mancunne ? 
hehft of alre manne. 
INbelin Bruttene king ? 


LA3AMONS BRUT, 


387 


MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
hi-bore he was in Beth.... 
of one swete may... ; 
.... ihote Jhu Crifty 
porp ........ goft. 


fader he his on heuene ¥ 
and alle man his frouere. 


and pe holi goft ’ 

holdep mid him seolue. 
and al fo hine dealep? 

to wam him beop lofue. 
also he dude Petyr 

pat was a wrecche fiffare. 
makede hine heheft ¥ 

of alle cwike manne, 
Kinbelyn pe king 


wes god mon purh alle pig.was god man porh alle ping. 


& he luuede here’ 21 
twa & twenti 3ere. 

An his deie her luuede a m6? 
inne piffe leoden. 

feorliche ping fuleden him ? 

he wes ihaté Teilefin. 


and he lifuede here ¥ 

two and twenti 3ere. 

On his daize here was a man 
ine piffe peode. 

fwipe ferliche ping foljede him / 
he was ihote Telefyim, 


maiden]. He is named Jhesu Christ, through the Holy Ghost, ‘of all 
worlds the treasure, lord of angels’! Father he is in heaven, ‘ and’ ‘man- 
kinds [each man his] saviour; ‘Son he is on earth, of the good maiden;’ 
and the Holy Ghost he holdeth with himself; ‘the spirit he well [and also 
it] imparteth to those ‘ that’ are dear to him, as he did to Peter, who was a 
poor fisher, ‘ who’ made him ‘among mankind’ highest of all men [alive]. 
Kinbelin ‘Britains [the] king, was good man through all things, and 
he lived here two and twenty years. In his days here ‘lived [was] a man 
in this country,—[very] marvellous things followed him,—he was named 
2c2 


388 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


heo heolten hine for witie ’ 
purh his wit-fulne crefte. 

& al heo hit ilefden / 

pat Teilefin heom feide. 

he feide heom feolku® inoh 
& al heo hit fundé so3. 

he feide heom elche 3ere ¥ 
wet hed to cumen weore. 

Pe king him fende efter 
wife twalf cnilites. 

baS* hine comen him to ¥ 
pat he nan o%er feolden* don. 
& heo hine brodten fone. 
bi-foren pen folke-kinge. — [c.2.] 
A-nan fwa pe king hine imette ? 
feire he hine igrette. (chin? 
Swa me helpen min hefde & mi 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 9094—9116.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xin. _ 
hii heolden hine for witti? 


for his wifdome. 
alle hine ilefde' ’ 


Telefyn faide inoh ¥ 

and al ifunde?® foh. 

he faide 3am eche 3ere ¥ 

wat to comene were. 

Pe king him fende after 
twei wife cnihtef. 

bad him comen hi toy 

pat he hit neode folde do. 

and hii hine brohte ? 

bi-fore pan kinge. 

Anon fo pe king hine imette 
faire he hine grette. —[f-45.c.1.] 
So me helpe min chin ¥ 


wulcume ert pu Teilesin. wolcome hart pou Telefyn. 

& leouere me is pine ifundé? —_ wel leofre me his pe ifunde’ 
. péne a pufend punden. —.20_—s pane a pufend pund. 

Pa andfwerede Teilefin ? Po anfwerede Telefyn ’ 


and pus feide to Kinbelin. 
Swa ich mote gode ipeon 


and pus faide to Kinbelyn. 
-o ich mote ipeon Y 


Teilesin ; they held (esteemed) him for a prophet ‘through [for] his ‘wise 
crafts [wisdom], ‘and’ all ‘that Teilesin said to them, they’ ‘it [him] 
believed; ‘he [Telesyn] said ‘ to them marvel’ enow, and all they found ‘ it’ 
sooth; he said to them each year what things were to come ‘to them.’ 
The king sent after him ‘twelve [two] wise knights; bade him come to 
him, that he should ‘no other ¢hing do [needs do it}; and they him brought 
‘soon’ before the ‘sovereign [king]. Anon as the king him met, fair he 
greeted him: ‘So help me my ‘head and my’ chin, welcome art thou 
Teilesin, ‘and [well] liefer is to me ‘thy [thee in] safety (health) than a 
thousand pounds!” Then answered Teilesin, and thus said to Kinbelin : 
“So may I ‘ goodly ’ thrive, thou shalt it all well bestow!” Then was glad 


" A line is here deficient. ? hii funde? 3 bad? 4 feolde? 


[v. 9117—9139.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 389 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xii. 
al pu hit felt wel biteon. alo. 0e wees .++ bi-teon. 
Pa wes glad Kinbelin ¥ Po was .ssid.us a yoy 
& pus feide to Teilesin. and pus fai.. ........m. 
Her beod to piffe lide icumé? Heer his to piffe..... - ome ¥ 


feolcuSe leod-ronen. _[falem’ felcoupe tocke. . 

& fromward' peon londe of Jeru- .ram pe lond of Jerufa.em ¥ 
iwuréen heo beo’d in Bedleem. pat his iwroht in Beth...m. 
per is iboren an luttel child? _ par his ibore a lutel child ¢ 


inne pere leoden. in pare leode. 

muchele if & ftor pe eiz3e/ 10 

tacnen per beod on fterren. tockne par his on ftorre ¥ 
an monen & on fednenY on mone an on fonne. 


eie is on mon-cunnen. 
pif if widen icud 
& pa writen me beod to icume. 


& ic wolde iwité et pe? And ich wolde witen of pe ¥ 
pu ert mi wine deore. what tockne pif mai beo. 

to whan pis tocne wule ten’ —_to wan hit wolle teon? 

to wulche pige temen. 19 to wan hit wole teme. 

for her fore is alches londes folec ¢ for her fore pif londes folk 
led-liche afered. fore his afered. 

Pa anfwerede Teilefin / Po anfwerede Telefyn 

& puf feide to Kinbelin. and pus faide to Kinbelyn. 


Kinbelin, and thus said to Teilesin: “Here ‘are [is] come to this ‘land 
(kingdom) strange ‘marvels [token], ‘and’ from the land of Jerusalem ; 
‘they are [that is] wrought in Bethlehem. There is born a little child in 
the nation. ‘Great and strong is the awe;’ ‘tokens [token] there ‘are 
[is] in the stars, in the moon and in the sun; ‘dread is among mankind ! 
This is known wide, and the writs are come to me;’ and I would know 
of thee,—‘ thou art my dear friend,’—[what token this may be,] to what 
‘this token [it] will tend, to what ‘thing’ [it will] go?—for herefore 
is the folk of ‘each [this] land sorely afraid.” ‘Then answered Teilesin, 
and thus said to Kinbelin: ‘‘It was of yore said,—the sayings are now 


1 fromward? 


390 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
Hit wes 3are iqueSen ’ 
pa quides beod nu fose. 
} fcolden! bed a child iboren 
of alle folke icoré. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 9140—9163.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 
Hit was 3are icwepe ¥ 
pe cwides beop nou fope. 
pat a child folde beo ibore 
and of alle folke icore. 


& pa tfcolde beon i-haten Heeléd Yand he folde hote ¥ 


& helpen his freondes. 
alefen his leofue wines 
of lee heore bendes. 


of helle brigen Adam ¥ 

Noe & Abraham. 10 
Sadoc & Samiel?/ [£.52.c.1.] 
& Symeon pene alde. 


Jofep an Beniamin ’ 

& alle his broderes mid him. 
Johel & Elifeon y 

Afor & Naafon. 

Yfaac & his broSer 

& monienne o®ser. 

moni hundred pufend ¥ 

pe ipud beo’ to hellen. 20 
& for fwulchere neode 

he is icumen to pere peodé. 
Peos word seide Teilesin 

& alle heo weoren soSe. 


worlene Helare. 

alefe mannef cunde? 

of hire lope bendes. 

of helle bringe Adam ? 
Noe and Habraam. 

Sadoc and Samuel ? 

and Symeon pan holde. 
Jofeph and Beniamin 
and al his bropers mid him. 
Johel and Elifeon 

Azor and Nazon. 

Ifaac and his broSer 

and mani on oper. 

mani hundred pufend / 
pat igliden weren to helle. 
and for foche neode? 
icome he his to peode. 
Peof word feide Telefin Y 
and alle hii weren fope. 


[c. 2.] 


sooth,—that a child should be born, [and] of all folk chosen, and ‘that [he] 
should be called Saviour [of the world], ‘and help his friends’; release ‘his 
loved people [mans race] from their hateful bonds, from hell bring Adam, 
Noah and Abraham, Sadoc and Samuel, and Symeon the old, Joseph 
and Benjamin, and all his brothers with him, Johel and Eliseon, Asor and 
Naason, Isaac and his brother, and many another; many hundred thou- 
sand that ‘are thrust into [were descended to] hell; and for such need is 
he come to ‘the’ people.” These words said Teilesin, and they all were 
sooth. ‘When the king was informed of these sayings that were sooth,’ 


1 feolde? 2 R. Samuel. 


{v. 9164—9187.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 391 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. * MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
Pa pan kinge wes icudde ¥ 
pas quides pa weoré fode. 
pa weoren pa tidinde cude and he hi let cupi’ 
3eond his kineriche. oueral his kine-riche. : 
Bruttef her of 3emden ?’ Bruttes her of fpeke ? 
& noht hit ne forzeten. and noht hit for-3iete. 
q Kinbelin wes god kig Y Kinbelyn was god king ¥ 
& gri®ful purh alle ping. and gripfol porh alle ping. 
& pa Rom-leoden and pe Romleode 
swide hine luueden, 10 {wipe hine lofuede. 
& 3if pe king wolde and 3if pe king wolde / 
wid heom wider-heolden. wip 3am wiper-holde. 
he mite zt-halden heore feoh? he mihte at-holde pe feo 
pe Juli® her fette. pat Julius here vette. 
ah euere mere bi hif liue ¥ ac euere bi his liue ¥ 
he hit heom leofliche 3eaf. he heom was lipe. 
Seodse him comen pe tidinde? After pat com pe tidinge ¥ 
of C'ft godes childe. of Crift Godes childe. 
ne leouede pe kig mvere ne liuede pe king mare 
buten ten 3ere. 2 bo! one 3ere. 
seodven pe king bilefden® hif lif’ po he bi-lefde hif lif? 
inne Eowtwike he 3et li8. == and in Euerwike he lip. 
Her he bilefden® tweien funen Y Here he bi-lefde twei fones ? 
Witer & Aruiragune. Wiper and Aruiragum. 


‘then were the tidings [and he caused them to be} made known over [all] 
his kingdom ; the Britons hereof ‘took heed [spake], and nought it for- 
got. Kinbelin was a good king, and peaceful through all things, and the 
Rome-folk greatly him loved ; and if the king would against them rebel, 
he might withhold ‘their [the] money that Julius here procured; but 
ever‘ more’ in his life he ‘gave it to them lovingly [was obedient to them]. 
After that the tidings came ‘to him,’ of Christ, Gods child, the king lived 
no more than ‘ten years [one year]; then ‘the king [he] relinquished his 
life, [and] in York he ‘yet’ lieth. He left here two sons, Wither 


? bote? 3 bi-lefde? 


Clau{ dius] 
Cef[ar]. 


392 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 9188—9210.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
Witer wes pa zldere Y Wip” was pe eldere y 
Aruiragun pe 3ungere. Aruiragum pe 3eongere. 
ah pe king bi-queth Wider ac pe king bi-cwap Wiper? 
al his kineriche. al his kineriche. 

& he dihte and delde ¥ and he hit dihte and dealde ¥ 
efter his fader deie. after his fader deie. 

He wes swide! god cniht ” He was {wipe god eniht 

& hiefde ihelden moni fiht. [c.2.] and hadde iholde mani fiht. 
ah he wes {wise fturne ac he was {wipe fterne ? 

& fterc wid peon folke. 10 and ftare wip pan folke. 

He nalde for nane dome He nolde for none dome ¥ 
mare heren to Rome. more herie to Rome. 

ne na gauel’ heon® fendé ¥ ne non truage fende 

vt of piffen londe. of piffe londe. 


ah where fwa hefonde enne gume?vac war he funde eni gome Y 

pe of Rome weore hider icumen. pat of Rome were icome. 

he lette fmiten him of } hefde? he lette fmite him of pat heued ¥ 
bireiuie hine at liue. bi-refe him of lifue. 

& pus he heom greiSedé*y ~- .and p® he 3am fareuede? 

mid grimme his gomene. 20 +euerechone. 

&* keifere wes in Rome kaifer was in Rome?/f. 45°.c.1.] 
Claudius ihaten. Claudius i-hote. 

iherden® pa tiSende he ihorde tidinge 


and Arviragus. Wither was the elder, Arviragus the younger; but the 
king bequeathed Wither all his kingdom, and he [it] ruled and governed 
after his fathers day. He was knight most good, and had maintained 
many a fight, but he was exceeding stern, and harsh with the folk. He 
would not for any doom be subject more (longer) to Rome, nor any tribute 
send ‘ them out’ of this land ; but where ‘so’ ever he found ‘a [any] man, 
that from Rome were ‘ hither’ come, he caused the head to be smitten from 
him, deprived him of life ;—and thus he “treated [served] them ‘with his 
grim sport [every one]. An emperor was in Rome, named Claudius ; [he] 


1 swite? ? heom? Cf. v. 9680. 
3 greitede? The last letter is sub. ras. 4 An? § iherde? 


[v. 9211—9233.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 393 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x.” MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
of Wiper pon kinge. {idon? of Wiper pan king. 
whulene feome he him hefden' woch fcame he him hadde ido Y 


& mare him bi-hehte. and more bi-hehte. 

pe keifere hine wredde*/ pe kaifer him iwarp wrop / 
pe wurf him wes on heorte. wonderliche {wipe. 

& fwor bi his rigge / and fwor bi his ruge 

pat Wiser hit feolde a-biggen. pat Wiper folde a-bugge. 
He bigon to fenden He bi-gan to fende ? 

3e0d al pan Romleoden. oueral Romleode. 

he hette al pa reize / 10 and hehte alle pe he3e/ 
and alle pa rad-fulle. and pe readfolle. 

alle his he3e men alle his hez3e men Y 

his huftigge® ifechen. come to him feolfe. 

& heo to-geedere comé / And hi to-gadere come 
ipere burh of Rome. in pare borh of Rome. 
heo buden heore ferdé ” hii fomnede hire ferde / 
wide 3eond pon erde. in euereche erpe. 

mid unimete dome mid onimete dome ¥ 

heo ferden vt of Rome. hii verde vt of Rome. 

heo ferden fwa longe / 2% hii verden fo longe? 

pat heo comen to piffe londe. _ pat hii comen to piffe londe. 
Claudi° pe keifere / Claudius pe kaifere / 

& al his Romanifce here. and al his Romaniffe here. 


heard ‘the’ tidings of Wither the king, what shame he had done him, 
and more ‘him’ promised, The emperor ‘wrathed him [became wrath],— 
‘the Worse was in his heart—[wonderfully much,] and swore by his back, 
that Wither should buy ‘ it’ dear! He began to send over all ‘ the’ Rome- 
land; [and] ‘he’ ordered all the ‘brave [noble], and ‘all’ the wise of 
counsel, all his chief men, ‘to seek his husting [to come to himself]. And 
they together came in the burgh of Rome; they assembled their forces 
‘wide over the [in every] land, with immense power they marched out of 
Rome ; they proceeded so long, that they came to this land. Claudius the 
emperor and all his Romanish army at Porchester they ‘came ashore [took 


1 heefde? ? wredde? 5 huftingge ? 


394 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 9234—9257.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
at Port-cheeftre heo comé alond?at Portcaftre hii nomen lond Y 
& ftepen up a fee ftrond. and fteop vp pat féé ftrond. 


& bi-leien anan Port-cheftreY and bi-leizen Portcaftre ¥ 
mid heore folke fwiSe fafte. mid hire folke fafte. 


Heo letten deluen diches ” Hii lette delue diches ” 
vnimete deope. onimete deope. 

& al abuté ouer al? and al aboute ouer al ¥ 

he makede ftenene wal. makede ftonene wal. 

Pa wes Port-cheftre?  [f. 52%.c.1.] Po was Portcaftre ¥ 

burh mid pan bezfte. 10 borh mid pan befte. » 

ah mid pan wind-reefen!? ac mid hire bitere refes ¥ 

al heo gunnen® to-reofen. al he gan to-drefe. 

mid fure and mid fehte for-uaren?mid fure al for-fare ? 

purh Glaudi®* pan keifere. porh Claudius pan kaifere. 
pif iherde Wider? pis ihorde Wiper? 

pe wes Bruttene king her. pat was Bruttene king her. 

} icumen wes i piffe lond pat icome was to piffe londe ¥ 
Claudius pat wes fwa ftrong. Claudius pe ftronge. 

pe king gedere uerde pe king gaderede verde? 
wide 3eond his ezrde, 20 ouer al his erpe. 

& Aruiragus his broSer and Aruiragus his broper?  [c.2.] 
gederede an o®er. gaderede anoper. 

& ferdé toward pere fe?’ and verde toward pare féé ? 
mid felku%Se folk’. mid felcupe folke. 


land}, and stept upon [the] sea-strand; and besieged ‘anon’ Porchester 
with their folk ‘most’ fast (vigorously). They caused ditches to be dug, 
exceedingly deep, and all about over all ‘he’ made a stone wall. Then 
was Porchester a burgh with the best, but with ‘the hostile [their bitter] 
assaults all it began to tumble; with fire ‘and with fight [all] to be 
destroyed, through Claudius the emperor. This heard Wither, who was 
Britains king here, that Claudius, ‘who was so [the] strong, was come ‘in [to] 
this land. The king gathered an army, ‘wide over [over all] his land, and 
Arviragus, his brother, gathered another, and marched toward the sea 


) win-refen? ? gunne? 


[v. 9258—9279.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 395 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
pat heo comen mid heore here? pat hii comen mid hire here ¥ 
to Claudiene pan keife’. to Claudius pan kaifere. 
feondliche heo feohten ¥ feondeliche hii fohten ’ 
fullen pa feie. folle pe feie. 
and pe eorl Aruirag? ¥ and pe eorl Aruirag. . 


mid e%ele help his broSer. mid mihte halp his ...... 
Claudius hefde énerichene? mon?....dius hadde ann. ........ 


pe wes icleoped Haumid. .- was icleopid Ham... Hamun, 
he redde al® pen keifere / .. radde pan kaifere / 

& al pan Romanifce here. 10 ..... pe Romaniffe here. 
Hamid bi-heold Wiser / Ha.... bi-heold Wiper? 

& his wider-happes. and his wiper-happes. 

& heu ladliche ipon fihten / and ou 1.pliche in pan fihte / 
he floh pa Rom-cnihtes*. he floh Romaniffe cnihtes. 
& al pat him bi-foré ftod ? and al pat him bi-fore ftod 
he falden® to his foten. he fulde to his fot. 

Hamun hine bi-pohte ¥ Hamund hine bi-pohte ? 
whet he d6 mihte. wat he don mihte. 

hv® he mihte pene kig’ hou he miht pane king 
Wier aquelle. 2 Wiper a-cwelle. 

Hamun ferde 3eon pat wel Hamund wende oueral ¥ 

& wende pa deden. a-mag’ pe cnihtes deade. 


with a marvellous multitude, until they came with their hosts to Claudius 
the emperor. Fiercely they fought,—the fated fell!—and the earl Arvi- 
ragus with might helped his brother. Claudius had a noble man, who 
was called Hamun ; he counselled the emperor, and all the Romanish host, 
Hamun beheld Wither, and his hostile feats, and how evilly in the fight 
he slew ‘the Rome [Romanish] knights, and all that before him stood 
he felled to his feet. Hamun bethought him what he might do, how he 
might the king Wither kill. Hamun went over ‘the corpses, and turned 
the dead; [all, among the dead knights ; he] found there a knight who 


1 R., keifere. ® The first five letters of richene are sup. ras. 
3 Redundant ? 4 Sup. ras,, sed pr. m. ® falde? 
® Sup. ras. 7 amang? 


396 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 9280—9302.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
funde per enne cniht Y he funde anne eniht ¥ 
pe ifle3é wes per riht. | pat was iflawe par riht. 
nom he his bufe ” nam he his feine ? 
& his gold ileired bord. and his fceald bripte. 
leoup he an his ftede leop he on hif ftede ¥ 
& bihezluef he gon riden. and bi-halues gan ride. 
per he ifeeh Wise! kig / par he ifeh Wiper king 
pe wider wes an compe. pat wiper was in fihte. 
Hamii pe ridere? [c.-2.] Hamund pe ridere 
fmat his a3ene ifere. 10 {mot a3ein his i-veres. 
& ward him fwiSe bifiY and iwarp him fwipe bufiy 
swulc he Brut weore. afe he Brut were. 
wende pe king Wi®er Y wende pe king Wiper 
pat he weore his iuere. pat hit his man were. 
ah per he na ne come? ac pare nadde he hi-come 
3if hit nere for fwike-dome. nere hit for fwikedome. 
Hamun arnde upward? Hamund hernede vpward 
& oer while adunward. and oper wile a-dunward. 
penne he ifeeh Romanifce mon: wane he ifehze Romaniffe men / 
he rafdé* him ouen an. 2 he refde to heom. [[£ 46. c.1.] 
his fpeche wes al Brutife / his fpeche was al Bruttes / 
Brut fwule he weoren‘*. afe poh he Brut were. 
Swa longe he gon riden So long he gan ride’ 


was slain there right ; he took his ‘cuirass [banner], and his ‘gold-covered 
[bright] shield, he leapt on his steed, and aside ‘he’ gan ride, where he saw 
king Wither, who was hostile in the ‘combat [fight]. Hamun the rider 
smote ‘his own [against his] companions, and made him most busy, as if 
he were a Briton. The king Wither weened, that ‘he [it] were his ‘comrade 
[man], but there he had not come, if it were not for treachery. Hamun 
rode upward, and another while downward; when he saw Romanish ‘man 
[men], he rushed ‘upon him (towards them]; his speech was all British, as 
[though] he were a Briton. So long he gan ride, that he was by the 
kings side, and fought before the king, as if he were his ‘born’ man, and 


1 R, Wider. 2 upward? 5 rafde? ‘ weore? 


[v. 9303 —9325.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


pat he wes bi pees kinges fide. 
& feht pa kige bi-foré / 


fwulc he weoren! his mon iboren...... 


& floh if*® hazen iueren 
muchel fwike-dom wes pere. 
Pe king him treoufede on / 

for he wes fwa eht mon. 

& wende for fos riht / 

pat he weore his a3en cniht. 
Pe king wende for’ rihtes 10 
bi-hzlues pan fihte. 

he wes fwiSe of-het ? 

pat al his burne wes bi-fwet. 
he lette his burne ¥ 

of his rugge eorne. 

& Hamun him to ftrac / 

mid to3en his meine. 

mid his fpere he wes weht : 
pes kinges breofté he to-brec. 
pane kig Wider he of-floh ? 20 
per wes fwike-dom inoh. 

& feodSen rehliche fleh 

to his Rom-leode. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


397 
MS. Cott. Otho, C. xm. 

pat he was bi p. kinges fide. 

... fa.. pane king bi-f... 


eee» His ma. 


weet was fo oht ... 
....ende for fop.... 

..» he were his o3e....4.. 
.. king wende forp rih. . 
-i-halue pan fihte. 

and lete his brunie / 

of his rugge valle. 

for he was {wipe a-feat ? 
and his wepne al bi-fwat. 
Hamund him wende to ? 
mid luper his maine. 

his fpere to his heorte rack 
pe kinges breofte he to-brac. 
pane king Wip” he of-sloh Y 
par was fwike-dom i-noh. 
and suppe ewicliche 

fieh to his iveres. 


slew his ‘noble [own] companions,—much treachery was there! The king 
trusted on him, for he was so brave a man, and weened forsooth right, that 
he were his own knight. The king went forth-right aside from the fight ; 
‘he was much over-heated, so that all his cuirass was covered with sweat; 
he let his cuirass drop from his back [and let his cuirass fall from his back, 
for he was much over-heated, and his weapon all covered with sweat]. ‘And’ 
Hamun went towards him, with his ‘tough [wicked] strength; ‘with his spear 
he was active [his spear to his heart he drove], the kings breast he pierced, 
the king Wither he slew,—there was treachery enow! And afterwards 
quickly fled to his ‘Rome-folk [comrades]; made it known to his emperor, 


1 weore? ? Interlined. 


398 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 9326—9348.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
kudde hit his keifere ¥ cudde hit his kaifere y 
whet he dude mid his fpere. wat he dude mid his fpere. 
Pis ifeeh Aruirag® Y pis ifeh Aruiragus 
pat his broSer ifle3ze wes pus. _ou his broper iflawe was. 
mid muchelen hizinge / mid mochele hizenge / 
he leup to pan dede kinge. he leop to pan deade king. 
ig“p his ftede / [f.53.c.1.] nam he his ftede ¢ 
& alle his iwede. and al his oper wede. 


& fturede i pon compe 9 and ftorede in pan fihte / 

al fe hit pe kig weore. _—[pereY afe hit pe king were. 

Meft alle pa Bruttes pe weoren Meft alle pe Bruttefy 
wenden pat hit weoren' Wider. wende pat hit pe king were. 


heo rafdé to Romleoden ” hii remde to Romlede [[e.2.] 
& heo remden to flonne. and makede heom ruggef turne. 
heo flo3en ford rihtef? alle Claudienes enihtef / 
Claudienes cnihtef. flowe forp rihtef. 

nizen pufende ? nize pufend par of Y 

heo leiden to pon grunde. hii leide to pan grunde. 
Claudien pe keifere ¥ Claudien pe kaifere ? 

saS*? wes of pon compe. 2 fad was of fihte. 

his fole flah® into feipé / his folk fleh in to fipe’ 

& frd pen londe iwenden. vt of pon londe. 

ford mid pon vpen 


what he did with his spear. This saw Arviragus, that his brother was 
slain ‘thus’; with mickle haste he leapt to the dead king, ‘grasped [he 
took] his steed, and all his [other] weeds (garments), and stirred himself 
in the ‘combat [fight], as if it were the king. Most all the Britons ‘that 
were there’ weened that it were ‘Wither [the king]; they rushed 
towards the Rome-folk, and ‘they took to flight [made them turn their 
backs]; ‘they’ ‘slew [fled] forth-right [all] Claudiens knights, nine 
thousand [thereof ] they laid on the ground. Claudien the emperor was 
sad for ‘the combat [fight]; his folk fled into ship, ‘and from [out of} the 
land ‘ sailed, forth with the waves,—fiends them conveyed!’ [But] five 


1 weore? 2 sad? > Sup. ras. 


[v. 9349—9370.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 399 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
feondes heom uereden. 
Fif pufend heo lefden ” Ac fif poufend par were / 
uppen pon londe. 


pat ne mithte' no to fcipe cumen/pat ne mihte fip habbe. 
patheoneorenifle3en operinomen. 
wunderliche a-wei heo riden’ = wonderliche hi awei ride / 


touward ane muchele wude. toward one mochele wode. 
Aruir“guf heom efter ? Aruiragus heom after?’ 
mid twenti pufend cnihtes. mid twenti pufend cnihtes. 
heo flo3en heo nomen 10 hii flowen i* nomen? 

mid honden heo to-drowen. al pai i-neh comen, 
Hamun purh pene wude fleh’ Hamund to pane wode fleh / 
riht touward pere fe. » and touward pe fee he bieh. 
he ernde to are heeuene ? 

he wendé® fcipen habben. po he wende fip habbe’ 
pe fie wes izeonged4 Y ' 

pe fcipen ftoden a londe. po ftoden hii a londe. 

Pee wile pe he pa fcipen vt fcwf? Pe wile pat he pat fip fef? 
Aruiragus him to dref. Aruiragus him was neh. 
nefde Hamii to iueren ? 20 ; 

bute pritti rideren. Aruiragus him floh ’ 
Aruirag® heom alle floh ¥ and alle his iveres. 


thousand ‘they left [there were] ‘upon the land,’ that might not ‘to ship 
come [ship have], ‘unless they were slain or captured.’ Swiftly away 
they rode, toward a great wood; Arviragus pursued after them, with 
twenty thousand knights ; they slew, they captured, ‘with hands they cut 
them to pieces [all they came nigh]. Hamun fled ‘through [to] the wood, 
‘right [and] toward the sea [he bent Ais steps]; ‘he rode to a haven,’ 
{when] he weened to have ships ‘ the sea was ebbed,’ ‘the ships stood [then 
stood they] on land. The while that he the ‘ships [ship] ‘ out’shoved, 
Arviragus ‘drove towards him [was nigh to him]. ‘Hamun had but thirty 
riders for comrades,’ Arviragus slew ‘them all [him, and all his compa- 


1 This word is added in the margin by a second hand. ? hii? 
3 wende? * izeonged ? 


Hamt{on). 


400 LA3AMONS BRUT. (v. 9371—9393.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
& Hamii mid heorfé to-droh.. ac Hamund mid horfe he to-droh? 
for his broSer dete Y for his broper pat he floh. 


him wes fwide' unneSe. 

& an oder halue he wes gled? 

pat his ifon weoren deed. 
Par Hamund was to-dra3e ? 
an toun he makede. 

for Hamundes deede ? [c.2.] for Hamundes deape / 


Hamton heo? hit hehte. Hamtone hine hehte. 

nu and auere mare Y to nou and heuere more? 

pe nome ftonde® pere. pa name ftondep pare. 

Nu pu ihereft of wuche gomen Nou pou woft for woche game 
araf per pe to-nome. arof par pe toname. 

swa do® a feole wife’ so doh a fale wife ¥ 

to-nome arifed. toname arifeh. 

& ofte of lutle pinge ¥ and ofte of lutel ping 

pe long ilafted®. lang ping ilaftep. 


for nis nauere nan oder gomé y 
pat cleouied alfwa uefte. [dad / 
pa Hamun & is iueren weoren Po Hamun and his ivere ¥ 
21 alle dead were. 
Aruirag® wes fwidSe glad. Aruiragus was fwipe glad. 
and dude al pat me hine bad. 


nions], and Hamun with horses [he] tore in pieces; for his ‘brothers death 
{brother that he slew] ‘he was most afflicted, and ye¢ on the other half 
(hand) he was glad, that his foes were dead.’ [Where Hamund was 
torn in pieces he made a town]; for Hamuns death, Hamton ‘he’ named 
it; now and evermore the name standeth there. Now thou ‘hearest 
from [knowest for] what game (circumstance) arose there the surname ; 
so doth in many wise a surname arise, and oft of little thing, ‘that long 
{long thing] lasteth, ‘for no other thing is there ever, that cleaveth 
so fast.” When Hamun and his companions were [all] dead, Arviragus 
was exceeding glad, [and did all that men him bade], but soon thereafter 


1 fwiSe? 2 he? 3 ilafted ? 


[v. 9394—9417.] LA3AMONS BRUT: 401 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
ah fone per efter? ac fone par after / 
him com ferineffe. him com foriniffe. [f. 46%.c.1.] 
He & his cnihtes / He and his cnihtes / 
peonene for’ rihtes. wende forp rihtef. 
tuo Wincheftre wenden to Winceftre panene Y 
weene com on uefte. par hi harm hadde. 
heo wende to fodey hii wéde to fope ? 
pat heo fiker weoren. pat hii fiker were. 
Claudiuf pe keifere Claudius pe kaifere 
mid alle his Romanifce here. 10 mid al his Romaniffe here. 
ouer fe wende ? - ouer fee wende 
al mid ifunde. al mid i-funde. 
Nes he per buté enne niht Y Nas pare bote one niht / 
pe wind wende for® riht. pe winde tornde forp riht ¥ 
framward pan ftronde / framward pare ftrdde / 
in to piffen londe. in to piffe londe. 
Claudi? wenden! azan? Claudiuf him wende a-3ein Y 
weder him ftod an wille. weder him ftod at wille. 
hizenliche sone / hizenliche fone ¥ 
to Port-cheftre heo comen. .% to Portcheftre hii come. 
Up iwende pe keifere / Vp wende pe kaifer/ 
mid al his Romanifce here. mid al his Romaniffe here. 
iwepned wel alle / hii wepned® wel alle / 
heo wenden to pan walle. hii wende to pan walle. 


came to him sorrow. He and his knights proceeded forth-right thence 
to Winchester,—mischief came quickly [there they had harm]}!—they 
weened in sooth that they were secure. Claudius the emperor with all 
his Romanish army went over sea, all with safety. ‘He’ was there but 
one night, when the wind turned forth-right from off the strand into this 
land. Claudius turned [him] back; the weather stood at his will; speedily 
soon to Portchester they came. Up went the emperor, with all his Ro- 
manish host ; all well armed they advanced to the wall, all marched to it 


lwende? 2 R. i-wepned. 


402 LA3AMONS BRUT. (v. 9418—9440.] 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
to heo eoden alle afoten ¥ to i' eoden afote ¥ 
& fwide freche weoren. and fwipe frech weren. 
ouer pene wal heo clumben; — Quer pan wal iclemde*? 
& binnen heo prungen. and alle in pronge. 
pat fole heo al flowen pat folk hii alle flowen 
pa «hte heo nomé. pe godes inomen®. 
al pa wunliche burh ¢ pane wonfome borh? | 
heo barnden to dufte. hii barnde to doufte. 


puf Port-cheeftre to-raes? (¢.53*.c.1.]pus Portcheftre to-reos ¥ 
& nauere feodden‘ heo ne aras. and neuere fuppe na ros. 


 heo fwule weore ? nu pat soch were ¥ 

swa heo wes eare. afe he wes ere. 

Claudius pe keifere Claudius pe kaifere ¢ 

mid wunderlichele® here. mid wonderliche moche here. 
ferde to Wincheftre wende to Wincheftre 


& bi-lei pa burh fwide® fefte. and bi-lai pe borh fafte. 
Per binnen wes Aruiragus ? Par in was Aruiragus ¥ 


zrmliche biprungen. narwe bi-pronge. 

and muchel del of his cunne? — and mochel deal of his cunne? 
of Bruttifce monnen. 20 of Bruttiffe manne. 

wa wes pon kinge Aruirag®’ — wo was pan kinge Aruiragus? 

& to hif cnihtef feide pus. and to his cnihtef faide pus. [c.2.] 
Sugged me gode men Y Seggep me gode men? 


on foot, and were most fresh ; over the wall they climbed, and ‘within they 
{all in] thronged; the folk they all slew, the goods they seized; ‘all’ the 
goodly burgh they burnt to dust. Thus Portchester fell, and never since 
‘it’ arose, that ‘it’ were such as it ere was! Claudius the emperor, with a 
wonderful [great] army marched to Winchester, and besieged the burgh 
‘most’ fast (vigorously). “here within [Therein] was Arviragus, ‘miserably 
{narrowly] oppressed, and great part of his kin, of the British men. Woe 
was the king Arviragus, and to his knights he said thus: “ Say ye to me, 
good men, ‘goodly warriors! [some good counsel); will ye help me with 


1 hii? 2 hii clemde? 3 hii nomen? 4 feodSen? 
5 wunderliche? wunderliche muchele? 6 fwite? 


[v. 9441—9464.] LA3JAMONS BRUT. 403 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

godfulle kempen. fomne read godne. 

wulle 3e me helpen Y wolle 3e0 me helpe? 

mid hehjere ftrengSe. mid al woure! ftrengpe. 

her to biwinne / her to bi-winne / 

wurdfcipe mine. worfipe ...... 

Pa anfwereden ? -o anfwere... 

adele cnihtes. p stearate te tes. 

Nulle we pe bileeuen ¢ Nolle w. .. 6006. 

for liue ne for deen. for lifue ne... ..... 

On heo duden heore iweden? 10 .. ... dude hire ..... 

& leopen on heore ftedé. =... . pe on hire..... 

cnihtes per weoren swide iwhete?...... par were wel .... 

heo dudem® up pere burh 3eten. .. wefde vp pe bo..... ° 

heo makeden heore fceld-t°me? hii makede hire .... 

pa fcalkes weoren gode. pe cnihtes were ...e. 

Weoren alle pa enihtes Weren alle pe enihtes ¢ 

3erewe to pon fihte. 3ar.. to pan fihte. 

pa fomnede alle pa alde / po bad he pe holde / 

pe to fehte heom fculde halden. pat pe 30nge folde boldie. 

bi are halue heo riden 20 bi one half hii riden ? 

& fpileden of rede. and fpeke of reade. 

& nomen tweien cnihtes ¥ and nemen tweie enihtes i-vere® / 

& fenden to pd keifere. and fende to pan kaifere, 


& axeden wheSer he wolde gri® :'to i-wite waper he wolde grip? 


‘powerful [all your] strength, to win here my honor?” Then answered 
the noble knights: ‘‘ We will not desert thee, for life nor for death!” On 
they put their weeds (garments), and leapt on their steeds; knights there 
were ‘most [well] brave ; they raised up the burgh gates, they made their 
shield-troop,—the ‘men [knights] were good! All the knights were ready for 
the fight; then summoned [he] ‘all’ the elders, that ‘in fight should them 
lead [the youth should embolden]; by one side (apart) they rode, and spake 
of counsel, and took two knights [companions], and sent to the emperor, 
‘and asked [to know] whether he would have peace, or ‘he would have war 


1 j0ure? 2 R. duden. 3 j-viere sec, m. 


2n2 


404 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 9465—9488.] 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
pe he wolde vnfrih. oper fiht 3am wip. 
zer per come mare lure Y 
hefde he pene cure. 


Pa andfwerede Claudiuf ‘ Po anfwerede Claudius ¥ 

& wid pan cnihten he fpec pus. and to peos cnihtes {pac Jus. 
Wel is pe man nut? wel his pe man init? 

pe feehtneffe wurche’. {c.2.]. pat feahniffe werchep. 

Ich em reh mG i-noh’ Ich ham riche man inoh ¥ 
Rome is min riche. Rome his min riche. 

& alle pa londes ¥ 10 and alle pe londes 

ftonded a mire honde. ftondep in mine honde. 

pa bizet me bi-uoren pat bi-3et me bi-vore ¥ 
Juliuf pe keifere. Juliuf pe kaifere.. 

& eft? mine dome / and after mine dome ? 
hered into Rome. heriep in to Rome. 

buten pes ilke kinedom bote peos ilke kinedom 
nulle me noht icnawen. nele me noht icnowe. 

na piffere leodes folke ¥ ne piffe leod folk ¥ 

for lauerd! me halden. for louerd me holde. [f.47.¢.1.] 


& me pugche3* muche fcome ¢ 20 And me pinchep miochel feame 
at mire heorte ic habbe grome. andatmineheorteichhabbegrame. 


3if Rome fecal for-leofen / 3if Rome fal for-leafe ¥ 
pa while pe ich leouie. pe wile pat ich libbe. 
heore muchele wurhfcipe heore mochele worf ipe ¥ 


(or fight with them]? ‘Ere there came more (greater) mischief, he had the 
choice.’ Then answered Claudius, and ‘with [to] the knights ‘he’ spake 
thus: “ Well is the man abundantly, who maketh reconciliation! I am 
powerful man enough ; Rome is my realm; and all the lands stand in my 
hand, that Julius the emperor won for me before, and at my doom are subject 
to Rome, except this same kingdom will me not acknowledge, nor this lands 
folk hold me for lord. And i seemeth to me much shame, [and] at my 
heart I have grief, if Rome shall lose, the while that I live, her mickle 
honor, that mine ancestors won for ‘her [themselves]. ‘ For no covetous- 


1 lauer pr. m. 2 punched? 


[v. 9489—9512.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 405 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. _ 
pat mine wl%re! hire biwunnen. pat mine heldre heom bi-wonne. 
For nare 3itfunge / 
for nare 3iuerneffe. 
ne com ich to piffen londe For none fiht ftronge ” 


to halden fiht ftronge. NE oss eee to piffe londe. 
ne for nane plihte ” NE oes veve plibt ? 

buten to bi3ziten mine rihte. bote for...... mine riht. 
& ic heo wulle bi-winnen and ich ... wole winne ’ 
oder an wele liggen. oper .... polie. 


/Et* cnihtes3itbeo% hider icumen?Ac cnihtes 3e ... hider icome ¥ 
from pon kige Aruiragune. 1 fram ... king Aruiragum. 


fared fwide® a3é ¥ farep {wipe a3ein ¢ 
to pan fole-kinge. 
sugged hi to fode Y and feggep oure* kinge. 


for hit cume®S him to cu%e. 

pat 3if he wule a leod gan? pat 3if .. . .le paif makie ¥ 
& halden me for lauerd’. and holde me for louerd. 
& he me wulle bu3en ” 

pa bet hi feal iwurSen. 


3if he me wule fende ? 2 and 3if he me wole fende ¥ 
mine rihten of his londe. pe riht of mine londe. 

ic hine wulle wurSien ¥ ich hine wole weorpi ¥ 
mid wurhfeipe muclen. mid worfipe mochele. 

& fugged him ful iwis ’ and feggep him foliwis / 


ness, for no avarice’ [For no strong fight] came I to this land, ‘to hold 
strong fight,’ nor for any strife, but ‘to [for to] obtain my right ; and I will 
it win, or ‘lie among the dead [suffer death]! But, knights, ye are hither 
come from the king Arviragus ; go quickly back ‘ to the sovereign,’ [and] 
say ‘to him in sooth [to your king] ,—“‘ for it cometh to declare to him,’—that 
if he will ‘go in amity [make peace], and hold me for lord, ‘ and if he will 
submit to me, the better i¢ shall be for him;’ [and] if he will send me ‘my 
[the] right of ‘his [my] land, I will him honor with much worship. And say 
to him full surely, I give him my daughter Genuis, in friendship and in con- 


1 eldre? 2? Ah? Ac? 3 {wie ? 4 30ure ? 


406 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 9513—9535.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott, Otho, C, x11. 


ich3ifuen' him minedohterGenuis.mine dohter ich him 3efue Genuis. 
to fibben & to fomey [f£.54.c.1.] to fehte and to fibbe? 


pe bet wit mawen libben. pe bet we mawe libbe. 

& 3if he pis nule don? And 3ef he nele pus don 
he scal wurs ynderfon. he fal worfe onderfo. 
faren wit fwullen to-fomne Y wende we folle to-gadere ¥ 
& mid fehten hit to-delen. and mid fihte hit to-deale. 


makien wen-f lahtes® / 
penne beod hit pe wurfe. 
Pa enihtes wenden ford rihtY 10 Peof cnihtef wende forp ? 


to pan fole-kinge. riht to hire kinge. 

cudden® hi so8 quides faide him wordes fope? 

from Claudien pe keifere. fram pan kaifere. 

pe king ifteh pe neode Pe king ifeh his nede 

& droh to his rede. and droh to hif reade. 

and he mid wurd-fcipe ¢ and he mid mochele worf ipe ¥ 
pas cnihtes awurSede. pe bode i-worpede. [c. 2] 
pat he of his kinedome pat he of his kinedome 
wulde heren in to Rome. wolde herie in to Rome. 


and seodée wurSfcipe him don and fuppe worfipe don 

his dohter to quene vnder-fon. 21 his dohter to cwene onder-fon, 
To-gedere heo comen ? To-gadere icomen* ¥ 

and fahté heo weoren sone. and fahte i° worpe fone. 


cord,—the better we may live! And if he will not do ‘this [thus], he 
shall receive worse ; engage we shall together, and with fight it decide, 
‘ slaughter make,—then will it be the worse !’’’ “The [These] knights went 
forth-right to ‘the monarch [their king], and ‘shewed [said] him sooth words 
from ‘ Claudien’ the emperor. The king saw ‘the [his] necessity, and drew 
to his counsel, and he with [much] worship “these knights (the message] 
honored; that he for his kingdom would be subject to Rome, and after- 
wards do ‘him’ worship, and receive his daughter for queen. Together 
they came, and soon they were reconciled; and afterwards they all pro- 


? ifue? 2 wal-flahtes? Cf. v. 1369. 5 cudden? 
4 hii comen? § hii? 


[v. 9536—9559.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 407 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
& feoS%en heo alle iwenden? — and fuppe hii alle wende ¥ 
ito' Wincheftré. in to Wincheftre. 
pa weoren in piffen londe ¥ 
bliffulle songes. 
Heo wuneden inne Wincheftre 


an and twéti wikene. ; 
& fenden to Rome ful iwis ” and fende to Rome foliwify 


zfter pan maidene Genuis. after pan maide Genuis. Genuis. 
Pat maiden mid iftide / Pat maide mid ifunde 

com to piffe londe. 10 com to piffe londe. 

& Claudien pe keifere ¥ and Claudien pe kaifer ¥ 

3eef heo piffe kinge. hire 3eaf pe kinge. 

3et hit is ifene Y 3et hit his ifene Y 

p heo wes her quene, pat 3e0 was here cwene. 


pat pe king |Aruiragus] / 

to quene hefde Genuis. 

Pes pinges weoren idone 7 [Rome. Peos pinges weren al idon ¥ 
and Claudien heuede ifend to and pe ferdes wende om. 


pa while iwende Claudius ” and pe wile wende Claudi? y 
& pe king Aruirag®. 2 and pe king Aruiragus. 
into Orcaneize ¥ in to Oganeye? ¥ 


& pat lond al bi-leien. {e2] and pat lond al bi-leie. 
ah? muchel lond per abuten’ — and moche lond par aboute / 
al heo hit bizeten. al hit bi-3eote. 


ceeded into Winchester ;—‘ then were there in this land blissful songs! 
They remained in Winchester one and twenty weeks,’ and sent to Rome, 
full certainly, after the ‘maiden [maid] Genuis. The ‘maiden [maid] 
with safety came to this land, and Claudien the emperor gave her to ‘this 
(the] king ; yet is it seen, that she here was queen, ‘ that the king Arviragus 
had Genuis for queen.’ These things were [all] done, and ‘Claudien had sent 
to Rome; [the armies went home; and] the while (during the interval) 
went Claudius and the king Arviragus into Orcany, and the land all be- 
lay, and much land there about, all ‘they ’ it conquered; two and thirty 


1 R, in to. 2 Organeye? 3 and? 


408 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
two & pritti zit-lond / 
heo fetten on heore a3eF heond. 
heore grid heo fetten feefte Y 
and wenden to Wincheftre. 


LA3AMONS BRUT, 


[v. 9560—9583:] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xin. — 
two and pritti yllond’ 
hii wonne to hire owene hond. 
hire grip hii fetten fafte. 
and wende to Wincheftre. 


From Rome wes icumen ful iwis ” 


pat feeire maide Genuis. 

ifund & hire iueren 

fixti rideren. 

pat maiden wes iwedded ¥ 

pe king heo hafde to bedde. 10 
Muchel wes pa bliffe Y 

pe wes i pane’ Bruttene. 

mid pan kinge Aruirag? / 

and peen keifere Claudius. 

pa wes pis folk fwa blide 


swa heo nere nauer zr on liue. 


for pere muchele bliffe ¥ 

heo arerden enne bur3e. 

a enne swive feire ftude ” 

uppe Seuerne. 20 
Pa pe burh wes al imaked ¥ 
mid muchelere ftrengSe. 

pa burh 3f Aruiragus ¥ 

pen kaifere Claudius. 


Mochel was pe bliffe / 

pat po was in Britayne. 

and® mid pan king Aruiragus 
and pa kaifer Claudius. 

po waf pis folke fo blipe¥ 

fo hii nere her on lifue. 


hii arerde ane borh 


vppe Seeuarne. 

Po pe borh was al imaked ¥ 
mid mochelere ftrengpe. 
pane borh 3ef he® Claudiuf? 
pe he3e king Aruiragus. 


islands they ‘set [won] in their own hand; their peace they established 
fast, and returned to Winchester. ‘From Rome was come, full surely, 
the fair maid Genuis in safety, and sixty riders, her companions; the 
maiden was wedded, the king had her to bed.’ Great was the bliss 
that was then in Britain with the king Arviragus and the emperor 
Claudius ; then was this folk so blithe as they were never ere in life! ‘ for 
the mickle bliss’ they areared a burgh ‘in a spot most fair,’ upon Severn. 
When the burgh was all made, with much strength, the burgh gave [the 
high king] Arviragus to the ‘emperor Claudius, and the land there about, 

1 j is interlined. R. pane i. 


2 Redundant ? 3 3efue? 


[v. 9584—9607.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 409 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
and pat lond per abuté / and pat lond par aboute ? [f47".¢.1-] 
muchel & noht lutel. mochel and noht lute. 
He hehte setten hire on nome? and hehte fette hire name’ 
pe hire mihte ifemen. pat hire mihte femi. 
hu pe king Aruirag® ¥ 


nam to quene Géuis. 
& per pe king heo 3ef Claudiene ¥ 
pan Romanifce keeifere. 


Claudien pe he3e/ par for loue of Claudius ¥ 

Kairclou heo hehte. 10 Kairlou hire hehte. Kae[relou.} 
at! nas hit noht longe? ac nas hit noht longe 

pat pe nome mofte ftdden. pat pe name mofte ftonde. 


at! for Claudiuffes wurSfcipe ? 

swa wes pe nome iqueSSen.[[f. 54°.c.1.] 

AhpaClaudius ereft in piffenlondepo Claudius ereft here com 
hefundeennefeire wimman. [com?he funde one faire wifman. 


heo wes wit? heo wes? wis 3e0 was fair 3e0 was wis? 
heo wes maidé ful iwis. 3e0 was maide foliwis. 
Claudienes cnihtes Claudienes cnihtes ¥ 

heo bi-wunnen ipon fihte. 2% wonne hire in pan fihte. 
ine Port-cheftre / ine Portcheftre 

& heolden heo wel feefte. and heolde hire wel fafte. 
& 3euen heo Claudiene ? and 3euen hire Claudiene 
hit wes him fwide iqueme. hit was him wel icweme. 


much and not little. ‘He [and] ordered a name to be set on it, that 
might it beseem, ‘how the king Arviragus took Genuis to queen, and’ 
there the king gave it to Claudien, the Romanish emperor.’ ‘Claudien 
the noble [there for love of Claudius], named it Kaerclou; but it was 
not long that the name might stand, ‘ but for Claudiuses worship so was 
the name called. But’ when Claudius first came ‘in this land [here], he 
found a fair woman; she was ‘witty [fair], she was wise, she was ‘maiden 
[maid] full certainly. Claudiens knights obtained her in the fight in 
Portchester, and held her well fast, and gave her to Claudien,—it was to 


1 ac? 2 heo wes are sup. ras. 


Gloi}chaef- 
tre]. 


410 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


. & he hire reedde Y 


& fords mid him ladde. 

& leouede pe wimman Y 
leofliche fwiSe. 

Pe wifman iwar’ mid childe 
bi Claudiene pan balde. 

pa pet child wef iboren 

wel wes Claudiene per foren. 
Pa pe time wes ifulled ¥ 

} hit fulleht feulde habben. 10 
efter pan a¥elene lajen ? 

pat ftoden open ilke de3en. 
nome heo him arehten” 

ad Gloi pat child hahté. 

Pis child weex and wel ipeh / 
& muchel fole him to bah. 

& Claudien him biteehte 

pa burh pe he ahte. 

& fette heo mid enihten ” 

pe gode weoren to fehten. —_ 20 
and hehte heo wite wel fafte 
& heoten® heo Gloicheftre. 

al for his fune luuen 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 9608—9630.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xs. 


and he hire radde Y 

and forp mid him ladde. 

and lofuede pe womman ? 
lofueliche fwipe. 

Pe womman iwarp mid childe ¥ 
bi Claudiene pan bolde. 

po pat child was ibore / 

wel was Claudien par vore. 
Po pe time com? 

pat hit folloht folde habbe. 
after pan hepene’ lawe ¥ 

pat ftode bi pilke dawe. 
name hii him a-rehte ? 

and Gloi pat child hehte. 
pis child wex and wel ipeh ’ 
and moche folk him to beh. 
and Claudien him bi-tahte. 
pe borh pat he hahte. 

and fette pare cnihtes / 

pat gode weren to fihte. 

and hehte 3am hine witie fafte 7 
and hote him Glouceftre. 

al for his fones lofue ¥ 


him ‘most [well] pleasing,—and he her ruled, and forth with him led, and 


loved the woman lovingly much. 


The woman became with child by 


Claudien the bold;—when the child was born, glad was Claudien there- 
fore. When the time ‘was filled [came], that it should have baptism, 
after the noble laws that stood in those days, a name they bestowed on 
him, and Gloi the child ‘named [hight]. This child waxed, and well throve, 
and much folk bowed to him; and Claudien gave to him the burgh that he 
possessed, and set ‘it with [there] knights, that were good in fight; and 
bade [them] guard it well fast; and named it ‘Gloichestre [Gloucestre], all 
for his sons love, who was dear to him in heart ;—who afterwards obtained 


? apelene? 


2 heote? 


[v. 9631—9654.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
pe leof him wes an heorté. 


LA3AMONS BRUT, 


411 


MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
pat leof him was on heorte. 


pe seoSde! bizcet al Walifc lond ¢ pat fuppe bi-3et al Walfe land. [c. 2.] 


to his a3ere hond, 

and perof he wes deme 

& duc feole 3ere. 

Pis child me biwufte? 

inne Gloicheftre. [[e-2.] 
& pa peos pinges weoren idone ¥ 
Claudi° ferde to Rome. 

& ladde pes childes moder? 10 
for quene nauede he oSer, 
Pa Claudius com to Rome? 
tidende him com fone. 

pat per wes cumen lidende ¥ 
into pere leode. 

a {wide felcus gume / 

of Antioge he wes icome. 
Petrus he wes ihaten / 

he dude per feole teonen®. 
he uerde 3e6d al pat lond ? 
& turnde hit to godes hond. 
Heonene wes iuaren Claudius 


pis lond heold Aruiragus. 
& Genuis his quene ’ 


to his owene hond. 
and par of he was louerd 
and duck fale 3eres. 
Pis child me bi-wifte / 
in Glouceftre, 
and po peos pinges were i-don ¢ 
Claudius wende to Rome. 
he ladde pis childes moder 
for cwene nad,, .. «+. oper. 
Tidinge pan.. ... 
to pe borh of Rome. 
+++ +++ Was icome? 
into pare.... 
on wel felcup gome 
of » he was icome. 
Etrus he was ihot.. 
he dude fale tockne. 
he verde ouer al pat lond? 
and tornde hit to god...... 
Heonene was ivare Claudi? ¥ 
pis lond heold Aruiragus. 
and Genuis his cwene / 


Petrus. 


all Welshland in his own hand, and thereof he was ‘chief [lord] and duke 
many years. This child was taken charge of in Gloichestre; and when 
these things were done, Claudius went to Rome, ‘and [he] led with him 


this childs mother, for other queen had he not. 


‘When Claudius came to 


Rome, tidings came to him soon [Tidings then came to the burgh of Rome], 
that there was arrived in the country a man very wonderful; from Antioch 
he was come. Peter he was named; he did ‘there’ many miracles; he 
fared over all the land and turned (converted) it to Gods hand, Hence was 
Claudius departed ; this land held Arviragus, and Genuis his queen, ‘the 


1 seotve? 


2 tocnen? 


412 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 9655—9677.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 

pe wifmon wel idone. pat was a womman fcene. 

pa ifeeh piffes ledes king po ifah pis londes king / 

pat him ne derede na%ing. pat him ne derede noping. 

pus he wunede here pus he wonede here 

mid bliffe twenti 3ere. two and twenti 3ere. 

Vnder pan comen tiSende / Vnder pan come tidinge ? 

to Aruiragus pan kige. to Aruiragus pan kinge. 

nes per nan oSer reed ¥ nas par non oper read ¥ 

bute Claudius inne Rome wes deed.bote pat Claudius was dead. 

wa wes piffe kinge ¥ 10 ~wo was pif kinge ? 

swa wes pere quene. so was pare cwene. 

swa wes alle pon bezften’ so weren alle pe befte? 

pe wuneden an Bruttene. pat wonede in Brutlonde. 

an pan timen hit wes a pilke time foh riht? 

pat Gloi wes swide god cniht. was Gloi fwipe god eniht. 

Pa peo tiSende Po pan tidinge weren icome 

weoren comen to londe. 

of Claudius pen keifere Y of Claudienef deape. 


& hu hit wes al iuaren. 

pa feide pe king Aruirag® Y 2» po faide pe king Aruiragus ¥ 

& wid his.duzeSe he fpac pus. — and to his cnihtes {pac pus.[f. 48.c.1.) 
Swa ich auere ibiden' are’ So ich eu’e i-bide ore ¥ 

nulle ich nauere mare. nelle ich neuere more. . 


[who was a] woman fair ;—then saw this lands king, that nothing him 
harmed ;' thus he dwelt here ‘with bliss [two and] twenty years. In the 
mean time came tidings to Arviragus the king, that there was no other 
counsel, but [that] Claudius was dead ‘in Rome.’ . Woe was this king, so 
was the queen, so ‘was [were] all the best, that dwelt in Britain! It was 
in the time that [In that time sooth right] Gloi was knight most good. 
When the tidings were come ‘ to land’ of ‘Claudius the emperor [Claudiens 
death], ‘and how it was all befallen,’ then said the king Arviragus, 
and ‘with [to] his ‘people [knights] ‘he’ spake thus: ‘ As I ever abide 
mercy, will I never more through [ever] any doom be subject to Rome, 


} ibide? 


{v. 9678—9701.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 413 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
purh nane dome ¥ herie in to Rome? 


heren into Rome. [£55.c.1.] porp neuere none dome. 
ne nauere mare heom fenden Y : 
gauel of mine londe. 


ah 3if heo hider cumed liteny and hif hii heder comep lipe 


leoden to biwinen. hus to a-winne. 

her heo feuled ibidé here hii follep [ibide -] 
bittereft alre baluwen. bitereft alre harme. 

nz bizeten nan oSer god ¢ ne follep hii awinne oper god ¥ 
buten here 3eoten heorere! blod. bote 3eote hire blod. 
scullen alle heore wif? rt : 

widewen iwuréen. 

pus feide pe king Pus feide pe king 

peh hit sod neore*. peh hit fop nere. 

per he set mid hif feenche ¢ par he fat on his benche ¥ 
an his kine-benche. mid his win fenche. 

Ah al o8er hit iward Y Ac al oper hit iwarp? 
inne pan twa wintré. in lutele time. 

for pa Rom-leoden ¥ for pe Romleode / 

sende to piffere peoden. 2 fende to piffe peode. 
hehte hed fenden / hehte ham fende? 

here gauel of piffen londe. pe feo of piffe londe. 

And pe king Aruirag?? And pe king Aruiragus / 


wradliche* heom anfwerede. wropliche ham anfwerede. 


‘nor ever more send them tribute of my land!’ ‘But [And] if they 
hither arrive, ‘the country [us] to conquer, here shall they abide harms 
bitterest of all, nor ‘obtain [shall they win] ‘any’ other good, but ‘here’ 
spill their blood! < All their wives shall become widows!’” Thus said 
the king,—though it were not sooth,—where he sate with his [wine-] 
draught on his ‘throne [bench]. But all otherwise it happened within ‘the 
two winters [little time], for the Rome-folk sent to this nation, and 
ordered them to send ‘their tribute [the fee] of this land. And the 
king Arviragus wrathly them answered; commanded them ‘in much 


1 heore? 2 weore pr. m. 3 wradlice? 


414 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


hehten! hed mucle eize*? 
ut of his «eh feone. 

fleon of piffen londe 

zr heo feize iwurden. 

forS heo iwenden 

into Rom-londe. 

Pa wes i pon 3ere?’ 
Vafpafien keifere. 

pes tiSende him wes let / 
& her fore he wes wrad. 
He clupede to rede’ 

alle Rom-leode. 

& feide bi his liue ? 

pat he wolde to Brutt-lide. 
bi-telen his irihten ¥ 

} Claudi? er ahte. 

& 3if heo nolden gan an grid / 
he wolden® fehten heom wi®. 
and al Rom-leoden 


pis him gon reden. 20 


Vafpafien hi for wende ¥ 
pat he com to France. 
pa 3et hit wes al his ajen 


LA3JAMONS BRUT. 


{v. 9702—9724.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. xrr. 


hehte heom fone’ 
faren a3ein to Rome. 


Was in pan ilke 3ere/ 
Vafpafian kaifere. 
peos anfwere him was lop? 


10 par vore he i-warp wrop. 


He cleopede to reade 

al Romleode. 

and tolde of peos fonde ? 

and pat he wolde to Brutlond. 
awinne his rihte¥ 

pat Claudius her hahte. 


and alle Rom-leode ¥ 

pis him gan reade. 
Vafpafian forp wende ? 

pat he com to France. 

pe 3et hit was al his owene? 


rage out of his eye-sight [soon to return to Rome], ‘ to flee from this land 
ere they should be slain ;—forth they departed into Rome-land. Then’ in 
the [same] year was Vespasien emperor ; ‘these tidings [this answer] was 
loath to him, ‘and herefore [therefore] he ‘was [became] wrath. He called 
to counsel all the Rome-folk, and ‘said by his life, [told of this message, 
and] that he would go to Britain, to win his right, that Claudius ere 
possessed; ‘and if they (the Britons) would not go in (make) peace, he 
would fight with them’. And all the Rome-folk this gan advise him. 
Vespasien forth marched ‘him,’ until he came to France; the yet it was 
all his own, that he saw with ‘his’ eyes. He ‘led [took with him] the 

1 hehte? 


2 The last two letters of eiz3e are sup. ras. > wolde? 


[v. 9725—9747.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 415 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
pat he ifeh mid his z3ene. [c.2.) pat he ifeh mid ejene. 
ladde he pere leodene king ¥ he nom mid him pane king ¢ 
pe hine for lauer’ ieneou. 
vord mid im? feoluen 


touward piffen londé. in to piffe londe. 

To pere fie he wende? To pare fee hii wende ¥ 

fcipen he per funde*. fipes pare hii funde. 

pat to-3enes him weoren ibonned pat to-3ein him was ibannede ¥ 
pe 3et pe he wes i Rome. pe 3et he was in Rome. _[c.2.] 
He ibad pes wederes / 10 

wind com on ouefte. 

in he wende at Wit-fond : In he wend at Witfonde ¥ 

& wt Doure he pohte nimen lond. at Douere he pohte nime lond. 
Aruirag® per of wes war? Aruiragus par of was war 


& atliche him bi-uore uerde. and hahliche him wornde. 
& draf hine ut* mid ftregSe57 and drof hine a3e mid ftrengpe / 


ford mid fee ftrae. in to f{éé ftremes. 

Mid him hafde Vafpafien / Mid him hadde Vafpafian 
{wide gode fe men. {wipe gode féé men. 
scrahten® vt here lof y 20 

& leiden efter vSen. 

ford bi fe fide hii wende bi féé fide Y 


seileden swide. in pan féé wide. 


‘sovereign [king], ‘who acknowledged him for lord, forth with himself’ 
‘toward [into] this land. To the sea ‘he [they] went, ships there ‘he 
[they] found, that against him (his arrival) were assembled, the while 
‘that’ he was in Rome. He awaited the weather, ‘a wind came speedily’; 
in he went (embarked) at Witsand, and at Dover he thought to take land. 
Arviragus was aware thereof, and boldly ‘before him marched [impeded 
him], and drove him ‘out [back] with strength ‘forth with [into] the sea 
‘stream [streams]. Vespasian had with him sea-men most good; ‘ they threw 
out their luff, and floated with the waves,’ ‘forth by [they went by] the sea- 
side ‘they sailed quickly; [in the wide sea, and] in haste ‘full’ soon to 


? lauerd? ? Interlined. R. him. 5 funden pr. m. 
* Sup. ras. 5 ftrengSe? 5 strahten? 


416 


MS, Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


an hizende ful fone 

to Tottenaf heo come. 
strahten feipen to pa londe 

& eoden uppen ft‘nden. 

Heo nomen heore wepnen 

& ford gunnen wenden. 
to-fomnen heo riden uafte ¥ 
pat heo comen to Aixecheltre. 
he wen! wel to bi-ftelene 

in to pare burh3e. 10 
Ah pet burh-fole wes war 

& wel hine wuften. 

wel.heo clufden heore 3eten ’ 
& 3areweden heom to fehten. 
& pa burh bi-wufté ? 

wél mid pan bezften. 

Seouen dajes fulle ’ 

Vafpafien mid his monnen. 
leize at Excheftre / 

& bilaie heom swiSe uefte. 20 
p iherde Aruirag?? — [£.55%.«.1.] 
} he wes icum pus. 

he nom al pa ferde 

of Brut-londes erde. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


and an hizenge fone Y 

to Totenas hii come. 

ftrehte fipes to pan londeY 
and vp hii wende a {éé ftrond. 
Hii nemen hire wepne? 

and forp gonne wende. 
wonderliche fafte ¥ 

to pa borh of Exceftre. 


-hii wenden wel to bi-ftelen Y 


in to pan borwe. 

Ac pat folk was wel war? 
and wel hine wufte. 

wel hii tunde hire 3ates ” 
and greipede ham to fihte. 
and pan borh bi-wufte 
wel mid pan befte. 

Soue dawes folle / 
Vafpafius? mid his manne. 
lay at Exceftre ’ 

and bi-clufede hine fafte. 
Pat i-horde Aruiragus / 
pat he was icomen puf. 
he nam al pe ferde 7 

of Brutlondes erpe. 


{v. 9748—9771.] 


Totnes they came ; drew the ships to the land, and [up they] went on the 
[sea] strand. They took their weapons, and forth gan to march; ‘together 
they rode [wondrously] fast, ‘ until they came’ to [the burgh of] Exeter ;— 
they thought well to steal into the burgh. But the ‘ burgh ’-folk was [well] 
_ wary, and well it guarded; well they closed their gates, and prepared them 
for fight, and kept the burgh well with the best. Full seven days Vespasian 
with his men lay at Exeter, and ‘besieged them [inclosed it] ‘ most’ fast. 
That heard Arviragus, that he (Vespasian) was thus come; he took all the 
forces of Britains land, and soon he gan fare in toward Cornwall, into 


1 heo wenden? ? R. Vafpafian. 


[v. 9772—9796.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 417 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xi. 
& fone he gon faré Y and fone he gan fare ¥ 
in toward Cornwalen. in toward Cornwale. 
in to Ex-cheeftre in to Exceftre ? 
pa burh wes pa feftre. pat bileie’ fafte. 
Aruiragus wes per innen ¢ Aruiragus was par ine? 
mid Bruttifee mennen. mid Brutteffe manne. - 
Vafpafien per vte Vafpafian par houte / Vafpafi- 
pa burh bi-lei abute. pe borh bi-lai aboute. a ge 
Amar3en pa hit dei wes Amorwe pa hit dai was fe pba 
duren heo vntunden. 10 ve a 
cnihtes heom gereden enihtes vt wende. Britlanni- 
grundliche feire. ed: 
blewé pa bemen bleouen hire bumes Y psd ing 
heornes gunnen dremen. hornef par dremde. [f.48".c.1.] “tam Romane 
heondleden fezftef pene aoa 
& gold-fa3e feeldes. 
riden ut to-fome? par riden vt of Bruttef’ 
re3e Brutes. 
pritti pufend prittie pufend. 
pe pret wes pa mare. 20 
Per ute wes heom to-3en / Par vt was heom a3ein Y 
pe keifere Uafpafien. pe kaifer Vafpafian. 
to-gadere heo tuhten to-gadere hi comen y 
& ladliche fuhten. and lopliche fohten. 
h’deliche heuwen hardeliche hewen 


Exeter,—'the burgh was the faster! [that Vespasian belaid fast]. Arviragus 
was therein, with Ais British men; Vespasian thereout belaid the burgh 
about. On the morrow when it was day, ‘they unclosed the doors’; knights 
‘made them ready [out marched], ‘ exceedingly fair’; they blew ‘the [their] 
trumpets, horns ‘gan to bray [there brayed]; ‘ ‘hey handled their shafts and 
gold-dyed shields’; [there] rode out ‘ together’ thirty thousand ‘brave [of ] 
Britons,—the throng was the greater! Thereout against them was the em- 
peror Vespasian; together they ‘drew [came], and hostilely fought, hewed 


=s Vafpafian bileie? ? to-fomne ? 
2E 


418 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 9797—9820.] 


MS. Cott, Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xrr. 
helmes per gullen. healmes par 3ollen. 
ft? cliche to-ftopen ? 
mid fteles egge. 
Alle dei per ilefte ? Alle dai par ilaft Y 
feeht mid pa mefte. fiht mid pan mefte. 
a pet } puftere niht ” 
to-deelde heore muchele fiht. 
leien a ba halue? leizen a bope halue :’ 
cnihtes to-heouwen. cnihtef to-ewe. 
per wes herm mid pon mefte ‘10 par was arm mid pan mefte~ 
bi-uoren Ex-cheftre. bi-fore Exceftre. 
Pat bi-heold pa quene Pat bi-heold pe cwene ¥ 
Géuif i-haté. Geni? hi-hote. 


seri wes hire heorte ’ 

mid her men a-fulled. 

cleopede to hire lauerde ¥ 3e0 faide to hire loud y 

pe leof hire wes on heorte. pat 3e0 moche louede. 

to pd kinge Aruiraguf/ 

pe quene fpac wid him pus. Louerd Aruiragus ? 

Lauer! bi-penc pe? [c.2.] 20 wi neol pou bi-penche pis. 
pine peowes beos gode. 

pu haueft mucle treow-fcipe?’ of pane mochele treoufipe ’ 
treowse ftaSeluetfte. pat pou min fader makedeft. 


pat beo’ pa pingges ¢ trupe beop pe pinges 


hardily,—helms there resounded, ‘ strongly smote with the steels edge.’ All 
day lasted there fight with the most, ‘ until the dusky night separated their 
furious conflict’; on both sides lay knights hewed in pieces,—there was 
harm with the most before Exeter! That beheld the queen, named Genuis, 
‘sorry was her heart for her men who were felled’; [she] ‘called[ said] to 
her lord, ‘who was dear to her in heart [whom she loved much], ‘ to the 
king Arviragus, the queen spake with him thus’: “Lord [Arviragus], ‘be- 
think thee! [why wilt thou not think of this?]—‘ thy virtues are good’; 
‘thou hast much [of thy great] faith, ‘truth most sure, which [that thou 


1 Jauerd? 


[v. 9821—9843.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 419 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu1. 
pe bi-rifed to elche kige. pat bi-comep to alle kinges. 
riche men & heney _ [cleenen. 
3if wid feon men he wule beon 
Bi-penc pu a pine quides ¥ 
pe pu fulf quiddeft. 
wid Claudien minne fader ¥ 
pe wes pi cudliche! freond. 


pe dude pe pa wurhfcipe ” Bi-penche in pane worfipe / 
bi-tahte me pe to wiue. pat he me pe 3ef to wife. 

& pu ert me fwa leof 10 and pou hart me al fo leof 
swa mi kine-lauerd. fo min cine-louerd. 

Mi cun is her wid vten? Min cun his her wip vten ? 
& pi kun her wiS innen. and pin his her wip ine. 

3ef pu brekeft pine quides ¥ 3ef pou brekeft pin word 
& mi cun quelleft. and min cun ewelleft. 

sod ich pe habbe ifeid ¥ 3eat falt pou bi-lefued?y 
wid pine fune pu beoft iueid. — euere pe laffe. 

& 3if mi cun clembed ¥ an 3if min cun clembep? 

& bi-neo&é pe ibringe’. and pe bi-neope bringep. 

& pe feoluen & pi fole ” 2 pa hart pou for-lore ¥ 

falled to grunde. for euere more. 

3if pu and pine per wurdSed ded ¥ 


peonne beo ich wid mine fune iued. 


madest to my father, truth] are the things that become each king [all 
kings], ‘ doth rich men and poor, if with good (?) men he will be clean!’ 
Reflect ‘thou’ on ‘ thy words, that thou thyself spakest with Claudien my 
father, who was thy familiar friend, who did thee’ the worship, [that he] 
gave me to thee for wife,—and thou art to me as dear as my sovereign 
should be. My kindred is here without, and ‘thy kindred [thine is} here 
within ; if thou breakest thy words, and my kindred slay, ‘the sooth I have 
said to thee, with thy son thou wilt be hated [yet shalt thou ever remain 
the less (worse) ];—and if my kindred climb over, and bring thee beneath, 
‘and thyself and thy folk fell to ground,—if thou and thine there are killed,’ 


1 cudliche ? ? bi-lefue? 


420 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 9844—9866.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, xr. 
betere weore fehte ¢ betere his fahte ” 
pene fwulc vnifibbe. pane onfibbe. 
& bi-penc pe of pan fore ¥ And bi-penche of pe fore ¥ 
hu pu mine fader fwore. ou pou to mi fader fwore. 
to laften alche 3ere to fenden eche 3ere ? 
al to pine liue. bi al pine lifue. 
gauel in to Rome? feo into Rome 
of pine kine-dome. of pine kinedome. 
& 3et ileefted pi lif? and 3et laftep pin lif? 
swa hit do longe. 10 fo hit do longe. 
for pi pu moft holdé / for pi pou moft holde [c.2.] 
pat pu zr bihehteft. pat pou her bi-hehtef. 
Al pa hered-cnihtes ? Alle pe riche / 
heolden mid pere quene. heolde mid pan ewene. 
pe king and alle his cnihtes’ pe king and alle his cnihtes ¥ 
wakeden alle nihte. wakeden alle nihte. 
al niht heo runden ? [c-1-] al niht hii rounede Y 


whet heom weoren' to reede. [£.56. wat heom were to reade. 

ne milite heo finde nznne red? ne miht hii finde nanne read Y 
pe heom puhte al fwa god. 2 pat were alfe god. 

swa heom puhte pe fode quides ? fo were pe wordes ¥ 

of pere quene. of pare cwene. 

Amarwe pa hit deei wes ‘ Amorwe po hit dai was?’ 


then ‘shall I with my son be detested [art thou lost for evermore] ;—better 
“were [is] reconciliation than ‘such’ strife. And bethink ‘thee’ of the 
compact, how thou swore to my father to ‘observe [send] each year, in all 
thy life, ‘tribute [money] into Rome, of thy kingdom; and yet lasteth thy 
life,—so may it do long !—therefore thou must hold what thou ‘ere’ pro- 
misedest.” All the ‘courtiers [nobles] held with the queen. The king and 
all his knights waked all night, all night they communed what were best to 
them for counsel: they might find no counsel that ‘seemed to them [were] 
as good as ‘seemed to them [were] the ‘sooth’ words of the queen. On the 
morrow, when it was day, ‘the people [they] made them ready [for battle]; 


1 weore? 


[v. 9867—9889.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 421 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, xin. 
du3epé heom gereden. hii greipede ham to fihte. 
to-gedereward heo uufden ; 
alfwa heo wolden fehten. 


Ford com pa quene ¥ Forp com pe ewene y 

& rad' heom bi-tweonen. and rod heom bi-twine. 

zrft heo nom grid ereft 3e0 nam grip? 

& feodden heo heom fpac wid. and 3e0 fpac heom wip. 

fette feehtneffe and fette fehniffe ¥ 

somnede cnihtes. and fomnede cnihtes, 

pa wr weoren ifeonde 10 pe her weren folle fon y 
makede heom to frdde. 3eo makede freondes. 

And pe king heom bi-hehten*? And pe king heom bi-hehte ¥ 
his foreward to haldene. pe foreward holde. 

& fwa he hit ilefte / and fo hit ilafte / 

pe while pe he luuede. wile pat he liuede. 

pus heo weoren fahte ” pus hii weren fehte / 

& pus heo weoren fome. and pus hii weren fome. 

Pa wes peos Bruttene / Po was Brutaine / 

{wipe ibliffed. fwipe i-bliffed. 

& Vafpafien and hif iuerenf* / 2and Vafpafian and hiis* i-veres ¥ 
al pat winter wuneden here. al pat winter wonede ere. 

frd burie to burie Y fram borwe to borwe 
ferden mid bliffe. verde mid bliffe. 


‘ togetherward they marched, as if they would fight.’ Forth came the queen, 
and rode between them; first she took peace, and ‘then’ she spake with 
them, [and] set reconciliation, [and] assembled the knights; those that 
ere were ‘enemies [full foes, she] made ‘them’ friends. And the king pro- 
mised them ‘his [the] compact to hold, and so ‘he observed it [it lasted] 
‘the’ while that he lived. Thus they were reconciled, and thus they were 
accorded. Then was ‘this’ Britain most joyous, and Vespasian and his 
companions dwelt here all the winter; from bury to bury they went with 
bliss. Anonas summer came, then proceeded ‘they [he] to Rome ; Britain 


* Two letters are sup. ras., apparently radde pr. m. ? bi-hehte? 
5 jueren? * his? 


Maurius. 


422 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 9890—9913,] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

Anan fwa feomer come ¥ Anon fo fomer com? 

pa ferden heo to Rome. po wende he to Rom. 

Brutlond wes bliSe / Brutlonde was blipe ¥ 

a to peos kingef liue. in piffe kingef lifue. [gus ¢ 

4 Nu hauede pe king Aruiragus ¥ Ou hadde pe king Aruira- 

enne fune pe hehte Mauri®!. ane fone pat hehte Maurus. 

he wes ifende to Rome he waf ifende to Rome = 

to leornien in feole. to leorni in fcole. 

per him wes fwa wel idiht / par he was fo wel i-diht/ 

he wes clere & god cniht. 10 hewasclerckandgodecniht.[f49.c.1.] 

Pider him com fonde Pider him com fonde? 

ut of piffen londe. vt of piffe londe. 

peet her nes nan rad? pat par nas non oper read ? 


for pe king his fader wes deed. _ bote hif fader was dead. 
& he moften? cume fone’ [e.2.] and he moftecome fone? 


to his kine-dome. to his kinedome. 

Swa wes pat writ idiht ¥ pus was pat writ i-diht ¥ 

& he hit dude for’ riht. and he hit dude forp .... 

to piffe londe he cd? to piffe londe he com? 

& under-feng pene kinedd. 2% ... onderfeng pane kined.m. 
Wel riche wes Aruirag® Wel riche was Aruiragus ¥ 

ad mucle riechere Mauriuf. and moche richere waf Maurus. 


a piffe londe he heold grid ¥ 
a piffe londe he hulde fri’. 


was blithe ‘ever’ in this kings life. Now the king Arviragus had a son 
that hight Maurus; he was sent to Rome to learn in school; there he was 
so well instructed, that he was clerk and good knight. Thither came a 
message to him out of this land, that ‘here [there] was no [other] counsel, 
‘for [but that] ‘the king’ his father was dead, and he must come soon to 
his kingdom. ‘So [Thus] was the writ indited, and he it did forth-right; to 
this land he came, and received the kingdom. Well rich was Arviragus, 
and much richer [was] Maurius ; ‘in this land he held peace, in this land 
he held quietness’; here was bliss [and] here was meat, ‘and of all goods 


1 The i in Maurius has been erased. 2 mofte? 


[v.9914—9937.] LA3AMONS BRUT, 423 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
her wes bliffe her wes mete? __ here was bliffe and her was mete 
& alre godene matt. her was lofue wip houte hate. 
A piffé ilken hit ftod ¥ Ac' pif ilke hit ftod ’ 
pet com ouer see flod. forte com ouer féé flod. 
an king pe haehte Rodric a king pat hehte Rodrich ¢ 
elche oSer unilic. eche opere oniliche. 


he com ut of Scice Y 
elches londes vniliche. 
he brohte mid him pe Peohtes? he brohte mid hi pe Peutes ¥ 


folc of muchele mahte. 10 men of moche mihte. 

Seodden Rodic? wes erft mon: Fram pat Rodrich was ereft man / 
& he mihte uuel don. and cupe eye vuel don. 

a he ferde bi fee flod / he verde bi {éé flod ’ 

& dude he uuel & nzuere god. and dude vuel and neuere god. 
monie hundre’ buri3e mani hiidred borewes ? 

he heefde imakede ble®Se. he hadde for-fare. 

He ferde bi fe ftrde ¥ He verde bi {éé ftronde ‘ 

into Scotlonde. in to Scotlonde. 

pat lond he al weefte’ pat lond he al wefte ¥ 

mid hermé pan mefte. 2 mid harme pan meite. 

purh pat lod he ernde / porh pat lond he hearnde / 

& he3ede® and hermde. and floh folk and barnde. 
Comen pa tidéde ¥ Come pe tidind / 

to Maurius po kige. to Maurus pan kinke*. 


the most [here was love without hatred]. In this same wise it stood until 
there came over sea-flood a king that hight Rodric, to each (every) other 
unlike ; ‘ he came out of Scythia, to each land unlike;’ he brought with him 
the Peohtes (Picts), ‘folk [men] of much might. ‘After [From the time] 
that Rodric first was man, and ‘he might [could] do evil, ‘ ever’ he fared 
by the sea-flood, and ‘he’ did evil and never good; many hundred burghs 
he had ‘made destitute [destroyed]. He fared by the sea strand into Scot- 
land ; the land he all wasted with the most harm, through the land he ran, 
and ‘harried and harmed [slew folk and burnt]. The tidings came to Mau- 


1 A? 2 R. Rodric. 5 heerjede?- 4 R. kinge. 


424 LA3AMONS ' BRUT. [v- 9938 —9960.] 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 

hu pe king Rodric hou pe king Rodrich ¥ 

his reeflac makede. his lond al for-verde. 

Sone he sende fonde _ Sone he fende fonde ¢ 

3eond alle piffe kine-londe. 3eond al his kinelonde. 

hehte eeuerelene mon ¢ [£.56°.c.1.] hehte echne ma’ 

pa his monfcipe uSe. pat him god wolde. 

pat he wel iwepned ’ mid al his wepne? 

comen! to hirede. come to pan kinge. 

pif fole wes ifomned Pis folk was ifomned? _ [c.2.] 

and pe king fufde. 10 and hit forp fufde. 

ferde into Scotlonde ’ wende into Scotlond 

pere he Rodric king fond. par he Rodrich fond. 

Heo fuhten swiSe feondliche’ Hii fohten mainliche / 

& feollen pa Peohtes. and folle pe Peutes. 


& Rodric per wes of-fla3é ¥ and Rodrich par was of-flawe 
& feoSSen mid heorfen to-drazen.and fuppe mid horfe to-drawe. 
Per dude Maurius pe king’ Par dude Maurus pe king ¥ 


a wel fwuse fellech ping. a {wipe fellich ping. 
uppen pen ilke ftude ¥ vppen pan ilke ftude ¥ 
per he Rodric uor-dude. 2 par he Rodrich for-dude. 
he lette a-reren anan ? he lette arere anon ¥ 
enne swuve felcu® ftan. ane felcupe fton. 

he lette per on grauen he lette par an grauie ? 


rius the king, how the king Rodric ‘made his ravage [his land all destroyed]. 
Soon he sent messengers over all ‘this [his] kingdom ; ordered ‘every [each] 
man, who ‘his honor granted [would good to him], ‘ that he’ ‘well weaponed 
should come [with all his weapons to come] to ‘court [the king]. This folk 
was assembled, and ‘the king [it forth] marched ; proceeded into Scotland, 
where he found ‘king’ Rodric. They fought ‘most fiercely [strongly], and 
the Peohtes fell, and Rodric was there slain, and afterwards drawn in 
pieces by horses. There did Maurius the king an exceeding marvellous 
thing; upon the same spot where he destroyed Rodric he caused anon to be 
reared a ‘most’ wonderful stone pillar; he caused thereon to be graven 


1 come? 


. 


[v. 9961—9983.] LA3AMONS BRUT. 425 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
selcuSe run-ftaué. of Rodriches deape. 
hu he Rodric of-floh ¥ ou he Rodrich of-sloh ¥ 
& hine mid horfen to-droh. and mid horfe to-droh. 
& hu he pa Peohtes / and ou he pe Peutes 
ouer-com mid his fehtes. ouercom mid fihte. 
Vp he fette pene fta’ Vp he fette pane fton ¥ 
3et he per ftonde®. 3et he pare ftondep. 
swa he de® al fwa longe Y 
swa pa woreld ftonded. 


Nome him fcupte pe king? 10 Name him fcopte pane king y 
& hehte pene ftan West-mering. ad hehte hine Weftmering. 

a muchel deel londes for name of pan ftone / 

pe per lid abuté. pat lond his fo hi-hote. 

nd pe king to his hond? 

& hehte hit Weft-merelige lond. 


Nu pu hafueft fod iherd 

for wha hit swa hatte. 

Pa pe! peo Peohtes 

weoren ouer-cumne i pon fehte. Ul 

and Rodric wes ded? 2 Po Rodrich was of-fla3e ¢ 
& his iueren for-demed. and idon of lif da3e. 

pa fluzen per biheelues?  [c.2.] po fleh pare bi-halues / 
fiftene hundred. fiftene hundred. 


‘strange characters, [of Rodrics death, and] how he slew Rodric, and with 
horses drew him in pieces, and how he overcame the Peohtes with ‘his’ 
fight. Uphe set the stone; yet it there standeth ; ‘so it will do as long as 
the world standeth.’ A name the king shaped to it, and called ‘the stone 
[it] West-mering ; ‘a great part of the land that there lieth about the king 
took in his hand,’ ‘and named it West-merelinge land [for the name of the 
stone the land is so called]. ‘Now thou hast heard the sooth, for what 
cause it so hight. When that the Peohtes were overcome in the fight,’ 
‘and Rodric was dead, and his companions destroyed [When Rodrich was 
slain, and done of life-day], then fled there aside fifteen hundred, that 


1 A letter has been erased after pe. 


426 LA3AMONS BRUT. [v. 9984—10007.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C, x11. 
pat weoreoren! pa feireft men? pat weren pe fairefte men? 
pe weoren i po fehte. pat weren in pan filte. 
heefden he* to here-to3e ¥ hadden hii anne heuedling ¥ 
enne heh iborene mon. of on he3e ibore man, 

Peof weolden heom ibur3en’ — Peos wolden hinne bouwe ¥ 
& bi-halues fleon. and bi-halues wende. 

& bu3en vt of lode? and fleon vt of londe 

to helpen heore liue. to helpe hire lifue. 
 i-fehzen preo eorles’ Pat ifeh3e preo eorles ¥ 

pe i peon fehte weoren ohte. 10 pat in pan fihte were. 
whudereward pa ferde woder pe ferde ¥ 

heore flam makeden. hire fleen® makede,. 

pe eorles heom fizen to’ peos eorles heom fette to’ 


mid felé heore cnihtes. [wude? mid alle hire enihtef. 
driuen heom in to enne hehne driuen heom into one wode 


per heo hezrm poleden. par hii harm hadde. 

Stod pe wundliche wude Stod pe wonliche wode ? [£49». c.1.] 
amidden ane weelde. a-midde one wolde. 

bi-uoren na bihinden bi-vore ne be-hinde / 

ne mihten per nan atwindé. 2 ne miht par non atwende. 

ah alle hi heom nomen / ac alle hii heom neme 

& nane heo ne a-flozen. nanne hii ne flowe. 

feefte heom heo bunden ¥ fafte hii heom bunde ¥ 

& brohten to pen kinge. and brohte to pan kinge. 


were the fairest men that were in the fight; they had ‘for leader [a chief- 
tain of ]a high-born man. These would ‘shelter themselves [hence depart], 
and aside ‘flee [go], and ‘depart [flee] out of the land, to save their lives. 
That saw three earls, who in the fight were ‘ brave,’ ‘whitherward [whither] 
the party made their flight. ‘The [These] earls them followed, with ‘their 
good [all their] knights, and drove them into a ‘ great’ wood,—there they 
‘suffered [had] harm! The fair wood stood amidst a weald, before nor 
behind might there none escape, but all they them took, ‘and’ none they 
slew ; fast they bound them, and brought to the king, that the king should 


1 R. weoren. 2 heo? 3 flem? 


[v. 10008—10030.] 


MS. Cott, Calig. A. 1x. 


} pe king heom feuldé! don 
oder flan oder hon. 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


427 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


pat pe king heom folde don y 
oper flean oper an-hon. 


Anan swa pe king heom fpec wid xAnon fo hii pe king fpeke wip 


swa heo 3eornden his grid. 
3eorne heo hine bedé / 

purh his edmeden. 

pat he nomen® heé to prallen ? 
& heo him wolden piwien. 

& heo him woldé bed lide 

a to heore liue. 10 
Al pe kig weorhte ” 

alfo heo bi-fohten. 

& heom an heond felde y 
muchel deel of londe. 

al abuten Catenes 7 

per heo ca®el wrohten. 


and hii 3eornde his grip. 
3eorne hii hine bede 

porh his edmode. 

pat he neme heom to paife / 
and hii him wolde be peouwe. 
and hii him wolde beo lipe? 
evere to hire lifue. 

Al pe king wrohte ¢ 

afe hi him bi-fohte. 

and heom an hond folde 
mochil deal of londe. 

al aboute Catenas ? 

par hii homes makede. 


Pat lod wes fwiSe god? [f.57.¢.1.] Ac pat lond was fwipe god? 


ah feodS8é wef pe muchel flod. 
nes hit neuere itiled ¥ 

purh neenne eor%e-itilie. 20 
no nauere per ne wuneden on 


for fuppe was pe mochele flod. 
nas hit neuere itiled ” 

porh non erpe-tilie. 

no neuere par ne wonede on ¥ 


nanes cunnes quic mon. 
Sonen heo gunnen to erien ¥ 


no manere ewike m6. 
Sone hii gonne herie ? 


dispose of them, either slay or [up] hang. Anon as ‘the king [they] 
spake with ‘them [the king], ‘so [they] yearned his grace, they prayed 
him earnestly, through his mercy, that he would take them ‘for slaves 
{in peace], and they would ‘serve [be slaves to] him, and they would 
be obedient to him, ever in their lives. All the king wrought as they be- 
sought [him], and gave them in hand a great deal of land, all about 
Caithnes; there they ‘chattels wrought [made homes]. [But] the land 
was most good, ‘but [for] since the great flood was, never was it tilled by 
any earth-tillage, nor ever thereon dwelt any ‘kind [manner] of man alive. 
As soon as they gan to plough, the land was most fertile ; they tilled, they 


1 fculde? ? nome? 


428 LA3AMONS BRUT. 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


pat lond wes swiSe zSele. 
heo tileden heo feowen 

heo repen heo meowen. 

wid iné pan prom 3eré ¥ 

pa nomen heo tweelf iueren. 
& heo uerden fone Y 

pat heo to piffe londe comen. 
Bruttes heo gretten ¥ 

mid greiliché worden. 

beden heom beon on fele? 10 
& alle ifunde. 

We eow to-3erned ? 

3eue {wide deore. 

pet 3e uf 3iuen wifmen ¥ 

to habben to wiue. 

penne maze we heolden luue ? 
to piffen leod-folke. 

Pa pif iherden Bruttes 
heokerliche heom puhte. 


& hehté hed faren awei’ 20 


& fleon of heore londe. 

for nolde heo heom 3etten ¥ 
pa pinges pe heo 3erndé. 
Peohtes weoren ifcende / 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x111. 


pat lond was fwipe murie. 

hii tilede hii fewen 

hi repen hii mewen. 

wip in pan pridde 3iere ¥ 

po nemen hii twealf veres. 
and wende fone 

pat hii to pife londe come. 
Bruttef hii gretten / 

mid {wipe faire wordes. 
beden heom be feale ” 

and alle ifunde. 

We of ou 3ernepy 

3iftes swipe deore. 

pat 3e vs 3ifue wifmen / 

for habbe to wifue. [c.2.] 
pan mawe!' loue? 

habbe bi-twine. 

Po pis ihorde Bruttef? 
hokerliche heom pohte. 

and hehten heom faren awei 
and fleo of hire londe, 

for ne folden hii neuere habbe? 
ping pat i* 30rnde: 

Peutes weren ifend y 


[v. 10031—10054.) 


sowed, they reaped, they mowed, within the ‘three years [third year];— 
then took they twelve companions, and ‘they’ proceeded soon, so that 
they came to this land. The Britons they greeted with ‘peaceful [most fair] 
words ; bade them be prosperous, and all in health :—‘ We yearn of you 
gifts most dear (precious), that ye give us women to have for wives; then 
may we‘hold love to this people [have love between us]. When the Britons 
heard this, disdainful it seemed to them, and they ordered them to go away, 
and flee from their land, for they ‘would not grant them the things [should 
never have the thing] that they yearned. The Peohtes were shamed, and 


1 mawe we? 2 hii? 


[v. 10055—10078.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


& heore wei ford wende. 

ham to heore cunne 

& cudden! heom heore erende. 
Heo nomen heore sonde ¥ 

& fende to Irlonde. 

to pes londes kinge ’ 

Gille Caor ihaten. 

& biden hine heom senden ” 
wifmen of his londe. 


& pe king heom 3ettey 10 
al pat heo 3eorenden. [c.2.] 
Purh pa ilke wifmen ? 
pa per wuneden longe. 


pat fole gan to fpelien ? 
Irlondes fpeche. 

& auer seodSen pa lazen / 
wunied a pan londe. 

swa heo beo’ pere ? 

nu and eeuere mare. 
Hefde Mauri’ pe kig / 20 
god grid 3e0d* his lond. 
a to his liue ? 

his leoden weoren bli%e. 
Pa con® pe ilke dei? 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


429 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 


. +» a-wei wende. 

hom to h... cunne? 
and tolde hire h....de. 
Hii nemen hire fonde ’ 
and fende to Yrlonde. 
to pane leod-kinge ’ 
Gillekaor ihote. 

and beden him ham fende Y 
wifmen of his londe. 
and pe king ihorde ¥ 

al pat hii 3ornde. 

Porh pe ilke wifmon / 
pat pare wonede longe. 
pat folk gan to vfiy’ 
Yrlondes fpeche. 

and euere fuppe / 

hii dop in pan londe. 


Gille Caor. 


Adde Maurus pe king 
god grip porh alle ping. 
heuere to his lifue / 
hif folk weren blipe. 
Po com pe ilk dai’ 


Maur([ius). 


went ‘forth’ their way home to their kin, and told ‘to them’ their errand. 
They took their messengers, and sent to Ireland, to ‘the king of the land 
[the sovereign], named Gille Caor, and bade him send them-women of his 
land: and the king ‘granted them [heard] all that they desired. Through 
the same women, who there long dwelt, the folk gan to‘speak [use] Irelands 
speech; and ever since ‘the usages dwell [they do] in the land; ‘so they 
shall be there, how and evermore.’ Maurius the king had good peace ‘over 
his land [through all things]; ever in his life his people were blithe. Then 


1 cudSden? 


2 R, 3eond. 


3 com? 


Coil. 


Luces. 


430 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
pat pe kig deed lei. 
fords com pes kinges fune / 
Coil wes ihaten. 
Pes wes reh pes wes ftrong ¥ 
pes wes {tid 2! ponke. 
pes cuSe alle pa domes ” 
pe ftoden inne Rome. 
ah he ne luuede noht longe ¥ 
pat wes his leodene hzerm. 
ah pa while pe he luuedeY 10 
his lond he huld a bliffe. 
Heefde Coil pe kig Y 
pe wes Bruttene adel. 
enne leofue suney 
Luces ihaten. 
pes wes pe bezfte mon’ 
pe auere heefde kinedom. 
seodden to Brutlonde com ? 
Bruttes pe hit biwan. 
Luces wes kineboren ¥ 20 
Luces wes wel ito3en. 
& he wes swiSe ble Sfeeft ? 
Bruttes hine luueden. 


Moni wes pat gode pig’ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


[v. 10079—10102.] 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
pat pe kying dead lay. 
forp com pis kinges fone ¥ 
Coyl was i-hote. 


Peos cube alle pe domes 
hinene to Rome. 

ac he ne lifuede noht longe 
pat was mochel teone. 


Ac he hafde one fone 

Lucius i-hote. 

pes wes pe befte man ¥ 

pat euere welde kinedome. 

suppe to Brutlond com? 

Brutus pat hit bi-won. 

Luce was kinebore Y 

Luces was wel icore. 

and he was {wipe rihfolle ¥ [£50.c.1.] 
Brutes hine lofuede. 


Moche was pe gode ping ¥ 


.was named Coil. 


came that day, that the king lay dead; forth came ‘the [this] kings son, who 
‘This man was bold, this was strong, this was stiff in 
thought ; this knew all the ordinances ‘that stood in [hence to Rome] ; but 
he lived not long,—that was ‘harm to his people [much grief ]!—*‘ but the 
while that he lived, his land he held in bliss.” ‘Coil the king, [But he] 
‘ who was Britains prince,’ had a ‘dear’ son, named Luces. This was 
the best man that ever ‘had [ruled] kingdom, since to Britain came ‘the’ 
Britons who obtained it. Luces was royally born, Luces was well ‘in- 
structed [chosen], and he was most ‘worthy [just]:—zhe Britons loved 


1 an sec. m, 


Sa 


[v. 10103—10126.] 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 


} cude Luces pe king. 

nes pa na man vnder lufte / 

pe cue betere creeftes. 

purh pifne ilke 2Sele mon Y 
vnder-fehg! pis léd criftindom. 
pe pe? mon pe wule luften ? 


hu hit ereft ilomp. [e.1.] 
peos boc him wulle fuggen ?[f-57°. 
fodsere wordes. 

hu Luces pe kig / 10 
eerft Crift luuede. 


Men wel idone Y 

comen vt of Rome. 
comen to pan kinge 

& talden him tiSende. 

of alle pere fore? 

pe Petruf dude in Rome. 
and whulene martirdom 
Petruf hauede vnder-fon. 
& pa odere halen ¥ 

pe mid godde hah weoren. 
Pa longede swu%e 
Luces pon kige. 

ere he mare wufte ’ 


LA3AMONS BRUT. 


4 


431 


MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. 
pat coupe Luces pe king. 
nas no ma onder lufte / 
pat coupe betere craftes. 
Porh piffere gode man?’ 
onderfeng pis lond criftendom. 
pe man pat wole hure? 


pis boc him .... telle. 


ou Luces pe king / 
ereft Crift lofuede. 
Men wel idone Y 
comen vt of Rome. 
comen to pan kinge ¢ 


and tolde him tidinge. 

of alle pe .ore / 

pat Petrus dude in Rome. [4nn]o | 

and wochne martirdom / Renetel 

Petrus hadde i-nome him on, | Roman] 
Bare [Pei]- 
rum cruce, 

Po langede fwipe ¥ ee 

Luces pan kinge. per aes 

are he more wifte ¥ ni |bus inter- 


him. ‘Many [Much] was the good thing that Luces the king knew; was 
there no man under heaven that knew better crafts! Through this ‘same’ - 
‘noble [good] man this land received Christendom;—the man that will 
‘listen [hear] ‘ how it first befell,’ this book will ‘say [tell] to him, ‘sooth 
words,’ how Luces the king first worshiped Christ. Excellent men came 
out of Rome, they came to the king, and told him tidings of all the pro- 
ceeding tha? Petrus did in Rome, and what martyrdom Petrus had ‘received 
(taken on him], ‘and the other saints, who were high with God.’ Then 
longed Luces the king exceedingly, ere he knew more of the Lord Christ. 


1 vynder-feng ? 


? Redundant ? 


7 a 
432 LA3AMONS BRUT. _[v. 1012710. 
ra) MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xm. 
fect tev ha of pan lauerd Crifte. , of pan louerd ee 
fl reps Pa weoren. inne Rome: 
Lmensilus men wel idone. ‘. eabiae 
& an hali mon per wes p*p? An holy man par was popey 
eng rs 2 Eleudarius wes ihaté. Eleucherius ihote. 
gracie eZ. No Luces pe king ¥ Nam Luces pe king ¥ 
fia th “* of his leofufte monen. of his leueft men. 
ra ace fende to pa papen ? stde to pan pope? . a 
& feire hine gon greten. and faire hine gan grete. 
& bed! hine on godes nomen #10 and bad him a godes name? — mi z 
pat him god u%e. id deer : 
pet he fenden® him anan Y ; 
sumne god-cunde mon. fom god mahimfendee 
for pe king wolde wel don / pat ich mihte weldon? = Se 
& Criftef lazen vnderfon. vnderfange pane criftendom.'. 
libben mid rihte ¥ libben mid rihte ” 
& luuien his drihte. and lofuien vre drihte. 
he an alle his leoden / seo spelians Eats 
pe wuneden inne piffere peodé. 
Pa puhte Elau%erie / 2 Po pohte Eleucherie / 
pat tiSende {wide murie. peos tidinge {wipe murie. 
nes na mon on liue’ nas no maa-lifuey = 
pat weore al fwa blide. pat were fo blipe. 
alfe wes pe hali man afe was pe holie man? 


‘Then were there in Rome excellent men, and’ a holy man was there pope, 
‘who was’ named Eleutherius. Luces the king took some of his dearest men, 
and sent to the pope, and fair gan him greet, and prayed him in Gods name; 
‘that good him granted,’ ‘that he should [to] send him ‘anon’ some ‘holy 
[good] man; ‘for the king would [that I may] do well ‘and’ receive ‘Christs 
law [the Christendom], live with right, and worship ‘his [our] Lord ;—‘ he 
and all his people, that dwelt in this country.’ Then thought Eleutherius 
‘the [these] tidings most joyful ; there was no man alive that was so blithe, 
as was the holy man, when ‘he gan to hear this [the tidings came]! The 


bed? 2 fende? 


aor 


. _ 
* - 
(v. 10151—10178.] LA3ZAMONS BRUT. ~ 433 
MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. MS. Cott. Otho, C. xin. 
pa he pif iherdenen' gon. po pe tidinge com. 


Pa pape hafdé tweien bifeopes‘ pe pope fende tweie biffopes ¢ 
pe luueden godes rihten.  [c.2.] <0) 
hiderwardes he hed fenden ‘ 
pa bifcopes ford wenden. 

pat comen pa godef fonden Y 


in to piffen londe. ‘ 
to Luces pon kingé / to Luces pan kinge. 

& to al his here--Sringen. 

Pa fpac Dunian ” io =soch weren hire na’ 

& pe oSer bifcop Fagan. Dunian and Fagan. 

feiden pan kinge lar-fpel ¥ Hii fpeke pan king lor-fpel ? [c.2.] 
& he hit hercnede wel. and him likede fwipe wel. 

er pat ler-fpel weoren idon? her pat fpel weren® idon 

pe kig 3eoFde criftindom. pe king 30rnde criftendom. 

& alle his du3epe-cnihtes ¥ and alle his cnihtes ¥ 

hit 3eorde® ford rihtes. 3ornde hit forhrihtef. 

pe king fulluht vnder-fehn+? — pe king folloht onderfeng ¥ 

& alle his gode men mid him. and fuppe alle his gode men. 

& alle his Bruttes ” 20 

pe him buzen wolden. {onderfon 
& pa fulluht nulden vnder-fon? and paie pat folloht nolde onde® 
pe kig heom letten fords. pe king heom lette for-don. 


pope ‘had [sent] two bishops, ‘ who loved Gods law ; hitherwards he sent 
them ; the bishops forth went, so that the messengers of God came into 
this land,’ to Luces the king, ‘ and to all his nobles.’ “Then spake Dunian, 
and the other bishop Fagan; they said [their names were such, Dunian 
and Fagan. They spake] to the king a sermon, and he ‘hearkened to 
[liked] it well; ere the sermon were done the king yearned Christendom, 
and all his knights yearned it forth-right. The king received baptism, 
and all his good men ‘with him [afterwards], ‘and all his Britons, who 
would submit to him;’ and [those] who would not receive baptism, the 


) iheren? ? were? 5 j3eornde? 
* vnder-feng? 5 Sic; onde is redundant. 
VOL. I. » 2F 
~S . 


- 
7 


434 


MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
Pa pis wes al ido / 
pa token heo o®er weife on. 
_beiene pa bifcopes / 
ferden 3eond pas Bruttene. 
alle patemplenY 
pe pa heSene hafden itimbrid. 


> & 
heo letten alle pa ferud ¥ 
at pere dure werpé vt. 
_. wafcen pa wajes ? 


wel mid pan bezften. 

pa nomen! anlicnef 

pe mahun weoren ihatene. 
heo letten heom drajzen vt ¥ 
oer bi hondes oder bi fot. 
heo heom letten fwalen?’ 
inne sweerte fure. 

Pa pis wes al idon’ 

pa token heo o8er weiif on. 
heo ferde for’ rihtef 
purh godes mihten. 

from ftouwe to ftouwe ¥ 


& ftureden heom feolué. [f. 58. c.1-] 


heljeden alle pa templen : 


is 
LA3AMONS BRUT. | 


[v. 10174—10196.] 


~& 
MS. Cott. Otho, C. x11. * 


Po pis was al idon? 

po tocken hii oper weief on. 
beie peos biffopes ? 

wende 3eond pis londes. 

alle pe temples 

pat hepene were. ~ 
hii letten alle pe frud ’ 

at pare dore warpe vt. 

waffen pe wowes 

wel mid pan befte. 


alle pe mahunes ” 


mid fure hii for-fwelde. 


Po pis was al idon ¥ 

po tocken hii oper weies on. 
hii verde forp rihtes ¢ 

al porh godes mihte. 

fram temple to temple : 


and haljede alle. 


king caused them to be slain, When this was all done, then took they | 
otherwise on; both ‘the [these] bishops went over ‘this Britain [these lands]; 
and visited all the temples, that ‘the heathens had built [were heathen]. . 
They caused all the vestments to be thrown out at the door, and the walls 
to be washed, well with the best; ‘they took the images, that were named 
Mahun, [all the idols] ‘they caused them to be drawn out, either by the 
hands or by the feet ;’ ‘they caused them to be burnt in swart fire [with 
fire they consumed]. When this was all done, then took they other- 
wise on; they proceeded forth-right [all] through Gods might, from ‘place 
to place [temple to temple], and ‘stirred themselves’; and hallowed all 


1 heo nomen pa? 


> 


g° 
° 
° oe ” oS © 
— 4 = 5 c 
[v. 10197—10220.] _ LAZAMONS BRUT. _ 435 
” 4 . « 


: MS. Cott. Calig. A. rx. 
a pes helindes nomen’. 
pa pet wef all i-dony 


"MS. Cott. Otho, C. xu. 


Po pis was alidon’ 


po token heo o®er weif on. po tocken hii oper weies on. ithe 
< 


pa fetten heo bifcopes ? po fetten hii biffopes ? 

pan folken to dihten. pat folk to dihte. a 
per ouer eerchebifcopes par ouer archebiffopes’ = = 
pat clerefcipe to rihté. pane clercfipe to rihte. 

chirchen he?® letté areren ? cherches hii lette arere / 

monie & wel iwhare. manie and wel iware. ee 
preoftes heo per fetté ¥ 10 ~«preftef par i ine hii dude ¥ : 

afe per to mihte semen. | afe hit were neode. * ——_ 
Pa pis wef al idon , ; » 

pa token heo oer weis on. z. tape 

pa com Luces pe king po com Lucef pe kig’ 

& lad per to leide. and lond par to leide. : 

& fette per on godes frid ¥ ; awe 9 
& freoden alle pe chirehen. i" [ftude ¥ 

& pa lazen beod a monie ftuden ¥ and pe lawes beop 3ete in mani 

al fwa Luces heom on dude. afe Luces heom dude. 

napeles heo weoren fodSen¥ 2 nopelef hii weren fuppe ’ 

&* fwide awemmed. {wipe iwemmid, 

ladliche inipered ¥ 

purh nidfulne craft. 7 


& eft heo weoren irihte ” pes iweren i-ribt ¥ 


‘the temples in the Saviours name.’ When ‘that [this] was all done, 
then took they otherwise on; then set they bishops to direct the folk; 
thereover, archbishops, the clergy to rule; churches they let arear, many, 
and everywhere ; priests there[in] they ‘set [placed], as ‘thereto might be- 
seem [need it were]. ‘ When this was all done, then took they otherwise 
on;’ then came Luces the king, and land thereto laid (assigned), ‘and set 
thereon Gods peace; and freed all the churches,’ and the laws are [yet] 
in many places, as Luces placed on them. Nevertheless they were after- 
wards greatly corrupted, ‘ loathly debased through wicked craft, and eft’ 


* monnen, pr. m. ? heo? 5 Redundant? 
. 


B 
- 


7 436 _ LASAMONS ten ing 
* 
: MS. a C.aam. : a 


‘MS. Cott. Calig. A. 1x. 
’ swa hit weolde drihten. 


4 Pa alle pas pinges weoren idone ? Po al peos pingef rap 
_pa ferden pa bifeopes to Rome. po verde pe biffopes to e. 


re "& bi-lewfden i in piffe londe ¢ 
pat folc a godes heonde. — 
Luces heore lauerdY 
pe leof heom was an heorte. 
pus hit ferde here Y > 
_ wel feole 3ere. — 


v. : ae 


afe wolde vre driht. 


and bi-lefde in a ; 
pat lond! in godes honde. 
and Luces hire louerd ¥ | 
pas leof him* was on heorte. 


pus hit verde here ¥ 
wel fale 3ere. 


. “they reheat were righted; btn Teed would ‘it.’ When aiken things 
were done, then went the bishops to Rome, and left in this 


d the folk 


, ‘in Gods hand, and Luces, their lord, ac al dear to them in heart ;— 


PF; < 


ot ria thus i it fared ‘here Liv Had years. 


bg? ye, 
te iio 


i. Pred ma 2? ham? 
. a” . + 
. ™ '® * ~~, a 
& ~ 
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 
* 
i 
LONDON: 
PRINTED BY RICHARD AND JOHN E. TAYLOR, 
RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET. *” 


+ ALERE 


FYLAMMAM. 


-— 


<4 


> 
< 


4 
* 
~ 


* , yr 


-~ a ~ é — 


‘ ° 
p- 1. v. 9 (see. t.) for faftebi read fatte bi. 
' — 5.1. 4, he should be in italics. . 
nd —14. v. 11, (see. #.) for fette read fette. f 
§ 20, w. 455, insert hyphens in prel werkes and pralle ia Sedercioceae 


will be ted in the G R 
: — 22. », “a ‘Matias mi feolue 


— 29. ll. 7. 10. for friend read 
—Sl.v. 26. for q ne 
_ — 82. v, 734. for ftille read {ti 
- 35. 1. 7. correct the 
bd = d; loudh 
— 37. 1. 4. the 
{ — 39. l. 6. for nobleman read noble man. < 
— 41. 1. 1. insert before well. 
\ $ — 44. |. 5. for give read gave. 
— 46. v. 1088. (sec. t.) for fipef read fipef. ~ 
— 53.1. 3. most should be marked by superior commas. 
— 64, l. 5. and after destroy should be included in superior commas. > 4 
— 66. 1. 8. for therewith read ‘there "with. va “a 
** — 67. v. 1567. (sec. t.) for fwibe read fwibe. se 
—~_— 70. 1. 4. for hill, ~~ hill; it. 
F — 71. Ul. 5. 6. for drive read drove. 
" te — 76.1. 3. for ‘bite [smite] read ‘bit [smote]. 
— 77. l. ult. for wihteste? read hehteste? a 
— 78. 1. 7. for Then when, and after flee substitute a comma. 
— 83. l. 9. for tarneth read turned, and dele the conjecture. 
— 92, v. 2175. insert a hyphen in Brat londe, and again v. 2194. in ‘ : 
” — 93. 1. 9, with him should be marked by superior commas. i 
— 101.1. 4. for companions read companion. __ 
— 109. 1. 9. perhaps we should read wood, to ‘his own destruction [wander by 


himself]. See Glossary.” - . \ 

; —111. 1. ult. for 3arke read jarkie. ° ale e - a 

' . — 112. L. 3. for a robbing read a-robbing. 4 

- 
ee . 
~ 
_ én. 7 
ge ‘Bey 3 

oo. ‘ a ,* cael 


—— 


ie) 
‘ 


_— 177. v, 4144. for to-gene read to-zene. — nad 


of > 4 a 


, * 
438 ERRATA. 


‘ ; ~¥" . * a 


- p. 117. 1. 11. for Leir read Leil. a, @. a “ 


— 121. l. 3. for the folk read ‘to’ the folk. ; +s 

— 130.1, 10. for then read when, and dabetitute a comma for the break, after 
forth. ° ~~ g 

— 134. v. 3164. for rich read rith.  s é 

— 140. 1. 1. wit should not be marked by superior commas. = 

— 142. l. 3. for dismiss read manage. oo 

-~ 150, 1. 5. for Then read When. , . . = 

— 155. l. 8. perhaps this difficult Passage may be read, ‘ and know all, he (Leir) is 

__ the man, that they here look on.’ a 

— 162. l. 5. for oure read our. © : 

— 163. l. 6. dele the brackets. - 

— 167. l. 9. for wight read whit. . . 

—171. 1. 8. for when read then. 


= 16151. 9. dele the after him. : : 
Bi — 185. 1. 11. for Murray read Moray. ’ ii 
— 191. ». 4492. for fede read fede. ' ; . 
—192. v. 4514. for pa read pa. y oe » 
— 197. v. 4629. (sec. t.) for man read men. . ; 
— 198. 1. 4. for the before woman read this. - 
— 199, v. 4680. (sec. ¢.) for ni read in. . 4 
— 200. v. 4686. (sec. t.) for faire read faire, and in the translation, for sure read 
fair. 
— 204. l. 2. for his after of read my. 
— 209. 1. 10. dele well. 
— 220. l. 8. for smite read smote. 
l 
1 


— 221. 1. 1. for break read brake. 
— 225. l. 9. for or speak read or ‘ they” should speak. 
— 228. 1. 3. for stands read standeth. ‘ 
— 229. Ul. 8. 9, dele the semi-colon after knee, and substitute a semi-colon for the 

comma after ground. it 
— 231. l. 6. for Then read When. - 
— 242. l. 2. for ride read rode. . 
— 244. v. 5739. (sec. t.) for on-eze read on eje. 
— 254. 1. 10. all should be in brackets. = 
— 255. v. 5983. (sec. t.) for torues read toures. : &. 
— 262. l. 1. for ‘Ride [Go] ye and run read Run [Go] ye ead ride. 
— 264. 1. 5. after mefsenger insert ‘to them.” 
— 279.1. 4. insert came after end. 
— 281. Ll. 6. his should be in brackets. 


~* 


— 285. v. 6698. for wil read wel. e 
7 
<4 a 
7 % “. 
J & 


gifts read gift. « . 
. 9. for are read were, eee 
3. for [c. 2.] read [f. 49°. c. 1.] P 

— 387. 1. 2. apenas read joy. 

— 388. l. 2. for crafts read craft. 

— 390. v. 9144. for ba tfeolde read Ide. 

- . 9190. fete gga 

— 417.1. a. 

— 418. 1. 9. for th 

— 420. l. 5, ere 

= 422. 1.2. for Maurus read | 
1%. ls. te, Sagal 


he ol 


al ay ‘, J RK : 
eae pe ors 
Bote bon ty 


“ wis Fe wears alge, + 
* . x we . aie acto ee ’ 


a, CR eee 
, > . “— nal bane doing aicey — 
a . fey ler tig , Ryei- ' 
es . 3 
’ Myst Ceet vite vA Vath or fe ne we oo a 7 
LAs "te J) ies 5, 
- : eae | es ao FAST 


“s (o( Son emkegWAY i. Tah-< 

> Dorr> bory alley .e A eae — 

” leh blak bow abled wt wh Toco bie 
Pou TE beet dtp i _ 


— 
Pm > oe hapigt oro 
4 
An a Pe 


a ] » 
° ' e *. 


$ . a a. 7 
ia a '» (cer yh “ 
? ow sear ortd tg 


ee ae “a 


A 
. 
oy 


Lea ae MDZ Piatlsterunyszentrun 
taatsBibliothet Digitale Bibliothek 


Layamon, 


Layamons Brut, of chronicle of Britain a poeticel semi-Saxon paraphrase of 
the Brut of Wace ; now first published from the Cottonian manuscripts in 
the British Museum. 

Bd.: Voll 


London 1847 


P.o.angl. 199 k-1 
urn:nbn:de:bvb:12-bsb10747256-6 


