QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX
by Augustus Le Plongeon, M.D.
New York: Published by the author, 1896

[Transcribed from the Internet Archive scan (queenmooegyptian00lepl_0; Getty Research Institute copy). Raw OCR, not proofread. Public domain: published 1896; author d. 1908.]

Getty Research Institute


QUEEN MOO

AND

THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX

BY

AUGUSTUS LE PLONGEON, MU.

AUTHOR OF

‘SACKED MYSTERIES AMONG THE MAYAS AND THE QUICHES”

A SKETCH OF THE ANCIENT INHABITANTS OF PERU AND THEIR
CIVILIZATION, ETC., ETC., ETC.

LONDON

KEGAN PAUL, TKENCH, TKUBNER & CO., Ltd.

PUBLISHERS

PATERNOSTER HOUSE, CHARING CROSS ROAD, W. C.

1896

All rights of translation and reproduction reserved

Pbintjsd at New York.

THOMAS J. DIXON
Copyrighted
1896


TO MY WIFE,

ALICE D. LE PLONGEON,

MY CONSTANT COMPANION DURING MY EXPLORATIONS
OF THE

RUINED CITIES OF THE MAYAS,

WHO,

IN ORDER TO OBTAIN A GLIMPSE OF THE HISTORY OF THEIR BUILDERS,
HAS EXPOSED HERSELF TO MANY DANGERS,

SUFFERED PRIVATIONS, SICKNESS, HARDSHIP;

MY FAITHFUL AND INDEFATIGABLE COLLABORATOR AT HOME;

THIS WORK IS

AFFECTIONATELY AND RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED.

AUGUSTUS LE PLONGEON, M.D.

Brooklyn, February 15, 1896.

1

LIST OF AUTHORS QUOTED.

A.

Acosta, Jos6 de.

Acts of the Apostles.
iElian, Claudinus.

Alcedo, Antonio de.

Ancona, Eligio.

Aristotle.

B.

Bancroft.

Beltran de Santa Rosa, Pedro.
Bernal Diez del Castillo.
Berosns.

Bhagavata, Purana.

Birch, Henry.

Blavatsky, H. P.

Brasseur de Bourbourg.
Brinton, Daniel G.

British and Foreign Review.
Brugsch, Henry.

Bunsen, Christian Karl Julius.
Burckhardt Barker, William.

C.

Cartaud de la Yillate.

Chablas.

Champollion Figeac.
Champollion le Jeune.

Charencey, Hyacinthe de.

Chou-King.

Chronicles.

Cicero, Marcus Tullius.

Cieza de Leon, Pedro.

Clement of Alexandria.

Clement of Rome.

Codex Cortesianus.

Cogolludo, Diego Lopez de.
Colebrooke, H. T.

Confucius — Kong-foo-tse.

Cook, Captain James.

D.

Daniel, Book of.

De Rouge, Olivier Charles Camille.
Diodorus Siculus.

Dion Cassius.

D’Orbigny, Alcide Dessalines.

Dubois de Jancigny, Adolphe Phili-
bert.

Du Chaillu, Paul.

Duncker, Maximilian Wolfgang.

E.

Ellis, William.

Emerson, Ralph Waldo.

LIST OF AUTHORS QUOTED.

Euclydes.

Eusebius.

F.

Flaubert, Gustave.

G.

Garcilasso de la Yega.

Genesis, Book of.

Gordon Cumming, C. F.

Grose, Henry.

H.

Haeckel, Ernest.

Haliburton, R. G.

Heber, Bishop Reginald.

Heineccius, Johann Gott.

Herodotus.

Herrera, Antonio de.

Hilkiah (the High Priest).

Homer.

Horapollo.

Horrack.

Hue, Abb6 Evariste RSgis.
Humphreys, Henry Noel.

I.

Isaiah, Book of.

J.

Joshua, Book of.

Juvenal, Decimus Junius.

K.

Kenrick, John.

Kings, II. Book of.

Kingsborough (Lord), Edward King.
Klaproth, Heinrich Julius.

L.

Land a, Diego de.

Las Casas, Bartolome de.

Layard, Sir Henry.

Lenormaut, Fran£ois.

Le Plongeon, Alice D.

Le Plongeon, Augustus.

Lepsius, Karl Richard.

Leviticus, Book of.

Lizana, Bernardo.

London Times.

Lucius III. (Pope).

Lyell, Charles.

M.

Macrobius.

Mahabharata, Adiparva Vyasa (other-
wise Krishna Dwaipayana).
Manava-Dharma-Sastra.

Marco Polo.

Marcoy, Paul (Lorenzo de St. Bricq).
Markham, Clement R.

Matthew’s Gospel.

Molina, Cristoval de.

Moore, Thomas.

Moses de Leon.

Muller, Friedrich Maximilian.

N.

New York Herald.

O.

Oman, John Campbell.

Ordonez y Aguiar Ramon de.

Osburn, William.

Ovidius.

P.

Paley, Dr.

Papyrus IV., Bulaq Museum.
Pausanias.

Philostratus.

Piazzi Smyth, C.

Pictet, Adolphe.

Pierret.

Pio Perez, Juan.

LIST OF AUTHORS QUOTED.

Plato.

Plinius.

Plutarch.

Popol-Vuh.

Porphyry.

Proclus.

Procopius.

R.

Ranking, John.

Rau, Charles.
Rawlinson, George.
Rawlinson, Sir Henry.
Renan, Ernest.

Rig-veda.

Ripa, Father.

Robertson, William.
Rochefort.

Rockhill Woodville, W.
Roman, Fray Geronimo.
Rosny, Leon de.

S.

Salisbury, Stephen.

Santa Buena Ventura, Gabriel de.
Sayce, A. H.

Schellhas.

Schoolcraft, Henry R.

Sclater, P. L.

Seiss, Joseph Augustus.
Squier, George E.
Stephens, John L.

St. Hilaire, BarthelSmy.
Strabo.

T.

Tertullian.

Theopompus de Quio,
Thucydides.
Torquemada, Juan de.
Troano MS.

Two Chelas.

V.

Valentini, Pliilipp J. J.
Valmiki, Ramayana.

W.

Ward, William.

Wheeler, J. Talboys.
Wilkinson, Sir Gardner.
Wilson, John.

Wiittke, Heinrich.

Y.

Young, Dr.

ILLUSTRATIONS.

Engraved by F. A. Ringler & Co., of New YorTc, from photographs and
drawings by the author.

PLATES PAGE

I. Fossil Shells .......... xviii

II. Map of Maya Empire, from Troano MS. .... xlii

III. Modern Map of Central America, with Maya symbols . . xliv

IV. Map of Drowned Valleys of Antillean Lands, by Prof. J. W.

Spencer, by his permission ....... xlv

V. Map of West Indies, from Troano MS lx

VI. Banana Leaf, a token of hospitality among the South Sea

Islanders. From Captain Cook’s Atlas .... 8

VII. Serpent Heads found in Cay’s Mausoleum, Cliiclien . . 4

VIII. Serpent Head with Crown, carved on the entablature of the
east fa9ade of the west wing of King Canclii’s palace at

Uxinal 5

IX. "Ruins of Prince Coil’s Memorial Hall at Cliiclien . . 7

X. Columns of the Portico of Prince Coil’s Memorial Hall,

discovered by the author ....... 8

XI. Altar at the Entrance of Funeral Chamber in Prince Coil’s

Memorial Hall, discovered by the author . . . .11

XII. One of the Atlantes supporting the Table of the Altar in

Prince Coil’s Memorial Hall ...... 12

XIII. Officials at Burmese Embassy at Paris . . . . .18

XIV. | Sculptured Wall in the Chamber at the Foot of Prince

XV. ) Coil’s Memorial Hall 14

XVI. Part of the East Fa9ade of West Wing of King Canclii’s

Palace at Uxinal, with Cosmic Diagram .... 16

XVII. Maya Cosmic Diagram 17

XVIII. Sri-Santara, Hindoo Cosmic Diagram 32

XIX. Ensoph, Chaldean Cosmic Diagram 26

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

PLATES

XX.

XXI.

XXII.

XXIII.

XXIV.

XXV.

XXYI.

XXVII.

XXVIII.

XXIX.

XXX.

XXXI.

XXXII.

XXXIII.

XXXIV.

XXXV.

XXXVI.

XXXVII.

XXXVIII.

XXXIX.

XL.

XLI.

Head with Phoenician Features, discovered by the author
in 1875 in the royal box tennis court at Cliicben .

A Native Girl of Yucatan .......

Caribs of the Island of St. Vincent. From Edwards’s
“ History of the British Colonies in the West Indies ”
Portal of Eastern Facade of the Palace at Cliiclien. Tab-
leau showing the Creator in the Cosmic Egg .

Kneeling Cynocephalus. From the Temple of Death at

Uxinal

Portico, witli inscription resembling those of Palenque
Portrait of a Maya Nobleman called Cancoli. A bas-
relief on one of the antae of the portico of Prince Coil’s

Memorial Hall at Cliiclien

Portrait of a Maya Nobleman called Chiicli. A bas-
relief on one of the antae of the portico of Prince Coil’s
Memorial Hall .........

Portrait of a Maya Chieftain called Cul. Bas-relief on
one of the jambs of the entrance to the funeral chamber
in Prince Coil’s Memorial Hall .....

Priest and Devotee. Sculptured slab from Manche, now
in the British Museum .......

Obelisk, from Copan. Photographed by Mr. Marshall H.
Saville ; reproduced by liis permission ....

Queen Zoo. One of the atlant.es supporting the table of
the altar in Prince Coil’s Memorial Hall
A Maya Matron. One of the atlantes supporting the
table of the altar in Prince Coil’s Memorial Hall .

A Canob Vase. Used in religious ceremonies
Slab from Altar in the Temple of God of Rain. Palenque
Restoration of the Portico of Prince Coil’s Memorial Hall.
Drawing by the author .......

Fish. Bas-relief from Pontiff Cay’s Mausoleum at Clii-

cneii

1 Sculptured Zapote Beam, forming the lintel of the en-
r trance to funeral chamber in Prince Coil’s Memorial
- Hall. Casts from moulds made by the author
Fresco Painting in Funeral Chamber in Prince Coil’s Me-
morial Hall. Queen Moo when yet a young girl consult-
ing Fate by the ceremony which the Chinese call Pou
Fresco painting. Queen Moo asked in Marriage
Attitude of Respect among the Egyptians

58

63

64

69

77

81

82

82

82

82

82

84

84

86

109

120

121

122

128

130

131

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

PLATES PAGE

XLII. Attitude of Respect among the Mayas. Statue of Prince

Coll exhumed from his Mausoleum by the author . 132

XLIII. Attitude of Respect among the Mayas. Columns of Ka-

tuns at Ake ......... 132

XLIV. Fresco Painting in Funeral Chamber in Prince Coil’s Me-
morial Hall. Queen Moo’s Suitor consulting Fate . 133

XLV. Fresco Painting in Funeral Chamber in Prince Cob’s Me-
morial Hall. Citam, the Friend of Queen Moo, con-
sulting an Aruspice . . . . . . .134

XLYI. Fresco Painting in Funeral Chamber in Prince Coil’s Me-
morial Hall. Prince Aac in Presence in the H-men . 134

XLVII. Fresco Painting in Funeral Chamber in Prince Coil’s Me-
morial Hall. Highpriest Cay consulting Fate . . 135

XL VIII. Fresco Painting in Funeral Chamber in Prince Coil’s Me-
morial Hall. Prince Coll in Battle .... 136

XLIX. Fresco Painting in Funeral Chamber in Prince Coil’s Me-
morial Hall. A Village, assaulted by Prince Coil’s
Warriors, abandoned by its Inhabitants .... 137

L. Fresco Painting in Funeral Chamber in Prince Coil’s Me-
morial Hall. Prince Coil’s Body prepared for Cremation 138
LI. Fresco painting in Prince Coil’s Memorial Hall. Prince

Aac proffering his Love to Queen Moo . . 139

LII. Queen Moo a Prisoner of War. Plate xvii., part ii., of

Troano MS 143

LIII. Account of the Destruction of the Land of Mu. Slab in
the building called Akab-oib at Cbictlen. Cast from
mould made by the author ...... 146

LIV. Account of the Destruction of the Land of Mu. Plate

v., part ii., of Troano MS. ...... 147

LV. j Calendar and an Account of the Destruction of the Land
LVI. ) of Mu. From the Codex Cortesianus .... 147

LVII. Mausoleum of Prince Coll. Restoration and drawing by

the author ......... 155

LVIII. A Dying Warrior. Bas-relief from Prince Coil’s Mauso-
leum .......... 155

LIX. Leopard eating a Human Heart: Totem of Prince Coll.

A bas-relief from his Mausoleum ..... 157

LX. Macaw eating a Human Heart : Totem of Queen Moo.

A bas-relief from Prince Coil’s Mausoleum . . . 157

LXI. Salutation and Token of Respect in Thibet. From the

book by Gabriel Bondalot, “ Across Thibet ” . . 158

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

PLATES PAGE

LXII. A Dying Sphinx (a leopard with a human head) that was

placed on the top of Prince Coil’s Mausoleum . . 158

LXIII. Javelin Head and Arrow Points, found with the Charred

Remains of Prince Coll in his Mausoleum . . . 159

LXIY. Egyptian Sphinx, Reproduced from a photograph by Mr.

Edward Wilson, by his permission .... 159

LXY. Portrait of Queen Moo. From a demi-relief adorning
the entablature of the east fa9ade of the Governor’s House

at Uxmal 166

LXYI. Portrait of Bishop Landa, second Bishop of Yucatan.

From an oil painting in the Chapter Hall of the Cathe-
dral at Merida; reproduced by permission of the present

bishop 169

LXYII. Autograph of the Historian, Father Lopez de Cogolludo.

The original is in the possession of the present Bishop of

Yucatan 173

LXVIII, Mezzo-relievo in Stucco on the Frieze of the Temple of

Kabul at Izamal. A Human Sacrifice .... 197

LXIX. Fresco Painting in the Funeral Chamber of Prince Coil’s

Memorial Hall. Adepts consulting a Seer . . . 222

LXX. Fresco Painting in the Funeral Chamber of Prince Coil’s
Memorial Hall. A Female Adept consulting a Magic

Mirror 222

LXXI. Part of Fa9ade of the Sanctuary at Uxmal. Image of

the Winged Cosmic Circle . . . . . .218

LXXII. The Lord of the Yucatan Forests. From life . . . 236

LXXIII. Part of Fapade of the Sanctuary at Uxmal. Cosmic

symbols carved on the trunk of the Mastodon . . 256

I

PREFACE.

“ To accept any authority as final, and to
dispense ivith the necessity of independent in-
vestigation, is destructive of all progress.”
(Man by two Chelas.)

“ What you have learned, verify by expe-
rience, otherwise learning is vain.”

(Indian Saying.)

In this work I offer no theory. In questions of history
theories prove nothing. They are therefore out of place. I
leave my readers to draw their own inferences from the facts
presented for their consideration. Whatever he their conclu-
sions is no concern of mine. One thing, however, is certain
—neither their opinion nor mine will alter events that have
happened in the dim past of which so little is known to-day.
A record of many of these events has reached our times writ-
ten, by those who took part in them, in a language still spoken
by several thousands of human beings. There we may read
part of man’s history and follow the progress of his civilization.

The study — in situ — of the relics of the ancient Mayas has
revealed such striking analogies between their language, their
religious conceptions, their cosmogonic notions, their manners
and customs, their traditions, their architecture, and the lan-
guage, the religious conceptions, the cosmogonic notions, the
manners and customs, the traditions, the architecture of the

PREFACE.

viii

ancient civilized nations of Asia, Africa, and Europe, of which
we have any knowledge, that it has become evident, to my
mind at least, that such similarities are not merely effects of
hazard, but the result of intimate communications that must
have existed between all of them; and that distance was no
greater obstacle to their intercourse than it is to-day to that of
the inhabitants of the various countries.

It has been, and still is, a favorite hypothesis, with certain
students of ethnology, that the Western Continent, now known
as America, received its human population, therefore its civili-
zation, from Asia. True, there is a split in their ranks. They
are not quite certain if the immigration in America came from
Tartary across the Strait of Behring, or from Hindostan over
the wastes of the Pacific Ocean. This, however, is of little
consequence.

There are those who pretend, like Klaproth, that the cradle
of humanity is to be found on the plateau of Pamir, between
the high peaks of the Himalayan ranges, or like Messrs. Eenan
and Barthelemy Saint-Hilaire, who place it in the region of
the Timaeus, in the countries where the Bible says the “ Gar-
den of Eden” was situated ; while others are equally certain
man came from Lemuria , that submerged continent invented
by P. L. Sclater, which Haeckel 1 believes was the birthplace
of the primitive ape-man, and which they say now lies under
the waves of the Indian Ocean. The truth of the matter is,
that these opinions are mere conjectures, simple hypotheses,
and their advocates know no more when and where man first
appeared on earth than the new-born babe knows of his sur-
roundings or how he came.

The learned wranglers on this shadowy and dim point
1 Haeckel, Ernst, Hist, of Creation , vol. ii., p. 326.

PREFACE.

IX

forget that all leading geologists now agree in the opinion that
America is the oldest known continent on the face of the
planet ; that the fossil remains of human beings found in vari-
ous parts of it, far distant from each other, prove that man
lived there in times immemorial, and that we have not the
slightest ray of light to illumine the darkness that surrounds
the origin of those primeval men. Furthermore, it is now
admitted by the generality of scientists, that man, far from
descending from a single pair, located in a particular portion
of the earth’s surface, has appeared on every part of it where
the biological conditions have been propitious to his develop-
ment and maintenance ; and that the production of the various
species, with their distinct, well-marked anatomical and intel-
lectual characteristics, was due to the difference of those bio-
logical conditions, and to the general forces calling forth
animal life prevalent in the places where each particular spe-
cies has appeared, and whose distinctive marks were adapted
to its peculiar environments.

The Maya sages doubtless had reached similar conclusions,
since they called their country Mayach ; that is, “ the land
first emerged from the bosom of the deep,” “the country
of the shoot / ” and the Egyptians, according to Herodotus,
boasted that “their ancestors, in the ‘Lands of the West,’
were the oldest men on earth.”

If the opinion of Lyell, Humphry, and a host of modern
geologists, regarding the priority of America’s antiquity, be
correct, what right have we to gainsay the assertion of the
Mayas and of the Egyptians in claiming likewise priority for
their people and their country ?

It is but natural to suppose that intelligence in man was
developed on the oldest continent, among its most ancient

X

PREFACE.

inhabitants; and that its concomitant, civilization, grew apace
with its development. When, at the impulse of the instinct of
self-preservation, men linked themselves into clans, tribes, and
nations, history was born, and with it a desire to commemo-
rate the events of which it is composed. The art of drawing
or writing was then invented. The incidents regarded as
most worthy of being remembered and preserved for the
knowledge of coming generations were carved on the most
enduring material in their possession — stone. And so it is that
we find to-day the cosmogonic and religious notions, the rec-
ords of natural phenomena and predominant incidents in the
history of their nation and that of their rulers, sculptured on
the walls of the temples and palaces of the civilized Mayas,
Chaldeans, and Egyptians, as on the sacred rocks and in the
hallowed caves of primitive uncivilized man.

It is to the monumental inscriptions and to the books of the
Mayas that we must turn if we wish to learn about the pri-
meval traditions of mankind, the development of civilization,
and the events that took place centuries before the dim myths
recorded as occurrences at the beginning of our written
history.

Historians when writing on the universal history of the
race have never taken into consideration that of man in
America, and the role that in remote ages American nations
played on this world’s stage, and the influence they exerted
over the populations of Asia, Africa, and Europe. Still, as
far as Ave can scan the long vista of the past centuries, the
Mayas seem to have had direct and intimate communications
with them.

This fact is indeed no neAV revelation, as proved by the uni-
versality of the name Maya, which seems to have been as Avell

PREFACE.

xi

known by all civilized nations, thousands of years ago, as is to-
day that of the English. Thus we meet with it in Japan, the
Islands of the Pacific, Hindostan, Asia Minor, Egypt, Greece,
Equatorial Africa, ISTorth and South America, as well as in
the countries known to us as Central America, which in those
times composed the Maya Empire. The seat of the Govern-
ment and residence of the rulers was the peninsula of Yucatan.
Wherever found, the name Maya is synonymous with power,
wisdom, and learning.

The existence of the Western Continent was no more a
mystery to the inhabitants of the countries bordering on the
Mediterranean than to those whose shores are bathed by the
waves of tbe Indian Ocean.

Yalmiki, in his beautiful epic the “ Ramayana,” says that,
in times so remote that the “ sun had not yet risen above the
horizon,” the Mayas, great navigators, terrible warriors,
learned architects, conquered the southern parts of the Indo-
Chinese peninsula and established themselves there.

In the classic authors, Greek and Latin, we find frequent
mention of the great Saturnian continent, distant many thou-
sand stadia from the Pillars of Hercules toward the setting-
sun. Plutarch, in his “Life of Solon,” says that when the
famed Greek legislator visited Egypt (600 years before the
Christian era), Sonchis, a priest of Sais, also Psenophis, a
priest of Heliopolis, told him that 9,000 years since, the rela-
tions of the Egyptians with the inhabitants of the “Lands of
the West ” had been interrupted because of the mud that had
made the sea impassable after the destruction of Atlantis by
earthquakes.

The same author again, in his work, “ De Facie in Orbe
Lunas, ’ ’ has Scylla recount to his brother Lampias all he had

PREFACE.

xii

learned concerning them from a stranger he met at Carthage
returning from the transatlantic countries.

That the W estern Continent was visited by Carthaginians a
few years before the inditing of Plato’s “Atlantis,” the por-
traits of men with long beards and Phoenician features, discov-
ered by me in 1875, sculptured on the columns and antae of the
castle at Chichen, bear witness. Diodorus Siculus attributes
the discovery of the Western Continent to the Phoenicians, and
describes it as “a country where the landscape is varied by
very lofty mountains, and the temperature is always soft and
equable.” Procopius, alluding to it, says it is several thousand
stadia from Ogygia, and encloses the whole sea, into which a
multitude of rivers, descending from the highlands, discharge
their waters. Theopompus, of Quio, speaking of its magni-
tude, says: “Compared with it, our world is but a small
island; ” and Cicero, mentioning it, makes use of nearly the
same words: “ Omnis enin terrse quas colitur a vobis parva
qusedam est insula.” Aristotle in his work, “ De Mirabile
Auscultatio, ” giving an account of it, represents it “ as a very
large and fertile country, well watered by abundant streams; ”
and he refers to a decree enacted by the Senate of Carthage
toward the year 509 b.c., intended to stem the current of emi-
gration that had set toward the Western Lands, as they feared
it might prove detrimental to the prosperity of their city. The
belief in the former existence of extensive lands in the middle
of the Atlantic, and their submergence in consequence of seis-
mic convulsions, existed among scientists even as far down as
the fifth century of the Christian era. Proclus, one of the
greatest scholars of antiquity, who during thirty -five years
was at the head of the ISTeo-Platonic school of Athens, and
was learned in all the sciences known in his days, in his “ Com-

PREFACE.

xiii

mentaries on Plato’s Timseus,” says: “The famous Atlantis
exists no longer, but we can hardly doubt that it did once, for
Marcellus, who wrote a history of Ethiopian affairs, says that
such and so great an island once existed, and that it is evi-
denced by those who composed histories relative to the external
sea, for they relate that in this time there were seven islands
in the Atlantic sea sacred to Proserpine; and, besides these,
three of immense magnitude, sacred to Pluto, Jupiter, and
Neptune; and, besides this, the inhabitants of the last island
(Poseidonis) preserve the memory of the prodigious magnitude
of the Atlantic island as related by their ancestors, and of its
governing for many periods all the islands in the Atlantic sea.
From this isle one may pass to other large islands beyond,
which are not far from the firm land near which is the true
sea.”

It is well to notice that, like all the Maya authors who have
described the awful cataclysms that caused the submergence of
the “ land of Mu,” Proclus mentions the existence of ten
countries or islands, as Plato did. Can this be a mere coinci-
dence, or was it actual geographical knowledge on the part of
these writers ?

Inquiries are often made as to the causes that led to the
interruption of the communications between the inhabitants of
the 'Western Continent and the dwellers on the coasts of the
Mediterranean, after they had been renewed by the Cartha-
ginians.

It is evident that the mud spoken of by the Egyptian
priests had settled in the course of centuries, and that the sea-
weeds mentioned by Ilamilco had ceased to be a barrier suffi-
cient to impede' the passage, since Carthaginians reached the
shores of Yucatan at least five hundred years before the Chris-

XIV

PREFACE.

tian era.1 These causes may be found in the destruction of
Carthage, of its commerce and its ships, by the Romans under
Publius Scipio. The Romans never were navigators. After
the fall of Carthage, public attention being directed to their
conquests in Northern Africa, in Western Asia, and in Greece;
to their wars with the Teutons and the Cimbri ; to their own
civil dissensions and to the many other political events that
preceded the decadence and disintegration of the Roman Em-
pire; the maritime expeditions of the Phoenicians and of the
Carthaginians — their discoveries of distant and transatlantic
countries became well-nigh forgotten. On the other hand,
those hardy navigators kept their discoveries as secret as
possible.

With the advent and ascendency of the Christian Church,
the remembrance of the existence of such lands that still lin-
gered among students,2 as that of the Egyptian and Greek
civilizations, was utterly obliterated from the mind of the
people.

If we are to believe Tertullian and other ecclesiastical
writers, the Christians, during the first centuries of the Chris-
tian era, held in abhorrence all arts and sciences, which, like
literature, they attributed to the Muses, and therefore regarded
as artifices of the devil. They consequently destroyed all ves-
tiges as well as all means of culture. They closed the acade-
mies of Athens, the schools of Alexandria; burned the libra-
ries of the Serapion and other temples of learning, which
contained the works of the philosophers and the records of

1 Juan de Torquemada, Monarquia Indiana, lib. iii. , cap. 3. Lizana
(Bernardo), Pevocionario de nuestra Seflora de Itzamal, etc., part 1, folio
5, published by Abb6 Brasseur, in Landa’s Las Cosas de Yucatan, pp. 349
et 'passim.

■ Clement of Rome, First Epistle to the Corinthians, chapter viii. , verse 12.

PREFACE.

xv

their researches in all branches of human knowledge (the
power of steam and electricity not excepted). They depopu-
lated the countries bathed by the waters of the Mediterranean ;
plunged the populations of Western Europe into ignorance,
superstition, fanaticism; threw over them, as an intellectual
mortuary pall, the black wave of barbarism that during the
Middle Ages came nigh wiping out all traces of civilization —
which was saved from total wreck by the folloAvers of Ma-
homet, whose great mental and scientific attainments illumined
that night of intellectual darkness as a brilliant meteor, too
soon extinguished by those minions of the Church, the members
of the Holy Inquisition established by Pope Lucius III. The
inquisitors, imitating their worthy predecessors, the Metropoli-
tans of Constantinople and the bishops of Alexandria, closed
the academies and public schools of Cordoba, where Pope
Sylvester II. and several other high dignitaries of the Church
had been admitted as pupils and acquired, under the tuition
of Moorish philosophers, knowledge of medicine, geography,
rhetoric, chemistry, physics, mathematics, astronomy, and the
other sciences contained in the thousands of precious volumes
that formed the superb libraries which the inquisitors wantonly
destroyed, alleging St. Paul’s example.1

Abundant proofs of the intimate communications of the
ancient Mayas with the civilized nations of Asia, Africa, and
Europe are to be found among the remains of their ruined
cities. Their peculiar architecture, embodying their cosmo-
gonic and religious notions, is easily recognized in the ancient
architectural monuments of India, Chaldea, Egypt, and Greece ;
in the great pyramid of Ghizeh, in the famed Parthenon of
Athens. Although architecture is an unerring standard of the
’The Acts of the Apostles, chapter xix., verse 19.

XVI

PREFACE.

degree of civilization reached by a people, and constitutes,
therefore, an important factor in historical research; although
it is as correct a test of race as is language, and more easily
applied and understood, not being subject to changes, I have
refrained from availing myself of it, in order not to increase
the limits of the present work.

I reserve the teachings that may be gathered from the
study of Maya monuments for a future occasion ; restricting
my observations now principally to the Memorial Hall at
Cliiclien, dedicated to the manes of Prince Coll by his sister-
wife Queen Mbo ; and to the mausoleum, erected by her order,
to contain his effigy and his cremated remains. In the first
she caused to be painted, on the walls of the funeral chamber,
the principal events of his and her life, just as the Egyptian
kings had the events of their own lives painted on the walls of
their tombs.

Language is admitted to be a most accurate guide in tracing
the family relation of various peoples, even when inhabiting
countries separated by vast extents of land or water. In the
present instance, Maya, still spoken by thousands of human
beings, and in which the inscriptions sculptured on the walls of
the temples and palaces in the ruined cities of Yucatan are
written, as are also die few books of the ancient Maya sages
that have come to our hands, Avill be the thread of Ariadne
that will guide us in following the tracks of the colonists from
Mayacli in their peregrinations. In every locality where their
name is found, there also we meet with their language, their
religious and cosmogonic notions, their traditions, customs,
architecture, and a host of other indications of their presence
and permanency, and of the influence they have exerted on
the civilization of the aboriginal inhabitants.

PREFACE.

XYll

My readers will judge for themselves of the correctness of
this assertion.

The reading of the Maya inscriptions and books, among
other very interesting subjects, reveals the origin of many
narratives that have come down to us, as traditions, in the
sacred books of various nations, and which are regarded by
many as inexplicable myths. For instance, we find in them
the history of certain personages who, after their death, be-
came the gods most universally revered by the Egyptians, i
Isis and Osiris, whose earthly history, related by Wilkinson
and other writers who regard it as a myth, corresponds ex-
actly to that of Queen Moo and her brother-husband Prince
Coli, whose charred heart was found by me, preserved in a
stone urn, in his mausoleum at Cliiclien.

Osiris, we are told, was killed by his brother through jeal-
ousy, and because his murderer wished to seize the reins of the
government. Fie made war against the widow, his own sister,
whom he came to hate bitterly, after having been madly in
love with her.

In these same books we learn the true meaning of the tree
of knowledge in the middle of the garden ; of the temptation
of the woman by the serpent offering her a fruit. This offer-
ing of a fruit, as a declaration of love, which was a common
occurrence in the every-day life of the Mayas, Egyptians, and
Greeks, loses all the seeming incongruity it presents in the
narrative of Genesis for lack of a word of explanation. But
this shows how very simple facts have been, and still are, made
use of by crafty men, such as the highpriest Hilkiah, to de-
vise religious speculations and impose on the good faith of
ignorant, credulous, and superstitious masses. It is on this story
of the courting of Queen Moo by Prince Aac, the murderer of

xviii PREFA CE.

her husband — purposely disfigured by the scheming Jewish
priest Hilkiah, who made the woman appear to have yielded to
her tempter, perhaps out of spite against the prophetess Hul-
dah, she having refused to countenance his fraud and to
become his accomplice in it1 — that rests the whole fabric of
the Christian religion, which, since its advent in the world, has
been the cause of so much bloodshed and so many atrocious
crimes.

In these Maya writings we also meet with the solution of
that much mooted question among modern scientists — the ex-
istence, destruction, and submergence of a large island in the
Atlantic Ocean, as related by Plato in his “ Timaeus ” and
“ Critias,” in consequence of earthquakes and volcanic erup-
tions. Of this dreadful cataclysm, in tvhich perished sixty-
four millions of human beings, four different authors have left
descriptions in the Maya language. Two of these narratives
are illustrated — that contained in the Troano MS.,2 the other in
the Codex Cortesianus. The third has been engraved on stone
in relief, and placed for safe-keeping in a room in a building at
Cliictien, where it exists to-day, sheltered from the action of
the elements, and preserved for the knowledge of coming gen-
erations. The fourth was written thousands of miles from
Mayach, in Athens, the brilliant Grecian capital, in the form
of an epic poem, in the Maya language. Each line of said
poem, formed by a composed word, is the name of one of the
letters of the Greek alphabet, rearranged, as we have it, four
hundred and three years before the Christian era, under the
archonship of Euclydes.

1 2 Kings, chap, xxii., verse 14 et passim ; also 2 Chronicles, chap,
xxxiv., verse 24.

2 See Appendix, note iii.

Page xviii.

Plate I.

PREFACE.

xix

Fleeing from the wrath of her brother Aac, Queen Moo
directed her course toward the rising sun, in the hope of
finding shelter in some of the remnants of the Land of
Mu, as the Azores, for instance. Failing to fall in with such
place of refuge as she was seeking, she continued her jour-
ney eastward, and at last reached the Maya colonies that
for many years had been established on the banks of the
Nile. The settlers received her with open arms, called
her the “little sister,” ioln (Isis), and proclaimed her their
queen.

Before leaving her mother-country in the West she had
caused to be erected, not only a memorial hall to the memory
of her brother-husband, but also a superb mausoleum in which
were placed his remains and a statue representing him. On
the top of the monument was his totem, a dying leopard with
a human head — a veritable sphinx. Once established in the
land of her adoption, did she order the erection of another of
his totems — again a leopard with human head — to preserve
his memory among her followers? The names inscribed on
the base of the Egyptian sphinx seem to suggest this conjec-
ture. Through the ages, this Egyptian sphinx has been the
enigma of history. Has its solution at last been given by the
ancient Maya archives ?

In the appendix are presented, for the first time in modern
ages, the cosmogonic notions of the ancient Mayas, re-discov-
ered by me. They will be found identical with those of the
other civilized nations of antiquity. In them are embodied
many of the secret doctrines communicated, in their initia-
tions, to the adepts in India, Chaldea, Egypt, and Samothra-
cia — the origin of the worship of the cross, of that of the
tree and of the serpent, introduced in India by the Nagas, who

XX

PREFACE.

raised such a magnificent temple in Cambodia, in the city of
Angor-Thom, to their god, the seven-headed serpent, the Ali-
ac-cliapat of the Mayas, and afterward carried its worship
to Akkad and to Babylon. In these cosmogonic notions we
also find the reason why the number ten was held most sacred
by all civilized nations of antiquity ; and why the Mayas, who
in their scheme of numeration adopted the decimal system, did
not reckon by tens but by fives and twenties; and why they
used the twenty -millionth part of half the meridian as stand-
ard of lineal measures.

In the following pages I simply offer to my readers the re-
lation of certain facts I have learned from the sculptures, the
monumental inscriptions carved on the walls of the ruined pal-
aces of the Mayas ; the record of which is likewise contained
in such of their books as have reached us. I venture only such
explanations as will make clear their identity with the concep-
tions, on the same subjects, of the wise men of India, Chaldea,
Egypt, and Greece. I do not ask my readers to accept d priori
my own conclusions, but to follow the sound advice contained
in the Indian saying quoted at the beginning of this preface,
“ Verif y by experience what you have learned ; ” then, and only
then, form your own opinion. When formed, hold fast to it,
although it may be contrary to your preconceived ideas. In
order to help in the verification of the facts herein presented, I
have illustrated this book with photographs taken in situ ,
drawings and plans according to actual, careful surveys, made
by me, of the monuments. The accuracy of said drawings and
plans can be easily proved on the photographs themselves. I
have besides given many references whose correctness it is not
difficult to ascertain.

This is not a book of romance or imagination ; but a work —

PREFACE.

xxi

one of a series — intended to give ancient America its proper
place in the universal history of the world.

I have been accused of promulgating notions on ancient
America contrary to the opinion of men regarded as authori-
ties on American archaeology. And so it is, indeed. Mine is
not the fault, however, although it may be my misfortune,
since it has surely entailed upon me their enmity and its conse-
quences. But who are those pretended authorities f Certainly
not the doctors and professors at the head of the universities
and colleges in the United States; for not only do they know
absolutely nothing of ancient American civilization, but, judg-
ing from letters in my possession, the majority of them refuse
to learn anything concerning it.

It may be inquired, On what ground can those who have
published books on the subject, in Europe or in the United
States, establish their claim to be regarded as authorities?
What do they know of the ancient Mayas, of their customs
and manners, of their scientific or artistic attainments ? Do
they understand the Maya language? Can they interpret
one single sentence of the books in which the learning of the
Maya sages, their cosmogonic, geographical, religious, and
scientific attainments, are recorded? From what source have
they derived their pretended knowledge ? Not from the
writings of the Spanish chroniclers, surely. These only
wrote of the natives as they found them at the time of, and
long after, the conquest of America by their countrymen,
whose fanatical priests destroyed by fire the only sources of
information — the books and ancient records of the Maya
philosophers and historians. Father Lopez de Cogolludo, in
his “Historia de Yucathan,”1 frankly admits that in his time
‘Cogolludo, Hixtoria de Yucathan, lib. iv., cap. iii., p. 177.

XXII

PREFACE.

no information could be obtained concerning the ancient his-
tory of the Mayas. He says: “Of the peoples who first
settled in this kingdom of Yucathan, or their ancient history,
I have been unable to obtain any other data than those which
follow.” The Spanish chroniclers do not give one reliable
word about the manners and customs of the builders of the
grand antique edifices, that were objects of admiration to
them as they are to modern travellers. The only answer of
the natives to the inquiries of the Spaniards as to who the
builders were, invariably was, We do not know.

For fear of wounding the pride of the pseudo-authorities,
shall the truth learned from the works of the Maya sages and
the inscriptions carved on the walls of their deserted temples
and palaces be withheld from the world? Must the errors
they propagate be allowed to stand, and the propagators not
be called upon to prove the truth of their statements ?

The so-called learned men of our days are the first to
oppose new ideas and the bearers of these. This opposition
will continue to exist until the arrogance and self-conceit of
superficial learning that still hover within the walls of colleges
and universities have completely vanished ; until the generality
of intelligent men, taking the trouble to think for themselves,
cease to accept as implicit truth the ipse dixit of any quidam
who, pretending to know all about a certain subject, pro-
nounces magisterially upon it ; until intelligent men no longer
follow blindly such self-appointed teachers, always keeping in
mind that “to accept any authority as final, and to dispense
with the necessity of independent investigation, is destructive
of all progress.” For, as Dr. Paley says: “ There is a princi-
ple which cannot fail to keep a man in everlasting ignorance;
this principle is contempt prior to examination. ’ ’

PREFACE.

xxiii

The question is often asked, “ Of what practical utility can
the knowledge that America was possibly the cradle of man’s
civilization be to mankind ? ” To some, of but little use truly ;
but many there are who would be glad to know the origin of
man’s primitive traditions recorded in sacred books in the shape
of myths or legends, and what were the incidents that served
as basis on which has been raised the fabric of the various reli-
gions that have existed and do exist among men, have been
and still are the cause of so many wars, dissensions, and per-
secutions. This knowledge would also serve to disclose the
source whence emanated all those superstitions that have
been and are so many obstacles in the way of man’s physical,
intellectual, and moral progress; and to free his mind from
all such trammels, and make of him, what he claims to be,
the most perfect work of creation on earth; also to make
known the fact that Mayacli — not India — is the true mother
of nations.

Then, perhaps, will be awakened, in the mind of those in
whose power it is to do it, a desire to save and preserve what
remains of the mural inscriptions carved on the walls of the
ruined palaces and temples of the Mayas, that are being torn
to pieces by individuals commissioned by certain institutions in
the United States and other places to obtain curios to adorn
their museums, regardless of the fact that they are destroying
the remaining pages of ancient American history with the
reckless hand of ignorance, thus making themselves guilty of
the crime of leze-history as well as of iconoclasm.

Perhaps also will be felt the necessity of recovering the
libraries of the Maya sages (hidden about the beginning of
the Christian era to save them from destruction at the hands
of the devastating hordes that invaded their country in those

XXIV

PREFACE.

times), and to learn from their contents the wisdom of those
ancient philosophers, of which that preserved in the books
of the Brahmins is but the reflection. That wisdom was no
doubt brought to India, and from there carried to Babylon
and Egypt in very remote ages by those Maya adepts (Xaaeal
- — “the exalted ”), who, starting from the land of their birth
as missionaries of religion and civilization, went to Burmah,
where they became known as Nagas , established themselves
in tlu Dekkan, whence they carried their civilizing work all
over the earth.

At the request of friends, and to show that the reading of
Maya inscriptions and books is no longer an unsolved enigma,
and that those who give themselves as authorities on ancient
Maya palaeography are no longer justified in guessing at, or in
forming theories as to the meaning of the Maya symbols
or the contents of said writings, I have translated verbatim
the legend accompanying the image, in stucco, of a human
sacrifice that adorned the frieze of the celebrated temple of
Kabul at Izamal.

This legend I have selected because it is written with hie-
ratic Maya characters, that are likewise Egyptian.1 Any one
who can read hieratic Egyptian inscriptions will have no diffi-
culty in translating said legend by the aid of a Maya diction-
ary, and thus finding irrefutable evidence: 1. That Mayas and
Egyptians must have learned the art of writing from the same
masters. Who were these ? 2. That some of the ruined mon-

uments of Yucatan are very ancient, much anterior to the
Christian era, notwithstanding the opinion to the contrary of
the self-styled authorities on Maya civilization. 3. That

:See Le Plongeon’s ancient Maya hieratic alphabet compared with the
Egyptian hieratic alphabet, in Sacred Mysteries , Introduction, p. xii.

PREFACE.

xxv

nothing now stands in the way of acquiring a perfect knowledge
of the manners and customs, of the scientific attainments, reli-
gious and cosmogonic conceptions, of the history of the builders
of the ruined temples and palaces of the Mayas.

May this work receive the same acceptance from students of
American archaeology and universal history as was vouchsafed
to “ Sacred Mysteries among the Mayas and the Quiches.” It
is written for the same purpose and in the same spirit.

Augustus Le Plongeon, M.D.

New York, January, 1896.

INTRODUCTION.

ORIGIN OF THE NAME MAYACH.

The country known to-day as Yucatan, one of the states
of the Mexican confederacy, may indeed be justly regarded
by the ethnologist, the geologist, the naturalist, the philologist,
the archaeologist, and the historian as a most interesting field
of study. Its area of seventy -three thousand square miles,
covered with dense forests, is literally strewn with, the ruins of
numerous antique cities, majestic temples, stately palaces,
the work of learned architects, now heaps of debris crumbling
under the inexorable tooth of time and the impious hand of
iconoclastic collectors of relics for museums. Among these the
statues of priests and kings, mutilated and defaced by the
action of the elements, the hand of time and that of man, lie
prostrate in the dust. Walls covered with bas-reliefs, inscrip-
tions and sculptures carved in marble, containing the pane-
gyrics of rulers, the history of the nation, its cosmogonical
traditions, the ancient religious rites and observances of its

INTRODUCTION.

xxviii

people, inviting decipherment, attract the attention of the
traveller. The geological formation of its stony soil, so full of
curious deposits of fossil shells of the Jurassic period (Plate I.);
its unexplored caves, supposed dwellings of sprites and elves,
creatures of the fanciful and superstitious imagination of the
natives; its subterraneous streams of cool and limpid water,
inhabited by bagres and other fish — are yet to be studied by
modern geologists ; whilst its flora and fauna, so rich and so
diversified, but imperfectly known, await classification at the
hand of naturalists.

The peculiar though melodious vernacular of the natives,
preserved through the lapse of ages, despite the invasions
of barbaric tribes, the persecutions by Christian conquerors,
ignorant, avaricious, and bloodthirsty, or fanatical monks
who believed they pleased the Almighty by destroying a civ-
ilization equal if not superior to theirs, is full of interest
for the philologist and the ethnologist. Situated between 18°
and 21° 35' of latitude north, and 86° 50' and 90° 35' of longi-
tude west from the Greenwich meridian, Yucatan forms the
peninsula that divides the Mexican Gulf from the Caribbean
Sea.

Bishop Landa 1 informs us that when, at the beginning of
the year 1517, Francisco Hernandez de Cordova, the first of
the Spaniards who set foot in the country of the Mayas, landed
on a small island which he called Mugeres, the inhabitants, on
being asked the name of the country, answered U-luumil
cell (the land of the deer) and U-luumil cutz (the land of
the turkey).2 Until then the Europeans were ignorant of the
existence of such a place; for although Juan Diaz Solis and

1 See Appendix, note i.

2 Diego de Landa, Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan , chap, ii., p. 6.

INTRODUCTION.

xxix

Vicente Yanes Pinzon came in sight of its eastern coasts in
1506, they did not land nor make known their discovery.1

Herrera, in his Decadas, tells ns that when Columbus, in
his fourth voyage to America, Avas at anchor near the island
of Pinos, in the year 1502, his ships were boarded by Maya
navigators. These came from the west; from the country
knoAvn to its inhabitants under the general name of the Great
Can (serpent) and the Cat-ayo (cucumber tree).2 The penin-
sula, then divided into many districts or provinces, each gov-
erned by an independent ruler who had given a peculiar title
to his oavu dominions, seems to have had no general name.
One district was called Cliacan, another Cepech, another
Clioaca, another Mayapan, and so on.3 Mayapan, how-
eArer, was a \Tery large district, Avhose king was regarded as
suzerain by the other chieftains, previous to the destruction of
his capital by the people, headed by the nobility, they having
become tired of his exactions and pride. This rebellion is said
to have taken place seventy-one years before the advent of the
Spanish adventurers in the country. The pOAverful dynasty
of the Cocomes, Avhich had held tyrannical SAvay over the
land for more than tAVO centuries, then came to an end.4

Among the chroniclers and historians, several have ven-
tured to give an etymology of the word Maya. Hone, hoAV-
ever, seem to have knoAvn its true origin. The reason is very
simple.

At the time of the invasion of the country by the turbu-

1 Antonio de Herrera, Hist, general de los hechos de los Castellanos en las
■islas y la Uerrajirrne del Oceano. (Madrid, 1601.) Decada 1, lib. 6, cap. 17.

2 Ibid. Decada 1, lib. 5, cap. 13.

3 Landa, Relacion, etc., chap, v., p. 30.

4 Cogolludo, Historiade Yucathan, lib. iv., cap. iii., p. 179. See Appen-
dix, note ii.

XXX

INTRODUCTION.

lent and barbaric ISTahnatls, the books containing the record of
the ancient traditions, of the history of past ages, from the
settlement of the peninsula by its primitive inhabitants, had
been carefully hidden (and have so remained to this day) by
the learned philosophers, and the wise priests who had charge
of the libraries in the temples and colleges, in order to save the
precious volumes from the hands of the barbarous tribes from
the west. These, entering the country from the south, came
spreading ruin and desolation. They destroyed the principal
cities ; the images of the heroes, of the great men, of the cele-
brated women, that adorned the public squares and edifices.
This invasion took place in the year 522, or thereabout, of the
Christian era, according to the opinion of modern computers.1

As a natural consequence of the destruction, by the invad-
ers, of Cliictien-Itza, then the seat of learning, the Itzaes,
preferring ostracism to submitting to their vandal-like con-
querors, abandoned their homes and colleges, and became wan-
derers in the desert.2 Then the arts and sciences soon declined;
with their degeneracy came that of civilization. Civil war —
that inevitable consequence of invasions — political strife, and
religious dissension broke out before long, and caused the dis-
memberment of the kingdom, that culminated in the sack and
burning of the city of Mayapan and the extinction of the
royal family of the Cocomes in 1420 a.d., two hundred and
seventy years after its foundation.3 In the midst of the social
cataclysms that gave the coup de grace to the Maya civiliza-

1 Philip J. J. Valentini, Katunes of the May a History, p. 54.

2 Juan Pio Perez (Codex Maya), U Tzolan Itatunil ti Mayab (§ 7):
“Laixtun u Katuuil binciob AIi-Ytzaob yalan die, yalan
aban, yalan ak ti numyaob lae.” (“Toward, that time, then, the
Itzaes went in the forests, lived under the trees, under the prune trees,
under rhe vines, and were very miserable.”)

3 Cogolludo, Historia de Tucathan, lib. iv., cap. 3, p. 179.

INTRODUCTION.

xxxi

tion, the old traditions and lore were forgotten or became dis-
figured. Ingrafted with the traditions, superstitions, and
fables of the ISTahuatls, they assumed the shape of myths.
The great men and women of the primitive ages were trans-
formed into the gods of the elements and of the phenomena of
nature.

The ancient libraries having disappeared, new books had to
be written. They contained those myths. The Troano and
the Dresden MSS. seem to belong to that epoch.1 They con-
tain, besides some of the old cosmogonical traditions, the tenets
and precepts of the new religion that sprang from the blend-
ing of the ceremonies of the antique form of worship of the
Mayas with the superstitious notions, the sanguinary rites,
and the obscene practices of the phallic cult of the ISTahuatls;
the laws of the land ; and the vestiges of the science and knowl-
edge of the philosophers of past ages that still lingered among
some of the noble families, transmitted as heirlooms, by word
of mouth, from father to son.2 These books were written in
new alphabetical letters and some of the ancient demotic or
popular characters that, being known to many of the nobil-
ity, remained in usage.

With the old orders of priesthood, and the students, the
knowledge of the hieratic or sacred mode of writing had
disappeared. The legends graven on the facades of the tem-
ples and palaces, being written in those characters, were no

1 See Appendix, note iii.

2 Diego de Landa, Relation de las Cosas de Yucatan (cliap. vii., p. 42):
“ Que ensenavan los hijos de los otros sacerdotes, y a los hijos segundos
de los senores que los llevaban para esto desde ninos. ”

Lizana (chap. 8), Historia de Nuestra Seftora de Ytzamal : “ La historia y
autores que podemos alegar son unos caracteres mal entendidos de muchos
y glossados de unos indios antiguos que son hijos de los sacerdotes de sus
dioses, que son los que solo sabian leer y adevinar.”

XXX11

INTRODUCTION.

longer understood, except perhaps by a few archaeologists, who
were sworn to secrecy. The names of the builders, their his-
tory, that of the phenomena of nature they had witnessed,
the tenets of the religion they had professed— all contained,
as we have said, in the inscriptions that covered these antique
walls — were as much a mystery to the people, as to the mul-
titudes which have since contemplated them with amazement,
during centuries, to the present day.

Bishop Landa, speaking of the edifices at Izamal, asserts 1
that the ancient buildings of the Mayas, at the time of the
arrival of the Spaniards in Yucatan, were already heaps of
ruins — objects of awe and veneration to the aborigines who
lived in their neighborhood. They had lost, he saj^s, the
memory of those who built them, and of the object for which
they had been erected. Yet before their eyes were their
facades, covered with sculptures, inscriptions, figures of human
beings and of animals, in the round and in bas-relief, in a
better state of preservation than they are now, not having
then suffered so much injury at the hand of man, for the
natives regarded them, as their descendants do still, with rev-
erential fear. There were recorded the legends of the past —
a dead letter for them as for the learned men of the present
age. There, also, on the interior walls of many apartments,
were painted in bright colors pictures that would grace the
parlors of our mansions, representing the events in the history
of certain personages who had flourished at the dawn of the
life of their nation; scenes that had been enacted in former
ages were portrayed in very beautiful bas-reliefs. But these
speaking tableaux were, for the majority of the people, as

1 Landa, Relation de las Cosas (p. 328): “ Que estos edificios de Izamal
eran xi a xii por todos, sin aver ineinoria de los fundadores.”

INTRODUCTION.

xxxiii

much enigmas as they are to-day. Still travellers and sci-
entists are not wanting who pretend that these strange build-
ings were constructed by the same race now inhabiting the
peninsula or by their near ancestors 1 — regardless of Cogolludo’s
assertion3 “ that it is not known who their builders were, and
that the Indians themselves preserved no traditions on the sub-
ject; ” unmindful, likewise, of these words of Lizana: “That
when the Spaniards came to this country, notwithstanding
that some of the monuments appeared new, as if they had
been built only twenty years, the Indians did not live in them,
but used them as temples and sanctuaries, offering in them
sacrifices, sometimes of men, women, and children; and that
their construction dated back to a very high antiquity.” 3

The historiographer par excellence of Yucatan, Cogolludo,
informs us that in his day — the middle of the seventeenth
century — scarcely a little more than one hundred years after
the Conquest, the memory of these adulterated traditions was
already fading from the mind of the aborigines. “ Of the
people who first settled in this kingdom of Yucathan,” he says,
“ nor of their ancient history, have I been able to find any
more data than those I mention here. ’ ’ 4

The books and other writings of the chroniclers and his-
torians, from the Spanish conquest to our times, should there-
fore be considered well-nigh valueless, so far as the history of
the primitive inhabitants of the country, the events that tran-
spired in remote ages, and ancient traditions in general are

1 John L. Stephens, Incidents of Travels in Yucatan , vol. ii., p. 458. De-
sire Charnay, North American Review , April, 1882.

2 Diego Lopez de Cogolludo, Historic fi de Yucatlian, lib. iv., chap, iii.,
p. 177.

3 Lizana, Ilistoria de Nuestra Sehora de Ytzamal, chap. ii.

4 Cogolludo, Ilistoria de Yucathan , lib. iv., chap, iii., p. 177.

XXXIV

INTRODUCTION.

concerned, seeing that Cogolludo says they were unable to pro-
cure any information on the subject. “ It seems to me that it
is time,” he says, “to speak of the various things pertaining
to this country, and of its natives; not, however, with the ex-
tension some might desire, mentioning in detail their origin
and the countries whence they may have come, for it would be
difficult for me to ascertain now that which so many learned
men were unable to find out at the beginning of the Conquest,
even inquiring with great diligence, as they affirm, particu-
larly since there exist no longer any papers or traditions among
the Indians concerning the first settlers from whom they are
descended; our evangelical ministers, who imported the faith,
in order to radically extirpate idolatry, having burned all char-
acters and paintings they could get hold of in which were
written their histories, and that in order to take from them
all remembrances of their ancient rites.” 1

Those who undertook to write the narrative of the Con-
quest and the history of the country, in order to procure the
necessary data for this, had naturally to interrogate the na-
tives. These were either unable or unwilling to impart the
knowledge sought. It may be that some of those from whom
inquiries were made were descendants of the Nahuatls, igno-
rant of the ancient history of the Mayas. Others may have
"been some of the Mexican mercenaries who dwelt on the coasts,
where they were barely tolerated by the other inhabitants,
because of their sanguinary practices. They, from the first,
had welcomed the Spaniards as friends and allies — had main-
tained with them intimate relations during several years,2 be-

1 Cogolludo, Eistoria de Yucathan, lib. iv., chap. iii. , p. 170.

2 Nakuk Peck. An ancient document concerning the Nakuk Pecli
family, Lords of Ckicxulub, Yucatan. This is an original document be-
longing to Srs. Regil y Peon, of Merida, Yucatan.

INTRODUCTION.

xxxv

fore the invaders ventured into the interior of the country.
Fearing that if they pleaded ignorance of the history it might
he ascribed to unwillingness on their part to answer the ques-
tions; dreading also to alienate the goodwill of the men with
long gowns, who defended them against the others that handled
the thunderbolts — those strangers covered with iron, now mas-
ters of the country and of their persons, who on the slightest
provocation subjected them to such terrible punishments and
atrocious torments — they recited the nursery tales with which
their mothers had lulled them to sleep in the days of their
childhood. These stories were set down as undoubted tradi-
tions of olden times.

Later on, when the Conquest was achieved, some of the
natives who really possessed a knowledge of the myths, tra-
ditions, and facts of history contained in the books that those
same men with long gowns had wilfully destroyed by feed-
ing the flames with them, notwithstanding the earnest prot-
estations of the owners, invented plausible tales when ques-
tioned, and narrated these as facts, unwilling, as they were, to
tell the truth to foreigners who had come to their country un-
invited, arms in hand, carrying war and desolation wherever
they went;1 slaughtering the men ; 2 outraging the wives and
the virgins ; 3 destroying their homes, their farms, their cities ; 4
spreading ruin and devastation throughout the land;5 dese-

1 Cogolludo, Historia de Yucathan, lib. ii., chap, vi., p. 77.

2 Lancia, Las Cosas de Yucatan, chap, xv., p. 84, et passim. Bernal Diez
de Castillo, Historia de la Conquista de Mexico, chap. 83.

3 Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan , chap, xv., p. 84. Bartholome de las Ca-
sas, Tratado de la Destruccion de las Indias, Reyno de Yucathan, lib. viii.,
cap. 27, p. 4.

4 Cogolludo, Hist, de Yucathan, lib. iii., chap, xi., p. 151. Landa, Las
Cosas, ch. iv.

5 Hid.

XXXVI

INTRODUCTION.

crating the temples of their gods; trampling underfoot the
sacred images, the venerated symbols of the religion of their
forefathers ; 1 imposing upon them strange idols, that they said
were likenesses of the only true God and of his mother 2 — an
assertion that seemed most absurd to those worshippers of the
sun, moon, and other celestial bodies, who regarded Ivu, the
Divine Essence, the uncreated Soul of the "World, as the only
Supreme God, not to be represented under any shape. Yet,
by lashes, torture, death even, the victims were compelled to
pay homage to these images, with rites and ceremonies the
purport of which they were, as their descendants still are,
unable to understand, being at the same time forbidden to
observe the religious practices which they had been accustomed
to from times immemorial.3 More, their temples of learning
were destroyed, with their libraries and the precious volumes
that contained the history of their nation, that of their illus-
trious men and women whose memory they venerated, the

1 Cogolludo, Hist, cle Tucathan, lib. iii. , chap, x., p. 147. Landa, Las
Cosas, chap. iv.

2 Ilid., lib. iv., chap, xviii., p. 229. Landa, Las Cosas, chap. iv.

3 Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan, chap, xli., p. 316.

Cogolludo, Hist, de Tucathan , lib. iv., chap, vi., p. 189. “Los religiosos
de esta provincia, por cuya atencion corrio la conversion de estos indios, a
nuestra santa ft catolica, con el zelo que tieuen de que aprouechassen en
ella, no solo demolieron y quemaron todos los sinxulacros que adoraban,
pero aun todos los escritos (que a su modo tenian) con que pudieran re-
cordar sus memorias y todo lo que presumiero tendria motino de alguna
supersticion 6 ritos gentilicos.”

Then when speaking of the auto-de-fe ordered by Bishop Landa, which
took place in the city of Mani towards the end of 1561, he says : “ Con el
rezelo de esta idolatria, liizo juntar todos los libros y caracteres antiguos
que los indios tenian, y por quitarles toda ocasion y memoria de sus auti-
guos ritos, quantos se pudieron liallar, se quemaron publicamente el dia del
auto y a las bueltas con ellos sus liistorias de antiguedades ” (lib. vi., chap,
i., p. 309).

INTRODUCTION.

XXXVll

sciences of their wise men and philosophers.1 How, then, could
it be expected that they should tell what they knew of the his-
tory of their people, and treat as friends men whom they
hated, and with reason, from their heart of hearts? — men
who held their gods in contempt ; men who had, without prov-
ocation, destroyed the autonomy of their nation, broken up
their families, reduced their kin to slavery, brought misery
upon them, gloom and mourning throughout the land.2

How that three hundred and fifty-five years have elapsed
since their country became part of the domain of the Spanish
Crown, one might think, and not a few do try to persuade
themselves and others, that old feuds, rancor, and distrust
must be forgotten; in fact, must be replaced by friendship,
confidence, gratitude, even, for all the blessings received at the
hands of the Spaniards — not the least among these, the de-
struction of their idolatrous rites, the knowledge of the true
God, and the mode of worshipping He likes best — notwith-
standing the unfair means used by their good friends, those of
the long gowns, to force such blessings and knowledge upon
them, and cause them to forget and forego the customs and
manners of their forefathers.3 To-day, when the aborigines
are said to be free citizens of the Republic of Mexico, entitled
to all the rights and privileges that the constitution is sup-
posed to confer on all men born within the boundaries of the
country, they yet seek — and with good cause — the seclusion of
the recesses of the densest forests, far away from the haunts
of their white fellow -citizens, to perform, in secrecy, certain
ancient rites and religious practices that even now linger

1 Cogolludo, Hist, de Yucathan, lib. ii., chap, xiv., p. 108, et passim.

2 Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan , chap, xv., p. 84, et passim.

3 Cogolludo, Hist, de Yucathan , lib. v., cap. xvii., xviii., p. 296, et pas-
sim. Las leyes mas en orden al lien espiritual de los Lndios.

INTRODUCTION.

xxxviii

among them, to which they adhere with great tenacity, and
that the persecution and ill-treatment they have endured have
been powerless to extirpate.1 Yes, indeed, up to the present
time, they keep whatever knowledge of their traditions they
may still possess carefully concealed in their bosoms ; their lips
are hermetically sealed on that subject.

Their confidence in, their respect and friendship for, one not
of their blood and race must be very great, for them to allow
him to witness their ceremonies, or become acquainted with
the import of certain practices, or he told the meaning of pecul-
iar signs and symbols, transmitted to them orally by their
fathers. This reserve may be the reason why some travellers,
unable to obtain any information from the aborigines, have
erroneously asserted that they have lost all traditionary lore;
that all tradition has entirely disappeared from among them.2

Maya was the name of a powerful nation that in remote
ages dwelt in the peninsula of Yucatan and the countries,
to-day called Central America, comprised between the Isthmus
of Tehuantepec on the north and that of Darien on the south.
That name was as well known among the ancient civilized
nations the world over as at present are the names of Spain,
France, England, etc. As from these countries colonists,
abandoning the land of their birth, have gone and still go
forth in search of new homes in far distant regions ; have car-
ried and do carry, with the customs, manners, religion, civiliza-
tion, and language of their forefathers, the name even of the
mother country to their new abodes — so we may imagine it
happened with the Mayas at some remote period in the past.

1 See Appendix, note iv. ; Cogolludo, Hist, de Tucathan , lib. v., cap.
xvi., xvii., xviii.

2 John L. Stephens, Incidents of Travels in Yucatan , vol. ii., pp. 44G, 449.

INTRODUCTION.

xxxix

For it is a fact that, wherever we find their name, there also
we meet with the vestiges of their language and customs, and
many of their traditions; but nowhere, except in Yucatan, is
the origin of their name to be found.

Among the various authors who have written on that coun-
try several have endeavored to give the etymology of the
word Maya : none has succeeded; for, instead of consulting
the Maya books that escaped destruction at the hands of the
Zumarragas, Landas, and Torquemadas, they have appealed
to their imagination, as if in their fancy they could find the
motives that prompted the primitive inhabitant to apply such
or such name to this or that locality.

Ramon de Ordonez y Aguiar 1 fancied that the name Maya
was given to the peninsula on account of the scarcity of water
on its surface, and intimated that it was derived from the two
vocables ma, “no,” and lia, “water” — “without water.”
Brasseur,2 following his own pet idea, combats such explana-
tion as incorrect and says: “The country is far from being
devoid of water. Its soil is honeycombed, and innumerable
caves exist just under the surface. In these caves are deposits
of cool, limpid water, extensive lakes fed by subterranean
streams.” Hence he argues that the true etymology of the
word Maya may possibly be the “mother of the waters ” or
the “teats of the waters ma-y-a ” — she of the four hundred
breasts, as they were wont to represent the Ephesian goddess.

Again, this explanation did not suit Senor Eligio Ancona,3

1 Ramon de Ordonez y Aguiar, the author of Historia de la Creadon del
cielo y de la Tierra, was a native of the ciudad Real de Chiapas. He died,
very much advanced in years, in 1840, being canon of the cathedral of that
city.

a Brasseur (Charles Etienne), MayaVocabulary , vol. ii., p. 298, Troano MS.

3 Ancona (Eligio), Hist, de Yucatan, vol. i., chap. i. See Appendix, note v.

xl

INTRODUCTION.

for he ridicules the etymologists. “ What nonsense,” he says,

“to thus rack their brains ! They must be out of their mind
to give themselves the work of bringing forth these erudite

elucidations to explain the word Maya, that everybody knows

is a mere Spanish corruption of Mayab, the ancient name of
the country. ’ ’ In asserting that the true name ( nombre ver-
dadero ) of the peninsula in ancient times was Mayab, Senor
Ancona does not sustain his assertion by any known historical
document; he merely refers to the Maya dictionary of Pio
Perez, that he himself has published. He is likewise silent as
to the source from which Senor Pio Perez obtained his infor-
mation concerning the ancient name of the peninsula.

Landa, Cogolludo, Lizana,1 all accord in stating that the
land was called U-luumil cell, “the land of the deer.”
Herrera2 says it was called Beb (a very thorny tree), and the
“ great serpent ” Can ; but we see in the Troano MS. that this
was the name of the whole of the Maya Empire, not the
peninsula alone. Senor Ancona, notwithstanding his sneers, is
not quite sure of being right in his criticism, for he also tries
his hand at etymologizing. Taking for granted that the state-
ment of Lizana is true, that at some time or other two differ-
ent tribes had invaded the country and that one of these tribes
was more numerous than the other, he pretends that the word
Mayab was meant to designate the weaker, being composed,
as he says, of Ma, “not,” and yab, “abundant.”

I myself, on the strength of the name given to the birthplace
of their ancestors by the Egyptians, and on that of the tradition
handed down among the aborigines of Yucatan, admitting
that one of the names given to the peninsula, Mayab, was cor-

1 See Appendix, note v.

a Antonio de Herrera, Decada 1, lib. 7, chap. 17.

INTRODUCTION.

xli

rect; considering, moreover, the geological formation of its soil,
its porousness; remembering, besides, that the meaning of the
wordMayab is a “ sieve,” a “ tammy,” I wrote: 1 “It is very
difficult, without the help of the books of the learned priests of
Mayab, to know positively why they gave that name to their
country. I can only surmise that they called it so from the great
absorbent quality of its stony soil, which in an incredibly short
time absorbs the water at the surface. This water, percolating
through the pores of the stone, is afterward found filtered, clear
and cool, in the smotes and caves, where it forms vast deposits.”
When I published the foregoing lines, in 1881, I had not
studied the contents of the Troano MS. I was therefore
entirely ignorant of its historical yalue. The discovery of a
fragment of mural painting, in the month of February, 1882, 2
on the walls of an apartment in one of the edifices at Kabah,
caused me to devote many months to the study of the Maya
text of that interesting old document. It was with consider-
able surprise that I then discovered that several pages at the
beginning of the second part are dedicated to the recital of the
awful phenomena that took place during the cataclysm that
caused the submersion of ten countries, among which the £ ‘ Land
of Mu,” that large island probably called “ Atlantis” by
Plato ; and the formation of the strangely crooked line q

of islands known to us as C£ West Indies,” but as the “ Land of
the Scorpion ” to the Mayas.3 I was no less astonished than
gratified to find an account of the events in the life of the per-
sonages whose portraits, busts, and statues I had discovered
among the ruins of the edifices raised by them at Chiclien

1 Aug. Le Plongeon, Vestiges of the Mayas, p. 26.

3 North American Review, April, 1882. “ Explorations of the Ancient

Cities of Central America,” Desirg Cliarnay.

3 Troano MS., part ii., plates vi., vii.

xlii

INTRODUCTION.

and Uxmal, whose history, portrayed in the mnral paintings,
is also recounted in the legends and the sculptures still adorn-
ing the walls of their palaces and temples ; and to learn that
these ancient personages had already been converted, at the
time the author of the Troano MS. wrote his book, into the
gods of the elements, and made the agents who produced
the terrible earthquakes that shook parts of the “ Lands of the
West” to their very foundations, as told in the narrative of
the Akab-oib, and finally caused them to be engulfed by the
waves of the Atlantic Ocean.1 2

The author of the Troano MS. gives in his work the adjoin-
ing map (Plate II.) of the “ Land of the Beb ” (mulberry tree),
the Maya Empire.3 In it he indicates the localities which
were submerged, and those that still remained above water, in
that part of the world, after the cataclysm.

In the legend explanatory of his object in drawing that
chart, as in many other places in his book,3 he gives the ser-
pent head kan, ‘ ‘ south, ’ ’ as symbol of the southern con-

tinent. He represents the northern by this monogram
that reads aac, “ turtle. ” By this sign ='10£= placed between

the two others, he intends to convey to the mind of his readers
that the submerged places to which he refers are situated be-
tween the two western continents, are bathed by the waters
of the Mexican Gulf, and more particularly by those of the
Caribbean Sea — figured by the image of an animal resem-
bling a deer, placed over the legend. It is well to remark that
this animal is typical of the submerged Antillean valleys, as it
will plainly appear further on.

1 Troano MS., part ii., plates ii., iii., iv.

2 Ibid., vol. i., part ii., pi. x.

3 Ibid., pi. xxiv., xxv., et passim.

Page xlii.

Plate II.

INTRODUCTION.

xliii

The lines lightly etched here are painted blue in the origi-
nal. As in our topographical maps the edges of the water-
courses, of the sea and lakes, are painted blue, so the Maya
hierogrammatist figured the shores of the Mexican Gulf, indi-
cated by the serpent head. The three signs □ of locality,
placed in the centre of said gulf, mark the site of the extin-
guished volcano known to-day as the Alacranes reefs. The
serpent head was, for the Maya writers, typical of the sea,
■whose billows they compared to the undulations of a serpent
in motion. They therefore called the ocean canali, a word
whose radical is can, “ serpent,” the meaning of which is the
‘ ‘ mighty serpent. ’ ’

The lines of the drawing1 more strongly etched, the end of

II

pO.*;i= , are painted red, the
color of clay, kaiieab, and indicate the localities that were
submerged and turned into marshes. This complex sign is

formed of the tld emblem of countries near or in the
water, and of the cross, made of dotted lines, symbol of the
cracks and crevices made on the surface of the earth by the
escaping gases, represented by the dots . . . . , and of small

it

circles, O, images of volcanoes. As to the character
is composed of two letters equivalent to Maya

and Greek letter A, so entwined as to form the character X ,
equal to the Greek and Maya K, but forming a mon-
ogram that reads aac, the Maya word for “turtle.”

Before proceeding with the etymology of the name May-
ach, it may not be amiss to explain the legends and the other
drawings of the tableau. It will be noticed that the charac-
ters over that part of the drawing which looks like the hori-
zontal branch of a tree are identical with those placed verti-
cally against the trunk, but in an inverted position. It is, in

xliv

INTRODUCTION.

fact, the same legend repeated, and so written for the better
understanding of the map, and of the exact position of the
various localities; that of the Mexican Gulf figured on the
left, and of the ideographic or pictorial representation of the
Caribbean Sea to the right of the tableau. In order to
thoroughly comprehend the idea of the Maya author, it
is indispensable to have a perfect knowledge of the con-
tours of the seas and lands mentioned by him in this instance,
even as they exist to-day. Of course, some slight changes
since the epoch referred to by him have naturally taken
place, and the outlines of the shores are somewhat altered,
particularly in the Gulf of Mexico, as can be ascertained
by consulting maps made by the Spaniards at the time of the
conquest.

The adjoining map of Central America, the Antilles, and
Gulf of Mexico, being copied from that published by the Bu-
reau of Hydrography at Washington, may be regarded as accu-
rate (Plate III.). On it I have traced, in dotted lines, figures
that will enable any one to easily understand why the Maya
author symbolized the Caribbean Sea as a deer, and the empire
of Mayacli as a tree, rooted in the southern continent, and
having a single branch, horizontal and pointing to the right,
that is, in an easterly direction.

A glance at the map of the “Drowned Valleys of the
Antillean Lands ” (Plate IV.), published by Professor J. W.
Spencer, of "Washington, in the “Bulletin of the Geological
Society of America” for January, 1895, which is reproduced
here with the author’s permission, must convince any one
that the ancient Maya geologists and geographers were
not far behind their brother professors, in these sciences,
of modern times, in their knowledge, at least, of those

Page xliv.

Plate III.

Page xliv.

Plate IV.

INTRODUCTION.

xlv

| , that
I

was

parts of the earth they inhabited, and of the adjoining coun-
tries.1

The sign that most attracts the attention is
Bishop Landa says must be read Yax-kin, and
that of the seventh month of the Maya calendar. Literally
these words mean the “ vigorous sun.” If, however, we inter-
pret the symbol phonetically, it gives us £ ‘ the country of
the king, which is surrounded by water ; ” ‘ ‘ the kingdom in the
midst of water. ’ ’ It will also be noticed that it is placed at the
top of the tree, to indicate that that ££ tree ” is the kingdom.
Next to it, on the left, is the name Mayacli, which indicates
that it is the ££ kingdom of Mayacli,” which will be- ^
come plair by the analysis of the symbols. To begin with, 1 1
is a wing or feather, insignia worn by kings and warriors.
Placed here it has a double meaning. It denotes the north,
as we will see later on, and also shows that the land is
that of the king whose emblem it is. The character fOlQ]
stands for ahau, the word for king, and we have already

1 The adjoining map (Plate IV.) was constructed by Professor J. W. Spen-
cer according to his own original researches and geological studies in the
island of Cuba and in Central America, aided by the deep-sea soundings made
in 1878 by Commander Bartlett of the United States steamship Blake. It
can be therefore accepted as perfectly accurate. During a short stay in
Belize, British Honduras, Commander Bartlett honored me with a visit.
Speaking of his work of triangulation and deep-sea soundings in the Carib-
bean Sea, he mentioned the existence of very profound valleys covered by its
waters, revealed by the sound. I informed him that I had become cognizant
of that fact, having found it mentioned by the author of that ancient Maya
book known to-day as Troano MS. If my memory serves me right, I showed
him the maps drawn by the writer of that ancient book, and made on a map
in my copy of Bowditch’s Navigation an approximate tracing of the sub-
merged valleys in the Caribbean Sea, in explanation of the Maya maps,
showing why they symbolized said sea by the figure of an animal resem-
bling a deer— which may have been the reason why they called the country
U-luumil cell, the “ land of the deer.”

xlvi

INTRODUCTION.

seen that this fc qA , luumil, is the symbol for “ land near, in,
or surrounded by water, ’ ’ as the Empire of May ach

(the peninsula of Yucatan and Central America are certainly
surrounded by water), on the north by the Gulf of Mexico, on
the east by the Caribbean Sea, on the west and south by the
Pacific Ocean. The symbol then reads Iammil aliau, the
“King’s country,” the “kingdom.”

But how do you make your rendering accord with the
meaning given to the character by Bishop Ban da ? I fancy I
hear our learned Americanists asking ; and I answer, In a very
simple manner, knowing as I do the genius of the Maya people
and their language.

The ancient armorial escutcheon of the country still exists on
the western facade of the “ sanctuary ” at Uxmal, and in the
bas-reliefs carved on the memorial monu-
ment of Prince Coll at Chicken. The
emblem represented on said escutcheon
scarcely needs explanation. It is easily
read U-luuinil kin, the “ Land of the
Sun.”

The kings of Mayach, like those
of Egypt, Chaldea, India, China, Peru,
etc., took upon themselves the title of “ Children of the Sun,”
and, in a boasting spirit, that of “the Strong, the Vigorous
Sun.” Kin is the Maya word for sun. But kin is also the
title of the highpriest of the sun. As in Egypt and many
other civilized countries, so in Mayach, the king was, at
the same time, chief of the state and of the religion, as in
our times the Queen in England, the Czar in Bussia, the Sultan
in Turkey, etc. The title Yax-kin may therefore have been
applied, among the Mayas, to the king and to the kingdom;

INTRODUCTION.

xlvii

and my rendering of the symbol VoV|| does not conflict with
that of Landa. fcQ:y_|

In the tableau the Maya Empire is portrayed by the beb —
a tree with the trunk full of thorns. The trunk is the image of
the chain of mountains that traverses the whole country from
north to south. There dwelt the masters of the earth, the
Volcanoes. They gave it life, power, and strength. This
chain is, as it were, its backbone. It terminates at the Isthmus
of Darien, to the south. This is why the tree is planted

in the character \ kan, that Landa tells us was the name

for south anciently.1 At the north, the branch of the tree
extends eastward, that is, to the right of the trunk. This
branch, the peninsula of Yucatan, is represented by this

symbol

a slight difference in
placed in the verti-
position, against the

pV). which, with but
the drawing, is the same as that
cal legend, in an inverted
trunk of the tree, by which the author has designated the
whole country, calling it u Ma yach, the “ land of the shoot,”
the “land of the veretrum ,” from the name of the peninsula
that seems to have been the seat of the government of the
Maya Empire.

The motive for the slight change in the drawing is easily
explained. The peninsula jutting out into the sea from the
mainland, as a shoot, a branch from the trunk of the tree, is in-
dicated by the representation of a yach, a vere- brum,

the base of which rests on the sign of land ma;

or also of a shoot, projecting beyond two /^Nimix, symbols
of two basins of water — that is, of the Mexican Gulf

and the Caribbean Sea — that are on each side of it. The
whole hieroglyph, name of the peninsula, reads therefore
1 Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan , chap, xxxiv., p. 206.

slviii

INTRODUCTION.

u-Mayach, the place of the ancestor’s veretrum , or of the
shoot of the tree.

These two imix differ somewhat in shape. The imix
is meant to designate the Caribbean Sea, the eastern
part of which being opened to the waves of the ocean
is indicated by the wavy line AWvV\, emblem of water. In
this instance it may also denote the mountains in the islands,

that close it,
other imix

as it were, toward the rising sun. The
v,|| stands for the Gulf of Mexico, a medi-
terranean sea, completely land-locked, with a small entrance
formed by the peninsula of Florida and that of Yucatan,
and commanded by the island of Cuba. It is well to notice
that, as has been already said, some of the signs in the hori-
zontal legend are the same as those in the vertical legend,
but placed in an inverse position with regard to one an-
other. This is as it should naturally be. Of course, the
particular names of the various localities in the country are
somewhat different, and the signs indicating their position
with reference to the cardinal points are not the same.

The symbol (j^) imix, for instance, of the Mexican Gulf
is placed in the vertical legend to the left, that is to the west,
of the imix [ M image of the Caribbean Sea, as it should
certainly be if we look at the map of Central America
from the south, when it is apparent that the Gulf of Mexico
lies to the westward of the Caribbean Sea On the

other hand, if we enter the country from the north, the
Gulf of Mexico will be to the right, and the Caribbean Sea to
the left, of the traveller, just as the Maya hierogrammatist
placed them in the horizontal legend,

To return to the character in which the foot of the tree
is planted. Kan not only means “south,” as we have just

INTRODUCTION.

xlix

seen, but it has many other acceptations — all conveying the
idea of might and power. It is a variation of can,

“serpent.” The serpent, with inflated breast,
suggested by the contour of the Maya Empire, was adopted as
a symbol of the same. Its name became that of the dynasty
of the Maya rulers, and their totem. We see it sculptured
on the walls of the temples and palaces raised by them. In
Mayacli, in Egypt, in China, in India, in Peru, and many
other places the image of the serpent was the badge of royalty.
It formed part of the headdress of the kings ; it was embroid-
ered on their royal garments.1 Khan is still the title of the
kings of Tartary, Burmak, etc., that of the governors of prov-
inces in Afghanistan, Persia, and other countries in central
Asia.

That the tree was also meant by the author of

the Troano MS. J ( as symbol of the Maya Empire,

there can be
takes pains to

no doubt. He himself

uuc

inform us of the fact,

Beb uaacal (the beb has sprung up) between r° °-
luumilob, the seven countries • • ® • of Can.

The sign I \ is painted red in the original, to indicate the
arable land, kancab. I > was the symbol of land, coun-

try, among the Mayas, as with the Egyptians; but the former
used it also as numerical for five, to which, in this case, must
be added the two units O O . So we have seven fertile lands.

The four black dots • • • ® are the numerical four, and
another ideographic sign for the name of the country — Can,
‘ ‘ serpent. ’ ’ This
tree, like the sign
kingdom. They

is why it is placed at the foot of the
at the top to signify that it is the
are juxtaposed to the character W

1 Wilkinson, Customs and Manners , vol. i., p. 163 (illust.).

1

INTRODUCTION.

kan, also, to denote its geographical position. It will be
noticed that this sign was omitted in the horizontal legend, as
it should be, since kan is the word for “ south; ” but it has
been replaced by ix (OQ\ (“ north,”) which sign has been in-
corporated with the vQ/ sign, beb, thus to show

that this is the northern part of 'C' the 'O' tree —
that is, of the country.

There remains to be -JUL explained what may be con-
sidered, in the present instance, the most important

character of the tableau, since it is the original name

given, in the most remote ages, to that part of the Maya
Empire known on our maps as the peninsula of Yucatan. It
reads, Mayacli, the “land just sprung,” the “primitive
land,” the “hard land.” The symbol itself is an ideographic
representation of the peninsula and its surroundings, as will
be shown.

The reason that caused it to be adopted by the learned men
of Mayacli as symbol for the name of their country is indeed
most interesting. It clearly explains its etymology, and also
gives us a knowledge of the scope of their scientific attain-
ments— among these their perfect understanding of the forces
that produced the submersion of many lands, and the upheaval
of the peninsula and other places; a thorough acquaintance
with the geography of the continent wherein they dwelt, and
of the lands adjacent in the ocean; that even of the ill-fated
island mentioned by Plato,1 its destruction by earthquakes,
and the sad doom of its inhabitants that remained, an histor-
ical fact, preserved in the annals treasured in the Egyptian
temples as well as in those of the Mayas. May we not assume
that the identity of traditions indicates that at some epoch,
1 Plato, Dialogues , “Timseus,” ii., 517.

INTRODUCTION.

li

more or less remote, intimate relations and communications
must have existed between the inhabitants of the valley of
the Nile and the peoples dwelling in the “ Lands of the West ” ?

We shall begin the interpretation

of the symbol
that Landa tells

with the analysis of the character
us 1 stood, among the Maya writers, either for ma, me, or mo.
Some would-be critics among the Americanists, our contempo-
raries,2 have accused the bishop of ignorance regarding the
writing system of the Mayas, or of incompetency in transmit-
ting to us the true value of this character, simply because he
gave it a plurality, or what seems to be a plurality, of meanings.

What right, it may be asked, have we to dispute the fact
asserted by Bishop Landa, that in his time, among

the Mayas, the character was equivalent to ma

and perhaps to me and mo ? Had he not better opportunity
than any of us for knowing it? Did not the chiefs of the
Franciscan Order in Yucatan consider it a prime duty to
become thoroughly versed, and have all their missionaries
instructed, in the language of the natives to whom they had
to preach the gospel, and, after converting them to Chris-
tianity, to administer the sacraments of their Church? Were
they not scholars, men conversant with grammatical studies ?
Who hut they have reduced to grammatical rules the Maya

1 Landa, Relation de las Cosas de Yucatan, cli. xli., p. 322.
a Heinrich Wiittke, De^ en&tehung der Schrift, S. 205, quoted and whose
opinions are indorsed by Professor Charles Rau, chief of the archaeological
division of the National Museum (Smithsonian Institution) at Washington.
Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge, chap, v., No. 331. “The Palenque
Tablet in the United States National Museum.” Dr. Ed. Seler, Tiber die
Bedeutung des Zahlzeichens 20 in der Mayaschrift , in Verhandlungen der Ber-
liner Qesellschaft fur Anthropologie, etc., 1887, S. 237-241. J. J. Vallentini,
“ The Landa Alphabet a Spanish Fabrication,” in Proceedings of the
American Antiquarian Society, April, 1880.

lii

INTRODUCTION.

language for the benefit of students ? Are we not told that
Bishop Landa acquired a great proficiency in it? Was he
not for many years a teacher of it ? Has he not composed a
grammar of that tongue for the use of his pupils? What
right, then, have men in our age, innocent of all knowledge of
Maya language, even as spoken to-day, however great may
be their attainments in any other branch of learning, to pass
judgment on, worse still, to condemn, a learned teacher of
that language, charging him with ignorance and incompetency,
simply because he assigns various meanings to a character ?

Perhaps Mr. Champollion le jeune will be branded in like
manner, because he tells us that the Egyptians represented
indifferently the vowels A, A, 0, A by the character 1
“We see effectively,” says the learned discoverer of *
Egyptian alphabet, “ the leaf or feather as their homo-
phones, to mean, according to the occasion, ani, an I, an E ,
and even an 0 , as the ^ (aleph) of the Hebrews. So do we
find in the Egyptian tongue, written with Coptic letters, a
dialect that uses indifferently a for o, where the other two
write o only; and e where the other two write a. We have
in the same dialect a /3 s and o/3s — Sitire • a us — “reed,”

? 1
the

“ rush , ” Juncus. 2

1 Champollion le jeune, Precis du Systeme liieroglypliique des Anciens Egyp-
tians, p. Ill, Paris, 1828.

2 Ake is likewise a word belonging to the Maya language. As in
Egyptian, it means a “reed,” a “rush,” a “withe.” It was the name of
an ancient city the ruins of which still exist near Tixkokob, in Yucatan,
on the property of Dn. Alvaro Peon. It was also a family name, as can
be seen (in Appendix, note ii.) from a baptismal certificate signed by
Father Cogolludo, taken from an old baptismal register found in the
convent of Cacalchen. The original is now in possession of the Right Rev.
Dn. Crecencio Carillo y Ancona, present bishop of Yucatan, who has kindly
allowed me to make a photographic copy of Father Diego de Cogolludo’s
autograph.

INTR OD UGTION.

liii

Let us resume our explanation. We have found that
in re- mote times ma Avas the meaning of the char-

acter^*-' Sf\V Let us try to analyze its component parts in
its relation to the name Mayacli, and its origin as an alphabetic

character. It is easy to see that it is composed of the
geometrical figure |"""j flanked on each side by the symbol
imix. Who can fail to see that this figure bears a strik-
ing resemblance to the Egyptian sign \ that Dr. Young
translates ma,1 and Mr. Champollion asserts to be simply the
letter AT?2 By a strange coincidence, if coincidence there be,
the meaning of the syllable ma is the same in Maya and Egyp-
tian; that is, in both languages it signifies “ earth,” “ place.”
“The Avord rono? — £ place,’ ‘site,’” says Mr. Champollion,
“of the Greek text of the Rosetta inscription is expressed in
the hieroglyphic part of the tablet by an oavI for M, and the
extended arm for A, Avhich gives the Coptic Avord jxa (ma)y
£ site,’ £ place.’ ” 3

We see that in the Troano MS. the author represented the
earth by the figure of an old man,4 “ the grandfather,” mam ;
hence, by apocope, ma, “earth,” “site,” “country,” “place.”

Ma, in the Maya, is also a particle used, as in the Greek
' language, in affirmation or negation according to its position
before or after the verb. Another curious coincidence Avorthy
of notice is that the sign of negation is abso- lutely

the same for the Mayas as for the Egyptians, * i—*. Bun-
sen 5 says that the latter called it nen. That Avord in Maya

’Dr. Young, “Egypt,” Encyclopedia Britannica , Edinburgh edition,
yoI. iv.

2 Champollion le jeune, Precis du Systetne Meroglyphique, etc., p. 34.

3 Ibid., p. 125.

4 Troano MS., vol. i., Maya text, part ii. , plates xxv.-xxvii., et passim.
6 Bunsen, Egyjd's Place in Universal History, Vocabulary word Nen.

liv

INTRODUCTION.

means “mirror; ” ancl Ken-ha, “the mirror of water,” was
anciently one of the names of the Mexican Gulf. This also
may be a coincidence.

No one has ever told us why the learned hierogrammatists
of Egypt gave to the sign \ the value of ma. No one can ;
because nobody knows the origin of the Egyptians, of their
civilization, nor the country where it grew from infancy to
maturity. They themselves, although they invariably pointed
toward the setting sun when questioned concerning the father-
land of their ancestors, were ignorant of who they were and
whence they came. Nor did they know who was the inventor
of their alphabet. “ The Egyptians, who, no doubt, had for-
gotten, or had never known the name of the inventor of their
phonetic signs, at the time of Plato honored with it one of
their gods of the second order, Thoth, who likewise was held
as the father of all sciences and arts.” 1

It is evident that we can learn nothing from the Egyptians
of the motives that prompted the inventor of their alphabetical
characters to select that peculiar figure / to represent the
letter M, initial of their word Ma. The Mayas, we are in-
formed,2 made use of the identical sign, and ascribed to it the
same signification. We may perhaps find out from them the
reasons that induced their learned men to choose this strange
geometrical figure as part of their symbol for Ma, radical of
Mayach, name of the peninsula of Yucatan. Who knows
but that the same cause which prompted them to adopt it sug-
gested it also to the mind of the Egyptian hierogrammatist ?
Many will, no doubt, object that this may all be pure coinci-
dence— the two peoples lived so far apart. Very true. I do

' Champollion, Precis du Systeme Hieroglyphique , p. 355.

a Lauda, lielacionde las Cosas de Yucatan , chap, xli., p. 322.

INTRODUCTION.

lv

not pretend it is not accidental. I merely suggest a possi-
bility, that, added to other facts, may later become a probabil-
ity, if not a certainty. In the course of these pages we shall
meet with so many concurrent facts , as having existed both in
Mayacli and Egypt, that it will become difficult to reconcile
the mind to the belief that they are, altogether, the identical
working of the human intelligence groping its way out of bar-
barism to civilization, as some have more than once hinted,
as a last resort, in their inability to deny the striking concord-
ance of these facts.

We are told that in the origin of language names were
given to places, objects, tribes, individuals, or animals, in ac-
cordance with some peculiar inherent properties possessed by
them, such as shape, voice, customs, etc., and to countries on
account of their climate, geological formation, geographical
configuration, or any other characteristic ; that is, by onomato-
poeia. This assertion seems to find confirmation in the sym-
bol j^| of the Mayas ; and the name Mayacli forms no
exception to the rule.

In fact, if we draw round the Yucatan peninsula a geometri-
cal figure enclosing it, and composed of straight lines, by follow-
ing the direction of its eastern, northern, and western
coasts, it is easy to see that the drawing so made
will unavoidably be the symbol fj.

That fact alone might not be deemed proof sufficient to
affirm that the Mayas, in reality, did derive their sign for Ma
from this cause, since to complete it, as transmitted by

Landa, the character yillW imix 1 is wanting on each side.

It does not require a very great effort of the imagina-
tion to understand what this sign is meant for. A single
1 Landa, Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan , p. 204.

lvi

INTRODUCTION.

glance will suffice to satisfy us that the drawing is intended to
represent a woman’s breast, with its nipple and areola. Any
one inclined to doubt that such is the case will soon he con-
vinced by examining the female figures portrayed in the Tro-
ano MS.1

Yes, imix is the breast, the bosom, called to-day simply im,
the word having suffered the apocope of its desinence ix, which
is a copulative conjunction and the sign of the feminine
gender.

But bosom is also an enclosed place.2 3 We say “ the bosom of
the deep,” le sein de la terre, el seno de los mares d It was
in that sense, indeed, that the Maya sages, who invented the
characters and symbols with which to give their thoughts a
material form, made use of it. This fact becomes apparent if

1 Troano MS., part 1, plate xxii. See Appendix, note iii.

The reader may perhaps desire to know the mean-
ing of this picture. Alas! it teaches us that the
powers that govern nature were as indifferent to the
lot of man in remote ages as they are to-day ; that
no creatures, whatever they be, have for them any
importance beyond their acting of the role which
they are called upon to play momentarily in the
great drama of creation.

The figures are anthropomorphous representations
—the kneeling, supplicating female, of the “Laud of Mu;” the male, of the
“Lord of the Seven Fires ” (volcanoes), Men kak uuc. Mu, in an im-
ploring posture, comes to inform him that one of his volcanoes has caused
the basin at the edge of her domains to rise, and has converted the coun-
try into marshy ground. She speaks thus : “ Ak lia pe be be imik
Kaan” (that is, “The basin has risen rapidly, and the land has become
marshy”). Men Kak uuc, for all consolation, replies : “Imix be Ak
Mu ? ” (“So the basin in rising has caused the land to become marshy,
Mu?”) This is evidently the record of a geological event — the rising of
the part of the bottom of the ocean near Mu.

3 Webster, English Dictionary.

3 Diccionario Espaflol por una sociedad literaria.

INTRODUCTION.

lvii

we examine the drawing still more closely, and notice the four
lines drawn in the lower part, as if to shade it. If we con-
sider each line as equivalent to -one unit, their sum represents
the numerical four — can — in the Maya language. We have
already seen that can also means ‘ ‘ serpent, ’ ’ one of

the symbols for the sea, canali. Then the two y/Tly imix
are placed, one on each side of the geometrical figure |^|
image of the peninsula, to typify the two gulfs whose waters
bathe its shores — on the left that of Mexico, on the right
the Caribbean Sea. That this was the idea of the invent-
ors of the symbol is evident; for as the Gulf of Mexico is
smaller than the Caribbean Sea, and the western coast line
of Yucatan shorter than the eastern, so in the drawing the
imix on the left of the figure is smaller than the imix
on the right, and the line on the left shorter than that on the
right.

This explanation being correct, it clearly proves, as much as

that nature can be demonstrated,
ovres its origin, among the Mayas,
to the configuration of the Yucatan peninsula, and its posi-
tion between two gulfs, and that the inventors were acquainted
with their extent and contour.

Mot a few, even among well-read people, often express a
doubt as to the ancient Mayas having possessed accurate in-
formation respecting the existence of the various continents and
islands that form the habitable portions of the earth ; question-
ing likewise if they were acquainted even with the geography
and configuration of the lands in which they lived ; seeming to
entertain the idea that the science of general geography
belongs exclusively to modern times.

The name Maya, found among all civilized nations of

a proposition of
that the character

it ^

lviii

INTRODUCTION.

antiquity, in Asia, Africa, Europe, as well as in America,
always with the same meaning, should be sufficient to prove
that in very remote ages the Mayas had intimate relations
with the inhabitants of the lands situated on those continents,
were therefore great travellers, and must, perforce, have been
acquainted with the general geography of the planet.

We must not lose sight of the fact that we know but very
little indeed of the ancient American civilizations. The annals
of the learned men of Mayach having been either hidden
or destroyed, it is impossible for us to judge of the scope of
their scientific attainments. That they were expert architects,
the monuments built by them, that have resisted for ages the
disintegrating action of the elements i and that of vegetation,
bear ample testimony. The analysis of the gnomon discovered
by the writer in the ruins of the ancient city of Mayapan,
in 1880, proves conclusively that they had made advance in the
science of astronomy. They knew, as well as Ave do, how to
calculate the latitudes and longitudes; the epochs of the sol-
stices and of the equinoxes; the division of time into solar
years of three hundred and sixty -five days and six hours; that
of the year into twelve months of thirty days, to Avhich they
added fi\Te supplementary days that Avere left without name
and regarded as inauspicious. During these, as on the third
day of the Epact among the Egyptians, all business was sus-
pended; they did not even go out of their houses, lest some
misfortune should befall them. All those calculations required,
of course, a thorough knowledge of algebra, geometry, trigo-
nometry, and the other branches of mathematics. That they
were no mean draughtsmen and sculptors, the fresco paintings,
the inscriptions and bas-reliefs carved on marble, that are still
extant, bear unimpeachable testimony.

INTRODUCTION.

fix

The study of the Troano MS. will convince any one that the
learned author of that book, and no doubt many of his asso-
ciates, had not only a thorough knowledge of the geographical
configuration of the Western Continent and the adjacent islands,
but also of their geological formation. The “Lands of the

West ” are represented by these symbols,

which some have translated A than. 1 They Wa mm
leave no room for doubting that the ^ ^

Mayas were acquainted with the eastern coasts of said con-
tinent, from the bay of Saint Lawrence in latitude north 48° to
Cape St. Roque, in Brazil, in latitude south 5° 28'. The two signs
(j^ or Q of the locality placed under the symbols repre-
sent the two large regions of the Western Conti-
nent, bTorth and South America ; whilst the signs
and fcfij seen within the curve figuring the northern basin
of the Atlantic, stand for the Land of Mu, that extensive
island now submerged under the waves of the ocean.

The sign as well as this that forms the upper

part of the symbol, is familiar to all students of Egyptology.
These will tell you that the first meant, in the Egyptian
hieroglyphs, “ the sun setting on the horizon,” and the second,
“ the mountainous countries in the west.”

As to the conventional posture given to all the statues of
the rulers and other illustrious personages in Mayach it con-
firms the fact of their geographical attainments. If we com-
pare, for instance, the outlines of the effigy of Prince Coll
discovered by the author at CliicLien-Itza in 1875, with

O

1 Kingsborough, Mexican Antiquities , vol. i., and Comment, vol. v. Atlan
is not a Maya but a Nahuatl word. It is composed of the two primitives
Atl, “water,” and Tlan, “near,” “between.” The Maya name for the
symbol is Alau.

lx

INTRODUCTION.

the contour of the eastern coasts of the American continent,

belly of the statue, between the hands, would then be symbol-
ical of the Gulf of Mexico and of the Caribbean Sea.1

Again, the outlines of the)profile of the statue may also
represent with great accuracy the eastern shores of the Maya
Empire — the head being the peninsula of Yucatan, anciently
the seat of the government; the knees would then correspond
to Cape Gracias d Dios , in Nicaragua; the feet to the Isthmus
of Darien, the southern boundary of the empire; and the shal-
low basin on the belly would in that case stand for the Bay of
Honduras, part of the Caribbean Sea. The Antilles were
known to the Mayas as the £ ‘ Land of the Scorpion, ’ 5 Zinaan,
and were represented by the Maya hierogrammatist by the
figure of that arachnid, or in his cursive writing by this
other /■' "v 2 proof evident that he was as well acquainted
as we are with the general outlines of the archipelago.

1 Various other statues discovered by the writer at Cliiclien-Itza have
the same position, and hold a basin on the belly, between their hands.
Others, again, are to be seen in the “National Museum” of Mexico, all
having the same conventional attitude, with the head turned to the right
shoulder.

2 Troano MS., part 11, plates vi., vii.

In the tableau, plate v., which forms the middle section of plate xiii.
in the second part of the Troano MS., the author describes the occurrence
of a certain phenomenon of volcanic origin, whose focus of action was lo-
cated in the volcanoes of the island of Trinidad, figured by the image of a

placing the head at New-
foundland, the knees at
Cape St. Roque, and the
feet at Cape Horn, it is

% easy to perceive that they
are identical. The shal-
low basin held on the

» • t < •

Page lx.

Plate V.

INTRODUCTION.

lxi

The ancient Maya sages sometimes likened the earth to a
caldron, cum, because as nutriment is cooked in such utensil,
so also all that exists on the surface of the earth is first elab-
orated in its bosom. Sometimes, likewise, on account of its
rotundity, and because it contains the germs of all things, they
compared the earth to a calabash, kum, full of seeds. These
similes seem to have been favorite ones, since they made fre-
quent use of them in illustrating their explanations of the
geological phenomena which have convulsed our planet. Per-
haps also the second reason was what caused them to generally
adopt a circular shape for the characters they invented to give
material expression to the multitudinous conceptions of their
mind (unless it be that they gave that form to these charac-
ters from that of their skull, containing the brain, organ of
thought). The fact is that their symbol for the name May-
acli, of the peninsula of Yucatan, affects the shape of a cala-
bash, with its tendril just sprouted — a yach or ach, as the
natives call a young sprout.

What can have induced the hierogrammatists to select a

hand at the end of the scorpion’s tail. The rope that connects said hand
with the raised right forefoot of the deer indicates that not only the seis-
mic action was felt throughout the length of the Caribbean Sea, from south
to north, but that it produced the upheaval of some locality in the northern
parts of said sea. Beginning, naturally, the reading of the legend by the
column on the right, we find that he describes the phenomenon in the fol-
lowing words: “ Oc ik ix canab ezab nab” (that is, “A handful
(small quantity) of gases, escaped from the crater, caused canab to show
the palm of his hand ”). According to its location this raised forefoot may
be the upheaval of the large volcano that looms high in the air in the middle
of the island of Roatan, the largest of the group called G-uanacas in the Bay
of Honduras, where the Mayas met the Spaniards for the first time in 1502.
The second column reads : “ Cib canalcunte lam a ti aliau ©•”
(“ The lava having filled (raised) the submerged places, the master of the
basin,” etc.) (The last sign being completely obliterated, we cannot know
what the author had said.)

Ixii

INTRODUCTION.

germinating calabash as part of the name of their country,
remains to be explained.

If we examine the map of the lands back of the peninsula,
it will not be difficult to discover the idea uppermost in the
mind of the draughtsman at the time of composing the sym-
bol ; and to see that he was as thoroughly acquainted with the
geography of the interior and the western shores of those
parts of the continent, as with the configuration of its eastern
coasts; also that their geological formation was no mystery
to him. cn

By comparing this symbol with the shape of the

countries immediately south of \2/ the peninsula, notwith-
standing the changes that are continually taking place in the
contour of the coast lines, particularly at the mouth of rivers,1
by the action of currents, etc., we cannot fail to recognize that

the hierogrammatist
assumed it to be the
sprout of a calabash,
the body of which was
represented by the
lands comprised with-
in the segment of
a circle having for
radius the half of a line, parallel to the eastern and western
shores of the peninsula, starting from Point Lagartos, on the
northern coast of Yucatan, draAvn across the country to the shore
of the Pacific Ocean on the south. For if, from the middle of
said line as centre, we describe a circumference, part of it will
follow exactly the bent of the coast line of said ocean, opposite
the northern shore of the peninsula ; another part will cross the
1 Charles Lyell, Principles of Geology, vol. i., chap, iii., p. 252.

INTRODUCTION.

lxiii

Isthmus of Tehuantepec, the northern frontier of the Maya
Empire, ancl, if carried overland on the south until it intersect
the seaboard of the Bay of Honduras, the segment of the circle
thus formed resembles the bottom of a calabash, and the
peninsula the sprout.

Analyzing the character yet more closely, we see a line of
dots on each side of the base of the sprout, the root of
which is made to repose on the curled figure intended
to represent the curling of the smoke as it ascends into
the air from the crater of the volcanoes among the mountains,
indicated, as on our maps, by the etchings on both sides of the
body of the symbol. These tokens prove that the designer
knew the geological formation of the country in which he
lived ; and that the peninsula had been upheaved from the bot-
tom of the sea by the action of volcanic forces, whose centre
of activity was in his time, as it still is, in the mountains of
Guatemala, far away in the interior of the continent. By
placing the small end of the sprout deep into the figure on
the focus of the volcanic action, on the curling line of the
smoke, and by the dots, on both sides of the root of the sprout,
he shows that he knew that the upheaval of the peninsula was
effected by the expansive force of the gases, which produce
earthquakes by their pressure on the uneven under surface
of the superficial strata, too homogeneous to permit their
escape.1

Thus it is that we come to learn from the pen of an ancient
Maya philosopher that the name of his people, once upon a
time so broadly scattered over the face of the earth, had its

1 Sir Charles Lyell, Principles of Geology , chap, xxxii., xxxiii. Augustus
Le Plougeon, “The Causes of Earthquakes,” Van Nostrand's Engineering
Magazine, vol. 6, Nos. 41, 42.

lxiv

INTRODUCTION.

origin in that of the country they inhabited, a place situated
in the northern tropical parts of the "Western Continent,
in that “ Land of Kui,” 1 that mysterious home of their
ancestors, where the Egyptians thought the souls of their
departed friends went to dwell, which was known to its inhab-
itants as Mayacli, a word that in their language meant
the “first land,” the “land just sprouted,” also the “hard
land,” the “terra firma,” as we learn from the sign f') 'of
aspiration, hardness, coagulation, placed each side of the
body of the calabash, to indicate, perhaps, the rocky forma-
tion of its soil, and that it had withstood the awful cata-
clysms which swept from the face of the earth the

Land of Mu and many other places with their popu-

lations. The priests of Egypt, Chaldea, and India preserved
the remembrance of their destruction in the archives of their
temples, as did those of Mayacli on the other side of the
ocean.

The latter did not content themselves with recording the
relation in their treatises on geology and history, but in order
to preserve its memory for future generations they caused it to
be carved on a stone tablet which they fastened to the wall in
one of the apartments of their college at Chidien, where
it is yet seen. The natives have perpetuated, from genera-
tion to generation, for centuries, the name of that inscrip-
tion. They still call it Akab-aib, the awful, the tenebrous
writing.

1 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs of Ancient Egyptians, vol.
iii., p. 70. “Kui Land." according to the Maya language the “land of
the gods,” the birthplace of the Goddess Maya, “the mother of the gods ”
and of men, the feminine energy of Brahma by whose union with Brahma
all things were produced.

2 Lauda, Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan , chap, xli., p. 322.

INTRODUCTION.

lxy

The history of that terrible catastrophe, recounted in vari-
ous ways in the sacred books of the different nations among
which vestiges of the presence of the Mayas are to be found,
continues to be the appalling tradition of a great portion of
mankind.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

We infer the spirit of the nation in great
measure from the language, which is a sort of
monument to which each forcible individual in
a course of many hundred years has contrib-
uted a stone.

(Ralpth Waldo Emerson,

Essays, XX. , ‘ ‘ Nominalist and Realist. ”)

In ages long lost in the abyss of time, when Aryan colonists
had not yet established their first settlements on the banks
of the river Saraswati in the Punjab, and the primitive Egyp-
tian settlers in the valley of the Nile did not fancy, even in
their most hopeful day-dreams, that their descendants would
become the great people whose civilization was to be the
cradle of that of Europe, there existed on the Western Conti-
nent a nation— the Maya — that had attained to a high degree
of culture in arts and sciences.

Y almiki, in his beautiful epic the ‘ ‘ Kamayana, ’ ’ which is
said to have served as model to Homer’s “ Iliad,” tells us that
the Mayas were mighty navigators, whose ships travelled
from the western to the eastern ocean, from the southern to
the northern seas, in ages so remote that £ £ the sun had not
yet risen above the horizon; ” 1 that, being likewise great war-
riors, they conquered the southern parts of the Ilindostanee
1 Y almiki, Ramayana, Hippolyte Fauche’s translation, vol. L, p. 353.

2

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

peninsula, ancl established themselves there; that, being also
learned architects, they built great cities and palaces.1 These
Mayas became known in after times under the names of Da-
navas,2 and are regarded by modern historians as aborigines
of the country, or Ndgcis as we shall see later on. Of these
J. Talboys Wheeler in his “History of India” says:3 “The
traditions of the Ndgds are obscure in the extreme ; they point,
however, to the existence of an ancient Ndgd empire in the
Dekkan, having its capital in the modern town of Hagpore,
and it may be conjectured that, prior to the Aryan invasion, the
Ndgd rajas exercised an imperial power over the greatest part
of the Punjab and Hindostan. . . . "The Ndgds, or serpent

worshippers, who lived in crowded cities and were famous for
their beautiful women and exhaustless treasures, were doubt-

1 Valmiki, Ramayana, vol. ii., p. 26. “In olden times there was a prince
of the Danavas, a learned magician endowed with great power ; his name
was Maya. It was he who, by magic art, constructed this golden grotto.
He was the mcvakarma (“architect of the gods ”) of the principal Danavas,
and this superb palace of solid gold is the work of his hands.”

Maya is mentioned in the Mahabharata as one of the six individuals
■who were allowed to escape with their life at the burning of the forest of
Khandava, whose inhabitants were all destroyed.

We read in John Campbell Oman’s work, The Great Indian Epics (p.
118) : “ How, Maya was the chief architect of the Danavas, and in grati-
tude for his preservation built a wonderful sabha, or hall, for the Pandavas,
the most beautiful structure of its kind in the whole world.”

Danava = Tan-ha-ba : Tan, “ midst; ” lxa, “water; ” ba, a com-
positive particle used to form reflexive desinences; “they who live in the
midst of the water ” — navigators.

This Maya etymon accords perfectly with what Professor John Camp-
bell Oman in his work The Great Indian Epics, “Mahabharata” (p. 133),
says with regard to the dwelling-place of the Danavas :

“ Arjuna carried war against a tribe of the Danavas, the Nivata-Kava-
chas, who were very powerful, numbering thirty millions, whose principal
city was Hiranyapura. They dwelt in the womb of the ocean.” (The name
Hiranyapura means in Maya “ dragged in the middle of the water jar.”)

3 J. Talboys Wheeler, History of India, vol. iii. , pp. 56-57.

■

Page 3.

Plate VI.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

3

less a civilized people living under an organized government.
Indeed, if any inference can be drawn from the epic legends
it would be that, prior to the Aryan conquest, the Naga rajas
were ruling powers, who had cultivated the arts of luxury to
an extraordinary degree, and yet succeeded in maintaining a
protracted struggle against the Aryan invaders.”

Like the English of to-day, the Maya's sent colonists all
over the earth. These carried with them the language, the
traditions, the architecture, astronomy,1 cosmogony, and other
sciences — in a word, the civilization of their mother country.
It is this civilization that furnishes us with the means of ascer-
taining the role played by them in the universal history of the
world. We find vestiges of it, and of their language, in all
historical nations of antiquity in Asia, Africa, and Europe.
They are still frequent in the countries where they flourished.

It is easy to follow their tracks across the Pacific to India,
by the imprints of their hands dipped in a red liquid and
pressed against the walls of temples, caves, and other places
looked upon as sacred, to implore the benison of the gods — also
by their name, Maya, given to the banana tree, symbol of
their country,2 whose broad leaf is yet a token of hospitality

1 H. T. Colebrooke, “Memoirs on the Sacred Books of India,” Asiatic
Pesearches, vol. ii., pp. 369-476, says: “Maya is considered as the author
of the Sourya-Siddhanta, the most ancient treatise on astronomy in India.
He is represented as receiving his science from a partial incarnation of
the Sun.” This work, on which all the Indian astronomy is founded, was
discovered at Benares by Sir Robert Chambers. Mr. Samuel Davis partly
translated it, particularly those sections which relate to the calculation
of eclipses. It is a work of very great antiquity, since it is attributed to a
Maya author whose astronomical rules show that he was well acquainted
with trigonometry ( Asiatic Researches , vol. ii., pp. 245-249), proving that
abstruse sciences were cultivated in those remote ages, before the invasion
of India by the Aryans. (See Appendix, note vi.)

2 Codex Cortesianus, plates 7 and 8.

4

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

among the natives of the islands ; 1 then along the shores of
the Indian Ocean and those of the Persian Gulf to the mouth
of the Euphrates; up that river to Babylon, the renowned
City of the Sun ; thence across the Syrian desert to the valley
of the Nile, where they finally settled, and gave the name of
their mother country to a district of Nubia, calling it Maiu
or Maioo.2 After becoming firmly established in Egypt they
sent colonists to Syria. These reached as far north as Mount
Taurus, founding on their way settlements along the coast of
the Mediterranean, in Sidon, Tyre, the valley of the Orontes,
and again on the banks of the Euphrates, to the north of
Babylon, in Mesopotamia.

Mayacli (that is, “the land that first arose from the
bottom of the deep ”) was the name of the empire whose sov-
ereigns bore the title of Can (serpent), spelt to-day khan in
Asiatic countries.3 This title, given by the Mayas to their
rulers, was derived from the contour of the empire, that of
a serpent with inflated breast, which in their books and their
sculptures they represented sometimes with, sometimes without
wings, as the Egyptians did the urceus, symbol of their coun-
try. kElian says : “It was the custom of the Egyptian kings
to wear asps of different colors in their crowns, this reptile

1 Captain J. Cook, Voyage among the Islands of the Pacific.

2 Henry Brugsch-Bey, History of Egypt under the Pharaohs , vol. i., p. 363 ;
vol. ii., p. 78 (note) ancl p. 174. The name is comprised in the list of the
lands conquered by Thotmes III., and in the list found in a sepulchral
chamber in Nubia.

3 Khan is the title of the kings of Tartary, Burmah, Afghanistan, and
other Asiatic countries. The flag of China is yellow, with a green dragon
in the centre. That of the Angles also bore as symbol a dragon or serpent:
that of the Saxons, according to Urtti-scind, a lion, a dragon, and over
them a flying eagle ; that of the Manclious, a golden dragon on a crimson
field; that of the Huns, a dragon. Their chief was called Kakhan — short
for Khan-Khan.

Page 4.

Plate VII.

Page 5.

Plate VIII.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 5

being emblematic of the invincible power of royalty ; ” 1 but
he does not inform us why it was selected as such an emblem,
nor does Plutarch, although he also tells us that it was the
symbol of royalty.2 Pausanias8 affirms that the asp was
held sacred throughout Egypt, and at Omphis particularly
enjoyed the greatest honor. Phylarchus states the same
thing.4

Still the Egyptian sages must have had very strong motives
for thus honoring this serpent and causing it to play so con-
spicuous a part in the mysteries of their religion. Was it per-
chance in commemoration of the mother country of their
ancestors, beyond the sea, toward the setting sun ? There the
ancient rulers, after receiving the honors of apotheosis, were
always represented in the monuments as serpents covered with
feathers, the heads adorned with horns, and a flame instead
of a crown; often, also, with simply a crown.

It is well to remember that in Egypt the cerastes , or horned
snakes, were the only serpents, with the asp, that were held as
sacred. Herodotus5 tells us that “when they die they are
buried in the temple of Jupiter, to whom they are reputed
sacred. ’ ’

The Maya Empire comprised all the lands between the
Isthmus of Tehuantepec and that of Darien, known to-day
as Central America. The history of the sovereigns that had
governed it, and of the principal events that had taken place
in the nation, was written in well-bound books of papy-
rus or parchment, covered with highly ornamented wooden

1 .Elian, Nat. An., lib. vi., 33.

2 Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride, S. 74.

3 Pausanias, Besot., c. 21.

1 .<Elian, Nat. An., lib. xvii. 5.

6 Herodotus, lib. ii., Ixxiv.

6

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

boards,1 while the most important occurrences were likewise
carved in stone on the walls of their public edifices, to preserve '
their record in a lasting and indelible manner for the knowledge
of future generations. It is from these sculptured and Avritten
memoirs graven on their palaces at Uxmal and Cliiclieii in
the peninsula of Yucatan, the head of the imperial serpent
and the seat of the government of the Maya Empire, that the
author has learned the history of Queen Moo and her family.

At its southern extremity and on the top of the east Avail
of the tennis court at Chiclien, there is a building that is of
the greatest interest to the archaeologist, the historian, and the
ethnologist ; Avhile the architect may learn from it many useful
lessons. John L. Stephens, who Adsited it in 1812, speaks of
it as a casket containing the most precious jewels of ancient
American art.2

It was a memorial hall erected by order of Queen Mdo,
and dedicated to the memory of her brother-husband, Prince
Coli, an eminent Avarrior. Those paintings so much admired
by Stephens, rivalling the frescos in the tombs of Egypt and
Etruria, or the imagery on the walls of the palaces of Babylon
mentioned by Ezekiel, Avere a pictorial record of the life of
Prince Coll from the time of his youth to that of his death,
and of the events that folloAved it. They thus form a few

: Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan, pp. 44, 316. Cogolludo, Historia de Yu-
cathan, etc., lib. iv., cap. v.

These books were exactly like the holy books now in use in Thibet.
These also are written on parchment strips about eighteen inches long and
four broad, bound with wooden boards, and wrapped up in curiously em-
broidered silk.

Cl F. Gordon Cumming, In the Himalayas and on the Indian Plains,
p. 438.

2 John L. Stephens, Incidents of Travels in Yucatan , vol. ii., p. 310, et
passim.

Page 7.

Plate IX.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 7

pages of the ancient history of the Maya nation, and of the
last days of the Can dynasty.

This interesting edifice is now in ruins. Enough, however,
remains to have enabled the writer to make not only an accu-
rate plan of it, but a restoration perfect in all its details.

After climbing to the top of the wall, that formed a ter-
race six metres wide, levelled and paved with square marble
slabs carefully adjusted, we find a broad stairway composed of
five steps. Ascending these, we stand on a platform, and be-
tween two marble columns each one metre in diameter. The
base of these columns is formed of a single monolith one
metre twenty centimetres high and two metres long, carved in

GROUND PLAN.

the shape of serpent heads with mouth open and tongue pro-
truding. The shaft represents the body of the serpent, emblem
of royalty in Mayach, as it was in Egypt and as it is yet
in many countries of Asia. It is covered with sculptured
feathers, image of the mantle of feathers worn in court cere-
monials by the kings and the highpriests as insignia of their
rank.

Between these columns there was a grand altar supported
by fifteen atlantes, three abreast and five deep, whose faces

8

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

were portraits of friends and relatives of the dead warrior.
On this altar, placed at the door of the inner chamber, they
were wont to make offerings to his manes, just as the Egyp-
tians made oblations of fruits and flowers to the dead on altars
erected at the entrance of the tombs.1 From Papyrus IV., at

the Bulaq Museum, we learn that the making of offerings to
the dead was taught as a moral precept. “ Bring offerings to
thy father and thy mother who rest in the valley of the tombs ;
for he who gives these offerings is as acceptable to the gods
as if they were brought to themselves. Often visit the dead,
so that what thou dost for them, thy son may do for thee. ’ ’ 2

1 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs of Ancient Egyptians,
vol. iii., chap. xvi.

3 Papyrus IV. , Bulaq Museum. Translation by Messrs. Brugsch and E.
de RougS. Published by Mariette.

Page 8.

Plate X.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

9

If we compare this with the precepts of the “ Manava-Dharma-
Sastra — “ The ceremony in honor of the manes is superior, for
the Brahmins, to the worship of the gods, and the offerings to
the gods that take place before the offerings to the manes have
been declared to increase their merits ’ ’ 1 — it will be easy to
see that these teachings must have emanated from the same
school.

This most ancient custom is likewise scrupulously followed
by the Chinese, for whom the worship of the ancestors is as
binding and sacred as that of God himself, whose representatives
they have been for their children while on earth. Confucius
in his book “ Ivhoung-Tseu ” dedicates a whole chapter to the
description of the ceremony in honor of ancestors as practised
twice a year, in spring and autumn,2 and in his book “ Lun-yu ”
he instructs his disciples that “it is necessary to sacrifice to
the ancestors as if they were present.”3 The worship of the
ancestors is paramount in the mind of the Japanese. On the
fifteenth day of the seventh Japanese month a festival is held
in honor of the ancestors, when a repast of fruit and vegeta-
bles is placed before the If ays, or wooden tablets of peculiar
shape, on which are written inscriptions commemorative of the
dead.

Great festivities were held by the Peruvians in honor of the
dead in the month of Aya-marca , a word which means literally
“ carrying the corpses in arms.” These festivities were estab-
lished to commemorate deceased friends and relations. They
were celebrated with tears, mournful songs, plaintive music,
and by visiting the tombs of the dear departed, whose provi-

1 Manava-Dharma-Sastra, lib. iii., Sloka 203, also Slokas 127, 149, 207,
etc., et passim.

2 Confucius, Khoung-Tseu, Tchoung- Young, chap. xix.

3 Ibid., Lun-yu, chap, iii., Sloka 12.

10

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

sion of corn and chicha they renewed through openings arranged
on purpose from the exterior of the tomb to vessels placed
near the body.1

Even to-day the aborigines of Yucatan, Peten, and other
countries in Central America where the Maya language is
spoken, as if in obedience to this affirmation of the Hindoo
legislator — ‘ ‘ The manes accept with pleasure that which is
offered to them in the clearings of the forests, localities natu-
rally pure; on river banks and in secluded places ” 2 — are wont,
at the beginning of November, to hang from the branches of
certain trees in the clearings of the forests, at cross-roads, in
isolated nooks, cakes made of the best corn and meat they
can procure. These are for the souls of the departed to par-
take of, as their name lianal pixan (“ the food of the souls ”)
clearly indicates.3

Does not this custom of honoring the dead exist among us
to-day? The feast of “ All Souls ” is celebrated by the Cath-
olic Church on the second day of November, when, as at the
feast of the Feralia , observed on the third of the ides (Febru-
ary the eleventh) by the Romans, and so beautifully described
by Ovid,4 people visit the cemeteries, carry presents, adorn

1 Christoval de Molina, The Fables and Rites of the Yncas Translation
by Clements R. Markham, pp. 36-50.

2 Manava-Dharma-Sastra , lib iii., Sloka 203.

9 Cakes were likewise offered to the dead in Egypt, India, Peru, etc.

* Est honor et tumulis ; animas placare paternas,

Parvaque in extructas munera ferre pyras :

Parra petunt manes : pietas pro divite grata est
Munere ; non avidos Styx habet ima Deos ;

Tegula porrectis satis est velata coronis,

Et spar sob fruges, parvaque mica salis.

Ovid, Fast 1, Y. 533, et passim.

Tombs also have their honor; our parents wish for
Some small present to adorn their grave.

Page 11.

Plate XL

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

11

with flowers, wreaths, and garlands of evergreen the resting-
place of those who have been dear to them — a very tender
and impressive usage, speaking eloquently of the most affec-
tionate human sentiments.

Mr. K. G. Haliburton, of Boston, Mass. , in a very learned
and most interesting paper 1 on the “ Festival of Ancestors,”
or the feast of the dead, so prevalent among all nations of the
earth, speaking of the singularity of its being observed every-
where at precisely the same epoch of the year, says : “ It is
now, as it was formerly, observed at or near the beginning of
November by the Peruvians, the Hindoos, the Pacific islanders,
the people of the Tonga Islands, the Australians, the ancient
Persians, the ancient Egyptians, and the northern nations of
Europe, and continued for three days among the Japauese, the
Hindoos, the Australians, the ancient Eomans, and the ancient
Egyptians. . . . This startling fact at once drew my atten-
tion to the question, How was this uniformity in the time of
observance preserved, not only in far distant quarters of the
globe, but also through that vast lapse of time since the Peru-
vian and the Indo-European first inherited this primeval festi-
val from a common source? ” What was that source?

When contemplating the altar at the entrance of Prince
Coil’s funeral chamber, we asked ourselves, Are we still in

That small present we owe to the ghosts ;

Those powers do not look at what we give them, but how;

No greedy desires prompt the Stygian shades.

They only ask a tile crowned with garlands,

And fruit and salt to scatter on the ground.

The Romans believed, as did the Hindoos and the Mayas, that salt
scattered on the ground was a strong safeguard against evil spirits.

1 R. G-. Haliburton, “Festival of Ancestors,” Ethnological Researches
Bearing on the Year of the Pleiades.

12

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

America, or has some ancient wizard, by magic art, suddenly
transported us to the south of the Asiatic peninsula, in Cam-
bodia, in the old city of Angor-Thom ? There also we
find similar altars, figures of serpents, and the bird-headed
god.

This bird, symbol of the principal female divinity, is met
with in every country where Maya civilization can be traced
— in Polynesia,1 Japan, India, Chaldea, Egypt, Greece, as in
Mayacli and the ancient city of Tiahuanuco on the high
plateaus of the Peruvian Andes. In Egypt the vulture formed

SCULPTURE IN ANCIENT CITY OF ANGOR-THOM, CAMBODIA.

the headdress of the Goddess Isis, or Mau, whose vestments
were dyed with a variety of colors imitating feather work.2
Everywhere it is a myth. In Mayach only we may perhaps

1 When Banks, who accompanied Captain Cook in his first voyage, vis-
ited the great Morai at O-Taheite, he saw on the summit of the pyramid a
representation of a bird, carved in wood (the Creator). John Watson, The
Lost Solar System , vol. ii. , p. 232.

2 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs of Ancient Egyptians , vol.
iii., p. 375.

Page 12.

Plate XII.

Page 13.

Plate XIII.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

13

find the origin of this myth, since it was the totem of Queen
Mdo, whose name means macaw ; and she is generally pict-
ured, in the sculptures and inscriptions, by the figure of
that beautiful bird, whose plumage is composed of brilliant
feathers of various colors.

GODDESS ISIS AS A EIKD.1

1 Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs, vol. iii., chap, xiii., p. 115.

II.

On examining the adornments of the atlantes that sup-
ported the altar, we could not help exclaiming, “ Why, this is
Burmah!” And so it is. But it is also America. Yes,
ancient America, brought back to light after slumbering many
ages in the lap of Time, to show the people of the nineteenth
century that, long, long ago, intimate communications existed
between the inhabitants of the Western Continent and those of
Asia, Africa, and Europe, just as they exist to-day; and that
ancient American civilization, if not the mother of that of his-
torical nations of antiquity, was at least an important factor
in the framing of their cosmogonic notions and primitive
traditions.

Of that fact no better proof can he obtained than by com-
paring the symbols of the universe found among the Mayas,
the Hindoos, the Chaldees, and the Egyptians.

The simplest is that of the Mayas. It seems to have served
as model for the others, that evidently are amplifications of it.
We find it many times repeated, adorning the central fillet of
the upper cornice of the entablatures of the eastern and west-

Page Ilf..

Plate XIV.

Page 1J+.

Plate XV.

■

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

15

ern facades of King Can’s palace at Uxmal. This edifice was
also the residence of the pontiff.

A knowledge of antique geometric symbology makes it
easy to understand these cosmic diagrams. In the centre of
the figure we see a circle inscribed within the hexagon formed
by the sides of two interlaced equilateral triangles.

The Egyptians held the equilateral triangle as the symbol
of nature, beautiful and fruitful. In their hieroglyphs it meant
“worship.” For the Christians the equilateral triangle, con-
taining the open eye of Siva, is the symbol of Deity. The
Hindoos and the Chaldees regarded it as emblem of the spirit
of the universe. Exoterically this central circle represents the
sun, the light and life-giver of the physical world, evolved
from fire and water.1

It is well known that among the ancient occultists, of all
nations, the triangle with the apex upward symbolized “ fire; ”
that with the apex downward, “ water. ” The outer circle that
circumscribes the triangles is the horizon, that apparent boun-
dary of the material world, within which, in his daily travels,
the sun seems to be tied up. Hence the name Inti-huatana,
“sun’s halter,” given by the ancient Peruvians to the stone
circles so profusely scattered over the high plateaus of the
Andes, along the shores of Lake Titicaca,2 in India, Arabia,
northern Africa, northern Europe, where they are known as
druidical circles. Their use is still a matter of discussion for
European antiquaries. They disdain to seek in America for
the explanation of the motives that prompted their erection
and that of many other constructions, as well as the origin of

1 See Appendix, notes vii. and xx.

2 George E. Squier, Peru : Incidents of Travels and Explorations in the
Land of the Incas , chap, xx., p. 384.

Augustus Le Plongeon, A Sketch of the Ancient Inhabitants of Peru, chap. i.

16

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

customs and traditions that continue to be among them the
themes for useless controversies.

The twelve scallops which surround the outer circle are the
twelve houses or resting-places of the sun ; that is, the twelve
months of the solar year, or twelve signs of the zodiac. As
to the four double rays, those nearest to the houses of the sun
typify the primordial Four, direct emanations from the central
sun— the four Heavenly Giants who helped in fashioning the
material universe. The lower ones symbolize the four primor-
dial substances known to modern scientists as nitrogen , oxygen ,
hydrogen , and carbon , whose various combinations form the
four primitive elements — fire, water, air, and earth — into
which these can again he resolved.

In the Appendix the esoteric explanation of the diagram is
presented as it was given by the Maya sages to their pupils in
the secrecy of the mysterious recesses of their temples. It cor-
responds precisely to the doctrine of the cosmic evolution con-
tained in that ancient Sanscrit book of “ Dzyan,” which forms
the groundwork of Madame H. P. Blavatsky’s “ The Secret
Doctrine.” 1

The Maya colonists who carried their conceptions of cosmic
evolution to India, fearing lest the meaning of this diagram,
purposely made so simple by the wise men in their mother
country, should not be sufficiently intelligible to the new ini-

1 H. P. Blavatsky, The Secret Doctrine , vol. i., pp. 27-35. “Is it a mere
coincidence that the name Dzyan of the archaic Indian MS., whose trans-
lation, with commentaries, Madame Blavatsky gave to the world, is a pure
Maya word ? To write it according to the accepted manner of writing
Maya, we must replace the double consonant dz by its equivalent o. We
then have the word Qian, which means “to be swollen by fire.” In the
book Dzyan, stanza iii. , § 1, we read : “ The mother swells, extending from
within xoithout , lilce the hud of the lotus ; ”... and § 9: “ Light is cold
flame, and flame is fire, and fire produces heat, which yields water ; the water
of life in the great mother." . . .

Page 16.

Plate XVI.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

17

tiates to whom they communicated it in the land of their
adoption, amplified it, and composed the “ Sri-Santara,” mak-
ing each part of easy comprehension.

This, at first sight, may appear like an assertion of private
opinion. It is not, however. It is the stating of an histor-
ical fact, that becomes evident when we study said “ Sri-San-
tara,” and notice that the names of its different parts, from
Aditi , the “boundless,” to Maya, the “earth,” are not San-
scrit, but pure American Maya words.

How, if the Hindoo priests, the Brahmins, did not receive
their cosmogony from the Mayas, together with the diagram
by which they symbolized it, how did it happen that they
adopted precisely the same geometrical figures as the Mayas
to typify their notions of the creation of the universe, which
we are told they borrowed from ‘ ‘ the materialistic religion of
the non-Yedic population; ” 1 and that, in giving names to the
various parts of said figures, they made use of vocables not
belonging to their own vernacular, but to a language spoken
by the inhabitants of a country distant many thousand miles
from their own, and separated from it by the wastes of the
ocean, the traversing of which was by them, as it is by their
descendants, regarded as a defilement ?

We must not lose sight of the fact that the Danavas and
the Nagds were peoples who did not belong to the Aryan stock,
and that they suffered a fierce persecution at the hands of the
Brahmins when these acquired power.2

As to these, their origin is one of the most obscure points
in the annals of ancient India; they are barely mentioned in
the Yedic hymns. When, in remote times, the Aryans invaded

1 J. Talboys Wheeler, History of India, vol. iii. , p. 56.

2 Ibid.

2

18

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

the Punjab, the Brahmins had no power or authority. They
were merely messengers and sacrificers. JSTo food so pure as
that cooked by a Brahmin.1 Others among them, having a
devout turn of mind, were hermits doing penance, immersed
in contemplation. At the time of Alexander’s conquest of
northern India, many lived in convents, practising occultism.
They were called gymnosophists by the Greeks, and were re-
garded as very wise men.2 But it must be remembered that
the period between the establishment of the Yedic settlements
on the Saraswati and the conquest of Hindostan by the Aryans,
when they had become the leading power, probably covers an
interval of thousands of years.3

“ The Aryans appear to have had no definite idea of a uni-
verse of being or of the creation of a universe.”4 From them,
therefore, the Brahmins could not have borrowed their ac-
count of the creation, which differs from that we might infer
from the Yedic hymns.5 Still “ Manu borrowed some of the
ideas conveyed in his account of the creation of the universe
by Brahma. ’ ’ 6

From whom did he borrow them ?

“ The Brahmins rarely attempted to ignore or denounce the
traditions of any new people with whom they came in contact ;
but rather they converted such materials into vehicles for the
promulgation of their peculiar tenets.” 7

The Nagds , we have seen, were a highly civilized people,

1 J. Talboys Wheeler, History of India, vol. ii. , p. 640.

2 Philostratus, Life of Apollonius of Tyana, lib. ii., chap. 15, p. 242;
lib. iii. , chap. 11, p. 8. Translation of Charles Blount, London, 1680.

3 J. Talboys Wheeler, History of India, vol. ii., p. 624.

4 Ibid. , p. 452. Adolphe Pictet, Les Origines Indo-Europeennes, vol.
iii., p. 410.

6 J. T. Wheeler, History of India, vol. ii., p. 452.

6 Ibid., p. 449. 7 Ibid., p. 450.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

19

whose rulers held sway over the whole of Hindostan when the
Aryans established their first colonies on the banks of the
Saraswati. Later on we shall see that these Nagds were orig-
inally Maya adepts, who in remote ages migrated from May-
ach to Burmah, whence they spread their doctrines among
the civilized nations of Asia and Africa. How else explain the
use of the American Maya language by the Hindoos, calling
Maya the material world ? (Ma, ‘ ‘ country ; ’ ’ yach, the
veret/rum of the ancestor, through which all living earthly
things were produced.)

This query may be answered by another. Why do we
find English customs, English traditions, English language,
in America, India, Australia, Africa, and a thousand and one
other places very distant from each other, among peoples that
do not even know of each other’s existence ? Why, any one
will say, because colonists from England have settled in those
countries, and naturally carried there the customs, traditions,
language, religion, sciences, and civilization of the mother
country. Why, then, not admit that that which occurs in our
day has taken place in past ages ? Is not man the same in all
times ? Has not the stronger always imposed his ideas on the
weaker ? If in the struggle toward eternal progress, the most
civilized has not always been physically victorious, history
teaches that intellectually he has obtained the victory over his
conqueror in the long run ; proving, what has so many times
been asserted, that mind is mightier than matter.

Civilization is indeed like the waves of the sea; one wave
follows another. Their crests are not of equal height. Some
are higher; some are lower. Between them there is always a
trough more or less deep. The wave behind inevitably pushes
that immediately before it, often overwhelms it.

20

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

If we compare the “ Sri-Santara ” with the cosmogonic dia-
gram of the Mayas, it does not require a great effort of
imagination to perceive that it is an amplification of the latter.
This being so, let us see what may be, in the Maya language,
the meaning of the names of its different parts.

The use of the Maya throughout these pages, to explain
the meaning of names of deities, nations, and localities whose
etymon is not only unknown but a mystery to philologists,
will show the necessity of acquiring this most ancient form of
speech. It is not a dead language, being the vernacular of well-
nigh two millions of our contemporaries. Its knowledge will
help us to acquire a better understanding of the origin of the
early history of Egyptian civilization, of that of the Chaldeans,
and of the nations of Asia Minor. It will also illumine the
darkness that surrounds the primitive traditions of mankind.
By means of it, we will read the ancient Maya books and
inscriptions, reclaim from oblivion part, at least, of the ancient
history of America, and thus be enabled to give it its place in
the universal history of the world. We shall also be able to
comprehend the amount of knowledge, scientific and historical,
possessed by the wise men who wrote on stone the most strik-
ing events in the life of their nation, their religious and cos-
mogonic conceptions. Perhaps when the few books written
by them that have reached us, and the monumental inscrip-
tions still extant, have been thoroughly deciphered, many
among the learned will have to alter their pet opinions, and
confess that our civilization may not be the highest ever
reached by man. We must keep in mind the fact that we are
only emerging from the deep and dark trough that had existed
between the Greek and Roman civilizations and ours, and that
we are as yet far from having arrived at the top of the wave.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

21

Before proceeding, I may remark that although the Mayas
seem to have penetrated the interior of Asia as far as Meso-
potamia, and to have dwelt a long time in that country as well
as in Asia Minor; that although, from remote ages, they had
sojourned in the Dekkan and other localities in the south
of India; that although the Greek language was composed in
great part of Maya, and the grammars of both these lan-
guages were well-nigh identical 1 — they and the Aryans, so far
as shown by philology, never had intercourse with each other.
After a thorough study of Mr. Adolphe Pictet’s learned work,
“ Les Origines Indo-Europeennes ou les Aryas Primitifs,” and
a careful examination of their language and the Greek words
derived from it, either directly, or indirectly through Sanscrit,
then comparing these with the Maya, I am bound to confess
that I have been unable to find the remotest analogy between
them. KSTo — not one word! It might be supposed that the
name of the most abundant and necessary fluid for living
beings would be somewhat similar in languages concurring to
form a third one. Hot so, however. The erudite Mr. Pictet
is at a loss as to the origin of the Greek word, thalassa, for
“ sea. ” 2 Had he been acquainted with the Maya language, he
would easily have found it in the word thallac, that means
a “ thing unstable; ” hence the Greek verb tarasso — thrasso —
“ to agitate.” The name for water in Maya is ha, in Egyp-
tian and Chaldean a.

What are we to argue from this utter want of relation be-
tween two peoples that have had such a stupendous influence
on the civilization of Asiatic, African, and European popula-

1 Brasseur, Troano MS., vol. ii. , edit. 1870. Introduction aux elements de
la langue Maya, from p. xxiv. to p. xl.

2 Adolphe Pictet, Les Origines Indo-Europeennes , vol. i., pp. 138-139.

22

QUEEN MdO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

tions? Shall we say that when the Mayas colonized the
countries at the south of Asia, then the banks of the Eu-
phrates, then the valley of the Nile, and later Asia Minor, it
was in ages so remote that the Aryans, regarded as a primitive
people living at the dawn of history, had not yet multiplied
to such numbers as to make it imperative for them to abandon
their native country in search of new homes ? Shall we say
that the Maya colonies much antedated the migrations of the
Aryan tribes, that, abandoning their bactrian homes only
about three thousand years before the Christian era,1 went
south and invaded the north of India; whilst others, going
west, crossed over to Europe and spread over that continent ?
This would explain the use of Maya instead of Sanscrit
words for the names of the various parts of the “ Sri-Santara; ”
show the Maya to be more ancient than Sanscrit; and also
account for the grammatical forms common to both the Maya
and the Greek, that the ulterior admixture of Aryan words to
the latter was unable to alter.

We must premise the explanation of the names of the parts
of the ££ Sri-Santara ” by stating that the letters D, F , G, J, Q,
and V are not used in the Maya language.2

From remote ages the Brahmins taught that in the begin-
ning existed the Infinite. This they called Aditi , “that
which is above all things.” It is precisely the meaning of the
Maya words A titich — composed of All, masculine article,
the ££ strong,” the “powerful; ” and titich, “that which is
above all things.”3 A-titich or A-diti would then be the
“powerful superior to all things,” the “ Infinite.” In this

1 A. Pictet, Les Origines Indo-Europeennes , vol. iii., pp. 508-515.

2 Beltran de Santa Rosa, Arte del Idioma Maya. Gabriel de Santa
Buenaventura, Elementos de la Lingua Maya.

3 Pio Perez, Maya dictionary.

Page 22.

Plate XVIII.

H^oru^

22

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

tions? Shall we say that when the Mayas colonized the
countries at the south of Asia, then the banks of the Eu-
phrates, then the valley of the Nile, and later Asia Minor, it
was in ages so remote that the Aryans, regarded as a primitive
people living at the dawn of history, had not yet multiplied
to such numbers as to make it imperative for them to abandon
their native country in search of new homes ? Shall we say
that the Maya colonies much antedated the migrations of the
Aryan tribes, that, abandoning their bactrian homes only
about three thousand years before the Christian era,1 went
south and invaded the north of India; whilst others, going
west, crossed over to Europe and spread over that continent ?
This would explain the use of Maya instead of Sanscrit
words for the names of the various parts of the “ Sri-Santara; ”
show the Maya to be more ancient than Sanscrit; and also
account for the grammatical forms common to both the Maya
and the Greek, that the ulterior admixture of Aryan words to
the latter was unable to alter.

We must premise the explanation of the names of the parts
of the “ Sri-Santara ” by stating that the letters D, F, G, J, Q,
and V are not used in the Maya language.2

From remote ages the Brahmins taught that in the begin-
ning existed the Infinite. This they called Aditi, “that
which is above all things.” It is precisely the meaning of the
Maya words A titich — composed of Ah, masculine article,
the “strong,” the “powerful; ” and titicli, “that which is
above all things.”3 A-titich or A-diti would then be the
“powerful superior to all things,” the “Infinite.” In this

1 A. Pictet, Les Origines Indo-Europeennes, vol. iii., pp. 508-515.

2 Beltran de Santa Rosa, Arte del Idioma Maya. Gabriel de Santa
Buenaventura, Elementos de la Lingua Maya.

3 Pio Perez, Maya dictionary.

Page 22.

Plate XVIII.

I

:

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 23

infinite dwelt Aum, whose name must precede all prayers, all
invocations. 1 Manu says that the monosyllable means ‘ ‘ earth, ’ ’
‘ £ sky, ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ heaven. ’ ’ 2

J. Talboys Wheeler says : 3 £ ‘ As regards the three letters
A, TJ, M, little can be gathered excepting that, when brought
together in the word Aum they are said by Manu to form a
symbol of the Lord of created beings, Brahma.” Colebrooke
says: “According, however, to the Nirukta , which is an

ancient glossary of the Vedas , the syllable Aum refers to every
deity. The Brahmins may reserve for their initiates an esoteric
meaning more ample than that given by Manu.” But by
means of the Maya language we learn its full significance.
A-U-M :

A — for All, masculine article: the fecundating power; the
father.

XT — feminine pronoun: the basin; the generative power; the
mother.

M — Melien : the engendered; the son; or, Ma, yes and no;
the androgynus.

Any way we combine the three letters of the sacred mono-
syllable— in the Maya language — they give us the names and
attributes of each person of the Trimourti.

For instance : Au-M — thy maker.

A-U-M — thy mother’s son.

U-A-M —I am the male creator.

M-U-A — the maker of these waters.

We read in the first chapter of the ordinances of Manu,4
that the Supreme Being produced first the waters, and in them

1 Manava-Dharma-Sastra , book ii. , Sloka 74.

2 Ibid., 76-77.

3 J. T. Wheeler, History of India, vol. ii., p. 481.

4 Manava-Dharma-Sastra , book i., Sloka 8.

24

QUEEN MdO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

deposited a germ, an egg, in which He himself was born again
under the shape of Brahma , the great ancestor of all beings.
This egg, this golden uterus, is called Iliramyagarbha. 1 This
word is composed of the following four Maya vocables,
liilaan, yam, kalba, ha, expressing the idea of something
floating in the water : liilaan, “ to be dragged ; ’ ’ yam,
££ midst; ” kalba, “ enclosed; ” ha, ££ water.”

In it was born Brahma , the Creator, the origin of all
beings, “he who was submerged in the waters.” So reads
his name, according to the Maya — Be-lam-lia : Be, “ the
way;” lam, “ submerged; ” ha, “ water.”

The waters were called JVara, says Manu,2 because they
were the production of Hara the divine spirit, “the mother
of truth: ” ISTaa, “ mother; ” La, “ eternal truth,” that con-
tained the hidden voice of the mantras. The verb Vach,
Uach (Maya), “a thing free from fetters,” the divine male;
the first embodied spirit Viraclj, Uilal (Maya), “ that which is
necessary, ’ ’ whose union with Maya produced all things.

Again we may ask, Is the use of Maya words in this
instance without significance? Does the similarity of the
ancient Indian architecture to that of the Mayas — which so
puzzled the learned English architect, the late James Fergus-
son — or the use of the Maya triangular arch, and no other,
in all sacred buildings in India, prove nothing? And the
practice of stamping the hand, dipped in red pigment, on the
walls of temples and palaces, as a way of invoking the benison
of the gods, or of asserting ownership to the building, as with
a seal, being common both in Mayacli and India ; or the cus-
tom of carrying children astride on the hip, which was never

1 H. T. Colebrooke, Notice on the Vedas , lib. ii. , § vi.

2 Manava-Dharma-Sastra, book i. , Sloka 10.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

25

done by the Mayas without first performing a very interest-
ing ceremony called Hearnek ; 1 or the prevalence of the tree
and serpent worship, or that of the cross and the elephant,
among the Mayas as among the Hindoos — is all this without
meaning ?

In another work 2 1 have shown how the worship of the tree
originated in Mayach, and why it Avas always allied to that of
the serpent and of the monarch. But no antiquary has ever
been able to trace the origin of these cults either to Egypt,
Chaldea, or India, although it is Avell known they existed in
those countries from, remote ages.

The object of these pages is not to give here all the proofs
that can be adduced of the presence of the Mayas in India, and
of the influence of their civilization on its inhabitants ; but to
follow their tracks along the shores of the Indian Ocean, into
the interior of Asia, across Asia Minor where they established
colonies, on to Africa, until finally they reached the valley of
the Nile, and laid the foundation of the renowned Egyptian
kingdom, some six thousand years before the reign of Menes,
the first terrestrial Egyptian king.3

1 Alice D. Le Plongeon, Harper's Magazine, vol. xx., p. 385.

2 Augustus Le Plongeon, Sacred Mysteries, p. 109, et passim.

3 Bunsen, Egypt's Place in Universal History, vol. iii., p. 15.

Continuing the examination of the cosmogonic diagrams of
ancient historic Asiatic nations, we find, next in importance,
the “ Ensoph ” of the Chaldees. It can be seen at a glance
that this also is an amplification of the Maya symbol of the
universe, as yet existing atUxmal, as well as of the “ Sri-San-
tara ’ ’ of the Hindoos.

It may be asked, How came the Chaldees to adopt the
same geometrical figures used by the Mayas to symbolize their
cosmogonic conceptions ?

Berosus, the Chaldean historian, tells us that civilization
was brought to Mesopotamia by Oannes and six other beings,
half man, half fish, who came from the Persian Gulf; in other
words, by men who dwelt in boats, which is precisely the
meaning of the vocable “ Oannes,” or Hoa-ana in the Maya
language (ha, “water;” a, “thy;” na, “house,” “resi-
dence”— “he who has his residence on the water”). Sir
Henry Rawlinson, speaking of the advent of the early Chal-
deans in Mesopotamia, says d “ With this race originated the

1 Sir Henry Rawlinson, note to Herodotus, lib. i., 181, in George Rawl-
inson’s Uerodotus , vol. i., p. 319.

Page 26.

Plate XIX.

TIKKUN

Manifested log as

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

27

art of writing, the building of cities, the institution of a reli-
gious system, the cultivation of all sciences and of astronomy
in particular.”

If philology, like architecture, may serve as guide in fol-
lowing the footsteps of a people in its migrations on the face
of the earth, then we may safely affirm that the Mayas, at
some epoch or other, travelling along the shores of the Indian
Ocean, reached the mouth of the Indus, and colonized Beloo-
chistan and the countries west of that river to Afghanistan;
where, to this day, Maya tribes live on the north banks of the
Kabul River.1

The names of the majority of the cities and localities in
that country are words having a natural meaning in the Maya
language ; they are, in fact, those of ancient cities and villages
whose ruins cover the soil of Yucatan, and of several still
inhabited.

I have made a careful collation of the names of these cities
and places in Asia, with their meaning in the Maya language.
In this work my esteemed friend the Rt. Rev. Dr. Dn. Crecen-
cio Carillo y Ancona, the present bishop of Yucatan, has kindly
helped me, as in many other studies of Maya roots and words
now obsolete; the objects to which they applied having ceased
to exist or having fallen into disuse.2 Bishop Carillo is a liter-
ary gentleman of well-known ability, the author of an ancient
history of Yucatan, a scholar well versed in the language of
his forefathers. He is of Maya descent.

Following the Mayas in their journeys westward, along
the seacoasts, we next find traces of them at the head of the

1 London Times , weekly edition, March 4, 1879, p. 6, col. 4.

2 This list is given in full in my large work, yet unpublished, The
Monuments of May ach and their Historical Teachings.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

27

art of writing, the building of cities, the institution of a reli-
gious system, the cultivation of all sciences and of astronomy
in particular.”

If philology, like architecture, may serve as guide in fol-
lowing the footsteps of a people in its migrations on the face
of the earth, then we may safely affirm that the Mayas, at
some epoch or other, travelling along the shores of the Indian
Ocean, reached the mouth of the Indus, and colonized IJeloo-
chistan and the countries west of that river to Afghanistan;
where, to this day, Maya tribes live on the north hanks of the
Kabul River.1

The names of the majority of the cities and localities in
that country are words having a natural meaning in the Maya
language; they are, in fact, those of ancient cities and villages
whose ruins cover the soil of Yucatan, and of several still
inhabited.

I have made a careful collation of the names of these cities
and places in Asia, with their meaning in the Maya language.
In this work my esteemed friend the Rt. Rev. Dr. Dn. Crecen-
cio Carillo y Ancona, the present bishop of Yucatan, has kindly
helped me, as in many other studies of Maya roots and words
now obsolete; the objects to which they applied having ceased
to exist or having fallen into disuse.2 Bishop Carillo is a liter-
ary gentleman of well-known ability, the author of an ancient
history of Yucatan, a scholar well versed in the language of
his forefathers. He is of Maya descent.

Following the Mayas in their journeys westward, along
the seacoasts, we next find traces of them at the head of the

1 London Times, weekly edition, March 4, 1879, p. C, col. 4.

2 This list is given in full in my large work, yet unpublished, The
Monuments of May ach and their Historical Teachings.

28

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

Persian Gulf, where they formed settlements in the marshy
country at the mouth of the Euphrates, known to history
under the name of Akkad.

The meaning of that name, given to the plains and marshy
lands situated to the south of Babylonia, has been, until of
late, a puzzle to students of Assyriology; and it still is an
enigma to them why a country utterly devoid of mountains
should have been called Akkad. Have not the well-known
scholars, the late George Smith of Chaldean Genesis fame,
Rev. Prof. A. IT. Sayce of Oxford in England, and Mr.
Francois Lenormant in France, discovered, by translating one
of the bilingual lexicographical tablets found in the royal
library of the palace of King Asurbanipal in Kineveh, that
in Akkadian language it meant “ mountain,” “ high country,”
whilst the word for “ low country, ’ ’ “ plain,” was Sumer ■ and
that, by a singular antithesis, the Sumerians inhabited the
mountains to the eastward of Babylonia, and the Akkadians
the plains watered by the Tigris and the Euphrates and the
marshes at the mouth of this river ?

The way they try to explain such strange anomaly is by
supposing that, in very remote times, the Akkadi dwelt in the
mountains, and the Sumeri in the plains; and that at some
unknown, unrecorded period, and for some unknown reason,
these nations must have migrated en masse , exchanging their
abodes, but still preserving the names by which they were
known, regardless of the fact that said names were at variance
with the character of the localities in which they now dwelt ;
but they did it both from custom and tradition.1

Shall we say, “ Si non e vero e ben trovato ,” although this
may or may not be the case, there being no record that said
J Francois Lenormant, Chaldean Magic and Sorcery, p. 399.

QUEEN MdO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

29

permutation ever took place, and it therefore cannot be
authenticated.

The Maya, of which we find so many vestiges in the
Akkadian language, affords a most natural, thence rational,
etymology of the name Akkad , and in perfect accordance with
the character of the country thus named. Akal is a Maya
word, the meaning of which is “ pond,” 1 ‘ £ marshy ground; ”
and akil is a marshy ground full of reeds and rushes, such as
was and still is lower Mesopotamia and the localities near the
mouth of the Euphrates.

As to the name Sumer , its etymology, although it is also
very clear according to the Maya, seemed perplexing to the
learned Mr. Lenormant, who nevertheless has interpreted it
correctly, “ the low country.” The Akkadian root sum evi-
dently corresponds to the Greek HVfA/3o?y “ bottom,” “ depres-
sion,” and to the Maya, kom, a valley. The Sumeri would
then be the inhabitants of the valleys, while the Akkari would
be those of the marshes.

From this and from what will directly appear let it not be
supposed that the ancient Akkadian and ancient Maya are
cognate languages. The great number of Maya words found
in the Akkadian have been ingrafted on it by the Maya colo-
nists, who in remote times established themselves in Akkad,
and became prominent, after a long sojourn in the country,
under the name of Kaldi.

Through the efforts of such eminent scholars as Dr. Hincks,
Sir Henry Rawlinson, Dr. Oppert, Monsieur Grivel, Professor
Sayce, Mr. F rancois Lenormant, and others, the old Akkadian
tongue, or much of it, has been recovered, by translating the

1 Sir Henry Layard ( Nineveh and Babylon , p. 356) says that the ancient
name of the Mediterranean was Akkari.

30

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

tablets that composed King Asurbanipal’s library. Mr. Le-
normant has published an elementary grammar and vocabulary
of it. From this I cull the few following words that are pure
Maya, with the same signification in both languages. Having
but a limited space to devote here to so interesting a subject,
in my selection I have confined myself to words so unequivo-
cally similar that their identity cannot be questioned.

Akkadian.

4,

Water.

Maya.

Ha,

Water. A is also the Egyptian for water.

Akkadian.

Abba,

Father.

Maya.

Ba,

Father, par excellence ; ancestor.

Akkadian.

Bala ,

Companion ; also Pal.

Maya.

Pal,

Companion.

Akkadian.

Pab,

Before; that which is in front; gat , hand.

Maya.

Kab,

Hand ; arm ; branch of a tree.

Cab,

A particle that, in composition, indicates that
the action of the verb takes place quickly.

Akkadian.

Ge,

That which is below.

Maya.

Ke,

Radical of Kernel, to descend softly; with-
out noise.

Akkadian.

Kale ,

To complete; to finish.

Maya.

Kaacnac,

Abundant; exceeding.

Kak,

Fire; to burn; hence to destroy, to finish, etc..

Akkadian.

Kalama,

The world; the countries.

Maya.

Kalac,

The world ; the universe.

Akkadian.

Kas,

Two.

Maya.

Ca,

Two.

Akkadian.

Ke-acu,

Inside of the earth ; under.

Maya.

Kel<i,

Upside down ; the inverse side.

Akkadian.

Ki,

The inhabitable earth.

Maya.

Kilacabil,

The nations ; the ancestors.

Akkadian.

Kul,

The seed of animals.

Maya.

Kill,

The seat; the rump; also to worship, as in
Assyrian.

Akkadian.

Kun,

The tail.

Maya.

Kun,

Mulieris pudenda.

Akkadian.

Kun ,

Daybreak.

Maya.

Kin,

Day; sun.

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

31

Akkadian.

Ku,

Place.

Maya.

Kub,

To place in safety.

Akkadian.

Lai ,

Sign of possession ; to take.

Maya.

Lai,

To take away; to empty.

Akkadian.

Ma ,

Expresses the idea of locality; the earth.

Maya.

Ma,

The earth ; the country. Ma is likewise
Egyptian for country ; place.

Akkadian.

Ta,

Expresses the idea of an internal or external
locative — into ; from ; from within ; as
tan ; Ma ta, country.

Maya.

Ta,

Place; smooth and level ground.

Tan,

Toward; in the centre; before; near.

Akkadian.

Pa,

To bear toward.

Maya.

La,

Place; neighborhood; place where one stands.

Akkadian.

Me,

Prefixed to verbs, nouns, or adjectives, is the
sign of negation.

Maya.

Ma,

Prefixed to verbs, nouns, or adjectives, is the
sign of negation. Ma uolel liaual (“I
don’t wish to eat ”). So also it is in Greek.

Akkadian.

Men,

To be.

Maya.

En,

I am.

Akkadian.

Nana,

Mother.

Maya.

Naa,

Mother.

Akkadian.

Sar,

White.

Maya.

Zac,

White.

Akkadian.

San, Sana,

Four.1

Maya.

Can,

Four; also serpent.

1 Mr. Lenormant, Chaldean Magic and Sorcery , p. 300, in a foot-note re-
marks : “I do not give the name of number ‘ four’ in this table, because
in the Akkadian it seems quite distinct.” The Akkadian word San is (in
Maya) can. See farther on for the various meanings and the power of
that word, which among the Mayas was the title of the dynasty of their
kings. It meant “serpent.” Mr. Lenormant (p. 232) says that “the serpent
with seven heads was invoked by the Akkadians.” Was this seven-headed
serpent the Ali-ac-cliapat, totem of the seven members of the family of
King Canclii of Mayacli, that no doubt the Nag as worshipped at Angor-
Thom in Cambodia ? (See Le Plongeon, Sacred Mysteries, p. 145.) Sir
George Rawlinson ( The Five Great Monarchies, vol. i., p. 122) says, “The
Accadians made the serpent one of the principal attributes, and one of the
forms of Hea.”

32

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

Akkadian.

Sir,

Light.

Maya.

Zazil,

Light; brilliancy.

Akkadian.

Tab,

To place; to add.

Maya.

Tab,

To tie; to join; to unite.

Akkadian.

Xa or Xana,

Fish.

Maya.

Cay,

Fish.

Akkadian.

Xas,

To cut.

Maya.

Cliac,

To cut with an axe.

Akkadian.

Xir,

Cry.

Maya.

Cili,

Word. Ciliil, to speak.

Akkadian.

Idu,

The moon.

Maya.

U,

The moon.

Akkadian.

HurTci,

The moon.

Maya.

Hul-kin,

Sun struck; lighted by the sun.

Modern Assyriologists, after translating the tablets on
Assyrian and Chaldean magic, written in the Akkadian lan-
guage, agree with the prophetical books of Scripture in the
opinion that the Chaldees descended from the primitive Akka-
dians, and that those people spoke a language differing from
the Semitic tongues. A writer in the British and Foreign
Review says:1 “Babylonia was inhabited at an early period
by a race of people entirely different from the Semitic popula-
tion known in historic times. This people had an abundant
literature, and they were the inventors of a system of writing
which was at first hieroglyphic. ... Of the people who
invented this system of writing very little is known with cer-
tainty, and even the name is a matter of doubt. ’ ’

According to Berosus, who was a Chaldean priest, these
first inhabitants of Babylonia, whose early abode was in Chal-
dea, were foreigners of another race (aXXosOveii).2 He care-
fully establishes a distinction between them and the Assyrians.

1 British and Foreign Review , No. 102, January, 1870, vol. ii. , p. 305.

2 Berosus, Fragments , $$ 5, 6, 11.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 33

Those primitive Akkadians, those strangers in Mesopotamia,
the aborigines would naturally have regarded as guests in the
country. Taking a hint from this idea, they called their first
settlement ula or ul, a Maya word meaning ‘ ‘ guests newly
arrived.” In this settlement in the marshy ground, lest the
natives or the wild beasts that swarmed in the reeds should
attack them, the strangers surrounded their dwellings with
palisades, and designated the place as Kal-ti, whence Kcildi
by which their tribe continued to be known even when they
became influential. The word kalti is composed of two
Maya primitives — kal, “to be enclosed with posts,” and ti,
“ place.”

In my work “ The Monuments of Mayach and their Histor-
ical Teachings,” I have traced step by step the journey of the
Maya colonists, along the course of the Euphrates, to the
‘‘City of the Sun,” Babylon, called in Akkadian, according
to Mr. Lenormant,1 Kd-Dingira or Tin-tir, the etymology of
which appears to be unknown to him, though very easily found
by means of the Maya. The name Kd-Dingira seems to be
composed of four Maya primitives — Cali, “city;” Tin, a
particle which in composition indicates the place where one is
or an action happens; Kin, “priest; ” La, “ eternal truth, ”
the god, the sun. Cali-Tin-kin-la, or be it Kd-Dingira , is
“ the city where reside the priests of the sun.”

The name Tin-tir, Maya Tin-til, means Tin, “the place
where a thing actually exists; ” Tiliz, by elision til, “ sacred,”
‘ ‘ mysterious, ” “ venerable. ’ ’ Tin-til would therefore be ‘ ‘ the
holy, the mysterious place, ” a very appropriate title for a sacred
city. Til may, again, be the radical of Tilil, which means
“ property.” Tin-til would in this case signify “ this place is
1 Lenormant, Chaldean Magic and Sorcery , pp, 193, 353.

3

34

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

my property; it belongs to me, the god, the sun,” which is in
perfect accordance with this other ethnic name of Babylon,
Ka-Rci , or be it Call-La, ‘ ‘ the city of eternal truth, ” of “ the
sun.”

The name given to the temple of the “ seven lights of
heaven,” as well as its mode of construction, shows that the
builders were colonists from a country where that kind of edi-
fice— the pyramid of stone— -was not only common, but had so
been from remote ages.

Babel is a word whose etymon has been a bone of conten-
tion for Orientalists and philologists. They are not yet agreed
as to its meaning, simply because they do not know to what
language it belongs nor whence came the people who raised the
monument. We are told they were strangers in the plains of
Shinar. Did they come originally from Mayach ? They
spoke the vernacular of that country far off beyond the sea
toward the rising sun, and Genesis asserts that they had
journeyed from the east.1

Ba, in Maya, has various meanings; the principal, how-
ever, is “ father,” “ancestor.”

Bel has also several significations. Among these it stands
for “way,” “custom.”

Ba-bel Avould therefore indicate that the sacred edifice was
constructed according to the way, the custom, of the builders’
ancestors.

Landa, in his work “Las Cosas de Yucatan,” informs us
that the Mayas were very fond of giving nicknames to all
persons prominent among them. The same fondness exists to-
day among their descendants, who seldom speak of their supe-
riors by their name, but a sobriquet descriptive of some marked
1 Genesis, chap, xi., verse 2.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

35

characteristic observed by them and belonging to the individ-
ual. For instance, should anybody inquire concerning me, by
my proper name, of the men who for months accompanied
me in my expeditions in the ruined cities of Yucatan, they
certainly would shake their heads and answer, “Don’t know
him.” But if asked about the Alimeexnal, “he of the
long beard,” then they would at once understand who was
meant.1

This same custom seems to have prevailed among the prim-
itive Akkadians, judging from the names of their first kings,
the builders of the cities along the banks of the Euphrates,
whose seals are stamped on the bricks used in the foundations
of the edifices erected by them.

TJrukh , we are told, is one of them ; likbabi is another
frequently met with.

It is well known that no stones are to be found on the allu-
vial plains of Mesopotamia, that consequently the first cities
were built of mud; that is, of sun-dried bricks — adobes. It is
probably from that fact that they called the king who ordered
them to be built UruJch, ‘ ‘ he who makes everything from mud. ’ ’

1 It always was, and it is to-day, a characteristic of the Mayas to give
surnames to those whom they regard as their superiors. Cogolludo speaks
of that peculiarity, and mentions their great witticism in thus giving nick-
names, so that those to whom they were given could not take offence, even
when they knew they were derided. An instance of this kind comes to my
mind. Nakuk-Pecli, a native nobleman who wrote a narrative of the
conquest of Yucatan by the Spaniards, in the Maya language, represents
them as addicted to drunkenness and to all sorts of debauchery ; yet calls
them Kul-uinicob, the holy men, who came to preach a “holy religion.”
But that nickname has a second meaning. Kill, it is true, means holy. Pro-
nouncing the k softly, which a foreigner unaccustomed to the Maya pro-
nunciation invariably does, it sounds cul, which means a “ cup,” a “ gob-
let,” a “chalice,” just as the Greek kvXs. Therefore, cul-uinicob means
“men addicted to the cup” — drunkards.

36

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

TJrukh is a word composed of two Maya primitives — huk,
“to make everything,” and luk, “ mud.” In composition
Huk-luk would become contracted into Huluk, hence
Urukh.

This is also said to have been the name of the city of
Erech, the seat of a famous Akkadian ecclesiastical college.1
This, however, does not alter the meaning of the Maya
etymology of the word, nor make it less appropriate, since the
town was built of bricks dried in the sun — of mud, conse-
quently.

As to the name of King Likbabi 2 it is also composed of two
Maya primitives — lik, “ to transport, ” and bab, “to row.”
It is extremely probable that when constructing the temples
in whose foundations his name has been found, as there were
no roads for transporting easily by land his building materials,
he made use of the most convenient waterway offered by the
Euphrates. Hence his sobriquet, Likbabi , “he who transports
all things by water,” that is, “by rowing.”

In the language of Akkad were preserved all the scien-
tific treatises of the Babylonians. But from the time when
the Semitic tribes established themselves in Assyria, in or
about the thirteenth century b.c., the Akkadian language
began to fall into disuse. It was soon forgotten by the gener-
ality of the inhabitants. Its knowledge became the exclusive
privilege of the priests, who were the depositaries of all learn-
ing. "When the Semitic conquerors imposed their own dialect
on the vanquished, the ancient tongue of Akkad remained,
according to Sir Henry Bawlinson,3 the language of science in

1 F. Lenormant, Chaldean Maqic and Sorcery, pp. 13, 323.

2 1 lid., pp. 318-321.

s Apud George Rawlinson, Herodotus. , vol. i., p. 319.

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

37

the East, as Latin was in the West during the middle ages. In
the seventh century b.c., Asurbanipal, king of Assyria, tried
to revive it. He ordered copies of the old treatises in the
Akkadian language to be made, and also an Assyrian translation
to be placed beside the text. It is those copies that have reached
our times, conveying to us the knowledge of this ancient form
of speech, that but few among the learned men of Babylon had
preserved at the time of the fall of the Babylonian Empire,
when Darius took possession of the city of Belus.1 We are
informed by the Book of Daniel that none of the king’s wise
men could read the fatidical words, written by a spirit’s hand
on the wall of the banquet hall of King Belshazzar. Only
one, Daniel the prophet, who was learned in all the lore of
ancient Chaldeans, could interpret them.2 Dr. Isaac of Hew
York, and other learned rabbins, assert that these words were
Chaldaic. But they were, and still are, vocables pertaining to
the American Maya language, having precisely the same
meaning as given them by Daniel.3 The Maya Avords
Manel, mane, tec, uppah, read in English :

Man el, “ Thou art past,” in the sense of finished.

Mane, “ Thou art bought,” hence “ weighed ” (all things
being bought and sold by weight).

Tec, “light,” “not ponderous.” The word is taken to-
day in the sense of “ swift,” “ agile.”

Uppah, “Thou wilt be broken in two.” To that Avord
are allied paa and paaxal, “to break in two,” “ to break
asunder,” “ to scatter the inhabitants of a place.” 4

1 Herodotus, lib. iii. , 151, 158.

2 Book of Daniel, chap, i., verse 17.

3 Ilid., chap, v., verses 25-28.

4 Pedro Beltran, Arte del Idioma Maya. Pio Perez, Maya dictionary.
Of. ocaioo, “to break.”

38 QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

Is this a mere coincidence ? By no means. There can be
no doubt that the Akkadian or Chaldean tongue contained
many Maya words. The limits of this work do not allow me
to adduce all the proofs I could bring forward to fully establish
their intimate relationship. A few more must suffice for the
present.

Let us take, for instance, the last words, according to
Matthew and Mark,1 spoken by Jesus on the cross, when a
sponge saturated with posca 2 was put to his lips: “ Eli , Eli,
la/mah sabachthani. ’ ’

No wonder those who stood near him could not understand
what he said. To this day the translators of the Gospels do
not know the meaning of these words, and make him, who
they pretend is the God of the universe, play before mankind
a sorry and pitiful role , I will not say for a god, but for a
man even. He spoke pure Maya. He did not complain
that God had forsaken him when he said to the charitable
individual who tried to allay the pangs of the intolerable thirst
he suffered in consequence of the hardships he had endured,
and the torture of the chastisement inflicted on him: “ Hele,
Hele, lamah zabac ta lii ; ” that is, “Now, now, I am
fainting; darkness covers my face; ” or, in John’s words, “It
is finished.” 3

1 Matthew, chap, xxvii., verse 46. Mark, chap, xv., verse 34.

2 Posca was the ordinary beverage of Roman soldiers, which they were
obliged to carry with them in all their expeditions, among which were the
executions of criminals. Our authorities on this matter are Spartianus
(Life of Hadrian , § 10) and Vulcatius Gallicanus {Life of Avidius Cassius, § 5).
This posca w*as a very cooling drink, very agreeable in hot climates, as the
writer can certify, having frequently used it in his expeditions among the
ruined cities of the Mayas. It is made of vinegar and water, sweetened
with sugar or honey, a kind of oximel.

3 John, chap, xix., verse 30.

Page 82.

Plate XXVIII.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

39

Again, in the legend of the creation, as reported by Bero-
sns, according to Eusebius 1 the Chaldeans believed that a
woman ruled over all the monstrous beasts which inhabited
the waters at the beginning of all things. Her name was
Thalatth. The Greeks translated it Thalassa , and applied
it to the sea itself. Ask modern philologists what is the
etymology of that word. They will answer, It is lost. I say,
Ho — it is not lost! Ask again any Maya scholar the meaning
of the word tliallac. He will tell you it denotes “ a thing
without steadiness,” like the sea.

Again, when confidence in legal divination became shaken
by the progress of philosophical incredulity, and the observa-
tion of auguries was well nigh reduced to a simple matter of
form,2 Chaldean magicians, whose fame was universal and
dated from very remote antiquity, flocked to Borne, and were
welcomed by the Bomans of all classes and both sexes.3 Their
influence soon became so great as to excite the superstitious
fears of the emperors, praetors, and others high in authority.
As a consequence, they were forbidden under heavy penalties,
even that of death, to exercise their science.4 In the year 721
of Borne, under the triumvirate of Octavius, Antonius, and
Lepidus, they were expelled from the city.5 They then scat-
tered in the provinces — in Gaul, Spain, Germany, Brittany, etc.

Messrs. Lenormant and Chevalier, in their “ Ancient His-
tory of the East,” 6 inform us that when these conjurers exor-

1 Eusebius, Chroni., can. i. 2, pp. 11-12.

3 Cicero, De Natura Deorum, 11, 3.

3 Juvenal, Satires , vi. 553. Chaldeis sed major erit fiducia.

* Heineccius, Elements of Roman Jurisprudence , vol. i., Tabul viii., art.

25, p. 496.

6 Dion Cassius, xlix., 43, p. 756. Tacitus, Annal., 11-32.

6 Lenormant et Chevalier, Ancient History of the East , vol. i., p. 448.

40

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

cised evil spirits they cried, “ Hilka, hilka! Besha, besha /”
which they render, “ Go away, go away! evil one, evil one! ”

These authors little suspected, when they wrote those words,
that they were giving a correct translation of the Maya voca-
bles ilil ka xaxbe, forming part of a language still spoken
by thousands of human beings.

In order to understand properly the meaning of the exor-
cism, we must read it, as all ancient Maya writings should be
read, from right to left, thus : xabe, xabe ! kail ! kail ! The
Maya X is the equivalent of the English sh.

Xabe is evidently a corruption of the Maya verb xaxbe,
“to be put aside,” “to make room for one to pass.” Ka
or kafi means “ something bitter,” “ sediment.” Ka in
Egyptian was “spirit,” “genius,” equivalent to the Maya
ku, “god.” II is a contraction of the Maya adjective ilil,
£ £ vicious, ” a £ £ forbidden thing, ’ ’ corresponding exactly to the
English “ill,” and having the same meaning.1 The literal
rendering of these words would therefore be, £ £ Aside, aside !
evil spirit, evil spirit ! ” as given by Messrs. Lenormant and
Chevalier.

J. Collin de Plancy, in his “ Dictionnaire Infernal,” under
the title £ £ Magic W ords, ’ ’ tells us that magicians taught that the
fatal consequences of the bite of a mad dog could be averted
by repeating liax joax max. The learned author of the diction-
ary deprecates the ignorant superstition of people who believe
in such nonsense; and he himself, through his ignorance of
the American Maya language, fails to comprehend the great
scientific importance of those words that to him are meaning-
less.

1 Pio Perez, Maya dictionary, and also ancient Maya dictionary MS.
in Brown Library, Providence, R. I.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

41

These words belong to the Maya tongue, although we are
told they are Chaldee and used by Chaldean magicians.

Hax, in Maya, is a small cord or twine twisted by hand;
that is to say, on the spur of the moment, in a hurry. Such
cord would naturally be used to make a ligature to stop the
circulation of the blood in the wounded limb, to prevent the
rabid virus from entering into it. This ligature is still made
use of in our day by the aborigines of Yucatan in case of any
one being bitten by a snake or other venomous animal.

Pax is a Maya verb of the third conjugation, the meaning
of which is to play on a musical instrument.

The action of music on the nervous system of animals, of
man particularly, was well known of the ancients. They had
recourse to harmonious sounds to calm the fury of those
afflicted with insanity. We read in the Bible: 1 “ And it came
to pass, when the evil spirit from God was upon Saul, that
David took a harp, and the evil spirit departed from him. ” We
are aware that music can excite all passions in man or appease
them when aroused. Martial sounds inflame in the breast of
warriors homicidal rage, and they rush blindly to combat and
slay one another without cause or provocation. Patriotic
hymns sustain the courage of the victims of political parties,
even in the face of death. Soft and sweet melodies soothe the
evil passions, predisposing the mind to peace, quietude, and
meditation. Religious strains excite ecstasy, when the mind
sees visions of heavenly things, and the enthusiasts become
convinced that they hold communion with celestial beings,
whoever or whatever these may be, and imagine they act under
divine impulse.

The thccumaturgi of old Avere well acquainted with the in-
1 1 Samuel, chap, xvi., verse 23.

42

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

fluence of music on men. In the temples of Greece and Asia
they used flutes, cymbals, drums, etc., among other means, to
induce in certain individuals the abnormal condition known
to-day as “clairvoyance,” and to develop prophetic exaltation.
And Elisha said: 1 “ But now bring me a minstrel; and it came
to pass when the minstrel played that the hand of the Lord
came upon him.”

Pax, then, indicates that in cases of hydrophobia they had
recourse to musical instruments to calm the patient and assuage
his sufferings.

Max is the’ Maya name for a certain species of wild pepper
(the Myrtus pimento, of Linnasus, the Eugenia pimenta of De
Candolle). It grows spontaneously and in great abundance in
the West Indies, Yucatan, Central America, in fact, through-
out the tropical regions of >the Western Continent. Cayenne
pepper, therefore, was considered by the Chaldeans as by the
Mayas an antidote to the rabic virus, and applied to the
wounds, as garlic is in our day and has been from remote ages.
It is a very ancient custom among the aborigines of Yucatan,
when anybody is bitten by a rabid dog, to cause the victim
to chew garlic, swallow the juice, and apply the pulp to the
wounds made by the animal’s teeth. They firmly believe that
such application and internal use of the garlic surely cure
hydrophobia, or any other evil consequences of the venomous
virus introduced into the body by the bites of certain animals.

Resuming, liax, pax, max, simply means, make a liga-
ture, soothe the patient by means of soft music, apply wild
pepper to cauterize the wounds and counteract the effects of
the poison.

Let us mention another name the etymon of which, from
’2 Kings, chap. iii. , verse 15. 1 Samuel, chap, x., verse 5.

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

43

the Maya, is so evident that it cannot be regarded as a mere
coincidence. A hymn in the Akkadian language, an invoca-
tion to the god Asshur, the mighty god who dwells in the
temple of Kliarsak-kurra, “the mountain of the world, daz-
zling with gold, silver, and precious stones,” has been trans-
lated by Professor Sayce of England.1

The name of the god and that of the temple in which he
was worshipped are bright flashes that illumine the darkness
surrounding the origin of these ancient nations and their civil-
ization. In Maya the words Kharsak-kurra would have to be
spelled Kal-zac-kul-la, the meaning of which is, literally,
kal, “enclosure ; ” zac, “white ; ” kill, “ to adore ; ” la,
“eternal truth,” “God;” that is, “the white enclosure
where the eternal truth is worshipped.” As to the name
of the god Asshur, or Axul in Maya, it means, a, “thy; ”
xul, “end.”

In all nations that have admitted the existence of a Su-
preme Being, ITe has always been regarded as the beginning
and the end of all things, to which men have aspired, and do
aspire, to be united after the dissolution of the physical body.
This reunion with God, this Nirvana, this End, has in all
ages been esteemed the greatest felicity to which the spirit
can attain. Hence the name Axul, or Asshur, given to the
Supreme Deity by the Assyrians and the Chaldeans.

1 Professor A. H. Sayce (translation), Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western
Asia , London, vol. i., pp. 44-45 ; also Records of the Past , vol. xi., pp.
131-132. Also Lenormant, Chaldean Magic, p. 168 ; last revised transla-
tion in Les Origines de VHistoire, vol. ii., pp. 127-128.

IV.

Some of these Maya-speaking peoples, following the migra-
tory instincts inherited from their early ancestors, left the banks
of the Euphrates and the city of Babylon, and went forth
across the Syrian desert, toward the setting sun, in search of
new lands and new homes. They reached the Isthmus of Suez.
•Pushing their way through it, they entered the fertile valley
of the Nile. Following the banks of the river, they selected
a district of Nubia, where they settled, and which they named
Main,1 in remembrance of the birthplace of their people in
the lands of the setting sun, whose worship they established
in their newly adopted country.2

When the Maya colonists reached the valley of the Nile,
the river was probably at its full, having overflowed its banks.
The communications between the native settlements being
then impossible except by means of boats, these must have
been very numerous. What more natural than to call it the

1 Henry Brugsch-Bey, History of Egypt under the Pharaohs , vol. i. , p. 363 ;
vol. ii., pp. 78-174.

2 Thoth is said to have been the first who introduced into Egypt the
worship of the “ Setting Sun.”

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

45

“ country of boats ” — Cliem, this being the Maya for
“ boat ” ?

Be it remembered that boats, not chariots, must have been
the main means of transportation among the early Egyptians.
Hence, unlike the Aryans, the Greeks, the Bomans, and other
nations, they did not figure the sun travelling through the
heavens in a chariot drawn by fiery steeds, but sailing in the
sky in a boat ; nor were their dead carried to their resting-
place in the West in a chariot, but in a boat.1

EGYPTIAN FUNERAL BOAT.

No doubt at the time of their arrival the waters were
swarming with crocodiles, so they also naturally called the
country the “place of crocodiles,” Ain, which word is the
name of Egypt on the monuments ; 2 and in the hieroglyphs
the tail of that animal stood for it. But Ain is the

©Maya for “crocodile.” The tail serves as rudder to
the animal ; so for the initiates it symbolized, in this
instance, a boat as well as a crocodile.3
“ A real enigma,” says Mr. Henry Brugsch, “ is proposed

1 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , vol. iii., p. 178.

2 Henry Brugsch-Bey, Hist, of Egypt , vol. i., p. 10.

3 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , vol. iii., p. 200.

46 QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

to us in the derivation of the curious proper names by which
the foreign peoples of Asia, each in its own dialect, were ac-
customed to designate Egypt. The Hebrews gave the land
the name of Mizramti ; the Assyrians, Muzur. We may feel
assured that at the basis of all these designations there lies an
original form which consisted of the three letters M, z, r — all
explanations of which have as yet been unsuccessful.” 1

It may be asked, and with reason, How is it that so many
learned Egyptologists, who have studied the question, have
failed to find the etymology of these words ?

The answer is, indeed, most simple. It is because they have
not looked for it in the only language where it is to be found
— the Maya.

Egypt has always been a country mostly devoid of trees,
which were uprooted by the inundation, whose waters carried
their debris and deposited therrq all over the land. The hus-
bandman, in order to plough the soil, had first to clear it
from the rubbish ; hence no doubt the names Misur, or Muzur ,
given to it by the Assyrians. Well, then, miz, in the Maya
language, means “ to clear away rubbish of trees,” and lnuu-
zul “ to uproot trees.”

Hot satisfied with these onomatopoetic names, they gave
the new place of their adoption others that would recall to
their mind and to that of their descendants the mother country
beyond the western seas. We learn from the Troano MS.,
the Codex Cortesianus, and the inscriptions, that Mayacli
from the remotest ages was symbolized either as a beb (mul-
berry tree) or as a liaaz (banana-tree);2 also by a serpent
with inflated breast, standing erect in the midst of the waters

1 Henry Brugsch-Bey, Hist, of Egypt, vol. i., p. 12.

2 Aug. Le Plongeon, Sacred Mysteries, p. 115, et passim.

Page 82.

Plate XXIX.

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

47

between the two American Mediterraneans, the Gulf of Mex-
ico and the Caribbean Sea, represented in the Maya writings
by a sign similar to our numerical 8.1 Diego de Cogolludo
in his history of Yucatan informs us that up to a. d. 1517,
when the Spaniards for the first time invaded that country,
the land of the Mayas was still designated as “the great
serpent ” and “ the tree.” 2

The Maya colonists therefore called their new settlement
on the banks of the Nile the “ land of the serpent ” and also
the “land of the tree.” The Egyptian hierogram-
matists represented their country as a serpent with
inflated breast, standing on a figure 8, under which is ’8^'

sculptures resembles a human heart,5 which vividly recalls
the on of the Mayas, that bears the alligator pear — the
Laurus per sea of Linnaeus, so abundant in tropical America.

Can it be that all these are mere coincidences ? If they be,
then let us present more of them.

The river, spread as it was over the land, they designated
as Hapimil, which in aftertimes was corrupted into Hapi-

1 Aug. Le Plougeon, Sacred Mysteries , p. 120, et 'passim.

2 Cogolludo, Hist, de Yucathan, lib. i., cap. i.

3 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , vol. iii. , p. 199.

* Eid., p. 200.

5 Ibid., p. 119.

a sieve, called Mayab in Maya; some-
times also as a serpent with inflated
breast \ and wings, wearing a head-
dress / identical with that worn by
some of the magnates pictured in

the bas-reliefs at
ized Egypt as a
sacred to the

CliicTien.3 They likewise symbol-
tree4 believed to be the Perseo ,
goddess Athor, whose fruit in the

48

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

mau. It is a word composed of two Maya primitives — lia,
“water,” and pim, “the thickness of flat surfaces;” hence
the “thickness,” the “depth of water.” The desinence il is
used as a suffix to nouns to denote usage, custom, or a thing
having existed previously. This accords precisely with the
signification given to the name Hapimau of the Nile, by
Egyptian scholars, the 1 ‘ abyss of water. ’ ’

Herodotus tells us1 that “ anciently the whole of Egypt,
with the exception of the nome of Thebes, was a marshy
swamp. ’ ’

The name Thebes, of the capital of Upper Egypt, was
Taba among the natives. That word seems to be allied to the
Maya vocable tepal, “to govern,” “to reign,” which, as a
noun, is equivalent to “majesty,” “king,” the “head of the
nation.”

As to Memphis, the capital of Lower Egypt, its sacred
name, we are informed by M. Birch, was Hakaptah , which is
a word composed of two Maya vocables — ha, ‘ ‘ water, ’ ’ and
kaptah, past participle of the verb kaapal, “to place in a
hole.” The name of the city would then signify that it was
built in a hole made by water ; very appropriate indeed, since
we are told that King Menes, the founder of Memphis, having
diverted the course of the Kile, built the city in the bed of the
ancient channel in which it flowed.

The very name of King Menes may be a mere surname
commemorative of his doings, since the Maya word men
means “wise man,” “legislator,” “builder,” “architect,”
every one of these epithets being applicable to him.

Although the limits of this book allow but little space to
adduce more proofs of the Maya origin of the names of places

1 Herodotus, lib. ii., iv.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

49

— which would be, after all, but cumulative evidence, for which
the reader is referred to my larger work, “ The Monuments of
Mayacli and their Historical Teachings ” — I cannot resist the
temptation to mention the name of the Governing Spirit of the
universe, that of the Creator, and of the deities that represented
His attributes to Egyptian minds ; also giving the Maya ety-
mology of these names. In order that it cannot be argued
that they are mere coincidences, I will next present the tableau
of creation as it still exists on the east facade of the palace at
Chicften, where we have soon to return and pursue our study
of the Memorial Hall dedicated to Prince Coll by his sister-
wife Queen Moo.

Ghnoumis , or ISfourn, was said to be the 1 1 vivifying spirit, ’ ’
the “cause of life in animals,” the “father of all that has
life;”1 therefore, the abundant source from which all things
emanate. This is the exact meaning of the Maya particle
num in composition with another word.2 Amen-imm, or
x-num, means the “ architect,” the “ builder of all things ” —
a, contraction of all, “the; ” men, “architect,” “builder,”
“ wise man,” “legislator;” num, or x-num, “ multiplicity,”
“ abundance of things.”

Kneph was another name for X-noum , who was also
called Amen- Kneph. Horapollo says : ‘ ‘ The snake is the

emblem of the spirit which pervades the universe. ” 3 So also
we learn from Eusebius, who tells us that the Egyptians called
Kuepli the “ good genius,” and represented him under the
shape of a serpent.4 In the ancient monuments the god

1 Eusebius, Prcep. et Demons. Evang., lib. iii., chap, xi., p. 215. Diodorus
Siculus, Hist., lib. i. 12.

2 Pedro Beltran, Arte del Idioma Maya.

3 Horapollo, Hieroglyphs , lib. ii.

4 Eusebius, Prcep., Evang., lib. iii., chap. xi. Vigiers, Paris, 1628.

4

50

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

Amen-Knejpli is often depicted either preceded or followed
by an enormous serpent that envelops him within its huge
folds.1 This is not the place to enter into speculations as
to the reasons why the Egyptians selected the serpent as
emblem of the deity. In another work I have explained the
origin of serpent worship among the Mayas.2 The name
K-nejph can be read Ka-neph, that may be a dialectical pro-
nunciation of the Maya word Canliel, which means a serpent,
a dragon. Later on we will see the serpent accompanying the
statue of the Creator, in the tableau of creation at Cliicllen.

Ptliah was the name of another attribute of the Divine
Spirit, a different form of the creative power, said to be sprung
from an egg produced from the mouth of Kneph.3 It there-
fore corresponds to Brahma , the ancestor of all beings, in the
Hindoo cosmogony,4 to Melien in that of the Mayas.
Pthah, says Iamblicus, was the artisan • the “ Lord of Truth,”
according to Porphyry. In the Maya language Tliaah
means the “ worker,” the “artisan.”5 In the Maya sculp-
tures, particularly on the trunk of the mastodon heads
that adorn the most ancient buildings, the name is written

Khem was the generative principle of nature,
another attribute of the Creator. This god presided over gen-
eration, not only of man and all species of animals, but of the
vegetable world also. Mr. Samuel Birch affirms that his name
has been variously read Xem or Mill.

1 Eusebius, Prcep., Evang., lib. iii., chap. xi. Vigiers, Paris, 1628.

2 Aug. Le Plougeon, Sacred Mysteries, p. 100, et passim, particularly in
Monuments of Mayach and their Historical Teachings, chap. iii.

3 Horapollo, Hierogl., lib. i. 12.

4 Manava-Dharma-Sastr a, lib. i , chap, i., Sloka 9.

6 Pio Perez, Maya dictionary. Pedro Beltran, Arte del Idioma Maya.

Tza, “ that which is necessary.” 6

6 Ibid.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

51

In the Maya language liem-ba is the organs of generation
in animals, xex is the sperm of man, and min the “grand-
mother on the father’s side.” 1

hlaturally this query will present itself to the mind of the
reader as it has to that of the author : Supposing Maya colo-
nists, coming from the east, reached the valley of the Nile,
established themselves there, and developed that stupendous
civilization of which Renan says:2 “ For when one thinks of
this civilization, at least six thousand five hundred years old
from the present day; that it has had no known infancy; that
this art, of which there remain innumerable monuments, has no
archaic period ; that the Egypt of Cheops and of Chephren is
superior in a sense to all that followed — one is seized with
giddiness. ‘ On estpris de vertige. 5 ”

Although mistaken in asserting that Egyptian art had no
archaic period, he is right, however, in saying that its birth-
place was a mystery for Egyptologists ; for, to quote Rawlin-
son’s own words, “ In Egypt it is notorious that there is no
indication of an early period of savagery or barbarism.

All authorities agree that, however far back we go, we find in
Egypt no rude or uncivilized time out of which civilization is
developed.”3 “The reasonable inference from these facts,”
says Osburn “ (to our apprehension, we are free to confess, the
only reasonable one), appears to be, that the first settlers in
Egypt were a company of persons in a high state of civiliza-
tion, but that through some strange anomaly in the history of
man they had been deprived of a great part of the language
and the entire written system which had formerly been the

1 Pio Perez, Maya dictionary. Pedro Beltran, Art del Idioma Maya.

2 Ernest Renan, Revue des deux Monies, April, 1865.

3 Rawlinson, Origin of Nations, p. 13.

52

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

means and vehicle of their civilization. . . . Combin-

ing this inference with the clear, unanswerable indications we
have already pointed out, that the fathers of ancient Egypt
first journeyed thither across the Isthmus of Suez, and that
they brought with them the worship of the £ setting sun, ’ how
is it possible to resist the conclusion that they came thither
from the plains of Babel, and that the civilization of Egypt
was derived from the hanks of the Euphrates ? ” 1

This so far is, or seems to be, perfectly true; but who were
the emigrants ? Osburn does not tell us. What country did
they come from when they reached the banks of the Euphrates
and brought there civilization ? They did not £ £ drop from the
unknown heavens,” 2 as Seiss would have his readers to believe,
although they came from Kui-land, the country of the gods
in the west.3

The Egyptians themselves claimed that their ancestors were
strangers who, in very remote ages, settled on the banks of
the Nile,4 bringing there, with the civilization of their mother
country, the art of writing and a polished language ; that they
had come from the direction of the setting sun,5 and that they
were the ££ most ancient of men.” 6 This expression Herodotus
regarded as mere boasting. It is, however, easily explained if
the Egyptians held Mayacli, j “the land first emerged
from the bosom of the deep,” as the cradle of their race.

This statement, that the Egyptians pointed to the west as

1 William Osburn, The Monumental History of Egypt , vol. i., chap, iv.,

pp. 220-221.

2 Seiss, A Miracle in Stone , p. 40.

3 Ku is the Maya and also the Egyptian for Divine Intelligence, God ;
i is the mark of plural in Egyptian and Quiche.

4 Rawlinson, Origin of Nations , p. 13.

6 Diodorus, Hist. , vol. i., p. 50.

c Herodotus, Hist., lib. ii. 11.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

53

the point of the compass where the birthplace of their ancestors
was situated, may seem a direct contradiction of the fact that
the first Maya settlers in the valley of the Nile came from the
banks of the Euphrates; that is, from the east. This seeming
discrepancy is, however, easily explained by the other fact, that
there were two distinct Maya migrations to Egypt. The
second, the more important, coming from the West, direct from
Mayacli, produced a more lasting impression on the memory
of the people.

We have followed step by step the Mayas in their jour-
neys from their homes in the ‘ ‘ Lands of the West ” across
the Pacific, along the shores of the Indian Ocean to the head
of the Persian Gulf, then up the Euphrates — on the banks of
which tney formed settlements that in time became large and
important cities — to Babylon. The migration of these Maya-
speaking peoples from the eastern countries, across the Syrian
desert, to Egypt took place centuries before the coming to
that country of Queen Moo with her retinue, direct from
Mayacli, across the Atlantic. Her followers, fresh from the
“ Lands of the West,” naturally brought with them the man-
ners and customs, traditions, religion, arts, and sciences of the
mother country they had so recently abandoned. They were
aped, and their ways readily adopted, by the descendants of the
first Maya settlers, who had become more or less contaminated
with the habits, superstitions, religious ideas, of the inhabitants
of the various places where they had so long sojourned, or
with whom they had been in contact.

If, therefore, we wish to find the cradle of Egyptian civili-
zation, where it had its infancy and developed from a state of
barbarism, and why it appeared full grown on the banks of
the Nile, we must seek westward whence it was transplanted.

54

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

It is a well-known fact that history repeats itself. What hap-
pened centuries ago in the valley of the USTile happens in our
day. European civilization is now being transported full
grown to the United States and other countries of the Western
Continent. Ten thousand years hence, scholars speaking of
the present American civilization may reecho Renan’s words
regarding the Egyptian: “It had no known infancy — no
archaic period.”

We have seen that the Akkadians — that is, the primitive
Chaldeans, who dwelt in places enclosed by palisades in the
marshy lands at the mouth of the Euphrates — who brought
civilization to Mesopotamia, possessed a perfect system of writ-
ing ; spoke a polished language akin to the Maya ; had cos-
mogonic notions identical with those of the Mayas, and
expressed them by means of a diagram similar to, but more
complex than, that found in Uxmal, Yucatan.

We have also seen that the Maya-speaking peoples, whose
tracks we have followed across the Syrian desert, and who
settled in the valley of the Nile, brought there the art of writ-
ing, a polished language, and the same cosmogonic notions
entertained by the Chaldees, the Hindoos, and the Mayas;
that the names of the cities they founded, of the gods they
worshipped, were also words belonging to the Maya language.
In another work 1 it has been shown that the Maya alphabet,
discovered by the author, and the Egyptian hieratic alphabet
were identical. Did the limits of this book allow, it could
also be proved that the initial letter of the Maya names of the
objects representing the letters of the Egyptian alphabet is
the very letter so represented in said alphabet, and that several
of these signs are contours of localities in the Maya Empire.

1 Le Plongeon, Sacred Mysteries , Introduction, p. xii.

Page 82.

Plate XXX.

QUEEN MOO AND TIIE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

55

From these premises may it not be safely asserted, that,
if the Mayas and the Egyptians did not teach one another
the arts of civilization, they both learned them from the same
masters, at the same schools ? And if Professor Max Muller’s
assertion be true, that particularly in the early history of the
human intellect there existed the most intimate relationship
between language, religion, and nationality,1 then there can be
no doubt that the Egyptians and the Mayas were branches
of one mighty stem firmly
rooted in the soil of the
“Land of Kui ” in the
Western Continent.

Should I give dates,
according to the author of
the Troano MS. and other
Maya historians, many
would doubt their accuracy
and reply : How do we

know that you have cor-
rectly interpreted narra-
tives—written in characters that none of the Americanists,
who claim to be authorities on American palaeography, can
decipher ? It is well known that they cannot interpret with
certainty half a dozen of the Maya signs, much less translate
a whole sentence; and they assert that, if they, who have
written whole volumes on the subject, do not understand these
Maya writings, no one else can.

For this reason I leave to Mr. Bunsen the care of determin-
ing the dates, particularly as those calculated by him, strange

GODPESS UATI (?) MATI.2

1 Max Muller, Science of Religion, p. 53.

2 Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , vol. ii. , p. 198.

56

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

as it may appear, correspond, very nearly to those given by the
ancient Maya writers.

“ The latest date at which the commencement of Egyptian
life, the immigration from the Euphrates district,1 can have
taken place is 9580 b.c., or about 6000 before Menes. But the
empire which Menes founded, or the chronological period of
the Egyptians as a nation, down to the end of the reign of
Nectanebo II., comprised, according to our historical computa-
tions, very nearly thirty-three centuries.

‘ £ In reality, there were disturbances, especially in those
early times, which must be taken into account. We have cal-
culated the lowest possible date to be six thousand years, or one
hundred and eighty generations, before Menes. Were this to
be doubled, it would assuredly carry us too far. A much higher
date, indeed twice that number of years, would certainly be
more conceivable than a lower one, considering the vast amount
of development and historical deposit which existed prior to
Menes. It can be proved that but a few centuries after his
time everything had become rigid not only in language but
also in writing, which had grown up entirely on Egyptian soil,
and which must be called the very latest link in that ancient
civilization.

“Now, if instead of six thousand years we reckon four
thousand more, or about ten thousand years from the first im-
migration down to Menes, the date of the Egyptian origines
would be about 14000 b.c.” 2

1 Philostratus, in his Life of Apollonius of Tyana, a book written at the
beginning of the Christian era, asserts (p. 146) that the first Egyptians were
a colony from India.

2 Bunsen, Egypt's Place in Universal History , vol. iv., p. 58.

V,

When, by their increasing numbers and their superior civil-
ization, the descendants of the emigrants that came from the
banks of the Euphrates had become the dominating power
in the valley of the Nile, they sent colonists to the land of
Kanaan. These, following the coast of the Mediterranean,
advanced as far north as Mount Taurus in Asia Minor; and as
they progressed they founded settlements, that in time became
great and important cities, the sites of mighty nations whose
history forms for us, at present, the ancient history of the
world.

The names of these cities and nations will be the unerring
guide which will lead us on the road followed by these Maya-
speaking colonists, that, starting from Egypt, carried their
civilization along the eastern shores of the Mediterranean,
northward; then, eastward, back again to the banks of the
Euphrates in Mesopotamia.

On leaving Egypt they had to traverse the sandy desert
that forms the Isthmus of Suez, and is the northern limit, the
end, of the Sinai peninsula. We have already said that the

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

59

The word Rephaim is another enigma for philologists.
They pretend, although they do not affirm it positively, that
it means “giants.”1 The Maya, however, tells us it simply
signifies “inhabitants of the lowlands,” which is the purport
of the name Canaan , according to some philologists. Rephaim
seems to he composed of three Maya primitives — leb, ha,
iin — leb, to “cover;” ha, “water;” im, contraction of
imix, “bosom,” “basin;” therefore, literally, “the basin
covered by water,” hence the “ lowlands.”

¥e read in the ethnic table of Genesis,2 “ Canaan begat
Tzidon his firstborn,” which means that Tzidon was prob-
ably the earliest settlement founded by the Maya-speaking
colonists from Egypt; when, according to the book of Ka-
bathoean agriculture, compiled in the early ages of the Chris-
tian era, it seems that the Phoenicians were expelled from
Babylon in consequence of a quarrel with the Cushite monarch
then reigning — an event which probably occurred about the
time of Abram, when a migration set in motion from the banks
of the Euphrates to the shores of the Mediterranean. They
had therefore been in close relation with the Ethiopians of the
coast of the Erythraean Sea and the Chaldeans of Babylonia.
Then, even if they used also Maya words in giving names to
the countries they conquered and the cities they founded, it
could be easily accounted for; as also the similarity of their
alphabetical characters with those carved on the walls of the
temples and palaces of Mayach, where we see portraits of
bearded men of unmistakable Phoenician types, discovered by
the author in 1875. Tzidon-Rabbah is one of the epithets
given in the Bible to the old capital of Phoenicia, and is trans-

1 Joshua, chap, xii., verse 4; chap, xiii., verse 12.

2 Genesis, chap, x., verse 15.

60

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

lated “ Zidon the great.” The Maya, however, gives Tzidon
the ancient}

On the northern coast of Yucatan there is a seaport called
to-day Zilan, near which are to be seen the extensive ruins of
the ancient city of Oil an (. Dzilan ). Is it not possible that
the founders of the seaport in Canaan gave it the name of
Tzidon in remembrance of that of the seaport in Mayach, and
that Tzidon is either a dialectical pronunciation or a corrup-
tion of Dzilan ?

The city that vied in importance with Tzidon, and at last
obtained the supremacy, was Tzur, “ the strong city,”2 the
Tyrus of the Greeks and of the Latins. The philologists
translate the name “rock,” and historians affirm that the
founder gave it to the city because it was built on a rocky
island about half a mile from the shore. Tzub is the Maya
for “ promontory,” and Tzucub is a “ province.”

The principal god worshipped by the Phoenicians was
the sun, under the name of Baal or Bel, which we are told
meant “lord,” “ chief.” This is exactly one of the meanings
of the word Baal (in Maya).3 As for Bel, it is in Maya the
“road,” the “origin.”

Astarte, or Ishtar, was the goddess of love of the Phoe-
nicians, the Chaldeans, Assyrians, etc., as Yenus was of the
Romans, and Aphrodite of the Greeks. Her cult was cele-
brated with great pomp in Babylon and in Nineveh. Her
name in Maya would be Ixtal or Ixtac, a word composed of
two Maya primitives — the feminine pronoun ix, “ she,” and
the verb tal or tac, “to feel the desire to do something cor-

1 Rablah would read in Maya Labal, ' the meaning of which is “to
become old,” “to age.”

2 Joshua, chap, xix., verse 29. Jeremiah, chap, xxv., verse 22.

3 Jose de Acosta, Historia Natural y Moral de las Indias, 1590.

i

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

61

poreal; ” as, for instance, tac in uenel, “I want to sleep.”
Ixtal or Ixtac, or Ishtar, would therefore mean “she who
wishes to satisfy a corporeal desire, inclination, or want.”
What name more appropriate for the goddess of love and lust !

Moloch was another god of the Phoenicians, to whom
offerings of human victims were made by enclosing them
alive in a bronze statue representing him. This being heated
to red heat, the bodies were consumed,1 and were said, by the
priests, to have served as food for the god who had devoured
them.2

Moloch is another descriptive name composed of two Maya
primitives — mol, to gather, and och or ooch, food, provis-
ions, provender. Do not these sacrifices to Moloch of human
victims burned alive vividly recall those made by the Itzaes of
Peten to Hobo the destroyer, in which a human victim was
burned alive amidst dances and songs ? 3

Neighbors to the Phoenicians, on the north, were the pow-
erful Khati , who dwelt in the valley of the Orontes. Their
origin is still a matter of speculation for ethnologists, and so
is also their name for philologists. They made themselves
famous on account of their terrible wars with the Assyrians
and the Egyptians. Placed between these two nations, they
opposed either, and proved tenacious and redoubtable adversa-
ries to both. All historians agree that the Khati, up to the
time when they were vanquished by Rameses the Great, always
placed obstacles in the way of conquest by these nations, and
at all times sallied forth in battle array to meet them and
prevent their passage through their territories. Was it from

1 Leviticus, chap, xviii., verse 21.

2 John Kenrick, Phoenicia , p. 317. Gustave Flaubert, Salamlo , chap,
xiii. Moloch the Devour er, Diodorus Siculus, lib. xx., cap. 14.

3Cogolludo, Ilist. de Yucathan, lib. ix., cap. 14.

62

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

that fact that they were called Khciti ? Any Maya scholar
will answer, No donbt of it; since kat is a Maya verb mean-
ing “ to place obstacles across a road ” or “ to sally forth to
impede the passage of a road ” 1 — a name most in accordance
with the customs of that warlike nation.

The Khati were not warriors only ; they were likewise mer-
chants, whose capital, Carchemish, situated at the confluence
of the river Chebar and the Euphrates, vied in commercial
importance with Tyre and Carthage. There met traders from
India and other countries.

Carchemish , the great emporium, was, as its name indi-
cates, the place where navigators and merchants from afar
congregated. This name is composed of two Maya vocables —
call, “city,” and chemul, “navigator.” Carchemish may
well be a dialectical pronunciation of Cahchemul, the
“ port,” the “ place of navigators,” hence of merchants.

Katish was the sacred city of the Khati, where they
were wont to worship in a temple dedicated to Set, or Sut,
their principal god. Set was tbe brother of Osiris, and his
murderer. His name is a cognate word of ze (Maya), “to
ill-treat with blows.” In that place sacrifices were offered,
and religious ceremonies particularly performed, as its name
indicates. We have just said that call is the Maya for “ city ”
or “village.” Tich is a peculiar ceremony practised by the
Mayas from the remotest antiquity, and still observed by their
descendants. It consists in making offerings, called u-kanil-
col, “the crop is ripe,” to the Yumil Ivaax, the “lord of
the fields, ’ ’ of the p rimitice of all crops before beginning the
harvest. In another work2 I have described the ceremony.

1 Pedro Beltran, Arte del Idioma Maya. Pio Perez, Maya dictionary.

2 A. Le Plongeon, Monuments of Mayach, etc.

Page 63.

Plate XXL

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

63

Caktich, or Katish, is therefore an appropriate name for a
sacred city where religious ceremonies are performed and offer-
ings made to the gods.

The whole coast of Asia Minor on the Mediterranean was
once inhabited by nations having their homonyms in the
"Western Continent. Prominent among these were the Cari-
ans, of unknown origin, but wide-spread fame. Herodotus,1
himself a Carian, says that the ancient Carians called themselves
Lelcges, a name akin to Leletli (Maya), “to dwell in rocky
places.” Well, Strabo2 tells us they had been the occupants
of all Ionia and of the islands of the Aegean Sea, until driven
from them by the Ionians and the Dorians, when they estab-
lished themselves on the mainland. Thucydides calls them
pirates, and asserts that King Minos expelled them from the
Cyclades.3 Herodotus, bound to defend his countrymen from
such an imputation, simply represents them as a warlike and
seafaring people that, when requested, manned the ships of
Minos. At that time they styled themselves “ the most famous
of all nations of the earth.” 4 The dress of the Carian women
consisted of a linen tunic which required no fastenings.5 From
all antiquity this tunic was used by the Maya women, and is
still by the aborigines of Yucatan, Peten, and other places in
Central America. It is called nipil.

The name Kar, or Carian, certainly is identical with that
of the warlike nation the Caras , whose name is still preserved
in that of the Caribbean Sea, and of many cities and places in
the northern parts of the South American continent, the

1 Herodotus, lib. i., 171.

2 Strabo, lib. vii., p. 321 ; lib. xiii., p. 611.

3 Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War , lib. i., 8.

* Herodotus, lib. i., 171.

6 Ibid. , lib. v., 87-88.

64

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

Antilles, and the coast of Honduras, where Carib tribes still
exist. These Caras , once neighbors of the Mayas, extended
their conquests from the frontiers of Mayaclx throughout the
southern continent; to the river Plata, east of the Andes;
to Chile, west of that chain of mountains. It would indeed
be very difficult to explain the striking similarity of abo-
riginal names of places and tribes still used in the countries
known to-day as V enezuela and Colombia, and those of locali-
ties on the shores of the Mediterranean, and of the people who
dwelt in them, except through the intimate relationship of the
Carians of Asia Minor and the Caras of the “ Lands of the
"West.” Their names are not only similar, but, on both sides
of the Atlantic, were synonymous of “man,” jpar excellence ,
of “ eminent warrior,” endowed with great dexterity and
extraordinary power.1 When the Spaniards landed for the
first time in America, the Caribs of the islands of St. Vin-
cent and Martinique were cannibals, and the terror of their
neighbors.

Lastly, according to Max Muller, 2 Philip of Theangela, a
Carian historian, says that the idiom of the Carians was mixed
with a great number of Greek words. But Homer represents
them among the earliest inhabitants of Asia Minor and of
the Grecian peninsula,3 anterior, consequently, to the Hellenes,
who in their intercourse with them would naturally have made
use of many words of their language that afterward became
engrafted on that of the Greeks themselves.

For the present we shall depart from the eastern shores of

1 Rochefort, Histoire NatureXle et Morale des Antilles, p. 401. D’Orbigny,
L' Homme Americain, vol. ii. , p. 268. Alcedo, Diccionario Geografico & Ilisto-
rico de las Indias Occidentales.

2 Max Muller, Fragments , Hist. Grose, vol. iv., p. 475.

3 Homer, Iliad , X., 428-429.

Page 64.

Plate XXII.

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

65

the Mediterranean and from Egypt, which we shall revisit later
on. Before returning to Mayach let us again ask, This per-
fect identity of Maya, Hindoo, Chaldean, and Egyptian
cosmogonic notions ; these Maya words that form the names
of places, nations, and gods, descriptive of their attributes or
characteristics, in India, Chaldea, Phoenicia, and Egypt — are
they mere coincidences ?

VI.

In our journey westward across the Atlantic we shall pass
in sight of that spot where once existed the pride and life of
the ocean, the Land of Mu, which, at the epoch that we have
been considering, had not yet been visited by the wrath of
Homen, that lord of volcanic fires to whose fury it afterward
fell a victim. The description of that land given to Solon by
Sonchis, priest at Sais ; its destruction by earthquakes, and sub-
mergence, recorded by Plato in his “ Timrnus,” have been told
and retold so many times that it is useless to encumber these
pages with a repetition of it. I shall therefore content myself
with mentioning that the ten provinces which formed the
country,1 that Plato says Kronos divided among his ten sons,2
were thickly populated, and that the black race seems to have
predominated. We shall not tarry in Zinaan, “ the scor-
pion, ’ ’ longer than to inquire if, perchance, the Egyptian god-
dess Selk, whose title was “the great reptile, ” directress of
the boohs, whose office was principally in the regions of the

1 Troano MS., part ii. , plate v.

8 Plato, Timceus.

QUEEN 2100 AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

67

Amenti — that is, in the “ Lands of the West ” — where she was
employed in noting on the palm branch of Thoth the years
of human life, was not a deification of the
West Indies of our day.

Selk was also called the lady of letters ,
from which she appears to have been the goddess
of writing • 1 and her emblem was placed over
the doors of libraries, as the keeper of hooks.

What connection could possibly have existed,
in the mind of Egyptian wise men, between a
scorpion, the letters of the alphabet, and the
art of writing, Egyptologists do not inform us.

Still they did nothing concerning their sym-
bols and their deities without a motive. In
thus making Sclk the goddess of writing, and G0IXDESS SELK-
symbolizing her as a scorpion, did they intend to indicate that
the art of writing and knowledge of the books came to
them from the “ Lands of the West,” and take the shape of
the West Indies as emblem of said lands?

This suggestion seems plausible if we consider that they
figured the land of Psek 2 as a scorpion, and that, from the
general contour of the group of islands known to us as the
West Indies, the Mayas called them Zinaan, the “scor-
pion.”3 But Zinaan means also an “accent,” a “mark in
writing.” (See Plate Y.)

As to the name Selk, it may have been suggested by the
color of the black ink used in writing, or by the name of the
large black scorpion quite abundant in Central America. Eek

1 Wilkinson, Manners and Customs, vol. iii., chap. siii.

2 Ibid., p. 169 (note). Champollion lejeune, Pantheon, plate xv.

s Uhi supra, Introduction, pp. xli-lx.

68

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

means “ black” in Maya. If to designate the name of a god-
dess we prefix the word with the feminine article X (English
sh), we have X-Eek, that may easily become Selk. Ekeliuch
is the name of the black scorpion. X-Ekchuch would be that
of the female black scorpion. From it the name of the Egyp-
tian goddess of writing and the connection of the scorpion with
letters may easily be derived.

From Zinaan we set sail for the nearest seaport in
Mayach. It is Tulum, a fortified place, as the name in-
dicates, situated in lat. X. 20° 11' 50" and long. W. 87° 26' 55"
from Greenwich. Its ruins, seen from afar, serve yet as a land-
mark to mariners navigating the waters of the eastern coast of
the peninsula of Yucatan.

Proceeding thence inland, in a direction west eight de-
grees north, one hundred and twenty miles as the crow flies,
we reach the city of Chicken whence we started on our
voyage of circumnavigation.

Page 69.

Plate XXIII.

It is well that we now return with a knowledge of the
myths of the Hindoos and the Egyptians regarding creation.
¥e shall need them to comprehend the meaning of the tableau
over the doorway of the east facade of the palace. Many
have looked at it since, toward the beginning of the Christian
era, the wise Itzaes abandoned the city when it was sacked and
devastated by barbaric Hahuatl tribes coming from the south.
How many have understood its meaning, and the teaching it
embodies?1 Yery few, indeed; otherwise they would have
respected instead of defacing it.

Among the modern Americanists and professors of Ameri-
can archaeology, even those who pretend to be authorities as to
things pertaining to the ancient Mayas and their civilization,
how many are there who understand and can explain the

1 In order to thoroughly apprehend the full meaning of this most inter-
esting cosmic relation, it is necessary to he versed in occultism, even as
taught by the Brahmins and other wise men of India. Occultists will not
fail to comprehend the teaching conveyed in this sculpture, which teaching
proves that, in very remote ages, the Maya sages had intimate communi-
cations with those of India and other civilized countries.

70

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

lessons that the Maya philosophers in remote ages have in-
trusted to stone in this tableau, for the benefit and instruction
of the generations that were to follow after them ?

No one has ever ventured an explanation of it. And yet it
contains no mystery. Its teaching is easily read ; the explana-
tory legends being written in Egyptian characters, that, how-
ever, are likewise Maya.

If we ask the Brahmins to explain it, they will tell us :
At the beginning of the first chapter of the “ Manava-Dharma-
Sastra ” — a book compiled, according to Mr. Chezy,1 from very
ancient works of the Brahmins, about thirteen hundred years
before the Christian era — we read: “ The Supreme Spirit having
resolved to cause to come forth from its own corporeal substance
the divers creatures , first produced the waters, mid in them de-
posited a productive seed. This germ became an egg, brilliant as
gold, resplendent as a star with thousands of rays / and in this
egg was reproduced the Supreme Being, under the form of
Brahma, the ancestor of all beings. ’ ’ 2

An analysis of the tableau shows this quotation from the
Brahministic book to be an explanation of it, although not
quite complete. But we find the balance of the description in
Eusebius’s “ Evangelical Breparations. ”

/ We are told that the Supreme Intelligence first produced
the waters. The watery element is represented in the sculp-
tures in Mayacli, Egypt, Babylonia, India, etc., by superposed
wavy or broken lines These lines form the rim,

or frame, of the tableau, surrounding it nearly, as the water
encircles the land. It is well to notice that the upper line
of water is opened in the middle, and that each part ter-

1 Chfizy, Journal des Savants. 1831 ; also H. T. Colebrooke.

2 Manava-Dharma-Sastra. lib. i., Slokas 8-9.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

71

minates in a serpent head; also, that the distance between
said serpent heads is two-fifths of the whole line. Is this with-
out significance ? Certainly not. Everything has its meaning
in the Maya sculptures. Did the learned men of Mayach
know that the waters cover about three-fifths of the earth,
the land only two-fifths ? And why not ? Do we not know
it? Were not their people navigators? It may be asked,
What is the meaning of the serpent heads at the extremity of
the lines, symbol of water? Are they merely ornamental?
By no means. They indicate that said lines represent the
ocean, kanali in Maya, the “great, the mighty serpent;”
image, among the Mayas, Quiches, and other tribes allied to
them, as among the Egyptians, of the Creator, whose emblem
(says ITorapollo) was a serpent of a blue color with yellow
scales. Can, we know, means “serpent,” but kan is Maya
for “ yellow.” Kanali, the ocean, might therefore be inter-
preted metaphorically “the powerful yellow serpent.”1 We
read in the ‘ ‘ Popol-Y uh, ’ ’ sacred book of the Quiches, regarding
Gucumatz, the principle of all things, manifesting at the dawn
of creation: 2 “ All was immobility and silence in the darkness,
in the night; only the Creator, the Maker, the Dominator,
the Serpent covered with feathers, they who engender, they
who create, were on the waters as an ever-increasing light.
They are surrounded by green and azure ; their name is Cfucn-
matz.” Compare this conception of chaos and the dawn of
creation among the Quiches, with that of the Hindoos as we
read of it in the “ Aitareya-A’ran’ya: ” 3 “ Originally this uni-
verse was only a soul. Nothing active or inactive existed. The

1 See Appendix, note vii,, p. 186.

s Popol-Vuh, lib. i., chap. i.

3 H. T. Colebrooke, Notice on the Sacred Bootes of the Hindoos , Aitareya-
A'ran'ya, lib. ii., $ iv.

72

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

thought came to Him, I wish to create worlds. And so He
created these worlds, the water, the light, the mortal beings,
and the waters. That water is the region above; the sky that
supports it ; the atmosphere that contains the light ; the earth
that is perishable; and the lower regions that of the waters.”

On the first of the tablets inscribed with the cosmogony of
the Chaldeans, found in the library of the palace of King
Assurbanipal, at Nineveh, we read the following lines, trans-
lated by the late Mr. George Smith : “ At a time when neither
the heavens above nor the earth below existed, there was the
watery abyss; the first of seed, the mistress of the depths,
the mother of the universe. The waters clung together (cov-
ered everything). No product had ever been gathered, nor
was any sprout seen. Ay, the very gods 'had not yet come
into being.” . . . On the third tablet it is related how

‘ ‘ the gods are preparing for a grand contest against a monster
known as Tidmat , ‘ the depths,’ and how the god Bel-
Marduk overthrows Tiamat.'1'1

My readers will forgive me for indulging here in a short
digression that may seem unnecessary, but it is well to add to
the proofs already adduced to show that, at some remote epoch,
the primitive Chaldeans must have had intimate relations with
Maya colonists; and that these were a great factor in the
development of the civilization of the Babylonians, to whom
they seem to have imparted their religious and cosmogonic
notions. The names Tidmat and Bel-Marduk add corrobora-
tive evidence to confirm this historical truth, since no language
except the Maya offers such a natural etymon and simple
explanation of their meaning.

Tidmat , “the depths,” is a Maya word composed of the
four primitives, ti, lia, ma, ti (that is, ti, “there;” ha,

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

73

“water;” ma, “without;” ti, “land”), Tihamati ; by
elision, Tihamctt, or be it Tiamat , “everywhere water, no-
where land,” the “ deep.”

As to the name Bel-Marduk (in Maya) it would read Bel-
Maltuuc ; that is, Bel, “occupation,” “business;” mal is
a particle that, united to a noun, indicates “ the act of multi-
plying,” of “doing many things;” tuucul is a “mass of
things placed in order.” Bel-Maltuuc or Bel -Marduk
would be a most appropriate name for one whose business
seems to have been to put in order all the things that existed
confusedly in chaos.

Mr. Morris Jastrow, Jr., in an article in the Century
Magazine for January, 1894, 1 says that the word teliom occurs
both in the cuneiform tablets and in Genesis with the mean-
ing of “ the deep,” which is precisely its import in the Maya
language — te or ti, ‘ £ where ; ’ 1 hom, ‘ £ abyss without bottom. ’ ’

Returning to the comparison of the cosmogonic notions of
the various civilized nations of antiquity, we find that Thales, like
all the ancient philosophers, regarded water as the primordial
substance, in the midst of which the ‘ ‘ Great Soul ’ ’ deposited
a germ that became an egg, brilliant as gold and resplendent
as a star with a thousand rays, as we read in the first book
of the “ Manava-Dharma-Sastra, ” and we see represented in
the tableau over the door of the east facade of the palace at
Cliiclien. (Plate XXIII.) In this egg was reproduced the
Supreme Being under the form of Brahma, through whose
union with the goddess Maya, the good mother of all gods and
other beings, all things were created, says the “Rig-veda.”2

1 Morris Jastrow, Jr., “The Bible and the Assyrian Monuments,” New
York, Century Magazine , January, 1894.

2 Rig-veda, Langlois’ translation, sect, viii., lect. 3, h. ii. , v. i. , vol. iv.,
pp. 316-317.

74

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

The inhabitants of the islands of the Pacific entertained
similar notions regarding creation. Ellis in his “ Polynesian
Eesearches ” says: 1 £t In the Sandwich Islands there is a tradi-
tion that in the beginning there was nothing but water, when
a big bird descended from on high and laid an egg in the sea.
That egg burst, and Hawaii came forth.” They believe that
the bird is an emblem of deity ; a medium through which the
gods often communicate with men.

It is well not to forget that the Egyptians also caused Ptah,
the Creator, to he horn from an egg issued from the month of
Kneph , the ruling spirit of the universe, whose emblem was an
enormous blue serpent with yellow scales ; that is, the ocean.

The learned men of Mayacli always described with ap-
propriate inscriptions the notions, cosmogonic or others, or
the religious conceptions that they portrayed in the sculptures ;
ornamenting with them the walls of their public edifices, not
only to generalize them among their contemporaries, but to
transmit them to future generations in a lasting manner. They
did not fail to | — , do it in this instance.

The legend ^ — - on either side of the egg tells who is
the personage E5" seated therein. It is composed of the
characters — four times repeated, for the symmetry of the
drawing, and to emphasize the meaning of the word,

as well as to indicate the exalted quality of said personage.
Champollion le jeune tells us that in Egypt this very combi-
nation of letters means “ the engendered.” 1 2 These letters em-
phatically belong to the alphabet of the Mayas. The sign
/' or be it, |J that stands for our Latin M, represented

1 Ellis, Polynesian Researches, vol. i., chap, v., p. 100.

5 Champollion le jeune , Precis du Systeme Hieroglyphique des Anciens
Egyptiens.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

75

the contour of the peninsula of Yucatan. It is pronounced ma
in Egyptian as in Maya, and means, in both languages, ‘ 1 place, ’ ’
“land.” Why this sign, with that meaning, in Egypt?
Can learned Egyptologists tell ? In Mayach it is the radical
ma of the name of the country ; it is a contraction of mam,
the “ancestor,” the “earth.” The sign | — i , so frequent in
all the ancient edifices of the Mayas, is the letter correspond-
ing to our Latin Iff, with these and the Egyptians. If to these
characters we add the letter AWVA K, forming the border,
we have the word/~~| — i AWM mehen, which in Maya
means, as in Egyptian, the “ son,” the “ engendered.” 1 But
mehen was the name of the serpent represented over the head
of the god Kneph, the creator. According to Mr. Samuel Birch,
said serpent was termed in Egyptian texts “ proceeding from
what is in the abyss.” In the egg, behind the engendered, the
scales of the serpent’s belly form a background to the figure.

To complete the explanation of the tableau we must ask
Eusebius’s help. In his “ Evangelical Preparations ” 2 he tells
us that the Egyptians “ represented the Creator of the world,
whom they called Knepli , under a human form, with the flesh
painted blue, a belt surrounding his waist, holding a sceptre in
his hand, his head being adorned with a royal headdress orna-
mented with a plume. ” Were I to describe minutely the figure
within the egg, I could not do it better. Although much
mutilated by iconoclasts, it is easy to perceive that once it
was painted blue, to indicate his exalted and holy character ;
around the waist he wears a puyut, or loin cloth, and his iiead
is still adorned with a huge plume, worn among the Mayas
by personages of high rank.

1 Pedro Beltran, Arte del Idioma Maya. Pio Perez, Maya dictionary.

2 Eusebius, Prmp. Evang., lib. iii. , p. 215.

76

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

Lastly, it is well to notice that there are forty -two rays
around the cosmic egg. Those versed in the knowledge of the
Kabbalah will say that the number of the rays, twenty-one,
placed on each side of the egg, was not used arbitrarily, but
as an emblem of the Creator, Jehovah ; that, if we consider
the numerical value of the Hebrew letters composing it, his
name in numbers will read Joel, 10; lie, 6; and Vav, 5; that
is, 10, 6, 5,1 the sum of which is 21 = 3 x 7, the trinity and the
septenary.

The rabbis, says J. Ralston Skinner,2 extol these numbers
so beyond all others, that they pretend ‘ ‘ that by their uses
and permutations, under the cabalistic law of T^mura — that is,
of permutation — the knowledge of the entire universe may be
had.”

The number of the assessors who, according to the Egyp-
tians, assisted Osiris, when sitting in judgment upon the souls
in Amenti, was, it will be remembered, 42 ; that is, 21 x 2. But
these twenty-one rays on each side of the cosmic egg also call

1 The reader’s attention is here called to the following interesting facts
which show the origin of the British foot-measure of dimension. The half
of 1056 is 528. This number multiplied by 10 gives 5280, the length in feet
of the British mile. By permutation 528 becomes 825. But 8.25 feet is the
length of half a rod, whilst 5280 x 8.25 feet is the area in feet of one acre.

In the drawing of their plans the builders of the great pyramid of Egypt
and those of the pyramids of Mayach made use of these numbers. All
the most ancient pyramids in Yucatan are twenty-one metres high, the side
of the base being forty-two metres. Their vertical section was conse-
quently drawn so as to be inscribed within the circumference of a circle
having a radius of twenty-one metres, whose diameter formed the base line
of the monument.

3 J. Ralston Skinner, “ Hebrew Metrology,” p. 6, Masonic Review, July,
1885. “For the ratio 113 to 355 multiplied by 3 equals 339 to 1065. The
entire circumference will be 1065 x 2 =2130, of which 213 is factor with 10.
And 213 is the first word of Genesis; viz., Rash, or ‘head,’ from whence
the entire book.”

Page 77.

Plate XXI V.

__

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

77

to mind the twenty- one prajapati, or creators, mentioned in the
“ Mahabharata ; ” and the twenty-one words constituting the
most sacred prayer of the followers of Zoroaster, still in use
by the Par sis.

On each side of the Creator, outside of the lower line of
the border of the tableau, is the figure of a monkey in a sit-
ting posture and in the act of adoration. We learn from the
“ Popol-Yuh ” that in his attempts to produce a perfect man , an
intellectual creature, the Creator failed repeatedly, and each
time, disgusted with his work, he destroyed the results of his
early experiments; that at last he succeeded in making a
human being nearly perfect, but yet wanting. This primitive
race of man having grown proud and wicked, forgetful of their
Creator, to whom they ceased to pay due homage, the majority
of them were destroyed by floods and earthquakes. The few
that escaped by taking refuge on the mountains were changed
into monkeys.1 This is perhaps the reason why simians were
held in great veneration by the Mayas. (Plate XXIV.)

It is indeed worthy of notice, although it may be a mere
coincidence, that, wherever Maya civilization has penetrated,
there also ape worship has existed from the remotest antiquity,
and does still exist where ancient religious rites and customs
are observed.

In Hindostan, some nations hold the same belief concerning
monkeys that we read of in the sacred book of the Quiches,
to wit : ‘ ‘ That formerly men were changed into apes as a pun-
ishment for their iniquities.” The ape god Ilanuman , who
rendered such valuable assistance to Rama in the recovery of his
wife Sit a when she was abducted by Havana ,2 is still held in

1 Popol-Vuh , Brasseur translation, part i., chap. iii. , p. 31.

2 Valmiki, Eamayana, part i., p. 342, et passim. French translation by
Hippolyte Faucke.

78

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPEINX.

great veneration in the Asiatic peninsula and the island of Cey-
lon. Pompous homage is paid to him. The pagodas in which
he is worshipped are adorned with the utmost magnificence.
When in 1554 the Portuguese made a descent upon that island,
they plundered the temple of the ape god Thoth, and made
themselves masters of immense riches. I beg to call the atten-
tion of the reader to the name of this ape god, for whose ran-
som an Indian prince offered the viceroy of Goa seven hundred
thousand ducats. It was likewise that of the “god of letters
and wisdom,” represented as a cynocephalus monkey, among
the Egyptians. Is this also a coincidence ? The Maya word
Thoth means to “scatter” flowers or grain. Might it not
mean, metaphorically, to scatter letters — knowledge ? As sym-
bol of the “god of letters” the cynocephalus ape was treated
with great respect in many cities of Egypt ; but at Hermopolis
it was particularly worshipped,2 whilst in the Necropolis of
Thebes a spot was reserved as cemetery for the sacred mon-
keys, whose mummies were always placed in a sitting posture,
as the bodies of deceased persons in Mayach, Peru, and many
other countries in the Western Continent.

In the ancient city of Copan, in Guatemala, the cynoceph-
alus was frequently represented in the sculptures of the tem-
ples, in an attitude of prayer. There, as at Thebes, those
monkeys were buried in stone tombs, in which their skeletons
have been found in perfect preservation.

Pray Geronimo Roman, a writer of the sixteenth century,2
and other chroniclers, inform us that monkeys received divine
worship in Yucatan under the names of Baaa and Cliuen,

1 Strabo, XVII., p. 559.

2 Fray Geronimo Roman, Repriblica de las Indias Occidentals, lib. ii.,
cap. xv.

QUEEN M60 AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

79

whose images are often found in the temples of the Mayas, in
a kneeling posture (as in Plate XXIY.).

The ape was also held sacred in Babylonia. In Japan there
is a sumptuous temple dedicated to monkey worship. It is
said that the Japanese believe that the bodies of apes are in-
habited by the souls of deceased grandees and princes of the
empire. Is not this great veneration for monkeys a form of
ancestor worship ? The Darwinian theory of evolution does
not seem to be so very modern, after all. The study of the first
chapters of the “ Popol-Yuh ” will convince any one that some
of the ancient Maya scientists had reached the same conclusions
as some of the learned philosophers of our day regarding the
unfolding of animated beings — of man, consequently. It would
seem that Solomon had some reason in saying, and that we
may repeat after him, “There is nothing new under the
sun.” 1

There are many other interesting facts to be learned from
the study of the sculptures that embellish the eastern facade
of the palace at Chiclien. But as they have no direct bear-
ing on the object of our present investigation, we shall turn
away from that edifice, and, taking a northern direction, in-
dulge in an agreeable walk of half a mile, under secular trees,
through the forest, to return to Prince Coil’s memorial hall,
whence we started ; for we have yet to glean much information
from its contents.

During our promenade, protected from the fiery rays of the
tropical sun by the thick foliage overhead, enjoying the delight-
ful coolness that perpetually prevails in the Yucatan forests,
we let our thoughts Avander. But they naturally revert to the
tableau of creation and the strange facts it has revealed to us,

1 Ecclesiastes, chapter i., verse 9.

80 QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

and we ask ourselves : Did the Mayas receive all these teach-
ings from the Egyptians, or the Chaldeans, or the Hindoos, as
some want us to believe? If so, when and how? Or did
Maya missionaries, abandoning their country as apostles of
religion, civilization, and science, carry their knowledge among
these various nations and impart it to them ?

Page SI.

Hate XXT

VIII.

The study of the atlantes that supported the table of the
altar at the entrance of the funeral chamber is most interest-
ing. In those, and in the portraits of personages carved on the
pillars and antae of the portico and the jambs of the doorway,
the ethnologist can study the features of the ancient Mayas,
and, perhaps, discover the race to which they belonged. What-
ever this may have been, one fact is evident — the Mayas did
not deform their skulls artificially, as did the inhabitants of
Copan and Palenque. These, therefore, were not Mayas.
Their mode of writing was not Maya ; their language was
most probably different from the Maya ; consequently it is
absurd to try to interpret the inscriptions left by them, as the
late Professor Charles Rau,1 of the Smithsonian Institution,
Mess. Hyacinthe de Charancey 2 and Leon de Rosny, in
France,3 and others, have done. Being unable to read one

1 Charles Rau, Tablet of Palenque, chap. v. Aboriginal Writings of Mex-
ico, Yucatan, and Central America. Smithsonian Institution’s publications.

2 Hyacinthe de Charencey, Essai de Dechiffrement d'un Fragment d' Inscrip-
tion Palenquenne, tom. 1, No. 3, Mars, 1870. Actes de la Societe Philologique,
p. 56.

3 Leon de Rosny, Essai sur le Dechiffrement de VEcriture Hieratique de
VAmerique Centrale, p. 13.

6

82

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

single sentence of those inscriptions, how can these gentlemen
assert that they are written in the Maya language ? Because
a few characters resemble the Maya ? What does that prove ?
English, French, Spanish, Italian, and other modern languages
are all written with Latin letters : does that mean that they are
one and the same ?

It is not easy to surmise what common relationship can
possibly be claimed to have existed between the squat-figured,
coarse-featured, large-nosed, thick-lipped, flat-headed people,
with bulging eyes, represented in the stucco bas-reliefs of
Palenque, whose “heads, so very unusual, not to say unnat-
ural, ’ ’ have been compared with those of the Huns ; 1 or the
short-statured individuals with round heads, oval faces, high
cheek bones, flat noses, large gaping mouths, small oblique
eyes, portrayed on the obelisks of Copan and Quirigua, that
recall the Tartar or Manchu type (Plate XXX.) ; and the good-
looking Mayas, whose regular features, lithe figures with
well-proportioned limbs, finely formed heads, high foreheads,
shapely noses, small mouths with firm thin lips, eyes open ,
straight, and intelligent, that we see pictured in fresco paint-
ings or sculptured in low and high reliefs and statues. (Plates
XXV. , XXVI., XXVII.)

Ho one, surely, will presume to maintain that they belong
to the same family or race, and that the difference in their
appearance is due to unknown causes that have effected such re-
markable changes at various periods of their national existence.

1 William Burckhardt Barker, Lares and Penates , or Cilicia and its Gov-
ernors, chap. iv. Plate XXIX.

See Appendix, note viii.

John Ranking, Historical Researches on the Conquest of Peru, Mexico , etc.,
p. 275. According to this author the builders of Palenque were Mongols.
(A. L. P.)

Page 82.

Plate XXVI.

Page 82.

Plate XXVII.

QUEEN MdO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

83

To-day all the distinct peculiarities of these various peoples
are, to the eye of the careful observer, quite as noticeable,
among their descendants, as of yore, notwithstanding the inter-
marriages that have inevitably occurred between the different
races, particularly since the Spanish conquest.

Again, the atlantes and the bas-reliefs on the pillars show
the mode of dress in vogue among the higher classes of the

Standard-bearer.

Mode of carrying shield among the Mayas.

FIGURES FROM FRESCOS IN PRINCE COH’s MEMORIAL HALL.1

Mayas in remote ages, the ornaments they wore, and many
of their customs, whose identity with those of far-distant
nations cannot be ascribed to mere coincidence. These may
also guide the ethnologist.

For the present purpose, it will suffice to mention various
practices observed at funerals both by the Mayas and the
Egyptians. Among the figures that supported the table of the

1 See the various plates from the fresco paintings in Prince Coil’s Memo-
rial Hall at Cliiclien (Plates XXXIX. -LI.).

84

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

altar, there were some intended to represent women. From
these we learn that Maya matrons, to betoken grief, covered
the right side of their face with their hair. Sir Gardner
Wilkinson,1 speaking of the funeral customs of the Egyptians,
says: “ Married women alone were permitted to wear the ma-
gasies, or ringlets, at the side of the face. The hair was hound
at the end with a string, like the plaits at the back of the
head, so as to cover part of their ear-ring.”

Macrobius,2 trying to explain this custom of Egyptian
matrons, says it was in imitation of the images of the sun, in
which that luminary was represented as a human head having
a lock of hair on the right side of the face. This lock, he
assumes, was emblematic of its reappearance after being con-
cealed from our sight at its setting, or of its return to the
solstice.

What explanation would he have given of the same custom
being observed among the Mayas, had he known of it ? That
it existed there can be no doubt; the portraits of the two
Maya matrons found among the atlantes of the altar are the
best proof of it. (See Plates XXXI. -XXXII., which are
photographs of them.)

The practice of tying their dress round their waist and of
uncovering their breast when a friend died 3 4 was common both
to the Mayas 4 and the Egyptians. The dead in Egypt were
made to carry round their neck the vase, placed on the scale of

1 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , etc., vol. iii., chap, xvi.,
p. 452 ; also vol. i., chap. xii.

a Macrobius, Saturnaliorum , etc., lib. i., 26.

3 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , vol. iii., chap, xvi., p.

439.

4 See picture of Prince Coll being prepared for cremation; also in

Sacred Mysteries , p. 80.

Page Se-

riate XXXI.

/

Page 8 1/..

Plate XXXII.

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

85

judgment, to indicate their good deeds.1 The same custom
obtained in Mayach. This we learn from the various statues
of personages of high rank discovered at Chichen by the
writer — that of Prince Coh and others. They invariably
hold between their hands a vase placed on the abdomen. In
Mayach this vase was typical of the Gulf of Honduras.
Whence such strange customs among the Egyptians? Por-
phyry tells us2 that in Egypt, “ When the bodies of persons of
distinction were embalmed, they took out the intestines and
put them into a vessel, over which (after some other rites had
been performed for the dead) one of the embalmers pronounced
an invocation to the sun in behalf of the deceased.” These
intestines, with the other viscera, were deposited in four vases;
each contained a separate portion. They were placed in the
tomb with the coffin, and were supposed to belong to the four
genii of Amenti, whose heads and names they bore.3 These
funeral vases were called ccmopi A Sir Gardner Wilkinson
asks, ‘ 1 Why call these funeral vases canopi, a word without
an etymon in the Egyptian language? ” 5

For the answer we must come to America. In ancient
Peru the canopa were household gods ; but the Quichua offers
no explanation of the name. If we want to know its mean-
ing we must inquire from the learned men of Mayach. They
will tell us that, in remote ages, their ancestors imagined that
the vault of heaven was sustained on four pillars, placed one at
each of the cardinal points, whose names were Kan, Muluc,
lx, and Cauac ; that the Creator assigned the care of these

1 Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , etc., vol. iii. , chap, xvi., p. 470.

2 Porphyry, De Abstinencia, lib. iv. 10.

3 Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , vol. iii., chap, xvi., p. 481.

* Ibid ., p. 482.

6 Ibid., p. 480.

86

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

pillars to four brothers, whose names were Kan-Bacab, the
yellow Bacab, who stood at the south ; Cliac-Bacab, the red
Bacab, who occupied the east ; Zac-Bacab, the white Bacab,
to whom was intrusted the north ; and Ek-Bacab, the black
Bacab, whose place was the west. They were held in great
veneration, and regarded as the genii of the wind.1 These
learned men will also inform us that those powerful genii were
represented by four jars with narrow necks, surmounted by
human heads,2 which jars, during certain religious ceremonies,
were filled with water, and called Canob, that is, the “ Four,”
the “strong,” the “mighty.”3 From the Maya Canob the
Egyptians no doubt called canopi the four vases in which were
deposited the entrails of the dead. Do not these four Bacabs
recall the four gods of the Hindoo mythology who preside at
the four cardinal points — Indr a, the king of heaven, to the
east; Ilouvera , the god of wealth, to the north; Varouna,
the god of the waters, to the west ; and Yama , the judge of the
dead, to the south?4 Or the Four Mountains, Sse-yo, of the
Chinese — the “ four quarters of the globe,” as they are wont
to designate their country — Tai-Tsong being the yo of the
East; Sigan-fou , that of the west; IIou-Kowang , that of the
south; and Chen-si, that of the north?5 Or, again, the four

1 Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan , p. 206, et passim.

2 Bac means, in the Maya, language, ‘ ‘ to pour water from a narrow-
mouthed vase.” Pio Perez, Maya dictionary. Plate xxxiii.

3 Cogolludo, Historia de Yucathan , lib. iv., cap. viii., p. 197. Edit., 1688.

* Manava-DJiarma-Sastra , lib. 1, Sloba 87.

6 Chou-King, chap. i. Yoa-tien, parti. These four mountains recall the
four pillars that support heaven ; that is, the four cardinal points of the
Mayas, of the Hindoos, of the Chaldeans, and of the Egyptians. On a
Stela of Victory of Thotmes III., in the Bulaq Museum, it is written : “I,
Amon, have spread the fear of thee to the four pillars of Heaven.” Do not
the bags of H3olus, that contain the winds in Grecian mythology, recall the
four bottles, or jars, of the Bacabs?

Page 86.

Plate XXXIII.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 87

principal protecting genii of the human race among the
Chaldeans,1 whose names were : Sed-Alap or Kirub , who was
represented as a bull with a human face ; Lamm or Nirgal,
as a lion with a man’s head; JJstur, after the human likeness;
and JLattig, with the head of an eagle ?

These last were said by Ezekiel to be the four symbolical
creatures which supported the throne of Jehovah in his visions
by the river Chebar.2

In this connection also may be mentioned the four genii
of Amenti, Amset, Ilapi , Tesautmutf, and Qabhsenuf ’ said
by the Egyptians to be present before Osiris while presiding
in judgment; protecting, by their influence, every soul that
entered the realms of the West. It was to these genii that a
portion of the intestines, taken from the body of the deceased,
was dedicated, and placed in the vase, or canog >, which bore their
respective heads, as we have already seen. If the name given
to these vases by the Egyptians is not of Maya origin, it
must be admitted that it is a most remarkable coincidence.

In Mayacli, the brains, the charred viscera, and other
noble parts, preserved in red oxide of mercury? were deposited
in stone urns, which were placed with the statues of the
deceased, in superb mausolei, where they are found in our
day.4 Lauda5 and several other chroniclers tell us that the
Mayas made statues of stone, wood, or clay, according to the
wealth of the individual, in the likeness of the deceased, and,
after cremating the remains, put the ashes in the head of said
statues, which, for the purpose, had been made hollow.

1 F. Lenormant, Chaldean Magic and Sorcery, p. 121.

2 Ezekiel, chap. i. , verse 10; chap, x., verse 14.

3 See Appendix, note ix.

4 See farther on Prince Coil’s Mausoleum (Plate Ivii.)

5 Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan , g xxxiii., p. 193.

88

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

In Egypt, likewise, they sculptured on the lid of the coffin,
or fastened on it, a cast of the features of the person whose
remains it contained.

After clearing from the altar the debris of the roof of the
portico, that in falling had not only injured, but so completely
buried it that it had escaped the notice of John L. Stephens
and others who had visited the spot before us, we found that
the atlantes and the bas-reliefs that adorned the upper side and
the edges of the table had been brilliantly colored. The pig-
ments used by the Maya artists were of such lasting nature
that the colors were actually as bright as when they were laid
on; and the vehicle or menstruum in which they were dis-
solved had deeply penetrated the stone without injuring the
surface. Here was the confirmation of a very interesting fact
that we had already discovered— that the Mayas, like the
Hindoos,1 the Chaldees,2 the Egyptians,3 and the Greeks, col-
ored their sculptures and statues, and provided them with eyes
and nails made of shell. Shall it be said that this is a mere
coincidence, or shall we regard it as a custom transmitted from
one nation to another; or, again, taught to the rest by the
people who introduced among them the sculptor’s art ?

1 Bishop Heber in his Narrative of a Journey through the Upper Provinces
of India , vol. i., p. 386 ; vol. ii . , pp. 430, 525, 530 ; vol. iii. , pp. 48-49.

2 Henry Layard, Nineveh and its Remains , vol. ii., part ii., chap. iii.

3 Eusebius, Prcep. et Demons. Evang., lib. iii., chap. xi. See Appendix,
note x.

IX.

The state of perfect preservation of the colors again reveals
to us several most interesting facts, that come to add the weight
of their evidence to the many other proofs we have already
adduced, to show that, in remote ages, the Mayas entertained
intimate relations with the other civilized nations of Asia,
Africa, and Europe. From these we learn that, for instance,
yellow was the distinctive color of the royal family, as red was
that of nobility; and that blue was used in Mayacli, as in
Egypt 1 and Chaldea,2 at funerals, in token of mourning, as it
still is in Bokhara and other Asiatic countries.

“ But in that deep blue, melancholy dress
Bokhara’s maidens wear in mindfulness
Of friends and kindred, dead or far away.” 3

Had the Maya sages, and the ancient philosophers in Chal-
dea and Egypt, found out what is well known to those who,

1 Sir Gardner Wilkinson. Manners and Customs , vol. iii., chap, xvi., p.
442, et passim.

3 Henry Layard, Nineveh and Babylon , pp. 375-557.

3 Thomas Moore, Lalla Roohh, p. 74.

90

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

in our clay, have made a study of the effect produced by colors
on the nervous system of man and animals — that blue induces
sadness and melancholy? Blue, from the color of the vault
of heaven, was typical of holiness, sanctity, chastity, hence of
happiness ; it was then worn in Mayacli, Egypt, and Chaldea
during the period of mourning, in token of the felicity the
soul, free from the trammels of matter and the probations of
earthly life, was enjoying in realms beyond the grave. They
believed that all things existed forever; that to cease to be on
the earth was only to assume another form somewhere else in
the universe, where dwelt the spirits of the justified — the ma-
xeru of the Egyptians, that, translated in Maya, xma-xelel,
means “ without tears,” “ whole.” Lancia tells us that, to the
time of the Spanish conquest, the bodies of the individuals who
offered themselves, or were offered, as propitiatory victims to
Divinity, as well as the altars on which they were immo-
lated, were painted blue, and held holy.1 We have seen these
victims, painted blue, represented in the ancient fresco paint-
ings. The image of Melien, the engendered, that ancestor of
all beings, seated in the cosmic egg, was painted blue; so was
the effigy of the god Kneph ,2 the Creator, in Egypt; and the
gods, the boats, the shrines, carried in the funeral processions,
were likewise painted blue.3 In Hindostan, the god Vishnu ,
seated on the mighty seven-headed serpent Caisha, the Ali-ac-
chapat of the Mayas, is painted blue, to signify his exalted
and heavenly nature. The plumes worn on the heads of the

1 Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan , chap, xxviii., p. 166.

“ Y llegado el dia, juntavanse en el patio del templo, y si avia de ser
sacrificado a saetadas, desnudavanle en cueros y untavan el cuerpo de
azul,” etc.

2 Eusebius, Prcep. et Demons. Evang., lib. iii., chap, xi., p. 215.

3 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , vol. ii. , c. xiii. , p. 400.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

91

kings and queens of the Mayas, for the same reason, were
blue, the king being the vicegerent and vicar of Deity on
earth.1 The ceremonial mantle of the highpriest was made
of blue and yellow feathers, to indicate that in his office he
partook both of the divine and the kingly.

In another work I have treated at length of the meaning
wThich the Mayas attached to colors. The limits of this book
do not allow for lengthy explanations on this subject; but a
few words must be said about yellow and red, colors which
have been held by all civilized nations of antiquity as distinc-
tive of royalty and nobility of race.

The unearthing of the altar at the entrance of Prince Coil’s
funeral chamber has revealed the fact that among the Mayas
yellow was the distinctive color of the royal family.

It is well known that throughout China the emperor and
his family are the only persons allowed to wear yellow gar-
ments. Bed is the other color set apart for the particular use
of the imperial family.3

In the islands of the Pacific, the Sandwich Islands especially,
yellow was likewise the distinctive color of royalty. The king
alone had the right to wear a cloak made of yellow feathers.3
“The cloaks of the other chiefs were adorned with red and
yellow rhomboidal figures, intermingled or disposed in alter-
nate lines, with sometimes a section of dark purple or glossy
black.”

In Thibet, the dress of the lamas consists of a long yellow
robe, fastened by a red girdle, and a yellow cap surmounted by

1 Is this the reason why the Egyptians also placed feathers alike on the
heads of their gods and their kings ?

a Memoir of Father Bipa, p. 71. “Thirteen Years’ Residence at the
Court of Pekin.” Marco Polo Travels , by Hugh Murray, in 1250, p. 74.

3 William Ellis, Polynesian Researches , vol. iv., chap, vi., p. 119.

92

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

a reel rosette.1 The king of the lamas, the Guison-Tamba,
when he travels, is carried in a yellow palanquin.2

In India, yellow and red are colors used in the worship of
the gods. Yellow is set apart for Yishnu and Krishna and their
wives. Widows who immolate themselves on the funeral pyre
of their husbands, in the Suttee ceremony, have their bodies
painted yellow with an infusion of sandalwood and saffron.3
Yellow is likewise the color of the dress of the bonzes in Laos,
Indo-China; and the priests officiating at the funerals of
Siamese kings wear yellow robes.

Among Christians, even, yellow is the distinctive color of
the Pontiff, whose seat is in the Solar City. The papal banner
is white and yellow.4 Several learned writers, whose opinion
is authority on all matters pertaining to customs and manners
of the ancient civilized inhabitants of Asia and Africa, in try-
ing to account for the selection of yellow as distinctive color
for the kings, pontiffs, and priests officiating at funerals of
kings, have suggested that, as the emperors of China, like the
kings in India, Chaldea, Egypt, and other countries, styled
themselves £ ‘ Children of the Sun, ’ ’ it was but natural that
they should select for color of their own garments that of
their father the Sun, and to make it the mark of their exalted
rank, and the privilege of their family.

1 M. Hue, Recollections of a Journey through Tartary, Thibet, and China,
vol. i., chap, i., p. 22.

2 Ibid., chap, iv., p. 89.

3 Abbe Dubois, Description of the Manners of the People of India, pp.
240-243.

4 Cartaucl de la Villate, Critical Thoughts on Mathematics (vol. i.,
Paris, 1752), says : “The Cardinal Dailly and Albert the Great, Bishop of
Ratisbonne, distribute the planets among the religions. To the Christians
they assign the Sun. This is the reason why they hold the Sun in great
veneration, and why the city of Rome is styled the Solar City, and the car-
dinals wear dress of a red color, this being that of the Sun.”

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

93

The selection of that color may, however, have an esoteric
and more scientific origin ; one pertaining to the ancient sacred
mysteries, known only to the initiates who had been admitted
to the higher degrees.

It is well to remember that the kings of Mayach, also,
styled themselves ‘ £ Children of the Sun, 5 ’ as did the emperors
of Mexico and the Yncas of Peru.

We have seen that Kan was the name of the first Bacab,1
the powerful genius to whom the Creator had entrusted, from
the beginning, the keeping of the pillar that supported the sky
on the south, the fiery region whence comes the greatest heat ;
hence Kan, for yellow, the color of fire, that direct emana-
tion from the sun, Kin, the vivifying, the life sustainer, the
God, without whom nothing could exist, and everything
would perish on earth — that God who is, therefore, the visible
image of the Creator.

Kan is but a variation of caan, “ heaven,” “that which
is above,” caanal, and also of can, “ serpent,” which was
the emblem of the Maya Empire.

But Can is also the numerical “Four,” the tetrciktis, that
most solemn and binding oath of the initiates into the mys-
teries. The number four, according to Pythagoras, who had
learned from the Egyptians the meaning of numbers, repre-
sents the mystic name of the creative power. Can, again, is
a copulative particle that, united to verbs, indicates that the
action is verified frequently and with violence.2 Hence the
name Kancab for yellow or red clay, the dry land, upheaved
from the bottom of the deep by volcanic fires, anthropomor-
phized in Homen.

1 Lancia, Las Cosas de Yucatan. JJii supra, p. 86.

2 Pedro Beltran, Arte del Idioma Maya.

94

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

According to Hahuatl cosmogony, “when Omeyocax , the
Creator, who dwelt in himself, thought that the time had
come when all things should be created, he arose, and from
one of his hands, resplendent with light, he darted four
arrows, which struck and put in motion four molecules, origin
of the four elements that floated in space. These molecules,
on being hit by the divine arrows, became animated. Heat,
which determined movement in matter, was developed in
them. Then appeared the first rays of the rising sun, which
brought life and joy throughout nature.” 1

What conclusions are we to derive from the fact that the
Egyptians, the Greeks, the Nahuatls,2 and the Mayas assigned
the number Four to the creative power ? That the Chinese, other
Asiatic, and Polynesian nations adopted, like the Mayas, as
a distinctive badge for their kings and their religious chiefs,
vicars of the Deity on earth, the yellow color, tvhose name in
the Maya language, Kail, is but a variant of that of the
numerical Four, or that of heaven, or that of the serpent,
emblem of the Creator in Egypt, Chaldea, China, as in May-
acli ? In China, Long or Ti- Iloang, the Tse-yuen , the “ engen-
dered,” who had the body of a serpent, is the protector and
arranger of all things; and Hoa, the “god of life,” of the
Chaldees,3 was represented as a serpent. I may quote in this
connection the following remarks from Canon Rawlinson:
“ There are no means of strictly determining the precise mean-
ing of the word (Hoa) in Babylonian, but it is perhaps allow-

1 Lord Kingsborough, vol. ii. , copy of a Mexican manuscript in the
Vatican library, No. 3738. Compare with the recital of Creation in Ma-
nava-Dharma-Sastra , lib. i., Slokas 5-7.

2 The origin of the Nahuatls is unknown, and a matter of discussion
among Americanists. Were they Huns ?

3 Berosus, Fragments , 1. g 3. Helladius, 1. s. c.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

95

able to connect it provisionally with the Arabic Iliya, which
is at once £ life ’ and £ serpent, ’ since, according to the best
authority, there are strong grounds for connecting Hea or Hoa
with the serpent of the Scripture, and the paradisiacal tradi-
tions of the tree of knowledge and the tree of life.” 1

Will it be argued that this widespread symbol of the Cre-
ator is but a natural consequence of the working of various
cultivated minds, pondering over this same subject and reach-
ing identical conclusions? We must not lose sight of the fact,
before answering this question in the affirmative, that in
Mayach alone the name of the serpent can, and the numer-
ous meanings of the word, form a pandect. Is it not, then,
probable, that the Mayas, having conceived the idea from the
geographical outlines of their country, which figures a serpent
with inflated breast, spread the notion among the other nations
with which they had intimate relation, in whose territories
they established colonies ?

There is much to be said, that is interesting, on the red
color as symbol, and its use as mark of nobility of race among
all civilized nations of antiquity, in Asia, Polynesia, Africa,
and America. The subject seems directly connected with the
object of our present investigations, since we are told by Mr.
Piazzi Smyth, the well-known Egyptologist, that the great
Egyptian Sphinx was originally painted red. Judging from
the royal standards represented in fresco paintings in Prince
Coil’s Memorial Hall ; from the tint prevalent on the facades
of the palaces of the Mayas, and that of the floors in castles

1 Such is the knowledge of the majority of the great scholars whose
works are accepted as authority on historical questions. In this case Canon
Rawlinson, in his biased ignorance, has been teaching a greater truth than
he imagined. But let it be said to his credit— he has not done it on pur-
pose, for he did not dream of it.

96

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

and temples, red was the distinctive color of nobles and war-
riors. It was in early times the symbol of nobility among the
Egyptians, who styled themselves Rot-en-ne-Rdme, a name
having the same meaning as kar or caret in the language of the
Caras of the West Indies and northern coast of South Amer-
ica, and that of those Carians, once the terror of the inhabit-
ants of the littoral of the Mediterranean, and who finally
established themselves on the western coast of Asia Minor;
that is, of men par excellence , of “brave men.” Was it
because their ancestors came from the country of the red men
in the West, that in their paintings they invariably painted
their skin a reddish brown, as did the Mayas ? From remote
antiquity to our day, among all nations civilized or savage,
red has been and is typical of courage, war, contention ; and,
by contrast, of prayer and supplication.

That the red color in the “Lands of the West” was the
distinctive mark of warriors and of power, there can be no
doubt. All the chroniclers of the time of the Spanish con-
quest tell us that where the hosts of natives opposed the
invaders and confronted them in battle array, their faces and
bodies were painted red.1 To this day the North American
Indians, particularly when on the warpath, daub their faces
and bodies with red paint.

Plinius 2 speaks of Camillus painting his face and body red,
before entering Pome, on returning victorious after the expul-
sion of the Gauls from Italy by the troops under his com-
mand. It was customary for Boman soldiers to paint their
bodies red in token of their bravery. The same author also

1 Cogolludo, Hist, de Yucathan, lib. i., chap, ii., p. 6 ; lib. ii. , chap, vi.,
p. 77, et passim.

2 Plinius, Historia Nat., xxxiii. 7.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

97

says that one of the first acts of the censors on entering upon
their duties was to paint the face of Jupiter with minium, such
being the practice on every high festival day.

In Egypt, the god Set, the enemy of Horus, was styled “ the
very valiant.” He was painted red. At Ombos he was wor-
shipped as the evil principle of nature, under the name of
Nubti , a word for which the Maya affords this very natural
etymon: imp, ‘‘adversary;” ti, “for.” He was the chief
god of the warlike Ivhati.

The possession of land and wealth has always been the
privilege of the strongest and the most daring ; of the warriors,
who, wrongly or rightly, possessed themselves of the property
of the conquered, and appropriated it to their own use. In
the distribution of spoils, the chiefs never failed to set apart
for themselves the largest share. At first, these chiefs were
elective. They were chosen on account of their superior phys-
ical strength and their prowess in battle. Having acquired
wealth, they paid men to fight under their leadership. To
insure their power and authority, even over their own follow-
ers, they contracted alliances with other leaders, so that they
might help each other in case of necessity. Thus they formed
a privileged class, the Nobility, that by and by claimed to be
of a nature superior to that of other men. They justified that
claim by close obedience to the law of selection. Red, color
of the blood shed on the battle-field, became the distinctive
color of “ nobility of race,” of “brave and valiant man,” of
1 1 man par excellence y ’ ’ therefore, emblematic of power,
strength, dominion.

All historians say that red in Egypt was the symbol of nobil-
ity of race. Landa 1 says it was customary with the aborigines
1 Lancia, Las Cosas de Yucatan , pp. 117-185.

7

98

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

of Yucatan, both male and female, to adorn themselves with
red paint. According to Du Chaillu,1 the Fans of equatorial
Africa, who have so many customs strangely identical with
those of the ancient Mayas — even that of filing their front
teeth like a saw — paint themselves red, men and women.

Herodotus 2 asserts that the Maxyes (Mayas ?), a people
dwelling to the westward of Lake Triton, in Libya, daubed
themselves with vermilion.

Molina, in his vocabulary of the Mexican tongue, at the
word Tlapilli , explains that whilst its primary meaning is “to
paint in red color,” it also signifies “noble,” “ancient,” and
that Tlapilli eztli implies, metaphorically, nobility of blood
and family.

Garcilasso de la Yega,3 Cieza de Leon,4 Acosta,5 and other
writers on Peruvian customs and manners, inform us that the
fringe and tassel of the Llantu , royal headdress of the Yncas,
were made of fine crimson wool.

Mr. William Ellis asserts6 that the Areois of Tahiti, in cer-
tain religious ceremonies, painted their faces red; that “the
ceremony of inauguration, answering to coronation among
other nations, consisted in girding the king with the Maro Uru ,
or sacred girdle of red feathers, which identified him with the
gods.7

The prophet Ezekiel mentions the figures of red men pictured

1 Da Chaillu, Explorations and Adventures in Equatorial Africa , pjr. 94,
104-107, et passim.

2 Herodotus, Hist., lib. iv. 19.

8 Garcilasso de la Yega, Gommentarios Beales , part i., lib. i., cap. 22 ;
lib. vi., cap. 28.

4 Cieza de Leon, Cronica , cap. 114.

6 Acosta, Historia de las Indian Occidentales, lib. iv., cap. 12.

6 William Ellis, Polynesian Researches , vol. i.. p. 180.

7 Ibid., vol. iii., chap, iv., p. 85.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

99

on the walls of the edifices at Babylon, similar to the human
figures found on those of the tombs in Hindostan and Etruria.
In Egypt, the god Atum, emblem of the setting sun, was
painted red. The Egyptians regarded him as the creator of
all things visible and invisible. Were we not told of it by
the writers on Egyptian manners and customs, we would learn
it from the meaning of the name in the Maya language — Ali-
Tum ; literally, “he of the new things.” Here again red is
symbolical of power — might.

According to Sir Gardner Wilkinson,1 Egyptologists are
not positive as to the manner in which the name written with
the initial letters A and T should be read. It is sometimes
interpreted T-Mu. The paintings in the tombs where he is
represented in a boat in company with Athor, Thoth. and Ma,
the goddess of truth,2 show that he filled an important office in
the regions of Amenti.

If we accept T-Mu as the correct reading of the hiero-
glyphs that form his name, then that god must have been the
personification of that continent which disappeared under the
waves of the ocean, mentioned by Plato and other Greek
writers as Atlantis. The Mayas also called it Ti-Mu , the
country of Mu, a name that the Greeks knew equally well, as
we Avill see later on. Do we find here the explanation of why
the Egyptians figured Alum in a boat, holding an office in the
West, and painted him red, the color of the inhabitants of the
countries with which they were most familiar, and of which
they kept the most perfect remembrance ?

The same motive may have influenced the Hindoo philoso-

1 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs, vol. iii., chap, xiii.,
p. 178.

2 These names are Maya words expressive of the attributes imputed to
these gods by the Egyptians.

100

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

phers when they painted with red Gcmesha, god of prudence,
of letters and science. By this they perhaps wished to indi-
cate that men of that color, coming from Patala, the antip-
odes,1 imported to India, with civilization, the knowledge of
letters, arts, and sciences.

In Polynesia, red is still regarded by the natives of the
islands as a favorite color with the gods. William Ellis says
‘ ‘ that the ordinary means of communicating or extending
supernatural powers was, and still is, the red feather of a
small bird found in many of the islands, and the beautiful long
feathers of the Tropic or man-of-war bird.”2

We are told that when kings, chiefs, and nobles died they
were deified, became the minor gods, watching over the desti-
nies of mankind, and the mediators between man and the
Godhead. The red color seems to have continued to be sym-
bolical of their new powers, as it had been of their authority
on earth. This may possibly account for the custom, prevalent
in Mayach, Polynesia, and India, of devotees stamping the
impression of their hands, dipped in red liquid, on the walls of
the temples, of the sacred caves, and other hallowed places,
when imploring some benefaction from the Deity.

1 Mahabharata-Adiparva, Slokas 7788, 7789 ; also Bhagavata-Purdna, ix.,
xx. 33. See Appendix, note xi.

2 William Ellis, Polynesian Researches, vol. ii. , chap, ix., p. 260.

Although there is much to be said in connection with this interesting

fact, which is one of the many vestiges of the Mayas’ presence among the
Polynesians, I will simply remark, at present, that in Egypt the feather was
the distinctive adornment of the gods and kings, as in Mayacli it was of
the kings, pontiffs, nobles, and warriors, differing in color according to
their rank and their more or less exalted position ; as is yet in China the
button and the peacock feather ; that the Maya name for feather is
Enkurn, the radical of which, Ku, is the word for the Supreme Intelli-
gence ; and that Khu in Egyptian means “ Intelligence,” “ Spirit,” “Light,”
“ Manes.”

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

101

This most ancient and universal belief, that the inferior
gods — that is to say, the glorified spirits of eminent men and
women — are mediators between the Divinity and earth’s inhab-
itants, has survived to our day, and is still prevalent with mil-
lions of human beings. The Church of Rome teaches this
doctrine to her followers. Her Fathers and Doctors received it
from the Greek philosophers, several of whom held that ‘ £ each
demon is a mediator between God and man.” 1 Many festivals
have therefore been instituted by the Church in honor of the
saints, who, the faithful are taught to believe, convey their
prayer to the Almighty.

True, these do not, as the devotees in some temples in India
still do, stamp the red imprint of their hands on the walls,2 to
remind the god of their vow and prayer; but they fasten
votive offerings made of gold, silver, copper, or wax, accord-
ing to the worshipper’s means, to the image and to the altar
of the saint invoked.

Such votive offerings, made of clay, are found scattered
most abundantly round the altars in the temples of the ancient
Mayas, or buried in the ground at the foot of the statues of
their great men.

It is well known that no two individuals have hands of
exactly the same size or shape ; that the lines in the palms differ
in every person. The red impress of the hand, on that account,

1 Plato, Simpos, vol. iii. , pp. 202-203 (edit. Serrain). St. Clement of
Alexandria, Stromata , v., lib. c., p. 260 (edit. Potter), in admitting that
the good demons were the angels, stated the opinion of many Christians of
his time ; and Dionysius Areopagite, in his Celestial Hierarchy , chap, x.,
§ 11, says : “All the angels are interpreters and messengers of their supe-
riors ; the most advanced, of God who moves them, and the others as they
are moved by God.”

a Account of General Grant’s visit to the Maharajah of Jeypoor, New
York Herald , edition of April 12, 1879.

102

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

came to be regarded as a private seal, a mark of ownership.1
As such it was used from time immemorial by the Mayas, iu
whose temples and palaces can yet be seen numerous red im-
prints of hands of various shapes and sizes. Such impressions
being met with in all places in Polynesia and in India where
other vestiges of the Mayas are found, may serve as compass
to guide us in following their migrations over the vast expanse
of land and sea, and to indicate the ancient roads of travel.
In time the red color, used in thus recording invocations to
the gods and registering the rights of ownership, came to be
accepted as legal color for seals in public and private docu-
ments. The Egyptians made use of a red mixture to stamp
the imprint of their personal seals on the doors of tombs, of
houses, and of granaries, to secure them.2

Red seals are used by the Mongol kings on all official docu-
ments.3 This custom of using materials of a red color to seal
all important and legal documents has reached our times; it
still obtains among all civilized nations.

The foregoing facts tell us, it is true, of the adoption of the
red color, among all civilized nations of antiquity, as symbol of
nobility of race and of invocation — devotees using it in recording
their vow or prayer when imploring the benison of the gods on
themselves or their homes ; also of its being employed in seals
as mark of ownership, hence of dominion over the objects thus
sealed; but nowhere is any mention made of the people among
whom the custom originated, nor why it came to be the symbol

1 Henry R. Schoolcraft, “On the Red Hand,” apud J. L. Stephens,
Incidents of Travels in Yucatan, vol. ii. , p. 476, Appendix.

2 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs, vol. iii., chap, xvi.,
p. 437.

3 M. Hue, Recollections of a Journey through Tartary, Thibet, and China,
vol. i., chap, viii., p. 182.

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

103

of acts so dissimilar as the assertion of power, might, and
dominion, and the recording of a prayer and a supplication. It
is again from the Mayas that we may learn the cause of this
seeming antithesis; the various meanings of the single Maya
word cliac afford a complete explanation.

Cliac is the Maya word for “red.” Cliaac is the
rain-storm, and the thunder, that powerful and terrible genius
that produces the rain which brings fertility to the earth.
This giant, this Cliac, was held as the “god of rain,”
“the god of plenty,” “the keeper of the fields,” in whose
honor the great festival, called Tupp-Kak, “ the extinguish-
ment of fire,” was celebrated in the month of Mac,1 when
the priests, assisted by the Cliacs, their aids, implored his
blessing in the shape of abundant rains, to bring forth the
crops and produce plenteous harvests, hence joy and happiness
to the people.

Here, then, we find the reason why the color red was at
the same time the symbol for violence and for supplication
or prayer. It typified the violence of the thunder, the god
of rain, and the supplications of his priests that he should
grant a bountiful harvest that would insure happiness to his
worshippers.

The cross was his emblem.2

1 Lancia, Las Cosas de Yucatan , | xl., p. 252.

This month of Mac began on the 13th of our month of March, and
ended on the 2d of April.

2 Aug. Le Plongeon, Sacred Mysteries , etc., p. 128, et passim.

X.

The following invocation to the god of rain was made
known for the first time to students of American antiquities
by the learned Abbe Brasseur in his Chrestomathy.1 He tells
us he had it from a native, while at the hacienda of X-Can-
chakan. It is one of the many ancient prayers yet extant
among the natives, who still repeat them when, in the obscure
recesses of the forests, or in the depths of the dark, myste-
rious subterranean caves with which the country is honey-
combed, they perform some of the antique rites of the religion
of their forefathers.2

As published, the invocation, adulterated by the interpola-
tion of Christian words taught the natives by the Catholic
priests, despoiled of its archaic form, loses much of its interest.
The individual who translated it for the Abbe, either did it
very carelessly, or purposely did not interpret all the words, or
was very illiterate. As presented it is stripped of its most

1 Abbe Brasseur, “ Chrestomathie,” in bis Elements de la Langue Maya,
Troano MS., vol. ii., p. 101.

5 Alice D. Le Plongeon, Here and There in Yucatan, pp. 88-89.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

105

instructive features, which relate to certain religious practices
in use among devotees in olden times. Although the learned
Abbe says he has tried to improve the translation, it is certain
that he himself is far from having apprehended the true mean-
ing of the Maya words. As for Dr. Brinton — who in bis
books poses as authority on all matters pertaining to the
Mayas and their language, and is very prone to criticise
others 1 — by rendering verbatim , in English, the French abbe’s
version,3 he has conclusively demonstrated that he does not
understand the context of the prayer better than Brasseur,
who, he affirms, ir knew next to nothing about Maya.” 3

On our return to Yucatan in June, 1880, Senor Dn. Yicente
Solis de Leon, one of the present owners of the hacienda
of X-Cancliakan, within the boundaries of which tire situ-
ated the ruins of the ancient city of Mayapan, invited Mrs.
Le Plongeon and myself to visit the remains of the famous
abodes of the powerful king Cocom, and of his descendants
until the year 1446 of the Christian era, when, according to
Landa, the lords and nobles of the country, with the chief of
the Tutuxius at their bead, put to death the then reigning
Cocom and his sons, sacked his palace, and destroyed by fire
his city and stronghold, after removing the libraries and other
precious things from the temples and private dwellings.4

Being at X-Cancliakan, I met a native, Marcelo Canicli,
an old Mayoral who had lived for more than forty years on the

1 Dr. Brinton presumes to criticise, without adducing his reasons for so
doing, the assertion made by the author that the ancient Maya architects
made use, in the construction of their edifices, of a lineal measure identical
with the metre. For an answer to this unfounded criticism, see Appendix,
notes xii. and xiv.

2 T). G. Brinton, Essays of an Americanist, p. 167.

3 Ibid., p. 261. For a reply to this assertion, see Appendix, note xv.

4 Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan , chap, viii., p. 50.

106

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

hacienda. He had a clear remembrance of John L. Stephens
and his companions Messrs. Catherwood and Cabot. He also
remembered well Abbe Brasseur, to whom he had recited the
invocation to the god of rain. When he repeated it to me,
notwithstanding the admixture of Christian ideas, I saw in it
not only one of those archaic prayers that continue to live in
the memory of the natives, but that it contained most interest-
ing information, and the explanation of certain ceremonies
that the ancient sculptors have so graphically portrayed in
their bas-reliefs.

Some months later we again established our residence in
Uxmal, that ancient metropolis of the Tutul-Xius. While
there, the head man of the laborers who accompanied me was
the late I)n. Lorenzo Pacab. He was a lineal descendant of
the kings of Muna. His commands, given in a soft low
voice, were instantly obeyed by the men. He understood
Spanish, was fond of reading, but hated to speak the tongue of
the destroyers and persecutors of his race. He himself had
cruelly suffered at the hands of the white man. Still, when he
died, so highly respected was he by his townfolk, that they
honored his remains with as grand a funeral as had taken place
for many years in Muna ; the principal inhabitants, white as
well as native, accompanying his body, reverentially, to its last
abode.

I do not remember having ever seen him laugh. Some-
times a sad, bitter smile would play upon his lips, when allusion
was made to the history of his people. Notwithstanding the
color of my skin, a great friendship sprang up between us — a
true, sincere attachment. He was well informed concerning
the traditions, antique lore, customs, and religious rites of his
ancestors. I could seldom induce him to speak on that subject,

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 107

to him so replete with painful, cruel memories. Only when
I pointed out to him the strange similarity of the customs and
manners of ancient Mayas and those of ancient Egyptians,
Chaldees, and other historical nations of antiquity, would he
relax from his habitual secrecy, and ask me questions that, to
my mind, were like the lifting of a veil hung over a bright
panorama.

When I showed him the invocation as given to me by
Canich, he smiled, and passed his pencil, without speaking,
over the words referring to Christian ideas.1

Invocation to the God of Rain.

Tippen lakin yume ti u
cante tzil caan, ti li cante
tzil luum, cu lubul in than
ti cancan xottiol, ti ti kab
yumbil.

U likil muyal lakm, ti
nacalibal chumuc ti c&nil
Ahtepal, ti oxlahun taz
muyal, Alitzolan, Kan
chac ; u. paatahbal yum
tzibol ul-laalibalob Ahtzo-
lan, Kancheob ti cilicli
oami balche, yetel u cilich
yacunali ti yumtzilob, Ab-
canan colob utial li chaob

When the master rises in
the East, the four parts of
heaven, the four corners of the
earth, are shattered, and my
broken accents fall in the hands
of the Lord.

When the cloud rises in the
East, and ascends to the centre
where sits the Orderer of the
thirteen banks of clouds, King
Ahtzolan, the “tearer,” the
“ yellow thunder,” where the
lords who tear await the com-
ing of Alitzolan, then the
keeper of the troughs wherein
is fermenting the precious

1 1 present here, side by side, the Maya text and my own English trans-
lation. Dictionary in hand, Maya students will be able to verify its
accuracy.

108

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

u cilich oabilah, tu cilicli
noli yumbil.

Cin kubic u zuliuy eiiii-
ctiil yetel in cilicli yacu-
naliil ; tech bin yanac a
pactic, en ti u xothol rna-
ali kintzil; cin katoltic
A putic A cicithan tu uolol
a puczikal ca kubic a cil-
icli yacunah a chic Zuliuy
oabilah ; bay-tumen pay-
ben utial kubic ti li Kab
Yumbil.

balche, full of love for the
lord’s fearers, “guardians of
the crops,” presents the holy
offerings that they may place
them in the presence of the
Most High, whom they rever-
ence as a father.

I also offer the virgin bird
with my holy love. Thou
wilt look at me when I cut my
privities, I who beg thy bless-
ings with my heart full of love
for thee, and ask thee to accept
my precious offerings and place
them in the hands of the Most
High.

The mutilation of the devotee by his own hand, and his
prayer that the gods should look upon him whilst he performs
the operation, recall vividly the practices in use among the
Phoenicians and the Phrygians during the orgiastic rites, and
their worship of the goddess Amma (Agdistis), the “great
mother of the gods,” Mai'a, when young men were wont to
make themselves eunuchs with a sharp shell, crying out at the
same time, “ Take this, Agdistis.'1'1 1 Herodotus2 tells us that
at the feast of Isis, at Busiris, “after the sacrifices, men and
women, to the number of several myriads, beat themselves —
in honor of what god, it would be impiety to say. The

’Max Duncker, History of Antiquity, vol. i., p. 531.

3 Herodotus, History, lib. ii. , lxi.

Page 109.

Plate XXXIV.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

109

Carians established in Egypt do still more. They stab them-
selves on the forehead with knives. ’ ’

Landa1 informs us that “the men in Yucatan made offer-
ings of their own blood, and inflicted the most cruel treatment
on their own persons, to propitiate the gods and beseech their
favor. These sanguinary acts of piety that formed part of the
religious observances of the Nahuatls, when introduced by
them among the Mayas, were looked upon by the latter with
great abhorrence, as acts unworthy of intelligent beings, for-
eign to the religion of their fathers, and distasteful to the
gods. We may here record another singular coincidence. The
worshippers of Siva, the Hindoo god of destruction, and those
of his wife, the cruel goddess Kali, are wont to torture them-
selves to do homage to these divinities by drawing a rope
through their pierced tongue,2 as we see in the sculpture from
Manche, now in the British Museum. (Plate XXIX.)

The invocation to the god of rain affords, also, an expla-
nation of the subjects represented on the tablets of the altars
in the temples of Nachan (Palenque), a city which seems to
have been sacred to the god of rain, symbolized by an image of
the Southern Cross. This special worship would seem to indi-
cate that the inhabitants of that country were agriculturists.
The analysis of the tablet represented in the illustration
strengthens this presumption. (Plate XXXIV.)

A knowledge of the symbolism in vogue among ancient
Maya adepts, together with the text of the invocation, gives
us a clear understanding of the meaning of the sculptures on
the said tablet.

1 Lancia, Las Gosas de Yucatan, pp. 160-162.

2 William Ward, A View of the History, Literature , and Religion of the
Hindoos , pp. 282-284.

110

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

There can be no question as to the central figure represent-
ing a cross, image of the constellation known as the Southern
Cross. When at the beginning of the month of May this
appears perpendicular over the horizon, the husbandman knows
that the rainy season is near at hand. He then prepares to
sow the seed for the next crop. This is why, in all times and
in all countries, the cross has been regarded as harbinger of
the regeneration of nature, and the sign of the life to come ; and
why the J, tau, in Egypt, was placed in the hands or on the
chest of all mummies.

This symbol, so common in the sculptures and temples of
Palenque, sacred to the gods of rain, is of very rare occur-
rence in those of Yucatan, whose inhabitants were navigators,
hence worshippers of the mastodon, god of the sea, whose
image adorns their palaces, sacred and public buildings.

The Maya meaning of Ti-lia-u, name of the sign f, is,
“ This is for water; ” and the main ornament, on

the headdress of the priest standing on the right, or east, side
of the cross, is the well-known symbol of water, emblem of the
divinity to whom he ministers.

On each side of the cross stands a human figure ; that of a
man on the right, that of a woman on the left. They are
emblematic of the dual forces of nature.

As in the tableau represented in plates vii. and viii. of the
Codex Cortesianus, herein reproduced (Plates LY.-LYI.), the
male principle, Cab, the “world,” the “ancestor,” is pictured
facing the east, holding in his hand the sign of life, Ik three
times repeated, so in the Palenque tablet the male, he who
fecundates, is placed to the right (that is, the east), whence the
“ Lord,” life-giver and sustainer, the Sun, rises every morning
to animate and give strength to all nature.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 1H

As again in the tableau of the Cortesianns, the female prin-
ciple, Ik mamacali, the “ life nullifier,” “ she who causes life
to disappear,” is placed to the left, so in the Palenque tablet
the female, the generator, is likewise placed to the left (that is,
the west), where every evening the sun disappears, leaving
behind him darkness, in which generation takes place. The
badge on her arm, a circle with its perpendicular and horizontal
diameters intersecting each other, image of the mundane cross,
is the symbol of the impregnated virgin womb of nature,1
hence of the life to come; while her headdress is adorned with
leaves, emblem of the life that has come.

Both are making offerings to their god: the priest presents
a young bird ; the priestess, a full-grown plant with its roots,
trunk, leaves, flowers, and fruit. We are told that they are
the chacs, keepers of the troughs in which the sacred balclie
is fermenting.2

It is well to recall here what Father Cogolludo,3 quoting
various authors who wrote regarding the Conquest and the
customs and religion of the natives, says respecting the cross
as symbol of the god of rain :

“ Gomara, speaking of the religion of the people of the
island of Cozumel, says: . . . ‘ Hear by there was a tem-

ple that looked like a square tower, in which they kept a very

1 See Appendix, note xiii.

2 The lbalcliC was a fermented liquor made of honey and the bark of
the balclie tree steeped in water. It was used to make libations in the
sacrifices to the gods, and in all religious rites — as the wine is used at the
mass in Catholic churches. Does not this sacred balche of the Mayas
bring to mind the soma of the Hindoos, made from the Asclepias acida and
from the Sarcostemma acidum ; or the amrta, the divine beverage of the
Indian gods ; or the nectar that Homer tells us the beautiful H6b6 dispensed
to the gods of Olympus ?

3 Cogolludo, Hist, de Yucathan, lib. iv., cap. ix., pp. 200-202.

112 QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

famous idol. At the foot was an enclosure made of stone and
mortar, highly finished with battlements. In the middle of
this existed a stone cross ten palms high, which they regarded
and worshipped as the god of rain ; because when it did not
rain, and the water was scarce, they went to it in procession
and with great devotion. They made offerings of quails that
had been sacrificed, in order to allay its wrath against them
with the blood of this small bird; after which they held it
certain that rain would soon fall. ’ ” . . . “ Torquemada says,
that after the Indian Chilam Balam showed them the symbol
of the cross , they regarded this as the god of rain , and felt
certain that they would never be in want of rain whilst they
devoutly asked it of the cross.” . . . “ Dr. Yllescas, in his

Pontifical (lib. 6, chap. 23, § 8), also says that they had a god,
in the shape of a cross, which they regarded as the god of
rain . ” .

Without a knowledge of the Maya language and of the
symbolism of the Maya occultists, it would be well-nigh
impossible to understand why a quail, a bird, in full plumage,
is figured perched on the top of the cross; why the cross is
planted on a skull ; why devotees offered sacrifices of birds to
the god of rain. The explanation, however, is most simple.
The bird on the top of the cross typifies the seed deposited in
the ground at the beginning of the rainy season, and placed in
the keeping of the god of rain, invoked as protector of the
fields. Ctiiicli is the Maya generic name for “ bird; ” but it
also means “seed,” and “to gather one by one grains that
have been scattered,” as birds do in the fields, robbing the
owners of both the seed and the crops. What, then, more
natural than to offer their enemies in sacrifice to the god, to
the Yumil col, the lord of the crops? This is why they

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

113

made offerings of birds, those destroyers of the crops, those
robbers of the seed, to the protector of the fields.

The cross being planted on a skull simply indicates that
from death springs life; that the seed symbolized by the bird
on the top of the cross must first become decomposed in the
ground before coming again to life in the shape of a plant.

It is well to notice that all the ornaments that, besides the
text, adorn the tablet, are either leaves, flowers, or some other
parts of the living plant, showing that the temple, where it
was placed, was dedicated to the god, protector of agriculture.

XI.

Let us revert to our inquiry concerning the customs observed
at funerals by both Mayas and Egyptians. We will examine
one or two so remarkable that they cannot be honestly attrib-
uted to mere coincidence.

We have seen that in Mayacli, as in India, Chaldea,
Egypt, and many other countries, a certain kind of ape was
held sacred; its worship being, no doubt, closely related to
that of ancestors. But how came the cynocephalus to be con-
nected in Egypt with the rites of the dead ? This species of
monkey is not a native of Egypt, but is of Central America,
where it is very abundant.

Thoth, the god of wisdom and letters, was the reputed
preceptor of Isis and Osiris. He was supposed to hold the
office of scribe in Arnenti, where his business was to note
down the actions of the dead, and present or read the record of
them to Osiris while sitting as judge of the lower regions.
Thoth, in that capacity, is represented as a cynocephalus mon-
key, in a sitting posture. He is thus frequently portrayed
seated on the top of the balance in the judgment scenes, and

QUEEN M60 AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 115

regarded as the second of the gods of the dead. In May-
acli, also, Baao, the cynocephalus, was the attendant of the
4 4 god of death, ’ ’ and always represented in a kneeling posture.

During our sojourn at Uxmal we surveyed a ruined edifice
little known to visitors, although quite extensive. On the sum-
mit of the pyramid, forming the north side, is a shrine com-
posed of two apartments, one smaller than the other. The
smaller, the sanctum sanctorum , can only be reached by pass-
ing through the larger. Opposite the doorway of the front
chamber, and at the head of the steep stairway leading to the
yard, is a round stone altar where, Landa tells us, human vic-
tims were immolated, as offerings to the deity. At the foot of
those stairs is a large rectangular platform, one metre high.
The sides were once composed of slabs covered with inscrip-
tions beautifully sculptured in intaglio to make them more
lasting. Having been submitted to the action of fire, the
characters have become well nigh obliterated. On several of
the slabs that had happened to fall face downward, the writing
is well preserved.

The centre of the platform was occupied by a huge statue
of the Yum cimil, “ god of death,” represented by a skeleton
in a squatting posture. His attendants were six cynocephali,
kneeling as if in prayer (Plate XXIV.), placed on each side of
him, one at each corner of the platform, one between these in
the middle of the east and west sides. The god of death faced
south, where his kingdom was supposed to be situated.

In the present state of our knowledge it is difficult to
surmise why that species of ape came to be connected, in
Mayach, with the rites of the dead. We might, perhaps,
find the explanation by translating the inscriptions that
adorned the platform, at least what remains of them. Is it a

116

QUEEN MdO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

mere coincidence that in Egypt, as in Mayach, cynocephali
were thus associated with the king of the dead ? That such
was the fact there is no doubt. But who can to-day tell what
circumstances concurred to originate it ? The cynocephalus is
a native of Ethiopia, not of Egypt.1 It is also indigenous of
Yucatan and other parts of Central America.

Images of cynocephali, always in the attitude of prayer,
are found in many places in Yucatan, as well as in Copan
(Honduras) and Guatemala.2 Baao and Chuen, of whose
metam orphosis into monkeys we read in the 1 ‘ Popol- vuh, ’ ’ 3
and which is said to have taken place in Xibalba, the lower
regions, the kingdom of darkness, were worshipped in May-
ach, particularly in Yucatan and Oaxaca.4 5

Baao and Clmen are the names of personages who lived
in times anterior to those when King Canclii and his family
reigned over Mayach. Their history has come to us, in the
sacred book of the Quiches, in the form of a myth. Deified
after their death, as all rulers were, the generations that fol-
lowed them paid them divine homage. Baao is the Maya
word for “ cynocephalus.” The meaning of the name Chuen
is now lost. We only find it as that of the eighth day of the
month.

Like the Mayas,3 the Egyptians regarded the West as the
region of darkness, the place where the souls of the dead

1 Plinius, Hist. Nat., viii. 54 ; vii. 2.

3 Horapollo, Hierogly., lib. i., 14, 15. In astronomical subjects two
cynocephali are frequently represented standing in a boat in attitude of
prayer before the sun.

3 Popol- Vuh, part ii., chap, vii., et passim.

4 Fray Geronimo Roman, Republica de las Indias Occidentales, lib. ii.,
cap. xv.

5 Codex Cortesianus, plate viii.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

117

returned to the bosom of their ancestors in the realms of
Amenti. There King Osiris sat on a throne in the midst of
the waters ; there, also, it was that Thoth performed his office
of scribe. Was, then, the worship of the cynocephalus, his
totem, brought to Egypt from the Lands of the West?

Another funeral custom among the Egyptians, mentioned
by Champollion Figeac1 and Sir Gardner Wilkinson,2 was that
of placing the right arm of the mummies of distinguished per-
sons across the chest, so that the right hand rested on the left
shoulder. We find that this same custom obtained in May-
acli. We shall refer to it more at length, later on, when
explaining the sculptures that ornamented Prince Coil’s
mausoleum.

If we examine the ornaments worn by the personages rep-
resented by the atlantes, those portrayed in the bas-reliefs on
the jambs of the doorway and on the antaa that supported the
entablature of the portico of Prince Coil’s Memorial Hall,
likenesses, probably, of individuals who lived when the struc-
ture was erected, who were, no doubt, friends and relatives of
the deceased prince, we find that said ornaments consisted of
ear-rings, nose-rings, nose-studs, armlets, bracelets, anklets,
garters, necklaces, breastplates, and finger-rings. From times
immemorial to our day, the same kind of jewelry has been
used in India, Chaldea, Asia Minor, Egypt, and Greece. Hose
rings and studs, however, seem to have been ornaments essen-
tially belonging to the Western Continent. They are still as
much the prevalent adornment among the tribes living on the
banks of the upper Amazon River and its affluents, in the very

1 Champollion Figeac, L'Univers, Egypte, p. 261.

2 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , vol. iii., chap, xvi.,
p. 486.

118 QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

heart of the southern American continent,1 and with the
majority of the Mexican tribes,2 as they were among the
Mayas even at the time of the Spanish Conquest.3 They are
habitually worn by women of all classes in India ; 4 by Arab
women of Mesopotamia,5 as they were by Jewish women in the
time of Isaiah. He threatened the daughters of Zion, on
account of their haughtiness, with the loss of their ornaments,
among which were their rings and other nose jewels.6 So
far as we know, nose-rings and nose-studs were not in vogue
among the ancient Aryans. They, therefore, did not intro-
duce the custom of wearing such ornaments in the countries
they invaded. Said custom must have been brought to Asia,
in very remote ages, by immigrants from America. It is a
noticeable fact that it only obtained in countries where vestiges
of the Mayas and their civilization are found.

Must we regard as a mere coincidence the use of these nose
and lip ornaments that, to us, seem not only extremely incon-
venient, but rather disfiguring than beautifying the face of the
wearer, yet so prevalent among many peoples living thousands
of miles apart, knowing nothing of each other’s existence ?

Perhaps those knowing professors who pretend to explain
all these identical customs existing in so many diverse nations,
by the tendency of the human mind, in its struggles to free

1 Paul Marcoy (Lorenzo de Saint-Bricq), Travels in South America ,
vol. ii.

2 Bancroft, Native Races of America, vol. i.

3 Diego de Cogolludo, Hist, de Yucathan, lib. xii., chap, vii., p. 699.
Diego de Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan, p. 182.

4 C. P. Gordon Cumming, In the Himalayas and on the Indian Plains,
chap, iv., p. 90. Bishop Heber, Narratives of a Journey through the Upper
Provinces of India, vol. ii., pp. 179, 188.

6 Henry Layard, Nineveh and Babylon, pp. 153-262.

6 Isaiah, chap, iii., verse 21.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 119

itself from the darkness of barbarism, when placed in similar
conditions, to act in the same manner and repeat the same
actions, will find here an incontrovertible proof of the accu-
racy of tbeir pet theory. But we who want more than theo-
ries, who require proofs for every scientific or historical fact
asserted, will ask them, How is it that the strange custom
of wearing rings hanging from the nose or lips, or studs fast-
ened on either or both sides of the nose, has obtained and does
still obtain with peoples who have had intimate relations with
the ancient Mayas, and with these only ?

Who can assign limits to the extravagance of the votaries
of fashion, that most merciless of tyrants ? In all times, in all
countries, it has held, and still holds, sway over them, be they
civilized or savage. It incites them to deck their bodies with
the most ridiculous and unbecoming appendages under pretext
of adorning them; and they, its slaves, humbly obey.

Next to these nose and lip jewels, the ornament that most
attracts attention in the portraits represented in the sculptures
and paintings of the Maya artists is the necklace, of which
there is a great variety, worn by persons of rank. It would
seem that it was used as a badge of authority, as was the
breastplate, since some necklaces bear a notable resemblance
to those seen round the necks of the images of the gods and
goddesses in Egypt. We know that there, as in Chaldea and
many other countries, they were bestowed on the wearers
as a mark of royal favor ; 1 whilst armlets and bracelets were
tokens of rank, seldom worn except by officers of the court or
persons of distinction.2

1 Genesis, chap, xli., verse 42. Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Cus-
toms, vol. iii., p. 370.

2 Rawlinson, 1'he Five Monarchies , vol. i., p. 568 ; vol. iii., p. 370.

XII.

Before entering the funeral chamber, let us examine the
graceful decorations that embellished the entablature of the
Memorial Hall. From them we shall learn by whom, to whom,
and for what purpose it was erected. Properly speaking, there
is not a single inscription, not a single letter or character, on
any part of the building ; and yet the architect Avho conceived
the plan, and had it executed, so cleverly arranged the orna-
ments that they form the dedication. We must, of course,
read it in the Maya language. (Plate XXXY.)

Beginning at the top of the entablature, we notice that the
first line of ornaments represents a rope loosely twisted, and
that within the open strands there are circles. This ornament
is three times repeated.

One of the names for rone, in Maya, is kaan. There are
two words for circle, hoi and uol. Taking liol to be the first
syllable of a dissyllable suggested by the two distinct objects
that compose the ornament, and kaan to be the second, we
have, by changing the k into c, the word holcan, which
means a “warrior.” Holcan,1 moreover, was a title corre-
1 Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan , $ xxix., p. 174.

Page 120.

Plate XXXV.

HnH

Page 121.

Plate XXXVI.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

121

sponding to our modern captain-general. The repetition of a
word is one form of superlative. Hence the word holcan
three times repeated would read the ££ very valiant,” the ££ war-
rior of warriors,” the ££ warrior par excellence .”

The most prominent ornament in the second line represents
a series of knots or joints of the bamboo cane. Moc is the
generic Maya word for ££ knot. ” This bamboo joint or knot is
often used as totem of Queen Moo, whose name is the radical
or first syllable of the verb moocol, ££ to knot,” and of many
other words the meaning of which is ££ to join,” ££ to tie,” etc.

On the same line there are also four circles, and a fish on
each side of the series of knots. Cay is the Maya for “ fish.”
It was the name of the highpriest, elder brother of Queen
Moo. His totem on the monuments is always a fish. (Plate
XXXVI.) Taking each of the circles that accompany the fish
as a unit, we have the numerical “four,” can, a word that,
as we have already seen,1 has many meanings in the Maya
language. It is, as the English word can , always connected
with power and might. In this instance it signifies “to
speak,” and, by extension, “to testify,” particularly if we
consider that the word uol, besides circle, also means “ to
desire,” “ to wish.” The ornament composed of four circles
and a fish, then, signifies that Cay, the pontiff, wishes to
speak, to testify.

On the third line we again find the circles uol many times
repeated, which in this case should be translated “to ear-
nestly desire,” “to crave.” These circles are separated by
reedings, that form, as it were, a kind of frame around the
knots in the centre of the second line, to indicate that the
action represented by this ornament is directly connected with
1 Ubi supra , p. 93.

122 QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

I

the person whose totem said knots are. These reedings are
composed of straight lines carved in the stone, and are sur-
rounded by a border.

To cut or carve straight lines in a hard substance with a
sharp-pointed tool is expressed by the simple word ppaay, in
Maya. Clii is the word for border. The whole ornament, then,
gives the word ppaay chi. But pay al chi is a “prayer,”
an ‘ £ invocation ; ’ ’ and ppaachi is “to make an offering, ’ ’
“ to make a vow.” The duplication of the ornament indicates
the earnestness of the vow, or the fervor with which the
offering is made.

The leopards are the totem, hence the name of the hero to
whose memory the hall was erected. By these we learn that
he was called Coh. As to the shields covered with leopard
skin, they are the badges of his profession, which, from the
ropes with circles within their open strands, we have already
learned was that of a warrior.

Translating this dedication into English, it reads: “ Cay,
the highpriest , desires to hear witness that Moo has made this
offering, earnestly invoking Coll, the warrior of warriors.”

Does not this recall to mind the invocations of the two
sisters, Isis and Nike, in the book of Lamentations;1 and in
that of “ Glorifying Osiris in Aquerti ” ?2

As we are about to enter the funeral chamber, hallowed by
the love of the sister-wife, Queen Moo, the beauty of the
carvings on the zapote beam that forms the lintel of the
doorway calls our attention. (Plates XXXVII. -XXXVIII.)
Here is represented the antagonism of the brothers Aac
and Coh, that led to the murder of the latter by the former.

1 Translation of Mr. Horrack.

2 Translation of Mr. Pierret.

Page 122.

Plate XXXVII.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

123

Carved in the lintel are the names of these personages, rep-
resented by their totems — a leopard-head for Coll ; and a
hoar-head as well as a turtle for Aac, this word meaning
both hoar and turtle in Maya. Aac is pictured within the
disk of the sun, his protective deity, which he worshipped,
according to mural inscriptions at Uxmal. Full of anger
he faces his brother. In his right hand there is a badge orna-
mented with feathers and flowers. The threatening way
in which this is held suggests a concealed weapon. , Among
the people of Tahiti, eloquent bards went to battle among the
warriors, inciting them Avith gloAving words ; those orators car-
ried a hunch of green leaves which served to hide a dangerous
weapon made from the bone of the sting-ray.1 A fell intent
disguised beneath blossoms suggests the treacherous Avay in
which Coll was slain.

The face of Coll, also, expresses anger. With him is the
feathered serpent, emblem of royalty, thence of the country,
more often represented as a winged serpent protecting Coll.
In his left hand he holds his weapons, down; while his
right hand clasps his badge of authority, Avith which he
covers his breast as if for protection, and demanding the
respect due to his rank.

So in Mayacli as in Egypt,2 and in every place where
Maya civilization has penetrated, we find the sun and the ser-
pent inimical to each other. Are we to see in the Egyptian
myth of Horus (the sun) killing the serpent Aphophis, by
piercing his head Avith a lance, a tradition of the hostility of the
brothers Aac and Coli in Mayacli ? Both belonged to the

1 Ellis (W.), Polynesian Researches , vol. i. , chap, xi., p. 287.

2 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , vol. iii. , chap, xiii.,
pp. 59, 144, 154.

124

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

Can (serpent) dynasty. In Greece we find a reflection of the
Egyptian myth in the fable of Apollo (the sun) killing the
serpent Python. In the “ Mahabharata ” Krishna — that is,

the god Vishnu in his eighth avatar — kills the serpent Anantha ,
the seven-headed, enemy of the gods, when he was wrestling
with the goddess Parvati.1

During their captivity in Babylon, the Jews, among other
legends of the Chaldees, learned the tradition of the enmity
between the woman and the serpent, that Hilkiah, the high-
priest,2 introduced at the beginning of Genesis.3 The Chris-
tians received it from the Jews; and to this day the Church

1 J. T. Wheeler, Mahabharata, vol. i., “ Legends of Krishna.”

2 2 Kings, chap, xxii., verses 8-10 ; also 2 Chron., chap, xxxiv., verse
15. See Appendix, note xvii.

3 Genesis, chap. ii. , verse 15.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

125

of Rome always pictures the Virgin Mary with a serpent
coiled at her feet. So, also, we see the Goddess Maya in
Japan. She is represented standing on a rock, the name of
which is symbolized by a dragon encircling it with its body,
its head resting at her feet. In her hand she holds aloft a
branch of the mangrove tree, bearing fruit. This is the totem,
or name, of her family, Canchi. The mangrove tree and
its fruit are called Canclie in the Maya language; that is,
“serpent wood,” from the appearance of its contorted roots,
that resemble snakes. It is well, in this connection, to
remember that even at the time of the Spanish Conquest the
Maya Empire was called Nobcan, the great serpent, and
also beb, the mulberry tree,1 and the authors of the Troano
MS. and of the Cortesianus always represented the Maya
Empire either as a tree rooted in the South American continent,
or as a serpent — sometimes with, sometimes without, wings. In
another work I have shown, when speaking of the relation of
the tree and the serpent with the country in the middle of the
land,2 that Yuen-leao-fctn , a very ancient commentator on the
“ Chou-King,” says that kan means the trunk of a tree, and
tchi are the branches.

Passing between the figures of armed chieftains sculptured
on the jambs of the doorway, and seeming like sentinels guard-
ing the entrance of the funeral k chamber, we notice one
wearing a headdress similar to the / V crown of Lower Egypt,
which formed part of the Pshent of the Egyptian mon-

archs. "We step into the hallowed place with as much rever-
ence as if the body of the dead hero still lay in state within
its walls after being prepared for cremation.

1 Cogolludo, Hist, de Yucathan, lib. i., chap. i.

2 A. Le Plongeon, Sacred Mysteries , etc., p. 127.

126 QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

Does not the memory of his life, of his exploits in war, of
the hitter hatred of his brother Aac, of his death at the
hand of the friend of his childhood, still hover there? So,
also, that of the love of his sister-wife, Moo, who, we know,
ordered the erection of this monument to perpetuate it; of his
friends, who shed tears1 for their companion in pleasure, their
brave leader in battle, and whose effigies supported the altar
on which offerings were made to his manes ; of a whole nation
that mourned the untimely end of their beloved ruler — he
who brought glory, power, and happiness to the people ? In
so saying, I am but the mouthpiece of the author of that
celebrated Maya book, the Troano.

1 Troano MS., part ii. , plate xvi., lower compartment.

XIII.

It was with conflicting sentiments of awe and disgust that
we contemplated the walls by which we were surrounded.
Many before us had visited this apartment, and, by inscribing
their names, disfigured what remained of the fresco paintings
that once covered those walls from the plinth to the apex of
the triangular arch forming the ceiling. Of these we saved,
by making accurate tracings, all that was possible, noting the
various colors in each part. The tints were still bright,
some even brilliant. It seemed as if we had been transported to
one of the royal tombs at Thebes, or to the cave temples in
the island of Elephanta,1 only here the artists were less tram-
melled by conventionalities in art. Their designs, freer, truer
to nature, more correct in their delineations, particularly of
the human body, show that the artists who executed them
were masters in the art of drawing.2 Like the Egyptian, the

Chaldee, and the Hindoo artists, the Mayas were little

•

1 Henry Grose, Voyage in the East Indies , chap, vii., p. 95. See Ap-
pendix, note xviii.

2 John L. Stephens, Incidents of Travels in Yucatan , vol. ii., p. 311. See
Appendix, note xi.

128

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

acquainted with the rules of perspective. Their landscapes
were, therefore, defective.1

The frescos in the funeral chamber of Prince Coil’s Me-
morial Hall, painted in water colors taken from the vegetable
kingdom, are divided into a series of tableaux separated by-
blue lines. The plinths, the angles of the room, and the edges
of the ceiling, being likewise painted blue, indicate that this
was intended for a funeral chamber. We have already said that
blue was the mourning color in Egypt, Chaldea, and many
other places. The study of the tableaux proves that the his-
tory they are meant to record must be read from right to left ;
and, in this instance, from below upward.

The first scene represents Queen Moo when yet a child.
She is seated on the back of a peccary, or American wild boar,
under the royal umbrella of feathers, emblem of royalty in
Mayach as it was in India, Chaldea, Egypt, and other places.
She is consulting a H-men, or wise man; listening with pro-
found attention to the decrees of fate as revealed by the crack-
ing of the shell of an armadillo exposed to a slow fire on a
brazier, the condensing on it of the vapor, and the various
tints it assumes. (Plate XXXIX.)

This mode of divination is one of the customs of the
Mayas that tends to show the influence of their civilization
on Asiatic populations, even on that of the Chinese who seem
to have adopted many Maya customs — unless it be again
argued that they are mere coincidences : for instance, their
mythical traditions of the Tchi, those children of Tien-IToang,
who had the body of a serpent , and lived in times anterior to
Ti-Hoang, sovereign of the “ country in the middle of the

1 William Osburn, Monumental History of Egypt, p. 260. See Appendix,
note xi.

Page 128-

Plate XXXIX.

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

129

land,” mentioned in the “ Chou-Ixing,” that calls to mind the
empire of the Mayas situated in the middle of the Western
Continent, whose contour was that of a serpent, whose sover-
eigns were the Cans, or serpents ; also the yellow color, prerog-
ative of the royal family in China as in Mayach. Why have
the Chinese a dragon on their imperial banner? Long , “the
winged dragon,” say the Chinese, is the being that excels in
understanding. It is therefore among them the emblem of the
god of intelligence, keeping watch over the tree of knowledge.

Does not this “winged dragon” recall the “winged ser-
pent,” emblem of the Maya Empire, also figured as a tree;
and was not that tree the site of ancient culture, civilization,
and knowledge ? Again, on great and solemn state occasions,
a precisely similar mode of consulting fate, by the emperor, to
that pictured in the first tableau is still performed in China.
It is called the ceremony of Pou , in which, instead of an arma-
dillo, a turtle called Kuri is the victim.1

Returning to the description of the tableau: in front of
the young queen Moo, and facing her, is seated the sooth-
sayer, evidently a priest of high rank, judging from the col-
ors, blue and yellow, of the feathers of his ceremonial mantle,

1 In the fourth chapter, entitled “Hong-Fau,” of the fourth part of the
Chou-King , at the seventh paragraph, Sloka 20, we read : “In all dubious
cases the king selects an officer whose duty it is to consult fate. When in-
stalled in office he examines Pou.”

Sloka 21 : “This examination comprehends : 1st, the vapor in form of
dew ; 2d, the vapor when it vanishes in the air ; 3d, the color, dark or dull,
of the shell ; 4th, the isolated cracks on the shell ; 5tli, the cracks that cress
each other, aud those that are joined together.”

They believed that by these means they consulted the spirits Kuei , and
only used this mode of divination when the knowledge sought could not
be otherwise obtained, and was of great moment. It is well to notice that
the name Ku-ei, given to the spirits by the Chinese, is identical with Ku,
“ the Supreme Intelligence,” among the Mayas and Egyptians.

9

130

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

and as behooves the dignity of the consnlter; he reads the
decrees of fate on the shell of the armadillo, and the scroll
issuing from his throat says what they are. By him stands
the winged serpent, emblem and protective genius of the
Maya Empire. His head is turned toward the royal banner,
which he seems to caress; his satisfaction is reflected in the
mild and pleased expression of his face. Behind the priest,
the position of whose hand is the same as that of Catholic
priests in blessing their congregation, and the significance of
which is well known to occultists, are the ladies-in- waiting
of the young queen.

I forbear now to read the meaning of the scroll, because its
colors are here wanting ; otherwise it would be an easy matter,
knowing as I do the history of the lady, the import of the colors
among the Mayas, and that of the shape of the lines forming
the scrolls — image of speech in their paintings and sculpture.

In another tableau (Plate XL.) we again see Queen Moo, no
longer a child, but a comely young woman. She is not seated
under the royal umbrella or banner, but she is once more in
the presence of the H-men, whose face is concealed by a mask
representing an owl’s head.

She, pretty and coquettish, has many admirers who vie with
each other for the honor of her hand. In company with one
of her wooers she comes to consult the priest, accompanied by
an old lady, her grandmother probably, and her female attend-
ants. According to custom the old lady is the spokeswoman.
She states to the priest that the young man, he who sits on a
low stool between the two female attendants, desires to marry
the queen. The priest’s attendant, seated also on a stool, back
of all, acts as crier, and repeats in a loud voice the speech of
the old lady.

Page 130.

Plate XL.

Page 131.

Plate XLI.

QUEEN 3100 AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

131

The young queen refuses the offer. The refusal is indicated
by the direction of the scroll issuing from her mouth. It is
turned backward, instead of forward toward the priest as
would be the case if she assented to the marriage.

The H-men explains that Moo, being a daughter of the
royal family, by law and custom must marry one of her
brothers. 1 The youth listens to the decision with due respect
for the priest, as shown by his arm being placed across his
breast, the left hand resting on the right shoulder. lie does
not accept the refusal in a meek spirit, however. His clinched
fist, his foot raised, as if in the act of stamping, betoken anger
and disappointment, while the attendant behind him expostu-
lates, counselling patience and resignation, judging by the posi-
tion and expression of her extended left hand, palm upward.

Herodotus tells us2 “that the Egyptians observed the cus-
toms of their ancestors and did not adopt new ones.” Among
them there were two tokens of respect used by inferiors in
the presence of their superiors. They are remarkable enough
to arrest the attention of any one inquiring into their manners
and customs.

One consisted in placing an arm across the chest, the hand
resting on the opposite shoulder; the other, in putting the
forearm, the right generally, across the chest — the hand, with
closed fingers, being over the heart.3 (Plate XLI.)

1 It was the law among the Mayas, that, in order to preserve the royal
blood from admixture and contamination, the girls should marry their
brothers. The same custom obtained in Egypt, Chaldea, Greece, and
many other places from the remotest antiquity. The gods even observed
the practice. We are told that Jupiter married his sister Juno. In Peru
and other countries of the Western Continent, royal brothers wedded their
royal sisters.

2 Herodotus, Hist., lib. ii. , lxxix.

3 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , illust.

132

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

From the remotest antiquity, if we are to judge by the
fresco paintings in the funeral chamber and the illustrations in
the Troano MS., the same marks of respect obtained among
the Mayas, and were in vogue still at the time of the conquest
of Yucatan by the Spaniards, according to Father Cogolludo.1
The Mayas usually placed the left arm across the chest, letting
the left hand rest on the right shoulder.

The natives of Yucatan, British Honduras, Peten, and the
countries bordering on Guatemala still use these signs, among
themselves, when their white neighbors are not present. (Plates
XLII.-XLIII.) Before their white superiors they either stand
erect, hat in hand, their arms hanging by their sides, as is
customary with soldiers in presence of their officers; or Avith
both arms crossed over their chest.

Can this similarity of signs of respect, common to both
Mayas and Egyptians, be a simple coincidence ? If so, then
what of the identity of the dress of the Egyptian and the Maya
laborers ; 2 of the gifts of cloaks to the victors in athletic
games in Egypt 3 and Mayacli ; 4 of the great respect professed
for their elders by the Egyptians 5 and the Mayas ; 6 of their
carrying children astride the hip ; 7 of their hatred of for-
eigners ; 8 of the year beginning on about the same day (cor-
responding to the middle of our month of July) in Egypt as

1 Diego de Cogolludo, Hist, de Yucathan , lib. ix., cap. viii., p. 489.

2 Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , etc., vol. ii., chap, x., p. 323. Hero-
dotus, Hist., lib. ii., lxxxi.

3 Ibid., xci.

4 Herrera.

5 Herodotus, Hist., lib. ii., lxxx.

6 Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan, § xxx., p. 178.

7 Ibid., I xx., p. 112. Wilkinson, Manners and Customs, vol. ii., p. 334.
Appendix, note xvi.

“ Herodotus, lib. ii., xli., xci.

Page 132.

Plate XLII.

Page 132.

Plate XLIII.

Page 133.

Plate XLIV.

— Mill I

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 133

in Mayacli ; 1 and of many other customs, the list of which is
too long to be enumerated in these pages — are these also coin-
cidences? But if they are not, what then? The Egyptians
invariably following the habits of their ancestors, must we
infer that they and the Mayas had a common ancestry ?

In another tableau (Plate XLIY.) we see the same individual
whose offer of marriage was rejected by the young queen, in
consultation with a aSTubclii, or prophet, a priest whose exalted
rank is indicated by his headdress, and the triple breastplate he
wears over his mantle of feathers. The consulter, evidently a
personage of importance, has come attended by his haclietail,
or confidential friend, who sits behind him on a cushion. The
expression on the face of said consulter shows that he does
not accept patiently the decrees of fate, although conveyed by
the interpreter in as conciliatory manner as possible. The
adverse decision of the gods is manifested by the sharp pro-
jecting centre part of the scroll, but it is wrapped in words as
persuasive and consoling, preceded by as smooth a preamble as
the rich and beautiful Maya language permits and makes easy.

His friend is addressing the prophet’s assistant. Reflecting
the thoughts of his lord, he declares that the Nubchi’s fine
discourse and his pretended reading of the will of the gods
are all nonsense, and exclaims “ Pshaw! ” which contemptuous
exclamation is pictured by the yellow scroll, pointed at both
ends, escaping from his nose like a sneeze. The answer of the
priest’s assistant, evidenced by the gravity of his features, the
assertive position of his hand, and the bluntness of his speech,
is evidently, “ It is so! ”

Should you ask occultists why the feet of the consulter and

1 Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan , $ xxxix., p. 236. Wilkinson, Manners
and Customs, vol. iii., chap, xiii , p. 107. Champollion Figeac, L'Univers.
Egypte , p. 236. See Appendix, note xvi.

134

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

of the prophet are in such close contact, they would tell you
that it is to establish and maintain the magnetic rapport
between them.

In another tableau (Plate XLY.) we see a third, a youthful,
admirer of Queen Moo. His name is Citam (peccary). He
also desires to peer into futurity. His headdress shows him to
belong to the nobility. In fact, he has been Moo’s companion
of infancy, and accompanied her when she went to the H-men
to consult the Pou. He comes naked, in humility, to ask the
aruspice to consult Fate on the motion of the entrails of a
peccary. The interpreter of the decrees of destiny points out
to him the working of the intestines of the animal, which he
has cut open with his sacrificial adze. Judging from the
expression on his face, the future shows itself full of tribula-
tions. The young man listens with sad and respectful attention
to the words of the aruspice. He will submit to the inevita-
ble. He will always be Queen Moo’s stanch friend in her
days of happiness, never forsaking her in those of adversity.

Hot so, however, her brother Aac, who is madly in love
with her. In Plate XLYI. he is not portrayed approaching, the
interpreter of the will of the gods divested of his garments, in
token of humility in presence of their majesty and of submission
to their decrees. He comes full of arrogance, arrayed in gor-
geous attire, and with regal pomp. He comes not as a suppli-
cant, to ask and accept counsel ; but, haughty, he makes bold to
dictate. He is angered at the refusal of the priest to accede
to his demand for his sister Moo’s hand, to whose totem, an
armadillo on this occasion, he points imperiously. It was on
an armadillo’s shell that the Fates wrote her destiny when con-
sulted by the performance of the Pou ceremony. The yellow
flames of wrath darting from all over his person, the sharp yel-

Page 13 h.

Plate XL V.

Page 13Jf.

Plate XL VI.

Page 135.

Plate XL VII.

*

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

135

low scroll issuing from his month, symbolize Aac’s feelings.
The pontiff, however, is unmoved by them. In the name of
the gods, with serene mien, he denies the request of the proud
nobleman, as his speech indicates. The winged serpent, genius
of the country, that stands erect and ireful by Aac, is also
wroth at his pretensions, and shows in its features and by
sending its dart through Aac’s royal banner, a decided oppo-
sition to them, expressed by the ends of his speech being
turned backward, some of them terminating abruptly, others in
sharp points.

Prince Coll sits behind the priest, as one of his attendants.
He witnesses the scene, hears the calm negative answer, sees
the anger of his brother and rival, smiles at his impotence, is
happy at his discomfiture. Behind him, however, sits a spy,
who will repeat his words, report his actions to his enemy.
He listens, he watches.

The highpriest himself, Cay, their elder brother, sees the
storm that is brewing behind the dissensions of Coh and
Aac. He trembles at the thought of the misfortunes that
will surely befall the dynasty of the Cans ; of the ruin and
misery of the country that will certainly follow. Divested of
his priestly raiment, he comes nude and humble, as it is
proper for men in presence of the gods, to ask their advice
how best to avoid the impending calamities. The chief of the
aruspices is in the act of reading their decrees on the palpitat-
ing entrails of a fish (Cay). The sad expression on his face,
that of humble resignation on that of the pontiff, of deferen-
tial astonishment on that of the assistant, speak of the inevita-
ble misfortunes that are to come in the near future. (Plate
XLYII.)

Could the history portrayed by these fresco paintings be

136

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

given here in all its details, it would prove most interesting; but
the limits assigned to this work do not allow it. Skipping,
therefore, over several very curious tableaux, we shall consider
the one in which Prince Coll is pictured at the head of his
warriors (Plate XLYIII.) in the heat of battle, accompanied
and overshadowed by the winged serpent as by an aegis. The
genius of Mayach guards him, fights at his side, leads his
followers to victory.

This serpent is not the rattlesnake, covered with feathers
(Kukulcan), image of the rulers of the country. It is
the winged serpent, whose dart is the South American conti-
nent. It is the Nolioch Can, the great serpent, protective
genius of Mayach, as the urseus, that “winged serpent”
with inflated breast, represented standing erect on a sieve, was
of Lower Egypt.1

The sieve was in Egypt emblematic of power and dominion ;
singular antithesis, indeed, which none of the learned Egyp-
tologists have explained. Still the Egyptian priests never
selected an object as symbol without good and sufficient rea-
sons. These were made known to initiates only, in the seclu-
sion of the temples.2 "What could have induced them to choose,
as emblem of domination and authority, an utensil used solely
by slaves and menials, and place, standing erect upon it, the
emblem of the genius of Lower Egypt, has never been accounted
for in modern times.

In the Maya language we again find the explanation of
such seeming mystery. In it the word for sieve is Mayab.

1 Those who consider themselves authorities on Maya antiquities always
confound these two serpents, and call them Kukulcan, although they are
very distinct symbols.

2 Clement of Alexandria, in Stromata 12, says : “ It is requisite to hide
in a mystery the wisdom spoken.” He had been initiated in the mysteries.

Page 136.

Plate XL VIII.

Page 137.

Plate XLIX.

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

137

But Mayab, we are told, was in remote times one of the
names of the Yucatan peninsula, given to it on account of the
porosity of its soil, which allows the water to filter through it
as through a sieve, and gather, cool and pure, in pools and lakes,
in the immense subterranean caves with which the country is
honeycombed.

Did, then, the wise men of Egypt select as symbol of their
country the serpent with wings and an inflated breast, in
remembrance of the birthplace of their ancestors; did they
place it erect on a sieve to signify that the first settlers coming
from Mayab (the sieve) conquered and dominated the former
dwellers in the valley of the Nile ?

Pursuing our study of the fresco paintings, we pass over
interesting battle scenes, including one (Plate XLIX.) repre-
senting a village 1 invaded by the hosts of Prince Coh. The
women and children flee for safety, carrying their most precious
belongings. Their defenders have been defeated by the Mayas.

Coh will return to his queen loaded with spoils that he will
lay at her feet with his glory, which is also hers, and his love,
which she claims in return for hers. She loves him because he
is brave and generous. The people idolize him because he gives
fame, riches, and happiness to the nation. His warriors cher-
ish him because, always foremost in battle, he leads them to
triumph and conquest.

We next see him in a terrible altercation with his brother
Aac. The figures in that scene are nearly life size, hut so
much disfigured and broken as to make it impossible to obtain

1 This is evidently a Mexican village in the now state of Vera Cruz.
The traveller who to-day goes by rail from the port of Vera Cruz to the City
of Mexico sees, on his way, villages, the women of which come to offer for
sale chirimoyas and other tropical fruits. In their features and dress they
resemble those pictured here by the Maya artist.

138

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

good tracings. Coll is portrayed without weapons, his fists
clinched, looking menacingly at his foe, who holds three spears,
typical of the three wounds he inflicted in his brother’s back
when he killed him treacherously.

Coli is now laid out, being prepared for cremation. (Plate
L.) His body has been opened under the ribs to extract the
viscera and the heart, which, after being charred, are to be pre-
served in a stone urn with cinnabar, where the writer found them
in 1875. His sister-wife, Queen Moo, in sad contemplation of
the remains of her beloved, ozil in Maya, and his second sister,
Nike (the flower), kneeling at his feet, recall vividly the pic-
ture of Isis (Mail) and her sister Nike lamenting over the
body of their much loved brother Ozir-is. Coil’s children and
mother stand by him in affliction. One of the children, prob-
ably the eldest, carries the band which is to be wrapped round
the chest and waist to hide the gash made for the extraction of
those parts regarded as vital organs, and which are to be pre-
served and placed in the tomb with the statue of the deceased.
Another, who seems to be a girl, holds in her hands and con-
templates with sadness the brains of the dead hero. These
are to be kept in a separate urn. The youngest child is pic-
tured with the heart of his father in his right hand. He is
crying. The grandmother comes last. All the figures in this
tableau are represented naked or nearly so ; for in Mayacli, as
in India and Egypt, the presence of a dead body polluted those
present, who had to submit to purification by appropriate
ceremonies.1 The winged serpent, protective genius of the

1 “ The presence of a corpse defiles those who come near it.” — Manava-
Dharma-Sastra, lib. v.. Sloka 62.

“He who lias touched a corpse purifies himself by bathing.” — Ibid., lib.
v., Sloka 85.

“The death of a parent or relative causes one to become defiled.”

Page 138.

Plate L.

Page 139.

Plate LI

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

139

deceased, is pictured without a head. The ruler of the country
has been slain. He is dead. The people are without a chief.

With the customary rites Prince Coil’s remains have been
made to return to their primitive elements by means of the
all-purifying flame; the vital parts, in which intelligence and
sensation were believed to have their seat, have been preserved
incorruptible in separate urns, so that when the spirit of the
departed warrior returns to earth to reanimate the stone image
made in his likeness he will find them ready, placed by it in
his mausoleum. With due respect they have been entrusted to
the care of mother earth.

Queen Moo is now a widow. “ What is to prevent her
marrying my master, the powerful Prince Aac ? ” So speaks
the messenger who has brought to her house a basket of oranges ;
golden apples whose acceptance would mean that of Prince Aac
also, and constitute betrothal — a custom still existing among
the natives of Yucatan.1 (Plate LI.) Ho sooner has she
dismissed this first messenger, who has left the basket of fruit
on the ground outside of the house — a sign that she has refused
it — than a second presents himself, and, with supplicating
gestures, entreats the lady to accept the proffered love of his
master, who is at the foot of the elevation on which stands her
residence. Aac is dressed in the color peculiar to the royal
family — yellow. He bows and lowers his weapons, in token of
his submission, and that he places them at her command. The
deformed figure of the messenger indicates the abjectness of
his entreaties. It also shows that the wise men of Mayach
had studied the science of physiognomy, and had reached the
conclusion that the moral qualities leave their imprint on the
physical body.

See Appendix, note xix.

140

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

Queen Moo, with outstretched hand, seems to protect the
brazier and armadillo on whose shell the Fates wrote her des-
tiny when consulted by the H-men in the ceremony of Pou.
She refuses to listen to the proposal of Prince Aac, whose
totem, a serpent, name of his dynasty, is pictured at the top
of a tree, trying to charm a macaw, her own totem, perched
higher up on another tree, symbol of her more exalted polit-
ical position. Here, then, we have icoman, garden, fruit, and a
tempter whose title is Can, “ serpent ,” an episode in ancient
American history.

It is this refusal to accept the fruit, not the acceptance of
it as asserted by the highpriest Hilkiah in his book Genesis,
that eventually brought dire calamities upon Queen Moo, caused
the misfortunes of her people and the decline of the Maya civil-
ization, occasioned by the dismemberment of the empire in
consequence of intestine feuds and civil war that put an end to
the Can dynasty, as we learn from the author of the Troano
MS.1 and the much distorted tradition that has reached us.2

Clinging to the tree on the top of which the macaw is
perched, we see a monkey. His right arm is raised as if about
to strike, or at least menacing, the second messenger, who
addresses the queen. What has the artist wished to indicate by
introducing this monkey in this scene, by its attitude and its
gestures? If, in consequence of events, Queen Moo became
Queen Man in Egypt, or the goddess Isis, then the solution of
the riddle is easy. Thoth, the god of letters, the scribe of
Osiris in Amenti, represented as a cynocephalus ape, was said
to have been the preceptor of Isis and Osiris, therefore the
protector of their youth. The presence here of this monkey,

1 Troano MS., part ii., plate xvii.

2 Lancia, Las Cosas de Yucatan , \ v., p. 34.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 141

as protector of the widowed Queen Moo, would be naturally
explained.

It is impossible to even conjecture the meaning of the group
formed by a rattlesnake entwined to a tree, angrily facing an
unknown animal resembling a kangaroo. This animal exists
no longer in Yucatan. It is, therefore, difficult to surmise
what or whom it is meant for, consequently to assign to him a
role in this history. That he and the serpent were inimical is
certain, since he seems to have been bitten by the latter, judg-
ing from the drops of blood which cover his visage.

If the events that followed the rejection of Prince Aac’s
love were also portrayed on the walls of the funeral chamber,
as they probably were, that pictorial record is destroyed.
For the knowledge of these we are indebted to the above-men-
tioned Maya author, whose book, having happily escaped the
iconoclastic hands of the fanatical friars that came to Mayach
at the beginning of the Spanish Conquest, illumines the dark-
ness which until now has hung over the ancient history of
America and that of the builders of Chicllen and Uxmal.

Aac’s pride being humiliated, his love turned to hatred.
His only wish henceforth Avas to usurp the supreme poAver, to
wage war against the friend of his childhood. He made reli-
gious disagreement the pretext. He proclaimed that the Avor-
ship of the sun Avas to be superior to that of the “ winged
serpent,” genius of the country; also to that of the worship of
ancestors, typified by the feathered serpent, with horns and a
flame or halo on the head.1 To avenge himself on the Avoman
he had so much loved became the sole aim of his life. To
gratify his desire for vengeance he resolved to plunge the
country into civil war ; to sacrifice his friends, his OAvn wel-
1 Hbi supra , plate vii.

142 QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

fare, that of the people, if necessary. Prompted by such evil
passions, he put himself at the head of his own vassals and
attacked those who had remained faithful to Queen Moo and
to Prince Coil’s memory.

Here, then, we have the origin of the enmity between the
woman and the serpent, to which we find allusion in Genesis ;
and of that of the sun and the serpent, prevalent in all coun-
tries where vestiges of Maya civilization are found.

At first, Queen Moo’s adherents successfully opposed her
foes. The contending parties, forgetting in the strife that
they were children of the same soil, blinded by their preju-
dices, let their passions have the best of their reason. Fortune
favored now one side, now the other. At last Queen Moo fell
a prisoner in the hands of her enemy.1 (Plate LII.)

Let us hear what the author of the Troano says: “The
people of Mayacli, having been whipped into submission and
cowed, no longing opposing much resistance, the lord seized
her by the hair and, in common with others, caused her to
suffer from blotvs. This happened on the ninth day of the
tenth month of the year Kail ; ” that is, on the seventh Eb,
of the month Yax, of the year Kail.

“ Being completely routed, she passed to the opposite sea-
coast, toward the east. Seeking refuge, the cpieen went to the
seacoast in the southern parts of the country, which had
already suffered much injury. This event took place on the
first day of the sixth month of the year Mnluc ; ” that is
to say, on the tenth of the month Xul, in the year Muluc,
or eight months and twelve days after she had been made a
prisoner.

“ The northern part of the country being subjected, he con-
1 Troano MS., part ii. , plates xvi. and xvii.

Page 143.

Plate LIT.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

143

quered the others one by one, and also those which had aided
the queen, reunited the severed parts, and again made the
country whole under his sway. This happened on the eighth
day of the fourth month of the year lx ; ” that is, on the
third Imix, of the month Zoo, of the year lx, or ten months
and eight days after Queen Moo’s departure for Zinaan.

An explanation of the illustrations accompanying the text
of the Maya author may serve to show that we have correctly
apprehended his narrative.

Beginning with the picture on the right of the chapter, we
see the queen on her knees, her hands joined as in supplication.
Her foe holds her by the hair and kicks her. This explains
sufficiently the text “ he caused her to suffer from blows.”

Hext she is portrayed as a bird, a macaw, Moo, with black
plumage, typical of her misfortunes. Her leg is hanging ; the
claw half open, as having just lost hold of the liindquarter of
the deer — another symbol of the country. This is emblematic of
her losing the last grasp on that part (the south) of the empire.
The deer is severed in two, to show the political condition of
the country divided into two factions. She is in full flight
toward Zinaan, a figure of which the bird holds in its beak.
The line joining it to the deer indicates that the West Indies
were a dependency of the Maya Empire. The last picture rep-
resents Aac carrying away triumphantly the country of which
he is now sole master, whose several parts, reunited, are under
his sway. We shall leave for another occasion the recital of
the events that took place in Mayacli after Moo’s depart-
ure from the country, and follow her in her journey east-
ward. Enough to say that Aac, left alone in the government,
became so tyrannical that the people uprose against him
and expelled him from the country. That event ended the

144 QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

Can dynasty, and brought about the dismemberment of the
empire.

As far as our present knowledge of American records con-
cerning Queen Moo goes, her history comes to an end with
her flight to Zinaan. Not feeling safe in that country, she
continued to travel toward the rising sun, in the hope of reach-
ing some of the isles, remnants of the Land of Mu. It was
known that that country, once the “pride of the sea,” had
greatly suffered in consequence of an awful cataclysm caused
by earthquakes. She was well aware that a few islands had
escaped the general destruction, and remained above the waters
the only vestiges of that place, once so populous and so rich
that in their writings the Maya authors styled it “ the Life,”
“ the Glory of the Ocean,” and of which, in his “ Timseus,” 1
Plato has given so glowing a description. In one night it had
suddenly disappeared, engulfed by the waves, with the major-
ity of its inhabitants, some time previous to the happening of
the political events in Maya history which we have just related.

To one of those islands Queen Moo resolved to go to seek
shelter.

1 Plato, Dialogues , “Timseus,” ii. 20.

XIV.

The occurrence of that dreadful cataclysm caused great
commotion among the inhabitants of the countries on both
sides of the Atlantic. They recorded it in the annals kept in
the archives of their temples, and in other places where its
remembrance was most likely to be preserved for the knowl-
edge of coming generations; and so it has lasted to our
day.

The existence of this land, and its destruction by earth-
quakes and fire, then by submergence, is a mooted question
among modern scientists. There are many who, disdaining
to investigate the ancient American records, and affecting to
regard as fabulous Plato’s narrative and that of the Egyptian
priests Psenophis and Sonchis to Solon, although these asserted
that “ all that, has been written down of old, and is preserved
in our temples, ’ ’ prefer to invent hollow theories and to advance
opinions having no firmer foundations than their own magistral
ipse dixit , and thus dispose of the question by a denial, little
dreaming that, besides Plato’s narrative, the records of the

catastrophe are to be found, full of details, in the writings of
10

146

QUEEN Jl60 AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

four different Maya authors, in the Maya language. Each
of these has written the relation in his own particular style,
but all agree as to the date of the occurrence and the manner
in which the destruction of the Atlantean land was effected.
It may be that three of them had read each other's writings
on that subject ; hut as to the fourth, it can he safely presumed
that he knew nothing of the works of those writers, all com-
munications between his country and theirs having ceased to
exist long before his time.

One of these narratives, carved on stone in bas-relief, is
preserved in the city of Chicken. The slab on which it is
written forms the lintel of the door of the inner chamber at
the southern end of the building called Akab-oib, “ the awful,
the tenebrous record.” It is as intact to-day as when it came
from the hand of the sculptor. (Plate LIII.) Mot only did the
Maya historians record the submergence of Mu in such a
lasting manner, but the date of its occurrence became a new
starting point for then’ chronological computations. From it
they began a new era and reckoned the epochs of their his-
tory, as the Christians do from the birth of Christ, and the
Mohammedans from the Hegira or flight of Mohammed from
Mecca.

They also arranged all their other computations on the base
of 13, in memory of the thirteenth Cliuen, the day of the
month in which the cataclysm occurred. So they made weeks
of thirteen days ; weeks of years of four tunes thirteen, or fifty-
two years ; and their great cycle of thirteen tunes twenty, or
two hundred and sixty years, as we are informed by Father
Pedro Beltran.1

The second narrative of the cataclysm is to be found in the
1 Pedro Beltran, Arte del Idioma Maya , numeracion p. 204.

Page 146.

Plate LIII.

Page U7.

Plate LIV.

mu

QUEEN JldO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

147

Troano MS., whose author has devoted several pages1 of his
interesting work to a minute description of the various phe-
nomena attending the disaster. (Plate LIT.) Thus he recounts
the closing scenes of the tragedy : 2 “ The year six Kan,

on the eleventh Muluc, in the month Zac, there occurred
terrible earthquakes, which continued without intermission
until the thirteenth Chueii. The country of the hills of mud,
the 1 Land of Mu,’ was sacrificed. Being twice upheaved,
it suddenly disappeared during the night, the basin being
continually shaken by volcanic forces. Being confined, these
caused the land to sink and rise several times and in various
places. At last the surface gave way, and the ten countries
were torn asunder and scattered in fragments ; unable to
withstand the force of the seismic convulsions, they sank with
their sixty-four millions of inhabitants, eight thousand and
sixty years before the writing of this book.”

Does not this recital recall the story of the destruction of
Atlantis told by Plato, and the division of the country by
Poseidon into ten portions, assigning one to each of his ten
sons?

Let us hope that no one will be so bold as to accuse Plato
of having been in collusion with the author of the Troano MS.

The third narrative of the destruction of the ‘ ‘ Land of
Mu” is by the author of that Maya book known to us as
Codex Cortesianus. His style is more prolix, less terse, more
symbolical than that of the writer of the Troano. His relation
of the event reads as follows (Plates LY.-LVI.):

1 Troano MS., part ii. , plates ii. to v.

2 Ibid., plate v.

Have we not here the origin of that singular superstition that attributes
ill luck to the number thirteen ? And is not this superstition a reminiscence
of the cataclysm, that has come down to us through the lapse of centuries ?

148

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

“ By his strong will, Homen 1 caused the earth to tremble
after sunset; and during the night, Mu, the country of the
hills of mud, was submerged.

“ Mu, the life of the basin, was submerged by Homen
during the night.

‘ ‘ The place of the dead ruler is now lifeless ; it moves no
more, after having twice jumped from its foundations. The
king of the deep, while forcing his way out, has shaken it up
and down, has killed it, has submerged it.

“Twice Mu jumped from its foundations. It was then
sacrificed with fire. It burst while being shaken up and down
violently by the earthquake. By kicking it, the wizard that
makes all things move like a mass of worms sacrificed it that
very night.”

From the fact that the Mayas changed their mode of com-
putation,1 2 and began, as it were, a new era from the time of
the submergence of the Land of Mu, it is evident that in
reading their ancient history, in order to establish correct dates,
it becomes necessary to know if the events related took place
before or after the cataclysm.

The commotion produced by that disaster seems to have
been no less great among the populations bordering on the
Mediterranean than among those inhabiting the Western Con-
tinent. Plato tells us that the Egyptians preserved a relation
of it in the archives of their temples, asserting it was the

1 Homen was the overturner of mountains, the god of earthquakes,
the wizard who made all things move like a mass of worms, the volcanic
forces anthropomorphized and then deified. The Mayas deified all phe-
nomena of nature and their causes, then represented them in the shape of
human beings or animals. Their object was to keep for the initiates the
secrets of their science.

2 Landa, Las Cosasde Yucatan , chap, xxxix., p. 234.

Page lift.

Plate LVI.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 149

greatest deluge which had occurred within the memory of
man. Their narrative tallies exactly with that of the Maya
authors. From that time, they said, all their communications
with the inhabitants of the Lands of the West had been
interrupted, the sea having become an impassable barrier of
mud.

As for the Greeks, they had good reasons for grieving at
the loss of Mu, since, according to Egyptian records, thou-
sands of their best warriors lost their lives by it. They cele-
brated the festival of the Small Panatheneas, in commemora-
tion of the victory gained by their ancestors, with the aid of
Minerva, over the Atlanteans, when the latter tried to invade
Greece after having conquered the other Mediterranean
nations — those living on the coast of Libya as far as Egypt, and
those dwelling on the European shores as far as Tyrrhania.
After repelling the invaders the Greek warriors pursued them
to their own homes ; so they also fell victims to the wrath of
Homen. In order to preserve the memory of the catastro-
phe for the knowledge of future generations, they wrote an
epic in the Maya language, which seems to have been at that
time still prevalent among them. In it were described the
geological and meteorological phenomena that took place and
caused the wholesale destruction of the Lcmd of Mu and its
inhabitants. When in the year 403 b.c., during the archonship
of Euclid, the grammarians rearranged the Athenian alphabet
in its present form, they adopted for the names of their letters
words formed by the agglutination of the various vocables
composing each line of said Maya epic. In this most interest-
ing philological and historical fact will be found the reason
why certain letters having the same value were placed apart,
instead of juxtaposed as they naturally should be. What else

150

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

could have induced Euclid and his collaborators, men of intel-
ligence and learning, to separate the Epsilon from the Eta,
the Theta from the Tau f to place the Omikron in the middle
and the Omega at the end of the alphabet ?

In August, 1882, the writer published in the ‘ ‘ Revista de
Merida,” a daily paper of Merida, the capital of Yucatan, a
Spanish translation of the Maya epic formed by the names of
the letters of the Greek alphabet. He invited Maya schol-
ars to review and correct it, in case any word had been mis-
apprehended, as he was desirous to present his discovery to the
scientific world. Ho correction was offered, although at the
time it attracted the attention of students in a country where
Spanish and Maya are the vernacular of the people — the
Spanish that of the white inhabitants, the Maya that of the
natives; all, however, speaking more or less Maya, a knowl-
edge of it being necessary to hold intercourse with the latter,
who absolutely refuse to even learn the Spanish, which they
hate. That language perpetually revives the memory of the
lost autonomy of their people ; of the long and cruel perse-
cutions their race has suffered since 1540 at the hands of
the Spanish invaders, the destroyers of their civilization, and
at those of their descendants whose serfs they have become
and remain, although called free in accordance with the
law.1

The following translation may be regarded as absolutely
cprrect, being an English rendering of that published in Span-
ish in Merida.

1 See Appendix, note iv.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

151

Greek

Alphabet.

Mata Vocables with their English Meaning.

Alpha.

A1

paa

ba.

Heavy ;

break ;

water.

Beta.

Be

ta.

Walk;

place.

Gamma.

Kam

ina.

Receive ;

earth.

Delta.

Tel

ta.

Depth; bottom;

where.

Epsilon.

Ep

zil

on-om.

Obstruct ;

make edges ;

whirlpool; to

whirl.

Zeta.

Ze

ta.

Strike ;

place ;
ground.

Eta.

Et

lia.

With ;

water.

Theta.

Tlietlieali

ha.

Extend ;

water.

Iota.

Io

ta.

All that which
lives and moves;

earth.

Kappa.

Ka

pda.

Sediment ;

break; open.

Lambda.

Lain

be

ta.

Submerge ;

go ; walk ;

where ; place.

Mu.

Mu.

Mu.

Ni.

Xi.

Point; summit.

Xi.

Xi.

Rise over; appear

over.

Omikron.

Om

ik

le

Oil.

Whirlpool ; whirl ;

wind ;

place ;

circular.

Pi.

Pi.

To place by little

and little.

Rho.

La

bo.

Until ;

come.

152 QUEEN 3100 AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

Greek

Alphabet.

Mata Vocables with their English Meaning.

Sigma.

Zi

ik

rna.

Cold;

wind ;

before.

Tad.

Ta

u.

Where ;

basin ; valley.

Upsilon.

TJ

pa

zi

le

on.

Abyss :

tank ;

cold; frozen;

place ;

circular.

Phi.

Pe

lii.

Come; form;

clay.

Chi.

Clii.

Mouth; aperture.

Psi.

Pe

zi.

Come out;

vapor.

Omega.

O

mec

ka.

There ;

whirl ;

sediments.

Freely Translated.

Alpha.

Heavily break — the — waters

Beta.

extending — over the — plains.

Gamma.

They — cover — the — land

Delta.

in low places where

Epsilon.

there are — obstructions, shores form and whirlpools

Zeta.

strike — the — earth

Eta.

with water.

Theta.

The — water spreads

Iota.

on all that lives and moves. %

Kappa.

Sediments give way.

Lambda.

Submerged is — the — land

Mr.

of Mu.

Ni.

The peaks — only

Ki.

appear above — the renter.

Omikron.

Whirlwinds blow around

Pi.

by little and little,

Rho.

until comes

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 153

Sigma.

cold air. Before

Tau.

where — existed— valleys,

Upsilon.

now , abysses, frozen tanks. In circular places

Phi.

clay — formed.

Chi.

A — mouth

Psi.

opens; vapors

Omega.

come forth — and volcanic sediments.

When Queen Moo reached the place where she hoped
to find a refuge, she discovered that the Land of Mu had
vanished. Not a vestige of it was to be seen, except the
shoals and muddy waters mentioned by Herodotus, Plato,
Scylax, Aristotle, and other ancient writers, who tell us that
this made the ocean impassable to ships and prevented naviga-
tion for many centuries after the cataclysm.

It seems that Queen Moo, notwithstanding these obsta-
cles, was able to continue her voyage eastward, and suc-
ceeded in reaching Egypt. We find mention made of her
on the monuments and in the papyri, always as Queen Man
(Moo). She is, however, better known as the goddess Isis ;
wearing vestments dyed with a variety of colors, imitating
feather work,1 like the plumage of the macaw, after which she
was named in Mayach. Isis was, no doubt, a term of endear-
ment applied to their beloved queen by her followers and her
new subjects. It seems to be a corruption or may be a dialect-
ical pronunciation of the Maya word ioin (pronounced idzin) ,
the “little sister.”

1 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs, vol. iii. , p. 395.

Page 155.

Plate LVII

—

Page 155-

Plate L VIII.

QUEEN MOd AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 155

We have seen how, before leaving Mayach, Queen M<3o
caused the erection of a memorial hall that she dedicated to
the memory of Prince Coll, her brother and husband ; and that
in it she had the principal events of his and her life painted in
bright colors on the walls of the funeral chamber. ISTot satisfied
with this mark of her love, she had raised over his remains a
mausoleum that would be an ornament to any of our modern
cemeteries or public squares. (Plate LYII.)

The four sides of the monument were ornamented with
panels, on which were sculptures in mezzo-relievo. (Plate
LYIII.) That on the frieze represents a dying warrior on
his back, his knees drawn up, the soles of his feet firmly
planted on the ground. His head, covered with a helmet,
is thrown backward. From his parted lips the breath of
life escapes in the shape of a slender flame.1 His posture is,
in fact, the same as that given by the Mayas, in those
remote ages, to all the statues of their great personages; a
position that represented the contour of the Maya Empire
as nearly as the human body could be made to assume it.
The upper part of the body in this case, instead of being
erect, is pictured lying down, the head thrown back, emblem-
atic of the chief of the nation being dead. In his right hand,
placed upon his breast, he holds a broken sceptre, composed of
three javelins, typical of the three wounds that caused his
death, and of the weapons with which they were inflicted.
One of the wounds was under the left shoulder-blade. The
blow was aimed at the heart from behind, proving that the
victim was treacherously murdered. The two others were in
the lumbar region. These are indicated in the sculptures by
two small holes just above the waist-band of the kilt worn by
1 See Appendix, note xx.

156 QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

the warrior, and the image of a small arrowhead >, its point
directed toward the left shoulder. His left arm is placed across
his breast, the left hand resting on the right shoulder. This is
a token of respect among the living, as we have already seen;
hut what can he its meaning when made to be assumed by the
dead ? Does it signify that this is the attitude of humility in
which the souls of the departed must appear before the judg-
ment seat of Ymn-cimil, the “ god of death; ” just as we see,
in the Egyptian inscriptions and papyri, the souls when stand-
ing before the throne of Osiris in Amenti, waiting to receive
their sentence from his mouth ? This is very probable, for the
same custom existed in Egypt. “The Egyptians,” says Sir
Gardner Wilkinson,1 “placed the arms of the mummies
extended along the side, the palms inward and resting on the
thighs, or brought forward over the groin, sometimes even
across the breast ; and occasionally one arm in the former, the
other in the latter position. ’ ’ Mr. Champollion Figeac, speaking
on the same subject, says: 2 “ On croisait les mains des femmes
sur leur ventre; les bras des homines restaient pendants sur
les cotes; quelquefois la main gauche etait place e sur Vepaule
droitej ce bras faisait ainsi ecliarpe sur la poitrineP The
upper end of the sceptre is ornamented with an open dipetal-
ous flower, with a half -opened bud in the centre of the corol.
This is significant of the fact that the dead warrior was killed
in the flower of life, before he had had time to reach maturity.
The lower extremity of said sceptre is carved so as to represent

1 Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , vol. iii., chap, xvi.,
p. 486.

2 Champollion Figeac, L'univers, Egypte , p. 261.

“The women’s hands were crossed on the belly ; the men’s arms re-
mained hanging at the sides ; but sometimes the left hand was placed on
the right shoulder, the arm across the chest.

Page 157.

Plate LIX.

Page 157.

Plate LX.

QUEEN MdO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

157

a leopard’s paw. This is intended for the name of the dead
hero, Coh, or Chaacmol, “leopard.” The etymon of the
last word is: Chaac, “thunder,” “tempest,” hence, “irre-
sistible power; ” and mol, “ the paw of any carnivorous ani-
mal.” The leopard being’ the largest and fiercest of the beasts
of prey inhabiting the forests of Yucatan and Central America,
the Mayas, who, as we have said, named all things by ono-
matopoeia, called their most famous warrior Chaacmol ; that
is, “the paw swift like thunder,” “ the paw with irresistible
power like the tempest ” — just as the French designate a noted
general on the battle-field as “ un aigle dans le combat,” “ un
foudre de guerre.” 1

On the panels that adorned the architrave were carved two
figures (Plate LIX.), the one a leopard, the other a macaw
(Plate LX.), in the acting of licking or eating hearts. The first
is the totem of the warrior to whose memory the mausoleum
was erected ; the other that of his wife, Queen Moo, by whose
order it was constructed, and who dedicated it to the memory
of her beloved brother and husband. Being portrayed in the
act of licking the hearts of their enemies, whom they had
vanquished on the battle-field, certainly indicates that the
Mayas, although ordinarily not addicted to cannibalism, like
many other nations of antiquity sometimes ate the hearts of
their conquered foes, in the belief that by so doing they
would inherit their valor. This same custom prevails even in
our day among various peoples.

The corona of the cornice is adorned with a row of human
skulls. Xot one is artificially deformed. Evidently the cus-
tom of deforming the head was not practised by the ancient
Mayas as it was by the inhabitants of the cities of Copan and

1 “An eagle in the battle,” “ a thunder in war.”

158 QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

Palenque. These, therefore, could not have been Mayas as
the majority of Americanists assert without adequate proofs.
In fact, the sculptures at Cliiclien show that the Mayas and
the peoples that so deformed their heads, whoever they were,
were inimical to each other.

At the foot of the balustrades, on each side of the stairs
leading to the top of the mausoleum, there were large serpent
heads, with open mouth and protruding tongue.

These serpent heads, we know, were totems of the Cans,
used in all edifices erected by them, to show that they were
built by their order. The tongue protruding from the mouth
was the symbol of wisdom among the Mayas. It is often
found thus in the portraits of priests, kings, and other exalted
personages supposed to be endowed with great wisdom.1 It
may, perhaps, have been also a token of respect, as it is even
to-day in Thibet.2 (Plate LXI.)

The mausoleum was crowned by a most interesting statue.
It was that of a dying leopard with a human head (Plate LXII.),
a veritable sphinx ; the prototype, may be, of the mysterious
Egyptian Sphinx, the most ancient monument in the valley of
the Nile. This Maya sphinx, like the leopard in the sculp-
tures, had three deep holes in its back — symbols of the three
spear thrusts that caused Prince Coil’s death. Thus it has
come to the knowledge of succeeding generations that the
brave Maya warrior, whom foes could not vanquish in fair
fight, was treacherously slain by a cowardly assassin— this
assassin his own brother Aac ; just as Osiris in Egypt is said
to have been murdered by his brother Set, and for the same
motive, jealousy.

1 See Appendix, note xxi.

5 M. Hue, Recollections of a Journey through Thibet and Tartary , vol. ii.,
chap, vi., p. 158.

Page 158.

Plate LX I.

Page 158.

Plate LX1I.

'i

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX. 159

Osiris, in Egyptian history, comes to us as a myth. Prince
Coll, the well-beloved Ozil, is a tangible reality; the author
having in his possession his charred heart, part of which was
analyzed, on September 25, 1880, by the late Professor Charles
O. Thompson, at the request of Mr. Stephen Salisbury, now
president1 of the “American Antiquarian Society,” of Worces-
ter, Mass. Besides, the author has also in his possession the
very weapon with which the murder was committed. (Plate
LXIII.)

From all antiquity the Egyptian Sphinx has been a riddle,
that has remained unsolved to our day. (Plate LXIV.) It is
still, as Bunsen says, the enigma of history.2 “ The name most
conspicuous on the tablet in the temple between the paws of this
wonderful statue is that of Armais.” According to Osburn, it
was the work of King Khaf ra ; 3 but he is still in doubt about
it, for he adds: “On the other hand, the great enigma of the
bearded giant Sphinx still remains unsolved. When and by
whom was the colossal statue erected, and what was its signifi-
cation? . . . We are accustomed to regard the Sphinx in

Egypt as a portrait of the king, and generally, indeed, as that
of a particular king whose features it is said to represent. ’ ’ In
hieroglyphic written character, the sphinx is called Neb, ‘ £ the
lord.”4

But Richard Lepsius5 remarks: “King Khafra was named
in the inscription, but it does not seem reasonable thence to
conclude that Khafra first caused the lion to be executed, as

1 Aug. Le Plongeon, Sacred Mysteries, certificate of analysis by Prof.
Charles O. Thompson, pp. 84-85.

2 Bunsen, Egypt's Place in Universal History , vol. ii., p. 388.

3 Osburn, Monumental History of Egypt, vol. ii., p. 319.

4 Ibid., vol. i., p. 311.

5 R. Lepsius, Letters from Egypt, Ethiopia, and the Peninsula of Sinai ,
Horner’s translation, p. 66.

160

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

another inscription teaches ns King Khafra had already seen
the monster, or, in other words, says that before him the
statue already existed, the work of another Pharaoh. The
names of Thotmes IV., of Raineses II., as well as that of
Khafra, are inscribed on the base.”

Plinius, the first author who ever mentioned the Sphinx,
refers to it as the tomb of Amasis.1

Its age is unknown. De Rouge, in his “ Six Premieres
Dynasties,” supposes it to be as old as the fourth dynasty; but
it is probably coetaneous with, if not anterior to, the pyramids.

As to its significance, Clement of Alexandria 2 simply tells
us that it was the emblem of the “ union of force with pru-
dence or wisdom; ” that is, of physical and intellectual power,
supposed attributes of Egyptian kings.

Without pretending to emulate (Edipus, we may be per-
mitted to call attention to certain striking analogies existing-

o o o

between the Egyptian Sphinx and the leopard with human head
that crowned Prince Coil’s mausoleum. In order to better
understand these analogies, it will be necessary to consider not
only the meaning of the names of the Sphinx, but also its posi-
tion relative to the horizon and to the edifices by which it is
surrounded.

It is placed exactly in front, and to the east, of the second
pyramid, overlooking the Kile toward the rising sun. It rep-
resents a crouching lion, or may be a leopard, with a human
head, hewn out of the solid rock. Piazzi Smyth 3 tells us that
‘ ‘ about the head and face, though nowhere else, there is much of
the original statuary surface still, occasionally, painted dull red. ”

1 Plinius, Hist. Nat., xxxvi. 17.

2 Clement of Alexandria, Strom, y.

3 Piazzi Smyth, Life and, Work at the Great Pyramid , vol. i., chap, xii.,
p. 323.

Page 159.

Plate LXIII.

Page 159.

Plate LXI\

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

161

The mausoleum of Prince Coll, in Chiclien, stands in
front and to the east of the Memorial Hall. The statue on the
top was that of a leopard with human head. (Plate LXII.)
The color of the Mayas was red brown, judging from the fresco
paintings in the funeral chamber, and Landa tells us 1 that even
to the time of the Spanish Conquest they were in the habit of
covering their face and body with red pigment.

According to Henry Brugsch: 2 a To the north of this huge
form lay the temple of the goddess Isis ; another, dedicated to
the god Osiris, had its place on the southern side ; a third tem-
ple was dedicated to the Sphinx. The inscription on the stone
speaks as follows of these temples: He, the living Hor, king
of the upper and lower country, Khufu, he, the dispenser of
life, founded a temple to the goddess Isis, the queen of the pyr-
amid; beside the god’s house of the Sphinx, northwest from
the god’s house and the town of Osiris, the lord of the place
of the dead.”

The Sphinx being thus placed between temples dedicated to
Isis and to Osiris, by their son Hor, would seem to indicate that
the personage represented by it was closely allied to both these
deities.

Another inscription shows that it was especially consecrated
to the god Ra-Atum , or the “ Sun in the West; ” thus con-
necting said personage with the “lands toward the setting
sun,” with “ the place of the dead,” with the country whence
came the ancestors of the Egyptians, where they believed they
returned after the death of the physical body, to appear in the
presence of Osiris seated on his throne in the midst of the
waters , to be judged by him for their actions while on earth.

1 Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan, \ xx., p. 114, and xxxi., p. 184.

2 Henry Brugsch, History of Egypt under the Pharaohs, vol. i. , p. 80,
Seymour and Smith’s translation.

11

162

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

Mr. Samuel Birch, in a note in the work of Sir Gardner
Wilkinson, “ Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyp-
tians,”1 says “that the Sphinx was called Ha or AkarH
These words mean respectively, in the Maya language,
“water,” and “pond” or “swamp.” In these names may
Ave not see a hint that the king represented by the huge statue
dAvelt in countries surrounded by Avater? Its position, again,
Avith the head turned toward the east, its back to the west,
may not be without significance. Might it not mean that the
people who sculptured it travelled from the West toward the
East? from the Western Continent where Isis was queen,
Avhen she abandoned the land of her birth and sallied forth,
with her followers, in search of a new home ?

May not that lion or leopard with
a human head be the totem of some
famous personage in the mother coun-
try, closely related to Queen Moo,
highly venerated by her and her peo-
ple, Avhose memory she wished to per-
petuate in the land of her adoption and
among coming generations ?

Was it the totem of Prince Coll ?
We have seen in Mayacli, on the
entablature of the Memorial Hall, and in
the sculptures that adorned his mauso-
leum at Cl lichen, that he Avas repre-
sented as a leopard. But in Egypt,
Osiris, as king of the Amenti, king of the West, Avas likeAvise
portrayed as a leopard, His priests always wore

PRIEST OF OSIRIS, COVERED WITH
LEOPARD’S SKIN.

1 Samuel Birch, Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Manners and Customs , note,
vol. iii., chap. xiv.

QUEEN MdO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

163

a leopard skin over their ceremonial dress, and a leopard
skin hnng always near his images or statues. In seeking to
explain the meaning of the names inscribed at the base of the
Sphinx, we will again make use of the Maya language, which
may be for us, in this instance also, the thread of Ariadne that
will guide us out of this more than dsedalian labyrinth.

Henry Brugsch again tells us : “ The Sphinx is called in the
text Hu, a word which designates the man-headed lion, while
the real name of the god represented by the Sphinx was Ilor-
makhu, that is to say, £ Horus on the horizon. ’ It was also called
Khejpra, £ Horus in his resting place on the horizon where the
sun goes to rest.’ ” 1

Herodotus says 2 that Horus was the last of the gods who
governed the Egyptians before the reign of Menes, the first of
their terrestrial kings. He came into the world soon after the
death of his father, being the youngest son of Isis and Osiris ;
and he stood forth as his avenger, combating Set and defend-
ing his mother against him.

According to the Maya language Hormahhu is a word
composed of three Maya primitives — Hool-ma-ku : that
is, hool, “head,” ££ leader;” ma, ££ country,” or ma, rad-
ical of Mayach, that becomes syncopated by losing the desi-
nence yach in forming the compound name; and ku, ££ god.”
Hormakhu would then mean “the God chief in Mayacli.”
It is well to remember that the Maya inscriptions and other
writings were read, as generally were the Egyptian
and many other ancient languages, from right to left.

That Ma stands for Mayacli in this instance, there
seems to be no doubt, since the sign — ~\, which is the shape

1 Henry Brugsch, History of Egypt, vol. ii., p. 464.

2 Herodotus, History , lib. ii., 144.

164

QUEEN MOO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

of the peninsula of Yucatan, forms part of the hieroglyph rep-
resenting the name of the Sphinx. Had not this been the
intended meaning, the hierogrammatists would no doubt have
made use of some other of the various signs with which they
represented the Latin letter M. We must not lose sight of the
fact that hiero- _ graphic writings were mostly pictorial.

Besides, the sign the “ sun resting on the western hori-
zon, ’ 5 makes it evident that the hieroglyph was

intended to represent a country, having similar geographical
contour, situated in the regions where the sun sets ; that is, the
West. The Mayas made use of the same sign to designate
regions situated toward the setting sun.1 2

Khejora would read in Maya Keb-la. Keb means “to
incline; ” La is the eternal “'truth,” the god, hence the sun.
Kebla or Kliejpra is therefore the sun inclined on the horizon.

As to the name Hu, used in the texts to designate the
Sphinx, it may be a contraction of the Maya 1ml, an
“ arrow,” a “ spear.”

The Greeks placed offensive weapons in the hands of some
of their gods, as symbols of their attributes. So also the
Egyptians. They represented Neith, Sati, or Khem holding
a bow and arrows. To Horus they gave a spear, hul, with
which he was said to have slain Set, his father’s murderer.
They represented him sometimes standing in a boat, piercing
the head of Set swimming in the water.3 Did they mean
by this to indicate that the tragedy took place in a country
surrounded by water, reached only by means of boats ? They

1 This sign forms part of the word Alau in the Troano MS., in part ii.,
plates ii. and iii.

See Introduction, ubi supra , p. lix.

2 Plutarch, Be Yside et Osiride , $S 25, 36.

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

165

also figured Horus on the land, transfixing with a spear the
head of a serpent (illustration, p. 124).

Was, then, the serpent in Egypt one of the totems of
Set, Osiris’s murderer, as it was in Mayacli of Aac, Prince
Coil’s slayer?

No doubt it was, since Osiris’s worshippers were wont, at
the celebration of his feast, to throw a rope into their assem-
bly, to simulate a serpent, emblem of his murderer, and hack it
to pieces, as if avenging the death of their god. Was this a
reminiscence of the tragedy that occurred in the mother country,
where one member of the Can (serpent) family slew his brother ?

From the portraits of his children, carved on the jambs of
the door of Prince Coil’s funeral chamber at Chicken, we
learn that his youngest son, a comely lad of about sixteen, was
named Hul ; his totem, a spear-head, is sculptured above his
head. Are not Hul, IIu, Hor, Hoi, cognate words ?

Elsewhere 1 I have endeavored to show, from the identity
of their history, from that of their names, and from their
totems, that Seb and Hut, and their children Osiris, Set,
Aroeris, Isis, and Hike, worshipped as gods by the Egyptians,
were the same personages known as King Canchi, his wife
Zoo, and their five children Cay, Aac, Coll, Moo and Nike,
who lived and reigned in Mayacli, where, having received the
honor of apotheosis, after their death, they had temples erected
to their memory and divine homage paid them.

Queen Moo, not finding vestiges of the land of Mu, went
to Egypt, where we meet with traditions of her family troubles.
There she became the goddess Isis, was worshipped throughout
the land, her cult being superior even to that of Osiris.2 She

1 Aug. Le Plongeon, Sacred Mysteries , p. 87, et passim.

3 Herodotus, Hist. , lib. ii., 42, 59, 61.

166

QUEEN MOO AND THE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

knew that, centuries before, Maya colonists, coming from
India and from the banks of the Euphrates, had established
themselves in the valley of the Nile. She naturally sought
refuge among them. They received her with open arms,
accepted her as their queen, and called her loin, “the little
sister,” an endearing word that in time became changed into
Isis.

Apuleius, in his “Metamorphosis,”1 makes her say: “But
the sun-illumined Ethiopians and the Egyptians, renowned for
ancient lore, worshipping me with due ceremonies, call me by
my real name Isis.” Diodorus causes her to say:2 “‘I am
Isis, queen of the country, educated by Thoth, Mercury. What
I have decreed, no one can annul. I am the eldest daughter of
Saturn (Seb), the youngest of the gods. I am the sister and
wife of King Osiris. I am the first who taught men the use of
corn. I am the mother of Horus.’ ”

In the Book of the Dead Isis says : “I am the queen of
these regions ; I was the first to reveal to mortals the mysteries
of wheat and corn. I am she who is risen in the constellation
of the dog.” 3

Was it she who, to perpetuate the memory of her husband
among the coming generations in the land of her adoption, as
she had done in the country of her birth, caused the Sphinx to
be made in the likeness of that with which she had embellished
the mausoleum of her beloved Coll in CliicTien ? There she
had represented him as a dying leopard with a human head,
his back pierced with three spear wounds. In Egypt she fig-
ured him also as a leopard with a human head ; but erect and

’Apuleius, Metamorphosis, lib. ii. , 241.

2 Diodorus, Bill. Hist., lib. i., 27.

3 Boole of the Dead, chap, cx., verses 4-5.

Page 166.

Plate LXV.

QUEEN MdO AND TEE EGYPTIAN SPHINX.

167

proud, a glorified soul watching over the country that had
insured her safety, giving her a new home; over the people
she loved, and who obeyed with reverence her smallest man-
date, and after her death deified and worshipped her, calling
her the “good mother of the gods and of men,” as Maia
was called by the Greeks, as Maya was by the Hindoos, and
Mayaoel by the Mexicans. Did she entrust to her son Hul
the supervision of the execution of the huge statue, that for
this reason was named Hu in the texts ?

Shall we answer with certainty in the negative these que-
ries that force themselves on the mind, when we reflect on the
influence of Maya customs and Maya civilization on the pop-
ulations of Asia and Africa.; on the similarity of the names,
and the striking analogy of the events in the lives of Isis and
Osiris, and those of Queen Moo and Prince Coh ; particularly
when, among other things, we consider the identity of the
ancient hieratic Maya and Egyptian alphabets; that of the
rites of initiation into the mysteries celebrated in the temples
of Mayacli and Egypt,1 and many other customs and tradi-
tions that it is impossible to regard as mere coincidences, these
being too numerous to be the effect of hazard ?

Furthermore, we may take into consideration the latest
discovery made by Col. G. E. Raum, of San Francisco, in
excavating the temple between the fore paws of the Sphinx, of
the cap that once covered the head of the statue. This cap is
painted red and adorned with three lotus stems and a serpent.
Might not these indicate that the personage represented by
the Sphinx came from a country situated in the midst of the
waters, and belonged to the family of the Cans, serpents ? 2

1 Aug. Le Plongeon, Sacred Mysteries , p. 15, et passim.

2 New YorTc Herald , March 20, 1896.

»

Page 169.

Plate LX VI.

■

APPENDIX.

Note I. (Page xxviii.)

(1) Diego tie Lancia, the second bishop of Yucatan, was a
native of Cifuentes cle Alcarria, in Spain. (Plate LXYI.) Born
in 1524, in the noble family of the Calderones, he at the age
of seventeen, that is, in 1541, became a monk of the Order of
St. Francis, in the Convent of San Juan de los Eeyes, at Toledo.
In August, 1549, being then twenty-five years old, he went to
Yucatan as a missionary. He soon learned the language of
the aborigines — Maya — under the tuition of Father Luis de
Villalpando, whose grammar of that tongue he revised and
corrected. It was afterward published in the City of Mexico
by Father Juan Coronel.

From the time when Lancia was able to understand the
Maya language he dedicated his whole life to evangelical work,
teaching Christianity to the natives, converting them to his
faith. During thirty years, to the hour of his death, which
occurred on the 29th of April, 1579, with the exception of the

170

APPENDIX.

two years lie passed in Spain, he lived among the Mayas.
Whilst preaching the gospel he took care to study the customs,
manners, mode of life, laws, institutions, religion, and tradi-
tions of the people among whom he labored. He tells us, in
his hook, that their sciences, their history, and their religious
tenets, with the rites and observances which they practised,
were contained in volumes written in alphabetical and ideo-
graphic characters on prepared deer-skin (parchment), or on
paper made from the roots of certain trees. At the impulse of
a misguided religious zeal, attributable, no doubt, to the ideas
and prejudices prevalent in Spain in the sixteenth century, and
to his early education, assuming the rights and prerogatives of
an inquisitor, he ordered an cmto-de-fe, which took place in
the city of Mani, in the year 1561, in presence of the majority
of the Spanish nobility resident in the country. It is to be
regretted that, together with the bones of a number of human
beings that he had disinterred for the occasion, many precious
volumes, containing the history and traditions of the Mayas
written in the characters in use among them at that time, and
other valuable objects, were consigned to the flames. Landa
himself, in his work, complacently gives a detailed account of
all the documents and various other things he thus caused to
be destroyed; stating emphatically, as if to allay some secret
pang of his conscience, that no human being was burned alive,
although several individuals, fearing lest such horrid chastise-
ment should be inflicted on them, hanged themselves, and their
carcasses were scattered through the forests to become the prey
of wild beasts and vultures.

However, the historian owes Landa a debt of gratitude,
since, in spite of his blind fanaticism, by a strange freak, and
as if to atone for the wanton destruction of the precious histor-

APPENDIX.

171

ical data, he has preserved, with the manners and customs of
the aborigines, some of the alphabetical and ideographic char-
acters used by the Maya hierogrammatists, together with their
symbols for the names of days and months. These have served
as a key to decipher some pages of the Troano MS., as well
as some of the inscriptions painted on the walls of the apart-
ments in the palaces at Kabali and other places. Whatever
certain Americanists may say, there can be no doubt as to the
genuineness of said characters and symbols, nor as to the good
faith of Landa, whose mental blindness we can only pity and
deplore.

172

APPENDIX.

Note II. (Page xxix.)

(4) Fray Diego Lopez cle Cogolludo was a native of Alcala de
Henares, Spain. I have been unable to obtain data concerning
bis family. The date of bis birth and that of bis death are
unknown. Though always ready to bestow praise on each and
every member of bis Order, he is most reticent when speaking
of himself. He seems to have been a man of superior intel-
ligence, remarkably free-minded for bis age and calling. From
bis “ Historia de Yucathan,” a great part of which is dedicated
to the doings and sayings of bis friends and associates in the
evangelical labor of preaching the gospel and catechising the
aborigines, we learn that be received the sacred orders in the
Convent of St. Francis, in bis native city, whence be came as
missionary to Yucatan in 1634, being one of twenty-five monks
brought to the country by Eev. Francisco Ximenes de Santa
Maria. Father Juan Coronel, author of a Maya grammar
published in Mexico, was his teacher of the Maya language.
During the twenty-two years that elapsed from the time of
his arrival until 1656, the last year mentioned in his work, he
occupied many posts of importance in his Order. He visited
the cities of Guatemala and Mexico, travelling on foot. While
he was Superior or Guardian of the Convent of Motul, a great
famine occurred in the country. The sufferings of the people
are said to have been very severe, many dying of inanition.
He also tells of a terrible epidemic, that, judging by the symp-
toms, minutely described, was yellow fever of the most virulent

Page 17-3.

Plate LX VII.

APPENDIX.

173

form. It began in 1648, and lasted two years, reducing the
population of the country by one-half. Cogolludo wrote his
work at intervals as his duties allowed him, while Superior of
the Convent of Cacalchen. The MS. was sent to Spain, and
published in Madrid in 1688 by Father Francisco de Ay eta,
procurator-general of the Order of St. Francis for all the prov-
inces of New Spain, having been granted a copyright by the
king; the printer was Juan Garcia Infanzon. Copies of this
first edition are now extremely rare. (Plate LXYII.)

174

APPENDIX.

Note III. (Page xxxi.)

(1) The Troano MS. is one of the books written for the use of
the Maya priests and noblemen. It is one of the few anal-
tes that escaped destruction at the hands of the over-zealous
missionaries who came to Yucatan even before the conquest of
that country by the Spaniards. How it was saved from their
iconoclastic fury, it is difficult to surmise; nor is it known who
brought it to Spain. Cogolludo, describing these Maya books,1
says : ‘ £ They were composed of a scroll of paper ten or twelve
varas (thirty to thirty-six feet) long, doubled up so as to form
folds about eight inches (una palma) wide, placed between two
boards, beautifully ornamented, that served as cover.” Landa
tells us that2 “ the paper was manufactured from the roots of
certain trees, and that when spread in sheets, these were coated
with a white and unalterable varnish on which one could easily
write.” The written space on each leaf of the Troano MS.
measures five by nine inches.

The learned Abbe Brasseur, returning from his expedition to
Yucatan, passing through Madrid, made the acquaintance of
Seiior Dn. Juan Tro y Ortelano, professor of palaeography at the
University of that city. That gentleman showed to Brasseur
an old manuscript which he said was Mexican. The abbe at
once recognized in it some of the characters of the Maya
alphabet preserved by Landa. He asked, and was graciously

Cogolludo, Hist, de Yucathan, lib. iv., cliap. v., p. 185.

“Landa, Las Uosas de Yucatan, chap, vii., p. 44.

APPENDIX.

175

permitted, to make a copy of the document. The work was
done by Mr. Henry Bourgeois, the artist who had accompanied
Abbe Brasseur to Yucatan, and the task occupied two years and
a half of the artist’s time. It was published by the French
Government under the title of “ Manuscrit Troano,” from the
name of the owner of the original.

This Maya manuscript is, indeed, a most precious docu-
ment, for it is a brilliant light that, besides the monumental
inscriptions, now illuminates the darkness which surrounds the
history of the ancient inhabitants of the peninsula of Yuca-
tan. The second part, after describing the events that took
place during the awful cataclysms that caused the destruction
of ten different countries, one of which, called Mu, was proba-
bly Plato’s Atlantis, is mostly dedicated to the recital of mete-
orological and geological phenomena that occurred in the
“Land of the Serpent,” also called Beb (tree), of which
Mayab formed a part.

176

APPENDIX.

Note IV. (Pages xxxviii. and 150.)

(1) TChat bitter irony! Every day, all over the land, some
workingmen in the haciendas (plantations), sirvientes as they
are called, are pitilessly and arbitrarily flogged by their over-
seers; put in stocks during the night, so that their day’s work
may not be left undone, and otherwise cruelly punished for the
smallest offence or oversight. True, we are told that there are
laws printed in the codes that forbid such iniquitous treatment,
and that those subjected to it can complain. Complain ! And
to whom ? If they lay their grievances before the owner of
the hacienda, their only redress is to receive a double ration of
lashes for (su atrevimiento cle quejarse ) daring to complain. If
they lodge a complaint before a Judge, as by law they have a
right, he, of course, is the friend or relative of the planter.
He himself may be a planter. On his own plantation he has
servants who are treated in like manner. TThat remains for
the poor devil to do but to endure and be resigned ? That is
all. His fathers have suffered as he suffers, as his children will
suffer.

These facts I do not report from hearsay, but from actual
personal observation. How many times have I witnessed the
whipping of some poor creature, for the most trifling cause,
without being able to interfere in his behalf, knowing well that
such interference would be resented, and would entail on the
victim a more severe punishment later on ! To a gentleman, a
very stanch Catholic, who considered it a sin to fail to attend

APPENDIX.

177

mass every morning, who had been educated in the colleges of
Europe and of the United States, I was once making some
observations on the bad treatment inflicted on the Indians in
the plantations, which, though most Christianlike, was not-
withstanding extremely barbarous, when he interrupted me by
saying, “"Well, they are accustomed to it. £ Al indio pan y
jpalo’> (c For the Indian, bread and stick’) is the common
saying throughout the country.”

Alas ! for the poor Indian this saying is true only in part,
for very little bread falls to his share, but abundance of lashes.
Of course, those ill-treated people at times become exasperated
—who would not? They kill their overseers. Woe to them
then ! for they are soon and surely made to remember that there
are criminal laws, enacted by congress to punish such as they.

During twelve years that I have dwelt amid the ruined
cities of the ancient Mayas, in the depth of the forests of the
Yucatan peninsula, I have had occasion to study the character
of the Indians as well as the remains of the palaces and temples
where, not so very long ago, their ancestors burned copal and
incense in honor of their gods. I have found that the Indians,
treated kindly, as every intelligent being, human or not human,
should be, were generally as good as, if not better than, their
white or mestizo countrymen. Of course, there are exceptions;
these, however, are rare, and are to be found among those who
have been brought up by some white or mestizo master.

With Madame Le Plongeon, I have been altogether in their
power for months at a time, in the midst of deep forests, far
from any city or village, far from any inhabited place ; I have
invariably found them respectful, honest, polite, unobtrusive,
patient, and brave. I cannot say as much for the mestizos in
general; though among them, also, there are honorable excep-
12

178

APPENDIX.

tions, unhappily not as numerous as might be desired. During
my expeditions I have always preferred to be accompanied by
Indians; I could trust them even in case of alarm from the
hostile Indians of Cfian Santa Cruz. They knew that I had
full confidence in them. I never had occasion to regret having
relied on them. Of course, they have defects ; but, Who has
not?

With Hon. Henry Fowler, who, when colonial secretary of
the colony of British Honduras, in 1878, made an exploration
in the uninhabited parts of the country, accompanied by half
a dozen Indians and two American guides, I will say, “ When
the Indian is sober, he is always a gentleman.” 1

During my last sojourn at Cliiciien, in December, 1884,
I had unearthed an altar sustained by fifteen atlantes of fine
workmanship, and painted with bright colors. One of these
particularly attracted the attention of some Indians who lived
in the forest a few miles from the ancient city, perhaps be-
cause the ornaments that adorned it appeared like the chasubles
worn by Catholic priests when celebrating mass. They came
to look at it several times. At last they begged me to give it
to them, to carry to their village, notwithstanding its weight.

“ What do you want it for ? ” I inquired of them. “ Oh,”
they answered, ‘ ‘ we will build a house for it ; we will burn
wax candles and incense in its honor, and we shall worship it
— it is so pretty! ” they added.

I then learned that in a cavern, in the depth of the forest,
they venerated another ancient statue, which they called Zac-
talali, that is, the “ blow or slap of a white man.” But they
would not show it to me unless I subscribed to certain condi, -

1 Hon. Henry Fowler, Official Report of an Excursion in the Interior of
British Honduras. (Belize.)

APPENDIX.

179

tions, among others not to make known the place where it was
concealed.

The image represents a man with a long heard, kneeling,
the hands raised to a level with the head, the palms upturned.
On his hack he carries a bag containing, according to the
Indians, Bui y uah, a paste made of a mixture of corn and
beans. It is now black with the smoke of wax candles and
incense burnt before it by the worshippers. Before applying
the lighted torch to the felled trees that are cut down to prepare
the ground for sowing corn and beans, the devotees repair to
Zactalah’s sanctuary, and place before him calabashes filled
with the refreshing beverage called Zacha, made from corn.
They burn copal and wax candles, imploring him to cause the
wood to burn well; which is for them most important, since
on the more or less thorough burning of the trees depends the
greater or lesser abundance of the crops. At the beginning of
June, after the first showers of the rainy season, and before the
sowing of the seeds, they again visit the cavern to implore
the god to grant them a plentiful harvest and to prevent the
animals of the forest from eating and destroying the crops.
Having obtained these favors, at the time of the harvest the
grateful worshippers again come to pay their homage to their
beneficent deity. They come with their wives and children,
bringing the finest ears of corn, the ripest squashes, the primitise
of the fields, besides roasted corn and various other offerings.
They then kneel in the presence of the image, having previously
presented their oblations and lighted a large number of wax
candles. Soon the smoke of a mixture of incense and copal
gathered from the trees in the forest, with ground roasted corn,
fills the cavern ; and the devotees, to the accompaniment of a
violin, a tunkul, a zacatan, and other musical instruments

180

APPENDIX.

used by tbeir forefathers in their ancient religious rites, chant
some prayers of the Catholic Church. These they repeat over
and over again, counting the beads of their rosaries. It is a
strange medley of ancient and modern idolatry. But what
matters it, since it makes them happy? And they have so
few joys in their life.

APPENDIX.

181

Note Y. (Pages xxxix., xl.)

Eligio Ancona, cC Historia de Yucatan,” vol. i., p. 37.

(3) Senor Dn. Eligio Ancona, who, in 1875, was governor
of Yucatan when Madame Le Plongeon and I discovered and
unearthed the statue of Prince Coll (Chaacmol), is a Yuca-
tan writer well known in his country. Besides several his-
torical novels of doubtful merit, and a history of Yucatan of
no great value, he edited, at his own expense, after the death
of the author, the Maya dictionary compiled in great part by
Dn. Juan Pio Perez, a gentleman who applied himself to the
study of things relating to the ancient history of the aborig-
ines of his fatherland. Whatever may be said of the history of
Yucatan, in four volumes, written by Senor Ancona, and its
worth respecting the events that have taken place since the
Spanish conquest, I leave to others to decide. But when he
attempts to write on the ancient history of the Mayas it may
be confidently said that it is a fictitious production of his fan-
ciful imagination, founded on the narratives of Bishop Landa,
Cogolludo, Lizana, and others, with some extracts from the
writings of Abbe Brasseur.

(1) Bernardo de Lizana was born in 1581, at Ocana, in the
province of Toledo. He entered the Order of St. Francis
in the convent of his native city. He came as a missionary to
Yucatan in 1606, with eleven other monks, under the care of
Father Diego de Castro. He learned with great perfection
the Maya language, and was teacher of it for many years.

182

APPENDIX.

He is said to have been one of the most clever preachers
of his time. In his disposition he was very affable. Every-
body loved him. During the twenty-five years of his resi-
dence in Yucatan, he filled the highest posts of his Order,
except that of Provincial. It is reported that after predicting
the hour of his death, he passed from this life in 1631.

Father Lizana wrote several works, all valuable. They are
to-day, if not all lost, very difficult to find. Cogolludo quotes
from his “ Devocionario de Ha Sen ora de Itzamal, Historia
de Yucathan y Su Conquista Espiritual.” Brasseur has pre-
served a fragment entitled “Del principio y fundacion de
estos Cuyos 6 Mules deste sitio y pueblo de Itzamal ” in his
translation of Banda’s “ Relacion de las C'osas de Yucatan.”

APPENDIX.

183

Note YI. (Page 3.)

(1) William Robertson, in the second edition (1794) of his
work, “An Historical Disquisition concerning Ancient India”
(page 292), says: “ It may be considered as the general result
of all the inquiries, reasonings, and calculations with respect to
Indian astronomy, which have hitherto been made public, that
the motion of the heavenly bodies, and more particularly their
situation at the commencement of the different epochs to which
the four sets of tables refer, are ascertained with great accu-
racy; and that many of the elements of their calculations,
especially for very remote ages, are verified by an astonishing
coincidence with the tables of the modern astronomy of
Europe, when improved by the latest and most nice deduc-
tions from the theory of gravitation. . . . These conclu-

sions are rendered particularly interesting by the evidence
which they afford of an advancement in science unexampled
in the history of rude nations.”

One of the astronomical tables referred to by Mr. Robert-
son goes back to the year 3102 before the Christian era; that
is, a century previous to the tune when the Aryans established
their first settlements on the banks of the river Saraswati,
according to Mr. Adolphe Pictet (“ Les Origines Indo-Euro-
piennes ”). At that time the Brahmins were not the powerful
caste and corporation of learned philosophers which they
became after the Aryans made themselves masters of Hindo-
stan. That country was then under the sway of the highly

184

APPENDIX.

civilized Rag&s. These were Maya colonists that, having
settled in very remote ages in the Dekkan, by little and little
had extended their dominion over the less cultured aborigines.
The Brahmins, it is well known, borrowed their system of cos-
mogony and acquired their knowledge of astronomy, as well
as all other sciences and the arts of civilization, from the
Ragas, whom, afterward, they relentlessly persecuted.

Again, Mr. Robertson says (page 296): “ It is accordingly
for those very remote ages (about five thousand years distant
from the present) that their astronomy is most accurate, and
the nearer we come down to our own times, the more the con-
formity of its results with ours diminishes. It seems reason-
able to suppose that the time when its rules are most accurate
is the time when the observations were made on which these
rules are founded. . . . The superior perfection of the

Indian tables becomes always more conspicuous as we go far-
ther back into antiquity. This shows, likewise, how difficult
it is to construct any astronomical tables which will agree
with the state of the heavens for a period so remote from the
time when the tables are constructed as four or five thousand
years. It is only from astronomy in its most advanced state,
such as it has attained in modern Europe, that such accuracy is
to be expected.” Again (page 297): “When an estimate is
endeavored to be made of the geometrical skill necessary for
the construction of the Indian tables and rules, it is found to
be very considerable; and, besides the knowledge of elemen-
tary geometry, it must have required plane and spherical trig-
onometry, or something equivalent to them, together with
certain methods of approximating to the values of geometrical
magnitudes, which seem to rise very far above the elements
of any of those sciences. Some of these last mark also very

APPENDIX.

185

clearly that the places to which these tables are adapted must
he situated between the tropics, because they are altogether
inapplicable at a greater distance from the equator.” And
(page 298): “From this long induction, the conclusion which
seems obviously to result is that the Indian astronomy is
founded upon observations which were made at a very early
period; and when we consider the exact agreement of the
places which they assign to the sun and moon and other heav-
enly bodies, at that epoch, with those deduced from the tables
of De la Caille and Mayer, it strongly confirms the truth of
the position which I have been endeavoring to establish con-
cerning the early and high state of civilization in India. 5 ’

186

APPENDIX.

Note YII. (Page 15.)

(1) In Maya there are several words for “ ocean,” “ sea ” —
all conveying the idea of fiery or yellow liquid. To comprehend
the motives that prompted those who applied these names to the
element by which the planet is mostly covered would require
a thorough acquaintance with the geological notions of the
ancient Maya scientists. But when we reflect that names
were generally given to objects by onomatopoeia, those of the
sea may perhaps shadow such notions. A long dissertation on
the subject would here be certainly out of place. I will there-
fore content myself with giving the etymon of the words,
leaving it to each reader to draw his own conclusions. By
consulting Maya dictionaries we find the various words for
“ sea,” “ ocean,” to be kanah, kaanab, kaknab, kankab.

The first I have explained in the text, according to the
monumental inscriptions and the characters in ancient Maya
books, in which a serpent head invariably stands as symbol of
the sea — the Mighty Serpent.

The second, kaanab, is a word composed of two primi-
tives— kaa, “ bitter;” and nab, which has various meanings —
“gold,” “unction,” “palm of the hand.” In the countries
of the Western Continent it was customary to anoint the kings
by pouring over their heads and bodies gold-dust held in the
palm of the hand.1 Is it a coincidence that the god, among

1 Fr. Pedro Simon, Noticias Ilistoriales de las Conquistas de Tierra Firme
en el Nuevo Reino de Grenada. Apud Kingsborough, vol. iii.

APPENDIX.

187

the Assyrians, who presided over the unction of the kings, was
called Nabo ; and that Nub, in Egypt, was the surname of the
god Set,1 and Neb meant lord ? In our day Nabob is still the
title for a viceroy in India. It also means a man of great
wealth.2

In aftertimes gold was replaced by oil in the royal unc-
tion, and by lustral water, poured from the palm of the hand,
in the ceremony of purification.

The third word, kaknab, is composed of two primitives
— kak, “ fire,” and nab, “ the palm of the hand.” Like the
Egyptians, the Mayas figured the earth as an old man with
his face turned toward the east, holding in his hand the spirit
of life,3 Fire, the “ soul of the universe,” the primordial cause
of all things, according to the Yajur-veda,4 and to all ancient
philosophers whose maxim was Corpus est terra , anima est
ignis.

The Aryans, and all peoples allied to them, represented the
earth as a woman and called it “ Mother Earth,” even as we do
to-day. Would not this show that the Egyptians were not
of Aryan stock as some Egyptologists pretend; but, on the
other hand, that they were closely related to the Mayas ? — a
fact which becomes more and more evident as we study deeper
their traditions, their manners, and their customs, and com-
pare more carefully their cosmogonic conceptions and astro-
nomical notions.

As to the fourth word, kankab, it is also composed of the
two primitives, kail, “ yellow,” and kab, “ hand.” It seems

1 Henry Brugsch, History of Egypt under the Pharaohs , vol. i., pp. 212-
236 ; vol. ii., pp. 120-246.

2 Webster’s Dictionary.

3 Codex Cortesianus, plates vii.-viii. See illustrations, plates lv.-lvi.

4 Asiatic Researches, vol. viii., pp. 431-433.

188

APPENDIX.

to have originated in the same personification of the earth as
an old man, with a golden or fiery hand, a yellow hand. It is
the same conception of the fire and the water allied to produce
all things, that we see portrayed in the cosmogonic diagrams
of the Mayas, the Hindoos, and the Chaldees.

APPENDIX.

189

Note YIII. (Page 82.)

(1) In Ms work “Lares and Penates,” Mr. William Burck-
hardt Barker, in Chapter IY., “ On Certain Portraits of Huns
and their Identity with the Extinct Races in America, ’ ’ says :
“ Mr. Abington’s observations on this piece (55), a head of most
monstrous form, in a conical cap, are of so remarkable a nature
that I must be permitted to publish them here. . . . Mr.

Abington says : ‘ This is the most extraordinary thing in the
whole collection. On the first view I was struck with the
identity of its strange profile with the figures sculptured upon
the monuments and edifices of an extinct people in Central
America. Many of Stephens’s engravings represent the same
faces exactly.’ . . . Is it not a faithful and correct por-
trait of a Hun ? . . . Hitherto the sculptures of Central
America have only been wondered at, but not explained.
Does not this head identify them with the Huns, and thereby
let light in upon a dark mystery? . . . The following

sketches of the sculptures in Central America, taken from
Stephens’s plates1 and the Quarterly Journal , will show that
my notion of the matter is not a mere fancy.

Heads so very unusual, not to say unnatural, though found
in such distant places, must surely have come from the same
stock. . . .We have written descriptions of the inhuman

appearance of the Huns who devastated the nation; but I

1 John L. Stephens, Incidents of Travels in Central America and Yucatan.

(The author.)

190

APPENDIX.

never met with any representation of them either pictorial or
sculptured. Perhaps you have the gratification of first bring-
ing before the world a true and exact representation of that once
terrible but now forgotten race, and that, too, by an illustration
probably unique ; also of removing the veil that has hitherto
concealed the mysterious origin of the men who have left the
memorial of their peculiar conformation upon the sculptured
stones of America, but who have been long extinct.” 1 . . .

Up to here Mr. Barker. It is certain that the peoples who
left images of their strange and hideous visages sculptured on
the temples and palaces of Copan, Palenque, Manche, and other
places in the countries watered by the river Uzumacinta and
its confluents, did not belong to the Maya race. But it is
equally certain that it would be most difficult, not to say impos-
sible, to prove that the}7 did to that of the Huns ; notwith-
standing the fact that there exist abundant proofs of the
presence in America, before and after the beginning of the
Christian era, of Mongol or Tartar tribes, and that these have
left their traces in many places of the Western Continent.2
These portraits sculptured on the temples of Palenque, Manche,
etc., may very well be those of people from Tahiti and other
islands of the Pacific, visited by the Mayas in the course of
their voyages to India. It was customary with the inhabit-
ants of certain of these islands to flatten the skulls of the
infants of the warrior caste, in the shape of a wedge, to make
them appear hideous when grown up, so that by their looks
they might inspire terror in the hearts of their foes.

1 See, ubi supra , Plate XXIX.

2 John Ranking, Historical Researches on the Conquest of Peru, Mexico ,
etc., by the Mongols.

APPENDIX.

191

Note IX. (Page 87.)

(3) This same custom of making use of mercury for the
preservation of corpses exists still in Thibet. C. F. Gordon
Cumming (Mrs. Helen Hunt), in her interesting book “ In the
Himalayas and on the Indian Plains” (page 142), says: “We
tried to exercise strong faith while recalling Hue’s curious
account of Tartar funerals, telling how, when a great chief
dies, several of the finest young men and women of the tribe
are made to swallow mercury till they suffocate, the supposi-
tion being that those who thus die continue to look fresh after
death.” In a note she adds: “Quicksilver is believed to
endow the body with power to resist death and avoid further
transmigration. So Hindoo wizards prepare elixirs of mer-
cury and powdered mica, which are supposed to contain the
very essence of the god Siva and one of his wives.”

We read in the “Travels of Marco Polo,” published in
Edinburgh by Hugh Murray (1844), that this ancient Italian
traveller found this same custom, of using mercury for the
preservation of corpses, existing in India and China when, in
1250, he visited those countries. Father Hue also makes men-
tion of it in his work, “Recollections of a Journey through
Tartary, Thibet, and China,” and so does Bayard Taylor,
Bishop Heber, and other modern travellers.

192

APPENDIX.

Note X. (Page 88.)

(1) Bishop Heber, in his “Narrative of a Journey through
the Upper Provinces of India” (vol. i., p. 386 ; vol. ii. , pp.
430, 525, 530 ; vol. iii. , pp. 48, 49), says “that at the city of
Cairah in Guzerat, as in Greece, the statues have the white of
the eyes made of ivory and silver. The statues of the gods
are still painted with colors emblematic of their attributes.
The gods Vishnu and Krishna are painted blue; Thoth, the
god of wisdom and letters, red, etc.”

(2) Henry Layard, “Nineveh and its Remains” (vol. ii.,
part ii., chap, iii.), speaks of the painted sculptures discovered
by him in Nineveh, Khorsabad, and other places; and in his
work, “ Nineveh and Babylon ” (p. 276), he mentions the find-
ing of statues with eyes made of ivory and glass. Diodorus
Siculus (lib. ii., c. xx.) speaks of the figures of men and ani-
mals painted on the walls of the palace of Semiramis in
Babylon, and so also does Ezekiel (chap, xxii., verses 14, 15)
and Smith, “Five Monarchies ” (vol. i., pp. 450, 451).

(3) Eusebius, “ Prgep. et Demons. Evang.” (lib. iii., chap,
xi.), says that the Egyptians painted the statues of their gods.
Kneph, Amen, Ra, Nilus, were painted blue. Set and Atum
were -painted red. Sir Gardner Wilkinson, in “Manners and
Customs of Ancient Egyptians” (vol. iii., chap, xiii., pp. 10,
207), also says that the Egyptians painted the statues of their
gods and of their kings, and provided them with eyes made of
ivory or glass.

(4) The Greeks colored their statues and provided them with
eyes.

APPENDIX.

193

Note XI. (Pages 100, 127, 128.)

(1) J. Talboys Wheeler informs us that the Nagds were a
tribe famous in the Ksliatriya traditions, whose history is
deeply interwoven with that of the Hindoos ; that they wor-
shipped the serpent as a national divinity, and that they had
adopted it as a national emblem.1 From it they derived their
name.

The origin of the Nagds is unknown to Indianists and other
writers ou the history of India. They agree, however, that
they were strangers in the country, having established them-
selves in the southern parts of Hindostan in times anterior to
the war of the Pandavas and the Kauvaras ; nay, anterior even
to the epoch when the Aryan colonists from Bactria emi-
grated to the Punjab and founded their first settlements on the
banks of the Saraswati when this river still emptied itself into
the Indus. They do not know whence they came, nor in what
part of the earth their mother country was situated.

Conjectures are not wanting on that point. Because these
Nagds worshipped the serpent, some have presumed that they
were a tribe of Scythians,2 whose race, Herodotus tells us, was
said to have descended fronf"^ .mythical being, half-woman,
half -serpent, who bore three sons to Heracles.3 We will not
now inquire into the origin of that myth. Looking into the

1 J. Talboys Wheeler, Hist, of India, vol. i., p. 146.

2 Ibid., p. 141.

3 Herodotus, Hist., lib. iv. 9-10.

13

194

APPENDIX.

land of fabulous speculations, we might as well imagine them
to have been the descendants of that Emperor of Heaven,
Tien-Hoang of Chinese mythology, who, the Chinese assert,
had the head of a man and the body of a serpent, since
they were regarded by the masses of Hindoos as semi-divine
beings.

W e have seen in the early part of this book that the Ndgds,
having obtained a foothold in the Dekkan, founded a colony
that in time became a large and powerful empire whose
rulers governed the whole of Hindostan. They did not confine
themselves to India; but pushed their conquests toward the
west and northwest, extending their sway all over western
Asia to the shores of the Mediterranean, introducing their civ-
ilization in every ancient country, leaving traces of their wor-
ship in almost every system of religion.

Pundit Dayanand Saraswati, said to be the greatest Sans-
critist of modern India, and the most versed in the lore and
legends of Hindostan,1 affirms that he has discovered the
mother country of the Ndgds to have been Pdtdla , the antip-
odes; that is, Central America.2 If it be so, then the Ndgds
were colonists from Mayach ; and their civilization, their

1 H. P. Blavatsky, From the Caves and the Jungles of Hindostan, p. 63.

2 Ibid., Secret Doctrine, vol. i., pp. 27-35.

The Swami Yive Kananda, a learned Hindoo monk, when lecturing
in New York on Yogi, the Vedanta, and the religious doctrines of India, in
speaking with the author on the origin of the Ndgds, assured him that it
was the received opinion of the learned pundits of that country that they
came originally from Pdtdla, the antipodes; that is, Central America. Pa-
tella was the name given by the inhabitants of India to America in those
remote times. It was also that of a seaport and great commercial empo-
rium frequently visited by ancient Egyptians in their commercial intercourse
with India. In his Periplus mavis Erytlircee, Arrian informs us that it was
situated at the lower delta of the river Indus. Tatta is the modern name
of the place.

APPENDIX.

195

scientific attainments, their traditions, their religious concep-
tions, must, of necessity, have been those of the Mayas.

Will any one object to the fact of a small colony of civilized
immigrants establishing themselves in the midst of barbarous
peoples, and growing, in the course of a few centuries, so as to
form a vast and powerful empire, exercising great influence on
the populations within its limits and even beyond ? To such
objection it may be answered, History repeats itself. Without
speaking of the origin of the great kingdoms whose history
forms our ancient history, let us cast a glance at what happens
round us. See what has occurred in the same countries within
the last two hundred and fifty years. From Fort St. George
and the small settlement called Madras, on the narrow strip six
miles long and one mile deep, bought by the English in 1639,
on the coast of Coromandel, in the peninsula of Dekkan, and
for which they had to pay, as tribute, every year, the sum of
twelve hundred pagodas, or about two thousand five hundred
dollars, has not the East India Company by little and little,
extended its domains, until in our day, after a lapse of only
two centuries and a half, they have become the rich and
mighty British Indian Empire, whose viceroys now rule part
of the same territories conquered in olden times by the Kdgds
and governed by their Cans, or kings ?

Are not the English to-day endeavoring to obtain a foot-
hold in Afghanistan, where, as we have already seen,1 the
names of cities and localities are identical with the names of
villages and places in Yucatan, some of which are actually
inhabited, others being in ruins ? For instance, Kabul is the
name of the Afghan capital, and of the river on the banks of
which it stands. It is likewise that of a celebrated mound in

1 See p. 27.

196

APPENDIX.

the city of Izamal in Yucatan. On its summit once stood a
temple dedicated to the “miraculous hand.” It was famous
throughout the land, even to the time of the Spanish Conquest.
Father Cogolludo, in his “ Historia de Yucathan,” 1 says: “ To
that temple they brought their dead and the sick. They
called it kabul, ‘ the working hand, ’ and made great offer-
ings. . . . The dead were recalled to life, and the sick
were healed.”

The Nahuatls, who settled in the northwestern parts of the
peninsula of Yucatan about the sixth century of the Christian
era, used to offer at that temple human sacrifices to obtain from
the god the benisons they sought. This fact we learn from a
mezzo-relievo, in stucco, that adorned the frieze that ran round
the temple. (Plate LXYIII.) It represents a man with
Nahiiatl features. His body is held in a posture that must
have caused great suffering. His hands are secured in stocks ;
his elbows rest on the edge of a hollow support ; his emptied
abdomen is propped by a small stool; his knees touch the
ground, but his feet are raised and wedged by an implement ;
his intestines hang from his neck and shoulders; his heart is
strapped to his thigh.

It is much to be regretted that since the author took the
photograph here reproduced, this figure, with its accompany-
ing inscription, has been purposely destroyed by the owner
of the premises, because he considered it an annoyance to
have interested parties coming to see it. This is but one
instance of that lack of appreciation manifested by the people
of Yucatan regarding the interesting and historically important
remains that make the Peninsula famous and attractive. It is
lamentable that the Mexican Government authorities take no
1 Cogolludo, Hist, de Yucathan , lib. iv., chap. viii.

Page 197.

Plate LXVIII.

APPENDIX.

197

steps toward compelling the preservation of ancient works of art,
even in their deteriorated condition. The legend on the right,
in front of the figure, translated verbatim, reads as follows :

the.

altar.

accepts; welcomes.

crushed.

lying face downward.

Uxmal.

That on the back, over the figure:

u

GlU

ta,

ox.

this.

three.

uuo, doubled.

That is: Ta ox uuo, u tem kam uuch noocol oxmal.

Freely translated: “ The thrice bent man” “ the altar wel-
comes the crushed body , lying face downward , of the man from
Uxmal. ’ ’

It is well to notice that all the signs forming this legend are

198

APPENDIX.

Egyptian as well as Maya ; that, therefore, any one able to
read Egyptian inscriptions can, without difficulty, with the aid
of a Maya dictionary, translate it as well as I. This proves
that the ancient Maya hieratic alphabet discovered by me and
published, in 1886, side by side with the Egyptian, on page xii
of the introduction of my book, “ Sacred Mysteries among the
Mayas and the Quiches, ” is a true key to the deciphering of
some, at least, of the Maya mural inscriptions, notwithstand-
ing the slanderous aspersions of Dr. Brinton, and his assertion
on page 15 of his “ Primer of Mayan Hieroglyphs ” “that I
have added nothing to corroborate the correctness of the inter-
pretations. ” But may I ask why he has not verified them?
Has he no Maya dictionaries ? The trouble with him is, judging
from his own books, that he knows personally nothing on the
subject. Is he not utterly ignorant of the true meaning of a
single Maya character, when in composition with other signs
to form words and sentences ? Can he decipher one single sen-
tence of the Maya books ? Does he even know Maya as
spoken to-day ? How, then, does he dare to attack the knowl-
edge of those who, by hard study during several years passed
among people who speak nothing but Maya, have made them-
selves familiar with the subject, and set himself up as an
authority on what he does not know ? Let him not lose sight
of the fact that we are no longer in those times when the peo-
ple, as Bishop Synesius says (in “ Calvit.,” p. 515), wish abso-
lutely to be deceived. To-day honest inquirers after knowledge
object to being gulled by mere pretenders, even if these boast
of the titles of doctor and professor in a university.

We know that the ancient Mayas were serpent worship-
pers.1 They worshipped the serpent, not that they believed it
1 Aug. Le Plongeon, Sacred Mysteries , p. 109.

APPENDIX.

199

to be wiser than, or intellectually superior to, any other ani-
mal— they hacl too much good sense for that — but because it
was the emblem of their country, the contour of which figures
a serpent with an inflated breast, like the Egyptian urteus, for
which reason they called it nohoeli can, “the great ser-
pent.”1 The serpent was the emblem of Mayacli,2 as the
eagle is that of the United States, the lion that of England,
the bear that of Russia, the cock that of France, etc.

Judging from their descendants in our day, the ancient
Mayas must have been fanatical lovers of their country. The
title of their rulers was can (serpent), as khan is to this day that
of the kings of Tartary, Burmah, and other Asiatic countries ;
as it was that of the Emperor of China even in the days of
Marco Polo, and its emblem is yet a dragon. Like the Egyp-
tian kings the Maya cans were initiates to the sacred mys-
teries performed in the secrecy of their temples.

Uo one has ever explained why the Asiatic rulers took
upon themselves the title of khan, or adopted the serpent for
an emblem as did the Egyptian kings. The Maya language
offers a simple explanation.

Can, “serpent,” “king,” by permutation becomes nac,
the meaning of which is “crown,” and also “throne,” insig-
nias of royalty. But the verb Naacal means “to be ele-
vated,” “to be raised.” It was the title adopted by the
initiates among the Mayas, corresponding to our modern

1 Cogolludo, Hist, de Yucathan, lib. i., chap. i.

2 Troano MS., part ii., plate xvii., § 2; plate xxvii., $ 1. The tree was
another emblem of Mayacli (Troano MS., part ii., plates viii. to xiii. ;
Codex Cortesianus , plates vii. and viii.). It is well to recall here that Egypt
was likewise called the Land of the Tree, although the valley of the Nile was
well-nigh devoid of trees. (Samuel Birch in Gardner Wilkinson, Customs
and Manners of Ancient Egyptians , vol. iii,, chap, xiii., p. 200.)

200

APPENDIX.

“His Highness,” they being elevated above their fellow-men
by their knowledge and superior wisdom. Transported to
India the word became corrupted, in the course of time, into
Naaca or Ndgd. The title was kept by the initiates who were
among the Maya colonists that settled in Dekkan and Bur-
mah. They also preserved as emblem of their new nationality
that of their mother country in the antipodes, and tvorshipped
the serpent in remembrance of the home of their ancestors.

Elsewhere I have shoAvn that the title of the highpriest,
chief of the adepts or naacals in Mayacli, was Hach-mac,
“ the true, the very man.” 1 The title of the pontiff or chief
of the Magi, in Chaldea, was Hab-mag, or, according to the
Maya,. Lab-mac, the “ old man; ” 2 another of his titles was
Nargal , Maya Naacal, Hindoo Nugd, “initiate,” “adept.”
(2) John L. Stephens, “Incidents of Travels in Yucatan ”
(vol. ii. , p. 311), speaking of these remarkable pictures, says:
“ The colors are green, yellow, red, blue, and a reddish brown,
the last being invariably the color given to the human flesh.
Wanting the various tints, the engraving, of course, gwes
only an imperfect idea of them, though even in outline they
exhibit a freedom of touch which could only be the result of
discipline and training under masters.”

(1) William Osburn, in his “Monumental History of
Egypt” (p. 260), says: “By comparing together the remains
of different epochs, it clearly appears that Egyptian art has
had its periods of perfection, of decline, and of renaissance, just
the same as art in Greece and Italy. But we have no trace
whatever of such beginnings in these first productions of art in
Egypt. It burst upon ns at once in the flower of its highest

1 Le Plongeon, Sacred Mysteries , p. 30.

2 Ibid., p. 45.

APPENDIX.

201

perfection. Where, then, are the imperfect attempts which
issued in this perfection to he found? No such have been dis-
covered, either at Ghizeh or in any other locality in Egypt,
notwithstanding that no work of man perishes there. This
circumstance compels us to assume that the skill of these primi-
tive artists of Egypt was a portion of that civilization which its
first settlers brought with them when they located themselves
in the valley of the Nile.”

202

APPENDIX.

Note XII. (Page 105.)

(1) Dr. Daniel G. Brinton, “ Essays of an Americanist ” (p.
439), says: “ I do not know of any measurements undertaken
in Yucatan to ascertain the metrical standard employed by the
ancient architects. It is true that Dr. Augustus Le Plongeon
asserts positively that they knew and used the metric system,
and that the metre and its divisions are the only dimensions
that can be applied to the remains of the edifices. But apart
from the eccentricity of this statement, I do not see from Dr.
Le Plongeon’s own measurements that the metre is in any sense
a common divisor for them.”

Abbe Brasseur is now dead — he cannot, therefore, refute
Dr. Brinton’s imputations; but I am still in the land of
the living, and will speak for the learned Abbe and for
myself.

The measurements that Dr. Brinton ignores to have been
undertaken in Yucatan, I have made most carefully, as proved
by my plans of the buildings and my restorations of the same.
The exactness of these surveys can be vouched for by the offi-
cers of my escorts in the ruined cities, they having helped me
in that work.

Unlike some genuinely good things, the would-be critic’s
memory does not seem to improve with age. It is, indeed, a
pity. When he wrote the lines just quoted he surely had for-
gotten that, once upon a time, after the one visit with which
he has ever honored me, he stated in the November (1885)

APPENDIX.

203

number of the American Antiquarian (page 378), under the
heading “ The Art of Ancient Yucatan: ”

“I recently passed an evening with Dr. and Mrs. Le Plongeon, who,
after twelve years spent in exploring the ruined cities of Yucatan, and
studying the ancient and modern Maya language aDd character, are pass-
ing a few months in this country. The evening was passed in looking at
photographs of the remains of architectural and plastic art, in examining
tracings and squeezes from the walls of the buildings, in studying the accu-
rate plans and measurements made by the doctor and his wife of those struc-
tures, in reviewing a small but exceedingly choice collection of relics, and
in listening to the doctor’s explanation of the Maya hieroglyphic system.
Whatever opinion one may entertain of the analogies the doctor thinks he has
discovered between Maya culture and language and those of Asia and Africa ,
no one who, as I had the privilege of doing, goes over the actual product
of his labors and those of his accomplished wife, can doubt the magnitude
of his discoveries and the new and valuable light they throw upon ancient
Maya civilization. They correct, in various instances, the hasty deduc-
tions of Charnay, and they prove that buried under the tropical growth of
the Yucatan forests still remain monuments of art that would surprise the
world were they exhumed and rendered accessible to students.” . .

Compare this with his other statement. It would indeed
be most interesting to know if it was envy or charity that thus
caused him to alter his mind. ITe has never visited the ruined
cities of Yucatan, unless it be in imagination. He has, there-
fore, never made measurements of the buildings erected by
the Mayas. How, then, can he know, of his own knowledge,
Avhich of our modern standards of lineal measures applies to
them exactly ? This, however, I do know, not from hearsay,
but from actual experience, that the metre is the only measure
which, when applied to said buildings, leaves no fraction.
How, then, does he, a mere closet archaeologist, dare impute to
eccentricity my statement to the £ ‘ American Antiquarian
Society of Worcester,” made first in June, 1878, and reiterated
in 1881, which reads: “I have adopted the metric standard
of lineal measure, not from choice, but from necessity, and

204

APPENDIX.

made the strange discovery that the metre is the only measure
of dimension which agrees with that adopted by these most
ancient artists and architects; another very striking point of
contact with the Chaldean priests, the Magi ” ? In August,
1893, in the Hew York Advertiser , I publicly challenged Dr.
Brinton to a conference before any scientific society of his
own choice, to show what he really knew about the Mayas,
their language, manners, customs, and history. He prudently
took no notice of my challenge. But, being as desirous to
defend my reputation in my chosen field of study as he is
to shield his, I seized the opportunity offered by the mem-
bers of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science holding their annual meetings, under his presidency, a
few steps from my residence in the city of Brooklyn, to send
him this second challenge, a copy of which was placed in his
hand on August 20th, while he was standing with other mem-
bers of the association in the reception room of the Polytech-
nic Institute:

DR. LE PLONGEON TO DR. BRINTON.

AN OPEN LETTER WHICH CONTAINS AN INVITATION TO A SCIENTIFIC DUEL.

The Eagle has received the following :

Dr. Daniel G. Brinton , President of the

American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Sir : Do you remember that in 1887, when the American Association
for the Advancement of Science met in New York at Columbia College, by
direction of Professor Putnam, I wrote to you from this city, inquiring if I
might be permitted to read a paper on “ Ancient American Civilization”
before the archaeological department of said association, you being then the
President of said section ? Do you remember also that I did not receive
until three weeks after the closing of the sessions of said association the
answer to my letter, it having somehow been sent to San Francisco , Gal.,
instead of Brooklyn, L. I. ? It is to avoid another such clerical mistake
that I now take this mode of reaching the association and yourself.

APPENDIX.

205

You are well aware that during the last quarter of a century, partic-
ularly, human knowledge has made great progress in all branches of science
except that of American archaeology, which is not now much more advanced
than it was a century ago. You also feel, if you do not admit it, that all
that has been written on that subject in Europe and America does not pass
from mere speculation on the part of the writers, and is therefore, scientifi-
cally and historically speaking, scarcely worth the paper on which said
speculations and theories are printed; that none of the pretended authori-
ties on the subject can read a single sentence of the Maya books and mural
inscriptions; that they therefore know nothing about the ancient Mayas,
their culture and scientific attainments, although some of said writers pre-
sume to pronounce magisterially on these subjects. You pose as, and are
therefore considered, the authority in the United States on all questions
pertaining to the ancient Mayas ; for this reason I address myself to you,
and also because you are now the president of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science, whose members should be proud to help
in shedding light on the ancient civilization of the continent on which
they live.

In your book, “Essays of an Americanist” (p. 439), you aver that my
asserting that the ancient Maya standard of lineal measures was the metre,
or be it the ten millionth part of the quarter of the meridian, is one of my
eccentricities, but give no reasons for so attacking my statement. A year
ago, through the columns of the New York Advertiser , a copy of which I
mailed to your address, I sent you an invitation to prove your averment
before any scientific society of your own choosing, provided the meeting
were public.

There can be no better opportunity than the present, no better qualified
audience than the scientists now assembled under your presidency, for pass-
ing judgment on all such questions.

Will you, then, appoint a day, at your own convenience, to meet me
before the members of the association and discuss all points treated by you
in your book above mentioned ? 1. Maya phonetics. 2. What were the

true signs used by ancient Mayas for the cardinal points ? 3. Landa alpha-

bet and Maya prophecies. 4. Maya standard of measures. And, besides,
the following : (1) Maya science of numbers ; (2) Maya cosmogony ; (3)
Maya knowledge of geography, geology; and, if you please (4), Maya
language and its universal spread among all ancient civilized nations of
antiquity in Asia, Africa, and Europe.

All said discussion to rest altogether on hard facts, scientific or his-
torical, not on mere conjectures or suppositions, so as to be of real value to
the scientific world, and thus give ancient America its proper place in the
universal history of the world. Of course, the four hundred photographic

206

APPENDIX.

slides made by me from photos also taken by me in situ I most willingly
place at your disposal to sustain your part of the discussion, which I doubt
not you will readily accept to redeem your written promise, made to me as
far back as 1885, as I intend using them to demonstrate my side of the
case. Hoping, sir, that you will gladly improve the opportunity to show
that you are really an authority, with right therefore to criticise others on
such an important subject, to all American scientists, and afford me one for
displaying my extravagancies or eccentricities before the members of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science, I beg to subscribe
myself,

Yours most respectfully,

Augustus Le Plongeon.

18 Sidney Place, August 18, 1894. 1

Dr. Brinton took no more notice of this challenge than he
had taken of the former one, published in August, 1893, in the
Yew York Advertiser.

Why ?

Is it that he regards me, claiming no title of professor in
any university, nor even that of member of any scientific soci-
ety, as an adversary unworthy of him, whose defeat would
bring him neither fame nor honor? Or is it on prudential
grounds? Does he fear lest his ignorance of a subject on
which he claims to he an authority should be made mani-
fest, and his reputation as a learned archaeologist be lost
forever? Since he has refused to give me the opportunity
to defend myself against his unwarranted aspersion, I will
say here what I would have said to him personally before
the members of the A. A. A. S. had he accepted my chal-
lenge.

The learned Professor of American Archaeology and Lin-
guistics of the University of Pennsylvania seems to be ignorant
of the fact that the Chaldeans, who, we have shown, were in

1 Brooklyn Eagle , edition of August 19, 1894.

APPENDIX.

207

their origin a Maya colony, also used the metre as their
standard of lineal measures. Will he likewise accuse Ernest
Eenan, the late famous French scientist and professor in the
College de France, of eccentricity, because on pages 60 and 61
of his “Histoire Generale des langues Semitiques,” he says:
“ Le car coder e grandiose des constructions Babyloniennes et
JVinivites, le cleveloppement scientifique de la Chaldee , les rap-
ports incontestcobles de la civilisation Assyrienne a/vec celle de
V Egypte , aurcoient leur cause dans cette premiere assise de
peuples materialistes , constructeurs, couxguels le monde entier
doit avec le systeme metbique les plus anciennes connaissances
qui tiennent d V astronomic, aux matliematiques et d Vindus-
trie

No doubt the Professor of Arch Ecology of the Pennsylvania
University will also accuse the learned English astronomer
John Wilson of downright lunacy for stating in his work,
“ The Lost Solar System of the Ancients Discovered 1

“The adaptation of the Babylonian standard, based on a
knowledge of the earth’s circumference, to the monumental
records of science prove that the Druids of Britain, the Persian
Magi, the Brahmins of India, the Chaldees of Babylonia, the
Egyptian hierarchy, the priests of Mexico and Peru, were all
acquainted, as Caesar says of the Druids, with the form and
magnitude of the earth; or, as Pomponius Mela states, with
the form and magnitude of the earth and motion of the
stars.

‘ ‘ Hence it is evident that the world had been circumnavi-
gated at an unknown epoch, and colonies formed in the old and
new world, all making use of the same standard in the con-

1 Join Wilson, The Lost Solar System of the Ancients Discovered , vol. ii.,
p. 236.

208

APPENDIX.

struction of their religious monuments. So the Babylonian or
Sabasan standard may be said to have been universal.

“The measurement of the earth’s circumference made at
a very remote period by an unknown race, who constructed
the great teocalli of Xocbicalco, accords with the measurement
lately made by the French, if the circumference of the fort
equals four thousand metres.” 1

‘ ‘ The wandering Masons, who have left traces of their
monuments in the four quarters of the world, will be found to
have traversed the great Pacific Ocean, made the circuit of the
globe, and measured its circumference.” 2

‘ £ The Burmese hyperbolic temples, like the Egyptian and
Mexican pyramidal temples, were most probably originally
dedicated to the worship of the heavenly bodies.

The Sabseans regarded the pyramidal and hyperbolic temples
and the obelisks as the symbols of divinity.” 3

‘ ‘ Religious zeal, so strongly characteristic of the doctrines
promulgated in the systems of India and Egypt, was the means
of furthering in those regions the extension of geographical
knowledge at an epoch long anterior to the date of Christian-
ity. This is evident from the still existing monumental records
left by these early missionaries of religion and civilization, the
founders of settlements in both hemispheres.”4

“ The ancient missionaries of religion and civilization
planted the Babylonian standard with their pyramids and tem-
ples in all parts of the globe. It is only by these silent mon-
uments that the ancient missions have been traced, after the

1 John Wilson, The Lost Solar System of the Ancients Discovered, vol. i.,
p. 381.

2 Ibid., vol. ii. , p. 232.

3 Ibid., vol. i., p. 247.

4 Ibid., vol. ii., p. 239.

APPENDIX.

209

lapse of ages, when all other records of their science and his-
tory had perished.” 1

“ The Babylonian standard of these missions has been
traced through Asia, Egypt, Phoenicia, and along the Mediter-
ranean coasts.” 2

Will the learned Piazzi Smyth be also accused of oddity by
the hypercritical Dr. Brinton because he asserts that the build-
ers of the great Egyptian pyramid used as a standard of
measures, at least in the king’s chamber — the most recondite,
mysterious, and, no doubt, sacred spot of the stupendous edi-
fice—the one ten-millionth part of the earth’s axis of rotation,
instead of the one ten-millionth part of the quadrant of a
great circle passing through the poles, as did the Chaldeans
and the Mayas ?

This selection of the one ten-millionth part of the diameter
on the one hand, and the one ten-millionth part of the arc
comprised between the pole and the equator on the other,
as standard of lineal measures, proves not only an identity
of canons in the astronomical computations of the Egyptians
and the Chaldees, but that they had ascertained the size of
the earth; and that, if they did not borrow this knowledge
one from the other, they had learned it from the same
masters, as Mr. John Wilson asserts. Were those masters the
Mayas ?

Let us hear what Piazzi Smyth says on the subject: “ Hence
all that we can declare as to the fact is that near the interior of

1 John Wilson, The Lost Solar System of the Ancients Discovered, vol. ii.,
p. 312.

Their language has also remained. It has been our guide through the
present volume. (The author.)

2 John Wilson, The Lost Solar System of the Ancients Discovered , vol ii.,
p. 239.

14

210

APPENDIX.

a building whose ancient name, it is said, was ‘ a division into
ten, ’ there is one typifying, or rather positively illustrating, a
division into five.

“ The coffer, according to the metrological theory, is
founded in part on the one ten-millionth of the earth’s axis
of rotation.

“ This is something suspicious of a connection, especially if
divided by the pyramidal ten, but not enough ; and on looking
round the room, an attentive observer may soon perceive a
more striking illustration of the division into five, in that the
four walls of the room have each four horizontal joint lines,
actually dividing the wall’s whole surface into five horizontal
stripes or courses.” 1

“Hence the chamber is constructed commensurably to
the coffer, and the coffer to the chamber, with fifty and five as
the ruling numbers. But there exists even more testimony of
this sort, identifying the whole pyramid also with the coffer
and its chamber, in a quarter, too, where I had certainly never
expected to find anything of the kind ; viz., the component
course of masonry of the entire building. ’ ’ 2

From the foregoing observations by Mr. Piazzi Smyth, it
is evident that the Egyptians made use of a decimal system
derived from their knowledge of the length of the earth’s
diameter, just as the Mayas did.

Panda tells us that, in archaic ages, before the occurrence
of the event3 which induced them to alter the basis of their
chronological computations and adopt as such the number

1 C. Piazzi Smyth, Life and Work at the Great Pyramid , vol. iii., pp.
162-163.

2 Ibid., vol. iii., p. 199.

3 Pio Perez, Gronologia Antigua de Yucatan. Apud Landa, Las Cosas de
Yucatan, p. 404. Brasseur’s publication.

APPENDIX.

211

thirteen, they also made use of the decimal system. “ They
counted in fives and twenties up to one hundred.” “ Que m
cuenta es de V en V hasta XX, y de XX en XX hasta C. ’ ’ 1
Cogolludo, Lizana, Torquemada, in fact, the majority of the
chroniclers who have written on the manners and customs of
the ancient Mayas, mention this mode of computation by
them until that by thirteenths was adopted. Of all these
writers Landa alone hints at the cause of this change.

Many a long and senseless discussion, full of profound
learning, has been indulged in; many an eloquently written
dissertation, replete with more or less specious reasons to show
why the wise men of Mayaeh adopted the number thirteen as
a basis for their computations, has been published by erudite
professors, each advocating his private opinion with as much
ardor as uselessness. And the conclusion? The same, of
course, as that reached by that “ scientific society on the Stan-
islaus,” whose debate on a certain jaw-bone, whether it was
that of a mule or that of an ass, Bret Harte has recounted.
All because they never read the book of Landa, or they dis-
dain to believe the relation of a man who was in an exceptional
position to learn much concerning the native traditions.

"We need not rely altogether on Landa’ s testimony regard-
ing the use of a decimal system by the Mayas. We find
abundant proofs in the ruins of their temples and palaces.

Had the learned Professor of American Archaeology of the
Pennsylvania University been less grossly ignorant of all things
relating to the Mayas, their religious and cosmogonic notions,
their scientific attainments, the meaning of their architecture,
and their language, he certainly would not have indited such
a paper as his “Maya Measures,” nor attributed to eccentri-
1 Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan , chap, xxxiv., p. 206.

212

APPENDIX.

city my statement that they made use of the metre as a
standard of lineal measures.

As to his emphatic assertion that he “does not see from
my own measurements that the metre is in any sense a com-
mon divisor for them,” this is not in the least surprising. He
has never personally measured the Maya constructions ; he has

GNOMON at MAYAPAN

Distance between Centers CC of Columns l“90‘ Dutmeter of Columns 0"" 45* Latitude of Mayapan 2 0°3G,

Arc AC of Declination. i distance between centers of columns V#rsed-Sine Cl of Declination, i Diameter of Columns, ,

SineBJof Latitude .(feofClrcunferencr that joawes Ibmugh fenters C ( Versed- Sine JC of latitude. £ Diameter F G of columns ,

Diameter FG of Columns -A firci.nfenmce that fwsjesthrcu^CrnlenCC Sine AX oMngleAOD* k distance between Centers CC

bine A I of Declination o h of Circu-n ferenco fkat fjasses through Centers CC

never had access to my field notes, or any of the restorations
of the buildings made by me from said notes and from the
photographs of said edifices made by me in situ. He has only
looked superficially at the few plans in my possession when he
honored me with his visit; these did not seem to interest him.

The only example of the use of the metre by Maya astron-

APPENDIX.

213

omers, architects, and mathematicians, ever published from
manuscripts written by me, is the protraction of a gnomon
which I discovered in the ruined city of Mayapan, situated
on the lands of the hacienda X-Canchakan, distant thirty
miles from Merida, the capital of Yucatan. This protraction
forms part of one of my reports to the “ American Antiqua-
rian Society,” of Worcester, Mass. (See illustration, p. 212.)

It is not the result of intricate calculations wherein errors
may creep. It is a simple drawing constructed from measure-
ments made by me in situ. These must, by force, have been
very accurate, or the various parts of the drawing would not
fit exactly in their proper places. Such protraction should
therefore settle all doubts regarding the true standard of
lineal measures used by the Mayas, in very remote times, and
even after the destruction of the Land of Mu by earthquakes
and submergence.

This report was published in the proceedings of said society
under the title of “Mayapan and Maya Inscriptions.” Tt
contains various typographical errors. The proof-sheets were
not submitted to me before being sent to press (I was then in
the forests of Yucatan). Therefore I could not correct them.
There is, however, one mistake which is due to a lapsus calami
on my part. How did it occur ? It was one of those inex-
plicable oversights that frequently take place in making com-
putations; perhaps a temporary systematic anaesthesia pro-
duced by the concentration of the mind on a single point when
passing over a number of figures in calculation. At any rate,
there is no mistake in the drawing, which is perfect, and in
accordance with the measurements made of the gnomon itself.

The diameter of the columns is 0.45 metre. The distance
between their centres is 1.90 metres. In my manuscript, it

214

APPENDIX.

seems, I wrote 1.70 metres, or I made the 9 and 7 so as to mis-
lead the printer ; and therein consists the grave error that has
given ground for Dr. Brinton’s criticism of all my measure-
ments. Had he not been looking for an excuse to impugn the
conscientious work of an original explorer, thereby seeking his
own aggrandizement, he could have seen that the error was
merely typographical; and that my statement “that the
Mayas, like the Chaldees, did certainly use the metre as a
standard of lineal measures, ’ ’ was not eccentricity , but positive
knowledge.

APPENDIX.

215

Note XIII. (Page 111.)

(1) It may be asked, How is it that the Mayas came to
adopt the one ten-millionth part of the quadrant of the great
circle that passes through the poles of the earth, as standard of
lineal measures ?

To him who is acquainted with the “ Sacred Mysteries ” of
the ancient Maya adepts, the motive is indeed very evident.
Like the ancient Egyptians, the Mayas of old were, as their
descendants are to-day, an eminently religious people. With
them, as, in fact, with every civilized nation, their cosmogonic
notions formed the base of their religious conceptions, and
both were embodied in their sacred edifices, particularly in
their pyramids, symbols of God in the universe.

They conceived this universe to be an infinite boundless
darkness, in which dwelt the unknowable, the inscrutable
Will, Uol. Having come to the knowledge that, by first
concentrating their thoughts, and then sending them forth in
every direction to the utmost limits of space, these formed, as
it were, radii of equal length, that terminated at the vault
of a sphere whose limitation was a great circle ; having, be-
sides, discovered that the circle is, in nature, the ultimatum
in extension, they figured that Will, that Eternal One
Being, as a circle, o> which they also called Uol, whose
centre was everywhere and circumference nowhere. They
imagined this Will as being both male and female — Andro-
gynus — two in one and one in two. In it life pulsated uncon-

216

APPENDIX.

scions. At the awakening of consciousness, when the Infinite
Sexless ceased to be sexless, the male principle, remaining still
distinct, fructified the immaculate virgin womb of nature, that
cosmic egg that we see pictured in the tableau of creation at

Chiclien.1

This new manifestation of the Boundless rrv One they
figured as a circle with its vertical diameter, ( j and called
it Lahun, the “all-pervading one,” from VL/ Bah, “he
who is everywhere, ’ ’ and hun, £ ‘ one. ’ ’ It became the Decade ,
image of the universe evolving from the boundless darkness,
the number lO, the most mystic among the initiates of all
nations, formed of the triad and the septenary; the most bind-
ing oath of the Pythagoreans. From this vertical diameter,
symbol of the male principle impregnating the virgin womb
of nature, originated the idea of the Phallus as emblem of
the Creator, whose worship under this image we find among
all civilized nations of antiquity from the remotest ages.

The circle divided into four parts, by its vertical and hori-
zontal diameters crossing each other, formed the tetraktis,2
‘ £ the sacred four, ’ ’ the £ £ builders, ’ ’ that is, the Canob of
the Mayas, or the Tian-chihaiis of the initiates among
them, the “ heavenly giants,” the same called by the Hindoo
occultists Dhyan-Chohans. The universe, now under the
regency of these Four powerful intelligences, they figured as a
circle with /■'T's. its vertical and horizontal diameters crossing
each other, h — - — j, thus forming the mundane cross, and to
them was intrusted the building of the physical world

and the guardianship of the cardinal points. To distinguish

1 Ubi swpra, Plate XXIII.

3 This sacred square, that Pythagoras taught his followers was Four and
their oath, was a sacred number with the initiates in India, Egypt, Chaldea,
Greece, and other countries, as well as with the Naacals of Mayach.

APPENDIX.

217

them, the genii of the north and of the south — that is, the
keepers of the male principle of nature, of the active and
fecundating forces — were figured by the same circle with its
crossed diameters, to which wings were added. This we learn
from the inscriptions that adorn the facade of the sanctuary
at Uxmal (Plate LXXI.) and from the Troano and other
Maya MSS.

These genii of the cardinal points, these four creators, are
known to the Hindoo occultists as the “Four Maharajahs,”
or “ great kings ” of the Dhycm Chofums. 1 In Ocosingo, Guate-

WINGED CIRCLE FROM OCOSINGO.

mala, as also in Egypt, we see them portrayed as circles with

WINGED CIRCLE FROM EGYPT.

wings ; in Assyria, as ferouhers. They became the amshaspands
of the Mazdeans; the Elohim and the seraphs of the Hebrews;
the archangels of the Christians and Mohammedans ; the kabiri
and Titans of Hesiod’s theogony; the four gods whose golden

1 H. P. Blavatsky, The Sacred Doctrine.

218

APPENDIX.

statues, Clement of Alexandria tells us,1 were carried by the
Egyptians at all the festivals of the gods.

These “four powerful ones,” these “ Canobs,” these
heavenly architects, emanated from the “ Great Infinite
One,” evolved the material universe from chaos. The Maya
occultists figured this manifested universe by
inscribing a square within a circle; that is, by
joining the ends of the vertical and horizontal
diameters.

The Pythagoreans honored numbers and geometrical de-
signs with the names of the gods.2 The Egyptians called the
monad “Intellect,”3 male and female, “god,” “chaos,”
“ darkness.”

1 Clement of Alexandria, Stromat, v., p. 242.

2 Plutarch, De Iside, s. 76.

3 Macrobius, Somnium Scipionis, c. 6.

Page 218.

Plate LXXI.

APPENDIX.

219

Damascius in his treatise “IlepiApxidv ” says: “ The Egyp-
tians asserted nothing of the First Principle of things, but cele-
brated it as a thrice unknown darkness transcending all intel-
lectual perception. ” According to Servius, “ they assigned the
perfect number three to the Great God.” Tetraktis was the
mystic name of the Creative Power, and three was looked upon
as embracing all human things. “Know God,” says Pythag-
oras, “who is number and harmony. Number is the father
of the gods and men.” Pythagoras borrowed his knowledge
of numbers and their meanings from the Egyptians. These
received their science from the Mayas, those civilized stran-
gers, their ancestors, who in remote ages, coming from the
East and from the West, had settled and brought civilization
to the banks of the Nile. Such being the case, it is but nat-
ural that we should find the same doctrine regarding cosmog-
ony and the meaning of numbers in Mayacli, their mother
country in the “ Lands of the West.”

Pythagoras’s teachings were that the rectangular triangle
which Plato called the mystic diagram, its height being repre-
sented by 3, its base by 4, and its hypothenuse by 5, was the
most perfect image of the “Infinite Spirit in the Universe,”
because 3, composed of 1 + 1 + 1, stood for the male principle;
4, the square of 2, for the female ; and 5, proceeding from both
2 and 3, the universe, and so was counted Pentcc in the general
numeration.

The Mayas called the first centenary (100, the square of
10) the number representing the “Infinite One about to
Manifest,” Hokal, and placed it in their diagram at the
upper end of the vertical diameter.

The second centenary (200) they said was “ the Infi-
nite still wholly enclosed,” iLalraiikal (that is, Lah,

220

APPEXDIX.

“ wholly ; ” hun, “ one; ” kal, “ enclosed ”), and placed it at
the right hand end of the horizontal diameter.

The third centenary (300) they held to be th q piercing of the
dosed virgin loornb, Holliukal (that is, Hoi, £‘ to pierce;”
Ini, “ virgin womb,” and kal, ££ closed”), and placed it at
the lower end of the vertical diameter that forms the height
of the four rectangular triangles which compose the square,
and therefore stands for the male principle in Plato's mystic
diagram.

Out of this notion came the doctrine so general in the
theogonies of all civilized nations of antiquity, of an immacu-
late virgin conceiving and giving birth to a god.

The fourth centenary (TOO) the 3Iayas called Himbak,
the one nude organ of generation . and placed it at the left end
of the horizontal diameter ; that is, the base of the rectangular
triangles composing the square, corresponding therefore to the
female principle of Plato's mystic diagram.

The hypothenuses, standing for number five and the uni-
verse in said diagram, form the sides of the square inscribed
in the circumference. Their numerical aggregated value is
twenty, which the 3Iaya sages called kal, or that which
closes and completes the square. t

Thus we come to know that the identical doctrine regard-
ing the esoteric meaning of numbers which existed in India,
Chaldea, Egypt, and Greece was likewise taught to the initi-
ates in the temples of 3Iayacli, and why, in their numer-
ical computations, the 3Iaya sages counted in fives up to
twenty, and by twenties to one hundred, thus making use of
what we moderns call the decimal system.

They refrained from counting by tens for the same reason
that we forbear to habitually utter the name of God ; number

APPENDIX.

221

lO, Lalmn, representing to their mind the “ Spirit of the
Universe,” the “Boundless,” the “Infinite One,” Ku,
whose name was too sacred to be pronounced except with the
utmost reverence.

Is it mere coincidence that in all countries where vestiges
of Maya civilization can be traced, there also we find that
among the occultists and initiates into the sacred mysteries
number ten stood for the name of God ?

Even for the Hebrew cabalists, who no doubt learned the
doctrine from the philosophers of the school of Alexandria,
number ten was represented by the letter J or A, Joel,
signature of the name of Jehovah, by whom all things were
created; Jah (Jehovah) being a name composed of the two
letters J and Id , that is, 10 and 5, or “ God and the universe. ”
The ten Sejjhirotk, or numbers, were regarded by them as
emanations of the Divine Intelligence, that, according to the
book of light, the Sohar, combined to form the Heavenly Man ,
of whom man on earth is an image.1

As we count by thousands, saying “ one thousand, two thou-
sand, three thousand,” etc., the Mayas, for sacred reasons,
counted by 1 ‘ four hundreds. ’ ’ Thus they said ‘ £ one four hun-
dred, two four hundred, three four hundred,” etc.

It may interest my readers, particularly those who have
made a study of occultism, to know the esoteric meaning of
the names of the cardinal numbers as taught by the ancient
Maya adepts, the Naacals, to those they initiated into the
mysteries of cosmogony.

In my rendering of the Maya names I have adhered to
their original purport as closely as the genius of the English

1 Moses de Leon, Booh of Sohar , ii. 70 b ; i. 20 a.

222

APPENDIX.

language permits. The correctness of my translation may be
easily verified by consulting Maya vocabularies.1

1

Hun

one; Hnnal), the universal,

2

ca

is (call),

3

ox

who, by his inherent power, caused

4

can

wisdom, the word, the Logos,2

5

lio

to come ;

6

uac

to disentangle things;

7

line

to he his associate (uk, companion ) ;

8

uaxac

to make them stand erect

9

liolon

and send them revolving on themselves.

10

Laliun

He is all in one (Lali, all; hun, one).

The

fact that the Mayas alone, among all civ:

nations of antiquity, and even of modern times, epitomized in
the names of the cardinal numbers their system of cosmogony,
would tend to prove that they were the originators of it.
This identical system having been adopted in all countries
where traces of their name is found, would show that, at some
time or other, they carried it to said countries; and its adop-
tion, without any material change, by the priesthood of these

1 There is a very complete ancient Maya dictionary MS. in the Brown
Library in Providence, It. I. It was the property of Abbe Brasseur, who
used it extensively in forming his own vocabulary — Maya and French.
He allowed Dr. Carl Berendt to make a copy of it. This copy is now in
possession of Dr. Brinton, who refers to it as “the Motul dictionary.” I
made a partial copy of it in 1884, when it was intrusted to me for that
purpose by my friend the late Mr. Bartlett, then librarian of Brown’s
Library.

2 Are we to see here the origin of the idea of the serpent being regarded
as the wisest of all animals (Genesis, chap. iii. , verse 11), and therefore of
its being used as symbol of the Creator by all civilized nations of antiquity ?
Can, in Maya, is the generic word for “serpent.”

Page 222.

Plate LXIX.

Plate LXX.

APPENDIX.

223

different countries, would establish the inference that they were
held by all as the most learned and civilized people of those
times.

It is admitted as proved beyond controversy that the Ar-
yans, the Hindoos, the Chaldees, the Greeks, in fact, every
nation regarded as civilized from which we have received our
knowledge of numbers, began their system of numeration by
counting the fingers of their hands, and named each number
accordingly. The Egyptians seem to have formed an excep-
tion. Bunsen has showed conclusively that their names for the
cardinal numbers had no relation to each other, and the few
whose etymon is suspected do not have reference to their
notions of the cosmic evolution. It is, however, probable that
they also cook the five fingers of the hand as starting point for
their numeration, since Tu or SB, name of the numerical five,
is regarded as an original form of TT or Tot , the “ hand.” 1

It now remains to explain why the Mayas adopted the
metre as standard of lineal measures.

That they were acquainted with exact sciences there can
be no doubt. They were mathematicians, astronomers, archi-
tects, navigators, geographers, etc. As well as the art they
possessed the science of navigation, since they knew how to
calculate longitudes and latitudes, as proved by the construc-
tion of the gnomon discovered by me at Mayapan. They
were, therefore, familiar with plane and spherical trigonome-
try. They had computed the size of the earth, estimated the
distance from pole to pole, calculated the length of the merid-
ian. I have already mentioned the fact that in the construc-
tion of their sacred buildings they invariably embodied their
cosmogonic and religious conceptions, particularly in their

1 Bunsen, Egypt's Place in the Universal History , vol. iv., pp. 105-106.

224

APPENDIX.

pyramids. The several parts of these edifices were so arranged
and proportioned as to agree with the ratio of the diameter to
the circumference, n — 3.1415; the sum total of which, 2x7,
was a numerical that, to the Maya initiates, as to all the occult-
ists in other parts of the world, represented the “circum-
scribed world,” the earth.

The vertical section of the plans of these sacred buildings
was always inscribed in a half circumference having a radius
of 21 = 3 x 7 metres, whose diameter formed the ground line.
Esoterically these buildings figured the earth; their height
stood for the gods of the earth, represented numerically by
number 1,065 = 21, number of the creators or pjrajapdtis, ac-
cording to the ‘ ‘ Mahabharata ; ’ ’ and that of the rays on each
side of the cosmic egg in the creation tableau at Cliiclien.1
We have seen that it is likewise the numerical value of the
letters composing the name of Jehovah.2 It is well to remark
that the height of the principal pyramids in Yucatan is invari-
ably twenty- one metres.3

In fixing a standard of lineal measures the Maya sages
adopted a subdivision of the circle which was naturally divided
into four hundred parts, in accordance with their cosmic con-
ceptions, whilst the Egyptians selected a subdivision of the

1 Ubi supra , p. 76, illustration xxiii.

2 Ibid.

3 Those of my readers who are desirous to know why the Maya archi-
tects always inscribed the vertical section of the plan of their pyramids
within a circumference, I beg to refer to the work of my friend the late
J. Ralston Skinner of Cincinnati, O., Source of Measures, at $ 55, “ Effect
of Putting a Pyramid in a Square ” (p. 95), and to § 82, “Pyramid Symbo-
lization ” (p. 159), published by the Robert Clarke Company of said city.
Also to the remarkable work The Lost Solar System of the Ancients Dis-
covered, by Mr. John Wilson, an English astronomer, vol. i., parts i. and
ii. , London edition of 1856.

APPENDIX.

225

circle divided into three hundred and sixty parts, as modern
scientists do ; this subdivision representing the abstract circum-
ference value of the celestial circle, being the mean between
355, number of the days of the lunar synodical year, and 365,
the number of the days of the solar year. The Mayas chose
the twenty-millionth part of one-half of the meridian — that
is, the metre — instead of the ten-millionth part of the distance
between the poles of the earth as did the Egyptians.

15

226

APPENDIX.

Note XI Y. (Page 105.)

(1) Having explained how the ancient Maya sages came to
adopt the decimal system in their numeration, and the metre as
a standard of lineal measures, as found by actual survey of their
ancient temples and palaces, I will premise a few observations
on Dr. Brinton’s chapters on “Maya Measures”1 by some
lines from the introduction to my paper on ‘ ‘ Maya and Maya
Inscriptions,” published in the “Proceedings of the American
Antiquarian Society,” of Worcester, Mass. They were writ-
ten by Mr. Stephen Salisbury, now its president. This gen-
tleman has many friends in Yucatan, a country which he has
often visited. These know personally Mrs. Le Plongeon and
myself. They are well acquainted with our work among the
ruined cities of their native land.

“ Dr. and Mrs. Le Plongeon have the rare advantage of an
almost continuous residence among Maya ruins for more than
seven years, and of constant relations with a class of Indians
most likely^- to preserve traditions regarding the past history of
the mysterious structures which abound in Yucatan.”2

It being settled, I hope beyond doubt, that we have stud-
ied the Mayas where they can be thoroughly studied — that is,
by living among them and as one of them — and it being admit-
ted that such being the case we ought to know their customs,
manners, traditions, etc., better than any one who has not

1 D. G. Brinton, Essays of an Americanist, pp. 433-439.

2 Stephen Salisbury, Proceedings of Am. Antiq. Soc., April, 1881.

APPENDIX.

227

even set foot in their country, may I be permitted to ask Dr.
Brinton a few questions respecting the “ only measures ” that,
he asserts, were used by their ancestors ? If these did not use
the metric system, why, in speaking of the size of the pages of
the Dresden Codex, does he say, “ The total length of the sheet
is 3.5 metres, and the height of each page is 0.295 metre, the
width 0.085 metre ” ? 1

What, in the name of common sense and professorial con-
sistency, does this mean ? Does he not assert authoritatively,
on page 43-1 of his book, “The Maya measures are derived
directly and almost exclusively from the human body, and
largely from the hand ” ? 2 It would seem that the apostrophe
of Festus to Paid suits his case exactly: “ Thou art beside
thyself; much learning doth make thee mad. ’ ’ 3 The first duty
of a teacher, and particularly a would-be critic, is to be con-
sistent with himself. Describing the size of the Dresden
Codex, a Maya book, he should have said, “It is three and
one-half paces long, one span and four fingers in height,
and four fingers in width. ” His readers would then have been
able to form a very exact idea of its size, particularly had they
perused the half dozen pages of the Maya names for foot-
step, pace, or stride ; for the distance from the ground to the
ankle, to the knee, to the waist, to the breast, to the neck,
to the mouth, to the top of the head; then for the width of
the finger, of the hand, of the stretch between the end of the
thumb and each of the other finger tips, which he has copied
from Dr. Carl Herman Berendt’s notebook, and imposes upon
his readers as being, of his own knowledge, the only measures

1 D. G. Brinton, Essays of an Americanist , “ Maya Codices,” p. 251.

3 Ibid., work quoted, “ Maya Measures,” 434^39.

3 Acts of the Apostles, chap, xxvi., verse 24.

228

APPENDIX.

of length in use among the Mayas. Unhappily the late Dr.
Berendt’s cast-off philological garments are a misfit on Dr.
Brinton’s figure. He does not know how to wear them, nor
that it is not always safe to parade with the feathers of a
strange bird, though the feathers are paid for and the bird is
dead.

All the words quoted are perfectly correct. The German
naturalist certainly noted them down when he began to learn
Maya, from the mouth of the natives, not because he believed
that the learned Maya mathematicians and architects had no
other lineal measures than these rough estimates, which, on
the other hand, are not peculiar to the Mayas, but are used
by ignorant people in every country, and even by those who
are not ignorant. Do we not say ankle deep in the sand;
knee deep in the mud ; waist, breast, chin deep in the water ?
Do we not measure distances approximately by steps or strides ?
depth, by fathoms ? Describing the stature of a horse, do we
not express it by saying it is so many hands high ? Does this
mean that these are the only standard measures of length in
vogue among us ? that astronomers, surveyors, architects,
and mechanics make use of them in their mathematical compu-
tations ? Can any one with common sense be guilty of such
stupendous absurdity as to pretend that they do ? "Will any
intelligent person doubt that that which happens to-day among
us has happened in all times, in all countries, when and where
skilful workmen have wanted accurate measurements to carry
on their undertakings ?

How, then, can the learned Professor of Linguistics and
Archaeology in the Pennsylvania LTniversitv assert that the
ancient Maya astronomers and architects had no other stand-
ard of lineal measures for their mathematical calculations, and

APPENDIX.

229

then attribute to my eccentricity the statement that they used
the metre and its divisions ?

In conclusion, it is apparent that this pedantic display of a
useless nomenclature of Maya names for what he calls the
standard lineal measure of the Mayas, was not published so
much to impart to his readers exact information, as to parade
Dr. Berendt’s knowledge of the Maya language, while con-
veying the impression that this knowledge was his own. He
should have remembered the saying: “ Those who live in
glass houses should not throw stones ; ” to which I will add :
If they venture to do so, they should at least wait until their
neighbors are dead and buried.

230

APPENDIX.

Note XV. (Page 105.)

(3) May we inquire, without being accused of indiscretion,
how great is Dr. Brinton’s acquaintance with this most inter-
esting of languages, the Maya ? It must indeed be quite
extensive, since he presumes to declare authoritatively that
Abbe Brasseur “knew next to nothing about it,”1 and that
Father Cogolludo, the author of the best history of Yucatan,
published for the first time in Madrid in 1688, although he,
during twenty-one years, preached the gospel to the natives
in their own language, “ was only moderately acquainted with
the Maya tongue. ” 2 This is indeed a singular assertion. How
does the learned doctor know it ? What proof has he that such
statement is true? Has he the pretension to expect that
students of Maya, civilization will accept such preposterous
averment because he makes it ?

If Abbe Brasseur “knew next to nothing about the
Maya,” and Dr. Brinton was aware of this, why, instead
of making for himself a correct translation of that most inter-
esting ancient Maya prayer, “ The Invocation to the God of
Bain, ’ ’ has he given a crippled, curtailed English rendering of
the French version published by Brasseur, and offered it to
his readers as a sample of Maya composition ? Since he was
intent upon imposing on them this deception, as he did not
even preserve the depth of fervor exhibited in the French

1 D. G. Brinton, Essays of an Americanist , p. 261.

a Tbid., p. 127.

APPENDIX.

231

interpretation, the least he could have done was to give the
invocation complete.

As rendered by the Spanish translator, it means little, and
Dr. Brinton’s version is quite as meaningless, whilst the Maya
text expresses devotion and religious sentiment, and is for us,
at this late date, full of significance and information, as shown
by my own interpretation (pp. 107, 108).

This is the Spanish version given by Brasseur in Yol. II.
of Troano ISIS. (pp. 101, 102): “ A1 asomarse el sol, senor del
oriente, en las cuatro esquinas del cielo, en las cuatro esquinas
de la tierra, cae mi palabra a cada cuatro punto, a la mano del
Dios padre, de Dios hijo , de Dios EspnriMt Santo.

“ A1 levantarse las nubes al oriente, al subir en medio de
la majestad celeste, a las trece ordenes de las nubes el que
pone en orden el uracan amarillo, esperanza de los senores vis-
itadores, el que pone en orden los asientos para el precioso vino,
con el precioso amor para los senores cuidadores de milpas,
para que vengan a poner su precioso favor, al santo grande
Dios padre, Dios hijo, Dios Espiritu Santo.

“ Yo entrego su virgen semilla con mi santo amor, tu tendras
que mirarme un momento; yo suplico que me lleves tu ben-
dicion con todo tu corazon y entregues tu santo amor, para
alcanzar tu creciente y virgen favor; porque es precioso entre-
gar en la mano del Dios padre, de Dios hijo, de Dios Espiritu
Santo. ’ ’

The following is Dr. Brinton’s pretended interpretation of
the Maya text : 1

“ At the rising of the Sun, Lord of the East, my word goes
forth to the four corners of heaven, to the four corners of the

1 D. G. Biinton, Essays of an Americanist , p. 167. Compare with my
own version of this invocation, pp. 107, 108.

232

APPENDIX.

earth, in the name of God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Ghost.

“ When the clouds rise in the East, when he comes who
sets in order the thirteen forms of the clouds, the yellow lord
of the hurricane, the hope of the lords to come, he who rules
the preparation of the divine liquor, he who loves the guardian
spirits of the fields, then I pray to him for his precious favor;
for I trust all in the hands of God the Father, God the Son,
and God the Floly Ghost.”

Did he not know then, does he not know now, that even
with the admixture of Christian ideas as Brasseur received it
from the mouth of Marcelo Ccmich , mayoral of the hacienda
of X-Cancliakan (who also recited it to me), if the mean-
ing of the words had been properly rendered, far from be-
ing the senseless sentences he has published, he would have
found it, as it is, replete with curious and most valuable
information ?

His rendering of the Invocation is indeed worthless, but
the Maya text tells its own most interesting story. From
his not giving a proper translation, made by himself, are we
to infer that the learned professor of linguistics does not
know the Maya language as he would have the world
believe ?

Ho one can read the learned analysis of the Maya, and
the comparison of its grammatical construction with that of
the ancient Greek, by the scholarly Brasseur, which forms the
introduction to his “Elements of the Maya tongue,” in the
second volume of the Troano MS., without being satisfied that
he was thoroughly acquainted with said language; and with-
out acquiring the conviction that, by attacking the memory
of a great scholar, who now lies silent in the grave, Dr.

APPENDIX.

233

Brinton has given another proof that lie w: ./its to build for
himself a reputation for learning at the cost of that of fellow-
students.

In mentioning Balam, the Yumilcax, the “lord of the
fields,” the learned Professor of Archaeology of the University
of Pennsylvania confounds him with the Cliacs, “ the gods of
rain,” “ guardians of the cardinal points.” “ These Balams,”
says he, “are in fact the gods of the cardinal points, and
of the winds and rains which proceed from them,” etc.,1 and to
prove his assertion he covers several pages of his book with idle
tales, known to everybody. They are current to-day among
the natives, who beguile the evening hours by recounting them
over and over. These stories have no relation with ancient
traditions. They contain as much teaching as the stories of
“ Puss in Boots ” and “ Bluebeard.”

Ve have seen (p. 103) that the Cliacs were the “gods
of rain, ’ ’ and as such held as the £ £ keepers of the fields, ’ ’ the

1 D. G-. Brinton, Essays of an Americanist , “ The Birds of the Winds ”
(p. 175). It will be noticed that Dr. Brinton writes the word Balams and
gives H-Balamoh as the Maya plural. This is a word of his own coinage.
He will not find it in his copy of Brown Library (Motul) dictionary. He
does not seem to know that the ancient termination ob, as sign of plural
in nouns, has not been in use for very many years, having been replaced
by ex, second person plural of the personal pronoun. So that, if in ad-
dressing his workmen he should say to them, “Palob ” (“ Boys ”), as it was
proper anciently, they would cast at each other an inquiring glance, the
meaning of which would plainly be, What does he say ? But should he
tell them, “ Palex ! conex lianal ” (“Boys, let us go to eat ”), he would
not have to repeat the order twice.

Neither does he seem to know that h is never used before a noun,
except as a mark of the masculine gender, it being the contraction of all,
masculine article, never as a diminutive or particle of elegance. In that
case x, contraction of the feminine article ix, is, and has always been, em-
ployed, even before a masculine noun, as, for instance, in X-K.ukulcan.
But this is regarded as affectation on the part of the speaker.

234

APPENDIX.

good genii who brought fertility to the earth. Bala in’s
office, however, is quite different. He is the lord of the
fields , the protector of the crops, and to him the primitia? of
all the fruits of the earth are offered before the harvesting is
begun. Is he an imaginary Being ? By no means. His name
Balain tells who he is — an anthropomorphism of the puma ,
whose clear, shrill whistle rings sharply through the forests,
breaks the stillness of the night, and, waking the sleeping
echoes, sends a thrill of terror coursing along the spine of the
superstitious native. How came he to be looked upon as the
protector, the guardian of the fields — Yiimil eol ? Host
naturally, indeed.

The fields, covered with their abundant, ripening crops of
corn, beans, and pumpkins, are nightly the resort of deer,
peccaries, rabbits, and other herbivora that, during the day,
sheltered by thick foliage from the fierce rays of the tropical
sun, roam in the forests. All these grass- eating denizens of
the woods are the natural food of leopards, pumas, cata-
mounts, and other carnivora. These emerge from their lairs
after sunset in search of prey. In the twilight, in the dark-
ness, they prowl in and around the fields where they know
their intended victims are feeding. Pouncing upon those
nearest, an awful struggle for life takes place. Alarmed by
the noise and the despairing cries of the victims, the others
seek safety in flight, and the crops are thus saved from destruc-
tion. This is why these self-constituted protectors of the
crops came to be regarded as natural guardians of the fields.
Believing that the pumas and leopards obey the orders of their
invisible spirit lord. Balain, the natives, with appropriate
ceremonies called Ticli, make to him offerings of the best
fruits of their fields. (Plate LXXII.)

APPENDIX.

235

Notwithstanding his pretensions, Dr. Brinton does not
know Maya, even remotely. If any further proof were
needed of the truth of this assertion, it would be found in
this simple sentence, “ Pixe avito 1 2 xnoch cizin, ’ ’ printed in his
book (p. 174), as it is here, in italics; as is also his Spanish
translation, which, with cause, I omit. He has copied both,
original and translation, from a manuscript by a native of
Tihosuco, named Zetina, who, it seems, was not over partic-
ular in the choice of his language. I wish to believe that the
learned Professor of Linguistics is but little better acquainted
with the Spanish tongue than with the Maya, else how does
he dare call particular attention, by printing them in italics, to
words that no gentleman would use in refined society ? — words
that, besides, are not a correct translation of what was prob-
ably intended to be conveyed in the Maya ; the exact render-
ing of which in that tongue would be, “ Pixe a ito, xnoch
cizin,” 2 whilst the intention of Senor Zetina was to write,
“ Pixe a uitlio, xnoch cizin.” Like the majority of his
countrymen, he did not know how to write correctly his
mother tongue. It must be confessed very few do.

The first lesson in Maya taught to pupils is the letters of
the alphabet and their proper pronunciation. At the same
time they are told that several of the characters forming part
of the Latin alphabet are not used in the Maya ; among
these the letter v.

1 Avito is not a Maya word. It has no meaning in that language.

2 1 might be censured for publishing this sentence, which is a verbatim
translation of Dr. Brinton’s Spanish. My excuse for doing so is to show
that the learned doctor does not know Maya, which is an unknown
language outside of the countries where it is spoken ; I do not therefore
run the risk of shocking the sense of propriety or decency of my readers in
this or in European countries.

236

APPENDIX.

Dr. Brinton is evidently ignorant of this elementary fact.
Throughout his book, -whenever he has had occasion to men-
tion the Maya word for man, he has invariably spelled it
vinic.1 This is Quiche. The Maya orthography of the word

is uinic.

In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries the letters v and
u were used indifferently one for the other. Thus it is that
Landa, Cogolludo, Torquemada, Las Casas, and the other
writers of those times wrote both uinic and vinic. It is
quite different, however, in our day.

It is evident that the learned Professor of Linguistics does
not know which is the right word in Maya for “ man,” any
better than he knows what was the true name for each of the
cardinal points among the Mayas, although Landa gives
them very explicitly. Shall it he said of Dr. Brinton as of the
wooden saints, He has eyes but sees not? Or has he also,
perchance, the pretension of being better informed on that sub-
ject than the author of “ Las Cosas de Yucatan ” ? In every
one of his books he assigns a different name to each of said
points, in the hope of perhaps hitting, in one at least, on the
right name.

For instance, in his book “Myths of the Hew 'World,”
article “Quiche Legends” (p. 82), he magistrally informs his
readers: “ The four known by the names of Ivan, Muluc, lx,
Cauac, represent respectively the east, north, icest, and south.
As in Oriental symbolism, the east was yellow, the south red,
the west black, the north white.” These were the names of
the guardians of the pillars that sustained the vault of heaven.2
In his “ Essays of an Americanist ” (p. 201), the author seems

1 D. G. Brinton, Essays of an Americanist, pp. 176, 254, 438, et passim.

2 Ibid., Myths of the New World , p. 82.

Page 236.

Plate LXXII.

APPENDIX.

237

to indorse Prof. Cyrus Thomas’s interpretation of the Maya
signs for the cardinal points. In that case he would take
Muluc to be the north , Cauac the south, lx the east, and
Kan the west y1 hut he does not know that the signs he repro-
duces are not the names of the cardinal points, nor even of the
genii, guardians of the same, but of certain localities situated
in the direction of said points. Again, in another of his works,
“Hero Myths,” the learned doctor, following Bishop Banda’s
assertion that in his day the Mayas assigned Kan to the
south, Muluc to the east, lx to the north , and Cauac to the
west, informs his readers that such were the true respective
names of the cardinal points.2 But he probably reasoned,
What did Bishop Banda know of Oriental symbolism ? So he
casts aside Banda’s positive teachings, with the result that, to-
day, he does not know which are really the names of said
cardinal points. As for me, I positively affirm that it can he
demonstrated that Bishop Banda has transmitted to us the
correct name of each point, and that they agree with those
given by the authors of the various Maya hooks and inscrip-
tions known to us, notwithstanding the learned Dr. Brinton’s
opinion.3

On October 16, 1887, I wrote to him that, as I was writing
a review of what had been done in the decipherment of the
Maya inscriptions and books, I would be very glad, so as not
to misrepresent him, if he would he kind enough to tell me
which of the names he looked upon as the real one given by the
Mayas to each particular cardinal point, as it was impossible
to find out his opinion from his own works.

1 D. G. Brinton, Essays of an Americanist , p. 204.

2 Ilid., Eero Myths, p. 209.

3 Landa, Las Cosas de Yucatan , cap. xxxiv.

238

APPENDIX.

Five days later — that is, on October 21 — he answered
me:

“ The first time I visit New York I hope to have the pleasure of seeing
you and Mrs. Le Plongeon, and then I should like exceedingly to hear of
your discoveries, and also to explain to you my views about the cardinal
points and their representations in the Maya hieroglyphs.

‘ ‘ I remain, etc. ,

“ D. G. Brinton.”

Well, Dr. Brinton has never called upon me, nor given me
his views about the cardinal points and their representations in
Maya hieroglyphs, though in August, 1887, I offered him an
excellent opportunity, when the “ American Association for the
Advancement of Science” met at Columbia College in New
York. By request of Professor Putnam I then wrote to him,
as president of the archaeological section, asking the privilege
of reading a paper on £ ‘ Ancient Maya Civilization ’ ’ before its
members. I did not read such paper; neither was my request
refused; but the envelope containing the granting of it reached
me exactly three weeks after the association had closed its ses-
sions. It had been sent to me, by mistake , to San Francisco,
Cal., instead of to Brooklyn, 1ST. Y. ; at least, so I was in-
formed in the apologetic letter that came in the same envelope.

Dr. Brinton’s essay on the “Maya Phonetics,” from page
196 to 205, had better not have been written, much less pub-
lished. Its contents are most misleading, injurious even, to
students of Maya palaeography, who might place reliance on
the assumed knowledge of the author on this particular subject.
The following statement made by him is positively inaccurate :

“ Turning first to the Maya, I may in passing refer to the
disappointment which resulted from the publication of Landa’s
alphabet by the Abbe Brasseur in 1861. Here was what

APPENDIX.

239

seemed a complete phonetic alphabet, which should at once
unlock the mysteries of the inscriptions on the temples of
Yucatan and Chiapas, and enable us to interpret the script of
the Dresden and other codices. Experience proved the utter
fallacy of any such hope. His work is no key to the Maya
scripts.” 1

How, I affirm that, if it be true that the characters of
Landa’s alphabet are not of themselves a complete clew to the
decipherment of Maya books and inscriptions, they are never-
theless repeatedly found in the Maya manuscripts known to
us, and with the identical value attributed to them by Landa.2
I furthermore maintain that, with the names of the days and
the alphabetic characters preserved by him, the Maya codices
can he translated. Of course, there are modifications of the
same, as there are with our mode of writing; there are also
composed signs as there are composed words in the language.
It is the translator’s business to know what they are.

This I have demonstrated in my unpublished work, “ The
Monuments of Mayach and their Historical Teachings,”
which contains translations from the Troano and Cortesianus

codices, whose authors have recorded many interesting his-

■ lane

1 D. G. Brinton, Essays of an Americanist , p. 199.

2 To exemplify my assertion, let us take, for instance, the

character [ 1 that Landa tells us stands for ma, adverb of nega-

tion, No. ® Is it not identical with the Egyptian adverb of
negation, ["’’l Nen? But ma, radical of Mayacli, also means

id,” I I D “country,” both in Egyptian and in Maya. The sign

in Maya scripts is the hieroglyph for Mayacli ; that is, the
peninsula of Yucatan, standing between the Gulf of Mex-
ico and the Caribbean Sea, both represented by the sign
imix, “bosom,” “bosom of the deep.” The Egyptian word Nen
means in Maya “mirror.” Nen-lia, the “mirror of water,” is said to
have been the ancient name of the Mexican Gulf, on account of its almost
circular shape.

Q)

240

APPENDIX.

torical events that occurred ages and ages ago, and which have
reached us in the guise of myths and misty traditions.

As to the late Abbe Brasseur, I cannot claim the honor of
having been personally acquainted with him, but among my
friends and acquaintances in Yucatan and British Honduras
several have known him intimately when he was residing in
those countries. All agree that he understood and spoke
Maya and could converse freely with the natives.

The late Dn. Juan Yillanueva, a well-known lawyer in Mer-
ida, when in 1873 I made his acquaintance, was acknowledged
by his countrymen to be one of the best Maya scholars in the
country. He gave Brasseur his first lessons in that language,
and was proud of his pupil, who, he said, learned it very rap-
idly. Dn. Juan now sleeps that sleep that knows no wak-
ing ; but I can testify to what he toid me. Many, however, are
still living who were intimately acquainted with the learned
Abbe, and who have also assured me that he had a fair knowl-
edge of the language. Among these I may mention my
esteemed friend the Bight Bev. Dr. Dn. Crecencio Carillo y
Ancona, now bishop of Yucatan, himself a student and a
thorough Maya scholar ; also Dn. Yicente Solis de Leon,
owner of the hacienda of X-Cancliakan, a government
engineer; Dn. Bafael Begil y Peon, a wealthy merchant and
landed gentleman; Dn. Jose Tiburcio Cervera, a planter,
owner of the lands on which the ruins of the ancient city of
Labnaa are situated. All these gentlemen are well-knoAvn
citizens of Merida, who have imbibed Maya with their nurses’
milk.

In Belize, Mr. Henry Trumback, a merchant, whose name
is mentioned by Abbe Brasseur among those of the persons to
whom he was indebted for information whilst acquiring data

APPENDIX.

241

for the compilation of his Maya vocabulary ; Eev. John
Anderson, a Baptist minister, author of a Maya and English,
and English and Maya dictionary; and Eev. Father Pitar,
superior of the Jesuit college in Belize, wherein dwelt the
Abbe when in that city, have assured me, all and each one, in
particular, that they had been well acquainted with the late
Abbe Brasseur and that he knew the Maya language.

Let us hope that the testimony of such witnesses, and
others whose names I could mention, will suffice to wipe off
the slanderous aspersion with which Dr. Brinton has tried to
tarnish the memory of a great scholar.

To Abbe Brasseur belongs the honor of having been the
first to bring to public notice the existence, in our day, of
ancient books of Maya origin, when in 1867 he placed on
exhibition in the Exposition on the Champ de Mars, in Paris,
some of the proof-sheets of the Troano MS., which was then
being reproduced under his supervision.

In November, 1S64, as a member of the “ French Scientific
Commission ’ ’ which went to Mexico under the auspices of
the French Government, he landed in Yucatan, and at once set
to work to study the Maya language under the tuition of our
friend, the late Dn. Juan Villanueva, a great Maya scholar.
He was unable to make a prolix study of the ruins of
Tlxmal on account of the many difficulties placed in his way
by the Imperial Commissary.

On his return to Europe, he found in Madrid, in possession
of Dn. Juan Tro y Ortelano, professor of palaeography at the
Hniversity, an original American manuscript, which at a glance
he recognized as being written with characters analogous to
those he had seen on the edifices at Uxmal. He obtained

from the owner not only the loan of the document for all
16

242

APPENDIX.

the time he might need it for his study, but also permission
to reproduce it. After reaching Paris the Abbe applied
himself with ardor to the classification and deciphering of
the characters and symbols contained in the manuscript,
with the help of those handed down by Landa. In 1869 he
published the result of his labors in his work, “Etudes sur le
Systeme Graphique et la Langue Maya.” In it he announced
that he had discovered, classified, and deciphered two hun-
dred and thirty-three variants of the thirty-five alphabetic
characters of Landa, and one hundred and forty-one variants
of his twenty symbols of the days.

With this vast array of signs, the value of which he fancied
he knew, and with his knowledge of the Maya language, he
undertook the deciphering of the texts of the Maya book.
He certainly was better qualified for the work than those who
after him have attempted it, as proved by the results. Still,
not only have they criticised his interpretations, without how-
ever offering better in their stead, but they have tried to belit-
tle his labors, going so far as to assert that he had hindered for
a long time the study of American palaeography. Yet it may
be asked, What have his critics done? Have they not made
use of His works in their endeavors to find a clew to the mean-
ing of these same texts ? Have they not built a reputation for
learning on the debris of his fame, and from his own mate-
rials, to which they have added not a single valuable particle ?
Do we not find them consulting his Maya and French vocab-
ulary, and translating ancient characters and symbols by words
of modern coinage, not to be found in old dictionaries, and that
are unknown in the vernacular of the natives ?

Brasseur’s vocabulary is decidedly the work of a scholar.
Were it mine I should be proud of it. It is a comparative

APPENDIX.

243

study of Maya with ancient Greek and other languages,
marred, however, by his having taken too great a license with
the language, and having given explanations of ancient lore
and traditions according to his own personal bias and precon-
ceived ideas. Barring these blemishes, it is a most valuable
work for students of Maya antiquities and of philology. So
also is his French translation and rearrangement of Father
Gabriel de San Buenaventura’s “Arte del Idioma Maya,”
which he transcribed from the copy in possession of my
honored friend, Bishop Dn. Crecencio Oarillo y Ancona.

Although his many scholarly attainments preeminently
qualified him for the undertaking of the interpretation of the
Maya texts, his great drawbacks were his preconceived opin-
ions on the one hand, and a strange weakmindedness on the
other. The first led him to see analogies and similitudes where
none existed, and to launch into speculations and fancies unsup-
ported by facts and lacking evidence ; the second caused him to
be influenced by criticisms of persons incapable, for want of the
necessary knowledge, of judging of the accuracy or inaccuracy
of his renderings; but who, in their dogmatic ignorance, pre-
sumed to jeer at the idea of the Troano MS. containing an
account of earthquakes, of the subsidence of certain countries
and the upheaval of others, of volcanic eruptions, of inunda-
tions and cyclones and other geological and meteorological
phenomena, that either happened in the writer’s time or a rela-
tion of which he had found in older works. Yet it is well
known that all early chroniclers, speaking of the books found
among the natives, state that some contained the events of their
ancient history; that they had treatises on archaeology, med-
icine, and other sciences ; and why should not the Troano be
one of these? Still he allowed himself to be persuaded, and

244

APPENDIX.

acknowledged (p. xxvii) in liis £ ‘ Bibliotheque Mexico Guate-
malienne precedee d’un coup d’ceil sur les Etudes Ameri-
caines,” that lie liad begun the reading of the Maya text at the
wrong end ; adding, however, that his translations were simply-
intended as mere experiments. Could he answer from beyond
the grave, I would ask him: “ Abbe, how did you know, when
you wrote this confession, that you were not mistaken again in
making it? You had not learned then how to read the texts
better than before ; you did not even know it at the time of
your demise. Friend,” I would tell him could he hear me,
“ you have been weak, and many have taken advantage of your
weakness to ridicule you, and then place themselves where
you ought to be, by making use of your own discoveries.”

It is evident that he had no reliance on his ability to wade
through the intricacies of the Maya symbols and characters;
and that he did not notice the clew, placed by the author of the
Troano within reach of his readers, like another thread of
Ariadne, to guide them out of the mazes of the labyrinth. So
he took no heed of the red lines that divide the text into para-
graphs, and mark to which part the illustrations correspond.
He read the horizontal lines from end to end, mixing discon-
nected sentences of one paragraph with equally disconnected
sentences of another, then beginning the reading of the per-
pendicular columns at the bottom instead of at the top; the
results were, of course, what might naturally" be expected — an
incoherent jumble and senseless phrases.

He likewise interpreted literally- the names of the symbols
for the days, many of which he simply regarded as variants of
the originals given by Landa, not reflecting that variation in
the sign implied also variation in the meaning, and that many
of the characters were composed of the elements of several

APPENDIX.

245

others, just as our polysyllabic words are formed of syllables
found in many other vocables having very distinct mean-
ings. However, through his acquaintance with the significa-
tion of the Maya words, and the works of the early writers
and chroniclers, perhaps also guided by his scholarly intuition,
he felt, more than he really made out, the general drift of the
contents of the Maya text which he attempted to interpret.
So he became convinced that in his writings the Maya author
described volcanic eruptions and other geological phenomena.
By publishing his convictions, he afforded his would-be critics
an opportunity to condemn the results of his labors, although
incapable themselves of deciphering a single sentence of the
Maya books.

To the present day they are unable to correct his mistakes
by offering a true translation of the passages which they
accused Brasseur of having improperly rendered. And may I
ask how they know that they are not well translated ? It is
the same old, old story so happily expressed in these few French
words : La critique est facile, mais Va/rt est difficile.

This recalls to my mind a certain conversation which I once
had on this same subject with a French antiquary, a member
of the Societe Ethnologique de Paris. He also was bitter in
his denunciation of Brasseur’s interpretation of the Troano.

“ What do you know, personally, about translating Maya
writings ? Do you understand the Maya language ? Can you
interpret a single Maya sign ? ’ ’

“Ho,” he answered, “ but Mr. de Rosny, and with him all
authorized Americanists, have condemned Brasseur’s interpre-
tation.”

“ So, so, my man,” I replied, “this is a case of give a dog
a bad name and hang him, is it ? Pray tell me who are the

246

APPENDIX.

authorized Americanists ? Who are they that dare pass judg-
ment on the efforts of a fellow student and condemn him ? Is
it Mr. de Charencey, whose assertions and speculations are
not worth refuting ? ” 1

“ Oh ! ” replied my antiquary friend, “Mr. de Rosny has
severely criticised all his attempts at decipherment of Central
American inscriptions.”2

“Yes, I am aware of it; he has also bitterly condemned
those of Brasseur. By what right, pray ? Is it because he
has published large volumes on Maya palaeography ? What do
their contents amount to, so far as the reading of the Maya
books and inscriptions is concerned ? True, he says that since
he has determined, £ after a certain fashion , ’ the value of the
greatest part of the Maya characters, it will be easy to read
them. But he himself cannot translate a single sentence of
said hooks ; and yet he seems quite proud because the meaning
of a few words interpreted by him has been accepted by
some authorized Americanists , whoever these may be; or, in
his own words, ‘ J’ai donne , dans divers receuils la lecture de
quelques mots, la quelle a ete acceptee par les americanistes auto-
rises. ’ 3 And do these quelques mots , which he thinks he has
interpreted, give him a right to sit as judge, and enable him to
pass such a severe verdict, on Abbe Brasseur ?

“What I say of the French applies equally to the English
German, and American Americanists. They have not advanced
one step toward the interpretation of the Maya books and
inscriptions, beyond Brasseur’s attempts. He, at least, never

1 H. de Charencey, Essai de Dechiffrement, Actes de la Societe Philologique
de Paris , vol. i., No. 3, p. 50, Mars, 1870.

2 Leon de Rosny, Essai sur le Dechiffrement de VlScriture de VAmerique
Centrale , p. 13, Paris, 1876.

3 Ibid., Le Dechiffrement de V Venture Hieratique, Introduction.

APPENDIX.

247

designated any of the personages who figure in the Maya
books as does Dr. P. Schellhas,1 and after him many whose
name is legion, who pretend to be authorities on Maya palae-
ography, £ the god with the banded face, ’ £ the god with the
long nose,’ etc., instead of giving each his proper title, such
as Ppa and Uacacli, which are plainly written in the orna-
ments that adorn these anthropomorphic personifications of the
forces and phenomena of nature.

‘ £ They assert that their £ god with the long nose ’ is the £ god
of rain, ’ disdaining to take heed of the broad hint as to who
he is, given by the author of the Dresden Codex on the lower
division of plate lxv. of his work, where he represents
Uacacli paddling a canoe, under which a big fish is figured
swimming in the ocean. May we be allowed to ask on what
occasion the £ god of rain ’ had to paddle his own canoe, and
when big fishes swam in the clouds ?

££ It may truthfully be said that a very great part of what
has been published in modern times on the subject of Maya
writings can only be ranked with comic literature, though not
very amusing either. Even the beautifully printed papers of
the Smithsonian Institution, on the subject, are as meaning-
less as they are pretentious ; and I challenge any Americanist,
authorized or not authorized, to disprove this assertion.

££ I will add: more than any of those who have followed in
his wake on the road opened by him, the learned Abbe was
competent and well prepared to surmount the difficulties with
which it is strewn. His knowledge of the Maya as well
as of the QuichS, a cognate tongue ; his acquaintance with
the lore and traditions of the Indians of Rabinal, in the moun-

1 Schellhas, P., Die Maya Handschrift der Koliglichen Bibliotheh z u Dres-
den, p. 149.

248

APPENDIX.

tains of Guatemala; his sojourn among the Quiches and the
Mams to whom he administered the rites of the Catholic
Church, and preached in their own vernacular, besides his
many other scholastic attainments — I repeat, qualified him
preeminently for undertaking the interpretation of the Maya
texts. He erred in letting his imagination and his pre-
conceived opinions blind his judgment. But who on earth
is perfect? To err is human. Did not his self-appointed
judges err when they condemned him because he dared say
that the Troano contained the narratives of geological events ?
Yet the learned Abbe was right in so saying; and they were
wrong in presuming to pass an opinion on what they did not
know, and do not even at present. Whilst disapproving his
translation, it was their duty to point out where it was incor-
rect. Have they done this ? Ho! Why not? Because they
themselves are unable to interpret the Maya texts, and are
ignorant of their meaning.

“Instead of accusing him of having impeded the study of
Maya palaeography, they should have thanked him for having
made known the existence of Maya books in Europe in our
day. These books had been preserved in libraries, private
and public, since they were sent to Charles Y. , and presented
to him in 1520 by Dn. Francisco de Montejo, the conqueror
of Yucatan, and Porto Carrero, by order of Hernando Cortez,
whose companions in arms they were. Ho one knew in what
language they were written, nor to what kind of alphabet the
characters belonged, until Brasseur recognized them as being
similar to those preserved by Landa in his work £ Relacion de
las Cosas de Yucatan,’ which had remained unpublished in the
library of the ‘ Royal Academy of History ’ in Madrid.
Brasseur again unearthed it from beneath the coating of dust

APPENDIX.

249

where it had lain for more than three centuries, and in 1860
had it printed. Is not that alone sufficient to cause his mem-
ory to be respected by all students of American archaeology? ”

My interlocutor, who had been listening with manifest
impatience to my just panegyric of the learned Abbe, inter-
rupted me and exclaimed: “ Do not speak so, or you will kill
your own reputation and lose the fruits of your own labors;
all authorized Americanists will condemn you as they have
Brasseur. ’ ’

“Indeed! Well, sir, they are welcome to do it; that is,
when they can do it knowingly. Meanwhile, before they pro-
nounce their sentence, let them remember the words of Themis-
tocles to the over-hasty Eurybiades: £ Strike, but hear me! ’ ”

250

APPENDIX.

Note XYI. (Pages 132, 133.)

(7) This custom of carrying children astride the hip still pre-
vails in Yucatan, as it does in India (“ Buddaghosha Parables,”
translation by H. T. Rogers, R.E.) and other places where we
find Maya customs and traditions.

(1) Landa, “Las Cosas de Yucatan” (p. 236): “El primer
dia del ano desta gente era siempre a xvi dias de nuestro mes
de Julio, y primero de su mes de Popp.”

Champollion Figeac, “ Egypte ” (p. 336): “ Or pendant plus
de trois mil ans avant l’ere chretienne et quelques siecles apres
cette belle etoile (Sirius) s’est levee le meme jour fixe en Egypte
(parallele moyen) un peu avant le soleil (lever heliatique) et ce
jour a ete le 20 Juillet de notre calendrier Julien. ”

Censorius, “ De die Natali,” says that the canicula in Egypt
regularly rises on the first of Thoth, that corresponded to the
20th of July, 1322 b.c.

Porphyry says “ that the first day of the month Thoth and
of the year are fixed in Egypt by the rising of Sothis, or Dog-
star.”

ATPETI’L T

2' :m _L ' Page 1E1

i ~r,~:-r- the reconstraesi :*r ct the temple of •" emsaien.
m ter the reign :c f-nsk.'. . on a remain morning the High Priest
:: iiah. in die year 621 s.c.. told Shapham. a scribe, that
he ha 2 fotmd the Book of the Lav- in tee name of the Lori
n . mn. mm t_e ■: m ant presenter. tt to me nem. who
m tel e :• : rmittee t: g: and rensmt me praphetess Phhiah
regarhng me gerthrere-ss of the hoik. She. mse irnwian met
s he was. : •: isemg t: make an etem >f FPh . gave an

ernsave answer, met. rowever. satisnei the king. — h: . it seems,
was net of e very critical mm of mini, hhe prevalent opin-
: m at me eginnmg t me Chrisrian ere. regmiing the anthor-
smt ad the Periateoch. vs* that hi tees never wrote me hook,
i leer entire. Emt 22 51: E:mt. • __ . m.

hk-TE rPh. Page IE 7.

1 merry Prase. " eyage in the East ladies chap. vil.
r. P : " Pier harm Island, rear P: relay, contains cave ten-
mes > am mat mere rs tt tradition as to ~_o made men.
mere are paintings romaine comiees mat. for the learny and
freshness tt me :• tiering, n at any panie-nPrity in the design, call
me attention: which mnst have lastei for seme thousands of
years- tn stemming it. ts there is ah reason to set pose it. con-
tent* :®arv with the heealiam. "

252

APPENDIX.

Note XIX. (Page 139.)

(1) The acceptance, by a young girl, of a fruit sent by her
lover constituted betrothal among the ancient Mayas, as it
does in our day among their descendants. In Yucatan, if a
young man wishes to propose marriage to a girl, he sends by a
friend, as a present, a fruit, a flower, or some sweetmeat. The
acceptance of it is a sign that the proposal of the suitor is ad-
mitted. From that moment they are betrothed. The refusal
of the present means that he is rejected. A similar custom
exists in Japan. "When a young lady expects a proposal of
marriage, a flower-pot is placed in a convenient position on the
window-sill. The lover plants a flower in it. If next morning
the flower is watered, he can present himself to his lady-love,
knowing that he is welcome. If, on the contrary, the flower
has been uprooted and thrown on the sidewalk, he understands
that he is not wanted.

In Egypt the eating of a quince by two young people, to-
gether, constituted betrothal. So also in Greece, where the
custom was introduced from Egypt. In this custom we find
a natural explanation of the first seven verses of the third
chapter of Genesis, and why the serpent was said to have
- offered a fruit to the woman.

APPENDIX.

253

Note XX. (Pages 15, 155.)

(1) The Mayas held Fire to be the breath, the direct eman-
ation of Ku, the Supreme Intelligence; its immediate agent
through which all things were produced, and the whole crea-
tion kept alive. Therefore they worshipped it as deity itself.
To it, in high places, they raised altars, on which a perpet-
ual fire, rekindled once a year, was watched by priestesses
whose special duty was to see that it never became extin-
guished. These were recruited from among the daughters of
priests and nobles. They were called Zuliuy Kak, “ Vir-
gins of the Fire.”1 At their head was a Lady Superior,
whose title, lx naacan-katun,2 meant ‘ ‘ She who is forever
exalted.”

They procured the new fire either directly from the rays of
the sun, or from the shock of two hard stones, or by rubbing
two pieces of wood together.

Among the symbols sculptured on the mastodon trunks that,
at a very remote period of Maya history, embellished the
facades of all sacred and public edifices, these signs are occasion-
ally seen: . Taken collectively they read

Far deeper, however, is their esoteric meaning. The inter-,
pretation of each individual sign reveals the fact that they
form a cosmological pandect, or treatise, on the creation of the

Chaac,

“ thunder,” hence, “fire.”

1 Cogolludo, Hist, de Tucathan, lib. iv. , cap. ii., p. 177.

a Ibid.

254

APPENDIX.

world. They thus afford us a glimpse of some of the scientific
attainments of the learned Maya priesthood. Their knowl-
edge they communicated in the mysterious recesses of the tem-

PART OP MASTODON THUNK. FROM UXMAL. (PLATE LXXIII.)

pies, where the profane never penetrated, to initiates only.
These were bound by the most solemn oaths never to make
known the sacred mysteries there taught, except to those
rightly entitled to receive them.

Science was then, as it is even to-day, the privilege of the
few. In those remote ages the sacerdotal class- and the nobility
claimed it as their own ; now it is that of the wealthy. True,
in our times, knowledge is denied to none, provided the appli-
cant can pay for it, and no one is under oath not to divulge
what he has learned ; hut its acquirement is costly, and beyond
reach of the majority.

The temples of the Maya sages are in ruins, slowly but
surely crumbling to dust, gnawed by the relentless tooth of
time ; and, what is worse, recklessly destroyed by the iconoclas-
tic hand of ignorance and avarice. Sanctuaries have become

Page 256.

Plate LXXIII.

/

“

APPENDIX.

255

the abode of bats, swallows, and serpents. Lairs of the wild
beasts of the forests, they are not only deserted but shunned
by human beings, who stand in awe of them. Where now are
the sages who used to assemble within their sacred precincts
to delve into the mysteries of creation, to wrest her secrets from
the bosom of Mother Nature ? Do their spirits still hover there,
as the natives assert? Purified from all earthly defilement,
have they been reabsorbed in the great ocean of intelligence,
as Buddhists would have us believe ? Are they enjoying the
perfect repose of Nirvana, waiting to be summoned to begin
another cycle of mundane existences in more advanced plane-
tary worlds than ours ?

To-day I surely violate no oath if I reveal part of those
very teachings that the adepts of old so carefully kept from
the multitudes, whom they regarded as unworthy to participate
in the divine light that had been vouchsafed to their minds; a
principle practised, likewise, by the Egyptian priests, and that
Clement of Alexandria, who had been initiated into their mys-
teries, proclaimed by asserting (Stromate XII.), “ The myste-
ries of the faith are not to be divulged to all. . . . It is

requisite to hide in a mystery the wisdom spoken.”

I will premise the explanation of the signs under consider-
ation by stating that they teach precisely the same doctrine re-
garding creation that we find in ‘ c Primander, ’ ’ the most ancient
and authentic of the first philosophical books of Egypt, attrib-
uted to Thoth, that is, Hermes Trismegistus. “ Out of it
[chaos] came forth the fire, pure and light, and rising it was
lost in the air that, spirit-like, occupies the intermediate space
between the water and the fire. The earth and the water were
so mixed that the surface of the earth, covered by the water,
appeared nowhere.”

256

APPENDIX.

Again we read in the Hermetic books on the origin of things :
‘ £ For there were boundless darkness in the abyss, and water,
and a subtile spirit, intellectual in power, existing in chaos.”
Berosus, recounting the Chaldean legend of creation, says :
“ In the beginning all was darkness and water.”

In Genesis we read: “ In the beginning darkness was upon
the face of the deep, and the Spirit of God moved upon the
face of the Avaters. ”

The author of the “ Popol-vuh ” tells us: “ This is the recital
of hoAV everything was without life, calm and silent; all was
motionless and quiet ; void was the immensity of the heavens,
and the face of the earth did not manifest itself ; yet only the
tranquil sea Avas, and the space of the hea\Tens.”

In the £ ‘ Manava-Dharma-Sastra, ’ ’ we are told : £ £ The visible
uniArerse in the beginning was nothing but darkness. Then the
great, self -existing PoAver dispelled that darkness and appeared
in all his splendor. He first produced the waters; and on
them moved Naraiycma , the Divine Spirit. ’ ’

As in Egyptian so in Maya, the sign \ corresponds to
our Latin letter ic, or di, Avhich in Maya UiJ is pronounced
with a peculiar hard accent, clia.

Cfia is the radical of the verb dial), ££to create,” “to
bring forth from nothing,” “ to animate,’
or life.” Also of the word diali, “a drop of Avater

Placed as it is in the inscription, it stands for its heading or
epitome of its contents.

The next is a complex sign, as the world it repre-

sents. It is vX/ composed of a circumference, image of the
horizon ; of a central point, or boss, symbol of the sun ; and of
five radii, or rays, emanating from it. These rays are curved
from right to left, to indicate the direction in which the sun

to give breath

APPENDIX.

257

apparently travels every day. These same five radii stand for
the numerical “five,” ho, in the Maya language, radical of
hool, the “head,” “that which is above,” hence the Deity,
and also the universe. As to the five parts into which the
circle is divided, they probably stood for the five great conti-
nents— North America, South America, Asia, Africa, and
Europe.

The whole sign is therefore symbolical of the world, with
the Deity, “the sun,” shedding its beneficent rays over it, as
it travels from east to west.

We have just seen that in the cosmogonies of all civilized
nations of antiquity, in Asia and Africa, as well as in America,
water is not only regarded as the primordial element, but is said
to have covered the whole surface of the earth. The Mayas,
the Chaldeans, and the Egyptians also called it “ A ,” probably
because that is the first sound uttered without constraint by
the vocal organs of infants.

The Mayas graphically represented that name of the water
by a circumference Q, the shape of a drop of water, or of
the horizon, sometimes with, sometimes without, a central point,
indicating the sun.

When inventing the characters of their alphabet, which are
mostly images of objects surrounding them, they naturally
assigned it the first place. Thus “A” became the first letter
in the alphabets of all nations with which they had communi-
cations, and it is yet the first letter of the majority of alphabets
in use.

The Egyptians were not the inventors of their own alpha-
bet. They attributed it to Thoth, their god of letters. Did
they learn from the Mayas the name and shape of their first
letter ?

17

258

APPENDIX.

“ A ” in Maya is radical of many words conveying the idea
of humidity, generation, reviviscence. A few will suffice.

Aakal, a pond; humidity; as a verb, to become green, as
the plants after the first showers.

Aakil, to revivify; to spring back to life, as does nature
after its apparent death during winter, when it lies
dormant.

Ab, is the breath; the respiration; vapor.

Ac, to prepare for cultivation dried-up swamps; popula-
tion; people.

This last sign is perhaps the most comprehensive, and
vyj therefore the most interesting.

As an alphabetical sign, it is the X of the Maya alphabet,
pronounced as the English sli. As prefix to a noun, it indicates
the feminine gender, being a contraction of ix, the feminine
article. In the inscription under consideration, it represents
th q female forces of nature, as component part of f

the Maya letter corresponding LTu to our II, stands '
for ah, the masculine article, the male forces.

The character Op1 is composed of two C one of

the signs that in the Maya alphabet is equivalent

to letter N in ours. As a distinct symbol it is found
four times only in the Troano MS. (plates xx., xxi., xxiii.,
part ii.).

1 This sign has been mistaken by the learned Dr. Henry Schliemann for
a svastica. Quoting my name in his work Trojn (p. 122), he says it was dis-
covered by me in the mural inscriptions of the Mayas. This is an error,
so far as the meaning of the sign is concerned. Neither in the monumental
inscriptions nor in the Maya books known to-day have I ever found a
svastica. I am not aware that such symbol was used by the ancient Maya
sages. It may have existed among them, however. All I can assert is that
I have met with no proof of it.

APPENDIX.

259

The author of this most interesting work informs his readers
that it represents’ the ‘ c boundaries of the two inclosed basins or
seas;” that is, the two American mediterraneans, the Gulf
of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea — a fact easily verified by
tracing a general outline of the shores of the Gulf of Mexico
from Cape Sable, the southernmost point of Florida, to Cape
Catoche, the northernmost end of Yucatan; then continuing
the drawing to Cape San Antonio, the westernmost extremity
of the island of Cuba, thence following the general contour
of the western shores of the West India Islands to Grenada.
The curved line thus obtained will be precisely the sign
JV, initial letter of the ancient names Nen-lia of the Mexican
Gulf, and Nau of the Caribbean Sea.

Does not this sign recall that over which stands the serpent
0 with inflated breast, emblem of Lower Egypt? Under
it is the image of a sieve, symbol of lordship and
dominion. The sieve in Maya is called Mayab, one of the
ancient names of Yucatan.

The character AT, the female principle, the matrix, is the
initial letter of many words relating both to water and to
generation.

The ancient philosophers held, and modern physiologists
teach, that all living things had their origin in -water. It
would appear that the Maya sages, in remote times, had dis-
covered this scientific truth, and adapted their language to
this, as to many other of their scientific discoveries, so as to
express them in as concise a manner as possible. So, for
instance :

Xaa, to flow.

Xaan, to flow slowly. It becomes, by permutation,

260

APPENDIX.

Nax, to shine in the darkness, as tire; the divine spirit
floating on the surface of the waters; or the phos-
phorescence of the water in tropical seas.

Xaab, the abyss of water in which took place the genera-
tion xab. This may be one of the reasons why the
wise Maya priests selected as emblem for god of the
ocean the mastodon, that, like the elephant, could
propagate only in water.

Now, if we consider the MO as a composite sign formed
by two its meaning is then “power,” “wis-

dom,” “knowledge,” since it gives us the word ca-n,
which, as we have seen (p. 95), is always significant of might,
power, intelligence, as all vocables allied to it. Such, for
instance, as:

Kaan,

Kaanaat,

Kanab,

Kanlia,

Kancliaac,

Kalian,

manifested, raised,
great intelligence ; genius,
the sea.

the rain storm,
hurricane.

that which is necessary, which is precious.

The doctrine contained in the three signs that form the
inscription can therefore be epitomized in the following words :
“ In water, by fire the vivifying power of the universe, were
created the male and female forces of nature, and they pro-
duced all things.”

A glance at the sculpture of the dying warrior that adorned
Prince Coil’s mausoleum 1 suffices for us to see that the ancient

1 Plate LYIII.

APPENDIX.

261

Mayas, like tlie Egyptians, Greeks, Chaldeans, Hindoos, and
other civilized nations of antiquity, held that the vital princi-
ple, the soul, in man and animals, was an igneous fluid that
escaped as a blue flame through the mouth at the death of the
material body. “ This blue flame,” says Baron Charles von
Reichenbach, in his work ‘ ‘ Physico-physiological Researches
in the Dynamics of Magnetism, Electricity, etc.,” is “often
seen escaping from dying persons, by sensitives.”

¥e learn from the Hermetic books the ideas of the Egyp-
tians regarding the composition of the soul. Fire, a constit-
uent part of divine intelligence, becomes a soul when immersed
in organic water, and a body when it enters into organic clay,
hence the old philosophic saying, “ Corpus est terra, anima est
ignis.” Hermes Trimegistus teaches that “at the moment of
death, our intelligence, one of God’s subtle thoughts, escapes
the body’s dross, puts on its fiery tunic again, and floats hence-
forth in space, leaving the soul to await judgment.”

Among the prayers and hymns of the Yajur Veda, there
are passages in which the unity of God is taught. One of said
prayers begins thus: “Fire is the original cause; the sun is
that; so is the air; so is the moon; such, too, is that pure
Brahm, and those waters, and that Lord of creatures. ’ ’ ( Asiatic
Researches , vol. viii., p. 431.)

Macrobius in his work “ Somnium Scipionis ” (cap. xiv.),
resumes the doctrine thus: “ There is a fluid luminous, igneous,
very subtle, called ether, spiritus, that fills the whole universe.
The substance of the sun, of the stars, is composed of it. It is
the principle, the essential agent, of all motion, of all life. It
is, in fact, the Deity. "When a body is about to become animated
on earth, a globular molecule of said fluid gravitates through
the milky way toward the moon. There it combines with

262

APPENDIX.

grosser air, thus becoming fit to associate with matter. It then
enters the body that is forming ; fills it completely, animates
it, grows, suffers, expands, contracts with it. When this body
perishes and its material elements dissolve, this incorruptible
molecule escapes from it. It would return immediately to the
great ocean of ether were it not detained by its association
with lunar air. It is the latter that, preserving the shape of
the body, remains in the condition of shadow or ghost, a per-
fect image of the deceased. The Greeks called that shadow
the image or idol of the soul. The Pythagoreans said it was
its vehicle or envelope. The rabbinical school regarded it as its
vessel or boat. If the individual had lived a righteous life, his
whole soul — that is, his vehicle and his ether — ascended back
immediately to the moon, where their separation took place.
The vehicle remained in the lunar elysium ; the ether returned
to God. If, on the other hand, he had lived an unrighteous
life, his soul remained on earth until it became purified, wander-
ing here and there in the fashion of Homer’s shadows.”

While in Asia, Homer had become acquainted with this
doctrine, three centuries before its introduction into Greece,
according to Cicero ( Tuscul ., lib. i., §16), by Pherecides
and his pupil Pythagoras, who pretended to be the inventors
of it, if we believe Herodotus. He positively asserts that the
story of the soul and its transmigrations had been invented by
the Egyptians d Did these receive it from the Mayas ?

Kak is the Maya word for “ fire.”

Ka is the Egyptian for the double; the astral shape; exist-
ence ; individuality.

Ku is the Maya for the Divine Essence; the God-head.

1 Herodotus, Hist ., lib. ii. , cxxiii.

APPENDIX.

263

Ehu — Akh is the Egyptian for intelligence ; spirit ; manes ;
light; God-head.

Kul, Maya, to worship ; to adore.

Khu = Akh, Egyptian, to worship ; to adore.

“ The root of life was in every drop of the ocean of immortal-
ity, and the ocean was radiant light , which was fire, and heat,
and motion. Darkness vanished and was no more • it disap-
peared in its own essence, the body of fire and water, or father
and mother. ” (From the Book of Dzyan, stanza iii., §6.
Apud H. P. Blavatsky, “ The Secret Doctrine,” vol. i., p. 29.)

The ancient Mayas believed in the immortality of the
spirit and in reincarnation, as do their descendants to this day.

264

APPENDIX.

Note XXI. (Page 158.)

(1) It may be seen from tbe following passage in the Saddh-

arma poundarikct , “ The Lotus of the Good Law,” chap, xx.,
entitled “Effect of the Supernatural Power of the Tathaga-
tas, ’ ’ 1 that the putting out of the tongue was a symbol of great
wisdom in India. This chapter is a record of what took place
in a council of Bodhisattvas ; that is, of men who, having
acquired the learning necessary to teach all creatures, had
arrived at the supreme intelligence of a Buddha. “ The
hands joined they worship Buddha, who has brought them
together, and they promise him, when he shall have entered
Nirvana, to teach the law in his stead. The Master thanks
them. Then the blessed Qakyamouni, and the blessed Pra-
choutavatma, always seated on the throne of their stoupa, began
to smile of one accord; then their tongues came out of their
mouth , and reached the world of Brahma. . . . The

innumerable Tathagatas, by whom these personages are sur-
rounded, imitate them.”

This simply means that all these wise men pronounced dis-
courses and gave their opinions on the matters discussed in the
council.

(2) Abbe Hue, in his work, “Recollections of a Journey
through Thibet and Tartary” (vol. ii. , chap, vi., p. 158),
says: “ A respectful salutation in Thibet consists in uncovering

1 Apud Barthelemy de Saint-Hilaire, Vie de Bouddha, pp. 71-72.

APPENDIX.

265

the head, lolling out the tongue , and scratching the right ear at
the same time.”

W. Woodville Rockhill, in the Century Magazine (New
York, edition of February, 1891, p. 606), says: “The draw-
ing out of the tongue, and at the same time holding out both
hands palms uppermost, is the mode of salutation near Dre-chu,
in Thibet. ... At l’Hasa, capital of Thibet, the mode
of salutation consists in one sticking out his tongue, pulling
his right ear, and rubbing his left limb at the same time. ’ ’

INDEX.

PAGE

A, meanings of letter . . . 258

Afghanistan, names of places in,
Maya words .... 197
Akkadian treatises, copies of old,
ordered by Assurbanipal . . 37

■ the scientific language of the

Bast 36

and Maya languages com-
pared 30

Akkad, its Maya meaning . . 29

Altar in Prince Coil’s Memorial

Hall 7

America, its ancient history never
taken into account . . .10

the oldest continent . . is

, hypotheses regarding its peo-
pling and civilization . . viii

Analyses of sign of negation Ma,

239 (note), liii

Ancients, the, generally acquainted
with size of earth . . . 207

Ancient Maya buildings, regard-
ed with awe by natives . xxxii

Maya structures, their build-
ers unknown to natives . xxxiii

buildings in ruins at time of

Spanish invasion . . xxxii

PAGE

Ancona, Eligio, biographical sketch, 181

Annals, Maya, destroyed and hid-
den lviii

Antagonism of the brothers Coll

and Aac 123

Arts and sciences, abhorred by
early Christians .... xiv
Art, works of, destroyed . . 196

Aryans, had no idea of a created

universe 18

Ashes, preserved in heads of statues
in Mayacli. In Egypt, like-
ness placed on coffin lid . . 88

Asps, emblematic of royalty in

Egypt 5

Aspersions of Dr. Brinton . . 199

Asshur, god, name of Maya ori-
gin 43

Astronomical tables, Hindoo, the
oldest, the most accurate . 183, 185
Attitude of respect, alike in May-
acli and Egypt . . .131

Baal, god, his name Maya . 60

Baaa, cynocephalus in Mayacli,
attendant of God of Death . 115
Babel, its Maya etymology . . 34

268

INDEX.

PAGE

Babylon, Maya etymology of its
Chaldean names . . .33

Babylonian standard of measures . 207
Sal am, why regarded as protec-
tor of crops .... 234

and Cliacs not the same . 233

Salclid, sacred liquor (note) 111
Bel-Marduk, god, his name Maya, 73
Bird, emblem of Deity in Sandwich

Islands 74

offering to God of Rain . Ill

, symbol of principal female

divinity 12

Blue, mourning color of Mayas, 89

, of Egyptians . 90

Books, Maya, written in alpha-
betical characters . . xxxi

Brahmins, origin of, obscure . 17

borrowed their science from

others 17

Burmah, Mayas in 201

Can, title of Maya rulers . . 4

, its important meanings . 93

Cans, initiated into Sacred Mys-
teries 200

Carchemish, commercial city of the

Khati 62

Cardinal points, Maya, how

named 236

, genii of, according to

Maya writings . . . 219

Carian and Maya woman’s dress, 63
Caribbean Sea, its emblem a deer . xliv

Carthaginians, America visited by, xii
Carvings of lintel at entrance to
Prince Coil’s funeral chamber.
Their meaning .... 122
Central America, ancient Maya

Empire 5

Chaldeans, primitive, Maya colo-
nists 29

, strangers in Babylonia . 32

, their name a Maya word . 33

Chaldeans used the metre . . 207

Chaldean magicians exorcised with
Maya words . . . .40

magicians first welcomed, and

later condemned to death, in

Rome 39

Challenge to Dr. Brinton . . 204

Children, carried astride the hip in
Mayacli and India . . . 132

Cocom, killed by his nobles . 105
Cogolludo, biographical sketch of . 172
wrote the most complete his-
tory of Yucatan . . xxxiii, 230

Consulting fate on the entrails of a

peccary 134

Cosmic egg, origin of all things . 73

Cosmic diagram, Chaldean and

Hindoo amplifications of the

Maya 26

Cosmogonic conceptions, epito-
mized in names of cardinal num-
bers 222

notions, base of Maya reli-
gious conceptions . . . 215

Creator, his attempts to make a
perfect man . . . .77

Creation Tableau, explained . . 70

, figure in cosmic egg of . 75

Creation, various accounts of . 256
Cremation of bodies . . .87

, preparation of bodies for . 138

Criticisms on Abbe Brasseur’s work, 242
Cross, emblem of Rain God among

Mayas 103

rarely found in Maya sculp-
tures 110

Custom of proffering love with a

fruit 140

Curio hunters, guilty of leze-his-

tory xxiii

Cynocephali, represented with God
of Death at Uxmal . . 115

Cynocephalus. indigenous to Cen-
tral America, not to Egypt . 116

INDEX.

269

Danavas, of Maya origin . . 2

Decimal system, use of, proved by
Maya ruins .... 211

, why used by the Mayas, 220

used by Egyptians . 210

Defilement, presence of corpse a,

(note) 138

Defence of Abbe Brasseur . . 240

Desert of Shur, its name a Maya

word 58

Destruction of Mu, described by
Maya authors .... 146

told in the names of

the Greek letters . . . 149

narrated in Egyptian

archives 149

Dhyan Chohans, four Maharajahs
of the Hindoos .... 217
Diagram, mystic, of the Mayas . 220
Dragon, emblem on banners of
Khans in Asia .... 199
Dress of laborers, alike in Ma-
yacli and Egypt . . . 132

, Maya, in olden times . . 83

Drowned valleys of Antillean lands, xliv
Durability of pigments used by
Mayas 88

Early Christians plunged Western
Europe into ignorance . . xv

Egyptian civilization, infancy of,

unknown 51

. its origin must be sought

in the West . . . .53

Art, maturity of . . . 201

Sphinx, the enigma of history, 159

, opinion of various wri-
ters regarding it 159

painted red . . .95

-, its position relative to

the pyramid . . . .160

, buildings surrounding it, 160

, names at base of . . 161

, whose portrait was it . 162

Egyptian pyramid, king’s chamber,
measurements of 209

Egyptians pointed to the West as
home of their ancestors . . 52

not of Aryan stock . .187

, primitive, strangers in the

valley of the Nile . . .52

received their sciences from

the Mayas . . . .219

Emblems, Maya, interpreted . 258

of the universe, the simplest

that of the Mayas . . .14

End of Can dynasty . . . 143

Enmity of Sun and Serpent, tradi-
tional among all nations . . 123

Entablature of Memorial Hall,
meaning of ornamentation . 120
Errors of Abbe Brasseur . . 243

Esoteric meaning of cardinal num-
bers, Maya .... 222

of numbers in various

countries 220

doctrine of creation, Maya, 216

■ cosmic diagram of Mayas . 16

Evolution of creation, doctrine of,
among various ancient nations . 71

, Maya doctrine of . .79

Exact sciences known to the
Mayas 228

Failure of scholars to read Maya
hieroglyphics .... 248
Fate, read by ceremony of Pou,

(note) 129

Feast of Feralia . . . .10

Feathers worn by kings and war-
riors xlv

, insignia of gods and kings,

(note) 100

Festival of ancestors, among all
nations at same time of year . 11

First Principle, the, a thrice un-
known darkness .... 219
Fire, the essential element . 187, 261

270

INDEX.

PAGE

Francisco De Cordova, first Span-
iard who landed in Mayach, xxviii
French, modern measurements of
the earth, accord with those of a

remote, unknown race . . 208

Fresco paintings, at Cliicllen,
admired by John L. Stephens . 200

in Memorial Hall . . 6

disfigured by visitors . 127

, history of Prince Coll

in 6

Funeral customs of Mayas and

Egyptians 84

urns, charred viscera pre-
served in red oxide of mercury

in 87

vases, Canopi in Egypt.

Maya meaning of word . . 85

Genii of the cardinal points,
Maya and others . . .86

Geometric symbology of the
Mayas and others . . .15

Gift of cloaks to victors in athletic

games 132

Goddess Isis, the bird an emblem of, 13
God of Rain, invocations to . . 104

symbolized by image

of Southern Cross . . . 109

Greek alphabet, why letters of
same value are placed apart . 150
Gucumatz, emblem of Creator . 71

Hakaptah, a Maya word . . 48

Hanuman, veneration for, in

Ceylon 78

Hapimau, name of Nile, Maya

etymology 47

Hieroglyphics, Maya, not the
same as those of Copan and Pa-

lenque 81

— — on Kabul mound, interpre-
tation of 197

, Maya, their true key found, 198

PAGE

Homen, God of Volcanic

Forces .... (note) 148
Horned snake, sacred in Egypt
and Mayacli .... 5

, symbol of royalty . 5

Huldah, prophetess, consulted . 251
Huns, were they the founders of
Copan, Palenque, etc. ? . . 189

Immaculate Conception, doctrine
of, its origin .... 220
Immortality, the Mayas believed

in 261

India, British invasion of . . 195

Inscription on Creation Tableau,
Egyptian and Maya . . 70

on mastodon trank, esoteric

meaning of .... 260
on Kabul mound in Egyp-
tian characters .... 199
Intimate relation of Mayas with
primitive Chaldeans . . .72

Invocation to God of Rain. Its
historical interest . . 106, 232

Ishtar, goddess, her name Maya, 60
Isis, the Good Mother, in Egypt,
like Maya in Greece, India, and

Mexico 167

Itzaes, abandoned their homes . xxx
Izamal, description of stucco bas-
relief at 197

Jehovah, name of, numerical value 221
Jesus, last words spoken by in
Maya tongue . . . .38

Kabul, Afghan capital . . .195

temple in Izamal . . 196

Kanaan, a Maya word . . 58

Katish, name of the city of, a
Maya word . . . .62

Khan or Can, its meaning . . 199

, Eastern title, emblematized

as a dragon .... 199

INDEX.

271

PAGE

Khati, name of the, a Maya word, 61
King Menes, his name a Maya

word 48

Knowledge among Mayas, privi-
lege of priesthood and nobility, xxxi

Land of Mu, pride of the ocean . 144
, its emblem after de-
struction xliv

, its ten provinces . 66

, Plato’s Atlantis . xli

Landa, Bishop, a Maya scholar . li

, his biography . . . 169

destroyed Maya books . 170

preserved Maya letters and

signs for days .... 171
Language, gauge of a nation’s

spirit 1

, an accurate guide in trac-
ing relationship between various
peoples ..... xvi
, a knowledge of Maya nec-
essary for understanding sculp-
tures 112

Legend on each side of cosmic
egg, its explanation . . .74

Leleges, ancient name of Carians,

Maya 63

Likbabi, etymology of the name . 36

Lineal measure, true standard of

the Maya 213

adopted by the Mayas, 224

Lip ornaments, American . . 118

Lizana, Bernardo, biographical
sketch of 181

Magic words, supposed cure for
hydrophobia, Maya . . .41

Map of Maya Empire explained . xliii
Masons, wandering, measured the
circumference of the earth . 208
Mastodon, God of the Ocean . . 110

Mausoleum of Prince Coll at
Chiclieu . . .155

PAGE

Maya Empire, emblems of, ex-
plained 1

, a powerful nation in remote

ages xxxviii

colonists settled on the banks

of the Nile in Nubia . . .44

called their settlement

Maioo . . . .44

origin of tree, serpent, cross,

and elephant worship . . 25

rulers, how represented after

death 5

Empire, symbolized as a tree, xlix

represented as a serpent, 125

buildings, some of very great

antiquity .... xxxiii

colonists called the Valley of

the Nile Cliem, also Ain ; mean-
ing of these names . . .47

sages believed America the

oldest continent . . . . xi

esoteric meaning of yellow . 93

mother of gods and men . 73

remains, destroyed by curio

hunters . . xxiii

books reveal origin of some

myths and traditions . . . xvii

conquest of India anterior to

the Aryan 22

geographers acquainted with

contour of American continent . 59

civilization, ancient, unknown

to chroniclers . . . xxxiv

, decadency of, its cause, xxxi

books, description of . .174

a universal name among na-
tions of antiquity x

writings relate the destruc-
tion of Plato’s Atlantis . xviii

colonists, went to the land of

Canaan ..... 57

history written in books . 5

etymology of the name Brah-
ma, and of that of the Cosmic egg, 24

272

INDEX.

PAGE

Maya history, important events
carved in stone .... 6

philosophers, their notions,

cosmogonic and others, portrayed
in sculpture . . . .74

etymology of the word by vari-
ous authors . . . .39

and Hindoo cosmic evolution

identical 16

migration to the banks of the

Nile, antiquity of . . .55

not a dead language, an aid

in finding origin of ancient civi-
lizations . . . .20

word for fire, analyses of . 262

names among all civilized

nations of antiquity . . .58

Mayas addicted to giving nick-
names 35

scientists and artists . lviii

, Cans called themselves Chil-
dren of the Sun .... xlvi

likened the earth to a caldron

and to a calabash . . . lxii

colonizers, astronomers, and

architects .... (note) 2

used vegetable colors . . 128

ate the hearts of enemies slain

in battle 157

, traces of the, found in all his-
torical nations of antiquity . 3

and Aryans seem to have had

no communication with each

other 21

believed in reincarnation . 139

believed in the eternity of

being 90

, treatment of, and of their

descendants, by the Spaniards . 176
highly civilized, great navi-
gators 1

believed the breath of life to

be fire 155

- — — , their astronomical knowledge, 223

PAGE

Mayas familiar with trigonome-
try 223

an eminently religious people, 215

• — — did not artificially deform
their skulls . . .81, 158

geologists and geographers . xliv

established colonies west of

the River Indus . . . .27

established colonies in the

country called Akkad . . 28

little acquainted with rules of

perspective 128

, proofs of their communication

with natives of Asia and Africa, xv

adopted religious practices of

Nahuatls .... xxxi
and Egyptians, acquired civ-
ilization from same masters . 54

intensely patriotic . . . 200

believed that the spirits of

their great men reanimated stat-
ues in which their ashes were

preserved 139

Mayacli, fruit offering a pro-
posal of marriage in . . . 252

, not India, mother of nations 23

, great personages of, deified, xxxi

Mayapan, ruins of . . . 105

, city of, destroyed . . . xxx

Meaning of the name Akkad, a puz-
zle for scholars ; its interpretation, 28

of Prince Coil’s name . . 157

Measurements of Maya gnomon . 212
Mehen, serpent accompanying the
Creator in Egypt . . .75

Memorial Hall of Prince Coll at
CliiclLen, by whom erected . 6

, description of . . 7

Metre, its use by the Mayas . 203
Migration into Egypt, Bunsen’s es-
timate of dates . . . .55

Misur and Muzur, names of Egypt,
Maya etymology of . 46

I Mizraim, Maya etymology of . 47

INDEX.

273

PAGE

Mode of wearing the hair by
Maya and Egyptian matrons
in mourning . . . .84

Moloch, the god, his name a Maya

word 61

Mongols in America . . . 190

Monkey worship in Mayacli, 77, 116

in India . . .77

Monkey-god Thoth, great price
offered for his image by an In-
dian prince . . . .78

Monkeys worshipped by Egyptians, 78

-, men changed into, because of

their iniquities .... 77

sacred in Babylonia and

Japan 79

buried in reserved spots in

Egypt and Guatemala . . 78

Mu, Land of, its destruction re-
corded by Mayas and Greeks . xiii
, history of its de-
struction preserved by many na-
tions ...... 66

its destruction recorded in

stone ...... lxiv

Nag&s, Brahmins acquired knowl-
edge from the .... 184

serpent worshippers . . 193

, their origin unknown to Indi-

anists 193

, their conquests . . . 194

, their rajahs called khans . 2

rulers held sway over Hin-

dost.an before Aryan invasion . 19

originally Maya adepts . 19

, meaning of the word . . 200

Nahuatl sacrifice .... 196
Nahuatls invaded Yucatan and de-
stroyed cities .... xxx
Name of Maya Empire, accord-
ing to Maya books ... 1

of Carians and Caribs, same

meaning 64

PAGE

Name of God Asshur’s dwelling-
place, of Maya origin . . 43

Names of Greek letters, their
Maya meaning . . .151

of Egyptian gods, Maya

words 49

Natives of Yucatan, their character 178
worship ancient im-
ages 178

adhere to ancient ife-

ligious practices . . xxxvii

Nose-rings worn in America . . 118

Number four in the cosmogony of
many nations . . . .94

Number ten sacred to the Maya
and other ancients . . . 221

Numbers and geometrical figures
honored with names of gods . 218
Number thirteen basis of Maya
computation . . . .211

, its adoption discussed by

professors 211

Oannes, brought civilization to
Mesopotamia . . . .20

, Maya etymology of the

name ...... 26

Ocean, its Maya names, and their
meanings ..... 180

likened to a serpent . „ 71

Offerings to the dead, in Ma-
yacli, Egypt, and India . . 8

in China, Japan,

Peru, and elsewhere ... 9

Offerings of food to the dead in

Yucatan 10

Origin of nobility . . . ,97

of ill-luck being attributed to

number thirteen . (note) 147

of British foot measure, (note) 76

of enmity between woman

and serpent .... 142
Ornaments in use among ancient
Mayas 117

274

INDEX.

PAGE

Osiris portrayed as a leopard . 165
Outrages, Spanish, during conquest
of Yucatan . . . xxxv

Pacab, Don Lorenzo — lineal de-
scendant of kings of Muna . 106
Paintings in cave temples, Ele-
phanta Island .... 251
Palenque, were its inhabitants

Hurts ? 189

tablet explained . . 110-113

Patala (Central America), mother
country of Nagas . . 100, 194

Pentateuch, not written by Moses, 251
People represented in sculptures,
at Copan, Palenque, Manche,
etc., not Mayas . . .190

Phallic worship, origin of . . 216

Physiognomy, Maya, compared
with that shown in sculptures at
Palenque, Copan, and Quirigua. 82
Pontiff Cay, consulting fate by
entrails of a fish . . . 135

Pope Sylvester II., pupil of Moor-
ish philosophers . . . xv

Posca, what made of . (note) 38
Position of priest’s hand in cere-
mony of Pou .... 130

of great personages’ hands,

after death, alike in Mayacli

and Egypt 156

Priests of Osiris wore leopard skin
over ceremonial dress . . 162

Prince Cob, leading his warriors . 136
•, his charred heart pre-
served in red oxide of mercury . 136
portrayed as a leopard,

with human head . . . 166

, his heart, part of, chemi-
cally analyzed .... 159

- — — slain by his brother Aac

as Osiris was by his brother

Set 158

Prince Aac became a tyrant . 143

PAGE

Prince Aac vanquished Queen

Mbo 142

proffered love to Queen

Mbo, by a present of oranges . 139

in presence of the Priest, 134

incited civil religious

war 141

Pshent, crown of Lower Egypt in
Maya sculptures . . .125

Ptah, Egyptian, the Creator, born
from an egg . . . .74

Pyramids in Yucatan, invariably
twenty-one metres high . . 224

Pythagoras’s teachings regarding
numbers 219

Queen Moo, consulting fate by
Pou ...... 129

, offer of marriage to . 130

built in Chicnen a

memorial hall and a mausoleum
to the memory of her husband . 155

■= , her refusal of Prince

Aac’s love brought misery to

her and to her country . . 140

, her flight from the

"West Indies .... 154

. her flight recorded by

author of Troano MS. . . 142

, her arrival in Egypt, re-
ceived with open arms . xix, 154

called loin, corrupted

into Isis 154

called Mau in Egypt . 155

may be the builder of the

Egyptian Sphinx . . . xix

Rabbis extol number twenty-one
beyond all others . . .76

Rays around cosmic egg, their
number, emblem of the Creators, 76
Red, distinctive color of nobility, 89-95

, symbolical of power . . 99

, its meaning in Maya . . 103

INDEX.

275

PAGE

Red always used for seals among
ancient Egyptians . . . 102

hand in Mayacli, Polyne-
sia, and India . . . 100, 101

, mark of ownership . 102

Reincarnation believed in by

Mayas 263

Religious ideas embodied in sacred

edifices 223

Rephaim, a Maya word . . 59

Respect for elders in Mayacli
as in Egypt .... 132
Royalty, yellow its distinctivecolor,

89-91

Royal brothers and sisters united
in marriage .... 131

Sacred Four, in India and Ma-

yacli 217

word “Aum” explained by

Maya language . . 13, 24

mode of writing Maya no

longer understood at beginning
of Christian era . . . xxxi

Sati, a Maya word, name given
by Egyptians to the Rephaim . 58

Science, the privilege of the few . 254
Scientific knowledge revealed in
Maya architecture . . . 224

Sculptured portraits used as fu-
neral urns 87

Sculptures in Mayacli, colored as
in Greece and other countries . 88

Sculpture of dying warrior, on
Prince Coil’s mausoleum . . 155

Self-torture by devotees of Goddess
Kali ...... 109

- — in America . . 108

Selk, goddess, deification of West
Indies, name of Maya origin . 67
Serpent, emblem of the Creator —
its Maya origin . . .94

, emblem of the Creator among

Mayas, Egyptians, and others, 71

PAGE

Serpent, supposed wisdom of, pos-
sible origin 222

, scales of, form background to

figure of Creator in tableau at

Cliiclien 75

, antagonism of Sun with . 123

, offering of fruit by, ex-
plained 252

, emblem of Mayacli . . 199

Set, god of the Khati . . .97

Seven-headed serpent . . .90

Sign of negation, Maya and Egyp-
tian alike .... liv, 239

, Maya, shape of the

Yucatan peninsula . . iv

, Egyptian, its origin

unknown iv

for Land of the W est, alike in

Mayacli and Egypt . . . lix

Sieve, one name of Yucatan, Egyp-
tian symbol of dominion . . 259

, why chosen by the Egyptians

as symbol of powTer . . . 137

Similarity of Maya and Hindoo
architecture and customs . . 24

Skulls deformed by some Pacific
Islanders ..... 190
Soul, escape of the . . . 261

Sphinx, totem of Prince Coll,
adorning his mausoleum . . 158

Sri-Santara, names of its various
parts are Maya words . . 22

, an amplification of the

Maya cosmic diagram . .17

Standard lineal measure, why the
Mayas adopted the metre . 224
Statues of deceased persons, made
by the Mayas . . . .87

provided with shell eyes and

nails 88

colored in Eastern countries

as in America .... 192

in the East, as in America,

provided with eyes . . . 192

276

INDEX.

Statues of Maya rulers, conven-
tional posture of, explained . 59

Stone circles, their meaning . , 15

Story of enmity between the woman
and the serpent .... 142
Survey of Maya buildings care-
fully made 203

Symbolism, a knowledge of, neces-
sary for the understanding of
Maya sculptures . . . 112

Taba, word of Maya origin . 48
Tau, Egyptian, explained by
Maya language . . . 110

Tehom, the deep, a Maya

word .73

Thalatth, her name of Maya ori-
gin . . . . . .39

Thibet, corpses preserved in mer-
cury in 191

Thirteen, computation by, to com-
memorate date of cataclysm . 146
Thoth, God of Wisdom, as cyno-
cephalus monkey, second God of

the Dead 114

, God of Letters, its name a

Maya word . . . .78

Tiamat, monster, name of Maya

origin 72

Tian-Chilians, “Sacred Four”
of the Mayas . . . .216

Ticll, religious ceremony in honor
of the God of the Fields . . 62

T-Mu, god, personification of At-
lantis 99

Tongue, the putting out of the,
symbol of wisdom . . 264

Tradition of Sandwich Islanders
regarding creation . . .74

Triangle, apex upward fire, apex
downward water . : .15

Troano MS. made known by
Abbe Brasseur .... 242
, why thus called . . . 175

PAGE

Troana MS., its author gives a
clue to the reading of his text . 244

, description of the . . . 174

, a precious scientific and his-
torical document . . . 175

, Part First, plate xxii., Trans-
lation of lvi

, Part Second, plate xiii. , Trans-
lation of ... (note) lx
Tzidon, a Maya word . . .59

Tzur, a Maya word . . .60

Umbrella, insignia of royalty in
Maya . . . . .128

Universe, Maya conception of . 215
Urukh, Maya etymology of the
name of . . . .36

Uxmal, escutcheon of . . xlvi

Vase, hung from necks of the
dead in Egypt . . . .85

, placed on the abdomen of the

dead in Mayacli . . .85

Virgins of the fire .... 253
Votive offerings .... 101
Vulture, symbol of Goddess Isis . 12

Water, primordial substance . . 73

, analysis of the Maya word

for 259

Western continent, mentioned by
classical authors . . . xi

West Indies called by Mayas
“ Land of the Scorpion ” . . xli

West, the, regarded by Egyptians
as place of the dead, where Thoth
exercised his duty as Scribe . 116
Winged Serpent, insignia of roy-
alty in Mayacli, like the
winged dragon in Asiatic coun-
tries 129

Winged circles in America, Egypt,
and Assyria, origin of . . 217

Words written on Belshazzar’s ban-
quet hall were Maya . . 37

INDEX.

277

PAGE

Work of Abbe Brasseur . . 242

Worship of elephants, of Maya

origin 25

of cross, of Maya origin . 25

of serpent, of Maya origin . 25

of tree, Maya origin . . 25

Year, began on same day in Ma-
yacli and Egypt . . . 250

Yucatan, description of thecountry,

xxvii

PAGE

Yucatan, its various names . . xxix

, Peninsula of, represented as

a shoot and a veretrum . xlvii

Zactalah, modern God of the
Crops, its worship by natives of
Eastern Yucatan . . . 179

Zahi, name given to Phoenicia by
the Egyptians. A Maya word, 58
Zinaan (Scorpion), name of West
Indies, Maya . . . .lx
