The Masters and the Path (C. W. Leadbeater, 1925; public domain)
===============================================================================
Leadbeater's account of the Theosophical Masters and the occult hierarchy — the definitive statement of 1920s Theosophical esotericism. Source: Internet Archive.

WILLS AR nS

it }

il}

i

iii}
it
HH

j K wh
Hit

trl tek

'
if

SSS SS see

SSS

creep a
\ cH

tty
COUEEUEAEELEETED OU Ca

ay
i
i
On

7

i

mt

iN
fbetere tg ae haslel dant dns ALBDAD ANT: wh

eS

iii
eigenen

i:

TH ee
H NTU tha Bitty

< z a9 SSS SSS SSE SSS ESS a at og any
Sletten esise * = 3 = ee me eee ' : == - 2 ores :

ave e
hire ape

' Bey Bh

am

Ab
> oa
:

a,

—

_——_—

6 felt
Pia
oP oe
ths 7

itp

=P en

ens ee

eS

ey inate ai Rte ge Nee

i

= eee

a hae ated

THE WESAK VALLEY PRINTED IN U.S.A

bs ay
BAA ah AUER

pri UP
Ps rt Ap |
yi 7 7
i A
iM

11
bat

AW Wi

{ { |
iL ae Pe
‘ ry a) Acs BY

: ‘ y
His
, 495

%

pile ae

ahs , LY. , es

Foe Dt be ares
a sh ; j Aj
Ry Lap a ; f

x ‘

: et.)
Aa Gly ! g
ni

SR NAY OF PRG

CL 7; .
JUL b&b 1925

a»
Ci;
NX v3; PEED erga *

The Wises and the Path

By The

Rihee Gow eadbester

THEOSOPHICAL PRESS
826 Oakdale Avenue
Chicago

CopyYRIGHT
Tue AMERICAN THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY
1925

CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I. Tue EXIstTencre oF THE MAsTeERs
Il. Tur Puysicau Bopies or THE Masters
Ill. Tue Way to THE MASTER
IV. PROBATION
V. ACCEPTANCE
VI. OvrueEr PRESENTATIONS
VIL. Tur First INITIATION
VIII. Tur Eco
IX. THE Sreconp anp THIRD INITIATIONS
X. THe HicgHer INITIATIONS
XI. THe Work or THE MASTERS
XII. THr CHOHANS AND THE Rays
XIII. Tue Trinity anp THE TRIANGLES
XIV. THE WIspoM IN THE TRIANGLES

XV. THe POWER IN THE TRIANGLES

112
120
152
169
192
210
233
265
276
321

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2022 with funding from
Princeton Theological Seminary Library

https://archive.org/details/masterspathOOlead

Cuapter [|
THE EXISTENCE OF THE MASTERS

The existence of Perfected Men is one of the most
important of the many new facts which Theosophy
puts before us. It follows logically from the other
great Theosophical teachings of karma and evolu-
tion by reincarnation. As we look round us we see
men obviously at all stages of their evolution—many
far below ourselves in development, and others who
in one way or another are distinctly in advance of us.
Since that is so, there may well be others who are
very much further advanced; indeed, if men are
steadily growing better and better through a long
series of successive lives, tending towards a definite
goal, there should certainly be some who have already
reached that goal. Some of us in the process of that
development have already succeeded in unfolding
some of those higher senses which are latent in every
man, and will be the heritage of all in the future;
and by means of those senses we are enabled to see
the ladder of evolution extending far above us as well
as far below us; and we can also see that there are
men standing upon every rung of that ladder.
There is a considerable amount of direct testimony
as to the existence of these Perfected Men whom we

9 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

call Masters, but I think that the first step which
each one of us should take is to make certain that
there must be such men; only as a later step will it
follow that those with whom we have come into con-
tact belong to that class.

The historical records of every nation are full of
the doings of men of genius in all the different depart-
ments of human activity, men who in their special
lines of work and ability have stood far above the
rest—indeed, so far that at times (and probably more
often than we know) their ideals were utterly beyond
the comprehension of the people, so that not only the
work that they may have done has been lost to man-
kind, but their very names even have not been pre-
served. It has been said that the history of every
nation could be written in the biography of a few indi-
viduals, and that it is always the few, towering above
the rest, who initiate the great forward steps in art,
music, literature, science, philosophy, philanthropy,
statecraft and religion. They stand high sometimes
in love of God and their fellow-men, as great saints
and philanthropists; sometimes in understanding of
man and nature, as great philosophers, sages and
scientists; sometimes in work for humanity as great
liberators and reformers. Looking at these men, and
realizing how high they stand among humanity, how
far they have gone in human evolution, is it not
logical to say that we cannot see the bounds of
human attainment, and that there may well have
been, and even now may be, men far further devel-

Tue EXIsTeNCE OF THE MASTERS © 3

oped even than they, men great in spirituality as well
as in knowledge or artistic power, men complete as
regards human perfections—men precisely such as the
Adepts or Supermen whom some of us have had the
inestimable privilege to encounter?

This galaxy of human genius that enriches and
beautifies the pages of history is at the same time the
glory and the hope of all mankind, for we know that
these Greater Ones are the forerunners of the rest,
and that They flash out as beacons, as veritable light-
bearers to show us the path which we must tread if
we wish to reach the glory which shall presently be
revealed. We have long accepted the doctrine of the
evolution of the forms in which dwells the Divine
Life; here is the complementary and far greater idea
of the evolution of that Life itself, showing that the
very reason for that wondrous development of higher
and higher forms is that the ever-swelling Life needs
them in order to express itself. Forms are born and
die, forms grow, decay and break; but the spirit
grows on eternally, ensouling those forms, and devel-
oping by means of experience gained in and through
them; and as each form has served its turn and is
outgrown, it is cast aside that another and better
form may take its place.

Behind the unfolding form burgeons out ever the
Life Eternal, the Life Divine. That Life of God per-
meates the whole of nature, which is but the many-
colored cloak which He has donned; it is He Who lives
in the beauty of the flower, in the strength of the tree,

4 THe MASTERS AND THE PatH

in the swiftness and grace of the animal as well as
in the heart and soul of man. It is because His Will
is evolution that all life everywhere is pressing on-
ward and upward; and it is therefore that the exist-
ence of Perfected Men at the end of this long line of
ever-unfolding power and wisdom and love is the
most natural thing in the world. Even beyond Them
—beyond our sight and our comprehension—stretches
a vista of still greater glory; some hint of that we
may endeavor to give later, but it is useless to speak
of it now.

The logical consequence of all this is that there
must be Perfected Men, and there are not wanting
signs of the existence of such men in all ages who,
instead of leaving the world entirely, to pursue a life
of their own in the divine or superhuman kingdoms,
have remained in touch with humanity, through love
of it, to assist its evolution in beauty and love and
truth, to help, as it were, to cultivate the Perfect
Man—just as here and there we find a botanist who
has special love for plants, and glories in the produc-
tion of a perfect orange or a perfect rose.

The records of every great religion show the pres-
ence of such Supermen so full of the Divine Life that
again and again They have been taken as the very
representatives of God Himself. In every religion,
especially at its founding, has such an One appeared,
and in many cases more than one. The Hindus have
their great Avataras or divine incarnations, such as
Shri Krishna, Shri Shankaracharya, and the Lord

Tue EXISTENCE OF THE MASTERS 5

Gautama Buddha, Whose religion has spread over
the Far East, and a great galaxy of rishis, of saints
and teachers; and these Great Ones took interest not
only in awakening men’s spiritual natures, but also
in all affairs that made for their well-being on earth.
All who belong to the Christian world know, or ought
to know, much about the great succession of prophets
and teachers and saints in their own dispensation, and
that in some way (perhaps not clearly understood)
their Supreme Teacher, the Christ Himself, was and
is Man as well as God. And all the earlier religions
(decadent as some of them may be amid the decay
of nations), down even to those of primitive tribes
of men, show as outstanding features the existence of
Supermen, helpers in every way of the child-like
people among whom They dwelt. An enumeration
of these, interesting and valuable as it is, would take
us too far aside from our present purpose, so I will
refer the reader for it to Mr. W. Williamson’s excel-
lent book, The Great Law.

There is much direct and recent evidence for the
existence of these Great Ones. In my earlier days
I never needed any such evidence, because I was fully
persuaded as a result of my studies that there must
be such people. To believe that there were such
glorified men seemed perfectly natural, and my only
desire was to meet Them face to face. Yet there
are many among the newer members of the Society
who, reasonably enough, want to know what evidence
there is. There is a considerable amount of personal

6 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

testimony. Madame Blavatsky and Colonel Olcott,
the co-founders of the Theosophical Society, Dr.
Annie Besant, our present President, and I myself—
all of us have seen some of these Great Ones, and
many other members of the Society have also been
privileged to see one or two of Them, and there is
ample testimony in what all these people have
written.

It is sometimes objected that those who saw Them,
or fancied that they did so, may have been dreaming
or perhaps deluded. The chief reason, I think, for
the possibility of such a suggestion is that we have
very rarely seen the Adepts at a time when both
They and we were in our physical bodies. In
the early days of the Society, when only Madame
Blavatsky had developed higher faculties, the Mas-
ters not infrequently materialized Themselves so that
all could see Them, and showed Themselves thus
physically on various occasions. You will find many
records of such happenings in the earlier history of
our Society, but of course the Great One so showing
Himself was not in His physical body, but in a
materialized form.

Many of us habitually and constantly see Them
during our sleep. We go out in our astral bodies (or
in the mental body, according to our development)
and we visit Them and see Them in Their physical
bodies; but we are not at that time in ours, and that
is why on the physical plane people tend to be skep-
tical about such experiences. Men object: “But in

Tue EXISTENCE OF THE MASTERS 7

these cases either you who saw Them were out of the
physical body, and may have been dreaming or de-
luded, or Those who appeared to you came phenome-
nally and then disappeared again; so how do you know
that They were what you suppose Them to be?”
There are a few cases in which both the Adept and
the one who saw Him were in the physical body. It
happened with Madame Blavatsky; I have heard her
testify that she lived for some time in a monastery in
Nepal, where she saw three of our Masters constantly
in Their physical vehicles. Some of Them have come
down more than once from Their mountain retreats
into India in Their physical bodies. Colonel :Olcott
spoke of having seen two of Them on those occasions;
he had met the Master Morya and also the Master
Kuthumi. Damodar K. Mavalankar, whom I knew in
1884, had encountered the Master Kuthumi in His
physical body. ‘There was the case of 8. Rama-
swamier, a gentleman whom I knew well in those
days, who had the experience of meeting the Master
Morya physically, as you may read in the book Five
Years of Theosophy, in the article “How a Chela
Found His Guru”; and there was the case of Mr. W. T.
Brown of the London Lodge, who also was privileged
to meet one of the Great Ones under similar condi-
tions. There is also a vast amount of Indian testi-
mony which has never been collected and sifted,
mainly because those to whom these experiences came
were so thoroughly persuaded of the existence of
Supermen and of the possibility of meeting Them

8 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

that they did not regard any individual case as
worthy of record.

I myself can tell you of two occasions on which I
have met a Master, both of us being in the physical
vehicle. One of Them was the Adept to Whom the
name of Jupiter was assigned in the book of the Lives
of Alcyone, Who greatly assisted in the writing of
portions of Madame Blavatsky’s famous work, Isis
Unveiled, when that was being done in Philadelphia
and New York. When I was living at Adyar He was
so kind as to request my revered teacher, Swami T.
Subba Rao, to bring me to call upon Him. Obeying
His summons we journeyed to His house, and were
most graciously received by Him. After a long con-
versation of the deepest interest we had the honor
of dining with Him, Brahman though He be, and
spent the night and part of the next day under His
roof. In that case it will be admitted that there could
be no question of illusion. The other Adept Whom
I had the privilege of encountering physically was the
Master the Comte de St. Germain, called sometimes
the Prince Ragoczy. I met Him under quite ordinary
circumstances (without any previous appointment,
and as though by chance) walking down the Corso
in Rome, dressed just as any Italian gentleman might
be. He took me up into the gardens on the Pincian
Hill, and we sat for more than an hour talking about
the Society and its work; or perhaps I should rather
say that He spoke and I listened, although when He
asked questions I answered.

Tue EXISTENCE OF THE MASTERS 9

Other members of the Brotherhood I have seen
under varying circumstances. My first encounter
with one of them was in a hotel in Cairo; I was on
my way out to India with Madame Blavatsky and
some others, and we stayed in that city for a time.
We all used to gather in Madame Blavatsky’s room
for work, and I was sitting on the floor, cutting out
and arranging for her a quantity of newspaper articles
. which she wanted. She sat at a table close by; indeed
my left arm was actually touching her dress. The
door of the room was in full sight, and it certainly
did not open; but quite suddenly, without any prep-
aration, there was a man standing almost between me
and Madame Blavatsky, within touch of both of us.
It gave me a great start, and I jumped up in some
confusion; Madame Blavatsky was much amused and
said: “If you do not know enough not to be startled
at such a trifle as that, you will not get far in this
occult work.”’ I was introduced to the visitor, who
was not then an Adept, but an Arhat, which is one
grade below that state; He has since become the
Master Djwal Kul.

Some months after that the Master Morya came to
us one day, looking exactly as though in a physical
body; He walked through the room where I was in
order to communicate with Madame Blavatsky, who
was in her bedroom inside. That was the first time
I had seen Him plainly and clearly, for I had not then
developed my latent senses sufficiently to remember
what I saw in the subtle body. I saw the Master

10 Tue Masters AND THE PATH

Kuthumi under similar conditions on the roof of our
Headquarters at Adyar; He was stepping over a bal-
ustrade as though He had just materialized from the
empty air on the other side of it. I have also many
times seen the Master Djwal Kul on that roof in the
same way.

This would, I suppose, be considered less certain
evidence, since the Adepts came as apparitions do;
but, as I have since learned to use my higher vehicles
freely, and to visit These Great Ones in that way, I
can testify that Those Who in the early years of the
Society came and materialized for us are the same
Men Whom I have often since seen living in Their
own homes. People have suggested that I and others
who have the same experience may be but dreaming,
since these visits take place during the sleep of the
body; I can only reply that it is a remarkably con-
sistent dream, extending in my own case over forty
years, and that it has been dreamt simultaneously by
a large number of people.

Those who wish to collect evidence about these
matters (and it is quite reasonable that they should
wish to do so) should turn to the earlier literature
of the Society. If they meet our President, they can
hear from her how many of the Great Ones she has
seen on different occasions; and there are many of
our members who will bear witness without hesitation
that they have seen a Master. It may be that in
meditation they have seen His face, and later have
had definite proof that He is a real being. Much

Tue EXISTENCE OF THE MASTERS 11

evidence may be found in Colonel Olcott’s Old Diary
Leaves, and there is an interesting treatise called Do
The Brothers Exist? written by Mr. A. O. Hume, a
man who stood high in the Civil Service in India, and
worked much with our late Vice President, Mr. A. P.
Sinnett. It was published in a book entitled Hints
on Esoteric Theosophy. Mr. Hume, who was a
skeptical Anglo-Indian with a legal mind, went
into the question of the existence of the Brothers
(as the Masters are also called, because They
belong to a great Brotherhood, and also because
They are the Elder Brothers of humanity) and
even at that early date decided that he had
overwhelming testimony that They did exist; and
very much more evidence has accumulated since
that book was published.

The possession of extended vision and other facul-
ties resulting from the development of our latent
powers has also brought within our constant experi-
ence the fact that there are other orders of beings
than the human, some of whom rank alongside the
Adepts in a grade of being higher than our own. We
meet with some whom we call Devas or Angels, and
with Others Whom we see to be far beyond ourselves
in every respect.

Since in the course of our development we have
become able to communicate with the Adepts, we
have naturally asked Them with all reverence how
They have attained to that level. They tell us with
one accord that no long time ago They stood where

12 THe MASTERS AND THE PatTH

we stand now. They have risen out of the ranks of
ordinary humanity, and They have told us that we
in time to come shall be as They are now, and that
the whole system is a graded evolution of life ex-
tending up and up, further than we can follow it, even
unto the Godhead Itself.

We find that as there are definite stages in the
earlier evolution—the vegetable above the mineral,
the animal above the vegetable and the human above
the animal—so in the same way the human kingdom
has a definite end, a boundary at which it passes into
a kingdom distinctly higher than itself, that beyond
men there are the Supermen.

In the study of this system of evolution, we have
learned that there are in every man three great divi-
sions—body, soul and Spirit; and each of these is ca-
pable of further subdivision. That is the definition
which was given by Saint Paul two thousand years ago.
The Spirit or Monad is the breath of God (for the
word spirit means breath, from the Latin spiro), the
divine spark which is truly the Man, though it may
more accurately be described as hovering over man
as we know him. The scheme of its evolution is that
it should descend into matter, and through its descent
obtain definiteness and accuracy in material detail.
So far as we are able to see, this Monad, which is a
spark of the Divine Fire, cannot descend as far as our
present level, cannot directly reach this physical
plane in which we are now thinking and working—
probably because the rates of its vibration and those

Tue EXISTENCE OF THE MASTERS 13

of physical matter differ too widely, so that there
must be intermediate states and conditions. On what
plane of nature that divine spark originally exists
we do not know, for it is far above, out of our reach.
The lowest manifestation of it, which might be called
a reflection of it, descends into the lowest of the Cos-
mic Planes, as described in A Textbook of Theosophy.

We speak commonly of seven planes of existence,
_ which are subdivisions or subplanes of the lowest
Cosmic Plane, called in our books the Prakritic,
meaning the physical plane of the Cosmos. The
Monad can descend to the second of these subplanes
(which we consequently call the Monadic plane) but
it does not seem able to penetrate lower than this.
In order to obtain the necessary contact with still
denser matter, it puts down part of itself through
two whole planes, and that fragment is what we call
the ego or soul.

The Divine Spirit far above us merely hovers over
us; the soul, which is a small and partial representa-
tion of it (it is as though the Monad puts down a
finger of fire, and the end of that finger is the soul)
cannot descend below the higher part of the mental
plane (which is the fifth plane counting downwards,
the physical being the seventh and lowest); and, in
order that it may reach a still lower level, it must in
turn put down a small portion of itself, which be-
comes the personality that we know. So this per-
sonality, which each person commonly thinks to be
himself, is in truth but the fragment of a fragment.

14 Tue MAsTers AND THE PatH

All the evolution through the lower kingdoms is
preparatory to the development of this human con-
stitution. An animal during its life on the physical
plane (and for some time after that in the astral
world) has a soul just as individual and separate as
a man’s; but when the animal comes to the end of
its astral life, that soul does not reincarnate again
in a single body, but returns to a kind of reservoir
of soul-matter, called in our books a group soul. It
is as though the group soul were a bucket of water,
supplying the need of several animals of the same
kind—say, for example, twenty horses. When a horse
is to be born from that group soul, it is as though one
dipped a vessel into that bucket and brought it out
full of water. During the life of that horse all kinds
of experiences come to it which modify its soul,
from which it learns lessons and these may be com-
pared to various kinds of coloring matter cast into
the vessel of water. When the horse dies, the water
in the vessel is emptied back into the bucket, and
the coloring matter which it has acquired spreads all
through the whole bucket. When another horse is
born from the same group soul, another vessel of
water is filled from the bucket; but it will be obvious
that it is impossible to take out in it exactly the same
drops of water which constituted the soul of the pre-
vious horse. (For further details of this process see
A Textbook of Theosophy.)

When an animal has developed far enough to be-
come human, that means that at the end of his life his

Tuer EXISTENCE OF THE MASTERS 15

soul is not poured back into the group soul but re-
mains as a separate entity. And now a very curious
but very beautiful fate befalls him. The soul-matter,
the water in the vessel, becomes itself a vehicle for
something much higher, and instead of acting as a
- soul, it is itself ensouled. We have no exact analogy
on the physical plane, unless we think of pumping air
into water under high pressure, and thereby mak-
_ ing it aerated water. If we accept that symbolism,
the water which was previously the animal soul has
now become the causal body of a man; and the air
pumped into it is the ego of which I have spoken—
that soul of man which is but a partial manifestation
of the Divine Spirit. This descent of the ego is sym-
bolized in ancient mythology by the Greek idea of
the crater or Cup and by the medieval story of the
Holy Grail; for the Grail or the Cup is the perfected.
result of all that lower evolution, into which is poured
the Wine of the Divine Life, so that the soul of man
may be born. So, as we have said, this which has
previously been the animal soul becomes in the case
of man what is called the causal body, which exists
in the higher part of the mental plane as the perma-
nent vehicle occupied by the ego or human soul; and
all that has been learned in its evolution is trans-
ferred to this new center of life.

The evolution of this soul consists in its gradual
return to the higher level on the plane next below the
Monadic, carrying with it the result of its descent in
the shape of experiences gained and qualities acquired.

16 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

The physical body in all of us is fully developed, and
because that is so we are supposed to have conquered
it; but it should be fully under the control of the soul.
Among the higher races of mankind at the present
day it usually is so, though it may break away and
run wild for a little at times. The astral body is also
fully developed, but it is not yet by any means under
perfect control; even among the races to which we
belong, there are many people who are the victims
of their own emotions. Instead of being able to gov-
ern them perfectly, they too often allow themselves
to be governed by them. They let their emotions run
away with them, just as a wild horse may run away
with its rider, and take him into many places where
he does not wish to go.

We may take it, then, that in all the best men of
the more advanced races at the present day the phys-
ical body is fully developed, and fairly under control;
the astral body is also fully developed, but not by
any means under perfect control; the mental body is
in process of unfoldment, but its growth is yet very
far from complete. They have a long way to go yet
before these three bodies, the physical, the astral and
the mental, are entirely subordinate to the soul.
When that happens the lower self will have been ab-
sorbed into the higher self, and the ego, the soul, will
have dominated the man. Though the man is not yet
perfect, the different vehicles are so far harmonized
that they have but one aim.

Up to this time the soul has been slowly controlling

Tue EXISTENCE OF THE MASTERS 17

the personal vehicles until they become one with it,
but now the Monad in his turn begins to dominate
the soul; and there will presently come a time when,
just as the personality and the soul have become one,
the Spirit and the soul will become one in their turn.
This is the unification of the ego with the Monad;
and when that is achieved the man has attained the
object of his descent into matter—he has become the
Superman, or Adept.

Now only, for the first time, does he enter upon his
real life, for the whole of this stupendous process of
evolution (through all the lower kingdoms and then
through the human kingdom up to the attainment of
Adeptship) is but a preparation for that true life of
the Spirit which begins only when man becomes more
than man. Humanity is the final class of the world-
school; and when a man has been trained therein he
passes out into the real life, the life of the glorified
Spirit, the life of the Christ. What that is we know
but little as yet, though we see some of Those who are
sharing it. It has a glory and a splendor which is
beyond all comparison, beyond our comprehension;
and yet it is a vivid and living fact, and the attain-
ment of it by every one of us is an absolute certainty
from which we cannot escape even if we would. If
we act selfishly, if we set ourselves against the cur-
rent of evolution, we can delay our progress; but we
cannot finally prevent it.

Having finished with human life, the Perfected Man
usually drops His various material bodies, but He

18 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

retains the power to take up any of them if ever He
should need them in course of His work. In the-
majority of cases, one who gains that level no longer
needs a physical body. He no longer retains an astral,
a mental or even a causal body, but lives permanently
at His highest level. Whenever for any purpose He
needs to deal with a lower plane, He must take a
temporary vehicle belonging to that plane, because
only through the medium of its matter can He come
in contact with those who live therein. If He wishes
to talk to men physically, He must take a physical
body; He must have at least a partial materializa-
tion, or He cannot speak. In the same way if He
wishes to impress our minds, He must draw round
Himself a mental body. Whenever He needs in His
work to take a lower vehicle, He has the power to do
so; but He holds it only temporarily.

There are seven lines of still further progress along
which the Perfected Man can go, a list of which we
shall give in a later chapter. The world is guided
and directed to a large extent by a Brotherhood of
Adepts to which our Masters belong. Theosophical
students make all sorts of mistakes about Them.
They often regard Them as a great monastic com-
munity, all living together in some secret place. They
suppose Them sometimes to be Angels, and many of
our students have thought that They were all Indian,
or that They all resided in the Himalayas. None of
these hypotheses is true. There is a great Brother-
hood, and its Members are in constant communica-

THE EXISTENCE OF THE MASTERS 19

tion with one another; but Their communication is
on higher planes and They do not necessarily live
together. As part of Their work, some of these great
Brothers Whom we call Masters of the Wisdom are
willing to take pupil-apprentices and teach them; but
They form only a small section of the mighty Body
of Perfected Men.

The powers of the Adept are indeed many and won-
. derful, but they all follow in natural sequence from
faculties which we ourselves possess. It is only that
They have these faculties in a very much greater
degree. I think that the outstanding characteristic
of the Adept, as compared with ourselves, is that He
looks upon everything from an absolutely different
point of view; for there is in Him nothing whatever
of the thought of self which is so prominent with the
majority of men. The Adept has eliminated the lower
self, and is living not for self but for all, and yet, in
a way that only He can really understand, that all
is truly Himself also. He has reached that stage in
which there is no flaw in His character, nothing of a
thought or feeling for a personal, separated self, and
His only motive is that of helping forward evolution,
of working in harmony with the Logos Who directs it.

Perhaps the next most prominent characteristic is
His all-round development. We are all of us im-
perfect; none has attained the highest level in any
line, and even the great scientist or the great saint
has usually reached high excellence in one thing only,
and there remain other sides of his nature not yet

20 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

unfolded. All of us possess some germ of all the
different characteristics, but always they are but:
partially awakened, and one much more than another.
An Adept, however, is an all-round Man, a Man
whose devotion and love and sympathy and compas-
sion are perfect, while at the same time His intellect
is something far grander than we can as yet realize,
and His spirituality is wonderful and divine. He
stands out above and beyond all men whom we know,
because of the fact that He is fully developed.

CHAPTER II
THE PHYSICAL BODIES OF THE MASTERS

There has been among Theosophical students a
great deal of vagueness and uncertainty about the
Masters, so perhaps it may help us to realize how
natural Their lives are, and how there is an ordinary
physical side to them, if I say a few words about the
daily life and appearance of some of Them. There
is no one physical characteristic by which an Adept
can be infallibly distinguished from other men, but
He always appears impressive, noble, dignified, holy
and serene, and anyone meeting Him could hardly
fail to recognize that he was in the presence of a
remarkable man. He is the strong but silent man,
speaking only when He has a definite object in view,
to encourage, to help or to warn; yet He is wonder-
fully benevolent and full of a keen sense of humor—
humor always of a kindly order, used never to wound,
but always to lighten the troubles of life. The Mas-
ter Morya once said that it is impossible to make
progress on the occult Path without a sense of humor,
and certainly all the Adepts Whom I have seen have
possessed that qualification.

“Most of Them are distinctly fine-looking men;
Their physical bodies are practically perfect, for

22 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

They live in complete obedience to the laws of health,
and above all They never worry about anything. All
Their evil karma has long been exhausted, and thus
the physical body is as perfect an expression of the
Augoeides or glorified body of the Ego as the limita-
tions of the physical plane will allow, so that not
only is the present body of an Adept usually splen-
didly handsome, but also any new body that He may
take in a subsequent incarnation is likely to be an
almost exact reproduction of the old one, allowing for
racial and family differences, because there is noth-
ing to modify it. This freedom from karma gives
Them, when for any reason They choose to take a
new body, entire liberty to select a birth in any
country or race that may be convenient for the work
that They have to do, and thus the nationality of
the particular bodies which They happen to be wear-
ing at any given time is not of primary importance.

To know that a certain man is an Adept it would
be necessary to see His causal body, for in that His
development would show by its greatly increased size,
and by a special arrangement of its colors into con-
centric spheres, such as is indicated to some extent
in the illustration of the causal body of an Arhat
(Plate xxvi) in Man Visible and Invisible.

Let me here briefly describe a certain valley in
Tibet where three of these Great Ones, the Master
Morya, the Master Kuthumi, and the Master Djwal
Kul are living at the present time. The Masters
Morya and Kuthumi occupy houses on opposite sides

Tue Puysicat Bopigs of THE MASTERS Haas

of a narrow ravine, the slopes of which are covered
with pine trees, and at the bottom flows a small
stream. Paths run down the ravine past Their
houses, and meet at the bottom, where there is a
little bridge. Close to the bridge a narrow opening
leads to a system of vast subterranean halls contain-
ing an occult museum of which the Master Kuthumi
is the Guardian on behalf of the Great White Brother-
hood.

The contents of this museum are of the most varied
character. They appear to be intended as a kind of
illustration of the whole process of evolution. For
example, there are here the most lifelike images of
every type of man which has existed on this planet
from the commencement—from gigantic loose-jointed
Lemurians to pigmy remains of even earlier and less
human races. Models in alto relievo show all the
variations of the surface of the earth—the conditions
before and after the great cataclysms which have
changed it so much. Huge diagrams illustrate the
migrations of the different races of the world, and
show exactly how far they spread from their respec-
tive sources. Other similar diagrams are devoted to
the influence of the various religions of the world,
showing where each was practiced in its original
purity, and where it became mingled with and dis-
torted by the remains of other religions.

' Amazingly lifelike statues perpetuate the physical
appearance of certain of the great leaders and teachers
of long-forgotten races; and various objects of interest

24 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

connected with important and even unnoticed ad-
vancements in civilization are preserved for the exam-_
ination of posterity. Original manuscripts of incred-
ible antiquity and of priceless value are here to be seen
—a manuscript, for example, written by the hand of
the Lord Buddha Himself in His final life as Prince
Siddartha, and another written by the Lord Christ
during His birth in Palestine. Here is kept that mar-
velous original of the Book of Dzyan, which Madame
Blavatsky describes in the opening of The Secret
Doctrine. Here too are strange scripts from other
worlds than ours. Animal and vegetable forms are
also depicted, some few of which are known to us as
fossils, though most of them are unimagined by our
modern science. Actual models of some of the great
cities of remote and forgotten antiquity are here for
the study of the pupils.

All statues and models are vividly colored exactly
as were the originals; and we may note that the
collection here was intentionally put together at the
time, in order to represent to posterity the exact
stages through which the evolution or civilization of
the time was passing, so that instead of mere incom-
plete fragments, such as our museums so often pre-
sent to us, we have in all cases an intentionally edu-
cational series of presentations. There we find models
of all the kinds of machinery which the different civ-
ilizations have evolved, and also there are elaborate
and abundant illustrations of the types of magic in
use at the various periods of history.

Tue PuysicaLt Bopigs oF THE MASTERS Zp

In the vestibule leading to these vast halls are kept
the living images of those pupils of the Masters
Morya and Kuthumi who happen at the'time to be
on probation, which I will describe in the next chap-
ter. These images are ranged round the walls like
statues, and are perfect representations of the pupils
concerned. It is not probable, however, that they
are visible to physical eyes, for the lowest matter
_ entering into their composition is etheric.

Near the bridge there is also a small temple with
turrets of somewhat Burmese form, to which a few
villagers go to make offerings of fruit and flowers,
and to burn camphor and recite the Pancha Sila. A
rough and uneven track leads down the valley by the
side of the stream. From either of the two houses
of the Masters the other house can be seen; they are
both above the bridge, but it is doubtful whether both
could be seen from it, since the ravine bends round.
If we follow the path up the valley past the house of
the Master Kuthumi it will lead us to a large pillar
of rock, beyond which, the ravine bending round, it
passes out of sight. Some distance further on the
ravine opens out into a plateau on which there is
a lake, in which, tradition tells us, Madame Blavatsky
used to bathe; and it is said that she found it very
cold. The valley is sheltered and faces south, and
though the surrounding country is under snow during
the winter, I do not remember having seen any near
the Masters’ houses. These houses are of stone, very
heavily and strongly built.

26 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

The house of the Master Kuthumi is divided into
two parts by a passageway running straight through
it. On entering the passage, the first door on the
right leads into the principal room of the house, in
which our Master usually sits. It is large and lofty
(about fifty feet by thirty feet), in many ways more
like a hall than a room, and it occupies the whole of
the front of the house on that side of the passage.
Behind that large room are two other nearly square
rooms, one of which He uses as a library, and the
other as a bedroom. That completes that side or
division of the house, which is apparently reserved
for the Master’s personal use, and is surrounded by
a broad veranda. The other side of the house, on the
left of the passage as one enters, seems to be divided
into smaller rooms and offices of various kinds, but
we have had no opportunity of closely examining
them.

The large room is well supplied with windows, both
along the front and the end—so well that on enter-
ing one gets the impression of an almost continuous
outlook; and under the windows runs a long seat.
There is also a somewhat unusual feature for that
country, a large open fireplace in the middle of the
wall opposite the front windows. This is so arranged
as to heat all three rooms, and it has a curious ham-
mered iron cover, which I am told is unique in Tibet.
Over the opening of that fireplace is a mantelpiece,
and near by stands the Master’s armchair of very old
carved wood, hollowed to fit the sitter, so that for it

GROUND PLAN OF THE WESTERN HALF OF THE HOUSE OF
THE Master KuTHUMI

THE PHYSICAL Bopies oF THE MASTERS Nee

no cushions are required. Dotted about the room are
tables and settees or sofas, mostly without backs, and
in one corner is the keyboard of the Master’s organ.
The ceiling is perhaps twenty feet high, and is very
handsome, with its fine carved beams, which descend
into ornamental points where they meet one another
and divide the ceiling into oblong sections. An arched
opening with a pillar in the center, somewhat in the
Gothic style, but without glass, opens into the study,
and a similar window opens into the bedroom. This
latter room is very simply furnished. There is an
ordinary bed, swung hammock-like between two
carved wooden supports fixed in the wall (one of these
carved to imitate a lion’s head, and the other an ele-
phant’s), and the bed when not in use folds up against
the wall.

The library is a fine room, containing thousands
of volumes. Running out from the wall there are tall
book-shelves, filled with books in many languages,
a number of them being modern European works; and
at the top there are open shelves for manuscripts.
The Master is a great linguist, and besides being a
fine English scholar has a thorough knowledge of
French and German. The study also contains a type-
writer, which was presented to the Master by one of
His pupils.

Of the Master’s family I know but little. There is
a lady, evidently a pupil, whom He calls “sister.”
Whether she is actually His sister or not I do not
know; she might possibly be a cousin or a niece.

28 THe MASTERS AND THE PatTH

She looks much older than He, but that would not
make the relationship improbable, as He has appeared
of about the same age for a long time. She resembles
Him to a certain extent, and once or twice when there
have been gatherings she has come and joined the
party; though her principal work seems to be to look
after the housekeeping and manage the servants.
Among the latter are an old man and his wife, who
have been for a long time in the Master’s service.
They do not know anything of the real dignity of
their employer, but regard Him as a very indulgent
and gracious patron, and naturally they benefit
greatly by being in His service.

The Master has a large garden of His own. He
possesses, too, a quantity of land, and employs
laborers to cultivate it. Near the house there are
flowering shrubs and masses of flowers growing freely,
with ferns among them. Through the garden there
flows a streamlet, which forms a little waterfall, and
over it a tiny bridge is built. Here He often sits
when He is sending out streams of thought and bene-
diction upon His people; it would no doubt appear
to the casual observer as though He were sitting idly
watching Nature, and listening heedlessly to the song
of the birds, and to the splash and tumble of the
water. Sometimes, too, He sits in His great armchair,
and when His people see Him thus, they know that
He must not be disturbed; they do not know exactly
what He is doing, but suppose Him to be in samadhi.
The fact that people in the East understand this kind

Tue PuysicaL Bopigs ofr THE MASTERS 29

of meditation and respect it may be one of the reasons
why the Adepts prefer to live there rather than in
the West.

In this way we get the effect of the Master sitting -
quietly for a considerable part of the day and, as we
should say, meditating; but He has much other
work besides. He has composed some music, and has
written notes and papers for various purposes. He
is also much interested in the growth of physical
science, although this is especially the province of
one of the other great Masters of the Wisdom. From
time to time the Master Kuthumi rides on a big bay
horse, and occasionally, when Their work lies together,
He is accompanied by the Master Morya, who always
rides a magnificent white horse. Our Master regularly
visits some of the monasteries, and sometimes goes up
a great pass to a lonely monastery in the hills. Riding
in the course of His duties seems to be His principal
exercise, but He sometimes walks with the Master
Djwal Kul, who lives quite near to the great crag
which gives a view of the lake.

Sometimes our Master plays on the organ which is
in the large room in His house. He had it made in
Tibet under His direction, and it is in fact a com-
bined piano and organ, with a keyboard like those
which we have in the West, on which He can play all
our Western music. It is unlike any other instru-
ment with which I am acquainted, for it is in a sense
double-fronted, as it can be played either from the
sitting room or the study. The principal keyboard

30 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

(or rather the three keyboards, great organ, swell and
choir) is in the sitting room, whereas the piano key-
board is in the study; and these keyboards can be
used either together or separately. The full organ
with its pedals can be played in the ordinary way
from the sitting room; but by turning a handle some-
what equivalent to a stop, the piano mechanism can
be linked with the organ, so that it all plays simulta-
neously. From that point of view, in fact, the piano
is treated as an additional stop on the organ.

From the keyboard in the study, however, the piano
can be played alone as a separate instrument, quite
dissociated from the organ; but by some complicated
mechanism the choir organ is also linked to that key-
board, so that by it one can play the piano alone
precisely as though it were an ordinary piano, or one
can play the piano accompanied by the choir organ,
or at any rate by certain stops of that organ. It is
also possible, as I said, to separate the two completely,
and so, with a performer at each keyboard, to play
a piano-organ duet. The mechanism and the pipes
of this strange instrument occupy almost the whole
of what might be called the upper story of this part
of the Master’s house. By magnetization He has
placed it in communication with the Gandharvas, or
Devas of music, so that whenever it is played they
cooperate, and thus He obtains combinations of sound
never to be heard on the physical plane; and there
is, too, an effect produced by the organ itself as of
an accompaniment of string and wind instruments.

THE PuysicaAL Bopigs oF THE MASTERS 31

The song of the Devas is ever being sung in the
world; it is ever sounding in men’s ears, but they will
not listen to its beauty. There is the deep bourdon
of the sea, the sighing of the wind in the trees, the
roar of the mountain torrent, the music of stream,
river and waterfall, which together with many others
form the mighty song of Nature as she lives. This
is but the echo in the physical world of a far grander
sound, that of the Being of the Devas. As is said in
Light on the Path: “Only fragments of the.great
song come to your ears while you are but man. But,
if you listen to it, remember it faithfully, so that none
which has reached you is lost, and endeavor to learn
from it the meaning of the mystery which surrounds
you. In time you will need no teacher. For as the
individual has voice, so has that in which the indi-
vidual exists. Life itself has speech, and is never
silent. And its utterance is not, as you that are deaf
may suppose, a cry; it is a song. Learn from it that
you are a part of the harmony; learn from it to obey
the laws of the harmony.”

Every morning a number of people—not exactly
pupils, but followers—come to the Master’s house,
and sit on the veranda and outside it. Sometimes He
gives them a little talk—a sort of lecturette; but more
often He goes on with His work and takes no notice
of them beyond a friendly smile, with which they
seem equally contented. They evidently come to sit
in His aura and venerate Him. Sometimes He takes
His food in their presence, sitting on the veranda,

32 THe MASTERS AND THE PatTH

with this crowd of Tibetans cross-legged on the .

ground around Him; but generally He eats by Him-
self at a table in His room. It is possible that He
keeps the rule of the Buddhist monks, and takes no
food after noon; for I do not remember ever to have
seen Him eat in the evening: it is even possible that
He does not need food every day. Most probably
when He feels inclined He orders the food that He
would like, and does not take His meals at stated
times: I have seen Him eating little round cakes,
brown and sweet; they are made of wheat and sugar
and butter, and are of the ordinary kind used in the
household, cooked by His sister. He also eats curry
and rice, the curry being somewhat in the form of
soup, like dhal. He uses a curious and beautiful
golden spoon, with an elephant at the end of the
handle, the bowl of which is set at an unusual angle
to the stem. It is a family heirloom, very old and
probably of great value. He generally wears white
clothes, but I do not remember ever having seen Him
wearing a head-dress of any kind, except on the rare
occasions when He assumes the yellow robe of the
Gelugpa sect or clan, which includes a hood somewhat.
of the shape of the Roman helmet. The Master
Morya, however, generally wears a turban.

The house of the Master Morya is on the opposite
side of the valley but much lower down—quite close,
in fact, to the little temple and the entrance to the
caves. It is of an entirely different style of archi-
tecture, having at least two stories, and the front.

ee

Tue PuysicaL Bopies or THE MASTERS So

facing the road has verandas at each level which are
almost entirely glassed in. The general method and
arrangement of His life is much the same as that
already described in the case of the Master Kuthumi.

If we walk up the road on the left bank of the
stream, rising gradually along the side of the valley,
we pass on the right the house and grounds of the
Master Kuthumi, and further up the hill we find on
the same side of the road a small hut or cabin which
He who is now the Master Djwal Kul constructed
for Himself with His own hands in the days of His
pupilage, in order that He might have an abiding
place quite near to His Master. In that cabin hangs
a sort of plaque upon which at His request one of
the English pupils of the Master Kuthumi precipi-
tated many years ago an interior view of the large
room in the house of the Master Kuthumi, showing
the figures of various Masters and pupils. This was
done in commemoration of a certain especially happy
and fruitful evening at the Master’s house.’

Turning now to a consideration of the personal
appearance of these Great Ones, that is modified to
some extent by the Ray or type to which each of
Them belongs. The First Ray has power for its most
prominent characteristic, and those who are born
upon it are the kings, the rulers, the governors of the
world—of the inner and spiritual world in the first
place, but also of the physical plane. Any man who
possesses in a very unusual degree the qualities which
enable him to dominate men and to guide them

34 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

smoothly along the course which he desires is likely |

to be either a First-Ray man or one who is tending
towards the First Ray.

Such a kingly figure is the Lord Vaivasvata Manu,
the Ruler of the Fifth Root-Race, Who is the tallest
of all the Adepts, being six feet eight inches in height,
and perfectly proportioned. He is the Representative
Man of our Race, its prototype, and every member
of that Race is directly descended from Him. The
Manu has a very striking face of great power, with
an aquiline nose, a full and flowing brown beard, and
brown eyes, and a magnificent head of leonine poise.
“Tall is He,” says our President, “and of King-like
majesty, with eyes piercing as an eagle’s, tawny and
brilliant with golden lights.” He is living at present
in the Himalaya mountains, not far from the house
of His great Brother, the Lord Maitreya.

Such a figure also is the Master Morya, the lieu-
tenant and successor of the Lord Vaivasvata Manu,
and the future Manu of the Sixth Root-Race. He is
a Rajput King by birth, and has a dark beard divided
into two parts, dark, almost black, hair falling to His
shoulders, and dark and piercing eyes, full of power.
He is six feet six inches in height, and bears Himself
like a soldier, speaking in short terse sentences as if
He were accustomed to being instantly obeyed. In
His presence there is a sense of overwhelming power
and strength, and He has an imperious dignity that
compels the deepest reverence.

Madame Blavatsky has often told us how she met.

Tue Puysicat Bopres or THE MASTERS 30

the Master Morya in Hyde Park, London, in the vear
1851, when He came over with a number of other
Indian Princes to attend the first great International
Exhibition. Strangely enough, I myself, then a little
child of four, saw Him also, all unknowing. I can
remember being taken to see a gorgeous procession,
in which among many other wonders came a party
of richly dressed Indian horsemen. Magnificent
‘ horsemen they were, riding steeds as fine, I suppose,
as any in the world, and it was only natural that my
childish eyes were fixed upon them in great delight,
and that they were perhaps to me the finest exhibit
of that marvelous and fairy-like show. And even as
I watched them pass, as I stood holding my father’s
hand, one of the tallest of those heroes fixed me with
gleaming black eyes, which half-frightened me, and
yet at the same time filled me somehow with inde-
scribable happiness and exaltation. He passed with
the others, and I saw Him no more, yet often the
vision of that flashing eye returned to my childish
memory.

Of course, I knew nothing then of who He was, and
I should never have identified Him had it not been
for a gracious remark which He made to me many
years afterwards. Speaking one day in His presence
of the earlier days of the Society I happened to say
that the first time I had had the privilege of seeing
Him in materialized form was on a certain occasion
when He came into Madame Blavatsky’s room at
Adyar, for the purpose of giving her strength and

36 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

issuing certain directions. He Himself, who was en- .
gaged in conversation with some other Adepts, turned
sharply upon me and said: ‘No, that was not the first
time. Do you not remember, as a tiny child, watching
the Indian horsemen ride past in Hyde Park, and did
you not see how even then I singled you out?” I
remembered instantly, of course, and said: “O Mas-
ter, was that you? But I ought to have known it.”
I do not mention this incident among the occasions
when I have met and spoken with a Master, both
parties to the interview being in the physical body,
because I did not at the time know that great horse-
man to be the Master, and because the evidence of
so small a child might well be doubted or discounted.

Another such regal figure is the Lord Chakshusha
Manu, the Manu of the Fourth Root-Race, Who is
Chinese by birth, and of very high caste. He has
the high Mongolian cheek bones, and His face looks
as though it were delicately carven from old ivory.
He generally wears magnificent robes of flowing cloth
of gold. As a rule we do not come into contact with
Him in our regular work, except when it happens that
we have to deal with a pupil belonging to His Root-
Race.

In the persons of our Lord the Bodhisattva, the
World-Teacher and of the Master Kuthumi, His
principal lieutenant, the influence that is especially
noticeable is the radiance of Their all-embracing Love.
The Lord Maitreya is wearing a body of the Keltic
race at the present time, though when He comes forth

Tue PuysicaL Bopies oF THE MASTERS AY |

to the world to teach His people, as He intends to do
very shortly, He will make use of a body prepared
for Him by one of His disciples. His is a face of
wondrous beauty, strong and yet most tender, with
rich hair flowing like red gold about His shoulders.
His beard is pointed, as in some of the old pictures,
and His eyes, of a wonderful violet, are like twin

flowers, like stars, like deep and holy pools filled with
~ the waters of everlasting peace. His smile is dazzling
beyond words, and a blinding glory of Light surrounds
Him, intermingled with that marvelous rose-colored
glow which ever shines from the Lord of Love.

We may think of Him as seated in the great front
room of His house in the Himalayas, the room with
many windows, that overlooks the gardens and the
terraces and, far below, the rolling Indian plains; or
in flowing robes of white, edged with a deep border
of gold, as walking in His garden in the cool of the
evening, among the glorious flowers, whose perfume
fills the surrounding air with a rich, sweet fragrance.
Wondrous beyond measure is our Holy Lord the
Christ, wondrous beyond any power of description, for
through Him flows the Love which comforts millions,
and His is the Voice that speaks, as never man spake,
the words of teaching that bring peace to angels and
to men. Within a very few years that Voice will be
heard and that Love be felt by those who dwell in
the dark ways of earth; may we prepare ourselves
to receive Him when He comes, and give Him fitting
welcome and faithful service!

38 Tue MaAstTers AND THE PaTH

The Master Kuthumi wears the body of a Kashmiri .
Brahman, and is as fair in complexion as the average
Englishman. He, too, has flowing hair, and His
eyes are blue, and full of joy and love. His hair and
beard are brown, which, as the sunlight catches it,
becomes ruddy with glints of gold. His face is some-
what hard to describe, for His expression is ever
changing as He smiles; the nose is finely chiseled, and
the eyes are large and of a wonderful liquid blue.
Like the great Lord, He, too, is a Teacher and Priest,
and many centuries hence He will succeed Him in His
high Office, and will assume the scepter of the World-
Teacher, and become the Bodhisattva of the Sixth
Root-Race.

The Maha-Chohan is the type of the Statesman, the
great Organizer, though He too has many military
qualities. He wears an Indian body, and is tall and
thin, with a sharp profile, very fine and clear cut, and
no hair on the face. His face is rather stern, with a
strong, square chin; His eyes are deep and penetrat-
ing, and He speaks somewhat abruptly, as a soldier
speaks. He generally wears Indian robes and a white
turban.

The Master the Comte de St. Germain resembles
Him in many ways. ‘Though He is not especially
tall, He is very upright and military in His bearing,
and He has the exquisite courtesy and dignity of a
grand seigneur of the eighteenth century; we feel at
once that He belongs to a very old and noble family.
His eyes are large and brown, and are filled with

THE PHYSICAL Bopies oF THE MASTERS 39

tenderness and humor, though there is in them a glint
of power; and the splendor of His presence impels
men to make obeisance. His face is olive-tanned;
His close-cut brown hair is parted in the center and
brushed back from the forehead, and he has a short
and pointed beard. Often He wears a dark uniform
with facings of gold lace—often also a magnificent
red military cloak—and these accentuate His soldier-
like appearance. He usually resides in an ancient
castle in Eastern Europe that has belonged to His
family for many centuries.

The Master Serapis is tall, and fair in complexion.
He is a Greek by birth, though all His work has been
done in Egypt and in connection with the Egyptian
Lodge. He is very distinguished and ascetic in face,
somewhat resembling the late Cardinal Newman.

Perhaps the Venetian Chohan is the handsomest of
all the members of the Brotherhood. He is very tall
—about six feet five inches, and has a flowing beard
and golden hair somewhat like those of the Manu;
and His eyes are blue. Although He was born in
Venice, His family undoubtedly has Gothic blood in
its veins, for He is a man distinctly of that type.

The Master Hilarion is a Greek and, except that
He has a slightly aquiline nose, is of the ancient
Greek type. His forehead is low and broad, and re-
sembles that of the Hermes of Praxiteles. He, too,
is wonderfully handsome, and looks rather younger
than most of the Adepts.

He who was once the disciple Jesus is now wearing

40 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

a Syrian body. He has the dark skin, dark eyes and -
black beard of the Arab, and generally wears white
robes and a turban. He is the Master of devotees,
and the keynote of His Presence is an intense purity,
and a fiery type of devotion that brooks no obstacles.
He lives amongst the Druses of Mount Lebanon.

Two of the Great Ones with Whom we have come
in contact diverge slightly from what perhaps we may
call, with all reverence, the usual type of the physical
body of the Adept. One of these is He of Whom
Colonel Olcott several times writes, upon Whom the
name Jupiter was conferred in the book, Man:
Whence, How and Whither. He is shorter than most
members of the Brotherhood, and is the only One
of Them, so far as I am aware, Whose hair shows
streaks of gray. He holds Himself very upright, and
moves with alertness and military precision. He is
a landed proprietor, and during the visit which I paid
to Him with Swami T. Subba Rao, I saw Him several
times transacting business with men who appeared to
be foremen, bringing reports to Him and receiving in-
structions. The other is the Master Djwal Kul, who
is still wearing the same body in which He attained
Adeptship only a few years ago. Perhaps for that
reason it has not been possible to make that body
a perfect reproduction of the Augoeides. His face is
distinctly Tibetan in character, with high cheek bones,
and is somewhat rugged in appearance, showing signs
of age.

Sometimes an Adept for some special purpose wants

Tue PuysicaL Bopres or THE MASTERS 41

a body to use temporarily amid the bustle of the
world. That will be the case when the World-Teacher
comes, and we have been told that several other
Adepts also may then appear, to act as His lieuten-
ants and assist Him in His great work for humanity.
Most of these Great Ones will follow the example of
Their Chief, and borrow temporarily the bodies of
_ Their pupils, so it is necessary that a certain number
of such vehicles should be ready for Their use.
Students sometimes ask why, since the Adepts have
physical bodies already, They will need others on this
occasion.

Those Who, attaining the level of Adeptship, choose
as Their future career to remain upon this world and
help directly in the evolution of Their own humanity,
find it convenient for Their work to retain physical
bodies. In order to be suitable for Their purposes,
these bodies must be of no ordinary kind. Not only
must they be absolutely sound in health, but they
must also be perfect expressions of as much of the
ego as can be manifested on the physical plane.

The building up of such a body as this is no light
task. When the ego of an ordinary man comes down
to his new baby body, he finds it in charge of an
artificial elemental, which has been created accord-
ing to his karma, as I have described in The Inner
Infe. This elemental is industriously occupied in
modeling the form which is soon to be born in the
outer world, and it remains after birth and continues
that molding process usually until the body is six or

42 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

seven years old. During this period the ego is grad-—

ually acquiring closer contact with his new vehicles,
emotional and mental as well as physical, and is be-
coming accustomed to them; but the actual work done
by himself upon these new vehicles up to the point at
which the elemental withdraws is, in most cases, in-
considerable. He is certainly in connection with the
body, but generally pays but little attention to it,
preferring to wait until it has reached a stage where
it is more responsive to his efforts.

The case of an Adept is very different from this.
As there is no evil karma to be worked out, no
artificial elemental is at work, and the ego himself
is in sole charge of the development of the body from
the beginning, finding himself limited only by its
heredity. ‘This enables a far more refined and deli-
cate instrument to be produced, but it also involves
more trouble for the ego, and engages for some years
a considerable amount of his time and energy. In
consequence of this, and no doubt for other reasons
as well, an Adept does not wish to repeat the process
more often than is strictly necessary, and He there-
fore makes His physical body last as long as pos-
sible. Our bodies grow old and die for various rea-
sons, from inherited weakness, disease, accident and
self-indulgence, worry and overwork. But in the case
of an Adept none of these causes is present, though
we must of course remember that His body is fit for
work and capable of endurance immeasurably beyond
those of ordinary men.

Tur PuysicaL Bopins oF THE MASTERS 43

The bodies of the Adepts being such as we have
described They are usually able to hold’ possession
of them much longer than an ordinary man can, and
the consequence is that we find on inquiry that the
age of any such body is usually much greater than
from appearances we had supposed it to be. The
Master Morya, for example, appears to be a man
absolutely in the prime of life—possibly thirty-five
‘or forty years of age; yet many of the stories which
His pupils tell of Him assign to Him an age four or
five times greater than that, and Madame Blavatsky
herself told us that when she first saw Him in her
childhood He appeared to her exactly the same as at
the present time. Again, the Master Kuthumi has the
appearance of being about the same age as His con-
stant friend and companion, the Master Morya; yet
it has been said that He took a university degree in
Europe just before the middle of the last century,
which would certainly make Him something very like
a centenarian. We have at present no means of
knowing what is the limit of prolongation, though
there is evidence to show that it may easily extend
to more than double the threescore years and ten of
the Psalmist. ;

A body thus made suitable for higher work is in-
evitably a sensitive one, and for that very reason it
requires careful treatment if it is to be always at its
best. It would wear out as ours do if it were sub-
jected to the innumerable petty frictions of the outer
world, and its constant torrent of unsympathetic vi-

44 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

brations. Therefore the Great Ones usually live in

comparative seclusion, and appear but rarely in that
cyclonic chaos which we call daily life. If They were
to bring Their bodies into the whirl of curiosity and
vehement emotion which is likely to surround the
World-Teacher when He comes, there can be no doubt
that the life of these bodies would be greatly short-
ened, and also, because of their extreme sensitiveness,
there would be much unnecessary suffering.

By temporarily occupying the body of a pupil, the
Adept avoids these inconveniences, and at the same
time gives an incalculable impetus to the pupil’s evo-
lution. He inhabits the vehicle only when He needs
it—to deliver a lecture, perhaps, or to pour a special
flood of blessing; and as soon as He has done what
He wishes, He steps out of the body, and the pupil,
who has all the while been in attendance, resumes it,
as the Adept goes back to His own proper vehicle to
continue His usual work for the helping of the world.
In this way His regular business is but little affected,
yet He has always at His disposal a body through
which He can cooperate, when required, on the phys-
ical plane, in the beatific mission of the World-
Teacher.

We can readily imagine in what ways this will
affect the pupil who is so favored as to have the op-
portunity of thus lending his body to a Great One,
though the extent of its action may well be beyond
our calculation. A vehicle tuned by such an influ-
ence will be to him verily an assistance, not a limi-

fa

THE Puysicat Bopigs of THE MASTERS 45

tation; and while his body is in use he will always
have the privilege of bathing in the Adept’s marvel-
ous magnetism, for he must be at hand to resume
charge as soon as the Master has finished with it.

This plan of borrowing a suitable body is always
adopted by the Great Ones when They think it well
to descend among men, under conditions such as those
-which now obtain in the world, The Lord Gautama
employed it when He came to attain the Buddha-
hood, and the Lord Maitreya took the same course
when He visited Palestine two thousand years ago.
The only exception known to me is that when a new
Bodhisattva assumes the office of World-Teacher after
His predecessor has become the Buddha, on His first
appearance in the world in that capacity He takes
birth as a little child in the ordinary way. Thus did
our Lord, the present Bodhisattva, when He took
birth as Shri Krishna on the glowing plains of India,
to be reverenced and loved with a passion of devotion
that has scarcely ever been equaled.

This temporary occupation of a pupil’s body should
not be confused with the permanent use by an ad-
vanced person of a vehicle prepared for him by some-
one else. It is generally known among her followers
that our great Founder, Madame Blavatsky, when she
left the body in which we knew her, entered another
which had just been abandoned by its original tenant.
As to whether that body had been specially prepared
for her use, I have no information; but other instances
are known in which that was done. There is always

46 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

in such cases a certain difficulty in adapting the
vehicle to the needs and idiosyncrasies of the new
occupant; and it is probable that it never becomes a
perfectly fitting garment. There is for the incoming
ego a choice between devoting a considerable amount
of time and trouble to superintending the growth of
a new vehicle, which would be a perfect expression
of him, as far as that is possible on the physical
plane; or of avoiding all that difficulty by entering
the body of another—a process which will provide a
reasonably good instrument for all ordinary purposes,
but which will never fulfill in every respect all that
its owner desires. In all cases, a pupil would natu-
rally be eager to have the honor of giving up his body
to his Master; but few indeed are the vehicles pure
enough to be so used.

The question is often raised as to why an Adept,
Whose work seems to lie almost entirely on higher
planes, needs a physical body at all. It is really no
concern of ours, but if speculation on such a matter
be not irreverent, various reasons suggest themselves.
The Adept spends much of His time in projecting
streams of influence, and while, so far as has been
observed, these are most often on the higher mental
level, or on the plane above that, it is probable that
they may sometimes at least be etheric currents, and
for the manipulation of these the possession of a
physical body is undoubtedly an advantage. Again,
most of the Masters Whom I have seen have a few
pupils or assistants who live with or near Them on

Tue PuysicaLt Bopizs oF THE MASTERS 47

the physical plane, and a physical body may be neces-
sary for their sake. Of this we may be certain, that
if an Adept chooses to take the trouble to maintain
such a body, He has a good reason for it; for we
know enough of Their methods of working to be fully
aware that They always do everything in the best
way, and by the means which involve the least ex-
penditure of energy.

Cuapter III
THE WAY TO THE MASTER

There has always been a Brotherhood of Adepts,
the Great White Brotherhood; there have always been
Those Who knew, Those Who possessed this inner
wisdom, and our Masters are among the present rep-
resentatives of that mighty line of Seers and Sages.
Part of the knowledge which They have garnered
during countless #ons is available to everyone on
the physical plane under the name of Theosophy.
But there is far more behind. The Master Kuthumi
Himself once said smilingly, when someone spoke of
the enormous change that the Theosophical knowledge
had made in our lives, and of the wonderful compre-
hensiveness of the doctrine of reincarnation: “Yes,
but we have only lifted a very small corner of the
veil as yet.” When we have thoroughly assimilated
the knowledge given us, and are all living up to its
teaching, the Brotherhood will be ready to lift the
veil further; but only when we have complied with
those conditions.

For those who wish to know more and to draw
nearer, the Path is open. But the man who aspires
to approach the Masters can reach Them only by
making himself unselfish as They are unselfish, by

Tuer Way To THE MASTER 49

learning to forget the personal self, and by devoting
himself wholly to the service of humanity as They
do. Their point of view is so radically ‘different from
ours that it is difficult at first for us to grasp it. They
have their private affections just as we have, and
assuredly They love some men more than others; but
They will never allow such feelings as those to influ-
ence Their attitude in the very slightest degree when
the work is in question. They will take much trouble
over a man if They see in him the seeds of future
greatness, if They think that he will prove a good in-
vestment for the amount of time and force spent upon
him. There is no such possibility as the faintest
thought of favoritism in the minds of these Great Ones.
They consider simply and solely the work which has to
be done, the work of evolution, and the value of the
man in relation to it; and if we will fit ourselves to
take part in that, our progress will be rapid.

Few people realize the magnitude of this under-
taking and therefore the seriousness of what they are
asking when they want to be taken as pupils. The
Adepts are dealing with the entire world in enormous
comprehensive sweeps of power; They are influencing
millions in their causal bodies or on the buddhic
plane, and all the time steadily, though by almost
imperceptible degrees, raising the higher bodies of the
people on a wholesale scale. And yet the same Mas-
ter Who spends His life in doing that work will some-
times turn aside and pay personal attention to little
details connected with one pupil. All who dare to

50 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

ask to become pupils should try to realize the stu-
pendous character of the forces and the work, and the
magnitude of the Beings with Whom they propose to
come into contact. The least understanding of the
greatness of all these things will make it clear why
the Adepts will not spend some of Their energy on a
pupil unless They have evidence that in a reasonable
time he will add to the support of the world a strong
current of strength and power in the right direction.
They live to do the work of the Logos of the system,
and those of us who wish to draw near to Them must
learn to do likewise, and live only for the work.
Those who do that will certainly attract the attention
of the Holy Ones, and be trained by Them to help
and bless the world.

Human progress is slow, but it is constant; there-
fore the number of the Perfected Men is increasing,
and the possibility of attaining to Their level is within
the reach of all who are willing to make the stupen-
dous effort required. In normal times we should need
many births before we could gain Adeptship, but just
now it is possible for us to hasten our progress on that
Path, to compress into a few lives the evolution which
otherwise would take many thousands of years. That
is the effort which is being made by many members
of the Theosophical Society; for there is in that
Society an Inner School which teaches men how to
prepare themselves more rapidly for this higher work.
That preparation needs great self-control, determined
effort carried on year after year, and often with but

THE Way To THE MAsTER 51

little to show outwardly in the way of definite prog-
ress; for it involves the training of the higher bodies
far more than the physical body, and the training of
the higher does not always manifest itself very ob-
viously on the physical plane.

Any one who hears about the Masters and Their
teaching, if he has any grasp at all of what it means
and involves, must instantly be seized with a most
_intense desire to understand Them and enter Their
service; the more he learns the more does he become:
filled with the wonder and beauty and glory of God’s
plan, and the more anxious does he become to take
part in the work. Once he has realized that God has
a plan of evolution, he wants to be a fellow-laborer
with God, and nothing else can possibly bring sat-.
isfaction.

Then he begins to ask himself the question, “What
must I do next?” and the answer is: “Work. Do
what you can to help the progress of humanity in
the Master’s way. Begin with what you have the:
opportunity to do and what you can do, which may
be any little external thing at first, and presently as
you acquire the necessary qualities of character you
will be drawn into the higher side of it all, until,
through striving to be and do your best you will find
yourself possessed of the qualifications which admit
to Initiation and membership in the Great White
Brotherhood itself.” I remember, when first I had
the privilege of coming into somewhat closer touch
with the Master, I asked Him in a letter what I should.

52 Tue MAstTEerRs AND THE PatH

do. He answered to the following effect: “You must
find work for yourself; you know what we are doing.
Throw yourself into our work in any way you can.
If I gave you a definite piece of work to do you would
do it, but in that case the karma of what was done
would be mine, because I told you to do it. You
would have only the karma of willing obedience,
which, of course, is very good, but it is not the karma
of initiating a fruitful line of action. I want you to
initiate work for yourself, because then the karma
of the good deed will come to you.”

I think we might all take that unto ourselves. We
might realize that it is our business not to wait until
we are asked to do something, but to set to work.
There is a good deal of quite humble work to be done
in connection with Theosophy. Often perhaps some
of us would prefer the more spectacular part; we
would like to stand up and deliver lectures in public
to big audiences. You can generally find people who
are willing to offer themselves for that; but there is
a great deal of humdrum office work to be done in
connection with our Society, and we do not always
find so many volunteers for that. Reverence and
love for our Masters would lead us to be willing to
do anything whatever in Their service, however hum-
ble; and we may be sure that we are working in Their
service when we are helping the Society which two
of Them founded.

The qualifications for admission to the Great White
Brotherhood, which have to be acquired in the course

Tue Way To THE MASTER 53

of the work in the earlier part of the Path, are of a
very definite character, and are always essentially the
same, although they have been described in many
different terms during the last twenty-five centuries.
But the latest and simplest account of them is to be
found in Mr. J. Krishnamurti’s wonderful little book,
At the Feet of the Master.

Although Mr. Krishnamurti puts this book before
_ the world, the words which it contains are almost en-
tirely those of the Master Kuthumi. ‘These are not
my words,” the author says in the Foreword; ‘They
are the words of the Master who taught me.” When
the book was written, Mr. Krishnamurti’s body was
thirteen years old, and it was necessary for the Mas-
ter’s plans that the knowledge requisite for Initiation
should be conveyed to him as quickly as possible.
The words contained in the book are those in which
the Master tried to convey the whole essence of the
necessary teaching in the simplest and briefest form.
But for the requirements of this particular case, we
might never have had a statement so concise and yet
so complete, so simple and yet so all-inclusive. Many
books have been written expounding the details of
the stages of this preparatory path, and there has been
much argument over the exact shades of meaning of
Sanskrit and Pali words; but in this little manual
the Master boldly brushes all that aside and gives
nothing but the essence of the teaching, expressed as
far as may be in modern terms and illustrated from
modern life. For example, He translates the four

54 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

qualifications Viveka, Vairagya, Shatsampatti and
Mumukshatva as Discrimination, Desirelessness, Good
Conduct and Love. By no possible license can the
English word love be taken as a literal translation
of the Sanskrit word Mumukshatva, for that unques-
tionably means simply the desire for liberation. The
Master apparently argues thus: that the intense de-
sire for freedom is desire for escape from all worldly
limitations, so that even when among them one may
be absolutely free from the slightest feeling of bond-
age to them. Such freedom can be attained only
by union with the Supreme, with the One Who is
behind all, that is to say, by union with God—and
God is Love. Therefore only by our becoming thor-
oughly permeated with the Divine Love can freedom
become possible for us.

There is no more beautiful or satisfactory descrip-
tion of the qualifications than that given in this book,
and one may say with confidence that any one who
will thoroughly carry out its teaching will certainly
pass immediately through the portal of Initiation.
It was a very exceptional case for the Master to spend
so much of His time in the direct teaching of one
individual, but through Mr. Krishnamurti it has
reached tens of thousands of others, and helped them
to an immeasurable extent.

The story of how this little book came to be written
is comparatively simple. Every night I had to take
this boy in his astral body to the house of the Master,
that instruction might be given him. The Master de-

Tue Way To THE MASTER 55

voted perhaps fifteen minutes each night to talking to
him, but at the end of each talk he always gathered
up the main points of what He had said into a single
sentence, or a few sentences, thus making an easy
little summary which was repeated to the boy, so that
he learnt it by heart. He remembered that summary
in the morning and wrote it down. The book consists
of these sentences, of the epitome of the Master’s
teaching, made by Himself, and in His words. The
boy wrote them down somewhat laboriously, because
his English was not then very good. He knew all
these things by heart and did not trouble particularly
about the notes that he had made. A little later he
went up to Benares with our President. While there
he wrote to me, I being down at Adyar, and asked
me to collect and send to him all the notes that he
had made of what the Master had said. I arranged
his notes as well as I could, and typed them all out.

Then it seemed to me that as these were mainly the
Master’s words I had better make sure that there was
no mistake in recording them. Therefore I took the
typewritten copy which I had made to the Master
Kuthumi and asked Him to be so kind as to read it
over. He read it, altered a word or two here and
there, added some connecting and explanatory notes
and a few other sentences which I remembered hav-
ing heard Him speak. Then He said: “Yes, that
-seems correct; that will do;” but He added, “Let us
show it to the Lord Maitreya.” And so we went
together, He taking the book, and it was shown to

56 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

the World-Teacher Himself, Who read it and ap-
proved. It was He Who said: “You should make
a nice little book of this to introduce Alcyone to the
world.” We had not meant to introduce him to the
world; we had not considered it desirable that a mass
of thought should be concentrated on a boy of thir-
teen, who still had his education before him. But in
the occult world we do what we are told, and so this
book was put into the printer’s hands the following
morning. é

All the inconveniences which we expected from
premature publicity came about; but still the Lord
Maitreya was right and we were wrong; for the good
that has been done by that book far outweighs the
trouble it brought to us. Numbers of people, literally
thousands, have written to say how their whole lives
have been changed by it, how everything has become
different to them because they have read it. It has
been translated into twenty-seven languages. There
have been some forty editions of it, or more, and over
a hundred thousand copies have been printed. A
wonderful work has been done by it. Above all, it
bears that special imprimatur of the Coming World-
Teacher, and that is the thing that makes it most
valuable—the fact that it shows us, to a certain ex-
tent, what His teaching is to be. Other books also
there are which the pupil will find of the utmost use
to him in his endeavor to enter upon this Path; The
Voice of the Silence and Light on the Path were given
to us for this purpose, and our President’s wonderful

Tue Way To THE MASTER 57

books In the Outer Court and The Path of Disciple-
ship will be found of inestimable value.

Having these books before him the pupil is left in
no doubt as to what he should do. He should ob-
viously make efforts along two particular lines—the
development of his own character, and the under-
taking of definite work for others. Clearly what is
set before him in this teaching implies an altogether
different attitude towards life in general; that has
been expressed by one of the Masters in the phrase,
“He that wishes to work with us and for us must
leave his own world and come into ours.”’ That does
not mean, as might usually be supposed by students
of Oriental literature, that the pupil must abandon
the ordinary world of physical life and business, and
retire to the jungle, the cave or the mountain, but it
does mean that he must abandon altogether the
worldly attitude of mind and adopt instead of it the
attitude of the Master. The man of the world thinks
of the events of life chiefly as they affect himself and
his personal interests; the Master thinks of them only
as they affect the evolution of the world. Whatsoever
on the whole tends to progress and helps humanity
along its path—that is good and to be supported;
whatsoever in any way hinders these things—that is
undesirable and should be opposed or set aside. That
is good which helps evolution, that is evil which re-
tards it. Here we have a criterion very different from
that of the outer world; a touchstone by means of
which we can quickly decide what we must support

58 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

and what we must resist; and we can apply it to
qualities in our own character as well as to outer
events. We shall be of use to the Master just in
so far as we can work along with Him, in however
humble a fashion; we can best work along with Him
by making ourselves like to Him so that we shall
regard the world as He regards it.

If we work along the same lines as He works we
shall come more and more into sympathy with Him,
and our thoughts will become more and more like His.
This will bring us nearer and nearer to Him both in
thought and activity, and, in so doing, presently we
shall attract His attention, for He is all the time
watching the world in order to find those who will
be of use in His work. Noticing us, He will pres-
ently draw us nearer to Him for still closer and more
detailed observation. That is usually done by bring-
ing us into contact with one who is already His
pupil. It is thus quite unnecessary for anyone to
make any direct effort to attract His attention.

Madame Blavatsky told us that whenever a person
joined the outer Theosophical Society the Master
looked at him, and furthermore she said that in many
cases the Great Ones guided people to join the Society
because of their previous lives. So it would seem that
They usually know a great deal about us before we
know anything about Them. The Adept never forgets
anything. He appears to be always in full possession
of all that has happened to Him, and so if He does
cast even a most casual glance at a person He will

Tue Way To THE MASTER 59

never thereafter overlook that person. When a per-
son joins the Inner School a definite link is formed,
not yet directly with an Adept, but first of all with
the Outer Head of the School, and through her with
her Master, Who is the Inner Head.

That link so made with the Outer Head is definitely
increased and strengthened at each step further into
the School. In the introductory stages there is but
a slight connection; something much more definite
comes with the taking of the pledge of the School, and
those who take the pledges of the higher degrees draw
a little nearer still. This mainly shows itself in a
thickening of the line of communication, for there is
a line of thought connecting each member of the
School with the Outer Head, because he constantly
thinks of her in his meditation. That keeps the link
bright and strong.

She on her part has become one with her Master.
Therefore a connection with her is in that sense a
connection with Him. All those in the Inner School
are thus in touch with her Master, the Master Morya,
though they are often working on other lines than
His, and will become pupils of other Masters when
they are taken on probation. Under such circum-
stances, however, they will receive the influenre of
their own future Master through these channels, be-
cause the Adepts, although living far apart physically,
are in such very close contact that to be in touch
with one of Them is really to be linked with all. It
seems to us a roundabout connection; but it is much

60 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

less so than we think down here, because of the
amazingly close unity between the Great Ones on-
higher levels.

Even at the early stage of this indirect link through
the Outer Head, the Master can work to a certain ex-
tent through any of those people if He wishes to do
so. It is a little out of His way to send His force
through a channel not specially prepared, so He does
not usually do it. But He has some sort of conscious-
ness of those who are in His School, which sometimes
manifests itself in the way of sending to them a help-
ful thought when they are doing some work for Him.
I have known Him to utilize a member of the School
who was giving a lecture, in order to put some fresh
point before the people. Of course, He does that far
more frequently with His pupils, but it has certainly
been done with others as well.

When a student understands all this he will no
longer ask: ‘What can I do that will attract the
Master’s attention?” He will know that it is quite
unnecessary that we should try to do so and that there
is not the slightest fear that any one will be over-
looked.

I remember very well an incident of the early days
of my own connection with the Great Ones, which
bears on this point. I knew on the physical plane
a man of vast erudition and of the most saintly char-
acter, who believed thoroughly in the existence of
the Masters, and devoted his life to the one object of
qualifying himself for Their service. He seemed to

Tue Way To THE MASTER 61

me a man in every way so entirely suitable for dis-
cipleship, so obviously better than myself in many
ways, that I could not understand how it was that
he was not already recognized; and so, being young
in the work and ignorant, one day, when a good oppor-
tunity offered itself, I very humbly and as it were
apologetically mentioned his name to the Master, with
the suggestion that he might perhaps prove a good
instrument. A smile of kindly amusement broke out
upon the Master’s face as He said:

“Ah, you need not fear that your friend is being
overlooked; no one can ever be overlooked; but in
this case there still remains a certain karma to be
worked out, which makes it impossible at the moment
to accept your suggestion. Soon your friend will pass
away from the physical plane, and soon he will re-
turn to it again, and then the expiation will be com-
plete and what you desire for him will have become
possible.”

And then, with the gentle kindness which is always
so prominent a characteristic in Him, He blended my
consciousness with His in an even more intimate man-
ner, and raised it to a plane far higher than I could
then reach, and from that elevation He showed me
how the Great Ones look out upon the world. The
whole earth lay before us with all its millions of souls,
undeveloped, most of them, and therefore inconspic-
uous; but wherever amidst all that mighty multitude
there was one who was approaching even at a great
distance the point at which definite use could be made

62 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

of him, he stood out among the rest just as the flame
of a lighthouse stands out in the darkness of the
night.

“Now you see,” said the Master, “how utterly im-
possible it would be that any one should be overlooked
who is even within measurable distance of the possi-
bility of acceptance as a probationer.”

We can do nothing on our side but steadily work
at the improvement of our character, and endeavor
in every possible way, by the study of. Theosophical
works, by self-development, and by the unselfishness
of our devotion to the interests of others, to fit our-
selves for the honor which we desire, having within
our minds the utter certainty that as soon as we are
ready the recognition will assuredly come. But until
we can be utilized economically—until, that is to say,
the force spent upon us will bring forth, through our
actions, at least as much result as it would if spent
in any other way, it would be a violation of duty on
the part of the Master to draw us into close relations
with Him.

We may be quite sure that there are in reality no
exceptions to this rule, even though we may sometimes
think that we have seen some. A man may be put
upon probation by an Adept while he has still some
obvious faults, but we may be sure that in such a
case there are good qualities under the surface which
far more than counterbalance the superficial defects.
Like the rest of us, the Great Masters of Wisdom have
a long line of lives behind Them, and in those lives,

)

Tue Way To THE MASTER 63

like others, They have made certain karmic ties, and
so sometimes it happens that a particular individual
has a claim on Them for some service rendered long
ago. In the lines of past lives which we have ex-
amined we have sometimes come across instances of
such a karmic link.

Remember also that everyone who meditates upon
the Master makes a definite connection with Him,
which shows itself to clairvoyant vision as a kind of
line of light. The Master always subconsciously feels
the impinging of such a line, and sends out in re-
sponse a steady stream of magnetism which continues
to play long after the meditation is over. The regular
practice of such meditation and concentration is thus
of the utmost help to the aspirant, and regularity is
one of the most important factors in producing the
result. It should be undertaken daily at the same
hour, and we should steadily persevere with it, even
though no obvious effect may be produced. When
no result appears we must be especially careful to
avoid depression, because that makes it more difficult
for a Master’s influence to act upon us, and it also
shows that we are thinking of ourselves more than
of Him.

People very often come or write to our President
or to myself and say, “Why does not the Master use
me? Iam so earnest and devoted to Him. I do so
want to be used. I want Him to take me and teach
me. Why does He not do so?”

There may be many reasons why He does not.

64 THe MASTERS AND THE PaTH

Sometimes a person, asking that, will have some

prominent fault which is in itself quite a sufficient
reason. Not infrequently, I regret to say, it is pride.
A person may have so good a conceit of himself that
he is not amenable to teaching, although he thinks
that he is. Very often in this civilization of ours the
fault is irritability. A good and worthy person will
have his nerves all ajangle, so that it would be im-
possible for him to be drawn into very close and con-
stant touch with the Master. Sometimes the impedi-
ment is curiosity. Some are surprised to hear that
that is a serious failing, but certainly it is—curiosity
about the affairs of other people, and especially about
their occult standing or development. It would be
quite impossible that a Master should draw near to
Himself one who had that failing.

Another common hindrance is readiness to be of-
fended. Many a good and earnest aspirant is so
easily offended as to be of practically no use in the
work, because he cannot get on with other people. He
will have to wait until he has learnt to adapt himself
and to cooperate with any person whatever.

Many people who make the inquiry have failings
of this kind, and they do not like it if their fault is
pointed out to them. They do not generally believe
that they have it, and imagine that we are in error;
but in rare cases they are willing to profit by the sug-
gestion. I remember very well a lady coming to me
in an American city, and asking the question: “What
is the matter with me? Why may I not draw near to

Tue Way To THE MASTER 65

the Master?” “Do you really want to know?” I
asked. '

Yes, certainly, she really wished to know. She
adjured me to look at her occultly, or clairvoyantly,
or in any way I wished, at all her vehicles and her
past lives, and to decide thereby. I took her at her
word and said, ‘Well, if you really want to know,
there is too much ego in your cosmos. You are think-
ing all about yourself and not enough about the
work.”

Of course she was terribly offended; she flounced
out of the room, and said she did not think much of
my clairvoyance; but that lady had the courage to
come back two years later and say: “What you told
me was quite true, and I am going to put it right and
to work hard at it.” That story has repeated itself
many times, except that this is the only case in which
the person came back and acknowledged the fault.

Self-centeredness is only another form of pride, but
it is very prominent at the present day. The person-
ality which we have been building up for many thou-
sands of years has grown strong, and often self-
assertive, and it is one of the hardest tasks to reverse
its attitude and compel it to acquire the habit of
looking at things from the standpoint of others. One
must certainly step out of the center of his own circle,
as I explained in The Inner Life, if he wishes to come
to the Master.

It sometimes happens, however, that those who ask
the question have not any particular outstanding de-

66 THE MASTERS AND THE PatTH

fect, and when one looks them over, one can only |
say, “I do not see any definite reason, any one fault
which is holding you back, but you will have to grow
a little all round.” That is an unpalatable thing to
have to tell a person, but it is the fact; they are not
yet big enough, and must grow before they will be
worthy. It requires some strength and bigness to put
oneself in the same attitude towards the work which
the Master Himself adopts, because, in addition to
any defect of our own, we have the whole pressure
of the thought of the world against us.

Those who drift along with the current of evolu-
tion and will reach this stage in the very far distant
future, will find it much easier, for popular opinion
at that period will be in harmony with these ideals.
We have now, however, to resist what the Christian
would call temptation, the steady pressure of opinion
from without, for millions of people all round us are
thinking personal thoughts. To make a stand against
these needs a real effort, true courage and persever-
ance. We must doggedly keep to the task, and though
we may fail again and again we must not lose heart,
but get up and go on.

The astral and mental bodies of an aspirant ought
to be continually exhibiting four or five big and splen-
did emotions—love, devotion, sympathy, and intellec-
tual aspiration among them. But instead of a few
great emotions vibrating splendidly and clearly with
fine color, one generally sees the astral body spotted
over with red and brown and gray and black vortices,

Tue Way To THE MASTER 67

often a hundred or more. They are somewhat like a
mass of warts would be on a physical body, prevent-
ing the skin from being sensitive as it should be. The
candidate must see to it that these are removed, and
that the usual tangle of petty emotions is entirely
combed away.

There can be no half measures on this Path. Many
people are in the position of those much-maligned
individuals Ananias and Sapphira. It will be re-
membered how they (not at all unnaturally nor in a
blameworthy manner) wanted to keep something to
fall back upon, as they were not quite sure that the
new Christian movement was going to be a success.
They were very enthusiastic, and wanted to give all
that they could; but they did feel that it was the
path of wisdom to keep a little back in case the move-
ment failed. For that they were not in the least to
be blamed; but what they did do which was most
damaging and improper was that, though keeping
something back they did not admit the fact, but
pretended that they had given all. There are many
to-day who follow their example; I hope the story
is not true, because the Apostle was certainly some-
what severe upon them.

We do not give everything, but keep back a little
bit of ourselves—I do not mean of our money, but
of personal feeling deep down, which holds us back
from the Master’s feet. In occultism that will not
do. We must follow the Master without reserve, not
saying within, “I will follow the Master so long as

68 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

He does not want me to work with such-and-such a |
person; I will follow the Master so long as all that
I do is recognized and mentioned in the papers!” We
must not make conditions. I do not mean that we
should give up our ordinary physical-plane duties, but
simply that our whole self should be at the Master’s
disposal. We must be prepared to yield anything, to
go anywhere—not as a test, but because the love of
the work is the biggest thing in our lives.

Cuapter IV
PROBATION

Out of the ranks of earnest students and workers
of the kind I have already described, the Master has
on many occasions selected His pupils. But before
He definitely accepts them He takes special pre-
cautions to assure Himself that they are really the
kind of people whom He can draw into intimate con-
tact with Himself, and that is the object of the stage
called Probation. When He thinks of a man as a
possible pupil, He usually asks one who is already
closely linked with Him to bring the candidate to Him
astrally. There is not generally much ceremony con-
nected with this step; the Master gives a few words
of advice, tells the new pupil what will be expected
of him, and often, in His gracious way, He may find
some reason to congratulate him on the work that
he has already accomplished.

He then makes a living image of the pupil—that
is to say, He molds out of mental, astral and etheric
matter an exact counterpart of the causal, mental,
astral and etheric bodies of the neophyte, and keeps
that image at hand, so that He may look at it period-
ically. Each image is magnetically attached to the
person whom it represents, so that every variation of

70 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTtTH

thought and feeling in him is accurately reproduced |
in it by sympathetic vibration, and thus by a single
glance at the image the Master can see at once
whether during the period since He last looked at it
there has been any sort of disturbance in the bodies
which it represents—whether the man has been losing
his temper, or allowing himself to be a prey to impure
feelings, worry, depression or anything of the kind.
It is only after He has seen that for a considerable
time no serious excitement has taken’ place in the
vehicles represented by the image that He will admit
the pupil into near relation with Himself.

When the pupil is accepted he must be drawn into
a unity with his Master closer than anything we can
imagine or understand; the Master wants to blend
his aura with His own, so that through it His forces
may be constantly acting without special attention
on His part. But a relation so intimate as this can-
not act in one direction only; if among the vibrations
of the pupil there are some which would cause dis-
turbance in the astral and mental bodies of the Adept
as they react upon Him, such union would be impos-
sible. The prospective pupil would have to wait un-
til he had rid himself of those vibrations. A proba-
tionary pupil is not necessarily better than other peo-
ple who are not on probation; he is only more suitable
in certain ways for the Master’s work, and it is ad-
visable to subject him to the test of time, for many
people, swept upwards by enthusiasm, appear at first
to be most promising and eager to serve, but unfor-

PROBATION Foul

tunately become tired after a while and slip back.
The candidate must conquer any emotional failings
that he may have, and go on steadily working until
he becomes sufficiently calm and pure. When for
quite a long time there has been no serious upheaval
in the living image, the Master may feel that the time
has come when He can usefully draw the pupil nearer
to Him.

We must not think of the living image as recording
only defects or disturbances. It mirrors the whole
condition of the pupil’s astral and mental conscious-
ness, so it should record much of benevolence and joy-
ousness and should radiate forth peace on earth and
good will to men. Never forget that not only a
passive but also an active goodness is always a pre-
requisite for advancement. To do no harm is already
much; but remember that it is written of our Great
Exemplar that He went about doing good.

If a pupil on probation does something unusually
good, for the moment the Master flashes a little more
attention on him, and if He sees fit He may send a
wave of encouragement of some sort, or He may put
some work in the pupil’s way and see how he does it.
Generally, however, He delegates that task to some of
His senior pupils. We are supposed to offer oppor-
tunities to the candidate, but to do so is a serious re-
sponsibility. If the person takes the opportunity, all
is well; but if he does not it counts as a bad mark
against him. We should often like to give opportu-
nities to people, but we hesitate, because although if

4 THe MASTERS AND THE PATH

they take them it will do them much good, if they do.
not take them it will be a little harder to do so next
time. It will be seen, then, that the link of the pupil
on probation with his Master is chiefly one of obser-
vation and perhaps occasional use of the pupil. It
is not the custom of the Adepts to employ special or
sensational tests, and in general, when an adult is
put on probation, he is left to follow the ordinary
course of his life, and the way in which the living
image reproduces his response to the trials and prob-
lems of the day gives quite sufficient indication of
his character and progress. When from this the Mas-
ter concludes that the person will make a satisfactory
disciple, He will draw him nearer and accept him.
Sometimes a few weeks is sufficient to determine this;
sometimes the period stretches into years.

Because the time is exceptional many young people
have been put on probation in recent years, and their
parents and the older members of the Society have
sometimes wondered how it is that, notwithstanding
their own sincere sacrifices and labors, often extend-
ing over twenty, thirty or even forty years, they are
passed over and the young people are chosen. The
explanation is simple:

It has been your karma to work all this time pre-
paring yourself and preparing the way for the com-
ing of the World-Teacher; and just because you are
good old members you have attracted some of these
souls who have been working up to a high level of
development in previous incarnations, so that they

PROBATION To

have been born to you as children; and you must not
be surprised if you sometimes find that those who in
the physical body are your children are in other and
higher worlds far older in development than you are.
If a boy or a girl suddenly enters into close relations
with a Master—such relations as you have hardly
ventured to think of for yourself, even after many
years of meditation and hard work—do not be aston-
ished. Your child may be capable of soaring far
beyond you; but it is just because he has that ca-
pacity that his birth and education have been en-
trusted to you, who have been studying and working
so long on Theosophical lines. In the course of that
study you should have learned to be the ideal parent
—the kind of parent required for the body of an
advanced ego. Instead of being perplexed or sur-
prised, you should rejoice with exceeding great joy
that you have been found worthy to train the physical
footsteps of one who shall be among the saviors of
the world.

You may wonder, perhaps, how mere children can
appreciate the honor which comes to them, can grasp
the splendor and glory of it all. Do not forget that
it is the Ego which is initiated, the Ego who is taken
as a pupil. True, he must obtain such control over
his lower vehicles that they will be to a certain con-
siderable extent an expression of him, so that at least
they will not get in the way of the work which has
to be done; but it is he, the Ego, who has to do that
work and to make that development, and you do not

74 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

know how much of it he may have already achieved
in a previous birth. Many of those who are coming
into incarnation just now are highly evolved souls; it
is precisely of such highly evolved souls that the great
group of disciples who will stand around the Lord
when He shall come must be constituted. Those who
become pupils early in this life may well have been
pupils for many years in a previous life, and the
greatest. privilege that we elder people can have is
that we find ourselves associated with these young
ones, for through them we can further the Lord’s work
on earth by training them to do it more perfectly.

In the chapter on “Our Relation to Children” in
The Hidden Side of Things I have dealt at consider-
able length with what is necessary for the training
of children, that they may preserve all that is best in
what they bring from the past and may develop into
full flower the many beautiful characteristics of their
nature, which are so generally, alas, ruthlessly de-
stroyed by uncomprehending elders. There I have
spoken among other things of the devastating effects
of fear induced in children by roughness and cruelty:
but on that subject I should like to add here some
mention of an experience which illustrates the un-
speakably terrible results which sometimes follow in
its wake. Parents who have children of an age to be
sent to school cannot be too careful and searching in
their inquiries before they intrust those children to an
instructor, lest ineradicable harm be done to the little
ones for whom they are responsible.

PROBATION 75

Some time ago a very striking instance of the
calamity which may in certain cases be brought about
by such brutality came prominently before my notice.
I had the very great honor of being present at the
Initiation of one of our younger members, the Initiator
on that occasion being the Lord Maitreya Himself.
In the course of the ceremonial the candidate, as usual,
had to reply to many questions dealing largely with
the manner in which help can best be given in certain
difficult or unusual cases, and a special interrogation
was added as to whether he forgave and could help
a certain man who had treated him with terrible
harshness and cruelty in early childhood. The Initia-
tor made an image of an aura with the most wonder-
fully delicate little puffs or touches or shoots of lovely
color of light playing over its surface, as if it were peep-
ing out of it, and then drawing in again, and said,
“Those are the seeds of the highest and noblest qual-
ities of mankind—fragile, delicate as gossamer, to be
developed only in an atmosphere of deepest, purest
love, without one touch of fear or shrinking. He who,
being otherwise ready, can unfold and strengthen
them fully may reach Adeptship in that same life.
That was the fate We had hoped for you, that as a
great Adept you should have stood beside Me when
I come to your physical plane; but those to whom I
intrusted you (because they offered you to My service
even before birth) allowed you to fall into the hands
of this person, who was so utterly unworthy of such
a trust. This was your aura before the blight of his

76 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

wickedness fell upon you. Now see what his cruelty
made of you.”

Then the aura changed and twisted about horribly,
and when it was still again all the beautiful little
shoots had disappeared, and in their place were in-
numerable little scars, and the Lord explained that
the harm done could not be canceled in the present
life, and said, “You will still help Me when I come,
and I hope that in this life you will attain Arhatship;
but for the final consummation we must wait awhile.
In our eyes there is no greater crime than thus to
check the progress of a soul.”

As the candidate saw this aura writhe and harden,
saw all its fair promise ruthlessly destroyed by the
brutality of this man, he felt again for a moment
what he had to a great extent forgotten—the agony
of the small boy sent away from home, the ever-
hovering fear and shrinking, the incredulous horror,
the feeling of flaming outrage from which there is no
escape or redress, the sickening sense of utter helpless-
ness in the grasp of a cruel tyrant, the passionate re-
sentment at his wicked injustice, with no hope, no
foothold anywhere in the abyss, no God to Whom to
appeal; and seeing this in his mind, I who watched
understood something of the terrible tragedy of child-
hood, and why its effects are so far-reaching.

It is not only when approaching Adeptship that this
most loathsome sin of cruelty to children checks
progress. All the new and higher qualities which the
Aryan race should now be unfolding show themselves

PROBATION (if

in light and delicate buds of a similar nature, though
ata lower level than those described above. In thou-
sands of cases these are ruthlessly crushed out by the
insensate ferocity of parent or teacher; and thus many
good people remain at the same level through sev-
eral incarnations, while their tormentors fall back into
lower races. There are certainly many egos coming
into incarnation who, although they fall far short of
the great heights of Initiation, are nevertheless un-
folding rapidly, and need now to add to their char-
acters some of these further and more delicate devel-
opments; and for the advancement intended for them
also brutality would be fatal.

I had not heard until the occasion mentioned above
that the last life in which Adeptship is attained must
have absolutely perfect surroundings in childhood;
but the appropriateness of the idea is obvious when
once it is put before us. That is probably one reason
why so few students gain Adeptship in European
bodies, for we are much behind the rest of the world
in that particular. It is at any rate abundantly clear
that nothing but evil can ever follow from this ghastly
custom of cruelty. Our members should certainly
work wherever possible for its suppression, and should
be, as I said in the beginning, most especially careful
to make certain that no children for whom they are
in any way responsible shall be in any danger from
this particular form of crime.

The Lord Maitreya has frequently been called the
Teacher of Gods and Men, and that fact is sometimes

78 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

expressed in a different way by saying that in the
great kingdom of the spiritual work He is the minis-
ter for Religion and Education. It is not only that
at certain intervals, when He sees it to be desirable,
He either incarnates Himself, or sends a pupil, to state
the eternal truth in some new way—as we may put it,
to found a new religion. Quite apart from that He
is constantly in charge of all religions, and whatever
new and beautiful teaching is sent out through any
of them, new or old, it is always inspired by Him.
We know little of the methods of world-wide instruc-
tion which He adopts; there are many ways of teach-
ing apart from the spoken word; and it is certain that
it is His constant and daily endeavor to raise the
intellectual conceptions of millions of angels and of
men.

His right-hand man in all this marvelous work is
His assistant and destined successor, the Master
Kuthumi, just as the assistant and destined successor
of the Lord Vaivasvata Manu is the Master Morya.
Just because, then, the Master Kuthumi is the ideal
teacher, it is to Him that we have to bring those who
are to be put on probation or accepted at an early
age. It may be that later on in life they will be used
by other Masters for other portions of the work; but
at any rate they all (or almost all) begin under the
tutelage of the Master Kuthumi. It has been part
of my task for many years to endeavor to train along
the right lines any young person whom the Master
regards as hopeful; He brings them in contact with

PROBATION 79

me on the physical plane, and usually gives brief
directions as to what qualities He wants developed
in them, and what instruction should be given to them.
Naturally He, in His infinite wisdom, does not deal
with these younger brains and bodies exactly as with
those of older people. Let me quote from an account
of the putting on probation some ten years ago of
three of our young people:

ENTERING Upon PROBATION

We found the Master Kuthumi seated on the ver-
anda of His house, and as I led the young ones for-
ward to Him, He held out His hands to them. The
first boy dropped gracefully on one knee and kissed
His hand, and thenceforward remained kneeling,
pressing against the Master’s knee. All of them kept
their eves upon His, and their whole souls seemed to
be pouring out through their eyes. He smiled on
them most beautifully and said:

“T welcome you with peculiar pleasure; you have
all worked with me in the past, and I hope you will
do so again this time. I want you to be of Us before
the Lord comes, so I am beginning with you very
early. Remember, this that you wish to undertake
is the most glorious of all tasks, but it is not an easy
one, because you must gain perfect control over these
little bodies; you must forget yourselves entirely and
live only to be a blessing to others, and to do the
work which is given us to do.”

Putting His hand under the chin of the first boy
as he knelt, He said with a bright smile: “Can you
do that?”

And they all replied that they would try. Then
the Master gave some valuable personal advice to
each in turn, and asked each one separately: ‘Will

80 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

you try to work in the world under My guidance?”
And each said: “I will.”

Then He drew the first boy in front of Him, and
placed both His hands upon his head, the boy once
more sinking to his knees. The Master said:

“Then I take you as My pupil on probation, and I
hope that you will soon come into closer relationship
with Me, and therefore I give you My blessing, in
order that you may pass it on to others.”

As He spoke, the boy’s aura increased wonderfully
in size, and its colors of love and devotion glowed with
living fire; and he said: “O Master, make me really
good; make me fit to serve you.”

But the Master smilingly replied: “Only you your-
self can do that, my dear boy; but My help and bless-
ing will be ever with you.”

Then He took the others and went through the same
little ceremony with each of them, and their auras also
increased and grew firmer and steadier as they glowed
responsively in the most marvelous manner.

Then the Master rose and drew the boys with Him
saying: ‘Now come with Me, and see what I do.”

We all trooped together down the sloping path to
the bridge across the river. He took us into the cave,
and showed to the boys the living images of all the
probationary pupils. Then He said: “Now I am
going to make images of you.” And He materialized
them before their eyes, and they were naturally tre-
mendously interested. One of them said in an awed
voice: “Am I like that?”

In one of the images there was a patch of reddish
matter, and the Master said to its original with a
humorous glance: ‘What is that?”

“T don’t know,” replied the boy; but I think he
guessed, for it was the result of an emotional strain
the night before. The Master pointed out various
colors and arrangements in the auras, and told them

PROBATION 81

what they meant and which He wanted altered. He
told them that He should look at these images each
day to see how they were getting on, and He hoped
that they would so arrange them that they would be
pleasant to look upon. Then He gave them His final
blessing.

In the case of elder people put upon probation, they
are left to a large extent to find the most suitable
work for themselves; but with the younger people
He sometimes quite definitely puts a piece of work
in the way of one of them and watches to see how he
does it. He condescends sometimes to give special
messages of encouragement and instruction to indi-
viduals among these young people, and even to give
special advice as to their training. For the guidance
of other young people who desire to follow along the
same path extracts from some of those messages are
given here:

ApvicE From THE MASTER

“T know that your one object in life is to serve the
Brotherhood; yet do not forget that there are higher
steps before you, and that progress on the Path means
sleepless vigilance. You must not only be always
ready to serve; you must be ever watching for oppor-
tunities—nay, making opportunities to be helpful in
small things, in order that when the greater work
comes you may not fail to see it.

“Never for a moment forget your occult relation-
ship; it should be an ever-present inspiration to you—
not only a shield from the fatuous thoughts which float
around us, but a constant stimulus to spiritual ac-

82 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

tivity. The vacuity and pettiness of ordinary life
should be impossible for us, though not beyond our
comprehension and compassion. The ineffable bliss
of Adeptship is not yet yours, but remember that you
are already one with Those who live that higher life;
you are dispensers of Their sunlight in this lower
world, so you, too, at your level, must be radiant suns
of love and joy. The worid may be unappreciative,
uncomprehending; but your duty is to shine.

“Do not rest on your oars; there are still higher
peaks to conquer. The need of intellectual develop-
ment must not be forgotten; and we must unfold
within ourselves sympathy, affection, tolerance. Each
must realize that there are other points of view than
his own, and that they may be just as worthy of at-
tention. All coarseness or roughness of speech, all
tendency to argumentativeness, must absolutely dis-
appear; one who is prone to it should check himself
when the impulse towards it arises; he should say
little, and that always with delicacy and courtesy.
Never speak without first thinking whether what you
are going to say is both kind and sensible. He who
tries to develop love within himself will be saved
from many mistakes. Love is the supreme virtue of
all, without which all other qualifications water but
the sand.

“Thoughts and feelings of an undesirable kind must
be rigorously excluded; you must work at them until
they are impossible to you. Touches of irritability
ruffle the calm sea of the consciousness of the Brother-
hood. Pride must be eliminated, for it is a serious
bar to progress. Exquisite delicacy of thought and
speech is needed—the rare aroma of perfect tact which
can never jar or offend. That is hard to win, yet you
may reach it if you will.

“Definite service, and not mere amusement, should
be your aim; think, not what you want to do, but

PROBATION 83

what you can do that will help someone else; forget
about yourself, and consider others. A pupil must be
consistently kind, obliging, helpful—not now and then,
but all the time. Remember, all time which is not
spent in service (or fitting yourself for service) is for
us lost time.

“When you see certain evils in yourself, take them
in hand manfully and effectively. Persevere, and you
will succeed. It is a question of will-power. Watch
for opportunities and hints; be efficient. I am always
ready to help you, but I cannot do the work for you;
the effort must come from your side. Try to deepen
yourselves all round and to live a life of utter devo-
tion to service.

“You have done well, but I want you to do better
yet. I have tested you by giving you opportunities
to help, and so far you have taken them nobly. I
shall therefore give you more and greater opportuni-
ties, and your progress will depend upon your recog-
nizing them and availing yourself of them. Remem-
ber that the reward of successful work is always the
opening out before you of more work, and that faith-
fulness in what seem to you small things leads to
employment in matters of greater importance. I hope
that you will soon draw closer to me, and in so doing
will help your brothers along the Path which leads
to the feet of the King. Be thankful that you have
a great power of love, that you know how to flood
your world with sunlight, to pour yourself out with
royal prodigality, to scatter largess like a king; that
indeed is well, but take care lest in the heart of this
great flower of love there should be a tiny touch of
pride, which might spread as does an almost invisible
spot of decay, until it has tainted and corrupted the
whole blossom. Remember what our great Brother
has written: ‘Be humble if thou wouldst attain to
wisdom; be humbler still when wisdom thou hast mas-

&4 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

tered.’ Cultivate that modest fragrant plant, hu-
mility, until its sweet aroma permeates every fiber
of your being.

“When you try for unity, it is not enough to draw
the others into yourself, to enfold them with your
aura, to make them one with you. To do that is
already a long step, but you must go yet further, and
make yourself one with each of them; you must enter
into the very hearts of your brothers, and understand
them; never from curiosity, for a brother’s heart is
both a secret and sacred place; one must not seek to
pry into it or discuss it, but rather endeavor reverently
to comprehend, to sympathize, to help. It is easy to
criticize others from one’s own point of view; it is
more difficult to get to know them and love them, but
that is the only way to bring them along with you.
I want you to grow quickly that I may use you in the
great Work; to help you in that I give you my
blessing.

“Daughter, you have done well in exercising your
influence to civilize as far as may be the rougher
elements around you, and to help another pure soul
upon her way to me. That will be ever a bright star
in your crown of glory; continue your help to her, and
see whether there be not other stars which you can
presently add to that crown. This good work of
yours has enabled me to draw you closer to me far
earlier than would otherwise have been the case.
There is no more certain method of rapid progress
than to devote oneself to helping others upon the
upward Path. You have been fortunate, too, in meet-
ing a comrade from of old, for two who can really
work together are more efficient than if they were
putting forth the same amount of strength separately.
You have begun well; continue to move along the
same line with swiftness and certainty.

“T welcome you, the latest recruit to our glorious

PROBATION 85

band. It is not easy for you to forget yourself en-
tirely, to yield yourself without reservation to the
service of the world; yet that is what is required of
us—that we should live only to be a blessing to others,
and to do the work which is given us to do. You have
made a good beginning in the process of self-develop-
ment, but much yet remains to be done. Repress
even the slightest shade of irritability, and be ready
always to receive advice and instruction; cultivate
humility and self-sacrifice, and fill yourself with a
fervid enthusiasm for service. So shall you be a fit-
ting instrument in the hand of the Great Master, a
soldier in the army of Those Who save the world.
To help you in that I now take you as a probationary

pupil.”

Many who read these instructions may be surprised
by their extreme simplicity. They may even despise
them as being little suited to guide and help people in
the immense complexity of our modern civilization.
But he who thinks thus forgets that it is of the es-
sence of the life of the pupil that he shall lay aside
all this complexity, that he shall, as the Master put
it, “come out of your world into ours,” come into a
world of thought in which life is simple and one-
pointed, in which right and wrong are once more
clearly defined, in which the issues before us are
~ straight and intelligible. It is the simple life that the
disciple should be living. It is the very simplicity
which he attains which makes the higher progress
possible to him. We have made our life an entangle-
ment and an uncertainty, a mass of confusion, a storm

86 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

of cross-currents, in which the weak fail and sink;
but the pupil of the Master must be strong and sane,
he must take his life in his own hands, and make it
simple with a divine simplicity. His mind must brush
aside all these man-made confusions and delusions
and go straight as an arrow to its mark. “Except ye
be converted, and become as little children, ye shall
in nowise enter into the kingdom of heaven.” And
the kingdom of heaven, remember, is the Great White
Brotherhood of the Adepts. (See The Hidden Side of
Christian Festivals, pp. 12, 446.)

We see from these extracts how high is the ideal
which the Master sets before His pupils, and perhaps
it may seem to some of them to be what in theology
we call a counsel of perfection—that is to say, a goal
or condition impossible to reach perfectly as yet, but
still one at which we must constantly aim. But all
aspirants are aiming high, and no one yet can fully
reach that at which he aims; otherwise he would not
need to be in physical incarnation at all. We are
very far from being perfect, but the young people who
can be brought close to the Great Ones have a most
wonderful opportunity, just because of their youth
and plasticity. It is so much easier for them to elimi-
nate those things which are not quite what they should
be than it is for older people. If they can cultivate
the habit of taking the right point of view, of acting
for the right reasons, and of being in the right atti-
tude the whole of their lives, they will steadily draw
nearer and nearer to the ideal of the Masters. If the

ae _

PROBATION 87

pupil who has been put on probation could see while
awake in his physical body the living images that the
Master makes he would understand much more fully
the importance of what may seem to be but minor
details.

Irritability is a common difficulty; as I have al-
ready explained, to be irritable is a thing which is
hkely enough to happen to anyone living in this pres-
ent civilization, where people are always very highly
strung. We live to a large extent in a civilization of
torturing noises; and above all things noise jars the
nerves and causes irritation. The experience of going
down into the city and returning home feeling quite
shattered and tired is a common one to sensitive peo-
ple. Many other things are contributory, but prin-
cipally the weariness is due to the constant noise, and
the pressure of so many astral bodies vibrating at dif-
ferent rates, and all excited and disturbed by trifles.
It makes it very difficult to avoid irritability—espe-
cially for the pupil, whose bodies are more highly
strung and sensitive than those of the ordinary man.

Of course, this irritation is somewhat superficial;
it does not penetrate deeply; but it is better to avoid
even a superficial irritation as far as possible, because
its effects last so much longer than we usually realize.
If there is a heavy storm, it is the wind that first stirs
the waves; but the waves will continue to swell long
after the wind has died down. That is the effect
produced on water, which is comparatively heavy;
but the matter of the astral body is far finer than

88 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

water, and the vibrations set going penetrate much
more deeply, and therefore produce a more lasting
effect. Some slight, unpleasant, temporary feeling,
which passes out of mind in ten minutes, perhaps, may
yet produce an effect on the astral body lasting for
forty-eight hours. The vibrations do not settle down
again for a considerable period of time.

When such a fault as this is known it can most
effectually be removed not by focusing attention upon
it, but by endeavoring to develop the opposite virtue.
One way of dealing with it is to set one’s thought
steadfastly against it, but there is no doubt that this
course of action arouses opposition in the mental or
astral elemental, so that often a better method is to
try to develop consideration for others, based of
course fundamentally on one’s love towards them. A
man who is full of love and consideration will not
allow himself to speak or even to think irritably
towards them. If the man can be filled with that
idea the same result will be attained without exciting
opposition from the elementals.

There are many other forms of selfishness that can
delay the pupil’s progress very seriously. Laziness is
one form of these. I have seen a person enjoying
himself very much with a book, who did not like to
leave it in order to be punctual; another will write
very badly, careless of the inconvenience and the
damage to eyes and temper of those who have to read
his caligraphy. All such things tend to make one less
sensitive to high influences, to make life untidy and

PROBATION 89

ugly for other persons, and to destroy self-control and
efficiency. Efficiency and punctuality are essential, if
satisfactory work is to be done. Many people are in-
efficient: when a piece of work is given to them, they
do not finish it thoroughly, but make all kinds of ex-
cuses; or when they are asked for some information,
they do not know how to find it. People differ much
in this respect. We may ask a question of one, and
he will answer: “I don’t know;” but another will
say: ‘Well, I don’t know, but I will go and find out,”
and he returns with the required information. In the
same way one person goes to do a thing, and comes
back and says he could not do it; but another holds
on until it is done.

Yet in all good work the pupil must always think
of the benefit that will result to others and of the
opportunity to serve the Master in these matters,
which even when they are small materially are great
in spiritual value—not of the good karma resulting
to himself, which would be only another and very
subtle form of self-centeredness. Remember how
the Christ put it, “Inasmuch as ye have done it
unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done
it unto Me.”

Other subtle effects of the same kind are to be seen
in depression and jealousy, and aggressive assertion
of one’s rights. An Adept has said: “Think less
about your rights and more about your duties.”
There are some occasions in dealing with the outside
world when the pupil might find it necessary gently

90 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

to state what he needs, but amongst his fellow-pupils
there are no such things as rights, but only opportuni-
ties. If a man feels annoyed, he begins to shoot out
from himself aggressive feelings; he may not go so
far as actual hatred, but he is setting up a dull glow
in his astral body and affecting the mental body as
well.

Similar disturbances are frequently set up in the
mental body, and are equally disastrous in their
effects. If a man allows himself to be greatly wor-
ried over some problem, and turns it over and over
again in his mind without reaching any conclusion,
he has thereby set up something like a storm in his
mental body. Owing to the exceeding fineness of the
vibrations at this level, the word storm only par-
tially expresses the reality; we should in some ways
come nearer to the effect produced if we thought of
it as a sore place in the mental body, as an irritation
produced by friction. We sometimes encounter argu-
mentative people, people who must argue about every-
thing, and apparently love the exercise so much that
they scarcely care on which side of the problem they
are engaged. A person of that sort has his mental
body in a condition of perpetual inflammation, and
the inflammation is liable on very slight provocation
to break out at any moment into an actual open sore.
For such an one there is no hope of any kind of occult
progress until he has brought balance and common
sense to bear on this diseased condition.

Fortunately for us, the good emotions persist even

PROBATION 91

longer than the evil, because they work in the finer
part of the astral body; the effect of a feeling of
strong love or devotion remains in the astral body
long after the occasion that caused it has been for-
gotten. It is possible, though unusual, to have two
sets of vibrations going on strongly in the astral body
at the same time—for example, love and anger. At
the moment of feeling intense anger a man would not
be likely to have any strong affectionate feeling, un-
less the anger were noble indignation; in that case the
after results would go on side by side, but one at a
much higher level than the other, and therefore per-
sisting longer.

It is very natural for boys and girls to wish to enjoy
themselves, to be merry, to read and to hear amusing
things, and to laugh at them; that is quite right, and
it does no harm. If people could see the vibrations
set up by jovial, kindly laughter, they would realize
at once that, while the astral body is shaken up to
some extent, it is the same thing as shaking up the
liver in riding; it actually does good, not harm. But
if the results of some of the less pleasant stories that
foul-minded people are in the habit of telling were
visible to them they would realize a ghastly differ-
ence; such things are altogether evil, and the forms
produced by them remain clinging for a long time to
the astral body, and attract all kinds of loathsome
entities. Those approaching the Masters must be
utterly free from all that, as well as from all that is
boisterous and rough; and the younger must con-

92 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

stantly be on their guard against any relapse into
childishness or silliness.

There is sometimes a tendency towards inane gig-
gling, which must be avoided at all costs, as it has
a very bad effect on the astral body. It weaves round
it a web of gray-brown threads, very unpleasant to
look upon, which forms a layer which hinders the en-
trance of good influences. It is a danger against
which young people should sedulously guard them-
selves. Be as happy and as joyous as you can; the
Master likes to see it, and it will help you on your
path. But never for a moment let your joyousness
be tinged by any sort of roughness or rudeness, never
let your laughter become a boisterous guffaw; never
let it, on the other hand, degenerate into silly giggling.

There is a definite line of demarcation in this, as
in other matters, between what is harmless and what
may easily become harmful. The most certain method
of determining it is to consider whether the amusement
passes beyond the point of delicacy and good taste.
The moment that the laughter oversteps these—the
moment that there is in it the least touch of boister-
ousness, the moment that it ceases to be perfect in
its refinement, we are passing on to dangerous ground.
The inner side of that distinction is that so long as
the ego is fully in control of his astral body, all is
well; as soon as he loses control, the laughter becomes
vacuous and meaningless—the horse is, as it were,
running away with its rider. An astral body thus left
unchecked is at the mercy of any passing influence,

PROBATION 93

and may easily be affected by most undesirable
thoughts and feelings. See to it also that your mirth
is ever pure and clean—never tinged for a moment
with a malicious delight in the suffering or discom-
fiture of another. If a mortifying accident should
happen to someone, do not stand there laughing idly
at the ridiculous side of the incident, but rush forward
at once to help and console. Lovingkindness and help-
fulness must be always your most prominent char-
acteristics.

A clairvoyant who can see the effect upon the higher
bodies of the various undesirable emotions finds no
difficulty in understanding how important it is that
they should be controlled. But because most of us
do not see the result we are liable to forget it, and
allow ourselves to become careless. The same thing
is true of the effect produced by casual or thoughtless
remarks. The Christ in His last incarnation on earth
is reported to have said that for every idle word that
men shall speak, they shall give account on the day
of judgment. That sounds a cruel thing to say, and
if the orthodox view of judgment were correct, it
would indeed be unjust and abominable. He did not
mean in the least that every idle word spoken would
condemn a man to eternal torture—there is no such
thing as that; but we know that every word and every
thought has its karma, its result, and when foolish
things are repeated again and again, it makes an at-
mosphere round the person which does keep out good
influences. To avoid this, constant attention is re-

94 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

quired. It would be a superhuman ideal to expect
a person never to forget himself for a moment; but
disciples are after all trying to become superhuman,
because the Master is beyond man. If the pupil
could live the perfect life he would himself already
be an Adept; he cannot be that yet, but if he con-
stantly remembered his ideal he would approach much
nearer to it. Every idle word that he speaks is cer-
tainly affecting for the time his relations with the
Master; so let him watch his words with the utmost
care.

Especially is it necessary for the aspirant to avoid
all fidgetiness or fussiness. Many an energetic and
earnest worker spoils most of his efforts and makes
them of no effect by yielding to these failings, for he
sets up around him such an aura of tremulous vibra-
tions that no thought or feeling can pass in or out
without distortion, and the very good that he sends
out takes with it a shiver that practically neutralizes
it. Be absolutely accurate; but attain your accuracy
by perfect calmness, never by hurry or fuss.

Another point that it is necessary to impress upon
our students is that in occultism we always mean
exactly what we say, neither more nor less. When
a rule is laid down that nothing unkind or critical
must be said about another, just that is exactly what
is meant—not that when we happen to think of it
we should slightly diminish the number of unkind or
critical things that we say every day, but that they
must definitely altogether cease. We are so much in

PROBATION 95

the habit of hearing various ethical instructions which
no one seems to endeavor to put seriously into prac-
tice, that we have a habit of thinking that a perfunc-
tory assent to an idea, or an occasional feeble effort
to approximate to it are all that religion requires of
us. We must put aside that frame of mind altogether
and understand that exact and literal obedience is
required when occult instruction is given, whether by
a Master or by His pupil.

Very much help in all these matters is often given
to the aspirant, both probationary and accepted, by
the presence of an older pupil of the Masters. In the
early days in India, when a guru selected his chelas,
he formed them into a group and took them about
with him wherever he went. Now and then he taught
them, but often they received no instruction; yet they
made rapid progress because all the time they were
within the aura of the teacher and were being brought
into harmony with it, instead of being surrounded by
ordinary influences. The teacher also assisted them
in the building of character, and always watched the
pupils carefully. Our Masters cannot adopt that
plan physically, but They have sometimes arranged
matters so that some of Their elder pupils can draw
round themselves a group of the younger ones, and
attend to them individually, much as a gardener
would deal with his plants, raying upon them day
and night the influences needed to awaken certain
qualities or strengthen weak points. The older pupil
rarely receives direct instructions with regard to this

96 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

work; though now and then the Master may make
some remark or comment.

The fact that the pupils are together in a group
also assists their progress; they are influenced in com-
mon by high ideals, and this hastens the growth of
desirable characteristics. It is probably inevitable
in the course of karmic law that one who is aspiring
shall be brought into contact with someone more ad-
vanced than himself, and receive much benefit through
his ability to respond to him; and it is generally the
fact that the Master does not advance or raise any
person unless he has been with an older pupil who
can guide and help him. There are, however, excep-
tions, and each Master has His own way of dealing
with His pupils. In one case, it has been said by
our President, the Master makes a practice of send-
ing His pupils ‘‘to the other end of the field,” so that
they may gain great strength by the development of
their powers with the minimum of external assistance.
Each individual is treated as is best for him.

CHAPTER V
ACCEPTANCE

Though the acceptance of the pupil by the Master
produces so great a difference in his life, there is but
little more of external ceremony attached to it than
there was in the case of probation. The following
account of the acceptance of some of our young people
is given for comparison with the corresponding ac-
count of probation in the last chapter.

ACCOUNT OF AN ACCEPTANCE

Going as usual to the house of our Master Kuthumi,
we found the Master Morya sitting in earnest con-
versation with Him. We naturally stood aside for
a moment, but the Master called us forward with His
dazzling smile of welcome, and we made the custom-
ary salutation.

The first of our candidates, whom his Master had
once called ‘‘an Ever-glowing Love Star,” is so full
of love for his Master that he looks upon Him as
an Elder Brother, and is absolutely free and at home
with Him, though he never speaks to Him without
deep reverence. It is indeed beautiful to see them
together.

On this occasion our Master smiled kindly upon

98 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

him and said: ‘Have you finally decided that you
will work under Me and devote yourself to the serv-
ice of humanity?” The boy replied very earnestly
that he meant to do so, and our Master continued:
“T have been much pleased with the efforts that you
have made, and I hope that you will not relax them.
Do not forget under the new conditions what I told
you a few months ago. Your work and your deter-
mination have enabled Me to shorten the period of
your Probation and I am pleased that you have
chosen the shortest of all roads to progress, that of
bringing others with you along the Path. Absolutely
unselfish love is the strongest power in the world,
but few are they who can keep it pure from exaction
or jealousy, even if it be for one object alone. Your
advancement is due to your success in keeping that
flame burning ardently for several objects simultane-
ously. You have done much to develop strength, but
you need still more of it. You must acquire discrim-
ination and alertness, so that you see what is wanted
at the right moment, instead of ten minutes after-
wards. Before you speak or act, think carefully what
the consequences will be. But you have done re-
markably well, and I am much pleased with you.”
Then the Master laid His hand upon the head of
each of the candidates separately, saying: “I accept
you as My chela according to the ancient rite.” He
drew each in turn into His aura, so that for a few
moments the pupil disappeared in Him, and then
emerged looking inexpressibly happy and noble, show-

ACCEPTANCE 99

ing forth the special characteristics of the’ Master as
he had never done before. When all this was over
our Master said to each one, “I give you My bless-
ing.” And then speaking to all together: ‘Come
with Me; I must present you in your new character
for official recognition and registration.” So He took
them to the Maha-Chohan, Who looked them over
keenly, and said: ‘You are very young. I congratu-
late you on reaching such a position so early. See
that you live up to the level which you have at-
tained.” And He entered their names in the imper-
ishable record, showing them the columns opposite
their names which had still to be filled, and express-
ing a hope that He might soon have other entries
to make for them. |

On the way back from the visit to the Maha-
Chohan the Master took His new pupils once more
into the cave near His house, and they watched Him
dissolve into thin air the living images of themselves
which He had made a short time before. ‘Now that
you are actually part of Me all the time,” He said,
“we shall not need those any longer.”

If one observes this ceremony with the sight of the
causal body, one sees the Master as a glorious globe
of living fire, containing a number of concentric shells
of color, His physical body and its counterparts on
other planes being in the center of the glowing mass,
which extends to a radius of many hundreds of yards.

100 THe MASTERS AND THE PatH

In approaching the physical body of the Master,
the pupil advances into that glowing globe of finer
material, and when he finally reaches the physical
feet of his Master he is already in the heart of that
splendid sphere; and when the Master embraces the
neophyte as described above, and expands Himself to
include the aura of the pupil, it is really the central
heart of fire which so expands and includes him, for
all through the ceremony of acceptance he is already
far within the outer ring of that mighty aura. Thus
for a few moments they two are one and, not only
does the Master’s aura affect that of the pupil as
described above, but any special characteristics at-
tained by the latter act upon the corresponding cen-
ters of the Master’s aura and that flashes out in
response.

The inexpressible union of the pupil with the Mas-
ter that begins during the ceremony of ‘acceptance
is a permanent thing, and after that, though the
pupil may be far distant from the Master on the
physical plane, his higher vehicles are vibrating in
common with those of his teacher. He is all the
time being tuned up, and thus growing gradually
more and more like his Master, however remote the
resemblance may have been in the beginning; and
thus he becomes of great service in the world as an
open channel by means of which the Master’s force
may be distributed on the lower planes. By con-
stant meditation upon his guru, and ardent aspira-
tion towards Him, the pupil has so affected his own

ACCEPTANCE 101

vehicles that they are constantly open towards his
Master and expectant of His influence. At all times
they are largely preoccupied with that idea, waiting
the word of the Master and watching for something
from Him, so that while they are keenly and sensi-
tively open to Him they are to a considerable extent
closed to lower influences.’ Therefore all his higher
vehicles, from the astral upwards, are like a cup or
funnel, open above but closed at the sides, and al-
most impervious to influences touching him at the
lower levels.

This tuning-up of the pupil continues throughout
the period of discipleship. At first his vibrations are
many octaves below those of the Master, but they
are in tune with them, and are gradually being raised.
This is a process that can take place only slowly.
It could not be done at once, like the stamping out
of a piece of metal with a die, or even comparatively
quickly, as one would tune a violin or piano string.
Those are inanimate things; but in this case a living
being is to be molded, and in order that the life may
be preserved, the slow growth from within must adapt
the form to the outside influence, as a gardener might
gradually direct the limbs of a tree, or a surgeon with
proper appliances might gradually straighten a
crooked leg.

We know that throughout this process the Master
is not giving His full attention to each individual
pupil, but is working upon thousands of people
simultaneously, and all the time doing much higher

102 Tue Masters AND THE PaTtTH

work as well, playing a great game of chess, as it
were, with the nations of the world and with all the
different kinds of powers, of angels and men, as pieces
on the board. Yet the effect is as though He were
watching the pupil and thinking of no one else, for
the attention that He can give to one among hundreds
is greater than ours when we concentrate it entirely
upon one. The Master often leaves to some of His
older pupils the work of tuning the lower bodies,
though He Himself is allowing a constant flow be-
tween His vehicles and those of His pupil. It is in
this way that He does most for His pupils, without
their necessarily knowing anything about it.

The accepted pupil thus becomes an outpost of the
Master’s consciousness—an extension of Him, as it
were. The Adept sees, hears and feels through him,
so that whatever is done in his presence is done in the
Master’s presence. This does not mean that the
Great One is necessarily always conscious of such
events at the time when they are going on though He
may be so. He may be absorbed in some other work
at the time; nevertheless the events are in His mem-
ory afterwards. What the pupil has experienced with
reference to a particular subject will come up in the
Master’s mind among His own knowledge when He
turns His attention to that subject.

When a pupil sends a thought of devotion to his
Master, the slight flash which he sends produces an
effect like the opening of a great valve, and there is
a tremendous downflow of love and power from the

ACCEPTANCE 103

Master. If one sends out a thought of devotion to
one who is not an Adept, it becomes visible as a
fiery stream going to him; but when such a thought
is directed by a pupil to his Master, the pupil is
immediately deluged by a stream of fiery love from
the Master. The Adept’s power is flowing outwards
always and in all directions like the sunlight; but the
touch of the pupil’s thought draws down a prodigious
stream of it upon him for the moment. So perfect
is the union between them that if there is any serious
disturbance in the lower bodies of the pupil it will
affect also those of the Master; and, as such vibra-
tion would interfere with the Adept’s work on higher
planes, when this unfortunately happens He has to
drop a veil that shuts the pupil off from Himself until
such time as the storm settles down.

It is of course sad for the pupil when he has to be
cut off in this manner; but it is absolutely his own
doing, and he can end the separation at once as soon
as he can control his thoughts and feelings. Usually
such an unfortunate incident does not last longer than
forty-eight hours; but I have known cases much worse
than that, in which the rift endured for years, and
even for the remainder of that incarnation. But these
are extreme cases, and very rare, for it is little likely
that a person capable of such defection would be re-
ceived as a pupil at all.

No one could become an accepted pupil unless he
had acquired the habit of turning his forces outwards .
and concentrating his attention and strength upon

104 THe MASTERS AND THE PATH

others, to pour out helpful thoughts and good wishes
upon his fellow-men. Practically all the ordinary
people in the world turn their forces inwards upon
themselves, and because they are self-centered their
forces are jangling together inside. But the pupil has
to turn himself inside out, and maintain a constant
attitude of giving in affection and service. We have
in the pupil, therefore, a man whose higher vehicles
are a funnel open to the highest influences from his
Master, while his lower vehicles at the bottom of the
funnel have been trained into the constant habit of
radiating those influences out upon others. This
makes him a perfect instrument for his Master’s use,
for the translation of His force to the outer planes.

If an Adept in Tibet wanted to distribute some force
at the etheric level in New York, it would not be
economical to direct the current etherically for that
distance; He would have to transmit His force on
much higher levels to the point required, and then
excavate a funnel downwards at that point. Another
simile which might be suggested is that of the trans-
mission of electricity at enormous voltages across
country, and the stepping of it down through trans-
formers which give great current and low voltage at
the place where the power is to be used. But to ex-
cavate such a funnel, or to step the force down at
New York, would involve a loss to the Adept of nearly
half of the energy that He had available for the piece
of work to be done. Therefore the pupil on the spot
is an invaluable labor-saving apparatus, and he must

ACCEPTANCE 105

remember that above all things he must make himself
a good channel, because that is most of all what the
Master needs from him. Thus the pupil may be re-
garded in another way as an additional body for the
Master’s use in the place where he happens to be.
Every human body is in reality a transmitter for
the powers of the self within. Through many ages
it has been adapted to carry out the commands of the
will in the most economical manner; for example, if
we wish for any reason to move or to overturn a tum-
bler standing upon the table it is easy enough to
stretch out one’s hand and do so. It is also possible
to overturn that tumbler by mere force of will with-
out physical contact; indeed one of the earliest mem-
bers of the Theosophical Society tried this experi-
ment and actually succeeded, but only at the expense
of devoting an hour’s strenuous effort to it every day
for two years. It is obvious that to use the ordinary
physical means is in such a case far more economical.
In the earlier stages of the pupil’s relation with his
Master, he will often feel that a vast amount of force
is poured through him, without his knowing where it
is going; he only feels that a great volume of living
fire is rushing through him and flooding his neigh-
borhood. With a little careful attention he can soon
learn to tell in which direction it is going, and a lit-
tle later, he becomes able to follow with his con-
sciousness that rush of the Master’s power, and can
actually trace it down to the very people who are
being affected and helped by it. He himself, however,

106 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

cannot direct it; he is being used simply as a channel,
yet is at the same time being taught to cooperate
in the distribution of the force. Later, there comes
a time when the Master, instead of pouring force into
His pupil and aiming it at a person in a distant place,
tells him to seek out the person and then give him
some of the force, for this saves the Master some
energy. Whenever and wherever a pupil can do a
bit of the Master’s work, He will always give it to
him, and as the pupil increases in usefulness, more
and more of the work is put into his hands, so as to
relieve by however slight an amount the strain upon
the Master. We think much, and rightly so, about
the work that we can do down here, but all that we
can imagine and carry out is as nothing to what He
is doing through us. There is always a gentle radia-
tion through the pupil, even though he may not be
conscious of it, yet the same pupil will feel it dis-
tinctly whenever an unusual amount of force is being
sent. :
Sometimes the Master sends a definite message
through His pupil to a third party. I remember once
being told to deliver such a message to a very highly
intellectual member whom I did not know very well.
I felt a little embarrassment in approaching him on
such a subject, but of course I had to do it; so I
said to the recipient: “I have been told by my Mas-
ter to give you this. message, and I am simply doing
as I am told. I am perfectly aware that I cannot
give you any evidence that this is a message from the

ACCEPTANCE 107

Master, and I must leave you to attach to it just as
much importance as you feel disposed. I have no
alternative but to carry out my instructions.” Now,
I was of course conscious of the contents of the mes-
sage, because I had had to take it down; and I aver
that on the face of it it was a perfectly simple and
friendly message, such as might have been sent by
any kindly person to another, without appearing to
bear any special significance whatever. But evidently
appearances were deceptive; the old gentleman to
whom I delivered it looked much startled, and said:
“You need not take any trouble to try to persuade
me that that is a message from your Master; I know
it instantly from the wording; it would have been
absolutely impossible for you to know the meaning
of several of the references that He makes.” But to
this day:I have no idea what he meant.

Another most valuable privilege which the accepted
pupil enjoys is that of laying his thought on any sub-
ject beside that of his Master, and comparing them.
It will be readily understood how the frequent use of
this power will keep the pupil’s thought running along
noble and liberal lines—how he will constantly be
able to correct any mistakes, any tendencies towards
prejudice or lack of understanding. There may be
various ways in which he can exercise this power; my
own method was always to lie down in meditation and
endeavor to reach up into the consciousness of the
Master just as far as I possibly could. When I had
reached the highest point that was for the time pos-

108 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

sible to me, I suddenly turned and looked back as
it were upon the subject in question, and instantly
received an impression of how it appeared to the
Master. It was probably very far from being a per-
fect impression, but at least it showed me what He
thought on the matter as far as I was able to enter
into His thought.

Care, however, must be taken that this wonderful
privilege is not misused. It is given to us as a power
of ultimate reference in questions of great difficulty,
or in cases where we have no sufficient ground for
judgment, and yet have to come to some decision;
but it is by no means intended to save us the trouble
of thinking, or to be applied to the decision of ordi-
nary everyday questions which we are perfectly
competent to settle for ourselves.

The candidate for Acceptance must necessarily
watch himself closely. If he has not received any
direct hint from his Master or from some older pupil
as to the special failings which he must try to avoid,
he will do his best to observe these for himself, and
having once decided upon them or been told of them
he will exercise unceasing vigilance against them. At
the same time he should be warned on no account to
overdo his introspection and allow himself to become
morbid. The safest of all lines for him to take is to
concentrate his attention on the helping of others;
if his mind is full of that thought he will instinctively
move in the right direction. The desire to fit himself
thoroughly for that work will impel him to brush all

ACCEPTANCE 109

obstacles out of the way, so that without consciously
thinking of his own development at all, he will yet
find that it is taking place.

It is not expected that a pupil shall be actively
thinking of nothing else but the Master; but it 7s ex-
pected that the form of the Master shall be ‘always in
the background of his mind, always within immediate
reach, always there when needed in the vicissitudes
of life. Our minds, like bowstrings, cannot be kept
always taut; reasonable relaxation and change of
thought is one of the necessities of mental health.
But the pupil should be exceedingly careful that there
is no slightest tinge of impurity or unkindness about
his relaxation; no thought should ever be permitted,
even for a moment, which the pupil would be ashamed
that his Master should see.

There is no harm whatever in reading a good novel
for the sake of diversion; the thought-forms engen-
dered by it would not in any way interfere with the
current of the Master’s thought; but there are many
novels full of evil insinuation, novels which bring
impure thought-forms before the mind, novels which
glorify crime, and others which concentrate the
thought of their readers on the most unsavory prob-
lems of life, or vividly depict scenes of hatred and
cruelty; all such should be rigorously avoided. In
the same way, there is no harm in taking part in or
watching all ordinary games which are fairly played;
but any which are rough and boisterous, any in which
any sort of cruelty is involved, any in which there is

110 Tue Masters AND THE PatTH

likelihood of injury to man or beast—all these are
absolutely barred.

The pupil must make up his mind that with regard
to his efforts towards self-improvement he will never
allow himself to be discouraged by failure, even
though it be often repeated. However many times
he may have failed in his effort, however many falls
he may have on the path he sets before himself, there
is exactly the same reason for getting up and going
on after the thousandth fall that there was after the
first. In the physical plane there are many things
which are frankly impossible; but that is not the
case in the higher worlds. We cannot lift a ton
weight without machinery, but in the higher worlds it
is possible with perseverance to lift the weight of our
many imperfections. The reason for this is obvious
if we think. Human muscles are not so constructed
as to be able to lift a ton, and no conceivable training
of them could enable them to do it, because the force
behind them is limited. In spiritual matters, the
man has behind him the whole divine power on which
he can draw, and so little by little and by repeated
efforts he may, and furthermore certainly will, be-
come strong enough to overcome any obstacle.

People often say: “I can deal with things on the
physical plane, but on the astral and mental I can do
very little; it is so difficult.’ That is the reverse of
the truth. They are not accustomed to thinking and
working in that finer matter, and so they believe that
they cannot. But as soon as their will is set, they

ACCEPTANCE 111

will find that things will follow the direction of that
will in a way impossible in the physical world.

Some pupils have found themselves much helped in
this work by the use of a talisman or amulet. That
may be a very real aid since the physical nature has
to be dealt with and brought into subjection, as well
as the mind and the emotions, and it is without doubt
the hardest to deal with; a talisman strongly charged
with magnetism for a particular purpose by someone
who knows how to do it may be an invaluable help,
as I have explained at considerable length in The
Hidden Side of Things. Many people hold themselves
superior to such things, and say that they need no
help; but for myself I have found the task so arduous
that I am glad to avail myself of any assistance that
may be offered to me.

Cuapter VI
OTHER PRESENTATIONS

All this while the Adept, besides using His pupil
as an apprentice, has been preparing him for presen-
tation to the Great White Brotherhood for Initiation.
The whole object of the existence of that Brotherhood
is to promote the work of evolution, and the Master
knows that when the pupil is ready for the stupen-
dous honor of being received as a member of it he
will be of very much more use in the world than
before. Therefore it is His wish to raise His pupil
to that level as soon as possible. In the Oriental
books on the subject, written thousands of years ago,
are to be found many accounts of this preparatory
period of instruction; and when reference has been
made to it in the earlier Theosophical literature it
has been called the Probationary Path—the term re-
ferring not to probation to any individual Adept, but
a course of general training preparatory to Initiation.
I myself used the term in /nvisible Helpers, but have
lately avoided it on account of the confusion caused
by the employment of the same word in two distinct
senses.

The method really adopted is readily comprehen-
sible, and is in fact much like that of some of our

a a ———

~~ td

OE AS er Dames

OTHER PRESENTATIONS 113

older universities. If a student wishes to take a
degree at one of those he must first pass the entrance
examination of the university and then be admitted
to one of the colleges. The Head of that college is
technically responsible for his progress, and may be
regarded as his tutor-in-chief. The man will have
to work to a large extent by himself, but the Head
of his college is expected to see that he is properly
prepared before he is presented to take his degree.
The Head does not give the degree; it is conferred
by that abstraction called the university—usually at
the hands of its Vice-Chancellor. It is the university,
not the Head of the college, that arranges the exam-
ination and confers the various degrees; the work of
the Head of the college is to see that the candidate is
duly prepared, and generally to be to some extent
responsible for him. In the process of such prepara-
tion he may, as a private gentleman, enter into what-
ever social or other relations with his pupil he may
think proper; but all that is not the business of the
university.

Just in the same way the Great White Brotherhood
has nothing to do with the relations between a Mas-
ter and His pupil; that is a matter solely for the
private consideration of the Master Himself. The
Initiation is given by an appointed member of the
Brotherhood in the Name of the One Initiator; that
is the only way in which an Initiation can be ob-
tained. Whenever an Adept considers that one of
His pupils is fit for the first Initiation, He gives no-

114 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

tice of that fact and presents him for it; the Brother-
hood asks only whether the man is ready for Initia-
tion, and not what is the relationship between him
and any Adept. It is not Their affair whether he is
at the stage of probation, acceptance or sonship. At
the same time it is true that a candidate for Initia-
tion must be proposed and seconded by two of the
higher members of the Brotherhood—that is to say,
by two Who have reached the level of Adeptship; and
it is certain that no Master would propose a man for
the tests of Initiation unless He had with regard to
him the certainty of his fitness, which could only
come from very close identification with his con-
sclousness. ;

The Probationary Path is thus a stage leading up
to the Path proper, which begins at the first Initia-
tion. In the Oriental books both these Paths are
described quite impersonally, as though no private
Masters existed. The questions are first raised:
“How is a man living in the ordinary world brought
to this Probationary Path, and how does he come to
know that such a thing exists?” In the books we are
told that there are four reasons, any one of which
may bring a man to the commencement of the Path
of development. First, by being in the presence of,
and getting to know, those who are already interested
along that line. Some of us, for example, may have
been monks or nuns in the Middle Ages. We may
have come into contact in that life with an abbot or
abbess who had deep experience of the inner world—

OTHER PRESENTATIONS 115

a person like St. Theresa. We may, looking up to
that leader, have earnestly wished that such expe-
rience should come to us; and our wish for that might
have been quite unselfish. It may be that we did not
think of the importance that would come to us or of
the satisfaction of achievement, but simply of the joy
of helping others, as we saw the abbot able to help
others through his deeper discernment. Such a feeling
in that life would certainly bring us in the next in-
carnation into touch with teaching on the subject.

It happens that, in lands which have the European
culture, almost the only way in which we can get
the inner teaching put clearly before us is by coming.
into the Theosophical Society, or by reading Theo-
sophical works. There have been mystical or spiritu-
alistic works which have given some information,
which have gone a long way, but there are none, so:
far as I know, which state the case so clearly, so
scientifically, as the Theosophical literature has done.
I know of no other book which contains such a wealth
of information as The Secret Doctrine.

There are, of course, the sacred books of the Hindus.
and of other nations, and there is a great deal on this
subject in those, but it is not put in a way which
makes it easy for us, with our training, to assimilate
it or to appreciate it. When, having read Theosoph-
ical books, we take up some of those beautiful trans-
lations of Oriental works, we can see our Theosophy
in them. In the Christian Bible (though that is in
many places not well translated from our point of

116 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

view) we shall find a great deal of Theosophy; but
before we can find it we must know the system.
When we have studied Theosophy we see at once how
many texts support it, and cannot rationally be ex-
plained without it; we see how Church ceremonies,
before apparently meaningless, leap into life under
the illumination of the teaching, and become vivid
and full of interest. Yet I never heard of anyone
who was able to deduce the Theosophical system from
either the texts or the ceremonies.

So one way of approaching the Path is by being
with those who are already treading it. Another way
is by reading or hearing about it. All this teaching
came to me in 1882 through Mr. Sinnett’s book, The
Occult World; and immediately after that I read his
second book, Esoteric Buddhism. I knew at once
instinctively that what was written was true, and I
accepted it; and to hear and to read about it at once
fired me with the desire and the determined inten-
tion to know more, to learn all I could on the subject,
to pursue it all over the world if necessary until I
found it. Shortly after that I gave up my position
in the Church of England and went out to India,
because it seemed that more could be done there.

Those are two ways in which people are led to the
Path—by reading and hearing of it, and by being in
close association with those who are already treading
it. The third way which is mentioned in Oriental
books is by intellectual development; by sheer force
of hard thinking a man may come to grasp some of

OTHER PRESENTATIONS ji By

these principles, though I think that method is rare.
Again, they tell us of a fourth way—that by the long
practice of virtue men may come to the beginning of
the Path—that a man may so develop the soul by
steadily practicing the right so far as he knows it that
eventually more and more of the light will open before
him.

Forty years ago, when the Qualifications for the
Path were first put before me from the Esoteric
Buddhist point of view, they were given as follows:
The first of them, Discrimination, called by the
Hindus, Viveka, was described as Manodvaravajjana,
which means the opening of the doors of the mind, or
perhaps escaping by the door of the mind. That is a
very interesting way of putting it, since Discrimina-
tion arises from the fact that our minds have been
opened in such a way that we can understand what
is real and what unreal, what is desirable and what
undesirable, and can distinguish between the pairs of
opposites. |

The second qualification, Desirelessness, known as
Vairagya among the Hindus, was taught to me as
Parikamma, meaning preparation for action, the idea.
being that we must prepare ourselves for action in
the occult world by learning to do right purely for
right’s sake. This involves the attainment of a con-
dition of higher indifference in which one certainly
no longer cares for the results of action; and so it
comes to mean the same thing as Desirelessness,
though it is put from a different point of view.

118 Tur MASTERS AND THE PatTu

The Six Points of Good Conduct, called Shatsam-
patti in the Hindu scheme, were given as Upacharo,
which means attention to conduct. For the conveni-
ence of the student who would like to compare the
Six Points with those given in At the Feet of the
‘Master I will reprint here what I said about them in
Invisible Helpers.

These are called in Pali:

(a) Samo (quietude)—that purity and calmness of thought
which comes from perfect control of the mind—a qualification
exceedingly difficult of attainment, and yet most necessary,
for unless the mind moves only in obedience to the guidance
of the will, it cannot be a perfect instrument for the Master’s
work in the future. This qualification is a very comprehen-
sive one, and includes within itself both the self-control and
the calmness necessary for astral work. ~

(b) Damo (subjugation)—a similar mastery over, and
therefore purity in, one’s actions and words—a quality which
again follows necessarily from its predecessor.

(c) Uparati (cessation)—explained as cessation from big-
otry or from belief in the necessity of any act or ceremony
prescribed by a particular religion—so leading the aspirant to
independence of thought and to a wide and generous tolerance.

(d) Titikkha (endurance or forbearance)—by which is
meant the readiness to bear with cheerfulness whatever one’s
karma may bring upon one, and to part with anything and
everything worldly whenever it may be necessary. It also
includes the idea of complete absence of resentment for wrong,
the man knowing that those who do him wrong are but in-
struments of his own karma.

(e) Samadhana_ (intentness)—one-pointedness, involving
the incapability of being turned aside from one’s path by
temptation.

(f) Saddha (faith)—confidence in one’s Master and oneself:
confidence, that is, that, the Master is a competent teacher, and
that, however diffident the pupil may feel as to his own powers,
he has yet within him that divine spark which, when fanned
into a flame, will one day enable him to achieve even as his
Master has done.

OTHER PRESENTATIONS | 119

The fourth qualification in the Hindu classification
is called Mumukshatva, usually translated as an ar-
dent longing for liberation from the wheel of births
and deaths, while among the Buddhists the name
given to it is Anuloma, which means direct order or
succession, signifying that its attainment follows as
a natural consequence from the other three.

From this comparison of the different systems it
will be seen that the qualifications which the aspirant
must develop preparatory to the first great Initiation
are fundamentally the same, however much they may
appear to differ at first glance. Certainly for twenty-
five centuries, and probably for a long time before
that, this quite systematic procedure has been fol-
lowed with regard to the evolution of those special
persons who persist in struggling ahead, and although
at certain times, (and the present is one of them)
circumstances are more favorable for Initiation than
at others, the requirements remain the same, and we
must be careful not to fall into the erroneous thought
that the qualifications have been in any way reduced.
We thus find that these different lines all bring us
to the same point of Initiation.

Cuapter VII
THE FIRST INITIATION

Most people when they think of Initiation have in
mind a step to be gained for themselves. They think
of the Initiate as a man who has developed himself
very highly, and has become a great and glorious
figure, as compared with the man of the outer world.
That is true; but the whole question will be better
understood if we try to look down on it from a higher
point of view. The importance of Initiation does not
lie in the exaltation of an individual, but in the fact
that he has now become definitely one with a great
‘Order, the Communion of Saints, as it is very beau-
tifully put in the Christian Church, though few ever
pay attention to the real meaning of those words.

The stupendous reality that lies behind Initiation
into the Brotherhood will be better understood after
we have considered the organization of the Occult
Hierarchy and the work of the Masters, to be dealt
with in later chapters. The Candidate has now be-
come more than an individual man, because he is a
unit in a tremendous force. On every planet the Solar
Logos has His Representative acting as His Viceroy.
On our globe the title given to this great Official is
the Lord of the World. He is the Head of the Broth-

.
;

Tue First INITIATION 121

erhood; and the Brotherhood is not only a body of
Men each of Whom has His own duties to perform;
it is also a stupendous unity—a fully flexible instru-
ment in the Lord’s hand, a mighty weapon that He
can wield. There is a marvelous and incomprehen-
sible plan by which the One, having become many,
is now becoming One again; not that any unit in the
whole scheme will lose the least fraction of his indi-
viduality or power as a unit, but that he has added
to it something a thousand times greater; he is part
of the Lord, part of the body that He wears, of the
weapon that He uses, the organ upon which He plays,
the implement with which He does His work.

In all the world there is but One Initiator, but in
the case of the first and second Initiations it is open
to Him to depute some other Adept to perform the
ceremony for Him, though even then that Officiant
turns and calls upon the Lord at the critical moment
of the conferring of the degree. This is a very won-
derful moment in the candidate’s spiritual life, as was
explained by the Master Kuthumi when accepting a
pupil not long ago. He said to him:

“Now that you have attained the immediate goal
of your aspiration, I would exhort you at once to
turn your attention to the far greater requirements of
the next step. That for which you have now to pre-
pare, the ‘entering upon the stream’ which the Chris-
tians call Salvation, will be the salient point in the
long line of your earthly existences, the culmination
of seven hundred lives. Ages ago, by individualiza-

122 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

tion, you entered the human kingdom; in a future
which I trust is not remote, you will quit it by the
door of Adeptship, and become a Superman; between
these two extremes is no point of greater importance
than that Initiation towards which you should now
turn your thoughts. Not only will it make you safe
forever, but it will admit you to that Brotherhood
which exists from eternity unto eternity—the Broth-
erhood which helps the world.

“Think then with how great care so wondrous an
event should be approached. I would have you keep
the glory and the beauty of it constantly before your
mind, that you may live in the light of its ideals.
Your body is young for so mighty an effort, but you
have a rare and splendid opportunity; I want su to
take it to the full.”

When an ego is initiated he becomes part of the
closest organization in the world, one with the great
sea of consciousness of the Great White Brotherhood.
For a long time the new Initiate will not be able to
understand all that this union implies, and he must
penetrate far into the sanctuaries before he can real-
ize how close is the link, and how great is that con-
sciousness of the King Himself, which all Brothers to
a certain extent share with Him. It is incomprehen-
sible and inexpressible down here; metaphysical and
subtle it is beyond words, but nevertheless a glorious
reality, real to such an extent that when we begin to
grasp it everything else seems unreal.

We have seen how the accepted pupil may lay his

Tue First INITIATION 123

thought beside that of the Master; so now may the
Initiate put his thought beside that of the Brother-
hood and draw into himself just as much of that tre-
mendous consciousness as he at his level is able to
respond to; and ever as he draws it into himself he
will be able to receive more of it, and his own con-
sciousness will widen out so that narrowness. of
thought will become impossible for him. And just as
the accepted pupil must take care not to cause dis-
turbance in the lower vehicles of the Master, lest he
should interfere with the perfection of His work, so
must a member of the Brotherhood never introduce
anything discordant into that mighty consciousness,
which is acting as a whole.

He must remember that not by any means the
whole of the Brotherhood is doing the same work as
our Masters. Many of Them are engaged in other
work which requires the utmost concentration and the
most perfect calm, and if some of the younger mem-
bers should sometimes forget their high calling, and
cause ripples of annoyance to disturb the Brother-
hood, it would affect the work of those Greater Ones.
Our own Masters might perhaps overlook that, and be
willing to endure a little occasional worry of that kind
for the sake of the future when the new member will
be making really great use of the powers of the
Brotherhood; but we can quite understand that Those
Who have nothing to do with the training of indi-
viduals might say: ‘Our work is being disturbed, and
it is better that those who have such immature per-

124 Tue Masters AND THE PaTH

sonalities should stay outside.”’ They would say that
nothing was lost, that progress can be made just as
well outside, and that pupils could go on making
themselves better and stronger and wiser before gain-
ing Initiation. :

So wonderful is the expansion of the Initiate’s con-
sciousness that it is most apt to speak of the change
as a new birth. He begins to lead a new life “as a
little child,” the life of the Christ; and the Christ, the
intuitional or buddhic consciousness, is born within
his heart. He has also now the power to give the
blessing of the Brotherhood—a tremendous and over-
whelming force, which he is able to give or send to
any one, as he judges to be most appropriate and
useful. The power of the Brotherhood will flow
through him just as much as he will let it flow; it is
for him to use the power and to remember that he has
the entire responsibility of directing it for whatever
purpose he may choose. The blessing given by the
Officiant at Initiation means, ‘I bless you; I pour my
force and blessing into you; see that you in your turn
constantly pour out this blessing to others.”

The more confidence the new Initiate has the
greater will be the flow of force through him. If he
feels the least hesitation, or is weighed down by the
responsibility of letting such a tremendous power flow
through him, he will not be able to use this wonderful
gift to the full; but if he has that qualification of
Sraddha—perfect trust in his Master and in the
Brotherhood, and the utter certainty that because he

Tue First INITIATION 125

is one with Them all things are possible to him, he
may go through the world as a veritable Angel of
light, shedding joy and benediction. around his path.

The consciousness of the Great White Brotherhood
is an indescribably wonderful thing. It is like a great
calm shining ocean, so strangely one that the least
thrill of consciousness flashes from end to end of it
instantaneously, and yet to each member it seems to
be absolutely his own individual consciousness, though
with a weight and a power and a wisdom behind it
that no single human consciousness could ever have.
As the band of pupils is all one in the Master, so is
the Brotherhood all one in its Lord. The members
may freely discuss a point among themselves, yet it
is as though different aspects of a case presented
themselves in the same mind and were by that mind
weighed one against the other; but one is all the time
in the presence of a tremendous, an almost awful
serenity, a certainty which nothing can ever disturb.
And yet somehow in all that every suggestion is wel-
comed; indeed, there is the sensation that the whole
Brotherhood is alertly and eagerly waiting for each
individual’s contribution to the subject before it.
There is nothing down here to which this conscious-
ness can be adequately compared; to touch it is to
come into contact with something new and strange,
yet inexpressibly wonderful and beautiful, something
which needs no evidence and no comparison, but
asserts itself to be of a higher and unknown world.

Though individualities are so strangely merged in

126 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

this, yet are they at the same time sharply separated,
for the assent of each Brother is required to every
decision of importance. The rule of the King is ©
absolute, yet He carries His vast council with Him,
and is at every moment willing to consider any point
that occurs to any member of it. But this great
governing body differs utterly from any parliament
of earth. Those who stand above the rest in positions
of authority have not been elected, nor have they been
appointed by some party organization; they hold their
positions because they have won them—won them by
superior development and greater wisdom. None
doubts the decision of his superior, because he knows
that he really 7s a superior—that he has greater in-
sight and a fuller power to decide. There is, there
can be, no shadow of compulsion that these Super-
men shall think or act alike; yet is their confidence
in their mighty organization so perfect that it is un-
thinkable that in the long run they should differ;
it is only in the case of such a Brotherhood under
such a King that we can fully realize the beautiful
wording of one of the Collects of the Church of
England, “In His service is perfect freedom.”

In such an organization there should surely be no
possibility of failure or trouble of any sort; and yet,
because humanity is frail, and because not all mem-
bers of this great Brotherhood are yet Supermen,
failures do sometimes occur, although they are very
rare. “Great ones fall back even from the threshold,
unable to sustain the weight of their responsibility,

THE First INITIATION 127

unable to pass on,” as is said in Light on the Path,
and only the attainment of Adeptship insures perfect
safety. The Initiator tells the candidate that now he
has entered upon the stream he is safe forever; but
although that is so, it is still possible for him to delay
his progress to a most serious extent, if he yields to
any of the temptations that still beset his path. To
be safe forever is usually taken to betoken the cer-
tainty of passing onward with the present life-wave—
of not being left behind at the “day of judgment’
which comes in the middle of the fifth Round, when
the Christ Who has descended into matter decides
what souls can and what souls cannot be carried on
to final attainment in this chain of worlds. There is
no eternal condemnation; it is, as the Christ said,
simply szonian; there are some who cannot go on in
this age or dispensation, but they will follow along
in the next, precisely as a child who is too dull to
succeed in this year’s class will drift comfortably
along in next year’s, and will probably even be at the
head of it.

When the sad and terrible thing does occur—when
there is a failure of any sort among Initiates, a thrill
of pain runs through the whole of that vast conscious-
ness, for the separation of one from the rest is of the
nature of a veritable surgical operation, tearing the
heart strings of all. Yet the erring Brother cannot
finally fall away; there is a link that cannot be
broken, although we know little of the weary road
of trial and suffering that he must tread before he

128 Tue Masters AND THE PaTH

can again weld it together with the rest. ‘‘The Voice
of the Silence remains within him, and though he
leave the path utterly, yet one day it will resound,
and rend him asunder, and separate his passions from
his divine possibilities. Then with pain and desperate
cries from the deserted lower self, he will return.”

As in previous chapters, I give here an account of
the ceremonial adopted. Its formula has been un-
changed throughout the ages, yet there is a certain
elasticity about it. The Initiator’s Charge to the
candidate is always the same so far as the first part
of it goes, but almost invariably there is a second and
personal part which consists practically of advice to
the particular candidate who is going through. This
is usually called the private part of the Charge. I
have also seen instances in which an image is made of
the candidate’s worst enemy and he is asked how he
would deal with him, whether he is fully prepared
to forgive him absolutely, and whether he would help
even one so low as this if it came in his way. In
some cases also questions are asked as to the work
already done by the candidate, and those who have
been helped by him are sometimes invited to come
forward and bear witness.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE First INITIATION

As the Wesak Festival was this year (1915) on the
morning of May 29th, the night of May 27th was
chosen for the Initiation of the candidate, and we were
all instructed to hold ourselves in readiness. In this

Tue First INITIATION 129

case the Lord Maitreya was the Initiator, and conse-
quently the ceremony took place in His garden. When
the Master Morya or the Master Kuthumi performs
the rite it is usually held in the ancient cave-temple,
the entrance to which is near the bridge across the
river between Their houses. There was a large gath-
ering of the Adepts, all Those Whose names are fa-
miliar to us being present. The glorious garden was
at its best; the rhododendron bushes were one blaze
of crimson blossom, and the air was fragrant with the
scent of the early roses. The Lord Maitreya sat in
His usual place on the marble seat which runs round
the great tree in front of His house; and the Masters
grouped Themselves in a semicircle on His right and
left, on seats which were placed for Them on the
grass terrace from which the marble seat rises by a
couple of steps. But the Lord Vaivasvata Manu and
the Maha-Chohan sat also on the marble seat, One
on each side of the arms of the specially raised carved
_ throne which faces exactly south, which is called the
Throne of Dakshinamurti.

The candidate, with the Master who introduced
him, stood on the next stage of the terrace, at the feet
of the Lord, and behind and below them were other
pupils, initiated and uninitiated, and a few privileged
spectators who were allowed to see a good deal of the
ceremony, though at certain times a veil of golden
light hid from them the proceedings of the central
figures. The candidate was, as always, dressed in
flowing robes of white linen, while the Masters were

130 Tue Masters AND THE PatH

mostly clad in white silk, deeply edged with magnifi-
cent gold embroidery. A great host of Angels floated
above the group, filling the air with a soft ripple of
melody, which, in some strange and subtle way,
seemed to draw out of the chord of the candidate an
intricate interwoven web of sound, expressing his
qualities and possibilities; throughout the ceremony
this went singing on, delicately supporting all words
that were spoken, and no more interrupting them than
the soft laughter of a stream interrupts the thrilling
music of the birds, but swelling to a triumphant
climax at certain points of the ritual. The music
made the air vocal—enriching, not drowning, the
tones of the speakers. In every case this music is
founded upon the special chord of each candidate,
and weaves variations and fugues upon it, expressing,
in a way that we down here cannot comprehend, all
that he is and all that he will be.

In the center of the scene stood the candidate, be-
tween his Proposer and Seconder. He was led for-
ward by his own Master Kuthumi, and the Master
Jesus stood as his Seconder. The Lord Maitreya
smiled as He asked the opening question of the ritual:

“Who is this that you thus bring before Me?”

Our Master gave the usual reply:

“This is a candidate who seeks admission to the
great Brotherhood.”

Then came the next question:

“Do you vouch for him as dibs of admission?”

And the usual answer:

Tue First INITIATION pra sl

wilt do.”

“Will you undertake to guide his steps along the
Path which he desires to enter?”

And the Proposer said: “TI will.”

“Our rule requires that two of the higher Brethren
shall vouch for every candidate; is any other Brother
prepared to support this application?”

Then for the first time the Seconder spoke, saying:

“T am prepared to do so.”

The Initiator asked:

“You have evidence that if additional powers are
conferred upon him, they will be used for the further-
ance of the Great Work?”

And the Master Kuthumi replied:

“This candidate’s life this time has been short, but
even already he has many good deeds to his credit,
and he is beginning to do our work in the world. Also
in his life in Greece he did much to spread my phil-
osophy, and to improve the country in which he lived.”

And the Master Jesus added:

“Through two lives of vast influence he patiently
did my work, righting wrong and introducing a noble
ideal in his life as a ruler, and spreading abroad the
teaching of love and purity and unworldliness in his
incarnation as a monk. For these reasons I stand by
his side now.”

Then the Lord, smiling upon the boy, said:

“The body of this candidate is the youngest that
has ever been presented to us for the honor of recep-
tion into the Brotherhood; is any member of our

132 Tue Masters AND THE PATH

Brotherhood who still lives in the outer world ready
to give him on our behalf such help and counsel as
his young physical body may need?”

Sirius came forward from a group of pupils who
stood behind, and said:

“Lord, in so far as I am able, and while I remain
within reach of his body, I will most gladly do for
him all that I possibly can.’’

Then said the Lord:

“Ts your heart full of true brotherly love for this
young candidate, so that you can give such guidance
as should be given?”

Sirius answered: “It is.’

The Lord spoke for the first pig directly to the
candidate:

“Do you in turn love this brother, so that you will
willingly be helped by him when necessary?”

And the young man replied:

“Indeed I do, with all my heart, for without him
I could not have stood here.”

The Lord bowed His head gravely, and the Mas-
ters put the candidate forward so that he stood before
the Initiator. Fixing His eyes upon him, the Lord
said:

“Do you desire to join the Brotherhood which
exists from eternity unto eternity?”

The youth replied:

“T do, Lord, if you think that I am fit to do so while
my body is still so young.”

The Initiator asked:

Tun First Inrriation 133

“Do you know the object of this Brotherhood?”

The candidate answered that its object is to do
God’s Will by carrying out His plan, which is evolu-
tion.

Then said the Lord:

“Will you pledge yourself to devote ait your life
and all your strength henceforth to this work, for-
getting yourself absolutely for the good of the world,
making your life all love, even as He is all love?”

And he answered:

“T will endeavor to do so to the utmost of my
ability, with the help of my Master.”

“Do you promise to keep secret those things which
you are told to keep secret?”

And he said: “I promise.”

The usual questions as to astral knowledge and
astral work were then put to the candidate. Many
astral objects were shown to him and-he had to tell
the Initiator what they were. He had to distinguish
between the astral bodies of a living man and a dead
man, between a real person and a thought-image of
a person, and between an imitation Master and a real
one. Then the Initiator showed him many astral
cases and asked how he would help in each, and he
replied as well as he could. At the end He smiled and
said that the answers were very satisfactory.

The Initiator then delivered the Charge—a very
solemn and beautiful address—part of which is always
to the same effect, though something personal to each
candidate is generally added. This Charge explains

134 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

the work of the Brotherhood in the world, and the
responsibility which rests on each member individ-
ually, for each has to share in the bearing of the great
burden of the sorrows of the world. Each must be
ready to help both by service and by counsel, for it is
one Brotherhood, acting under one Law and one Head,
and each Brother has the privilege of putting any
local knowledge or special faculty that he may possess
at the disposition of the Brotherhood for the further-
ance of any department of Their great work of aiding
the progress of humanity. Although the rule of the
King is absolute, no decision of importance is taken
without the consent of even the youngest member of
the Brotherhood. Each is a representative of the
Brotherhood in whatever part of the world he may
be, and each is pledged to be at the disposal of the
Brotherhood, to go wherever he is sent, to work in
any way that is required. While younger members
will naturally implicitly obey the Heads, they may yet
help by local knowledge, and may always suggest
anything that seems to them of possible use.

Each Brother living in the world must remember
that he is a center through which the force of the
King may be sent for the helping of those who are in
need, and that any older Brother may at any time
use him as a channel for His blessing. Therefore each
younger Brother should always be ready to be so used
at any moment, for he never can tell when his services
may be required. The life of the Brother should be
one of entire devotion to others; he should watch

Tue First INITIATION 135

eagerly and incessantly for every opportunity of ren-
dering service, and let such service be his keenest joy.
He must remember that the honor of the Brotherhood
is in his hands, and he must see to it that no word or
act of his shall ever sully it in the eyes of men, or
cause them to think of it one whit less highly.

He must not think that, because he has entered the
Stream, trial and struggle will cease for him; on the
contrary, he will have to make still greater efforts,
but he will have greater strength to make them. His
power will be far greater than before; but, in exactly
the same proportion, his responsibility is greater also.
He must remember that it is not he, a separated self,
who has gained a step which has lifted him above his
fellows; rather he should rejoice that humanity
through him has risen a little, has freed itself to this
small! extent from its chains, has come into this much
more of its own. The blessing of the Brotherhood is
ever with him; but it will descend upon him precisely
in the measure in which he passes it on to others; for
this is the eternal law.

That is part of the Charge which is always given.
As a private admonition to this candidate the Initiator
added:

“Your body is very young to bear so heavy a re-
sponsibility as this great gift of Initiation; yet that
very youth offers you an opportunity as wonderful
as any that has ever fallen to the lot of man. It has
been earned by the karma of your previous lives of
self-sacrifice; see to it that in this body you prove

136 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

yourself worthy of it. We trust you to show that, in
deciding to open the doors to you so soon, we have
chosen wisely; remember always the absolute unity
that exists between us all who are members of the
One Brotherhood, so that its dignity shall never suffer
at your hands. Beginning thus early, you may go
very far in this incarnation; the climb will be steep,
but your strength and love will be sufficient for it.
Cultivate wisdom; learn perfect control of all your
vehicles; develop in yourself alertness, decision, far-
sightedness; remember that I expect you to be ready
to act as a trusty lieutenant for Me when I come forth
to teach the world. You have won the way so far
by the wealth of your love; let that love ever increase
and strengthen, and it shall carry you through to the
end.”

Then the Lord turned to the other Masters and
sald:

“T find this candidate satisfactory; do all present
agree to his reception into our company?”

And all answered: “We agree.”

Then the Initiator rose from His seat and turned
towards Shamballa, and called aloud:

“Do I this, O Lord of Life and Light and Glory,
in Thy Name and for Thee?”

Over His head in response blazed forth the flashing
Star which conveys the assent of the King, and all
bowed low before it, while the Angel music rang out
in a triumphant burst like some great royal march.
And to these strains the candidate advanced, led by

Tue Iirst INITIATION 137

the two Masters, and knelt before Him Who repre-
sented the One Who alone can grant admission to
the Brotherhood. A line of dazzling light, like a flash
of lightning standing still, extended from the Star to
the heart of the Initiator, and from Him to the heart
of the candidate. Under the influence of that tre-
mendous magnetism, the tiny Silver Star of Conscious-
ness which represents the Monad in the candidate
swelled out in glowing brilliancy until it filled his
causal body, and for a wonderful moment the Monad
and the Ego were one, even as they will be perma-
nently when Adeptship is attained. The Lord placed
His hands upon the head of the candidate, and, call-
ing him by his true name, said:

“In the Name of the One Initiator, Whose Star
shines above us, I receive you into the Brotherhood
of Eternal Life. See to it that you are a worthy and
useful member of it. You are now safe forever; you
have entered upon the Stream: may you soon reach
the further shore!”

The Angel music pealed forth in a great ocean of
sweet, glad sound, and seemed to fill the very air
with strength and joy. And the Initiator and the
kneeling candidate and his sponsors were almost
veiled in the loveliest of colors, which brought the
blessings of the Bodhisattva and the Maha-Chohan
on their waves, and the exquisite golden light of the
Flower of earth’s Humanity, of Gautama, the Lord
Buddha, hovered over them in benediction, for an-
other child of Man had entered on the Path. And the

138 Tue MASstTerRs AND THE PatH

Silver Star seemed for a moment to expand and enfold
the Initiator and the new Brother in its blinding glory.
And when they came forth from that glory the robe
of the neophyte was no longer linen, but white silk,
like those of the other Initiates. |

The picture when the Initiator made His own causal
body glow, and that of the new Initiate glowed out
in response, was enthrallingly beautiful. Green and
golden light shone out, and the Monad—normally but
appearing as a speck. of light within the permanent
atom of the causal body—shone forth resplendently,
so that the brilliant nucleus swelled out and occupied
the whole oval. The Monad on this occasion iden-
tifies himself for the time with the fraction of himself
that is the ego, and it is he who takes the vows. The
effect on the astral body is also most interesting; a
great rhythmical swing is given to it, without disturb-
ing the stability of its equilibrium, so that it is able
thenceforth to feel with far greater keenness than
before, without being shaken from its own base, or
escaping from its owner’s control. The Initiator sets
the swing, reproducing His own vibration in the astral
body of the neophyte, and at the same time steady-
ing it, so that there is no shaking, no disturbance, but
an immensely increased power of vibration.

When all this had been done, the Initiator gave the
Key of Knowledge to the new Brother, and instructed
him how he might infallibly recognize astrally any
member of the Brotherhood who was not personally
known to him. He directed some of the older pupils

Tue First INITIATION 139

of the Masters to attend as soon as might be to the
necessary buddhic exercises, and the great ceremony
ended with the blessing of the new Initiate by the
assembled Brothers. The new Brother in turn then
gave the blessing of the Brotherhood to the world,
wielding thus for the first time the new and mighty
power which had been conferred upon him. As the
blessing plays round and through the world, adding
new life to everything, giving to each a little more
force, a little more beauty, a multitudinous murmur
fills the air, myriad whispers that form themselves
into a song of deep delight and gratitude. Another
force for good has been made manifest, and Nature,
that groans and travails with her children, rejoices
when one of them enters the Brotherhood that shall
at last deliver her from pain. For the life of the
world is One Life, and when real progress is made
by any unit, all Nature shares in the gain, even that
part of it which we so wrongly call inanimate.

So the wonderful ceremony ended, and the Masters
gathered round the new Brother and gave him hearty
congratulations as the blazing Star disappeared.

On the following night I had orders to present the
neophyte to the Lord of the World. This is of course
a very unusual honor, and not in any way part of the
ceremony of the First Initiation. It generally accom-
panies the Third. We repaired to Shamballa at the
appointed time, and were received in the great hall
as usual. We found the King in conversation with
the Lord Gautama Buddha and the Lord Maitreya.

140 Tue MAsTers AND THE PatTH

The latter presented the neophyte to the King as “our
newest Brother, the Ever-glowing Love-Star,” and
Sanat Kumara smiled graciously upon the youth as
he knelt before Him. The neophyte raised his hands
in the Eastern salutation, and the King put forth His
right hand and grasped them as He said to him:

“You have done well, my son, and I am pleased
with you; I have called you thus before Me to tell
you so. Go on and do better still, for I expect you to
play a great part in the future of My new subrace.
My Star shone over you visibly a few hours ago; re-
member that it hovers over you just as really always
when you cannot see it; and where it shines there
shall ever be power, purity and peace.”

Then the Lord Buddha, laying His hand upon the
neophyte’s head, spoke:

“T also wish to give you My blessing and My con-
gratulations; for I think that your rapid progress now
is an earnest of that which is to come, and that in
the future I shall greet you as a Brother of the
Glorious Mystery, a member of the Spiritual Dynasty
through whom light comes to the worlds.”’

The Three Kumaras Who stood behind smiled also
upon the youth as he knelt speechless, but glowing
with love and adoration. The King raised His hand
in blessing while we prostrated ourselves, and we came
away.

The time occupied by the ceremony of Initiation
varies according to several considerations, one of

Tue First INITIATION 141

which is the amount of knowledge that the candidate
brings with him. Some traditions put the period as
three days and nights, but it is often finished in much
less time. One at which I was present took two nights
and a day of seclusion, but others have been con-
densed into one night by leaving much that used to
be included to be finished later by the higher pupils
of the Masters. Some of the old Initiations lasted so
long because the candidates had to be instructed in
astral work. There are also buddhic experiences
which must be realized, for a certain amount of devel-
opment of the buddhic vehicle is required for Initia-
tion, as some of the teachings which must be given at
that level could not otherwise be understood. Most
Theosophists have already done astral work, and
thus have learnt the detail of the astral world,
much of which must be taught at this time if it
is not already known. But when the Initiator
knows that the candidate has already some buddhic
development it has several times been left to older
pupils to carry the candidates through the buddhic
experiences on the following night, or whenever it
could be arranged.

The actual ceremony of Initiation takes less than
six hours, but a certain amount of time is given to
the candidates both before and afterwards. The
Masters always congratulate the candidates after
the Initiation, and each says a few kindly words.
They take the opportunity of such a gathering to
transmit certain orders to Their pupils; and gener-

142 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

ally it is an occasion of great rejoicing, at any rate
among all the younger members. It is a victory for
all when another neophyte is admitted, when one
more is safe forever.

We have already spoken of the close relation be-
tween an accepted pupil and his Master; all the time
this intimacy has been steadily growing, and it usually
happens that when the pupil is approaching the por-
tal of Initiation the Master considers that the time is
ripe for Him to draw the chela into a still deeper
union. He is then called the Son of the Master, and
the link is such that not only the lower mind but also
the ego in the causal body of the pupil is enfolded
within that of the Adept, and the latter can no longer
draw a veil to cut off the pupil. There is a beautiful
reference to this state of closest union in Light on the
Path, where it is written: ‘“ ‘My peace I give unto
you’ can only be said by the Master to the beloved
disciples who are as Himself.” And so these are they
who have the inestimable privilege of being able to
pass on that peace to others in all its fullness. Any
accepted pupil of the Master has the right and the
duty to bless in His Name, and a splendid outpouring
of the Master’s power will assuredly follow his effort
to do so. Especially should he give that blessing men-
tally whenever he enters a house: “May the blessing
of the Master rest on this house and on all who live
therein.” But the Son of the Master can give the
very touch of His intimate presence, a fuller and a
greater peace. But he who is a Son of the Master

Tue First INITIATION 143

either is or soon will be a member of the Great White
Brotherhood also; and that, as we have said, gives the
power to wield an even greater blessing, though both
are appropriate, each in its several place.

I well remember giving each of these on different
occasions to a great Angel of the neighborhood with
whom I have the honor to be well acquainted. Pass-
ing close to his territories in a vessel I gave him once
as a greeting the full blessing of my Master, and it
was indeed beautiful to see the way in which he re-
ceived it, bowing profoundly and showing his appre-
ciation by a lovely soft glow of holiness and utter-
most devotion. Another day under similar circum-
stances I gave him the blessing of the Brotherhood,
and instantly every power of that great Angel flashed
out in glad response, and the whole of his territory
lit up. It was as though a soldier had leapt to at-
tention, as though everything, not only within himself
but in all the thousands of minor creatures working
under him had suddenly been vivified and raised to
its highest power. All Nature instantly responded.
You see, my Master, however deeply reverenced by
him, is not his Master, but my King is his King, for
there is but One.

The question as to whether a man is approaching
fitness for Initiation involves three separate sets of
considerations, all depending upon one another. The
first is as to whether he is in possession of a sufficient
amount of the necessary Qualifications, as laid down
in At the Feet of the Master, and that means that he

144 Tue MAsTersS AND THE PatTH

must have a minimum of all, and very much more
than a minimum of some of them. To illustrate this
think for a moment of the method adopted in mark-
ing papers at certain examinations. It is determined
beforehand by the examiners that no candidate shall
be allowed to pass who falls below a certain minimum
in each of the subjects; but the percentage required
in each subject is very low—say twenty-five per cent.
Anyone who fails to secure twenty-five per cent of
the marks in any subject will fail; but nevertheless
one who secures exactly that amount in each of the
subjects will not succeed, for not only are separate
minima set for the different subjects but there is also
a total minimum—let us say forty per cent. One
therefore who falls as low as twenty-five or thirty
per cent in one or two of his subjects must make
very much more than that in several other subjects
in order to attain the average required. This is pre-
cisely the method adopted in occultism; there must
be a certain amount of each of these qualifications
present in the successful candidate, but he must have
very thoroughly developed some of them. A candi-
date cannot succeed if he be entirely lacking in dis-
crimination; yet if he shows much less of that than
he should, an overflowing flood of love may perhaps
be accepted as atoning for it. Secondly, the ego must
have so trained his lower vehicles that he can func-
tion perfectly through them when he wishes to do
so; he must have effected what in our earlier Theo-
sophical literature was called the junction of the lower

TuHeE First INITIATION 145

and higher self; and thirdly, he must be strong
enough to stand the great strain involved, which ex-
tends even to the physical body.

As to the level of progress at which he will be
initiated, there is room for very great variety. It
would be a mistake to suppose that all Initiates are
equal in development, just as it would be unsafe to
assume that all men who have taken the degree of
Master of Arts are equal in knowledge. It is quite
possible that a man might have done exceedingly well
in many of the qualities required, and be far beyond
the total minimum, and yet be seriously deficient and
below the minimum standard in one subject; it would
then, of course, be necessary for him to wait till he
had the minimum in that neglected subject, and no
doubt while he was acquiring that he would be de-
veloping the others still further. It is therefore ob-
vious that while there is a certain attainment required
for Initiation, some of those who are presented for
it may have achieved far more than that in some di-
rections. We see, too, that there is likely to be con-
siderable variation in the interval between Initiations.
One man who has just now been able to take the first
may nevertheless possess a considerable share of the
qualifications for the second; therefore for him the
interval between the two might be unusually short.
On the other hand, a candidate who had only just
sufficient strength in all directions to enable him to
pass through the first, would have slowly to develop
within himself all the additional faculties and knowl-

146 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

edge necessary for the second, so his interval would
probably be long.

We have now entered upon a period in the world’s
history in which progress at all levels of evolution can
be very rapid because the near coming of the World-
Teacher has set up so strong a tide of thought and
feeling about spiritual things, all in the direction of
progress, that any one who now makes an effort along
that line finds himself swimming with the current and
advancing swiftly. This refers not merely to the
current of human thought and feeling; in fact, human
thought is but a very small part of that tide, for the
human beings who know anything definite as to the
nearness of the Coming are but a minority. What
counts most is the tremendously powerful thought and
feeling of the vast hosts of the great Angels who know
of the plan, and are trying in every way to help it.

Such rapid progress is, however, a very decided
strain—a thing which few aspirants sufficiently realize.
The student of occultism who sets before himself the
idea of hastening his development will do well to
remember that one of the necessities is good physical
health. He wishes to make in one life the progress
which under ordinary circumstances would be dis-
tributed over twenty or more, and as the amount
that has to be done is the same in either case, for no
reduction whatever has been made in the standard of
the requirements for Initiation, it is obvious that he
must work all his vehicles very much harder if he is
to succeed.

Tue First INITIATION 147

It is possible on the physical plane to shorten the
period of study usually assigned to any given exami-
nation; but a man can do it only by putting a far
greater tax upon his brain, his attention, his eyesight,
his power of endurance; and we all know how fatally
easy it is for him to strain himself in any one of these
directions, and thereby seriously to injure his physical
health. Similar conditions attend upon the efforts to
hasten spiritual evolution; it can be done, and it has
been done, and it is a very fine thing for any man to:
do, always with this provision, that he must watch
very carefully against overstrain lest in the ultimate
he should delay his development instead of advancing.
it. It is not sufficient to have good physical health
at the beginning of one’s endeavor; it is also necessary
to preserve it until the end, for the progress itself is
but a means to an end, and we try to develop our-
selves not that we may become great and wise, but
that we may have the power and the knowledge to
work for humanity to the best effect. We must never
forget that occultism is above all the apotheosis of
common sense.

Hitherto, except very rarely, persons have been
initiated only after their physical bodies have come
to mature age, and after they have proved by their
activities in life that their hearts are pledged to the
work of the Logos. During the last few years, how-
ever, certain egos whose bodies are still young have
been given the privilege of Initiation, and we under-
stand that this has been done in order that when the

148 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

Lord comes He may find a band of young workers
ready to serve Him. On His arrival the World-
Teacher will wield the wondrous consciousness of the
Brotherhood, and the more helpers dwelling in phys-
ical bodies that He can draw round Him at any given
place, the more will His work be facilitated. He can
use the services of any ordinary man of the world to
the extent of that man’s capacity; but one who is
already an accepted pupil of the Master would be of
far more use to Him in many directions than the man
of the world could ever be; and of almost infinitely
ereater use still would be one who had passed the
portal of Initiation and had awakened all the multiple
links which bind together the members of the Broth-
erhood. It is always the ego who is initiated; the age
of the physical body which it happens to be holding
at a given time has little to do with the case.

In all cases when young people have been initiated,
elder members of the Brotherhood living near to them
or in touch with them in the physical body have un-
dertaken to assist and guide them. This is necessary
because of the great responsibility that Initiation
brings along with its expansion of consciousness and
additional faculty and power. A wrong action or a
false step on the part of an Initiate involves bigger
karmic consequences than a similar action on the part
of one who is not a member of the Brotherhood.
Therefore perhaps it will be well to include here a
few directions for these younger people. Each one
should ever remember that he was initiated because in

Tue First INITIATION 149

past lives, and perhaps in the present one, he has
helped the world to a certain requisite degree, ‘and it
is hoped that he will continue in that path and be-
come an ever larger channel for the life of the Logos.
It is because of the probability of his increased use-
fulness that he is admitted to Initiation, and at the
ceremony he takes the pledge, not only as the ego
but as the Monad, that he will make it his life work.
to pour himself out in blessing, even as the Logos is
continually streaming forth His love. He must there-
fore each day and hour keep this pledge in mind and.
subserve all things to it. His karma from the past
gives him various personal characteristics and im-
pulses; he must take heed lest these drive him to think
of himself and his own well-being, rather than of the
greater self and the welfare of the world.

Before he can undertake the larger work awaiting.
him, the youthful Initiate has often to prepare him-
self by an ordinary training in college and univer-
sity. In that case he will be plunged into circum-
stances of vigorous activity and many self-centered
interests. Life surrounds him with many temptations,.
and with occasions tending to make him forget his
pledge to the Brotherhood. Through them all he must
have a clearly defined attitude, that he has thrown in
his lot with the aims of the Brotherhood. In that life
in the world on every occasion, whether of study,
recreation or amusement, he must definitely hold the
thought, “Is this that I am going to do likely to make:
me better equipped for the Master’s work, or a better

150 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

channel to spread love and happiness?” He must
always remember that the Brotherhood has the first
claim on his services, and must never put himself in
any position which makes it impossible for him to
fulfill that duty. It is not intended that he should
live the life of a hermit; but while he lives that life
in society which will give him the growth he requires,
he must all the time watch to see whether it is making
him more of a channel for the Logos. Henceforth for
him any experience, however pleasant and harmless,
which cannot make him a fuller channel of the Logos,
or give an opportunity for service, is valueless to him,
and is so much waste of time. He should try to take
advantage of every opportunity to help that he sees,
and to learn such things as will make him useful.

When the pupil takes the great step of Initiation
and becomes a member of the Brotherhood, he also
becomes in a far greater and more special sense than
before the brother of every one of his fellow-men.
This does not mean that he must direct their lives,
and try to guide them with criticism. It is not his
business in life to criticize but to encourage; but if
he sees reason to make any suggestion he must do it
with the very greatest care and courtesy. The world
does not see the higher members of the Brotherhood;
therefore it is apt to Judge that organization by the
junior members who come within its purview. That —
is what is meant by the remark in the Charge at
Initiation, that the neophyte holds the honor of the
Brotherhood in his hands.

Tue First INITIATION 151

It is his duty to stream forth love and benediction
so that every place in which he happens to be is
happier because of his presence. He must therefore
steadily turn outwards. Henceforth it does not mat-
ter to him what judgment the world gives on his ac-
tions, but only what judgment the Brotherhood gives.
Whether he is popular or unpopular with the world
matters not at all, if through all his conduct he has
been loyal to the ideals placed before him. Some
senior members of the Brotherhood may desire to use
him at any moment, wherever he happens to be, and
sometimes without his knowing it in the brain-con-
sciousness, but he cannot be used if, at the moment
when he is needed, he is found brooding over his own
affairs and turned inwards, not outwards to the world.
The supreme need for him is the building of character,
so that, when his Master looks at him, He will find
him thinking of the world’s welfare and not whether
that world is giving him happiness or misery.

Cuapter VIII
THE EGO

In order that the further steps on the Path may be
clearly understood, it is necessary at this point to
consider the ego, and the way in which it has awak-
ened and put forth its powers to bring the personality
into harmony with itself, and to reach up to the
buddhic plane and realize its unity with all that lives.

In Man Visible and Invisible and The Christian
Creed I published a diagram illustrating the Three
Outpourings of the Divine Life in our evolutionary
scheme. At the top of the diagram appear three
circles symbolizing the Three Aspects of the Logos,
the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity; and from
each of them a line runs down, crossing at right
angles the horizontal lines which signify the seven
planes of nature. That from the lowest circle (the
Third Aspect) is drawn straight down the middle
of the diagram, growing heavier and darker as it
descends, showing how the Holy Spirit vivifies the
matter of the various planes, first building their re-
spective atoms, and then aggregating those atoms into
elements.

Into that matter so vivified the Second Outpouring
comes down from the circle typifying God the Son,

THE Eco 153

and the Divine Life of which that Outpouring con-
sists draws that matter together into forms which it
can inhabit, and thus incarnates and makes bodies
or vehicles for itself. At its lowest level of materi-
ality that Life ensouls the mineral kingdom, and as
it evolves it gradually becomes definite enough to
ensoul the vegetable kingdom, and still later the
animal. When it has risen to the highest level of the
animal kingdom a very remarkable change takes
place, and an entirely new factor is introduced—that
of the Third Outpouring, which comes from the
highest circle, the First Aspect of the Logos, com-
monly called God the Father.

That force which has hitherto been the ensouler
now becomes in its turn the ensouled, and the new
force from the First Person seizes upon what has
heretofore been the soul of the animal, and actually
makes it into a body for itself, though a body of
matter so exceedingly fine as to be utterly inappreci-
able to our physical senses. Thus is born the ego in
his causal body, and he at once draws into himself
the result of all the experience that has been gained by
that animal soul in all the eons of its previous devel-
opment, so that nothing of the qualities which have
been acquired in the course of its evolution is lost.

What then is this wonderful force that rushes from
the Highest Aspect of the Solar Logos which is known
to us? It is in very truth the actual life of God
Himself. So, you may say, are the First and Second
Outpourings. That is quite true, but they have come

154 Tue MAsTerRs AND THE PatTH

down slowly and gradually through all the subplanes,
drawing round themselves the matter of each of these,
and enmeshing themselves in it so thoroughly that it
is scarcely possible to discern them for what they are,
to recognize them as Divine Life at all. But this
Third Outpouring flashes straight down from its
source without involving itself in any way in the in-
termediate matter. It is the pure white light, uncon-
taminated by anything through which it has passed.
Although for clearness’ sake our diagram shows this
Third Stream of the Divine Life as coming forth
directly from the Logos, it has in fact issued forth
from Him long ago, and is hovering at. an intermediate
point in the second of our planes. When hovering at
that level it is called the Monad, and perhaps the
least misleading manner in which we can image it to
ourselves is to think of it as a part of God—a part,
but of That Which cannot be divided—a paradox,
truly, to our mortal intellect; yet enshrining an eter-
nal truth which is far beyond our comprehension.
The general method of this descent of spirit into
matter seems to be always the same, though the
diverse conditions of the different planes naturally
produce many variations in detail. The Logos Him-
self puts down the Monad—a tiny fragment of Him-
self—into a level far below His own; of course such
a descent must mean a most serious limitation, though
it is all too far above the utmost reach of our con-
sciousness to be described or understood. In exactly
the same way the Monad puts down a tiny fragment

THE Eco 155

of Himself which becomes the ego; and in that case
also the limitation is enormously increased. The very
same thing happens once more when the ego repeats
the operation and projects a minute portion of himself
into the mental, the astral and the physical bodies of
the man—a fragment which we call the personality.

This last tiny fragment is the point of conscious-
ness which those of us who are clairvoyant can see
moving about within the man. According to one sys-
tem of symbology this is seen as “‘the golden man the
size of a thumb” who dwells in the heart; but many
of us see it rather in the form of a star. I think I
have always seen it myself as a brilliant star of light.
A man may keep this star of consciousness where he
will—that is to say, in any one of the seven principal
centers of the body. Which of these is most natural
to a man depends largely upon his type or Ray, and
I think also upon his race and subrace. We of the
fifth subrace of the fifth root-race nearly always keep
that consciousness in the brain, in the center depend-
ent upon the pituitary body. There are, however,
men of other races to whom it comes more natural
to keep it habitually in the heart, the throat or the
solar plexus.

This star of consciousness is the representative of
the ego down here in these lower planes, and as it
manifests through those vehicles we call it the per-
sonality; and that is the man as he is known to his
friends down here.

But though that personality is absolutely part of the

156 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

ego—though the only life and power in it are those of
the ego—it nevertheless often forgets those facts, and
comes to regard itself as an entirely separate entity,
and works down here for its own ends. It has always
a line of communication with the ego (often called
in our books the antaskarana), but it generally makes
no effort to use it. In the case of ordinary people
who have never studied these matters the personality
is to all intents and purposes the man, and the ego
manifests himself only very rarely and partially.

Man’s evolution in its earlier stages consists in the
opening up of this line of communication, so that the
ego may be increasingly able to assert himself through
it, and finally entirely to dominate the personality,
so that it may have no separate thought or will, but
may be merely (as it should be) an expression of the
ego on these lower planes. It must, of course, be
understood that the ego, belonging as he does to an
altogether higher plane, can never fully express him-
self down here; the most for which we can hope is
that the personality will contain nothing which is
not intended by the ego—that it will express as much
of him as can be expressed in this lower world.

The absolutely untrained man has practically no
communication with the ego; the Initiate has full
communication; consequently we find (as we should
expect) that there are men among us at all stages
between these two extremes. It must be remembered
that the ego himself is only in process of development,
and that we have therefore to deal with egos in very

THE Eco 157

different stages of advancement. In any case an ego
is in a great many ways something enormously bigger
than a personality can ever be. Though, as has been
said, he is but a fragment of the Monad, he is yet
complete as an ego in his causal body, even: when his
powers are undeveloped; whereas there is but a touch
of his life in the personality. It is also true that life
at his level is an infinitely larger and more vivid thing
than what we know as life down here. Just as it is
evolution for the personality to learn to express the
ego more fully, so is it evolution for the ego to learn
to express the Monad more fully. An undeveloped
personality forgets all about his connection with the
ego and feels himself quite independent. It can
hardly be possible for an ego at his much higher level
to be unaware of his link with the Monad; certainly
some egos are far more awake to the necessities of
their evolution than others—which is only another
way of saying that there are older and younger egos
and that the older are striving more earnestly than
the younger to unfold their latent possibilities.

We are apt to think that the only development
possible for an ego is through the personality; but
that is not so—or rather it is so only in connection
with one small set of qualities. As I have explained
at length in Man Visible and Invisible, the causal
body of a savage is almost colorless. As in the proc-
ess of his evolution he develops good qualities which
can find corresponding vibrations in the matter of the
causal body, the colors expressive of these qualities

158 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

begin to show themselves; and presently the causal
body, instead of being empty, is full of active, pul-
sating life. So much more of the ego can now man-
ifest through it that it has to increase enormously in
size; it extends further and further from its physical
center until the man is able to enfold hundreds and
even thousands of persons within himself, and so
exercise a vast influence for good.

But all this, wonderful though it be, is only one
side of his development. He has quite other lines
of progress of which we down here know nothing; he
is living a life of his own among his peers, among the
great Arupadevas, among all kinds of splendid Angels,
in a world far beyond our ken. The young ego prob-
ably is but little awake as yet to all that glorious life,
just as a baby in arms knows little of the interests
of the world surrounding him; but as his consciousness
gradually unfolds, he awakens to all this magnifi-
cence, he becomes fascinated by its vividness and
beauty.

At the same time he himself becomes a glorious
object, and gives us for the first time some idea of
what God means man to be. Among such beings
thoughts no longer take form and float about as they
do at lower levels, but pass like lightning flashes from
one to another. Here we have no newly acquired
vehicles, gradually coming under control and learning
by degrees more or less feebly to express the soul
within; but we are face to face with one body older
than the hills, an actual expression of the Divine

THE Eco 159

Glory which ever rests behind it, and shines through
it more and more in the gradual unfolding of its
powers. Here we deal no longer with outward forms,
but we see the things in themselves, the reality which
hes behind the imperfect expression. Here cause and
effect are one, clearly visible in their unity, like two
sides of the same coin. Here we have left the con-
erete for the abstract; we have no longer the multi-
plicity of forms, but the idea which lies behind all
those forms.

Here the essence of everything is available; we no
longer study details; we no longer talk round a sub-
ject or endeavor to explain; we take up the essence or
the idea of the subject and move it as a whole, as one
moves a piece when playing chess. What down here
would be a system of philosophy, needing many vol-
umes to explain it, is there a single definite object—
a thought which can be thrown down as one throws
a card upon the table. An opera or an oratorio, which
here would occupy a full orchestra for many hours in
the rendering, is there a single mighty chord; the
methods of a whole school of painting are condensed
into one magnificent idea; and ideas such as these are
the intellectual counters which are used by egos in
their converse one with another.

It is not easy to explain in physical words the
differences which exist between egos, since all of them
are in many ways much greater than anything to
which we are accustomed down here. Analogies are
notoriously misleading if pressed too far or taken too

160 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

literally; but I may perhaps convey some faint re-
flection of the impression produced upon me by in-
tercourse with them, if I say that an advanced ego
reminds me of a dignified, stately and most courteous.
ambassador, full of wisdom and kindliness, while the
less developed man has more of the type of the bluff,
hearty, country squire. An ego who is already on the
Path, and is nearing Adeptship, has much in common
with the great Angels, and radiates spiritual influences
of prodigious power.

Can we wonder, then, that the ego throws himself
energetically into the whirl of intense activity of his
own plane, and that it seems to him immensely more
interesting and important than the faint far-distant.
struggles of a cramped and half-formed personality
veiled in the dense obscurity of a lower world?

In the physical life of the ordinary man of the
world there is little of interest to the ego, and it is
only now and then that something of real importance
occurs, that may for a moment attract his attention,
so that from it he draws whatever is worth taking.
The ordinary man lives in patches; more than half
the time he is not awake to the real and higher life
at all. Some of us are apt to complain that our egos
take very little notice of us; let us ask ourselves how
much notice we have taken of them. How often, for
example, in any given day, have we even thought of
the ego? If we wish to attract his attention we must
make the personality useful to him. As soon as we
begin to devote the greater part of our thought to

Tue Eco 161

higher things (and that is equivalent to saying as soon
as we really begin to live) the ego will be likely to
take somewhat more notice of us.

The ego knows that certain necessary parts of his
evolution can be achieved only through that person-
ality, and in its mental, astral and physical bodies;
he knows, therefore, that he must sometime attend to
it, must take it in hand and bring it under his con-
trol. But we can well understand that the task may
often seem uninviting, that a given personality may
appear anything but attractive or hopeful. If we
look at many of the personalities around us—their
physical bodies poisoned with meat, alcohol and to-
bacco, their astral bodies reeking with greed and sen-
suality and their mental bodies having no interests
beyond business, or perhaps horse-racing and prize-
fighting—it is not difficult to see why an ego, sur-
veying them from his lofty height, might decide to
postpone his serious effort to another incarnation, in
the hope that the next set of vehicles might be more
amenable to influence than those upon which his hor-
rified gaze then rested. We can imagine that he
might say to himself: “I can do nothing with that;
I will take my chance of getting something better
next time; it can hardly be worse, and meantime I
have much more important business to do up here.”

A similar thing not infrequently happens in the
early stages of a new incarnation. From the birth
of the child the ego is hovering over it, and in some
cases he begins to try to influence its development

162 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

while it is still very young. As a general rule he pays
little attention to it until about the age of seven, by
which time the work of the karmic elemental should
be practically over. Children differ so widely that it
is not surprising to find that the relation between the
egos and the personalities involved differs widely also.
Some child-personalities are quick and responsive,.
some are dull or wayward; when the latter character-
istics are prominent, the ego often withdraws his:
active interest for the time, hoping that as the child-
ish body grows it may become cleverer or more re-
sponsive.

Such a decision may seem to us unwise, because if
the ego neglects his present personality it is unlikely
that the next will be an improvement upon it; and if
he allows the child-body to develop without his in-
fluence, the undesirable qualities which have been
manifested may quite possibly grow stronger instead
of dying out. But we are hardly in a position to
judge, since our knowledge of the problem is so im-
perfect and we can see nothing of the higher business
to which he is devoting himself.

From this it will be seen how impossible it is to
judge with any precision the position in evolution of
anyone whom we see only on the physical plane. In
one case karmic causes may have produced a very fair
personality, having an ego of only moderate advance-
ment behind it; while in another case those causes
may have given rise to an inferior or defective per-
sonality, belonging to a comparatively advanced ego.

THE Eco 163

A good illustration of this appears among the stories
of the life of the Lord Buddha. A man came to Him
one day, as people in trouble were wont to do, and
told Him that he had great difficulty with his medi-
tation, which he could scarcely succeed in doing at
all. Then the Buddha told him that there was a very
simple reason for it—that in a previous life he had
foolishly been in the habit of annoying certain holy
men and disturbing their meditations. Yet that man
may have been more advanced as an ego than some
of his companions whose meditations were well done.

When the ego does decide to turn the full force of
his energy upon the personality, the change which he
can produce is marvelous. No one who has not per-
sonally investigated the matter can imagine how won-
derful, how rapid, how radical such a change may be
when conditions are favorable—that is, when the ego
is reasonably strong, and the personality not incur-
ably vicious—more especially when a determined
effort is made by the personality on its side to be-
come a perfect expression of the ego, and make itself
attractive to him.

The difficulty of this subject is greatly enhanced
by the fact that it is necessary for us to regard it
simultaneously from two points of view. Most of us
down here are very emphatically personalities, and
think and act almost exclusively as such; yet we
know all the time that in reality we are egos, and
those of us who by many years of meditation have
rendered ourselves more sensitive to finer influences

164 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

are often conscious of the intervention of this Higher
Self. The more we can make a habit of identifying
ourselves with the ego, the more clearly and sanely
shall we view the problems of life; but in so far as
we feel ourselves to be still personalities looking up
to our Higher Selves, it is obviously our duty and
our interest to open ourselves to them, to reach up
towards them, and persistently to set up within our-
selves such vibrations as will be of use to them. At
least let us be sure that we do not stand in the way
of the ego, that we always do our best for him ac-
cording to our lights.

Since selfishness is the intensification of the per-
sonality, our first step should be to get rid of that.
Then we must keep our minds filled with high
thoughts; for if they are continually occupied with
lower matters (even though those lower matters may
be quite estimable in their way) the ego cannot
readily use them as channels of expression. When
he makes a tentative effort, when he puts down an
exploratory finger, let us receive him with enthusiasm
and hasten to obey his behests, that he may take pos-
session of our minds more and more, and so come into
his inheritance as far as these lower planes are con-
cerned. ‘Thus shall we bring ourselves ever nearer to
the goal that we wish to reach; thus shall we set our
feet upon the Path which leads directly to that First
Initiation in which the lower and the Higher become
one, or rather the greater has absorbed the lesser, so
that there should now be nothing in the personality

THE Eco 165

which is not a representation of the ego; the lower
is now merely an expression of the higher. The per-
sonality may have had a: great many unpleasant
qualities of his own, such as jealousy, anger and de-
pression, but they have all been cast off, and now he
merely reproduces that which comes from above.
The ego having brought the lower self into harmony
with himself is now reaching upwards into the buddhic
plane, the plane of unity. It is only in this way that
the man can begin to cast off the delusion of self
which stands in the way of his further progress, and
that is why the buddhic experience is necessary at the
First Initiation if it has not been had before. In
many cases it has come earlier because the higher
emotions showing themselves in the astral body, have
reflected themselves in the buddhic vehicle and
aroused it, and consequently there is some awaken-
ing before Initiation.

All that lives is really one, and it is the duty of
those who enter the Brotherhood to know that as
a fact. We are taught that the Self is one, and we
try to understand what that means; but it is quite
a different thing when we see it for ourselves, as the
candidate does when he enters the buddhic plane. It
is as if in physical life we were each living at the
bottom of a well, from which we may look up at the
sunlight in the world above; and, just as the light
shines down into the depth of many wells, and yet
ever remains the one light, so does the Light of the
One illumine the darkness of our hearts. The Initiate:

166 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

has climbed out of the well of the personality, and
sees that the light which he thought to be himself is
in very truth the Infinite Light of all.

While living in the causal body, the ego already
recognized the Divine Consciousness in all; when he
looked upon another ego his consciousness leaped up
as it were to recognize the divine in him. But on the
buddhic plane it no longer leaps to greet him from
without, for it is already enshrined within his heart.
He is that consciousness and it is his. There is no
longer the “you” and the “I,” for both are one—facets
of something that transcends and yet includes them
both.

Yet in all this strange advance there is no loss of
the sense of individuality even though there is an
utter loss of the sense of separateness. That seems
a paradox, while yet it is obviously true. The man
remembers all that lies behind him. He is himself,
the same man who did this action or that in the
far-off past. He is in no way changed, except that
now he is much more than he was then, and feels
that he includes within himself many other manifes-
tations as well. If here and now a hundred of us
could simultaneously raise our consciousnesses into
the intuitional world, we should all be one conscious-
ness, but to each man that would seem to be his own,
absolutely unchanged except that now it included all
the others as well.

To each it would seem that it was he who had
absorbed or included all those others, so we are here

Tue Eco 167

manifestly in the presence of a kind of illusion, and
a little further realization makes it clear to us that
we are all facets of a greater consciousness, and that
what we have hitherto thought to be our qualities,
our intellect, our energies, have all the time been His
qualities, His intellect, His energy. We have arrived
at the realization in actual fact of the time-honored
formula: “Thou art That.” It is one thing to talk
about this down here and to grasp it, or to think that
we grasp it, intellectually; but it is quite another to
enter into that marvelous world and know it with a
certainty that can never again be shaken.

When this buddhic consciousness fully impresses
the physical brain, it gives a new value to all the
actions and relations of life. We no longer look upon
a person or object, no matter with what degree of
kindliness or sympathy; we simply are that person
or object, and we know him or it as we know the
thought of our own brain or the movement of our
own hand. We appreciate his motives as our own
motives, even though we may perfectly understand
that another part of ourselves, possessing more know]l-
edge or a different view point, might act quite dif-
ferently.

Yet it must not be supposed that when a man en-
ters upon the lowest subdivision of the Intuitional
world he at once becomes fully conscious of his unity
with all that lives. That perfection of sense comes
only as the result of much toil and trouble, when he
has reached the highest subdivision of this realm of

168 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

unity. To enter that plane at all is to experience an
enormous extension of consciousness, to realize him-
self as one with many others; but before him there
opens a time of effort, of self-development, analogous
at that level to what we do down here when by medi-
tation we try to open our consciousness to the plane
next above us. Step by step, subplane by subplane,
the aspirant must win his way; for even at that level
exertion is still necessary if progress is to be made.

Having passed the First Initiation and consciously
entered the buddhic plane, this work of developing
himself on subplane after subplane now lies before
the candidate, in order that he may get rid of the
three great fetters, as they are technically called,
which embarrass his further progress. He is now
definitely on the Path of Holiness, and is described
in the Buddhist system as the Sotapatt: or Sohan,
“he who has entered the stream”; while among the
Hindus he is called the Parivrajaka, which means
“the wanderer,’ one who no longer feels that any
place in the three lower worlds is his abiding place
or refuge.

CuaptTer IX
THE SECOND AND THIRD INITIATIONS

The candidate who has passed the First Initiation
has entered definitely upon the Path Proper—the Path
that leads to Adeptship, to the portal leading out of
the human kingdom into that of the Superman. Look-
ing at this Path from below, one might wonder that
the aspirant is not exhausted after his labors leading
to the First Initiation, that he does not shrink back
discouraged by the dizzy heights that he sees rising
before him on the relentless ever-ascending Path. But
he has drunk at the fount of life, and his strength is
as the strength of ten, because his heart is pure, and
the glory of the ideal humanity, which he sees with
ever-increasing clearness, has for him an attraction
and inspiration with which no material stimulus or
interest can ever compare.

The first stage of his journey ends in the Second
Initiation, to achieve which he must cast off three
samyojana or fetters, which are:

1. Sakkayaditthi—the delusion of self.
2. Vichikichcha—doubt or uncertainty.
3. Silabbataparamasa—superstition.

The first of these is the “I am I” consciousness

which, as connected with the personality, is nothing

170 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

but an illusion, and must be got rid of at the very
first step of the real upward path. But to cast off
this fetter completely means even more than this, for
it involves the realization of the fact that the indi-
viduality also is in very truth one with the All, that
it can therefore never have any interests opposed to
those of its brethren, and that it is most truly pro-
gressing when it most assists the progress of others.

As to the second fetter, a word of caution is neces-
sary. People who have been trained in European
habits of thought are, unhappily, so familiar with the
idea that a blind, unreasoning adhesion to certain
dogmas may be claimed from a disciple of any re-
ligion, school or sect, that on hearing that in occult-
ism doubt is considered to be an obstacle to progress,
they are likely to suppose that this path also requires
from its followers the same unquestioning faith as
many modern superstitions do. No idea could be
more entirely false.

It is true that doubt (or rather uncertainty) on
some questions is a bar to spiritual progress, but the
antidote to that doubt is not blind faith (which is
itself considered as a fetter, as will presently be seen)
but the certainty of conviction founded on individual
experiment or mathematical reasoning. While a child
doubted the accuracy of the multiplication table, he
could hardly acquire proficiency in the higher math-
ematics; but his doubts could be satisfactorily cleared
up only by his attaining a comprehension, founded
on reasoning or experiment, that the statements con-

THE SECOND AND THIRD INITIATIONS 171

tained in the table are true. He believes that twice
two are four, not merely because he has been told so,
but because it has become to him a self-evident fact.
And this is exactly the method, and the only method,
of resolving doubt known to occultism.

Vichikichcha has been defined as doubt of the doc-
trines of karma and reincarnation, and of the efficacy
of the method of attaining the highest good by this
Path of Holiness; but the knowledge of these things
also brings with it a vivid realization that the world
is God’s school for man, and that His plan is the
evolution of the immortal life through the perishing
forms, and is wonderful and beneficent in every part.
As he casts off this second fetter, the Initiate arrives
at absolute certainty, based either upon personal first-
hand knowledge or upon reason, that the occult teach-
ing upon these points is true.

The third fetter, superstition, has been described as
including all kinds of unreasoning and mistaken be-
lief, and all dependence upon outward rites and cere-
monies to purify the heart. He sees that all the meth-
ods of help offered to us by the great religions—
prayer, sacraments, pilgrimages, fastings and the ob-
servation of manifold rites and ceremonies—are helps
and no more; that the wise man will adopt such of
them as he finds useful to him but will never trust
to any of them alone as sufficient to attain salvation.
He realizes clearly that within himself deliverance
must be sought and that however valuable these aids
may be in developing his will, his wisdom and his

Ly Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

love, they can never take the place of that personal
effort by which alone he can achieve. The man who
has cast off this fetter realizes that there is no one
form of religion which is a necessity for all men, but
that through any and all alike, and even outside of
them, the path to the highest may be found.

These three fetters are in a coherent series. The
difference between individuality and personality being
fully realized, it is then possible to some extent to
appreciate the actual course of reincarnation, and so
to dispel all doubt on that head. This done, the
knowledge of the spiritual permanence of the true ego
brings reliance on one’s own spiritual strength, and
so dispels superstition.

Each stage of the Path Proper is divided into four
steps. The first is its Maggo or Way, during which
the student is striving to cast off the fetters. The
second is its Phala, literally fruit or result, when the
man finds the result of his efforts showing themselves
more and more. Thirdly comes its Bhavagga or con-
summation, the period when, the result having cul-
minated, he is able to fulfill satisfactorily the work
belonging to the step on which he now firmly stands.
The fourth is its Gotrabhu, which means the time
when he has arrived at a fit state to receive the next
Initiation.

That the candidate may become Gotrabhu, nothing
short of complete and entire freedom from the fetters
of his stage on the Path is absolutely essential. Be-
fore the man can proceed to the Second Initiation, the

THE SECOND AND THIRD INITIATIONS 173

Initiator of that occasion demands evidence as to how
the candidate has used the powers acquired by him
at the First Initiation, and one of the most beautiful
features of the ceremony is the part when those who
have been helped by the candidate come forward to
give their testimony. It is also requisite for this
Initiation that the candidate shall have developed the
power to function freely in his mental body, for al-
though the ceremony of the First Initiation is held
on the astral plane, that of the Second takes place in
the lower mental world.

It may seem difficult to reconcile that statement
with the fact that the Initiations are described as
taking place in a certain hall or garden; but really
there is no discrepancy. If the Lord Maitreya acts
as Initiator, the ceremony usually takes place either
in His garden or in His great room. He Himself is
present in His physical body, and so in many cases
is the Lord Vaivasvata Manu Who lives close by.
All others present are usually in the astral vehicle in
the case of the First Initiation but in the mental body
in the case of the Second. The Great Ones present
focus Their consciousnesses with perfect ease at what-
ever level is required, but there is of course on the
astral and the mental planes a perfect counterpart of
everything on the physical, and so the accounts given
are perfectly correct, and the positions taken up in
relation to physical objects are just as there described.

Following the plan of earlier chapters, I once more
give an account of the ceremony:

174 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

ACCOUNT OF A SECOND INITIATION

Notice was received that a great gathering of
Adepts was to take place at the house of the Lord
Maitreya on the night of the full moon of the month
of Chaitra, and that advantage would be taken of the
occurrence of this august assemblage to admit certain
candidates to the Sakridagamin Initiation, as soon
after as should be found convenient. That night the
Master Morya desired the guardians to attend Him
not later than ten o’clock on the night of the full
moon, as they were in charge of one of the can-
didates. :

On the evening of the full moon many friends from
India were hovering round, and when the candidates
and their guardians went to the house of the Master
Kuthumi, these followed discreetly and waited about
respectfully in the near distance. Soon after they had
reached the house, the Master Morya entered. The
two Masters left almost immediately for the house
of the Lord Maitreya, the disciples following and
remaining in the garden while the Masters entered
the house.

This garden is on a southern slope of the Hima-
layas, overlooking a vast expanse of the plains of
India, which stretch away to the far horizon. It is
sheltered, lying in a hollow, and protected by a pine
wood at the back which curves round on the right.
Beyond this wood, and a little eastwards, is the very
ancient stone house, with pillared and wide veranda,

THE SECOND AND THIRD INITIATIONS Lid

wherein dwells the Manu of our Race, the great Lord
Vaivasvata. . The garden of the Lord Maitreya was
flooded with the silver light of the full moon, which
fell on the great clumps of rhododendrons and on the
spring flowers in bloom, and shone dazzlingly on the
white marble seat round the huge tree, the favorite
resting-place of the Lord Maitreya, which He now
assumed on issuing from the house. The Masters
grouped Themselves in a semicircle on the grass ter-
race just below His seat, taking Their places on His
right and left.

On the terrace a step lower stood the two candi-
dates, between the two Masters who presented them
—the Master Kuthumi and the Master Djwal Kul.
Behind them stood the appointed guardians of the
younger candidate in the lower world. The Manu sat
a little behind on the right hand of the Bodhisattva,
and there shone out above Them the glorious figure
of the Lord Gautama Buddha, Who in His last
earthly life had accepted from these two candidates
“the Vow which can never be broken,” and now gave
His all-powerful benediction to them in the step which
they were about to take. Near Him was the Maha-
Chohan, the Head of the five Rays, and between Them
and a little above Them flashed out later in answer
to the solemn invocation of the Bodhisattva the
blazing Star of the One Initiator, the mighty King
of the Occult Hierarchy, the Lord of the World.
Such was the exquisite setting of the ceremony of
Initiation.

176 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

The Master Kuthumi and the Master Djwal Kul
led the two candidates a step forward, and the Bod-
hisattva asked:

‘Who are these that you now bring before me?”’.

The Master Kuthumi answered:

“These are two Brothers who, having cast off the
fetters of separateness, doubt and superstition, and
having reaped the harvest and shown the result of
their labor, now desire to enter on the Path of the
Sakridagamin. I present them as Gotrabhu.”’

The Lord Maitreya asked:

“Will you continue to guide these Brothers along
the Path they seek to enter?”

The Master replied:

“T will do so.”

The Lord said:

“Our rule requires that two of the higher Brethren
shall vouch for every candidate who presents himself
for the second Path. Does any other Brother support
their prayer?”

The Master Djwal Kul answered:

opt do0,”?

The Lord said, addressing the guardians:

“You, as two Brothers living in the outer world,
have taken charge of the younger of these candidates.
You have had experience in your accepted duty of
guardianship; are you willing, as the body is still of
tender age, to persevere in that guardianship and
to help him as he treads the second Path?”

They answered:

Tuer SECOND AND THIRD INITIATIONS 77.

“We are willing and glad so to do.”

The Lord asked:

“Ts your love for him still so strong that the work
will be pleasant and easy?”

They answered:

“Our love for him is even deeper nat it was when
we began our happy task; he is easy to guide and
eager to learn.”

The Lord said to the younger candidate:

“And is your heart also full of love for these two
Brothers, and will you continue gladly to submit
yourself to their guidance, not permitting aught to
come between your heart and theirs?”

He answered:

“T will gladly do so, for I love them both dearly,
and am grateful to them for their care.”

The Lord said to the two candidates:

“You desire then to enter on the Path of the
Sakridagamin?”

They answered:

“We do thus desire, if we are fit to enter on it.”

The Bodhisattva said:

“Forasmuch as it is the immemorial custom of this
Brotherhood, when candidates are presented for each
successive Initiation, to ask how they have used the
powers previously conferred upon them; and foras-
much as a power is only a power when it is used for
the helping of others; I ask therefore who will testify
to services done by these candidates since last they
stood before us, and were admitted into the Brother-

178 Tue MAsTerRS AND THE PatTH

hood? What definite work have they done of teach-
ing? Whom have they helped?”

As the solemn words clove the surrounding air,
seeming as if they rang around the world as a sum-
mons, a great crowd of witnesses surged up from the
four quarters, and hung silent, gazing with loving
grateful eyes on the candidates standing in the center.
The Master Kuthumi spoke:

“These are they from many nations and from many
lands who from these, my two pupils, have received
light, strength and comfort. From the lips of my
elder son my message has gone forth to many thou-
sands, and he has labored unceasingly to bring the
light to those who are in darkness; they are here to
bear witness. He has also written a book and many
articles which remain as evidence of his loving labor
for others. My younger son’—the Master smiled
tenderly—“‘is yet young in body for public work, but
he has written a little book which gives to others the
teaching I gave to him, and tens of thousands love
him as their guide to us; they also are here, ready to
bear witness.”

And many voices cried: ‘We bear witness,” and
the very air seemed vocal, so multitudinous were the
testimonies. And the smile of the Bodhisattva grew
sweet beyond expression as He, the Savior of the
world, listened to the answer He had evoked.

The first guardian then spoke: “I bear witness to
the elder of these candidates, that in time of sore
trouble and bitter strife he stood in perfect loyalty

THE SECOND AND THIRD INITIATIONS 179

to both my Brother and myself, apparently opposed,
in unshaken strength and sweetness, serene and true.
I bear witness also to his unwearied and unselfish
work for others, using all his powers in service. To
the younger, my beloved ward, I bear witness that he
is ever seeking to help those whom he meets, and
shows rare skill in helping, while he sheds around him.
a radiant love and purity that make his mere pres-
ence a benediction. All know the value of his price-
less little book.”

The second guardian also spoke in the candidates’
favor as follows:

“T also add my testimony in the case of both these
dear candidates. I bear witness that the elder has.
rendered to me personally much loyal, affectionate
and self-sacrificing help and support, and that I have:
heard from many others of the inspiration and light
that he has brought into their lives. On behalf of the
younger candidate I bear witness that I have myself
seen the evidence of the wonderful love and devotion
which he has inspired in the members of his Order
both at Adyar and Benares, and of the change which
has been produced in them. I have also received
many letters in which the writers state that they owe
a new conception of life to the book which he wrote.”

The Master Kuthumi called from the multitudes
some who had learned the truth from each candidate,
who looked to him and followed him as guide. Many
came forward to acknowledge the help given, each
speaking what he felt in his heart; and many said

180 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

that At the Feet of the Master had given them a new
view of life. Some who had been much helped, but
could not be brought on this occasion because they
were awake and engaged in their ordinary avocations,
were represented by living images made by the Mas-
ter; and though these could say and do nothing, it is
probable that some touch of the wonderful influences
of the hour may have been conveyed through them to
their originals. The crowd then withdrew, while the
ceremony proceeded.

The Bodhisattva then addressed the candidates,
approving of the work they had done, and expressing
the hope that the new powers now to be conferred
upon them would be used as well as those had been
which they already possessed. He continued:

“You have cast off forever the three fetters which
bind your brethren on earth, and your own freedom
must be used to lessen the weight of these fetters on
them. You have learned with utter certainty that
the idea of the separated self is a delusion; you must
now impress that certainty on your lower vehicles, so
that in them there shall never be any action or
thought for the separated self, but that all shall be
done for the One Self, working through all. Will you
endeavor to do this, and not cease your efforts until
you have succeeded?”

The candidates answered: “I will.”

The Lord Maitreya said:

“You have cast off the fetter of doubt, and you
know surely that evolution is a fact, and that the

es ee, ee eee

THE SECOND AND THIRD INITIATIONS 181

method of evolution is the constant dipping down into
matter under the law of readjustment. You must
use the powers now to be conferred upon you for the
dispelling of doubt in others regarding these vital
facts, so that they may share in the knowledge you
have gained—gained surely not for yourselves alone.
Will you then use your powers for the enlightening
of others?”

The candidates answered:

“T will so use them.”

The Lord Maitreya:

“You have transcended all superstition; you know
that a man may find the light in any religion; you
know that rites and ceremonies have no intrinsic
value, and that all which is done by them can be
done without them by knowledge and by will. Above:
all, you are free from the superstition of the wrath
of the Power behind evolution, and you know that all
that exists is within the Universal Love, and that it
is the gospel of Universal Love which you must spread
among men. Will you seek to lift the darkness by
spreading this gospel?”

The candidates answered:

Seiwa}?

Then the Lord Maitreya added:

“Never forget that there is no darkness save that.
which is made by ignorance and delusion. It was
well said: ‘Every good gift and every perfect gift
is from above, and cometh down from the Father of
Lights, in Whom is no variableness, neither shadow

182 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

of turning.’ In Him is no darkness at all, but men
turn their backs on His Light, and then walk in their
own shadows, crying out that it is dark.”

The candidates were then put through some tests
as to work on the mental plane. They had to ex-
amine people in the heaven-world, such as would be
placed under their care in the future, and the Lord
asked them what they would do to help each case,
having in view the limitations under which their
charges would be laboring. One case was that of a
medieval monk, very full of devotion, but with ex-
ceedingly limited ideas concerning God, the Saints
and the Church, and the Lord questioned them as to
what they would do to help his growth.

All that passes during the Second Initiation is done
on the mental plane, and all are working in their
mental bodies, not in the ordinary mayavi-rupa which
they would use on the astral plane.

After this testing was over, and the candidates had
successfully answered the questions addressed to
them, they were led up to the Lord Maitreya and
knelt before Him. He rose, and turning towards
Shamballa, He cried aloud:

“Do I this, O Lord of Light and Life and Glory,
in Thy Name and for Thee?”

Then over Him blazed out the flashing Star, giving
the consent of the One Initiator, and the august
figure of the Lord Gautama Buddha shone out with
more blinding brilliance, while He raised His right
hand in blessing. The Maha-Chohan also rose to add

THE SECOND AND THIRD INITIATIONS 183

His benediction, as the Bodhisattva laid His hands in
turn on each bowed head, and all bent low in reverent
homage before the Mighty Ones; and there was
silence.

In that stillness the Key of Knowledge was given,
the Bodhisattva pouring out from His own mental
and causal bodies rays of power which, falling on the
mental and causal bodies of the newly initiated, stim-
ulated into sudden and splendid growth the germs of
similar powers therein existing. As though a bud,
stimulated by the sun-rays, should suddenly burst
into all the glory of the opened flower, so did their
mental and causal bodies suddenly unfold the powers
latent within them, expanding into radiant beauty.
Through them, thus expanded, intuition could freely
play, the great new power thus set free to work. And
the Lord Maitreya said:

“Take now this new power which I give you and
trust yourself to it fearlessly. Bring your lower
vehicles into such order and responsiveness that it
may pass freely through them to your physical brain,
and guide your conduct unerringly. So shall it shine
upon the way which lies before you, and prepare you
to enter upon the Third Path.”

He ended with the great benediction, and the Star
and the august Figures near it vanished, all again
bending low in reverence, and the great ceremony was
over.

The assembled Masters then left Their places, and
each spoke a few kind words to the newly initiated,

184 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

and blessed them. The Master Kuthumi also ad-
dressed a kindly word to the crowd who had borne
witness—who had withdrawn to some distance, as
said above, but were now permitted again to ap-
proach to bid farewell to their leaders, who, in the
light of the new knowledge just attained, gave some
advice to each of these followers, and dismissed them
with a blessing.

The Second Initiation rapidly continues the devel-
opment of the mental body, and at or near this point
the pupil learns to use the mayavi-rupa, which is
sometimes translated as the body of illusion. This
is a temporary astral body made by one who is able
to function in his mental body. When a man travels
in the astral plane, he usually does so in the astral
body; and if it were necessary for him to show him-
self on the physical plane while he was functioning
in his astral body, he would have to materialize a
physical body round it. This is sometimes done,
though not frequently, because it involves a great
expenditure of force. Similarly, if he were working
in his mental body and desired to manifest himself
on the astral plane, he would need to materialize a
temporary astral body, which is the mayavi-rupa.
When he had finished his work, he would withdraw to
the mental plane once more, and the temporary body
would vanish, its materials returning to the general
circulation of astral matter whence they had been
drawn by the pupil’s will.

THE SECOND AND THIRD INITIATIONS 185

Up to the time of the First Initiation the man
works at night in his astral body; but as soon as
it is perfectly under control and he is able to use
it fully, work in the mental body is begun. When
that body in turn is completely organized, it is a far
more flexible vehicle than the astral body, and much
that is impossible on the astral plane can be accom-
plished therein. With the power to form the mayavi-
rupa, the man is able to pass instantly from the men-
tal plane to the astral and back, and to use at all
times the greater power and keener sense of the men-
tal plane, and it is only necessary to form the astral
materialization when he wants to become visible to
people in the astral world. It is necessary that the
Master shall first show His pupil how to make the
mayavi-rupa, after which, although it is not at first
an easy matter, he can do it for himself.

A very great expansion and development of the
mental body takes place in connection with this Sec-
ond Initiation, but it usually some years before the
effects of this can show themselves in the physical
brain. As they begin to do so they unquestionably
put a great strain upon that brain, as it cannot be
instantaneously tuned to the necessary pitch.

The period after the taking of the Second Initiation
is in many ways the most dangerous that the candi-
date must pass through anywhere on the Path,
although at any point until the Fifth Initiation is
passed there is the possibility of falling back or of
spending many incarnations wandering about. But

186 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

it is at this stage especially that if there is any weak-
ness in a candidate’s character it will find him out.
It should be impossible for a man who has raised
himself to this height to fall back; but unfortunately
experience has shown us that even this does some-
times happen. In nearly all cases the danger comes
through pride; if there is the least tinge of pride in
the man’s nature, he is in serious risk of a fall. What
we talk about down here as intellect is the merest
reflection of the real thing; yet some of us are proud
of that, proud of our intellect and insight. So when
a man gets even a remote glimpse of what his intel-
lect is going to be in the future there is serious danger,
and if he once starts on that line he will have a ter-
ribly hard time getting back again. Nothing but
unceasing and increasing vigilance can enable him
to pass through this stage successfully, and it must
be his constant endeavor to kill out every trace of
pride, selfishness and prejudice.

When we know these things from behind, we find
sudden and curious illumination thrown upon various
texts of the Bible. This danger point in the life of
the Initiate is indicated in the Gospel story by the
temptation in the wilderness which followed the Bap-
tism of Christ by John. The forty days in the Wil-
derness symbolize the period during which the expan-
sion of the mental body given in the Second Initiation
is being worked down into the physical brain, though
for the ordinary candidate some forty years or longer
might well be required for its accomplishment. In

Ee —

THE SECOND AND THIRD INITIATIONS 187

the life of Jesus it was the period when His brain
was being adapted to the incoming Christ. Then the
Devil, who in the symbolism represents the lower
nature, comes to tempt the Initiate, first to use his
powers for the satisfaction of his own needs: “If thou
be the Son of God, command that these stones be
made bread.” Then he is tempted to cast himself
down from a pinnacle of the temple, thus performing
a miracle which would astound the populace. And
lastly he is shown all the kingdoms of the world and
the glory of them, and the Devil says: ‘All these
things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and
worship me”—he is tempted to use his powers to
gratify his own ambition. Each of these temptations
represents a different form of pride.

Just as the First Great Initiation corresponds to a
new birth, so may the Second Initiation be justly
compared to the baptism of the Holy Ghost and of
Fire; for it is the power of the Third Person of the
Blessed Trinity that is outpoured at that moment,
descending in what may but inadequately be described
as a flood of Fire, a flaming tide of living Light. The
man at this stage is spoken of among the Buddhists
as a Sakadagamin, the man who returns but once,
which means that he who has reached that level should
need but one more incarnation before attaining
Arhatship, the Fourth Initiation, after which there is
no compulsory physical rebirth. The Hindu name for
this second step is the Kutichaka, the man who builds
a hut, he who has reached a place of peace. At this

188 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

stage no additional fetters are cast off, but it is usu-
ally a period of considerable psychic and intellectual
advancement. If what are commonly called psychic
faculties have not been previously acquired, they must
be developed at this stage, as without them it would
be impossible to assimilate the knowledge which must
now be given, or to do the higher work for humanity
in which the Initiate is now privileged to assist. He
must have the astral consciousness at his command
during his physical waking life, and during sleep the
heaven-world will be open before him—for the con-
sciousness of a man when away from his physical
body is always one stage higher than it is while he
is still burdened with the house of flesh.

When the candidate has’ passed through the four
sub-stages of the Second Initiation, and has once more
become Gotrabhu he is ready for the Third Initiation,
to become the Anagamin, which means literally “he
who does not return,” for it is expected of him that
he will attain the next Initiation in the same incarna-
tion. The Hindu name for this stage is the Hamsa,
which means a swan, but the word is also considered
to be a form of the sentence so-ham, “That am I.”
There is a tradition, too, that the swan is able to
separate milk from water, and the sage is similarly
able to realize the true value for living beings of the
phenomena of life.

This Initiation is typified in the Christian symbol-
ism by the Transfiguration of the Christ. He went
up into a high mountain apart, and was transfigured

THE SECOND AND THIRD INITIATIONS 189

before His disciples: “His face did shine as the sun,
and His raiment was white as the light,” “exceeding
white as snow so as no fuller on earth can white
them.” This description suggests the Augoeides, the
glorified man, and it is no inaccurate picture of what
happens at this Initiation, for just as the Second
Great Initiation is principally concerned with the
quickening of the lower mental body, so at this stage.
the causal body is especially developed. The ego is
brought more closely into touch with the Monad, and
is thus transfigured in very truth. Even the person-
ality is affected by that wondrous outpouring. The
higher and the lower self became one at the First Ini-
tiation, and that unity is never lost, but the develop-
ment of the higher self that now takes place can never
be mirrored in the lower worlds of form, although
the two are one to the greatest possible extent.

The Gospel story tells also that at the Transfigura-
tion there appeared Moses and Elijah, the two chief
figures of the old dispensation; one the greatest of
the Jewish prophets, the other representing the Jewish
law. Thus the two dispensations or methods of ap-
proach to truth, that of the following of the law and
that of the inspiration of prophecy, are represented
as with Him who was about to establish a new dis-
pensation, that of the Gospel; and all these symbols
have meanings referring to the actual facts of the
Third Initiation.

Another symbol relating to the same step appears
in the Gospel story of the presentation of the Christ

190 Tue Masters AND THE PaTH

to His Father in the temple. In the traditional ac-
count this is somewhat out of place, for the Christ is
then presented as a little child. At this stage of the
man’s progress he has to be brought before the Spirit-
ual King of the World, the mighty Head of the Oc-
cult Hierarchy, Who at this third step either confers
the Initiation Himself, or deputes one of His pupils,
the three Lords of the Flame Who came with Him
from Venus to do so; and in the latter event the man
is presented to the King soon after the Initiation has
taken place. Thus the Christ is brought into the
presence of His Father; the buddhi-in the Initiate is
raised until it becomes one with its origin on the nir-
vanic plane and a very wonderful union between the
first and the second principles in man is then effected:

The Anagamin enjoys, while moving through the
round of his daily work, all the splendid possibilities
given by the full possession of the faculties of the
higher mental plane, and when he leaves his physical
vehicle at night he enters once more into the wonder-
fully widened consciousness that belongs to the
buddhic plane. While in this stage he has to throw
off any lingering remains of what are called the fourth
and fifth fetters, kamaraga and patigha, attachment
to the enjoyment of sensation, typified by earthly
love, and all possibility of anger or hatred. The as-
pirant must free himself from the possibility of being
enslaved in any way by external things. It is not
by any means that he will not feel the attraction of
what is pleasant or beautiful or clean, nor the repul-

an ie sine a

THE SECOND AND THIRD INITIATIONS 191

sion of the opposites of these things, and will not take
them into account in the course of his work. But
he will not let them be a deciding element in duty,
and will override them entirely on those emergency
occasions when it is necessary for his work.

Here we must guard against a possible misconcep-
tion—one with which we frequently meet. The purest
and noblest human love never dies away—is never in
any way diminished by occult training; on the con-
trary, it is increased and widened until it embraces all
with the same fervor which at first was lavished on
one or two. But the student does in time rise above
all considerations connected with the mere personality
of those around him, and so is free from all the in-
justice and partiality which ordinary love so often
brings in its train.

Nor should it for a moment be supposed that in
gaining this wide affection for all, he loses the es-
pecial love for his closer friends. The unusually per-
fect link between Ananda and the Lord Buddha, as
between St. John and the Christ, is on record to prove
that, on the contrary, this is enormously intensified;
and the tie between a Master and His pupils is_
stronger far than any earthly bond. For the affec-
tion which flourishes upon the Path of Holiness is an
affection between egos, not merely between personal-
ities; therefore it is strong and permanent, without
fear of diminution or fluctuation, for it is that “per-
fect love which casteth out fear.”

CHAPTER X
THE HIGHER INITIATIONS

It will simplify matters for the student if he thinks
of the four stages on the path to Adeptship as in two
divisions, and groups together the foregoing three
stages in the first. They are the stages during which
the buddhic consciousness is being evolved to its per-
fection; but at the Fourth Initiation the candidate
enters the nirvanic plane, and he is engaged from now
onward in climbing steadily through that, or rather
through that division of it, consisting of its five lower
subplanes, on which the human ego has being. This
Initiation may also be thought of as a midway point,
as it is usually said that seven lives are occupied in
the average case at normal times between the First
and the Fourth Initiations, and seven lives also be-
tween the Fourth and Fifth; but these figures are
capable of very great reduction or increase, as I have
said before, and the actual period of time employed
is in most cases not very great, since usually the lives
are taken in immediate succession, without interludes
in the heaven-world.

The candidate who has passed the Fourth Initiation
is spoken of in Buddhist terminology as the Arhat,
which means the worthy, the capable, the venerable

:
|

Tue Hicuer INITIATIONS 193

or perfect, and in the Eastern books very many beau-
tiful things are said about him, for they realize at
what a high level of evolution he stands. The Hindus
call him the Paramahamsa, the one above or beyond
the Hamsa.

In Christian symbology the Fourth Initiation is in-
dicated by the suffering in the Garden of Gethsemane,
the Crucifixion and the Resurrection of the Christ;
though since there are certain preliminary stages it
may be more completely symbolized by the various
events that are said to have taken place during Holy
Week. The first event in the series was that the
Christ raised Lazarus from the dead; and this is al-
Ways commemorated on the Saturday before Palm
Sunday, though according to the Gospel narrative it
took place a week or two earlier. On the Sunday,
there was the triumphal entry into Jerusalem; on
Monday and Tuesday the delivery of a number of
addresses in the temple; on Wednesday the betrayal
by Judas Iscariot; on Thursday the Founding of the
Holy Eucharist; on the night between Thursday and
Friday the trials before Pilate and Herod, and on
Good Friday the Crucifixion. Holy Saturday was
spent in the grave, and at midnight on Saturday, or
rather at the first moment on Sunday morning, Christ
rose from the dead, triumphant for evermore.

All these details of the Christ-drama have a rela-
tion to what really happens in connection with the
Fourth Initiation. The Christ did something unusual
and wonderful in the raising of Lazarus on the Sat-

194 Tue Masters AND THE PatTH

urday, and it was very largely as a result of that that
he enjoyed His one earthly triumph soon after, for
all the people came together when they heard of the
raising of the dead man. They waited for Him, and
when He came out from the house to go on the way
to Jerusalem they received Him with an ovation and
a great display of feeling, and treated Him as in the
East they still treat anyone whom they think to be
holy; so He was escorted by the people with great
enthusiasm into Jerusalem, and having won that little
earthly recognition, He naturally took the opportun-
ity of teaching them, and gave the. addresses in the
temple to which great crowds came to see and hear
Him. This is symbolical of what really takes place.
The Initiate attracts some attention, and gains a cer-.
tain amount of popularity and recognition. Then
there is always the traitor to turn upon him and dis-
tort what he has said and done so that it appears to
be evil; as Ruysbroek puts it:

“Sometimes these unhappy ones are deprived of the
good things of earth, of their friends and relations,
and are deserted by all creatures; their holiness is
mistrusted and despised, men put a bad construction
on all the works of their life, and they are rejected
and disdained by all those who surround them; and
sometimes they are afflicted with divers diseases.”

Then follows a rain of obloquy and abuse, and His
rejection by the world. After that comes the scene in
the Garden of Gethsemane when the Christ feels Him-
self utterly forsaken; and then He is held up to de-

Tue Hicuer INITIATIONS 195

rision and crucified. Finally there is the ery from
the cross: “My God, my God, why hast Thou for-
saken me?”

Madame Blavatsky held a theory which she ex-
pounded in The Secret Doctrine, which I am not able
personally to verify, that the real meaning of those
words was, “My God, my God, how Thou dost
glorify me!” I do not know which of the two render-
ings is the more accurate, but there is great truth in
both of them. It is one of the features of the Fourth
Initiation that the man shall be left entirely alone.
First he has to stand alone on the physical plane;
all his friends turn against him through some misun-
derstanding; it all comes right afterwards, but for the
time the man is left with the feeling that all the world
is against him. Perhaps that is not so great a trial,
but there is another and inner side to it; for he has
also to experience for a moment the condition called
Avichi, which means “the waveless,”’ that which is
without vibration. The state of Avichi is not, as has
been popularly supposed, some kind of hell, but it is
a condition in which the man stands absolutely alone
in space, and feels cut off from all life, even from
that of the Logos; and it is without doubt the most
ghastly experience that it is possible for any human
being to have. It is said to last only for a moment,
but those who have felt it have the impression that
it lasted very much longer, for time and space do not
exist at that level. That terrible experience has, I
think, two results—that the candidate may be able

196 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

to sympathize with those to whom Avichi comes
as a result of their actions, and that he may learn to
stand cut off from everything external, and test and
realize his own utter certainty that he is one with the
Logos, and that any such feeling of loneliness must be
but an illusion. ‘There have been those who have
fallen at that very terrible test, and have had to go
back and begin their Initiation work over again; but
for the man who can endure it without flinching, it
is certainly a very wonderful experience, however ter-
rible, so that while to the trial itself the interpreta-
tion ‘‘Why hast Thou forsaken me” might be applied,
“How Thou dost glorify me!” would certainly not be
an untrue expression of the feeling of the man when
he comes forth from it victorious.

This Initiation differs from all the others in that
it has this strange double aspect of suffering and
victory. Each of the earlier Initiations was symbol-
ized in the Christian system by one definite fact, the
Birth, the Baptism, the Transfiguration; but in order
to represent this Fourth Initiation a series of events
have been found necessary. The Crucifixion and all
the varied sufferings of which it was the culmination
were employed to typify one side of this Initiation,
while the Resurrection with its triumph over death
represents the other side. Always at this stage there
is suffering, physical, astral and mental; always there
is the condemnation by the world, and the apparent
failure; always there is the splendid triumph upon
higher planes—which, however, remains unknown to

~— eo 2”)60 le ee eee ee

—— ——-———

Tue HicHer INITIATIONS 197

the outer world. The peculiar type of suffering which
invariably accompanies this Initiation clears off any
arrears of karma which may still stand in the Initi-
ate’s way; and the patience and joyousness with
which he endures them have great value in the
strengthening of his character, and help to determine
the extent of his usefulness in the work which lies
before him.

The Crucifixion and Resurrection which symbolize
the actual Initiation are thus described in an ancient
Egyptian formula:

Then shall the candidate be bound upon the wooden cross,
he shall die, he shall be buried, and shall descend into the

underworld; after the third day he shall be brought back from
the dead.

Only after three clear days and nights and part of
a fourth had passed was the still entranced candidate
of those ancient days raised from the sarcophagus in
which he had lain, and borne into the outer air at the
eastern side of the pyramid or temple, so that the first
rays of the rising sun might fall upon his face and
awaken him from his long sleep.

There is an old proverb, “No cross, no crown,”
which may be taken to mean that without man’s
descent into matter, his binding on the cross of mat-
ter, it would have been impossible for him to gain the
resurrection and receive the crown of glory; but by
the limitation and through the sorrow and trouble he
has gained the victory. It is impossible for us to
describe that resurrection; all words that we can em-

198 Tue Masters AND THE PatH

ploy seem to sully its splendor, and any attempt at
description seems almost blasphemy; but this much
may be said, that a complete victory has been gained
over all sorrows, troubles and difficulties, temptations
and trials, and it is his forever because he has con-
quered by knowledge and inner strength. We may
recall how the Lord Buddha proclaimed His freedom:
Many a House of life
Hath held me—seeking ever him who wrought

These prisons of the senses, sorrow-fraught ;
Sore was my ceaseless strife!

But now

Thou Builder of this syainrseaiva Paacg iran

I know Thee! Never shalt Thou build again
These walls of pain,

Nor raise the roof-tree of deceits, nor lay
Fresh rafters on the clay;

Broken Thy house is, and the ridge-pole split!
Delusion fashioned it!

Safe pass I thence—deliverance to obtain.

For the Arhat henceforth the consciousness of the
buddhic plane is his while still in the physical body,
and when he leaves that body in sleep or trance, he
passes at once into the unutterable glory of the nir-
vanic plane. At his Initiation he must have at least
one glimpse of that nirvanic consciousness, just as
at the First Initiation there must be a momentary
experience of the buddhic, and now his daily effort
will be to reach further and further up into the nir-
vanic plane. It is a task of prodigious difficulty, but
gradually he will find himself able to work upwards
into that ineffable splendor.

The entry into it is utterly bewildering, and it

Tue Hicguer INITIATIONS 199

brings as its first sensation an intense vividness of
life, surprising even to him who is familiar with the
buddhic plane. This surprise has been his before,
though in a lesser measure, whenever he mounted for
the first time from one plane to another. Even when
we rise first in full and clear consciousness from the
physical plane to the astral, we find the new life to
be so much wider than any that we have hitherto
known that we exclaim: “I thought I knew what life
was, but I have never known before!’”’ When we pass
into the mental plane, we find the same feeling re-
doubled; the astral was wonderful, but it was noth-
ing to the mental world. When we pass into the
higher mental plane, again we have the same experi-
ence. At every step the same surprise comes over
again, and no thought beforehand can prepare one
for it, because it is always far more stupendous than
anything that we can imagine, and life on all those
higher planes is an intensity of bliss for which no
words exist.

European Orientalists have translated nirvana as
annihilation, because the word means “blown out,” as
the light of a candle is extinguished by a breath.
Nothing could be a more complete antithesis of the
truth. Certainly it is the annihilation of all that
down here we know as man, because there he is no
longer man, but God in man, a God among other
Gods, though less than they.

Try to imagine the whole universe filled with and
consisting of an immense torrent of living light, the

200 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

whole moving, moving onward, without relativity, a
resistless onward sweep of a vast sea of light, light
with a purpose, if that is comprehensible, tremen-
dously concentrated, but absolutely without strain or
effort—words fail. At first we feel nothing but the
bliss of it, and see nothing but the intensity of the
light; but gradually we begin to realize that even in
this dazzling brightness there are brighter spots
(nuclei, as it were) through which the light obtains a
new quality that enables it to become perceptible on
lower planes, whose inhabitants without this aid would
be altogether beneath the possibility of sensing its
effulgence. Then by degrees we begin to realize that
these subsidiary suns are the Great Ones, the Plane-
tary Spirits, Great Angels, Karmic Deities, Dhyan
Chohans, Buddhas, Christs and Masters, and many
others Who are to us not even names, and that
through Them the light and the life are flowing down
to the lower planes.

Little by little, as we become more accustomed to
this marvelous reality, we begin to see that we are
one with Them, though far below the summit of Their
splendor, part of the One that dwells somehow in
Them all, and also in every point of space between;
and that we ourselves are also a focus, and through
us at our much lower level the light and life are
flowing to those who are still further away (not from
it, for all are part of it, and there is nothing else
anywhere) but from the realization of it, the com-
prehension and experience of it.

Tue Hiauer INITIATIONS 201

Madame Blavatsky often spoke of that conscious-
ness as having its center everywhere and its circum-
ference nowhere, a profoundly suggestive sentence,
attributed variously to Pascal, Cardinal de Cusa and
the Zohar, but belonging by right to the Books of
Hermes. Far indeed from annihilation is such con-
sciousness; the Initiate reaching it has not in the least
lost the sense that he is himself; his memory is per-
fectly continuous; he is the same man, yet all this
as well, and now indeed he can say “I am |” knowing
what “I” really means. It may sound strange, but
it is true. No words that we can use can give even
the least idea of such an experience as that, for all
with which our minds are acquainted has long ago
disappeared before that level is attained. There is,
of course, even at that level, a sheath of some sort for
the spirit, impossible to describe, for in one sense it
seems as though it were an atom and yet in another
it seems to be the whole plane. The man feels as if
he were everywhere, but could focus anywhere within
himself, and wherever for a moment the outpouring
of force diminishes, that is for him a body.

The man who has once realized that marvelous
unity can never forget it, can never be quite as he
was before; for however deeply he may veil himself
in lower vehicles in order to help and save others,
however closely he may be bound to the cross of
matter, cribbed, cabined and confined, he can never
forget that his eyes have seen the King in His Beauty,
that he has beheld the land which is very far off—

202 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

very far off, yet very near, within us all the time if
we could only see it, because to reach Nirvana we
need not go away to some far-distant heaven, but
only open our consciousness to its glory. As the
Lord Buddha said long ago: “Do not complain and
cry and pray, but open your eyes and see; for the
light is all about you, and it is so wonderful, so beau-
tiful, so far beyond anything that men have ever
dreamed of or prayed for, and it is for ever and for
ever.”

“The land that is very far off” is a quotation from
the Prophet Isaiah, but strangely enough it is a mis-
translation. Isaiah did not speak of the land which
is very far off, but of the land of far distances, which
is a very different idea and one of great beauty. It
suggests that the Prophet had had some experiences
of these higher planes, and was comparing in his
thought the splendor of the star-strewn fields of
heaven with the cramped catacombs through which
we crawl on earth; for that is what this life is as
compared with that higher one, a blind crawling
through dark and devious ways as compared with a
splendid purposeful life, an utter realization of the
divine will ensouling and working through the wills
of those who dwell therein.

A mighty work the Arhat has before him to climb
to the topmost heights of that utmost of human planes
of existence, and while he is doing it he must cast off
the remaining five of the ten great fetters, which are:

6. Ruparaga—desire for beauty of form or for

0 Sk eee

Tue HicHer INITIATIONS 203

physical existence in a form, even including that in
the heaven-world.

7. Aruparaga—desire for formless life.

8. Mano—pride.

9. Uddhachcha—agitation or irritability, the pos-
sibility of being disturbed by anything.

10. Avtjja—ignorance.

The sixth and seventh fetters include not only the
idea of Raga, or attraction, but also that of dwesha
or repulsion, and the casting off of these fetters im-
plies a quality of character such that nothing in the
lower planes of form or the higher and formless planes
ean hold him by its attraction even for a moment, or
can deter him by its disagreeableness if he has work
therein. As the eighth fetter, Mano, is filed away,
he forgets the greatness of his own achievements, and
pride becomes impossible for him, since now he stands
always in the light, and measures himself against no
lower thing. Then comes the perfect serenity which
naught can disturb, leaving him free to acquire all
knowledge, to become practically omniscient as re-
gards our planetary chain.

Now does the Candidate approach the Fifth Initia-
tion, that of the Adept; “he hath wrought the purpose
through of that which made him man,” so now he
takes the final step that makes him Superman—
Asekha, as the Buddhists call Him, because He has
no more to learn, and has exhausted the possibilities
of the human kingdom of nature; Jivanmukta, as the
Hindus speak of Him, a liberated life, a free being,

204 Tuer MASTERS AND THE PaTH

free not because of any separate independence, but
because His will is one with the universal Will, that
of the One without a second. He stands ever in the
light of Nirvana, even in His waking consciousness,
should He choose to remain on earth in a physical
body, and when out of that body He rises still higher
into the Monadic plane, beyond not merely our words
but our thought. Hear again the Lord Buddha:

‘“’ , . Measure not with words

The Immeasurable; nor sink the string of thought
Into the Fathomless. Who asks doth err,

Who answers, errs. Say naught!”

In Christian symbolism the Ascension and the De-
scent of the Holy Ghost stand for the attainment of
Adeptship, for the Adept does ascend clear above
humanity, beyond this earth; although if He so
chooses, as did the Christ, He may return to teach
and help. As He ascends He becomes one with the
Holy Ghost, and invariably the first thing He does
with His new power is to pour it down upon His dis-
ciples, even as the Christ poured down tongues of fire
upon the heads of His followers at the Feast of Pen-
tecost. A glance at any of the diagrams showing the
principles in man, which have been published in
earlier books, will show the relation between the
manifestations of the Logos in the Prakritic Cosmic
plane and in the soul of man; we shall see that the
triple atma, the threefold spirit of man, lies in the
lower part of the nirvanic or spiritual plane, and that

Tue Higuer INITIATIONS 205

the lowest manifestation of the Third Person, God
the Holy Ghost, is in the higher part of the same
plane. The Adept becomes one with Him at that
level, and that is the real explanation of the Christian
feast of Whitsunday, the festival of the Holy Spirit.
It is on account of unity with Him that the Asekha
can take pupils; the Arhat, though he has very much
to teach, still works under an Adept, acts for Him
and carries out His orders on the physical plane, but
does not take pupils for himself, because he has not
yet that special link with the Holy Ghost.

Above the Initiation of the Adept lies that of the
Chohan, and further on still others, of which I will
speak in the chapter on the Occult Hierarchy. The
ladder of being extends up into clouds of light, into
which few of us as yet can penetrate, and when we
ask Those who stand higher than we and know in-
finitely more than we do, all They can say is that
it extends beyond Their sight also. They know very
many more steps of it than we do, but it goes still
further, onward and upward to unimaginable heights
of glory, and no one knows its end.

Although what I have just said is perfectly accu-
rate, that none of us can see the end of that ladder,
and that the work of Those in the higher ranks of the
Hierarchy is almost incomprehensible, still I wish to
make it perfectly clear that Their existence and work
is as real and definite as anything in the world—nay,
more so, and that there is not the slightest vagueness
about our vision of Those Great Ones. Though I

206 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

know but little about the higher part of His work,
for many years past I have seen the Bodhisattva
constantly, almost daily, engaged in that work, and
I have very many times seen the Lord of the World
in His wonderful and incomprehensible existence; so
that They are to me people just as real as any whom
I know, and I am as certain as I can possibly be of
Their existence and of something of the part that
They play in the world.

Of the tremendous truth of what I can say about
Them I am utterly certain, and yet I cannot explain
Them, nor understand more than a fragment of what
They are doing. I have seen Dhyan Chohans and
Planetary Spirits and Ambassadors from other solar
systems, and I know absolutely of the existence and
transcendent glory of those people, but what Their
tremendous life work may be I do not know at all.
I have myself seen the Manifestation of the Logos of
the Solar System, seen Him as He is among His Peers,
and yet millions of times more than the unspeakable
grandeur that I have seen in Him must be that which
They see when They look at Him. As Arjuna in
The Bhagavad Gita is said to have seen the Divine
Form, so have I seen, without the shadow of a doubt.
And I want to put my testimony on record that these
things are so. I dare say that I lay myself open to
a certain amount of scorn for writing this; people
will ask, “Who are you, to say these things?” But
I have seen, and it would be cowardly to refuse to
bear witness.

Tue HIGHER INITIATIONS 207

I have repeatedly declared, both in speech and in
writing, that I wish no one to base his belief in The-
osophy upon any assertion of mine. I think that each
man should study the system for himself and come
to his own conclusions, the fundamental reason for
his acceptance of any doctrine being either that he
knows it from his own experience or that he finds it
the most reasonable hypothesis at present before him.
But that in no way alters the fact that I have evi-
dence to give to those who care to listen to it—evi-
dence which I have placed before them in this and
other books. We who write upon Theosophy in this
twentieth century can fully reaffirm St. John’s plain
statement of nearly two thousand years ago:

“That which was from the beginning, which we
have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which
we have looked upon and our hands have handled

. that which we have seen and heard declare we
unto you.”

We who have seen bear witness; whether the world
accepts our testimony makes little difference to us.

Whoso has felt the Spirit of the Highest,
Cannot confound nor doubt Him nor deny:

Yea, with one voice, O world, though thou deniest,
Stand thou on that side, for on this am I.

Immediately beyond the Asekha Initiation this
higher Path opens up in seven great ways, among
which the Adept must take His choice, and on this
subject I cannot do better than quote what was said
in Man: Whence, How and Whither:

208 Tue MAsTeRS AND THE PATH

When the human kingdom is traversed, and man stands on
the threshold of His superhuman life, a liberated Spirit, seven
paths open before Him for His choosing: He may enter into
the blissful omniscience and omnipresence of Nirvana, with
activities far beyond our knowledge, to become, perchance, in
some future world an Avatara, or divine Incarnation: this is
sometimes called “taking the Dharmakaya vesture.” He may
enter on “the Spiritual Period”— a phrase covering unknown
meanings, among them probably that of “taking the Sambho-
gakaya vesture.’ He may become part of that treasure-house
of spiritual forces on which the Agents of the Logos draw for
Their work, “taking the Nirmanakaya vesture.” He may re-
main a member of the Occult Hierarchy which rules and
guards the world in which He has reached perfection. He may
pass on to the next Chain, to aid in building up its forms.
He may enter the splendid Angel or Deva Evolution. He
may give Himself to the immediate service of the Logos, to
be used by Him in any part of the Solar System, His Servant
and Messenger, who lives but to carry out His will and do
His work over the whole of the system which He rules. As
a General has his staff, the members of which carry his mes-
sages to any part of the field, so are These the Staff of Him
Who commands all, “Ministers of His that do His pleasure.”
This seems to be considered a very hard Path, perhaps the
greatest sacrifice open to the Adept, and is therefore regarded
as carrying with it great distinction. A member of the Gen-
eral Staff has no physical body, but makes one for Himself by
kriyashakti—the “power to make”—of the matter of the globe
to which He is sent. The Staff contains Beings at very dif-
ferent levels, from that: of Arhatship upwards.

The man who takes the Dharmakaya robe retires
into the Monad, and drops even his nirvanic atom;
the Sambhogakaya retains His nirvanic atom and
shows Himself as the Triple Spirit, and the Nirman-
akaya retains His causal body and also the perma-
nent atoms which He has carried all through His
evolution, so that at any moment He can materialize
round them mental, astral and physical bodies, if He
so desires. He definitely keeps His link with the

Tue Higuer INITIATIONS 209

world from which He has come, in order that He may
supply the reservoir from which spiritual power is
poured down upon that world. The Nirmanakaya are
spoken of in The Voice of the Silence as forming a
Guardian Wall which preserves the world from fur-
ther and far greater misery and sorrow. For those
who do not understand the inner meaning that seems
to imply that the misery and sorrow come to the
world from outside, and that these Great Ones ward
it off, but that is not so at all, for all the trouble in
the world comes from those who suffer it. Each man
is his own law-giver, each decrees his own doom or
reward; but the duty of the Nirmanakaya is to sup-
ply a great store of spiritual force for the helping of
men. All the time They generate this force, taking
no part for Themselves, but putting it all at the serv-
ice of the Brotherhood for Their use in lifting the
heavy burden of the world.

It will thus be seen that of those who attain Adept-
ship comparatively few remain on our earth as mem-
bers of the Occult Hierarchy, but These and Their
work are of vital importance, so we will devote to
that subject the remaining chapters of this book.

CHAPTER XI
THE WORK OF THE MASTERS

I have already explained that of the human beings
who attain Adeptship, but a few remain on our earth
as members of the Occult Hierarchy, to promote the
evolution of life upon it in accordance with God’s
plan. At present there are some fifty or sixty of
these Supermen so engaged, and of Their general
work our President has written as follows in her
pamphlet on The Masters:

They aid, in countless ways, the progress of humanity.
From the highest sphere They shed down light and life on
all the world, that may be taken up and assimilated, as
freely as the sunshine, by all who are receptive enough to
take it in. As the physical world lives by the life of God,
focused by the sun, so does the spiritual world live by that
same life, focused by the Occult Hierarchy. Next, the
Masters specially connected with religions use these religions
as reservoirs into which They pour spiritual energy, to be
distributed to the faithful in each religion through the duly
appointed “means of grace.” Next comes the great intellec-
tual work, wherein the Masters send out thought-forms of
high intellectual power to be caught up by men of genius,
assimilated by them and given out to the world; on this
level also They send out Their wishes to Their disciples,
notifying them of the tasks to which they should set their
hands. Then comes the work in the lower mental world,
the generation of the thought-forms which influence the con-
crete mind and guide it along useful lines of activity in this
world, and the teaching of those who are living in the
heavenly world. Then the large activities of the intermediate

Tue Work oF THE MASTERS 211

world, the helping of the so-called dead, the general direc-
tion and supervision of the teaching of the younger pupils
and the sending of aid in numberless cases of need. In the
physical world the watching of the tendencies of events, the
correction and neutralizing, as far as law permits, of evil
currents, the constant balancing of the forces that work for
and against evolution, the strengthening of the good, the
weakening of the evil. In conjunction with the Angels of
the Nations also They work, guiding the spiritual forces as
the others guide the material.

We may consider more fully some of the lines of
work, here indicated in small compass with the sweep
of vision for which our President is world-renowned.
Though the number of Adepts is small, They have
arranged that in all the world no life shall be dis-
regarded or neglected, so They have divided the
earth into special areas in somewhat the same way
as in older countries the Church has divided the whole:
land into parishes, so that wherever a man may live
he is within one of these geographical divisions and
has a definite Church organization to administer to
his spiritual and sometimes to his bodily needs.
The parishes of the Adepts, however, are not country
districts or parts of towns, but huge countries and
even continents.

As the world is at present divided, one great Adept
may be said to be in charge of Europe, and another
looks after India; and thus the whole world is par-
celed out. The parishes do not follow our political
or geographical boundaries, but within His territory
the Adept has all the different grades and forms of
evolution to regard—not only our own, but also the:

212 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

great kingdom of the Angels, of the various classes
of Nature Spirits, the animals, vegetables and min-
erals beneath us, the kingdoms of the elemental es-
sence, and many others of which so far nothing has
been heard by mankind; so there is a vast amount of
work to be accomplished. In addition to the guard-
ianship of the Adepts, each race or country has also
the assistance of a Spirit of the Race, a deva or
guardian Angel who watches over it and helps to
guide its growth, and corresponds in many ways to
the ancient conception of a tribal Deity, though he
stands at a considerably higher level. Such an one,
for example, was Pallas Athene.

There are many different sets of influences at work
in the service of the Logos for the evolution of man,
and naturally they all operate in the same direction,
and in cooperation with one another. We must never
make the mistake of attributing to these great
agencies the disasters which sometimes overtake
countries, as in the case of the French Revolution and
the recent upheavals in Russia. Those are due en-
tirely to the savage passions of the people which have
run riot and caused destruction instead of construc-
tion, and they illustrate the danger to which the work
of the Adepts and the Spirit of the Race is exposed
when They make experiments along democratic lines.
There is terrible evil involved in tyranny, and some-
times great suffering also, but at least there is some
sort of control; and the great problem in getting rid
of the tyranny is how to do it without losing social

Tue Work oF THE MASTERS 213

stability and self-control. When that goes many
persons fail to keep the human end uppermost in their
own personalities, passion rises, crowds run riot, and
the people become liable to obsession by great waves
of undesirable influence. The national Angel tries to
guide the feelings of the people; he is interested in
them in great masses, and he would when necessary
urge them to great patriotism and heroic deeds, just
as a general might encourage his men to advance on
the field of battle; but he is never reckless of their
lives or careless of their suffering any more than a
wise general would be.

A large part of the Adepts’ work, as we have seen
in an earlier chapter, lies at levels far. beyond the
physical, as They are engaged in pouring out Their
own power, and also the force from the great store
filled by the Nirmanakaya. It is the karma of the
world that it shall have a certain amount of this
uplifting force at its service, and even ordinary men
who turn their wills into line with the Divine Will,
by directing their thought and feeling to the service
of humanity, add to the reservoir a little, and are
thus privileged to share in the great sacrifice. On
account of this, humanity is evolving as a unit, and
the miracle of brotherhood enables everyone to make:
much more progress than would be even remotely
possible were he standing entirely by himself. All
this is part of the scheme of the Logos, Who appar-
ently has calculated upon our taking part in His plan.
When He devised it He thought: “When My peopie-

214 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

shall rise to a certain level, they will begin to cooper-
ate intelligently with Me; therefore I will arrange. so
that when they come to that point they will be able
to draw upon My power.” Thus He is counting upon
everyone.

The Brotherhood is one with all humanity on higher
leveis, and through its agency the distribution of the
supply of force from the great reservoir takes place
for men. They are raying upon all egos without ex-
ception in the higher mental plane, and thus giving
the greatest possible assistance to the unfoldment of
the indwelling life. That life is like a seed which
cannot die and must grow, because the principle of
evolution, the Logos Himself, is at the heart of its
very being; in man the plant has already risen through
the soil and is seeking the upper air, and the rapidity —
of its development is now very largely due to the sun-
light of the spiritual force that comes through the
channels of the Hierarchy. This is one of the many
ways in which the more advanced help the less ad-
vanced, as they share more and more the divine
nature, in accordance with the divine plan.

Each of the Adepts Who has undertaken this spe-
cial work is raying out upon enormous numbers of
people, running often into many millions simultane-
ously, and yet such is the wonderful quality of this
power that He pours forth that it adapts itself to
each one of these millions as though he were the only
. object of its influence, and it appears as though what
for us would be full attention were being given to

Tue Work OF THE MASTERS 215

that one. It is difficult to explain on the physical
plane how this may be—but it arises from the fact
that the Master’s nirvanic consciousness‘is a kind of
point which yet includes the entire plane. He can
bring that point down through several planes and
spread it out like a kind of vast bubble. On the out-
side of that huge sphere are all the causal bodies
which He is trying to affect, and He, filling the
sphere, appears all in all to each individual. In this
way He fills with His life the ideals of millions of
people, and is for them respectively the ideal Christ,
the ideal Rama, the ideal Krishna, an Angel or per-
haps a spirit guide. This is quite a different kind
of work from the superintendence of one of the great
parishes, and in it the Master pays attention chiefly
to pupils of one type, those who are developing along
His own line of evolution, though naturally most of
them are quite unconscious of His action. He has
also many special cases to deal with, and for this
purpose sometimes delegates part of this work to
Devas, leaving them considerable liberty within cer-
tain well-defined limits. The Devas in their turn
employ nature-spirits and make a variety of thought-
forms, and there is thus a large field of activity con-
nected with their work.

In The Science of the Sacraments I have explained
how the Great Ones take advantage of the ceremonies
of all religions to pour out Their power over the world
on the lower planes, and thus to stimulate in as many
men as possible the spiritual growth of which each

216 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

is capable. But it is not only in connection with
religious ceremonial that this is done, for the Broth-
erhood makes use of every opportunity that offers.
If there be a gathering of people who are all under
the influence of devotion, all bent for the time being
upon nobler and higher thought, such a gathering
offers to the Adepts an unusual opportunity, of which
They will straightway make use, since it forms a
focus which They can employ as a channel for
spiritual influence. When people are scattered and
living in their homes, they are like a number of sep-
arated lines down each of which but a little force
can flow, but when they come together at a meeting,
it is as though these were combined to make a kind
of pipe through which a much greater flood of bless-
ing may be poured than the sum of what could de-
scend through the separate lines.

I have seen a million pilgrims together in the holy
city of Benares, many of them no doubt ignorant and
superstitious, but for the time full of devotion and
utterly one-pointed. The mass of devotional feeling
generated by such a crowd is almost incalculable, and
the Adepts never miss the opportunity of utilizing it
for good. It is, of course, unquestionable that a sim-
ilar number of equally enthusiastic but intelligent
people would supply vastly more force—and also
force capable of playing upon a higher plane alto-
gether; but we must not for a moment make the mis-
take of ignoring the value of the vast amount of
energy produced by ignorant and even fanatical peo-

Tue Work OF THE MASTERS 217

ple. The members of the Brotherhood have a won-
derful faculty of separating the evil from the good,
or rather of drawing out the last ounce of force which
can be used for good, even from the midst of a great
deal that is evil.

It is common to find the most intense devotion
allied with bitter sectarian feeling; in such a case the
Adept will extract and make use of every particle
of the devotional feeling, simply ignoring and leav-
ing behind the savage hatred which to us seems to
be a part of it. Therefore people with most undesir-
able characteristics often produce a certain amount
of good karma, though it is undeniable that it would
be far greater if it were dissociated from the other
unfortunate qualities.

Such a city as Benares is always a tremendous
center of force, even quite apart from the annual
pilgrimages. It is a city of shrines and relics, and
these also can be utilized as channels by the Adepts;
and the same is true of such things the world over. In
some place, for example, there may be a relic of a
great saint belonging to any one of the religions of
the world. If the relic is genuine, a certain amount
of strong magnetism does radiate from it, on account
of its connection with a worthy man, and it may
therefore be used to bless those who reverence it by
sending through it a stream of force. In many cases,
however, the relic is not genuine; but that, which to
us would seem a most important fact, in reality mat-
ters less than one might suppose. |

218 Tue Masters AND THE PaTH

If for a long time people have made a great center
of devotional feeling around it, on that account alone
the Brotherhood can use it as effectively as a genuine
relic, and the fact that the people are deluded in their
belief does not affect its usefulness, since their devo-
tion is genuine, and that is the important thing. If
this were more fully understood, it would probably
check many thoughtless people who are inclined to
ridicule the superstitions of the Catholic peasants in
Italy or Sicily or Spain, or to look down upon Indian
coolies because they pay homage at some shrine which
is obviously not what it is supposed to be. There is
no doubt that truth is better than error, yet we must
remember that it is not well to tear away from the
ignorant the objects of their devotion until they are
able to rise to higher things; by such iconoclasm the
world is the poorer, for by it not only is devotion
destroyed, but useful channels of the Masters’ force
may be closed.

Besides, it is obviously impossible for an ignorant
peasant to judge as to the genuineness of a relic, and
it would be grossly unfair that the effect of his de-
votion, poured out with good intention and in all
innocence of heart, should be made to depend upon
a fact as to which he can have no knowledge. In the
great world of realities things are never so badly
managed as that; the true devotion will find full and
hearty response whether the object round which it is
focused is or is not all that he thinks it to be. The
devotion is the real thing—the only thing that mat-

Tue Work OF THE MASTERS 219

ters, and it must and does receive the real return
which it deserves. ‘The supposed relic is merely a
point upon which it is focused, and an imaginary
point will do for this as well as any other.

I have already mentioned that the pupils of the
Masters are also apprentices, but at their lower level
they serve as transmitters of force, and also do a
great variety of work in every branch of civilization
and human culture, all of which is part of the Adepts’
work in the world. A vast amount of this is done
by others who have received inspiration or sugges-
tion from these pupils, or through the various socie-
ties and agencies that they have set going or influ-
enced. Without these influences humanity would be
poor indeed, though for the most part it knows little
of the source of its true wealth. The Adepts
Themselves cannot turn aside from Their exalted
work to do these lower and easier tasks, because
if They did the whole machinery of evolution would
suffer.

Men sometimes ask why these Great Ones have not
written books; for example. They forget that the
Adepts are carrying on the evolution of the world;
They can hardly drop that in order to give people
information with regard to some part of it. It is true
that if One of the Great Ones had the time to write
a book, if His energy could not be better employed,
that book would be far superior to any that we have.
But if it were the plan of things that all work should
be done by those who can already do it perfectly

sp

"4 They Save lf AC f Bee ait,
ie TNty Nave. C£ MiGs Fe

: ‘
vr" Ve f Ww h 0 S¢ maw é 7 1 are Lows 7

220 Tue MAstTerRS AND THE PaTH

there would be no field for the exercise of our facul-
ties, and it would be difficult to see any utility in our
existence in this world.

A department of activity which has recently been
organized on a large scale by pupils of the Masters
is that of practical service on the astral plane, about
which I have written in the book, Invisible Helpers.
The greatest part of that work is among the newly
dead, who often find themselves there confused, bewil-
dered, and even suffering, especially. when they have
been frightened during life by the hideous stories of
dreadful torture after death which form part of the
stock-in-trade of some perverted religious sects.
Though it is many years ago, it is still within the
life of the Theosophical Society, that the organized
band of invisible helpers was founded and set to
work. It was originally composed of people still liv-
ing who had decided to use their time during the sleep
of the body in this definite way; but they soon drew
to themselves a great many already dead, who had
not thought of this work before.

Until that time, newcomers to the astral world were
mostly left to themselves, unless it occurred to their
relations to meet them and introduce them to the
new life. For example, a mother who died would
still watch over her children, and if any of the chil-
dren died shortly after the mother she would give
them what help and information she could; and gen-
erally the good-natured people among the dead would
pass on to others what knowledge they possessed

THE WorkK oF THE MASTERS 221

when they saw the need of help. In older civiliza-
tions, when large families and joint families were the
rule, perhaps comparatively few people found them-
selves without a friend in need on the other side of
death. Readers of Oriental literature will remember
how much is said in Hindu religious books about the
importance of family ties and duties as extending to
the invisible regions beyond the veil of death. Still,
the condition there was somewhat like that of a
country without hospitals or schools or bureaus of
public information, where many must suffer, and in
times of special calamity and war that was often most
serious.

An excellent picture of the way in which the Adepts
work for the betterment of civilization is given in our
President’s London Lectures of 1907, in which she
tells us something of the steps that were taken by the
Brotherhood to lift Europe out of the terrible dark-
ness of the Middle Ages. She explains that in the
thirteenth century a mighty personage then living in
‘Tibet promulgated His order to the Brotherhood that
in the third quarter of every century an effort should
be made to enlighten Europe. If one goes through
history carefully, one can find that from that time
onward, towards the end of each century a new ray
of light was sent forth from the Lodge.* (See Dia-
gram 1 on page 222.)

The latest of these efforts was the founding of the
Theosophical Society in 1875. After careful consid-
eration the Masters Morya and Kuthumi undertook

222 Tue MAaAsTEeRS AND THE PATH

the responsibility of that step, and chose that noble
worker, Madame Blavatsky, to help Them on the
physical plane. Most students of Theosophical lit-
erature know how she was prepared for what she
had to do; how in due course the Brotherhood sent her
to America to search for Colonel Olcott, the comrade
who would supply what was lacking in herself—the
power of organization and of speaking to men and
gathering them round him and shaping them into a

”

* These have been worked out by Mr Fritz Kunz as follows:

re ne rE eR SETS SR A RS A SE A SRR RE ER

EFFORT
1275 Roger Bacon and the restoration of mental
culture
1375 Christian Rosenkreuz and the spread of
culture
The printed book: fixation of knowledge

1575 Francis Ba¢on and Science: English lan-
guage the medium

1675 Union of classes attempted: secret societies

1775 Political freedom, unfortunately mainly by
revolution

1875 | Theosophical Society: Society for Psychical
Research: Liberal Catholic Church:
Co-Masonry: Evolution

1975 Wide spread of what is now esotericism:
_ Evolution (spiritual) -

DIAGRAM 1

= Se

Tue Work oF THE MASTERS 223

movement in the outer world—and how the Society
was founded in New York, and later had: its Head-
quarters removed to India.

As I write, our Society is in its fiftieth year of
service to humanity, and it is impossible to estimate
the vast amount of good it has done in every depart-
ment of human life. Its influence cannot in the
least be measured by the number of its members or
branches, although that is by no means insignificant,
since it extends to every civilized part of the globe.
But in each field of human endeavor it has sounded
its characteristic note, the reverberations of which
multiply around us in the words and work of states-
men and scientists, literary men and artists, and
many others of whom great numbers perhaps have
never even heard the word Theosophy. It has drawn
attention to the realities of the invisible world and
the power of mind. It has voiced the claims in out-
ward life of the fact of brotherhood, seeking no uni-
formity in human life, but the organization for
mutual support of widely different individuals, each
of whom shall be strong in his special type, and all
of whom shall be bound together by the indissoluble
bond of respect for the man who is different from
oneself. It has brought together East and West as
never before, and has demanded fair play in the com-
parison of religions, and revealed with unmistakable
clearness their essential unity of teaching and their
common source. And it has brought thousands to the
feet of the Masters to serve Them with all their

224 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatHu

power and with all their hearts for the good of man--
kind for all time to come.

In its work for the world the Brotherhood deals:
not only with the present, but looks far into the
future and prepares for the development of new races
and nations in which the qualities of humanity shall
be developed in harmonious sequence. As we shall
see in the chapter on the Occult Hierarchy, the
progress of mankind takes place in no haphazard
manner, but the formation of the’ races with their
special characteristics, physical, emotional and men-
tal (serving as classes in the great world school for
the development of special qualities) is as precise and
definite as the curriculum and time-table of any
modern college.

The great Aryan race which, though not yet at its
prime, dominates the world to-day with its supreme
gift of intellect, has followed after the Atlantean race,
the people of which still form the majority of man-
kind and occupy a great portion of the land surface
of our globe.

In this connection three great pieces of work are
in hand at the present time, the first of which is the
preparation for the physical embodiment and ac-
tivity among men of the Bodhisattva or World-
Teacher, Who is the same great Personage, the
Christ, Who occupied the body of Jesus two thousand
years ago. His coming must not be confused with
the centennial events already mentioned; those be-
long to the First Ray and are in the department of

Tue Work or THE MASTERS 225

occult work that deals with the guidance of races
and subdivisions of races; whereas this is an event
which occurs only once in a long time, and is an ac-
tivity of the Second Ray, the department of religion
and education. The World-Teacher will come when
He thinks well, but we are told that the Coming
will be soon. The Order of the Star in the East was
established thirteen years ago to prepare for that
Coming by drawing together people of every sect and
religion all over the world who for various reasons
believe in the near approach of the World-Teacher,
and are willing to combine in a grand effort to pro-
claim it to the world, and prepare themselves as far
as may be to be useful servants of the Lord when He
comes.

Since the Lord Maitreya has chosen to announce
His coming to the world through our President, we
are justified, I think, in assuming that His teaching
will be somewhat along the line of the ideals that she
has been promulgating with such wonderful eloquence
during the last thirty-six years. Some sects claim
that He will come to judge mankind and to destroy
the earth, so that there is a great element of fear and
uncertainty connected with their beliefs. But all fear
of God comes from a misunderstanding. The Coming
of Christ is indeed connected with an end—not the
end of the world, but the end of an age or dispensa-
tion. The Greek word is aion, which is the same as
zon in English; and just as Christ said two thou-
sand years ago that the dispensation of the Jewish

226 Tue Masters AND THE PaTH

law had come to an end, because He had come to
found a new one, that of the gospel, so will the era
of the gospel come to an end when He returns and
founds yet another. He will give the same great
teaching; the teaching must be the same, for there is
only one Truth, though perhaps it may be put a little
more clearly for us now, because we know a little
more. It will be promulgated in some fresh dress,
perhaps, with some beauty of expression which will
be exactly suited to us in this present day, and there
will be some statement of it which will appeal to a
large number of people.

It will certainly be the same, because it has ap-
peared in all the existing faiths. They have differed
much in their method of presenting it, but they all
agree absolutely in the life which they ask their
followers to live. We find considerable difference
between the external teachings of Christianity, Bud-
dhism, Hinduism, and Mohammedanism; but if we
examine the good men of any one of those religions
and inquire into their daily practice, we shall find
that they all are leading precisely the same life—
that they all agree as to the virtues a good man must
possess, and as to the evils he must avoid. They all
tell us that a man must be charitable, truthful, kindly,
honorable, helpful to the poor; they all tell us that
a man who is hard and grasping and cruel, who is
untruthful and dishonorable, is making no progress,
and has no chance of success until he changes his
ways. As practical people we must recognize that

| Tue Work OF THE MASTERS 227

the things or real importance in any religion are not
the vague metaphysical speculations on’ matters of
which no one can really know anything for certain,
for these can have no influence upon our conduct; the
important things are the precepts which affect our
daily lives, which make us this kind of man or that
kind of man in our relations with our fellow-men.
Those precepts are the same in all existing religions;
they will be the same in the new teaching, whatever
it may be.

Perhaps we may go a little further than that in
predicting what He will teach. Surely, the great
central truth which He will emphasize is that the
evils of the world come from lack of love and
brotherliness—that if man will learn to love and to
adopt the brotherly attitude, all evil will pass away
and the golden age will dawn upon us. Not imme-
diately—we cannot hope for that; but at least men
will begin to see for themselves, and to understand
how much more is to be gained along that line than
the other.

The second of these great events is the molding
of the form of body, emotions and mind of the sixth
subrace of our Aryan race, which has already begun
to appear in America and Australia and perhaps
other parts of the world. The great modeling power
of the Manu’s mind and will is at work on the inner
planes, modifying even the physical type of the chil-
dren of the new age, wherever they may be suscep-
tible to it, and some of the junior members of the

228 Tue MASsTers AND THE PatTH

Brotherhood, working in the outer world, have their
instructions to provide for these, when possible, the
education and training that befits the new race. This
work is small as yet, but it is destined to swell into
voluminous proportions, until within a few short
centuries the sixth subrace will stand out distinct
and admirable in its young manhood in the new
world, while the old world continues to develop the
fifth subrace to its maturity and perfection. And
perchance later still the sixth subrace, radiant and
glorious in its manhood, will shed its blessing upon the
fifth, so that for the first time a race shall have a
serene and dignified decline into fruitful and vener-
able age. That may be the reward of its present and
coming service to the infant race, and of its fight,
full of sacrifice but triumphant, against the powers
of darkness, opening up possibilities for man such
as the race has never known before.

We must try to understand what is meant by be-
longing to the new sixth subrace. Our ideas are too
inelastic. When the sixth subrace is fully established,
it will show certain definite characteristics—physical,
astral and mental—which are not to be seen in the
average man of the fifth subrace. Remember, it has
to be built gradually out of the fifth subrace, and
these new characteristics must be developed one by
one in each of the egos concerned. The process of
preparation is a long one, and may well extend over
several lives. So when you look round and examine

Tue Work or THE MASTERS 229

people (and especially young people) from this point
of view, we must not expect to be able to say off-
hand that one belongs to the new subrace, and an-
other does not.

A more accurate statement would be something like
this: “A seems to possess about twenty-five per cent
of the characteristics of the new subrace; B has per-
haps as much as fifty per cent; C has a large pro-
portion—perhaps seventy-five per cent; in D I cannot
see anything lacking; as far as I can tell he is a
fully developed example.” And you must understand
that the average boy or girl whom you think hopeful
is probably an A, for B’s are as yet very rare in the
world, and C’s and D’s practically non-existent, ex-
cept in our own tiny circle. Remember also that
developments are very unequal; a boy may have
made a considerable amount of astral or mental
progress before it shows much in his physical body;
and on the other hand, through good heredity, he may
have a physical body capable of expressing greater
advancement on higher planes than he has yet at-
tained. Very few can expect to show all the signs
yet; they may be well satisfied if they show one or
two.

Even at its culmination it will not be uniform;
for example, it is in the main a dolichocephalous race,
but it will always have brachycephalous subdivisions;
it will contain fair-haired and dark-haired people,
people with blue eyes and people with brown. Natu-

230 Tuer MASTERS AND THE PaTH

rally the astral and mental traits are the more impor-
tant, but in most cases it is only by the physical ap-
pearance that one can make an estimate. The keynote
is unselfishness, and the dominant is eager enthus-
iasm for service; and these must be accompanied
by active kindliness and large-hearted tolerance.
He who forgets his own pleasure, and thinks only
how he can help others, has already gone far on the
path. Discrimination and common sense are also
marked characteristics.

If we wish to know for what physical tokens we
may look, perhaps the most marked of all are deli-
cate, well-shaped hands and feet, thin fingers and
oval nails, especially thinness in fingers and thumb
when seen edgewise. The texture of the skin is also
important. Of faces there are three types—the
markedly oval with high forehead, the slightly less
oval with broad forehead, and the practically brachy-
cephalous (this last being rare; the definition of a
brachycephalous skull is that its breadth is four-
fifths of its length). There is a distinguishing ex-
pression about the person who is approaching the
sixth subrace which one who looks for it will soon
begin to recognize.

The third great event is the foundation of the sixth
root-race, which is to take place physically in Cali-
fornia about seven hundred years from now. A com-
munity will be established there with the Manu of
that race, He who is now our Master Morya, at the

Se ee ee oF Se

-TuHer Work oF THE MASTERS 231

Head of it, and beside Him His co-worker through-
out the ages, the Master Kuthumi, who is to be the
Bodhisattva of the sixth root-race. We have written
of that community in Man: Whence, How and
Whither. Although it les some hundreds of years
ahead, which after all is but a brief time in the life
of a man, as all of us will realize when we look back
upon it, preparations are swiftly afoot for that also,
and the Theosophical Society is playing no incon-
siderable part in those. Every branch of the Society
is or ought to be encouraging each one of its mem-
bers in his efforts to apply in the outer world the
Theosophic knowledge that he has gained; he must,
of course, do that according to his temperament and
ability, and his opportunities as he mixes with men;
but all that helps the present race. Within the The-
osophical Lodge where so many different types of
men foregather and must help one another if the
Lodge be true to its ideals, a breadth of character
should be developed in the members, for they receive
in this respect an education in the spirit of broth-
erhood which can scarcely be had elsewhere in the
world. Most societies are organized for the attain-
ment of one goal or one purpose, but in the Theosoph-
ical Society we know that although one model of
perfection appeals most strongly to one man and
another to another, the brotherhood of man will not
be achieved by the triumph of any one ideal, be it
love, or truth, or beauty alone, but by the twisting

232 Tue Masters AND THE PatTH

of all these strands into one mighty rope which will
bind man forever to the Divine. As was said in the
Hitopadesha long ago:
Small things wax exceeding mighty,
Being cunningly combined;
Furious elephants are fastened
With a rope of grass-blades twined.

Such is the spirit of brotherhood gradually ac-
quired by the ‘true Theosophist, holding to his fellow
by inner impulse, not by outward compulsion, and
membership in the Society is verily a training by the
Masters that, if successful, will fit the man to be
reborn in the community of the sixth root-race when
it is established on the physical plane.

CuapTer XII
THE CHOHANS AND THE RAYS

In the last chapter I have tried to describe some
of the many avenues of work of the great Masters,
but there are, of course, many others, and some about
which we know practically nothing; yet what we do
know indicates that the work is vast and varied, and
that the Adepts deal with it in different ways, ac-
cording to Their own temperaments and preferences.
There is a sevenfold division running through all
things, as I must explain more fully presently, and
this appears also in the Great White Brotherhood.
In the Hierarchy the seven Rays are clearly distin-
guished. The First or ruling Ray is governed by the
Lord of the World; at the head of the Second Ray
stands the Lord Buddha, and under These come re-
spectively the Manu and the Bodhisattva of the root
race which is predominant in the world at any given
time. Parallel in rank with These is the Maha-
Chohan, Who supervises all the other five Rays, each
of which nevertheless has also its own Head. In my
next chapter I will explain what I can about the
loftier ranks of the Hierarchy, attempting in this to

234 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

render some account of the work of the Heads of
Rays Three to Seven, and of the Masters Morya and
Kuthumi who stand at Their level on the First and
Second Rays.

The title Chohan is given to those Adepts Who
have taken the Sixth Initiation, but the same word
is employed also for the Head of Rays Three to
Seven, which is a very definite and exalted office in
the Hierarchy. We are given to understand that the
meaning of the word Chohan is simply “Lord,” and
that it is used both generally and specifically, in
much the same way as the word Lord is employed in
England. We speak of a man as a lord because he
possesses that title, but that is quite different from
what we mean when we speak, for example, of the
Lord Chancellor or the Lord Lieutenant of the County.
The term appears again in the name Dhyan Chohan,
which occurs frequently in The Secret Doctrine and
elsewhere, and then it refers to Beings of very high
station, altogether outside the Occult Hierarchy of
our planet.

It is necessary at this point, if we are to under-
stand at all this part of the work of the Masters,
to digress a little and say something of what is
meant by the seven Rays. This is a matter of con-
siderable difficulty. Long ago we received some in-
formation, very incomplete certainly, but still very
valuable—about these Rays. I remember well the
occasion on which it was given to us. Mr. Cooper-

THE CHOHANS AND THE Rays 235

Oakley and I and a Hindu brother were sitting talk-
ing on the roof at Adyar in the very early days, when
there was only the one headquarters house and
twenty-nine acres of half-jungle behind it, and there
came to us suddenly the Master Djwal Kul, who was
at that time the chief pupil of the Master Kuthumi.
He gave us a great deal of teaching in those days,
and was always very kind and patient, and while
He sat and talked to us that day this question of
the Rays came up. Mr. Cooper-Oakley in his char-
acteristic way said, “O, please, Master, will you tell
us all about the Rays?”

There was a twinkle in our Teacher’s eye as He
said, ‘Well, I cannot tell you all about them until
you have reached a very high Initiation. Will you
have what I can tell you, which will be partial and
inevitably misleading, or will you wait until you can
be told the whole thing?” Not unnaturally we
thought that half a loaf was better than no bread,
so we said we would take what we could get. We
noted down the very interesting information that He
gave, but much of it was incomprehensible to us, as
He had foretold. He said, “I cannot tell you any
more than that, for I am bound by certain pledges;
but if your intuition can make out more I will tell
you whether you are right.”’ Even that little frag-
mentary information was of very great value to us.

The following is the table of Rays and their char-
acteristics He then gave to us:

236 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

} Cuaracteristic Maaic Last RELIGION

Ray CHARACTERISTIC OF Ray

Wisdom Raja Yoga Buddhism
(Human Mind)
3 Astrology Chaldean
ae Aisa (Natural Magnetie Forces) bearer
Birth of Horus Hatha Yoga Egyptian
(Physical Development)

5 Fire Alchemy Z Zoroastrian
(Material Substances)
Incarnation of Deity Bhakti Christianity, ete
(Devotion) (Kahala, etc.)
inf io areal

DIAGRAM 2

Elemental! Worship

It was explained that the religion written opposite
each Ray is not to be taken as necessarily a perfect
exposition of it, but is simply that which now remains
on earth as a relic of the last occasion on which that
Ray exercised dominant influence on the world. The
Magic of the First Ray and the characteristics of
the Seventh were not given. ‘The meaning of the
Birth of Horus could not be explained, but one of
the characteristics of the Fourth Ray was stated to
be the use of the forces of action and interaction—
the male and female forces of nature, as it were.
Whenever phallicism occurs in the various religions
it is always due to a materialization and misconcep-

2 = =

Tur CHOHANS AND THE Rays 237

tion of some of the secrets connected with this Ray.
The true development of the Seventh Ray would be
communication with and instruction from the higher
Devas.

After what I have said above it should be clear
that the information that has as yet reached us about
the Rays is fragmentary. It is not only not a full
account of the subject, but is not even a perfect out-
line, for we were plainly told that there were huge
gaps in the description given to us which could not
possibly be filled up till much later. So far as we
know very little has hitherto been written on this
subject, and that little so guardedly expressed as not
to be at all readily intelligible, and occult teachers
are markedly reticent when questioned about it.*

The essential thing to understand is that there is a
certain sevenfold division of everything that exists in
the manifested world, whether of life or matter. All
life which exists in our chain of worlds passes through
and belongs to one or other of seven Rays, each hav-
ing seven subdivisions. In the universe there are
forty-nine such Rays, making, in sets of seven, the
seven great cosmic Rays, flowing from or through the
seven Great Logoi. In our chain of worlds, however,
and perhaps in our solar system, only one of these

*While this book is in the press an important work on the
subject appears, The Seven Rays, by Professor Ernest Wood.
The material which it gives is illuminative, and is presented
from quite a new angle.

238 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

great cosmic Rays is operating, and its subdivisions
are our seven Rays. It must not, of course, be sup-
posed that our solar system is the only manifestation
of that particular Logos, since each of the seven Great
Logoi may have millions of systems dependent upon
Him. As I have explained in The Inner Life:

The whole of our solar system is a manifestation of its
Logos, and every particle in it is definitely part of Huis
vehicles. All the physical matter of the solar system taken
as a totality constitutes His physical body; all the astral
matter within it constitutes His astral body; all the mental
matter, His mental body, and so on. Entirely above and
beyond His system He has a far wider and greater existence
of His own, but that does not in the least affect the truth of
the statement which we have just made.

This solar Logos contains within Himself seven planetary
Logoi, Who are as it were centers of force within Him, chan-
nels through which His force pours out. Yet at the same
time there is a sense in which they may be said to constitute
Him. The matter which we have just described as com-
posing His vehicles also composes theirs, for there is no par-
ticle of matter anywhere in the system which is not part of
one or other of them. All this is true of every plane; but
let us for a moment take the astral plane as an example,
because its matter is fluid enough to answer the purposes
of our inquiry, and at the same time it is near enough to the
physical to be not entirely beyond the limits of our physical
comprehension.

Every particle of the astral matter of the system is part
of the astral body of the solar Logos, but it is also part of
the astral body of one or other of the seven Planetary Logoi.
Remember that this includes the astral matter of which your
astral body and mine are composed. We have no particle
which is exclusively our own. In every astral body there are
particles belonging to each one of the seven Planetary Logoi,
but the proportions vary infinitely. The bodies of those
Monads which originally came forth through a Planetary
Logos will continue all through their evolution to have more
of the particles of that Planetary Logos than of any other,
and in this way people may be distinguished as primarily
belonging to one or other of these seven great Powers.

tig Sa ~~ Se

THE CHOHANS AND THE Rays 239

In Christian terms these seven great, Beings are
found in the vision of St. John the Evangelist, who
said: “And there are seven lamps of fire burning
before the throne, which are the Seven Spirits of
God.” Those are the Mystical Seven, the great
Planetary Logoi, Who are life-centers in the very
Logos Himself. Those are the true Heads of our
Rays—the Heads for the whole solar system, not for
our world only. Out through one or other of that
mighty Seven every one of us must have come—
some through one, some through another.

They are the Seven Sublime Lords of The Secret
Doctrine, the Primordial Seven, the Creative Powers,
the Incorporeal Intelligences, the Dhyan Chohans,
the Angels of the Presence. But remember that this
last title is used in two quite different senses, which
must not be confused. At every Celebration of the
Holy Eucharist of our Christian brethren there ap-
pears an “Angel of the Presence,’ who is in truth a
thought-form of the Lord Christ, a vehicle of His
consciousness, and so is rightly called a manifesta-
tion of His Presence; but these Seven Great Ones
receive the title for a very different reason—because
They stand ever in the very presence of the Logos
Himself, representing there the Rays of which They
are the Heads—representing wus therefore, since in
every one of us is part of the Divine Life of every
one of Them.

For though each of us belongs fundamentally to
one Ray—the channel through which he, as a Monad,

240 Tue MASsTers AND THE PATH

flowed forth from the Eternal into Time—yet has he
within himself something of all the Rays; there is
in him no ounce of force, no grain of matter, which
is not actually part of one or other of these wondrous
Beings; he is literally compacted of Their very sub-
stance—not of one, but of all, though always one
predominates. Therefore, no slightest movement of
any of these great Star Angels can occur without
affecting to some extent every one of us, because
we are bone of Their bone, flesh of Their flesh, spirit
of Their Spirit; and this great fact is the real basis
of the often misunderstood science of Astrology.
We all stand always in the presence of the Solar
Logos, for in His system there is no place where He
is not, and all that is, is part of Him. But in a very
special sense these Seven Spirits are part of Him, »
manifestations of Him, almost qualities of His—
centers in Him through which His power flows out.
We may see a hint of this in the names assigned to
them by the Jews. The first of them is always
Michael, ‘‘your Prince,” as he is called; and this
name means “The Strength of God,” or, as it is
sometimes interpreted, “He who is like God in
strength.” El, in Hebrew, means God; so we find it
in Beth-El, which is “The House of God’; and
Elohim is the word used for “God” in the very first
verse of the Bible. This termination El occurs in
the name of each of the Seven Spirits. Gabriel means
“The Omniscience of God,’ and he is sometimes

THE CHOHANS AND THE Rays 241

called God’s Hero. He is connected with the planet
Mercury, as Michael is with Mars. Raphael signi-
fies “The Healing Power of God,” and he is associ-
ated with the sun, which is the great health-giver
for us on the physical plane. Uriel is “The Light
or Fire of God”; Zadkiel is “The Benevolence of
God,” and is connected with the planet Jupiter. The
other Archangels are usually given as Chamuel and
Jophiel, but I do not at present recollect their mean-
ings or their planets.

St. Denys speaks of these Seven Spirits as the
Builders, and also calls them the Cooperators of God.
St. Augustine says that they have possession of the
Divine Thought, or the Prototype, and St. Thomas
Aquinas wrote that God is the primary and these
Angels are the secondary cause of all visible effects.
Everything is done by the Logos, but through the
mediation of these Planetary Spirits. Science will
tell you that the planets are fortuitous aggregations
of matter, condensations from the mass of the nebula,
and so no doubt they are; but why at those partic-
ular points? Because behind each there is a Living
Intelligence to choose the points so that they will bal-
ance one another. Truly whatsoever exists is the out-
come of natural forces working under cosmic laws;
but do not forget that behind every force is always
its administrator, an Intelligence directing and man-
aging. In thus describing Them I have used the
Christian terminology, but the same Beings can be

242 Tue Masters AND THE PATH

found under different names in every great religion.

When, then, that primordial matter or spirit which
in the future was to become ourselves first emerged
from undifferentiated infinity, it issued through seven
channels, as water might flow from a cistern through
seven pipes, each of which, containing its peculiar
coloring matter would so tinge the water that passed
through it that it would forever after be distinguish-
able from the water of the other pipes. Through all
the successive kingdoms, the elemental, the mineral,
the vegetable, the animal, the Rays are always dis-
tinct one from another, as they are also distinct in
man, though in the lower kingdoms the influence of
the Ray naturally acts in a somewhat different man-
ner. Since in them there is no individualization, it
is obvious that the whole of one species of animals,
for example, must be on the same Ray; so that the
different kinds of animals in the world might be ar-
ranged in seven parallel columns according to the
Rays to which they belong, and since an animal can
individualize only through association with man, at
the head of each of these Rays stands some class of
domestic animal through which alone individualiza-
tion on that particular Ray takes place. The ele-
phant, dog, cat and horse are examples of such
classes, so it is clear that the impulse of the universal
life which is now animating, let us say, a dog, can
never animate a horse or a cat, but will continue to
manifest through the same species until individual-
ization takes place.

eee ead

THE CHOHANS AND THE Rays 243

Researches have not yet been made as to the par-
ticular animals and vegetables which stand on each
Ray, but I had reason a few years ago to investigate
the precious stones, and found that each Ray had
its own representatives, through which the force of
the Ray works more readily than through any other.
I print here the table that appears in The Science
of the Sacraments, in which is shown the jewel at the
head of each Ray, and others which stand on the
same Ray and therefore hold the same kind of force,
though less strongly.

Ray RRL AT TER SUBSTITUTES
Heap or Ray

1 Diamond Rock crystal

Lapis Lazuli, Turquoise, Sodalite

Sapphire

Emerald Aquamarine, Jade, Malachite

Jasper Chalcedony, Agate, Serpentine

Citrine, Steatite

Topaz

Ruby Tourmaline, Garnet, Cornelian, Carbuncle

Amethyst Porphyry, Violane

DIAGRAM 3

From all that I have said above it follows that
these seven types are visible among men, and that
every one of us must belong to one or other of the
Rays. Fundamental differences of this sort in the:
human race have always been recognized; a century

244 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

ago men were described as of the lymphatic or the
sanguine temperament, the vital or the phlegmatic,
and astrologers classify us under the names of the
planets, as Jupiter men, Mars men, Venus or Saturn
men, and so on. I take it that these are only differ-
ent methods of stating the basic differences of dispo-
sition due to the channel through which we happen
to have come forth, or rather, through which it was
ordained that we should come forth.

It is, however, by no means an easy matter to
discover to what Ray an ordinary man belongs, for
he has become very much involved in matter and has
generated a great variety of karma, some portion of
which might be of a kind that would dominate and
obscure his essential type even perhaps through the
whole of an incarnation; but the man who is ap-
proaching the Path ought to be showing in himself
a definite driving impulse or leading power which will
_ have the character of the Ray to which he belongs,
and will tend to lead him into the kind of work or
service which distinguishes that Ray, and it will also
bring him to the feet of one of the Masters upon it,
so that he becomes enrolled as it were in the college
of which the Chohan of the Ray may be regarded as
the Principal.

It may help a little towards the comprehension of
these differences of type if I give one or two examples
of the methods likely to be used, judging from the
table that I have printed above, by persons on the
different Rays when they want to use magic to pro-

Tur CHOHANS AND THE Rays 245

duce a given result. The First Ray man would attain
his object by sheer force of resistless will, without
condescending to employ anything in the nature of
means at all; he of the Second Ray would also work
by force of will, but with the full comprehension of
the various possible methods, and the conscious di-
rection of his will into the channel of the most suit-
able one; to the Third Ray man it would come most
naturally to use the forces of the mental plane, no-
ticing very carefully the exact time when the influ-
ences were most favorable to his success; the Fourth
Ray man would employ for the same purpose the
finer physical forces of the ether, while his Fifth Ray
brother would be more likely to set in motion the cur-
rents of what used to be called the astral light; the
devotee of the Sixth Ray would achieve his result
by the strength of his earnest faith in his particular
Deity and in the efficacy of prayer to Him, while the
Seventh Ray man would use elaborate ceremonial
magic and probably invoke the assistance of non-
human spirits if possible.

Again, in attempting the cure of disease, the First.
Ray would simply draw health and strength from the
great fountain of Universal Life; the Second would
thoroughly comprehend the nature of the malady and
know precisely how to exercise his will-power upon
it to the best advantage; the Third would invoke the
great planetary spirits, and choose a moment when.
astrological influences were beneficent for the appli-
cation of his remedies; the Fourth would trust chiefly’

246 Tue MASTERS AND THE Patu

to physical means such as massage, the Fifth would
employ drugs, the Sixth faith-healing and the Seventh
mantras or magical invocations. In all the above
cases the operator might possibly use many of the
powers mentioned, but would probably find the most
effective instrument in his hands the one that is
typical of his own Ray.

In the members of the Adept Brotherhood the dis-
tinctions of Rays are much moré clearly marked
than in others and are visible in the aura; the Ray
to which an Adept belongs decidedly affects not only
His appearance, but also the work that He has to do.
We may perhaps best see what are the distinctive
characters of the Rays by observing the work of the
five Chohans of Rays Three to Seven, and of the two
Chohans Who stand at Their level on the First and
Second Rays and carry on work of the same grade in
service of the Greater Ones Who are Their directing
Heads. In the Seven Heads of the Rays in the
Hierarchy we have a reflection of the Seven Spirits
before the Throne. It must be understood that we
can here mention but the merest outline of the qual-
ities that are grouped under each of the Rays, and
but a fragment of the work that the Adepts on those
Rays are doing, and care must be taken also to
realize that full possession of the qualities of one Ray
in no case implies a lack of those of the other Rays.
If we speak of one of the Adepts as preeminent in
strength, for example, it is also true that He has
achieved nothing less than human perfection in de-

THE CHOHANS AND THE Rays 247

votion and love and every other quality as well.

Of the Master Morya, who is the representative
of the First Ray at the level of the Chohan Initiation,
I have already written to some extent. He stands
with all the unshakable and serene strength of His
Ray, playing a great part in that work of guiding
men and forming nations, of which I must speak more
fully in the next chapter. ‘On that Ray, too, there is
the Master whom we have called Jupiter, acting as
Guardian of India for the Hierarchy, guardian of
that nation which throughout the long lifetime of the
fifth race cherishes the seeds of all its possibilities
and sends them out in due course to each subrace,
that there they may grow and ripen and fructify. He
also penetrates deeply into the abstruser sciences of
which chemistry and astronomy are the outer shells,
and His work in this respect is an example of the
variety of activity that may exist within the limits
of one Ray.

The Master Kuthumi, who was formerly the great
teacher, Pythagoras, is also a Chohan, and He rep-
resents the Second Ray at the same level. This is the
Ray of Wisdom, which gives great Teachers to the
world, and the work that lies upon it can best be
described in connection with that of the Bodhisattva
and the Buddha in my next chapter. I have already
spoken of the marvelous love and wisdom that radi-
ate from the Master whom I have the inexpressible
delight and honor to serve and follow, and all that I
have said about the teaching and training of pupils

248 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

expresses especially His method. Other teachers on
other Rays bring Their pupils to the same point and
develop in them exactly the same noble qualities, and
always by the most irreproachable means, yet there
are distinct differences in Their methods; indeed there
are differences in the way in which the same Master
deals with different pupils.

At the Head of the Third Ray stands the great
Master called the Venetian Chohan. In the people
of that Ray engaged in the service of man there ap-
pears very strongly the characteristic of adaptability
that belongs to the Ray, and its influence tends to
make one fit oneself to people, so as to help them
the better, and thus become, as St. Paul said, “all
things to all men.” Those who are advanced on this
Ray have a great deal of tact, and a rare faculty for
doing the right thing at the right moment. Astrology
is connected with this Ray, because, so far as an out-
sider may understand, the science of it is to know
exactly when is the best time to do anything, to set
any given forces in motion, and to know also when
the present time is not a fitting one to do a certain
thing and in that way save oneself a great deal of
trouble and make oneself more useful.

The Fourth Ray is under the care of the Master
Serapis. In the earlier days of the Theosophical
Society we used to hear a good deal about Him, be-
cause of the fact that He at one time took charge
of the training of Colonel Olcott, when his own Mas-
ter, the Master Morya, was otherwise engaged for a

eee

Ture CHOHANS AND THE Rays 249

time. Such interchange of pupils among the Masters,
for special and temporary purposes, is not infrequent.
The special line of this Chohan is harmony and
beauty, and people who belong to His type are
always unhappy until they can introduce harmony
into their environment, for it is along that line that
they do most of their work. Art counts for much
on this Ray, and many artists belong to it.

At the Head of the Fifth Ray stands the Master
Hilarion—with His splendid quality of scientific ac-
curacy. He was once Iamblichus, of the Neo-Platonic
school, and He gave to us, through M. C., Light on
the Path and The Idyll of the White Lotus, He being,
as our President puts it, a “skilled craftsman in
poetic English prose and in melodious utterance.”
His influence is upon most of the great scientists of
the world, and people well advanced along His Ray
are notable for their ability to make accurate ob-
servations, and be absolutely dependable where
scientific investigation is concerned. The Master’s
science extends, of course, far beyond what is com-
monly called by that name, and He knows and works
with many of the forces which nature introduces into
the life of man.

Nature is responsive to the moods of mankind and
intensifies them in various ways. If a man is happy
and joyous, other creatures enjoy his presence; the
nature-spirits go forth to meet him, and his own hap-
piness is thus increased. This sort of reaction takes
place everywhere. In the north of Europe, for ex-

250 Tue Masters AND THE PaTH

ample, the nature-spirits are somewhat wistful, and
have moods of mournful introspection, and such as
these find a ready home in Scotland, Ireland, Wales,
Brittany and similar places; they respond less readily
to joy, and the people there are also colder and more
dificult to rouse. In those countries nature is less
joyous; they are all lands of much rain and dull skies,
gray and green, where life and poetry take a wistful
turn. The contrast is tremendous between those and
Greece or Sicily, where everything is radiant, golden
and blue and red and all the people are joyous and
happy on the surface. The creatures of nature actu-
ally bathe in a person’s happiness, and most of all
they are drawn to anyone who is full of joyous love,
and they are happy in his aura and wait upon him
most favorably. To-day much of this side of life
is ignored. Now we know that H,O = water, but
the ancient Greeks and ancient Hindus recognized
the spirits of the water, and studied how they might
work with them, and they did it as definitely as we
to-day work with electricity and machinery.

The Master Jesus, who became an Adept in His
incarnation as Apollonius of Tyana, and was after-
wards the great South Indian religious reformer, Shri
Ramanajucharya, rules the Sixth Ray, that of Bhakti
or devotion. This is the Ray of the devotional saints
and mystics of every religion, and the Chohan Jesus
has charge of such people under whatever form they
may worship the Divine Being. Nineteen hundred

TuE CHOHANS AND THE Rays 251

years ago Apollonius of Tyana was sent out by the
Brotherhood upon a mission, one feature of which
was that he was to found, in various countries, certain
magnetic centers. Objects of the nature of talismans
were given to him, which he was to bury at these
chosen spots, in order that the forces which they
radiated might prepare these places to be the centers
of great events in the future. Some of these centers
have already been utilized, but some have not, and
all these latter are to be employed in the immediate
future in connection with the work of the coming
Christ; so that much of the detail of His work was
already definitely planned nearly two thousand years
ago, and arrangements even on the physical plane
were being made to prepare for it.

The Head of the Seventh Ray is the Master the
Comte de St. Germain, known to history in the
eighteenth century, whom we sometimes call the
Master Rakoczy, as He is the last survivor of that
royal house. He was Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam,
in the seventeenth century, Robertus the monk in the
sixteenth, Hunyadi Janos in the fifteenth, Christian
Rosencreuz in the fourteenth, and Roger Bacon in
the thirteenth, and is the Hungarian Adept of The
Occult World. Further back in time He was the
great Neo-Platonic Proclus, and before that St.
Alban. He works to a large extent through cere-
monial magic, and employs the services of great
Angels, who obey Him implicitly and love to do His

252 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

will. Though He speaks all European and many
Oriental languages, much of His working is in Latin,
the language which is the especial vehicle of His
thought, and the splendor and rhythm of it is unsur-
passed by anything that we know down here. In His
various rituals He wears wonderful and many-col-
ored robes and jewels. He has a suit of golden chain-
mail, which once belonged to a Roman Emperor; over
it is thrown a magnificent cloak of crimson, with, on
its clasp, a seven-pointed star in diamond and ame-
thyst, and sometimes He wears a glorious robe of
violet. Though He is thus engaged with ceremonial,
and still works some of the rituals of the Ancient
Mysteries, even the names of which have long been
forgotten in the outer world, He is also much con-
cerned with the political situation in Europe and the
growth of modern physical science.

The following is a summary of the work of these
Chohans and Their Rays as I have given them in
The Science of the Sacraments, with the thought to
be held in mind by those who wish to serve along
these lines:

1. SrreNGcTH.

“T will be strong, brave, persevering in His service.”

2. Wuspom.

“T will attain that intuitional wisdom which can be
developed only through perfect love.”

3. ADAPTABILITY oR Tact.

“T will try to gain the power of saying and doing just
the right thing at the right moment—of meeting

each man on his own ground, in order to help him
more efficiently.”

THE CHOHANS AND THE Rays 253

4, Beauty anp Harmony.
“So far as I can I will bring beauty aud harmony
into my life and surroundings that they may be
more worthy of Him; I will learn to. see beauty
in all Nature, that so I may serve Him better.”

5. Scrence (detailed knowledge).
“T will gain knowledge and accuracy, that I may
devote them to His work.”

6. DeEvorTIon.
“T will unfold within myself the mighty power of
devotion, that through it I may bring others to
Him.”

7. ORDERED SERVICE.
“T will so order and arrange my service of God along
the lines which He has prescribed, that I may be
able fully to take advantage of the loving help
which His holy Angels are always waiting to
render.”

All these different qualities will have to be devel-
oped in each one of us in due time, but we shall
possess them all perfectly only when we ourselves
have reached perfection and become Supermen. At
the present time one of the ways in which our imper-
fection shows itself in our lives is in the fact that we
have some one characteristic developed in excess of
the others. There are some, for example, who have
scientific accuracy and discrimination well unfolded
within them, but because as yet they have not cul-
tivated affection and devotion, their nature is cold
and hard; they often appear unsympathetic and are
liable to misjudge their fellow-men, and in matters
of judgment or in the consideration of an intellectual
problem their attitude is often intensely critical.
Their decision would always tend to be against rather

254 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

than in favor of any person who happened to cross
their path, whereas the devotional or affectionate
type of people would make far more allowance for
the other man’s point of view, and would on the whole
be more likely to judge favorably, and even if their
judgment were wrong, as they might easily be swayed
by their feelings, it would err on the side of mercy.
Both these are deflections from strictly accurate judg-
ment, and in ourselves it will be’ necessary in the
course of time to balance these qualities perfectly,
for the Superman is the perfectly balanced man. As
it says in The Bhagavad Gita, “Equilibrium is called
Yoga.”

In the seven Planetary Logoi certain cyclic changes
periodically occur, which correspond perhaps to in-
breathing and out-breathing or to the beating of the
heart down here on the physical plane. However
that may be there seems to be an infinite number of
possible permutations and combinations of them; and
since our astral bodies are built of the very matter of
their astral bodies it is obvious that no one of these
Planetary Logoi can change astrally in any way
without thereby affecting the astral body of every
man in the world, though, of course, more especially
those in whom there is a preponderance of matter
expressing Him. If it be remembered that we take
the astral plane merely as an example, and that ex-
actly the same thing is true on all the other planes,
we shall then begin to have an idea how important
to us are the emotions of these Planetary Spirits.

Tur CHOHANS AND THE Rays 255

Whatever these may be, they are visible in the long
history of human races as regular cyclic changes in
the temperament of the people and the consequent
character of their civilization. Putting aside the
thought of world-periods and considering only the
period of a single root-race, we find that in it the
seven Rays are preponderant in turn (perhaps more
than once) but in the period of that dominance of
each Ray there will be seven subcycles of influence,
according to a rather curious rule which requires
some explanation. Let us take, for example, that
period in the history of a race when the Fifth Ray is
dominant. During the whole of that epoch the cen-
tral idea of that Ray (and probably a religion
founded upon it) will be prominent in the minds of
men; but that time of predominance will be subdi-
vided into seven periods in the first of which this
idea, though still the principal one, will be colored by
the idea of the First Ray, and the methods of the
First Ray will be to some extent combined with its
own. In the second of its subdivisions its ideas and
methods will be similarly colored by those of the
Second Ray, and so on, so that in its fifth subdivision
it will naturally be at its purest and strongest. It
would seem as if these divisions and subdivisions
ought to correspond with the subraces and branch
races respectively, but it has not so far been possible
for us to see that they do so.

In discussing a subject so complex and so obscure
as this with a knowledge of it so slight as is ours at

256 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

present, it is perhaps hardly safe to adduce instances;
yet since we are told that the Sixth or devotional Ray
is at present dominant, we may fancy that we can:
trace the influence of its first subcycle in the stories

of the wonderful powers exhibited by the earlier

saints; of its second in the Gnostic sects whose central
idea was the necessity of the true wisdom, the
Gnosis; of the third in the astrologers; of the fourth

in the strangely distorted efforts to develop will-power

by the endurance of painful or loathsome conditions,
as did St. Simeon Stylites or the Flagellants; of the
fifth in the alchemists and Rosicrucians of the Middle
Ages; while its sixth division of the purest devotion
might be imaged in the ecstasies of the contemplative
monastic orders, and the seventh cycle would produce
the invocations and exact adherence to external forms
of the Roman Church.

The advent of modern spiritualism and the devo-
tion to elemental worship which is so often a char-
acteristic of its degraded forms, may be regarded as
a premonition of the influence of the coming Seventh
Ray, the more so as this movement was originated
by a secret society which has existed in the world
since the last period of the Seventh Ray predomi-
nance in Atlantis.

How real and decided a dominance is exerted by
a Ray in the course of its cycle of influence is very
evident to those who have read anything of Church
history. They realize how much of utterly blind de-
votion there was all through the Middle Ages, how

THE CHOHANS AND THE Rays 257

people who were very ignorant about religion never-
theless spoke in its name, and tried to force the ideas
bred of their ignorance on other people who in many
eases knew much more. ‘Those who wielded the
power—the dogmatic Christians—were precisely the
people who knew least about the real meaning of the
dogmas they taught. There were those who could
have told them a great deal more, and could have
explained the meaning of many points in Christian
doctrine; but the majority would not hear, and they
cast out these more learned ones as heretics.
Throughout this dark period the people who really
knew something, such as the alchemists (not that all
alchemists knew very much, but certainly some of
them knew more than the Christians) were to be
found among such secret orders as the Templars and
the Rosicrucians, and some of the truth was hidden
in Freemasonry. All these people were persecuted
by the ignorant Christians in those days, in the name
of devotion to God. A great many of the medieval
saints were very full of a devotion that was often
beautiful, and even spiritual; but it was generally so
narrow in form that it usually allowed them, in spite
of their spirituality, to hold uncharitable views about
others who differed from them, and even to persecute
them openly. There were a few who held really spir-
itual ideals, but they were regarded with suspicion.
Such were the Quietists: Ruysbroeck, Margaret and
Christina Ebner, Molinos and Jacob Boehme. In
almost all cases the more ignorant people rode down

258 Tuer MASTERS AND THE PatTH

those who knew; they always did it in the name of

devotion, and we must not forget that their devotion
was very real and very intense.

It was not only in Christianity that the reign of
devotion showed itself. It reflected itself powerfully

into the religions left behind by the earlier Rays.
Hinduism might be thought distinctly cold by devo-
tional people. The religion of Shiva, God the Father,
the First Person of the Blessed Trinity, spread almost
entirely over India; and even to this day three-

fourths of the Hindus are worshipers of that aspect.

of the Divine. Before these people is set up the ideal
of duty—dharma, which is unquestionably the strong
point of that religion. They held that men were born
in the different castes according to their deserts; that
wheresoever a man was born, it was his duty to carry
on the dharma of his caste, and he must be so ex-
ceptional to rise out of it that for a long time such
a thing was almost unknown. They worshiped law
and order and did not approve of discontent as ap-
plied to environment, but taught that the way to God
was to use to the utmost the conditions in which a
man found himself. If he did that those conditions
would improve from birth to birth, but they taught
that the door to God was open to a man from any
caste if he lived rightly, not seeking to better his
opportunities by strife, but by doing his dharma to
the uttermost in the state of life to which God had
called him.

To the very devotional mind that would seem cold

Al
i

THE CHOHANS AND THE Rays 259

and scientific, and perhaps it was; but when the de-
votional Ray began to influence the world there came
a great change, and the worship of the Second Person
of the Trinity, Vishnu, incarnating as Shri Krishna,
came prominently forward. Then devotion surged
forth without restraint; so extreme it was that. it
became in many ways a mere orgy of emotion; and
it is probable that there is greater devotion at this
moment among the followers of Vishnu in India than
can be found even among Christians whose religion is
confessedly devotional. The emotion is so great that
its demonstration is often uncomfortable for us of
the colder races to watch. I have seen hard men of
business throw themselves into an ecstasy of devo-
tion, which led them to burst into tears and appar-
ently to break up and change entirely, merely at the
mention of the Child Shri Krishna. All that has ever
been felt for the Child Jesus among Western nations,
is felt for the Child Krishna amongst the Hindus.
This was the effect of devotion on a religion which
in itself was not devotional in character. Buddhism
also can hardly be called a devotional faith. The
Buddhist religion was a gift of Hinduism to the great
Fourth Race, and the devotional cycle for that race
does not necessarily coincide with ours. That religion
does not hold the necessity for prayers; it tells its
people, in so far as it recognizes the existence of God,
that He knows His own business very much better
than they can hope to do; that it is quite useless for
them to pray to Him, or to try to influence Him, for

260 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

He is already doing better than any man can think.
The Buddhists in Burma would say, “The boundless
Light exists, but that is not for us. We shall reach
that one day; meantime our business is to follow the
teaching of our Lord, and see to it that we do those
things which He would have us do.”

It is not that they disbelieve in a God, but that
they set God so far—so infinitely far—above us all;
they are so sure about Him, that they take it all for
granted. The missionaries say that they are athe-
istical. I have lived among them and know them
more intimately than the average missionary does,
and my impression is that they are not in the least
atheistical in spirit; but that their reverence would
be too great for them to put themselves on such
familiar terms with God, or, like many in the West,
to talk with intimacy of Him, as if they knew pre-
cisely what He is going to do and all about His work.
That would strike the Oriental as a very irreverent
attitude. Buddhism itself has been touched by this
fire of devotion, and in Burma they worship the Lord
Buddha almost as a God. I noticed this when I had
to write a catechism for Buddhist children. Colonel
Olcott wrote the first catechism of Buddhism, intend-
ing it for the use of children, but he made his answers
difficult even for grown-up people to understand. We
found it necessary to write an introduction to it for
children, and to reserve his catechism, which was a
splendid work, for older students. He asked in that
catechism: “Was Buddha a God?” and the answer

|

THE CHOHANS AND THE Rays 261

was “No, not a God, but a man like ourselves, only
far more advanced than we.” ‘That was accepted
fully in Ceylon and Siam, but when we came to
Burma they objected to the negative answer, saying:
“He is greater than any God of Whom we know
anything.” The Sanskrit word for God is “deva”
and the Hindus never use God in our sense of the
word unless they are speaking of Ishvara, or else of
the Trinity, Shiva, Vishnu and Brahma.

When the missionaries talk about the Hindus as
having thirty-three million (or three hundred and
thirty million) gods, the word used is “deva,”’ and
that includes a great many beings—angels, nature-
spirits and so on, but they no more worship them
than we would. They know that they exist and they
catalog them, that is all. In Burma we found that
devotion had thus appeared in Buddhism, but in
Ceylon where the people are mostly descendants of
Hindu immigrants they will tell you, if you ask them
why they make offerings to the Lord Buddha, that
it is out of gratitude for what He has done for them.
When we asked if they thought that He knew of it
and was pleased, they said: “O no, He has passed
far away into Paranirvana; we do not expect Him
to know anything about it, but to Him we owe this
knowledge of the Law which He has taught us, and
for that we perpetuate His name, and make our offer-
ings out of gratitude.”

So this wave of devotion has influenced the world
powerfully since the coming of the Child Krishna two

262 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

thousand four hundred years ago, but now the special
intensity of its sixth phase has gone, and its seventh
substage is rapidly giving place to the influence of
the incoming Ray, the Seventh. There is still igno-
rant devotion among the peasantry in many Aryan
countries, but the more educated people are not now
readily moved to devotion unless they have at the
same time some understanding of its object. There
was a phase which had its own value, in the fourth
subrace particularly when the people were prepared
to be devoted to almost anything that would draw
out their emotion, and from that, with the stronger
development of the lower mind in the fifth subrace,
there was a reaction into agnosticism. That now in
its turn has proved unsatisfactory, so that that wave
has practically passed over, and men are now ready
at least to inquire and examine instead of frantically
denying everything.

There is a double change now taking place, for in
addition to the modification of Ray influence there is
also the beginning of the sixth subrace, which brings
in intuition and wisdom, blending all that is best in
the intelligence of the fifth subrace and the emotion
of the fourth.

The Ray that is now coming into force is very
largely one of ceremonial, and, this being no longer
but the seventh sub-activity of the Sixth Ray, but the
first subdivision of the Seventh Ray, it will not be
regarded principally from the point of view of dis-
play but rather from that of its usefulness in connec-

y
:
H
|
;
i

Tur CHOHANS AND THE Rays 263

tion with the great Deva evolution. It will be most
beneficial when the people make it their business to
understand as much as may be of what is going on.

In modern religion, ceremonial is year by year
playing a more prominent part. In the middle of the
last century in England the churches and cathedrals
had but little life in them. ‘The average country
church was then scarcely different from a dissenting
chapel; there were no vestments, no painted windows
nor decorations of any kind, and everything was as
dull and unornamental as could be. No attention
was paid to making things beautiful and reverent and
worthy of God and His service; thought was given to
preaching more than to anything else, and even that
was done mainly from a practical point of view. If
we were to go into the same churches in England
to-day, we should find hardly a parish in that condi-
tion. The old carelessness has been replaced by rev-
erence; the churches have in many cases been beau-
tifully decorated, and in many of them and of the
cathedrals the ceremonies are performed with accu-
racy and reverence. The whole conception of church
work has changed.

The influence of the change of Ray is beginning to
manifest in other ways as well. There is now rising
a special form of Freemasonry, called Co-Masonry,
which differs from other forms of the same Craft in
that the necessity of our time is met by accepting
women as equal to men, for it is the tendency of our
present age that women shall take their place beside

264 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

men and be equal to them in every respect. Those
who initiated the movement were not thinking about
the influence of the Ray; nevertheless, it has been
formed and directed by the ceremonial tendency of
the age. I remember that for a long time in the reign
of Queen Victoria there was but little ceremonial to
be seen in the streets of London, but it was revived
towards the end of her rule, and Edward VII restored
it to its original splendor. Many people will now
begin to feel the influence of the new Ray, and will
desire to see and perhaps take part in ceremonial as
they have not done before.

Ss

‘
y
if

THER EOGiO's
First Aspect Second Aspect

Lord of the Wort

oes
Initiation .

The Buddha.

\
va es , Bodhisatiha P -

Buddha
osur
lnitiation.

Mahachohan

Initiation

Chohan

6th Master | The Master Master Master Master
Initiattow Morya + Venetian Serapis- Hilarion * Jesus « The cene tetrad

Asekha
45th

Initiation

DIAGRAM 4

Cuapter XIII
THE TRINITY AND THE TRIANGLES

We know that the Logos of our Solar System—
and that is what most men mean when they speak
of God—is a Trinity; He has, or rather is, Three
Persons; He functions through Three Aspects. These
are called by many different names in the different
religions, but They are not always viewed in the same
way; for this mighty scheme of a Trinity has so many
Aspects that no one religion has ever succeeded in
symbolizing the whole truth. In some faiths we have
a Trinity of Father, Mother, Son, which is at least
comprehensible to us when we think of methods of
generation and interaction. Of this type we find
Osiris, Isis and Horus in the Egyptian teaching, and
in Scandinavian mythology, Odin, Freya and Thor.
The Assyrians and Pheenicians believed in a Trinity,
the Persons of which were Anu, Ea and Bel. The
Druids called Them Taulac, Fan and Mollac. In
Northern Buddhism we hear of Amitabha, Avaloki-
teshvara and Manjushri. In the Kabala of the
Jews the Three are Kether, Binah and Chokma, and
in the Zoroastrian religion Ahuramazda, Asha and
Vohumano, or sometimes Ahuramazda, Mithra and
Ahriman. Everywhere the principal of the Trinity

266 THe MASTERS AND THE PaTH

is recognized, though the manifestations are dif-
ferent.

In the great Hindu system there is the Trinity of
Shiva, Vishnu and Brahma. The Mother element is
not shown in this Trinity, but it is indirectly recog-
nized in that each of these Three is said to have a
Shakti or power, which is sometimes in the symbolism
named His consort. This is evidently. a manifestation
of His power in matter, perhaps a somewhat lower
manifestation than that of which we must think
when we mention the Trinity Itself. In the Chris-
tian system we have the Trinity of Father, Son and
Holy Ghost; and it is interesting in this connection
to note that in some of the old books the Holy Ghost
is definitely mentioned as being feminine.

There is also a similar Trinity in the case of higher
and greater Logoi; and far behind and beyond all
that we can know or imagine there is the Absolute,
of which the presentation is also a Trinity. At the
other end of the scale we find a Trinity in man, his
Spirit, his Intuition and his Intelligence; which rep-
resent the threefold qualities of Will, Wisdom and
Activity. This Trinity in man is an image of that
other and greater Trinity; yet it is also much more
than an image. It is not only symbolical of the
Three Persons of the Logos, but in some way impos-
sible to understand in physical consciousness, it is also
an actual expression and manifestation of those Three
Persons at this lower level.

As the Logos is a Trinity, so the occult government

<

wy .
ae ee

>

es

Tuer TRINITY AND THE TRIANGLES 267

of the world is in three great departments, ruled by
three Mighty Officials, Who are not merely reflections
of the Three Aspects of the Logos, but are in a very
real way actual manifestations of Them. They are
the Lord of the World, the Lord Buddha and the
Maha-Chohan, Who have reached grades of Initia-
tion which give Them waking consciousness on the
planes of nature beyond the field of evolution of
humanity, where dwells the manifested Logos.* The
Lord of the World is one with the First Aspect on
the highest of our seven planes, and wields the Divine
Will on earth; the Buddha is united with the Second
Aspect which dwells on the Anupadaka plane, and
sends the Divine Wisdom down to mankind; the
Maha-Chohan is utterly one with the Third Aspect,
which resides in the Nirvanic plane and exercises
the Divine Activity—representing the Holy Ghost.
He is verily the Arm of the Lord stretched out into
the world to do His work. The following table will
make this clear:

OWERS
Anupadaka or Monadic | The Lord Buddha aed

Atmic or Spiritual The Maha-Chohan ust

DIAGRAM 5

*See A Study in Consciousness, by Annie Besant, pp. 3-5.

268 Tue Masters AND THE PaTH

The first and second members of this great Tri-
angle are different from the third, being engaged in
work of a character that does not descend to the
physical plane, but only to the level of the buddhic
body in the case of the Lord Buddha, and the Atmic
plane in that of the great Agent of the First Aspect.
Yet without Their higher work none of that at lower
levels would be possible, so They provide for the
transmission of Their influence even to the lowest
plane through Their representatives, the Manu Vai-
vasvata and the Lord Maitreya respectively.

These two great Adepts stand parallel with the
Maha-Chohan on Their respective Rays, both hav-
ing taken the Initiation that bears that name; and
thus another Triangle is formed, to administer the
powers of the Logos down to the physical plane. We
may express the two Triangles in one diagram thus:

DIAGRAM 6

Tue TRINITY AND THE TRIANGLES 269

For the entire period of a root-race the Manu
works out the details of its evolution, and the Bodhi-
sattva, as World-Teacher, Minister of Education and
Religion, helps its members to develop whatever of
spirituality is possible for them at that stage, while
the Maha-Chohan directs the minds of men so that
the different forms of culture and civilization shall
be unfolded according to the cyclic plan. Head and
Heart are These, and the Hand with five Fingers,
all active in the world, molding the race into one
organic being, a Heavenly Man.

This last term is no mere simile, but describes a
literal fact, for, at the close of each root-race effort,
those who have attained Adeptship within it form a
mighty organism which is in a very real sense one,
a Heavenly Man, in Whom, as in an earthly man,
are seven great centers, each of which is a mighty
Adept. The Manu and the Bodhisattva will occupy
in this great Being the place of the brain and heart
centers, and in Them and as part of Them, gloriously
one with Them, shall we Their servants be; and the
splendid totality will go on in its further evolution
to become a Minister of some future Solar Deity.
Yet so transcending all comprehension is the wonder
of it all that this union with others does not mar the
freedom of any Adept in the Heavenly Man, nor
preclude His acting quite outside its scope.

Until recently it was not the rule that the office of
Maha-Chohan should be occupied by a permanent
Adept of that grade. It was usual that each of the

270 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTtTH

five Chohans, in rotation, should be appointed to
leadership over all five Rays, though before occupy-
ing that position He was required to take the Maha-
Chohan Initiation. At present, however, we find a
Chohan in charge of each of the five Rays, and also
a Maha-Chohan separate from all of Them—a de-
parture from what we understand to be the ordinary
method that may be due principally to the near com-
ing of the World-Teacher.

On these Five Rays, Three to Seven, the highest
Initiation that can be taken on our globe is that of
the Maha-Chohan, but it is possible to go further
on the First and Second Rays, as is indicated in the
following table of Initiations, in which it will be seen

Silent
Watcher

Initiations possible on the First and Second Rays only

Lord
of the
% World
‘
es ay
ay Buddha
fe Bodhi-
sattva Mana-CHoHAN

Initiations

sai [aie [eis [ ai

First | Second Fifth Sixth | Seventh
Ray Ray Ray Ray

DIAGRAM 7

Tue TRINITY AND THE TRIANGLES 271

that the Buddha Initiation is possible on the Second
and First Rays, and that the Adept may go still
further on the First.

Lest it should seem as though in this fact there
lay something in the nature of an injustice, it must
be made clear that Nirvana is attainable as soon on
one Ray as on another: any man on reaching the
Asekha level is at once free to enter this condition
of bliss for a period that to us would seem eternity;
but He enters its first stage only, which, exalted in-
finitely beyond our comprehension as it is, is yet far
below the higher stages available to the Chohan and
Maha-Chohan respectively, while even these in turn
pale before the glory of those divisions of the Nir-
vanic state which those Adepts reach Who make the
tremendous effort necessary to take during earth-life
the still higher Initiations of the First and Second
Ray. Further progress is also possible on the five
Rays to those who take up other lines of work out-
side our Hierarchy.

The possibility of changing one’s Ray by the firm
determination to do so leaves all paths alike open to
the occult student. It is known that both the Mas-
ters with whom the Theosophical Society has been
most closely connected have chosen to make this
effort, and those of us who wish to retain our affilia-
tion to them as individuals are therefore, consciously
or unconsciously, in course of making it also. The
method by which the transfer is effected is simple
enough in theory, though often very difficult to carry

2712 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

out in practice. If a student on the Sixth or devo-
tional Ray wishes to transfer himself to the Second
Ray, that of wisdom, he must first endeavor to bring
himself under the influence of the second subdivision
of his own Sixth Ray. Then he will try steadily to
intensify the influence of that subray in his life, until
it becomes the dominant one. Thus instead of being
on the second subdivision of the Sixth Ray he will
find himself on the sixth subdivision of the Second
Ray; in a word, he has tempered his devotion by
mcereasing knowledge till it has become devotion to
the Divine Wisdom. From that he can if he wishes,
by sufficiently strenuous and long-continued effort,
further transfer himself to some other subdivision of
the Second Ray.

Evidently here we have a departure from the or-
dinary rules of procedure, for a Monad who came
forth through one Planetary Spirit will return
through another. Such changes are comparatively
rare, and tend to balance one another satisfactorily
at the end. The transfers are usually to the First
and Second Rays, and there are relatively few per-
sons on those two at the lower levels of evolution.

The marvelous unity with the Logos of the mem-
bers of these Triangles may be well illustrated by
the case of the Bodhisattva. We have seen that the
union of pupil with Master is closer than any tie .
imaginable on earth; closer still, because at a higher
level, was that between the Master Kuthumi and His
Teacher the Master Dhruva, Who was in His turn a

Tue TRINITY AND THE TRIANGLES 273

pupil of the Lord Maitreya, during the time when
the latter took pupils. Thereby the Master Kuthumi
became also one with the Lord Maitreya, and as at
Their level unity is still more perfect, the Master
Kuthumi is one with the Bodhisattva in a very won-
derful way.

The Adepts seem so far above us that we can
hardly distinguish any difference in glory between
the lower and the higher levels. They all look like
stars above us, and yet They speak of Themselves
as dust under the feet of the Lord Maitreya. There
must be an enormous difference there, even though
we cannot see it. We look up to these stupendous
heights and all appears a blinding glory, in which
we cannot presume to distinguish one as greater than
another, except that we can see by the size of the
aura that there are differences. But at least we can
comprehend that the unity of the Master Kuthumi
with the Lord Maitreya must be a far greater and
more real union than anything imaginable at lower
levels. Still more is the Bodhisattva one with that
Second Person of the Logos Whom He represents.
He has taken the office of representing Him here on
earth, and that is the meaning of the hypostatic union
between Christ as God and Christ as man. For He,
the Bodhisattva, Whom in the West we call the Lord
Christ, is the Intuitional Wisdom, the Representative
and Expression of the Second Person of the Blessed
Trinity. Herein is the mystery which underlies the
two natures of the Christ, “Who, although He be

274 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

God and Man, yet He is not two, but one Christ—
One, not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but
by taking of the manhood into God.”

The Second Person of the Ever-Blessed Trinity ex-
isted ages before the Lord Maitreya came into evo-
lution; and the first descent of that Second Person
into incarnation was when as the Second Outpouring
He took the vehicles of His manifestation out of the
virgin matter of His new solar system, already im-
pregnated and vivified by God the Holy Ghost.
When that has been done we have for the first time
Christ unmanifested as opposed to Christ manifested,
and even at that time it must have been true that
Christ as God was in one sense greater than Christ
as man. As the Bodhisattvas Who are to represent
this Second Person on different planets of His system
one by one attain the Headship of Their Ray, They
in turn become so thoroughly one with Him that
They deserve the title of Christ as Man; and so at
the moment of the consummation of such Initiation
the hypostatic union takes place for each of Them.

This Second Aspect of the Logos pours Himself
down into matter, is incarnated, and becomes man;
and is therefore “equal to the Father as touching His
Godhead, and inferior to the Father as touching His
manhood,” as is said in the Athanasian Creed. Our
Lord the Bodhisattva has been a man like ourselves,
and is such a man still, though a perfected man; yet
that manhood has so been taken into the Godhead
that He is in truth a very Christ, a Representation

Tue TRINITY AND THE TRIANGLES 275

of the Second Aspect of the Trinity; for in Him and
through Him it is possible for us to reach to that
Divine Power. That is why the Christ is spoken of
as the Mediator between God and man; it is not that.
He is making a bargain on our behalf, or buying
us off from some horrible punishment, as many ortho-
dox Christians believe, but that He is in truth a
Mediator, One that stands between the Logos and
man, Whom man can see, and through Whom the
power of the Deity pours forth to humankind.
Therefore is He the Head of all religions through
which these blessings come.

CHAPTER XIV
THE WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES

The Buddha of the present time is the Lord Gau-
tama, Who took His last birth in India about two
thousand five hundred years ago, and in that incar-
nation finished His series of lives as Bodhisattva, and
succeeded the previous Buddha Kasyapa as Head of
the Second Ray in the Occult Hierarchy of our globe.
His life as Siddartha Gautama has been wonder-
fully told in Sir Edwin Arnold’s Light of Asia, one
of the most beautiful and inspiring poems in our lan-
guage. Seven Buddhas appear in succession during
a world period, one for each race, and each in turn
takes charge of the special work of the Second Ray
for the whole world, devoting Himself to that part
of it which lies in the higher worlds, while He en-
trusts to His assistant and representative, the Bod-
hisattva, the office of World-Teacher for the lower
planes. For One Who attains this position Oriental
writers think no praise too high, no devotion too deep,
and just as we regard those Masters to Whom we
look up as all but divine in goodness and wisdom,
so to an even greater degree do They regard the
Buddha. Our present Buddha was the first of our
humanity. to attain that stupendous height, the pre-

THE WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 271%

vious Buddhas having been the product of other evo-
lutions, and a very special effort was needed on His
part to prepare Himself for this lofty post, an effort
so stupendous that He is spoken of constantly by
the Buddhists as the Mahabhinishkramana, the
Great Sacrifice.

Many thousands of years ago there arose the need
for one of the Adepts to become the World-Teacher
of the fourth root-race; for the time had come when
humanity should be able to supply its own Buddhas.
Up to the middle of the fourth round of the fourth
incarnation of our Chain, which was exactly the cen-
tral point of the scheme of evolution to which we
belong, the great Officers Who were required—the
Manus and the World-Teachers and others—were
supplied to our humanity by more advanced human-
ities of other Chains, which had made more progress.
or perhaps were older than we; and we ourselves, hav-
ing been thus assisted, shall in our turn have later
on the privilege to make provision for other and more
backward schemes of evolution.

In such ways the real brotherhood of all that lives
is demonstrated; and we see that it is not merely a
brotherhood of humanity, or even of the life in this
Chain of worlds, but that all the Chains in the Solar
System mutually interact and help one another. I
have no direct evidence that Solar Systems give as-
sistance to each other in such ways, but I should
imagine it by analogy to be almost certain that even:
that is done. At least I have myself seen Visitors.

278 Tue MAsTersS AND THE PatTH

from other systems, as I have said before, and have
noticed that They are not merely traveling for
pleasure, but are certainly in our system for some
good purpose. What Their purpose is I do not know;
but of course it is not my business.

Now at this time in the remote past to which we
have referred, humanity should have begun to provide
its own Teachers; but we are told that no one had
quite reached the level required for the incurring of
so tremendous a responsibility. The first fruits of
humanity at this period were two Brothers Who
stood equal in occult development; One being He
Whom we now call the Lord Gautama Buddha, and
the Other our present World-Teacher, the Lord Mai-
treya. In what way They fell short of the required
qualifications we do not know, but out of His great
love for humanity the Lord Gautama instantly of-
fered to make Himself ready to undertake whatever
additional effort might be necessary to attain the re-
quired development. We learn from traditions that
life after life He practiced special virtues, each life
showing out some great quality achieved.

That great sacrifice of the Buddha is spoken of in
all the sacred books of the Buddhists; but they have
not understood the nature of the sacrifice, for many
believe it to have been the descent of the Lord
Buddha from nirvanic levels, after His Illumination,
to teach His Law. It is true that He did so descend,
but that would not be anything in the nature of a
sacrifice; it would only be an ordinary, but not very

Se ae ee eel

ee

oe

a
a
* op!

Seat
=

a

EPONA eS

A RP ss ae oe

Tue WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 279

pleasant piece of work. The great sacrifice that He
made was this spending of thousands of years in order
to qualify Himself to be the first of mankind Who
should help His brother-men by teaching to them the
Wisdom which is life eternal. That work was done,
and nobly done. We know something of the various
incarnations that He took after that, as Bodhisattva
of His time, though there may be many more of which
we know nothing. He appeared as Vyasa; He was
the first of the twenty-nine Zoroasters, the Teachers
of the Religion of the Fire; He came to ancient Egypt
as Hermes, the Thrice-Greatest, Who was called the
Father of All Wisdom; still later He walked amongst
the Greeks as Orpheus, and taught them by means
of music and of song; and finally He took His last
birth in the north of India, and wandered up and
down the Ganges valley for five and forty years,
preaching His Law, and drawing round Himself all
those who in previous lives had been His pupils.

In some way which we cannot hope yet to under-
stand, because of the great strain of those many ages
of effort, there were certain points in the work of the
Lord Buddha which it may be that He had not time
to perfect utterly. It is impossible at such a level
for there to be anything in the nature of a failure or
_a fault, but perhaps the strain of the past was too
great even for such power as His. We cannot know;
but the fact remains that there were certain minor
matters to which at the time He could not perfectly
attend, and therefore the after-life of the Lord Gau-

280 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

tama was not quite the same as that of His Prede-
cessors. It is usual, as I have said, for a Bodhisattva
when He has lived His final life and become Buddha
—when He has entered into glory, bearing His
sheaves with Him, as it is put in the Christian Scrip-
tures—to hand over His external work entirely to
His Successor, and devote Himself to His labors for
humanity at higher levels. Whatever may be these
manifold activities of a Dhyani Buddha they do not
bring Him again into birth on earth; but because of
the peculiar circumstances surrounding the life of the
Lord Gautama two differences were made, two sup-
plementary acts were performed.

The first was the sending by the Lord of the World,
the Great King, the One Initiator, of one of His
three Pupils, Who are all Lords of the Flame from
Venus, to take earthly incarnation almost immedi-
ately after the attainment of Buddhahood by the Lord
Gautama, in order that by a very short life spent in
traveling over India He might establish therein cer-
tain centers of religion called mathas. His name in
that incarnation was Shankaracharya—not he who
wrote the commentaries, but the great Founder of his
line, Who lived more than two thousand years before.

Shri Shankaracharya founded a certain school of
Hindu Philosophy; revived Hinduism to a large ex-
tent, putting new life into its forms, and gathering
together many of the teachings of the Buddha. Hin-
duism to-day, though in many ways it may fall short
of its high ideal, is a very much more living faith

Tue WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 281

than in the old days before the coming of the Buddha,
when it had degenerated into a system of formalism.
Shri Shankaracharya was also largely responsible for
the disappearance of animal sacrifices; although such
sacrifices are still offered in India, they are but few,
and those are on a very small scale. Besides His
teaching on the physical plane, Shri Shankaracharya
accomplished certain occult work in connection with
the higher planes of nature which was of considerable
importance to the later life of India.

The second supplementary act to which I have re-
ferred above was undertaken by the Lord Gautama
Himself. Instead of devoting Himself wholly to
other and higher work, He has remained sufficiently
in touch with His world to be reached by the invoca-
tion of His Successor when necessary, so that His ad-
vice and help can still be obtained in any great
emergency. He also undertook to return to the world
once in each year, on the anniversary of His death,
and shed upon it a flood of blessing.

The Lord Buddha has His own especial type of
force, which He outpours when He gives His blessing
to the world, and this benediction is a unique and
very marvelous thing; for by His authority and posi-
tion a Buddha has access to planes of nature which
-are altogether beyond our reach, hence He can trans-
mute and draw down to our level the forces peculiar
to those planes. Without this mediation of the
Buddha these forces would be of no use to us here in
physical life; their vibrations are so tremendous, so

282 | Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

incredibly rapid, that they would pass through us
unsensed at any level we can reach, and we should
never even know of their existence. But as it is, the
force of the blessing is scattered all over the world;
and it instantly finds for itself channels through
which it can pour, just as water instantly finds an
open pipe, thereby strengthening all good work and
bringing peace to the hearts of those who are able to
receive it.

The occasion selected for this wonderful outpouring
is the full moon day of the Indian month of Vaisakh
(called in Ceylon, Wesak, and usually corresponding
to the English May), the anniversary of all the mo-
mentous occurrences of His last earthly life—His
birth, His attainment of Buddhahood, and His de-
parture from the physical body.

In connection with this visit of His, and quite apart
from its tremendous esoteric significance, an exoteric
ceremony is performed on the physical plane at which
the Lord actually shows Himself in the presence of
a crowd of ordinary pilgrims. Whether He shows
Himself to the pilgrims I am not certain; they all
prostrate themselves at the moment when He appears,
but that may be only in imitation of the prostration
of the Adepts and Their pupils, who do see the Lord
Gautama. It seems probable that some at least of
the pilgrims have seen Him for themselves, for the
existence of the ceremony is widely known among the
Buddhists of central Asia, and it is spoken of as the
appearance of the Shadow or Reflection of the

Tue WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 283

Buddha, the description given of it in such traditional
accounts being as a rule fairly accurate. So far as
we can see there appears to be no reason why any
person whatever who happens to be in the neighbor-
hood at the time may not be present at the ceremony ;
no apparent effort is made to restrict the number of
spectators; though it is true that one hears stories of
parties of pilgrims who have wandered for years
without being able to find the spot.

All members of the Great White Brotherhood, ex-
cept the King Himself and His three disciples, usually
attend this ceremony; and there is no reason why any
of our earnest Theosophical members should not be
present at it in their astral bodies. Those to whom
the secret has been confided usually try so to arrange
matters as to put their physical bodies to sleep an
hour or so before the exact moment of full moon,
and to be undisturbed until about an hour after it.

The place selected is a small plateau surrounded
by low hills, which lies on the northern side of the
Himalayas, not far from the frontier of Nepal, and
perhaps about four hundred miles west of the city of
Lhassa. This little plain is roughly oblong in shape,
its length being perhaps a mile and a half and its
breadth rather less. The ground slopes slightly from
south to north, and is mostly bare and stony, though
in some places covered with coarse wiry grass and
rough scrubby vegetation. A stream runs down part
of the west side of the plateau, crosses its northwest
corner, and escapes about the middle of the north side

South

West

“My
Mayen 15

yey V7; aN Spry gpI np appr
lly, A Myon tng Target) my

Maqui : @ 2 €
i! ¥ SS
= eH =z wf

SN Pia b! S E4 »
ND) @6 = FS
= Juz <

e 4, S

=

=

= . i os

= bd - 3 *

E aS =

é Sale 3: 3 ¢ 4

= - “e * oe by
é eo ee as 2,

Z ay Yullfg
A 3
€ 4.

my cus

YU costbayottnn iin HUT omg Udwaly

M, \ \
Gldddsiy My try yd Mya vo tag silly Mj

Bo"

East

Lake a

DIAGRAM 8

THE WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 285

through a pine-clothed ravine, eventually reaching a
lake which is visible at a distance of some miles. The
surrounding country seems wild and uninhabited, and
there are no buildings in sight except a single ruined
stupa with two or three huts beside it, on the slope
of one of the hills on the eastern side of the plain.
About the center of the southern half of the plain lies
a huge block of grayish-white stone, veined with some
glittering substance—an altar-like block, perhaps
twelve feet in length by six feet wide, and standing
about three feet out of the ground.

For some days before the appointed time an ever-
increasing cluster of tents of strange and uncouth
appearance (most of them black) may be seen along
the banks of the stream, and down the sides of the
neighboring hills; and this otherwise desolate spot is
enlivened by the camp-fires of a considerable multi-
tude. Large numbers of men come in from the wan-
dering tribes of central Asia, and some even from the
far north. On the day before the full moon all these
pilgrims take a special ceremonial bath, and wash all
their clothes in preparation for the ceremony.

Some hours before the time of the full moon these
people gather in the lower or northern part of the
plain and seat themselves in a quiet and orderly man-
ner on the ground, always taking care to leave a
considerable space before the great altar stone. Gen-
erally some of the lamas are present, and they usu-
ally take this opportunity to deliver addresses to the
people. About an hour before the moment when the

286 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTtH

moon is full the astral visitors begin to arrive, among
them the members of the Brotherhood. Some of These
generally materialize Themselves so as to be seen by
the pilgrims, and are received with genuflections and
prostrations. Often our Masters and some even
greater than They condescend on this occasion to
converse in a friendly manner with Their pupils and
with others who are present. While this is going on
those who are appointed to do so prepare the great
altar stone for the ceremony by covering it with the
most beautiful flowers and placing at each corner of
it great garlands of the sacred lotus. In the center
is placed a magnificently chased golden bowl full of
water, and immediately in front of that a space is
left among the flowers.

About half an hour before the moment of full
moon, at a signal given by the Maha-Chohan, the
members of the Brotherhood draw together in the
open space in the center of the plain to the north of
the great altar of stone, and arrange Themselves
three deep in a large circle, all facing inwards, the
outermost circle being composed of the younger mem-
bers of the Brotherhood, and the greater Officials
occupying certain points in the innermost circle.

Some verses from the Buddhist scriptures are then
chanted in the Pali language, and as the voices die
into silence, the Lord Maitreya materializes in the
center of the circle, holding in His hands the Rod of
Power. This wonderful symbol is in some way a

THE WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 287

physical center or fulcrum for the forces poured forth
by the Planetary Logos, and was magnetized by Him
millions of years ago, when first He set the human
life-wave in motion round our chain of globes. We
are told that it is the physical sign of the concentra-
tion of the attention of the Logos, and that it is car-
ried from planet to planet as that attention shifts—
that where it is, that is for the moment the central
theater of evolution, and that when it leaves this
planet for the next, our earth will sink into compar-
ative inertia. Whether it is. carried also to the non-
physical planets we do not know, nor do we under-
stand exactly the way in which it is used, nor the part
which it plays in the economy of the world. It is
kept usually in the custody of the Lord of the World
at Shamballa, and so far as we know this Wesak F'es-
tival is the only occasion on which it ever leaves his
care. It is a round bar of the lost metal orichalcum,
perhaps two feet in length and about two inches in
diameter, having at each end a huge diamond shaped
into a ball with a cone projecting from it. It has the
strange appearance of being always surrounded by
fire—of having an aura of brilliant yet transparent
flame. It is noteworthy that no one but the Lord
Maitreya touches it during any part of the ceremony.

DIAGRAM 9

288 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

On His materialization in the center of the circle
all the Adepts and Initiates bow gravely towards
Him, and another verse is chanted. After this, still
intoning verses, the inner rings divide into eight parts,
so as to form a cross within the outer circle, the Lord
Maitreya still remaining at the center. At the next
movement of this stately ritual, the cross becomes a
triangle, the Lord Maitreya moving forward so as to
stand at its apex, and therefore close to the altar
stone. Upon that altar, in the open space left in front
of the golden bowl, the Lord Maitreya reverently lays
the Rod of Power, while behind Him the circle
changes into a rather involved curved figure, so that
all are facing the altar. At the next change the
curved figure becomes a reversed triangle, so that we
have a representation of the well-known sign of the
Theosophical Society, though without its encircling
snake. This figure in turn resolves itself into the
five-pointed star, the Lord Maitreya being still at the

QO RO w

Dr1acrRAM 10

THE WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 289

southern point nearest the altar stone, and the other
great Officials or Chohans at the five points where the
lines intersect. A diagram of the symbolic figures !s
herewith appended, as some of them are not easy to
describe.

When this seventh and final stage is reached the
chanting ceases, and after a few moments of solemn
silence the Lord Maitreya, again taking the Rod of
Power into His hands and raising it above His head,
utters in a few sonorous words of Pali:

“All is ready; Master, come!”’

Then as He again lays down the fiery rod, at the
exact moment of the full moon, the Lord Buddha
appears as a gigantic figure floating in the air just
above the southern hills. The members of the Broth-
erhood bow with joined hands, and the multitude
behind them fall on their faces and remain prostrate,
while the others sing the three verses which were
taught by the Lord Buddha Himself during His earth-
life to the school-boy Chatta:

The Lord Buddha, the Sage of the Sakyas, is among man-
kind the best of Teachers. He has done that which was to
be done, and has crossed to the other shore (Nirvana). He is
filled with strength and energy; Him, the Blessed One, I take
for my guide.

The truth is non-material; it brings freedom from passion,
desire and sorrow; it is free from all stain; it is sweet, plain
and logical; this truth I take as my guide.

Whatever is given to the eight kinds of the Noble Ones,
Who in pairs form the four grades, Who know the truth,
verily brings great reward; this Brotherhood of the Noble
Ones I take as my guide.

290 Tue Masters AND THE PatTH

Then the people rise and stand gazing at the pres-
ence of the Lord while the Brotherhood chants for the
benefit of the people the noble words of the Maha-
mangala Sutta, which has been translated thus (I
think by Professor Rhys Davids) :

“When yearning for good, many devas and men
Have held divers things to be blessings;
Do thou then inform us, O Master,

What is the greatest blessing?” -

“Not to serve the foolish,

But to serve the wise;

To honor those worthy of honor;
This is the greatest blessing.

To dwell in a pleasant land,

To have done good deeds in a former birth,

To have a soul filled with right desires;
This is the greatest blessing.

Much insight and much education,

Self-control and a well-trained mind,

Pleasant words that are well spoken;
This is the greatest blessing.

To support father and mother,

To cherish wife and child,

To follow a peaceful calling;
This is the greatest blessing.

To bestow alms and live righteously,

To give help to one’s kindred,

To do deeds which cannot be blamed;
This is the greatest blessing.

To abhor and cease from sin,

To abstain from strong drink,

Not to be weary in well-doing;
This is the greatest blessing.

To be long-suffering and meek,

To associate with the tranquil,

Religious talk at due seasons;
This is the greatest blessing.

Tue WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 291

Self-restraint and purity,
The knowledge of the Four Great Truths,
The realization of Nirvana;

This is the greatest blessing.

Beneath the stroke of life’s changes

The soul that stands unshaken,

Passionless, unsorrowing, secure;
This is the greatest blessing.

Invincible on every side

Is he who acteth thus;

On every side he walks in safety;
And his is the greatest blessing.”

The figure which floats above the hills is of enor-
mous size, but exactly reproduces the form and fea-
tures of the body in which the Lord last lived on
earth. He appears seated cross-legged, with the
hands together, dressed in the yellow robe of the
Buddhist monk, but wearing it so as to leave the
right arm bare. No description can give an idea of
the face—a face truly God-like, for it combines calm-
ness and power, wisdom and love in an expression
containing all that our minds can imagine of the
Divine. We may say that the complexion is clear
yellowish-white, and the features clearly cut; that
the forehead is broad and noble; the eyes large,
luminous and of a deep dark blue; the nose slightly
aquiline; the lips red and firmly set; but all this puts
before us merely the outer mask and gives but a
little grasp of the living whole. The hair is black—
almost blue-black—and wavy; curiously, it is neither
worn long according to Indian custom, nor shaved
off altogether in the manner of Oriental monks, but

292 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

is cut off just before it reaches the shoulders, parted
in the center and swept back from the forehead.
The story is told that when the Prince Siddartha left
home to seek the truth, he seized his long hair and
cut it off close above his head with a sweep of his
sword, and that ever afterwards he kept it at the
same length.

When the Mahamangala Sutta is finished, the Lord
Maitreya takes the golden bowl of water from the
altar stone, and holds it above His head for a few
moments, while the multitude behind, who have also
provided themselves with vessels filled with water,
follow His example. As He replaces it on the altar
stone another verse is chanted:

He is the Lord, the Saint Who is perfect in knowledge,
Who possesses the eight kinds of knowledge and has accom-
plished the fifteen holy practices, Who has come the good
journey which led to the Buddhahood, Who knows the three
worlds, the unrivaled, the Teacher of gods and men, the
Blessed One, the Lord Buddha.

As this ends, a smile of ineffable love beams forth
from the face of the Lord as He raises His right hand
in the attitude of benediction while a great shower
of flowers falls among the people. Again the mem-
bers of the Brotherhood bow, again the crowd pros-
trates itself, and the figure slowly fades out of the
sky, while the multitude relieves itself in shouts of
joy and praise. The members of the Brotherhood
come up to the Lord Maitreya in the order of Their
admission, and each sips the water in the golden
bowl, and the people also sip theirs, taking the re-

Tue WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 293

mainder home in their quaint leather bottles as holy
water to drive away all evil influences from their
houses or perhaps to cure the sick. Then the vast
company breaks up with mutual congratulations, and
the people bear away to their far-distant homes an
ineffaceable memory of the wonderful ceremony in
which they have taken part.

An interesting glimpse of the Predecessors of the
Buddha is to be found in the Vision of St. John the
Divine:

“And round about the throne were four and twenty
seats; and upon the seats I saw four and twenty elders
sitting, clothed in white raiment; and they had on
their heads crowns of gold.” He who is privileged
to see this—and remember it will come to everyone
some day—does so from the special point of view
of his own beliefs. Therefore St. John saw what he
expected to see, the twenty-four elders of the Jewish
tradition. That number, twenty-four, marks the
date at which this vision was first seen, or rather
the date at which the Jewish idea of that glory was
formulated. If we now could raise ourselves into the
Spirit, and could see that ineffable glory, we should
see twenty-five, not twenty-four Elders, for there has
been one Lord Buddha Who has attained since this
Vision was crystallized in the Jewish scheme of higher
thought. For those Elders are the Great Teachers
Who have taught the worlds in this our Round.
There are seven Buddhas to each world; that makes
twenty-one for the three worlds which we have

294 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

passed, and then the Lord Gautama was the fourth
of the Buddhas of this world. Therefore, twenty-four
were the Elders in those old days, but They would
be twenty-five if we could see Them now.

The Christian Church has translated that some-
what differently, taking those Elders as its twelve
apostles and the twelve Jewish prophets. If those
twenty-four were the apostles and the prophets, the
seer must have seen himself among the rest, which
would surely have been mentioned. Those Elders
had on their heads crowns of gold, it is said, and a
little later on we read that They cast their crowns
before Him, as we sing in the glorious Trinity hymn.

I remember that as a child I marveled much how
that could be. It seemed a strange thing that these
men could constantly cast down those crowns, and
still have crowns to cast. I could not understand it,
and I wondered what scheme there was for the re-
turning of the crowns to their heads, so that they
could cast them down again. Such faintly ridiculous
ideas are perhaps not unnatural in a child; but they
disappear when one understands. If we have seen
images of the Lord Buddha we must have noticed
that out of the crown of His head there usually comes
a little mound or cone. It is as a crown, golden in
color, which represents the outpouring spiritual force
from what is called the brahmarandra chakra, the
center at the top of the man’s head—the thousand-
petaled lotus, as it is poetically called in Oriental
books.

Tuer WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 295

In the highly developed man that center pours out
splendor and glory, which makes for him a veritable
crown; and the meaning of the passage is that all
that he has developed, all the splendid karma that
he makes, all the glorious spiritual force that he
generates—all that he casts perpetually at the feet
of the Logos to be used in His work. So, over and
over again, can he continue to cast down his golden
crown, because it perpetually re-forms as the force
wells up from within him.

The Lord Maitreya, Whose name means kindliness
or compassion, took up the office of Bodhisattva when
the Lord Gautama laid it down, and since then He
has made many efforts for the promotion of Religion.
One of His first steps on assuming office was to take
advantage of the tremendous magnetism generated
in the world by the presence of the Buddha, to ar-
range that great Teachers should simultaneously ap-
pear in many different parts of the earth; so that
within a comparatively short space of time we find
not only the Buddha Himself, Shri Shankaracharya
and Mahavira in India, but also Mithra in Persia,
Lao-tse and Confucius in China, and Pythagoras in
ancient Greece.

Twice He has Himself appeared—as Krishna in
the Indian plains, and as Christ amid the hills of
Palestine. In the incarnation as Krishna the great
feature was always love; the Child Krishna drew
round Him people who felt for Him the deepest, the
most intense affection. Again in His birth in Pales-

296 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

tine, love was the central feature of His teaching.
He said: “This new commandment I give unto you,
that ye love one another as I have loved you.” He
asked that His disciples might all be one in Him even
as He was one with the Father. His closest disciple,
St. John, insisted most strongly upon the same idea:
“He that loveth not knoweth not God, for God is
Love.” ;

What is now called Christianity, as He originally
taught it was undoubtedly a magnificent conception,
sadly as it has fallen away from that high level in
the hands of ignorant exponents since. It must not
be assumed, of course, that the teaching of brotherly
and neighborly love was new in the world. As St.
Augustine said in his book De Civitate Dei, “The
identical thing that we now call the Christian religion
existed among the ancients, and has not been lacking
from the beginnings of the human race until the
coming of Christ in the flesh, from which moment on
the true religion which already existed began to be
called Christian.” Readers of The Bhagavad Gita
will also remember the teaching of love and devotion
with which it is filled. The Bodhisattva also occu-
pied occasionally the body of Tsong-ka-pa, the great
Tibetan religious reformer, and throughout the cen-
turies He has sent forth a stream of His pupils, in-
cluding Nagarjuna, Aryasanga, Ramanujacharya,
Madhavacharya and many others, who founded new
sects or threw new light upon the mysteries of re-

Tue WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 297

ligion, and among these was one of His pupils who
was sent to found the Mohammedan faith.

Now the time is ripe for Him to appear among us
again on the physical plane, and He will surely come
within a few years, and of this advent and of what
He is likely to teach I have already written in a
previous chapter.

The sending out of the teachers I have mentioned
above is only part of His work, which is not confined
to humanity, but includes the education of all crea-
tures on earth, and among them the Deva evolution.
He is thus the head of all the faiths at present exist-
ing, and of many others which have died out in the
course of time, though He is of course only respon-
sible for them in their original form and not for the
corruption which man has naturally and inevitably
introduced into all of them as the ages have rolled
by. He varies the type of religion to suit the period
of the world’s history at which it is put forth, and
the people to whom it is given; but though the form
may vary as evolution proceeds, the ethics are ever
the same.

He will come to earth many times more during the
progress of the root-race, founding many such re-
ligions, and each time drawing round Himself such
men of that race as are prepared to follow Him, from
among whose number He chooses some whom He can
draw into closer relation with Himself, some who are
pupils in the innermost sense. Then towards the end

298 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

of the race, when it is already far past its prime, and
a new race is beginning to dominate the world, He
will arrange that all His special pupils who have
followed Him in those previous incarnations shall
come to birth together about the time of His last
life in the world.

In it He will attain the great Initiation of the
Buddha, and thus gain perfect enlightenment; at that
time these pupils of His, without physically knowing
or remembering Him, will all be strongly attracted
towards Him, and under His influence great numbers
of them will enter the Path, and many will advance
to the higher stages, having already in previous in-
carnations made considerable progress. We thought
at first that the accounts given in the Buddhist books
of the large numbers of men who instantly attained
the Arhat level when the Lord Gautama became the
Buddha were beyond the bounds of possibility; but
we found on closer examination that there was truth
underlying those accounts. It is possible that the
numbers were exaggerated, but that very many pupils
did suddenly attain these higher degrees of Initiation
under the impetus given by the mighty magnetism
and power of the Buddha is undoubtedly a fact.

Besides the great Wesak Festival, there is one other
occasion in each year when the members of the Broth-
erhood all meet together officially. The meeting in
this case is usually held in the private house of the
Lord Maitreya situated also in the Himalayas, but
on the southern instead of the northern slopes. On

Tue WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 299

this occasion no pilgrims on the physical plane are
present, but all astral visitors who know of the cele-
bration are welcome to attend it. It is held on the
full moon day of the month of Asala, usually corre-
sponding to the English July. This is the anniver-
sary of the delivery by the Lord Buddha of His first
announcement of the great discovery—the sermon
which He preached to His five disciples, commonly
known as the Dhammachakkappavattana Sutta,
which has been translated by Rhys Davids as “The
Setting in Motion of the Royal Chariot Wheels of the
Kingdom of Righteousness.” It is often more briefly
described in Buddhist books as “The Turning of the
Wheel of the Law.” It explains for the first time
the Four Noble Truths and the Noble Eightfold Path,
expounding the great middle way of the Buddha—
the life of perfect righteousness in the world, which
lies midway between the extravagances of asceticism
on the one hand and the carelessness of mere worldly
life on the other.

In His love for His great Predecessor the Lord
Maitreya has ordained that, whenever the anniver-
sary of that first preaching comes round, the same
sermon shall be recited once more in the presence
of the assembled Brotherhood; and He usually adds
to it a simple address of His own, expounding and
applying it. The recitation of the sermon commences
at the moment of full moon, and the reading and the
address are usually over in about half an hour. The
Lord Maitreya generally takes His place upon the

300 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

marble seat which is set at the edge of a raised ter-
race in the lovely garden just in front of His house.
The greatest of the Officials sit close about Him,
while the rest of the Brotherhood is grouped in the
garden a few feet below. On this occasion, as on the
other, there is often an opportunity for pleasant con-
verse, and kindly greetings and benedictions are dis-
tributed by the Masters among Their pupils and those
who aspire to be Their pupils.

It may be useful to give some account of the cere-
mony, and of what is usually said at these Festivals,
though it is, of course, utterly impossible to repro-
duce the wonder and the beauty and the eloquence
of the words of the Lord Maitreya on such occasions.
The account which follows does not attempt to report
any single discourse; it is a combination of, I fear,
very imperfectly remembered fragments, some of
which have already appeared elsewhere; but it will
give to those who have not previously heard of it
some idea of the line generally taken.

That great sermon is wonderfully simple, and its
points are repeated over and over again. There was
no shorthand in those days, so that it might be taken
down and read by everyone afterwards; His disciples
had to remember His words by the impression made
on them at the time. So He made them simple, and
He repeated them again and again like a refrain, so
that the people might be sure of them. One may
readily see in reading it that it is constructed for this
special purpose—that it may be easily remembered.

THE WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 301

Its points are arranged categorically, so that when
it has once been heard each point reminds one of the
next, as though it were a kind of mnemonic, and to
the Buddhist each of these separate and easily re-
membered words suggests a whole body of related
ideas, so that the sermon, short and simple as it is,
contains an explanation and a rule of life.

One might well think that all that can be said
about that sermon has been said already many times
over; yet the Lord, with His wonderful eloquence
and the way in which He puts it, makes it every year
seem something new, and each person feels its mes-
sage as though it were specially addressed to himself.
On that occasion, as in the original preaching, the
Pentecostal miracle repeats itself. The Lord speaks
in the original sonorous Pali, but everyone present
hears Him “in His own tongue wherein He was born,”
as is said in the Acts of the Apostles.

The sermon begins with a proclamation that the
Middle Path is the safest, and indeed the only true
Path. To plunge on the one hand into the sensual
excesses and pleasures of the ordinary worldly life
is mean and degrading, and leads a man nowhither.
On the other hand, extravagant asceticism is also evil
and useless. There may be a few to whom the high
ascetic and solitary life appeals, and they may be
capable of leading it rightly, though even then it
must not be carried to excess; but for all ordinary
people the Middle Way of a good life lived in the
world is in every way best and safest. The first step

302 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

towards the leading of such a life is to understand
its conditions; and the Lord Buddha lays these down
for us in what He has called the Four Noble Truths.
These are:

Sorrow or Suffering.

The Cause of Sorrow.

The Ceasing of Sorrow (or the Escape from Sorrow).
The Way which leads to the Escape from Sorrow.

see

1. The first truth is an assertion that all mani-
fested life is sorrow, unless man knows how to live
it. In commenting upon this, the Bodhisattva said
that there are two senses in which manifested life is
sorrowful. One of these is to some éxtent inevitable,
but the other is an entire mistake and is very easily
to be avoided. To the Monad, which is the true
spirit of man, all manifested life is in one sense a
sorrow, because it is a limitation; a limitation which
we in our physical brain cannot in the least conceive,
because we have no idea of the glorious freedom of
the higher life. In exactly the same sense it has
always been said that the Christ offers Himself as a
Sacrifice when He descends into matter. It is a sac-
rifice undoubtedly, because it is an inexpressibly
great limitation, for it shuts off from Him all the
glorious powers which are His on His own level. The
same is true of the Monad of man; he undoubtedly
makes a great sacrifice when he brings himself into
connection with lower matter, when he hovers over
it through the long ages of its development up to the
human level, when he puts down a tiny fragment of

Tue WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 303

himself (a finger-tip as it were) and thereby makes
an ego or individual soul.

Even though we may be only a tiny fragment—
indeed, a fragment of a fragment—we are neverthe-
less a part of a magnificent reality. There is noth-
ing to be proud of in being only a fragment, but there
is a certainty that because we are therefore part of
the higher, we can eventually rise into the higher and
become one therewith. That is the end and aim
of our evolution. And even when we attain that,
remember that it is not for the sake of our delight
in the advancement, but that we may be able to help
in the scheme. All these sacrifices and limitations
may rightly be described as involving suffering; but
they are undertaken gladly as soon as the ego fully
understands. An ego has not the perfection of the
Monad, and so he does not fully understand at first;
he has to learn like everybody else. That quite tre-
mendous limitation at each further descent into mat-
ter is an unavoidable fact, and so there is that much
of suffering inseparable from manifestation. We
have to accept that limitation as a means to an end,
as part of the Divine Scheme.

There is another sense in which life is often sor-
row, but a kind of sorrow that can be entirely
avoided. The man who lives the ordinary life of the
world often finds himself in trouble of various kinds.
It would not be true to say that he is always in sor-
row, but he is often in anxiety, and he is always

liable at any moment to fall into great sorrow or

304 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

anxiety. The reason for this is that he is full of
lower desires of various kinds, not at all necessarily
wicked, but desires for lower things; and because of
these desires he is tied down and confined. He is
constantly striving to attain something which he has
not, and he is full of anxiety as to whether he will
attain it; and when he has attained it, he is anxious
lest he should lose it. This is true not only of money
but of position and power, of wealth and of social
advancement. All these cravings cause incessant
trouble in many different ways. It is not only the
individual anxiety of the man who has or has not
some object of desire; we have also to take into
account all the envy and jealousy and ill-feeling
caused in the hearts of others who are striving for
the same object.

There are other objects of desire which seem higher
than these and yet are not the highest. How often,
for example, a young man desires affection from
someone who cannot give it to him, who has it not
to give! From such a desire as that comes often a
great deal of sadness, jealousy and much other ill-
feeling. You will say that such a desire is natural;
undoubtedly it is, and affection which is returned is
a great source of happiness. Yet if it cannot be re-
turned, a man should have the strength to accept the
situation, and not allow sorrow to be caused by the
unsatisfied desire. When we say that a thing is nat-
ural, we mean that it is what we might expect from
the average man. But the student of occultism must

Tue WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 305

try to rise somewhat above the level of the average
man—otherwise how can he help that man? We
must rise above that level in order that we may be
able to reach down a helping hand. We must aim
not at the natural (in the sense of the average), but at
the supernatural.

One who is clairvoyant will readily subscribe to
the truth of this great teaching of the Buddha, that
on the whole life is sorrow, for if he looks at the
astral and mental bodies of those whom he meets he
will see that they are filled with a vast number of
small vortices all whirling vigorously, representing
all sorts of odd little thoughts, little anxieties, little
troubles about one thing or another. All these cause
disturbance and suffering, and what is needed most
of all for progress is serenity. The only way to gain
peace is to get rid of them altogether, and that brings
us to our second noble truth, the Cause of Sorrow.

2. We have already seen that the cause of sorrow
is always desire. If a man has no desires, if he is not
striving for place or power or wealth, then he is
equally tranquil whether the wealth or position comes
or whether it goes. He remains unruffled and serene
because he does not care. Being human, he will of
course wish for this or that, but always mildly and
gently, so that he does not allow himself to be dis-
turbed. We know, for example, how often people
are prostrated with sorrow when they lose those
whom they love by death. But if their affection
_be at the higher level, if they love their friend and

306 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

not the body of their friend, there can be no sense
of separation, and therefore no sorrow. If they are
filled with desire for bodily contact with that friend
on the physical plane, then at once that desire will
cause sorrow. But if they will put aside that desire
and live in the communion of the higher life, the
sorrow passes away.

Sometimes people sorrow when they find old age
coming upon them, when they find their vehicles not
so strong as they used to be. They desire the strength
and the faculties that they once had. It is wise for
them to repress that desire, to realize that their bodies
have done good work, and if they cah no longer do
the same amount as of yore, they should do gently
and peacefully what they can, but not worry them-
selves over the change. Presently they will have new
bodies; and the way to insure a good one is to make
such use as they can of the old one, but in any case
to be serene and calm and unruffled. The only way
to do that is to forget self, to let all selfish desires
cease, and to turn the thought outward to the helping
of others as far as one’s capabilities go.

3. The Ceasing of Sorrow. Already we see how
sorrow ceases and how calm is to be attained; it is
by always keeping the thought on the highest things.
We have still to live in this world, which has been
poetically described as the sorrowful star—as indeed
it is for so many, perhaps for most people, though it
need not be; yet we may live in it quite happily if
we are not attached to it by desire. We are in it,

Tue WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 307

but we must not be of it—at least not to such an
extent as to let it cause worry and trouble and sor-
row. Undoubtedly our duty is to help others in their
sorrows and troubles and worries; but in order to
do that effectively we must have none of our own;
we must let those ruffles which might cause them slip
smoothly past us, leaving us calm and contented. If
we take this lower life with philosophy we shall find
that for us sorrow almost entirely ceases.

There may be some who think such an attitude
unattainable. It is not so, for if it were the Lord
Buddha would never have prescribed it for us. We
can all reach it, and we ought to do so, because only
when we have attained it can we really and effec-
tively help our brother man.

4. The Way which leads to the Escape from Sor-
row. This is given to us in what is called the Noble
Eightfold Path—another of the Lord Buddha’s won-
derful tabulations or categories. It is a very beau-
tiful statement, because it can be taken at all levels.
The man in the world, even the uneducated man, can
take it in its lowest aspects and find a way to peace
and comfort through it. And yet the highest philos-
opher may also take it and interpret it at his level
and learn very much from it.

The first step in this Path is Right Belief. ‘Some
people object to that qualification, because they say
it demands from them something in the nature of
blind faith. It is not at all that sort of belief which
is required; it is rather a demand for a certain.

308 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

amount of knowledge as to the ruling factors in life.
It demands that we shall understand a little of the
Divine Scheme as far as it applies to us, and if we
cannot yet see that for ourselves, that we should ac-
cept it as it is always put before us. Certain broad
facts are always put before men in some form or
other. They are explained even to savage tribes by
their medicine-men, and to the rest of mankind by
various religious teachers and in all kinds of scrip-
tures. It is very true that scriptures and religions
differ, but the points in which they all agree have to
be accepted by a man before he can live happily.
One of these facts is the eternal Law of Cause and
Effect. If a man lives under the delusion that he can
do anything that he likes, and that the effect of his
actions will never recoil upon himself, he will most
certainly find that some of these actions eventually
involve him in unhappiness and suffering. If, again,
he does not understand that the object of his life is
progress, that God’s Will for him is that he shall grow
to be something better and nobler than he is now,
then also he will bring unhappiness and suffering
upon himself because he will be likely to live for the
lower side of life only, and that lower side of life
never finally satisfies the inner man. And so it
comes about that he must at least know something
of these great laws of Nature, and if he cannot yet
know them for himself it will be well for him to
believe them. Later on, and at a higher level, before

Tue WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 309

the Second Initiation can be attained, we are told
that we must kill out all doubt.

When the Lord Buddha was asked whether this
meant that we must accept some form of belief
blindly, He replied: ‘No, but you must know for
yourself three great things—that only upon the Path
of Holiness and Good Living can man finally attain
perfection; that in order to attain it he moves through
many lives, gradually rising higher and higher; and
that there is a Law of Eternal Justice under which
all these things work.” At that stage the man must.
cast out all doubt, and must be thoroughly and in-
wardly convinced of these things; but for the man
of the world it is well that he should at least believe
that much, because unless he has that as a guide in
life he cannot get any further.

The second step of the Noble Eightfold Path is
Right Thought. Now, Right Thought means two.
separate things. The first demands that we should
think about right things and not about wrong things.
We can have at the back of our minds always high
and beautiful thoughts, or on the other hand those
minds may be filled with thoughts of common every-
day matters. Let there be no mistake here; what-
ever work we are doing should be done thoroughly
and earnestly, and with whatever concentration of
thought upon it is necessary for that perfection. But
most people, even when their work is done, or when
there comes a pause in it, still have their thoughts.

310 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTH

running upon unimportant and comparatively ignoble
things. Those who are devoted to the Master seek
always to hold the thought of that Master in the back
of their minds, so that when there is a moment’s res-
pite from worldly action, at once that thought of Him
comes forward and occupies the mind. At once the
pupil thinks: “What can I do to make my life like
the Master’s? How can I so improve myself that I
can show forth the beauty of the Lord to those
around me? What can I do to carry on His work
of helping other people?” One of the things we can
all do is to send out helpful and sympathetic thought.

Remember, also, that right thought must be defi-
nite and not scattered; thoughts resting for a mo-
ment on one thing and then flying instantly to some-
thing else are useless, and will not help us at all in
learning to manage our thoughts. Right thought
must never have the slightest touch of evil in it;
there must be nothing doubtful about it. There are
many people who would not deliberately think of
anything impure or horrible, and yet they will cher-
ish thoughts which are on the brink of that—not
definitely evil, but certainly a little doubtful. In
right thought there must be nothing like that; wher-
ever there is anything which seems in the least sus-
picious or unkind, it must be shut out. We must be
quite sure that our thoughts are only kind and good.

There is another meaning of right thought, and
that is correct thought—that we should think the
truth only. So often we think untruly and wrongly

Tue WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 311

of persons just because of prejudice or ignorance.
We get an idea that a certain person is a bad person,
and therefore that all that he does must be evil. We
attribute motives to him which are often absolutely
without foundation, and in doing so we are thinking
untruly of him, and therefore our thought is not right
thought. All men not yet Adepts have in them some-
thing of evil as well as something of good; but most
unfortunately it is our custom to fix all our attention
on the evil, and to forget all about the good—never
to look for it at all. Therefore our thought about
these people is not right thought, not only because
it is uncharitable, but because it is untrue. We are
looking only at one side of the person and we ignore
the other side. Furthermore, by fixing our attention
on the evil in the man instead of the good, we
strengthen and encourage that evil; whereas by right
thought we might give just the same encouragement
to the good side of that man’s nature.

The next stage is Right Speech; and here again we
find just the same two divisions. First, we should
speak always of good things. It is not our business
to speak of the evil deeds of others. In most cases
the stories about other people which reach us are not
true, and so if we repeat them our words also are
untrue, and we are doing harm to ourselves as well
as to the person of whom we speak. And even if the
story is true it is still wrong to repeat it, for we can
do no good to the man by saying over and over again
that he has done wrong; the kindest thing that we

312 Tue Masters AND THE PatH

could do would be to say nothing about it. We
should do that instinctively if the wrong thing were
done by a husband, a son, a brother; we should cer-
tainly feel that it would be wrong to advertise the
misdeed of one whom we loved to many people who
would not otherwise hear of it. But if there is any
truth at all in our profession of universal brotherhood
we should realize that we have no right to circulate
evil about any man, that we should speak with re-
gard to others as we should wish them to speak with
regard to us. Yet again we must remember that
many people make their speech untrue because they
allow themselves to fall into exaggeration and in-
accuracy. They make little things into enormous
stories; assuredly that is not right speech.

Again, speech must be kindly; and it must be direct
and forceful, not silly. A large section of the world
exists under the delusion that it must make conver-
sation; that it is odd or rude not to be perpetually
babbling. The idea seems to be that when one meets
a friend one must keep talking all the time, or the
friend will be hurt. Remember that when the Christ
was on earth He made a very strict statement that
for every idle word that man should speak he would
have to account hereafter. The idle word is so often
a mischievous word; but quite apart from that, even
innocent idle words involve waste of time; if we must
talk, at least we might say something useful and
helpful. Some people with the idea of seeming smart,
keep up a stream of constant half-joking or sneering

THE WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 313

talk. They must always be capping something that
someone else has said. They must always be showing
everything in a ridiculous or amusing aspect. Cer-
tainly all that comes under the heading of idle words,
and there is no doubt that it is seriously necessary
that we should exercise exceeding care in this matter
of right speech.

The next step is Right Action. We see at once
how these three steps necessarily follow one from
another. If we think always of good things, we shall
certainly not speak of evil things, because we speak
what is in our mind; and if our thought and speech
are good, then the action which follows will also be
good. Action must be prompt and yet well consid-
ered. We all know some people who, when any
emergency arises, seem to become helpless; they pot-
ter about and do not know what to do, and they get
in the way of those who have their brains in better
working order. Others plunge into some rash action
without thinking at all. Learn to think quickly and
act promptly, and yet always with consideration.
Above all, always let action be unselfish; let it never
be actuated in the least by personal considerations.
That is very hard for most people, and yet it is a
power which must be acquired. We who try to live
for the Master have many opportunities in our work
to put that idea into practice. We must all think
only what is best for the work and what we can do
to help others, and we must entirely put aside any
personal considerations. We must not think what

314. Tuer MASTERS AND THE PatTH

part in the work we should like to bear, but we must
try to do the best that we possibly can with the part
that is assigned to us.

In these days few people live by themselves as
monks or hermits used to do. We live among others,
so that whatever we think or say or do will neces-
sarily affect a great many people. We should always
bear in mind that our thought, our speech and our
action are not merely qualities, but powers—powers
given to us to use, for the use of which we are
directly responsible. All are meant to be used for
service, and to use them otherwise is to fail in our
duty. ;

We come now to the fifth step—Right Means of
Livelihood—and that is a matter which may touch
quite a large number of us. The Right Means of
Livelihood is that which causes no harm to any living
thing. We see at once that that would rule out such
trades as those of a butcher or a fisherman; but the
command reaches much further than that. We should
not obtain our livelihood by harming any creature
and therefore we see at once that the selling of
alcohol is not a right means of livelihood. The
seller of alcohol does not necessarily kill people but
he is unquestionably doing harm, and he is living
on the harm he does to the people.

The idea goes yet further. Take the case of a
merchant who in the course of his trade is dishonest.
That is not a right means of livelihood, because his
trading is not fair and he is cheating the people.

Tuer WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 315

If a merchant deals fairly, buying his articles whole-
sale and selling them retail at a reasonable profit,
that is a right means of livelihood; but the moment
he begins to mislead people and sells a poor article
for a good one, he is cheating them. A right means
of livelihood may become a wrong means if it is
treated in a wrong way. We must deal as honestly
with people as we should wish them to deal with us.
If a person is a trader in a certain class of goods,
he has special knowledge of those goods. The cus-
tomer trusts himself in the hands of the trader
because he himself has not that special knowledge.
When you trust a doctor or a lawyer, you expect to
be treated fairly. But it is exactly in the same way
that the customer comes to the trader, and therefore
the latter should be as honest with his customer as
the lawyer or the doctor is with his client or his
patient. When a man trusts you in that way, he
puts you on your honor to do your best for him.
You have a right to make a reasonable profit in the
course of your bargain, but you must also look to
your duty.

The sixth step is Right Exertion or Right En-
deavor, and it is a very important one. We must
not be content to be negatively good. What is de-
sired of us is not merely absence of evil, but the
positive doing of good. When the Lord Buddha made
that wonderful short statement of His doctrine in a
single verse, He began by saying, “Cease to do evil,”
but the next line runs, ‘Learn to do good.” It is

316 THE MASTERS AND THE PaTH

not enough to be passively good. There are so many
well-meaning people who yet achieve nothing.

Every person has a certain amount of strength, not
only physical, but mental. When we have a day’s
work before us, we know that we must reserve our
strength for that, and therefore before we begin it
we do not undertake something else which would so
exhaust us as that the day’s work could not be prop-
erly done. Similarly we have a certain amount of
strength of mind and of will, and we can perform
only a certain amount of work on that level; there-
fore we must take care how we spend that power.
There are other powers too. Every person has a
certain amount of influence among his friends and
relations. That influence means power, and we are
responsible for making good use of that power. All
about us are children, relations, employes, servants,
and over all of these we have a certain amount of
influence, at least by example; we must be careful
what we do and what we say, because others will
copy us.

Right Exertion means putting our work into useful
lines and not wasting it. There are many things that
can be done, but some of them are immediate and
more urgent than others. We must look about and
see where our exertion would be most useful. It is
not well that all should do the same thing; it is wiser
that the work should be divided among us so that it
may be perfectly rounded off and not left in a one-

Tur WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 317

sided condition. In all these matters we must use
our reason and common sense.

Right Memory or Right Remembrance is the sev-
enth step, and it means many things. The Right
Memory of which the Lord Buddha spoke has often
been taken by His followers to mean the memory of
past incarnations, which He Himself possessed most
fully. In one of the Jataka stories, a person spoke
ill of Him. He turned to His disciples and said: ‘TI
have insulted this man in a previous life, and there-
fore he speaks ill of me now; I have no right to
resent it.”’ No doubt if we remembered everything
that had happened to us before, we could arrange
our present life better than we do. Most of us, how-
ever, have not the power of remembering our past
lives; but we must not therefore think that the
teaching as to Right Memory does not apply to us.

First of all it means self-recollectedness. It means
that we must remember all the time who we are,
what our work is, what is our duty, and what we
should be doing for the Master. Then again Right
Memory means the exercise of a reasonable choice
as to what we shall remember. To all of us in our
lives there come pleasant things, and also things un-
pleasant. A wise person will take care to remember
the good things, but he will let the evil die. Suppose
someone comes and speaks rudely to us; a foolish
person will remember that for weeks, months and
years, and will continue to say that such-and-such

318 Tue MASTERS AND THE PATH

a person spoke unkindly to him. It will rankle in
his mind. But what good will that do him? Ob-
viously, none at all; it will only annoy him and keep
alive in his mind an evil thought. That certainly
is not Right Memory. We should forget and forgive
then and there an evil thing done to us; but we
should always bear in mind the kindnesses that
people have done us, because they will fill our minds
with love and with gratitude. Again, we have all
made many mistakes; it is well that we should re-
member them in so far as not to repeat them; but
otherwise, to brood over them, to be always filling
our minds with regret and with sorrow because of
them, is not Right Memory.

The last step is called Right Meditation or Right
Concentration. This refers not only to the set medi-
tation which we perform as part of our discipline, but
it also means that all through our lives we should
concentrate ourselves on the object of doing good and
of being useful and helpful. In daily life we cannot
be always meditating, because of the daily work that
we must all do in the course of our ordinary lives;
and yet I am not sure that a statement like that,
made without reservation, is entirely true. We can-
not always have our consciousness drawn away from
the physical plane to higher levels; yet it is possible
to live a life of meditation in this sense—that the
higher things are always so strongly present in the
background of our minds that, as I said when
speaking about Right Thought, they may instantly

Tue WISDOM IN THE TRIANGLES 319

come to the front when that mind is not otherwise
occupied. Our life will then be really a life of per-
petual meditation upon the highest and noblest ob-
jects, interrupted now and then by the necessity of
putting our thoughts into practice in daily life.

Such a habit of thought will influence us in more
ways than we see at the first glance. Like always
attracts like; two people who adopt such a line of
thought will presently be drawn together, will feel
an attraction one for the other; and so it may well
be that in time a nucleus of those who habitually
hold the higher thought will be gathered together,
and will gradually develop, perhaps into a Theo-
sophical Lodge; at any rate, they will draw together,
their thoughts will react upon one another and in
that way each will greatly help the advancement of
the rest. Again, wherever we go we are surrounded
by invisible hosts, Angels, nature-spirits, and men
who have laid aside their physical bodies. The con-
dition of Right Concentration will attract to us all
the best of those various orders of beings, so that
wherever we go we shall be surrounded by good and
holy influences.

This is the teaching of the Lord Buddha as He
gave it in that first Sermon; it is upon this teaching
that the world-wide Kingdom of Righteousness is
founded, the Royal Chariot-Wheels of which He set
in motion for the first time on that Asala Festival
so many centuries ago.

_ When in the far future the time shall come for the

320 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatTH

advent of another Buddha, and the present Bodhi-
sattva takes that final incarnation in which the great
step will be achieved, He will preach the Divine Law
to the world in whatever form may seem to Him most
suited to the requirements of that era, and then will
follow Him in His high office the Master Kuthumi,
Who has transferred Himself to the Second Ray to
take the responsibility of becoming the Bodhisattva
of the sixth root-race.

CHAPTER XV
THE POWER IN THE TRIANGLES

Our world is governed by a Spiritual King—one
of the Lords of the Flame Who came long ago from
Venus. He is called by the Hindus, Sanat Kumara,
the last word being a title meaning Prince or Ruler.
He is often spoken of as the One Initiator, the One
without a Second, the Eternal Youth of Sixteen Sum-
mers; and sometimes He is called the Lord of the
World. He is the Supreme Ruler; in His hand and
within His actual aura lies the whole of His planet.
He represents the Logos, as far as this world is con-
cerned, and directs the whole of its evolution—not
that of humanity alone, but also the evolution of the
Devas, the nature-spirits, and all other creatures
connected with the earth. He 1s, of course, entirely
distinct from the great Entity called the Spirit of the
Earth, who uses our world as a physical body.

In His mind He holds the whole plan of evolution
at some high level of which we know nothing; He is
the force which drives the whole world-machine, the
embodiment of the Divine Will on this planet, and
strength, courage, decision, perseverance and all
similar characteristics, when they show themselves
down here in the lives of men, are reflections from

322 Tue MASTERS AND THE PatH

Him. His consciousness is of so extended a nature
that it comprehends at once all the life on our globe.
In His hands are the powers of cyclic destruction,
for He wields Fohat in its higher forms and can deal
directly with cosmic forces outside our chain. His
work is probably usually connected with humanity
en masse rather than with individuals, but when He
does influence any single person we are told that it
is through the Atma and not through the Ego that
His influence is brought to bear.

At a certain point in the progress of an aspirant
on the Path he is formally presented to the Lord of
the World, and those who have thus met Him face
to face speak of Him as in appearance a handsome
youth, dignified, benignant beyond all description,
yet with a mien of omniscient, inscrutable majesty
conveying such a sense of resistless power that some
have found themselves unable to bear His gaze, and
have veiled their faces in awe. Thus, for example,
did our great Founder, Madame Blavatsky. One
who has had this experience can never forget it, nor
ean he ever thereafter doubt that, however terrible
the sin and sorrow on earth may be, all things are
somehow working together for the eventual good of
all, and humanity is being steadily guided towards
its final goal.

During each world-period, we are told, there are
three successive Lords of the World, and the present
holder of the office is already the third. He resides
with His three pupils in an oasis in the Gobi desert

THE PoWER IN THE TRIANGLES 323

called Shamballa, often spoken of as the sacred
island, in remembrance of the time when it was an
island in the Central Asian Sea. These four greatest
of the Adepts are often called “The Children of the
Fire Mist,” since They belong to an evolution dif-
ferent from ours. Their bodies, though human in ap-
pearance, differ widely from ours in constitution,
being rather garments assumed for convenience than
bodies in the ordinary sense, since they are artificial
and their particles do not change as do those of the
human frame. They require no nourishment and
remain unchanged through thousands of years.

The Three Pupils, Who stand at the level of the
Buddha, and are called Pratyeka or Pachcheka
Buddhas, assist the Lord in His work, and are Them-
selves destined to be our three Lords of the World
when humanity is occupying the planet Mercury.

Once in every seven years the Lord of the World
conducts at Shamballa a great ceremony somewhat
similar to the Wesak event, but on a still grander
scale and of a different type, when all the Adepts and
even some Initiates below that grade are invited, and
have thus an opportunity to come into touch with
Their great Leader. At other times He deals only
with the Heads of the Official Hierarchy, except when
for special reasons He summons others to His
presence.

The exalted position of this, our Spiritual King,
has been described in The Secret Doctrine. It is
there stated that as the ages pass the great steps

324 THe MASTERS AND THE PatHu

which we now recognize as leading to perfection will
remain unchanged as to their relative positions,
though the system of things as a whole is moving
upwards, and thus the actual attainments which in
the remote future will mark a particular step will
be far fuller than they are at present. The Perfected
Men of the Seventh Round of our Chain will be, it
is said, “but one remove from the Root-Base of
their Hierarchy, the highest on Earth and our Ter-
restrial Chain.” That is to say, the King stands even
now one stage beyond the point to which only ages
of evolution will bring the Perfected Men of our
humanity—ages that must run into millions of years,
taking us through two and a half rounds of varied
experience. This Wondrous Being came during the
Third Race period to take charge of the Earth evo-
lution. That coming of the World’s future King is
thus described in Man: Whence, How and Whither:

The great Lemurian Polar Star was still perfect, and the
huge Crescent still stretched along the equator, including
Madagascar. The sea which occupied what is now the Gobi
Desert still broke against the rocky barriers of the northern
Himalayan slopes, and all was being prepared for the most
dramatic moment in the history of the Earth—the Coming
of the Lords of the Flame.

The Lords of the Moon and the Manu of the third Root-
Race had done all that was possible to bring men up to the
point at which the germ of mind could be quickened, and the
descent of the ego could be made. All the laggards had
been pushed on; there were no more in the animal ranks
capable of rising into man. The door against: further immi-
grants into the human kingdom from the animal was only
shut when no more were in sight, nor would be capable of
reaching it without a repetition of the tremendous impulse

se

Tue Power IN THE TRIANGLES 325

only given once in the evolution of a Scheme, at its midmost
point.

A great astrological event, when a very special collocation
of planets occurred and the magnetic condition of the Earth
was the most favorable possible, was chosen as the time. It
was about six and a half million years ago. Nothing more
remained to be done, save what only They could do.

Then, with the mighty roar of swift descent: from incal-
culable heights, surrounded by blazing masses of fire which
filled the sky with shooting tongues of flame, flashed through
the erial spaces the chariot of the Sons of the Fire, the
Lords of the Flame from Venus; it halted, hovering over
the “White Island,” which lay smiling in the bosom of the
Gobi Sea; green was it, and radiant with masses of fragrant
many-colored blossoms, Earth offering her best and fairest
to welcome her coming King. There He stood, “the Youth
of sixteen summers,” Sanat Kumara, the “Eternal Virgin-
Youth,” the new Ruler of Earth, come to His kingdom, His
Pupils, the three Kumaras, with Him, His Helpers around
Him; thirty mighty Beings were there, great beyond Earth’s
reckoning, though in graded order, clothed in the glorious
bodies They had created by Kriyashakti, the first Occult
Hierarchy, branches of the one spreading Banyan-Tree, the
nursery of future Adepts, the center of all occult life. Their
dwelling-place was and is the Imperishable Sacred Land, on
which ever shines down the Blazing Star, the symbol of
Earth’s Monarch, the changeless Pole round which the life
of our Earth is ever spinning.

Of the Lord of the World, The Secret Doctrine
Says:

The “Being” just referred to, who has to remain nameless,
is the Tree from which, in subsequent ages, all the great
historically known Sages and Hierophants, such as the Rishi
Kapila, Hermes, Enoch, Orpheus, etc., have branched off. As
objective man, he is the mysterious (to the profane—the
ever invisible, yet ever present) Personage, about whom
legends are rife in the East, especially among the Occultists
and the students of the Sacred Science. It is He who changes
form, yet remains ever the same. And it is He, again, who
holds spiritual sway over the initiated Adepts throughout the
whole world. He is, as said, the “Nameless One” who has

326 THe MASTERS AND THE PaTH

so many names, and yet whose names and whose very nature
are unknown. He is the “Initiator,” called the “Great Sac-
rifice.” For, sitting at the Threshold of Light, He looks into
it from within the Circle of Darkness, which He will not
cross; nor will He quit His post: till the last Day of this Life-
Cycle. Why does the Solitary Watcher remain at His self-
chosen post? Why does He sit by the Fountain of Primeval
Wisdom, of which He drinks no longer, for He has naught
to learn which He does not know—aye, neither on this Earth,
nor in its Heaven? Because the lonely sore-footed Pilgrims,
on their journey back to their Home, are never sure, to the
last moment, of not losing their way, in this limitless desert
of Illusion and Matter called Earth-Life. Because He would
fain show the way to that region of freedom and light, from
which He is a voluntary exile Himself, to every prisoner
who has succeeded in liberating himself from the bonds of
flesh and illusion. Because, in short, He has sacrificed Him-
self for the sake of Mankind, though but a few elect may
profit by the Great Sacrifice.

It is under the direct, silent guidance of this Maha-Guru
that all the other less divine Teachers and Instructors of
Mankind became, from the first awakening of human con-
sciousness, the guides of early Humanity. It is through these
“Sons of God” that infant Humanity learned its first notions
of all the arts and sciences, as well as of spiritual knowledge;
and it is They who laid the first foundation-stone of those
ancient civilizations that so sorely puzzle our modern gener-
ation of students and scholars.

It is on the First Ray that the greatest progress
for man is possible within the Hierarchy of our
Globe, for there are on it two Initiations beyond that
of the Manu. The Pachcheka Buddhas, Who stand
next above the Manu, have been strangely misunder-
stood by some writers who have described Them as
the selfish ones Who refused to teach what They
have learned, and passed away into Nirvana. It is
true that these Buddhas do not teach, for They have
the other work of Their own Ray to do, and true also

THE PoweER IN THE TRIANGLES 327

that a time comes when They will leave the world,
but only to carry on Their glorious work elsewhere.

The next step, the Initiation that none can give,
but each must take for Himself, puts the Adept on
the level of the Lord of the World, an Office which
is held first for the shorter period of a First or Sec-
ond Lord on one World, and when that has been
achieved, for the longer responsibility of the Third
upon some other.

The task of the Third Lord of the World is far
greater than that of the First and Second Lord, be-
cause it is His duty to round off satisfactorily that
period of evolution, and to deliver over the countless
millions of evolving creatures into the hands of the
Seed-Manu, Who will be responsible for them during
the inter-planetary Nirvana, and will hand them over
in turn to the Root-Manu of the next globe. The
Third Lord of the World, having fulfilled this duty,
takes another Initiation entirely outside of our world
and its Hierarchy, and attains the level of the Silent
Watcher. In that capacity He remains on guard for
the whole period of a Round, and it is only when the
life-wave has again occupied our planet and is again
ready to leave it that He abandons His strange self-
imposed task, and hands it over to His Successor.

Far above us as is all the splendor of these great
heights at present, it is worth our while to lift our
thought towards them and try to realize them a little.
They show the goal before every one of us, and the
clearer our sight of it the swifter and steadier will

328 Tue MASTERS AND THE PaTtH

be our progress towards it, though we may not all
hope to fulfill the ancient ideal in this, and fly as an
arrow to the mark.

In the course of this great progress every man will
some day reach full consciousness on the highest of
our planes, the Divine plane, and be conscious simul-
taneously at all levels of this Prakritic Cosmic plane,
so that having in Himself the power of the highest,
He shall yet be able to comprehend and function on
the very lowest, and help where help is needed. That
omnipotence and omnipresence surely await every
one of us, and though this lower life may not be
worth living for anything that we may gain from it
for ourselves, yet it is magnificently worth enduring
as a necessary stage for the true life that lies before
us. “Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath
it entered into the heart of man to conceive the things
which God hath prepared for them that love Him,”
for the love of God, the wisdom of God, the power of
God, and the glory of God pass all understanding,
even as does His peace.

PEACE TO ALL BEINGS

a

.

Ab an
AY aie | Na pee
cay Aah eh)
nT

eh
vt i 1)
sa

M4 ei 1S if ah
Ne © eas 4
MUN haat
i

eee ee LL eS ee ee ee

PAGE

A DAGIULE AL Dee LTINIGY y OF) ieteiesyreisicte aeiarsielow o's stalMaMeagnarealy(s 266
PEPE OLATICOI Ss Vem clay Gosia wanes anole BW ciel or hhalejene abel mietinrs aterate 97-111
Bye (Masterr ores. pupils oor ees hehe resi a eerie ne 70
AGCOUTETOLAAIN TUT SOU ee ae. Minors & cea els nie a pavenn Ure Mele 97-99

PRE CRITA CYT A556 5 sip alan al o Coe obs e tn DIRE TAN SINE eel rate SU ROR abe a te 94
ARTs) Vo 260-4 1 aoe Ere eS AM Weg i Mibid Peed 313, 314
MAUL ESOPALD EL ITIVCI; sha: S «90d Ste oh, Sod ie Sata cba oy aber: NAC RRTR UPR Ria 252
depts (see also. Masters): js 6)c.isied ig noise eo ieleralpiete 3, 17, 19, 20
Physical characteristics of... ...2.. .40nltan eee oe eae 21, 22

As lieutenants of World-Teacher ................... 41
Health a necessity for ie A ae ee oe 41
Freedom) from) karma chsh Aue a a, pie 42
Piysival (bodies vol ie isa,| eee rah ee 42, 43, 46, 47
epg CTE CAND Jy) eet Cat a en FP 49, 50, 104, 2038, 204, 211
PVE ORY POL eR ORL CLT aT TAI IN nat nee A a 58
Requirements: of childhood of oo... als eis eel apalele 77
RPUTAIECTOS NO Letter tcteh tiiyey 5s 2bu oa 4 mtae tepae  bR RRR eines RE 253
PAWLOTIRGIIIS iret sere Ome eh aie isl si o swe se are eee Oe 17, 127, 204, 205
PTE CULOTA iis uleiavc emer eae roy: os) £5; Ss acuie’ oR ape neaene Ca 82, 191
PRICY ONES ovis ch emer Seeds Oe Sal SRA cece Ga 56
Altar stone in Wesak Valley ........... He Sen Be 285, 286, 288
mn wien, MEelpiilness® Ole. os... . 5 R le ete ae Seek alee 111
PTL SPRNI IT ay Shatin ce W nce v's) 9) ogi ab bos Aah PRR eRe EF ies rE 188, 190
nana. Love for aoords Buddha \i.5: dee ie ene euiu sal 191
PR TIALIMCU Runt sep RG PASE beds toCR at nha Jal ac a. 0. toz esd RAS ARM eS aR RUC AOL Se CAA 67
ATR OUNOL STAG UE TESONCE Yd Pike ais in oid balance HOUR ea eR ee rie 239
ARDEA OT OAN: ainda o's 6 Scab SURE ee Oe 146, 212
PAVE OE et) til ks Weare Page ee Nb URI at a 24
PAB ol ase ote ei ik oe Shs OR gens, Been cee 14
TILA RICHI Gee Wet Sn Li. See aah CR en ae es nebo hc 156
PRTG aa SO OU ana es rere Se Ma nein Recaro Ne 119
PPD WOT CL VAN Bolsa’ wii take eae eel Poet eee 250, 251
Archangels, Names and work of ...................-. 240, 241

PAGE
ATH at A ee UG e eno ai aan scoala yc eae iat oy een a 192, 205
CAUSAL HOD Wi COT at he lew ie esa ogni wiles eietelere er ie ana ater ena 22
CONSCIGUSIESS TOTTI aicais tan i@eannisl cis ates cate ree erie 198
NWOT OT! (30m Ge tres sien cS ate abated in ok watt etal suke sie) eee 202
Tritiabi om yarccrs cris ate eek let Seal eee ae cule ae ee ec 298
IATHAtS Ip We rae, aan et Baron re tenet tre teal a pent See 187, 298
Artists,stheir Rayvinite scp cect isn Matric trad aan ceed 249
Arura “Devaan Sons sairadraure eam stored tenet amet orale eee te 158
Aruparaga, Seventh itetter jaunts sre wails vianete 203
‘Aryan (Race, Qualities Ofc. sneer ae ciara corre rea 76, 224
ATV ASAD Sa Ge ey Se rise Om ie ates a cies weaken nineteen ee 296
Asala:sGeremnOly.th o') aside vd ore ooo oie tay Ole MPMI ea on 299, 301, 319
ASCENSION, “SyYMPOLISM. 1OL wsi0.0:4 <u'sis bias Slee le se oe 204
A sek Tay Ys es 2e) clad Seolte Gite odie wonton onc ane 2 An nee a 203
Aspirants
Impossibility (or OVerlooking vee ee cee a cow enes 61, 62, 96
Astral and: mental bodies (Gf oc)... s\sla.<cscs siete ene ee 66
Assyrian teaching of the Trinity ..................4. 265, 266
ASAT DOGG VAN WR Voce berate eR Wl seh Bebra 16, 66
Image.‘of):probationer ius. ooh Bee ee eee eee 69
Effects of irritation ys S0eine.& cee eee Wk ee 87, 88, 90
In- relation; to. laughter! /.'s.);.)/ ake ue eee 92
Effect. ofi First Initiation/ upon -.3ie0. eas. eee 138
Astral counterparts of physical objects ................. 173
AStral aplane Pade) the Cee Se ia. one ae 173, 220
Astral witnesses of Second Initiation ........... 177, 178, 179
Address. tii Peta Vic toe Sip reine eee 184
PREPOIORY isa Veins dlcatas aie a Kee PRETO tie cies © ataie rk eee 240
AthanasianuCreed, “The |\.cacnggrea +s os coc te ls eee 274
Atlantean Race) cicicecticl Later cee. < wale cheat ee eee 224
Atlantis, Predominance of Seventh Ray in ............. 256
Atoms; i Permanent?...3:0 3.5 eeeee ee 6 Ue ae 138, 208
At the Feet of the Master ........ 53, 54, 55, 56, 118, 143, 180
ATO OETIES 5.4 OCs Lak alee ARERR eh cic eal eoe ee 22, 40, 189
ANITA. aii le tahpue cide ole ee aI rane eae 31, 75, 76, 84, 98, 99, 100
PWC Ee beaten i ee re. 195, 196
Avajja,.Lenth, fetter: .,5\.).cneus oss ss Yeeeah e ae Gee 203
Bacon, \Francigy icity. os beablode is oleae eee 251
Bacon, Roger, ()s.65 ais cee oe a ee 251
Baptism of Christ, Symbology of ............... 186, 187, 196
Beauty, characteristic of Fourth Ray ................... 253

BaliogRight ui uk LRN en cr i i aearen 307, 308, 309

INDEX son

PAGE
Henares, s18 Becencer. OF TOLCE 7. ius ors sisi bie, eres oshe's ae 216, 217
Besant. DrwAnnies \ weak dais seek t 6, 10, 34, 56, 59, 96, 225
POCA MERINO GOL Be ako is ies als niu ie Fale ace ae aeons 240
PROUD Ar LOE THEN clea pale bs Ae sdele ¥'< ole ee pera a 254, 296
PRB CG Yee ULM aaretoN Bate PALEY oe deck cnep a elsvniobon ae avocet oy ahelnyedatalecohl it 250
LETT AAAS hlakal 8 Aidit aia afte A ans ns SON AN aloud 172
Diplert Nvistian.. LHGOSODH Yr IN i. 8's. i\es)4 vi «e's Saree ae 115, 116
Blavatsky, Madatne: Hat Piet itis bY ee aes See
MET: UR rewle nies ete 6, 7, 9, 24, 25, 34, 35, 45, 46, 58, 222, 322
pecefeVil ict Uh aig. Nar AAR aM rae Rei mam BA ALR Co Rrt Loe EE Sapte iry tees 206
Representative» of. Second. Ray, i..sidss ve hive <guibes 233
VROriW OL w cae siiite bce Ne A Oe ee See 269
Ag earti ore nea venly Many at ahaha eaten iain 269
Expression of Second Person of Logos ...... 273, 274, 275
Representative of Buddha of the Race ............. 276
WSOC STA LLUIMAN, > AS 3.9.» LLANSIIT LED vaya Wice clestetonsleveian eters 105
POSTINGS JACOB i\eiys. oe 2 ptk estes shel ears unpaid MADAM an ee ee 257
Boome Dzyan.. Original (ob .hsitsaciaslaa s nele sedans la eee 24
ERRAND RNY RSs i lds oxcovs..siapcoin cttsta Ata Dae a tee at at ae NeET SiR he Pa 261
Brahmarandravchakra \2ti co ot. hehe Nadi ese ead Rat ae 294
Bnttanvacyatiure-spirits: Of, 4 asic d desla oS aacawe Wacieiae oan 250
Brocherhoodial humanityi. 2. Quis) ee se, “oes wae 277
BrOUDernGOd « OL ATEMIPIONS: wlaieiy. siceasGcdo eal lente ite tae 226
RUMI IVA TOA VY cei haves gcde ln'n ssles es Gots Pale een eae Wea eer ae 7
PeUICAN EIT HARAAOT eens aii ats nieuwe So ikke eee 45, 271, 298
Pine Kasvapanew nd Pekar be JRA eh eee eee 276
Buddha, Lord Gautama ..... 5, 45, 139, 163, 202, 204, 276, 299
SSETECLICLION CO Rmeu ieee Bhs iad) ssw leje C ARR aR amas Caner 137
UNITES EP LTELE G's io... « oad aa ok abate ea te ee 140
Presence, at’ Second : Initiation. «0025. og shb ei aee 175
Lovecvfory Anaiaageins vc oo eee oe 191
Proclamationsots, Ereedom |... ...<)aeesMenadeneeh Soe 198
PTCA Of ECON A AY |... ... a's o:s\cahantneeeee 233, 247, oa
Reflection of Second Aspect of Logos ............... 267
PApnG OL Rei Viens. 0s.) hee hs eae 268
BYECECESIO TE OTANI tii. a5. 4.0 cscs idinardy atte oie eaters 276, 293
PCAN ATION COL cis oak sho sb AR ee We ae eh 279
Bari dOle ns. < tive ce Loe VaR eta: 277, 278, 279, 281
Return to the world each year ................. 281, 282
Appearance at Wesak Festival ............. 289, 291, 292
Fourths Buddhas: of this world: »: ssasies «> Moueebee oa 294
PAPE ST OL aisich potatoes ie «iD 4ie trae Wa acne ehede Cams es ae 298

Srentneermon Of 5. kee ie Pol a, ood RS aba 300-319

334 INDEX

PAGE
Buddhas
Appearance of during a world period .. 276, 277, 293, 294
Buddhas)! |Fachehekar os) ats ids scaein.c ute elite state orn erent 323, 326
Buddhas Pratyelce wie cir aio sk ss wlan aie pRe Esha a aealede cata nn 323
Budd his ides wwe eis ween veb ee etalon ettiele aig alec ea fend ot aiaterahe 190
Budd bie: CONSCIOUSMEHE iy sholsleseiscpiaten se overs mumbo nies a eae 124, 166, 167
Buddhie) Exercises s/s uae wa vols Mead eee ee bs ueeielan 139, 141
Buddhiec plane, Work of Adepts on the ................. 49
Pe Uara od shields GSR BeOS AES DROS, Me etal a Ve (al SE 4 Fate at Mert 259, 260, 261
Northern, Teaching of Trinity in .............. 265, 266
Buddhists M OVS iis iiss, sec the oA RRRMON ete oh of ofeach eaeonehe sie me 32
Burma, Budd hisny iin years aerate tare oleae eas een 260, 261
Causal body .......... 15, 22, 49, 69, 138, 157, 158, 166, 183, 208
Cause and Effect, Law NSIS NM rrr te i | 308
Ceremonial iyi sie eigeic nelle Mbt enna ita sh haba atey wee 263, 264
Ceremonies) of) religions iyi cakes aid oie oes arsscie cney ee tae 215
ere Girne alee ade ella teheioys to abies eee OIA ee bs ene Te 253
Ceremony conducted at Shamballa ..... eis o Sundelntic inet aA 323
Ceylon; Buddhism ina ictas adie Cie arate 2 ele ee arene 261
COMBI) 6 eae ist sa cial lalvcnllniavee, anellc starer diel arate eenG eee en eae 241
Chatta, Verses taught by Lord Buddha to .............. 289
Chelas
Effecti‘onof-being :with iguru)/ ei. Ol eek es eee 95, 96
A CREPUAILCE A845) «4 ahs bccsma clei palais a ie ole east nee a ena 9
Presentation of to Maha-Chohan ................... 99
Children sof; the) Fire : Mist 4h eas a eae, oe 323
Children) On Propation see veer nai x ticles aa ean 72, 73, 74, mn
CO a ye a sy SNR naar! ESR es le
Ghohansand Their; Rays.) gates . Se ae ee ee
Christ, The (see also Maitreya, Lord) .................. 5
Lafemobic cis, Wale vel seca earns, © UL eS aa 17
CJUOCALAONS MON Cui sale carp eetet ide -scecue eee ele 89, 93, 127
Consciousness, | birth iofie nei s)he Ae sie ee ee 124
Expression of Second Person of Logos .. 127, 273, 274, 275
Temptations Afi ic. c/s kee Mwlewins vice te: dele, ae eneere ean 186
symbology .ofibirth, ofi'ee vena; + scan fae eee 187, 196
Symbology of Transfiguration of ........... 188, 189, 190
Love tforySt. Johny ..5 ee Rae ieee ees 191
Symbology of Crucifixion and Resurrection of ...... 193
In (Palestine io iio ee oa Blt ee Ree ieee ae 295
Christ-Drama, The
Relation of to Fourth Initiation ........... 193, 194, 196

PAGE

CPP LRISAN OPEC TATE Vacate eae ata Taha ie) ahdas Whe so laitain brid hiebaca eines 152
CINTIGUIATI Vawsee CeO Uae ierneclcie ae Ug Rrele cis wal 256, 257, 258

PROUT CU TIDUIGY (AN s/c ee oh « Shastenes idle elanelaterntiny 265, 266
MATE UU SHARPE AUMCE Bch Msttelas tol Alas all Bees ie aeilel oie po beae'lati eh nib ae iol ag 126
Cities POR AANTMOUILY INOCEIS) OL) ia.4 oleie) ilassa ie nyeieoiece ts le algae 24
SO IVE SETAE VU Mihtairs (a sohs lh hile atin te Rt aD wd d Sota a N's een eta retm a etaT pe 263
Comminion, Of oainten Phe A 8) in Qecwide Meu bmeraienes 120
Wommiunity,s sixth Root-Rdces ss vale edanea 230, 231
Comte de St. Germain (see Ragoczy, Prince)

Meeting with C: W. Leadbeater .......0..00000..08- 8

PHVSICAL AD DCATANCEN OL WA's hue sesulein's bbls braketmunenedans aby 38, 39

As Representative of Seventh Ray ................. 251

FS A INO UEE ee chteieee U kenanaene es ctatio dew u\ote Sloe sb Natit Sian eemenE 252
Conceit as a hindrance to spiritual growth ............ 64, 65
SOT CeN Patong AiG 7 wists sie ala ae eee ree rn CS ane ehwUS CHORD 318, 319
PON ete GROOi | byes Krome nin ache eam ete ater Cie (uaa 54, 118
MOOT SANCTUS dul chelate 'alaia y Sia ae bee ete Oak Beh MOTTO Rhakh cit Bmelaie) Maia 295
Consciousness

DOE ATIGLOTIO LS | Y idiaia cid la Buel caanaatata wie ohctena betta ES Qtek 124

Star of, representative of monad ............... 187,.155

BURT tn atte bare arate Hot ee eee ea ta te die Mea RNs (2M 167, 168

PUITVATIIC I ies vite POR ee IR, Hee OREN bi 198, 215

CPSSTTON Heth te oie Ma bahe wala “ole AMA oak hee ee, Shes aE Sa INR 201
EEO PETA TION iy bth Ciisterahars iva wislaialaty Goa eie ea RUT tetteat Rad et 84
Paaperakiey aM es se oN este ote Chetan ae Re UG eae 235
Wauisel solr Peviegtiomitret We. do Pa a Oe ete ene Na 86
Counterparts rofuphysical: objects. sijciiie's okies bltiete pathol 173
Crucifixion and Resurrection of Christ

BSVUIOLOS Vihar eh sikls ic besa: vot valalaie Sine Rave ota 193, 197, 296
Cruelty sin -oftovenidren’. 2 .'o P20 er vine swaas 44, 75, 76, 77
Curiosity as a hindrance to spiritual growth ............ 64
DIAKMIUBARINULE ME NTONG Of. sc-.s0 se cd ee ee ae 129
TDA fale stare Satsivtcta tebe Sobita eh o'n'n io r'o a's ate Uke 6 SANE RMN EReL IS eR 118
POAVUAR ETOLERSOT) PVE. fay dss selec o's Sneed alte 290, 291, 299
MIAME OL WUGEMEDE, WE AGe os ica/e a sratcraleicda de eterna tele eee as 127
DesGrntate’ Dei, Quotation frome: 6285022) Sa ak 296
POPLMMONUOL SOLE sees she shee e eee eos Ma ta Lhe Gea, SNM 169
RIA VORRION A See A clatch sls iatete's) alae o Sle eR IA ORO Eee aha eee 89
TAORIPCLESSTIOHGN A te Sk chedcho sasha ty sichaie ei abehalea ate tate tube elated 54, 117
PAV GSOILION GPa ers Sit phan dichh oad cate See Ea 297
POMP R IE) t ibe ARUN SLO A is OSE era EN 11, 215, 237, 261

POM FON fy ae SR ea oo a ELSIE Pe ee 31, 130

336 INDEX

PAGE
Devil, Symbolism: of:in. Gospel) story ..00. . 4.0505. sae 187
Devotion
Résponse ‘to: by, thewMaster. i... vir steel. ha stage 102, 103
Valivel Ofer terion Oh ie We Loi fatale Bree et Oe caer ana 216
Rayi OL RAW otis ices atetece's Ct SEP Reis electra fae, Mea ae 250
Gharacteristict Orv Sixth Ra yy keeles win n s eine 253
DhammachakkappavattanaSutta 2000 coq c. soe. ba ees 299
Dharma, deal). of “Hinduism 2) ieee ciate chet teu ain eels 258
Dharmaksya:| vestune Wh eset er ee be oe enc ke ene 208
Dhruvas:' Master isd soda Cee eens le parr tae ee 272
Dhar Ghahang ye. ciek sieitissias ae a een 200, 206, 234, 239
Dhyaniy. Buddha 3, Park Gee as ec lekee) tae eee 280
Diagrams
Illustrating influence of religions ................... 23
Tilistrating?migrationa [ol races)... 5 saueee sent eee 23
No. 1—Centennial effort of Brotherhood ............ 222
No. 2—Rays and their characteristics ............... 236
Nono--Rays of Jewels. a. os op a. aiers slap ee 243
No. 4—Trinity of the Logos .......... PTA ee Ee Nh 265
No.) 5—-Three- Aspects, of the \L0g0s i ves crciy sie ee 267
No. 6—Triangle administering power of Logos ...... 268
No. 7—Initiations attainable upon each Ray ........ 270
No. 8— Lhe Wesak | Valley gis oe cis eas Wie ee redeem 284
Nov9-—The Rod: of) Powetwe cu) .isaclseesls soe ace Meliaeeene 287
No. 10—Symbolic figures of Great White Brotherhood
during » Wesak tMestivali. a: ..c0ttauset dealer 288
TVISCID LG aus chats sche chic aoe Sick wesw RAR RMR eh sevice Cae ee aoa 85
Diserimina tion ie ale ee aa ela ae ene ae 54, 117
Djwal Kul, Master
Meeting with C. W. Leadbeater ................... 9, 10
a CoS oats 03 EA AOeE Crem ghee ee = | Oo ERIS SY OO oh SRL STS yy is
(Goempanion ‘of Master ouucpurmil’.. .. )-cueuua onsen 29
Physicaliappeéarance sof: sen oe... «cicciaeks | Maen 40
Presence: atimecond«Inivgation 22) ). \\siJ ests ooo alee 175
Instructions regarding: Rayaivn. «: cash. osueiiee alae 235
Dov ther Brothers: cial ey te eek ce es | as ls vole ee Ce 11
Poubt vor Ua Certainty neler es te a des intl caine Carte 169, 170
Druids, Teaching of Trinity among the ............. 265, 266
Duty .thewdeal ol; Hinduism CMe nc ee ee 258
wel ay pa'e Ceca te cnt ony a Mia et Meine ee Teh cds 203
Earth, Models of variations of surface of the ............ 23
Hbner,<Margaret and Christina tiaisscuie as aca ie seth ee 257

HT CION Cys carte woe d dipenie hela alacke Fa lal can es) cle ltl ahd ee 89

PAGE
POOR es CURA Ree k see SMO iatle Le a eRe ea rear 152, 168
Bnd iotshnversofmonady ub sew ais ey oben rate 13
PriG tits ATT ROUL Rule ee ela a eis RAV ds oy ae ow ee prea nie ato 15
Domaine personality Haws sas nes op eee 16, 163
TITUGA GOD WILL ITIODAG eco dene heacce «Ue e aa ae ee 17;,.13%
PAR ITUC TEL bees) EEN OLUCan Badass rcsas skein esos 'n a louv isla forsee aan ee oth take 41, 42
PAUL VAT COC eS, Stal alah. Saco alae « Sate Sarees Ge ree ren 73
ARNSEUAGEKL Wiech niite hole aly» Lia db ve a cola sR Nee ti ate 122
Pnfoliment) withm. Master)... fs 2a ee eet oe 142
ATMITEALIGIN OL fake ois oe dstd ok ielaln cote ge IS has 148
COTBICErAalION! OL U0 osc Fak clea. ae eat aka See Pe os 152
Birth oivateindividualizationy yee gene a eee 153
Communication with personality ............... 156, 157
TAS ONTOWNADISNE Oe ens ote ee ewe inlem ereeiee 158, 192
AP OTIDATISOTOLOL NN etianivis state he ee heiee ean Leen er 159, 160
Attention’ to child personalities... 0.3. . yn'nc ew velee 162
Bféctiof) Second Initiation. once so... hss salos = > eae 189
Afrection between). cies Coles we dist nce Pacene ane Metre alee 191
Egyptian description of Initiation ..............eseecees 197
Mevotian teachingiof Trinity 2/30). ua epee 265, 266
PACTOCNUA LN ATEIUCIAL |e isch, come ss ss AeA aaa eia tae 41, 42, 162
THEN GH LALO NVOPSINIOs : so + oie s ss «th gees RON > ee re oe 256
PGAUYOL nthe ee hs ech 9 Sie oie 4 ae wield hae hala Meee ed Ha ate eee 189
ER ORMO DS User re bait War wo oes sip 2 5ce plain emo cane eran 66, 87-91, 93
WUDCEA VOTH eIS MN tale eo sp 5's sels ciat'sl acta ea alacant aaa 315, 316, 317
Enthusiasm for service ............0e+:- EA LY AGMA, eal wears 85
Pore ONT AS VOB as a oa 5/5 s « o's als ls ot ecole eat een nat 254
PAD LOTICY DUANE techy ois 03.5 « 0s A ae oan eee 116
Etheric body, image of probationer’s ...............0000- 69
Europe
In} thercharce; otra Adept |. :2. .c on han meee 211
BMlishtenmentwotie >... +s -s scam een eee ae 221 5.222
IALUTOCSDITILAT ITI sss s sce oa RE eee 249, 250
PCO LIOT ae: bela: 1,3, 4, 12, 14, 15, 23, 49, 51, 57, 119, 133
BEOTETON A Pei GE oil os ahead atys «hie sacks epee ee en aeree 315, 316, 317
UCT ig” SESW I LN GO Rack ON Pa ese E MREMDIE BS 44, 75, 16, 77
Fetters
MATL TNLOGE ere ss cie's asi Dace ag aden 169, 170, 171, 172, 180
UEC g LPR Ye BS 08 Ch a Rohe amen PR MRC, RTT Con SEAR Nac CS” 190
SIR OLL mci at chit cy cial d era's tins wrt a dies Mee ake a 202, 203
Seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth ................... 203
PMP eheare Ole TREOSOPRY tn. -. eke a eek bec ec reat aes rf

EIOROMANGA Scene ant Ae Cen poe ae ee ee eee Ee 256

338 INDEX

PAGE
Flame, Comparison of aspirants to .................: 61, 62
Flowers, Shower of at Wesak Festival .................. 292
Bye) 0024 ey ead aie ee WUE ia URSA A MRA cm Ca Ete meebo Co 322
Force Distribution: Ol gin au aude lamer tents 104, 105, 106, 209
PournNoble AL raths Vea uiah vate aceite, Meee ce enka neen 299, 302
PROG ASODT YH ii. Sis leew ein ae wis laeea ey lets aan tayenein ERED PEMa 6 Sota 257, 263
FrenchviRevolttion) Pe. ccs vielen aus oa erae c milareneee Laie 212
Funnel, Comparison of vehicles of chela to ......... 101, 104
Crapriel: meaning /Ofy sie lu aies eiteacear. tare carat Maen 240, 241
Games) Aa’ Telaxations, 1540s: Liaie ode oa ae rates SPN Rtn amen 109
CRANIGHAE VAR a Lal ea lceate delice Riba Ua da OUR Deanigy thy Sean 30, 130
Gugeling: effect‘on\ astral \bodyy mons ioe. cen ee eal erat 92
CFODERIOESETE Wet hau Tse eiesmtera wea wate aritare aay a eee ime res Stay 322, 323, 324
CROC ITUIN BEULE a VIN id dio diate as a ole earata oral elite tec Ht I a ane an 3
CFO. Plans OF Niger tale nalecce ee es Rete terete) ott eee 51, 133
Gotrabouiy seen Ts et cee eae nae 172, 188
Geral OL Ghee noel dior d cortsriova asta las le oT art, a ue nen 15
GEAR WL RE US UO oie Uae Rt ORI kg ane aes PPS Ateneo ariae 5
Great White Brotherhood, The
Guardians of} the! World yu Cs asa eras tel oatte aerate 18
Communication with each other ................... 19
MESUIIASLOT Hissar alr eee RN UEEN dict AS arc eee LH ately aad echelon ate een 23
PERISHOTIOE OE aa sia cl NE Park ieed cig ave tied a art ale) cle Aa ena ea 48, 132
Qualifications for membership in .............. 51, 52, 53
Effect of irritability upon consciousness of .......... 82
Kingdom) Of Deaveny yin igags gee e «oe MOR cele sarees 86
Preparation for presentation to ...........c.eceeeeee 112
Communion ot: Saints? (ope... chee eee Cee 120
An instrument of Lord of the World ........ 121, 125, 323
Gonsclousness) Of). 0, uhtemtentsid ss ahs 122, 123, 125, 148
Bless oy Ot el oie k oe 28 Gate Oe ly 54 ty Marne 124, 139, 143
Rivhts of ‘memberstot svar. 2. oo pene on 125, 126
Organization or ie Pow ieee, ees os b 5 Gee a gee ee ee 126
Effect of failure of an Initiate on ................00. i2r
Responsibility of members ..............200000- 134, 135
Number of members and division of work ...... 210, 211
Fave yrs isla une se tetas le ek Rite © ce a) alo Ss ate 233, 234
CEPADAEY OT) CCCI ELIGTATCIVUT Pot sen. ita shri tent aetna 266, 267
Participation in Wesak Festival ............ 283, 286, 288
Greece: * Nature-spirite cot i Iii ae ce 2A as ee ee eee 250
CElroirp BOUL Aceh, ee roa eae ra rena. hr ate ff cer eae, Spee ne 14, 15

Garin cee RO) EL ONE AY 95, 96, 100, 101

INDEX 339

PAGE
FURANSS Vals ccc en Aaae ioral tol Salter g Ue Rislacs SUM cts eu neinaeg 188, 193
Happiness of mankind, Effect of upon nature-spirits, 249, 250
Harmony, characteristic of Fourth Ray ............. 249, 253
Healing, methods characteristic of Rays ............ 245, 246
Health
AU eCessILY TOTP AGepts? 2 is Pa taawinie wean ete es 41
A’ necessity for Initiates ....... 2.0 5.05.64 PITY 146, 147
Hier yore ls INCOM, FOES ot ae lin Wt hele dite bioawern eet ananh ge 86
PAPA VERY IVERTEN Rien eb cs 2s als ad acd eid sky grea ae ete tM RNY’ 269
Lake aeet=)c) Oye NAL VON ITUCS FONDUE LL RARE ORC 2 Masta ab wg AG Gia)! (LANG 279
PIEPER BOOK GIs boy GE ie eee ae ha es amarok See AN RUN 201
PerisesyOl Praxiteles Gis ligay baie eee ee enw iieeeibaroieta Uh ake ALB 39
Hidden Side of Christian Festivals, The .............4.. 86
PHiaden audeor Things T hewn. oe he yee ot 74, 111
Hierarchy, Occult (see Great White Brotherhood)
PLVATION. BIVIBRLED RLS eee NE ah RN Melee) Senn NS RU ra 39, 249:
PASTA EA YAR ARS shee al 6! esti Sate ol ANN MAY as TU Foe NN 18, 34, 37
PATO GI MRD ia ras CRB oe eR Weve 258, 259, 260, 261, 280
Hmaw:teaching- of the Trinity <3 2o.d¢a. tere dee seo 265, 266.
PLIMCUA PACTECUNOOKS OL LNO/.c sche Las deweu elaine sie iatey 115
Heise on esoteric Theosophy *\o. eee. CP a ean 11
PIP GORING AAC EH ilic sate aistat ake Ucar hee eRe ote Me TGR AH 232
Holy Ghost, Descent of the, Symbolism of ........... ... 204
Holy Week, Symbology of events of .................00. 193
PLGTIATIILY AMTOOL? OL dine (ols sic ss ea Lb uals bess Pere ote ate eis Lin 328
Lo beVan dc 0% Big WP Rn @ Bb 20) CP te ORAS LA! VI Gl 4 eh TR 11
PS ETELA EG Vitae he Ee SNE aie ots Srosoe ag ak ARI iar ea 84, 85
MuDIOr SENSE tOm DECEssary o,f ee hee ae be ce ee ata 20
PRT. eI ALLOST Cie ie Oiere 6s.» so x iecels aie ante ee water a ee 251
TIVO CAPES ONCODM ESE oss oat calelele sale witrele ae etme my 35, 36.
RSID MOO Sie ate erP eee CUS ed.o chs bisientclalew eemle ee Ene 249
UTEIRCTRLILC? VW UELLC) LOCUS, ENE (oss oleic e ok sia Re lees 249
Images of pupils on probation .............. 25, 69, 70, 71, 99
India, in the charge of an Adept .............-.000.. 211, 247
Indian testimony regarding the existence of Perfected Men 7
TERE TMZ ATION PAR as SOS See ahd es Cateren ote aie ae VOL Da
Initiate
Responsibilities of ............ 123, 184, 185, 149, 150, 151
Expansion of comsciousness Of ........eccceeececcces 124
ORMULATION Moree ea ale nas coe kate 126, 127, 185, 186, 196
SELIG UN EIUIANOL Ur Gort eer avs she Sak clea oe ah amen eae eared ee 137

340 INDEX

PAGE
Initiate (continued)
Communication between ego and personality ....... 156
Pemnta tion) Ol, ae thei kies Bie ee ae tht oueluon dam cue 187
Prltiabronn OCHA as pM k eee ta eee bees be aaa (ERAS ae!
Heniivenenta conn cavers. oy coe ets 51, 143, 144, 145
Systems| leading aspirant \£0, i. 5 We emeite eaielone wey 112-119
PresentitimestsVorablestors us paseins ee ties oe date ee 119
Appearance) of ‘Star faticnnconeeni sees Gee oei 136, 137
Litmie required TOrey cee eee omere rahe be eres 140, 141
Variationin Jinterval; betweene 20s 2csa.kues teenie eee 145
OH voun ge WEODIE Piss de ac ese acai ae ote ere tote en nee 147-151
Lavestoccupied: betweenin sis. 4) se Sean meen 192
Higher di’. de5 ben te eg em) CC ica 192-209
Egyptian ‘description of.) «sai kes et erence 197
Farsi han eye ea bee epee s Bice dllk algtereh. alana eet ae 120-151
Qunalincations fOr ia wc. bars ee ceca ott uicaeaie Ra e 119
Blessing : LIVEN) cts be eee tsk elas oth ore ee 124
AnnountrOiyh. 2 talus Gia ate adsl acts cea een 128-140
Charge: Civeln}iet wees ween ae Mi che 128, 133-136
Robes iwortnein oon ao ANG te he As Bade 129, 130
Pests (SIVEN Witt cc On uae eee ee, eae Ps
Powerssconterredyati: ioe mikes 2c tetas hel apie ae 138
Symbolized ‘by; Gospel. story). ic. duhesuke oo 186, 187
Second
Requirements fOr eitegiseks tc... + ee ee i2cnire
Accountiof ceremony meme se oos40 pee eae 174-184
PL GStah SIVETL Ui < ncce catipe eae r es oo, cca ein ee 182
As Baptism, Ob, HOly AG HOSD \..usscs pees cele oie 187
Third
pymbolovy, concerning een. 2... <.ausic un ee 189
POUPGG Fie ithe vis te te oN Rea <x. 5 Ct aes ene 192
Symbolized by Crucifixion and Resurrection.....
glaba ciatla aye A ictkis at RRP EBIISL.: oy die Saas Mae 193, 196, 197
HAUG) date ein SAP en Cee As, Un ere eee 185, 203
Iathev Outer GOuUrth..c.) ieee ee A he, cc) a eee 57
lnnen Lifes Deu ind co Me ee a oe. aT eet 41, 65, 238
Intuitional (consclousnéss.is:. acco, wal os oo 124
Invisible Helpers: i200. a6 dake set Meee vel Lee ae > 220, 221
Tnuisthle: elpers ead: Gia oll zu re eee, ain 112, 118, 220
Treland.-Nature-spimte, Of Wik tes cic okite lech Be ee ee 250
Irritability as a hindrance to spiritual growth, 64, 82, 85, 87, 88
Isiah, .Quotation drome. oe. oe ee ee 202

PAGE
Jealous ya eee ORE eee LE neat che ait edie inlets! Monianiery 89
JGm RIV BStE I) aioe sc ails eee ac aan sel wisktca carey of irae 224, 250
PUVBICA LAD PORTACELOLIM ye sa vias. Marre ele sien Wy RlaMae 39, 40
TA URED cece CHT We eee tte ee vedi ee ahaa clei g sj) tallow des 0h oN) Ba tk 6 40
AS CCOMMELEOL VCAD CICA LE 5 2e'5ie s aixlct «Soe vo lngalointetn ols 130, 131
EERE EY AAs Ce (ee hte share ite) n'a b, 5 oats pesleues sec eate Te by ore 243
MPENOTITITUI NCU Reeh cra pial: ee, 0 Mies We Gud he ono Ue Oey Ae Mae dicot 203
TAP 2 iss ot fans Seintat 8 Ba, sak: oll sy. u'¢ Oo Ete AN erie 241
MT SIR UBT IC re Le Win ET. oh sca s yer a clcencvats ner otal eR Neg Ee 193
LNG EEA Sat LITMAN: Ati. sol 6 okt ain Slaieh s ua ae ol Sal Grae a tah apie ee 127
mate enla de Weati val is iia) 5 nthe ds Sonhe mies se clad ebad tint ad when 299
MAMIE VISSLCT ER mot ct See tn) oui ad eae tena Nace aie alle taba ene 247
(Wh dieaGbeater Buy 181 hi LO Ward ate hoes cera weuets aac 8
PHYSICALIADDEATANCE (Oli ess tpn auiain Sse rolsen Ve is)atelalne ncaa 40
Benals.ebeaening Of ErIniby: i) amas ee cteee aerated 265, 266
AINGCASAMIOUITIM MOLLER Ges sure tidcele ater es whtleliewiabls 190
TARP Yaa eis ee eee i, Se 1 Cale 1, 22, 41, 42, 52, 72, 93, 149, 197, 244
Mmearnuosies with the Masters: so. ses tacts aso Utes mere 63
Penve ye HiUlOia: «4:0. «> vine ote pebed dees e n Meraee ie eit 276
BAY OTR TCDOW COLE iene cieren ee ea cite tile a eke iaee als 138, 183
MADE OUAem OTIC Ad Dente “abides, sok ohea acne aie 83, 321, 322
PMP ISN TPAC TAIT] FONT ER LO h.e aha atte aun aes aigiad 4, 45, 259, 261, 295
POPS ATNUITEL g VIT. v5) ooo 2G os) Ade Wel dite eae oeede oe norenieeeey de 53, 54
TT RST AIC GME ore Fate At io a dnialt oty le\ ah nim nlite ies uae emetone 208, 325
MS AINTIAYSR REL OUTER AR i ots ihc s rs’, » 4.60.8 shard vce aataielmumahinette 140, 323
Kuthumi, Master
Meeting with Damodar K. Masa ST Sty te panto 7
MALEIALIZATIONS AG AGYAL/.. csigelestoomiens anc eelanieaa as 10
BI GIOGNOL Wain Bun alate: 2 avin mater alan Geet 2251205" 26
Gilardian Of OeCITAMUSCUM | A.\s'ccscchiaiieada Mule ated ter as 23
PETS COL cic ePID Go, 46 0 old RTA Meabetapta atest arn alee te 25.
Pbiatis INUyeeete ts ef. > 0.2) < ¢.a:e cele eet eae aaa a ane 27
PBPSATT) 11h, DOMDEMOLE es ie Nil ote’ + «4 sin sista tehaepatel etna 27, 29, 30
SESERUCT COL trate Tee k eb aes so) ai cik us elec ashe end pauh telaeiaree Ra eee 27
PEER Ech etn atlas Wino) anon ie Winn bata A acne here rane (ae 28, 43
A eth) COI PORETIG he's dhs) vic Heta ateteas aus taeaie Steteumaets ie ales 29, 30
CORSA CA TORY TIN Bi ota ake oo se HS aiceeraleie nies aM Ns Lk 31
Hise OO ANG,  ClOCDING 5k.) 54s i wncele ae etal ie 3 32
SIE PSF AVG oR GUE ELMS Bie AAO aE eerie TACT RA AINE NAAR AA RNR 33
As assistant and successor of the Lord Maitreya.... 36, 78
EPIRA COME BUS! OV Cisco asier<e 5/4: d sitaie airtel andre he 36

RIYORICAL SATIPCATATICE yi ie heer eat Mie inet oR etn as). Ces 38.

342 INDEX

PAGE
Kuthumi, Master (continued)
Bodhisattva of Sixth Root-Race ................. 38, 231
Liniversity) STAdUVAbEHI «Helena wie pvt eile terete Ppremiaed es 43
Statement regarding theosophical knowledge ........ 48
As the teacher of the author of At the Feet of the
We aster VCS SG DRS a ahah ME a pont ena eg 53, (04,) 55
Young People On Upropakilon ve. aires cea: ween ieee “78
AGVice tO. PUD UME aaron at a nee Gaza he ae te nae 121, 122
AS Tanita GO Ae ato OD ee Sikora auak 2h ok Lang ea a 129
As Proposer’ Of! Cancidgateniiae iui cee nmecie ae ont 130, 131
Attendance at Second Initiation ................ 174, 175
Address'ito) astral witnesses )S\! Siac Shs ae 184
Responsibility for Theosophical Society ............ 221
Work ofits ti cri iin ck Oi aie te Wa i eames berate et eeneen 247, 248
Pupiliof' Master Dhruva lolita eles saat 2 o vaee aoaeemen 272
Wetrtighiaa es Oe Aa es cv rane tore ne eae la a ernen 187
THQO-G8E EI SIDER CHEN OUEKRE Santas Ue Re SOT) RR a nee 295
Taduziiter yan ih eee SCR nC nCna Se tenet sai, 1 toler meena 91, 92
Lazarus) Syinbology ‘ofiraising (of tie cee wees 193
Laziness as a hindrance to spiritual progress ............. 88
Leadbeater, C. W.
Testimony of meeting the Masters ....... 8, 9, 10, 35, 36
Lnstruction ot Master stone aka eee och late itera traces 51, 52
Incident of man thought to have been overlooked by
thes Master viii deuce toes oes Aik cre emer 60, 61, 62
Incident of lady who desired to draw near to the
Master (4 0).4 Visite Watney cee rat aie beamline 64. 65
As‘a‘teacher ‘of young péople. s.r eee 78, 79
Advice to pupils on probation ..)................... 85-96
Incident of delivering message from Master to an-
other persone) 81 sees ee 2 S| Earle hea sen ae 106, 107
Method of meditation to reach consciousness of
Masters tani he ate meme, 0%. ee me CteaN areRan 107, 108
Piretcontact (vith neosonbyi co ocisuent eee ee 116
Promise) given ‘Lord Maitreyarc eel) oe cee eee 132
Blessing angel of neighborhood ..................... 143
Testimony as to seeing Great Beings ............... 206
Meéetine: Master’ Diwali Kuli si ue sees seen ee ee 235
Testimony regarding Visitors from other Solar
Syatemsee es aye Sle ie nee ire ae en ee eee 278
Lemiurians) Images (of iin aediputeie de sien bale (ales carnal ee 23

Library in home of the Master Kuthumi ................ 27

; PAGE
TAQKE, Of pASWH TIRE Hae en 6 Fi rare Clete dea ope 68 Shale alate bln nl ils 276
LADIES Ofa EMO MEAL patois isons sia die. ik age ee es «2h 3 31, 56, 127, 142, 249
Linen robe of candidate changed to silk ............ 129, 1388
Livelihood, Right means of ...........0. esses eees 314, 315
Logoi

PAV OWENS ATOM ie ic 4! sHoln Wt circle ss brut eid oo ie halal 237, 238
Planetary, Effect. on astral bodies .............. 238, 254
Logos, Solar
RUE PPCSCTIEB LIVE VOLE LAG 1 WN asic wilee wie Wiese Mlaeue bra RLelet ats 120
ELATEGOASDECES OL Os AS yeti il de Diuvieis ale lataentd 152, 153
TEOVAOTe LICCEUTER) OF 1907 ox bias uie® sn veo staalelelale eh a ciate plone 221
Lord of the Flame
Incarnation as Shri Shankaracharya ................ 280
PILOT: LHECVV OFLU Ne Baca bis Tl dia eins ale NUM K eine erate eben 83, 126
As Representative of Solar Logos ................0.4. 120
ASSN eM Ne EN ILIALOR Fads cio il a eae SLR OM ale ettlata eRcn tent 121
OTISCIOUSIIESS FOE EIA ds lieis isco ees Swine wate hon she nama ouan g 122
Great White Brotherhood one in Him .............. 125
PUA BOE at ek edb h he ok ot ReW selene oe bine G5 See benen et 126, 134
TOTES) OF rar Waal aed 8. oe ER Rae ap ialetale ie ahi eed uae ET 134
Der Of Rin init, 3 lal attra 's: baate dete ie Se 136, 139, 175, 183
Presemation ‘of Initiate to 0:5 0s dea ae. CON e Oe ears 139
MMOress GON Nitiatey .AVscsce wes ewes aa eiee saute 140
Asinitistoraty Uhird ‘Initiation: osiesk) Vues wens canes 190
Desenohion (on beauty Ol kia ae ce bla eats 201, 321
ASHTIGRAVOL) DAES | PERV, CUS TA Pe aay EU ete EN 233
Reflection of First Aspect of the Logos ............. 267
bransmission or influence of!) 242i eee tee one tains 268
Ant Crstodiancor- 10d of Power hick eeu ee ontes 287
PLOTS POLO) he Aa y's be otaale wlohe A Wane eer EG 322
Presentawon (onAspirant’ toes. Peo Mee 322
Lord of the World Initiation, self-taken ................ 327
Marcas OF LEE VV OTIC weed ooo obsess wich avore PUES Mie Wha see 322, 324
iotus, Lhe thougand-petaled \)..,...\.).\\eeivelies comb ereneva 294
BAIVOES. Vokes LAU e teed eee doe de ee Sane eet 54, 82, 98, 191
Machinery; models, of all: kinds), ::.3s o 05 dtp dee slau eee 24
DIGANAVACUSPVB. 55 bets ees Slee ee eae Reet tree ea eek canoe 296
ROU Ch NA Ni tas o's ta ck eae lene io hedetosely VO te el DEM aie 172
Magic
TUSLPALOUSL DL ALY DES) OL ails nai deta te earch torte alee 24
ATED COV nigh Gata ow tree CaP Rae POOR heh 236

Magnetic centers

344 INDEX

PAGE
Mahabhinishkramana, The Great Sacrifice .............. 277
Maha-Chohan
Description of physical appearance ..............66- 38
Presentation to of accepted chelas .................. 99
Presence ats Hirst init ahlon oisnje ae vines csen.spmeres atebiae 129
Presencevat) Second s1nitiation «2.2. soy biciaalare apie ee 175
Supervisor of Rays Three to Seven ............. 233, 234
Reflection of Third Aspect of Logos ................ 267
IW OTE OT Wuias tay cipte ainle caatereea ibis eeeee ©) aes eer eee 269, 270
Highest Initiation on Rays Three to Seven ......... 270
Mahamangala: Suttay.. sco as bis vie wath cee note > aan 290, 291
Mahaviragi eich co iawk Wom skates eee cia lain ae een 295
Maitreya, Lord
LOM OL is ca wt aie bee bie wis Ce ale nile eden ata Saeed ete 34, 37
Description of physical appearance ............... 36, 37
Usesofibody: of pupilisciss ie ss nell ae tae 41, 44, 45, 46
Approval of At the Feet of the Master ........... 55, 56
Coming OU y. ty aie eet makes tiie ee ret yaa 72, 146, 225
Tita tions D¥rcn eck ee te eae aad Paleo an eee ee ee 75
Teacher of Gods and Men ........... Seirditate HUES.” fi
Minister for Religion and Education ............. 78, 269
AS?TINGiQGObis eos ncak cisuc le sie oe 129, 7130, lalysla2e dee. ida
Description: of ‘garden; ole) vaya. newts 129, 174, 175
His teachings: Uv, o Wicd wk aes aise ae kia eae ee 227
Representative of Lord Buddha) ..:% 12). ove sues ema 268
As ‘Heart. of “Heavenly Mant, a.203.a nck sae eee 269
Unity of Master Kuthumi with ................ 2i2, 240
Master (Dhruva. pupil | Ofige asec s + .ale eee ieee 273
Representative and expression of Second Person of
THE LODO a tc yse 0 eee EREE te hrs, os /o) ieee em 273, 274, 275
Materialization of at Wesak Ceremony ......... 286, 288
As successor of Lord Gautama Buddha ............. 295
Meaning’ or naing. 0.5; ccceereis «+ «+ dane ea eee 295
Thichrnations (Of «: tc. apc a pn rceteeee ree 295, 296
AVOTI OFe cs ot ciatun kee Rite enema a kc! oe annie Geers 296, 297
Celebration of Asala Ceremony at home of...... 298, 299
Man O1VasIOnS: OFF) Coal na ee eieeet et oie Sal nadie ake ea 12
Man, Perfected, Lines of progress for ..............00. 17, 18
Meno eighth wietter oa... a clots tac onde a ieee ee 203
ManodVarava liana... cess daionmienn oes oe caiet a ae ae eae 117
Manu
Work of and place in Heavenly Man ............... 269

Mani; ‘Gord, Chakeshtsha ya. t. i. us, tcues | ae aaa, One 36

INDEX 345

PAGE
Manu, Lord Vaivasvata
Description of physical appearance of .............. 34
TEGMIG Gi et ee ek Lee ed eo iek feels e ole 34, 174, 175
Presence cats Hirst (iNItiation | i400 cise. coy coal cele nara 129
PresencevaL Cecona ANitiablON: 0.5..e aes geceme bes eab 173
Vaya ab RUD anaes ge tir ae Em a MeN ape a CREA eM ND oT,
As Representative of First Ray .......... aoe aia hea 233
Representative of Lord of the World ............... 268
PUR PRYTUP OTL OO Ps ici ts So heim ina sa ahs id rgb ape wlitlletila, wis la athe Meee oe cpanel mists Spall
IASI COU ie ein ie aie 2 ce a W's davadelals, aie Maas inane ae Maat 327
NranUuschipis OL LANUQuILY: )...4 is spas tae Se eee a eree 24
prey V isiole: and Invisible 028s). oleate ea es ee Zeb LOL

Man: Whence, How and Whither.. 40, 207, 208, 231, 324, 325
Masters, The

Hvidence: of existence ol ols. i oiiiee. ihe hoa eae 1-20
NIALETIBIIZALION. Ol orta cs cate eee 6, 7, 9, 10, 17, 18, 286
Willingness to take pupils giant ol. ae 19, 49, 50
Fhysiés) bodies of 7. ee nus, 7 era ae earn 21-47
IV ALIOTIALIEV OL aie). s coe cirala Staten E ia eas ele een ag
Reason for residing in the East .................. 28, 29
TVPOSOU COL BECIUISION sche cos ry ain Nene ie eine come areas 44
BPEL OTe ris oie ais so iy suds olalpe dhe hanced ae arene cae 48
WY RV INAY he Meru retah are kG eC Ue ra ee Tie eR RE .. 48-68
AcyvICe LO Ups Ont probation ta vaeaun «as eae eee 81-85
PPCRETINGION OL AUTA eure ise obiey Slew kin gee Be ee eee 99, 100
Pnione withwaccepteds pup f ee. cue Oa Beier eae 100
(ad csc HOT, 63 Liha eg 2 EN pO te RUM ah Ah Miah 142, 143
SC Es eras mya te meta ee oe fice MO MC Re anes 210, 211
WORK OT eta eens. cidlece Ciel, BQan RV AC nRee maoeiiniay 233, 234
ONAliLies Ole mn ne el /os. SSO Sie maint et er eb eee 253
BASES PL NE Ce ENE, a. ws a bdy calege eRe nee EER 210, 211
15 ESTs aie oi ER ty SMR EOE Oo. ol LR cag th 280
BEV AAT Ar, «| AITO A TREN Bien! nes oe GRIER aera raere SIM pres 7
May (Wesak) Festival, Description of ............... 282-293
Mayavi-rupa, Definition and use of ............ 182, 184, 185
PRIESTS LIC ete re tat oi waits a Metals yeaa C 63, 100, 163
PTC ROATAOT PERT tal hag sale ald ties Vantec eine wie Minis ea Ne 318, 319
VEE CTH) egigigal CA Toa 1 Ae PUM RUE REI Mina Ramee SALE 38 150 8 317, 318
MensPerfected, Existence: of . 0220002. i. 2e Se as 1-7, 50
PI PUIOUS Ten tet ra che ais Usk e we cae ie ia 16, 66, 178, 183
PEAT UAE ALT CAG AOL OU b ah tic banckbyscv ores tascavotaseies metal or ot atte a 90
Hea of Secondminitiation oni i sie edowene sete ess ote 185

PMMATOD OL) PPODAMONEK: sa 4 cs ces ca iain sum ete hess vie et 69

346 INDEX

PAGE
Mental Plane os eelaee ek alate Woe it ati shen Ca uare eave Rn ee 173, 182
Michael; ‘Meaning: of (Name wach carte yale Oe mrauen eae tke 240
Mit bas aa Ue ye as Ce Ob eouk pies bela sk 4 De ipa saan 295
Molinos) iis ahaa gia eis Oe) Wi Ue CP atn st erRNy col gtaie eta lglg gain samme re 257
Mona vias Riel Mega) Meat Ta RUE YgAe Nee Oe onan Wane 208
Definition’ Ob: \ks samen yy eae ella eee gi uata che ome. eee 12
Personalityas) 1ragmengr Or use denen pean en es wa ey ae 13
Donnnation’ of sour yee seats an se eae ae era ete 17
Represented by silver star of consciousness ......... 137
Blending) with! €g0 ih ere dalahielsa ca leutaeeuties 137, 138
‘Takes: vows: of Initiation: (25 ¢i.. uaeeePa e ere ee 138
Pledges a6, Initiation iii ai evan tena me eaters 149
Descent of at individualization .............+0.. 154, 155
Effect, of Second) Initiation on ji... .eee sce cen 189
Lamitation vot iin oan) apes 2o cereale. tae aemty 302, 303
Morya, Master
Meeting with S. Ramaswamier ..............02cee0. 7
Meeting with C. W. Leadbeater .................... 9
Sense of humor necessary ............ WO, KEANE ry 21
ET OTS) OF hia lala ad oio'a nue ie ete eer Uae he A rRT ERR MERC Stra 22, 32, 33
Pripils Ob WUA scale wa Win ere 020 /U) 0 oleae cl get me 25
Fis horse jo civic vr culd ane heed bic eels eikkes, baktare chert ot anne 29
His) CLOLHING ioe wie GA lente hcl enn Girne ee 32
Description of physical appearance ................. 34
Meeting with Madame Blavatsky ................ 34, 35
As successor of the Lord Vaivasvata Manu ....... 34, 78
PAC OL HG): oki ialalautedpwendictat abbtomivedereie leh fa retaseiicls akties Mat eaeee 43
As Inner Head of the Inner School ................ .59
Link with individual members ..................... 60
Utilization of ,members ‘of sehool.. .. 0s eae ee ee 60
ASC nitiator si as idcrte ca eereitets « 0 <cele Oakes area eee 129
Attendance at Second Initiation .................... 174
Responsibility for Theosophical Society ............ 221
As Manu of the Sixth Root-Race ................... 230
WHR OE se ia ialeiott czas Sante Miele ean. </Rh0s AG o  Rra 247
INIDSOR EE ong icama cia Cap meen koe i ary one aed (oY
WES OEE iste os os ouinin Geol t ks Tis! sec pets See re ee 54, 119
DAEUBGU OCCU Cr or he cis cipialans ahghelasSia‘cre ara eictece emer aie 23, 24
Music of Devas at Initiation ................... 130, 186, 137
RAAT TUIDS : ohocc o'e xstinth ww giocelacate Ww mcgitia pacman cab. ey ee 296
Name, True, of Initiate. 0 aiiiilieed ue Ae 137
National Angel’ Work of). oc... Se Oa 212, 213

Nature-spirite (vias ih waive Mal ay wetee en ata iae 215, 249, 250

PAGE
PVE WID AIL CAPE ALA ise Wilaiele e citlvinisl pols ale She's 4 die a! e inlets Ga miays 39
rT AT GO VAs Or tne whl Oe ois sas 6 ole rid we site 208, 209, 213
TMa gigs halve tie ke lay bi ARN diay guatana a yn TUR MRR mODD eel eumRrd Et 199, 200, 202
DLT TUYE UNA LL Gye ch) oi dccrrot abe soe a ioe sk en, is oh soa deas sisuora MNOMenRsls fale rape 267
BU CHARI ETILFONCE! Ee His slalla cons sca mai dietaibedenpaelatal aint 299, 307
Noise as a cause of irritability .............. Taga Has Wy ape feo 87
BIOVEIS CG OLeTEACING (0 osm disun's\s sle'e tps pe os ain S ele 109, 110
PEO EM VI COTE D TEER te 18 is | s soinle duane mie peialaietere ele ys allel ater lets 116, 251
Occultism
PRES OUITETMEN UG ia OL 14's) 54 2 asin gs abide ee aeela tate py ete ie bh eign ta 67
Bract obedience (TEQUITGG) 10) cbs cisvataelestalalaaneiied wis 94, 95
As the apotheosis of common sense ................. 147

Offended, Readiness to be, a hindrance to spiritual growth 64
Olcott, Colonel H. S.

Testimony of seeing the Masters ................ 6, 7, 40
RPA CCEA OF FOG MASUATE io 5if sicidabinihaidic camlaleeeiernalen 248
Anithor obs buddhist) CAtCCIISIN 1/5 cies soale) satelales wha daatebane 260
LEAT ATT LCCC sacle gO Cot A ECA MRR bag 11
forderion toe otar.in the Bast, "Che | ieee Gun mi ine, 225
Ordered Service, characteristic of Seventh Ray .......... 253
Organ in home of ‘Master: Kuthumi jee ee ais 29, 30
Ju heLSUY CSU b 18g Ee ea OFS eget Cr gah SE SELENE, Yate a SIE RA PO A 287
Oriental books, Description of Path in ..... 112, 114, 115, 116
CRTC US Ate oe renee oi cs oy 6 dees diccd ahepanace Sg AAC) act, oS 279
PUT B OUT ATID arte tc ee atele Ste ot sates iva sk A me heed 152, 153, 154
PERS A UA LUONO! Ble ees oe cc ada alana \etudue Mia es keene 212
Penna Sat HeCieION TOL ds csc ieee aula Meier tole 25
PIATATRAT INGER APR E (ee ote ik Ri hd 2a die as | os at 193
AVA TENA) eisai ay 'o/3"y@ lobatele: tae apa LAN sbatteke Wats anes t17
RET UT LD Rati eect e i s et sallesat Lins ae ieanha hanna ede aE 168
Matern OnlesHMichifoldiiey «bo iagckodsd ooh Aaa the tomers 299, 307
MALE eTORAMOUATINIAD Yagi h tut iota adin nema as 83, 84, 98, 164
PAI ITOAGIONS TOT Sys «wins scales fattest aed 53, 67, 117, 118, 119
Compared to method of universities ............ 112, 113
Discovery of existence of .............. 114, 115, 116, 117
LAPUA BOLI STE eT Tue) ue vitae Lathe aL lea) vialetta aes 57
GR A LORITIONS {Us aiaie epics’ 6 Bales pike Lik 168, 169, 172, 191
Prue IT eaeL OLLAD I actclat gig des thes Sey che Pe cl nse hie Re 190
Penpacont ale MiTAnle Lhe tan Ci) Pie ee uc Sno (eee 301
Perfected Men (see Masters)
PerIGsNent ALOIAY Tete sorts oe hue eter ie 138, 208

RETSOVETATING | Vat thoes MANIC ity # D8 Ph Tomo We NNO Merete 110

348 INDEX

PAGE
Personality % wnat 13, 65, 155, 156, 157, 160, 161, 166, 169
hia Dee ies Misses ai cated abi eta ry Aare SVS: Gliese beF aw. cua Rue uy 6 ee 172
Phoenician) teaching ofthe Trinity. 2.2.2... 2. canna es 265, 266
Physical body bales anaes wake Ges Wiles ae be ah aan ei ee 16
Physical health required of aspirant ................ 146, 147
Pituitary. (body) aiuiiils Uae aeuetan care kt ae lek anmid Ah oe deter 155
Planes of existence
As related /t0;-the, COSENOS ':.\.aies o's senian bales a obs ica amas 13
IVEGTACIC by CA SEE Ee URS yt Mian lore! yiat ath Ue re em 138, 15
Plaque in home of Master Djwal Kul ................... 33
Powerin the Triangles) Ube valine... vite sabes 321-328
Prakritic) cosmic planes v2: sects canes Pees thee 13, 328
Presentation of Christ in Temple, Symbology of...... 189, 190
Probation Moya wis. ed ena teivale ake ents ee ees 59, 62
Tmages ob pi pils ion vs us oh sain tana ovate ae 25, 69, 70, 71
Attitude toward life of pupils on ................... 57
Object) Of ttl aay a acuihatdavele te Oke etyrs eile chee aia eee 69, 70
UIT OND Ui oh eae shar chicka A men USO Recetas Mane 72, 81
Y GUNG. DEOPIE/ ON Wichameatc el Geis hk ake 72, 73, 74, 79, 81, 86
Account,of ceremony 4 20h i cetias fey ae, eee ee 79, 80, 81
Advice from Master to pupils on .................. 81-85
Progress iof pupil ees an eet nia? See a 85-96
Dissolution of living images after acceptance ....... 99
Pride as a hindrance to spiritual growth .............. 82, 83
OGL Uy itn BEI A es tee mL RR eet Renee ln OCT eee Rae 251
Progress GHOTLESE TOA: EO yah pa na oo ose ie eee 98
Peyehic ‘faculties: side oi GA cca eee ee, | (le ae eee ee 188
Potala aby ib wes piglets fess iee aie Ee MTR ws 12 8 1S eet ne 89
Pupil, Accepted
ET ORTORA/OF Vad uuicuilie a sane... s/a ene ae ee 101, 102
As an outpost of the Master’s consciousness ......... 102
Effect of disturbance in vehicles ..............-..0.. 103
Additional body for Master ............... 104, 105, 106
Privilege of laying thought beside that of his
PARE: Hi eee uh ecw eek oe en 107j)122) 1238
Right andi duty ofS S000 Fo) Tee eee 142
Pupil, Probationary (see Probation)
ENUNASGUAS Vas teas py Ae cole ee Mae Sa 247, 295
AQUROtIATS ME ON fet Ler ees i Oh A) Mae a 257
Peae re. Tees.” Daas ae Aa ae OR Seles ere 203

Ragoczy, Prince (see Comte de St. Germain)
FS nianaechary a) Pilirp n/c. Avge Mein Galen ete Janne team 250, 296

INDEX | 349

PAGE
Ramaswamier, Mr. 8.

Testimony of meeting Master Morya ............... if
TLS WET e LeE IDA. i slerjeis Adm seins eee eld Vl Nala fy 8, 40
A pire! MO Ca DIN Ow Oly DAINE ox\as5 so 's 2 uee-ateeeyh Mumia slo) ota 241
Ce Vel Gee crete en oe sca Sorel he ce ebm 233-264

‘Pablesoreavith. characteristics, \. 0.65 6.0\n eu meee eG 236, 237

Mowe CONT: LOLOL ia kis «dvi tote eae Sie 89 237, 238

Lyi WEEE (c) Dees an pm mgr ger o,()e ye ORD RRA 239

Distinguishable in all kingdoms ................ 242, 243

PEWESUTEDTERENEINE) «oa lu dostaeieeesek al teahoehgrmae ae ee ore 243

TNAUENCE ) OF) 1S ALIN B ii si hobacies aciale nals eee eae 244

isthe indi viduial)).i...)..) sam toni, wae se ee eee 244, 245

Misi DIG WIG AUT sien sss IL oheie aN eld idan eiata Grice 246

PETIOC AOL COMIN ANCA! soak ni) oe Meas ay Wea ae pc 255

Subeyclesvor, influence! Aes hiaia F euace a ek earls Cee 255

Initiationsiattainable upon. each joi i onlkaehiemen ke: 270

Possibility, of. changing: 4.2. 2enae. su eee 271, 272

PEAT LLU PMG site kele ee LAER ita ain, best ares iat AAS 33, 34, 224

Lordvol the World tH eadwor pli ceanuiiles onatainn et!
The Manu and Master Morya Representatives
DRAM ee a ONE. ict eral erate ein tes 233, 234, 247
Magiceore eis’... 5 lene hd Sand Goa UE St n'a Gas Ls GN BL Oar Rea 236
Gharacteristics: afi Lay gous aera, Se eka ee 245
Master Jupiter, Guardian of India .............. 247
Initiations attainable upon ................. 270, 271
ERTAMBIETON Ge dbO: kee vot cee Oe OER. eee Pra ate 272
Possibilities sot) progress) Upon sas. even oes eens 326
Second Ray
VV GT tae Foes ts sass gi Sle Sesh ola tat cress SURI GR MM nar 225
Gordes Buddhs Head of (s. ploveats dare abowestareien 233
The Bodhisattva and Master Kuthumi Repre-
SEDLASIVES Oils sic unwonlaaee Sacre 233, 234, 247
GAT ACKETISUICR liao oso y Lae ede e US ee 245
Initiations attainable upon ................ 270, 271
CLPARIRTETENICE AGO. giclee olunes oa REET RG 272
Third Ray
Manha-Chonan Head) of) \) io. Maca) ee yn 233, 234
UMIATROLOTISLIOS ) iia cn he aCe CR ai ak ay omen 245, 248
Venetian Chohan Representative of ............ 248
Fourth Ray
Maha-Chokan: Headeob ji tbs oes t alge 2335-254.
CODRPACTETISHICR OA rar ety eee a uc), lee Rees 245, 249
Master Serapis Representative of .............. 248

Artiste tupon, vite.) dive bane dad aS Pee eRe te 249

350 INDEX

PAGE
Rays, The (continued)
Fifth Ray
Maha-Ghohan Head solic enw isin detelay ees 233, 234
OHATACCETISICS Ue ies pa ee lateanana tl Ste ans 245, 246, 249
Master Hilarion Representative of ............. 249
Sixth Ray :
Maha-Chohan) Head iiamitiye. sci ietiate ne ieee igtlen 233, 234
Charaeteristics yy ce. Saute ¢<Mic ean eran ae aoe 245, 246
Master Jesus Representative of ................ 250
Subcycles ‘of \influence'cisc. bee tenis oe 255, 256
Seventh Ray
Maha-Chohani Head of! 4 iis nee airro enna eee 233, 234
Instruction {rom IeEVasiucie sia ajeedle Wises tenes Saeed 237
Characteristiosys io Wk Ued NSA eat ee 245, 246
Master the Comte de St. Germain Represen-
GEGIVE HOT IER UU GI ae eee el 251
TInfluenceof coming yyy Ae iia lee eee oe oe 256, 262, 263
FREY CATT MBION Hyer onli toc) asuuibnalcian ela topneinieemva Moats sayaiais Sieiepaie rete 1
Statement regarding, by Master Kuthumi .......... 48
Relaxation necessary for mental health ................. 109
BRL NORA UIE CWO a ily LAR tent a Sih 217, 218, 219
Religions
Records of )}Supermenys inhi. y ee eee rere 4
Brodtherhood ota y yin, at) ewne ate acer el eae ee te 226, 227
In’connection with Ra yisiys eels a aie eae ee 236
PeMembrance: i RISh HAUL ee aed kaon nD 317, 318
Resurrection, Symbology’ of )....0j000. 0s. slat 193, 196, 197
Ober hie, te (MOM K Hig site Sys a ae ee ons eer a a ee 251
Rod of Power, The

Description; and: Use sOf) 4 eae. cain eee Cae, 286-289
Root-Race;\ Fourth Manicotti iere 21 ee, eee 36
Root Race.’ Fifth ila Myce ae) Die las ae 34, 155
RootRace: Sixthiyg or fees be Se 34, 230

Comin ind ty Mie eso Cen eens Wel a 230, 231
Roseneretis,! Christian 22a iene a se Oe fae de 251
TUOSICTIICIAM A CR CG e Weta site we 07 9 ea er 256, 257
Rupsraga, srxth etter: aaiiwscido ence, ae nae 202, 203
HALVSDrOCCk ie ire PUTA ROA ty Je) te Sn aa 194, 257
ees Lh: a ene Ons Bea rm ppt fut 118
Saint Alba ei ele pully yy o 6, Way URS itn a DROS 251
aint tueuskine «veh Wes ed 41 4h edit dn ee nae 241, 296
prea ty Dem yes 4 sis ini pd heii Ee UR RE ie Pie ai 241

INDEX _ 351

PAGE
BSPL ETI Ural LITA LLDCS DEV ATIE eerie Tor ats oes calle folie s Sic fe bla ba 207, 239, 293
RTT TA UE oh eRe era Seats au lc bs want sede ow oe uistes 0! MOM ira vba eal 12
PSIG PRT COM GR LIDEH. © ..0lei c)cisicelihas «/sisvavnlo/a ops b/ oid tole suebayar piesa 256
BREET aE EYE eet ea di Tos co ahs toNad es Sesingdinl babes palo taneaaIn aha WRN 115
PTL MTA OUIN AS! 4 5 6 Usk Glee ot oid Ato nes tered taal 241
Bee LH Ga CeOSTPUTLION WOL rs vow neha woah e wnat ei fale aiuatenele a aa emes 120
POMPE TUITE Ok eco Se vieieus, a's & eoeceibraid aaa Aol oiuvate Mean Batali able at 187
PIC RV ACIE CANT IESG) REELED 6 5) ciaraseta ofnloi'dm al nlepstaveiel bitiel acaye 169, 170
MAKTICASATOIN » INITIAGION®, «seine eis niaiein sion bieideds Manatee tard 174
SRL ATAETOLL era cokee a ehat ate aN Goes ca alee a tetahavel aM ty oie p ebsa ga ons ite: Meee 121
PREISEUA TNA en ott eats tatave ie ta hans Ab a kedde be dateroratrceedelaratedcteeaery ints: MOOR 118
BEML CLAD e fases eieheak aoe hiPe a, 5 face! WRAY va lw ao atl al nt teas Rana PND 28
PESTA ESA COS PRE LY Bh We tes '5.% is eet ic aN IR le wR BN ites eR RI Ta ear 208
RSM Oyt ee, ta 22 SK ke us Aue arte in Ble cal Podctarts geal SORA READ LOL i LenS EAU 118
RoR OTL ts eke te bene ey Che ge hae tar eels Whe ik te Gt LG acl leg a 169
BPTI GIS WINIALS 2 es dium smininh Gre etc dd my crane RR 140, 321, 322
BUT EUITER TE Os ee Oe a me Glee SONG Ae Re Ea Re foetal 67
Scandinavian teaching of the Trinity ............... 265, 266
Science, characteristic of Fifth Ray ..................08. 253
Science of the Sacraments, The ............. 215, 243, 252, 253
PTIA DIL) ON ACUTE-SDITILA)) Oli As '.0 Ws ce k'n ee wave eeu be Cates 250
Secret Doctrine, The ...... 24, 115, 195, 234, 239, 323, 325, 326
Self-Centeredness as a hindrance to spiritual growth..... 65
Self-Development requisite to advancement ............ 62
RO RTAATTE FSS aia MEET S12, 'o Sc hia be WHE Pats tate ws ie Sle lecele BRR ee ee 88
Serapis, Master
Description of physical appearance of .............. 39
BY OFIS OLR E ee ae RES c saddam totale tates Buel SK ul hither 248
BOTA CE p50 ia ie Gals SCRA 5c. Zia wate ec te bello talh wae Blevesaewn 82, 83, 85
Se PINTS. OLNOTOG SL iets vba ks.dallalgag ence 238, 239, 240, 241
Shadow or reflection of the Lord Buddha ........... 282, 283
PRRINOSLAY 2 aI UNGM Mac os eta deanee 136, 139, 182, 287, 323
BUARKATACHATVA © DHEL) ci oie oe o'ssteetsa es slaouie hee 4, 280, 281, 295
cS AVCOUTY CEN ATA iagiar 2a 9) ON A a So 54, 118
SLA ic ARR oe Rally «Men 01 MAT SSS Bee AGHA, ae LD, 258, 261
PETE TS UELCLISIVE MITT TE SIGN a Shy cighion, Deters te chater ee Gn eee ete alee 261
RICHI V ee MOUUITE-BDITICS | OL Ped week Oe oi oie Gears pak wee ee 250
CMRI GELN Agee TINGE as ais) ociaa an iia Se at inte eee Pee ent 292
Silabbataparamassa, third fetter ...............0006. 1698 P71;
PArEer WeCOUEr |) Lhe ae eu us Sea eG AS ee ee 327
PIVePPOtar. OL CONSClousness Main.) SYSOP sree chee Os 137
Simplicity required in probationary pupil ............. 85, 86
BU VE Pet Bet GN), Heath eh sits yk heats oar aah eet aa 11

BPOPATLARS Orn. EY hE eeu h So eB kie eR Ty VW ahical/ Sete aN Roi 168

352 INDEX

SOnSIIT ply eee ek oe Ree ate asdsn oi oan ales a'y'e whee bl Aide <u ae paelonaeems 142
SOTrO WOT SUEFCrING iniae oe is aitae is ipeeters aes gv 302, 303, 304, 305
CAUSE OT he OR cca clo aceceade vera tess lakaroue ce Satpal get? eae an 305, 306
Geasine: OlMacwencman pamtler ss eeitneeas a’ > aaa 306, 307
Escape: frome ecicas See canes Mei Bie is ithe ancraicket se ee 307
Saba aby Wo cue sia RAN om he a1 ear clara ne Cie ee Ma TAN eat 168
TUL bis: Hea deatss a ay Ice et "Noe Bev RE ate to nem veircre et atirte ye ethene at isha ao 13
SPOOCH isk seaiviginiajeldonlele elaheraie se lebe suo anes ite os Wel eee a Ik eae ea 98
Refinements Of A wais p2 dicisiseone ho ete tesa hsbc che 82
Barina bei rhe bteiarailas Do tite ate sts ioe ete ene eoeeec at eee 93, 94
Tigi trian ew hantes ob oor ba ak ete ot rae as hee 311, 312, 313
Spinto thew Barth? aus ees ect be ches sats soe ete eee 321
Soirit)of the: Races 5 sees Weal sale seb tare a oes Smee ee 212
SPP tiualis, “VIGGeTO esi. es Wels cralnaryae lenis oi. net eer 256
SCLC arose ie tao a es ohecmle arta < eGo Pie at peel a aes a oe en 124
Star Old Consciousness (jl) desist, apenas esejedacd fees 137, 155
Statues of deaders: of. thes past 7 .i5 fice: ose eos eae eee 23
Stones Precious, table! o1sraya/). aes oom ees ee 243
Strength, characteristic of First Ray ....... ea Be hoe Oe a 252
Studysin;, Consciousness, Ay Ac gee nkaeeeee a a ae 267
Sabrace, PF ourty sci as 5 wsie = nels, vo pels teat eet eee oe 262
Sulbrace, oe icine, seein tiie e ghee weee td yearn 155, 228, 262
Subrace, Sixth, Characteristics of ............... 227-230, 262
Supermen (see Adepts and Masters)
DUDETBRILION fie meee le pone s ele Benet le ae rs 169, 171, 172, 181,218
Sympathy; unfoldment ofiin?pupil ian: 2 hore eee ae 82
4 WV) sie AL gear rR A bee SUNT) I SAR eB oleh 82, 252
fe SEE AES ORR OS ROO a Di ei Rh) at Ste ely Pa 111, 251
REED PATS OE ee eA iM Tea, ei a ar 257
cemple.” Burmese,» ae eens Mamie ots 5 scnctaneiaia ee ae 25
SUEI CA CLAD Govan. Mitt oe nga ae eee 2.) ae 66, 186, 187
dextoook-of Lheosophy, A. s4 deuce ot +s. 5 one ek eee 13, 14
A AEIE KD tes schtliters eke fale ais cata een eMerer saci" a «i 9 ee eee er 118
Theosophical knowledge
Statement regarding by Master Kuthumi ........... 48
Study of requisite to advancement ................. 62
Theosophical Society, The
Inner. SGDGOL OF 04).1 sis a ie Pan ene Seer ene 50, 59
Chiter Societviint., saiccandsemaie. dah ys gee 52, 58, 115
Founding and work of ............ 221, 222, 223, 931, 232
Emblem of formed during Wesak Festival .......... 288
RCORO DAY Fe nike gai ana te Da eke rie tl ae aes ee 48, 52

bought Rent ee ie regi ae ps 309, 310, 311

PAGE
Mea Si Ze INAS Gs Ol, TNE con ee 5 ore ae Oe oe = Mineola bles aS 155
Tibet, the home of three Masters ..........-seeeeeeeees 22
Tolerance, Uniolamentet ans pupils soy. tales «aires ¢ oles 82
Transfiguration of Christ, Symbology of.... 188, 189, 190, 196
Drvmitveandyine: priangies, Phe oso ee. Lael de ate, nin eins 265-275
RRPRTISD Se MEE TICIE A hah xls c\siain axe ionoin ete aielg wales atetyie eens 265-275

Teaching of in Assyrian, Buddhistic, Christian, Dru-
idic, Egyptian, Hindu, Kabalistic, Phoenician,

Scandinavian and Zoroastrian religions...... 265, 266
REPL VOe Ge PTE Saris cle Dettele ots core ec cllate bie seater 265, 266
CULM TR ee ieee hoe seve fe cid etal sinte hte ae Palehe ees 266
PISUOCUILALIICTARCUY (ae pe -visie siekices a's t's apes 266, 267
DOSE OS TE YOU, yg RSE Ae GS OT ORRO RY Ba RM a PAE SO ph 296
Tumbler, Overturning of by will-power ................. 105
ReCanae en aeaIinGh CELGE T) wit saihis + amide che le ise a cbeimetie’s 203
A MCPY ORIN UOOUECLOUD L Bitet pete cis nace ae drole vin oho cave ale ee 169, 170
Unselfishness as the way to the Masters ........... 48, 49, 62
eA IATL ee oa ees CA ae 8 aso deo ale eee ae een oe 118
PEGE TRU cera err ne Ms cle 2. did ben ids! 4! iS re ale ate 118
PeeeeVICAIINU EOLeNAMG Vs.) ces sacle wise se alee ede eh ee 241
aeRO AU TOR Mots aa rs ike Pie Ania ach oweled taba aS 54, 117
DEMISE CHUL ULM Mae scl sss xiete wala nie Wate tior erate ae 282-293
READ IEs LOTINIAN I CRt og uk sw CNY tee Ea eae ai ate On ae 24
MeTiO neta (DONATE ir. eke ec htiy sid Ga co ee via cea on 248
MOVSICR ERD Tearance. OL 40. +o. ede dea eee eee 39
rae LGN Me eeeP Ss ., oo Fa cho ce ssl chee Sides ees 251
MOCHIEICH CHAS RECONOTCULEY (asic oe Los hue Mls acres ee 169, 171
NS Reet MSE «ic SAG lcs Seat re 259, 261
ROC ICH caine eens. sy salar nd ametoui nce trder tect 54, 117
POGELO) LUC IUCN OP a Es.) we a eee oe os cena 56, 209
UTS CBS a) yh eR Ae GRR nL Oe A are Re LA 279
Bee MLMPE-EDITILE VOLE iz, hs suet tek Chote aati oe 250
Mere Lhenvaster lho. ucu ue, sony ie wr al omun mr 48-68
Wesak Festival
PRELOPENCGL Ure Wt ee Aly tne ee gh I nd Vet 128
EO MTAULINU SOle oe eek kf es Loe eta 282-293
RBM UMN avinte oot he x eultidyag eM. in Cre Lu AI (oem ded 283, 284
Re nicarlelandantGobr, Seal ua wce ls ven. mh ea 325
PAO Dern Ut se SE cle eet srg tits ahaa tek ere eD 205

UCU Ce eT 2) 10 RAS ay lO di An ie a a 5
RECS EATS SAMAR esa i i el ae ego oR ee 83, 84, 252

354 INDEX

PAGE

Wisdom jin the -rnangles, The, 2: Nae. sa setae skeen 276-320

Witnesses, Astral, at Second Initiation .......... 177, 178, 179
World-Teacher, The (see also Maitreya, Lord)

Wit ktoad iat ris PSR Lage Capen. Yad cate ee ie 269

Aadkiel, Meaning of name nei ipesscuaakivs occa oe Gane 241

LOTORSLER, sk se TH iat ol Rear A ta a hay Nel le 279

ans rey Ait

oh bere Hel mM
; Vina

ay ais

DATE DUE

|

af
1

& 4

«4 3 =a

4
.

¢
7" a
€

AU

PRINTEDINU S.A.

GAYLORD

0623

Speer Library

P<
o
o
“n
2
a
o
o
®
=

012 01015

Princeton

j

1

i
ih

isi
i
