Man Visible and Invisible: Examples of Different Types of Men as Seen by Means of Trained Clairvoyance
C. W. Leadbeater, 1902
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Leadbeater's 1902 clairvoyant anatomy — the theosophical classic of auras and subtle bodies 'seen' by trained clairvoyance: the source-text of New Age energy imagery. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/dli.ministry.16766). This 1902 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================


HIGH DEVOTION MIXED DEVOTION TO A VURF RELIGIOUS SELFISH RELIGI- |
SPIRITUALITY WITH AFFECTION NOKLE IDEAL FILFLING OUS FEELING


REV.IGIOUS FEEL-


HIGHEST IN- STRONG INTEL: LOW TYPE
SED WITH PRIDE
LG TINGED TELLECT LECT INTELLECT
FEAR
LOVE FO HIG ‘NSE LFIS Lh URE
ungnis LOVE R IGM) UNSELFISH SELFISH PURE
HUMANITY AIFEC TION ADFEC TION AVYECTION


ADAPTARILITY JEALOUSY DECEIT IRAR DEPRESSION


SELFISHNESS AVARICE ANGER SENSUALITY ' MALICE


MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE


MAN VISIBLE AND
INVISIBLE


EXAMPLES OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF MEN AS
SEEN BY MEANS OF TRAINED CLAIRVOYANCE


BY


C. W. LEADBEATER


WITH


FRONTISPIECE, THREE DIAGRAMS, AND TWENTY-TWO
COLOURED ILLUSTRATIONS


LONDON
THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY


1902


AUTHOR’S NOTE.


Tue Author wishes to express his very hearty acknow-
ledgments to two Theosophical colleagues who have
prepared for him the illustrations of this book—to
Count Maurice Prozor, who drew and coloured them
for him from the life, and to Miss Gertrude Spink,
who spent many days in patiently copying them with
the air-brush, in order that they might be more success-


fully reproduced by the photographic process,


OHAP.
. How tHust THINGS ARE KNown


II.
ITI.
IV.
. THe TRINITY
VI.
VII,
VITI.
IX.

. Tas THirp OUTPOURING
XI,
XII,
XII.
XIV.
XV.
XVI.
XVII.
XVIII.
XTX.


CONTENTS.


Tue Puanes oF NATURE
CLAIRVOYANT SIGHT .


Man’s VEHICLES


THe EARLIER OUTPOURINGS
Tae ANIMAL Group-Sou_L .
THE UpwaRD CURVE


Human CoNscIousNngEss


How Man Evo.tves .

Wuart His Bopigs SHow Us
CoLOURS AND THBIR MEANING
THE SavaGE

THE ORDINARY PERSON

SuDDEN EmoTIONS

More PERMANENT CONDITIONS .
THe DsvELorep Man

THe HeattH-Aura

Tue CavusaL Bopy oF THE ADEPT


PAGE


104
117
128
135


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


PLATE


I. SIGNIFICATION OF THE CoLOURS. Frontispiece.

Il. Tas Puangs or Nature . page 20
Ill. Tas Turee OvuTpourines . » 938
IV. Invotution anp EvoLvution » 46

V. Tae Causa Bopy or THE SavaGE . », 66

VI. Tas Menta Bopy or THE SavaGE . » of
VII. Tue AstraL Bopy or THE SavacE . » 88
VIII. Tot Cavusat Bopy or tHe Averace Man ,, 91
IX. Tae Menrat Bopy oF THE AvERacE Man ,, 93

X. Tue AstraL Bopy oF THE AvERAGE Man. ,, 94

XJ. A Suppen Rusu oF AFFECTION . » 96
XII. A Suppzn RusH or Devotion . .» 98
XIII. Intense Ancer. » 100
XIV. A SHock or Fear ,», 103
XV. Tae Averact Man 1n Love ,, 107
XVI. Tae IreitasteE Man » 109
XVII. THe Miser » 110
XVIIL Deze Depression ,, 112
XIX. Tue Devorionat TyPs » 114
XX. Tae Screntiric Tyre », 116
XXII. THe Cavsat Bopy or tHe Devetorep Man ,, 118
XXII. Tae Mentau Bopy or tHe Devetorep Man ,, 121
XXIII. Toe Astrat Bopy or tue DEVELOPED May ,, 123
XXIV. Tas Norma Hearts-Avra » 128
XXV. Tas Heatra-Aura 1n Disnase. », 132
XXV1I, Tue Cavsan Bopy or tHe Annat 138


MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


CHAPTER I.
HOW THESE THINGS ARE KNOWN.


Man is a curiously complex being, and _ his
evolution, past, present and future, is a study
of perennial interest for all who can see and
understand. Through what toilsome eternities
of gradual development he has come to be what
he is, to what round in the long ladder of his
progress he has now attained, what possibilities
of further progress the veil of the future conceals
from us, these are questions to which few can be
indifferent—questions which have been occurring
all through the ages to every one who has thought
at all.

Among us in the Western world the answers
given have been many and various. There has
been much dogmatic assertion, based on differing
interpretations of alleged revelation; there have
been many ingenious epecuiavions, the fruit in


ys MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


some cases of close metaphysical reasoning. But
dogmatism meets us with a story which is on
the face of it manifestly impossible, while
speculation moves chiefly along entirely
materialistic lines, and endeavours to arrive at
a satisfactory result by ignoring half of the
phenomena for which we have to account.
Neither dogmatism nor speculation approaches
the problem from a practical poimt of view, as
a matter which can be studied and investigated
like any other science.

Theosophy comes forward with a theory based
upon entirely different foundations. While in
no way depreciating the knowledge to be gained
either by study of the ancient scriptures or by
philosophical reasoning, it nevertheless regards
the constitution and the evolution of man as
matters, not of speculation, but of simple investi-
gation—not of vague theory, but of definite fact.
Its statement is perfectly clear; the past, the
present, and the future of man may be examined
at first-hand by all who will take the trouble to
qualify themselves for the study. When so
examined, they prove to be parts of a magnificent
scheme, coherent and readily comprehensible—
a scheme which, while it agrees with and explains
much of the old religious teaching, is yet in no
way dependent on it, since it can be verified at
every step by the use of the inner faculties which,


HOW THESE THINGS ARE KNOWN. 3


though as yet latent in the majority of mankind,
have already been brought into working order
by a considerable number among our students.

For the past history of man, this theory depends
not only upon the concurrent testimony of the
tradition of the earlier religions, but upon the
examination of a definite record—a record which
can be seen and consulted by any one who
possesses the degree of clairvoyance requisite to
appreciate the vibrations of the finely-subdivided
matter upon which it is impressed. For its knowl-.
edge as to the future which awaits humanity, it
depends, first, upon logical deduction from the
character of the progress already made ; secondly,
on direct information supplied by men who have
already reaghed those conditions which for most
of us still constitute a more or less remote future ;
and thirdly, on the comparison which any one
who has the privilege of seeing them may make
between highly-evolved men at various levels,
We can imagine that a child who did not
otherwise know the course of nature might
reason that he would presently grow up and
become a man, merely from the fact that he
had already grown to a certain extent and ina
certain way, and that he saw around him other
children and young people at every stage of
growth between his own and the adult level.

The study of the condition of man at the


4 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


present time, of the immediate methods for
his evolution, and of the effect upon that
evolution of his thoughts, his emotions, his
actions—all this is regarded by Theosophical
students as a. mere matter of the application
of well-known laws as a broad, general principle,
and then of careful observation, of painstaking
comparison of many cases in order to comprehend
the detailed working of these laws. It is, in fact,
simply a question of sight, and this book is
published in the hope, first, that it may help
earnest students who do not yet possess this
sight to realise how the soul and its vehicles
really appear when examined by its means; and
secondly, that the very large number of persons
who are now beginning to exercise this vision
more or less perfectly, may by it be helped to
understand the meaning of what they see.

J am perfectly aware that the world at large
is not yet convinced of the very existence of this
power of clairvoyant sight; but I also know that
all who have really studied the question have
found the evidence for it irresistible, and we can
afford to ignore the very positive convictions
which are usually so vehemently expressed by
those who have not studied it. I will venture
to say that if any intelligent person will take
the trouble to read the stories—the authenticated
stories—quoted in my little book on Clair-


HOW THESE THINGS ARE KNOWN. 5


voyance, and will then turn from them to the
books from which they were selected, he will see
at once that there is an overwhelming mass of
irrefutable evidence in favour of the existence of
this faculty. To those who themselves can see,
and are daily in the habit of exercising this
higher vision in a hundred different ways, the.
denial of the ignorant majority that such sight
is possible naturally seems ridiculous. For the
clairvoyant the question is not worth arguing.
If a blind man came up to us and assured us
that there was no such thing as ordinary physical
sight, and that we were deluded in supposing
that we possessed this faculty, we in our turn
should probably not feel it worth while to argue
at great length in defence of our supposed de-
lusion. We should simply say: “I certainly do
see, and it is useless to try to persuade me that
I do not; all the daily experiences of my life
show me that I do; I decline to be argued out
of my definite knowledge of positive facts.” Now
this is precisely how the trained clairvoyant feels
when ignorant people serenely pronounce that it
is quite impossible that he should possess a
power which he is at that very moment using to
read the thoughts of the wiseacres who deny it
to him!

I am not attempting, therefore, in this book to
prove that clairvoyance is a reality; I take that


6 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


for granted, and proceed to describe what is seen
by its means. Neither will I here repeat the
details given in the little book which I have
mentioned as to the methods of clairvoyance,
but will confine myself to such brief statement
of the broad principles of the subject as is
absolutely necessary in order that this book
shall be comprehensible to one who has not
studied other Theosophical literature.


CuaPrTer II.
THE PLANES OF NATURE.


In order to enunciate even these broad principles,
however, it is necessary to begin by explaining
some of the facts discovered by the use of
this very faculty. The first point which must
be clearly comprehended is the wonderful com-
plexity of the world around us—the fact that
it includes enormously more than comes within
the range of ordinary vision.

We are all aware that matter exists in
different conditions, and that it may be made
to change its conditions by variation of pressure
and temperature. We have the three well
known states of matter, the solid, the liquid and
the gaseous, and it is the theory of science that
all substances can, under proper variation of
temperature and pressure, exist in all these
conditions. There are still, I think, a few
substances which chemists have not succeeded
in reducing from one state to another; but it
is universally believed that just as water may


8 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


become ice at a lower temperature, and steam
at a higher one, so every solid which we know
might become liquid or gaseous under proper
conditions ; every liquid may be made solid or
gaseous, every gas may be liquefied and even
solidified. We know that air itself has been
liquefied, and that some of the other gases have
been reduced to a solid slab.

Occult chemistry shows us another and higher
condition than the gaseous, into which also all
substances known to us can be translated or
transmuted; and to that condition we have
given the name of etheric. That which science
postulates as ether is found by occult chemistry
to be not a homogeneous body, but simply
another state of matter; not itself a new kind
of substance, but ordinary matter reduced to a
particular state. We may have, for example,
hydrogen in an etheric condition instead of as
a gas; we may have gold or silver or any other
element either as a solid, a liquid or a gas, or
in this other higher state which we call etheric.
Just as we find in the world about us some
elements normally solid, as is gold; some
normally liquid, as is mercury; and some
normally gaseous, a8 18 oxygen, so there are
substances which are normally etheric—which
ordinarily exist in that condition, though by
special treatment they can be brought down to


THE PLANES OF NATURE. 9


the gaseous condition, or raised to some other
state still finer than their own.

In ordinary science we speak of an atom of
oxygen, an atom of hydrogen, an atom of any of
the sixty or seventy substances which chemists
call elements, the theory being that that is an
element which cannot be further reduced, and .
that each of these elements has its atom—and an
atom, as we may see from the Greek derivation
of the word, means that which cannot be cut, or
further subdivided. Occult science tells us, what
many scientists have frequently suspected, that
all these so-called elements are not in the true
sense of the word elements at all; that what we
call an atom of oxygen or hydrogen is not the
ultimate, and in fact is not an atom at all, but
a molecule which can under certain circumstances
be broken up into atoms. By repeating this
breaking-up process it is found that we arrive
eventually at an infinite number of definite
physical atoms which are all alike; so that there
is one substance at the back of all substances,
and different combinations of its ultimate atoms
give us what in chemistry are called atoms of
oxygen or hydrogen, gold or silver, lithium or
platinum, etc. When these are all broken up
we get back to a set of atoms which are all
identical, except that some of them are positive
and some negative.


10 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


~The study of these atoms and of the possi-
bilities of their combination is in itself one of
most enthralling interest, though foreign to our
present subject; but those specially interested
in the matter may be referred to Mrs. Besant’s
article upon Occult Chemistry in Lucifer for
November 1895. Even these, however, are
found to be atoms only from the point of view
of our physical plane; that is to say, there are
methods by which even they can be subdivided,
but when they are so broken up they give us
matter belonging to a different realm of nature—
matter which is not expansible by any degree
of heat which we are able to produce, or con-
tractible by any degree of cold with which we
are acquainted. Yet this higher matter also is
not simple but complex; and we find that it
also exists in a series of states of its own,
corresponding very fairly to the states of
physical matter which we call solid, liquid,
gaseous or. etheric. Again, by carrying on our
process of subdivision far enough we reach
another atum—the atom of that realm of nature
to which occultists have given the name of the
astral world.

Then the whole process may be repeated ; for
by further subdivision of that astral atom we
find ourselves dealing with another still higher
and more refined world, though a world which


THE PLANES OF NATURE. ll


is still material. Once again we find matter
existing in definitely marked conditions corre-
sponding at that much higher level to the states
with which we are familiar; and the ultimate
result of our investigations brings us once again
to an atom—the atom of this third great realm _
of nature, which in Theosophy we call the mental
world. So far as we know, there is no limit to
this possibility of subdivision, but there is a
very distinct limit to our capability of observing
it. However, we can see enough to be certain
of the existence of a considerable number of
these different realms, each of which is in one
sense a world in itself, though in another and
wider sense all are parts of one stupendous
whole.

In our literature these different realms of
nature are frequently spoken of as planes,
because in our study it is sometimes convenient
to image them as one above another, according
-to the different degrees of density of the matter
of which they are composed. It will be seen
that in the accompanying diagram (Plate II.)
they are drawn in this way; but it must be very
carefully borne in mind that this arrangement
is merely adopted for convenience and as a
symbol, and that it in no way represents the
actual relations of these various planes. They
must not be imagined as lying above one another


12 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


like the shelves of a book-case, but rather as
filling the same space and interpenetrating one
another. It is a fact well known to science
that even in the hardest substances no two
atoms ever touch one another; always each
atom has its field of action and vibration, and
every molecule in turn has its larger field; so
that there is always space between them under
any possible circumstances. Every physical
atom is floating in an astral sea—a sea of astral
matter which surrounds it and fills every inter-
stice in this physical matter. It is universally
recognised that ether interpenetrates all known
substances, the densest solid as well as the most
rarefied gas; and just as it moves with perfect
freedom between the particles of the denser
matter, so does astral matter interpenetrate it
in turn, and move with perfect freedom among
its particles. The mental matter in its turn
interpenetrates the astral in precisely the same
manner; so that all these different realms of
nature are not in any way separated in space,
but are all existing around us and about us here
and now, so that to see them and to investigate
them it is not necessary for us to make any
movement in space, but only to open within
ourselves the senses by means of which they
can be perceived.


Cuapter III.
CLAIRVOYANT SIGHT.


Tuais brings before us another very important
consideration. All these varieties of finer matter
exist not only in the world without, but they
exist in man also. He has not only the physical
body which we see, but he has also within him
what we may describe as bodies appropriate to
these various planes of nature, and consisting in
each case of their matter. In the man’s physical
body there is etheric matter as well as the solid
matter which is visible to us (see Plates XXIV.
and XXV.); and this etheric matter is readily
visible to the clairvoyant. In the same way a
more highly developed clairvoyant who was cap-
able of perceiving the more refined astral matter,
would see the man represented at that level by a
mass of that matter, which is in reality his body
or vehicle as regards that plane; and exactly the
same thing is true with regard to the mental
plane in its turn. The soul of man has not one
body, but many bodies, for when sutliciently


14 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


evolved he is able to express himself on all these
different levels of nature, and he is therefore
provided with a suitable vehicle of the matter
belonging to each, and it is through these various
vehicles that he is able to receive impressions
from the worlds to which they correspond.

We must not think of the man as creating
these vehicles for himself in the course of his
future evolution, for every man possesses them
from the beginning, though he is by no means
conscious of their existence. We are constantly
using to a certain extent this higher matter
within ourselves, even though it be uncon-
sciously. Every time that we think, we set in
motion the mental matter within us, and a
thought is clearly visible to a clairvoyant as a
vibration in that matter, set up first of all
within the man, and then affecting matter of
the same degree of density in the world around
him. But before this thought can be effective
on the physical plane it has to be transferred
from that mental matter into astral matter; and
when it has excited similar vibrations in that,
the astral matter in its turn affects the etheric
matter, creating sympathetic vibrations in it,
and that in turn acts upon the denser physical
matter, the grey matter of the brain.

So every time we think, we go through a much
longer process than we know ; Just as every time


CLAIRVOYANT SIGHT. 15


we feel anything we go through a process of
which we are quite unconscious. We touch
some substance and feel that it is too hot, and
we snatch away our hand from it instantaneously,
as we think. But science teaches us that this
process is not instantaneous, and that it is not
the hand which feels, but the brain; that the
nerves communicate the idea of intense heat to
the brain, which at once telegraphs back along
the nerve-threads the instruction to withdraw the
hand; and it is only as a result of all this that
the withdrawal takes place, which seems to us to
be immediate. The process has a definite dura-
tion, which can be measured by sufficiently fine
instruments ; the rate of its motion is perfectly
well defined and known to physiologists. Just
in the same way thought appears to be an
instantaneous process; but it is not, for every
thought has to go through the stages which I
have described. Every impression which we
receive in the brain through the senses has to
pass up through these various grades of matter
before it reaches the real man, the ego, the soul
within.

We have here a kind of system of telegraphy
between the physical plane and the soul; and it
is important to realise that this telegraph-line
has intermediate stations. It is not only from
the physical plane that impressions can be


16 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


received; the astral matter within a man, for
example, is not only capable of receiving a
vibration from etheric matter and transmitting
it to the mental matter, but it is also quite
capable of receiving impressions from the sur-
rounding matter of its own plane, and trans-
mitting those through the mental body to the
real man within. So the man may use his
astral body as a means for receiving impressions
from and observing the astral world which
surrounds him; and in exactly the same way
through his mental body he may observe and
obtain information from the mental world.
But in order to do either of these things, he
must first learn how they are done; that is to
say, he must learn to focus his consciousness
in his astral body or in his mental body, just
as it is now focussed in the physical brain. |
have already treated this subject fully in my
little book on Clairvoyance, so that I need do
no more than refer to it here.

Although science is not yet prepared to admit
the existence of these various planes or degrees
of matter in nature, there is nothing in this
hypothesis in the least contradictory to its
teaching. It should always be remembered
that all this is a matter of direct knowledge
and certainty to those who are in the habit
of studying it, although it is presented to


CLAIRVOYANT SIGHT. 17


the: consideration of the world merely as a
hypothesis; but even the man who approaches
the subject for the first time must surely see
that in suggesting this we are not in any way
claiming faith in a miracle, but simply inviting
investigation of a system. The higher grades
of matter follow on in orderly sequence from
those which we already know, so that though to
some extent each plane may be regarded as a
world in itself, it is yet also true that the whole
ig in reality one great world, which can be fully
seen only by the highly-developed soul.

To aid us in our grasp of this, let us take an
illustration which, although impossible in itself,
may yet be useful to us as suggesting rather
startling possibilities. Suppose that instead of
the sight which we now possess, we had a visual
apparatus arranged somewhat differently. In
the human eye we have both solid and liquid
matter; suppose that both these orders of
matter were capable of receiving separate
impressions, but each only from that type of
matter in the outside world to which it
corresponded. Suppose also that among men
some possessed one of these types of sight and
some another. Consider how very curiously
imperfect would be the conception of the world
obtained by each of these two types of men.
Imagine them as eae on the sea-shore ; one


18 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


being able to see only solid matter, would be
utterly unconscious of the ocean stretched before
him, but would see instead the vast cavity of
the ocean-bed, with all its various inequalities,
and the fishes and other inhabitants of the deep
would appear to him as floating in the air above
this enormous valley. If there. were clouds in
the sky they would be entirely invisible to him,
since they are composed of matter in the liquid
state; for him the sun would be always shining
in the day-time, and he would be unable to
comprehend why, on what to us is a cloudy day,
its heat should be so much diminished ; if a glass
of water were offered to him, it would appear to
him to be empty.

Contrast with this the appearance which would
be presented before the eyes of the man who saw
only matter in the liquid condition. He would
indeed be conscious of the ocean, but for him
the shore and the cliffs would not exist; he
would perceive the clouds very clearly, but
would see almost nothing of the landscape over
whieh they were moving. In the case of the
glass of water he would be entirely unable to
see the vessel, and would therefore be quite
unable to understand why the water should so
mysteriously preserve the special shape given to
it by the invisible glass. Imagine these two
persons standing side by side, each describing


CLAIRVOYANT SIGHT. 19


the landscape as he saw it, and each feeling
perfectly certain that there could be no other
kind of sight but his in the universe, and that
anyone claiming to see anything more or any-
thing different must necessarily be either a
dreamer or a deceiver ! |
We can smile over the incredulity of these
hypothetical observers; but it is exceedingly
difficult for the average man to realise that, in
proportion to the whole that is to be seen, his
power of vision is very much more imperfect
than either of theirs would be in relation to the
world as he sees it. And he also is strongly
disposed to hint that those who see a little
more than he does must really be drawing upon
their imagination for their alleged facts. It is
one of the commonest of our mistakes to consider
that the limit of our power of perception is also
the limit of all that there is to perceive. Yet
the scientific evidence is indisputable, and the
infinitesimal proportion (as compared to the
whole) of the groups of vibrations by which
alone we can see or hear is a fact about which
there can be no doubt. The clairvoyant is
simply a man who developes within himself
the power to respond to another octave out of the
stupendous gamut of possible vibrations, and
so enables himself to see more of the world
around him than those of more limited perception.


CHaprer LV.
MAN’S VEHICLES.


Ir we turn to Plate II. we shall see there a
diagram of these planes of nature, and we shall
also observe the names which have been em-
ployed to designate the vehicles or bodies of
man which correspond to them. It will be
noticed that the names used in Theosophical
literature for the higher planes are derived from
Sanskrit, for in Western philosophy we have as
yet no terms for these worlds composed of finer
states of matter. Hach of these names has its
especial meaning, though in the case. of the
higher planes it indicates only how little we
know of those conditions. ,

Nirvana has for ages been the term employed
in the East to convey the idea of the highest
conceivable spiritual attainment. To reach
Nirvana was to pass beyond humanity; to gain
& ‘level of ‘peace. and bliss far above earthly
comprehension. So absolutely was all that was
earthly left behind by the aspirant who attained


MAN'S VEHICLES. 21


its transcendent glory, that some European
orientalists fell at first into the mistake of
supposing that it was an entire annihilation of
the man—an idea than which nothing could be
more utterly the opposite of the truth. To
gain the full use of the exalted consciousness of
this exceedingly elevated spiritual condition is
to reach the goal appointed for human evolution
during this son or dispensation—to become an
adept, a man who is something more than man.
For the vast majority of humanity such progress
will be attained only after cycles of evolution,
but the few determined souls who refuse to be
daunted by difficulties, who as it were take the
kingdom of heaven by violence, may find this
glorious prize within their reach at a much
earlier period.

Of the states of consciousness above this we
naturally know nothing, except that they exist.
‘* Para” signifies ‘‘ beyond,” and “‘ Maha” means
“great,” so all the information conveyed by the
names of these conditions is that the first is
“the plane beyond Nirvana,” and the second is
“the greater plane beyond Nirvana ”—showing
that those who bestowed these appellations
thousands of years ago either possessed no more
direct information than we have, or else, possess-
ing it, despaired of finding any words in which
it could be expressed.


22 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


The name of Buddhi has been given to that
principle or component part of man which
manifests itself through the matter of the
fourth plane, while the mental plane is the
sphere of action of what we call the mind in
man. It will be observed that this plane is
divided into two parts, which are distinguished
by a difference in colour and the names of
‘“rupa” and ‘“arupa,’ meaning respectively


)


“having form” and “formless.” These are
names given in order to indicate a certain
quality of the mattcr of the plane; in the lower
part of it the matter is very readily moulded by
the action of human thought into definite forms,
while on the higher division this does not occur,
but the more abstract thought of that level
expresses itself to the eye of the clairvoyant in
flashes or streams. A fuller account of this
will be found in the sixth of our series of
Theosophical manuals.

The name “astral” is not of our choosing ;
we have inherited it from the medieval al-
chemists. It signifies “starry,” and is supposed
to have been applied to the matter of the plane
next above the physical because of the luminous
appearance which is associated with the more
rapid rate of its vibration. The astral plane is
the world of passion, of emotion and sensation ;
and it is through man’s vehicle on this plane


MAN'S VEHICLES. 23


that all his feelings exhibit themselves to the
clairvoyant investigator. The astral body of
man 18 therefore continually changing in appear-
ance as his emotions change, as we shall show
in detail later.

In our literature certain colours have usually
been employed to represent each of the lower
planes, following a table of colours given by
Madame Blavatsky in her monumental work
The Secret Doctrine; but it should be clearly
understood that these are employed simply as
distinctive marks—that they are merely sym-
bolical, and are not in any way intended to
imply a preponderance of a particular hue in
the plane to which it is applied. All known
colours, and many which are at present unknown
to us, exist upon each of these higher planes of
nature; but as we rise from one stage to an-
other, we find them ever more delicate and
more luminous, so that they might be described
as higher octaves of colour. An attempt 1s
made to indicate this in our illustrations of the
various vehicles appropriate to these planes, as
will be seen Jater.

It will be noticed that the number of planes
is seven, and that each of them in turn 1s
divided into seven sub-planes. This number
seven has always been considered as holy and
occult, because it is found to underlic mani-


24 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


festation in various ways. In the lower planes
which are within the reach of our investigation .
the sevenfold subdivision is very clearly marked ;
and all indications seem to warrant the assump-
tion that in those higher realms which are as
yet beyond our direct observation a similar
arrangement obtains, allowing for the difference
of conditions. |

As man learns to function in these higher
types of matter, he finds that the limitations of
the lower life are transcended, and fall away
one by one. He finds himself in a world of
many dimensions, instead of one of three only;
and that fact alone opens up a whole series of
entirely new possibilities in various directions.
The study of these additional dimensions is one
of the most fascinating that can be imagined ;
and those who feel an interest in it cannot do
better than take it up in earnest, beginning with
Mr. ©. H. Huinton’s admirable volumes of
Scientific Romances. Short of really gaining
the sight of the other planes, there is no
method by which so clear a conception of
astral life can be obtained as by the realisation
of the fourth dimension.

It is not my object at the moment to describe
all that is gained by the wonderful extension of
consciousness which belongs to these higher
planes—indeed, I have done that already to


MAN'S VEHICLES. 25


some extent in a previous book. For the
present we need refer only to one line of in-
vestigation—that connected with the constitu-
tion of man, and how he came to be what he is.

The history of his earlier evolution can be
obtained only by examination of those inefface-
able records of the past from which all that has
happened since the solar system came into
existence may be recovered, and caused to pass
before the mind’s eye; so that the observer sees
everything precisely as though he had been
present when it occurred, with the enormous
additional advantage of being able to hold any
single scene as long as may be required for
careful examination, or to pass a whole century
of events in review in a few moments if desired.
This wonderful reflection of the divine memory
cannot be consulted with perfect certainty below
the mental plane, so for the ready reading of this
earlier history it 1s necessary that the student
should at least have learnt to use with freedom
the senses of his mental body; and if he is so
fortunate as to have under his control the
faculties of the still higher causal body, his task
will be easier still. The question of these
records has been more fully dealt with in
Chapter VII. of my little book on Clarrvoyance,
to which the reader may be referred for further
<letails.


CHAPTER V.
THE TRINITY.


Wer must now endeavour to understand how
man comes into existence amidst this wonderful
system of the planes of nature, and in order to
do that we shall find ourselves compelled to take
an excursion into the domain of theology, though
in such theology as interests us we deal with no
pious opinions or speculations, but only with
what to us is proved scientific fact.

When we search these records in order to
discover the origin of man, what do we see?
We find that man is the resultant of an elaborate
and beautiful evolutionary scheme, and that in
him three streams of Divine life may be said to
converge. One of the sacred scriptures of the
world speaks of God as having made man in His
own image—a statement which, when it is
properly understood, is seen to embody a great
occult truth. All religions agree in describing
the Deity as threefold in His manifestation, and
it will be found that the soul of man is also three-


THE TRINITY. 27


fold, and that there is the closest possible con-
nection between these facts.

It will, of course, be understood that we are
speaking now not of the Absolute, the Supreme,
and the Infinite (for of Him naturally we can
know nothing, except that He 2s), but of that
glorious Manifestation of Him who is the great
Guiding Force or deity of our own solar system
—who is called in our philosophy the Logos of
the system. Of Him is true all that we have
ever heard predicated of the Deity—all that is
good, that is, for in these days we hear so very
much that is not good attributed to Him. Those
who profess to worship Him frequently attribute
to Him their own vices, and impiously dare to
describe Him as jealous, angry, revengeful and
cruel. Such abominable blasphemy may
possibly be less heinous in the Central African
savage, who has no conception of power except
as expressed in cruelty and bloodthirstiness ; but
there can be no shadow of excuse for it among
people who profess to be civilized, and those
who so malign the Fount of all Goodness and
Love are committing a crime whose evil results
cannot easily be measured. But all that we have
heard of God which is good—the love, the wisdom,
the power, the patience and compassion, the
omniscience, the omnipresence, the omnipotence
—all of this, and much more, is true of the


28 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


Solar Logos, in whom, in very truth, we live
and move and have our being. And be it
remembered that in Theosophy we do not offer
this as a pious opinion or an article of religious
faith; to the clairvoyant investigator this Mighty
lixistence is a definite certainty—not that any
merely human development can enable us
directly to see Him, but that unmistakable
evidence of His action and His purpose sur-
rounds us on every side as we study the life of
the higher planes.

As He shows Himself to us in His otk the
Solar Logos is undoubtedly triple—three and yet
one, as religion has long ago told us. ‘There is
much that at first sight seems quite incompre-
hensible in the statements on this subject which
are contained in the old formule of the Church ;
yet when explained by the light of the Theo-
sophical teaching it will be seen that they con-
stitute a remarkably accurate and very beauti-
ful declaration of the truth, even though here
and there passages of the most degraded material-
ism have crept in. The real beauty and mean-
ing of the Athanasian Creed, for example, can be
seen only when it is studied verse by verse with
the aid of Theosophical diagrams.

It is obviously impossible to picture this
divine manifestation in any way, for it is
necessarily entirely beyond our power either of


THE TRINITY. 29


representation or comprehension, yet a small
part of its action may perhaps to some extent
be brought within our grasp by the employment
of certain simple symbols, such as those adopted
in Plate II. It will be seen that on the seventh
or highest plane of our system the triple mani-
festation of our Logos is imaged by three circles,
representing His three aspects. Hach of these
aspects appears to have its own quality and
power. In the First Aspect He does not manifest
Himself on any plane below the highest, but in
the Second He descends to the sixth plane, and
draws round Himself a garment of its matter,
this making a quite separate and lower expression
of Him. Inthe Third Aspect He descends to the
upper portion of the fifth plane, and draws
round Himself matter of that level, thus making
a third manifestation. It will be observed that
these three manifestations on their respective
planes are entirely distinct one from the other,
and yet we have only to follow up the dotted
lines to see that these separate persons are never-
theless in truth but aspects of the one. Quite
separate, when regarded as persons, each on his
own plane—quite unconnected diagonally, as it
were ; yet each having his perpendicular connec-
tion with himself at the level where these three
are one.

Thus we see a very real meaning in the


30 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


insistence of the Church ‘that we worship one
God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither
confounding the persons nor dividing the
substance’”’—that is to say, never confusing
in our minds the work and functions of the three
separate manifestations, each on his own plane,
yet never for a moment forgetting the Eternal
Unity of the “ substance,” that which les behind
all alike on the highest plane.

It 1s instructive to notice here exactly the
true meaning of this word person. It is com-
pounded of the two Latin words per and sona,
and therefore signifies “that through which the
sound comes”—the mask worn by the Roman
actor to indicate the part which he happened at
the moment to be playing. Thus we very
appropriately speak of the group of temporary
lower vehicles which a soul assumes when he
descends into incarnation as his “ personality.”
Thus also these separate manifestations of the
One on different planes are rightly thought of as
persons.

Thus we see how it can be said :—‘ There is
one Person of the Father, another of the Son,
and another of the Holy Ghost; but the God-
head of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost is all one—the glory equal, the majesty
co-eternal.” Truly the manifestations are distinct,
each on its own plane, and consequently one


THE TRINITY. 31


appears lower than another; yet we have only
to look back to the seventh plane to realise that
‘‘in this Trinity none is afore or after other, none
is greater or less than another, but the whole
three Persons are co-eternal together and co-
equal.” So also ‘‘every Person by himself is God
and Lord,” ‘“‘and yet they are not three Lords,
but one Lord.”

See also how clear and luminous become many
of the statements concerning the Second Aspect
and His descent into matter. There is another
and far wider meaning for this, as will be seen
in Plate LI.; but what is true of that grander
descent is true also of this, for when we think
of the Aspect on the higher plane as the essential
Godhead ensouling the manifestation in matter
relatively lower, though still high above our ken,
we see how he is “God, of the substance of his
Father, begotten before the world; but man, of
the substance of his Mother, born in the world.”
-For as an aspect of the divine He existed before
the solar system, but His manifestation. in the
matter of the sixth plane took place during the
life of that system.

So, “although he be God and Man, yet he is
not two, but one Christ; one, not by conversion
of the Godhead into flesh, but by taking of the
manhood into God.” One, that is, not only
because of the essential Unity, but because of


32 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


the glorious power of drawing back into Himself
all that has been acquired by the descent into
lower matter. But this belongs more especially
to that greater descent illustrated for us in Plate
ITI.

The greatest schism which has ever occurred
in the Christian Church was that between the
Eastern and Western branches, the Greek Church
and the Roman. Although asa matter of fact
political and financial considerations were largely
responsible for this division, yet the doctrinal
reason alleged for it was the supposed corruption
of the truth, by the introduction into the Creed
of the word filioque at the Council of Toledo in
the year 589. |

The question at issue was whether the Holy
Ghost proceeded from the Father alone, or from
the Father and the Son—surely a point sufficiently
unpractical and remote from human knowledge
to have been put aside by both parties for the
sake of unity, But theological acrimony always
seems to rage most bitterly around subjects the
most obscure, unimportant, and uninteresting.
Our diagram, however, does enable us to seé
what was the point at issue in this case; and
furthermore, it shows us, curiously enough, that
both parties were right, and that if they had
only clearly understood the matter there need
have been no schism at all.


THE TRINITY. 33


The Latin Church held, quite reasonably,
that there could be no manifestation on the
fifth plane of a Force which admittedly came
from the seventh, without a passage through
the intermediate sixth, so they declared that
He proceeded from the Father and the Son.
The Greek Church, on the other hand, insisted
absolutely on the distinctness of the Three
Manifestations, and quite rightly protested
against any theory of a procession from the
First Manifestation through the Second such as
would be typified in our diagram if we drew
a diagonal line through the First, Second and
Third. The dotted line on the right of Plate
IT., showing how the Third Aspect descends
through the planes and finally manifests on
the fifth, is of course the key to the true line
of procession, and the absolute harmony of
the two conflicting ideas.

The wonderful way in which man is made in
the image of God may be seen by comparing the
triad of the human soul with the Trinity in
manifestation above it. So astonishingly material
have been the orthodox conceptions, that this
text has literally been interpreted as referring
to the physical body of man, and made to mean
that God created man’s body in a shape which
He foresaw as that which Christ would choose
to assume when He Sete on earth—a rather


34 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


remarkable instance of mental confusion even
for a theologian. |

A glance at Plate IJ. shows us at once the
true meaning of those words. Not the physical
body of man, but the constitution of his soul,
reproduces with marvellous exactitude the method
of Divine manifestation. Just as three aspects
of the Divine are seen on the seventh plane, so
the Divine Spark of the spirit in man is seen to
be triple in its appearance on the fifth plane. In
both cases the Second Aspect is able to descend
one plane lower, and to clothe itself in the matter
of that plane; in both cases the Third Aspect is
able to descend two planes and repeat the process.
So in both cases there is a Trinity in Unity,
separate in its manifestations, yet one in the
reality behind.

But for the moment we are concerned simply
with the fact that each of the three Aspects or
Persons or Manifestations of the Logos has an
especial part to play in the preparation and
development of the soul of man. What these
parts are we shall endeavour to make clear by
the help of the diagram given on Plate III.
The horizontal subdivisions indicate the planes,
precisely as in Plate II., and above them will
be seen three symbols belonging to the series
described by Madame Blavatsky in The Secret
Doctrine. The highest represents the First


THE TRINITY. 35


Aspect of the Logos, and bears only a central
dot, signifying the primary manifestation in
our system. The Second Aspect of the Logos
is symbolized by a circle divided by a diameter,
showing the dual manifestation which is always
associated with the Second Person of any of the
Trinities, while the lowest circle contains the


Greek cross, one of the most usual symbols of
the Third Aspect.


CyHaprer VI.


THE EARLIER OUTPOURINGS.


Ir is from this Third Aspect that the first
movement towards the formation of the system
comes. Previous to this movement we have in
existence nothing but the atomic state of matter
in each of the planes of nature, none of the
aggregations or combinations which make up
the lower sub-planes of each having yet been
formed. But into this sea of virgin matter
(the true Virgin Maria) pours down the Holy
Spirit, the Lifegiver, as He is called in the
Nicene Creed ; and by the action of His glorious
vitality the atoms are awakened to new powers
and possibilities of attraction and repulsion, and
thus the lower subdivisions of each plane come
into existence. It will be seen that this is
symbolized in the diagram by a line descending
from the lowest circle straight through all the
planes, growing broader and darker as it comes,
to show how the Divine Spirit becomes more
and more veiled in matter as it descends, until


THE EARLIER OUTPOURINGS. 37


many are quite unable to recognise it as divine
at all.

Yet the living force is nevertheless there, even
when it is most strictly confined in the lowest of
its forms. ‘The recent experiments of Professor
von Schrén at Naples have conclusively proved
the existence of life in the mineral kingdom, and
show also in a most wonderful manner the action
of the first and second of these great successive
outpourings of the Divine Life.

Into this matter thus vivified, the second
great outpouring of the divine life descends.
Thus the Second Person of the Trinity takes
form not of the “virgin” or unproductive matter
alone, but of the matter which is already instinct
and pulsating with the life of the Third Person,
so that both the life and the matter surround
Him as a vesture, and thus in very truth He is
‘“imearnate of the Holy Ghost and the Virgin
Mary,’ which is the true rendering of a prominent
passage in our creed. (See The Christian Creed,
page 42.)

Very slowly and gradually this resistless flood
pours down through the various planes and
kingdoms, spending in each of them a period
equal in duration to one entire incarnation of a
planetary chain, a period which, if measured as
we measure time, would cover very many millions


of years. This flood is symbolized in Plate IT].


$8 - MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


by the line which, starting from the second of
the circles, sweeps down the left-hand side of
the oval, gradually darkening as it approaches
its nadir. After passing that point it commences
its upward arc and rises through the physical,
astral, and lower mental planes until it meets
the third great outpouring, which is typified
by the line starting from the highest circle and
forming the right-hand side of the great oval.
Of this meeting we shall say more hereafter, but
for the moment let us turn our attention to the
descending arc. To aid us the better to com-
prehend this, let us turn to Plate IV. This
diagram, though it looks so different, in fact
corresponds very closely with Plate III.; the
variously coloured column on the left is identical
with the downward-sweeping curve on our left
in Plate III., and all the pyramidal figures which
make the rest of the diagram are simply repre-
sentations of the earlier part of the upward curve
on the right of Plate III, pictured at various
stages of its growth.

It will be observed that at various stages of
-its descent it is called by various names. As
a whole, it is often spoken of as monadic
essence, more especially when clothed only in
the atomic matter of the various planes; but
when on its downward course it energizes in
the matter of the higher part of the mental


THE THREE OUTPOURINGS


THE EARLIER OUTPOURIN®S. — — -B9


plane, it is known as the First Elemental
Kingdom. After spending a whole chain-
period in that evolution, it descends to the
lower or rupa levels of the same plane, and
there it ensouls the Second Elemental Kingdom
for another chain-period. Its next son is
spent on the astral level, where it is called the
Third Elemental Kingdom, or very often simply
elemental essence of the astral plane. At both
of these stages it is very intimately connected
with man, as it enters largely into the composi-
tion of his various vehicles, and influences his
thought and action. This, however, is beside
our present subject, and for a full description
of this action of the ‘‘desire-elemental” and
the “mental elemental” upon man we must
refer our readers to other Theosophical works.
When this great life-wave of divine force
reaches the lowest point of its destined course
it is immersed in physical matter; and at this
period, and for some time after it has begun its
long upward journey, it is energizing or en-
souling the mineral kingdom of the particular
chain upon which it happens to be at the
moment. At this stage it has sometimes been
called “the mineral monad,” just as at later
periods of its evolution it has been named “the
vegetable monad” and “the animal monad.”
But all these titles are somewhat misleading


40 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


because they seem to suggest that one great
monad animates the entire kingdom.

Even when this monadic essence first comes
before us, in the earliest of the elemental
kingdoms, it is already not one monad, but
very many —not one great life-stream, but
many parallel streams, each possessing charac-
teristics of its own. The whole scheme tends
increasingly toward differentiation, and ever as
these streams descend from kingdom to king-
dom they divide and subdivide more and more.
It may be that there is a point before all this
evolution at which we may think of the great
outpouring as homogeneous, though no man has
ever seen it in that condition; and at the con-
clusion of the first great stage of evolution it
is finally divided into individualities, each man
being a separate soul, though as yet an unde-
veloped soul.

Now at all points between these two extremes
its condition is something intermediate; there
is always subdivision, but it is not yet carried
to the point of individualization. It must never
be forgotten that we are dealing all the while
with the evolution of the ensouling force or
life, and not of the outward form; and this
ensouling energy evolves by means of the
qualities acquired in physical incarnation. In
the vegetable kingdom, for example, we have


THE EARLIER OUTPOURINGS. 4]


not a soul for one plant, but one group-soul for
an enormous number of plants—perhaps in some
cases for a whole species. In the animal king-
dom this subdivision has proceeded much further,
and though it may still be true among low
forms of insect life that one soul animates many
millions of bodies, in the case of the higher
animals a comparatively small number of


physical forms are the expression of one group-
soul,


CHaprer VII.
THE ANIMAL GROUP-SOUL.


THis idea of the group-soul seems to many
students novel and difficult; perhaps an
Oriental simile may help us to understand it
more readily. They tell us that the group-soul
is ike the water in a bucket, while if we suppose
a tumblerful of water withdrawn from that
bucket, we shall have a representation of the
soul of the single animal. The water in the
glass is for the time quite separate from that
in the bucket, and it takes the form of the glass
which contains it. Suppose that we put into
that glass a certain amount of colouring matter,
so that the water in it acquires a distinctive hue
of its own; that colouring matter will represent
the qualities developed in the temporarily
separated soul by the various experiences
through which it passes. ,

The death of the animal will be typified by
pouring back the water from the glass into the
bucket, when the colouring matter will at once


THE ANIMAL GROUP-SOUL. 43


spread through the whole of the water, tinting
it faintly. In exactly the same way, whatever
qualities have been developed during the life
of the separated animal will be distributed
through the whole group-soul after his death.
It would be impossible to take again out of the
bucket the same glass of water, but every
glassful taken out afterwards will necessarily be
coloured by the matter brought in from that
first glass. If it were possible to take out of
the bucket exactly the same molecules of water,
to reproduce the first glassful exactly, that
would be a veritable reincarnation; but since
that is not possible, we have instead the reab-
sorption of the temporary soul into the group-
soul—a process in which, nevertheless, every-
thing that has been gained by the temporary
separation is carefully preserved.

Not one glass at a time only, but many glasses
simultaneously, are filled from each bucket ;
and each one of them brings back to the group-
soul its own quota of evolved quality. Thus
in time many different qualities are developed
within each group-soul, and of course manifest
themselves as inherent in every animal which is
an expression of it. Hence come the definite
instincts with which certain creatures are born.
The duckling, the moment it is set free from
the egg, seeks the water and can swim fearlessly,


44 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


even though it may have been hatched by a
hen which dreads water, and is terribly worried
to find her charges rushing to what she supposes
to be destruction. But that fragment of a
group-soul which is functioning through the
duckling knows perfectly well from previous
experience that the water is its natural element,
and the tiny body fearlessly carries out its
behests.

All the while within each group-soul the
tendency to further and further subdivision is
steadily working. It manifests itself in a
phenomenon which, though upon a higher plane,
has a curious resemblance to the way in which a
cell divides. In the group-soul, which may be
thought of as vividly animating a great mass of
matter on the mental plane, a kind of scarcely
perceptible film appears, as we might suppose a
sort of barrier gradually to form itself across the
bucket. The water at first filters through this
barrier to some extent, but nevertheless the
glasses of water taken out from one side of that
barrier are always returned to the same side, so
that by degrees the water on one side becomes
differentiated from the water on the other, and
then the barrier gradually deusifies and becomes
impenetrable, so that we have eventually two
buckets imstead of one.

This proéess is constantly repeated, until by


THE ANIMAL GROUP-SOUL. 45


the time that we reach the really higher animals
‘@ comparatively small number of bodies is
attached to each group-soul. It is found that
the individualization which lifts an entity
definitely from the animal kingdom into the
human, can take place only from certain types
of animals. Only among domesticated creatures,
and by no means among all classes of even those,
does this individualization occur. It must of
course be remembered that we are very little
more than half through the evolution of this
chain of worlds, and it is only at the end of this
evolution that the animal kingdom is expected
to attain humanity. Naturally, therefore, any
animal which is now attaining or even approach-
ing individualization must be very remarkably
in advance of the others, and the number of such
cases is consequently very small. Still they do
occasionally occur, and they are of extreme
interest to us as indicating the manner in which
we ourselves came in existence in the remote
past. The lunar animal kingdom, out of which
we were individualized, was at a somewhat lower
level than the animal kingdom of the present
day ; but the principle adopted seems to have
been almost precisely the same.


CHaprer VIII.
THE UPWARD CURVE. :


BEFORE explaining this in detail we must refer
once more to Plate IV. It will be remembered
that the variously coloured bands which occupy
the principal part of this diagram are intended
to signify various stages in the upward progress
of the monadic essence. In its downward
course, which is indicated by the column to
the left of the diagram, it simply aggregates
round itself the different kinds of matter on
the various planes, evolving that matter by
accustoming and adapting it to convey vibra-
tions and impressions, and at the same time
acquiring for itself the power to receive and
respond readily to these impressions at their
respective levels. But when it has reached the
lowest point of its immersion in matter, and
turns to begin the grand upward sweep of
evolution towards divinity, its work then is
somewhat different. Its object then is to
develope its consciousness fully at these various


| INVOLUTION & EVOLUTION


|| MHAPARANIRYANIC PLANE
— PIRANIRIANIC PLANE


A Pee ee ae


a |


a MUNERAL . ‘iw ANIMAL . i am


IV.


THE UPWARD OURVE. 47


levels, learning to control the bodies which it
constructs from them, and to use them definitely
as vehicles, so that they shall not only serve
as bridges to carry impressions from without
to the soul, but shall also enable that soul to
express itself on their several planes through
their instrumentality.

In this effort it naturally begins with the
lowest matter, since its vibrations, though they
are the largest and coarsest, are also the least
powerful or penetrating, and therefore the easiest
to control. Thus it happens that man, although
possessing in a more or less latent condition so
many higher principles, is yet at first for a long
time fully conscious only in his physical body,
and afterwards very gradually developes the
consciousness in his astral vehicle, while in
his mental body it comes at a still later
stage.

Turning to Plate IV. we see that we have #
separate band or ribbon to represent each of the
kingdoms. It will be noticed that in the band
corresponding to the mineral kingdom we have
the full width developed only in the denser part
of the physical plane, and that in the part of the
band which corresponds to etheric physical
‘matter the band grows steadily narrower as we
approach the higher planes. This of course
indicates that in the mineral kingdom the control


48 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


of the soul over the higher part of the etheric
matter is not yet perfectly developed. It will
be noticed also that there is a small point of
red, showing that a certain amount of conscious-
ness is already working though astral matter—
that is to say, that a certain amount of desire is
already manifesting itself.

It may seem strange to many people to speak
of desire in connection with the mineral
kingdom; but every chemist knows that in
chemical affinity we have already a very distinct
manifestation of preference on the part of various
so-called elements; and what is that but a
commencement of desire? One element has so
strong a desire for the company of another that
it will instantly forsake, in order to join it, any
other substance with which it may happen to be
in association. Indeed, it is by means of our
knowledge of these likes and dislikes of the
various elements that we obtain various gases
when we want them. For example, oxygen and
hydrogen are combined in water, but if we throw
sodium into the water we shall find that oxygen
likes sodium better than hydrogen, and promptly
deserts the latter to combine with the former ;
so we have a compound called sodium hydroxide
instead of water, and the released hydrogen
escapes. Or if we put some zinc filings into


diluted hydrochloric acid (which is hydrogen


THE UPWARD CURVE. 49


combined with chlorine) we find that the chlorine
proceeds to abandon the hydrogen in order to
join the zinc, so that zinc chloride remains, while
hydrogen is given off and may be collected ; in
fact, this is one of the ordinary methods of
obtaining it. So it will be seen that we are
justified in speaking of the action of desire in
the mineral kingdom.

If we now look at the band which symbolizes
the vegetable kingdom we shall see that it is of
full width not only in the dense physical, but
also in the etheric part. We shall see also that
the point indicating desire is more fully de-
veloped, indicating a far greater capacity of
utilizing the lower astral matter. Those who
have studied botany will be aware that likes and
dislikes (that is to say, forms of desire) are very
much more prominent in the vegetable world
than in the mineral, and that many plants
exhibit a great deal of ingenuity and sagacity
in attaining their ends, limited though these
ends may be as regarded from our point of
view.

When we turn to the band representing the
animal kingdom we find that consciousness has
advanced very much further. It will be noticed
that the band is of full width not only through
the whole of the physical plane, but in the
lowest sub-plane of the astral as well, showing


CuHapPTerR [X.
HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS.


WHEN we turn to the consideration of the band
of colour which represents humanity, we at once
note several quite new features. In this case the
band retains its full width not only through the
whole of the physical plane, but also through the
whole of the astral, showing that man is capable
of all varieties of desire to the fullest possible
extent, the highest as well as the lowest. It also
exhibits the full width in the lowest level of the
mental plane, indicating that as far as that level
is concerned, man’s reasoning faculty 1s fully
developed. Higher than that, however, the
development is not yet full; but an entirely new
factor is introduced in the presence of the dark
blue triangle on the higher mental plane, indicat-
ing the possession by the man of a causal body
and a permanent reincarnating ego. This blue
triangle corresponds to the other triangle in the
circle which is seen in Plate III. In the case
of the great majority of mankind the point


HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS. 53


which indicates consciousness of any sort upon
the higher mental levels does not rise beyond
the third or lowest of them. It is only very
gradually, as his development progresses, that
the ego is able to raise his consciousness to the
second or the first of these sub-planes.

It is not, of course, implied that the man can
function consciously at these heights as yet. In
the lower types of men, desire is still emphatically
the most prominent feature, though the mental
development has also proceeded to some extent.
Such a man during life would have a dim con-
sciousness in his astral body while asleep, and
after death he would be very fully conscious and
active on the lower astral sub-planes. In fact,
that lower astral life would probably form nearly
the whole of the interval between his incarna-
tions, for as yet he would have practically
nothing of the life of the heaven-world. The
consciousness of the man at this level is un-
doubtedly centred in quite the lower part of the
astral body, and his life is principally governed
by sensations connected with the physical plane.

The ordinary man of our own race is still living
almost entirely in his sensations, although the
higher astral is coming into play; but still for
him the prominent question which guides his
conduct is not in the least what is right or
reasonable to do, but simply what he himself


54 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


desires to do. The more cultured and developed
among us are beginning to govern desire by
reason—that is to say, the centre of conscious-
ness is gradually transferring itself from the
higher astral to the lower mental. Slowly as
the man progresses it moves up further still, and
the man begins to be dominated by principle
rather than by interest and desire.

To be able to use these different bodies as de-
finite vehicles in which the soul can consciously
function is another and still greater develop-
ment. Any fairly advanced and cultured man
among the higher races of mankind has already
consciousness fully developed in the astral body,
and is perfectly capable of employing it as a
vehicle if he were only in the habit of doing so.
But to do this a definite effort would be necessary.
The enormous majority of these men know
nothing at all about the astral body or its uses,
and so naturally make no effort of any kind.
They have behind them the tradition of the
immemorial custom of a long series of lives in
which the astral faculties have not been used, for
these faculties have been gradually and slowly
growing inside a shell, something as a chicken.
grows inside the egg. The shell is composed of
the great mass of self-centred thought in which
the ordinary man is so hopelessly entombed.
Whatever may have been the thoughts chiefly


HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS. 55


engaging his mind during the day, he usually
continues them when falling asleep, and is thus
surrounded by so dense a wall of his own making
that he practically knows nothing of what is
going on outside. Occasionally, but very rarely,
some violent impact from without, or some
strong desire of his own from within, may tear
aside this curtain of mist for the moment and
permit him to receive some definite impression ;
but even then the fog closes in again almost
immediately, and he dreams on unobservantly
as before. It is obvious that this shell may be
broken in various ways.

First.—In the far distant future the slow but
sure evolution of the man will undoubtedly
gradually dissipate the curtain of mist, so that
he will become conscious by degrees of the
mighty world of intensely active life which
surrounds him.

Secondly.—The man himself, having learnt the
facts of the case, may by steady and persistent
effort from within clear away the mist, and
gradually overcome the inertia resulting from
ages of inactivity. This is, of course, merely the
hastening of the natural process, and will be in
no way harmful if the man’s development is
proceeding with equal rapidity along other lines.
But if he should gain this awakening without
having attained at the same time the strength,


56 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


knowledge and moral development which would
naturally have preceded it, he would be liable
to the double danger of misusing such powers as
he might acquire, and of being overwhelmed by
fear in the presence of forces which he could
neither understand nor control.

Thirdly.—It may happen that some accident,
or some unlawful use of magical ceremonies, may
so rend the veil that it may never be wholly
closed ; and then the man is left in the terrible
condition so well described by Madame Blavatsky
in her story of “‘ A Bewitched Life,” or by Bulwer
Lytton in his powerful novel Zanoni.

Fourthly.—Some friend who knows the man
thoroughly, and believes him capable of facing
the dangers of the astral plane and doing good
unselfish work there, may act upon this cloud-
shell from without and rouse the man to definite
action. ‘This is the awakening to which refer-
ence 1s made in our books, and naturally the
man who does this undertakes a very serious
responsibility towards the man whom he thus
arouses. ‘The elder worker assumes this respon-
sibility only when by long and intimate acquaint-
ance he has become reasonably certain that the
younger possesses in some measure all the
qualifications mentioned in Chapter XIV. of
Invisible Helpers ; but the need of helpers is so
preat that every aspirant may be absolutely


HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS. 57


certain that there will not be a day’s delay in
arousing him as soon as he is seen to be ready.
Meantime any who feel themselves overlooked
have always the resource of adopting the
second method to which I referred above: but
before doing so they would be well advised to
assure themselves absolutely and beyond any
possibility of doubt that they possess the
requisite development along other lines, as
otherwise their fall will be speedy and certain.

But, as has been explained in the books, a
great deal of work may be done, and constantly
is done, short of this full awakening. A man
who falls asleep with the definite intention in
his mind of doing a certain piece of work will
assuredly go and attempt to carry out his
intention as soon as he is freed from his physical
body; but having done his best in connection
with that particular case, he is almost certain to
let the fog close round him once more, simply
because of the fact that he has for ages been
unaccustomed to initiate a fresh line of action
when functioning apart from the physical brain.
Many of our members make a practice of thus
ensuring that they may perform at least one
helpful action each night; and of course in
many cases the action is such as to occupy the
whole of the time spent in sleep, so that they
are practically exerting themselves to the fullest


58 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


extent possible for them. We should also
remember that it is by no means only during
sleep than we can give effective help; the strong
living thought can be sent out at any moment,
and can never fail in producing its effect. But
the difference between the one who has been
definitely awakened and the one who has not, is
that in the case of the former the curtain of mist
has been for ever dissipated, while in the latter
it merely opens for the time and then shuts down
as impenetrably as before.


CHAPTER X.
THE THIRD OUTPOURING.


In order to understand the formation of the
soul in man there is another great factor which
must be taken into account. This is the third
outpouring of the divine life, which comes from
the first aspect of the Logos, and makes within
each man that distinctive ‘“‘spirit of the man
which goeth upward” in contradistinction to
‘the spirit of the beast which goeth down-
ward’’—which, being interpreted, means that
while the soul of the animal pours back after
the death of the body into the group-soul or
block to which it belongs, the divine spirit in
man cannot so fall back again, but rises ever
onward and upward towards the divinity from
whom it came. This third wave of life is
represented by the band on the right in Plate
III., and it will be noticed that in this case
the outpouring does not become darker or
more materialized as it proceeds. Of itself it
descends no lower than the buddhic plane,


60 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


though its down-stretching points rest on the
atomic mental. There it hovers like a mighty
cloud, waiting for an opportunity of effecting a
junction with the second outpouring, which is
slowly rising to meet it. Although this cloud
seems to exercise a constant attraction upon the
essence below it, yet the development which makes
the union a possibility must be made from below.

The illustration usually given in the Kast to
help the neophyte to comprehend this process
is that of the formation of the water-spout.
There also we have a great cloud hovering
above the sea, on the surface of which waves
are constantly forming and moving. Presently
a great finger is extended from the cloud—an
inverted cone of violently whirling vapour.
Underneath this a vortex is rapidly formed in
the ocean, but instead of being a depression in
its surface, as is the ordinary whirlpool, it is a
whirling cone rising above that surface.
Steadily the two draw closer and closer to-
gether, until they come so near that the power
of attraction is strong enough to overleap the
intervening space, and suddenly a great column
of mingled water and vapour is formed where
nothing existed before.

In just the same way the group-souls of the
animal kingdom are constantly throwing parts
of themselves into incarnation, like the tempor-


THE THIRD OUTPOURING. 61


ary waves on the surface of the sea, and the
process of differentiation continues until at last
a time comes when one of these waves rises high
enough to enable a down-stretching point from
the hovering cloud to effect a junction with it,
and it is then drawn up into a new existence
neither in the cloud nor in the sea, but between
the two and partaking of the nature of both.
Thus it is separated from the group-soul of
which hitherto it has formed a part, and falls
back again into the sea no more.

Anyone who has made a friend of a really
intelligent domestic animal will readily under-
stand how this happens, for he will have seen
the intense devotion manifested by the animal
for the master whom he loves, and the great
mental efforts which he makes to understand
his master’s wishes and to please him. Ob-
viously both the animal's intellect and his
power of affection and devotion will be
enormously developed by these efforts; and
the time will come when in this way he will
raise himself so much above the general level
of his group-soul that he will absolutely break
away from it, and in doing so become a fit
vehicle for this third outpouring, by the junction
with which the individual is formed, which
thereafter follows its own course of evolution
back again to divinity.


62 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


It is sometimes asked why, if the essence was
divine in the beginning, and returns again to
divinity at the end—if the human monad was
all-wise and all-good when it started on its long
journey through matter—it was necessary for
it to go through all this evolution, including as
it does much sorrow and suffering, simply to
return to its source in the end. But this
question is based on a complete misconception
of the facts. When what is sometimes, though
perhaps inappropriately, called the human
monad came forth from the divine it was not a
monad at all—still less an all-wise and all-good
one. There was no developed individualization
in it—it was simply a mass of monadic essence.
The difference between its condition when
issuing forth and when returning is exactly
like that between a great mass of shining
nebulous matter and the solar system which is
eventually formed out of it. The nebula is
beautiful, no doubt, but vague and _ useless;
the sun formed from it by slow evolution pours
life and heat and light ufpon many worlds and
their inhabitants.

Or we may take another analogy. The
human body is composed of countless millions
of tiny particles, and some of them are: con-
stantly being thrown off from it. Suppose
that it were possible for each of these particles’


THE THIRD OUTPOURING. 63


to go through some kind of evolution by means
of which it would in time become a human
being, we should not say that because it had
been in a certain sense human at the beginning
of that evolution, it had therefore not gained
anything when it reached the end. The essence
comes forth as a mere outpouring of force, even
though it be divine force; it returns in the
form of thousands of millions of mighty adepts,
each capable of himself developing into a Logos.

It is this wonderful course of evolution that
we shall try to indicate to a certain extent in
our series of illustrations, and though the most
that we can do is to endeavour to pourtray the
change which takes place in the various vehicles
of the man as he developes, it is yet hoped that
some idea of the progress may thus be conveyed
to those who are as yet unable to see. ‘There is
one point in connection with the junction which
we have been trying to describe which requires
further explanation. A curious change has taken
place in the position of the monadic essence.
All the way through its long ages of evolution
in all the previous kingdoms, it has invariably
been the ensouling and energizing principle—the
force behind whatever forms it may have tem-
porarily occupied. But now that which has
hitherto been the ensouler becomes itself in turn
the ensouled; from that monadic essence which


64 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


was part of the animal group-soul is now
formed the causal body—a splendid ovoid form
of living light, into which the still more glorious
light and life from above has descended, and by
means of which that higher life is enabled to
express itself as the human individuality.

Nor, as I have explained when writing upon
this subject in The Christian Creed, should any
think that it is an unworthy goal to reach as a
result of so long and weary an evolution, thus to
have become a vehicle of this last and grandest
outpouring of the divine Spirit; for it must be
remembered that without the preparation of this
vehicle to act as the connecting link, the im-
mortal individuality of man could never come
into being. No fragment of the work which has
been done through all these ages is lost, and
nothing has been useless. For the upper triad
thus formed becomes a transcendent unity, “‘ not
by conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by
taking of the manhood into God.” Without that
long course of evolution this final consummation
could never have been reached, that man should
rise to the level of divinity, and that thus the
very Logos Himself should be made more perfect,
in that He has of His own offspring those upon
whom that love which is the essence of His
divine nature has for the first time been fully
lavished, and by whom it can be returned.


THE THIRD OUTPOURING. 65


A stage of development much in advance of
the ordinary man is typified for us by the band
on the extreme right of the diagram in Plate IV.
There we have the image of the highly spiritual
man, whose consciousness has already evolved
even beyond the causal body, so that he is able
to function freely upon the buddhic plane, and
has also a consciousness (at least when out of
the body), upon a plane still higher than that,
as is indicated by the lilac point. It will be
seen that in his case the centre of consciousness
(typified by the widest part of the ribbon) is not
at all, as before, upon the physical and astral
planes, but lies between the higher mental and
the buddhic. The higher mental and the higher
astral are in him much more developed than
their lower parts, and although he still retains
his physical body, as is shown by the fact that
the lower point of the band still reaches the
lowest physical limit, yet this 2s only a point,
indicating that he holds this physical form
merely for the convenience of working in it, and
not in any way because his thoughts and desires
are fixed there. He has long ago transcended
all karma which could bind him to incarnation ;
and if he now takes upon himself the vehicles
of the lower planes, it is simply in order that
through them he may be able to work for the
good of humanity, and to pour out at these


66 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


levels influence which otherwise could not de-
scend thereto. For the vibrations of certain
types of the divine force are in themselves too
fine to be appreciated by the grosser essence of
these lower planes; but if they descend to them
through the ‘channel of one whose vehicles at
these levels are perfectly pure, then they can
be appreciated even down here, and so their
work may be done.

When this causal body is newly formed it is
transparent yet iridescent, like a gigantic soap-
bubble, when viewed by the higher clairvoyant
sight—that is to say, when examined at its own
level by one who has fully developed the faculties
of his own causal body, for it is only to such
sight that 1t would be visible at all. But at this
stage it also resembles the soap-bubble in being
almost empty in appearance, for the divine force
which is really contained within it has as yet
had no time to develope its latent qualities by
learning to vibrate in response to impacts from
without, and consequently there is little colour
to show. What little there is comes because
certain qualities have been already evolved
within the group-soul of which that causal body
previously formed a part, and it is in process of
communicating these to the force within, so that
there is already a certain vibration at the rates
corresponding to these; and consequently faint


THE THIRD OUTPOURING. 67


indications of these rates of vibrations are even
now observable within the form as dawning
gleams of colour. Plate V. will give us some
idea of its appearance at (or soon after) this stage,
and it may be taken to represent the causal body
of the primitive man. The grey shading at the
left side of this illustration must not be taken
as indicating any quality in the body ; in fact it
is not really present in it at all, but is intro-
duced by the artist simply to give the effect of
rotundity to the bubble.

But although the man now possesses a causal
body, he is very far from being sufficiently
conscious to receive or respond to impressions
at that level; and since the appointed method
for the evolution of his latent qualities is, as has
been said, by means of impacts from without, it
is obviously necessary that he should descend far
enough to meet such impacts as can affect him.
Therefore it is that the method of progress
destined for him is that by reincarnation—that
is to say, by putting forth part of himself into
these lower planes for the sake of the experience
to be gamed there, and of the qualities which
that experience developes, and then withdrawing
back again into himself, bearing with him the
results of his endeavour. Indeed, this putting
forth of a part of himself into incarnation may
be. not inaptly likened to an investment; he


68 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


expects, if all goes well, to reclaim not only the
whole of his capital but also a considerable
amount of interest, and he usually obtains this.
But as with other investments, there is occa-
sionally an opportunity of loss as well as of gain ;
for it is possible that some portion of that which
he puts down may become so entangled with
the lower matter through which it has to work,
that it may be impossible wholly to reclaim it.
The consideration of how this may happen hardly
belongs to our present subject, but it will be
found fully explained in The Astral Plane,
p. 50.

It is not my purpose here to present the
numerous arguments in favour of the doctrine
of reincarnation. Those will be found fully de-
tailed in the second of our Theosophical Manuals.
In this book I am simply endeavouring to deal
with the facts as seen, for it must be remembered
that this process of reincarnation can be followed
through all its stages by sufficiently developed
clairvoyance, and that therefore for many
Theosophical students it is not a hypothesis, but
a matter of direct knowledge.

The soul puts himself down under the impulse
of what in the Kast is called Zrishna, the thirst
for manifested existence, the desire to feel
himself alive. He plunges about in the sea of
matter, he strengthens self by selfishness, and


THE THIRD OUTPOURING. 69


shows himself to astral vision under the very
unlovely guise depicted in Plate VII. Very
gradually he learns that there is a higher
evolution, and that the strong shell of selfish-
ness (which was necessary for the formation of
a powerful centre) becomes a hindrance to the
growth of that centre after it has once been
formed, and so must be broken up and thrown
aside. Slowly through many incarnations his
astral presentment developes from that of Plate
VII. to that of Plate X., and later still to that of
Plate XXIII. We shall try to follow this evolu-
tion, and illustrate it at its different stages.


CHAPTER XI.
HOW MAN EVOLVES.


He puts himself down first into the matter
nearest to him, that of the lower levels of the
mental plane. Immediately, and in a certain
sense automatically, a vesture of this matter is
drawn round him, a vesture which is an exact
expression of such qualities as already exist in
him, so far at least as they can be expressed at
that level.

For it must never be forgotten that each stage
in the descent means submission to limitation,
and that consequently no expression of the soul
upon any lower level can ever be a perfect
expression. It is merely an indication of its
qualities, just as a picture painted by an artist
is a representation in two dimensions of a scene
existing (or imagined as existing) in three
dimensions. The picture represents the scene
as nearly as it can be represented on a flat
surface by means of perspective, but in reality
almost every line and angle in it must of


HOW MAN EVOLVES. 71


necessity be unlike the line or angle which it
is intended to image. In exactly the same way
the true quality as it exists in the soul cannot
be expressed in matter of any lower level; the
vibrations of the lower matter are altogether too
dull and sluggish to represent it, the string is
not sufficiently stretched to enable it to respond
to the note which resounds from above. It
can, however, be tuned to correspond with it
in a lower octave, like a man’s voice singing
in unison with a boy’s, expressing the same
sound as nearly as the capabilities of the inferior
organism permit.

Thus the colour which expresses a certain
quality in the causal body will express it also
in the mind body and even in the astral body,
but the colour will be less delicate, less luminous
and ethereal as we descend. The difference
between these octaves of colour is very far
greater than can be in any way represented
upon paper or canvas; we can endeavour to
image it only by stages or qualities, for even
the next octave above the physical is entirely
beyond the conception of our mind as long as
it works under the limitation of the physical
brain. The lowest astral colours may be thought
of as dark and coarse, and they certainly are so
as compared to the higher and purer hues, but
at least they are luminous in their coarseness ;


72 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


they are not so much dark colour in our ordinary
sense of the word, as dimly-glowing fire.

At each stage as we ascend we shall find
that while the higher matter exhibits a splendid
power of expression of the nobler qualities, it
gradually loses the power to express some which
are lower. The peculiarly unpleasant hue which
represents coarse sensuality in the astral body is
quite incapable of reproducing itself in mental
matter. It may be objected that this. surely
should not be so, as a man may undoubtedly
have a sensual thought; but this idea does not
seem accurately to represent the facts. A man
may form a mental image which evokes sensual
feeling in him, but the thought and the image
will express themselves in astral matter, and
not in mental. It will leave a very definite
impression of its peculiar hue upon the astral
body, but in the mental body it will intensify
the colours which represent its concomitant
mental evils of selfishness, conceit and decep-
tion. These in their turn will find no expression
whatever in the resplendent glory of the causal
body, but every intensification of them in the
lower vehicle, every indulgence in them down
here, tends somewhat to dim the luminosity of
the colours representing the development of the
opposite virtues in that higher existence which
ig so much nearer to reality.


HOW MAN EVOLVES. 73


The process by which the colours are produced
works always from below upward. The man
feels some impact from without, and in response
to it a wave of emotion of some sort is awakened
within him. That means that for the moment,
while the emotion endures, the particular type
of vibration (which represents it) is predominant
in the astral body, as will presently be shown in
our illustrations. After a time the emotion dies
down, and the colour representing it fades away
—but not entirely. A certain proportion of the
matter of the astral body is normally vibrating
at the especial rate appropriate to that emotion,
and every great outburst of it adds somewhat
to this proportion.

For example, most ordinary men have within
them a certain amount of irritability, which
expresses itself in the astral body as a scarlet
cloud. When the man manifests that irrit-
ability by some special outburst of temper the
whole astral vehicle 1s temporarily suffused with
scarlet, as will presently be shown. The fit of
passion subsides, and the scarlet flush dies away,
but it has left its traces behind, for there is
a slight permanent addition to the size of the
scarlet cloud of irritability, and the whole
matter of the astral body is a little more ready
than before to respond to the vibration of anger
when any opportunity offers. Naturally, exactly


74 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


the same course is followed in the case of any
other emotion, whether it be good or bad; and
thus we see the clear manifestation in matter
of the moral law, that every time we yield to
a passion of any kind, we make it a little more
difficult for ourselves to resist its next attack ;
while every successful effort at its repression
makes the next victory a little easier.

The comparatively permanent colour in the
astral body means a persistent vibration, which
in course of time produces its due effect upon
the mental body also, creating a vibration of
similar character at that much higher level—
provided, that is, that the vibration is of
such a character as can be reproduced in
that finer matter. It is by the same method
of exciting sympathetic vibration that the
higher qualities developed by the life on lower
planes are gradually built into the causal body
itself, though at that level, fortunately for us,
only the effect of the loftier emotions can be
recorded.

So, in the course of his many lives, man
developes within himself many qualities, some
good, some evil ; but while all good development
is steadily stored up and accumulated within
the causal body, that which is evil can express
itself only through the lower vehicles, and so is
comparatively impermanent. Under the mighty


HOW MAN EVOLVES. 75


law of divine justice, every man _ receives
absolutely the exact results of his own action,
whether it be bad or good; but the evil
necessarily works out its effects upon the
lower planes, because it is only in the matter
of those planes that its vibrations can be ex-
pressed, and it has no overtones capable of
awakening a response in the causal body. Its
force, therefore, is all expended at its own
level, and it reacts in its entirety upon its creator
in his astral and physical life, whether it be in
this or in future incarnations.

The good action or thought produces its
results upon these lower planes too, but in
addition to that it has the immensely higher
and permanent effect upon the causal body
which is so prominent a factor in the evolution
of man. Thus, while all alike produce their
results down here, and manifest them in the
various temporary vehicles, it is the good
qualities only which are retained as so much
definite gain to the real man. The evil meets
him again and again on his successive descents
into incarnation, until he has vanquished it,
and finally rooted out from his vehicles all
tendency to respond to it—until, in fact, he is
no longer liable to be swept away by any
passion or desire, but has learnt to rule himself
from within.


CHAPTER XII.
WHAT HIS BODIES SHOW US.


THis process of learning is a gradual one, and
the earlier manifestations of the undeveloped
man upon the lower planes are by no means
beautiful to see. We have not chosen absolutely
the primitive man for illustration, because in his
case there is as yet so very little to illustrate ;
but the savage whose causal body is represented
in Plate V. would be likely to possess much
such a mental body as is shown in Plate VI., and
an astral body of the type given in Plate VIL.

It must be understood that all these bodies
occupy the same space, and interpenetrate
one another; so that in looking clairvoyantly
at the savage we should observe his physical
body surrounded by a luminous ovoid mist,
but that mist would present to us the appear-
ance of Plate V., Plate VI., or Plate VII.
according to the type of clairvoyance which
we employed. Using our own astral senses,
we should see his astral body only, and


WHAT HIS BODIES SHOW US. V7


should learn from that what passions or
emotions or sensations he was at the moment
experiencing, and to which of these he was in
the habit of yielding himself frequently. This
is the field of the manifestation of desire—the
mirror in which every feeling is instantly
reflected, in which every thought even which
has in it anything that touches the personal
self must express itself. From its material a
bodily form is given to the dark elementals
which men create and set in motion by evil
wishes and malicious feelings; from it also are
bodied forth the beneficent elementals called
into life by good wishes, gratitude and love.
As might naturally be expected, there is little
of permanency about its manifestations; its
colours, its brilliancy, the rate of its pulsations,
are all changing from moment to moment. An
outburst of anger will charge the whole astral
body with deep-red flashes on a black ground ;
a sudden fright will instantaneously veil every-
thing in a mist of ghastly, livid grey. Never-
theless, there will be moments when even this
fluctuating astral vehicle 1s comparatively at
rest, and it will then show a definite group of
colours which retain more or less the same
arrangement. Such a moment is that chosen
for our illustration in Plate VII., and from
this, as we shall presently see, a good deal


78 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


of information about the man may be
obtained.

Using our mental sight, it would be the
mental body of our savage friend that we
should perceive, and it would probably resemble
that illustrated in Plate VI. As far as its
colours are the same, this body would agree
fairly with the astral in a condition of repose,
but it would also be much more than this, for
in it would appear whatever might be developed
in the man of spirituality and intellectuality—
not much yet, perhaps, in the case of our savage,
but of considerable importance later on, as we
shall see in due course. From this mental body
we are therefore able to deduce what kind of
man he is, and what sort of use he has made
of his life so far in this incarnation.

But if we are fortunate enough to be able to
apply to the problem the perfect power of vision
exercised through our causal body, then what we
see is the causal body of the savage, and from
that we know how far his real life as a soul has
advanced, and what progress the ego has made
in its unfoldment towards divinity. It will be
seen that, before the trained clairvoyant who is
able to employ all these various degrees of sight
in turn, the entire life of the man in all its stages
lies open like a book; for on these higher planes
no man can hide or disguise himself; what he


WHAT HIS BODIES SHOW US. 79


truly is, that he is seen to be by any unprejudiced
spectator.

Unprejudiced, I say; because we must never
forget that each sees the other through the
medium of his own vehicles, and so is somewhat
in the position of one looking at a landscape
through coloured glass. Until he has learnt to
make allowance for this influence, he will be liable
to consider as most prominent in the man
at whom he is looking just those characteristics
to which he finds himself most ready to respond ;
but with a little careful practice he soon frees
himself from the distortion produced by this
personal equation, and is able to read clearly and
accurately.


CHAPTER XIII.
COLOURS AND THEIR MEANING.


BEFORE we can intelligently study the detail of
these various bodies, we must familiarize our-
selves with the general meaning of the various
shades of colour in them, as indicated in our
frontispiece. It will be realised that almost
infinite variety is possible in their combination.
I am endeavouring to give, as nearly as possible,
the exact shade which expresses the unmixed
emotion whose name is attached to it; but
human emotions are hardly ever unmixed, and
so we have constantly to classify or to analyse
indeterminate hues in the formation of which
many factors have played their part.

Anger, for example, is represented by scarlet,
‘and love by crimson and rose; but both anger
and love are often deeply tinged with selfishness,
and just so far as that is the case will the purity
of their respective colours be dimmed by the
hard brown-grey which is so characteristic of
this vice. Or again, either of them may be


COLOURS AND THEIR MEANING. 81


mingled with pride, and that would instantly
show itself by a tinge of deep orange. Many
examples of suchcommingling, and of the resultant
shades of colour, will be seen as we continue our
investigation ; but our first endeavour must be
to learn to read the meaning of the simpler hues.
We will give here a list of some of these which
are most common.

Black.—Thick black clouds in the astral body
indicate hatred and malice. When a person
unhappily gives way to a fit of passionate anger,
the terrible thought-forms of hate may generally
be seen floating in his aura like coils of heavy,
poisonous smoke.

Red.—Deep-red flashes, usually on a_ black
ground, show anger; and this will be more or
less tinged with brown as there is more or less
of direct selfishness in the type of anger. What
is sometimes called “noble indignation” on
behalf of some one oppressed or injured may
express itself in flashes of brilliant scarlet on the
ordinary background of the aura.

Lurid, sanguinary red—a colour which is
quite unmistakable, though not easy to describe
—aindicates sensuality.

Brown.—Dull brown-red, almost rust-colour,
shows avarice ; and it usually arranges itself in
parallel bars across the astral body, giving a very
curious appearance.


82 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


Dull, hard brown-grey signifies selfishness,
and is unfortunately one of the very commonest
colours in the astral body.

_Greenish-brown, lit up by deep red or scarlet
flashes, denotes jealousy, and in the case of the
ordinary man there is nearly always a good deal
of this colour present when he is what is called
“in love.”

Grey.—Heavy leaden grey expresses deep
depression, and where this is habitual its
appearance is sometimes indescribably gloomy
and saddening. This colour also has the curious
characteristic of arranging itself in parallel
lines, as has that of avarice, and both
give the impression that their unfortunate
victim is imprisoned within a kind of astral
cage.

Livid grey, a most hideous and frightful hue,
shows fear.

Crimson.—This colour indicates love, and is
often the most beautiful feature in the vehicles
of the average man. Naturally it varies very
greatly with the nature of the love. It may be
dull, heavy and deeply tinged with the brown
of selfishness, if the so-called love occupies
itself chiefly with the consideration of how
much affection is received from somebody else,
how much return it is getting for its invest-
ment. But if the love be of that kind that


COLOURS AND THEIR MEANING. 83


thinks never of itself at all, nor of what it
receives, but only of how much it can give,
and how entirely it can pour itself forth as a
willing sacrifice for the sake of the loved one,
then it will express itself in the most lovely
rose-colour; and when this rose-colour is
exceptionally brillant and tinged with lilac,
it shows the more spiritual love for humanity.
The intermediate possibilities are countless ;
and the affection may of course be tinged in
various other ways, as by pride or jealousy.

Orange.—This colour is always significant of
pride or ambition, and has almost as many
variations as the last-mentioned, according to
the nature of the pride or the ambition. It is
not infrequently found in union with irritability.

Yellow.—This is a very good colour, implying
always the possession of intellectuality. Its shades
vary very much, and it may be much complicated
by the admixture of various other hues. Gener-
ally speaking, it has a deeper and duller tint if
the intellect is directed chiefly into lower channels,
most especially if the objects are selfish; but it
becomes brilliantly golden, and rises gradually
to a beautiful clear and luminous lemon or
primrose yellow, as it is addressed to higher and
more unselfish objects.

Green.—No colour has more varied significa-
tion than this, and it requires some study to


84 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


interpret it correctly. Most of its manifesta-
tions indicate a kind of adaptability, at first
evil and deceitful, but eventually good and
sympathetic.

Grey-green, a peculiar shade of it which can
hardly be described otherwise than by the
epithet “slimy,” signifies deceit and cunning,
and will be found very prominently in the astral
body of most savages. Unfortunately it is by
no means rare among more civilised men, who
ought loug ago to have passed the stage of
evolution which it indicates. As the man
advances, this hue improves into a_ bright
emerald-green, which still means versatility,
ingenuity and quickness of resource, but no
longer implies any evil intent in connection
with these qualities. It indicates the power
of ‘‘ being all things to all men,” not now for the
purpose of tricking or misleading them, but at
first in order to please them, to obtain their
praise or their favour, and later on, as under-
standing developes, for the purpose of helping
and strengthening them. Eventually it becomes
a lovely pale, luminous blue-green, such as may
sometimes be seen in an exceptionally delicate
sunset sky, and then it shows some of the grandest
qualities of human nature, the deepest sympathy
and compassion, with the power of perfect adapt-
ability which they only can give. In its earlier


COLOURS AND THEIR MEANING. 85


developments a bright apple-green seems always
to accompany strong vitality. |

Blue. — Dark, clear blue usually indicates
religious feeling, but this also varies immensely
according to the type of the feeling, its purity
or bigotry, its selfishness or nobility. It is lable
to be tinted by almost any of the qualities pre-
viously mentioned, so that we may have any
shade from indigo on one side and rich deep
violet on the other, down to a muddy grey-blue
which is at the level of the African’s fetish-
worship. The tinge of love or fear, of deceit or
of pride, may mingle with the hue of religion,
and thus there is a wide range of variation
observable.

Light blue, such as ultramarine or cobalt,
shows devotion to a noble spiritual ideal, and
gradually rises to a luminous lilac-blue, which
indicates the higher spirituality, and is usually
accompanied by sparkling golden stars, repre-
senting elevated spiritual aspirations.

It is easy to understand how almost infinite
may be the combinations and modifications of
all these hues,so that the most delicate gradation
of character or the most evanescent of mingled
feelings is expressed with the greatest accuracy.
The general brilliancy of the astral body, the
comparative definiteness or indefiniteness of
its outline, and the relative brightness of the


86 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


different centres of force, are all points which
have to be taken into consideration in reading
the full meaning of what is seen. Another fact
worth mentioning is that developed or developing
psychical faculties show themselves by means
of the colours which lie beyond the visible
spectrum, so that it is impossible to picture
them with physical hues. The ultra-violet tints
denote the higher and purer developments, while
gruesome combinations of the ultra-red reveal the
wickedness of the dabbler in evil and selfish
forms of magic. Occult advancement shows
itself not only by these colours, but also by the
greater luminosity of the various bodies, by their
increased size and more definite outline, as will
presently be seen in our illustrations.


ee a oa
4 Wl ay '
‘
a ea wo
i e D Wey, WPatey ”
yh rr
in ute ihet
0 tea ale aol hs fe
a ie he
Re Le doa hah .
fe ihe? ss :
Baa jie, pe
ae i ae
Neh ay ney


fr, Tad
Mie ad
ig


CHAPTER XIV.
THE SAVAGE.


APPLYING this information to the consideration
of the mind-body of our savage in Plate VI.,
certain facts about the man at once become
obvious. Although on the whole it is a very
poor and undeveloped mind-body, yet some
progress has already been made. The dull
yellow at the top indicates a certain amount of
intellect, but also shows by the muddiness of the
colour that it is applied exclusively to selfish
ends. The devotion denoted by the gray-blue
must be a fetish-worship, largely tinged with
fear, and prompted by considerations of self-
interest ; while the muddy crimson on our left
suggests a commencement of affection which
must as yet be principally selfish also. The
band of dull orange implies pride, but of quite a
low order; while the large dash of scarlet ex-
presses a strong tendency to anger, which would
evidently blaze out upon very slight provocation.
The broad band of dirty green which occupies so


88 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


great a portion of the body shows forth deceit,
treachery and avarice—the latter quality being
indicated by the brownish tint which is ob-
servable. At the bottom we notice a sort of
deposit of mud colour, suggesting general selfish-
ness and the absence of any desirable quality.

It is just that absence of any well-defined
higher quality which makes us certain that, in
turning to the corresponding astral body (Plate
VII.) we shall find it almost entirely uncontrolled.
Accordingly, we see how enormous a proportion
of this vehicle of desire is occupied exclusively.
by sensuality, indicated by the very unpleasant
brown-red which is almost blood-colour. It is
uot easy to reproduce the peculiar lurid tinge
given by this quality, which is so painfully
common except among the more advanced
souls.

Deceit, selfishness and greed are conspicuous
here, as might be expected, and fierce anger is
also implied by the smears and blots of dull
scarlet. Affection is scarcely indicated at all,
and such intellect and religious feeling as appear
are of the lowest possible kind.

Another point which should be noticed is the
irregularity of the outline of this astral body,
the generally blurred effect, and the manner in
which the colours are arranged. As we pass to
the vehicles of the more evolved human beings


a ae
bat bee cary:


ifr


Wits


‘
ty


THE SAVAGE. 89


we shall find a considerable improvement in this
respect. The colours always to some extent
intermingle and melt into one another, but
nevertheless in the ordinary man they have a
tendency to lie in more or less regular bands,
while the outline of the body becomes fairly
definite and regular. With our savage, how-
ever, all is ill-regulated and confused; he is
obviously a creature of violent and often vicious
impulses to which he instantly yields without
the slightest effort to control them. A very
unpleasant person altogether ; yet every one of
us has passed through this stage, and by the
experience gained in it we have been enabled to
rise out of it to something purer and nobler.

Only some of the lower negro races and the
relics of the third root-race now represent a
stage of evolution as early as this. Many of
those whom we call savages (as, for example;
some among the Zulus, the Maoris, or the South
Sea Islanders) are already considerably developed,
and would compare favourably with the lower
specimens of our own civilization. The astral
bodies of these comparatively superior savages
are usually intermediates between Plate X. and
Plate VII., though naturally there is a wide range
of individual variation.

It will be very necessary for us to hear con-
stantly in mind, in our endeavour to realise the


90 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


appearance of the various vehicles, that the
particles of which they are composed are always
in rapid motion. In certain cases, which will be
specially mentioned in their turn, there are
definite bands and clearly defined lines in these
bodies ; but in the vast majority the clouds of
colour not only melt into one another, but are all
the while rolling over one another, and appearing
and disappearing as they roll. Indeed the
surface of this luminous and brightly-coloured
mist resembles somewhat the surface of violently
boiling water in the way in which the particles
are seen to swirl about, to rise to the surface and
sink back again, and constantly to change places
with one another. So that the various colours
by no means retain always the respective
positions in which they are represented in our
illustrations. Yet it 1s nevertheless true that
they gravitate towards the arrangement indi-
cated—that though the yellow, the rose and the
blue are not always to be found grouped exactly
as depicted, yet in all their whirlings and
rollings they remain near the upper part of the
oval; they are always to be found near the head
of the physical body, when they exist at all,
while the colours indicating selfishness, avarice,
deceit or hatred tend always towards the bottom,
and the great mass of sensual feeling floats
usually between the two.


ei


\"s


Lay euet'e


THE SAVAGE, 91


Each of these rates of vibration (which show
themselves to us as colours) has its own special
type of astral or mental matter in which it can
operate most freely, and the average position of
these colours in the ever-shifting mist-cloud
depends in reality upon the respective specific
gravity of its special matter. The whole, or
almost the whole, of the matter in an astral
body may be temporarily forced by a sudden
rush of passion to vibrate at a certain rate; but
all of it except that to which the vibration is
natural will fall back into its ordinary rate when
the force is removed.

Naturally each man has his individual idio-
syncrasies, and no two are exactly alike; but
each illustration given represents a section of an
average specimen of its class, and its various
colours are shown in that part of the ovoid where
they are usually to be found. The outline of
the physical body is faintly marked inside each
mist-cloud merely to keep clearly before the
reader the conception of its size in comparison
to that of those higher vehicles: though indeed
in this respect there is but little variation until
we come to consider the highly developed man,
when we find that the finer vehicles greatly
increase in size, as will be shown hereafter.


CuHaPTeR XV.
THE ORDINARY PERSON.


Let us now turn from the consideration of the
savage to examine the ordinary average ‘‘ man in
the street” of our own race and period, in order
that we may see what advancement has been
made, and in what way it shows itself in the
various vehicles. For our example we will not
take the student, or the highly cultured and
refined person; but simply the ordinary lower
middle-class man—the small grocer, or clerk, the
concierge, the postman—not the roughest sort
of man, but simply the ordinary average—the
‘“‘commonplace type with a stick and a pipe,’ so
well described in Patience. Looking with appro-
priate sight at the causal body of such a man, we
shall find it at about the degree of development in-
dicated in Plate VIII. It will be seen that there
has been a distinct increase in the content of the
great ovoid film ; a certain amount of exceedingly
delicate and ethereal colour now exists within it,
though it is still less than half filled. The


THE ORDINARY PERSON. 93


general meaning of the colours is the same as at
lower levels, although here they indicate qualities
definitely and permanently acquired by the soul,
and they are many octaves higher than the
colours which represent the same qualities on
inferior planes. It will be seen that something
of the higher intellect, something of the power of
true devotion and true unselfish love, has already
been developed within the man; and whatever
expression of this may be possible upon the
lower planes will be his as a kind of stock-in-
trade or inherent quality in every incarnation
which the future holds in store for him. There
is even already a faint tint of that exceedingly
delicate violet which indicates the capacity of
love and devotion turned towards the highest
ideal, and also a faint hint of the clear green of
sympathy and compassion.

Hixamining the mental body of the ordinary
man as pictured in Plate LX., we find that it al-
ready shows considerable improvement upon that
of the savage. It is not only that there is more
in proportion of intellect, love and devotion ; but
that all of these characteristics have improved
very greatly in their quality. Though very far
yet from being perfectly pure, they are yet
certainly far better in tone than those in Plate
VI. The proportion of pride is quite as high as
before, but at least it is now pride at a higher


94 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


level ; if the man is still proud, it will be rather
of such good qualities as he imagines himself to
possess than merely of physical pre-eminence in
brute force or in cruelty. There is still a good
deal of the scarlet which indicates liability to
anger, but it is noticeable that it now takes a
much lower place in the cloud, which indicates an
improvement in the general quality of the matter
of which this mind-body is composed. The low
type of green in the mental body of the savage
(which indicates deceit very strongly tinged by
avarice and selfishness) required for its vibrations
a type of matter denser and coarser than that
needed by the scarlet of anger. ‘The decidedly
better green which shows in the mental body of
the ordinary man needs for its vibration matter
of a type somewhat less dense than the scarlet ;
and hence apparently the change of relative
position. The green has now advanced to the
indication of a certain amount of versatility and
adaptability, rather than deceit or cunning. A
large proportion of the mind is still occupied
by the brown of selfish tendencies; but even
this colour will be seen to be a trifle warmer and
less grim than before.

If we now turn to Plate X. we shall find the
astral body which corresponds to the mental body
in Plate [X.—the astral body of the ordinary
man. It will be seen that this astral body agrees


ory Fes 0
wt
1 ‘pat ‘


THE ORDINARY PERSON. 95


very closely with its mental, though its colours
are naturally somewhat coarser and it contains
very decided indications of certain passions
which cannot be expressed on the higher plane.
Still it will be found very much improved as
compared with the astral body of the savage on
Plate VII. There is less of sensuality, though
that is still unfortunately one of the most
prominent characteristics ; but at least it is less
utterly brutal and overpowering than it was.
Selfishness is still very prominent, and the
capability of deceit for personal ends is still
undoubtedly present; but already the green
seems to be dividing itself into two distinct
qualities, showing that mere cunning is gradually
becoming adaptability.

This drawing of the astral body represents not
only the average quality of that of the type of
man to which it belongs, but also its average
condition when comparatively at rest. The
astral body of any ordinary person is so very
rarely at rest that we should gain but a very
incomplete idea of the possibilities of its appear-
ance if we omitted to consider it as it is when
affected by sudden impulses or rushes of feeling.
There are also certain more permanent attitudes
of mind which produce modifications of the
astral body that are sufficiently distinctive to
be worthy of remark, and we shall now devote a
few pages to illustrating these various effects.


CHAPTER XVI.
SUDDEN EMOTIONS.


Some of these produce most striking results in
the astral body—results which are well worth
careful study. For instance, by turning to
Plate XI., we shall see an attempt to picture
the effect which is visible when a sudden wave
of strong and perfectly pure affection sweeps
over a person—when, for example, a mother
snatches up her baby and covers it with kisses.
In a moment the astral body is thrown into
violent agitation, and the original colours are for
the time almost obscured. In this, as in all these
cases, the astral body of the ordinary person, as
given in Plate X., is taken as a basis or back-
ground, though during the passage of the violent
emotion, but little is seen of it. If the change
introduced in Plate XI. is analysed it will be
found to consist of four separate parts. Certain
coils or vortices of vivid colour are to be seen,
well-defined and solid-looking, and glowing with
an intense light from within. Each of these is


r

4 ‘yh
ane

mM ty


SUDDEN EMOTIONS. 97


in reality a thought-form of intense affection,
generated within the astral body, and about to
be poured forth from it towards the object of
the feeling. It is difficult to depict these
whirling clouds of living light, but their real
appearance is indescribably lovely.

2. The whole astral body is crossed by hori-
zontal pulsating lines of crimson light, more
difficult to represent accurately even than the
thought-forms, by reason of the exceeding
rapidity of their motion. The general effect,
however, has been very happily caught by the
artist. |

3. A kind of film of rose-colour covers the
surface of the whole astral body, so that all
within is seen through it, as through tinted
glass. In the drawing this shows only at the
edges.

4. A sort of crimson flush filling the entire
astral body, tinging to some extent all the other
hues, and here and there condensing itself into
irregular floating wisps, like half-formed cirrus
clouds.

This magnificent display of astral fireworks
would probably last only a few seconds, and
then the body would rapidly resume its normal
condition. Yet every such rush of feeling pro-
duces its effect; it adds a little to the crimson
in the higher part of the oval, and it makes it


98 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


a little easier for the particles of the astral body
to respond to the next wave of affection which
comes. Transient though such an impulse may
be, yet as it occurs again and again its effects
are cumulative ; and another point which must
not be forgotten is the good influence upon
others which is produced by the radiation of
vivid vibrations of love and joy.


Devotion.


Except that blue is everywhere substituted
for crimson, Plate XII. is almost identical with
Plate XI. It illustrates a sudden accession of
devotional impulse which surged over a nun
while engaged in contemplation. All the four
forms of manifestation which we noted in con-
nection with the impulse of affection are also
observable here—the whirling, gleaming coils,
the rapidly-vibrating horizontal lines, the outer
film and the wisps of cloud—and their significa-
tion is precisely the same, substituting every-
where religious feeling for affection.

So perfect an outburst of devotion is somewhat
rare—much less common than a similarly perfect
outburst of love. A rush of feeling of this
nature, but generally without its definiteness or
precision, may sometimes be seen to occur in the
case of one who offers an act of adoration before
an altar, or perhaps a picture of the Blessed


SUDDEN EMOTIONS. 99


Virgin. Usually the parallel lines would be
less regular and less prominent, and the sharply-
defined coils would be altogether absent, their
place being taken by shapeless clouds of blue
vapour.

Quite often such shapeless clouds of heavy
blue may be seen rolling slowly along like
wreaths of dense smoke over the heads of the
congregation of a church. But this is not at all
observable in the ordinary fashionable church,
where the minds of the men are working over
again the vicissitudes of their latest speculation,
and the ladies are deeply absorbed in the delights
of criticising each other’s millinery; nor does it
ever show itself in those dour ‘‘ protestant” con-
venticles, where there is no thought of anything
so humble as worship or devotion, but only
conceit and self-righteousness, alike in the stilted
and pompous oration of the speaker, and in the
smug disputatious heresy-hunting attitude of the
hearers. But occasionally as an accompaniment
to the heartfelt though unmusical singing among
illiterate dissenters, or sometimes among the
poor peasants in a Catholic church, or more
often still at the hearty and earnest service of
what is called a ritualistic church, a great deal
of very real devotion manifests itself in this way.
It is not perhaps especially intelligent, for the
great blue clouds are rarely lit by even the


100 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


faintest gleam of gold; but at least it is genuine
as far as it goes, and it has undoubtedly an
elevating effect upon those by whom it is felt.

In the great majority of cases, however, devo-
tion aS a sentiment seems to be vague and ill-
defined, and so fine a specimen as that given in
our illustration is indeed rare.


Intense Anger.


Plate XIII. is perhaps the most striking in
appearance of the whole series, and even without
any explanation it would of itself be an eloquent
warning against the folly and wickedness of
yielding to a fit of passion. Asin the previous
cases, the ordinary background of the astral body
is temporarily obscured by the rush of feeling,
but now the strong and vivid thoughts are un-
fortunately those of malice and ill-will. They
express themselves once more as coils or vor-
tices, but this time as heavy, thunderous masses
of sooty blackness, lit up from within by the
lurid glow of active hatred. Less defined wisps
of the same dark cloud are to be seen defiling
the whole astral body, while the fiery arrows of
uncontrolled anger shoot among them like flashes
of lightning. A tremendous and truly awful
spectacle; and the more fully it is understood
the more terrible it appears. For this is the
case of a man who is absolutely transported and


1: et
PaaS a
. +


oat


SUDDEN EMOTIONS. 101


beside himself with rage—a man who for the
time being has utterly lost control of himself,
and is capable of murder or of the most atrocious
cruelties. He may be hurried into the commis-
sion of any crime, and in one moment may
commit an action for which a whole life of
repentance can never atone. Even should the
discipline of education and custom still withhold
him from outward violence, those terrible flashes
are penetrating other astral bodies like swords,
and the man is injuring those about him just as
really as, though less visibly than, if he assaulted
them on the physical plane.

An additional horror is imported by the con-
sideration that while he is thus a source of
danger to others, he is utterly defenceless him-
self. For the moment passion has entirely con-
trolled him; the desire-elemental is supreme, and
the true man has temporarily lost hold of his
vehicle. Under those circumstances another and
stronger will may seize that which he has allowed
to be wrested from him. Another entity, watching
and waiting, may as it were grasp the rudder of
the momentarily abandoned craft, and hold
possession against the true captain on his
return. In other words, at such a moment,
when a man is transported with rage, he is
liable to be seized and obsessed either by a dead
man of similar nature or by some evil artificial


102 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


elemental whose vibrations synchronize with
those which are dominating him. Not only is
he a danger to his fellows, but he is in appalling
danger himself.

The case selected for illustration is of course
an extreme one, and such a condition would not
usually last more than a few minutes. But
every one who falls into a passion exhibits these
characteristics to some extent; and one cannot
but feel that if men only knew how they appeared
in the eyes of those who can see, when they
yield themselves to these outbursts of anger,
they would surely take far greater care to avoid
them.

The gust of passion passes away, but it leaves
its mark behind. In the astral body of the
average man there is always a certain amount of
scarlet, which indicates the capacity for anger,
the possibility of being irritated; and each out-
burst of rage would add something to this, and
would predispose the matter of the entire vehicle
to respond somewhat more readily than before
to these very undesirable vibrations.

It may also be remembered that though the
passion may be impermanent, the record of it
remains for ever in the memory of nature;
though the elemental created by an evil wish
will cease to exist after a period proportioned to
the strength of that wish, yet the living photo-


SUDDEN EMOTIONS. 103


graph of every instant of its life remains, and
all the wide-spreading results of its actions
during that life are charged with absolute justice
to the karma of its creator.


Fear.


The effect of fear upon the astral body is very
striking. A sudden shock of terror will in an
instant suffuse the whole body with a curious
livid grey mist, while horizontal lines of the same
hue appear, but vibrate with such violence as to
be hardly recognisable as separate lines. ‘The
result is indescribably ghastly, and it is impos-
sible to convey an adequate idea of it by illustra-
tion. Plate XIV. gives such suggestion of it as
can be put upon paper, but it can hardly depict
the strange way in which all light fades out for
the time from the body, and the whole grey mass
quivers helplessly like a jelly.

Such an appearance as this denotes deadly
panic, and ordinarily would soon pass away. A
condition of permanent fear or extreme nervous-
ness will express itself in a much modified form
of the same phenomena, but the peculiar tinge
of grey, and the characteristic quiver, are invari-
able signs of this haunting presence.


CHaPrerR XVII.
MORE PERMANENT CONDITIONS.


WE have endeavoured to illustrate the immediate
effect of some of the sudden emotions which
affect the outer vehicles of man, and to explain
that, quickly as they pass, they are not without
permanent results to the soul within. It remains
for us to describe the way in which certain
dispositions or types of character manifest them-
selves, so that it may be seen to what extent
each of these modifies the progress of the man
upon his upward path.

There is one influence, however, which pro-
duces a considerable result in the lives of most
men, which does not exactly belong to either of
these categories. It is often sudden in its advent,
and in most cases it is certainly not lifelong in
its duration ; but still it does not fade away so
rapidly as those which we have been considering.
Nevertheless, in the life of such a man as is
imaged in Plates VIII., [X., and X. it is usually
the main event; indeed it is very frequently the


MORE PERMANENT CONDITIONS. 105


one really bright spot in an existence which is
otherwise monotonous, sordid and selfish—the
only occasion on which such a personality is
lifted temporarily out of himself, and lives for a
while on an altogether higher level.

This sudden elevation comes to the person who,
as it is commonly called, “falls in love.” It is
difficult for those of us who are so happy as to
live the wider and more cultured life to realise
how tremendous is the temporary change which
this ‘falling in love” brings into the existence
of the less developed man whom we have been
describing as ordinary. Those who live in the
freer atmosphere of art and music, of science and
philosophy, of world-wide interests and habitually
altruistic thought, find it difficult to put them-
selves back in imagination into the condition of
evolution through which they passed ages ago—
the condition of the less developed soul, with
its intense self-centredness, its strangely limited
horizon, its indescribably petty and sordid out-
look. Assuredly within these younger souls also
the divine lies latent, and when occasion offers
it will not infrequently shine forth in deeds of
splendid heroism and of magnificent self-sacrifice.
Yet this undoubted possibility does not alter
the fact that such souls are younger, and that
under ordinary circumstances they live the less-
developed life of which we have spoken.


106 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


Into a life thus cramped and limited there
suddenly shines a gleam from above, and the
divine spark within glows brighter in response.
Later, the man may lose it again, and descend
once more into the murky light of common day ;
yet nothing can take away from him the ex-
perience that for him also once the golden
gates have opened, and the glory of the higher
life has been to some extent revealed. He has
at least passed through a phase when for a
longer or shorter period self was dethroned,
and another entity occupied the first place in
his world; and thus he learns, for the first
time, one of the most valuable lessons in the
whole course of his evolution. It will be sons
yet before that lesson is perfectly assimilated,
yet even this first glimpse of it is of enormous
importance to the ego, and its effect on the
astral body is worthy of special notice.

The transformation is unexpected and com-
plete, as will be seen by comparing Plate X.
with Plate XV. The two bodies could not be
recognised as belonging to the same person, 50
extraordinary is the alteration. It will be seen
that certain qualities have altogether dis-
appeared for the time, that others have been
enormously increased, and that their relative
positions have considerably changed.

Selfishness, deceit and avarice have vanished,


iesg
UR


if y i


Ae,
My ast
ie
fi Mi i


Gi


Di, AC Ra
fe | ON a na be
Bu ee : ; al Bh Ni


aH
jh,
/)


}
hi,


an AN
fi att iy


Mr
A chal
1 BS


MORE PERMANENT CONDITIONS. 107


and the lowest part of the oval is now filled
with a large development of animal passions.
The green of adaptability has been replaced by
the peculiar brownish-green of jealousy, and the
extreme activity of this feeling is shown by the
bright scarlet flashes of anger which permeate
it.

But the undesirable changes are more than
counterbalanced by the splendid band of
crimson which fills so large a part of the oval.
This is for the time a dominant characteristic,
and the whole astral body glows with its light.
Under its influence the general muddiness of
the ordinary body has disappeared, and the hues
are all brilliant and clearly marked, good and
bad alike. It is an intensificatien of the life
in various directions.

It will be noticed that the blue of devotion
is also distinctly improved, and even (so much
has. the nature been temporarily elevated) a
touch of pale violet appears at the summit of
the ovoid, indicating a capacity of response to
a really high and unselfish ideal. The yellow
of intellect, however, has entirely vanished for
the time—which I suppose would be considered
by the cynical as characteristic of the con-
dition !

It seems scarcely possible that after all this
brilliant development the man should sink


108 = MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


back again into the condition indicated in
Plate X., yet in the majority of cases this is
what occurs, though naturally the amount of
crimson has considerably augmented, and it is
clearer in hue than before. This experience
of being “in love” is assuredly a valuable one
for the ego, and gives him a definite forward
impulse, even though there may often be
associated with it much that is undesirable.
The intensely strong and unselfish affection
often felt by children for those somewhat older
than themselves is a very powerful factor in
their progress, since it is usually an unmixed
benefit, free from all associations connected
with the lower animal nature. Even though
such affection may seem transitory, and may
change its object more than once as years roll
on, it is nevertheless very real while it lasts,
and it serves a noble purpose in preparing the
vehicle to respond more readily to the stronger
vibrations which are yet in the future—just as
the unset blossom of the fruit-tree, which seems
to come to nothing, in reality has its function,
since it not only looks exceedingly beautiful at
the time, but also helps to draw up the sap for
the fruit that is to come.


The Irritable Man.


We turn now to the consideration: of the


: ye
§ - a ee -
§ | ] { rae a
i age, Bytes
pt 4 4 7 ee °


: ftp
a

‘
Saat


4 Haina
_ i Hi Hiith
yi


1 tei oy
Cas


is


oy 4
nd eae
ae


gt
rif
cf I


a


a, Tha
ia


MORE PERMANENT CONDITIONS. 109


manner in which certain special types of
character exhibit themselves in the bodies of
the man. The case of the irritable man is a
good specimen of these. His astral body will
usually show a broad band of scarlet as one of
its prominent features, as we see in Plate XVI.
But what especially differentiates him from
other men is the presence in all parts of the
astral body of little floating flecks of scarlet,
somewhat like notes of exclamation. These
are the result of little accessions of irritation
at the small worries which are constantly
occurring in ordinary life. Every time any
little trifle goes wrong—when his coffee is cold,
when he misses his train, or when the baby
upsets the ink bottle—the irritable man gives
vent to an impatient or angry exclamation, and
a tiny scarlet flash shows the uncontrolled
feeling. In some cases these little messengers
of undisciplined temper fly outwards towards
the person who is supposed to be responsible
for whatever has gone wrong; but in many
others they simply remain floating within him,
suspended in the matter of the astral body, and
presenting the appearance shown in our illustra-
tion. These spots gradually fade away, but
their places are taken by others, for the irritable
man is never at a loss for subjects of annoy-
ance.


110 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


The Miser.


Another striking, but happily less common,
spectacle, is that which is imaged for us in Plate
XVII. The background differs somewhat from
the ordinary astral body, for there is a total
absence of devotion, and far less than the
normal proportion of affection. Avarice, selfish-
ness, deceit and adaptability (or perhaps, rather,
cunning) are all intensified, but, on the other
hand, there is very little sensuality. The most
remarkable characteristic, however, is to be seen
in the curious series of parallel horizontal lines
which bar the oval, and give the impression
that the man within is confined ina cage. These
bars are of a deep brown colour, almost burnt
sienna, level and clearly marked as to their
upper edge, but shading off into a sort of cloud
below. This is an illustration of a confirmed
miser, and naturally so extreme a case is not
very common; but a large number of people
seem to have some of the elements of the miser
in their nature, and show them by an intensifica-
tion of the colour of avarice and by one or two
such bars in the upper part of the astral body,
though few are so completely confined as is this
specimen. This vice of avarice seems to have
the effect of completely arresting development
for the time, and it is very difficult to shake off


Bi
.


Hi ‘i,
rats tt
fee hy

WT,


i


wee
mip


MORE PERMANENT CONDITIONS. 111


when once it has gained a firm hold upon the
personality.


Deep Depression.


The astral body shown in Plate XVIII. is in
many ways similar to the last. Here, however,
we have dull grey lines instead of the brown,
and the whole effect is indescribably gloomy and
depressing to the observer. Jt does not seem
that in this case any qualitics are necessarily
absent; we have simply the ordinary colours of
the body as a background, but all are veiled
by these heavy weeping lines. Our picture re-
presents a person during a period of extreme
depression, and naturally there are very many
intermediate stages between this and the healthy
astral body. A man may have only a few bars of
depression, and even they may be but transient ;
or in slighter and less persistent cases, the heavy
cloud may hardly have time to arrange itself in
lines at all. Yet there are only too many who
yield themselves to these feelings, and allow the
fog of despair to close round them until all the
world looks black ; not realising that in doing so
they are not only seriously delaying their own
evolution and losing manifold opportunities, but
are also causing unnecessary suffering and injury
to all those near to them. No psychic condition
is more infectious than this feeling of depression ;


112 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


its vibrations radiate in all directions and intro-
duce their slackening, deadening effects into
every astral body within reach, whether the ego
to which that astral body belongs is in incarnation
or not. The man who gives way to despondency
is thus a nuisance and a danger alike to the
living and the dead, for in these days of over-
strain and nervous worry most people find it
very difficult to resist the contagion of these
funereal vibrations. The only man who is proof
against such dire influences is he who understands
something of the purpose: of life, who regards it
from the philosophical and common-sense stand-
point, and realises that it is his duty to be happy,
since the Logos intends that he should be so.
The student of Theosophy should be instantly
distinguishable from the rest of the world by his
absolute serenity under all possible difficulties,
and his radiant joy in helping others. Fortu-
nately good influences can be spread abroad just
as readily as evil ones, and the man who is wise
enough to be happy will become a centre of
happiness for others, a veritable sun, shedding
light and joy on all around him, and to this
extent acting as a fellow-worker together with
God, who is the source of all joy. In this way
we may all of us help to break up these gloomy
bars of depression, and set the soul within them
free in the glorious sunlight of the divine love.


< if
"% i ‘oe

Fe DR a,

si


,
‘


ca


uf


MORE PERMANENT CONDITIONS. 113


The Devotional Type.


It will be useful for us to close our list of
special cases among astral bodies by examining
two very distinct types, from the comparison of
which a good deal may be learnt. The first of
these is illustrated in Plate XIX., and we may
call him the devotional man. His characteristics
present themselves through the medium of his
colours, and we see that he possesses the faint
touch of violet which suggests the possibility of
his response to the presentment of a high ideal.
His most prominent feature is the unusual de-
velopment of the blue, showing strong religious
feeling ; but unfortunately only a very small pro-
portion of this is the pure light blue of unselfish
devotion, the majority being of a dark and
somewhat muddy hue, suggesting the admixture
of a good deal of desire for personal gain.

The very small proportion of yellow tells us
that he has very little intelligence to direct his
devotion into reasonable channels, or to save him
from degenerating into senseless bigotry. He has
a fair proportion of affection and adaptability,
though not of very high order; but the amount of
sensuality expressed is much above the average,
and deceit and selfishness are also very prominent.
It is a remarkable fact that extreme sensuality
and the devotional i a are so frequently


114 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


seen in association ; it would suggest that there
must be some hidden connection between them
—or it may be simply that both are character-
istic of a man who lives chiefly in his feelings,
and is governed by them instead of trying to
control them by reason. Another point to which
attention should be paid is the irregularity in the
distribution of the colours and the vagueness of
their outline; they all melt into one another, and
there are no clear lines of demarcation anywhere.
This also is very characteristic of the vagueness
of the devotional man’s conceptions.

It will be understood that in this case, as in
all the others of this chapter, we are dealing
merely with variants of the ordinary person.
Consequently this is the astral body of an
ordinary and non-intellectual religious man—
not in the least that of the developed religious
man whose devotion is evoked by full compre-
hension and guided by reason.


The Scientific Type.


The observer can hardly fail to be struck by
the contrast between the body illustrated in
Plate XX. and that which we have just
described. In Plate XIX. we see the principal
features are devotion (of a sort) and sensuality,
and a very small modicum of intellect is shown ;
in Plate XX. we have no devotion at all, and far


MORE PERMANENT CONDITIONS. 115


less than the average amount of sensuality, but
the intellect is developed to a very abnormal
degree. Affection and adaptability are both
somewhat small in quantity and poor in quality,
being apparently overshadowed by the intellectual
development, as the man is not yet sufficiently
advanced to possess all these qualities equally
in their higher forms. There is a good deal of
selfishness and avarice, and a certain capability
of jealousy is also apparent. But the great
feature of this man is the large proportion of
golden yellow, showing a well-developed in-
telligence directed principally to the attainment
of knowledge. A huge cone of bright orange
rising in the midst of it indicates the presence
of much pride and ambition in connection with
that knowledge, but still the shade of the yellow
precludes the idea that the intellect is debased
to merely selfish ends.

It should be noticed also that the scientific
and orderly habit of mind has a distinct in-
fluence upon the arrangement of the astral
colours; they tend to fall into regular bands,
and the lines of demarcation between them are
decidedly more definite than in the previous illus-
tration.

It is evident that the bodies pictured in Plates
XIX. and XX. give us examples of two varieties
of unequal development; and while each has its


116 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


good points, each also has decided disadvantages.
We shall now proceed to the consideration of the
vehicles of the more developed man who possesses
all these various qualities to a much greater
extent, but has them well balanced, so that each
supports and strengthens the other, instead of
dominating or stifling it.


mor ygey
heya”
Ya Ae a)


i


mat
Wee?


s
Pf


ant a4 :
‘Ora siya ty
Poke earec


CHaPpTeR XVIII.
THE DEVELOPED MAN.


THE term ‘‘developed” is a relative one, so it
will be well to explain exactly what is here
meant by it. The vehicles illustrated under this
heading are such as might be possessed by any
pure-minded person who had definitely and
intelligently ‘‘set his affection on things above,
and not on things of earth.” They are not
those of one already far advanced upon the path
which leads to adeptship, for in that case we
should find a considerable difference in size as
well as in arrangement. But they do distinctly
imply that the man of whom they are expressions
is a seeker after the higher truth, one who has
risen above mere earthly aims, and is living for
an ideal. Among such some may be found
who are especially advanced in one direction,
and some in another ; this is an evenly-balanced
man—simply a fair average of those who are
at the level which I describe.

We may first examine Plate XXJ., which


118 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


represents for us his causal body. By compar-
ing this with Plates V. and VIII. we shall see
what the man’s progress has been, and how it
is expressed in his appearance. We observe
that by this time many beautiful qualities
have been developed within him, for the
glorious iridescent film is now filled with the
most lovely colours, typifying for us the higher
forms of love, devotion and sympathy, aided
by an intellect refined and spiritualised, and
by aspirations reaching ever towards the divine.
Let me quote from the sixth of our Theosophical
manuals, p. 80 :—

“Composed of matter inconceivably fine,
delicate and ethereal, intensely alive and
pulsating with living fire, it becomes as its
evolution proceeds a radiant globe of flashing
colours, its high vibrations sending ripples of
changing hues over its surface—hues of which
earth knows nothing — brilliant, soft and
luminous beyond the power of language to
describe. Take the colours of an Egyptian
sunset and add to them the wonderful soft-
ness of an English sky at eventide — raise
these as high above themselves in light and
translucency and splendour as they are above
the colours given by the cakes of a child's
paint-box—and even then none who have not
seen can image the beauty of these radiant


mse
Pi SAREE
‘Aa pends, 12
arta

ra aye ‘
Te
wn fag


ag


cae
ah nana
eS


; ve
Peet wi : he Bia


THE DEVELOPED MAN. 119


orbs which flash into the field of clairvoyant
vision as it is lifted to the level of this supernal
world. |

‘“ All these causal bodies are filled with living
fire drawn from a higher plane, with which the
globe appears to be connected by a quivering
thread of intense light, vividly recalling to the
mind the words of the stanzas of Dzyan, ‘The
spark hangs from the flame by the finest thread
of Fohat’; and as the soul grows and is able
to receive more and more from the inexhaustible
ocean of the Divine Spirit which pours down
through the thread as a channel, the latter
expands and gives wider passage to the flood,
till on the next sub-plane it might be imaged
as a water-spout connecting earth and sky,
and higher still as itself a great globe through
which rushes the living spring, until the causal
body seems to melt into the inpouring light.
Once more the stanza says it for us: ‘The
thread between the watcher and his shadow
becomes more strong and radiant with every
change. The morning sunlight has changed
into noon-day glory. This is thy present wheel,
said the flame to the spark. Thou art myself,
my image and my shadow. I have clothed
myself in thee, and thou art my vahan to the
day, “ Be-with-us,” when thou shalt re-become
myself and others, thyself and me.-”


120 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


How hopeless it seems to try to represent
all this glory on paper! Yet our artist has
skilfully contrived to suggest that which no
brush could paint, and however far even the
cleverest physical image may be from that
transcendent reality, it at least gives our
imagination a starting-point from which we
may try to build up a conception.

We must not omit to notice one of the
grandest characteristics of the developed
man—his capacity to serve as a channel for
higher force. It will be seen that from his
causal body streams of this force pour out in
various directions, for his attitude of unselfish-
ness, of helpfulness and readiness to give, makes
it possible for the divine strength to descend
upon him in steady stream, and through him
to reach many who are not yet strong enough
to receive it directly. Thus to become one of
God’s almoners is indeed a privilege worth
working for, yet it is within our reach if we
will but try for it.

The crown of brilliant sparks which ascends
from the upper part of the body indicates the
activity of spiritual aspiration, and adds very
greatly to the beauty and dignity of the man’s
appearance. This rises constantly from the
causal body, no matter how the lower man may
be occupied on the physical plane: for when the


THE DEVELOPED MAN. 121


soul of man is once awakened upon his own level,
and is beginning to understand something of
himself and his relation to the divine, he looks
ever upwards towards the source from which he
came, totally irrespective of any activities which
he may at the same time be inspiring on lower
planes. We must never forget how small and
partial an expression of the self even the noblest
personality can be; so that as soon as the higher
man begins to look round him, he finds almost
unlimited possibilities opening before him, of
which in this cramped physical life we can form
no idea.

This very upward rushing of spiritual aspira-
tion, which makes so glorious a crown for our
developed man, is itself the channel through
which the divine power descends ; so that the
fuller and stronger his aspirations become, the
larger is the measure of the grace from on
high.


fis Mental Body.


It can hardly fail to strike the observer as we
come to deal with the more developed man, that
his various vehicles are not only all of them
greatly refined and improved, but they are also
very much more like one another. Allowing for
the difference between what we may call the
octaves of the colour—between the hues belong-


122 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


ing to the lower and the higher levels of the
mental plane—Plate XXII. is almost a repro-
duction of Plate XXIJ.; and the resemblance
between Plates XXII. and XXIII. is perhaps
even more marked, though in comparing them we
have to remember that astral colours are again
of a different octave from even the lower mental.

Another useful comparison to make is that
between Plates XXII, IX. and VI., in order
that we may see how the evolution from the
savage to the unselfish man shows itself in the
mind-body. It will appear upon examination
that pride, anger and selfishness. have altogether
disappeared, and that the remaining colours
have not only so expanded as to fill the whole
oval, but have also so improved in tone as to
give quite a different impression. Every one
of them is more refined and delicate, for all
thought of self has vanished from them; and
in addition has appeared the pure violet with
the golden stars, which indicates the acquisi-
tion of new and greater qualities. The power
from above, which we saw radiating out through
his causal body, acts also through the mental
vehicle, though with somewhat less force. This
is on the whole a very fine mental body, already
well developed, and having within it every
promise of rapid progress along the Path, when
the time for that shall come.


saya
eae
fo
rr eal
et


a


iw ateng


it
va


¥


we a


THE DEVELOPED MAN. 123


Ms Astral Body.


. His astral body, which is pictured in Plate
XXIII., will at once be seen to resemble the
mental vehicle very closely. It is, in fact, little
more than a reflection of it in the grosser matter
of the astral plane. This indicates that the man
has his desires thoroughly under the control of
the mind, and is no longer liable to be swept
away from the firm base of reason by wild
surges of emotion. Since he is not yet definitely
on the Path, he will no doubt still be subject to
occasional irritability, and to undesirable cravings
of various sorts. But he knows enough now to
repress these lower manifestations, to maintain
a struggle against them whenever they appear,
instead of yielding to them. So though they
may temporarily change his astral body, they
will hardly make any permanent impression upon
it as against the much stronger vibrations of his
higher qualities.

In exactly the same way, at a still later stage
of progress, the mental body itself becomes a
reflection of the causal, since the man learns to
follow solely the promptings of the higher self,
and to guide his reason exclusively by them.

This illustration brings clearly before us an
interesting fact connected with the yellow light,
which signifies intellect. When this colour is


124 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


present in the oval, it invariably shows itself
in the upper part of it, in the neighbourhood of
the head; consequently it is the origin of the
idea of the nimbus or glory round the head of
a saint, since this yellow is much the most con-
spicuous of the colours of the astral body, and
the one most easily perceived by anyone who is
approaching the verge of clairvoyance. Also,
even without astral sight it may occasionally
be perceived; for when any person of some
development is making a special effort of any
kind, as, for example, in preaching or lecturing,
the intellectual faculties are in unusual activity,
and the yellow glow is therefore intensified.
In some cases which I have seen, it has passed
the bounds of physical visibility, and been seen
by many who had no power of higher sight than
that of this plane. In such a case, it is not that
the astral vibration slackens until it sinks below
the line which separates it from the physical,
but that it becomes so much more vigorous than
usual that it is able to arouse a sympathetic
vibration even in the coarse and heavy matter
of the physical plane. No doubt it was either
from occasional glimpses of this phenomenon or
from traditions derived from those who could
see, that our medieval painters derived the
idea of the glory round the head of the saint.
It may be remembered that in the nimbus of


THE DEVELOPED MAN. 125


the Christ a cross is usually drawn; and this
also is strictly within the probabilities, from the
point of view of occult investigation, for it has
often been observed that in the auras of very
highly-developed persons various geometrical
figures present themselves, signifying certain
elevated and far-reaching thoughts. See Mrs.
Besant’s article on “ Thought-Forms” in Lucifer
for September 1896.

The student will find it useful to compare
these illustrations carefully one with another ;
first, to examine each causal body in connection
with the mental and astral bodies which are
partial expressions of it, in order to understand
the connection between these different vehicles ;
and secondly, to compare the three astral bodies
in Plates VII., X., and XXIII., in order to under-
stand how progress shows itself in the desire-
body, which is naturally much the easiest of the
various vehicles to see clairvoyantly, and in fact
the only one which the ordinary psychically-
developed person is at all likely to see. The
same comparison should be instituted between
Plates VI., [X., and XXII., and also between
Plates V., VIII., and XXL, to study the progress
of the man as manifested in his higher bodies.

Among our Theosophical literature we have
many books which treat of the other side of all
this evolution, and catalogue the moral qualifica-


CHAPTER XIX.
THE HEALTH-AURA.


HitHERTO we have been dealing exclusively
with those bodies of man which are connected
with the higher planes, but our subject would
not be completely treated if we omitted all
reference to the minutely subdivided physical
matter which is seen by clairvoyant sight to be
part of the aura of man. Much of that matter
is in the etheric state, and constitutes what is
often called the etheric double. This is not in
any sense a separate vebicle, but must be con-
sidered simply as part of the physical body. It
is clearly visible to the clairvoyant as a mass of
faintly luminous violet-grey mist, interpenetrat-
ing the denser part of the physical body, and
extending very slightly beyond it, as will be seen
in Plates XXIV. and XXV. This etheric matter
is the link between the astral and the physical,
but it has also a very important function as the
vehicle of the vital force on the physical plane.
This vital force is poured upon us from the


rity


PMN es
Re om


ree +


pat


ek


a Nende
Bp saga ae
ai.
2


Isaac te Ae any Mi le
ae sc a


f..
PEE ce Aa


i“ aaa nah dea wi
a coe ”
. Pee ata py ms ren a
o
A


fy amen fee cana
Nenana ated


:
ol any vite


Hs Se ee
PD nc cee inte: ope
pyr tk a ge


OPES
Seon
ih ge me


oi A AR


vere
Soa ast
mary ee


ee eee
+ evtim tak


re Mgnt

vn
mts
pe
. a yee


Athy by wel


1


. ee


aay stn eter
imme oer eae et

co enna, wfunmtater +
fe ena wivamaten af


ae td


rem yeeice toh


hee


bean


Fe


we


oe


ests tee
‘ rea spa


THE HEALTH-AURA. _ 129


sun, which is the source of life in this inner sense
as well as by means of its light and heat in the
outer world. The earth’s atmosphere is full of
this force at all times, though it is in special
activity in brilliant sunlight ; and it is only by
absorbing it that our physical bodies are able to
live. The absorption of this vital energy is one
of the functions of the etheric part of that organ
which we call the spleen ; and that organ possesses
the curious property of specializing and trans-
muting the force as it passes through it, so that
it presents a totally different appearance.

The force itself is naturally invisible, like all
other forces; but as it exists around us in the
atmosphere it clothes itself in millions of tiny
particles which are colourless though intensely
active. After it has been absorbed into the
human body through the spleen, however, these
particles take on a beautiful pale rose-colour,
and they flow in a constant stream over and
through the whole body along the nerves, in the
same manner as the blood-corpuscles flow along
the arteries and veins, the brain being the centre
of this nervous circulation. An attempt is made
in our illustrations to represent the general
appearance of this stream, but this must not of
course be supposed to be an accurate map of the
nervous system.

It is evident that this flow is necessary to the


130 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


proper working of the nerves, for when it is
withdrawn there is no sensation. We know
how a limb may be so numbed by cold as to
be absolutely insensible to the touch; and the
reason of such insensibility is that the vital force
is no longer flowing through it. It might be
supposed that it was rather due to the failure of
the circulation of the blood, but those who have
studied mesmerism are aware that one of the
commonest experiments is to produce similar
insensibility in a limb by magnetic passes. This
does not at all interfere with the circulation of
the blood, for the limb remains warm; but it
does check the circulation of the subject’s life-
fluid, and substitutes for it that of the magnetizer.
The nerves of the subject are still there, and (so
far as physical sight can see) in perfect working
order ; yet they do not perform their office of
reporting to his brain, because the fluid which
animates them is not connected with that brain,
but with the brain of the operator.

In a healthy man the spleen does its work
in so generous a fashion that the specialized
life-force is present in very large quantities, and
is constantly radiating from the body in all
directions. A man in perfect health, therefore,
not only is able to impart some of it to another
intentionally, by means of mesmeric passes or
otherwise, but is also constantly though uncon-


THE HEALTH-AURA. 131


sciously shedding strength and vitality on those
around him. On the other hand, a man who
from weakness or other causes is unable to
specialize for his own use a sufficient amount of
the world’s life-force, sometimes, equally uncon-
sciously, acts as a sponge and absorbs the already
specialized vitality of any sensitive person who is
unfortunate enough to come into contact with
him, to his own temporary benefit, no doubt,
but often to the serious injury of his victim.
Probably most people have experienced this in
minor degree, and have found that there is
some one among their acquaintances after
whose visits they always feel a quite un-
accountable weariness and languor; and a
similar lassitude is frequently felt by persons
who attend spiritualistic séances without taking
special precautions against the drain upon
their vital force set up in the course of the
manifestations.

This radiation produces a striking effect upon
the appearance of what we may call the purely
physical part of the man’s aura. It is well
known that tiny particles of dense physical
matter are constantly being thrown off from
man’s body, in insensible perspiration and in
other ways; and these particles also are visible
to clairvoyant sight as a faint grey mist. These
particles are in many cases crystals, and there-


132 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


fore are seen in certain geometrical forms; for
example, the tiny cubes of chloride of sodium,
or common salt, are among the most frequent.
This purely physical part of man’s surrounding
is sometimes called the health-aura, from the
fact that its condition is greatly affected by the
health of the body from which it emanates. It
is a faint bluish-white, almost colourless, and
has the appearance of being striated; that
is, it is full of, or perhaps it might rather
be said to be composed of, an infinitude of
straight lines radiating evenly in all directions
from the pores of the body. That at least is
the normal condition of these lines when the
body is in perfect health; they are separate,
orderly, and as nearly parallel as their radiation
allows. But on the advent of disease there is
an instant change, the lines in the neighbourhood
of the part affected becoming erratic, and lying
about in all directions in the wildest confusion,
or drooping like the stems of faded flowers.

The reason for this curious appearance is itself
an interesting one. We find that the rigidity
and parallelism of the lines of this health-aura
are caused by the constant radiation of life-force
from the healthy body; and as soon as this
radiation ceases, the lines fall into the confused
condition described above. As the patient
recovers, the normal radiation of this magnetic


THE HEALTH-AURA. 133


form of vital energy is gradually resumed, and
the lines of the health-aura are thereby combed
into order once more. As long as the lines are
firm and straight, and the force steadily radiates
between them, the body seems to be almost
entirely protected from the attack of evil
physical influences, such as germs of disease, for
example—such germs being repelled and carried
away by the out-rush of the life-force ; but when
from any cause — through weakness, through
wound or injury, through over-fatigue, through
extreme depression of spirits, or through the
excesses of an irregular life—an unusually large
amount of vitality is required to repair damage
or waste within the body, and there is conse-
quently a serious diminution in the quantity
radiated, this system of defence becomes danger-
ously weak, and it 1s comparatively easy for the
deadly germs to effect an entrance.

It may also be mentioned that it is possible
by an effort of will to check this radiation of
vitality at the outer extremity of its lines, and
there to build it into a kind of wall or shell,
which will be absolutely impervious to these
germs — and, with a little further effort, im-
pervious also to any kind of astral or elemental
influence—so long as such effort of the will is
maintained.
 Dlustrations of this aura, showing its appear-


134 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


ance in health and disease respectively, will be
found in Plates XXIV. and XXV. It must be
remembered that it is almost colourless, so that
although it is physical matter, and so needs less
developed sight than the astral part of the aura,
yet this latter is so much more conspicuous by
reason of the brilliancy of its flashing colours
and its constant movement, that it is very often
seen at an earlier stage of the man’s progress
than the other.


CHAPTER XX.
THE CAUSAL BODY OF THE ADEPT.


PROBABLY to those who cannot yet see any of
the higher bodies of man, the illustrations given
in this book will be to some extent suggestive
and even illuminative, and it is in the hope that
that may be so that it has been published. Yet
those who can see, while recognising to the full
the painstaking care and skill of the artist, will
all agree that even the lowest of these super-
physical planes can never be adequately pour-
trayed on paper or canvas. If this be true,
as it assuredly is, how much more hopelessly
impossible (if one may be pardoned the use of
an improper, but expressive phrase) must it
be to try to represent the Adept—the man who
has attained the goal of humanity—who has
become something more than man.

In his case the size of the causal body has
enormously increased, and shines with a sun-like
splendour far beyond all imagination in its
glorious loveliness. Of the beauty of form and


136 MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


colour here no words can speak, for mortal
language has no terms in which those radiant
spheres may be described. Such a vehicle would
be a separate study in itself, but one quite
beyond the powers of any but those who are
already far on the Path.

This at least may be seen, that such a body
is not only much larger than that of the ordinary
man, but also has its colours differently arranged.
These no longer move in whirling clouds, but
are arranged in great concentric shells, yet
penetrated everywhere by radiations of living
light always pouring forth from him as a centre.
The order of the colours differs according to the
type to which the Adept belongs, so that there
are several well-marked varieties amid their
glory. Strangely enough, considering the re-
condite character of the subject, a tradition—a
perfectly accurate tradition—of this fact has been
oreserved in many of the roughly-drawn pictures
of the Lord Buddha which one sees upon temple
walls in Ceylon. The Great Teacher is usually
‘epresented there surrounded by an aura; and
he strange thing is that though the colouring
ind general arrangement of those surroundings
vould be grotesquely inaccurate and even im-
yossible if intended for that of an ordinary man,
r even for that of an ordinary Adept (if one may
vithout irreverence use such an expression),


THE CAUSAL BODY OF THE ADEPT. 137


yet it 7s a rough and material representation of
the actual higher vehicle of the Adept of that
particular type to which this Great One belongs.
It is noteworthy also that the lines of the
health-aura are drawn in some of these primi-
tive pictures.

If it is impossible to attempt to illustrate the
causal body of the Master, it may yet be worth
while to give some idea of the relative size and
appearance of that of one of His more advanced
pupils—one who has attained that fourth stage
of the Path which in Oriental books is called
that of the Arhat. (See Invisible Helpers, p.
119.) Such an endeavour has been made in
Plate XXVI., but an effort of the imagination
even greater than usual is necessary to complete
the picture, by reason of the fact that the colours
of this causal body have two characteristics which
are irreconcilable here on the physical plane.
They are definitely more delicate and ethereal
than any that have been previously described ;
yet at the same time they are far fuller, more
brilliant and more luminous. Until we can
paint with fire instead of mere colour, we shall
find ourselves always on one horn or other of the
dilemma; for if we attempt to represent the
depth and richness of the colour it must look
dense and solid; if we try instead to give its
marvellous transparency and luminosity, then


188 MAN ‘VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


the colours must be entirely lacking in the
wonderful power and brilliancy which is 90
prominent a characteristic of the glorious reality.
Since, however, an effort has been made in the
case of the other causal bodies to give an idea of
the transparent ovoid form, it seems better in
this case to try to give the depth of colour, its
arrangement, and the relative size. This last can
be brought into proportion only by the expedient
of decreasing many times the size of the physical
body in our picture; for if we retained the same
scale as that previously employed, the causal
body of the Arhat would need to be represented
as some yards in length and breadth. Conse-
quently we are compelled to reduce very much
the drawing of the physical form, in order that
the causal body, when drawn in proportion to it,
may come within the size of even a double plate.
But even at the best, such a drawing can only
be regarded as a help to stimulate us in an effort
to make a mental image—an image which may
perchance be less hopelessly inadequate than the
physical representation.

In examining this illustration we are at once
struck by the magnificent development of the
highest types of intellect, love and devotion, by
the wealth of sympathy and of the highest
spirituality which it displays, The outrush of
the Divine influence which we saw in Plate XXI.


Senne


THE CAUSAL ‘BODY OF THE ADEPT. 139


is enormously intensified here, for this man has
become an almost perfect channel for the life and
the power of the Logos. Not only in white light
does the glory radiate from him, but all the
colours of the rainbow play round him in ever
changing gleams like mother-of-pearl; so that
there is something in that radiation to strengthen
the highest qualities in every person who ap-
proaches him, no matter what those qualities
may be. Thus none can come within the range
of his influence without being the better for it;
he shines upon all around him like the sun, for,
like it, he has become a manifestation of the
Logos.

The mind-body and astral body connected
with this would have very little characteristic
colour of their own, but would be reproductions
of the causal body in so far as their lower
octaves could express it. They have a lovely
shimmering iridescence—a sort of opalescent,
mother-of-pearl effect — which is far beyond
either description or representation.

One thing at least we may perhaps hope that
our study of these inner vehicles will do for us;
it may help us to understand that it is this higher
presentation of him which is the real man, and
not that aggregation of physical matter crystal-
lized in the midst of it, to which we in our
blindness attach such undue importance. The


140 - MAN VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE.


very man himself—the divine trinity within—
we may not see; but the more our sight and
knowledge increase, the more nearly we
approach that which veils Itself in him; and if
for the moment the highest vehicle of his
which is perceptible to us is the causal body,
then that is the nearest to a conception of the
true man that our sight will at present give
us. But if the same man be looked upon from
the standpoint of the lower mental levels,
naturally only so much of him can be seen as
can be expressed in that mind-body which is
the manifestation of the personality. Hxamin-
ing him on the astral plane, we find that an
additional veil has descended, and only that
lower part of him is visible which can find
expression through the vehicle of desire. Here
on the physical plane we are still worse off,
since the true man is more effectually hidden
from us than ever.

Perhaps the knowledge of this may lead us
to form a somewhat higher opinion of our
fellow-man, since we realise that he is always
so much more than he seems to the physical
eye. There is always the higher possibility
in the background, and often an appeal to the
better nature will arouse it from its latency,
and bring it down into manifestation where all
can see it. When we have studied the man


THE CAUSAL BODY OF THE ADEPT, 141


as he is, it may be easier for us to pierce
through the dense physical veil, and image the
reality which is behind. Our faith in human
nature may become greater when we realise
how entirely it is part of the divine nature;
and so we may be able to help our fellow-man
the better, because we grasp the certainty that
he and we are one.

If through us the divine light shines out
more brightly, it is only in order that we may
share that light with him; if we have gained
a higher step upon the ladder, it is only that
we may stretch out a helping hand to him.
The more we understand this glorious scheme
of evolution whose progress we have been
studying in its outward manifestation, the
more fully shall we see the true intention of
the mighty self-sacrifice of the Logos; and so
beautiful is this, so perfect beyond all thought
of ours, that to see it once is to be devoted
for ever to its realisation. To see it is to
throw oneself into it, to strive for ever more
to be one with it, even though in the very
humblest capacity; for he who works with
God is working for eternity and not for time,
and in all the zons that le before us his work
can never fail.


INDEX.


ACCESSION of affection, 96.
Accession of devotion, 98.
Action of irritability, 73.
Adept, the, 135.
Affection in children, 108.
Affinity, chemical, 48.
Anger, sudden, 100.
Animal consciousness, 49.
Animal instincts, 43.
Animal intelligence, 61.
Animal monad, the, 39.
Arhat, the, 137.
Aspects of the Logos, 29, 34.
Aspirations, spiritual, 120.
Astral awakening, 55.
Astral body, the, 76, 94.
Astral body of savage, 88.
Astral impressions, how received,
16.
Astral work, 57.
Astral world, the, 10, 22.
Athanasian Creed, the, 28.
Atoms, 9.
Aura, the health, 128.
Avarice, exhibition of, 110.
Average man, the, 92.
Awakening upon the astral, 55.


Bases of Theosophical knowledge,


3.
Bodies of man, the, 13.
Buddhi, 22.
Building of a shell, 188.


CavsaL body, the, 52, 64, 66, 78,
92, 118.

Ceylon, Temple pictures in, 186.

Characteristics of the Theosophical
student, 112, 120.

Chemical affinity, 48.


Chemistry, occult, 8, 10.

Children, affection in, 108.

Church, effects seen in, 99.

Churches, schism between, 32.

Clairvoyance, what it is, 19.

Clairvoyant sight, 4, 13.

Colours and their meaning, 71, 80,
87, 93, 94.

Colours, production of the, 73.

Conditions of matter, 7.

Consciousness, development of the,


Consciousness during sleep, 58.

Consciousness, focus of, 16.

Consciousness in the animal king-
dom, 49.

Consciousness, human, 52.

Consciousness in the vegetable
kingdom, 49.

Creed, the Athanasian, 28.


DerpREssion, 111.

Descent of the Logos, 31, 36.
Desire, elemental, the, 39.
Developed man, the, 117.
Development of consciousness, 46.
Devotion, accession of, 98.
Devotional type, the, 118.
Differentiation, 40, 44.
Dimensions, many, 24.

Double, the etheric, 128.


Errect of motion, 78, 96.

Effects seen in church, 99.
Elemental kingdoms, 38.
Elementals, dark and bright, 77.
Elementals, desire and mental, 39.
Elements, 8.

Emotion, effect of, 73, 96.
Energy, vital, 129, 132.


INDEX.


Equation, the personal, 79.

Essence, monadic, 88.

Kther, 8.

Etheric double, the, 128.

Evil, impermanence of, 74.

Evolution, moral, 126.

Evolution, necessity of, 62.

Evolution, Theosophical theory of,

2.

Experiments

chrén, 87.


of Professor von


FALLING in love, 105, 107.
Fear, 103.

Feeling, the process of, 15.
First outpouring, 36.

Focus of consciousness, 16.
Future which awaits us, 126.


GRAVITY, specific (of astral matter),
90.
Group-soul, the, 40.


HEALTH-AURA, the, 128.

Holy Ghost, procession of the, 32.

How astral impressions are re-
ceived, 16.

Human consciousness, 52.


IMPERFECTION of ordinary vision,


Impermanence of evil, 74.
Impressions (astral), how received,


Individualisation, 45.

Instincts, animal, 43.

Intelligence in the animal, 61.
Intense anger, 100.
Interpenetration of planes, 11, 12.
Irritable man, the, 108.
Irritability, action of, 73.


JUSTICE, law of, 75.
KINGDOMS, elemental, 38.


Law of justice, 75.

Life in the mineral, 37.

Little worries, 109.

Logos, the, 27,

Logos, aspect of, 29, 384.

Logos, descent into matter of, 31,


6.
Love, falling in, 105, 107.
Matics, 100,


143


Man an image of God, 26, 33.

Man, the irritable, 108.

Man, the real, 139.

Man, spiritual, 65.

Man, various bodies of, 13.

Man’s_ evolution, Theosophical
theory of, 2.

Many dimensions, 24,

Mary, the Virgin, 36.

Matter, conditions of, 7.

Matter, descent of the Logos into,
31, 36,

Meanings of colour, 71, 80, 87, 98,
94,

Mechanism of thought, 14.

Mental body, 78, 93.

Mental elemental, 39.

Mental world, 11, 22.

Mineral, life in the, 37.

Mineral monad, 39.

Miser, the, 110.

Monadic essence, 38.

Monads, mineral and vegetable, 89.

Moral evolution, 126.


NATuwRE, planes of, 7.
Necessity of evolution, 62.
Nimbus, origin of the, 124.
Nirvana, 20.


OBSESSION, a man liable to, 101.
Occult chemistry, 8, 10.
Ordinary man, 92.

Origin of the nimbus, 124,
Outpouring, the first, 36.
Outpouring, the second, 37.
Outpouring, the third, 38, 59.


Passion, results of, 102.

Past, records of, 25.

Person, meaning of, 30.

Personal equation, the, 79.

Persons of the Logos, 29,

Planes, interpenetration of, 11, 12.

Planes of Nature, 7, 20, 28.

Process of feeling, 15.

Procession of the Holy Ghost, $2.

Production of the colours, 738.

Psychical faculties, how they show
themselves, 86.


REAL man, the, 189.

Reasoning power in animals, 49.
Records of the past, 25.
Reincarnation, 48, 67.

Results of passion, 102.


PRINTED BY NEILL AND GO., LITD., INBURGH.


