Clairvoyance
========================================
C. W. Leadbeater (1899) — Leadbeater's manual of psychic vision — the theosophical textbook of clairvoyance. Source: https://archive.org/details/clairvoyance01leadgoog. Public domain.

CLAIRVOYANCE

BY

1/  v>

Zy^y  LEADBEATER

LONDON :

THE  THBOSOPfflCAL  PUBUSHINO  50CIBTY,

j6,  charing  CR05S,  S.W.

mbwyork:  thb  thsosophical  publishing  socibty,  67,  fifth  avbnus.
benarbs  :    thb  thbosophical  publishing  socibty.

MADRAS  :    THE  "  THBOSOPHIST"  OFFICE,  AOYAR.

1899.


1

»     r    •

(        *      U.x

CONTENTS.

I

CHAPTER
CHAPTER

I. — What  Clairvoyance  is
II.— Simple  Clairvoyance  :  Full

CHAPTER      III.— -Simple  Clairvoyance  :  Partial

CHAPTER        v.— Clairvoyance  in  Space:  Semi-Inten-

TIONAL  •••  •••  •••

5

26

44

CHAPTER      IV. — Clairvoyance  in  Space  :  Intentional       51

74

CHAPTER      VI. — Clairvoyance    in    Space  :    Uninten-
tional            ...               •».               ...  78

CHAPTER     VII.— Clairvoyance  in  Time  :  the  Past     ...  87

CHAPTER  VIII. — Clairvoyance  in  Time  :  the  Future  ...  119

CHAPTER      IX.— Methods  of  Development                 ...  148

^

CiairboBancje.

CHAPTER  I.
What    Clairvoyance  is.

Clairvoyance  means  literally  nothing  more  than
*'  clear-seeing/'  and  it  is  a  word  which  has  been  sorely
misused,  and  even  degraded  so  far  as  to  be  employed
to  describe  the  trickery  of  a  mountebank  in  a  variety
show.  Even  in  its  more  restricted  sense  it  covers  a
wide  range  of  phenomena,  differing  so  greatly  in  char-
acter that  it  is  not  easy  to  give  a  definition  of  the  word
which  shall  be  at  once  succinct  and  accurate.  It  has
been  called  '*  spiritual  vision,"  but  no  rendering  could
well  be  more  misleading  than  that,  for  in  the  vast  ma-
jority of  cases  there  is  no  faculty  connected  with  it
which  has  the  slightest  claim  to  be  honoured  by  so
lofty  a  name.

For  the  purposes  of  this  treatise  we  may,  perhaps,  de-
fine it  as  the  power  to  see  what  is  hidden  from  ordinary
physical  sight.  It  will  be  as  well  to  premise  that  it  is
very  frequently  (though  by  no  means  always)  accom-
panied by  what  is  called  clairaudience,  or  the  power  to
hear  what  would  be  inaudible  to  the  ordinary  physical

5

6  CLAIRVOYANCB

ear ;  and  we  will  for  the  nonce  take  our  title  as  cover-
ing this  faculty  also^  in  order  to  avoid  the  clumsiness  of
perpetually  using  two  long  words  where  one  will  su£Bce.

Let  me  make  two  points  clear  before  I  begin.  First,
I  am  not  writing  for  those  who  do  not  believe  that
there  is  such  a  thing  as  clairvoyance^  nor  am  I  seeking
to  convince  those  who  are  in  doubt  about  the  matter.
In  so  small  a  work  as  this  I  have  no  space  for  that ;
such  people  must  study  the  many  books  containing
lists  of  cases,  or  make  experiments  for  themselves  along
mesmeric  lines.  I  am  addressing  myself  to  the  better-
instructed  class  who  know  that  clairvoyance  exists,  and
are  sufficiently  interested  in  the  subject  to  be  glad  of  in-
formation as  to  its  methods  and  possibilities;  and  I
would  assure  them  that  what  I  write  is  the  result  of
much  careful  study  and  experiment,  and  that  though
some  of  the  powers  which  I  shall  have  to  describe  may
seem  new  and  wonderful  to  them,  I  mention  no  single
one  of  which  I  haye  not  myself  seen  examples.

Secondly,  though  I  shall  endeavour  to  avoid  techni-
calities as  far  as  possible,  yet  as  I  am  writing  in  the
main  for  students  of  Theosophy,  I  shall  feel  myself  at
liberty  sometimes  to  use,  for  brevity's  sake  and  without
detailed  explanation,  the  ordinary  Theosophical  terms
with  which  I  may  safely  assume  them  to  be  familiar.

Should  this  little  book  fall  into  the  hands  of  any  to
whom  the  occasional  use  of  such  terms  constitutes  a
difficulty,  I  can  only  apologize  to  them  and  refer  them
for  these  preliminary  explanations  to  any  elementary
Theosophical  work,  such  as  Mrs.  Besant's  Ancuni  Wis-

LATBNT  FACULTIBS  7

dam  or  Mmu  and  His  Bodies.  The  truth  is  that  the
whole  Theosophical  system  hangs  together  so  closely^
and  its  various  parts  are  so  interdependent,  that  to  give
a  full  explanation  of  every  term  used  would  necessitate
an  exhaustive  treatise  on  Theosophy  as  a  preface  even
to  this  short  account  of  clairvoyance.

Before  a  detailed  explanation  of  clairvoyance  can
usefully  be  attempted,  however,  it  will  be  necessary  for
us  to  devote  a  little  time  to  some  preliminary  consider-
ations, in  order  that  we  may  have  clearly  in  mind  a  few
broad  facts  as  to  the  different  planes  on  which  clair-
voyant vision  may  be  exercised,  and  the  conditions
which  render  its  exercise  possible.

We  are  constantly  assured  in  Theosophical  literature
that  all  these  higher  faculties  are  presently  to  be  the
heritage  of  mankind  in  general — that  the  capacity  of
clairvoyance,  for  example,  lies  latent  in  every  one,  and
that  those  in  whom  it  already  manifests  itself  are  sim-
ply in  that  one  particular  a  little  in  advance  of  the  rest
of  us.  Now  this  statement  is  a  true  one,  and  yet  it
seems  quite  vague  and  unreal  to  the  majority  of  people,
simply  because  they  regard  such  a  faculty  as  something
absolutely  different  from  anything  they  have  yet  ex-
perienced, and  feel  fairly  confident  that  they  themselves,
at  any  rate,  are  not  within  measurable  distance  of  its
development.

It  may  help  to  dispel  this  sense  of  unreality  if  we  try
to  understand  that  clairvoyance,  like  so  many  other
things  in  nature,  is  mainly  a  question  of  vibrations,  and
is  in  fact  nothing  but  an  extension  of  powers  which  we

8  CLAimvOYANCE

are  all  using  every  day  of  our  lives.  We  are  living  all
the  while  surrounded  by  a  vast  sea  of  mingled  air  and
ether»  the  latter  interpenetrating  the  former,  as  it  does
all  physical  matter ;  and  it  is  chiefly  by  means  of
vibrations  in  that  vast  sea  of  matter  that  impressions
reach  us  from  th^  outside.  This  much  we  all  know,
but  it  may  perhaps  never  have  occurred  to  many  of  us
that  the  number  of  these  vibrations  to  which  we  are
capable  of  responding  is  in  reality  quite  infinitesimal.

Up  among  the  exceedingly  rapid  vibrations  which
affect  the  ether  there  is  a  certain  small  section — a  viry
small  section — ^to  which  the  retina  of  the  human  eye  is
capable  of  responding,  and  these  particular  vibrations
produce  in  us  the  sensation  which  we  call  light.  That
is  to  say,  we  are  capable  of  seeing  only  those  objects
from  which  light  of  that  particular  kind  can  either  issue
or  be  reflected.

In  exactly  the  same  way  the  tympanum  of  the  human
ear  is  capable  of  responding  to  a  certain  very  small
range  of  comparatively  slow  vibrations — slow  enough
to  affect  the  air  which  surrounds  us ;  and  so  the  only
sounds  which  we  can  hear  are  those  made  by  objects
which  are  able  to  vibrate  at  some  rate  within  that  par-
ticular range.

In  both  cases  it  is  a  matter  perfectly  well  known  to
science  that  there  are  large  numbers  of  vibrations  both
above  and  below  these  two  sections,  and  that  conse-
quently there  is  much  light  that  we  cannot  see,  and
there  are  many  sounds  to  which  Qur  ears  are  deaf.  In
the  case  of  light  the  action  of  these  higher  and  lower

VIBRATIONS  9

vibratioDsis  easily  perceptible  in  the  efifects  produced  by
the  actinic  rays  at  one  end  of  the  spectrum  and  the
beat  rays  at  the  other.

.  As  a  matter  of  fact  there  exist  vibrations  of  every
conceivable  degree  of  rapidity,  filling  the  whole  vast
space  intervening  between  the  slow  sound-waves  a|id
the  swift  light  waves ;  nor  is  even  that  all,  for  there
are  undoubtedly  vibrations  slower  than  those  of  sound,
and  a  whole  infinity  of  them  which  are  swifter  than
those  known  to  us  as  light.  So  we  begin  to  understand
that  the  vibrations  by  which  we  see  and  hear  are
only  Uke  two  tiny  groups  of  a  few  strings  selected
from  an  enormous  harp  of  practically  infinite  extent,
and  when  we  think  how  much  we  have  been  able  to
learn  and  infer  from  the  use  of  those  minute  fragments,
we  see  vaguely  what  possibilities  might  lie  before  us
if  we  were  enabled  to  utilise  the  vast  and  wonderful
whole.

Another  fact  which  needs  to  be  considered  in  this
connection  is  that  different  human  beings  vary  c<mi-
siderably,  though  within  relatively  narrow  limits,  in
their  capacity  of  response  even  to  the  very  few  vibra-
tions which  are  within  reach  of  otur  physical  senses.  I
am  not  referring  to  the  keenness  of  sight  or  of  hearing
that  enables  one  man  to  see  a  fainter  object  or  hear  a
slighter  sound  than  another ;  it  is  not  in  the  least  a
question  of  strength  of  vision,  but  of  extent  of  suscep-
tibility.

For  example,  if  anyone  will  take  a  good  bisulphide  of
carbon  prism,  and  by  its  means  throw  a  clear  spectrum

lO  CLAIRVOYANCB

on  a  sheet  of  white  paper,  and  then  get  a  number  of
people  to  mark  upon  the  paper  the  extreme  limits  of
the  spectrum  as  it  appears  to  them,  he  is  fairly  certain
to  find  that  their  powers  of  vision  differ  appreciably*
Some  will  see  the  violet  extending  much  farther  than
the  majority  do ;  others  will  perhaps  see  rather  less
violet  than  most,  while  gaining  a  corresponding  exten-
sion of  vision  at  the  red  end.  Some  few  there  will
perhaps  be  who  can  see  farther  than  ordinary  at  both
ends,  and  these  will  almost  certainly  be  what  we  call
sensitive  people — susceptible  in  fact  to  a  greater  range
of  vibrations  than  are  most  men  of  the  present  day.

In  hearing,  the  same  difference  can  be  tested  by
taking  some  sound  which  is  just  not  too  high  to  be
audible-— on  the  very  verge  of  audibility  as  it  were—
and  discovering  how  many  among  a  given  number  of
people  are  able  to  hear  it.  The  squeak  of  a  bat  is  a
familiar  instance  of  such  a  sound,  and  experiment  will
show  that  on  a  summer  evening  when  the  whole  air  is
full  of  the  shrill,  needle-like  cries  of  these  little  animals
quite  a  large  number  of  men  will  be  absolutely  uncon-
scious of  them,  and  unable  to  hear  anything  at  all.

Now  these  examples  clearly  show  that  there  is  no
hard-and-fast  limit  to  man's  power  of  respoaee  4o
either  etheric  or  aerial  vibrations,  but  that  some  among
us  already  have  that  power  to  a  wider  extent  than
others ;  and  it  will  even  be  found  that  the  same  man's
capacity  varies  on  different  occasions.  It  is  therefore
not  difficult  for  us  to  imagine  that  it  might  be  possible
for  a  man  to  develope  this  power,  and  thus  in  time  to

BXTBNDSD   SIGHT  II

Iwrn  to  see  much  that  is  invisible  to  his  fellow-men^
and  hear  much  that  is  inaudible  to  them,  since  we  know
perfectly  well  that  enormous  numbers  of  these  addi^
tional  vibrations  do  exist,  and  are  simply,  as  it  were»
awaiting  recognition.

The  experiments  with  the  Rdntgen  rays  give  us  an
example  of  the  startling  results  which  are  produced
when  even  a  very  few  of  these  additional  vibrations
are  brought  within  human  ken,  and  the  transparency  to
these  rays  of  many  substances  hitherto  considered
opaque  at  once  shows  us  one  way  at  least  in  which  we
may  explain  such  elementary  clairvoyance  as  is  involved
in  reading  a  letter  inside  a  closed  box,  or  describing
those  present  in  an  adjoining  apartment.  To  learn  to
see  by  means  of  the  Rdntgen  rays  in  addition  to  those
ordinarily  employed  would  be  quite  sufficient  to  enable
anyone  to  perform  a  feat  of  magic  of  this  order.

So  far  we  have  thought  only  of  an  extension  of  the
purely  physical  senses  of  man  ;  and  when  we  remember
that  a  man's  etheric  body  is  in  reality  merely  the  finer
part  of  his  physical  frame,  and  that  therefore  all  his
sense  organs  contain  a  large  amount  of  etheric  matter
of  various  degrees  of  density,  the  capacities  of  which
are  still  practically  latent  in  most  of  us,  we  shall  see
that  even  if  we  confine  ourselves  to  this  line  of  develop-
ment alone  there  are  enormous  possibilities  of  all  kinds
already  opening  out  before  us.

But  besides  and  beyond  all  this  we  know  that  man
possesses  an  astral  and  a  mental  body,  each  of  which  can
in  process  of  time  be  aroused  into  activity,  and  will  re-

12  CLAIRVOYANCE

spond  in  turn  to  the  vibrations  of  the  matter  of  its  own
plane,  thus  opening  up  before  the  ego,  as  he  learns  to
function  through  these  vehicles,  two  entirely  new  and  far
wider  worlds  of  knowledge  and  power.  Now  these  new
worlds,  though  they  are  all  around  us  and  freely  inter-
penetrate one  another,  are  not  to  be  thought  of  as  distinct
and  entirely  unconnected  in  substance,  but  .rather  as
melting  the  one  into  the  other,  the  lowest  astral  forming
a  direct  series  with  the  highest  physical,  just  as  the
lowest  mental  in  its  turn  forms  a  direct  series  with  the
highest  astral.  We  are  not  called  upon  in  thinking  of
them  to  imagine  some  new  and  strange  kind  of  matter,
but  simply  to  think  of  the  ordinary  physical  kind  as
subdivided  so  very  much  more  finely  and  vibrating  so
very  much  more  rapidly  as  to  introduce  us  to  what  are
practically  entirely  new  conditions  and  qualities.

It  is  not  then  difficult  for  us  to  grasp  the  possibility
of  a  steady  and  progressive  extension  of  our  senses,  so
that  both  by  sight  and  by  hearing  we  may  be  able  to
appreciate  vibrations  far  higher  and  far  lower  than
those  which  are  ordinarily  recognized.  A  large  section
of  these  additional  vibrations  will  still  belong  to  the
physical  plane,  and  will  merely  enable  us  to  obtain
impressions  from  the  etheric  part  of  that  plane,  which
is  at  present  as  a  closed  book  to  us.  Such  impressions
will  still  be  received  through  the  retina  of  the  eye  ;  of
course  they  will  affect  its  etheric  rather  than  its  solid
matter,  but  we  may  nevertheless  regard  them  as  still
appealing  only  to  an  organ  specialized  to  receive  them,
and  not  to  the  whole  surface  of  the  etheric  body.

ASTRAL  SBNSBS  I 3

There  are  some  abnormal  cases,  however,  in  which
other  parts  of  the  etheric  body  respond  to  these  addi-
tional vibrations,  as  readily  as»  or  even  more  readily
than,  the  eye.  Such  vagaries  are  explicable  in  various
ways,  but  principally  as  effects  of  some  partial  astral
development,  for  it  will  be  found  that  the  sensitive  parts
of  the  body  almost  invariably  correspond  with  one  or
other  of  the  chakramSf  or  centres  of  vitality  in  the  astral
body.  And  though,  if  astral  consciousness  be  not. yet
developed,  these  centres  may  not  be  available  on  their
own  plane,  they  are  still  strong  enough  to  stimulate
into  keener  activity  the  etheric  matter  which  they  inter-
penetrate.

When  we  come  to  deal  with  the  astral  senses  them-
selves the  methods  of  working  are  very  different.  The
astral  body  has  no  specialized  sense-organs — a.  fact
which  perhaps  needs  some  explanation,  since  many
students  who  are  trying  to  comprehend  its  physiology
seem  to  find  it  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  statements
that  have  been  made  as  to  the  perfect  interpenetration
of  the  physical  body  by  astral  matter,  the  exact  corres-
pondence between  the  two  vehicles,  and  the  fact  that
every  physical  object  has  necessarily  its  astral  counter-
part.

Now  all  these  statements  are  true,  and  yet  it  is  quite
possible  for  people  who  do  not  normally  see  astrally  to
misunderstand  them.  Every  order  of  physical  matter
has  its  corresponding  order  of  astral  matter  in  constant
association  with  it — ^not  to  be  separated  firom  it  except
by  a  very  considerable  exertion   of  occult  force,  and

14  CLAIRVOYANCB

even  then  only  to  be  held  apart  from  it  as  long  as  force
is  being  definitely  exerted  to  that  end.  But  fat  all  that
the  relation  of  the  astral  particles  one  to  another  is
far  looser  than  is  the  case  with  their  physical  corres-
pondences.

In  a  bar  of  iron»  for  example,  we  have  a  mass  of
physical  molecules  in  the  solid  condition — ^that  is  to  say,
capable  of  comparatively  little  change  in  their  relative
positions,  though  each  vibrating  with  immense  rapidity
in  its  own  sphere.  The  astral  counterpart  of  this  con-
sists of  what  we  often  call  solid  astral  matter — ^that  is,
matter  of  the  lowest  and  densest  sub-plane  of  the  astral ;
but  nevertheless  its  particles  are  constantly  and  rapidly
changing  their  relative  position,  moving  among  one
another  as  easily  as  those  of  a  liquid  on  the  physical
plane  might  do.  So  that  there  is  no  permanent  associa-
tion between  any  one  physical  particle  and  that  amount
of  astral  matter  which  happens  at  any  given  moment
to  be  acting  as  its  counterpart.

This  is  equally  true  with  respect  to  the  astral  body
of  man,  which  for  our  purpose  at  the  moment  we  may
regard  as  consisting  of  two  parts — the  denser  aggrega-
tion which  occupies  the  exact  position  of  the  physical
body,  and  the  cloud  of  rarer  astral  matter  which  sur-
rounds that  aggregation.  In  both  these  parts,  and
between  them  both,  there  is  going  on  at  every  moment
of  time  the  rapid  inter-circulation  of  the  particles  which
has  been  described,  so  that  as  one  watches  the  move-
ment of  the  molecules  in  the  astral  body  one  is  reminded
of  the  appearance  of  those  in  fiercely  boiling  water.

ASTRAL  SENSES  I 5

This  being  so,  it  will  be  readily  understood  that
though  any  given  organ  of  the  physical  body  must
always  have  as  its  counterpart  a  certain  amount  of
astral  matter,  it  does  not  retain  the  same  particles  for
mote  than  a  few  seconds  at  a  time,  and  consequently
there  is  nothing  corresponding  to  the  specialization  of
physical  nerve-matter  into  optic  or  auditory  nerves,
and  so  on.  So  that  though  the  physical  eye  or  ear  has
undoubtedly  always  its  counterpart  of  astral  matter,
that  particular  fragment  of  astral  matter  is  no  more
(and  no  less)  capable  of  responding  to  the  vibrations
which  produce  astral  sight  or  astral  hearing  than  any
other  part  of  the  vehicle.

It  must  never  be  forgotten  that  though  we  constantly
have  to  speak  of  «  astral  sight "  or  <'  astral  hearing  *'  in
order  to  make  ourselves  intelligible,  all  that  we  mean
by  those  expressions  is  the  faculty  of  responding  to
such  vibrations  as  convey  to  the  man's  consciousness,
when  he  is  functioning  in  his  astral  body,  information
of  the  same  character  as  that  conveyed  to  him  by  his
eyes  and  ears  while  he  is  in  the  physical  body.  But
in  the  entirely  different  astral  conditions,  specialized
organs  are  not  necessary  for  the  attainment  of  this
result ;  there  is  matter  in  every  part  of  the  astral  body
which  is  capable  of  such  response,  and  consequently
the  man  functioning  in  that  vehicle  sees  equally  well
objects  behind  him,  beneath  him,  above  him,  without
needing  to  turn  his  head.

There  is,  however,  another  point  which  it  would
hardly  be  fair  to  leave  entirely  out  of  account,  and  that

l6  CLAIRVOVANCB

is'the  question  of  the  chakrams  referred  to  above.  Theo-
sophical  students  are  familiar  with  the  idea  of  the
existence  in  both  the  astral  and  the  etheric  bodies  of
man  of  certain  centres  of  force  which  have  to  be  vivi-
fied in  turn  by  the  sacred  serpent-fire  as  the  man  ad-
vances in  evolution.  Though  these  cannot  be  described
as  organs  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  since  it  is
not  through  them  that  the  man  sees  or  hears,  as  he
does  in  physical  life  through  eyes  and  ears,  yet  it  is
apparently  very  largely  upon  their  vivification  that  the
power  of  exercising  these  astral  senses  depends,  each  of
them  as  it  is  developed  giving  to  the  whole  astral  body
the  power  of  response  to  a  new  set  of  vibrations.

Neither  have  these  centres,  however,  any  permanent
collection  of  astral  matter  connected  with  them.  They
are  simply  vortices  in  the  matter  of  the  body — ^vortices
through  which  all  the  particles  pass  in  turn — points,
perhaps,  at  which  the  higher  force  from  planes  above
impinges  upon  the  astral  body.  Even  this  description
gives  but  a  very  partial  idea  of  their  appearance,  for
they  are  in  reality  four-dimensional  vortices,  so  that
the  force  which  comes  through  them  and  is  the  cause
of  their  existence  seems  to  well  up  from  nowhere.  But
at  any  rate,  since  all  particles  in  turn  pass  through
each  of  them,  it  will  be  clear  that  it  is  thus  possible  for
each  in  turn  to  evoke  in  all  the  particles  of  the  body
the  power  of  receptivity  to  a  certain  set  of  vibrations,
so  that  all  the  astral  senses  are  equally  active  in  all
parts  of  the  body.
The  vision  of  the  devachanic  or  mental  plane  is  again

THE    BUDDHIC    FACULTY  IJ

totally  different,  for  in  this  case  we  can  no  longer  speak
of  separate  senses  such  as  sight  and  hearing,  but  rather
have  to  postulate  one  general  sense  which  responds  so
fully  to  the  vibrations  reaching  it  that  when  any  object
comes  within  its  cognition  it  at  once  comprehends  it
fully,  and  as  it  were  sees  it,  hears  it,  feels  it,  and  knows
all  there  is  to  know  about  it  by  the  one  instantaneous
operation.  Yet  even  this  wonderful  faculty  differs  in
degree  only  and  not  in  kind  from  those  which  are  at  our
command  at  the  present  time  ;  on  the  mental  plane,  just
as  on  the  physical,  impressions  are  still  conveyed  by
means  of  vibrations  travelling  from  the  object  seen  to
the  seer.

On  the  buddhic  plane  we  meet  for  the  first  time  with
a  quite  new  faculty  having  nothing  in  common  with
those  of  which  we  have  spoken,  for  there  a  man  cognizes
any  object  by  an  entirely  different  method,  in  which
external  vibrations  play  no  part.  The  object  becomes
part  of  himself,  and  he  studies  it  from  the  inside  instead
of  from  the  outside.  But  with  this  power  ordinary
clairvoyance  has  nothing  to  do.

The  development,  either  entire  or  partial,  of  any  one
of  these  faculties  would  come  under  our  definition  of
clairvoyance — the  power  to  see  what  is  hidden  from
ordinary  physical  sight.  But  these  faculties  may  be
developed  in  various  ways,  and  it  will  be  well  to  say  a
few  words  as  to  these  different  lines.

We  may  presume  that  if  it  were  possible  for  a  man
to  be  isolated  during  his  evolution  from  all  but  the
gentlest  outside  influences,  and  to  unfold  from  the  begiti-

B

1 8  CLAIRVOYANCB

ning  in  perfectly  regular  and  normal  fashion,  he  would
probably  develope  his  senses  in  regular  order  also.  He
would  find  his  physical  senses  gradually  extending  their
scope  until  they  responded  to  all  the  physical  vibrations,
of  etheric  as  well  as  of  denser  matter ;  then  in  orderly
sequence  would  come  sensibility  to  the  coarser  part  of  the
astral  plane,  and  presently  the  finer  part  also  would  be
included,  until  in  due  course  the  devachanic  faculty
dawned  in  its  turn.

In  real  life,  however,  development  so  regular  as  this
is  hardly  ever  known,  and  many  a  man  has  occasional
flashes  of  astral  consciousness  without  any  awakening
of  etheric  vision  at  all.  And  this  irregularity  of  develop-
ment is  one  of  the  principal  causes  of  man's  extra-
ordinary liability  to  error  in  matters  of  clairvoyance^a
liability  from  which  there  is  no  escape  except  by  a  long
course  of  careful  training  imder  a  qualified  teacher.

Students  of  Theosophical  literature  are  well  aware
that  there  are  such  teachers  to  be  found — that  even  in
this  materialistic  nineteenth  century  the  old  saying  is
still  true,  that  <'  when  the  pupil  is  ready,  the  Master  is
ready  also,"  and  that  '*  in  the  hall  of  learning,  when  he
is  capable  of  entering  there,  the  disciple  will  always  find
his  Master."  They  are  well  aware  also  that  only  under
such  guidance  can  a  man  develope  his  latent  powers  in
safety  and  with  certainty,  since  they  know  how  fatally
easy  it  is  for  the  untrained  clairvoyant  to  deceive  him-
self as  to  the  meaning  and  value  of  what  he  sees,  or
even  absolutely  to  distort  his  vision  completely  in
bringing  it  down  into  his  physical  consciousness.

AMONG  THE   UNCULTURED  I9

It  does  not  follow  that  even  the  pupil  who  is  receiving
regular  instruction  in  the  use  of  occult  powers  will  find
them  unfolding  themselves  exactly  in  the  regular  order
which  was  suggested  above  as  probably  ideal.  His
previous  progress  may  not  have  been  such  as  to  make
this  for  him  the  easiest  or  most  desirable  road ;  but  at
any  rate  he  is  in  the  hands  of  one  who  is  perfectly  com-
petent to  be  his  guide  in  spiritual  development,  and  he
rests  in  perfect  contentment  that  the  way  along  which
he  is  taken  will  be  that  which  is  the  best  way  for
him.

Another  great  advantage  which  he  gains  is  that  what-
ever faculties  he  may  acquire  are  definitely  under  his
command  and  can  be  used  fully  and  constantly  when
he  needs  them  for  his  Theosophical  work ;  whereas  in
the  case  of  the  untrained  man  such  powers  often  mani-
fest themselves  only  very  partially  and  spasmodically,
and  appear  to  come  and  go,  as  it  were,  at  their  own
sweet  will.

It  may  reasonably  be  objected  that  if  clairvoyant
faculty  is,  as  stated,  a  part  of  the  occult  development
of  man,  and  so  a  sign  of  a  certain  amount  of  progress
along  that  line,  it  seems  strange  that  it  should  often  be
possessed  by  primitive  'peoples,  or  by  the  ignorant  and
uncultured  among  our  own  race — persons  who  are  ob-
viously quite  undeveloped,  from  whatever  point  of  view
one  regards  them.  No  doubt  this  does  appear  remark-
able at  first  sight ;  but  the  fact  is  that  the  sensitiveness
of  the  savage  or  of  the  coarse  and  vulgar  European
ignoramus  is  not  really  at  all  the  same  thing  as  the

20  CLAIRVOYANCB

faculty  of  his  properly  trained  brother,  nor  is  it  arrived
at  in  the  same  way.

An  exact  and  detailed  explanation  of  the  difference
would  lead  us  into  rather  recondite  technicalities,  but
perhaps  the  general  idea  of  the  distinction  between  the
two  may  be  caught  from  an  example  taken  from  the
yery  lowest  plane  of  clairvoyance,  in  close  contact  with
the  denser  physical.  The  etheric  double  in  man  is  in
exceedingly  close  relation  to  his  nervous  system,  and
any  kind  of  action  upon  one  of  them  speedily  reacts  on
the  other.  Now  in  the  sporadic  appearance  of  etheric
sight  in  the  savage,  whether  of  Central  Africa  or  of
Western  Europe,  it  has  been  observed  that  the  corres-
ponding nervous  disturbance  is  almost  entirely  in  the
sympathetic  system,  and  that  the  whole  affair  is  practi-
cally beyond  the  man's  control — is  in  fact  a  sort  of
massive  sensation  vaguely  belonging  to  the  whole
etheric  body,  rather  than  an  exact  and  definite  sense-
perception  communicated  through  a  specialized  organ.

As  in  later  races  and  amid  higher  development  the
strength  of  the  man  is  more  and  more  thrown  into  the
evolution  of  the  mental  faculties,  this  vague  sensitive-
ness usually  disappears  ;  but  still  later,  when  the  spiri-
tual man  begins  to  unfold,  he  regains  his  clairvoyant
power.  This  time,  however,  the  faculty  is  a  precise
and  exact  one,  under  the  control  of  the  man's  will,  and
exercised  through  a  definite  sense-organ  ;  and  it  is  note-
worthy that  any  nervous  action  set  ^up  in  sympathy
with  it  is  now  almost  exclusively  in  the  cerebro-spinal
system.

UNDER   MESMERISM  21

Occasional  flashes  of  clairvoyance  do,  however,  some-
times come  to  the  highly  cultured  and  spiritual-minded
man,  even  though  he  may  never  have  heard  of  the
possibility  of  training  such  a  faculty.  In  his  case  such
glimpses  usually  signify  that  he  is  approaching  that
stage  in  his  evolution  when  these  powers  will  naturally
begin  to  manifest  themselves,  and  their  appearance
should  serve  as  an  additional  stimulus  to  him  to  strive
to  maintain  that  high  standard  of  moral  purity  and
mental  balance  without  which  clairvoyance  is  a  curse
and  not  a  blessing  to  its  possessor.

Between  those  who  are  entirely  unimpressible  and
those  who  are  in  full  possession  of  clairvoyant  power
there  are  many  intermediate  stages.  One  to  which  it
will  be  worth  while  to  give  a  passing  glance  is  the  stage
in  which  a  man,  though  he  has  no  clairvoyant  faculty
in  ordinary  life,  yet  exhibits  it  more  or  less  fully  under
the  influence  of  mesmerism.  This  is  a  case  in  which
the  psychic  nature  is  already  sensitive,  but  the  con-
sciousness is  not  yet  capable  of  functioning  in  it  amidst
the  manifold  distractions  of  physical  life.  It  needs  to
be  set  free  by  the  temporary  suspension  of  the  outer
senses  in  the  mesmeric  trance  before  it  can  use  the
diviner  faculties  which  are  but  just  beginning  to  dawn
within  it.  But  of  course  even  in  the  mesmeric  trance
there  are  innumerable  degrees  of  lucidity,  from  the
ordinary  patient  who  is  blankly  unintelligent  to  the  man
whose  power  of  sight  is  fully  under  the  control  of  the
operator,  and  can  be  directed  whithersoever  he  wills,
or  to  the  more  advanced  stage  in  which,  when  the  con-

22  CLAIRVOYANCB

sciousness  is  once  set  free,  it  escapes  altogether  from
the  grasp  of  the  magnetizert  and  soars  into  fields  of
exalted  vision  where  it  is  entirely  beyond  his  reach.

Another  step  along  the  same  path  is  that  upon  which
such  perfect  suppression  of  the  physical  as  that  which
occurs  in  the  hypnotic  trance  is  not  necessary,  but  the
power  of  supernormal  sight,  though  still  out  of  reach
during  waking  life,  becomes  available  when  the  body  is
held  in  the  bonds  of  ordinary  sleep.  At  this  stage  of
development  stood  many  of  the  prophets  and  seers  of
whom  we  read,  who  were  ''  warned  of  God  in  a  dream,'"
or  communed  with  beings  far  higher  than  themselves  in
the  silent  watches  of  the  night.

Most  cultured  people  of  the  higher  races  of  the  world
have  this  development  to  some  extent :  that  is  to  say»
the  senses  of  their  astral  bodies  are  in  full  working
order,  and  perfectly  capable  of  receiving  impressions
from  objects  and  entities  of  their  own  plane. .  But  to
make  that  fact  of  any  use  to  them  down  here  in  the
physical  body,  two  changes  are  usually  necessary ;  first,
that  the  ego  shall  be  awakened  to  the  realities  of  the
astral  plane,  and  induced  to  emerge  from  the  chrysalis
formed  by  his  own  waking  thoughts,  and  look  round  him
to  observe  and  to  learn ;  and  secondly,  that  the  con-
sciousness shall  be  so  far  retained  during  the  return  of
the  ego  into  his  physical  body  as  to  enable  him  to  im-
press upon  his  physical  brain  the  recollection  of  what
he  has  seen  or  learnt.

If  the  first  of  these  changes  has  taken  place,  the
second  is  of  little  importance,  since  the  ego,  the  true

FIRST   MANIFESTATIONS  23

man,  will  be  able  to  profit  by  the  information  to  be  ob-
tained upon  that  plane,  even  though  he  may  not  have
the  satisfaction  of  bringing  through  any  remembrance
of  it  into  his  waking  life  down  here.

Students  often  ask  how  this  clairvoyant  faculty  will
first  be  manifested  in  themselves — how  they  may  know
when  they  have  reached  the  stage  at  which  its  first
faint  foreshadowings  are  beginning  to  be  visible.  Cases
differ  so  widely  that  it  is  impossible  to  give  to  this
question  any  answer  Ihat  will  be  universally  appli-
cable.

Some  people  begin  by  a  plunge,  as  it  were,  and  under
some  unusual  stimulus  become  able  just  for  once  to  see
some  striking  vision;  and  very  often  in  such  a  case,
because  the  experience  does  not  repeat  itself,  the  seer
comes  in  time  to  believe  that  on  that  occasion  he  must
have  been  the  victim  of  hallucination.  Others  begin
by  becoming  intermittently  conscious  of  the  brilliant
colours  and  vibrations  of  the  human  aura  ;  yet  others
find  themselves  with  increasing  frequency  seeing  and
hearing  something  to  which  those  around  them  are
blind  and  deaf ;  others  again  see  faces,  landscapes,  or
coloured  clouds  floating  before  their  eyes  in  the  dark
before  they  sink  to  rest ;  while  perhaps  the  commonest
experience  of  all  is  that  of  those  who  begin  to  recollect
with  greater  and  greater  clearness  what  they  have  seen
and  heard  on  the  other  planes  during  sleep.

Having  now  to  some  extent  cleared  our  ground,  we
may  proceed  to  consider  the  various  phenomena  of
clairvoyance.

24  CLAIRVOYANCE

They  differ  so  widely  both  in  character  and  in  degree
that*  it  is  not  very  easy  to  decide  how  they  can  most
satisfactorily  be  classified.  We  might  for  example
arrange  them  according  to  the  kind  of  sight  employed —
whether  it  were  devachanic,  astral,  or  merely  etheric.
We  might  divide  them  according  to  the  capacity  of  the
clairvoyant,  taking  into  consideration  whether  he  was
trained  or  imtrained;  whether  his  vision  was  regular
and  under  his  command,  or  spasmodic  and  independent
of  his  volition ;  whether  he  could  exercise  it  only  when
under  mesmeric  influence,  or  whether  that  assistance
was  unnecessary  for  him ;  whether  he  was  able  to  use
his  faculty  when  awake  in  the  physical  body,  or  whether
it  was  available  only  when  he  was  temporarily  away
from  that  body  in  sleep  or  trance.

All  these  distinctions  are  of  importance,  and  we  shall
have  to  take  them  all  into  consideration  as  we  go  on,
but  perhaps  on  the  whole  the  most  useful  classification
will  be  one  something  on  the  lines  of  that  adopted  by
Mr.  Sinnett  in  his  Rationale  of  Mesmerism — ^a  book,  by
the  way,  which  all  students  of  clairvoyance  ought  to
read.  In  dealing  with  the  phenomena,  then,  we  will
arrange  them  rather  according  to  the  capacity  of  the
s^ht  employed  than  to  the  plane  upon  which  it  is  exer-
cised, so  that  we  may  group  instances  of  clairvoyance
under  some  such  headings  as  these :

I.  Simple  clairvoyance — that  is  to  say,  a  mere  open-
ing of  sight,  enabling  its  possessor  to  see  whatever  astral
or  etheric  entities  happen  to  be  present  around  him,
but  not  including  the  power  of  observing  either  distant

CLASSIFICATION  25

places  or  scenes  belonging  to  any  other  time  than  the
present.

2.  Clairvoyance  in  space — the  capacity  to  see  scenes
or  events  removed  from  the  seer  in  space,  and  either  too
far  distant  for  ordinary  observation  or  concealed  by  in-
termediate objects.

3.  Clairvoyance  in  time — that  is  to  say,  the  capacity
to  see  objects  or  events  which  are  removed  from  the  seer
in  time,  or  in  other  words  the  power  of  looking  into  the
past  or  the  future.

CHAPTER  II.

SiMPLB  Clairvoyance  :  Full.

Ws  have  defined  this  as  a  mere  opening  of  etheric
or  astral  sight,  which  enables  the  possessor  to  see  what-
ever may  be  present  around  him  on  corresponding
levels,  but  is  not  usually  accompanied  by  the  power  of
seeing  anything  at  a  great  distance  or  of  reading  either
the  past  or  the  future.  It  is  hardly  possible  altogether
to  exclude  these  latter  faculties,  for  astral  sight  necess-
arily has  considerably  greater  extension  than  physical,
and  fragmentary  pictures  of  both  past  and  future  are
often  casually  visible  even  to  clairvoyants  who  do  not
know  how  to  seek  specially  for  them;  but  there  is
nevertheless  a  very  real  distinction  between  such  in-
cidental glimpses  and  the  definite  power  of  projection
of  the  sight  either  in  space  or  time.

We  find  among  sensitive  people  all  degrees  of  this
kind  of  clairvoyance,  from  that  of  the  man  who  gets  a
vague  impression  which  hardly  deserves  the  name  of
sight  at  all,  up  to  the  full  possession  of  etheric  and
astral  vision  respectively.  Perhaps  the  simplest  method
will  be  for  us  to  begin  by  describing  what  would  be
visible  in  the  case  of  this  fuller  development  of  the

t6

BTHERIC  VISION  2J

power,  as  the  cases  of  its  partial  possession  will  then  be
seen  to  fall  naturally  into  their  places.

Let  us  take  the  etheric  vision  first.  This  consists
simply,  as  has  already  been  said,  in  susceptibility  to  a
isj  larger  series  of  physical  vibrations  than  ordinary,
but  nevertheless  its  possession  brings  into  view  a  good
deal  to  which  the  majority  of  the  human  race  still  re-
mains blind.  Let  us  consider  what  changes  its  acqui-
sition produces  in  the  aspect  of  familiar  objects,
animate  and  inanimate,  and  then  see  to  what  entirely
new  factors  it  introduces  us.  But  it  must  be  remem-
bered that  what  I  am  about  to  describe  is  the  result  of
the  full  and  perfectly-controlled  possession  of  the  faculty
only,  and  that  most  of  the  instances  met  with  in  real
life  will  be  likely  to  fall  far  short  of  it  in  one  direction
or  another.

The  most  striking  change  produced  in  the  appearance
of  inanimate  objects  by  the  acquisition  of  this  faculty
is  that  most  of  them  become  almost  transparent,
owing  to  the  difference  in  wave-length  of  some  of  the
vibrations  to  which  the  man  has  now  become  suscep-
tible. He  finds  himself  capable  of  performing  with  the
utmost  ease  the  proverbial  feat  of  ^*  seeing  through  a
brick  wall,"  for  to  his  newly-acquired  vision  the  brick
wall  seems  to  have  a  consistency  no  greater  than  that
of  a  light  mist.  He  therefore  sees  what  is  going  on  in
an  adjoining  room  almost  as  though  no  intervening
wall  existed;  he  can  describe  with  accuracy  the  con-
tents of  a  locked  box,  or  read  a  sealed  letter ;  with  a
little  practice  he  can  find  a  given  passage  in  a  closed

28  CLAIRVOYANCB

book.  This  last  feat,  though  perfectly  easy  to  astral
vision,  presents  considerable  difficulty  to  one  using
etheric  sight,  because  of  the  fact  that  each  page  has  to
be  looked  at  through  all  those  which  happen  to  be  super-
imposed upon  it.

It  is  often  asked  whether  under  these  circumstances
a  man  sees  always  with  this  abnormal  sight,  or  only
when  he  wishes  to  do  so.  The  answer  is  that  if  the
faculty  is  perfectly  developed  it  will  be  entirely  under
his  control,  and  he  can  use  that  or  his  more  ordinary
vision  at  will.  He  changes  from  one  to  the  other  as
readily  and  naturally  as  we  now  change  the  focus  of  our
eyes  when  we  look  up  from  our  book  to  follow  the
motions  of  some  object  a  mile  away.  It  is,  as  it  were,
a  focussing  of  consciousness  on  the  one  or  the  other
aspect  of  what  is  seen  ;  and  though  the  man  would  have
quite  clearly  in  his  view  the  aspect  upon  which  his  at-
tention was  for  the  moment  fixed,  he  would  always
be  vaguely  conscious  of  the  other  aspect  too,  just  as
when  we  focus  our  sight  upon  any  object  held  in  our
hands  we  yet  vaguely  see  the  opposite  wall  of  the  room
as  a  background.

Another  curious  change,  which  comes  from  the  pos-
session of  this  sight,  is  that  the  solid  ground  upon  which
the  man  walks  becomes  to  a  certain  extent  transparent
to  him,  so  that  he  is  able  to  see  down  into  it  to  a  consi-
derable depth,  much  as  we  can  now  see  into  fairly  clear
water.  This  enables  him  to  watch  a  creature  burrow-
ing underground,  to  distinguish  a  vein  of  coal  or  of
metal  if  not  too  far  below  the  surface,  and  so  on.

BTHBRIC   ENTITIES  29

The  limit  of  etheric  sight  when  looking  through  solid
matter  appears  to  be  analogous  to  that  imposed  upon
us  when  looking  through  water  or  mist.  We  cannot
see  beyond  a  certain  distance,  because  the  medium
through  which  we  are  looking  is  not  perfectly  trans-
parent.

The  appearance  of  animate  objects  is  also  consider-
ably altered  for  the  man  who  has  increased  his  visual
powers  to  this  extent.  The  bodies  of  men  and  animals
are  for  him  in  the  main  transparent,  so  that  he  can
watch  the  action  of  the  various  internal  organs,  and  to
some  extent  diagnose  some  of  their  diseases.

The  extended  sight  also  enables  him  to  perceive,  more
or  less  clearly,  various  classes  of  creatures,  elemental  and
otherwise,  whose  bodies  are  not  capable  of  reflecting
any  of  the  rays  within  the  limit  of  the  spectrum  as  ordin-
arily seen.  Among  the  entities  so  seen  will  be  some  of
the  lower  orders  of  nature-spirits — those  whose  bodies
are  composed  of  the  denser  etheric  matter.  To  this  class
belong  nearly  all  the  fairies,  gnomes,  and  brownies,
about  whom  there  are  still  so  many  stories  remaining
among  Scotch  and  Irish  motmtains  and  in  remote
country  places  all  over  the  world.

The  vast  kingdom  of  nature-spirits  is  in  the  main
an  astral  kingdom,  but  still  there  is  a  large  section  of
it  which  appertains  to  the  etheric  part  of  the  physical
plane,  and  this  section,  of  course,  is  much  more  likely  to
come  within  the  ken  of  ordinary  people  than  the  others.
Indeed,  in  reading  the  common  fairy  stories  one  fre-
quently comes  across  distinct  indications  that  it  is  with

30  CLAIRVOYANCE

this  class  that  we  are  dealing.  Any  student  of  fairy
lore  will  remember  how  often  mention  is  made  of  some
mysterious  ointment  or  drug,  which  when  applied  to  a
man's  eyes  enables  him  to  see  the  members  of  the  fairy
commonwealth  whenever  he  happens  to  meet  them.

The  story  of  such  an  application  and  its  result  occurs
so  constantly  and  comes  from  so  many  different  parts
of  the  world  that  there  must  certainly  be  some  truth
behind  it,  as  there  always  is  behind  really  universal
popular  tradition.  Now  no  such  anointing  of  the
eyes  alone  could  by  any  possibility  open  a  man's
astral  vision,  though  certain  ointments  rubbed  over  the
whole  body  will  very  greatly  assist  the  astral  body  to
leave  the  physical  in  full  consciousness — a  fact  the
knowledge  of  which  seems  to  have  survived  even  to
mediaeval  times,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  evidence
given  at  some  of  the  trials  for  witchcraft.  But  the
application  to  the  physical  eye  might  very  easily  so
stimulate  its  sensitiveness  as  to  make  it  susceptible
to  some  of  the  etheric  vibrations.

The  story  frequently  goes  on  to  relate  how  when  the
human  being  who  has  used  this  mystical  ointment  be-
trays his  extended  vision  in  some  way  to  a  fairy,  the
latter  strikes  or  stabs  him  in  the  eye,  thus  depriving
him  not  only  of  the  etheric  sight,  but  of  that  of  the
denser  physical  plane  as  well.  (See  The  Science  of  Fairy
Tales,  by  E.  S.  Hartland,  in  the  "  Contemporary  Sci-
ence "  series— or  indeed  almost  any  extensive  collection
of  fairy  stories.)  If  the  sight  acquired  had  been  astral,
such  a  proceeding  would  have  been  entirely  unavailing,

NEW  COLOURS  3 1

for  no  injury  to  the  physical  apparatus  would  affect  an
astral  faculty  ;  but  if  the  vision  produced  by  the  oint-
ment were  etherici  the  destruction  of  the  physical  eye
would  in  most  cases  at  once  extinguish  it,  since  that  is
the  mechanism  by  means  of  which  it  works.

Anyone  possessing  this  sight  of  which  we  are  speak-
ing would  also  be  able  to  perceive  the  etheric  double  of
man  ;  but  since  this  is  so  nearly  identical  in  size  with
the  physical,  it  would  hardly  be  likely  to  attract  his
attention  unless  it  were  partially  projected  in  trance  or
under  the  influence  of  anaesthetics.  After  death,  when
it  withdraws  entirely  from  the  dense  body,  it  would  be
clearly  visible  to  him,  and  he  would  frequently  see  it
hovering  over  newly  made  graves  as  he  passed  through
a  churchyard  or  cemetery.  If  he  were  to  attend  a
spiritualistic  s6ance  he  would  see  the  etheric  matter
oozing  out  from  the  side  of  the  medium,  and  could
observe  the  various  ways  in  which  the  communicating
entities  make  use  of  it.

Another  fact  which  could  hardly  fail  soon  to  thrust
itself  upon  his  notice  would  be  the  extension  of  his  per-
ception of  colour.  He  would  find  himself  able  to  see
several  entirely  new  colours,  not  in  the  least  resembling
any  of  those  included  in  the  spectrum  as  we  at  present
know  it,  and  therefore  of  course  quite  indescribable  in
any  terms  at  our  command.  And  not  only  would  he
see  new  objects  that  were  wholly  of  these  new  colours,
but  he  would  also  discover  that  modifications  had  been
introduced  into  the  colour  of  many  objects  with  which
he  was  quite  &miliar,  according  to  whether  they  had

32  CLAIRVOYANCB

or  had  not  some  tinge  of  these  new  hues  intermingled
with  the  old.  So  that  two  surfaces  of  colour  which  to
ordinary  eyes  appeared  to  match  perfectly  would  often
present  distinctly  different  shades  to  his  keener  sight.

We  have  now  touched  upon  some  of  the  principal
changes  which  would  be  introduced  into  a  man's
world  when  he  gained  etheric  sight ;  and  it  must  always
be  remembered  that  in  most  cases  a  corresponding
change  would  at  the  same  time  be  brought  about  in  his
other  senses  also,  so  that  he  would  be  capable  of  hear-
ing, and  perhaps  even  of  feeling,  more  than  most  of
those  around  him.  Now  supposing  that  in  addition  to
this  he  obtained  the  sight  of  the  astral  plane,  what
further  changes  would  be  observable  ?

Well,  the  changes  would  be  many  and  great ;  in  fact,
a  whole  new  world  would  open  before  his  eyes.  Let
us  consider  its  wonders  briefly  in  the  same  order  as
before,  and  see  first  what  difference  there  would  be  in  the
appearance  of  inanimate  objects.  On  this  point  I  may
begin  by  quoting  a  recent  quaint  answer  given  in  The
Vdhan.

**  There  is  a  distinct  difference  between  etheric  sight
and  astral  sight,  and  it  is  the  latter  which  seems  to
correspond  to  the  fourth  dimension.

^'  The  easiest  way  to  understand  the  difference  is  to
take  an  example.  If  you  looked  at  a  man  with  both
the  sights  in  turn,  you  would  see  the  buttons  at  the  back
of  his  coat  in  both  cases  ;  only  if  you  used  etheric  sight
you  would  see  them  through  him,  and  would  see  the
shank-side  as  nearest  to  you,  but  if  you  looked  astrally,

1  t
ASTRAL  VISION  33

t  >i

you  would  see  it  not  only  like  that,  but  just  as  if  you
were  standing  behind  the  man  as  well.

*<  Or  if  you  were  looking  etherically  at  a  wooden  cub^
with  writing  on  all  its  sides,  it  would  be  as  though  the
cube  were  glass,  so  that  you  could  see  through  it,  aad
you  would  see  the  writing  on  the  opposite  side  all  backr
wards,  while  that  on  the  right  and  left  sides  would
not  be  clear  to  you  at  all  unless  you  moved,  because
you  would  see  it  edgewise.  But  if  you  looked  at  it
astraliy  you  would  see  all  the  sides  at  once,  and
all  the  right  way  up,  as  though  the  whole  cube  had
been  flattened  out  before  you,  and  you  would  see  ev^ry
particle  of  the  inside  as  well — not  through  the  others,
but  all  flattened  out.  You  would  be  looking  at  it  from
another  direction,  at  right  angles  to  all  the  directions
that  we  know.

*^  If  you  look  at  the  back  of  a  watch  etherically  you
see  all  the  wheels  through  it,  and  the  face  through  them,
but  backwards  ;  if  you  look  at  it  astraliy,  you  see  the
face  right  way  up  and  all  the  wheels  lying  separately,
but  nothing  on  the  top  of  anything  else."

Here  we  have  at  once  the  keynote,  the  principal
factor  of  the  change ;  the  man  is  looking  at  everything
from  an  absolutely  new  point  of  view,  entirely  outside
of  anything  that  he  has  ever  imaging  before*  He  has
no  longer  the  slightest  difficulty  in  reading  any  page  in
a  closed  book,  because  he  is  not  now  looking  at  it
through  all  the  other  pages  before  it  or  behind,  it,  but
is  looking  straight  down  upon  it  as  though  it  were  th(3
only  page  to  be  seen.    The  depth  at  which  a  vein  of

c

34  CLAIRVOYANCE

metal  or  of  coal  may  lie  is  no  longer  a  barrier  to  his  sight
of  it,  because  he  is  not  now  looking  through  the  inter-
vening depth  of  earth  at  all.  The  thickness  of  a  wall,
or  the  number  of  walls  intervening  between  the  observer
and  the  object,  would  make  a  great  deal  of  difference  to
the  clearness  of  the  etheric  sight ;  they  would  make  no
difference  whatever  to  the  astral  sight,  because  on  the
astral  plane  they  would  not  intervene  between  the
observer  and  the  object.  Of  course  that  sounds  para-
doxical and  impossible,  and  it  is  quite  inexplicable  to  a
mind  not  specially  trained  to  grasp  the  idea  ;  yet  it  is
none  the  less  absolutely  true.

This  carries  us  straight  into  the  middle  of  the  much-
vexed  question  of  the  fourth  dimension — a  question  of
the  deepest  interest,  though  one  that  we  cannot  pretend
to  discuss  in  the  space  at  our  disposal.  Those  who
wish  to  study  it  as  it  deserves  are  recommended  to
begin  with  Mr.  C.  H.  Hinton's  Scientific  Romances  or
Dr.  A.  T.  Schofield's^fio^A^  Worlds  and  then  follow  on
with  the  former  author's  larger  work,  A  New  Era  of
Thought.  Mr.  Hinton  not  only  claims  to  be  able  him-
self to  grasp  mentally  some  of  the  simpler  fourth-
dimensional  figures,  but  also  states  that  anyone  who
will  take  the  trouble  to  follow  out  his  directions  may
with  perseverance  acquire  that  mental  grasp  likewise.
I  am  not  certain  that  the  power  to  do  this  is  within
the  reach  of  everyone,  as  he  thinks,  for  it  appears  to
me  to  require  considerable  mathematical  ability ;  but
I  can  at  any  rate  bear  witness  that  the  tesseract  or
fourth-dimensional    cube    which    he    describes   is    a

THROUGHTH  35

reality,  for  it  is  quite  a  familiar  figure  upon  the  astral
plane.

I  know  that  Madame  Blavatsky,  in  alluding  to  the
theory  of  the  fourth  dimension,  has  expressed  an  opinion
that  it  is  only  a  clumsy  way  of  stating  the  idea  of  the
entire  permeability  of  matter,  and  that  Mr.  W.  T.
Stead  has  followed  along  the  same  lines,  presenting  the
conception  to  his  readers  under  the  name  of  througkth.
Careful,  oft-repeated  and  detailed  investigation  does,
however,  seem  to  show  quite  conclusively  that  this
explanation  does  not  cover  all  the  facts.  It  is  a  perfect
description  of  etheric  vision,  but  the  further  and  quite
different  idea  of  the  fourth  dimension  as  expounded  by
Mr.  Hinton  is  the  only  one  which  gives  any  kind  of  ex-
planation down  here  of  the  constantly-observed  facts  of
astral  vision.  I  would  therefore  venture  deferentially  to
suggest  that  when  Madame  Blavatsky  wrote  as  she  did,
she  had  in  mind  etheric  vision  and  not  astral,  and  that
the  extreme  applicability  of  the  phrase  to  this  other  and
higher  &culty,  of  which  she  was  not  at  the  moment
thinking,  did  not  occur  to  her.

The  possession  of  this  extraordinary  and  scarcely
expressible  power,  then,  must  always  be  borne  in  mind
through  all  that  follows.  It  lays  every  point  in  the
interior  of  every  solid  body  absolutely  open  to  the  gaze
of  the  seer,  just  as  every  point  in  the  interior  of  a  circle
lies  open  to  the  gaze  of  a  man  looking  down  upon  it.

But  even  this  is  by  no  means  all  that  it  gives  to  its
possessor.  He  sees  not  only  the  inside  as  well  as  the
outside  of  every  object,  but  also  its  astral  counterpart.

36  CLAIRVOYANCB

Every  atom  and  molecule  of  physical  matter  has  its
corresponding  astral  atoms  and  molecules,  and  the  mass
which  is  built  up  out  of  these  is  clearly  visible  to  our
clairvoyant.  Usually  the  astral  of  any  object  projects
somewhat  beyond  the  physical  part  of  it,  and  thus
metals,  stones  and  other  things  are  seen  surrounded  by
an  astral  aura.

It  will  be  seen  at  once  that  even  in  the  study  of
inorganic  matter  a  man  gains  immensely  by  the  acquisi-
tion of  this  vision.  Not  only  does  he  see  the  astral
part  of  the  object  at  which  he  looks,  which  before  was
wholly  hidden  from  him;  not  only  does  he  see  much
more  of  its  physical  constitution  than  he  did  before,  but
even  what  was  visible  to  him  before  is  now  seen  much
more  clearly  and  truly.  A  moment's  consideration  will
show  that  his  new  vision  approximates  much  more
closely  to  true  perception  than  does  physical  sight.
For  example,  if  he  looks  astrally  at  a  glass  cube,  its
sides  will  all  appear  equal,  as  we  know  they  really  are,
whereas  on  the  physical  plane  he  sees  the  further  side
in  perspective — that  is,  it  appears  smaller  than  the
nearer  side,  which  is,  of  course,  a  mere  illusion  due  to
his  physical  limitations.

When  we  come  to  consider  the  additional  facilities
which  it  offers  in  the  observation  of  animate  objects  we
see  still  more  clearly  the  advantages  of  the  astral  vision*
It  exhibits  to  the  clairvoyant  the  aura  of  plants  and
animals,  and  thus  in  the  case  of  the  latter  their  desires
and  emotions,  and  whatever  thoughts  they  may  have,
are  all  plainly  shown  before  his  eyes.

THE  AURA  37

But  it  is  in  dealing  with  human  beings  that  he  will
most  appreciate  the  value  of  this  faculty,  for  he  will
often  be  able  to  help  them  far  more  effectually  when  he
guides  himself  by  the  information  which  it  gives  him.

He  will  be  able  to  see  the  aura  as  far  up  as  the  astral
body,  and  though  that  leaves  all  the  higher  part  of  a
man  still  hidden  from  his  gaze,  he  will  nevertheless  find
it  possible  by  careful  observation  to  learn  a  good  deal
about  the  higher  part  from  what  is  within  his  reach.
His  (Capacity  of  examining  the  etheric  double  will  give
him  considerable  advantage  in  locating  and  classifying
any  defects  or  diseases  of  the  nervous  system,  while
from  the  appearance  of  the  astral  body  he  will  be  at
once  aware  of  all  the  emotions,  passions,  desires  and
tendencies  of  the  man  before  him,  and  even  of  very
many  of  his  thoughts  also.

As  he  looks  at  a  person  he  will  see  him  surrounded
by  the  luminous  mist  of  the  astral  aura,  flashing  with
all  sorts  of  brilliant  colours,  and  constantly  changing
in  hue  and  brilliancy  with  every  variation  of  tHe
person's  thoughts  and  feelings.  He  will  see  this  aura
flooded  with  the  beautiful  rose-colour  of  pure  aflfection,
the  rich  blue  of  devotional  feeling,  the  hard,  dull  brown
of  selfishness,  the  deep  scarlet  of  anger,  the  horrible
lurid  red  of  sensuality,  the  livid  grey  of  fear,  the  black
clouds  of  hatred  and  malice,  or  any  of  tke  other
hundredfold  indications  so  easily  to  be  read  in  it  by  a
practised  eye ;  and  thus  it  will  be  impossible  for  any
persons  to  conceal  from  him  the  real  state  of  their
feelings  on  any  subject.

38  CLAtRVOYANCB

These  varied  indications  of  the  aura  are  of  themselves
a  study  of  very  deep  interest,  but  I  have  no  space  to
deal  with  them  in  detail  here.  A  somewhat  fuller
account  of  them  will  be  found  in  my  pamphlet  on  The
Aura^  and  a  rather  larger  work  on  the  subject  is  in
contemplation.

Not  only  does  the  astral  aura  show  him  the  temporary
result  of  the  emotion  passing  through  it  at  the  moment »
but  it  also  gives  him,  by  the  arrangement  and  propor-
tion of  its  colours  when  in  a  condition  of  comparative
rest,  a  clue  to  the  general  disposition  and  character  of
its  owner.  For  the  astral  body  is  the  expression  of  as
much  of  the  man  as  can  be  manifested  on  that  plane,  so
that  from  what  is  seen  in  it  much  more  which  belongs
to  higher  planes  may  be  inferred  with  considerable
certainty.

In  this  judgment  of  character  our  clairvoyant  will  be
much  helped  by  so  much  of  the  person's  thought  as
expresses  itself  on  the  astral  plane,  and  consequently
comes  within  his  purview.  The  true  home  of  thought
is  on  the  mental  or  devachanic  plane,  and  all  thought
first  manifests  itself  there  as  a  vibration  of  the  mind-
body.  But  if  it  be  in  any  way  a  selfish  thought,  or  if  it
be  connected  in  any  way  with  an  emotion  or  a  desire,  it
immediately  descends  into  the  astral  plane,  and  takes  to
itself  a  visible  form  of  astral  matter.

In  the  case  of  the  majority  of  men  almost  all  thought
would  fall  under  one  or  other  of  these  heads,  so  that
practically  the  whole  of  their  personality  would  lie
clearly  before  our  friend's  astral  vision,  since  their  astral

ASTRAL  INHABITANTS  39

bodies  and  the  thought-forms  constantly  radiating  from
them  would  be  to  him  as  an  open  book  in  which  their
characteristics  were  writ  so  largely  that  he  who  ran
might  read.  Anyone  wishing  to  gain  some  idea  as  to
how  the  thought-forms  present  themselves  to  clairvoyant
vision  may  satisfy  themselves  to  some  extent  by  ex-
amining the  illustrations  accompanjring  Mrs.  Besant's
valuable  article  on  the  subject  in  Luctfer  for  September,
1896.

We  have  seen  something  of  the  alteration  in  the
appearance  of  both  animate  and  inanimate  objects  when
viewed  by  one  possessed  of  full  clairvoyant  sight  as  far
as  the  astral  plane  is  concerned ;  let  us  now  consider
what  entirely  new  objects  he  will  see.  He  will  be  con-
scious of  a  far  greater  fulness  in  nature  in  many  direc-
tions, but  chiefly  his  attention  will  be  attracted  by  the
living  denizens  of  this  new  world.  No  detailed  account
of  them  can  be  attempted  within  the  space  at  our  dis-
posal ;  for  that  the  reader  is  referred  to  No.  V.  of  the
Theosophical  Manuals.  Here  we  can  do  no  more  than
barely  enumerate  a  few  classes  only  of  the  vast  hosts  of
astral  inhabitants.

He  will  be  impressed  by  the  protean  forms  of  the
ceaseless  tide  of  elemental  essence,  ever  swirling  around
him,  menacing  often,  yet  always  retiring  before  a  deter-
mined effort  of  the  will ;  he  will  marvel  at  the  enormous
army  of  entities  temporarily  called  out  of  this  ocean
into  separate  existence  by  the  thoughts  and  wishes  of
man,  whether  good  or  evil.  He  will  watch  the  mani-
fold tribes  of  the  nature-spirits  at  their  work  or  at  their

40  CLAIRVOYANCE

play ;  he  will  sometimes  be  able  to  study  with  ever-
incfeasing  delight  the  magnificent  evolution  of  some  of
the  lower  orders  of  the  glorious  kingdom  of  the  devas,
t^ich  corresponds  approximately  to  the  angelic  host  of
Christian  terminology.

But  perhaps  of  even  keener  interest  to  him  than  any
of  these  will  be  the  human  denizens  of  the  astral  world,
and  he  will  find  them  divisible  into  two  great  classes —
those  whom  we  call  the  living,  and  those  others,  most
of  them  infinitely  more  alive,  whom  we  so  foolishly  mis-
name the  dead.  Among  the  former  he  will  find  here
and  there  one  wide  awake  and  fully  conscious,  perhaps
sent  to  bring  him  some  message,  or  examining  him
keenly  to  see  what  progress  he  is  making ;  while  the
nlajority  of  his  neighbours,  when  away  from  their  physi-
cal bodies  during  sleep,  will  drift  idly  by,  so  wrapped  up
in  their  own  cogitations  as  to  be  practically  unconscious
of  what  is  going  on  around  them.

Among  the  great  host  of  the  recently  dead  he  will
find  all  degrees  of  consciousness  and  intelligence,  and
all  shades  of  character — for  death,  which  seems  to  our
limited  vision  so  absolute  a  change,  in  reality  alters
nothing  of  the  man  himself.  On  the  day  after  his  death
he  is  precisely  the  same  man  as  he  was  the  day  before
it,  with  the  same  disposition,  the  same  qualities,  the
same  virtues  and  vices,  save  only  that  he  has  cast  aside
his  physical  body  ;  but  the  loss  of  that  no  more  makes
him  in  any  way  a  different  man  than  would  the  removal
of  an  overcoat.  So  among  the  dead  our  student  will  find
men  intelligent  and  stupid,  kind-hearted  and  morose,

CONTINUOUS   CONSCIOUSNESS  4I

serious  and  frivolous,  spiritually-minded  and  sensually-
minded,  just  as  among  the  living.

Since  he  can  not  only  see  the  dead,  but  speak  with
them,  he  can  often  be  of  very  great  use  to  them,  and
give  them  information  and  guidance  which  is  of  the
utmost  value  to  them.  Many  of  them  are  in  a  condition
of  great  surprise  and  perplexity,  and  sometimes  even  of
acute  distress,  because  they  find  the  facts  of  the  next
world  so  unlike  the  childish  legends  which  are  all  that
popular  religion  in  the  West  has  to  offer  with  reference
to  this  transcendently  important  subject ;  and  therefore
a  man  who  understands  this  new  world  and  can  explain
matters  is  distinctly  a  friend  in  need.

In  many  other  ways  a  man  who  fully  possesses  this
faculty  may  be  of  use  to  the  living  as  well  as  to  the
dead ;  but  of  this  side  of  the  subject  I  have  already
written  in  my  little  book  on  Invisible  Helpers,  In  addi-
tion to  astral  entities  he  will  see  astral  corpses — shades
and  shells  in  all  stages  of  decay ;  but  these  need  only
be  just  mentioned  here,  as  the  reader  desiring  a  further
account  of  them  will  find  it  in  our  third  and  fifth  manuals.

Another  wonderful  result  which  the  full  enjoyment  of
astral  clairvoyance  brings  to  a  man  is  that  he  has  no
longer  any  break  in  consciousness.  When  he  lies  down
at  night  he  leaves  his  physical  body  to  the  rest  which
it  requires,  while  he  goes  about  his  business  in  the  far
more  comfortable  astral  vehicle.  In  the  morning  he
returns  to  and  re-enters  his  physical  body,  but  without
any  loss  of  consciousness  or  memory  between  the  two
states,  and  thus  he  is  able  to  live  as  it  were  a  double

42  CLAIRVOYANCB

life  which  yet  is  one,  and  to  be  usefully  employed  during
the  whole  of  it  instead  of  losing  one-third  of  his  exist-
ence in  blank  unconsciousness.

Another  strange  power  of  which  he  may  find  himself
in  possession  (though  its  full  control  belongs  rather  to
the  still  higher  devachanic  faculty)  is  that  of  magnify-
ing at  will  the  minutest  physical  or  astral  particle  to
any  desired  size,  as  though  by  a  microscope — ^though  no
microscope  ever  made  or  ever  likely  to  be  made  possesses
even  a  thousandth  part  of  this  psychic  magnifying
power.  By  its  means  the  hypothetical  molecule  and
atom  postulated  by  science  become  visible  and  living
realities  to  the  occult  student,  and  on  this  closer  ex-
amination he  finds  them  to  be  much  more  complex  in
their  structure  than  the  scientific  man  has  yet  realized
them  to  be.  It  also  enables  him  to  follow  with  the
closest  attention  and  the  most  lively  interest  all  kinds
of  electrical,  magnetic,  and  other  etheric  action ;  and
when  some  of  the  specialists  in  these  branches  of  science
are  able  to  develope  the  power  to  see  those  things
whereof  they  write  so  facilely,  some  very  wonderful  and
beautiful  revelations  may  be  expected.

This  is  one  of  the  siddhis  or  powers  described  in
Oriental  books  as  accruing  to  the  man  who  devotes
himself  to  spiritual  development,  though  the  name  under
which  it  is  there  mentioned  might  not  be  immediately
recognizable.  It  is  referred  to  as  ''  the  power  of  making
oneself  large  or  small  at  will,**  and  the  reason  of  a
description  which  appears  so  oddly  to  reverse  the  fact
is  that  in  reality  the  method  by  which  this  feat  is  per-

DIRECT   KNOWLEDGE  45

formed  is  precisely  that  indicated  in  these  ancient  books.
It  is  by  the  use  of  temporary  visual  machinery  of  in-
conceivable minuteness  that  the  world  of  the  infinitely
little  is  so  clearly  seen ;  and  in  the  same  way  (or  rather
in  the  opposite  way)  it  is  by  temporarily  enormously  in-
creasing the  size  of  the  machinery  used  that  it  becomes
possible  to  increase  the  breadth  of  one's  view — ^in  the
physical  sense  as  well  as,  let  us  hope,  in  the  moral —
far  beyond  anything  that  science  has  ever  dreamt  of  as
possible  for  man.  So  that  the  alteration  in  size  is
really  in  the  vehicle  of  the  student's  consciousness,  and
not  in  an3rthing  outside  of  himself;  and  the  old  Oriental
book  has  after  all  put  the  case  more  accurately  than  we.

Psychometry  and  second-sight  in  excdsis  would  also
be  among  the  faculties  which  our  friend  would  find  at  hi&
command ;  but  those  will  be  more  fitly  dealt  with  under
a  later  heading,  since  in  almost  all  their  manifestations
they  involve  clairvoyance  either  in  space  or  in  time.

I  have  now  indicated,  though  only  in  the  roughest
outlines,  what  a  trained  student,  possessed  of  full  astral
vision,  would  see  in  the  immensely  wider  world  to  which
that  vision  introduced  him ;  but  I  have  said  nothing  of
the  stupendous  change  in  his  mental  attitude  which
comes  from  the  experiential  certainty  as  to  the  existence
of  the  soul,  its  survival  after  death,  the  action  of  the  law
of  karma,  and  other  points  of  equally  paramount  im-
portance. The  difference  between  even  the  profoundest
intellectual  conviction  and  the  precise  knowledge  gained
by  direct  personal  experience  must  be  felt  in  order  to  be
appreciated.

CHAPTER  III.

Simple  Clairvoyance  :  Partial.

The  experiences  of  the  untrained  clairvoyant — and  be
it  remembered  that  that  class  includes  all  European
clairvoyants  except  a  very  few — ^will  however  usually  fall
very  far  short  of  what  I  have  attempted  to  indicate;
they  will  fall  short  in  many  different  ways — in  degree,  in
variety,  or  in  permanence,  and  above  all  in  precision.

Sometimes,  for  example,  a  man's  clairvoyance  will  be
permanent,  but  very  partial,  extending  only  perhaps  to
one  or  two  classes  of  the  phenomena  observable ;  he  will
find  himself  endowed  with  some  isolated  fragment  of
higher  vision,  without  apparently  possessing  other
powers  of  sight  which  ought  normally  to  accompany
that  fragment  or  even  to  precede  it.  For  example,  one  of
my  dearest  friends  has  all  his  life  had  the  power  to  see  the
atomic  ether  and  atomic  astral  matter,  and  to  recognize
their  structure,  alike  in  darkness  or  in  light,  as  interpene-
trating everything  else ;  yet  he  has  only  rarely  seen  entities
whose  bodies  are  composed  of  the  much  more  obvious
lower  ethers  or  denser  astral  matter,  and  at  any  rate  is
certainly  not  permanently  able  to  see  them.  He  simply
finds  himself  in  possession  of  this  special  faculty,  with-
out any  apparent  reason  to  account  for  it,  or  any  recog-

44

TEMPORARY   CLAIRVOYANCE  45

nizable  relation  to  anything  else ;  and  beyond  proving
to  him  the  existence  of  these  atomic  planes  and  demon-
strating their  arrangement,  it  is  difficult  to  see  of  what
particular  use  it  is  to  him  at  present.  Still,  there  the
thing  is,  and  it  is  an  earnest  of  greater  things  to  come —
of  further  powers  still  awaiting  development.

There  are  many  similar  cases — similar,  I  mean,  not  in
the  possession  of  that  particular  form  of  sight  (which  is
unique  in  my  experience),  but  in  showing  the  develop-
ment of  some  one  small  part  of  the  full  and  clear  vision
of  the  astral  and  etheric  planes.  In  nine  cases  out  of
ten,  however,  such  partial  clairvoyance  will  at  the
same  time  lack  precision  also — that  is  to  say,  there  will
be  a  good  deal  of  vague  impression  and  inference  about
it,  instead  of  the  clear-cut  definition  and  certainty  of
the  trained  man.  Examples  of  this  type  are  constantly
to  be  found,  especially  among  those  who  advertise
themselves  as  ''  test  and  business  clairvoyants."

Then,  again,  there  are  those  who  are  only  temporarily
clairvoyant  under  certain  special  conditions.  Among
these  there  are  various  subdivisions,  some  being  able
to  reproduce  the  state  of  clairvoyance  at  will  by  again
setting  up  the  same  conditions,  while  with  others  it
comes  sporadically,  without  any  observable  reference
to  their  surroundings,  and  with  yet  others  the  power
shows  itself  only  once  or  twice  in  the  whole  course  of
their  lives.

To  the  first  of  these  subdivisions  belong  those  who
are  clairvoyant  only  when  in  the  mesmeric  trance — who
when  not  so  entranced  are  incapable   of   seeing   or

46  CLAIRVOYANCE

hearing  anything  abnormal.  These  may  sometimes
reach  great  heights  of  knowledge  and  be  exceedingly
precise  in  their  indications,  but  when  that  is  so  they
are  usually  undergoing  a  course  of  regular  training,
though  for  some  reason  unable  as  yet  to  set  themselves
free  from  the  leaden  weight  of  earthly  life  without
assistance.

In  the  same  class  we  may  put  those— chiefly
Orientals — who  gain  some  temporary  sight  only  under
the  influence  of  certain  drugs,  or  by  means  of  the  per-
formance of  certain  ceremonies.  The  ceremonialist
sometimes  hypnotizes  himself  by  his  repetitions,  and  in
that  condition  becomes  to  some  extent  clairvoyant ;
more  often  he  simply  reduces  himself  to  a  passive  con-
dition  in  which  some  other  entity  can  obsess  him  and
^peak  through  him.  Sometimes  again  his  ceremonies
are  not  intended  to  affect  himself  at  all,  but  to  invoke  some
astral  entity  who  will  give  him  the  required  informa-
tion ;  but  of  course  that  is  a  case  of  magic,  and  not  of
clairvoyance.  Both  the  drugs  and  the  ceremonies  are
methods  emphatically  to  be  avoided  by  any  one  who
wishes  to  approach  clairvoyance  from  the  higher  side,
and  use  it  for  his  own  progress  and  for  the  helping  of
others.  The  Central  African  medicine-man  or  witch-
doctor and  some  of  the  Tartar  Shamans  are  good
examples  of  the  type.

Those  to  whom  a  certain  amount  of  clairvoyant  power
has  come  occasionally  only,  and  without  any  reference
to  their  own  wish,  have  often  been  hysterical  or  highly
^nervous  persons  with  whom  the  faculty  was  to  a  large

APPARITIONS  47

extent  one  of  the  symptoms  of  a  disease.  Its  appearance
showed  that  the  physical  vehicle  was  weakened  to  such
a  degree  that  it  no  longer  presented  any  obstacle  in  the
way  of  a  certain  modicum  of  etheric  or  astral  vision.
An  extreme  example  of  this  class  is  the  man  who  drinks
himself  into  delirium  tremens,  and  in  the  condition  of
absolute  physical  ruin  and  impure  psychic  excitation
brought  about  by  the  ravages  of  that  fell  disease,  is  able
to  see  for  the  time  some  of  the  loathsome  elemental  and
other  entities  which  he  has  drawn  round  himself  by  his
long  course  of  degraded  and  bestial  indulgence.  There
are  however  other  cases  where  the  power  of  sight  has
appeared  and  disappeared  without  apparent  reference  to
the  state  of  the  physical  health  ;  but  it  seems  probable
that  even  in  those,  if  they  could  have  been  observed
closely  enough,  some  alteration  in  the  condition  of  the
etheric  double  would  have  been  noticed.

Those  who  have  only  one  instance  of  clairvoyance  to
report  in  the  whole  of  their  lives  are  a  difficult  band  to
classify  at  all  exhaustively,  because  of  the  great  variety
of  the  contributory  circumstances.  There  are  many
among  them  to  whom  the  experience  has  come  at  some
supreme  moment  of  their  lives,  when  it  is  comprehen-
sible that  there  might  have  been  a  temporary  exaltation
of  faculty  which  would  be  sufficient  to  account  for  it.

In  the  case  of  another  subdivision  of  them  the  solitary
case  has  been  the  seeing  of  an  apparition,  most  commonly
of  some  friend  or  relative  at  the  point  of  death.  Two
possibilities  are  then  offered  for  our  choice,  and  in  each
of  them  the  strong  ivish  of  the  dying  man  is  the  im-

48  CLAIRVOYANCE

pelUng  force.  That  force  may  have  enabled  him  .  to
materialize  himself  for  a  moment,  in  which  case  of  course
no  clairvoyance  was  needed ;  or  more  probably  it  may
have  acted  mesmerically  upon  the  percipient,  and  mo-
mentarily dulled  his  physical  and  stimulated  his  higher
sensitiveness.  In  either  case  the  vision  is  the  producjt
of  the  emergency,  and  is  not  repeated  simply  because
the  necessary  conditions  are  not  repeated.

There  remains,  however,  an  irresolvable  residuum  of
cases  in  which  a  solitary  instance  occurs  of  the  exercise
of  undoubted  clairvoyance,  while  yet  the  occasion  seems
to  us  wholly  trivial  and  unimportant.  About  these  we
can  only  frame  hypotheses;  the  governing  conditions
are  evidently  not  on  the  physical  plane,  and  a  separate
investigation  of  each  case  would  be  necessary  before  we
could  speak  with  any  certainty  as  to  its  causes.  In  some
such  it  has  appeared  that  an  astral  entity  was  endeavour-
ing to  make  some  communication,  and  was  able  to  im-
press only  some  unimportant  detail  on  its  subject — all
the  useful  or  significant  part  of  what  it  had  to  say  failing
to  get  through  into  the  subject's  consciousness.

In  the  investigation  of  the  phenomena  of  clairvoy-
ance all  these  varied  types  and  many  others  will  be  en-
countered, and  a  certain  number  of  cases  of  mere  hallu-
cination will  be  almost  sure  to  appear  also,  and  will
have  to  be  carefully  weeded  out  from  the  list  of  examples.
The  student  of  such  a  subject  needs  an  inexhaustible
fund  of  patience  and  steady  perseverance,  but  if  he  goes
on  long  enough  he  will  begin  dimly  to  discern  order
behind  the  chaos,  and  will  gradually  get  some  idea  of  the

A   HIGHER   WORLD  49

great  laws  under  which  the  whole  evolution  is
working.

It  will  help  him  greatly  in  his  efforts  if  he  will  adopt
the  order  which  we  have  just  followed— that  is,  if  he
will  first  take  the  trouble  to  familiarize  himself  as
thoroughly  as  may  be  with  the  actual  facts  concerning
the  planes  with  which  ordinary  clairvoyance  deals.  If
he  will  learn  what  there  really  is  to  be  seen  with  astral
and  etheric  sight,  and  what  their  respective  limitations
are,  he  will  then  have,  as  it  were,  a  standard  by  which
to  measure  the  cases  which  he  observes.  Since  all  in-
stances of  partial  sight  must  of  necessity  fit  into  some
niche  in  this  whole,  if  he  has  the  outline  of  the  entire
scheme  in  his  head  he  will  find  it  comparatively  easy
with  a  little  practice  to  classify  the  instances  with  which
he  is  called  upon  to  deal.

We  have  said  nothing  as  yet  as  to  the  still  more
wonderful  possibilities  of  clairvoyance  upon  the  deva-
chanic  plane,  nor  indeed  is  it  necessary  that  much
should  be  said,  as  it  is  exceedingly  improbable  that  the
investigator  will  ever  meet  with  any  examples  of  it  ex-
cept among  pupils  properly  trained  in  some  of  the  very
highest  schools  of  occultism.  For  them  it  opens  up  yet
another  new  world,  vaster  far  than  all  those  beneath  it
— a  world  in  which  all  that  we  can  imagine  of  utmost
glory  and  splendour  is  the  commonplace  of  existence.
Some  account  of  its  marvellous  faculty,  its  ineffable
bliss,  its  magnificent  opportunities  for  learning  and  for
work,  is  given  in  the  sixth  of  our  Theosophical  manuals,
and  to  that  the  student  may  be  referred.

D

y>  CLAIRVOYANCE

AU  that  it  has  to  give — all  of  it  at  least  that  he  can
assimilate — ^is  within  the  reach  of  the  trwied  pupil^  but
for  the  untrained  clairvoyant  to  touch  it  is  hardly  more
than  a  bare  possibility.  It  has  been  done  in  mesmeric
trance^  but  the  occurrence  is  of  exceeding  rarity,  for  it
needs  almost  superhuman  qualifications  in  the  way  of
lofty  spiritual  aspiration  and  absolute  purity  of  thought
and  intention  upon  the  part  both  of  the  subject  and  the
operator.

To  a  type  of  clairvoyance  such  as  this,  and  still  more
fully  to  that  which  belongs  to  the  plane  next  above  it^
the  name  of  spiritual  sight  may  reasonably  be  applied ;
and  since  the  celestial  world  to  which  it  opens  our  eyes
lies  all  round  us  here  and  now,  it  is  fit  that  our  passing
reference  to  it  should  be  made  under  the  heading  of
simple  clairvoyance,  though  it  may  be  necessary  to
allude  to  it  again  when  dealing  with  clairvoyance  in
space,  to  which  we  will  now  pass  on.

CHAPTER  IV,

Clairvoyance  in  Space:  Intentional.

Wb  have  defined  this  as  the  capacity  to  see  events
or  scenes  removed  from  the  seer  in  space  and  too  far
distant  for  ordinary  observation.  The  instances  of  this
are  so  numerous  and  so  various  that  we  shall  find  it
desirable  to  attempt  a  somewhat  more  detailed  classifi-
cation of  them.  It  does  not  much  matter  what  par*
ticular  arrangement  we  adopt,  so  long  as  it  is  compre-
hennve  enough  to  include  all  our  cases;  perhaps  a
convenient  one  will  be  to  group  them  under  the  broad
divisions  of  intentional  and  unintentional  clairvoyance
in  space,  with  an  intermediate  class  that  might  be  de-
scribed as  semi-intentional — a,  curious  title,  but  I  will
explain  it  later.

As  before,  I  will  begin  by  stating  what  is  possible
along  this  line  for  the  fully-trained  seer,  and  endeavour-
ing to  explain  how  his  faculty  works  and  under  what
limitations  it  acts.  After  that  we  shall  find  ourselves
in  a  better  position  to  try  to  understand  the  manifold
examples  of  partial  and  untrained  sight.  Let  us  then
in  the  first  place  discuss  intentional  clairvoyance.

It  will  be  obvious  from  what  has  previously  been

51

52  CLAIRVOYANCE

said  as  to  the  power  of  astral  vision  that  any  one  pos-
sessing it  in  its  fulness  will  be  able  to  see  by  its  means
practically  anything  in  this  world  that  he  wishes  to
see.  The  most  secret  places  are  open  to  his  gaze,  and
intervening  obstacles  have  no  existence  for  him,  because
of  the  change  in  his  point  of  view ;  so  that  if  we  grant
him  the  power  of  moving  about  in  the  astral  body  he
can  without  difficulty  go  anywhere  and  see  anything
within  the  limits  of  the  planet.  Indeed  this  is  to  a  large
extent  possible  to  him  even  without  the  necessity  of
moving  the  astral  body  at  all,  as  we  shall  presently

Let  us  consider  a  little  more  closely  the  methods  by
which  this  super-physical  sight  may  be  used  to  observe
events  taking  place  at  a  distance.  When,  for  example,
a  man  here  in  England  sees  in  minutest  detail  something
which  is  happening  at  the  same  moment  in  India  or
America,  how  is  it  done  ?

A  very  ingenious  hypothesis  has  been  offered  to
account  for  the  phenomenon.  It  has  been  suggested
that  every  object  is  perpetually  throwing  off  radiations
in  all  directions,  similar  in  some  respects  to,  though  in-
finitely finer  than,  rays  of  light,  and  that  clairvoyance
is  nothing  but  the  power  to  see  by  means  of  these  finer
radiations.  Distance  would  in  that  case  be  no  bar  to
the  sight,  all  intervening  objects  would  be  penetrable
by  these  rays,  and  they  would  be  able  to  cross  one
another  to  infinity  in  all  directions  without  entanglement,
precisely  as  the  vibrations  of  ordinary  light  do.

Now  though  this  is  not  exactly  the  way  in  which

SEEING  AT  A  DISTANCE  53

clairvoyance  works,  the  theory  is  nevertheless  quite
true  in  most  of  its  premises.  Every  object  undoubtedly
is  throwing  off  radiations  in  all  directions,  and  it  is
precisely  in  this  way,  though  on  a  higher  plane,  that
the  &k&shic  records  seem  to  be  formed.  Of  them  it
will  be  necessary  to  say  something  under  our  next
heading,  so  we  will  do  no  more  than  mention  them  for
the  moment.  The  phenomena  of  psychometry  are  also
dependent  upon  these  radiations,  as  will  presently  be
explained.

There  are,  however,  certain  practical  difficulties  in
the  way  of  using  these  etheric  vibrations  (for  th£i  is,  of
course,  what  they  are)  as  the  medium  by  means  of
which  one  may  see  anything  taking  place  at  a  distance.
Intervening  objects  are  not  entirely  transparent,  and  as
the  actors  in  the  scene  which  the  experimenter  tried  to
observe  would  probably  be  at  least  equally  transparent,
it  is  obvious  that  serious  confusion  would  be  quite  likely
to  result.

The  additional  dimension  which  would  come  into  play
if  astral  radiations  were  sensed  instead  of  etheric  would
obviate  some  of  the  difficulties,  but  would  on  the  other
hand  introduce  some  fresh  complications  of  its  own ;
so  that  for  practical  purposes,  in  endeavouring  to  under-
stand clairvoyance,  we  may  dismiss  this  hypothesis
of  radiations  from  our  minds,  and  turn  to  the  methods
of  seeing  at  a  distance  which  are  actually  at  the  dis-
posal of  the  student.  It  will  be  found  that  there  are
five,  four  of  them  being  really  varieties  of  clairvoyance,
while  the  fifth  does  not  properly  come  under  that  head

54  CLAIRVOYANCB

at  ally  but  belongs  to  the  domain  of  magic.    Let  us
take  this  last  one  first,  and  get  it  out  of  our  way.

1.  By  the  assisiancs  of  a  naiuri'Spifit.  This  method
does  not  necessarily  involve  the  possession  of  any
psychic  faculty  at  all  on  the  part  of  the  experimenter ;
he  need  only  know  how  to  induce  some  denizen  of  the
astral  world  to  undertake  the  investigation  for  him.
This  may  be  done  either  by  invocation  or  by  evocation ;
that  is  to  say,  the  operator  may  either  persuade  his
astral  coadjutor  by  prayers  and  offerings  to  give  him
the  help  he  desires,  or  he'  may  compel  his  aid  by  the
determined  exercise  of  a  highly-developed  will.

This  method  has  been  largely  practised  in  the  East
(wh«re  the  entity  employed  is  usually  a  nature-spirit)
and  in  old  Atlantis,  where  '*  the  lords  of  the  dark  face  *'
used  a  highly-specialized  and  peculiarly  venomous
variety  of  artificial  elemental  for  this  purpose.  In*,
formation  is  sometimes  obtained  in  the  same  sort  of
way  at  the  spiritualistic  sSance  of  modem  days,  but  in
that  case  the  messenger  employed  is  more  likely  to  be
a  recently-deceased  human  being  functioning  more  or
less  freely  on  the  astral  plane — ^though  even  here  also  it
is  sometimes  an  obliging  nature-spirit,  who  is  amusing
himself  by  posing  as  somebody's  departed  relative.  In
any  case,  as  I  have  said,  this  method  is  not  clairvoyant
at  all,  but  magical ;  and  it  is  mentioned  here  only  in
order  that  the  reader  may  not  become  confused  in  the.
endeavour  to  classify  cases  of  its  use  under  some  of  thei
following  headings.

2.  By  means  of  an  astral  current.    This  is  a  phrase

ASTRAL  TELBGRAPH  55

firequently  and  rather  loosely  employed  in  some  of  our
Theosophical  literature  to  cover  a  considerable  variety
oi  phenomena,  and  among  others  that  which  I  wish  to
explain.  What  is  really  done  by  the  student  who
adopts  this  method  is  not  so  much  the  setting  in  motion
of  a  current  in  astral  matter,  as  the  erection  of  a  kind
of  temporary  telephone  through  it.

It  is  impossible  here  to  give  an  exhaustive  disquisi-
tion on  astral  physics,  even  had  I  the  requisite  know-
ledge to  write  it ;  all  I  need  say  is  that  it  is  possible  to
make  in  astral  matter  a  definite  connecting^line  that
shall  act  as  a  telegraph-wire  to  convey  vibrations  by
means  of  which  all  that  is  going  on  at  the  other  end  of
it  may  be  seen.  Such  a  line  is  established,  be  it  under-
stood, not  by  a  direct  projection  through  space  of  astral
matter,  but  by  such  action  upon  a  line  (or  rather  many
lines),  of  particles  of  that  matter  as  will  render  them-
capable  of  forming  a  conductor  for  vibrations  of  the
character  required.

This  preliminary  action  can  be  set  up  in  two  ways —
either  by  the  transmission  of  energy  from  particle  to
particle,  until  the  line  is  formed,  or  by  the  use  of  a  force
from  a  higher  plane  which  is  capable  of  acting  upon  the
whole  line  simultaneously.  Of  course  this  latter  method
implies  tax  greater  development,  since  it  involves  the
knowledge  of  (and  the  power  to  use)  forces  of  a  con-
siderably higher  level ;  so  that  the  man  who  could  make
his  line  in  this  way  would  not,  for  his  own  use,  need  a
line  at  all,  since  he  could  see  far  more  easily  and  com-
pletdy  by  means  of  an  altogether  higher  faculty.

56  CLAIRVOYANCE

Even  the  simpler  and  purely  astral  operation  is  a
difficult  one  to  describe,  though  quite  an  easy  one  to
perform.  It  may  be  said  to  partake  somewhat  of  the
nature  of  the  magnetization  of  a  bar  of  steel ;  for  it  con*
sists  in  what  we  might  call  the  polarization,  by  an
effort  of  the  human  will,  of  a  number  of  parallel  lines  of
astral  atoms  reaching  from  the  operator  to  the  scene
which  he  wishes  to  observe.  All  the  atoms  thus
affected  are  held  for  the  time  with  their  axes  rigidly
parallel  to  one  another,  so  that  they  form  a  kind  of
temporary  tube  along  which  the  clairvoyant  may  look.
This  method  has  the  disadvantage  that  the  telegraph
line  is  liable  to  disarrangement  or  even  destruction  by
any  sufficiently  strong  astral  current  which  happens  to
cross  its  path ;  but  if  the  original  effort  of  will  were
fiiirly  definite,  this  would  be  a  contingency  of  only  in*
frequent  occurrence.

The  view  of  a  distant  scene  obtained  by  means  of
this  *'  astral  current  "  is  in  many  ways  not  unlike  that
seen  through  a  telescope.  Human  figures  usually  ap-
pear very  small,  like  those  on  a  distant  stage,  but  in
spite  of  their  diminutive  size  they  are  as  clear  as  though
they  were  close  by.  Sometimes  it  is  possible  by  this
means  to  hear  what  is  said  [as  well  as  to  see  what  is
done ;  but  as  in  the  majority  of  cases  this  does  not
happen,  we  must  consider  it  rather  as  the  manifestation
of  an  additional  power  than  as  a  necessary  corollary  of
the  faculty  of  sight.

It  will  be  observed  that  in  this  case  the  seer  does  not
usually  leave  his  physical  body  at  all ;  there  is  no  sort

A   PSYCHIC  TBLBSCOPE  57

of  projection  of  his  astral  vehicle  or  of  any  part  of  him*
self  towards  that  at  which  he  is  looking,  but  he  simply
manufactures  for  himself  a  temporary  astral  telescope.
Consequently  he  has,  to  a  certain  extenty  the  use  of  his
physical  powers  even  while  he  is  examining  the  distant
scene ;  for  example,  his  voice  would  usually  still  be
under  his  control,  so  that  he  could  describe  what  he
saw  even  while  he  was  in  the  act  of  making  his  observa-
tions. The  consciousness  of  the  man  is,  in  fact,  dis*
tinctly  still  at  this  end  of  the  line.

This  fact,  however,  has  its  limitations  as  well  as  its
advantages,  and  these  again  largely  resemble  the  limi-
tations of  the  man  using  a  telescope  on  the  physical
plane.  The  experimenter,  for  example,  has  no  power
to  shift  his  point  of  view ;  his  telescope,  so  to  speak,
has  a  particular  field  of  view  which  cannot  be  enlarged
or  altered ;  he  is  looking  at  his  scene  from  a  certain
direction,  and  he  cannot  suddenly  turn  it  all  round  and
see  how  it  looks  from  the  other  side.  If  he  has  suffi*
cient  psychic  energy  to  spare,  he  may  drop  altogether
the  telescope  that  he  is  using  and  manufacture  an  en-
tirely new  one  for  himself  which  will  approach  his  objec-
tive somewhat  differently;  but  this  not  a  course  at  all
likely  to  be  adopted  in  practice.

But,  it  may  be  said,  the  mere  fact  that  he  is  using
astral  sight  ought  to  enable  him  to  see  it  from  all  sides
at  once.  So  it  would  if  he  were  using  that  sight  in  the
normal  way  upon  an  object  which  was  fairly  near  him
— ^within  his  astral  reach,  as  it  were;  but  at  a  distance
of  hundreds  or  thousands  of  miles  the  case  is  very  dif«

58  CLAIRVOYANCB

ferent.  Astral  sight  gives  us  the  advantage  of  an  addi*
tional  dimensiont  but  there  is  still  sach  a  thing  as  position
in  that  dimensiont  and  it  is  naturally  a  potent  factor  in
limiting  the  use  of  the  powers  of  its<  plane.  Our  ordinary
three-dimensional  sight  enables  us  to  see  at  once  every
point  of  the  interior  of  a  two-dimensional  figure,  such
as  a  square,  but  in  order  to  do  that  the  square  must  be
within  a  reasonable  distance  from  our  eyes ;  the  mere
additional  dimension  will  avail  a  man  in  London  but
little  in  his  endeavour  to  examine  a  square  in  Calcutta.

Astral  sight,  when  it  is  cramped  by  being  directed
along  what  is  practically  a  tube,  is  limited  very  much
as  physical  sight  would  be  under  similar  circumstances;
though  if  possessed  in  perfection  it  will  still  continue  to
show,  even  at  that  distance,  the  auras,  and  therefore
all  the  emotions  and  most  of  the  thoughts  of  the  people
under  observation.

There  are  many  people  for  whom  this  type  of  clair*
voyance  is  very  much  facilitated  if  they  have  at  hand
some  physical  object  which  can  be  used  as  a  starting-
point  for  their  astral  tube — a  convenient  focus  for  their
will-power.  A  .ball  of  crystal  is  the  commonest  and
most  effectual  of  such  foci,  since  it  has  the  additional
advantage  of  possessing  within  itself  qualities  which
stimulate  psychic  faculty ;  but  other  objects  are  also
employed,  to  which  we  shall  find  it  necessary  to  refer
more  particularly  when  we  come  to  consider  semi-
intentional  clairvoyance.

In  connection  with  this  astral-current  form  of  clair-
voyance, as  with  others,  we  find  that  there  are  some

BY  A  THOUGHT-FORM  59

psychics  who  are  unable  to  use  it  except  when  under
the  influence  of  mesmerism.  The  peculiarity  in  this
case  is  that  among  such  psychics  there  are  two  varieties
— one  in  which  by  being  thus  set  free  the  man  is  en-
abled to  make  a  telescope  for  himself,  and  another  in
which  the  magnetizer  himself  makes  the  telescope  and
the  subject  is  simply  enabled  to  see  through  it.  In  this
latter  case  obviously  the  subject  has  not  enough  will  to
form  a  tube  for  himself,  and  the  operator,  though  pos-
sessed of  the  necessary  will-power,  is  not  clairvoyant,
or  he  could  see  through  his  own  tube  without  needing
help.

Occasionally,  though  rarely,  the  tube  which  is  formed
possesses  another  of  the  attributes  of  a  telescope — ^that
of  magnifying  the  objects  at  which  it  is  directed  until
they  seem  of  life-size.  Of  course  the  objects  must
always  be  magnified  to  some  extent,  or  they  would  be
absolutely  invisible,  but  usually  the  extent  is  deter-
mined by  the  size  of  the  astral  tube,  and  the  whole
thing  is  simply  a  tiny  moving  picture.  In  the  few  cases
where  the  figures  are  seen  as  of  life-size  by  this  method^
it  is  probable  that  an  altogether  new  power  is  beginning
to  dawn ;  but  when  this  happens,  careful  observati<Hi
is  needed  in  order  to  distinguish  them  from  examples  of
our  next  class.

3.  By  the  projection  of  a  thought-form.  The  ability  ta
use  this  method  of  clairvoyance  implies  a  development
somewhat  more  advanced  than  the  last,  since  it  neces-
sitates a  certain  amount  of  control  upon  the  mental
plane.      All  students  of  Theosophy  are  aware  that

6o  CLAIRVOYANCE

thought  takes  form,  at  any  rate  upon  its  own  plane,  and
in  the  vast  majority  of  cases  upon  the  astral  plane  also ;
but  it  may  not  be  quite  so  generally  known  that  if  a
man  thinks  strongly  of  himself  as  present  at  any  given
place,  the  form  assumed  by  that  particular  thought  will
be  a  likeness  of  the  thinker  himself,  which  will  appear
at  the  place  in  question.

Essentially  this  form  must  be  composed  of  the  matter
of  the  mental  plane,  but  in  very  many  cases  it  would
draw  round  itself  matter  of  the  astral  plane  also,  and  so
would  approach  much  nearer  to  visibility.  There  are,
in  fact,  many  instances  in  which  it  has  been  seen  by  the
person  thought  of — most  probably  by  means  of  the  un-
conscious mesmeric  influence  emanating  from  the
original  thinker.  None  of  the  consciousness  of  the
thinker  would,  however,  be  included  within  this  thought-
form.  When  once  sent  out  from  him,  it  would  normally
be  a  quite  separate  entity — not  indeed  absolutely  un-
connected with  its  maker,  but  practically  so  as  far  as
the  possibility  of  receiving  any  impression  through  it  is
concerned.

This  third  type  of  clairvoyance  consists,  then,  in  the
pow6r  to  retain  so  much  connection  with  and  so  much
hold  over  a  newly-erected  thought-form  as  will  render
it  possible  to  receive  impressions  by  means  of  it.  Such
impressions  as  were  made  upon  the  form  would  in  this
case  be  transmitted  to  the  thinker — not  along  an  astral
telegraph  line,  as  before,  but  by  sympathetic  vibration.
In  a  perfect  case  of  this  kind  of  clairvoyance  it  is  almost
as  though  the  seer  projected  a  part  of  his  consciousness

ASTRAL  TRAVBLUNG  6 1

into  the  thought-form,  and  used  it  as  a  kind  of  outpost^
from  which  observation  was  possible.  He  sees  almost
as  well  as  he  would  if  he  himself  stood  in  the  place  of
his  thought-form.

The  figures  at  which  he  is  looking  will  appear  to  him
as  of  life-size  and  close  at  hand,  instead  of  tiny  and  at  a
distance,  as  in  the  previous  case ;  and  he  will  find  it
possible  to  shift  his  point  of  view  if  he  wishes  to  do  so*
Clairaudience  is  perhaps  less  frequently  associated  with
this  type  of  clairvoyance  than  with  the  last,  but  its
place  is  to  some  extent  taken  by  a  kind  of  mental  per-
ception of  the  thoughts  and  intentions  of  those  who  are
seen.

Since  the  man's  consciousness  is  still  in  the  physical
body,  he  will  be  able  (even  while  exercising  the  faculty)
to  hear  and  to  speak,  in  so  far  as  he  can  do  this  without
any  distraction  of  his  attention.  The  moment  that  the
intentness  of  his  thought  fails  the  whole  vision  is  gone,
and  he  will  have  to  construct  a  fresh  thought-form
before  he  can  resume  it.  Instances  in  which  this  kind
of~Bight  is  possessed  with  any  degree  of  perfection  by
untrained  people  are  naturally  rarer  than  in  the  case  of
the  previous  type,  because  of  the  capacity  for  mental
control  required,  and  the  generally  finer  nature  of  the
forces  employed.

4.  By  travdling  in  the  astral  body.  We  enter  here
upon  an  entirely  new  variety  of  clairvoyance>  in  which
the  consciousnes3  of  the  seer  no  longer  remains  in  or
closely  connected  with  his  physical  body,  but  is  defin-
itely transferred  to  the  scene  which  he  is  examining.

62  CLAIRVOYANCB

Though  it  has  no  doubt  greater  dangers  for  the  un-
trained seer  than  either  of  the  methods  previously
described,  it  is  yet  quite  the  most  satisfactory  form  of
clairvoyance  open  to  himi  for  the  immensely  superior
variety  which  we  shall  consider  under  our  fifth  head  is
not  available  except  for  specially  trained  students.

In  this  case  the  man's  body  is  either  asleep  or  in
trance,  and  its  organs  are  consequently  not  available
for  use  while  the  vision  is  going  on,  so  that  all  descrip-
tion of  what  is  seen,  and  all  questioning  as  to  further
particulars,  must  be  postponed  until  the  wanderer  re-
turns to  this  plane.  On  the  other  hand  the  sight  is
much  fuller  and  more  perfect ;  the  man  hears  as  well  as
sees  everything  which  passes  before  him,  and  can  move
about  freely  at  will  within  the  very  wide  limits  of  the
astral  plane.  He  can  see  and  study  at  leisure  all  the
other  inhabitants  of  that  plane,  so  that  the  great  world
of  the  nature-spirits  (of  which  the  traditional  fairy-land
is  but  a  very  small  part)  lies  open  before  him,  and  even
that  of  some  of  the  lower  devas.

He  has  also  the  immense  advantage  of  being  able  to
take  part,  as  it  were,  in  the  scenes  which  come  before
his  eyes — of  conversing  at  will  with  these  various  astral
entities,  from  whom  so  much  information  that  is  curious
and  interesting  may  be  obtained.  If  in  addition  he  can
learn  how  to  materialize  himself  (a  matter  of  no  great
difficulty  for  him  when  once  the  knack  is  acquired)  he
will  be  able  to  take  part  in  physical  events  or  conversa-
tions at  a  distance,  and  to  show  himself  to  an  absent
friend  at  wiiU

A    PHILADBLPHIAN   SBBR  6)

Again,  he  has  the  additional  power  of  being  able
to  bunt  about  for  what  he  wants.  By  means  of  the
varieties  of  clairvoyance  previously  described,  for  all
practical  purposes  he  could  find  a  person  or  a  place
only  when  he  was  already  acquainted  with  it,  or  when
he  was  put  m  rafp&rt  with  it  by  touching  something
physically  connected  with  it,  as  in  psychometry.  It  is
true  that  by  the  third  method  a  certain  amount  of
motion  is  possible,  but  the  process  is  a  tedious  one  ex-
cept for  quite  short  distances.

By  the  use  of  the  astral  body,  however,  a  man  can
move  about  quite  freely  and  rapidly  in  any  direction,
and  can  (for  example)  find  without  di£Sculty  any  place
pointed  out  upon  a  map,  without  either  any  previous
knowledge  of  the  spot  or  any  object  to  establish  a  con-
nection with  it.  He  can  also  readily  rise  high  into  the
air  so  as  to  gain  a  bird's-eye  view  of  the  country  which
he  is  examining,  so  as  to  observe  its  extent,  the  contour
of  its  coast-line,  or  its  general  character.  Indeed,  in
every  way  his  power  and  freedom  are  far  greater  when
he  uses  this  method  than  they  have  been  in  any  of  the
previous  cases.

A  good  example  of  the  full  possession  of  this  power
is  given,  on  the  authority  of  the  German  writer  Jung
Stilling,  by  Mrs.  Crowe  in  The  Night  Side  of  Nature  (p.
127).  The  story  is  r^ted  of  a  seer  who  is  stated  to
have  resided  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Philadelphia,  in
America.  ''His  h&1>its  were  retired,  and  he  spoke
little ;  he  was  grave,  benevolent  and  pious,  and  nothing
was  known  against  his  character,  except  that  he  had

64  CLAIRVOYANCE

the  reputation  of  possessing  some  secrets  that  were  con-
sidered not  altogether  lawful.  Many  extraordinary
stories;  were  told  of  him,  and  amongst  the  rest  the
following.

<^  The  wife  of  a  ship  captain  (whose  husband  was  on
a  voyage  to  Europe  and  Africa,  and  from  whom  she  had
been  long  without  tidings),  being  overwhelmed  with
anxiety  for  his  safety,  was  induced  to  address  herself  to
this  person.  Having  listened  to  her  story  he  begged
her  to  excuse  him  for  a  while,  when  he  would  bring  her
the  intelligence  she  required.  He  then  passed  into  an
inner  room  and  she  sat  herself  down  to  wait ;  but  his
absence  continuing  longer  than  she  expected,  she
became  impatient,  thinking  he  had  forgotten  her,  and
softly  approaching  the  door  she  peeped  through  some
aperture,  and  to  her  surprise  beheld  him  lying  on  a  sofa
as  motionless  as  if  he  were  dead.  She  of  course  did  not
think  it  advisable  to  disturb  him,  but  waited  his  return,
when  he  told  her  that  her  husband  had  not  been  able
to  write  to  her  for  such  and  such  reasons,  but  that  he
was  then  in  a  coffee-house  in  London  and  would  very
shortly  be  home  again.

''  Accordingly  he  arrived,  and  as  the  lady  learnt  from
him  that  the  causes  of  his  unusual  silence  had  been  pre-
cisely those  alleged  by  the  man,  she  felt  extremely
desirous  of  ascertaining  the  truth  of  the  rest  of  the  in-
formation. In  this  she  was  gratified,  for  he  no  sooner
set  his  eyes  on  the  magician  than  he  said  that  he  had
iseen  him  before  on  a  certain  day  in  a  coffee-house  in
London,  and  that  he  told  him  that  his  wife  was  ex-

OTHKlt  IKSl'AMCBS  65

tKinely  uneasy  about  him,  afid  that  he,  the  captain,  had
tiiereoD  mentioned  how  he  had  been  ptevented  writingf^
adding  that  he  was  on  the  eve  of  embarking  for  America.
He  had  then  lost  sight  of  the  stranger  amongst  the
tiirong,  and  knew  nothing  more  about  him."

We  have  of  course  no  means  now  of  knowing  what
evidence  Jung  Stillmg  had  of  the  truth  of  this  story,
though  he  declares  himself  to  have  been  quite  satisfied
with  the  authority  on  which  he  relates  it ;  but  so  many
similar  things  have  happened  that  there  is  no  reason  to
doubt  its  accuracy.  The  seer,  however,  must  either
have  developed  his  faculty  for  himself  or  learnt  it  in
some  school  other  than  that  from  which  most  of  our
Theosophical  information  is  derived;  for  in  our  case
there  is  a  well-understood  regulation  expressly  forbid-
ding the  pupils  from  giving  any  manifestation  of  such
power  which  can  be  definitely  proved  at  both  ends  in
that  way,  and  so  constitute  what  is  called  ''  a  pheno-
menon." That  this  regulation  is  emphatically  a  wise
one  is  proved  to  all  who  know  anything  of  the  history
of  our  Society  by  the  disastrous  results  which  followed
from  a  very  slight  temporary  relaxation  of  it.

I  have  given  some  quite  modem  cases  almost  exactly
parallel  to  the  above  in  my  little  book  on  Invisible
Helpers.  An  instance  of  a  lady  well-known  to  myself,
who  frequently  thus  appears  to  friends  at  a  distance,  is
g^ven  by  Mr.  Stead  in  Real  Ghost  Stories  (p.  27) :  and
Mr.  Andrew  Lang  gives  in  his  Dreafns  and  Ghosts  (p.  89),
an  account  of  how  Mr.  Cleave,  then  at  Portsmouth,
appeared  intentionally  on  two  occasions  to  a  young  lady

66  CLAIRVOYANCE

in  London,  and  alarmed  her  considerably.  There  is  any
amount  of  evidence  to  be  had  on  the  subject  by  any  one
who  cares  to  study  it  seriously.

This  paying  of  intentional  astral  visits  seems  very
often  to  become  possible  when  the  principles  are
loosened  at  the  approach  of  death  for  people  who  were
unable  to  perform  such  a  feat  at  any  other  time.  There
are  even  more  examples  of  this  class  than  of  the  other ;
I  epitomize  a  good  one  given  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  on
p.  loo  of  the  book  last  cited — one  of  which  he  himself
says,  "  Not  many  stories  have  such  good  evidence  in
their  favour."

"  Mary,  the  wife  of  John  Goffe  of  Rochester,  being
afBicted  with  a  long  illness,  removed  to  her  father's
house  at  West  Mailing,  about  nine  miles  from  her
own.

**  The  day  before  her  death  she  greW  very  impatiently
desirous  to  see  her  two  children,  whom  she  had  left  at
home  to  the  care  of  a  nurse.  She  was  too  ill  to  be
moved,  and  between  one  and  two  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing she  fell  into  a  trance.  One  widow  Turner,  who
watched  with  her  that  night,  says  that  her  eyes  were
open  and  fixed,  and  her  jaw  fallen.  Mrs.  Turner  put
her  hand  upon  her  mouth,  but  could  perceive  no  breath.
She  thought  her  to  be  in  a  fit,  and  doubted  whether  she
were  dead  or  alive.

"  The  next  morning  the  dying  woman  told  her  mother
that  she  had  been  at  home  with  her  children,  saying  *  I
was  with  them  last  night  when  I  was  asleep.'

'*  The  nurse  at  Rochester,  widow  Alexander  by  name»

MARY  GOPPB  67

affirms  that  a  little  before  two  o'clock  that  morning  she
saw  the  likeness  of  the  said  Mary  Goffe  come  out  of  the
next  chamber  (where  the  elder  child  lay  in  a  bed  by
itself),  the  door  being  left  open,  and  stood  by  her  bed*
ade  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour ;  the  younger  child
was  there  lying  by  her.  Her  eyes  moved  and  her  mouth
wient,  but  she  said  nothing.  The  nurse,  moreover,  says
that  she  was  perfectly  awake;  it  was  then  daylight,
being  one  of  the  longest  days  in  the  year.  She  sat  up
in  bed  and  looked  steadfastly  on  the  apparition.  In  that
time  she  heard  the  bridge  clock  strike  two,  and  a  while
after  said  :  '  In  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son  and  Holy
Ghost,  what  art  thou  ? '  Thereupon  the  apparition  re-
moved and  went  away ;  she  slipped  on  her  clothes  and
followed,  but  what  became  on't,  she  cannot  tell."

The  nurse  apparently  was  more  frightened  by  its
disappearance  than  its  presence,  for  after  this  she  was
afraid  to  stay  in  the  house,  and  so  spent  the  rest  of  the
time  until  six  o'clock  in  walking  up  and  down  outside.
When  the  neighbours  were  awake  she  told  her  tale  to
them,  and  they  of  course  said  she  had  dreamt  it  all ;  she
naturally  enough  warmly  repudiated  that  idea,  but
could  obtain  no  credence  until  the  news  of  the  other
side  of  the  story  arrived  from  West  Mailing,  when
people  had  to  admit  that  there  might  have  been  isome>
thing  in  it.

A  noteworthy  circumstance  in  this  story  is  that  the
mother  found  it  necessary  to  pass  from  ordinary  sleep
into  the  profounder  trance  condition  before  she  could  con-
sciously visit  her  children ;  it  can,  however,  be  paralleled

I

\r

68  CLAIRVOYANCE

here  and  there  among  the  large  number  of  dmilar
accoonts  which  may  be  found  in  the  literature  of  the
subject.

Two  other  stories,  of  precisely  the  same  type —
in  which  a  dying  mother,  earnestly  desiring  to  see  her
children,  falls  into  a  deep  sleep,  visits  them  and  returns
to  say  that  she  has  done  so — ^are  given  by  Dr.  F.  G*
Lee*  In  one  of  them  the  mother,  when  dying  in  Egypt,
ai^>ears  to  her  children  at  Torquay,  and  is  clearly  seen
in  broad  daylight  by  all  five  of  the  children  and  also  by
the  nursemaid.  {Glimpses  of  the  Supeff$aturalf  vol.  ii.,
p.  64.)  In  the  other  a  Quaker  lady  dying  at  Cocker-
mouth  is  clearly  seen  and  recognized  in  daylight  by  her
three  children  at  Settle,  the  remainder  of  the  story  being
practically  identical  with  the  one  given  above.
{Glimpses  in  the  Twilight,  p.  94.)  Though  these  cases
appear  to  be  less  widely  known  than  that  of  Mary
Go£Pe,  the  evidence  of  their  authenticity  seems  to  be
quite  as  good,  as  wiU  be  seen  by  the  attestations  ob-
tained by  the  reverend  author  of  the  works  from  which
they  are  quoted.

The  man  who  fully  possesses  this  fourth  type  of  clair-
voyance has  many  and  great  advantages  at  his  disposal,
even  in  addition  to  those  already  mentioned.  Not  only
can  he  visit  without  trouble  or  expense  all  the  beautiful
and  famous  places  of  the  earth,  but  if  he  happens  to  be
a  scholar,  think  what  it  must  mean  to  him  that  he  has
access  to  all  the  libraries  of  the  world !  What  must  it
be  for  the  scientifically-minded  man  to  see  taking  place
before  his  eyes  so  many  of  the  processes  of  the  secret

THB   MAyAVIIIOpA  69

chemistry  of  nature,  or  for  the  philosopher  to  hare  re-
vealed to  him  so  much  more  than  ever  before  of  the
working  of  the  great  mysteries  of  life  and  death  ?  To
him  those  who  are  gone  from  this  plane  are  dead  no
longer,  but  living  and  within  reach  for  a  long  time  to
come ;  for  him  many  of  the  conceptions  of  religion  are
no  longer  matters  of  faith,  but  ot  knowledge.  Above
%dl»  he  can  join  the  army  of  invisible  helpers,  and  really
be  of  use  on  a  large  scale.  Undoubtedly  clairvoyance,
even  when  confined  to  the  astral  plane,  is  a  great  boon
to  the  student.

Certainly  it  has  its  dangers  also,  especially  for  the
untrained ;  danger  from  evil  entities  of  various  kinds,
which  may  terrify  or  injure  those  who  allow  themselves
to  lose  the  courage  to  face  them  boldly ;  danger  of  de-
ception of  all  sorts,  of  misconceiving  and  misinterpreting
what  is  seen ;  greatest  of  all,  the  danger  of  becoming
conceited  about  the  thing  and  of  thinking  it  impossible
to  make  a  mistake.  But  a  little  common-sense  and  a
little  experience  should  easily  guard  a  man  against  these.

5.  By  travelling  in  the  mdydmrHpa.  This  is  simply  a
higher  and,  as  it  were,  glorified  form  of  the  last  type.
The  vehicle  employed  is  no  longer  the  astral  body,  but
a  substitute  manufactured  for  the  occasion  from  the
substance  of  the  seer^s  mind-body — a  vehicle,  therefore,
belonging  to  the  mental  plane,  and  having  within  it  all
the  potentialities  of  the  wonderfril  devachanic  sense,  so
transcendent  in  its  action  yet  so  impossible  to  describe.
A  man  functioning  in  this  leaves  bis  astral  body  behind
him  along  with  the  physical,  and  if  he  wishes  to  show

70  CLAIRVOYANCE

himself  upon  the  astral  plane  for  any  reason,  he  does  not
send  for  his  own  astral  vehicle,  but  just  by  a  single
action  of  his  will  materializes  one  for  his  temporary
need.

The  enormous  advantages  given  by  the  possession  of
this  power  are  the  capacity  of  entering  upon  all  the
glory  and  the  beauty  of  the  higher  land  of  bliss,  and
the  possession,  even  when  working  on  the  astral  planet
of  the  far  more  comprehensive  devachanic  sense  which
opens  up  to  the  student  such  marvellous  vistas  of  know-
ledge, and  practically  renders  error  all  but  impossible.
This  higher  flight,  however,  is  possible  for  the  trained
man  only,  since  to  form  this  mAyAvirdpa  for  the  first
time  needs  the  assistance  of  a  qualified  Master.

Before  leaving  the  subject  of  full  and  intentional
clairvoyance  it  may  be  well  to  devote  a  few  words  to
answering  one  or  two  questions  as  to  its  limitations^
which  constantly  occur  to  students.  Is  it  possible,  we
are  often  asked,  for  the  seer  to  find  any  person  with
whom  he  wishes  to  communicate,  anjrwhere  in  the
world,  whether  he  be  living  or  dead  ?

To  this  the  reply  must  be  a  conditional  affirmative*
Yes,  it  is  possible  to  find  any  person  if  the  experimenter
can,  in  some  way  or  other,  put  himself  m  rapport  with
that  person.  It  would  be  hopeless  to  plunge  vaguely
into  space  to  find  a  total  stranger  among  all  the  millions
around  us  without  any  kind  of  clue ;  but,  on  the  other
hand,  a  very  slight  clue  would  usually  be  sufficient.

If  the  clairvoyant  knows  anything  of  the  man  whom
he  seeks,  he  will  have  no  difficulty  in  finding  him,  for

THB   M AN  S  CHORD  7I

every  man  has  what  may  be  called  a  kind  of  musical
chord  of  his  own — ^a  chord  which  is  the  expression  of
him  as  a  whole,  produced  perhaps  by  a  sort  of  average
of  the  rates  of  vibration  of  all  his  different  vehicles  on
their  respective  planes.  If  the  operator  knows  how  to
discern  that  chord  and  to  strike  it,  it  will  by  sym
pathetic  vibration  attract  the  attention  of  the  man  in-
stantly wherever  he  may  be,  and  will  evoke  an  im-
mediate response  from  him.

Whether  the  man  were  living  or  recently  dead  would
make  no  difference  at  all,  and  clairvoyance  of  the  fifth
class  could  at  once  find  him  even  among  the  countless
millions  in  the  devachanic  state,  though  in  that  case
the  man  himself  would  be  unconscious  that  he  was
under  observation.  Naturally  a  seer  whose  conscious-
ness did  not  range  higher  than  the  astral  plane — ^who
employed  therefore  one  of  the  earlier  methods  of  seeing
— would  not  be  able  to  find  a  person  upon  the  deva-
chanic plane  at  all ;  yet  even  he  would  at  least  be  able
to  tell  that  the  man  sought  for  was  upon  that  plane,
from  the  mere  fact  that  the  striking  of  the  chord  as  &r
up  as  the  astral  level  produced  no  response.

If  the  man  sought  be  a  stranger  to  the  seeker,  the
latter  will  need  something  connected  with  him  to  act
as  a  clue — ^a  photograph,  a  letter  written  by  him,  alr^
article  which  has  belonged  to  him,  and  is  impregnated
with  his  personal  magnetism ;  any  of  these  would  do  in
the  hands  of  a  practised  seer.

Again  I  say,  it  must  not  therefore  be  supposed  that
pupils  who  have  been  taught  how  to  use  this  art  are  at

Jt  CLAIRVOYANCB

liberty  to  set  up  a  kind  of  inteUigence  o£Boe  through
which  couunumcBtioii  can  be  had  with  missing  or  dead
rdatives.  A  message  given  from  this  side  to  such  an
one  might  or  might  not  be  banded  on,  according  to
circumstances,  but  even  if  it  were  no  reply  might  be
brought,  lest  the  transaction  should  partake  of  the  nature
of  a  phenomenon — something  which  oonld  be  proved  on
the  physical  plane  to  have  been  an  act  of  magic.

Another  question  often  raised  is  as  to  whether,  in  the
action  of  psychic  vision^  there  is  any  limitation  as  to
distance.  The  reply  would  seem  to  be  that  there
should  be  no  limit  but  that  of  the  respective  planes.  It
must  be  remembered  that  the  astral  and  devachanic
planes  of  our  earth  are  as  definitely  its  own  as  its
atmosphere,  though  they  extend  considerably  fmrther
from  it  even  in  our  three*dimensional  space  than  does
the  physical  air.  Consequently  the  passage  to,  or  the
detailed  sight  of,  oth^  planets  would  not  be  possible  for
any  system  of  clairvoyance  connected  with  these  planes*
It  is  quite  possible  and  easy  for  the  man  who  can  raise
his  consciousness  to  the  buddhic  plane  to  pass  to  any
other  globe  belonging  to  our  chain  of  worlds,  but  that  is
outside  our  present  subject.

Still  a  good  deal  of  additional  information  about
other  (danets  can  be  obtained  by  the  use  of  such  clair*
voyant  faculties  as  we  have  been  describing.  It  is
possible  to  make  sight  enormously  clearer  by  psisang
outside  of  the  constant  disturbances  of  the  earth's
atmo^>here»  and  it  is  also  not  difficult  to  learn  how  to
put  on  an  exceedingly  high  mi^ifyiBg  power,  so  that

OTHER  PLANETS  73

even  by  ordinary  clairvoyance  a  good  deal  of  very  in-
teresting astronomical  knowledge  may  be  gained.  But
as  far  as  this  earth  and  its  immediate  surroundings  are
concerned,  there  is  practically  no  iimitation.

CHAPTER  V.

Clairvoyancb  in  Space:  Sbmi-Intsntional.

Under  this  rather  curious  title  I  am  grouping  to*
gether  the  cases  of  all  those  people  who  definitely  set
themselves  to  see  something,  but  have  no  idea  what
the  something  will  be,  and  no  control  over  the  sight
after  the  visions  have  b^^^n — ^psychic  Micawbers,  who
put  themselves  into  a  receptive  condition,  and  then
simply  wait  for  something  to  turn  up.  Many  trance*
mediums  would  come  under  this  heading ;  they  either
in  some  way  hypnotize  themselves  or  are  hypnotized  by
some  **  spirit  •guide,"  and  then  they  describe  the  scenes
or  persons  that  happen  to  float  before  their  vision*
Sometimes,  however,  when  in  this  condition  they  see
what  is  taking  place  at  a  distance,  and  so  they  come  to
have  a  place  among  our  **  clairvoyants  in  space."

But  the  largest  and  most  widely*spread  band  of  these
semi-intentional  clairvoyants  are  the  various  kinds  of
crystal-gazers — those  who,  as  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  puts
it,  **  stare  into  a  crystal  ball,  a  cup,  a  mirror,  a  blob  of
ink  (Egypt  and  India),  a  drop  of  blood  (among  the
Maories  of  New  Zealand),  a  bowl  of  water  (Red
Indian),  a  pond  (Roman  and   African),  water   in    a

74

CRYSTAL-GAZING  75

glass  bowl  (in  Fez),  or  almost  any  polished  sorhce  "
{Dnams  tmd  Ghosts^  p.  57).

Two  pages  later  Mr.  Lang  gives  us  a  very  good
example  of  the  kind  of  vision  most  frequently  seen  in
this  way.  **  I  had  given  a  glass  ball,"  he  says,  **  to  a
young  lady,  Miss  Baillie,  who  had  scarcely  any  success
with  it.  She  lent  it  to  Miss  Leslie,  who  saw  a  large
square,  old-fashioned  red  sofa  covered  with  muslin^
which  she  found  in  the  next  country-house  she  viated.
Miss  Baillie*s  brother,  a  young  athlete,  laughed  at
these  experiments,  took  the  ball  into  the  study,  and
came  back  looking  '  gey  gash.'  He  admitted  that  he
bad  seen  a  vision — somebody  he  knew  under  a  lamp.
He  would  discover  during  the  week  whether  he  saw
right  or  not.    This  was  at  5.30  on  a  Sunday  afternoon.

*'  On  Tuesday,  Mr.  Baillie  was  at  a  dance  in  a  town

some  forty  miles  from  bis  home,  and    met  a  Miss

Preston.    <  On  Sunday,*  he  said,  *  about  half-past  five

you  were  sitting  under  a  standard  lamp  in  a  dress  I

never  saw  you  wear,  a  blue  blouse  with  lace  over  the

shoulders,  pouring  out  tea  for  a  man  in  blue  serge,

whose  back  was  towards  me,  so  that  I  only  saw  the  tip

of  his  moustache.'

u  i  Why,  the  blinds  must  have  been  up,'  said  Miss
Preston.

'* '  I  was  at  Dulby,'  said  Mr.  Baillie,  and  he  undeni-
ably was."

This  is  quite  a  typical  case  of  crystal-gazing — ^the
picture  correct  in  every  detail,  you  see,  and  yet  absor
lutely  unimportant  and  bearing  no  apparent  signification

76  CLAIRVOYAMCB

of  any  sort  to  either  party,  except  that  it  eerved  to
prove  to  Mr.  Baillie  that  there  was  aomething  in
cry8tal*gazing«  Perhaps  more  frequently  the  visions
tend  to  be  of  a  romantic  character^^men  in  £3retgB
dress,  or  beautifol  though  generally  imknown  land-
scapes.

.  Now  what  is  the  rationale  of  this  kind  of  clairvoy*
ance  7  As  I  have  indicated  above,  it  belongs  usually  to
the  '*astral-currwt  '*  type,  and  the  crystal  or  other  object
simply  acts'asa  fppus  for  the  will-power  of  the  seer,  and
a  convenient  starting*point  for  his  astral  tube.  There
are  some  who  can  influence  what  they  will  see  by  their
willy  that  is  to  say  they  have  tikb  power  of  pointing  their
telescope  as  they  wish ;  but  the  great  majority  jiist  form
a  fortuitous  tube  and  see  whatever  happens  to  present
tself  at  the  end  of  it.

Sometimes  it  may  be  a  scene  comparatively  near  at
hand*  as  in  the  case  just  quoted ;  at  other  times  it  wHl
be  a  far-away  Oriental  landscape ;  at  others  yet  it  may
be  a  reflection  of  some  fragment  of  an  Ucishic  record,
and  then  the  picture  will  contain  figures  in  some  antique
dressy  and  the  phenomenon  belongs  to  our  third  large
division  of  ^*  clairvoyance  in  time."  It  is  said  that
visions  of  the  future  are  sometimes  seen  in  crystals  also
— a  further  development  to  which  we  must  refer  later.

I  have  seen  a  clairvoyant  use  instead  of  the  ordinary
shining  surface  a  dead  black  one,  produced  by  a  handful
of  powdered  charcoal  in  a  saucer.  Indeed  it  does  not
seem  to  matter  much  what  is  used  as  a  focus,  except
that  pure  crystal  has  an  undoubted  aidvantage  over

SBLF-HYPNOTIZATION  77

Other  substances  in  that  its  peculiar  arrangement  of
elemental  essence  renders  it  specially  stimulating  to  the
psychic  faculties.

It  seems  probable,  however,  that  in  cases  where  a
tiny  brilliant  object  is  employed — ^such  as  a  point  of
light,  or  the  drop  of  blood  used  by  the  Maories — ^the
instance  is  in  reality  merely  one  of  self-hypnotization.
Among  non-European  nations  the  experiment  is  very
frequently  preceded  or  accompanied  by  magical  cere-
monies and  invocations,  so  that  it  is  quite  likely  that
such  sight  as  is  gained  may  sometimes  be  really  that  of
some  foreign  entity,  and  so  the  phenomenon  may  in  fact
be  merely  a  case^of  temporary^  possession,  and  not  of
clairvoyance  at  all.

CHAPTER  VI.

Clairvoyance  in  Space:  Unintentional.

Under  this  heading  we  may  group  together  all  those
cases  in  which  visions  of  some  event  which  is  taking
place  at  a  distance  are  seen  quite  unexpectedly  and
without  any  kind  of  preparation.  There  are  people  who
are  subject  to  such  visions,  while  there  are  many  others
to  whom  such  a  thing  will  happen  only  once  in  a  life*
time.  The  visions  are  of  all  kinds  and  of  all  degrees  of
completeness,  and  apparently  may  be  produced  by
various  causes.  Sometimes  the  reason  of  the  vision  is
obvious,  and  the  subject-matter  of  the  gravest  import-
ance ;  at  other  times  no  reason  at  all  is  discoverable,
and  the  events  shown  seem  of  the  most  trivial  nature.

Sometimes  these  glimpses  of  the  super-physical
faculty  come  as  waking  visions,  and  sometimes  they
manifest  during  sleep  as  vivid  or  oft-repeated  dreams.  In
this  latter  case  the  sight  employed  is  perhaps  usually  of
the  kind  assigned  to  our  fourth  subdivision  of  clairvoy-
ance in  space,  for  the  sleeping  man  often  travels  in  his
astral  body  to  some  spot  with  which  his  affections  or  in-
terests are  closely  connected,  and  simply  watches  what
takes  place  there ;  in  the  former  it  seems  probable  that
the  second  type  of  clairvoyance,  by  means  of  the  astral

CAPTAIN   YONNT  79

current,  is  called  into  requisition.  But  in  this  case  the
current  or  tube  is  formed  quite  unconsciously,  and  is
often  the  automatic  result  of  a  strong  thought  or
emotion  projected  from  one  end  or  the  other — either
from  the  seer  or  the  person  who  is  seen.

The  simplest  plan  will  be  to  give  a  few  instances  of
the  different  kinds,  and  to  intersperse  among  them
such  further  explanations  as  may  seem  necessary.  Mr.
Stead  has  collected  a  large  and  varied  assortment
of  recent  and  well-authenticated  cases  in  his  Rial
Ghost  Stories^  and  I  will  select  some  of  my  examples
from  them,  occasionally  condensing  slightly  to  save
space.

There  are  cases  in  which  it  is  at  once  obvious  to  any
Theosophical  student  that  the  exceptional  instance  of
clairvoyance  was  specially  brought  about  by  one  of  the
band  whom  we  have  called  "  Invisible  Helpers  "  in  order
that  aid  might  be  rendered  to  some  one  in  sore  need.
To  this  class,  undoubtedly,  belongs  the  story  told  by
Captain  Yonnt,  of  the  Napa  Valley  in  California,  to
Dr.  Bushnell,  who  repeats  it  in  his  Nature  and  the
Supsmaiural  (p.  14).

''  About  six  or  seven  years  previous,  in  a  mid-winter*s
night,  he  had  a  dream  in  which  he  saw  what  appeared
to  be  a  company  of  emigrants  arrested  by  the  snows  of
the  mountains,  and  perishing  rapidly  by  cold  and
hunger.  He  noted  the  very  cast  of  the  scenery,  marked
by  a  huge,  perpendicular  front  of  white  rock  cli£f ;  he
saw  the  men  cutting  off  what  appeared  to  be  tree-tops
rising  out  of  deep  gulfs  of  snow ;  he  distinguished  the

8o  CLAIRVOYANCB

very  features  of  the  persons  and  tbe  look  of  their  parti-
cular distress.

«  He  awoke  profoundly  imprassed  by  the  distinctness
and  apparent  reality  of  the  dream.  He  at  length  fell
asleep,  and  dreamed  exactly  tbe  same  dream  over
again.  In  the  morning  he  could  not  expel  it  from  his
mind.  Falling  in  shortly  after  with  an  old  hunter  com-
rade, he  told  his  story,  and  was  only  the  more  deeply
impressed  by  his  recognizing  without  hesitation  the
scenery  of  the  dream.  This  comrade  came  over  the
Sierra  by  the  Carson  Valley  Pass,  and  declared  that  a
spot  in  the  Pass  exactly  answered  his  description.

<*By  this  the  unsophistical  patriarch  was  decided.
He  immecUatdy  collected  a  company  of  men,  with
mules  and  blankets  and  all  necessary  provisions.  The
neighbours  were  laughing  meantime  at  his  credulity.
*  No  matter,'  he  said,  *  I  am  able  to  do  this,  and  I  will,
for  I  verily  believe  that  the  fact  is  according  to  my
dream.*  The  men  were  sent  into  the  mountains  one
hundred  and  fifty  miles  distant,  direct  to  the  Carson
Valley  Pass.  And  there  they  found  the  company
exactly  in  the  condition  of  the  dream,  and  brought  in
the  remnant  alive.**

Since  it  is  not  stated  that  Captain  Yonnt  was  in  the
habit  of  seeing  visions,  it  seems  clear  that  some  helper,
observing  the  forlorn  condition  of  the  emigrant  party,
took  the  nearest  impressible  and  otherwise  suitable
person  (who  happened  to  be  the  Captain)  to  the  spot
in  the  astral  body,  and  aroused  him  su£Biciently  to  fix
the  scene  firmly  in  his  memory.    The  helper  may  pos-

THB   DUKE  OF  ORLEANS  8 1

sibly  have  arranged  an  "  astral  current "  for  the  Captain
instead,  but  the  former  suggestion  is  more  probable.
At  any  rate  the  motive,  and  broadly  the  method,  of  the
work  are  obvious  enough  in  this  case.

Sometimes  the  **  astral  current "  may  be  set  going
by  a  strong  emotional  thought  at  the  other  end  of  the
line,  and  this  may  happen  even  though  the  thinker  has
no  such  intention  in  his  mind.  In  the  rather  striking
story  which  I  am  about  to  quote,  it  is  evident  that  the
link  was  formed  by  the  doctor's  frequent  thought  about
Mrs.  Broughton,  yet  he  had  clearly  no  especial  wish
that  she  should  see  what  he  was  doing  at  the  time.
That  it  was  this  kind  of  clairvoyance  that  was  employed
is  shown  by  the  fixity  of  her  point  of  view — which,  be
it  observed,  is  not  the  doctor's  point  of  view  sym-
pathetically transferred  (as  it  might  have  been)  since
she  sees  his  back  without  recognizing  him.  The  story
is  to  be  found  in  the  Procudings  of  the  Psychical  Research
Society  (vol,  ii.,  p.  i6o).

**Mrs.  Broughton  awoke  one  night  in  1844,  and
roused  her  husband,  telling  him  that  something  dread-
ful had  happened  in  France.  He  begged  her  to  go  to
sleep  again,  and  not  trouble  him.  She  assured  him  that
she  was  not  asleep  when  she  saw  what  she  insisted  on
telling  him — what  she  saw  in  fact.

"  First  a  carriage  accident — which  she  did  not  actu-
ally see,  but  what  she  saw  was  the  result — a  broken
carriage,  a  crowd  collected,  a  figure  gently  raised  and
carried  into  the  nearest  house,  then  a  figure  lying  on  a
bed,  which  she  then  recognized  as  the  Duke  of  Orleans.

F

8a  CLAIRVOYANCE

Gradually  friends  collecting  round  the  bed — ^among
them  several  members  of  the  French  royal  family — ^the
queen,  then  the  king,  all  silently,  tearfully  watching
the  evidently  dying  duke.  One  man  (she  could  see  his
back,  but  did  not  know  who  he  was)  was  a  doctor.
He  stood  bending  over  the  duke,  feeling  his  pulse,  with
his  watch  in  the  other  hand.  And  then  all  passed
away,  and  she  saw  no  more.

**  As  soon  as  it  was  daylight  she  wrote  down  in  her
journal  all  that  she  had  seen.  It  was  before  the  days  of
electric  telegraph,  and  two  or  more  days  passed  before
the  Times  announced  '  The  Death  of  the  Duke  of
Orleans.'  Visiting  Paris  a  short  time  afterwards  she
saw  and  recognized  the  place  of  the  accident  and  re-
ceived the  explanation  of  her  impression.  The  doctor
who  attended  the  dying  duke  was  an  old  friend  of  hers,
and  as  he  watched  by  the  bed  his  mind  had  been  con-
stantly occupied  with  her  and  her  family.*'

A  commoner  instance  is  that  in  which  strong  affection
sets  up  the  necessary  current ;  probably  a  fairly  steady
stream  of  mutual  thought  is  constantly  flowing  between
the  two  parties  in  the  case,  and  some  sudden  need  or
dire  extremity  on  the  part  of  one  of  them  endues  this
stream  temporarily  with  the  polarizing  power  which  is
needful  to  create  the  astral  telescope.  An  illustrative
example  is  quoted  from  the  same  Proceedings  (vol.  i.,
p.  30).

"On September  gth,  1848,  at  the  siege  of  Mooltan,

Major-General  R ,  C.B.,  then  adjutant  of   his

regiment,  was  most  severely  and  dangerously  wounded ;

THB  SIBGB  OF  MOOLTAN  83

andy  supposing  himself  to  be  dying,  asked  one  of  the
officers  with  him  to  take  the  ring  off  his  finger  and  send
it  to  his  wife,  who  at  the  time  was  ftdly  one  hundred
and  fifty  miles  distant  at  Ferozepore.

"  *  On  the  night  of  September  gth,  1848/  writes  his
wife,  '  I  was  lying  on  my  bed,  between  sleeping  and
waking,  when  I  distinctly  saw  my  husband  being  car-
ried off  the  field  seriously  wounded,  and  heard  his
voice  saying,  **  Take  this  ring  off  my  finger  and  send  it
to  my  wife.*'  All  the  next  day  I  could  not  get  the  sight
or  the  voice  out  of  my  mind.

"  *  In  due  time  I  heard  of  General  R having

been  severely  wounded  in  the  assault  of  Mooltan.  He
survived,  however,  and  is  still  living.  It  was  not  for
some  time  after  the  siege  that  I  heard  from  General

L ,  the  officer  who  helped  to  carry  my  husband

off  the  field,  that  the  request  as  to  the  ring  was  actually
made  by  him,  just  as  I  heard  it  at  Ferozepore  at  that
very  time.' "

Then  there  is  the  very  large  class  of  casual  clair-
voyant visions  which  have  no  traceable  cause — ^which
are  apparently  quite  meaningless,  and  have  no  recogniz-
able relation  to  any  events  known  to  the  seer.  To  this
class  belong  many  of  the  landscapes  seen  by  some
people  just  before  they  fall  asleep.  I  quote  a  capital
and  very  realistic  account  of  an  experience  of  this  sort
from  Mr.  W.  T.  Stead's  Real  Ghost  Stories  (p.  65).

''  I  got  into  bed  but  was  not  able  to  go  to  sleep.  I
shut  my  eyes  and  waited  for  sleep  to  come ;  instead  of
sleep,  however,    there  came  to  me  a  succession    of

84  CLAIRVOYANCB

curiously  vivid  clairvoyant  pictures.  There  was  no
light  in  the  room,  and  it  was  perfectly  dark ;  I  had  my
eyes  shut  also.  But  notwithstanding  the  darkness  I
suddenly  was  conscious  of  looking  at  a  scene  of  singular
beauty.  It  was  as  if  I  saw  a  living  miniature  about
the  size  of  a  magic-lantern  slide.  At  this  moment  I
can  recall  the  scene  as  if  I  saw  it  again.  It  was  a  sea-
side piece.  The  moon  was  shining  upon  the  water,
which  rippled  slowly  on  to  the  beach.  Right  before  me
a  long  mole  ran  out  into  the  water.

**  On  either  side  of  the  mole  irregular  rocks  stood  up
above  the  sea-level.  On  the  shore  stood  several  houses,
square  and  rude,  which  resembled  nothing  that  I  had
ever  seen  in  house  architecture.  No  one  was  stirring,
but  the  moon  was  there  and  the  sea  and  the  gleam  of
the  moonlight  on  the  rippling  waters,  just  as  if  I  had
been  looking  on  the  actual  scene.

<<  It  was  so  beautiful  that  I  remember  thinking  that  if
it  continued  I  should  be  so  interested  in  looking  at  it
that  I  should  never  go  to  sleep.  I  was  wide  awake,
and  at  the  same  time  that  I  saw  the  scene  I  distinctly
heard  the  dripping  of  the  rain  outside  the  window.
Then  suddenly,  without  any  apparent  object  or  reason,
the  scene  changed.

"  The  moonlit  sea  vanished,  and  in  its  place  I  was
looking  right  into  the  interior  of  a  reading-room.  It
seemed  as  if  it  had  been  used  as  a  schoolroom  in  the
daytime,  and  was  employed  as  a  reading-room  in  the
evening.  I  remember  seeing  one  reader  who  had  a
curious  resemblance  to  Tim  Harrington,  although  it

MR.   STBAD'S  LITTLB   PBBP  85

was  not  he,  hold  up  a  magazine  or  book  in  his  hand
and  laugh.    It  was  not  a  picture — it  was  there.

**  The  scene  was  just  as  if  you  were  looking  through
an  opera-glass ;  you  saw  the  play  of  the  muscles,  the
gleaming  of  the  eye,  every  movement  of  the  unknown
persons  in  the  unnamed  place  into  which  you  were  gazing.
I  saw  all  that  without  opening  my  eyes,  nor  did  my  eyes
have  anything  to  do  with  it.  You  see  such  things  as
these  as  it  were  with  another  sense  which  is  more  inside
your  head  than  in  your  eyes.

<*  This  was  a  very  poor  and  paltry  experience,  but  it
enabled  me  to  understand  better  how  it  is  that  clair-
voyants see  than  any  amount  of  disquisition.

*'  The  pictures  were  apropos  of  nothing ;  they  had  been
suggested  by  nothing  I  had  been  reading  or  talking
of;  they  simply  came  as  if  I  had  been  able  to  look
through  a  glass  at  what  was  occurring  somewhere  else
in  the  world.  I  had  my  peep,  and  then  it  passed,  nor
have  I  had  a  recurrence  of  a  similar  experience."

Mr.  Stead  regards  that  as  a ''  poor  and  paltry  experi-
ence,*' and  it  may  perhaps  be  considered  so  when  com-
pared with  the  greater  possibilities,  yet  I  know  many  stu-
dents who  would  be  very  thankful  to  have  even  so  much
of  direct  personal  experience  to  tell.  Small  though  it  may
be  in  itself,  it  at  once  gives  the  seer  a  clue  to  the  whole
thing,  and  clairvoyance  would  be  a  living  actuality  to
a  man  who  had  seen  even  that  much  in  a  way  that  it
could  never  have  been  without  that  little  touch  with  the
unseen  world.

These  pictures  were  much  too  clear  to  have  been

86  CLAIRVOYANXE

mere  reflections  of  the  thought  of  others,  and  besides^
the  description  unmistakably  shows  that  they  were
views  seen  through  an  astral  telescope ;  so  either  Mr.
Stead  must  quite  unconsciously  have  set  a  current
going  for  himself,  or  (which  is  much  more  probable)
some  kindly  astral  entity  set  it  in  motion  for  him,  and
gave  him,  to  while  away  a  tedious  delay,  any  pictures
that  happened  to  come  handy  at  the  end  of  the  tube.

CHAPTER  VII.

Clairvoyancb  in  Timb  :  thb  Past.

Clairvoyancb  in  time — ^that  is  to  say,  the  power  of
reading  the  past  and  the  future — ^is,  like  all  the  other
varieties,  possessed  by  different  people  in  very  varying
degrees,  ranging  from  the  man  who  has  both  faculties
fully  at  his  command,  down  to  one  who  only  occasion-
ally  gets  involuntary  and  very  imperfect  glimpses  or
reflections  of  these  scenes  of  other  days.  A  person  of
the  latter  tjrpe  might  have,  let  us  say,  a  vision  of  some
event  in  the  past ;  but  it  would  be  liable  to  the  most
serious  distortion,  and  even  if  it  happened  to  be  fairly
accurate  it  would  almost  certainly  be  a  mere  isolated
picture,  and  he  would  probably  be  quite  unable  to
relate  it  to  what  had  occurred  before  or  after  it,  or  to
account  for  anything  unusual  which  might  appear  in  it.
The  trained  man,  on  the  other  hand,  could  follow  the
drama  connected  with  his  picture  backwards  or  for-
wards to  any  extent  that  might  seem  desirable,  and
trace  out  with  equal  ease  the  causes  which  had  led
up  to  it  or  the  results  which  it  in  turn  would  produce.

We  shall  probably  find  it  easier  to  grasp  this  some*
what  difficult  section  of  our  subject  if  we  consider  it  in
the  subdivisions  which  naturally  suggest  themselven,

9f

88  CIAIRVOYANCB

and  deal  first  with  the  vision  which,  looks  backwards
into  the  past,  leaving  for  later  examination  that  which
pierces  the  veil  of  the  future.  In  each  case  it  will  be
well  for  us  to  try  to  understand  what  we  can  of  the
modus  ofirandi,  even  though  our  success  can  at  best  be
only  a  very  modified  one,  owing  first  to  the  imperfect
information  on  some  parts  of  the  subject  at  present
possessed  by  our  investigators,  and  secondly  to  the
ever-recurring  failure  of  physical  words  to  express  a
hundredth  part  even  of  the  little  we  do  know  about
higher  planes  and  faculties*

In  the  case  then  of  a  detailed  vision  of  the  remote
past,  how  is  it  obtained,  and  to  what  plane  of  nature
does  it  really  belong  ?  The  answer  to  both  these  ques-
tions is  contained  in  the  reply  that  it  is  read  from  the
ik&shic  records  ;  but  that  statement  in  turn  will  require
a  certain  amount  of  explanation  for  many  readers.
The  word  is  in  truth  somewhat  of  a  misnomer,  for
though  .the  records  are  undoubtedly  read  from  the
Ucftsha,  or  matter  of  the  mental  plane,  yet  it  is  not  to  it
that  they  really  belong.  Still  worse  is  the  alternative
title,  **  records  of  the  astral  light,"  which  has  some-
times been  employed,  for  these  records  lie  far  beyond
the  astral  plane,  and  all  that  can  be  obtained  on  it  are
only  broken  glimpses  of  a  kind  of  double  reflection  of
them,  as  will  presently  be  explained.

Like  so  many  others  of  our  Theosophical  terms,  the
word  &kAsha  has  been  very  loosely  used.  In  some  of  our
earlier  books  it  was  considered  as  synonymous  with  astral
light,  and  in  others  it  was  employed  to  signify  any  kind

THB  RECORDS  89

of  invisible  matter,  from  mOllaprakiiti  down  to  the  physi-
cal ether.  In  later  books  its  use  has  been  restricted  to
the  matter  of  the  mental  plane,  and  it  is  in  that  sense
that  the  records  may  be  spoken  of  as  Ucftshic,  for
although  they  are  not  originally  made  on  that  plane  any
more  than  on  the  astral,  yet  it  is  there  that  we  first
come  definitely  into  contact  with  them  and  find  it
possible  to  do  reliable  work  with  them*

This  subject  of  the  records  is  by  no  means  an  easy
one  to  deal  with,  for  it  is  one  of  that  numerous  class
which  requires  for  its  perfect  comprehension  faculties  of
a  far  higher  order  than  any  which  humanity  has  yet
evolved.  The  real  solution  of  its  problems  lies  on
planes  far  beyond  any  that  we  can  possibly  know  at
present,  and  any  view  that  we  take  of  it  must  neces-
sarily  be  of  the  most  imperfect  character,  since  we
cannot  but  look  at  it  from  below  instead  of  from  above.
The  idea  which  we  form  of  it  must  therefore  be  only
partial,  yet  it  need  not  mislead  us  unless  we  allow  our-
selves to  think  of  the  tiny  fragment  which  is  all  that  we
can  see  as  though  it  were  the  perfect  whole.  If  we  are
careful  that  such  conceptions  as  we  may  form  shall  be
accurate  as  far  as  they  go,  we  shall  have  nothing  to  un-
learn, though  much  to  add,  when  in  the  course  of
our  further  progress  we  gradually  acquire  the  higher
wisdom.  Be  it  understood  then  at  the  commencement
that  a  thorough  grasp  of  our  subject  is  an  impossibility
at  the  present  stage  of  our  evolution,  and  that  many
points  will  arise  as  to  which  no  exact  explanation  is  yet
obtainable,  though  it  may  often  be  possible  to  suggest

go  CLAIRTOYAIfCB

analogies  and  to  indicate  the  lines  along  which  an  ex-
planation must  lie.

Let  us  then  try  to  carry  back  our  thoughts  to  the  be-
ginning of  this  solar  system  to  which  we  belong.  We
are  all  familiar  with  the  ordinary  astronomical  theory
of  its  origin — ^that  which  is  commonly  called  the  nebular
hypothesis — according  to  which  it  first  came  into  exist-
ence as  a  gigantic  glowing  nebula,  of  a  diameter  far
exceeding  that  of  the  orbit  of  even  the  outermost  of  the
planets,  and  then,  as  in  the  course  of  countless  ages
that  enormous  sphere  gradually  cooled  and  contracted,
the  system  as  we  know  it  was  formed.

Occult  science  accepts  that  theory,  in  its  broad  out-
line, as  correctly  representing  the  purely  physical  side
of  the  evolution  of  our  system,  but  it  would  add  that  if
we  confine  our  attention  to  this  physical  side  only  we
shall  have  a  very  incomplete  and  incoherent  idea  of
what  really  happened.  It  would  postulate,  to  begin
with,  that  the  exalted  Being  who  undertakes  the  forma-
tion of  a  system  (whom  we  sometimes  call  the  Logos  of
the  system)  first  of  all  forms  in  his  mind  a  complete  con-
ception of  the  whole  of  it  with  all  its  successive  chains
of  worlds.  By  the  very  act  of  forming  that  conception
He  calls  the  whole  into  simultaneous  objective  existence
on  the  plane  of  His  thought — a  plane  of  course  far
above  all  those  of  which  we  know  anything — from
which  the  various  globes  descend  when  required  into
whatever  state  of  further  objectivity  may  be  respec-
tively destined  for  them.  Unless  we  constantly  bear  in
mind  this  fact  of  the  real  existence  of  the  whole  system

GROWTH  OF  THB  AURA  9I

from  the  very  beginning  on  a  higher  plane,  we  shall  be
perpetually  misunderstanding  the  physical  evolution
which  we  see  taking  place  down  here.

But  occultism  has  more  than  this  to  teach  us  on  the
subject.  It  tells  us  not  only  that  all  this  wonderful
system  to  which  we  belong  is  called  into  existence  by
the  Logos,  both  on  lower  and  on  higher  planes,  but  also
that  its  relation  to  Him  is  closer  even  than  that,  for  it
is  absolutely  a  part  of  Him — a  partial  expression  of
Him  upon  the  physical  plane — and  that  the  movement
and  energy  of  the  whole  system  is  His  energy,  and  is
all  carried  on  within  the  limits  of  His  aura.  Stupendous
as  this  conception  is,  it  will  yet  not  be  wholly  unthink-
able to  those  of  us  who  have  made  any  study  of  the
subject  of  the  aura.

We  are  familiar  with  the  idea  that  as  a  person  pro*
gresses  on  the  upward  path  his  causal  body,  which  is  the
determining  limit  of  his  aura,  distinctly  increases  in  size
as  well  as  in  luminosity  and  purity  of  colour.  Many  of
us  know  from  experience  that  the  aura  of  a  pupil  who
has  already  made  considerable  advance  on  the  Path  is
very  much  larger  than  that  of  one  who  is  but  just
setting  his  foot  upon  its  first  step,  while  in  the  case  of
an  Adept  the  proportional  increase  is  far  greater  stilL
We  read  in  quite  exoteric  Oriental  scriptures  of  the  im-
mense extension  of  the  aura  of  the  Buddha ;  I  think
that  three  miles  is  mentioned  on  one  occasion  as  its
limit,  but  whatever  the  exact  measurement  may  be,  it
is  obvious  that  we  have  here  another  record  of  this  fact
of  the  extremely  rapid  growth  of  the  causal  body  as

^2  CLAIRVOYANCE

man  passes  on  his  upward  way.  There  can  be  little
<doubt  that  the  rate  of  this  growth  would  itself  increase
in  geometrical  progression,  so  that  it  need  not  surprise
us  to  hear  of  an  Adept  on  a  still  higher  level  whose
aura  is  capable  of  including  the  entire  world  at  once;
and  from  this  we  may  gradually  lead  our  minds  up  to
the  conception  that  there  is  a  Being  so  exalted  as  to
comprehend  within  Himself  the  whole  of  our  solar  sys-
tem. And  we  shotdd  remember  that,  enormous  as  this
seems  to  us,  it  is  but  as  the  tiniest  drop  in  the  vast
ocean  of  space.

So  of  the  Logos  (who  has  in  Him  all  the  capacities
and  qualities  with  which  we  can  possibly  endow  the
highest  God  we  can  imagine)  it  is  literally  true,  as  was
said  of  old,  that  '<  of  Him  and  through  Him,  and  to
Him  are  all  things,*'  and  "  in  Him  we  live  and  move
and  have  our  being."

Now  if  this  be  so,  it  is  clear  that  whatever  happens
within  our  system  happens  absolutely  within  the  con-
sciousness of  its  Logos,  and  so  we  at  once  see  that  the
true  record  must  be  His  memory ;  and  furthermore,  it
is  obvious  that  on  whatever  plane  that  wondrous
memory  exists,  it  cannot  but  be  far  above  anything  that
we  know,  and  consequently  whatever  records  we  may
find  ourselves  able  to  read  must  be  only  a  reflection  of
that  great  dominant  fact,  mirrored  in  the  denser  media
of  the  lower  planes.

On  the  astral  plane  it  is  at  once  evident  that  this  is
so— that  what  we  are  dealing  with  is  only  a  reflection  of
a  reflection,  and  an  exceedingly  imperfect  one,  for  such

A   BROKEN   REFLECTION  9^

records  as  can  be  reached  there  are  fragmentary  in  the
extreme,  and  often  seriously  distorted.  We  know  how
universally  water  is  used  as  a  symbol  of  the  astral  lights
and  in  this  particular  case  it  is  a  remarkably  apt  one.
From  the  surface  of  still  water  we  may  get  a  clear  re-
flection of  the  surrounding  objects,  just  as  from  a
mirror ;  but  at  the  best  it  is  only  a  reflection — a  repre-
sentation in  two  dimensions  of  three-dimensional
objects,  and  therefore  differing  in  all  its  qualities^
except  colour,  from  that  which  it  represents ;  and
in  addition  to  this,  it  is  always  reversed.

But  let  the  surface  of  the  water  be  ruiHed  by  the
wind,  and  what  do  we  find  then  ?  A  reflection  still,
certainly,  but  so  broken  up  and  distorted  as  to  be  quite
useless  or  even  misleading  as  a  guide  to  the  shape  and
real  appearance  of  the  objects  reflected.  Here  and
there  for  a  moment  we  might  happen  to  get  a  clear
reflection  of  some  minute  part  of  the  scene — of  a  single
leaf  from  a  tree,  for  example ;  but  it  would  need  long
labour  and  considerable  knowledge  of  natural  laws  to
build  up  anything  like  a  true  conception  of  the  obejct
reflected  by  putting  together  even  a  large  number  of
such  isolated  fragments  of  an  image  of  it.

Now  in  the  astral  plane  we  can  never  have  anything
approaching  to  what  we  have  imaged  as  a  still  sur-
face, but  on  the  contrary  we  have  always  to  deal  with
one  in  rapid  and  bewildering  motion  ;  judge,  therefore,
how  little  we  can  depend  upon  getting  a  clear  and
definite  reflection.  Thus  a  clairvoyant  who  possesses
only  the  faculty  of  astral  sight  can  never  rely  upon  any

^4  CLAIRVOYANCE

picture  of  the  past  that  comes  before  him  as  being  ac-
curate  and  perfect ;  here  and  there  some  part  of  it  may
be  so,  but  he  has  no  means  of  knowing  which  it  is.  If
he  is  under  the  care  of  a  competent  teacher  he  may,  by
long  and  careful  training,  be  shown  how  to  distinguish
between  reliable  and  unreliable  impressions,  and  to
construct  from  the  broken  reflections  some  kind  of
image  of  the  object  reflected ;  but  usually  long  before  he
has  mastered  those  difficulties  he  will  have  developed
the  devachanic  sight,  which  renders  such  labour  un-
necessary.

On  the  next  plane,  which  we  call  the  mental  or  deva-
chanic, conditions  are  very  different.  There  the  record
is  full  and  accurate,  and  it  would  be  impossible  to  make
any  mistake  in  the  reading.  That  is  to  say,  if  three
clairvoyants  possessing  the  powers  of  the  devachanic
plane  agreed  to  examine  a  certain  record  there,  what
would  be  presented  to  their  vision  would  be  absolutely
the  same  reflection  in  each  case,  and  each  would  acquire
a  correct  impression  from  it  in  reading  it.  It  does  not
however  follow  that  when  they  all  compared  notes  later
on  the  physical  plane  their  reports  would  agree  exactly.
It  is  well  known  that  if  three  people  who  witness  an
occurrence  down  here  in  the  physical  world  set  to  work
to  describe  it  afterwards,  their  accounts  will  differ  con-
siderably, for  each  will  have  noticed  especially  those
items  which  most  appeal  to  him,  and  will  insensibly
have  made  them  the  prominent  features  of  the  event,
sometimes  ignoring  other  points  which  were  in  reality
much  more  important.

THB   PERSONAL  BQUATION  95

Now  in  the  case  of  an  observation  on  the  mental
plane  this  personal  equation  would  not  appreciably
affect  the  impressions  received,  for  since  each  would
thoroughly  grasp  the  lentire  subject  it  wotdd  be  impos-
'  sible  for  him  to  see  its  parts  out  of  due  proportion  ;  but,
except  in  the  case  of  carefully  trained  and  experienced
persons,  this  factor  does  come  into  play  in  transfer-
ring the  impressions  to  the  lower  planes.  It  is  in  the
nature  of  things  impossible  that  any  account  given
down  here  of  a  devachanic  vision  or  experience  can  be
complete,  since  nine-tenths  of  what  is  seen  and  felt  there
could  not  be  expressed  by  physical  words  at  all ;  and,
since  all  expression  must  therefore  be  partial,  there  is
obviously  some  possibility  of  selection  as  to  the  part  ex-
pressed. It  is  for  this  reason  that  in  all  our  Theo-
sophical  investigations  of  recent  years  so  much  stress
has  been  laid  upon  the  constant  checking  and  verifying
of  clairvoyant  testimony,  nothing  which  rests  upon  the
vision  of  one  person  only  having  been  allowed  to  appear
in  our  later  books.

But  even  when  the  possibility  of  error  from  this  factor
of  personal  equation  has  been  reduced  to  a  minimum
by  a  careful  system  of  counterchecking,  there  still  re-
mains the  very  serious  difficulty  which  is  inherent  in  the
operation  of  bringing  down  impressions  from  a  higher
plane  to  a  lower  one.  This  is  something  analogous  to
the  difficulty  experienced  by  a  painter  in  his  endeavour
to  reproduce  a  three-dimensional  landscape  on  a  flat
surface — ^that  is,  practically  in  two  dimensions.  Just  as
the  artist  needs  long  and  careful  training  of  eye  and

96  CLAIRVOYANCE

hand  before  he  can  produce  a  satisfactory  representa-
tion of  nature,  so  does  the  clairvoyant  need  long  and
careful  training  before  he  can  describe  accurately  on  a
lower  plane  what  he  sees  on  a  higher  one ;  and  the
probability  of  getting  an  exact  description  from  an  un-
trained person  is  about  equal  to  that  of  getting  a
perfectly-finished  landscape  from  one  who  has  never
learnt  how  to  draw.

It  must  be  remembered,  too,  that  the  most  perfect
picture  is  in  reality  infinitely  far  from  being  a  reproduc-
tion of  the  scene  which  it  represents,  for  hardly  a  single
line  or  angle  in  it  can  ever  be  the  same  as  those  in  the
object  copied.  It  is  simply  a  very  ingenious  attempt  to
make  upon  one  only  of  our  five  senses,  by  means  of
lines  and  colours  on  a  flat  surface,  an  impression  similar
to  that  which  would  have  been  made  if  we  had  actually
had  before  us  the  scene  depicted.  Except  by  a  sugges-
tion dependent  entirely  on  our  own  previous  experience,
it  can  convey  to  us  nothing  of  the  roar  of  the  sea,  of  the
scent  of  the  flowers,  of  the  taste  of  the  fruit,  or  of  the
softness  or  hardness  of  the  surface  drawn.

Of  exactly  similar  nature,  though  far  greater  in  degree,
are  the  difficulties  experienced  by  a  clairvoyant  in  his
attempt  to  describe  upon  the  physical  plane  what  he
has  seen  upon  the  astral;  and  they  are  furthermore
greatly  enhanced  by  the  fact  that,  instead  of  having
merely  to  recall  to  the  minds  of  his  hearers  conceptions
with  which  they  are  already  familiar,  as  the  artist  does
when  he  paints  men  or  animals,  fields  or  trees,  he  has  to
endeavour  by  the  very  imperfect  means  at  his  disposal

THE   FOURTH    DIMENSION  97

to  suggest  to  them  conceptions  which  in  most  cases  are
absolutely  new  to  them.

Small  wonder  then  that,  however  vivid  and  striking
his  descriptions  may  seem  to  his  audience,  he  himself
should  constantly  be  impressed  with  their  total  in*
adequacy,  and  shotdd  feel  that  his  best  e£forts  have
entirely  failed  to  convey  any  idea  of  what  he  really  sees.
And  we  must  remember  that  in  the  case  of  the  report
given  down  here  of  a  record  read  on  the  mental  plane,
this  difficult  operation  of  transference  from  the  higher
to  the  lower  has  taken  place  not  once  but  twice,  since
the  memory  has  been  brought  through  the  intervening
astral  plane.  Even  in  a  case  where  the  investigator
has  the  advantage  of  having  developed  his  devachanic
faculties  so  that  he  has  the  use  of  them  while  awake  in
the  physical  body,  he  is  still  hampered  by  the  absolute
incapacity  of  physical  language  to  express  what  he
sees.

Try  for  a  moment  to  realize  fully  what  is  called  the
fourth  dimension,  of  which  we  said  something  in  an
earlier  chapter.  It  is  easy  enough  to  think  of  our  own
three  dimensions — to  image  in  our  minds  the  length,
breadth  and  height  of  any  object ;  and  we  see  that  each
of  these  three  dimensions  is  expressed  by  a  line  at  right
angles  to  both  of  the  others.  The  idea  of  the  fourth
dimension  is  that  it  might  be  possible  to  draw  a  fourth
line  which  shall  be  at  right  angles  to  all  three  of  those
already  existing.

Now  the  ordinary  mind  cannot  grasp  this  idea  in  the
least,  though  some  few  who  have  made  a  special  study

G

98  CLAIRVOYANCE

of  the  subject  have  gradually  come  to  be  able  to  realize
one  or  two  very  simple  four-dimensional  figures.  Still,
no  words  that  they  can  use  on  this  plane  can  bring  any
image  of  these  figures  before  the  minds  of  others,  and
if  any  reader  who  has  not  specially  trained  himself  along
that  line  will  make  the  efibrt  to  visualize  such  a  shape
he  will  find  it  quite  impossible.  Now  to  express  such
a  form  clearly  in  physical  words  would  be,  in  effect,  to
describe  accurately  a  single  object  on  the  astral  ^plane;
but  in  examining  the  records  on  the  mental  plane  we
should  have  to  face  the  additional  difficulties  of  a  fifth
dimension  !  So  that  the  impossibility  of  fully  explain-
ing these  records  will  be  obvious  to  even  the  most
superficial  observation.

We  have  spoken  of  the  records  as  the  memory  of  the
Logos,  yet  they  are  very  much  more  than  a  memory
in  any  ordinary  sense  of  the  word.  Hopeless  as  it  may
be  to  imagine  how  these  images  appear  firom  His  point
of  view,  we  yet  know  that  as  we  rise  higher  and  higher
we  must  be  drawing  nearer  to  the  true  memory — must
be  seeing  more  nearly  as  He  sees ;  so  that  great  interest
attaches  to  the  experience  of  the  clairvoyant  with  refer-
ence to  these  records  when  he  stands  upon  the  buddhic
plane — the  highest  which  his  consciousness  can  reach
even  when  away  from  the  physical  body  until  he  attains
the  level  of  the  Arhats.

Here  time  and  space  no  longer  limit  him;  he  no
longer  needs,  as  on  the  mental  plane,  to  pass  a  series
of  events  in  review,  for  past,  present  and  future  are
all  alike  simultaneously  present  to  him,  meaningless

A  CURIOUS   BOOK  99

as  that  sounds  down  here.  Indeed,  infinitely  below  the
consciousness  of  the  Logos  as  even  that  exalted  plane
is,  it  is  yet  abundantly  clear  from  what  we  see  there
that  to  Him  the  record  must  be  far  more  than  what  we
call  a  memory,  for  all  that  has  happened  in  the  past  and
all  that  will  happen  in  the  future  is  happening  now  before
His  eyes  just  as  are  the  events  of  what  we  call  the
present  time.  Utterly  incredible,  wildly  incomprehen-
sible, of  course,  to  our  limited  understanding ;  yet  ab-
solutely true  for  all  that.

Naturally  we  could  not  expect  to  understand  at  our
present  stage  of  knowledge  how  so  marvellous  a  result
is  produced,  and  to  attempt  an  explanation  would  only
be  to  involve  ourselves  in  a  mist  of  words  from  which
we  should  gain  no  real  information.  Yet  a  line  of
thought  recurs  to  my  mind  which  perhaps  suggests  the
direction  in  which  it  is  possible  that  that  explanation
may  lie :  and  whatever  helps  us  to  realize  that  so  as-
tounding a  statement  may  after  all  not  be  wholly  in>
possible  will  be  of  assistance  in  broadening  our  minds.

Some  thirty  years  ago  I  remember  reading  a  very
curious  little  book,  called,  I  think.  The  Stars  and  the
Earthy  the  object  of  which  was  to  endeavour  to  show
how  it  was  scientificall}''  possible  that  to  the  mind  of
God  the  past  and  the  present  might  be  absolutely  simul-
taneous. Its  arguments  struck  me  at  the  time  as  de-
cidedly ingenious,  and  I  will  proceed  to  summarize
them,  as  I  think  they  will  be  found  somewhat  sugges-
tive in  connection  with  the  subject  which  we  have  been
considering.

lOO  CLAIRVOYANCB

When  we  see  anything,  whether  it  be  the  book  which
we  hold  in  our  hands  or  a  star  millions  of  miles  away,
we  do  so  by  means  of  a  vibration  in  the  ether,  com-
monly called  a  ray  of  light,  which  passes  from  the
object  seen  to  our  eyes.  Now  the  speed  with  which
this  vibration  passes  is  so  great — about  186,000  miles
in  a  second — ^that  when  we  are  considering  any  object
in  our  own  world  we  may  regard  it  as  practically  in-
stantaneous. When,  however,  we  come  to  deal  with
interplanetary  distances  we  have  to  take  the  speed  of
light  into  consideration,  for  an  appreciable  period  is
occupied  in  traversing  these  vast  spaces.  For  example,
it  takes  eight  minutes  and  a  quarter  for  light  to  travel
to  us  from  the  sun,  so  that  when  we  look  at  the  solar
orb  we  see  it  by  means  of  a  ray  of  light  which  left  it
more  than  eight  minutes  ago.

From  this  follows  a  very  curious  result.  The  ray  of
light  by  which  we  see  the  sun  can  obviously  report  to
us  only  the  state  of  affairs  which  existed  in  that  luminary
when  it  started  on  its  journey,  and  would  not  be  in  the
least  affected  by  anything  that  happened  there  after  it
left ;  so  that  we  really  see  the  sun  not  as  he  is,  but  as
he  was  eight  minutes  ago.  That  is  to  say  that  if  any-
thing important  took  place  in  the  sun — ^the  formation  of
a  new  sun-spot,  for  instance — an  astronomer  who  was
watching  the  orb  through  his  telescope  at  the  time
would  be  quite  unaware  of  the  incident  while  it  was
happening,  since  the  ray  of  light  bearing  the  news
would  not  reach  him  until  more  than  eight  minutes
later.

QUAINT   BUT  INCONTROVBRTIBLB  1 01

The  difiference  is  more  strikiDg  when  we  consider  the
fixed  stars,  because  in  their  case  the  distances  are  so
enormously  greater.  The  pole  star,  for  example,  is  so
far  off  that  light,  travelling  at  the  inconceivable  speed
above  mentioned,  takes  a  little  more  than  fifty  years  to
reach  our  eyes ;  and  from  that  follows  the  strange  but
inevitable  inference  that  we  see  the  pole  star  not  as  and
where  it  is  at  this  moment,  but  as  and  where  it  was
fifty  years  ago.  Nay,  if  to-morrow  some  cosmic  cata-
strophe were  to  shatter  the  pole  star  into  fragments,  we
should  still  see  it  peaceftdly  shining  in  the  sky  all  the
rest  of  our  lives ;  our  children  would  grow  up  to  middle
age  and  gather  their  children  about  them  in  turn  before
the  news  of  that  tremendous  accident  reached  any
terrestrial  eye.  In  the  same  way  there  are  other  stars
so  far  distant  that  light  takes  thousands  of  years  to
travel  from  them  to  us,  and  with  reference  to  their  con-
dition our  information  is  therefore  thousands  of  years
behind  time.

Now  carry  the  argument  a  step  farther.  Suppose
that  we  were  able  to  place  a  man  at  the  distance  of
186,000  miles  from  the  earth,  and  yet  to  endow  him
with  the  wonderful  faculty  of  being  able  from  that  dis-
tance to  see  what  was  happening  here  as  clearly  as
though  he  were  still  close  beside  us.  It  is  evident  that
a  man  so  placed  would  see  everything  a  second  after
the  time  when  it  really  happened,  and  so  at  the  present
moment  he  would  be  seeing  what  happened  a  second
ago.  Double  the  distance,  and  he  would  be  t¥ro
seconds  behind  time,  and  so  on ;  remove  him  to  the

I02  CLAIRVOYANCB

distance  of  the  sun  (still  allowing  him  to  preserve  the
same  mysterious  power  of  sight)  and  he  would  look
down  and  watch  you  doing  not  what  you  art  doing  now»
but  what  you  wtre  doing  eight  minutes  and  a  quarter
ago.  Carry  him  away  to  the  pole  star,  and  he  would
see  passing  before  his  eyes  the  events  of  fifty  years  ago ;
he  would  be  watching  the  childish  gambols  of  those  who
at  the  very  same  moment  were  really  middle-aged  men.
Marvellous  as  this  may  sound,  it  is  literally  and  scien-
tifically true,  and  cannot  be  denied.

The  little  book  went  on  to  argue  logically  enough  that
God,  being  almighty,  must  possess  the  wonderful  power
of  sight  which  we  have  been  postulating  for  our  ob-
server ;  and  further,  that  being  omnipresent,  He  must
be  at  each  of  the  stations  which  we  mentioned,  and
also  at  every  intermediate  point,  not  successively  but
simultaneously.  Granting  these  premises,  the  inevi-
table deduction  follows  that  everything  which  has  ever
happened  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  world  must  be
at  this  very  moment  taking  place  before  the  eye  of  God
— not  a  mere  memory  of  it,  but  the  actual  occurrence
itself  being  now  under  His  observation.

All  this  is  materialistic  enough,  and  on  the  plane  of
purely  physical  science,  and  we  may  therefore  be
assured  that  it  is  fu>i  the  way  in  which  the  memory  of
the  Logos  acts ;  yet  it  is  neatly  worked  out  and  abso-
lutely incontrovertible,  and  as  I  have  said  before,  it  is
not  without  its  use,'  since  it  gives  us  a  glimpse  of
some  possibilities  which  otherwise  might  not  occur
to  us.

PSYCHOMBTRY  I03

But,  it  may  be  asked,  how  is  it  possible,  amid  the
bewildering  confusion  of  these  records  of  the  past,  to
find  any  particular  picture  when  it  is  wanted  ?  As  a
matter  of  fact,  the  untrained  clairvoyant  usually  cannot
do  so  without  some  special  link  to  put  him  m  rapp&rt
with  the  subject  required.  Psychometry  is  an  instance
in  point,  and  it  is  quite  probable  that  our  ordinary
memory  is  really  only  another  presentment  of  the  same
idea.  It  seems  as  though  there  were  a  sort  of  magnetic
attachment  or  affinity  between  any  particle  of  matter
and  the  record  which  contains  its  history — an  affinity
which  enables  it  to  act  as  a  kind  of  conductor  between
that  record  and  the  faculties  of  anyone  who  can  read  it.

For  example,  I  once  brought  from  Stonehenge  a  tiny
fragment  of  stone,  not  larger  than  a  pin's  head,  and  on
putting  this  into  an  envelope  and  handing  it  to  a
psychometer  who  had  no  idea  what  it  was,  she  at  once
began  to  describe  that  wonderful  ruin  and  the  desolate
country  surrounding  it,  and  then  went  on  to  picture
vividly  what  were  evidently  scenes  from  its  early
history,  showing  that  that  infinitesimal  fragment  had
been  sufficient  to  put  her  into  communication  with  the
records  connected  with  the  spot  from  which  it  came.
The  scenes  through  which  we  pass  in  the  course  of  our
life  seem  to  act  in  the  same  manner  upon  the  cells  of
our  brain  as  did  the  history  of  Stonehenge  upon  that
particle  of  stone :  they  establish  a  connection  with  those
cells  by  means  of  which  our  mind  is  put  m  rapport  with
that  particular  portion  of  the  records,  and  so  we
"  remember  "  what  we  have  seen.

I04  CLAIRTOYANCB

Even  a  trained  clairvoyant  needs  some  link  to  enable
him  to  find  the  record  of  an  event  of  which  he  has  no
previous  knowledge.  If,  for  example,  he  wished  to
observe  the  landing  of  Julius  Cassar  on  the  shores  of
England,  there  are  several  ways  in  which  he  might
approach  the  subject.  If  he  happened  to  have  visited
the  scene  of  the  occurrence,  the  simplest  way  would
probably  be  to  call  up  the  image  of  that  spot,  and  then
run  back  through  its  records  until  he  reached  the  period
desired.  If  he  had  not  seen  the  place,  he  might  run
back  in  time  to  the  date  of  the  event,  and  then  search
the  Channel  for  a  fleet  of  Roman  galleys ;  or  he  might
examine  the  records  of  Roman  life  at  about  that  period,
where  he  would  have  no  difficulty  in  identifying  so
prominent  a  figure  as  Caesar,  or  in  tracing  him  when
found  through  all  his  Gallic  wars  until  he  set  his  foot
upon  British  land.

People  often  enquire  as  to  the  aspect  of  these  records
— whether  they  appear  near  or  far  away  from  the  eye,
whether  the  figures  in  them  are  large  or  small,  whether
the  pictiures  follow  one  another  as  in  a  panorama  or
melt  into  one  another  like  dissolving  views,  and  so  on.
One  can  only  reply  that  their  appearance  varies  to  a
certain  extent  according  to  the  conditions  under  which
they  are  seen.  Upon  the  astral  plane  the  reflection  is
most  often  a  simple  picture,  though  occasionally  the
figures  seen  would  be  endowed  with  motion ;  in  this
latter  case,  instead  of  a  mere  snapshot  a  rather  longer
and  more  perfect  reflection  has  taken  place.

On    the  mental  plane  they  have  two  widely  difiiMr*

ASPECT  OP  THE  RECORDS  ZO5

ent  aspects.  When  the  visitor  to  that  plane  is  not
thinking  specially  of  them  in  any  way,  the  records
simply  form  a  background  to  whatever  is  going  on,  just
as  the  reflections  in  a  pier-glass  at  the  end  of  a  room
might  form  a  background  to  the  life  of  the  people  in  it.
It  must  always  be  borne  in  mind  that  under  these  con-
ditions  they  are  really  merely  reflections  from  the  cease-
less activity  of  a  great  Consciousness  upon  a  far  higher
plane,  and  have  very  much  the  appearance  of  an  endless
succession  of  the  recently  invented  cinematographe^  or
living  photographs.  They  do  not  melt  into  one  another
like  dissolving  views,  nor  do  a  series  of  ordinary  pictures
follow  one  another;  but  the  action  of  the  reflected
figures  constantly  goes  on,  as  though  one  were  watching
the  actors  on  a  distant  stage.

But  if  the  trained  investigator  turns  his  attention
specially  to  any  one  scene,  or  wishes  to  call  it  up  before
him,  an  extraordinary  change  at  once  takes  place,  for  this
is  the  plane  of  thought,  and  to  think  of  anything  is  to
bring  it  instantaneously  before  you.  For  example,  if  a
man  wills  to  see  the  record  of  that  event  to  which  we
before  referred — ^the  landing  of  Julius  Caesar — ^he  finds
himself  In  a  moment  not  looking  at  any  picture,  but
standing  on  the  shore  among  the  legionaries,  with  the
whole  scene  being  enacted  around  him,  precisely  in
every  respect  as  he  would  have  seen  it  if  he  had  stood
there  in  the  flesh  on  that  autumn  morning  in  the  year
55  B.C.  Since  what  he  sees  is  but  a  reflection,  the
actors  are  of  course  entirely  unconscious  of  him,  nor  can
any  efibrt  of  his  change  the  course  of  their  action  in  the

I06  CLAIRVOYANCB

smallest  degree,  except  only  that  he  can  control  the
rate  at  which  the  drama  shall  pass  before  him— can
have  the  events  of  a  whole  year  rehearsed  before  his
eyes  in  a  single  hour,  or  can  at  any  moment  stop  the
movement  altogether,  and  hold  any  particular  scene  in
view  as  a  picture  as  long  as  he  chooses.

In  truth  he  observes  not  only  what  he  would  have
seen  if  he  had  been  there  at  the  time  in  the  flesh,  but
much  more.  He  hears  and  understands  all  that  the
people  say,  and  he  is  conscious  of  all  their  thoughts  and
motives ;  and  one  of  the  most  interesting  of  the  many
possibilities  which  open  up  before  one  who  has  learnt
to  read  the  records  is  the  study  of  the  thought  of  ages
long  past — ^the  thought  of  the  cave-men  and  the  lake-
dwellers  as  well  as  that  which  ruled  the  mighty  civiliza-
tions of  Atlantis,  of  Egypt  or  Chaldaea.  What  splendid
possibilities  open  up  before  the  man  who  is  in  full
possession  of  this  power  may  easily  be  imagined.  He
has  before  him  a  field  of  historical  research  of  most
entrancing  interest.  Not  only  can  he  review  at  his
leisure  all  history  with  which  we  are  acquainted,
correcting  as  he  examines  it  the  many  errors  and  mis-
conceptions which  have  crept  into  the  accounts  handed
down  to  us ;  he  can  also  range  at  will  over  the  whole
story  of  the  world  from  its  very  beginning,  watching  the
slow  development  of  intellect  in  man,  the  descent  of  the
Lords  of  the  Flame,  and  the  gro¥rth  of  the  mighty
civilizations  which  they  founded.

Nor  is  his  study  confined  to  the  progress  of  humanity
alone;  he  has  before  him,  as  in  a  museum,  all  the

PAST  LIVBS  107

Strange  animal  and  v^etable  forms  which  occupied  the
stage  in  days  when  the  world  was  young ;  he  can  follow
all  the  wonderful  geological  changes  which  have  taken
place,  and  watch  the  course  of  the  great  cataclysms
which  have  altered  the  whole  face  of  the  earth  again
and  again.

In  one  especial  case  an  even  closer  sympathy  with  the
past  is  possible  to  the  reader  of  the  records.  If  in  the
course  of  his  enquiries  he  has  to  look  upon  some  scene
in  which  he  himself  has  in  a  former  birth  taken  part,
he  may  deal  with  it  in  two  ways ;  he  can  either  regard
it  in  the  usual  manner  as  a  spectator  (though  always,
be  it  remembered,  as  a  spectator  whose  insight  and
sympathy  are  perfect)  or  he  may  once  more  identify
himself  with  that  long-dead  personality  of  his — may
throw  himself  back  for  the  time  into  that  life  of  long
ago,  and  absolutely  experience  over  again  the  thoughts
and  the  emotions,  the  pleasures  and  the  pains  of  a  pre-
historic past.  No  wilder  and  more  vivid  adventures
can  be  conceived  than  some  of  those  through  which  he
thus  may  pass ;  yet  through  it  all  he  must  never  lose  hold  of
the  consciousness  of  his  own  individuality — must  retain
the  power  to  return  at  will  to  his  present  personality.

It  is  often  asked  how  it  is  possible  for  an  investigator
accurately  to  determine  the  date  of  any  picture  from
the  far-distant  past  which  he  disinters  from  the  records.
The  fact  is  that  it  is  sometimes  rather  tedious  work  to
find  an  exact  date,  but  the  thing  can  usually  be  done  if
it  is  worth  while  to  spend  the  time  and  trouble  over  it.
If  we  are  dealing  with  Greek  or  Roman  times  the

I08  CLAIRVOYANCE

simplest  method  is  usually  to  look  into  the  mind  of  the
most  intelligent  person  present  in  the  picture,  and  see
what  date  he  supposes  it  to  be ;  or  the  investigator
might  watch  him  writing  a  letter  or  other  document
and  observe  what  date,  if  any,  was  included  in  what
was  written.  When  once  the  Roman  or  Greek  date  is
thus  obtained,  to  reduce  it  to  our  own  system  of  chron-
ology is  merely  a  matter  of  calculation.

Another  way  which  is  frequently  adopted  is  to  turn
from  the  scene  under  examination  to  a  contemporary
picture  in  some  great  and  well-known  city  such  as
Rome,  and  note  what  monarch  is  reigning  there,  or  who
are  the  consuls  for  the  year ;  and  when  such  data  are
discovered  a  glance  at  any  good  history  will  give  the
rest.  Sometimes  a  date  can  be  obtained  by  examining
some  public  proclamation  or  some  legal  document ;  in
fact  in  the  times  of  which  we  are  speaking  the  di£Glculty
is  easily  surmounted.

The  matter  is  by  no  means  so  simple,  however,  when
we  come  to  deal  with  periods  much  earlier  than  this —
with  a  scene  from  early  Egypt,  Chaldaea,  or  China,  or,
to  go  further  back  still,  from  Atlantis  itself  or  any  of  its
numerous  colonies.  A  date  can  still  be  obtained  easily
enough  from  the  mind  of  any  educated  man,  but  there
is  no  longer  any  means  of  relating  it  to  our  own  system
of  dates,  since  the  man  will  be  reckoning  by  eras  of
which  we  know  nothing,  or  by  the  reigns  of  kings
whose  history  is  lost  in  the  night  of  time.

Our  methods,  nevertheless,  are  not  yet  exhausted.
It  must  be  remembered  that  it  is  possible  for  the  in*

TO   FIX  A   DATE  IO9

vestigator  to  pass  the  records  before  him  at  any  speed
that  he  may  desire — at  the  rate  of  a  year  in  a  second  if
he  will,  or  even  very  much  faster  still.  Now  there  are
one  or  two  events  in  ancient  history  whose  dates  have
already  been  accurately  fixed — ^as,  for  example,  the
sinking  of  Poseidonis  in  the  year  9,564  b.c.  It  is
therefore  obvious  that  if  from  the  general  appearance
of  the  surroundings  it  seems  probable  that  a  picture
seen  is  within  measurable  distance  of  one  of  these
events,  it  can  be  related  to  that  event  by  the  simple
process  of  running  through  the  record  rapidly,  and
counting  the  years  between  the  two  as  they  pass.

Still,  if  those  years  ran  into  thousands,  as  they  might
sometimes  do,  this  plan  would  be  insufferably  tedious.
In  that  case  we  are  driven  back  upon  the  astronomical
method.  In  consequence  of  the  movement  which  is
commonly  called  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,
though  it  might  more  accurately  be  described  as  a
kind  of  second  rotation  of  the  earth,  the  angle  between
the  equator  and  the  ecliptic  steadily  but  very  slowly
varies.  Thus,  after  long  intervals  of  time  we  find  the
pole  of  the  earth  no  longer  pointing  towards  the  same
spot  in  the  apparent  sphere  of  the  heavens,  or  in  other
words,  our  pole-star  is  not,  as  at  present,  a  Ursae
Minoris,  but  some  other  celestial  body ;  and  from  this
position  of  the  pole  of  the  earth,  which  can  easily  be
ascertained  by  careful  observation  of  the  night-sky  of
the  picture  under  consideration,  an  approximate  date
can  be  calculated  without  difficulty.

In  estimating  the  date  of  occurrences  which  took

no  CLAIRVOYANCE

place  millions  of  years  ago  in  earlier  races,  the  period  of
a  secondary  rotation  (or  the  precession  of  the  equi-
noxes) is  frequently  used  as  a  unit,  but  of  course
absolute  accuracy  is  not  usually  required  in  such  cases,
round  numbers  being  suiScient  for  all  practical  pur-
poses in  dealing  with  epochs  so  remote.

The  accurate  reading  of  the  records,  whether  of  one's
own  past  lives  or  those  of  others,  must  not,  however,
be  thought  of  as  an  achievement  possible  to  anyone
without  careful  previous  training.  As  has  been  already
remarked,  though  occasional  reflections  may  be  had
upon  the  astral  plane,  the  power  to  use  the  devachanic
sense  is  necessary  before  any  reliable  reading  can  be
done.  Indeed,  to  minimize  the  possibility  of  error,  that
sense  ought  to  be  fully  at  the  command  of  the  investi-
gator while  awake  in  the  physical  body ;  and  to  acquire
that  faculty  needs  years  of  ceaseless  labour  and  rigid
self-discipline.

Many  people  seem  to  expect  that  as  soon  as  they
have  signed  their  application  and  joined  the  Theo-
sophical  Society  they  will  at  once  remember  at  least
three  or  four  of  their  past  births ;  indeed,  some  of
them  promptly  begin  to  imagine  recollections  and  de-
clare that  in  their  last  incarnation  they  were  Mary
Queen  of  Scots,  Cleopatra,  or  Julius  Caesar  !  Of  course
such  extravagant  claims  simply  bring  discredit  upon
those  who  are  so  foolish  as  to  make  them  ;  but  unfor-
tunately some  of  that  discredit  is  liable  to  be  reflected,
however  unjustly,  upon  the  Society  to  which  they
belong,  so  that  a  man  who  feels  seething  within  him

A   RECOLLECTION  III

the  conviction  that  he  was  Homer  or  Shakespeare
would  do  well  to  pause  and  apply  common-sense  tests
on  the  physical  plane  before  publishing  the  news  to  the
world.

It  is  quite  true  that  some  people  have  had  glimpses
of  scenes  from  their  past  lives  in  dreams,  but  naturally
these  are  usually  fragmentary  and  unreliable.  I  had
myself  in  earlier  life  an  experience  of  this  nature.
Among  my  dreams  I  found  that  one  was  constantly
recurring — a  dream  of  a  house  with  a  portico  over-
looking a  beautiful  bay,  not. far  from  a  hill  on  the  top
of  which  rose  a  graceful  building.  I  knew  that  house
perfectly,  and  was  as  familiar  with  the  position  of  its
rooms  and  the  view  from  its  door  as  I  was  with  those
of  my  home]  in  this  present  life.  In  those  days  I  knew
nothing  about  reincarnation,  so  that  it  seemed  to  me
simply  a  curious  coincidence  that  this  dream  should  re-
peat itself  so  often ;  and  it  was  not  until  some  time
after  I  had  joined  the  Society  that,  when  one  who  knew
was  showing  me  some  pictures  of  my  last  incama-
tion,  I  discovered  that  this  persistent  dream  had  been
in  reality  a  partial  recollection,  and  that  the  house
which  I  knew  so  well  was  the  one  in  which  I  was  bom
more  than  two  thousand  years  ago.

But  although  there  are  several  cases  on  record  in  which
some  well-remembered  scene  has  thus  come  through
from  one  life  to  another,  a  considerable  development  of
occult  faculty  is  necessary  before  an  investigator  can
definitely  trace  a  line  of  incarnations,  whether  they  be
own  or  another  man's.    This  will  be  obvious  if  we

IJ2  CLAIRVOYANCE

remember  the  conditions  of  the  problem  which  has  to
be  worked  out.  To  follow  a  person  from  this  life  to  the
one  preceding  it,  it  is  necessary  first  of  all  to  trace  his
present  life  backwards  to  his  birth  and  then  to  follow
up  in  reverse  order  the  stages  by  which  the  ego  de-
scended into  incarnation.

This  will  obviously  take  us  back  eventually  to  the
condition  of  the  ego  upon  its  own  plane — ^the  adipa
level  of  devachan ;  so  it  will  be  seen  that  to  perform
this  task  e£fectually  the  investigator  must  be  able  to  use
the  sense  corresponding  tP  that  exalted  level  while
awake  in  his  physical  body — in  other  words,  his  con-
sciousness must  be  centred  in  the  reincarnating  ego
itself,  and  no  longer  in  the  lower  personality.  In  that
case,  the  memory  of  the  ego  being  aroused,  his  own
past  incarnations  will  be  spread  out  before  him  like  an
open  book,  and  he  would  be  able,  if  he  wished,  to  ex-
amine the  conditions  of  another  ego  upon  that  level
and  trace  him  backwards  through  the  devachanic  and
astral  lives  which  led  up  to  it,  until  he  came  to  the
last  physical  death  of  that  ego,  and  through  it  to  his
previous  life.

There  is  no  way  but  this  in  which  the  chain  of
lives  can  be  followed  through  with  absolute  certainty ;
and  consequently  we  may  at  once  put  aside  as  con-
scious or  unconscious  impostors  those  people  who  ad-
vertise that  they  are  able  to  trace  out  anyone's  past
incarnations  for  so  many  shillings  a  head.  Needless
to  say,  the  true  occultist  does  not  advertise,  and  never
under  any  circumstances  accepts  money  for  any  exhi-
bition of  his  powers.

THB   VALUB   OP   KNOWLEDGE  II3

Assuredly  the  student  who  wishes  to  acquire  the
power  of  following  up  a  line  of  incarnations  can  do  so
only  by  learning  from  a  qualified  teacher  how  the  work
is  to  be  done.  There  have  been  those  who  persistently
asserted  that  it  was  only  necessary  for  a  man  to  feel  good
and  devotional  and  *'  brotherly/'  and  all  the  wisdom
of  the  ages  would  immediately  flow  in  upon  him  ;  but  a
little  common-sense  will  at  once  expose  the  absurdity
of  such  a  position.  However  good  a  child  may  be,  if
he  wants  to  know  the  multiplication  table  he  must  set
to  work  and  learn  it ;  and  the  case  is  precisely  similar
with  the  capacity  to  use  spiritual  faculties.  The
faculties  themselves  will  no  doubt  manifest  as  the  man
evolves,  but  he  can  learn  how  to  use  them  reliably  and
to  the  best  advantage  only  by  steady  hard  work  and
persevering  effort.

Take  the  case  of  those  who  wish  to  help  others  while
on  the  astral  plane  during  sleep  ;  it  is  obvious  that  the
more  knowledge  they  possess  here,  the  more  valuable
will  their  services  be  on  that  higher  plane.  For  ex-
ample, the  knowledge  of  languages  would  be  usefid  to
them,  for  though  on  the  mental  plane  men  can  com-
municate directly  by  thought-transference,  whatever
their  languages  may  be,  on  the  astral  plane  this  is  not
so,  and  a  thought  must  be  definitely  formulated  in  words
before  it  is  comprehensible.  If,  therefore,  you  wish  to
help  a  man  on  that  plane,  you  must  have  some  language
in  common  by  means  of  which  you  can  communicate
with  him,  and  consequently  the  more  languages  you
know  the  more  widely  useful  you  will  be.      In  fact

H

IZ4  CLAIRVOYANCB

there  is  perhaps  no  kind  of  knowledge  for  which  a  use
cannot  be  found  in  the  work  of  the  occultist.

It  would  be  well  for  all  students  to  bear  in  mind  that
occultism  is  the  apotheosis  of  common-sense,  and  that
every  vision  which  comes  to  them  is  not  necessarily  a
picture  from  the  Ucishic  records,  nor  every  experience
a  revelation  from  on  high.  It  is  better  far  to  err  on  the
side  of  healthy  scepticism  than  of  over-credulity ;  and
it  is  an  admirable  rule  never  to  hunt  about  for  an  occult
explanation  of  anything  when  a  plain  and  obvious
physical  one  is  available.  Our  duty  is  to  endeavour  to
keep  our  balance  always,  and  never  to  lose  our  self-
control,  but  to  take  a  reasonable,  common-sense  view
of  whatever  may  happen  to  us ;  so  shall  we  be  better
Theosophists,  wiser  occultists,  and  more  useful  helpers
than  we  have  ever  been  before.

As  usual,  we  find  examples  of  all  degrees  of  the
power  to  see  into  this  memory  of  nature,  from  the
trained  man  who  can  consult  the  record  for  himself  at
will,  down  to  the  person  who  gets  nothing  but  occas-
ional vague  glimpses,  or  has  even  perhaps  had  only
one  such  glimpse.  But  even  the  man  who  possesses
this  faculty  only  partially  and  occasionally  still  finds  it
of  the  deepest  interest.  The  psychometer,  who  needs
an  object  physically  connected  with  the  past  in  order
to  bring  it  all  into  life  again  around  him,  and  the
crystal-gazer  who  can  sometimes  direct  his  less  certain
astral  telescope  to  some  historic  scene  of  long  ago,  may
both  derive  the  greatest  enjoyment  from  the  exercise  of
their  respective  gifts,  even  though  they  may  not  always

UNCONSCIOUS   PSYCHOMBTRY  II5

understand  exactly  how  their  results  are  produced,  and
may  not  have  them  fully  under  control  under  all  cir-
cumstances.

In  many  cases  of  the  lower  manifestations  of  these
powers  we  find  that  they  are  exercised  unconsciously  ;
many  a  crystal-gazer  watches  scenes  from  the  past
without  being  able  to  distinguish  them  from  visions  of
the  present,  and  many  a  vaguely-psychic  person  finds
pictures  constantly  arising  before  his  eyes  without  ever
realizing  that  he  is  in  effect  psychometrizing  the  various
objects  aroimd  him  as  he  happens  to  touch  them  or
stand  near  them.

An  interesting  variant  of  this  class  of  psychics  is  the
man  who  is  able  to  psychometrize  persons  only,  and
not  inanimate  objects  as  is  more  usual.  In  most  cases
this  faculty  shows  itself  erratically,  so  that  such  a
psychic  will,  when  introduced  to  a  stranger,  often  see  in
a  flash  some  prominent  event  in  that  stranger's  earlier
life,  but  on  other  similar  occasions  will  receive  no
special  impression.  More  rarely  we  meet  with  someone
who  gets  detailed  visions  of  the  past  life  of  everyone
whom  he  encounters.  Perhaps  one  of  the  best  ex-
amples of  this  class  was  the  German  writer  Zschokke,
who  describes  in  his  autobiography  this  extraordinary
power  of  which  he  foimd  himself  possessed.  He
says : —

**  It  has  happened  to  me  occasionally  at  the  first
meeting  with  a  total  stranger,  when  I  have  been
listening  in  silence  to  his  conversation,  that  his  past  life
up  to  the  present  moment,  with  many  minute  circum-

1 1 6  CLAIRVOYANCB

Stances  belonging  to  one  or  other  particular  scene  in
it|  has  come  across  me  like  a  dream,  but  distinctly,  en-
tirely involuntarily  and  unsought,  occupying  in  dura-
tion a  few  minutes.

'*  For  a  long  time  I  was  disposed  to  consider  these
fleeting  visions  as  a  trick  of  the  fancy — the  more  so  as
my  dream- vision  displayed  to  me  the  dress  and  move-
ments of  the  actors,  the  appearance  of  the  room,  the
furniture,  and  other  accidents  of  the  scene ;  till  on  one
occasion,  in  a  gamesome  mood,  I  narrated  to  my  family
the  secret  history  of  a  sempstress  who  had  just  before
quitted  the  room.  I  had  never  seen  the  person  before.
Nevertheless  the  hearers  were  astonished,  and  laughed
and  would  not  be  persuaded  but  that  I  had  a  previous
acquaintance  with  the  former  life  of  the  person,  inas-
much as  what  I  had  stated  was  perfectly  true.

<*  I  was  not  less  astonished  to  find  that  my  dream-
vision  agreed  with  reality.  I  then  gave  more  attention
to  the  subject,  and  as  often  as  propriety  allowed  of  it,
I  related  to  those  whose  lives  had  so  passed  before  me
the  substance  of  my  dream-vision,  to  obtain  from  them
its  contradiction  or  confirmation.  On  every  occasion
its  confirmation  followed,  not  without  amazement  on
the  part  of  those  who  gave  it.

'*  On  a  certain  fair-day  I  went  into  the  town  of
Waldshut  accompanied  by  two  young  foresters,  who
are  still  alive.  It  was  evening  and,  tired  with  our  walk,
we  went  into  an  inn  called  the  *  Vine.'  We  took  our
supper  with  a  numerous  company  at  the  public  table,
when  it  happened  that  they  made  themselves  merry

zschokjcb's  story  117

over  the  peculiarities  and  simplicity  of  the  ^Swiss  in
connection  with  the  belief  in  mesmerism,  Lavater's
physiognomical  system  and  the  like.  One  of  my  com-
panions, whose  national  pride  was  touched  by  their
raillery,  begged  me  to  make  some  reply,  particularly  in
answer  to  a  young  man  of  superior  appearance  who  sat
opposite,  and  had  indulged  in  unrestrained  ridicule.

<'  It  happened  that  the  events  of  this  person's  life  had
just  previously  passed  before  my  mind.  I  turned  to
him  with  the  question  whether  he  would  reply  to  me
with  truth  and  candour  if  I  narrated  to  him  the  most
secret  passages  of  his  history,  he  being  as  little  known
to  me  as  I  to  him  ?  That  would,  I  suggested,  go  some*
thing  beyond  Lavater's  physiognomical  skill.  He
promised  if  I  told  the  truth  to  admit  it  openly.  Then
I  narrated  the  events  with  which  my  dream* vision  had
famished  me,  and  the  table  learnt  the  history  of  the
young  tradesman's  life,  of  his  school  years,  his  pecca^
dilloes,  and,  finally,  of  a  little  act  of  roguery  committed
by  him  on  the  strong-box  of  his  employer.  I  described
the  uninhabited  room  with  its  white  walls,  where  to  the
right  of  the  brown  door  there  had  stood  upon  the  table
the  small  black  money-chest,  etc.  The  man,  much
struck,  admitted  the  correctness  of  each  circumstance
— even,  which  I  could  not  expect,  of  the  last."

And  after  narrating  this  incident,  the  worthy  Zschokke
calmly  goes  on  to  wonder  whether  perhaps  after  all
this  remarkable  power,  which  he  had  so  often  dis-
played, might  not  really  have  been  always  the  result
•f  mere  chance  coincidence !

Il8  CLAIRVOYANCE

Comparatively  few  accounts  of  persons  possessing
this  faculty  of  looking  back  into  the  past  are  to  be
found  in  the  literature  of  the  subject,  and  it  might
therefore  be  supposed  to  be  much  less  common  than
prevision.  I  suspect,  however,  that  the  truth  is  rather
that  it  is  much  less  commonly  recognized.  As  I  said
before,  it  may  very  easily  happen  that  a  person  may  see
a  picture  of  the  past  without  recognizing  it  as  such,
unless  there  happens  to  be  in  it  something  which
attracts  special  attention,  such  as  a  figure  in  armour  or
in  antique  costume.  A  prevision  also  might  not  always
be  recognized  as  such  at  the  time ;  but  the  occurrence
of  the  event  foreseen  recalls  it  vividly  at  the  same  time
that  it  manifests  its  nature,  so  that  it  is  unlikely  to  be
overlooked.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  occasional
glimpses  of  these  astral  reflections  of  the  &k&shic  records
are  commoner  than  the  published  accounts  would  lead
us  to  believe.

CHAPTER  VIII.
Clairvoyance  in  Time  :  the  Future.

Even  if,  in  a  dim  sort  of  way,  we  feel  ourselves  &ble
to  grasp  the  idea  that  the  whole  of  the  past  may  be
simultaneously  and  actively  present  in  a  sufficiently
exalted  consciousness,  we  are  confronted  by  a  far  greater
difficulty  when  we  endeavour  to  realize  how  all  the
future  may  also  be  comprehended  in  that  consciousness.
If  we  could  believe  in  the  Mohammedan  doctrine  of
kismet,  or  the  Calvinistic  theory  of  predestination,  the
conception  would  be  easy  enough,  but  knowing  as  we
do  that  both  these  are  grotesque  distortions  of  the  truth
we  must  look  round  for  a  more  acceptable  hypothesis.

There  may  still  be  some  people    who    deny    the

possibility  of  prevision,  but  such  denial  simply  shows

their  ignorance  of  the  evidence  on  the  subject.    The

large  number  of  authenticated  cases  leaves  no  room  for

doubt  as  to  the  fact,  but  many  of  them  are  of  such  a

nature  as  to  render  a  reasonable  explanation  by  no

means  easy  to  find.    It  is  evident  that  the  ego  possesses

a  certain  amount  of  previsional  faculty,  and  if  the  events

foreseen  were  always  of  great  importance  one  might

suppose  that  an  extraordinary  stiniulus  had  enabled

him  for  that  occasion  only  to  make  a  clear  impression

119

I20  CLAIRVOYANCB

of  what  he  saw  upon  his  lower  personality.  No  doubt
that  is  the  explanation  of  many  of  the  cases  in  which
death  or  grave  disaster  is  foreseen,  but  there  are  a  large
number  of  instances  on  record  to  which  it  does  not
seem  to  apply,  since  the  events  foretold  are  frequently
exceeding  trivial  and  unimportant.

A  well-known  story  of  second-sight  in  Scotland  will
illustrate  what  I  mean.  A  man  who  had  no  belief  in
the  occult  was  forewarned  by  a  highland  seer  of  the
approaching  death  of  a  neighbour.  The  prophecy  was
given  with  considerable  wealth  of  detail,  including  a
full  description  of  the  funeral,  with  the  names  of  the
four  pall-bearers  and  others  who  would  be  present.
The  auditor  seems  to  have  laughed  at  the  whole  story
and  promptly  forgotten  it,  but  the  death  of  his  neigh-
bour at  the  time  foretold  recalled  the  warning  to  his
mind,  and  he  determined  to  falsify  part  of  the  prediction
at  any  rate  by  being  one  of  the  pall-bearers  himself.
He  succeeded  in  getting  matters  arranged  as  he  wished,
but  just  as  the  funeral  was  about  to  start  he  was  called
away  from  his  post  by  some  small  matter  which  detained
him  only  a  minute  or  two.  As  he  came  hurrying  back
he  saw  with  surprise  that  the  procession  had  started
without  him,  and  that  the  prediction  had  been  exactly
fulfilled,  for  the  four  pall-bearers  were  those  who  had
been  indicated  in  the  vision.

Now  here  is  a  very  trifling  matter,  which  could  have
been  of  no  possible  importance  to  anybody,  definitely
foreseen  months  beforehand;  and  although  a  man
makes  a  determined  efibrt  to  alter  the  arrangement  in*

CAUSE   AND   EFFECT  121

dicated  he  fails  entirely  to  affect  it  in  the  least.  Cer-
tainly this  looks  very  much  like  predestination,  even
down  to  the  smallest  detail,  and  it  is  only  when  we
examine  this  question  from  higher  planes  that  we  are
able  to  see  our  way  to  escape  that  theory.  Of  course,
as  I  said  before  about  another  branch  of  the  subject,  a
fiiU  explanation  eludes  us  as  yet,  and  obviously  must
do  so  until  our  knowledge  is  infinitely  greater  than  it  is
now ;  the  most  that  we  can  hope  to  do  for  the  present
is  to  indicate  the  line  along  which  an  explanation  may
be  found.

There  is  no  doubt  whatever  that,  just  as  what  is
happening  now  is  the  result  of  causes  set  in  motion  in
the  past,  so  what  will  happen  in  the  future  will  be  the
result  of  causes  already  in  operation.  Even  down
here  we  can  calculate  that  if  certain  actions  are  per*
formed  certain  results  will  follow,  but  our  reckoning  is
constantly  liable  to  be  disturbed  by  the  interference  of
factors  which  we  have  not  been  able  to  take  into
account.  But  if  we  raise  our  consciousness  to  the
mental  plane  we  can  see  very  much  farther  into  the
results  of  our  actions.

We  can  trace,  for  example,  the  effect  of  a  casual
word,  not  only  upon  the  person  to  whom  it  was  ad-
dressed, but  through  him  on  many  others  as  it  is  passed
on  in  widening  circles,  until  it  seems  to  have  affected
the  whole  country ;  and  one  glimpse  of  such  a  vision  is
far  more  efficient  than  any  number  of  moral  precepts
in  impressing  upon  us  the  necessity  of  extreme  circum-
spection in  thought,  word  and  deed.    Not  only  can  we

122  CLAIRVOYANCE

from  that  plane  see  thus  fully  the  result  of  every  ac-
tion, but  we  can  also  see  where  and  in  what  way  the  re-
sults of  other  actions  apparently  quite  unconnected  with
it  will  interfere  with  and  modify  it.  In  fact,  it  may  be
said  that  the  results  of  all  causes  at  present  in  action
are  clearly  visible — ^that  the  future,  as  it  would  be  if  no
entirely  new  causes  should  arise,  lies  open  before  our
gaze.

New  causes  of  course  do  arise,  because  man's  will  is
free;  but  in  the  case  of  all  ordinary  people  the  use
which  they  will  make  of  their  freedom  can  be  calcu-
lated beforehand  with  considerable  accuracy.  The
average  man  has  so  little  real  will  that  he  is  very  much
the  creature  of  circumstances ;  his  action  in  previous
lives  places  him  amid  certain  surroundings,  and  their
influence  upon  him  is  so  very  much  the  most  impor-
tant factor  in  his  life-story  that  his  future  course  may
be  predicted  with  almost  mathematical  certainty.  With
the  developed  man  the  case  is  different ;  for  him  also
the  main  events  of  life  are  arranged  by  his  past  actions,
but  the  way  in  which  he  will  allow  them  to  affect  him,
the  methods  by  which  he  will  deal  with  them  and  per-
haps triumph  over  them — ^these  are  all  his  own,  and
they  cannot  be  foreseen  even  on  the  devachanic  plane
except  as  probabilities.

Looking  down  on  man's  life  in  this  way  from  above,
it  seems  as  though  his  free  will  could  be  exercised
only  at  certain  crises  in  his  career.  He  arrives  at  a
point  in  his  life  where  there  are  obviously  two  or  three
alternative  courses  open  before  him ;  he  is  absolutely

WHEN   CHOICB  IS  POSSIBLE  I23

free  to  choose  which  of  them  he  pleases,  and  although
some  one  who  knew  his  nature  thoroughly  well  might
feel  almost  certain  what  his  choice  would  be,  such
knowledge  on  his  friend's  part  is  in  no  sense  a  com*
pelling  force.

But  when  he  has  chosen,  he  has  to  go  through
with  it  and  take  the  consequences;  having  entered
upon  a  particular  path  he  may,  in  many  cases,  be
forced  to  go  on  for  a  very  long  way  before  he  has
any  opportunity  to  turn  aside.  His  position  is  some-
what like  that  of  the  driver  of  a  train  ;  when  he  comes
to  a  junction  he  may  have  the  points  set  either  this  way
or  that,  and  so  can  pass  on  to  whichever  line  he  pleases,
but  when  he  has  passed  on  to  one  of  them  he  is  com-
pelled to  run  on  along  the  line  which  he  has  selected
until  he  reaches  another  set  of  points,  where  again  an
opportunity  of  choice  is  offered  to  him.

Now  in  looking  down  from  the  mental  plane  these
points  of  new  departure  would  be  clearly  visible,  and
all  the  results  of  each  choice  would  lie  open  before  us,
certain  to  be  worked  out  even  to  the  smallest  detail.
The  only  point  which  would  remain  uncertain  would  be
the  all-important  one  as  to  which  choice  the  man
would  make.  We  should,  in  fact,  have  not  one  but
several  futures  mapped  out  before  our  eyes,  without
necessarily  being  able  to  determine  which  of  them
would  materialize  itself  into  accomplished  fact.  In  most
instances  we  should  see  so  strong  a  probability  that  we
should  not  hesitate  to  come  to  a  decision,  but  the  case
which  I  have  described*  is  certainly  theoretically  possi-

124  CLAIRVOYANCB

ble.  Stilly  even  this  much  knowledge  would  enable  us
to  do  with  safety  a  good  deal  of  prediction ;  and  it  is
not  difficult  for  us  to  imagine  that  a  far  higher  power
than  ours  might  always  be  able  to  foresee  which  way
every  choice  would  go,  and  consequently  to  prophesy
with  absolute  certainty.

On  the  buddhic  plane,  however,  no  such  elaborate
process  of  conscious  calculation  is  necessary,  for,  as  I
said  before,  in  some  manner  which  down  here  is  totally
inexplicable,  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future,  are
there  all  existing  simultaneously.  One  can  only  accept
this  fact,  for  its  cause  lies  in  the  faculty  of  the  plane,
and  the  way  in  which  this  higher  faculty  works  is
naturally  quite  incomprehensible  to  the  physical  brain.
Yet  now  and  then  one  may  meet  with  a  hint  that  seems
to  bring  us  a  trifle  nearer  to  a  dim  possibility  of  com-
prehension. One  such  hint  was  given  by  Dr.  Oliver
Lodge  in  his  address  to  the  British  Association  at  Car-
diff.   He  said :

"  A  luminous  and  helpful  idea  is  that  time  is  but  a
relative  mode  of  regarding  things ;  we  progress  through
phenomena  at  a  certain  definite  pace,  and  this  subjec-
tive advance  we  interpret  in  an  objective  manner,  as  if
events  moved  necessarily  in  this  order  and  at  this  pre-
cise rate.  But  that  may  be  only  one  mode  of  regard-
ing them.  The  events  may  be  in  some  sense  in  exist-
ence always,  both  past  and  future,  and  it  may  be  we
who  are  arriving  at  them,  not  they  which  are  happening.
The  analogy  of  a  traveller  in  a  railway  train  is  useful ;
if  he  could  never  leave  the  train  nor  alter  its  pace  he

DR.   LODGE  S  ADDRESS  1 25

would  probably  consider  the  landscapes  as  necessarily
successive  and  be  unable  to  conceive  their  co-existence.
.  •  •  We  perceive  therefore  a  possible  fourth  dimen-
sional aspect  about  time,  the  inexorableness  of  whose
flow  may  be  a  natural  part  of  our  present  limitations.
And  if  we  once  grasp  the  idea  that  past  and  future  may
be  actually  existing,  we  can  recognize  that  they  may
have  a  controlling  influence  on  all  present  action,  and
the  two  together  may  constitute  the  *  higher  plane '  or
totality  of  things  after  which,  as  it  seems  to  me,  we  are
impelled  to  seek,  in  connection  ,with  the  directing  of
form  or  determinism,  and  the  action  of  living  beings
consciously  directed  to  a  definite  and  preconceived
end."

Time  is  not  in  reality  the  fourth  dimension  at  all ;
yet  to  look  at  it  for  the  moment  from  that  point  of  view
is  some  slight  help  towards  grasping  the  ungraspable*
Suppose  that  we  hold  a  wooden  cone  at  right  angles  to
a  sheet  of  paper,  and  slowly  push  it  through  it  point
first.  A  microbe  living  on  the  surface  of  that  sheet  of
paper,  and  having  no  power  of  conceiving  anything  out-
aide  of  that  surface,  could  not  only  never  see  the  cone
as  a  whole,  but  he  could  form  no  sort  of  conception  of
such  a  tx>dy  at  all.  All  that  he  would  see  would  be  the
sudden  appearance  of  a  tiny  circle,  which  would  gradu-
ally and  mysteriously  grow  larger  and  larger  until  it
vanished  from  his  world  as  suddenly  and  incomprehen-
sibly as  it  had  come  into  it.

Thus  what  were  in  reality  a  series  of  sections  of  the
cone  would  appear  to  him  to  be  successive  stages  in  the

126  CLAIRVOYANCE

life  of  a  circle,  and  it  would  be  impossible  for  him  to
grasp  the  idea  that  these  successive  stages  could  be
seen  simultaneously.  Yet  it  is  of  course  easy  enough
for  us,  looking  down  upon  the  transaction  from  another
dimension,  to  see  that  the  microbe  is  simply  under  a
delusion  arising  from  his  own  limitations,  and  that  the
cone  exists  as  a  whole  all  the  while.  Our  own  delusion
as  to  past,  present  and  future  is  possibly  not  dissimilar,
and  the  view  that  is  gained  of  any  sequence  of  events
from  the  buddhic  plane  corresponds  to  the  view  of  the
cone  as  a  whole.  Naturally  any  attempt  to  work  out
this  suggestion  lands  us  in  a  series  of  startling  para-
doxes ;  but  the  fact  remains  a  fact,  nevertheless,  and
the  time  will  come  when  it  will  be  clear  as  noonday  to
our  comprehension.

When  the  pupil's  consciousness  is  fully  developed
upon  the  buddhic  plane,  therefore,  perfect  prevision  is
possible  to  him,  though  he  may  not — ^nay,  he  certainly
will  not — be  able  to  bring  the  whole  result  of  his  sight
through  fully  and  in  order  into  this  life.  Still  a  great
deal  of  clear  foresight  is  obviously  within  his  power
whenever  he  likes  to  exercise  it ;  and  even  when  he  is
not  exercising  it,  frequent  flashes  of  foreknowledge
come  through  into  his  ordinary  life,  so  that  he  often  has
an  instantaneous  intuition  as  to  how  things  will  turn
out  even  before  their  inception.

Short  of  this  perfect  prevision  we  find,  as  in  the
previous  cases,  that  all  degrees  of  this  type  of  clair-
voyance exist,  from  the  occasional  vague  premonitions
which    cannot  in   any  true    ense  be  called  sight  at

SBCOND*SIGHT  127

all,  up  to  frequent  and  &irly  complete  second-sight.
The  faculty  to  which  this  latter  somewhat  misleading
name  has  been  given  is  an  tatremely  interesting  one,
and  would  well  repay  more  careful  and  systematic
study  than  has  ever  hitherto  been  given  to  it.

It  is  best  known  to  us  as  a  not  infrequent  pos-
session of  the  Scottish  Highlanders,  though  it  is  by
no  means  confined  to  them.  Occasional  instances
of  it  have  appeared  in  almost  every  nation,  but
it  has  always  been  commonest  among  mountaineers
and  men  of  lonely  life.  With  us  in  England  it  is
often  spoken  of  as  though  it  were  the  exclusive  ap-
panage of  the  Celtic  race,  but  in  reality  it  has  appeared
among  similarly  situated  peoples  the  world  over.  It
is  stated,  for  example,  to  be  very  common  among  the
Westphalian  peasantry.

Sometimes  the  second-sight  consists  of  a  picture
clearly  foreshowing  some  coming  event ;  more  frequently,
perhaps,  the  glimpse  of  the  future  is  given  by  some
symbolical  appearance.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the
events  foreseen  are  invariably  unpleasant  ones— death
being  the  commonest  of  all ;  I  do  not  recollect  a  single
instance  in  which  the  second-sight  has  shown  anything
which  was  not  of  the  most  gloomy  nature.  It  has  a
ghastly  symbolism  which  is  all  its  own — ^a  symbolism  of
shrouds  and  corpse-candles,  and  other  funereal  horrors.
In  some  cases  it  appears  to  be  to  a  certain  extent  de-
pendent on  locality,  for  it  is  stated  that  inhabitants  of
the  Isle  of  Skye  who  possess  the  faculty  often  lose  it
when  they  leave  the  island,  even  though  it  be  only  to

128  CLAIRVOYANCE

cross  to  the  mainland.  The  gift  of  such  sight  is  some-
times hereditary  in  a  family  for  generations,  but  this  is
not  an  invariable  rule,  for  it  often  appears  sporadically
in  one  member  of  a  family  otherwise  free  from  its
lugubrious  influence.

An  example  in  which  an  accurate  vision  of  a  coming
event  was  seen  some  months  beforehand  by  second-
sight  has  already  been  given.  Here  is  another  and
perhaps  a  more  striking  one,  which  I  give  exactly  as
it  was  related  to  me  by  one  of  the  actors  in  the  scene.

<<We  plunged  into  the  jungle,  and  had  walked  on
for  about  an  hour  without  much  success,  when  Cameron,
who  happened  to  be  next  to  me,  stopped  suddenly,
turned  pale  as  death,  and,  pointing  straight  before  him,
cried  in  accents  of  horror  :

"  '  See!  see  !  merciful  heaven,  look  there  !  *

"  *  Where  ?  what  ?  what  is  it  ? '  we  all  shouted
confusedly,  as  we  rushed  up  to  him  and  looked  round
in  expectation  of  encountering  a  tiger — a  cobra — ^we
hardly  knew  what,  but  assuredly  something  terrible,
since  it  had  been  sufficient  to  cause  such  evident  emo-
tion in  our  usually  self-contained  comrade.  But  neither
tiger  nor  cobra  was  visible — nothing  but  Cameron
pointing  with  ghastly,  haggard  face  and  starting  eye-
balls at  something  we  could  not  see.

**' Cameron!  Cameron!'  cried  I,  seizing  his  arm,
*  for  heaven's  sake  speak !  what  is  the  matter  ?  '

'*  Scarcely  were  the  words  out  of  my  mouth  when  a
low,  but  very  peculiar  sound  struck  on  my  ear,  and
Cameron,  dropping  his  pointing  hand,  said  in  a  hoarse,

A   HORRIBLE  VISION  I29

Strained  voice,  *  There !    you  heard  it  ?     Thank  God
it's  over ! '  and  fell  to  the  ground  insensible.

*'  There  was  a  momentary  confusion  while  we  un-
fastened his  collar,  and  I  dashed  in  his  face  some  water
which  I  fortunately  had  in  my  flask,  while  another
tried  to  pour  brandy  between  his  clenched  teeth ;  and
under  cover  of  it  I  whispered  to  the  man  next  to  me
(one  of  our  greatest  sceptics  by  the  way), '  Beauchamp,
did  you  hear  anything  ? '

«4  (  Why,  yes,*  he  replied,  *  a  curious  sound,  very ;  a
sort  of  crash  or  rattle  far  away  in  the  distance,  yet  very
distinct;  if  the  thing  were  not  utterly  impossible,  I
could  have  sworn  it  was  the  rattle  of  musketry.'

*' '  Just  my  impression,'  murmured  I ;  *  but  hush  1
he  is  recovering.'

"  In  a  minute  or  two  he  was  able  to  speak  feebly,  and
began  to  thank  us  and  apologize  for  giving  trouble ;  and
soon  he  sat  up,  leaning  against  a  tree,  and  in  a  firm,
though  still  low  voice  said :

« <  My  dear  friends,  I  feel  I  owe  you  an  explanation
of  my  extraordinary  behaviour.    It  is  an  explanation
that  I  would  fain  avoid  giving ;  but  it  must  come  some
time,  and  so  may  as  well  be  given  now.    You  may  per-
haps have  noticed  that  when  during  our  voyage  you  all
joined  in  scoffing  at  dreams,  portents  and  visions,  I
invariably  avoided  giving  any  opinion  on  the  subject.
I  did  so  because,  while  I  had  no  desire  to  court  ridicule
or  provoke  discussion,  I  was  unable  to  agree  with  you,
knowing  only  too  well  from  my  own  dread  experience
that  the  world  which  men  agree  to  call  that  of  the

I

130  CLAIRVOYANCB

supernatural  is  just  as  real  as — ^nay,  perhaps,  even  £ar
more  rea]  than — this  world  we  see  about  us.  In  other
words,  I,  like  many  of  my  countrymen,  am  cursed
with  the  gift  of  second-sight — ^that  awful  faculty  which
foretells  in  vision  calamities  that  are  shortly  to
occur.

'* '  Such  a  vision  I  had  just  now,  and  its  exceptional
horror  moved  me  as  you  have  seen.  I  saw  before  me  a
corpse — not  that  of  one  who  has  died  a  peaceful  natural
death,  but  that  of  the  victim  of  some  terrible  accident ;
a  ghastly,  shapeless  mass,  with  a  face  swollen,  crushed,
unrecognizable.  I  saw  this  dreadful  object  placed  in  a
coffin,  and  the  funeral  service  performed  over  it.  I  saw
the  burial  ground,  I  saw  the  clergyman  :  and  though  I
had  never  seen  either  before,  I  can  picture  both  per-
fectly in  my  mind's  eye  now;  I  saw  you,  myself,
Beauchamp,  all  of  us  and  many  more,  standing  round
as  mourners;  I  saw  the  soldiers  raise  their  muskets
after  the  service  was  over;  I  heard  the  volley  they
fired — and  then  I  knew  no  more.'

<*  As  he  spoke  of  that  volley  of  musketry  I  glanced
across  with  a  shudder  at  Beauchamp,  and  the  look  of
stony  horror  on  that  handsome  sceptic's  face  was  Hot
to  be  forgotten."

This  is  only  one  incident  (and  by  no  means  the  prin-
cipal one)  in  a  very  remarkable  story  of  psychic  experi-
ence, but  as  for  the  moment  we  are  concerned  merely
with  the  example  of  second-sight  which  it  gives  us,  I
need  only  say  that  later  in  the  day  the  party  of  young
soldiers  discovered  the  body  of  their  commanding  officer

A   GRUESOME   RECOGNITION  I3X

in  the  terrible  condition  so  graphically  described  by  Mr.
Cameron.    The  narrative  continues :

**  When,  on  the  following  evening,  we  arrived  at  our
destination,  and  our  melancholy  deposition  had  been
taken  down  by  the  proper  authorities,  Cameron  and  I
went  out  for  a  quiet  walk,  to  endeavour  with  the  assist-
ance of  the  soothing  influence  of  nature  to  shake  off
something  of  the  gloom  which  paralyzed  our  spirits*
Suddenly  he  clutched  my  arm,  and,  pointing  through
some  rude  railings,  said  in  a  trembling  voice,  *  Yes,  there
it  is !  that  is  the  burial  ground  I  saw  yesterday.'  And
when  later  on  we  were  introduced  to  the  chaplain  of  the
post,  I  noticed,  though  my  friends  did  not,  the  irrepres-
sible shudder  with  which  Cameron  took  his  hand,  and  I
knew  that  he  had  recognized  the  clergyman  of  his
vision."

As  for  the  occult  rationale  of  all  this,  I  presume  Mr.
Cameron's  vision  was  a  pure  case  of  second-sight,  and
if  so  the  fact  that  the  two  men  who  were  evidently
nearest  to  him  (certainly  one — probably  both — actually
touching  him)  participated  in  it  to  the  limited  extent  of
hearing  the  concluding  volley,  while  the  others  who
were  not  so  close  did  not,  would  show  that  the  inten*
sity  with  which  the  vision  impressed  itself  upon  the
seer  occasioned  vibrations  in  his  mind-body  which  were
communicated  to  those  of  the  persons  in  contact  with
him,  as  in  ordinary  thought-transference.  Anyone  who
wishes  to  read  the  rest  of  the  story  will  find  it  in  the
pages  of  Lucifer^  vol.  xx,  p.  457.

Scores  of  examples  of  similar  nature  to.  these  might

132  CLAIRVOYANCE

easily  be  collected.  With  regard  to  the  symbolical
variety  of  this  sight,  it  is  commonly  stated  among  those
who  possess  it  that  if  on  meeting  a  living  i>erson  they
see  a  phantom  shroud  wrapped  around  him,  it  is  a  sure
prognostication  of  his  death.  The  date  of  the  approach-
ing decease  is  indicated  either  by  the  extent  to  which  the
shroud  covers  the  body,  or  by  the  time  of  day  at  which
the  vision  is  seen ;  for  if  it  be  in  the  early  morning  they
say  that  the  man  will  die  during  the  same  day,  but  if  it
be  in  the  evening,  then  it  will  be  only  some  time
within  a  year.

Another  variant  (and  a  remarkable  one)  of  the  sym-
bolic form  of  second-sight  is  that  in  which  the  headless
apparition  of  the  person  whose  death  is  foretold
manifests  itself  to  the  seer.  An  example  of  that  class
is  given  in  Signs  before  Death  as  having  happened  in  the
family  of  Dr.  Ferrier,  though  in  that  case,  if  I  recollect
rightly,  the  vision  did  not  occur  until  the  time  of  the
death,  or  very  near  it.

Turning  from  seers  who  are  regularly  in  possession
of  a  certain  faculty,  although  its  manifestations  are  only
occasionally  fully  under  their  control,  we  are  confronted
by  a  large  number  of  isolated  instances  of  prevision  in
the  case  of  people  with  whom  it  is  not  in  any  way  a
regular  faculty.  Perhaps  the  majority  of  these  occur
in  dreams,  although  examples  of  the  waking  vision  are
by  no  means  wanting.  Sometimes  the  prevision  refers
to  an  event  of  distinct  importance  to  the  seer,  and  so
justifies  the  action  of  the  ego  in  taking  the  trouble  to
impress  it.    In  other  cases,  the  event  is  one  which  is

THB  BULL  AND  THE  DOCTOR  I33

of  no  apparent  importance,  or  is  n9t  in  any  way
connected  with  the  man  to  whom  the  vision  comes.
Sometimes  it  is  clear  that  the  intention  of  the  ego  (or
the  communicating  entity,  whatever  it  may  be)  is  to
warn  the  lower  self  of  the  approach  of  some  calamity,
either  in  order  that  it  may  be  prevented  or,  if  that  be
not  possible,  that  the  shock  may  be  minimized  by
preparation.

The  event  most  frequently  thus  foreshadowed  is>
perhaps  not  unnaturally,  death — sometimes  the  death
of  the  seer  himself,  sometimes  that  of  one  dear  to
him.  This  type  of  prevision  is  so  common  in  the  litera-
ture of  the  subject,  and  its  object  is  so  obvious,  that  we
need  hardly  cite  examples  of  it ;  but  one  or  two  instances
in  which  the  prophetic  sight,  though  clearly  useful,  was
yet  of  a  less  sombre  character,  will  prove  not  uninterest-
ing to  the  reader.  The  following  is  culled  from  that
storehouse  of  the  student  of  the  uncanny,  Mrs.  Crowe*s
Night  Side  of  Nature^  p.  72.

''  A  few  years  ago  Dr.  Watson,  now  residing  at
Glasgow,  dreamt  that  he  received  a  summons  to  atteiid
a  patient  at  a  place  some  miles  from  where  he  was
living ;  that  he  started  on  horseback,  and  that  as  he  was
crossing  a  moor  he  saw  a  bull  making  furiously  at  him,
whose  horns  he  only  escaped  by  taking  refuge  on  a  spot
inaccessible  to  the  animal,  where  he  waited  a  long  time
till  some  peoplCi  observing  his  situation,  came  to  his
assistance  and  released  him.

**  Whilst  at  breakfast  on  the  following  morning  the
summons  came,  and  smiling  at  the  odd  coincidence  (as

134  CLAIRVOYANCB

he  thought  it),  he  started  on  horseback.  He  was  quite
ignorant  of  the  road  he  had  to  go,  but  by  and  by  he
arrived  at  the  moor,  which  he  recognized,  and  presently
the  bull  appeared,  coming  fuU  tilt  towards  him.  But
his  dream  had  shown  him  the  place  of  refuge,  for
which  he  instantly  made,  and  there  he  spent  three  or
four  hours,  besieged  by  the  animal,  till  the  country
people  set  him  free.  Dr.  Watson  declares  that  but  for
the  dream  he  should  not  have  known  in  what  direction
to  run  for  safety."

Another  case,  in  which  a  much  longer  interval
separated  the  warning  and  its  fulfilm^it,  is  given  by
Dr,  F.  G.  Lee,  in  Glimpsis  of  the  Supernatural^  vol.  i.^
p.  240.

"  Mrs.  Hannah  Green,  the  housekeeper  of  a  country
{iamily  in  Oxfordshire,  dreamt  one  night  that  she  had
been  left  alone  in  the  house  upon  a  Sunday  evening,  and
that  hearing  a  knock  at  the  door  of  the  chief  entrance
she  went  to  it,  and  there  found  an  ill-looking  tramp
armed  with  a  bludgeon,  who  insisted  on  forcing  himself
into  the  house.  She  thought  that  she  struggled  for
some  time  to  prevent  him  so  doing,  but  quite  inef-
fectually, and  that,  being  struck  down  by  him  and
rendered  insensible,  he  thereupon  gained  ingress  to  the
mansion.    On  this  she  awoke.

"  As  nothing  happened  for  a  considerable  period  the
circumstance  of  the  dream  was  soon  forgotten,  and,  as
she  herself  asserts,  had  altogether  passed  away  from
her  mind.  However,  seven  years  afterwards  this  same
housekeeper  was  left  with  two  other  servants  to  take

THE    HOUSEKEEPER  S   DREAM  I35

charge  of  an  isolated  mansion  at  Kensington  (subse-
quently the  town  residence  of  the  &mily),  when  on  a
certain  Sunday  evening,  her  fellow-servants  having
gone  out  and  left  her  alone,  she  was  suddenly  startled
by  a  loud  knock  at  the  front  door.

<*  All  of  a  sudden  the  remembrance  of  her  former
dream  returned  to  her  with  singular  vividness  and
remarkable  force,  and  she  felt  her  lonely  isolation
greatly.  Accordingly,  having  at  once  lighted  a  lamp
on  the  hall  table— <luring  which  act  the  loud  knock  was
repeated  with  vigour — ^she  took  the  precaution  to  go  up
to  a  landing  on  the  stair  and  throw  up  the  window ;
and  there  to  her  intense  terror  she  saw  in  the  flesh  the
very  man  whom  years  previously  she  had  seen  in  her
dream,  armed  with  the  bludgeon  and  demanding  an
entrance.

"  With  great  presence  of  mind  she  went  down  to  the
chief  entrance,  made  that  and  other  doors  and  windows
more  secure,  and  then  rang  the  various  bells  of  the
house  violently,  and  placed  lights  in  the  upper  rooms.
It  was  concluded  that  by  these  acts  the  intruder  was
scared  away."

Evidently  in  this  case  also  the  dream  was  of  practical
use,  as  without  it  the  worthy  housekeeper  would  with-
out doubt  from  sheer  force  of  habit  have  opened  the
door  in  the  ordinary  way  in  answer  to  the  knock.

It  is  not,  however,  only  in  dream  that  the  ego  im-
presses his  lower  self  with  what  he  thinks  it  well  for  it  to
know.  Many  instances  showing  this  might  be  taken
from  the  books,  but  instead  of  quoting  from  them  I

136  CLAIRVOYANCB

will  give  a  case  related  only  a  few  weeks  ago  by
a  lady  of  my  acquaintance — a  case  which,  although  not
surrounded  with  any  romantic  incident,  has  at  least  the
merit  of  being  new.

My  friend,  then,  has  two  quite  young  children,  and  a
little  while  ago  the  elder  of  them  caught  (as  was  sup-
posed) a  bad  cold,  and  suffered  for  some  days  from  a
complete  stoppage  in  the  upper  part  of  the  nose.  The
mother  thought  little  of  this,  expecting  it  to  pass  off,
until  one  day  she  suddenly  saw  before  her  in  the  air
what  she  describes  as  a  picture  of  a  room,  in  the
centre  of  which  was  a  table  on  which  her  child  was
lying  insensible  or  dead,  with  some  people  bending
over  her.  The  minutest  details  of  the  scene  were
clear  to  her,  and  she  particularly  noticed  that  the
child  wore  a  white  night-dress,  whereas  she  knew  that
all  garments  of  that  description  possessed  by  her  little
daughter  happened  to  be  pink.

This  vision  impressed  her  considerably,  and  suggested
to  her  for  the  first  time  that  the  child  might  be  suffer-
ing from  something  more  serious  than  a  cold,  so  she
carried  her  off  to  a  hospital  for  examination.  The  sur-
geon who  attended  to  her  discovered  the  presence  of  a
dangerous  growth  in  the  nose,  which  he  pronounced
must  be  removed.  A  few  days  later  the  child  was
taken  to  the  hosfntal  for  the  operation,  and  was  put  to
bed.  When  the  mother  arrived  at  the  hospital  she
found  she  had  forgotten  to  bring  one  of  the  child's
night-dresses,  and  so  the  nurses  had  to  supply  one,
which  was  whUe.     In  this  white  dress  the  operation

A  MURDER  FORESEEN  1 37

-was  performed  on  the  girl  the  next  day,  in  the  room
that  her  mother  saw  in  her  vision,  every  circumstance
being  exactly  reproduced.

In  all  these  cases  the  prevision  achieved  its  result,
but  the  books  are  full  of  stories  of  warnings  neglected
or  scouted,  and  of  the  disaster  that  consequently  fol-
lowed. In  some  cases  the  information  is  given  to  some-
one who  has  practically  no  power  to  interfere  in  the
matter,  as  in  the  historic  instance  when  John  Williams,
a  Cornish  mine-manager,  foresaw  in  the  minutest  detail,
eight  or  nine  days  before  it  took  place,  the  assassination
of  Mr.  Spencer  Perceval,  the  then  Chancellor  of  the  Ex-
chequer, in  the  lobby  of  the  House  of  Commons.  Even
in  this  case,  however,  it  is  just  possible  that  something
might  have  been  done,  for  we  read  that  Mr.  Williams
was  so  much  impressed  that  he  consulted  his  friends  as
to  whether  he  ought  not  to  go  up  to  London  to  warn
Mr.  Perceval.  Unfortunately  they  dissuaded  him,  and
the  assassination  took  place.  It  does  not  seem  very
probable  that,  even  if  he  had  gone  up  to  town  and  re-
lated his  story,  much  attention  would  have  been  paid  to
him;  still  there  is  just  the  possibility  that  some  pre-
cautions might  have  been  taken  which  would  have  pre-
vented the  murder.

There  is  little  to  show  us  what  particular  action  on
higher  planes  led  to^this  curious  prophetic  vision.  The
parties  were  entirely  unknown  to  one  another,  so  that
it  was  not  caused  by  any  close  sympathy  between  them.
If  it  was  an  attempt  made  by  some  helper  to  avert  the
threatened  doom,  it  seems  strange  that  no  one  who  was

138  CLAIRVOYANCE

sufficiently  impressible  could  be  found  nearer  than
Cornwall.  Perhaps  Mr.  WilliamSi  when  on  the  astral
plane  during  sleep,  somehow  came  across  this  reflection
^f  the  future,  and  being  naturally  horrified  thereby,
passed  it  on  to  his  lower  mind  in  the  hope  that  somehow
something  might  be  done  to  prevent  it ;  but  it  is  im-
possible to  diagnose  the  case  with  certainty  without  ex-
amining the  ^Ushic  records  to  see  what  actually  took
place.

A  typical  instance  of  the  absolutely  purposeless  fore-
sight is  that  related  by  Mr.  Stead,  in  his  Real  Ghost
Stories  (p.  83)  of  his  friend  Miss  Freer,  commonly  known
as  Miss  X.  When  staying  at  a  country  house  this  lady,
being  wide  awake  and  fully  conscious,  once  saw  a  dog-
cart drawn  by  a  white  horse  standing  at  the  hall  door,
with  two  strangers  in  it,  one  of  whom  got  out  of  the
cart  and  stood  playing  with  a  terrier.  She  noticed  that
he  was  wearing  an  ulster,  and  also  particularly  observed
the  fresh  wheel-marks  made  by  the  cart  on  the  gravel.
Nevertheless  there  was  no  cart  there  at  the  time ;  but
half  an  hour  later  two  strangers  did  drive  up  in  such  an
equipage,  and  every  detail  of  the  lady's  vision  was
accurately  fulfilled.  Mr.  Stead  goes  on  to  cite  another
instance  of  equally  purposeless  prevision  where  seven
years  separated  the  dream  (for  in  this  case  it  was  a
dream)  and  its  fulfilment.

All  these  instances  (and  they  are  merely  random  selec-
tions from  many  hundreds)  show  that  a  certain  amount
of  prevision  is  undoubtedly  possible  to  the  ego,  and
such  cases  would  evidently  be  much  more  frequent  if  it

A   PRBMONITION  1 39

were  not  for  the  exceeding  density  and  lack  of  response
in  the  lower  vehicles  of  the  majority  of  what  we  call
civilized  mankind — qualities  chiefly  attributable  to  the
gross  practical  materialism  of  the  present  age.  I  am
not  thinking  of  any  profession  of  materialistic  belief  as
common,  but  of  the  fact  that  in  all  practical  affairs  of
daily  life  nearly  everyone  is  guided  solely  by  considera-
tions of  worldly  interest  in  some  shape  or  other.

In  many  cases  the  ego  himself  maybe  an  undeveloped
one,  and  his  prevision  consequently  very  vague;  in
others  he  himself  may  see  clearly,  but  may  find  his
lower  vehicles  so  unimpressible  that  all  he  can  succeed
in  getting  through  into  his  physical  brain  may  be  an
indefinite  presage  of  coming  disaster.  Again,  there  are
cases  in  which  a  premonition  is  not  the  work  of  the
ego  at  all,  but  of  some  outside  entity,  who  for  some
reason  takes  a  friendly  interest  in  the  person  to  whom
the  feeling  comes.  In  the  work  which  I  quoted  above,
Mr.  Stead  tells  us  of  the  certainty  which  he  felt  many
months  beforehand  that  he  would  be  left  in  charge  of
the  Pall  Mall  GazetUf  though  from  an  ordinary  point  of
view  nothing  seemed  less  probable.  Whether  that  fore-
knowledge was  the  result  of  an  impression  made  by  his
own  ego  or  of  a  friendly  hint  from  someone  else  it  i&
impossible  to  say  without  definite  investigation ;  but
bis  confidence  in  it  was  fully  justified.

There  is  one  more  variety  of  clairvoyance  in  time
which  ought  not  to  be  left  without  mention.  It  is  a
comparatively  rare  one,  but  there  are  enough  examples*
on  record  to  claim  our  attention,  though  unfortunately

140  CLAIRVOYANCE

the  particulars  given  do  not  usually  include  those  which
we  should  require  in  order  to  be  able  to  diagnose  it  with
certainty.  I  refer  to  the  cases  in  which  spectral  armies
or  phantom  flocks  of  animals  have  been  seen.  In  The
Night  Side  of  Nature  (p.  462  et  seq.)  we  have  accounts  of
several  such  visions.  We  are  there  told  how  at  Havarah
Park,  near  Ripley,  a  body  of  soldiers  in  white  uniformi
amounting  to  several  hundreds,  was  seen  by  reputable
"people  to  go  through  various  evolutions  and  then  vanish ;
and  how  some  years  earlier  a  similar  visionary  army
was  seen  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Inverness  by  a  re-
spectable farmer  and  his  son.

In  this  case  also  the  number  of  troops  was  very  great,
and  the  spectators  had  not  the  slightest  doubt  at  first
that  they  were  substantial  forms  of  flesh  and  blood.
They  counted  at  least  sixteen  pairs  of  columns,  and  had
abundance  of  time  to  observe  every  particular.  The
Iront  ranks  marched  seven  abreast,  and  were  accom-
panied by  a  good  many  women  and  children,  who  were
carrying  tin  cans  and  other  implements  of  cookery.
The  men  were  clothed  in  red,  and  their  arms  shone
brightly  in  the  sun.  In  the  midst  of  them  was  an
animal,  a  deer  or  a  horse,  they  could  not  distinguish
which,  that  they  were  driving  furiously  forward  with
theit  bayonets.

The  younger  of  the  two  men  observed  to  the  other
that  every  now  and  then  the  rear  ranks  were  obliged  to
Tun  to  overtake  the  van ;  and  the  elder  one,  who  had
been  a  soldier,  remarked  that  that  was  always  the  case,
and  recommended  him  if  he  ever  served  to  try  to  march

SPECTRAL  ARMIES  I4I

in  the  front.  There  was  only  one  mounted  officer ;  he
rode  a  grey  dragoon  horse,  and  wore  a  gold-laced  hat
and  blue  Hussar  cloak,  with  wide  open  sleeves  lined
with  red.  The  two  spectators  observed  him  so  particu-
larly that  they  said  afterwards  they  should  recognize
him  anywhere.  They  were,  however,  afraid  of  being
ill-treated  or  forced  to  go  along  with  the  troops,  whom
they  concluded  to  have  come  from  Ireland,  and  landed
at  Kyntyre ;  and  whilst  they  were  climbing  over  a  dyke
to  get  out  of  their  way,  the  whole  thing  vanished*

A  phenomenon  of  the  same  sort  was  observed  in  the
earlier  part  of  this  century  at  Paderborn  in  Westphalia,
and  seen  by  at  least  thirty  people ;  but  as,  some  years
later,  a  review  of  twenty  thousand  men  was  held  on  the
very  same  spot,  it  was  concluded  that  the  vision  must
have  been  some  sort  of  second-sight — a  faculty  not  un-
common in  the  district.

Such  spectral  hosts,  however,  are  sometimes  seen
where  an  army  of  ordinary  men  could  by  no  possibility
have  marched,  either  before  or  after.  One  of  the  most
remarkable  accounts  of  such  apparitions  is  given  by
Miss  Harriet  Martineau,  in  her  description  of  Ths
English  Lakes.    She  writes  as  follows : —

"This  Souter  or  Soutra  Fell  is  the  mountain  on
which  ghosts  appeared  in  myriads,  at  intervals  during
ten  years  of  the  last  century;  presenting  the  same
appearances  to  twenty-six  chosen^witnesses,  and  to  all
the  inhabitants  of  all  the  cottages  within  view  of  the
mountain,  and  for  a  space  of  two  hours  and  a  half  at
one  time — the  spectral  show  being  closed  by  darkness !

14a  CLAIRVOYANCE

The  mountain,  be  it  remembered,  is  full  of  precipices,
which  defy  all  marching  of  bodies  of  men;  and  the
north  and  west  sides  present  a  sheer  perpendicular  of
900  feet.

**  On  Midsummer  Eve,  I735>  a  farm  servant  of  Mr.
Lancaster,  half  a  mile  from  the  mountain,  saw  the
eastern  side  of  its  summit  covered  with  troops,  which
pursued  their  onward  march  for  an  hour.    They  came,
in  distinct  bodies,  from  an  eminence  on  the  north  end,
and  disappeared  in  a  niche  in  the  summit.    When  the
poor  fellow  told  his  tale,  he  was  insulted  on  all  hands,
as  original  observers  usually  are  when  they  see  anything
wonderful.    Two  years  after,  also  on  a  Midsummer
Eve,  Mr.  Lancaster  saw  some  men  there,  apparently
following  their  horses,   as  if  they  had  returned  from
hunting.     He  thought  nothing  of  this  ;  but  he  happened
to  look  up  again  ten  minutes  after,  and  saw  the  figures,
now  mounted,  and  followed  by  an  interminable  array
of  troops,  five  abreast,  marching  from  the  eminence
and  over  the  cleft  as  before.    All  the  family  saw  this,
and  the  manoeuvres  of  the  force,  as  each  company  was
kept  in  order  by  a  mounted  officer,  who  galloped  this
way  and  that.    As  the  shades  of  twilight  came  on,  the
discipline  appeared  to    relax,    and  the   troops  inter-
mingled, and  rode  at  unequal  paces,  till  all  was  lost
in  darkness.     Now  of  course  all  the  Lancasters  were
insulted,  as  their  servant  had  been  ;  but  their  justifica-
tion was  not  long  delayed.

"  On  the  Midsummer  Eve  of  the  fearful  1745,  twenty-
six  persons,  expressly  summoned  by  the  family,  saw  all

SOUTER   FELL  1 43

that  had  been  seen  before,  and  more.  Carriages  were
now  interspersed  with  the  troops ;  and  everybody  knew
that  no  carriages  had  been,  or  could  be,  on  the  summit
of  Souter  Fell.  The  multitude  was  beyond  imagina-
tion ;  for  the  troops  filled  a  space  of  half  a  mile,  and
marched  quickly  till  night  hid  them — still  marching.
There  was  nothing  vaporous  or  indistinct  about  the
appearance  of  these  spectres.  So  real  did  they  seem,
that  some  of  the  people  went  up,  the  next  morning,  to
look  for  the  hoof-marks  of  the  horses ;  and  awful  it  was
to  them  to  find  not  one  foot-print  on  heather  or  grass.
The  witnesses  attested  the  whole  story  on  oath  before
a  magistrate ;  and  fearful  were  the  expectations  held
by  the  whole  country-side  about  the  coming  events  of
the  Scotch  rebellion.

"  It  now  comes  out  that  two  other  persons  had  seen
something  of  the  sort  in  the  interval — vf>.,  in  1743 —
but  had  concealed  it,  to  escape  the  insults  to  which
their  neighbours  were  subjected.  Mr.  Wren,  of  Wilton
Hall,  and  his  farm  servant,  saw,  one  summer  evening,
a  man  and  a  dog  on  the  mountain,  pursuing  some
horses  along  a  place  so  steep  that  a  horse  could  hardly
by  any  possibility  keep  a  footing  on  it.  Their  speed
was  prodigious,  and  their  disappearance  at  the  south
end  of  the  fell  so  rapid,  that  Mr.  Wren  and  the  servant
went  up,  the  next  morning,  to  find  the  body  of  the  man
who  must  have  been  killed.  Of  man,  horse,  or  dog,
they  found  not  a  trace ;  and  they  came  down  and  held
their  tongues.  When  they  did  speak,  they  fared  not
ch  better  for  having  twenty-six  sworn  comrades  in

eir  disgrace.

144  CLAIRVOYANCE

*<  As  for  the  explanation,  the  editor  of  the  Lonsdale
Magagim  declared  (vol.  ii.»  p.  313)  that  it  was  discovered
that  on  the  Midsummer  Eve  of  1745  the  rebels  were
'exercising  on  the  western  coast  of  Scotland,  whose
movements  had  been  reflected  by  some  transparent
vapour,  similar  to  the  Fata  Morgana.'  This  is  not
much  in  the  way  of  explanation ;  but  it  is,  as  far  as  we
know,  all  that  can  be  had  at  present.  These  facts,
however,  brought  out  a  good  many  more;  as  the
spectral  march  of  the  same  kind  seen  injLeicestershire  in
1707,  and  the  tradition  of  the  tramp  of  armies  over
Helvellyn,  on  the  eve  of  the  battle  of  Marston  Moor.'*

Other  cases  are  cited  in  which  flocks  of  spectral  sheep
have  been  seen  on  certain  roads,  and  there  are  of  course
various  German  stories  of  phantom  cavalcades  of  hunters
and  robbers.

Now  in  these  cases,  as  so  often  happens  in  the  inves*
tigation  of  occult  phenomena,  there  are  several  possible
causes,  any  one  of  which  would  be  quite  adequate  to
the  production  of  the  observed  occurrences,  but  in  the
absence  of  fuller  information  it  is  hardly  feasible  to  do
more  than  guess  as  to  which  of  these  possible  causes
were  in  operation  in  any  particular  instance.

The  explanation  usually  suggested  (whenever  the
whole  story  is  not  ridiculed  as  a  falsehood)  is  that  what
is  seen  is  a  reflection  by  mirage  of  the  movements  of  a
real  body  of  troops,  taking  place  at  a  considerable  dis-
tance. I  have  myself  seen  the  ordinary  mirage  on
several  occasions,  and  know  something  therefore  of  its
wonderful  powers  of  deception ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that

PRANKS  OF   FAIRIBS  I45

we  should  need  some  entirely  new  variety  of  mirage^
quite  different  from  that  at  present  known  to  sciencei  ta
account  for  these  tales  of  phantom  armies,  some  of
which  pass  the  spectator  within  a  few  yards.

First  of  ail,  they  may  be,  as  apparently  in  the  West-
phalian  case  above  mentioned,  simply  instances  of  pre-
vision on  a  gigantic  scale — by  whom  arranged,  and  for
what  purpose,  it  is  not  easy  to  divine.  Again,  they
may  often  belong  to  the  past  instead  of  the  future,  and
be  in  fact  the  reflection  of  scenes  from  the  &k&shic
records — though  here  again  the  reason  and  method  of
such  reflection  is  not  obvious.

There  are  plenty  of  tribes  of  nature-spirits  perfectly
capable,  if  for  any  reason  they  wished  to  do  so,  of
producing  such  appearances  by  their  wonderful  power
of  glamour  (see  Theosophical  Manual  No,  F.,  p.  60),  and
such  action  would  be  quite  in  keeping  with  their  delight
in  mystif3ring  and  impressing  human  beings.  Or  it
may  even  sometimes  be  kindly  intended  by  them,  as  a
warning  to  their  friends  of  events  that  they  know  to  be
about  to  take  place.  It  seems  as  though  some  explana-
tion along  these  lines  would  be  the  most  reasonable
method  of  accounting  for  the  extraordinary  series  of
phenomena  described  by  Miss  Martineau — that  is,  if
the  stories  told  to  her  can  be  relied  upon.

Another  possibility  is  that  in  some  cases  what  have
been  taken  for  soldiers  were  simply  the  nature-spirits
themselves  going  through  some  of  the  ordered  evolutions
in  which  they  take  so  much  delight,  though  it  must  be
admitted  that  these  are  rarely  of  a  character  which  could

146  CLAIRVOYANCE

be  mistaken  for  military  manoeuvres  except  by  the  most
ignorant.

The  flocks  of  animals  are  probably  in  most  instances
mere  records,  but  there  are  cases  where  they,  like  the
^'  wild  huntsmen  "  of  German  story,  belong  to  an  en-
tirely different  class  of  phenomena,  which  is  altogether
outside  of  our  present  subject.  Students  of  the  occult
will  be  familiar  with  the  fact  that  the  circumstances
surrounding  any  scene  of  intense  terror  or  passion,  such
as  an  exceptionally  horrible  murder,  are  liable  to  be
occasionally  reproduced  in  a  form  which  it  needs  a  vary
slight  development  of  psychic  faculty  to  be  able  to  see ;
and  it  has  sometimes  happened  that  various  animals
formed  part  of  such  surroundings,  and  consequently
they  also  are  periodically  reproduced  by  the  action  of
the  guilty  conscience  of  the  murderer  (see  Manual  F.,
p.  83).

Probably  whatever  foundation  of  fact  underlies  the
various  stories  of  spectral  horsemen  and  hunting-troops
may  generally  be  referred  to  this  category.  This  is
also  the  explanation,  evidently,  of  some  of  the  visions
of  ghostly  armies,  such  as  that  remarkable  re-enact-
ment of  the  battle  of  Edgehill  which  seems  to  have
taken  place  at  intervals  for  some  months  after  the  date
of  the  real  struggle,  as  testified  by  a  justice  of  the  peace,
a  clergyman,  and  other  eye-witnesses,  in  a  curious  con-
temporary pamphlet  entitled  Prodigious  Noius  of  War
and  Battle^  at  Edgehill,  near  Keinton,  in  Northamptonshire.
According  to  the  pamphlet  this  case  was  investigated
at  the  time  by  some  officers  of  the  army,  who  clearly

GHOSTS   OP    THE   GIBBET  I47

recognized  many  of  the  phantom  figures  that  they  saw.
This  looks  decidedly  like  an  instance  of  the  terrible
power  of  man's  unrestrained  passions  to  reproduce
themselves,  and  to  cause  in  some  strange  way  a  kind  of
materialization  of  their  record.

In  some  cases  it  is  clear  that  the  flocks  of  animals
seen  have  been  simply  hordes  of  unclean  artificial  ele-
mental taking  that  form  in  order  to  feed  upon  the
loathsome  emanations  of  peculiarly  horrible  places,
such  as  would  be  the  site  of  a  gallows.  An  instance  of
this  kind  is  furnished  by  the  celebrated  **  Gyb  Ghosts  "
or  ghosts  of  the  gibbet,  described  in  More  Glimpses  of  the
World  Unseen f  p.  109,  as  being  repeatedly  seen  in  the  -
form  of  herds  of  mis-shapen  swine-like  creatures,  rush-
ing, rooting  and  fighting  night  after  night  on  the  site  of
that  foul  monument  of  crime.  But  these  belong  to  the
subject  of  apparitions  rather  than  to  that  of  clairvoy-
ance.

CHAPTER  IX.

Methods  op  Development.

When  a  man  becomes  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the
valuable  power  of  clairvoyance,  his  first  question  usually
is  **  How  can  I  develope  in  my  own  case  this  faculty
which  is  said  to  be  latent  in  everyone  ?  "

Now  the  fact  is  that  there  are  many  methods  by
which  it  may  be  developed,  but  only  one  which  can  be
at  all  safely  recommended  for  general  use — ^that  of
which  we  shall  speak  last  of  all.  Among  the  less  ad-
vanced nations  of  the  world  the  clairvoyant  state  has
been  produced  in  various  objectionable  ways ;  among
some  of  the  non-Aryan  tribes  of  India,  by  the  use  of
intoxicating  drugs  or  the  inhaling  of  stupefying  fumes ;
among  the  dervishes,  by  whirling  in  a  mad  dance  of  re-
ligious fervour  until  vertigo  and  insensibility  super-
vene ;  among  the  followers  of  the  abominable  practices
of  the  Voodoo  cult,  by  frightful  sacrifices  and  loathsome
rites  of  black  magic.  Methods  such  as  these  are
happily  not  in  vogue  in  our  own  race,  yet  even  among
us  large  numbers  of  dabblers  in  this  ancient  art  adopt
some  plan  of  self-hypnotization,  such  as  the  gazing  at  a
bright  spot  or  the  repetition  of  some  formula  until  a

condition  of  semi-stupefaction  is  produced ;  while  yet

Z48

CURATIVE   MB8MBRISM  149

another  school  among  them  would  endeavour  to  arrive
at  similar  results  by  the  use  of  some  of  the  Indian  sys*
tems  of  regulation  of  the  breath.

All  these  methods  are  unequivocally  to  be  condenmed
as  quite  unsafe  for  the  practice  of  the  ordinary  man
who  has  no  idea  of  what  he  is  doing — ^who  is  simply
making  vague  experiments  in  an  unknown  world.  Even
the  method  of  obtaining  clairvoyance  by  allowing  one»
self  to  be  mesmerized  by  another  person  is  one  from
which  I  should  myself  shrink  with  the  most  decided
distaste ;  and  assuredly  it  should  never  be  attempted
except  under  conditions  of  absolute  trust  and  affection
between  the  magnetizer  and  the  magnetized,  and  a  per-
fection of  purity  in  heart  and  soul,  in  mind  and  inten-
tioUi  such  as  is  rarely  to  be  seen  among  any  but  the
greatest  of  saints.  is.

Experiments  in  connection  with  the  mesmeric  trance
are  of  the  deepest  interest,  as  offering  (among  other
things)  a  possibility  of  proof  of  the  fact  of  clairvoyance
to  the  sceptic,  yet  except  under  such  conditions  as  I
have  just  mentioned — conditions,  I  quite  admit,  almost
impossible  to  realize — I  should  never  counsel  anyone
to  submit  himself  as  a  subject  for  them.

Curative  mesmerism  (in  which,  without  putting  the
patient  into  the  trance  state  at  all,  an  effort  is  made  to
relieve  his  pain,  to  remove  his  disease,  or  to  pour  vitality
into  him  by  magnetic  passes)  stands  on  an  entirely
different  footing ;  and  if  the  mesmerizer,  even  though
quite  untrained,  is  himself  in  ^ood  health  and  animated
by  pure  intentions,  no  harm  is  likely  to  be  done  to  the

I50  CLAIRVOYANCE

subject.  In  so  extreme  a  case  as  that  of  a  surgical
operation,  a  man  might  reasonably  submit  himself  even
to  the  mesmeric  trance,  but  it  is  certainly  not  a  condition
with  which  one  ought  lightly  to  experiment.  Indeed,
I  should  most  strongly  advise  any  one  who  did  me  the
honour  to  ask  for  my  opinion  on  the  subject,  not  to  at-
tempt any  kind  of  experimental  investigation  into  what
are  still  to  him  the  abnormal  forces  of  nature,  until  he
has  first  of  all  read  carefully  everything  that  has  been
written  on  the  subject,  or — ^which  is  by  far  the  best  (rf
all — until  he  is  under  the  guidance  of  a  qualified
teacher.

But  where,  it  will  be  said,  is  the  qualified  teacher  to
be  found  ?  Not,  most  assuredly,  among  any  who  ad-
vertise themselves  as  teachers,  who  ofier  to  impart  for
so  many  guineas  or  dollars  the  sacred  mysteries  of  the
ages,  or  hold  *< developing  circles"  to  which  casual
applicants  are  admitted  at  so  much  per  head.

Much  has  been  said  in  this  treatise  of  the  necessity
for  careful  training — of  the  immense  advantages  of  the
trained  over  the  untrained  clairvoyant;  but  that  again
brings  us  back  to  the  same  question — where  is  this
definite  training  to  be  had  ?

The  answer  is,  that  the  training  may  be  had  precisely
where  it  has  always  been  to  be  found  since  the  world's
history  began — at  the  bands  of  the  Great  White
Brotherhood  of  Adepts,  which  stands  now,  as  it  has
always  stood,  at  the  back  of  human  evolution,  guiding
and  helping  it  under  the  sway  of  the  great  cosmic  laws
which  represent  to  us  the  Will  of  the  Eternal.

HOW    TEACHING    IS   GAINED  I5I

But  how,  it  may  be  asked,  is  access  to  be  gained  to
them  ?  How  is  the  aspirant  thirsting  for  knowledge  to
signify  to  them  his  wish  for  instruction  ?

Once  more,  by  the  time-honoured  methods  only.
There  is  no  new  patent  whereby  a  man  can  qualify  him-
self without  trouble  to  become  a  pupil  in  that  School —
no  royal  road  to  the  learning  which  has  to  be  acquired
in  it.  At  the  present  day,  just  as  in  the  mists  of  an-
tiquity, the  man  who  wishes  to  attract  their  notice  must
enter  upon  the  slow  and  toilsome  path  of  self-develop-
ment— must  learn  first  of  all  to  take  himself  in  hand
and  make  himself  all  that  he  ought  to  be.  The  steps
of  that  path  are  no  secret ;  I  have  given  them  in  full
detail  in  ItwisibU  Helpers^  so  I  need  not  repeat  them
here.  But  it  is  no  easy  road  to  follow,  and  yet  sooner
or  later  all  must  follow  it,  for  the  great  law  of  evolution
sweeps  mankind  slowly  but  resistlessly  towards  its  goal.

From  those  who  are  pressing  into  this  path  the  great
Masters  select  their  pupils,  and  it  is  only  by  qualifying
himself  to  be  taught  that  a  man  can  put  himself  in  the
way  of  getting  the  teaching.  Without  that  qualification,
membership  in  any  Lodge  or  Society,  whether  secret  or
oth^wise,  will  not  advance  his  object  in  the  slightest
degree.  It  is  true,  as  we  all  know,  that  it  was  at  the
instance  of  some  of  these  Masters  that  our  Theosophical
Society  was  founded,  and  that  from  its  ranks  some  have
been  chosen  to  pass  into  closer  relations  with  them.
But  that  choice  depends  upon  the  earnestness  of  the
candidate,  not  upon  his  mere  membership  of  the  Society
Qt  of  any  body  within  it.

15a  CLAIRVOYANCE

That,  then,  is  the  only  absolutely  safe  way  of  develop-
ing clairvoyance — ^to  enter  with  all  one's  energy  upon
the  path  of  moral  and  mental  evolution,  at  one  stage  of
which  this  and  other  of  the  higher  faculties  will
spontaneously  begin  to  show  themselves.  Yet  there  is
one  practice  which  is  advised  by  all  the  religions  alike
— ^which  if  adopted  carefully  and  reverently  can  do
no  harm  to  any  human  being,  yet  from  which  a  very
pure  type  of  clairvoyance  has  sometimes  been  developed ;
and  that  is  the  practice  of  meditation.

Let  a  man  choose  a  certain  time  every  day — ^a  time
when  he  can  rely  upon  being  quiet  and  undisturbed,
though  preferably  in  the  daytime  rather  than  at  night —
and  set  himself  at  that  time  to  keep  his  mind  for  a  few
minutes  entirely  free  from  all  earthly  thoughts  of  any
kind  whatever  and,  when  that  is  achieved,  to  direct  the
whole  force  of  his  being  towards  the  highest  spiritual
ideal  that  he  happens  to  know.  He  will  find  that  to
gain  such  perfect  control  of  thought  is  enormously  more
difficult  than  he  supposes,  but  when  he  attains  it  it
cannot  but  be  in  every  way  most  beneficial  to  him,  and
as  he  grows  more  and  more  able  to  elevate  and  concen-
trate his  thought  he  may  gradually  find  that  new  worlds
are  opening  before  his  sight.

Yet  after  all  if  those  who  so  earnestly  desire  clair-
voyance could  possess  it  temporarily  for  a  day  or  even
an  hour,  it  is  far  from  certain  that  they  would  choose  to
retain  the  gift.  True,  it  opens  before  them  new  worlds
of  study,  new  powers  of  usefulness,  and  for  this  latter
reason  most  of  us  feel  it  worth  while ;  but  it  should  be

THB   SADNESS  OF   IT  1 53

remembered  that  for  one  whose  duty  still  calls  him  to
live  in  the  world  it  is  by  no  means  an  unmixed  blessing.
Upon  one  in  whom  that  vision  is  opened  the  sorrow  and
the  misery,  the  evil  and  the  greed  of  the  world  press  as
an  ever-present  burden,  until  in  the  earlier  days  of  his
knowledge  he  often  feels  inclined  to  echo  the  passionate
adjuration  contained  in  those  rolling  lines  of  Schiller's :

Dein  Orakel  zn  verkiinden,  warom  warfest  du  mich  hin

In  die  Stadt  der  ewig  Blinden,  mit  dem  aufgeschloss*nen

Sinn?
Frommt't,  den  Schleier  aufzuheben,  wo  das  nahe  Schreck-

niss  drofat  ?
Nur  der  Irrthnm  ist  das  Leben ;  dieses  Wissen  ist  der  Tod.
Nimm,  O  nimm  die  traur'ge  Klarheit  mir  vom  Aug*  den

blut'gen  Schein  I
Schrecklich  ist  es  deiner  Wahrheit  sterbliches  Gefass  zu

seynl

which  may  perhaps  be  translated  **  Why  hast  thou  cast
me  thus  into  the  town  of  the  ever-blind,  to  proclaim
thine  oracle  by  the  opened  sense  ?  What  profits  it  to
lift  the  veil  where  the  near  darkness  threatens  ?  Ouly
ignorance  is  life ;  this  knowledge  is  death.  Take  back
this  sad  clear-sightedness;  take  from  mine  eyes  this
cruel  light  I  It  is  horrible  to  be  the  mortal  channel  of
thy  truth."  And  again  later  he  cries,  *'  Give  me  back
my  blindness,  the  happy  darkness  of  my  senses ;  take
back  thy  dreadful  gift  I  "

But  this  of  course  is  a  feeling  which  passes,  for  the
higher  sight  soon  shows  the  pupil  something  beyond
the  sorrow — soon  bears  in  upon  his  soul  the  overwhelm-

154  CLAIRVOYANCE

ing  certainty  that,  whatever  appearances  down  here  may
seem  to  indicatey  all  things  are  without  shadow  of  doubt
working  together  for  the  eventual  good  of  all.  He  re-
flects that  the  sin  and  the  suffering  are  there,  whether
he  is  able  to  perceive  them  or  not,  and  that  when  he
can  see  them  he  is  after  all  better  able  to  give  efficient
help  than  he  would  be  if  he  were  working  in  the  dark ;
and  so  by  degrees  he  learns  to  bear  his  share  of  the
heavy  karma  of  the  world.

Some  misguided  mortals  there  are  who,  having  the
good  fortune  to  possess  some  slight  touch  of  this  higher
power,  are  nevertheless  so  absolutely  destitute  of  all
right  feeling  in  connection  with  it  as  to  use  it  for  the
most  sordid  ends — actually  even  to  advertise  themselves
as  "test  and  business  clairvoyants ! "  Needless  to  say,
such  use  of  the  faculty  is  a  mere  prostitution  and  degra-
dation of  it,  showing  that  its  unfortunate  possessor  has
somehow  got  hold  of  it  before  the  moral  side  of  his
natmre  has  been  sufficiently  developed  to  stand  the
strain  which  it  imposes.  A  perception  of  the  amount
of  evil  karma  that  may  be  generated  by  such  action  in
a  very  short  time  changes  one's  disgust  into  pity  for  the
unhappy  perpetrator  of  that  sacrilegious  folly.

It  is  sometimes  objected  that  the  possession  of  clair-
voyance destroys  all  privacy,  and  confers  a  limitless
ability  to  explore  the  secrets  of  others.  No  doubt  it
does  confer  such  an  ability^  but  nevertheless  the  sugges-
tion is  an  amusing  one  to  anyone  who  knows  anything
practically  about  the  matter.  Such  an  objection  may
possibly  be  well-founded  as  regards  the  very  limited

THE   RESTRICTIONS  I55

powers  of  the  **  test  and  business  clairvoyant,"  but  the
man  who  brings  it  forward  against  those  who  have  had
the  faculty  opened  for  them  in  the  course  of  their  in-
strttction»  and  consequently  possess  it  fiilly,  is  forgetting
three  fundamental  facts :  first,  that  it  is  quite  incon-
ceivable that  anyone,  having  before  him  the  splendid
fields  for  investigation  which  true  clairvoyance  opens
up,  could  ever  have  the  slightest  wish  to  pry  into  the
trumpery  little  secrets  of  any  individual  man  ;  secondly^
that  even  if  by  some  impossible  chance  our  clairvoyant
had  such  indecent  curiosity  about  matters  of  petty
gossip,  there  is,  after  all,  such  a  thing  as  the  honour  of
a  gentleman,  which,  on  that  plane  as  on  this,  would  of
course  prevent  him  firom  contemplating  for  an  instant
the  idea  of  gratifying  it ;  and  thirdly,  in  case,  by  any
unheard-of  possibility,  one  might  encounter  some
variety  of  low-class  pitri  with  whom  the  above  con-
siderations would  have  no  weight,  full  instructions  are
always  given  to  every  pupil,  as  soon  as  he  developes
any  sign  of  the  faculty,  as  to  the  limitations  which  are
placed  upon  its  use.

Put  briefly,  these  restrictions  are  that  there  shall  be
BO  prying,  no  selfish  use  of  the  power,  and  no  display-
ing of  phenomena.  That  is  to  say,  that  the  same  con-
siderations which  would  govern  the  actions  of  a  man  of
right  feeling  upon  the  physical  plane  are  expected  to
apply  upon  the  astral  and  mental  planes  also ;  that
the  pupil  is  never  under  any  circumstances  to  use  the
power  which  his  additional  knowledge  gives  to  him  in
order  to  promote  his  own  worldly  advantage,  or  indeed

156  CLAIRVOYANCE

in  connection  with  gain  in  any  way ;  and  that  he  is
never  to  give  what  is  called  in  spiritualistic  circles  **  a
test " — ^that  is,  to  do  anything  which  will  incontestably
prove  to  sceptics  on  the  physical  plane  that  he  possesses
what  to  them  would  appear  to  be  an  abnormal  power.

With  regard  to  this  latter  proviso  people  often  say,
^VBut  why  should  he  not  ?  it  would  be  so  easy  to  con-
fute and  convince  your  sceptic,  and  it  would  do  him
good !  "  Such  critics  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that,  in  the
first  place,  none  of  those  who  know  anything  wani  to
confute  or  convince  sceptics,  or  trouble  themselves  in  *
the  slightest  degree  about  the  sceptic's  attitude  one  way
or  the  other ;  and  in  the  second,  they  fail  to  understand
how  much  better  it  is  for  that  sceptic  that  he  should
gradually  grow  into  an  intellectual  appreciation  of  the
facts  of  nature,  instead  of  being  suddenly  introduced  to
them  by  a  knock-down  blow,  as  it  were.  But  the  sub-
ject was  fully  considered  many  years  ago  in  Mr.
Sinnett's  Occult  Worlds  and  it  is  needless  to  repeat  again
the  arguments  there  adduced.

It  is  very  hard  for  some  of  our  friends  to  realize  that
the  silly  gossip  and  idle  curiosity  which  so  entirely  fill
the  lives  of  the  brainless  majority  on  earth  can  have  no
place  in  the  more  real  life  of  the  disciple  ;  and  so  they
sometimes  enquire  whether,  even  without  any  special
wish  to  see,  a  clairvoyant  might  not  casually  observe
some  secret  which  another  person  was  trying  to  keepi
in  the  same  way  as  one's  glance  might  casually  fall
upon  a  sentence  in  someone  else's  letter  which  happened
to  be  lying  open  upon  the  table.    Of  course  he  might.

THE   FUTURE  THAT  AWAITS   US  I57

but  what  if  he  did  ?  The  man  of  honour  would  at  once
avert  his  eyes,  in  one  case  as  in  the  other,  and  it  would
be  as  though  he  had  not  seen.  If  objectors  could  but
grasp  the  idea  that  no  pupil  cares  about  other  people's
business,  except  when  it  comes  within  his  province  to
try  to  help  them,  and  that  he  has  always  a  world  of
work  of  his  own  to  attend  to,  they  would  not  be  so
hopelessly  far  from  understanding  the  facts  of  the  wider
life  of  the  trained  clairvoyant.

Even  from  the  little  that  I  have  said  with  regard  to
'the  restrictions  laid  upon  the  pupil,  it  will  be  obvious
that  in  very  many  cases  he  will  know  much  more  than
be  is  at  liberty  to  say.  That  is  of  course  true  in  a  far
wider  sense  of  the  great  Masters  of  Wisdom  themselves,
and  that  is  why  those  who  have  the  privilege  of  occas-
ionally entering  their  presence  pay  so  much  respect  to
their  lightest  word  even  on  subjects  quite  apart  from
the  direct  teaching.  For  the  opinion  of  a  Master,  or
even  of  one  of  his  higher  pupils,  upon  any  subject  is
that  of  a  man  whose  opportunity  of  judging  accurately
is  out  of  all  proportion  to  ours.

His  position  and  his  extended  faculties  are  in  reality
the  heritage  of  all  mankind,  and,  far  though  we  may  now
be  from  those  grand  powers,  they  will  none  the  less
certainly  be  ours  one  day.  Yet  how  different  a  place
will  this  old  world  be  when  humanity  as  a  whole
possesses  the  higher  clairvoyance !  Think  what  the
difference  will  be  to  history  when  all  can  read  the
records ;  to  science,  when  all  the  processes  about  which
now  men  theorize  can  be  watched  through  all  their

158  CLAIRVOYANCE

course ;  to  medidne,  when  doctor  and  patient  alike  can
see  clearly  and  exactly  all  that  is  being  done ;  to  phUo-
sophy,  when  there  is  no  longer  any  possibility  of  dis-
cussion as  to  its  basis,  because  all  alike  can  see  a  wider
aspect  of  the  truth ;  to  labour,  when  all  work  will  be
joy,  because  every  man  will  be  put  only  to  that  which
be  can  do  best ;  to  education,  when  the  minds  and
hearts  of  the  children  are  open  to  the  teacher  who  is
trying  to  form  their  character ;  to  religion,  when  th«re
is  no  longer  any  possibility  of  dispute  as  to  its  broad
dogmas,  since  the  truth  about  the  states  after  death,
and  the  Great  Law  that  governs  the  world,  will  be
patent  to  all  eyes.

Above  all,  how  bx  easier  it  will  be  then  for  the
evolved  men  to  help  one  another  under  those  so  much
freer  conditions!  The  possibilities  that  open  before
the  mind  are  as  glorious  vistas  stretching  in  all  direc*
tions,  so  that  our  seventh  round  should  indeed  be
a  veritable  golden  age.  Well  for  us  that  these  grand
faculties  will  not  be  possessed  by  all  humanity  until
it  has  evolved  to  a  far  higher  level  in  morality  as
well  as  in  wisdom,  else  should  we  but  repeat  once  more
under  still  worse  conditions  the  terrible  downfall  of
the  great  Atlantean  civilization,  whose  members  failed
to  realize  that  increased  power  meant  increased  re*
sponsibility.  Yet  we  ourselves  were  most  of  us  am(»ig
those  very  men;  let  us  hope  that  we  have  learnt
wisdom  by  that  failure,  and  that  when  the  possi-
bilities of  the  wider  life  open  before  us  once  more,  this
time  we  shall  bear  the  trial  better.

INDEX.

Advantages  of  astral  vision    ...
of  devachanic  vision
of  training

Ak&shic  records

Apparitions

Annies,  phantom    ...  ...

Assassination  of  Mr.  Perceval

Aspect  of  the  records

Astral  body

counterpart

current        •.•  •••

matter,  polarization  of

sight  •••  •••

tdescope
world
Aura,  the  •••  ...

Balance  •••  •••

Bat*s  cry,  experiment  with
Battle  of  Edgehill  ...
Body,  the  astral     ...
the  causal    ...
Brownies  ...  •••

Buddhic  faculty     ...
Bull  and  the  doctor,  the  story  of

Causal  body
Centres  of  vitality
Cerebro-spinal  svstem
Ceremonies  used  to  gain  clairvoyance
Certainty  of  eventual  good
Character,  judgment  of
Chakrams  •••  ...

Chord  of  a  man,  the
Clairandience         ...  ..•

...

...  3^.52.

62,68

..•

•■*

70

»9.

50,  63,  70.  87,  94.  no

...

53.  7^  88.  92.  145

...

••.

47

...

••.

140

...

•..

137

...

...

104

..•

...

6t

...

...

14

.••

35^  7^  81,

82,86

...

..•

36

...

*•.

13.  J5

...

33.  33*  35.  52.

57.  93

...

...  3^1 7^«

79»86

•■•

...12,32,72,93

...

.••       3<5»  37i  91

...

...

"4

...

...

10

...  •

•«.

146

...

••.

61

...

...

91

...

...

29

...

17,  98,  X24,  126

...

••.

133

•••

• ..

91

.*•

••*

13.  16

...

••.

20

..•

••.

46

.*•

*•.

154

...

...

38

..•

*.•

13.  x6

»..

•«•

71

•*•

•«.

5.^1

i6o

INDBX

CUdrvojrftnce  by  drags  or  oerMnonies

caiaal

does  it  destroy  privacy  ?    ...

during  sleep

how  first  manifested

hysterical

limitations  of    ...

meaning  of  word

occasional  flashes  of

of  the  nncultored

on  mental  plvie

on  trivial  subjects

partial  and  temporary

restrictions  upon

sadness  of

under  mesmerism  ...

Clairvoyants, ' '  test  and  business  "
Classification  of  phenomena  ...
Colours,  new

Common-sense  in  occultism,  necessity  of
Consciousness,  continuous
Consciousness,  the  focus  of     ...
Considerations,  preliminary    ...
Contemplation
Continuous  consciousness
Control  of  thought
Counterpart,  astral
Crystal-gazing
Curative  mesmerism
Curiosity  not  permitted
Current,  astral

Oangers  ...  ...  ...

Date,  how  to  find  a
Dead,  the
Death,  visits  at
Delirium  tremens  ...
Dervishes,  the
Devachanic  sense,  the
Devas,  the
Development,  methods  of

the  path  of

regular
Difierence  between  etheric  and  astral  sight
Difficulties

Dimension,  the  fourth
Distance,  sight  at  a
Double,  the  etheric
Drugs  used  to  gain  clairvoyance

...
...

46.  ig

...

154

...

23

...
...

23

46

...

70.

72.155

...

5

...

21

...

19

...

49
48.  83,  13S

...
...

44
65. 72. 155

...

153

21.

45.

59. 149

...

154

...

24

...

4X

...

"4

•  •«

^

...

7

*..

15a

...

4«

...

152

...

...

14
58.  74.  "4

...

149

155
55.  76,  8x.  82,  86

...

69

...

X07

...

...

40.54
66.68

...
...

•*.

47
17.69

...
...

40
148

...

...

x8

...
...

32

95.96

32.34.

...

58.

97.125

52.78

•••
...

31
46. 148

INDEX  X6l

Dake  of  Orleans^  the  Story  of  the  ...  •••  8i

Earth,  th$  Stars  and  thi            ...  ...  ^.  99

Edgehill,  battle  of    '              ...  ...  ...  146

Elementals             ...               ...  ...  ...  2%  39»  147

Equation,  the  oersonal            ...  ...  ...  94

Eternal  now,  the                     ...  ...  ...  124

Etheric  double,  the                 ...  ...  ...  31

vision         •••               ...  ...  ...  37

Eventual  good,  the  certainty  of  ...  ...  154

Experiments  in  crystal-gazing  ...  ...  112

with  bat*s  cry  ...  ...  xo

with  spectrum  ...  ...  xo

Extension  of  senses                  ...  ...  ...  X2

Faculties,  latent                      ...  ...  ...  7

buddhic                  ...  ...  <7*  98*  I24»  126

Fairy  ointment                         ...  ...  ...  30

Finding  a  stranger                  ...  ...  ...  70,71

First  manifestations  of  clairvoyance  ...  23

Flocks,  phantom                      ...  ...  ...  140,  146.  147

Focus  of  consciousness,  the    ...  ...  ...  28

Fourth  dimension,  the            ...  ...  32,  34.  58,  97,  125

Freewill  limited      ...               ...  ...  ...  122

Future  prospects    ...               ..  ...  ...  157

Ghosts  of  the  gibbet                ...  ...  ...  147

Glamour                 ...               ...  ...  ...  X45

Goffe,  the  story  of  Mary          ...  ...  ...  65

Helpers,  invisible  ...               ...  ...  41*  65, 69,  79,  T5X

Historical  study,  possibilities  of  ...  ...  106

Hinton's  works       ...                ...  ...  ...  34

Housekeeper's  dream,  the  story  of  ...  ...  134

How  a  picture  is  found  ...  ...  103,  X04

to  find  a  date                  ...  ...  ...  107

to  investigate                   ...  ...  ...  48

Huntsman,  the  wild                 ...  ...  ...  146.

Hypnotization.  self                  ...  ...  74»  77

Hysterical  clairvoyance           ...  ...  ...  46

Incarnations,  past                    ...  ...  ...•  107,  no

Investigate,  how  to                  ...  ...  ...  48

Invisible  helpers    ...               ...  ...  41.65,69.79.151

Judgment  of  character            ...  ...  ...  38

ung  Stilling*s  story                 ...  ...  ...  63

Knowledge,  the  value  of          ...  ...  ...  113

I 62  INDEX

Latent  &cultias     ...              ...  .«.  ...  7

Limitations  of  clairvo3rance,  the  ...  ...  70,72,155

Limited  freewill     ...               ...  ...  122

Links  needed         ...               ...  ...  ...  104

Lodge,  address  by  Dr.  Oliver  ...  ...  124

Logos  of  the  sjTStem,  the  ...  ...  go,  92, 9S

Magic    ...              ...              ^,  «..  ...  46, 54

Magnifying,  the  power  of        ...  ...  ...  42, 59

Manifestations  of  clairvoyance,  the  first  ...  23

Masters  of  Wisdom,  the         ...  ,^  ...    18.150,157

Materialiiation      ...               ...  ...  62

MftyftvirOpa,  the    ...               ...  ...  ...  69

Meaning  of  word  clairvoyance  ...  ...  5

Meditation             ...              ...  ...  ...  152

Mediums,  trance    ...               ...  ...  ...  74

Mental  plane  clairvojrance      ...  ...  ...  49

plane  sense                 ...  ...  ...  17

world         ...              ...  .^  12, 72, 94,  105

Mesmerism,  clairvoyance  under  ...  21,  45,  59, 149

curative               ...  ....  ...  149

Methods  of  development         ...  ...  ...  148

Micawbers,  psychic                 ...  ...  ...  74

Mooltan,  story  of  the  siege  of  ...  ...  82

Murder,  reproduction  of        ...  ...  ...  146

Nature  spirits        ...              ...  ...  29,  39, 54,  145

Necessity  of  common-sense  in  occultism  ...  114

New  colours           ...               ...  .^.  ...  31

Now,  the  eternal   ...              ...  ...  ...  124

Occasional  clairvoyance          ...  ...  ...  21

Ointment,  fairy  and  witch      ...  ...  ...  30

Orleans,  the  story  of  the  Duke  of  ...  ...  81

Other  planets         ...               ...  ...  ...  72

Partial  and  temporary  clairvoyance  ...  ...  44

Past  incarnations  ...               ...  ...  ...  107,  no

Path  of  development,  the        ...  ...  ...  151

Perceval,  assassination  ^  Mr.  ...  137

Personal  equation,  the            ...  ...  ..•  94

Phantom  flocks      ...               ...  ...  ...  140,  146,  147

Phenomena,  classification  of  ...  ...  24

stance  room        ...  ...  ...  3i>  54

Philadelphian  seer,  the  story  of  a  ...  ...  63

Physical  obnects,  the  transparency  of       ...  ...  27,  28

Pictures  before  going  to  sleep  ...  ...  83

Planets,  other        ...               ...  ...  ...  72

Polarisation  of  astral  matter  ...  ...  ...  56
